A DESCRIPTION Of the Nature OF FOUR-FOOTED BEASTS, With their Figures (...)
WRITTEN IN LATIN By DR. JOHN JOHNSTON. Translated into English by J. P.

AMSTERDAM, Printed for the Widow of JOHN JACOBSEN SCHIPPER, and STEPHEN SWART.
M.DC.LXXVIII.

THE PREFACE To the BOOK Of the FOUR-FOOTED BEASTS.
Courteous Reader,
WE have thought good to anticipate something touching FOUR-FOOTED BEASTS in
general: which I trust I shall have sufficiently performed, when I shall have
praemised to you some account of the Name, the Parts, Place, Food, Growth,
Generation, Life, Animal actions, Use and Differences thereof. Now under the
denomination of These, Name.
are to be by us considered Those Animals which, being of a middle nature
between the airy and the waterish, are for the most part covered with hair,
sometimes with shells, and do go upon four feet. I should call them, after the
Greek idiom, Tetrapoda four-footed, Tetrakola having four members or parts,
Tetraskele four legged, and Tetrabamona such as walk on four. Plin. H. N. l.
11. c. 39.
In all the rest there is a manifold and incomprehensible variety, which, if
you should well consider, would strike you with astonishment.

Please first to view with me the outward Parts. Parts external.
They which bring forth living creatures have hairs; which produce eggs, a
shell. The hairs of Horses are seen in their large manes, so the locks of Lions
on their shoulders: and in Coneys within their cheeks and feet. The Hare is of
all living creatures the most hairy. The hairs grow thicker in all with age. In
the Horse only they contract a grayness. Swine and porcupines are covered with
bristles, Sheep with wool, Goats have their beards hanging down from their
chin. The Hide of the Seahorse is so thick, that out of it are formed
turned-spears: that also of the Elephant and Rhinoceros is almost impenetrable.
Nowhere is Natures wantonness, Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 37.
or lavishness, more evident than in the Horns. These It spreads abroad into
branches, as in the Hearts. To Others it gives single Ones, as in the Hearts
called Spitters which have young horns without tines. The horns of Others has
it fashioned as the palms of hands spread abroad, and has shot out fingers
from them, whence they call them Platycerota's Broad-horned beasts. To the
Roes, or wild Goats, has it given horns with branches, but little: neither
has it made them hanging down. Such as are circularly convolved or wound
about, as a worlebat, are given to the Rams: unlucky ones to Bulls. To the wild
Goats of the Rocks, such as are crookedly writhen backwards, to the Fallow-Deer
on the contrary, forwards. Such as stand bolt upright, and twined with the
compassing about of wrinckles and sharpened lightly toward the top, to the
Strepsiceros a Beast half wild and half tame, which in Africa they call an
Addax. Those are moveable, as are ears, which be found among the herds in
Phrygia: Those of the Troglodyts (so called from their inhabiting in caverns)
grow directly toward the earth, by reason whereof they must turn their necks
awry when they feed. To Others only one horn is given, and that in the middle
of the head, or on the nose. To Some also are given horns of strength to run on
in a forcible assault; to Others, for striking withal. Some are hooked, Others
contrariwise crooking upwards. In Some they are cast in various manners, lying
along, turned about, entangled together: all of them tending toward a sharp
point. To all them and them only who procreate a living creature are given
Ears, and they are movable. In Some they are less, in Others greater. In the
Hearts only they are cloven, and as it were divided: in Ratts they are full of
hairs. In Horses and all kind of laboring cattle they show the tokens of the
mind: in the weary they are flagging: panting or trembling in the fearful:
standing upright in the raging: hanging loose in the sick. The Dog, the Lion,
and those which live upon hunting for the prey have the Mouth so cut open as to
gape wide; 't is of a middle size in the Swine. The snout or trunk is only in
the Elephant. The Jaws in laboring cattle are long, in Apes round. The Neck
in the Lion only, and the Wolf and the subtle Beast Hyaena is stiffened with
each of them one bone. Plin H. N. l. 11. c. 42.
Touching the Paps or Teats this is observed by Pliny: The Beasts which have
whole hoofs, and bring not forth above two young at once, these all have two
paps, and not otherwhere than between the thighs: the cloven-footed and horned
in the same place. The Cows have four, the Sheep and Goats two. Those which are
fruitful with a numerous brood at once, and have toes or claws in their feet,
have many more along their whole belly, in a double rank, as the Swine: the
nobler sort have twelve, the vulgar fewer by two: in like manner the Bitches of
Dogs. Others have four in the middle part of the belly, as the Panthers: Others
two, as the Lionesses. The Elephant only has two under the shoulders; not in
his breast, but on the side hid under the arm-holes. None have any between
their thighs which have claws on their feet. They who live upon the prey have
Claws, Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 43.
five in the foremost feet, four in the rest. Lions, Wolvs, Dogs, and a few
other beasts have also in their after-feet five nails, one whereof hangs close
by the joining on of the leg: Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 45. and 46.
the rest which are less have five claws. All those that have toes or claws,
have also Nails. But the Apes have them bowed or roof-like rising up: the
ravenous crooked: in the rest they stand right out, as in dogs, except that
which commonly hangs upon the leg. They have solid or whole Hoofs which bear no
horns: but the horned are cloven-footed. They say that the Swine in some places
of Illyria (Sclavonia) have whole hoofs. They are renewed only in that kind of
beasts which bear burdens. Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 51.
Lastly, they have all Tails, except Apes, and those that bring forth eggs,
according to the need of their bodies. They are bare in those that are rugged,
or have bristles, as in boars: little in those that are full of hairs, or
wolly, as in bears: in those that are very long they are full of hard hair, as
in horses. Being cut off they renew again in lizards. In kine the tail is
longest of all, and at the lowest part long-hair'd. The same are longer in
asses than in horses, but in those that bear burdens, full of rough hairs:
Lions have them in the lowest part as they are in Oxen and in Rats: with the
Panthers not so: with Foxes and Wolvs they are full of rough, or flock-like
hair, as in Sheep, but longer.

No less is the diversity of the Inward Parts. Internal Parts.
The Teeth in the brawn and wild boar stick right out: in the Dog and the Lion,
like as if they were indented or sawed: in the Horse and Ox they stand close
together; the foremost are sharp, those more inward are plain: The horned
beasts want the one row: they stick not out in any, where they are as sawed:
none that have horns do either stick out or are sawed: but in all these they
are hollow, in others solidly fixed: they are in apes as in men. In those that
chew the cud, in the lion and the dog they are various or interchanged. In
Swine they never fall out. The Tongue in Crocodiles cleaves wholly fast: in
Lions and Catts it is very rough and sharp, like a file. In the Elephant
especially broad. The Ribs in Swine are ten, in horned beasts thirteen. The
Heart in all of them is in the middle of the breast. In that of horses, oxen
and hearts are bones found. It is proportionably the greatest in mice, hares,
rabbets, deer, hyaena's, and in all beasts that through timidity become
mischievous. The Lung is in the Tortoise without blood: In the Chamaeleon 't is
according to proportion the greatest, and nothing else within. The Belly in
those that are whole-hoofd is rough and hard: in some of the Land-beasts it
has a sharpness as of teeth, in others toothed, yet like a lattise. Touching
the bellies of those that chew the cud we have spoken in the second book. The
Spleen in round in the double-hoof'd and horned beasts: drawn out long-ways in
those that have many claws: very long in those that are whole-hoof'd: the lest
in the cattle that are in the region of Asia which is called Scepsis. All they
which generate a living creature have Reins: of those which bring forth eggs,
only the Tortoise. None of those that bring forth eggs, except the Tortoise,
have a Bladder: also none, save those that have a bloody lung: and none of them
that want feet. Concerning the Fat and Tallow it is observed, Plin. H. N. l.
11. c. 37.
the Horned Beasts which are toothed but on one side, and which have
pastern-bones in their feet, abound with tallow; the double-hoof'd and those
that have their feet slit into toes, and are not horned, with fat. The tallow
is congealed together, and when it is cold it is brittle; and is always in the
end of the flesh. On the contrary the fat is between the flesh and the skin
moistened with juice. Some grow not fat: all that are fat are more barren. The
Marrow in young beasts is reddish and in those of old age it grows white: this
is only in hollow bones, neither is it in the thighs or shanks of laboring
cattle or dogs: it abounds in those that are fat; it is like tallow in the
horned beasts: in Bears there is none, in the Lion among the bones of his
thighs and arms very little. And so much of the parts.

Nature has designed the earth as the Place for most of them: Place.
and the water to a few of them, as to the Crocodile, the Seahorse, the
Castor, the Sea-tortoise. Some of these and the other have certain dens or
lurking places: some dwell among the trees. You may find some in a cold, others
in a hot climate: some things in the same soil are denied to some of them.
Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 58.
In Cilicia (others read Lycia) the Bucks and Does pass not over the mountains
that border on the Syrians: the wild Asses go not over the mountain that
divides Cappadocia from Cilicia. On the coast by Hellespont the Hearts do not go
to and fro to other territories: and about Argenusa they do not go beyond that
lofty mountain. In the Island Pordoselene (or Poroselene) the weasels run not
over the way: the Moles of Baeotia brought over into Lebadia avoid the very
soil, which yet in Orchomenus, which is close by, do root up whole fields. The
Hares brought over into Ithaca die, and that upon the uttermost shores: in
Ebusus there are no Rabbets. Among the Cyrenians they have had frogs that were
dumb: but the kind of those Croakers brought out of the Continent continues
still. In Olympus a mountain of Macedonia are no Wolvs, nor in the Island Creta
(now Candia.) It Is more wonderful, that there are no Hearts in that Island,
except in the region of Cydon. In Africa are neither wild Boars, nor Hearts, nor
Goats.

'T is likewise in vain to look for an uniformity in their Food. Food.
Oxen, or kine, Hearts, Horses, Swine feed on herbs and fruits: the lower sort
whereof is the food of Sheep; the higher, as branches and twigs, of Goats.
Wolvs, Lions and Dogs delight in flesh: Beavers and Catts in fish: The
Chamaeleon in flies. Some chaw their victuals, some not. You may perhaps
rightly reckon the Apes and Monkeys among those that eat all things. It is
believed, that the Bear lives in his dens in the winter, out of that humor, or
moisture, which he sucks out of his fore-feet, which then swell.

Touching their Generation take this, Generation.
That Some bring forth without copulation, as the Mice in Egypt after the
running back of the Nile. Those that admit of copulation do it most in autumn,
summer or the spring: the Bulls and Bears do it with raging violence, the Dogs
not. The greatest number bring forth their young alive; the Tortoises, Resend.
Antiq. Lusit. l. 1.
Crocodiles, Lizards, etc eggs. I learn from Resendus that Mares in Portugal
conceive a mole (lump of unshapen flesh) from wind; and from Others, that Cows
being big do carry their young only on the right side of the womb, even when
they carry twins. Their time of Going with young wonderfully varies. The Wolf
goes a month or at the utmost XL. days; the Dog (Bitch) nine weeks; the Sow
four months; the Goat five; the Sheep about six; the Cow ten; the Horse
eleven. The same (variety) must you understand of the number of their young:
the Mule, as is believed, never brings forth: the Wolf but once in it is life:
the Hare brings forth abundantly.

Of their Augmentation it may suffice to say, Growth.
that the Whole-hoof'd and Two-hoof'd are greater than they that have claws (or
fingers) except the Rhinoceros, the Camel, the Seahorse, etc. and they differ
in greatness from the those of the same kind according to their places. In the
Region of Camadu the Rams are not less than the Asses: About Taprobane the
Tortoises are so great that they weigh CIII. pounds: the Lizards in Ethiopia
are eight Cubits long.

Some of them have a long, Life.
Others a short Life. Hares and Cats attain only to the seventh year: the Ram
and the Goat seldom to the tenth: the Sow arrives at the twentieth: the Dog
sometimes at the same: the Cow scarce exceeds sixteen: Horses (the male-kind)
sometimes reach the thirtieth year: yea the seventy fifth year, as we read in
Pliny. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 42. and 43.
It Is evident from the monuments of the Athenians, that a Mule has lived
eighty years: and that the Hearts have lived a hundred years you may find in
History.

Unto the Animal Actions appertain the external and internal senses, Animal
Actions.
their appetites, and their faculties of removing from place to place. The
Bucks (and Does) and Lynx excel in sight: the Hyenae and Cats see by night:
the Moles little or nothing: the Hares are quick of hearing: Camels, Hearts and
Lybian Mares are delighted with the music of the pipe: every one knows that
Dogs are excellent at smelling: Swine have so little (Smell) that they are not
moved with the stench of filthy mud: the Ape exceeds us in tasting, as the
vulgar verse runs. If we take notice of their Inward (senses,) Some are
exceedingly stupid, as the Buff, who, if his head be coverd, thinks his whole
body to be hid; Others are most acute: there is nothing that the Apes do not
imitate: Foxes, ere they go over the ice, first by laying their ears to it,
find out it is thickness: Dogs remember journeys though very long: neither have
any, except Man, a greater memory. Hearts, when they hear the barking of dogs,
run along with the wind, that therewith the sent of their footsteps might go
farther off. For the rest you may look in the chapters of Horses, Cicero de
Not. Deor. l. 2. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 27.
Goats, Wolvs, and Others. But it is mostly to be wondered at that so many
four-footed beasts do know the things whereby they may be cured of their
diseases. The Panther seeks Man's dung. The Tortoise recovers it is strength
against serpents by feeding on Savory or Marjoram, or, as Some will have it,
Pennyroyal: the Weasel by (eating of) Rue, Plin. H. N. l. 28. c. ult.
in its hunting of mice, when it is environed with them in battle: the Cow in
Cyprus cures itself against it is torments in the belly by the excrements of
men. In their Appetite, their Love and Lust especially shows it self: so great
is that of Apes toward their young, that they kill a great part of them by
embracing them. Sows swelling with lust are carried on with that fury that they
would tear a man: Livius l. 41.
the Bulls also are so greatly furious, as that the brazen Cow at Syracuse, was
entered upon, and bespattered with seed by a wild Bull which had wandered from
the heard. On the contrary the Camel shuns copulation in open view. Plin. H. N.
l. 8. c. 42.
Pliny tells us, that a Horse, his eyes being uncovered, and he thereby seeing
that he had copulated with his dam, fell down a steep place, and so died.
Touching their Motion we know that Some are swift, Others slow. Xenophon
believed, that no living creature does aequall the Hare in running. But Horace,
Xenoph. l. de Venatione.
when he would express a most speedy carefulness, said swifter than Hearts: the
Elck makes so long a journey in one day, as a horse does in three. I will say
nothing of the Arabian Asses: for the common Asses are most slow, as is also
the Tiger, as Bontius informs us.

I had almost forgot to speak of their Voice: Voice.
of which ne'retheless there is a wonderful variety in this sort of living
creatures. For the Horse neighs, or hinneys: the Bull low's, bellow's, or rowts:
the Ass howls: the Ram clatters: the Sheep bleats: the Swine grunts: the wild
Boar grunts and cries out aloud with grinning: the Heart and wild Ass clucks or
cackles: the Goat chatters: the Lion roars: the Tigers voice is hoars: the
Panther cries: the Libbard waws as a cat: the Wolf howls: the Elephant bray's:
the Dog barks: the Fox yelps: the Kitling mew's: the Hare cries like a child:
the Mouse chirps or squeaks: the Weasel makes a noise with it is teeth: the Rat
also, with the sawing of it is teeth: the Frog croaks.

But let us come to their Use. Use.
For no man will deny that they are made of God for our benefit. Hence they are
to us Aliment or nourishment, Medicin, Clothing, and for other Uses.
Nourishment: For those that are covered with hair supply us with milk, out of
which is made butter and chees: the laboring cattle give us flesh, as do also
those which live in deserts, Hearts, Fallow-deer, Boars, the Elck and others.
Neither are we only provided for with necessaries; Nature has not forgot to
store us also with delicacies: Martial calls the flesh of the Hare the chief
dainty: the flesh also of a tame Swine may so be seasoned or dressed fifty
several ways, that they may seem to be so many sorts of wild Boars flesh.
Medicaments: For they have taught us some: it is not one alone wherewith they
supply us: we have it from the Weasel and Tortoise that savory and rue are
available against venoms. The Sea-hors has taught us the art of bloodletting
by opening veins: the Hearts have led us to the knowledge of this, that dittany
is good to draw darts (out of the flesh.) You may consult History touching
remedies against diseases. Clothing: We have great advantage from the cattle
by the use of their skins: we are beholden to them for the preservation of our
bodies. The richest of the Caspian people made their garments of Camels hairs:
those (garments) also are made of wool which Gaesar called subcoacta
compressed, Helmodus Presbiter feltra and filtra felts, the same with those
called by the Greeks Pileta and Pilota: Out of these or of the quilted
coverings made of course wool or flocks, or out of hides the soldiers made
coats or coverings, wherewith they might avoid the darts. The Dead ones supply
us with skins. The first coats that God made, were out of these. Hercules was
clothed with the skin of a Lion. The ancient German Garments that covered
their shoulders and breasts were made of Sheepskins: their start-up-shoes and
baggs were of raw hides: the shoes of their more noble persons were of tawed
and dressed leather: lastly the Frieslanders, by the command of Drusius,
brought the hides of Oxen into military use. Touching other Uses I shall only
say this: That Dogs serve for our preservation: Cats defend the meat from the
Mice: the Horse, the Ass, the Mule, the Camel are used for carrying burdens.
Aristot. H. A. l. 5. c. 2.
Out of the Nervs or sinews are made fiddle-strings. With the yard of the
Camels are bows best spanned or stretched out. Dionys. Halicarn. l. 2.
The cords, wherewith the arms of the dart-shooting bows are kept together, are
twined or wreathed ont of the sinews. Paper is smoothed or polished with Boars
teeth. The vulgar or common servants among the Romans were driven to their
places of meeting by certain persons sounding with the horns of oxen. Ambrose
said that wine flowed down men's throats through a horn. The Barbarous Northern
people did certainly drink out of the horns of the wild Bulls. The altar of
Apollo of Delos made of horns is accounted among the seven wonders of the
world. Bulls gall is of mighty virtue, even in copper, and in coloring skins
of a golden color. What shall I say of their Dung? of the differences whereof
Pliny thus speaks: Plin. H. N. l. 17. c. 9.
Some Authors, for the manuring of ground, especially commend Man's dung,
calling it human dainties. Others praefer that which men drink, viz. Urin, when
hair has been steeped in it, (...) Tanners workhouses. In the next place they
prais the filth of Swine: Columella only ^ondemns it. Varro add's to his
precepts, that corn-ground should be nourished with that ^ors-dung, which is
lightest, but the meadows with that which is heavier, as also that which (...)
made by those who feed on bearley, as bringing forth many herbs. Some also
praefer (...)e dung of working-Cattle before that of the Buff or wild Ox; and
that of the Sheep before ^^at of the Goats. But the Asses dung is esteemed
above all, because they feed most leisurly.

Touching their Differences Differences.
we might infinitely treat. But how we have digested the whole host of
Four-footed Beasts into their several orders or ranks, the (following) History
will teach us. First you will meet with the Whole-hoofed; next Cloven-hoofed,
both such as chew the cud, whether horned or not, and those that chew not the
cud: lastly those that have fingers and toes, or claws, both those who bring
forth their young alive, whether on the land or water, and those who bring
forth eggs, which are either covered with a shell, or not. But I will not
further proceed herein.

Now, Courteous Reader, take my labor in good part; and at the next Marts or
Fairs expect the History of Serpents and Insects; after which shall follow, if
it please GOD, the History of such Creatures as fly on high, and of those Under
the earth, and also of Man.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.
THE FIRST BOOK. Of wholehoof'd fourfooted Beasts.
CHAPTER I. Of the Horse.
ON the living creatures that are brutish, ^^drov. de ^^lidiped.
or without reason, and having blood, has nature bestowed feet, on some two,
on some four. The fourfooted, (in Latin called Quadrupedes, in Greek
Tetrapoda, (...).
by Aristotle called Peza) are comprised under three main kinds. One whereof
is wholehoofd or solidfooted, (...).
or onehoofd (Aschides, Mononyschon.) Another sort are cloven-footed, ^^n.
^^^idipe^^. ^^za So^^edem.
having two clefts on either side, before and behind. In Latin bisulca; in
Greek Dichela, having as it were claws for hoofs. A Third kind are as it were
toed, (...).
having many partings (in Greek Polyschides, (...).
Polydaktylon, in Latin multifidum.) (...)
They have all feet to go on, but those that have toes do the offices of
hands with their forefeet, (...) A. l. 2.
as the wholehoof'd do with their hinderfeet. ^^stotle.
Among the wholehoof'd are the Horse, the Ass, the wild Ass, the Mule, the
Unicorn, and the Elephant; whereof we shall treat in order in this first
book.

We begin with the Horse, which has the preeminence among the laboring
beasts, called jumenta from juvando, or helpfulnesse. Demosthenes reckons him
among City-ammunition. The Romans out of the public purse laid out 10000
pieces for this beast, ^^nys.
and took them away from those, ^^lyc.
who could not go to war. (...).
A horse with fair trappings was held an ornament to any Consul, ^^iq.
or Emperor. ^^man.
In many countries care has been taken that no Horse should be exported. The
Circassians suffered not the common people to keep horses. M. Anthony forbad
riding on horseback in cities. ^^arch.
Atheas a Scythian King curried his horse with his own hands. Hectors wife
Andromache herself gave oats, and hay to her husbands horses, knowing he took
delight in them. Theophilactus, Patriarch of Constantinople under Lacapenus the
Emperor, kept above 2000 Horses, and was so intent, and earnest in feeding
them, that he gave them pistacknuts, pine-apples, palm-fruit, raisins,
dried-figs; and all of them choyse^t, moystened with perfumed wine, and mixed
with saffran, cinnamon, and other costly druge; in this excess going beyond
the Emperor himself, who laid in the manger for his Horse, Capitolinus.
called the winged, raisins, and kernels in stead of barley. The Moxy, a people
of Tartary, on a set and solemn day yearly after some ceremonies, flaid a
horse, eat the flesh at table, stuf'd the hide with chaff, then rear an altar,
set it up thereon, Joseph.
worshipped it as a favorable deity. Barbar.
In Petrarchs time there lived one in Italy who doated so on his sick horse,
Itiner.
that he spread under him a silk bed, with a golden pillow. And when he
himself was laid fast by the gowt that he could not stir, and must be ruled
by the Physicians Laws, yet would he needs be carried by his servants, or be
laid on another horse, and taking his Physicians with him twice, or thrice a
day visit his sick horse, and sit down by him sighing, and troubled, stroking
him, and murmuring comfort to him. The mighty King of Narsinga had a horse
thought to be of such a value for the incredible plenty of jewels, Ludo.
wherewith it was laden, Romans
that he was worth one of our cities. Navig, l. 4. c. 11.
In such esteem is the Horse among most nations, as Aldrovand shows more at
large.

But to come to his Name. The Name.
He has gotten diverse names both with the Greeks, (...).
and Latins. (...).
By the Greeks Hippus and Polos (which yet is properly a Fool. (...).
) By the Karians Alla; (...).
by some Kalpis (which seems to fit the ambler; (...).
by the Ligurians Damnos and Ikkos; (...).
by the Etimologers Kaballos, (...).
from the manger, and his ever-eating; Ergatees is a wrought one, or an
ordinary one the same with Caballus, so the Latins use it. (...).
Innos is that that has an Horse for the sire, and an ass for the dam;
Hinnos, (...).
whose dam is a mare, and the sire a mu^e. (...).
Aristotle takes it for a nag. Keles, and Azyx is a Horse when backed; some say
a generous one, some a saddle Horse, Varin.
or a bare Horse; some, but mistaking, a curvetter. Chrysampus is rather an
epithet or addition then a name, (...),
taken from the goldstring that ties his foretop. The Latins call him Equus
from payring, Isidor.
or matching them in wagons. Orig.
By Scaliger Eniochus and Canterius from gelding; l. 12. c. 43.
(Varro) or from branding; or taken for a cheap, Isid.
common Horse. Veredus is one that carries no packs, nor draws, or a post-horse.

Mannus is a little Nag, Porph.
so called from his gentle bringing to hand. Seneca calls the tollutares when
loose. Others call them Burdones, Burichi, and Strabo Gygeny. Musimones perhaps
from the place whence they are had, so much for their names.

We need not describe so known a beast, for his, and their names. The parts.
The Hoofs (Ungulae, Oplai,) whole, (...).
firm, not cloven. Chelidon is the hollow being like a swallows nest.
Batrachos, or frog is the tender part of the hoof, which is hurt, if the nayls
be ill driven. The Dutch call it Kern. Full, fleshy hoofs are called Chamelai
in Greek. Xenephon.
The joining tween the hoof, and foot the Greeks call Stephanee. Aristotle
says, no beast, but the Indian Ass has ankle bones: (but Horses have
Pasterns,) and that behind that answers the knee before, a turning joint,
(called Suffrago, and garrectum) joining the foot to the leg. They have
Fetlocks; little bones called Basis* Vegetius.
Tufts of hair adorn them.

The haunches, the hips, large and strong; the Horse thereof is thought to
desire his Rider, Nolanus.
or the saddle near his shoulders; the Asses and Mule contrary. ((...).)
The seat, (Edra) is that part of the back whereon men sit. The shoulder is
called armus. Xenophon.
Both Horses and Mares have teats; these two tween the thighs, those have but
risings like teats. Aristotle.
The tail is quite contrary to the Oxes; a short dock, and long hair, serving
them for a flee-flap. Plin.
They are stiffer in Horses then Mares, Plutar.
these weaken them with staling. Sertorius.
Horses have manes, and crests, and fore-tops. The lower eylids have no hayr;
therefore the painter, (whether the Ephesian Apelles, or Nicon, Micon, or
Polygnostus, is doubtful) is blamed for painting hayr there. It is a mistake
in Pliny, and Arist. that (except man) they only grow gray, or hoory, by reason
of the thinness of their brainpan, for dogs also wax grizly. Under the saddle
on the scares of galled places ever grow white hayrs, whether because that part
is weak, and perished, or for any other cause. Arist.
Yet they come forth of one color, if you sprinkle on them ground barley fried,
which has a dispersing, and cleansing power. Plin.
Of the Colors in the differences: They have a continued rue of teeth on both
sides; Arist.
and besides those in colts, 40. Before the rest are small ones, as big as a
bean that hinder their chewing, Arist.
and make them leaner. The stone Horses are said to have more then Mares. They
change. The foreteeth are shed first, called cutters and suckers; they are 12,
6 in the upper, Plin.
6 in the lower chap. Arist.
These show the Horses age. H. A. l. 6. c. 22. Xeno.
For a Horse 30 months old looses first his middle teeth, 2. above, and 2
below. Entering on their fourth year, they shed as many more, then come
Columellares, or eyeteeth. In the fifth year they shed the second dogteeth; in
the sixth year they grow again; and then they have their full number in the
eighth year. Varro.
Three year after, Absyrtus.
they break a tooth, which becomes roundish, and then 3 square, when a rheum
falls into their mouths. After 7 they grow crooked, and stick out sometimes;
and wax hollow; Columel.
and after there is no guessing at their age. Yet at 10 their temples grow
hollow, and their eybrows gray, and their teeth stick out, At 12 a blackness
is seen in the midst of their teeth, says Vegetius, but Varro, and Arist.
write then they wax brighter with age. Hesy^.
Pliny says they grow reddish. Varin.
Some have their names from the variety of teeth among the Greeks; Pet.
they with the mark out of the mouth, Agnomoi, Crescenti Cardan.
etc. (...).
Some write besides of Grinders, (...).
and double teeth. (...).
They hold them fast, though old, and fed with hard meat, because they eat
nothing hot. The Farrides call the cheekbone Psalion, (...).
Gnathos, jaw, or chap. The chaps are very large, and moved by great muscles,
because they eat stooping. In the heart is sometimes a bone found. Plin. H. N.
l. 8. c. 42. and 11. 37.
Some say he has a gall, some deny it. Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 15.
Indeed he has no gall-bag in the liver. Yet Ruinus in dissecting a Horse
found on the right side of the liver a hollow receipt for gall. In most it is
set in sprigs into the substance of the bowels, whereby the liver easily
disburthens it self of gall; it lays it also into the duodenum gut, or the
first gut 12 foot long. Nature, it seems confines the gall to no one bag in
him, as in man, and in other beasts, because he is ever eating, and needs gall
ever ready to provoke him to dung. Arist.
It is observed in their shape that the Foles are a little lower then their
dams, and being grown up cannot reach their head. It is said a witchcraft of
lust, called Hippomanes is natural to them, and sticks in their foreheads, it
is black, as big as a fig, which the Mare presently after foaling bites off
before she lets the fool suck, such another grows on the Mares privities. Plin.
l. 8. c. 42 and 24. 13.
This venom but daubd on the brazen Olympic Mare set all the Horses a
madding: Arist. H. A. 16. 15.
as Pliny, Pausanias, and Aelian. (H. A. l. 3. c. 17. and 14. 18.) write.
Horses are found in all places almost. They delight in marshes, and places well
watered, though plains, or hills. And such places are fittest for them, Colum.
R. R. l. 6. c. 27
not dry grounds; nor pestered with trees; and where tender shrubs grow rather
then tall trees. Horses for state, and service in war stand in the stable at
rack, and manger, where they are tied with head-stalls. Plin.
Their feed is fruit, it is a wise beast in choice. Barley is less windy for
them then oats, or wheat. We use oats. In England and elsewhere hors-loaves of
beans, and pease. Grass is the common, and proper fodder, and hay. Melilote in
Italy is called the Horse three-leave-grasse. Strabo speaks of a Median Physic
grass that battens them. Not the first cutting, especially if it grow in
stinking pudde water, Arist.
that is unwholesome. They cut it 4, or 6 times a year. Colum.
Some commend Cytisus in winter, Plin. l. 1. c. 24.
being dry, moystned. Ten pound serves an Horse; less, other cattle. In many
places they give them bundles of vetches. By Damascus, pulse; for a need other
things. Caesar's Horses besieged by Scipio ate duck meat, Hist.
rinced in fresh water. Bell.
The Pompejan Horses at Dyrrachium in a siege ate leaves striped from trees,
Afri.
and reed-roots. In Senega, that dry soil, fitches, and mixed. In Thrace by
Strymon, thistle-leaves. In Parthia the herb Hippax. Scalig. Ex. 206. 5.
In Tartary boughs, Aelian. H. A. ^. 41. c. 15.
and bark of trees, and roots struck out of the earth with their hoofs. In Aden
they eat fish, there being plenty there. And dried fish in Golconda in Persia;
and among the Gedrosians, the Celtae, Macedonians, Lydians, and Paeons
inhabiting the Prasian Lake. The Arabs feed them twice a day with camels milk.
In spring with tender herbs. ^.
They love to drink water whether troubled, Ven.
or clear, Herod.
running, Arist.
or standing, Veget.
muddy, or other. Some, to make them metled, Colum.
give them wine; especial if lean, Varin.
of old beer of oats, or corn, say some.

The males live longest. ^ge.
We read of one 70 years old. ^lin. 4. 42.
At 33 they gender. After 20 men use them for stallions. One called Opuns, held
out 40 years. Some judge their age by the pinching of their shoulder-skin, if
after pinching it, unfold it self leysumly, it is an old, if presently, a young
horse. Some judge by the joints in the tail, after the mark is out of the
mouth. Mares leave growing at 5, ^lin.
males grow a year longer, ^rist.
after they spread, and so till 20. But Mares come sooner to their just pitch.
^endring.
It is the most lustful of all beasts; ^rist. H. A. ^ 6. c. 12.
whence a venerous man is compared to a Horse, and called Hippobinos. The Mares
are most salacious; among whom Cupid is by Poets faind to be bred, and whores
all called Mares; having been but a few days together they smell out one
another. The Horses by biting drive away strange Mares, and hold to their own,
feeding with them. ^rist.
Some say, ^enanim. ^5.
a Mare great with fool, will take Horse, some deny it. Gryllus in Plutarchs
questions, whether buggerers are not worse then beasts, since beasts solicit
none. Yet at Athens, a Horse is said to have ravished a girl, the daughter of
the last of the Codry, called Hippomanes. ^rist. ^. A. ^ 5. c. 14. ^ 6. 24.
Those that begin to gender at two years old, ^^in. ^o. c. 63.
bring weak colts; but they begin commonly at 3, or 30 months old, and hold on
to 20. They are fit when they cease breeding teeth; but best, if they feed
well, when they are a year and half old complete, or somewhat younger. Pliny
says that Mares, after the third, or one year after they have had a fold, may
take Horse again, and be forced to it; The tame 60 days sooner then those
that run abroad. Martyr. ^lum. ^ R. ^. 1. 28.
In Hispaniola at 10 months old they conceive, and often fool two at once.
Columella thinks the Mare should be 2 years old, and the Horse 3. She after
10 bring sluggish foles; he lasts to 20. Anatolius would have the Horse begin
at 5, and give over at 14. You shall know their lust, by gathering themselves
up together, often whisking the tail, and often staling. The Horse will be
covering the Mare one, two, sometimes 3 days, or more; It is fit to give him a
years intermission.

The beginning of the conception from the Spring Equinoctial to the Solstice in
April, in hot places, is colder in May. So that the Mare, using to fool in the
twelfth month, that will fall out about the green and temperate season of the
year. The Eleans carry their Mares out of their own coasts to take Horse,
because they find by 600 experiments, that by this means the brood wonderful
prospers. The males covet coupling in the morning-season, the females after
midday. Some give them provocatives. Absyrtus bids men to weaken a Deers tail
burnt in wine, and therewith to anoint them. Some give them parsnip; some put
nettles into their mouths, etc. The Mares of Lybia, The Author adds much of
this stuff, that I will not translate.
and Mysia, are provoked with piping, and come thereby to be with fool, as we
read in Aelian in his history of beasts, in book 12, chapter 44. Pollu calls
the Pipe Hippophorbus, made of a bay tree peeld. Yet all conceive not, neither
do all that conceive, bring forth; which is, say they, betokened by this, that
the brood about the reins, has somewhat like reins that being cut, it seems to
have 4 reins. If you demand how many Mares serve one Horse, Columella says, no
less then 15, nor above 20. Arist. allows him 30. Palladius advises to allot
to able Horses, either few or many; and to a young and handsome one 12, or 15.
Aristo.
You shall know when they are with fool, Abscyrtus.
by the holding up of their months, Plin.
or by their refusing the Horse, or by their hayr turning on a sudden redder,
or fuller then it was. They say that it shall be an Horse-colt, if the Mare
take Horse the third day before the full Moon; if the third after, a
female-colt, They guess the former, if the Horse mount on the right side, the
latter, if on the left. In Pharsalia they counted that a right Mare, whose fool
resembled the Sire. That they conceived by the wind in Portugal, Var. R. R. l.
2. Pl. l. 8. c. 42. Soli. Poly. c. 36.
Colum. August. de civit. Dei l. 21. c. 5.
Varro, Plin. Solinus, Albertus, Avicen, thought, and S. Austin affirms it of
Cappadocia; but Justin reckons it for a fable. Aristotle denies it to be
possible. Husbandmen tell what is to be done about those with fool. They cast
their fool, if they smell the smoke of a candle, or if an ass cover them. They
go with fool, according to the opinion of most, a year; according to
Absirtus, eleven months and ten days. The hardness of the belly is the
cause, if we follow Aristotle. They bring forth with most of all the 4 footed
beasts, and standing upright. Eumelus says, that if they be long in foaling.
bind her nostrils close, and gently, and you help her. For the most part they
bring but one at once, sometimes twins. They are very cleanly in foaling, not
voiding much blood, according to their bigness. As Soon as she has foale'd,
she eats her afterbirth, and the bunch that is on the foals forehead.

There have been Hermophrodites, to wit, of both Sexus foales. Plin. H. N. l.
11. c. 47.
Nero showed such Mares brought out of Trier Land, yoaking them in his
Chariots, a strange sight; the Lord of the world riding on monsters. He was
himself a monster.
Of such a mixed brood that belonged to the Vicount Princival Cardanus writes
thus; De rer. var. l. 7. c. 33.
he had but one stone in the right place with swelling teats, His voice.
such as Mares have: And besides a matrice, whereout he put forth his member,
that was not greater then 4 fingers. When the Greeks would express a horses
neighing, (...).
they call it Chremetizein and Epichremitizein, (...).
the Latin, Fremere, hinnire. The voice it self is called Mimigmos, etc. Of
the change whereof Arist. (...).
writes, they differ much in their neighing. The shefolds send forth as soon
as foled, a very small voice; The males somewhat fuller, and greater, which
daily increases. A Horse of two years old, when he begins to engender, neighs
strongly; and the Mare clearer, and shriller then before, and it continues so,
for the most part, till 20; after that age their neigh is feebler. Of their
motion, and pace.
There are that never neigh in company; Card. l. 13. c. 3.
Miraldus calls them dumb: De var. rer.
when they go, or pace, they make a noise with their feet, striking the ground
with their hoofs: whence the Latins call them Sonipedes, Homer Hypsechees, or
great noyse-makers; because they cannot so well bend their hams, they are most
weary going up hill, and falling, they run headlong; going down hill, they can
well endure their burden, because they have four thighs. Their nimblenesse,
both the Epithites give them, that we meet with in Authors, and examples
testify. Homer calls them Okypodes, Elaphropodes, (...).
etc. fleetfooted, and deerfooted. Oppianus writes, that those of Iberia were
so swift, that Eagles only might be compared with them, or Hauks of the
Circus, where they ran for mastery. Perseus his Pegasus is said to be winged.
Some write that the Sarma^ae, could dispatch with their long journeys of 150
miles, without drawing bit, or baiting. In Arabia, if we credit Vertomannus,
they hold a more fleet pace day and night without resting. In the Alanican war,
Probus the Prince, (men report) took one that in one day would travel an 100
miles, and would hold out so for ten days together. But, Horat. l. 2. od. 16.
it is questioned, whether Mare, or Horse are swifter. Homer gives the plam to
the Pheretian Mares. Menelaus his Aetha was exceeding fleet. Horace chooses to
say, that Horses are fitter to draw then Mares. Pliny says, that Mares stale
as they run. The Mare of Crauxida, in the eight Olympiade, outran all the
Race-horses. We read that Hecra^ites the Thessalian his Mare, and she was
great with fool ( Pliny calls her Echecratides) N. H. l. 15. c. 21.
had the better of all the running-horses in the Olympique Games. But Oppinan
writes, that males are better for hunting; that Mares cannot so well rid way
in woods, in long courses. What Cicero means by the Horse called Admissus, p.
40.
see in Aldrovandus; He grows restive, lesning, or loosing his pace, if he
stand long idle in the stable. Therefore when King Antigonus with his Cavallery
was besieged, and so straightened, that he had no place to exercise his Horse, he
caused them to be thrust up by the head, that their forefeet could not touch
ground, and forced them to strike with their hind feet, which made them sweat,
as if they had traveled. It is well known, that Wasps breed in the marrow of
a rotten Horse.

If you look upon their Nature, Their nature.
they are very sociable, they sup their drink, and plunge their nose deep in
the water, which is a sign of their boldness: their minds are ever on rack and
manger, and can better endure thirst then hunger: Mares stale often; and their
monthly clensings: they dung more dry, then wet stuff, because they are kept at
hard meat: If you ride them hard, and tire them, they foam: the cause whereof
Galen has exactly declared; Aphor. 5. 2. 45.
They dream on what they are wonted: They sleep commonly standing; especially
geldings; who are more drowsy then others. When they are angry, like dogs, they
show their teeth, and bite: They love to be strok't: they eagerly love their
folds. Hence it was that Dartius after his defeat escaped on a Mare out of the
battle at Issus, she hastening home to her fool. And the Tartarians, Paul.
Vener. l. 9. c. 47.
when they go into any land to seek for prey, Paul.
or plunder, Venet. l. 9. c. 47.
where the Sun shines for a good part of the year, they leave their folds on
the borders; so that the Mares marking their night-journey at their return, go
strait to their foles. The Mares are seldom, but sometimes mad; as when they
see their shape by reflection in the water, they are taken with a vain
selflove, and forget their meat, and pine to death; they are brought to their
wits again, if you cut off their maine, and bring them to water: then the
memory, of the former ugly shape that they saw, will be abolished. Aelia. H. A.
l. 16. c. 24.
Aelianus writes that the Lycospadian Horses did their best, that they might
seem comely to their Wagoners. Unto their inward senses, Their inward senses.
their wit, teachablenesse, memory, love, and faithfulness toward their
masters, chastity, and courage do belong. It is ascribed to their wit, that
they know the enemies of their party, so that they bite their enemies in
Battle: that, having lost their Riders that they loved, they pine themselves to
death: that they show by their ears what they hear, and that they know well
a skillful Horsman. Alexander his Busephalus, would vouchsafe to suffer none at
any time to back him beside his Lord, and that with his Kingly caparisons: and
having received deep wounds in a Battle, he fell not before he had set his
Lord safe down out of danger. Solinus and Suetonius tell us, Sueton. i^
Caesare.
that Cajus Julius Caesar, his Horse would receive no man on his back besides
Caesar. A certain Pannonian Physician, his Horse being let loose before the
doors, would wait even a whole day, until his master returned from the sick;
and when he came again, met him rejoicing; it is well known by the example of
the Sybarites, that they may be taught to dance, who were come to that hight
of madness, that in their drinking-feasts, they would teach there Horses to
dance to the Pijpe. Scalig. exerc. 209. 5. 1.
Scaliger writes of a Horse that he saw, that was little and misshapen, which a
certain Juggeler carried about to show, by whose desire also he would
sometimes do all his tricks, that he would walk, go a round trott, run,
dance, either on fourefeete or on two. We have seen them drink wine, sitting
on their buttocks; that they have bourne up their first four feet, to carry a
goblet: that they have bourne up a basen with their legs, as if they had
been to be washed by a Barber; as we see the painted Ass with the Coule: they
will lie all alonge on the ground, stretched out at length: that they will
beckon unto you, closing their eyelids: and lift up their head at their master
his nod: and turn on their back, lying with their face upward. It is known
that they know their stable, and return willingly home. Therefore Galba, when
there was a dispute about the possession of a Horse, whose he was, commanded
that he should be led veiled to watering, and when he had drunk, he would go
home to the right stable. ^^idas in (...).
As Deuxippus his Horse was so taught, that he would gallop with him without a
bridle, and when he went saftly before, he would stand still. Strabo tells us,
that the Horses of the Nigrites, followed their masters like dogs. We read in
Herodotus, that they were taught by the Yarce, to lie down on their belly. In
Parthia a Horse bound down to Narva. Another at Paris, made obeisance with bent
knees, to the Queen of Louis the Twelfth. In the year 1636. we saw at Venice,
that a Horse would leep through wooden hoopes, like a doge, and jumping with a
lively swiftness turn himself round; that they have a good Memory, the sound
of the Trumpet especially shows us, which as soon as the Horse hears, he
pricks up his ears, snortles, he neighs, he champs upon the bit: he beats the
earth with his hoofes, no ground will scarce hold him. A certain jester also
in Tzetzen, riding upon a Chariot-Horse, lost his dinner, because the Horse
lighting by chance upon the marke-piller, thinking it to be the circe, he went
round about the pillar till night, running with great violence. To say nothing
of that Tholossanus writes of the Horse of a certain Bishop, that his brother
had so wonted, that as often as he heard these words, O God, attend to be my
helper, he would leap often, and high from the ground, curvetting, and bounding.

As concerning their love, gratitude, and faithfulness toward their master,
examples witness for them. Antiochus his Horse, his Lord being slain in
battle, cast himself, and rider Centeretrius a Gaul man headlong down. A Horse
of a Scythian King, with kicks, and bites killed the conqueror, coming to
plunder. Dionysius his Horse, being left by him, sticking in the mudde, (as we
read in Pliny out of Philistus,) as soon as he got out, traced his masters
steps, though a stock of Bees clave to his back. Homer says, that Patroclus
his Horse wept. Virgil writes the same of Pallantus, Suetonius of Caesar,
Cardan of his own Gennet. ^. 8.
Pliny also has delivered, that many Horses have such an affection to their
masters, that they will mourn for them, and sometimes bewail them with tears.
King Nicomedes being slain, his Horse starved himself to death. The same is
related of the Horse of Socles an Athenian, after he had sold him away.

Of their Chastity you may read in Aelian, Varro, and others. Pliny breefly
thus: A Horse his eyes being uncovered, and knowing then that he had covered
his dame, sought a steep place, and there killed himself. And in the Reatine
Province, a Mare for the like reason perished, and tore the Carter in pieces,
who had so deceived her, for they have understanding of their kindred;
therefore a Mare will choose rather to keep her sister of the former year
company, then the dame. About the folds jealousy, that is sprung from an
incestuous commixture, see Aldrovandus.

Of the Courage of the Horse, the same Author speaks at large. Let it suffice,
that Pliny has advised, that you shear of the Horse main, that they may
condescend to cover an ass, for they pride themselves in their crest. There
have been those also, that would win a course without a wagoner. In the circe,
put into Chariots, they undoubtedly manifest that they understand both
hartning, and praise. Hi. N. l. 8. c. 42.
In Claudius Caesar's races, a Charioter being shaken at setting out, from his
seat, the Horses clad in white, won the race, dashing out of their way whatever
hindered them, and performing all against their corrivals, as if they had had a
guide, shaming men, and their skill, that they should be outdone by horses; and
coming, having run their course, to the goal, they stood stone still. It was a
great matter of divination of old, that Horses in the Plebejan-games, having
cast off their guide, ran into the Capitol, and thence compassed the seat
there, (as Pliny adds.) And the greatest omen of all, that Ratumena, being
Conqueror of Veja, ran with laurel, and crowns thither; from which gate came
to bear the name. Pausanias in Corinthiacis.
In Pausanias we read that Phidotus of Corinth his Mare, her name was Aura, her
rider falling off, at first starting, held her course as exactly, as if he had
been managed by a Horseman, and reaching the goal, she turn herself; but
hearing the Trumpet sound, she was mad to be running, and preventing the
Judges, she stood still, as knowing that she had won. If you mark their
Sympathy, Their Sympathy, and Antipathy.
and Antipathy; The Horse holds much friendship with Hens, and the Buzzard; but
is at enmity with the Camel, Elephant, Wolf, Bear, Sow, Sheep, Ass, Serpents,
a Fish called Trachurus, the Sea-Calf, Apples, and Figs, a kind of Barley
called Pelwort, of a black color, and dead carcasses. When Cyrus encountered
Craesus his Horse with Camels, Herod. Hist. l. 1. c. 15.
the Horse fled. Xerxes placed his Arabians, mounted in Camels in his rere,
least his Horse should be frighted. In the Tarentine war, the Horses being
terrified by the greatness, the misshapen Bulk, and strange Hew, and hideous
noyce of the Elephants, thinking those unknown beasts to be huger then indeed
they were, fled all, which cause a great slaughter. Caesar wading over a River
in Britain, mounted on an Elephant, amazed the British Horses. Aporta reports,
that they cannot abide so much as drums made of the skins, either of Elephant,
or Camel, or Wolf. Plin. H. N. l. 20. c. 20.
Pliny testifies, that it went by tradition, that a Horse will burst that under
his rider treads in a Wolfs steps. We read in Aelian, that if a Wolf tread on a
Horse heel, as he is drawing a Cart, he stands still, and stif, as if with the
Carter he were frozen. Pierius Valerianus reports, that you cannot get a Horse
to pass by, where a Wolfs bowels are buried. Pliny says, that if you ty great
teeth to horses, they will never tire. We shall speak of Lycospadi, and
Lycophori, or Horses that men ride with bits, when we shall deal with the
differences of Horses. We ow it to Portaes relation, that Bears in the
wilderness, are affrighted by a drum, made of a horsehide. Geldings will by no
means come near a Lion, others not gelt will run on him. Colum. R. R. l. 6.
c. 30.
If Sheep stand in a stable wherein Mules, Horses, or Asses have stood, they
easily get the scab. Braying Asses in Darius his expedition against the
Scythians, troubled their Horses. Of Serpents, and Horses, Silius Ital. has
written. The tail of a Trachurus hung at a Mares belly, makes her cast her
foal, H. A. l. 13. c. 27. Plut. Symp. l. 6. q. 8.
if we believe Aelian. They cannot abide the sight of a sea-calf. They swound,
if they carry Appels, or Figs; but come to themselves again, if you lay bread
before them: They will not touch a kind of barley, that grows in Thrace, near a
Province of the Scythians and Medes. They run mad, if you smeare their nostrils
with the herb laser, or benjamin. Gesner was informed by an old man, that
Gentiana, or Pelwort, causes Mares to cast fool. If they tread on henbane, they
cast their shoos. If Horses drink of the River Sybaris, they are troubled with
neezing: if of Cossiniris in Thrace, that fall into the land of the Abdeerites,
they run mad. The same is said of a well, or pit, not far from Potniae a city
of Boeotia. SIlius Ital. writes, that Catoes Horse, though spurred on, would
not approach a black Moore in black harness. We have it from Homer, that they
loath carcases.

We have great use of the Horses in meat, Their use.
physic, war, hunting, journeying, triumphs, and other occasions: we will
only see in what account they are to be had in meats, and medicine. That not
only besieged persons have eaten horseflesh, as in Verona under Maximilian
the First, in Novara, under Lewis Aurelian; at Rupel, under Lewis 13 of France,
to name no more, but we read that heathens make it their food the name of the
Nomedes, the Scythians, the Scarmathae, and the late Tartarians is well known;
these take pleasure in wounding and cutting of Horses, and feeding upon half
raw flesh: they eat Horses dyeing the day before of themselves, or of a
desease, the impostumed place being cut up; and their Kings, when they would
distribute provisions amongst them, were wont to give one horse amongst 40 men.
And also amongst the Persians in their Feasts on their bearth-day, they had set
before them whole roasted horses: and among the Gearmans, they ate both wild
and tame horses, until it was forbidden by Gregory the III. Bruerenus relates,
Bruyer. l. 13. c. 42. Plin. H. N. l. 18. c. 10.
that he has heard that the Inhabitants of the Alps, eat colts. Blood also
has been a delicate: Pliny indeed reports that the Sauromatae do live of
hirse, especially pulls, and also raw meal mingled with blood out of the thigh
veins. Mecovius and Paulus Venetus have written, that if travelers be
surprised with hunger and thirst, they satisfy themselves with opening of
veins and drinking of blood. We read in Horace, l. 2. carm.
that the Cancany, who according to some are Besalte, and according to Acron
and Porphiry are Spanish nations, delighted in the same food. Concerning milk
there is no doubt. For the Scithyans give their children Mares-milke, as soon
as they are borne. Thence have they their names of horse and milke-suckers. The
same lay the milk in the Sun, that the thicker part may settle down, and by
and by they seath it. They say that it becomes like white wine. Cro. Hist.
Polon. l. 29.
The Moschy once, the servants of the Tarters, were wont to present them
Mares-milke upon their journey, as they came with their Captain to demand
tribute. l. 4. de morb. l. 28. c. 9.
Writers are not agreed what Hippacks is. Hypocrates, Dioscorides, and Pliny,
write that it is chees, which he ads smells of vennome, and answers in
proportion to ox-milke, others believe it to be Mares-milke crudled. Theopompus
writes that it was Scithian food of Mares-milke; however it is, we read in
Theophrastus that they could live 11 or 12 days together upon that and
licourise: Hypocrates testifies, H. P. l. 9. c. 13.
that for the most part they use Mares-milk chees. Neither is that any wonder,
since some relate, that Zoroaster lived once six months with milk alone;
which Atheneus declares also of another. As for what belongs to Medicines,
Horses milk, Their use in Phisique.
whay, blood, grease, curd, teeth, heart-bone, liver, stones, gall, hair,
hoofes, sweat, foame, spittle, stale and dunge has place therein; their Milk
is very purgative, M. M. l. 2. c. 75.
as Dioscorides delivers. Whay serves to cleanse the Ulsers of the reins, to
wit that, that by seathing is severed from the milk, if we believe Aethius.
Rhasis writes that a woman, if she unwittingly drink Mares-milk, if she
presently accompany with her husband, shall conceive. I find also in Pliny,
that the same milk is good to wash the matrix. Their blood is of a purifying
quality, Her. Barb.
but whether that of mares, that have taken horse, or of stallions, or of
either sex, experience may best decide. Pliny writes, that the same is good for
the Kings evil: and fariers use it for diverse diseases. The Phragmaticum drawn
from the matrix, Plin. Veger. l. 1. c. 17.
warm with oil and wine, and smeard on over the whole beast against the hayr,
cures it.

The Gall is of a malignant nature, and is reckoned among poisons, so that the
Priest for that cause must not touch a Horse. His grease smoked brings forth a
dead birth, and the afterbirth follows. extus.
His marrow is mixed with ointment for the cramp. Curd from the Mares milk is
accounted a remedy against bloody fluxes, and collicks, say Dioscor. Gale.
Avicenna, and Haly. Meal made of their teeth sprinkled on the privities cures
many, cures their greefs. The teeth that a Horse first sheds tied to infantes,
eases them in breeding teeth, and with more success, if they have not touched
the ground. Sextus writes that with a touch they heal the toothake; for, he
adds, that if an infant kiss a horse mouth, the pain of the teeth is not felt,
nor will a horse bite an infant. The tongue in wine is a present remedy for the
Milt, ^olcil. ^on.
says Pliny. The Heartbone nearly resembles dogsteeth: It scarifies, or opens
a sore; or if you take a tooth out of a dead horses jaw it helps a sore
shoulder, Plini says, infallibly. The Liver laid up in a cedar chest, tempered
with wine of chies, ^alen. ^porist. ^. c. 38.
and water prevents the consumption of the Liver. De* Milt drunk in fresh
water cast forth a dead child, says Pliny. Their stones dride, and drunk
provoke lust. Bunches in their knees, and the hard skin of their hoofs or grown
ground to powder, and given in vinegar are good against the falling sickness,
as Dioscor, Galen. and Pliny write. The hayr tied at a door keeps flies, and
the worms called cniphes out, as Rhasis, and Albertus have delivered. Three
Horse bristles tied in so many knots within sores in the privities, help them.
The ashes of the same taken out of the head, or belly stops a flux of blood.
Warts are taken away, if you bind a horse hayr about them, because by tying
that that feeds them is stopped, and so they dry away. The ashes of their Hoofs
smeare with oil, and water on wax kernels, and apostumate, mattery swelling in
any part scatters, and removes them: and also bunches, if mingled with hot
urine. The same being taken in with wine, and water helps against the stone in
de bladder. Hierocles write, scrapings pourd into a horses nostrils provokes
him to stale. Their sweat, drunk with urine in a bath drives out belly worms,
and serpents; if you will trust the promises of some, mixed with wine, and
drunk by one great with child makes her miscarry. If a knife, or sword warm
out a wound be dipped therein, it is so infected, says Albertus, that the
wounded place will never leave bleeding till the party die. Their foam newly
taken from them infuse in oil of roses helps ears, though never so sore.
Gesner commends their spittle as a remedy for the pestilentiall burning in the
jaws, that sometimes in summer troubles especially shouldiers; Let the patient,
says he, gargle horses spittle in his mouth, that is provenderd with oats, or
barley: then bruise together living crabs, press out the moisture, and wash it
again with the same; if you cannot get living ones, sprinkle the powder of
crabs dried in an oven: after you have washed it with horses spittle. Give to
them that are so far gone in a consumption of the lungs, that they are given
over, an horses some, or spitle in warm water three days together, Plin.
Ma^cellus. Sextus.
the sick person shall without delay be healed, but the horse shall die. As for
their stale, and dung, let it suffice to have said, that mingled with smiths
forge water it helps the falling sickness; the same sod in white wine is used
against the collicke, and the bite of a Scorpion; and in water, good against a
flux. Being fresh and put to the nose stanches blood, especially if stird with
chalk, and sharp vinegar mingled with Eggshell beaten to powder, it prevents
the overbleeding of a wound. Their breath, as some feign, is a preservative
against the plague.

The differences, or kinds of Horses are manifold; the chief are borrow from
places, parts, and certain accidents. From place, those of Acarnan are said to
be greatest; whence it grew a proverb, when men spoke of any huge thing. The
Ethiopian Horses, (the wild I believe) are reported to be wingd, and horned,
and can endure no heat.

Those from Agrigentum were use to be sent of old to the Grecian games, In
Sicilia.
and went away still conquerors. The Alanican were fleetest, and strongest.
Probus had one, as men say, of such swiftness, that between sun, and sun he
went an hundred mile, and would hold out so ten days together, H. Angl. l. 1.
Strabo. Geog. l. 16.
as we have said. The English are most pacers, few trotters, says Polydore
Virgil. The Apaniensers in Sytia kept above 30000 Mares, and 300 they sent out
for breed. Those of Apulia are cried up for the best warhorses, says Varro,
and Volateran. Those of Arabia, specially the Mares, in a day and a night, or
thereabout, can rid an 100 mile ground, if we believe Vartomannus. Arcadia is
famous for breed of mules tween-horses, and shee-asses, whence it has the name
Hippobatos. (...).
The Armenian are of the Parthian race, but have greater heads, says Absyrtus.
The Gennets of Austria are small, (...),
having a soft turning in the opening of their thighs, have been in great
request; but are unfit for war. Martial. Epigram.
The Barbaries out of Tunis, and Numidia are swiftest. Those of Bengala are so
hard hooft, that they need not be shod, though they travel among rocks, and
mountains. In Bisnagar they are sold for 400, or 500 pieces of gold, and
sometimes 800, because they are fetched elsewhere. The Britones have short
thighs and ears. Those of Burgundy most patient. The Calabrian best
travelers. Those of Cappadocia best of all; They used to pay yearly to the
Persian a thousand five hundred. Those of Caraja are brought by merchants into
India, the natives use to cut two or three joints from their tail, that they
may not swinge their rider. Those of Biscay are whitish; brought into the
farther end of Spain, they change color. Those of Cilicia paid for tribute
360 white Horses to Darius. Those of Corsica are gallant spirited, but low;
some little bigger then sheep, says Procopius; some add that they cannot be
rode unless you close their eyes. The Cretan are so lofty spirited, a man dare
scarce come near them. Those of Cyrene pinchbellued, but have sound feet,
shortbreath'd if ridden, and of great bulk. The Dacian most fleet, with manes
hanging to the ground, long-tayles, and little heads. The Danish handsome, and
famous for strength. The Oelandi of the I Will of the Gothique sea, the least tits
in the world, but very teachable. The Elean prayz'd for swiftness; the natives
cause their Mares to be lead out of their coasts to take horse, finding by
experience, that it wonderfully betters the breed. The Epirots are biters, and
froward, by the Elis they deserved the palm; they now call them Aban. Vegetius
applauds the Frigisci, as outdone by none for swiftness, and holding out
untired. The German horses are most trotters. The Transilvanian not so docible
as others, but yielding to none in maintaining a long course.

Those of Greece, whereof Absyrtus writes, have good feet, a great body, a
handsome head, high before, neat bodyed, but unhandsome buttocks, no way
answering the rest, swift and courageous. The Hetrusei are copt-headed and
thick crested. Absyrtus.
The Spanish are great, and handsome bodyed, straight, neat of head, their
whole frame plainly distinct; but thin buttockt, able, and stout travelers of
a body, nor slender, nor lean, but fit for going, and need no spur. Besides
they are from the time of their foaling to their full age, well manner'd, and
obedient, after untoward, and biters. Rodericus Santius says, Hist.
that so great is there fidelity, Hisp. p. 1. c. 2.
that when they feel themselves wounded in battle, they set down their Rider
safe from all danger: they commonly call them Gennets. Those of Holland,
especially southward, are of baway bodies. In Friesland, their Horses generous,
thick-brested, and fit for warre-service. Vegetius.
The Hunnisci are of a great and bow-bending head, their eyes sticking out,
narrow of nostrill, broad cheeckt, strong, and stiffe-neckt, their manes hang
below their knees, great ribs, saddle-backt, thick taild, strong legged, small
footed, full and broad hoofs, hollow bouweld, and the whole body full of
nooks, no fat in their buttocks, no muscles in their necks, rather long, then
high statured, hanging bellyed, great boned, lean, but handsome, and whose
deformity it self is beautiful, their spirit moderate, and knowing, patient of
wounds: they are otherwise called Hunnici: perhaps they are those of Hungaria,
that, Camerarius says, never shed their teeth. Those of Iberia are swift,
Oppianus. ceneg. l. 1.
but not for a long course, handsome bodyed, but tender hoof^d. Perhaps they
are not those of Spain, but out of Iberia, between Armenia and Colchis;
though Oppianus makes them the same. Of the Indian Horses, H. A. ^ l. 12. c. 9.
Aelian says, that they are hardly stopped when they run, unless by most
skillful horsemen. These know how to run the Ring. The Iusubres are harder
neckt then others, and of sparkling eyes. The Istrian, tall their backbone
continued, and hollow, or saddle-backt. The Lidian, very long, of thick ribs
and sides, and broad brested. They can well endure heat, and thirst at midday.
The Massesily are small, and fleet, governed only with a switch, which is also
said of the Moorish. The Menapian, or Gelders, are the only warre-horses of
Jermeny, and therefore much valued. Some will have them called Cicambry. The
Moscy go unshod. Herberstinius.
The Murciby, will scarce take a bit into their mouth. The Neapolitan, are
stout, handsome, and strong. The Negritae are almost of no use, because of the
too much heat: as also because they are codsweld, that they cannot stale. In
stead of hay they use shred fitches dried in the Sun: for oats they use hirse:
for a horse trapped, and with his other furniture they will give nine slaves,
at the most 14. The Nisei, which Oppeanus priseth highly, are most dutiful
easy paced and reined, smal-headed, their maines long and thick, the hair
hanging down on each side, somewhat yellow. Stephanus and Am. Marcel.
testify, that they have been out of Media, they are also called Nesei; they
were wont to send yearly 20000 of them to the King of Persia, Strabo.
about the time when the feast of Mithra was held.

Norwey breeds Horses of a middle pitch, but those of an admirable stoutnesse,
and fleednesse, even in craggy ways. The Numidian, taste not barley, nor wheat,
being content with grass, Absyr.
and hay alone. The Parthian are of fast, huge body; their hayr tied up in
crisped curls. Oppian.
The Persian Horses are not much unlike others in stature, and shape, only are
discerned from others by a certain graceful walk. They take their steps
thick, Vegetius.
and short, but their pace delights, and recreates the Rider, which they have
natural, never being taught it; they are reckoned among the pacers, or
amblers, and rackers, like neither, yet like both: for a spurt they have a
graceful gate, in a long journey of a strong endurance, of a proud temper,
and, unless kept down by labor, daily stubborn against their rider; swelling,
ingenious: and, which is strange, in such a hot climate, wary observers of
comeliness in carriage, their crest arched, and bowing down to their very
breast. Arist. A. H. l. 7. c. 5.
Among the Pharsalick, Arist. avers, there was a kind of Mare, called Justa,
that brought foals all like stallions; whence it may be, they have the name,
justae, or perfect. Cromerus.
The Polonian are coveted by strangers, partly for their swiftness, and
endurance of hardship, partly for their easy going. Among the Psylli, l. 16.
c. 37. H. H. In veterinaria.
Aelian Faines that their Horses are no greater then Rams. What the Saphareni
are, that Vegetius mentions with the Armenian, having applauded the Persian, I
can in no Author find. I guess they are from Saphara, a town of Arabia the
Happy, near the Midland-Sea, which Pliny mentions, and Ptolomy calls Saphara.
Those of Sardis are most cried up, their tayls are long, and bushy, their crest
short, their hoofs like Asses: of a strong, Absyrtus.
sinewy limbs, ears pricked up, if Stradanus have well described them. The
Sarmatici, a kind not unhandsome, and in their kind neat, good racers, plain,
and great bodied, strong of head, and of a comely neck. They geld them, least
being enraged by the sight of Mares, they be borne away, and take head, or
being high fed, they should run a madding, and by often neighing, betray their
owners. Pliny says, that that people, when they are to take a long journey,
prepare their Horses by keeping them short, and hungry, and let them not drink
much, and so shall travel 150 miles without lighting. The Scenitae are outgone
by none in swiftness. ^agri. ^aus ^agnus l. 1^ 65.
In Swethland, and Gothland, they are great, and very serviceable in Battle,
when armed, and are forbidden, by royal command, to be exported. The Tartar are
most white. Venetus writes, that the great Cham keeps XM; ^icho. ^1. c. 6.
so fleet they are, that they can ride 20 German miles of ground in one day:
low crested, and with their feet they search for their food, and water under
the snow; and are fleeter then others, as the Moschi say. Those of Thessalie
have this brand on them, ^^syrtus.
that they are Oxheaded. The Thrasian Horses are ugly, misshapen, rough-bodied,
great-shouldered, saddle-back'd, crooked-shanked, and go an uncertain jogging
pace. Yet Virgil praises the Delphique (uncertain, doubtful) oracle. The
Toringi, Vegetius commends, setting them next the Hunnisci. Volateran makes
those of Sardinia, and Corsica, Isles of the Tyrrhene Sea, to be very low, but
generous, and restles. And thus much of their kinds, in respect of places.

Very many differences also meet us taken from their several shaped parts,
some are stild Elaphopodes, or hartfooted, from their deersfeet, who have bones
in their hough joint, that make them of a hobbling pace, that they tire their
rider with their shufling, so hard they set. Some in the same parts have short,
^noba^^
and low bonds, and their hoofs come to the inmost part of their heels, so that
they trail, and drag their legs after them, and halt; these are dog-footed.
Some are waglers. Absyrtus calls them Eteroskeleis; (...).
not having a right stroke. Some toss their heads up, (or hold them like a Pig
on a spit,) others are unlike jaw'd, one jaw hard, the other soft; from their
accidents, or qualities, (...). ^mer. (...).
they are distinguished (to let pass the rest) from their color. In which
respect, they are some fleabitten, some streaked, some pide, some all of a
color, white, black, red, chestnut, etc.

The spotted, ^pian.
especially with great coleblack spots, and ringlets, whether on the thighs, or
back, at length, or distinct on the neck, are counted the noblest, and are
thought the choyser, because nature seems, in so marking them, to keep a kind
of order, whether in respect of numbers endures, or placed in those spots, or
straitness: next to these are the red, and dark spotted. To these may be
referred the chequered, ^^mer.
or dappled, the speckled, like Panthers; the pide; the fleabitten; those like
magpies, ^^beati. ^nstra^^i.
full of black and white spots. Those whose right, or left feet are both white,
are esteemed bad. Those that have each other foot white, worst of all. The
reason is, because the legs lay clapped together in the dames belly, whence they
became so spotted. Those that are of one only color, Palladius advises to
choose for stallions. The wall-eyed are skewish.
The white Claudian counts fleetest, and are most magnified by Plato. Those
also that are gray-eyed; for, since they all, either black, or goot-eyed, or
grey-eyed, the color of the ey answers that of the body. The blackish are
cried up, especially, if they have a star in the forehead, and a white streak,
and some white on one foot. The coleblacke, Varro. Cassius Medicus. (...).
as it were schorcht in the fire, (Homer calls them Aithoonas) Oppian commends
them for hunting the wild boar. There are some brightbloody, and palm
colored, and bay, and chestnut. Becanus said the azure, or bluish are fleet.
Hesychius, and Varinus mention flame-colour'd. Some, (calls Heterophthalmi)
have one ey greater, or lower then the other. Lacuna miscalls them, one-eyed.
The Parthians liked the fearful ones best, perhaps, because good to run away
upon. Some are called Aetogeneis, (...).
or eaglebreed, from a native scarlet spot on the shoulder, as Absyrtus thinks;
the Sarmatae hold them for good: but reject those that have an eagle mark
about their hips, or tail. (...)
Lastly, those that are called Alphorugchoi, are said to hold out good, and not
to decay so soon as others.

CHAPTER II. Of the Ass.
NExt the Horse, I shall treat of the Ass, a beast contemptible indeed, but no
less useful. Value.
Certainly the report goes, that it is above belief, almost how gainful they
prove to their owners: and it is said for certain, that a Shee-asse there was,
that brought in more then any the most fruitful farm: H. N. l. 8. c. 43.
for it was known, as we read in Pliny, that in Celtiberia, Shee-asses each
yielded 400000 pieces of money, so fruitful they were. No wonder therefore that
Q. Axius the Senator, gave 400 pieces for an Ass; and that Heliogabalus
distributed Asses for rich magnificent presents, and donatives to the people of
Rome. Name.
The name the Ass has obtained among the Romans ( Asinus) is not derived from
A, and Sinos, as if he were a senseless beast, as Bartholomaeus plays upon the
word; but from sitting, as one should say, a Waine, A sedendo Isidor^s. (...).
or Wagon; or rather from the Hebrew word Ason, that signifies an Ass. The
Greeks call him Onos, because helpful to us in our works; unless it were
better to say, from the Palish, wan color, whence also it is thought that the
same name ( Asellus) is put on the codfish. The Cyrenenses call him Brikos,
from his untowardnesse; (...).
Aristophanes, Boupalas, as a man should say, blockish as an ox. Nicander,
Broomaees, the brayer; (...).
and from his hideous absurd voice, Megamocos; Eustathius and Suidas, Kanthoon,
from his packsadle; Hezyc. and the Doors, Killos; others, Koothulos, Lepargos,
from his whitish bowels; (...). Descrip. (...), Hesych.
Cyrill, Memmemnoon, Monios; which yet the Phocenses give only to those that
are sent in have: Also Keeloon he is called; and Okribas, that is, wild;
Ogkistees, from braying. If you look on his Description, his ears are long
and broad, proportionable to his body; he is thick lipped, great headed, there
are black streaks on his neck, and feet. In the entrance of his skin, he bears
the shape of a cross, in which place also his burdens fall more uneasy to
him, then near his reins, because he is there weakerboned. His hair very
rough, and unfit to make clothes; his bowels white; he is fairer hanged then
any other of the fourfooted beasts; (...).
Nicander calls it Korooneen, he fors teeth both male, and female loose at 30
months old; the second, in the sixth month, and if they bring no young, before
they shed their last teeth, they are undoubtedly barren. Their skin is so
tough, Pliny.
and thick, that they scarce feel a club. The heart, very great, as in all
timorous beasts, or those out of fear do mischief. The blood extreme thick,
fat, and black.

As for places, Place.
the Nomades have them not, by reason of the coldness of the region; therefore
northward you find but few. Very many are found in Italy, France, Germany,
Greece, as we shall see in their differences; Feed.
their food is of the meanest. For even, where there are no pastures, Colum. R.
R. l. 7. c. 1.
they will be fed with anything, and a little serves their turn; for they will
eat leaves, and thorns, and willow spruggs, or bavins, if you lay them before
them. They thrive on chaff, that you may find every where in abundance.
Therefore Tetzes, declaring a cities utter ruin, said wittily, that he fears
it should prove Asses-provender. He delights in reed, that to other beasts is
poison; and in figs, the which when one had greedily eaten, and a boy desired
that wine (or grapes,) should be also given to him. Philemon (the Poet) seeing
the Ass eat them, died with laughing. Or Chrysippus.
But so great cost was laid out on Christian the Bishop of Mentz his Asses,
Kranzius. Sax. l. 6.
as might have well maintained a mighty Princes family. They say also that
drinking of water, battens them, and that the more they drink, the more they
thrive by their provender. Engendering.
They are very lustful, which appears by the brazen Ass, that those of
Ambracia dedicated at Delphos, after their conquest over the Molossi, in a
night-fight. But that excess of theirs in venery, it is well known, makes
them sluggish and barren. Hence it is, that to the Egyptians they were so
hateful, as Aelian relates. H. A. l. 10. c. 28. H. N. l. 16. c. 20.
Of their engendring thus Pliny; their soonest bringing forth is after 30 month
old, but a full exact birth after three years, as it is with Mares, in the same
months, and after the same fashion. The shee-asses brings forth in the twelfth
month, for the most part but one at once, for so is her nature, yet twins
sometimes, but very rarely. Seven days after she will couple, and then
conceives; but after again she will take the hee-asse. She is not wont to do
so, unless she bring forth, before she loose the tooth, whereby her age is
known; but if she bring forth before, she shall be fruitful as long as she
lives. She uses to breed all her life long, that is, till she be 30 years old;
when their time comes, they must be helped by a kind of midwiferie, for their
great toyling weakens them in those parts. They never let the he stand idle,
for rest makes him but worse. They bring the he and she together before the
solstice, that is the longest, or shortest day in the year, that every other
year they may bring forth about the same time, which they do the twelfth month
after conception. Thus far Pliny. They are use to be sore teated with breeding,
therefore at six months end they suffer their hee-colts to suck no more, but
suckle their shee-colts almost a whole year. The breeders have milk in the
tenth month; Pliny says, they are never without from the first. If the dames
run in rank pasture, it is deadly for the colts to suck for the two first days
after foaling; they call the disease Colostratio, coming from the first crudled
milk. Genesis 36. 24.
Anah was the first that brought horses, and Asses together, (whence Mules
proceed.) It is worthy our nothing, The following passage (...) list not (...)
English. Their enmity.
as Pliny said, that, especially at the production of Mules, the hair of the
ears, and brows are like the dames, and of as many colors, though all the rest
of the body be of one color. They are all at enmity with the bird, called
Aegithus, (that uses to peck-asses galled backs, because these spoil their
nests) as also the Spinus, (the Nightingal, or Thistlefinch.) And among plants,
they hate hemlock most. They use to rub themselves against thistles, and so
wrong the Aegithus his nest; which she so dreads, that, hearing but an Ass
bray, she casts out all her eggs, and the Chickens fall all out. The Spinus
hates the Ass, because he devours so the thistle-flowers, that she lives upon.
If in Hetruria they eat but hemlocke, they are taken with a deep sleep, and
seaz'd with a senselessness, that they seem stark dead. Scaliger testifies,
that many with eating thereof fall a yawning, and then are giddy, and turn
round, and fall. What men report of the Crow, Exerc. 152.
Wolf, Rat, and Horse, stands with plain reason.

The Ass loves the Scorpion, What they lo^^^
and Vines; whereof Merula says, if one struck by the Scorpion, sit on an Ass
upright toward the tail, the Ass shall feel the anguish in his stead; and that
is a sign thereof, that Ass dies farting. Or if he, whom a Scorpion has
stung, whisper the Ass in the ear, saying, a Scorpion has stung me, the
pain shall leave him, and pass into the Ass. But it is observed, that, if an
Ass crop a vine-branch off, from that time the vine shall take better, and
prove more fruitful: and that those that have studiously endeavored this,
have gained yearly an ample vintage. Men use to fetch the water of the river
Styx, only in an Asses hoof; and that Empedocles could allay east-winds with
botles made of asses-hides: I know not whether these are to be reckoned among
the examples of Sympathy. Their life they prolong to the thirtieth year, (...).
unless they be worn out with overhard labor. The shee-asse is more lively
then the he.

Their voice is braying, or onking, as Scaliger will have it, ^oyce.
and we read of that they call Bromomai, and Mycaomai by the Greeks. They only
among the hairy beasts are free from not only lice, ^^seases.
but also loosnes, and chapping of the skin. They are troubled with rheums, and
insatiable hunger, and that most, if they carry figs dried, and apples. They
call it Malida, which arises in the head, and causes much red and yellow stuff
to run out of the nostrills; which should it fall down on his lungs, would kill
him, ^. A. l. 14. ^^ 10.
as it is said. Aelian reports that the Maurusian Asses, as soon as they come
into the highway, ridd ground with such incredible swiftnes, that they rather
do fly, then run; but then they are soon tired, their feet, and spirits failing
them, and when goaded on to mend their pace, stand stone still, and weep
bitterly. See in Aldrovandus, how their halting may be cured. That, as Pliny
writes, they take heed of water, their na^re.
and fear to dip their feet in it; that (wonderful to be related) though very
thirsty, if the water be changed, you must force them to drink, and unload him
also; that grinning, gaping, and unhandsome showing their teeth, they seem to
laugh. That they will piss, when they see others stale before them, or upon
dung; that they are not much troubled with monthly terms; that, when they
drink, that thrust not their nose far in, certainly because of the shadow of
their ears. Lastly, that they, of all beasts, except the mouse, are most quick
of hearing; all this belongs to their nature. All men know, that they are
condemned to the priveledge of singular stupid dulnes, whence blockish men have
obtained deservedly the name of Asses; ^o^tish^^esse.
whereof Aldrovandus at large. Yet some examples show, that they may be taught,
^^ descr. ^fricae.
for Cardan, out of Leo Africanus, writes, that Asses can dance to the pipe,
and with a word whispered in their ear, will of their own accord ly down on
their back, and hold their eyes close shut, and as if they had drunk poison,
swell, nor can be brought for a time by threats, entreaties, nor blows to rise
up, but will start up on a sudden, and jolly, allured by stroaking, and
flattering, and by promis that they shall carry a beautiful woman; but when
they shall hear that they are to carry old crones, or decrepid women, they
shall hang their ears, and fain themselves lame; and being asked whether they
love fair mayds, they shall beckon a yea with their head; nay, they shall pick
out the fairest in the company. Gesner, having been an eye-witnes, ^ist.
^uadrup. ^ Asino.
reports the like of a shee-Asse of John a Grua the juggler. She, says he,
would first dance three several kinds of daunces, as the music changed; and
that with her forefeet held up, with great alacrity, and anon, as if all her
jollity were turned into the deepest sorrow, cast herself all along on the
ground, and there ly stone still, as struck with an apoplexy, and could not be
brought to stir, with spurning, or kicking: after being bid to greet all the
beholders, she would, like a man, turn her eyes and head toward them all, and
salute them, doing obeisance with her forefeet: and, which was the greatest
wonder of all, she, to the amazement of the bystanders, would cast her body
through a hoop, at her masters beck; as cleverly as a dog should leap through.
Lastly, like a dog, she would take up an handkerchief, or glove dropped on the
ground, and restore it to the owner. They are so fond on their colts, that they
will run through fire to come at them; and are so loving to their kind, that
they swound, if they see them die. It is also observed, that the sheeashe takes
special heed, that she bring not forth before any man's eyes, or in the light.
When she is overloaden, she shows it by hanging down her ears.

That Asses flesh has serve for food, is witnest by Galen. Their use in food
lib. 3. de aliment. facult.
The story also of Charles V. relates the Spanjards did sometime eat it. We
know also, that M.D.XVI. at the siege of Verona, it was counted a dainty, when
they used lentils, and beans but seldom. The Persians also on their
birth-feast-day would roast an Ass whole, and reckoned it among Princely
delicates. Mecaenas, says Pliny, was the first who appointed Asse-colts in
feasts, at that time preferred before wild Asses; H. N. l. 8. c. 43.
after his time the taste grew out of request. That they are ill tasted, and
hard of disgestion, and spoil the stomach, they that have fed on them can
witness. Use in Physic.
The Physicians have brought into use Asses milk, blood, flesh, liver, spleen,
yard, stones, hoofs, scurf, stales and dung. L. 6. de tuen. sa.
Galen says, their milk is thinnest, if compared with that of the cattle that
we use to milk: but thick, if compared with that of camels and Mares. Unless
we so distinguish he must be said to contradict himself; since Pliny also
writes, that camels-milk is thinnest, next that of Mares, the shee-asses so
thick that men use it in stead of curds. It is best, if she be well, well fed,
young, and shortly after her foaling. Physicians advise, some of them, that
they that are in a consumption, Plin. H. N. l. 23. c. 5. 28. c. 12.
should suck it themselves, that it abate not of the native warmth. Galen
prescribe it to young man, who was wasted away, mixed with honey, as soon as he
came out of a bath. The same drunk alone refreshes an exulcerated stomach;
and is commended against a cough, leannes, H. N. l. 11. c. 41.
and spitting of blood. Drinking it helps a sore breast, as Pliny delivers; and
taken in with honey it helps monthly terms. It is not good for a weak, or giddy,
swimming head. It helps against parget, ceruse, brimstone, and quicksilver.
Gargling it is most comfortable for exulcerated jaws. There are examples of
some helped of the gout by drinking Asses-milk. And some eased of that gowtish
pain, by drinking the whey thereof. Plin. H. N. l. 11. c. 41.
It is thought to help somewhat to the making women's skin white. It is certain
that Domitius Nero his Poppaea carried still along with her 500 bigbellied
Asses, and bathed her whole body in the milk, on a conceit that it saftned and
suppled her skin.

The blood, some say, stanches a flux of blood out of the brain. Plin. H. N.
lib. 28. c. 16.
Pliny says, that it is said to cure a quartan ague, if the patient drink
three drops of the blood taken out of a vein in the Asses-eare, In Praxichim.
in a pint and a half of water. Hartmannus commends the same taken after the
ears, as extreme good against madness. Linen never used before is thereby
softened, and bleached; whereof a part is softened in a draught of spring water,
and the water taken in against frenzy. Aelian witnesses the same of Asses
flesh; and that one Bathylis of Candia was recovered of lunacy thereby, it
being prescribed him. Pliny says, Lib. 28. H. N. c. 16.
it cures the Tisick, especially in Achaja: we read the same in Avicen, who
adds that it is given in against the falling sickness.

The liver also eaten helps against the same disease, but is prescribed to be
eaten fasting. Others advise it to be dropped into the mouth mixed with a little
of the universal medicine. The milt is so effectual against the spleen, that
the profit is felt in three days usage. The same beaten to powder, and out of
water put on the breasts brings the milk into them, if we credit Sextus. The
fume is good for old matrices, as Pliny holds. Their Reins in powder given in
pure wine, help the bladder, and to hold the water. The Asses genital is
conceived, says Pliny, burnt to ashes to make hayr come thick, and prevent
gray hayrs, if smeare on the new shaven with oil, and pounched to powder with
lead. His right stone drunk in wine, or bound to the arm provokes lust.
Either of them helps against witchraft. Wrapping infants in the skin keeps them
from frighting. Plin. l. 10. c. 19.
A ring made of his hoof, if there be no black in it carried about one
inclinable to sounding fits, keeps him from falling. The Asses of the same are
also good for that end, drunk many days together, and kneaded with oil
dispersse swellings, or bunches. Tarentus used it for a bait to take many
fishes. That they call lichen (whether male, or scurf, or tetter) burnt, and
powderd, and laid on with old oil, breeds hayr so, that if you anoint but a
woman's jaw with it, she shall have a beard; daubd on with vinegar raises from
a lethargy, or dead sleep. Their stale smeard on with clay takes away corns,
Plin. l. 26. c. 16. and 28. 15.
and cures hard flesh, says Marcellus. Savanarola has written that it is good
against an ill savor of the nostrils. Dioscorides, that in drink it helps the
ache, and gravel in the reins. Wherefore those of old have still used it. L.
28. c. 16.
Of their dung, thus Pliny; The dung of the Asse-colt, voided first after his
foaling, is called Polea. The Syrians minister it in vinegar, and meth against
the spleen: The same helps the colic, and bloody flux, boyld in wine it
greatly relievs the pain of the skin: In three days it cures the kings-evill
given but as big as a bean in wine. A mares foles dung has the like efficacy.
The same is used to stanch blood. Tarentinus much commends it moystned in
Coriander juice, and kneaded with barly-flower, for the taking of trachuris and
perch.

I need not speak of their usefulness in carriage, in the mill, in war, and
at the plow, etc. This may be added, that pipes are made of Asses bones, and
are shriller then others; and that the Arabs make parchment of the asse-hide,
and cloth of the hayr.

Some differences, Differences.
and kinds they may be divided into; There are those of Mysia, that are crooked
gutted; and Vary so called, such as the Great Turk gave Ferdinand K. of
Naples, of a strange hayr, Pontanus.
a body streakt, many colored, and marked with even streaks, Small, such as
Illyria, Thrace, and Epire breed. Great ones, such as Antron a City of Thessaly
yields. Swift, found by Euphrates, that outrun a Horse. Xenophon.
Scaliger writes that in Egypt such is the holding out, and fleetnesse of
their ambling Asses, Exercit. 117.
that they can without baiting ride their 40 miles a day without taking a hayrs
harm.

CHAPTER III. Of the wild Ass.
THe Greeks call him Onagros, (...).
as much as to say, the Ass of the field, or wild Ass. Nicephorus Callistus,
speaking of India, H. Eccl. l. 9.
seems to describe him, when he says, this Region breeds wild Asses both very
great, and of a skin of strange musuall colors, black, and white being mixed
with a great variety: And certain girdles, or rings reaching down from the top
of the backbone to the sides, and belly, and there parted, and by certain
turnings entertwined, making an admirable folding, and variety. Oppianus
ascribes a silver color to him, Cyn^g l. 3.
which Gesner takes it for an ash color, and conceives that Eeroenta signifies
the same. But that he is not all white is clear by what Oppian adds about a
black streak running along his back, fairly distinguished here, and there by
snow-white crownlets. Their skins Suidas calls Ozai.

They live in wildernesses, especially in rocky and craggy places, in Africa,
Lycaonia, Narsinga. Some deny that they pass in Lycia, that hill that severs
Cappadocia from it. The Cappadocians hunt them most. Lucian.
In Psara, an isle of the Aegean sea, lives there a kind, that translates
elsewhere die. Some deny that there are any in Scythia. But Strabo sais that the
inhabitants about the marshes of Moeotis, appoint hunting matches of them.

As for their nature, and fashions; Isidore, Their nature, and fashions.
and Bartholomew of England write, that they were about the first Equinoctial
once every hour night and day; and thereby men know that the nights, and days
are of a length: which rather agrees to the Cynocephalus, bodied like an Ape,
and headed like a Dog; Scaliger says, that if they have seen a man stand in
the same steps, they presently fall a braying, holding their forefeet still,
and flinging out with their hindfeet. He will suffer the hunter to come so near
him, that he can touch him with his hand, and then he betakes him to his heels.
Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 44. and Soli^us.
They are very jealous, and each governs his females: They are fearful of
their rivals. Whence it is, that they watch their shee-asses, when great with
fool; that, if they can, they may by biting geld the male-colts, which the
dammes fearing, do their best to hide them in corners, and love to foale by
stealth. We gather out of H. Scriptures, that they are impatient of thirst.
Some, to have a breed of Mules, choose wilde-asses tamed. This beast is easily
tamed, and made so gentle, that he shall not seek to return to his former
lovely wildness.

Their flesh is bitter, Use.
says Aelian: Galen says, that that of the well conditioned, and young, comes
near to Harts-flesh, and beef. Scaliger says, that it is rank, while warm;
cold, it neither smells, nor tastes well. And Pliny writes, that Maecenas made
feasts of Asses-colts, Exerc. Zob. 5. 4.
and that then they were far preferred before the wild Asses; but after his time,
their taste was not regarded.

Physicians smear their galls on Ulcers with good success; and mingle them in
plasters against S. Anthonies fire, if we believe Avicen. Their fat with oil
of Costus, is commended for the windiness of the loins, and reins. The flesh
of their back with oils, help aking-joynts. Their piss, says Avicen, breaks
the stone in the bladder. Their marrow cures the Gout, and takes away the pain,
anointing the place. The dung mixed with the yolke of an egg, daubed on the
forehead, stanches blood. The same with an Ox-gall, if you anoint the hair,
makes it curl.

There are said to be two kinds of them. Kinds. Sc^liger.
In the mountain that parts the Narsingae their Kingdom from the Malabars,
many savage Asses have their haunt. The same breeds wild Asses faced like a
Horse, ash-colored, so nimble of foot, that there is no taking of them. Those
also of Africa are so swift, that they fall short of no wild beast, except that
they call the Lant.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Mule, and the Indian Zebra.
THe name Name.
of the Mule is common to four living creatures; For the shee-mule is
ingendered, not only between a Mare and an Ass, but between a shee-Asse^, and
an Horse, as also a wild-Asse, and a Mare, as Columella has delivered. The
Iumar, R. R. l. 6. c. 36.
between an Ass, and a Bull. Only males come from a Horse and an Ass;
Ancients called them hinnulos, Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 44. Nonius.
or little Mules: on the other side, they called those Mules, that came of an
Ass and a Mare. Yet Varro thinks that they are to be called, Mules, that come
of a Mare, and a Mule. It may be those are the pumily, or tits, that Martial
mentions. For Hinnus (they are Varro his words) engendered of an Horse, R. R.
l. 2. c. 8.
and shee-Asse is fleshie in bulk then a Mule, and for the most part, ruddier,
dard as a Horse, mained, and tailed like an Ass. But the name of Mule, Isidore
conceives to be drawn from the Greeks, namely from that Bakers use to drive
abont their flowgoing mills withal, or a mullet: But it is better to drive it
from Molos, (...),
labor, or of the Hebrew Maal, which signifies prevaricating, deceiving. or
going out of the right way; Since this is a toyling creature, and bred out of
the road, or ordinary course of nature: Gr. (...).
He has obtained many names among the Greeks; Emionos, or half, mungril-breed,
because sprung from an Ass, and a Mare; Astrabe, from his strength of body;
Agonomoxthos, from barrenness; Eterogonon zoon, as bred of diverse seeds;
Thres, olkas, etc. are names given to the she, as Oreus to the he. Aeidaros,
because he can lobour more then any other beasts on mountanous places. Many
more Greeks names he has gotten, whereof consult with the Lexicons,

When the Mule has a Mare to the Dam, Description.
and an Ass to the Sire, he resembles partly the one, and partly the other:
yet more the Sire then the Dam, and is also voyced like him. They are long dard
like the Ass; and has them in stead of forelocks to guard the eyes. Xenoph.
There is a cross on the shoulder; small, slender footed they are, lank of
body; for the rest, like a Horse, save that the neck is none strait. They have
all 36. teeth, besides others more then usual by nature: Ruellus. s. Hierocle
We learn from Aristotle, that they shed them. In the heart of some is found a
bone. Gall they have none, as all whole hoofed.

If you would know their place; Place.
they say, that hot, and dark places spoil them, and make them after a manner
beside themselves; they love to have their standing in the open air, covered,
or only their head, it is enough; the rest takes no harm by the air. There
are none of them in Arabia the Happy, England, Scotland, Poland, nor in the
neighboring regions. They cannot breed in Eleus* because of a certain
imprecation, Herodotus.
or curse. Fran.
The East Indies also want them. Lopoz.
In Scythia they cannot abide so much as the beginning of winter. Diodor.
A certain Isle there breeds some, Siculus.
but those of a loud, Strabo.
and shrill voice. Geog. l. 11. and 12
Themisita is full of them. The Cappadocians pay yearly 2000 of them to the
Persians. That they abound in Persia, Mesopotamia, and Babylon appears by
Alexanders taking order to lead away 3000, at the taking of Susae, both such as
would carry and draw. Their food Feed.
is both fruit, and grass; but they baten most by their drink; nothing is
better to keep them in good plight, then clave-grasse: the more barley they eat,
the more they neigh. From their first breeding of teeth they wax, and live many
years. It is reported, that, when the Temple was built at Athens, there was one
80 years old.

The male, as they say, engenders at seven years old; Engendring. Arist. de
Genesis c. ult.
the female is barren, because, though she conceive, she can bring naught to
perfection; but the Hee-mule, being of a hotter temper, then the female,
sometimes generates, though he confer little to the brood; and what comes of him
is but a maimed tit, as among the Swine the Metachaerum, or afterbirth, you
shall find the same of a Mule in Juvenal. Yet good Authors, not to be
concealed, as M. Varro, and before him Dionysius, and Mago, have delivered that
in regions of Africa, the broods of shee-mules are not so prodigiously strange,
but are as common with them, as Mares with us. We shall unfold the reasons of
their barrenness, in the books of Nature. Smell.
Some relate that they excel in the sense of smelling, by the benefit whereof,
leave them any where, they shall by their sent alone find out their way. Hence
is it, that they are easily tainted with an infectious air, and stricken with
the pestilence, which also happens to dogs. Of the diseases whereto they are
liable, see Aldrovandus.

There is such a Sympathy, Sympathy. Antipathy.
or agreement in nature, between them and swimming fowls, whether Geese, or
Ducks, that they are said to be heald with the very sight of them. On the
contrary the Flowers, and leaves of the Laurel rose, that are wholesome to man,
are to them poison. In Mules also there is, I know not what, deadly to Mice.
For fasten but a Mules left hoof at door, and the Mice shall quit the house;
they are ever tame. The she is are found livelier then the he is, and wax not so
soon old. Those are cleansed by the flowing of stale; these seem sooner old by
the sent of urine. They love tumbling to refresh them, when weary. They borrow
from the fire hardiness to labor, and boldness, and from the dame, R. R. l.
2. c. ^.
swiftness. I have known, says Varro, that when a Wolf has come to a
company of Mules, they have hemmed him in among them, and kicked him dead. Yet
any un-usuall sight terrifies them, and brings them into hazards. They kick
most fiercely. There has been one seen, that would brook no master, but one.
They are extreme stubborn. I saw, as I went between Naples and Rome, one, that
could by no means be forced to lead the way, and being left by her fellows, lay
down, making us all laugh, and the Priest, who rode on her, fret. An example
of their craft, Plin. l. utr. anim.
you have in Thales his Mule, H. N. l. 8. c. 44.
and of their memory, in Pliny. Arist.
The monuments of Athens declare, H. A. l. 6. c. 24.
that one Mule lived 80 years; they taking delight in him, because; when they
were building a Temple in the Tower, he being excused from labor for his great
age, would endeavor to help, and in courage by his company, the beasts that
fell under their burden; concerning which mule they decreed, that no
corne-merchants should offer to drive him from their corne-sives: Some have
wrote, that they will not kick, when they have drunk wine. Use.
How true that is, we shall show elsewhere. They are of great efficacy against
poison, few one poisoned in a Mules belly newly killed, he shall escape with
life, if he remain therein, as long as there is any warmth in the beast; He
shall be much better, if he use many. Maranta is Author, that there have been
Princes, who to save a life, have used 30, 40, and 50 Mules. Some have allayed
their lust by sprinkling on their body the dust wherein a shee-Mule has
tumbled. Plin.
Their heart, H. N. l. 8. c. 45.
stones, reins, flesh, and filth of their ears, are said to cause barrenness.
The bristles of the tail, bound together, are good to help conception, says
Pliny. Hippocrates prescribes, against the womb-flux, to drink their dung
burnt, powdered, and sifted in wine.

Aristotle mentions two kinds, namely the barren, Kinds.
(whereof before) and the breeder, whereof he writes, that there are in Syria,
called Mules, of a diverse kind from that engendered between a Mare and an Ass,
but faced alike as wild-Asses, have obtained the name of tame from their
likeness. And indeed, as wild-Asses, so Mules excel in swiftness. Such Mules
engender in their kind, as it is well known in them, that in the time of
Pharnaces father of Pharnabazes came into Phrigia, that are there yet; three of
nine are kept there to this day. They commonly engender in Cappadocia, but it
is a peculiar kind.

The Zebra answers every way the mule, Theophrastus, Aldrovand. l list. quad.
l. 1. c. 8.
but that it is a fruitful breeder. Purchase Plig. l. 7. c. 13. 5. 7.
Of a hayr full of seames and streakes, wonderful to be seen. For even from
the back-top to the belly she has lines, as painted, of three colors, black,
white, and yellow, the lists being disposed in an even proportion, each almost
three fingers broad. They run wild, but in herds, and are famous for
swiftness; and, if tamed, might serve in stead of an Horse. Some take them for
mules. Whereof Pigafeta thus: Arist.
The Zebra is bred in this tract (Congo) as also in other parts of Barbary,
P^ga^. de^c. r^g. Congo.
and Africa, which though in shape, and stature like the mule, yet is not it,
(since it breeds) and differs from the mule, and all other beasts in color.
For in three colors, black, white, and fresh red streaks of three fingers
breadth compass the body from the back to the belly in fashion of semy, or half
circles; the tail being of a red, and shining hew-footed, and hoof'd as the
mule, otherwise of a light, and nimble foot, as the Horse, nay much fleeter
then he, so that it occasions the proverb in Portugal, swifter then the Zebra.
She breeds every year, whence there is great plenty of them; but useless to
the natives, who know not how to use them; else they might serve them as well
as Horses, both in peace, and war, nature having furnist those places with
them, where there are no Horses, to supply that want. Those of Congo therefore,
nether having Horse, nor knowing how to yooke oxen, nor to tame, or briddle the
Zebra, nor know how to use other beasts; are feign to use men in all their
works. And as they lay all their baggage on men's shoulders, so themselves are
carried about by men in litters, or on chairs covered from the Sun, having
always servants, or other hirelings at hand to that purpose. And if they are
to dispatch long journies in a short time, they carry many such man-bearers
about with them to take their turns, as the rest are weary; by which shifting,
they rid more way, then Horses themselves. So far Pigafeta.

CHAPTER V. Of the Elephant.
THe Elephant has also place among the whole-hoof'd, Aldr.
whose hoof, H. q. l. 4. c. 9.
though it may seem to be shaped, as if he had toes, yet because they are not
cleft: I know not well how to shut them out from among the whole-footed. He
has gotten his name, Name.
not from his vast bulk, he seeming to be a kind of mountain, as Isidore would
have it; Vincen. Beilun. Martin. in Lexi.
but rather from the Hebrew Alaph, to learn, he surpassing all other beasts in
teachablenesse: or from Eleph, an Ox, by reason of his greatness, Bu, being a
word importing increase: (...).
Or, as it were Elebas, from Elas, a marish, and Baino, to descend, because
with his weight he makes there deep gulls; or from Elephrairo, (...).
to hurt; or from Elisso, to bend in, because he has an involved in bending
his trunk; (...).
or finally, from Alphos, white, since ivory, triumphs in that color. Some
call him Pirissas, (...).
others simply the monstrous beast, (...).
( Theria.) The Romans, Helye. Bari^.
who saw Elephants first in their war with King Pyrrhus, P^^n.
call them Lucanian oxen; whether from Lucanian, where they first saw them, or
(a Luce) from light, because they glistered a far of by reason of the Princely
golden shields, wherewith the towers on their backs were adorned. The Indians
call him Bartus, from his voice, says Isidore; others will have it a Sabine
name, whence Servius thinks Ebur, Ivory has the name.

We shall show in the differences, Descript.
their different greatness. Gillius measured one at Constantinople, that from
the ey to the farther end of the back was eleven foot; from the ey to the end
of his trunk, eight foot. Some of them are twelve foot high; some thirteen;
some reach fifteen, and nine inches. Aloysius Cadamustus writes, that he saw
one, that had more flesh then five of our Bulls. They are all black, except the
Ethiopian: yet the writers of the Indian voyages report, that the King of
Narsinga has a white one.

They have a checquerd skin, or rather one graven with blistered pits, and is
of such a hardness, that you would take it to be of bone. Cassiod.
Therefore the Moors make their bucklers of it; Plin.
and the Peguans use it in stead of arms: yet it is harder on the back, H. H.
l. 8. c. 9.
then the belly. Their back-skin is extreme hard and stubborn, Solinus.
their bellies are soft. H. N. l. 11. c. 39.
Whether he be hairy, or no, Pliny himself knew not; He has no bristles to
cover him, nor can he use so much as his tail to drive away the flies from
annoying him; Pliny speaks of the Elephants in some places; but in others,
their bodies have impenetrable bristles. Cardan says, their skin is naked, and
gives reason why it must be so. But Cadamustus testifies that he himself has
plucked blackish hairs two palms long out of them. Gillius affirms the same
length thereof. Vartoman, finally, reports, that they have a tail like the
oxes, about 27 inches long, with a few hairs at the end; and in the description
of Guinea we read that the women use such for fly flaps to drive them from
their images. Nay Pliny, as forgetting himself, writes, that the Indians
delight strangely in Emeralds, counting them only precious stones, and had
rather want gold then them, and that they make holes in them, and tie them in
Elephants bristles.

They have an ugly misshapen head; and about the temples a kind of tunnell,
Plin. H. H. l. 35. c. 5.
whereout the male sends forth a fat stuff at couplingtime; the female also
has the like then open, if we believe Strabo. Their ears are little for a
beast of that bulk, Geog. l. 15. Oppian. Cyneg. l. 2. v. 519.
two hand-palms breadth every way, and under them is a place, where you may
strike him dead with one stroke of a chissell driven by a hammer. Livy thinks
that Haserubal first found it out. Those among the Sambri, Solin. c. 43. Plin.
l. 6. c. 30.
an Ethiopian folk, have no ears. Their eyes, though great, yet seem but small
for so vast a body; and those but heavy. The mouth in the breast, and with that
they suck, and not with the trunck; Cadamust.
their is also very small, Aelian.
and very far in, Arist.
not as in other beasts, H. A. l. 2. c. 6.
that you can hardly perceive it. They have four teeth within to chew withal,
besides the tushes that hang out, Arist.
the males are crooked, H. A. l. 2. c. 5.
and turning again, the females teeth strait, and hanging downward. They have
teeth so soon as they are brought forth, but those great ones, are not so
plainly seen; with those they grind their food as small as meal. They are
placed in their upper-jaw, and some are of an astonishing greatness.
Bartomannus saw a couple in Sumatra, hanging up, that weighed 336 pound. And
Gadamustus saw one slain, whose teeth exceeded 36 fingers breadth in greatness;
and sticking 24 fingers breadth out. Of whose vastness thus Pliny. The greatest
teeth are to be seen in temples. But in the utmost coasts of Africa, H. N. l.
8. c. 10.
where it borders on Ethiopia, they use them in stead of posts in their houses,
and for fences, Polyb. Guloss.
and stakes, and prope in their stalls for cattle. Gillius reports, that they
wax sometimes to ten foot length. Venetus the Merchant, that one was said to be
sold for 36. pieces of gold, being 94 inches long, and 36 inches thick; and
that it was so heavy, that he could not lift it from the ground. Besides
Sabellicus writes, that there was at Firmus two Elephants-teeth of that
excessive hugeness, that Aurelian, who conquered it, caused them to be carried
for a miracle to Rome, and of such an unbeleeveable length. Some call these
Horns. How properly Aldr and Cardan show, and shall elsewhere declare; only I
desire to add here, Arist.
that the lower jaw is only stirred in eating, H. A. l. 1. c. 11.
the upper lying still. In that place, where other beasts noses stand. The
Elephant has a part hanging, narrow, and long, that reaches to the very
ground, board at the end, flexible, yielding nimble, like a serpent, that can
every way turn it self, a Trunk the English call it; the Latins, Proboscis,
(or a snout.) Tuba (a Trumpet) Manus (a hand) as Pliny and Cicero call it; Cic.
l. 2. de not. Deo. Cas. l. 10. variorum.
Manus nasuta (a nosed hand) as Cassiodore, Promuscis, as Vitruvius. The Greeks
call it Proboskitha, Mokteera, Pronomaian, etc. There is the same use of it, as
of a hand. For therewith they take, and put food dry, and moist to their mouth.
Therewith they breath, drink, And take up burdens; discharge a pistol, as I
have seen. l. 8. a. 1. ad 12.
smell. Lucretius therefore calls them, Anguimanos, snakehanded. Aristotle H.
A. l. 2. c. 1. testifies, that they have bending joints in the lower part of
their hind legs; but, as concerning the bending of their legs, some report
otherwise, as that they have no joints, but their legs is one entire bone,
which they cannot bend, and that falling, they cannot rise again: But others,
as Pliny for one, deliver, that they have behind short joints, and within
bending hams, like a man; and indeed experience has taught us so much. Their
feet are round, like a horsehoofe, but broader, the bottomes being some 18
inches round. Vertoman likens them to a table-trencher, formed of an hard,
black, wide skin. Their toes are misshapen, five in number, but not parted, and
scarsely distinguished, the hoofs are not like claws. Plin. l. 11. c. 46.
They have two paps under their shoulders, Arist.
not on the breast, H. A.
but on the side it is hidden in the shoulder-pits. Their Genital is like a
horses, but small, no way answerable to their bulk. Pliny says, that they
gender averse, the face turn from each other. Their testicles are not seen
outwardly, but lurk within about the reins, whence they engender the sooner.
Ctezias trifles in saying their seed is as dry, and hard as amber. Pliny said,
they have four bellies. H. N. l. 11. c. 37.
Aristotle, H. A. l. 2. c. 17.
that their gut is windding, and turning, that they seem to have four
bellies, and therein meat is found. Galen makes it very wide, and most like a
horses, their entralls resemble a swines. Their liver is four times as great
as an oxes; the rest of the inwards are answerable, except the milt; this is
less then proportion would require. Pliny makes their lungs four times
greater as an oxes. Aristotle denies that he has any gall in his liver: yet,
if you cut that part, where it uses to bide, some gally moisture more, or
less, will spurt out. Galen also avers, that there is choler in his bladder.
The same took a bone out of the heart of one that he cut up; and he observes,
that it has two ventricles in it, H. A. l. 4. c. 31.
and not three, as Aristotle says. Whereof Aelian thus; The Elephant is said
to have a double heart, and sense, that by the one he is angered, by the other
appeased, as the Moors report. See the description of a couple in Aldrovandus.
They are found in Africa, Place.
Asia, and the neighboring Islands. And in Africa in a Forest behind the
Syrtes, or quicksands, in the deserts-bordering on Sala, a Town of Mauritania;
in Lybia, Getulia, and the Forests near mount Atlas, etc. The Symbari, between
the Arabian Mountains, and the Nile, live on the hunting of them. Plin. H. N.
l. 6. c. 3o.
There were huntings of them appointed by Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, King of
Egypt, in the Aethiopia of the Ophiophagi, or Serpent-eaters. As for Asia,
King of Parthia, Plin. H. N. l. 6. c. 20. 21.
kept D. C C. King of Audata a 1000. The King of the Palibroti 9000. The King
of Chrysaeum, Parasanga, Asanga had 300 armed. In Taprobana are vaster, and
more warlike accounted then in India, as Onesicritus a Governor under
Alexander the Great, Johan. Metellus.
relates. In Zeilan are at this day very great ones, and very ingenious. The
Siamensian King is said to keep 12000; whereof 4000 stand ever armed against
any sudden surprises, and chances. Under the great Mogul, his command are
50000. Var^omann (...) de Baros. Paul. Ven^t^s.
In Mosambique Isle, and in Benomotapa. are found whole herds of them. To the
Isle Zanzibar, also resort many Merchants to buy Yvory. They delight much in
moist and marishy places, they love rivers, especially in hot countries, for
they can endure no cold.

As concerning their foed, Meat, and drink.
they feed on fennygraffe, Plin.
on leaves of trees, H. N. l. 8. c. 12.
on stumps, the fruits of the mose-tree, and on the roots of the Indian
fig tree. They devour sometimes earth and stones. But eating it brings them
diseases, unless they first chew it. The tame ones are fed with barley, and
they will sometimes devour nine Macedonian bushels thereof at once. There was
one showed at Antwerp, that gobbled up four bushels of apples on one day. They
write, that they are much taken with musckmelons. (...).
Water, but muddy, and troubled, is their drink; Wine also made of rice, and
other grain, and so among us. That at Antwerp souped up at once more then 16.
pound; and did that so often, that it seems to come near the proportion,
whereof Aristotle writes. H. A. l. 8. c. 8.
Yet they can well bear thirst, and can go without drinking eight days
together. Engen. (...).
About their coupling, Plin.
the time and manners, Arist.
writers report diversely. H. A. l. 5. c. 2. and 5. 14.
Pliny out of Aristotle says, the male begins at five years old, the female at
ten. Aristotle assigns to both the 20 years, and anotherwhile, the twelfth to
the female, when soonest, and the fifteenth, when latest; you shall find in
Solinus, that they couple averse from each other. Horace of Canida agrees with
him, that the female sits, I will not translate all^ nor is it fit. wh^t they
are ashamed to do, I will bl^^^h to write. If they then spy any spi^s, they
will kill them, if they can.
then the male covers her. See Albertus the Great, and Aristotle, about the
circumstances, the desire to couple in the water especially, etc. They never
couple but in secret. The male three years after seeks out the same female, and
never more after. In two years they couple five days, and no more, says
Solinus out of Pliny, nor return* they to their herd, till they have washed
themselves in fountain water. In coupling-time they rage most, and ^^row down
the Indians stables. It is also doubted, how long the she carries her burden.
Some say a year and six months; some say three years, some say ten. Arist. H.
A. l. 6. c. 27. writes, two years; Strabo, 16 months at least; at longest 18.
Diod. Sic. and Aelian, say the same. Some say resolutely, eight years. They
bring forth sitting on their hind legs with pain. The Birth comes into the
light with the head foremost, H. A. l. 4. cap. 31.
says Aelian. They bring but one at once, as we read in Arist. and Diod. Sic.
Every four years one birth, say Cadamustus, and Scaliger. Exer. 204.


The birth is as great as a grown hog, Aelian.
or a calfe of three months. Plin.
As soon as it is brought forth, it can see and go; and sucks with the mouth,
and not with the trunk. They suck till they be eight years old.

They hold enmity with the Rhinoceros, Enmity.
the Lion, Tiger, Ram, Hog, Serpent, Dragon, they hate some colors and fire.
Of the Rhinoceros thus Pliny: In Pompey his sports was a Rhinoceros seen. A
born enemy to the Elephant; he whets his horn on the stones, (...). 11. A.
(...). 16. c. 44.
and prepares for fight, wherein he aims most at the belly, which he knows to
be softest.

They are of equal height, only the legs are somewhat shorter of one then the
other. Among the westerly Ethiopians, the Lions will fasten on the young
Elephants, and wound them; but if the dame come, they fly. The Tiger flies at
the Elephants head, and with ease chokes him. If he be in a raging fit, the
very sight of a Ram makes him gentle. The grunting of a Swine terrifies him.
(...).
Of their combating with Dragons, and their perpetual discord, Pliny writes,
that the Dragon clings about him, as on a knot; he finding himself overmastered
with his weight falling, disentangles himself. The cunning of beasts in
self-defence, is singular, as in those Dragons, who not being able to clime so
high as the Elephant, spying their prey, cast themselves thereon from a high
tree; He is not able to avoid the Serpents circling him, seeks a tree, or a
rock to rub against. The Dragon aware of this, clings with his feet about the
Elephants tail; he unites the knot: The Dragon flies then, and hides his head
in one of the Elephants nostrils, stops his breath, and tears the softest
parts: Dragons meeting them, being surprised, stand upright, and make at their
eyes most, so that many of them being blind, and famished, (...).
are found dead. Among colors, he avoids the light-red, and the white most: We
shall show the cause elsewhere. That fire frights them, Livy tells us by an
example of Hannibal, who at the siege of Capua, by fire drove them away: It so
terrified them that they fly, and can by no means be brought back again.

Of their Age, Age.
men write diversely: Some say they live two hundred years, some three hundred;
some say, one hundred and twenty years.

One Sicritus says, that they live to three hundred, seldom to five
hundred, and that they are very strong about the two hundred year of their
age. Philostratus relates, that one of those that fought against K. Alexander,
live above three hundred and fifty years after him. Strabo.
I say nothing of Juba his Elephant; and that of Ptolom. Philad. and that of
Seleucus Nicanor: At sixty years begins their youth. By the greatness of their
teeth you may know how long they shall live.

They can endure no cold, Plin.
that is their greatest bane: Arist.
They are troubled with wind, Cadamust.
and flux of the belly, and feel no other diseases. Yet Aelian speaks of sore
eyes.

They that are taken and wounded, their wounds are washed with warm water
first; then, if very deep gashed, anointed with butter; after that, men lay on
fresh and bleeding swines-flesh, and so the inflammation is assuaged. Some
years, I find they are mad, and then they spare none they meet. A foretoken
thereof is an oily substance, flowing out of their ears. The cure is, to chide,
and rage at them: Their keepers show, by reason that they are of a base, and
degenerate disposition; and that lust casts them into their mad-sits. Men
write, that they are troubled with rheums, and that the humor will petrifie,
or harden into a kind of stone, whereof there have been a statue shown. They
walk slowly, by reason of their heavy bulk: Yet they say, none is so swift,
whom they with their walk cannot overtake. They bend their hams inward like a
man: Pliny.
And because his bending joints of the legs are not so high, as those of other
beasts, but stand lower toward the earth; it is troublesome to the Rider, he
being so used to sitting, which yet is to be meant of those that are grown up;
Since the young have an easy pace, and as delightful to the Rider, as that of
the ambling Mule.

There are many things that witness their singular nature and ingenuety;
Var^om. G^^lisu^. Their Nature and Wit. Po^yb. H. lib. 5. Livy l. 21.
that it is no wonder, that Pliny calls him the wittiest of all that go on four
feet. We said before, that they fear water, whereof Hannibal had much ado to
bring his to it: and Pliny says, that at Puteoli, they ran away from the ships
for fear. Yet L. Caelius Meteilus joining tons together, ferried them over
the Sicilian sea, for want of ships. The female is much stronger then the male,
as shows plainly a masculine ability. Aristotle yet affirms them to be more
timorous. Ver^om.
Opian says, they can with their tuches turn beeches, wild-olives, and
palmtrees upside down. One of them laid flat a body of a tree of such a
vastness, that four and twenty men could scarce stir it; and three of them
drew a shore a very great Pinnace. They fight eagerly one with another. The
conquered flies the very voice of the conqueror, holding to him earth, and
verwain. It come to a proverb, the conquered brings grass to the conqueror,
from hence, yet with Vossius, I can hardly yield belief to it. They will
revenge an injury. One of them kept a nut-shell, that a soldier flung at his
face, and many days after cast it at him again walking in the same street.
They are strangly kind to their keepers, or masters, and also mindful of any
wrong offered them, as Seneca excellently expresses it: Seneca.
the wildness of Elephants, condescending to the basest offices deserves them
their meat. Strabo says indeed that some of them have carried their
chariotters fallen in battle, Geor. l. 15.
clearly off, and others have saved others. And Cassiodore writes, that when
they think that their Masters provision falls short, they will by a certain
motion, by meat of diverse, who if they slight them, and regard not answering
their desire, they will open a bladder wherein much filth is gathered together,
and cast so much out on the refusers houses, that you would think there ran a
river therein, with that stink revenging the denial. At Cochin some of them
took a soldier, and ducked him several times in the water, because he
refused to give their Master the way. Porus an Indian King being almost
dispatched with wounds, his Elephant with his trunk plucked out the darts by
degrees, Plutar. de Sol^r. Animn.
and gently, and himself being also much wounded, would not fall, till he felt
the King slide down from his back, having lost much blood; and then he bowed
himself a little, that the King might not tumble down, but reach gently the
ground. They by nature fear man, for if he but see the print of humane footing,
P^in. H. N. l. 8. c. 12.
though he spy not yet the man, he trembles for fear of ginnes, or snares,
makes a stand, smells, snufs, and looks about him, puffes, but tramples not on
him, but plucks him out, and delivers him over to the next, and he to the next,
like a message, and so to the very last of the herd, that goes too and fro, and
order themselves, as preparing for a battle. That sent of a man's steps, though
bare footed they hold long. Philos. de via^ Appo^lon.
Cicero is of opinion that they are great lovers of mankind, and there is a
kind of a conversation between them. Philos intimates the same, saying, that if
be once wonted to man, he suffers any thing from him, imitates all his
carriages, delights to take food from a man's hand, like dogs, and embraces him
with his trunk, suffers a man to thrust his head into his mouth; and hold it
there as long as he please. See Athenaeus and Aelian their relations of a
certain Elephants love toward an infant. Plin.
One is said to be in love with an Egyptian Herbwoman; it seems his choice was
not common, for she was also very acceptable to Aristophanes the famous
Grammarian. Many arguments there are of their teachablenesse, which is
singular. They will cast weapons into the air, and catch them again, the wind
not carrying them away; they among themselves can set-forth a swore fight; and
dance the armour-daunce sportively: And, which is the greatest wonder, go on
thwart ropes, but better backward, as stooping forward. You find the like, as
in Pliny, so in Seneca and Suetonius, Seneca Ep. 86. Sueton.
to say nothing of Xiphilinus. At Rome one was taught to tread the maze,
without admonition, by night, and was found one night practicing by himself by
moonshine without bidding. That that Eman* the Portugal King presented Pope Leo
the tenth with, would with all reverence salute him, looking out of a window,
thrice with bended knees, and a lowly posture, and courtesy, as Osorius
relates. A^ger. Busbequius also tells, that he saw a young one dance, and
foot it to music, and toss a ball with his trunk, as with hands. Those of
Zeilan understand languages; one there learnt to write in Greek these words: I
my self have written this, and dedicate these Celticke spoils. Plin. H. N. l.
8. Aeli. H. A. l. 8. c. 32. and 10.
They will feast together like men, and not one of them observed to be greedy
after the greater pieces: In drinking, reaching the cup to each other, drinking
with their trunks very moderately; then standing round, lightly, and merrily
dashing each other. Arrianus boasts that he saw them, as an Ape, imitate, and
fain the masters office, and as it were sing and dance, some leading the way.
Among the rest this shows their wit, that, being to pass deep ditches, and
hard to be waded through, the greatest standing in the midst, will like a
bridge, convey the rest over; others will carry pieces of planks into the
ditch, to save him. Plutarch. Aelian.
Besides they know their usual allowance of food; and can perceive it, if you
mingle meal with it, though never so cunningly: And, which is miraculous, one
of them would go draw water to try, if the kettle had holes in it, or no. They
will worship the Sun, and the new Moon; set a wandering man in his right way
again; watch adulterers, Aelian.
and murderers, and reveal them: But that they understand, speak and write
the native tongue of a land, I count it fabulous.

Of their use in war, Use.
shows, triumphs, and otherwise, shall be spoken elsewhere. Some use of them
has been in food, whence is the name of Elephant-eaters, dwelling about Draba
in the Azachaean mountains, and over against Meroe, Authors call them Adjabars,
or Magabars. Pliny also says that the Troglodites hunt, H. N. l. 8. c. 8.
Phrasis.
and live most upon them. Their flesh is heavy, cold, and odious. Aelian says,
there is nothing eatable in them, besides the trunk, the lip, and the marrow
of their teeth. The Aethiopians desire their hind-parts. But their reins are
said to be delicates for Kings. As for medicine; their fat is fabulously said
to make him who is nointed therewith, hurt-free, though naked, under the
wildest and savagest beasts. The touch of the trunk helps the head-ake, Aelian.
especial with neezing. His right side bound to red Lemnianearth makes
lustful. The liver is good against the falling sickness. Smearing with his
dung drives away lice.

The Ivory, Ivory.
that is that part especially about the mouth, or teeth, is of a singular
nature and use. Pliny.
It may endure moisture, drowth not, and it is subject to rot. It may be
softened, and is by a kind of drink called Zythus, or Beer. When softened, it may
be turned and take any shape. Thereof have been made Tables, Beds, Knif-hefts,
Swords, Sheaths, Quivers, Scepters, Chariots, Gates, and what not: Whereof
search Aldrovandus. It is pollished like wood, Hist. Quad. l. 1. c. 20. Plin.
especially with rough skin of a Skate, or Sole. The brightness of it is
dimmed by women's terms. It is of a binding force, though it have no taste.
Those who have tried it, delivers, that it furthers conception, and helps a
moist stomach. The clouds in a face are taken away by the shavings thereof,
smeared on with honey. The powder of it cures fellons, mixed with Hartshorns, it
is good against worms. If burned to ashes, it is called Spodium: But men are
cozened with other beasts horns for this. Hearts, horn is more used then ivory.

Their differences and kinds, Differences.
are especially considered from their places by Ancients, and later Writers.
Since some of them are fen, some mountain, Philast. Aelian. Pliny.
some field, some wood, or wild Elephants, some Lybian, and Indian. Solinus
mentions Prasian, and Taxilan ones.

Those that haunt marishy-fens, their teeth are pale, thin, rough, and have in
many places holes, in some knobs like hailstones, nor cannot be well wrought
on by Art. Those are maddish, and light.

The mountainers are perverse, and crafty, and never trust man, unless
necessity drives them to it. Their teeth are lesser, white enough, and not
very rough.

Those that live in fields, are accounted gentle, tame, and love to imitate.
Their teeth are largest, whitest, and easiest to be cut, and may be brought to
what you please.

Those of the woods, in the Kingdom of Senega they are to be found, especially
by the River Gambra; there they are by herds, as boors among us.

The Lybian, or Moorish, are less then the Indian, (...).
and can endure neither the voice, nor sent of these; nay they dare not so much
as look on them.

The Indian ones are greatest of all, yet not all of a bigness. (...).
Solinus therefore divides them into two kinds, the nobler are known by their
vastness, the lesser are called bastards.

The Parsy are the greatest, such as Madagascar produces. Scalig. Exer. 204.
Those men call Taxilae, that are in greatness next to the former. These you
find in Sumatra, very towardly, and excelling those on the Continent in good
conditions, and ingenuity. Aelian. H. H. l. 16. c. 15.
Therefore they have been transported in great ships to the fast land, (from
that Island Sumatra) and sold to the Calingian King.

Our Author promise a discourse of the use of the Elephants in War, and
otherwise; The Translator.
whereof are many noble relations extant. As before he omitted the diseases of
the Horse; that are so many, that it is grown to an English proverb, He has as
many diseases as a Horse. He is troubled with Stagger, Bots, Glanders, Vives,
Farcive, etc. But I must hold me to translating.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Unicorn, and of the Horned-Asses
THe name of Monoceros, Aldrov. H. Quad. l. 1. c. 16.
that among the Latins sounds so much, as a onehorned beast, agrees to many
creatures; but in a strict sense, is retained to one alone. namely that, who
from having but one horn, bears the name of Unicorn. In the Brachmans dialect,
called Kartazonon, whether there is, or has been such a beast in nature: I
shall elsewhere examine, after Baccius, and Bartholinus, the great son of so
great a father. For present we shall treat hereof briefly, as resting on the
fidelity of Relators.

As for the description of the Unicorne, Strabo.
he is said to resemble in his whole body the Horse: He is tailed like a Boor,
grins and snarls like a Lion, headed like an Heart, footed like an Elephant,
Plin.
furnished with one only horn, and that a black one, two cubits long, standing
in the midst of his forehead. Solinus.
Isidore makes him all one with the Rhinoceros, and says that his horn is so
sharp and strong, that what ever he strikes at, he shatters, or peirces it
through. There was one seen in the service of the great Cham of Tartary, M.
Paul. Venet. l. 3. c. 15.
in the Kingdom of Lambris. They are less then Elephants, holding their head
downwards, like a Swine, of a prickling tongue, wherewith they get what they
meet with; black eyed, and very like the Rhinoceros. Lewis of Barthema of
Bononia, writes thus of the Unicorns seen by him: There are Dens on the one
side of the Temple at Mecca, wherein are kept two Unicorns, Vartom l. 1. c. 18.
that are showen, as the manner is, for a rarity.

Concerning the shape: The greater resembled a Horse-colt of thirty months old;
his horn, that he bears on his forehead, is about three else in length; the
other was a year old, his horn grown to four hand breadth.

The color of the beast, somewhat darker then that of a Sumpter, or
Pack-horse, headed like a Heart, short-necked, and thin-haired thereabout,
short-mained, and that hanging only on one side: Small, and slender-legged,
like a Hind: The feet a little cloven before, Goat-hoofed, the feet hairy on
the right side. He seems feirce, and of a nature affecting loveliness. I add
not what Garzias has out of Hortus: They are said to be found in the Arabian
Deserts, Bartholi. de Unicor. c. 24. Car. H. Arom. l. 1. c. 14. Paul. Venet.
Aene. Sylv. Cadam.
and to have been seen there by Merchants; as also between the Cape of
Good-Hope, and that they call the Currentes. Some are in the Kingdom Basma, and
Lambris; some in the utmost parts of Asia, in the Province Macinus, between the
mountains of India, and Cathay, where the Serici inhabit. Some in the new
world. The Horn is shown in many places; the most famous are, S. Denis in
France, Venetia, Spain, Utrecht, Helvetia, Denmark, Hampton Court in England,
Windsor, and the Gedansian of Empiricus. That at S. Denis is of greatest note,
being rugged, not polished, blackish, and nearest those Ancients describe.
Writers differ about the Unicorns horns lenth, Renodaeus makes him as long as a
man's hight, he takes it on trust, Baccius, l. 2. c. ult.
as we do. Renod. l. 3.
Baccius, Pharin. c. 21.
and Marinus bring it to six cubits: Golnitzius his measure is six foot and an
half: Bellonius makes it up full seven foot. Nor do they agree about the
weight. Cardan says, one has* been seen to weigh seventeen pound, and three
quarters. Golnitzius rises it to five and twenty. I with Bellonius should judge
the horn to weigh eighteen pound, having poysed it in my hand. Baccius thinks
the Venetian are right. Marinus, that they are longer then old ones, nor so
writhed as Aelians, and so thin, that they cannot be drunk out of. Colored
like a smooth Hartshorn, and pale, not black. They are reported at the siege
of Bysantium, to be conveyed to the Venetian Commonwealth, with twelve
breast-plates of Imperial Cavaliers. The Spanish one has nothing singular, a
piece whereof Phil. IV. presented to Cardinal Francis Barbarine, an eminent
man, and most courteous to strange Gentery.

That at Utrecht is as long as that at Paris, and reasonable great; much
wreathed at top, and then growing straiter toward the bottom. The outside is
of a sand-colour, the inside is whither. It is held in great account, and is
shown for a right one, so that Colonia Agrippina, has bid a great sum of
gold for it. That of the Helvetians, was found in the year M.D.XX. Bartholin.
de Unicor. c. 27.
at the mouth of the River Arula, near Brugia; white it is within, yellowish
without, without writhings, two cubits long, but as sweet as musk, especially
if it be near the fire. The Danish, one is kept in Fredericks-Burgs Castle,
above seven Roman-foot long, if we except that part within the hollow, which
Bartholine conceives to be above a foot, it is seven fingers about, writhed all
along, and sharppointed at top; the color mixed of white, and ash color, and
in some of the spaces channeld, and chamfered with black, and duskish streaks.
That of the Venetian Merchants, was brought out of Germany, promising by the
bright, and diverse colored shape, that it is a right one; and the rather,
because there fall pieces from it, if you shave it, not like teeth, and
shavings, that can be crumbled; but there come thence shavings that are clammy,
and yielding, as any other cut horns. I can say little of the Gedanensian one.
Empiricus returning from Constantinople, not long ago, magnified it highly.
More about this beast Aelian tells us, H. A. l. 16. c. 20.
saying, that among all beasts he has the must absurd vile voice; that if
other beasts come to him, he is gentle, but ever fighting with those of his
own kind; the males do not only quarrel, but they also with the females, so
that they kill one other. His whole body is very strong, but his horn
invincible. He seeks deserts, and goes ever alone wandering. At coupling-time
the male is tamer, and feeds quietly with the female; when that time is over,
and the female begins to swell, the male returns to his former fierceness, and
betakes him to his wandering loveliness. Men say that there were some of their
young ones brought to the Prasian-King, and that on feast, and triumph-dayes,
they were put together to fight, to show their strength: for no man ever
remembers that one grown up, has been taken. So far Aelian. Some add, Albert.
H. A. l. 22.
that this beast loves young Virgins so, that if one spreads but her lap, as he
comes, he will lay his head there, and fall in a slumber, and is so taken. For
their use, all know how they are commended for the soverain virtue of their
horn against venom, for where poison is, it sweats, and drops stand on it;
and so, as some think, the right horn is known. Aloysius Mundella, commends it
against the bite of a mad dog, and other mischievous beasts, as also of worms.
The ancient Indian Kings, who first arrived at the knowledge of this horn,
made cups of it for themselves, that drinking out of them, they might fence
themselves against poison, drunkenness, cramp, falling sickness, and other
malignant diseases. (...)
A Jew of Venice, made a circle on a table with that horn, and cast then a
Scorpion, and a Spider within it, who had not the power to pass that circle:
after that they being plucked by it a hand high, whether by the shadow of it, or
the virtue flowing from it, they were both killed, within the space of an hour.
No wonder then that it is so valued, Baccius.
that German Merchants asked for one of them 90000 crowns; and the Pope,
setting up a kind of an Apothecaries shop in the Vatican, gave 12000 pieces of
gold to the Epidaurian Merchants, for a piece of an Unicorns horn; of the
which Austin Ricchus the Popes then chief Physician, used to put now a scruple,
now 10 grains in wine, or cordial water, and administered it with great
success. And thus shall serve now to have spoken of the Unicorn, we shall say
more elsewhere. l. 4. H. A. l. 1^. c. ^^.
Concerning horned Asses, I find them cried up in three places, namely in
India, Scythia, and Africa. Herodotus mentions the African. Aelian says that
they hold the water of the River Styx, and were sent in iron vessels by
Alexander to Delphos, to be there dedicated to Pythia. l. 4. c. ^2.
Of the Indian ones, the same Aelian thus: I have been informed, that there are
wild Asses, no less then Horses bred among the Indians, white bodied, only
purple-headed, and blew-eyed, and that they bear a horn in the forehead, a
cubite and half long; the upper part whereof is light red, the lower white, and
the middle coalblack; and that, not all, but the principal Indians have hanged
them as bracelets on their arms, and set them off with gold, and have use to
drink out of the same. They report, that, who so uses to drink out of this
horn, shall be free from incurable diseases, nor shall be ever troubled with
convulsion fits, nor ever touched with the falling sickness, nor tainted with
any poison; nay, that if he has drunk any venom, he shall cast it up again,
Cresias.
and recover his health. And when other Asses, all the world over, whether
tame, or wild, and all other wholehooft beasts have, as it is said, nor ankles,
nor gall in their liver: These Indian Asses only have ankles, and these black,
and that within, if you break them, neither want they a gall; and that in
swiftness, they exceed not only by much other Asses, but also by far both
Elephants and Horses. And when they come first on the way, their pace is but
slow at beginning, but then they mend it by degrees, and at length none can
overtake them. After the females have brought forth, the sires very carefully
look to the colts, and their haunt is in the most desert parts of India: when
the Indians hunt them, they hold the colts feeding behind them, and fight for
them: they dare meet the horsemen face to face, and make at them with their
horns. So strong they are, there is no resisting of them, they make all yield,
or what will not. They break, or so shatter, that it become useless, and is
quite spoiled. If they meet with horses they rend, and tear their sides in
pieces, that their very guts fall out, so that horsemen are afraid to come
near them, knowing that the approach is the utter lamentable destruction, both
man and horse, they lay finely about them with their heels. What ever they
bite, they make an utter riddance of it. If they be once grown up, they are not
to be taken; they are killed with darts and arrows. Their flesh is so bitter,
it is not to be eaten. Philostratus writes almost the same. Vit. Apollon. l. 9.
The figure that we have here added, is of a wild beastbodied, and eared like
an Ass, armed with two horns, one shooting out of his nostrills, the other
about his eyes; but because it is not wholehoof'd, nor one-horn'd, it cannot be
the Indian Ass.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.
THE SECOND BOOK. Of the Clovenfooted, Fourfooted Beasts.
THE FIRST TITLE. Of the Clovenfooted that live on the Earth.
CHAPTER I. Of the Horned Beasts in general that chew the Cud.
THus far have we prosecuted the History of the whole-hoof d; Aldrov. de
Bisul. l. 1. c. 1.
the Clovenfooted follow: In Greek Dichele, (...).
and Dischide; which in H. Scripture are said to divide the hoof, because they
have diverse clefts, though properly they cannot be said to have toes. I find
two kinds of them; to wit, those that live on the earth, and those that live in
the water. Of the former, some chew the cud, and some not. Of the former kind,
some are horned, and some not. We shall consider them in general, and in
particular. We call those Ruminaters, or chewers of the cud, that, having
swallowed their meat, bring it up again into the mouth, and chew it again.

In Latin, Ap^lejus. q^ntil.
Ruminare, Plin.
Rumigare, Remandere, Revolvere; in Greek, Mereykazein, Merikan, from Meruein,
to roll again. Some of the Latins have fetched the word, Ruminating, from
Rumen, the place in the belly whether the food descends, and whence it is again
sent upward into the mouth. But Servius, from Ruma, the upper part of the neck;
whether such beasts recall their eaten meat. But Mercurialis derives it from
Erumnae, Arnob. l. 7. con. gent.
that are these of the throatpipe. How necessary this chewing the cud is for
these beasts, we may gather from this, because they are fed with grosser food,
as also from this, because they want upper-teeth, and the lower are not sharp.
Whence it is, that nature recompenses the want of teeth with the multitude, as
it were, of bellies; for they have no less then four; namely the belly, the
call, the tripe, and the paunch. The throat beginning from the mouth reaches
down to the lungs, and midriffe: Arist.
thence, H. A. l. 2. c. ult.
to the greater belly, that on the inside is sharp, and rugged, and has a cell
near the knitting of the gullet, called the net, or call; for it is outwardly
like a belly, and within netted, like women's head calls, and is much greater
then the belly; next is the tripe, rugged, checkered, crusty, and as great as
the call; next is the paunch, greater and longer then the tripe, and checkered,
and crusted with many light, and great crusts, vast, and misshapen, and then
follow the bowels. In the first hollow place of the paunch the meat is to be
seen undisgested, even in bits, and pieces scarce turned; in the second, more
change, and yet more in the third; and in the last at length perfectly
concocted, where it is turned into a white cream. Nether yet do those only
chew the cud, Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. ult.
that want their upper-teeth; for among the fishes the Scarus does the same,
having blunt teeth; and among the beasts, the common, and pontick Mouse, the
Hare, the Cony, as we have it in Leviticus. If you ask the manner, and fashion
of chewing the cud, Aristotle answers, that the meat being chewed again is sent
out of one belly into another, till at last it slides into the bowels. Galen
says, that it is first brought up out of the stomach into the mouth; thence it
passes into the kall, thence into the tripes, thence into the guts. After
sucking, they begin to chew the cud, in seven months, understand it of the
tame. The herders, in less time, because they feed abroad; yet in winter, more
then at other times of the year; and they seem to delight more in this chewing
the cud, then in eating. That they then require rest appears by this, Plin. H.
N. l. 10. c. 73.
that they do that work lying in their stalles. Arist. H. A. l. 3. c. 21.
Aristotle says, that their milk alone cruddles, and that they have curdled
milk in their tripes, and that they abound in milk. The causes hereof we
shall elsewhere unfold.

Horns are given to these chewers (the Camel excepted) for defense, and
offense. The nourishment that should go to the making of upper-teeth, which
they want, turns into Horses, and those are very manifold, and different;
neither has nature in any thing more wantonized then in these weapons of
beasts; She has spread them into branches, as those of Deer; Plin. H. N. l.
11. c. 37.
to others she has given plain ones, as to the Hearts, called spitters, or
pipers, from the shape; others has she shaped like hands, and those as
fingered, called broadhorned. She has given to wild-goats, or Roes branched
ones, but small, as such which are never cast: to Rams crumpled horns, like
clubs, troublesome to Bulls. In this kind she gratifies females also in many,
only male: To Roe-bucks-horns hooked backward, to Bucks, contrary. To the
Strepsiceros, (a beast half wild, half tame, that Africa calls the Bold) horns
standing bolt upright, writhed, and sharp at top. To the Phrygian herds,
moveable horns like ears. To those of the Trogloditae, horns pointing
downwards, so that they are fain to feed with their necks on one side. Others
have but one horn, and that in the middle of their head, or in their nose.
Again, some of them are strong to push withal, some to strike, some crooked,
some to toffe many ways; upright ones, turned, beamy; all sharppointed. Thus
far Pliny; who has left out their several colors, which are very different.
Some simply, white, blackish, ash-colored, yellowish; others party-colored,
as shall be shown in the several kinds.

These horned beasts also have some peculiar parts, as hucklebones, and sewet,
and some parts common with others, but otherwise placed, as the belly, milt,
udders. The milt is most round: The bowels large; the udders between the legs
in couples. The belly has hollows while they go with young. In the hucklebone
they are furnished with many things, and the same in their hinder-feet. But more
of these in the several kinds.

CHAPTER II. Of the Horned Beasts, in particular that chew the cud.
ARTICLE I. Of the tame Beeve, or Neat, or Ox.
ANd thus much of the fourfooted, Aldrov. H. Quad. l. 2. c. 1.
clovenhoof'd, cud-chewing, horned beasts in general.

If you consider the kinds, there are among them, the Ox, both tame, and wild;
the sheep; the She, and Hee-Goat, the Heart, the Busse, Elk, Rhinoceros, (or
Nosehorned) we begin, and that with just reason, with the Beeve, being a beast,
that challenges to it self almost all thing, whereof we stand in need, for
food, or otherwise, Vegetius in Prolo. lib. 2. Veterin.
certain it is that we owe all pulse, and grain to the Neat, and plow. Nay the
use of vineyards would be lost, if they kept not our carts a going. What need I
speak of several trades, that must be all at a stand, and heavy mooveables,
ly still, and useless for want of carriage; other creatures, and birds
themselves fed in pens, and coops, live on their labor: for whence should
the masters be provided of barley for their horses, meat for their dogs, and
swine without the toil of the Ox: And, to make short, wat ever eats, ows the
food to the meat. Some make use of mules, some of camels, some few of
Elephants, but to what purpose are there without those. Tacit. de mori. Cerman.
No wonder then, that of old the Germans used to send to those that were to
marry, for a dowry Oxen yoked, to signify by these beginnings of the
marriage-state, that the wife came to be a yokefellow in all labors and
dangers. Aelian. H. A. l. 12. c. 34.
The Athenians would sacrifice not one for a long time, while they had use of a
plow, or a wagon. Pythagoras advised, that no such laboring cattle should be
killed. The Phrygians punished the killing of a laboring Ox, with death. The
Emperor Valens made a Law, that in all the East, they should eat no Veal: And
Constantine forbad taking plowing Oxen in pledge for debt: Nay, such were given
as rewards for virtue and deserts: Decius Mus, Tribuny of the souldery, having
saved the Roman Army, beset by the Sabines, by compassing a mountain, was
rewarded with a Crown of Gold, and an hundred Oxen; and Lelius with thirty,
after the City was taken. To say nothing of an hundred and thirty Oxen, D^brav.
in Histor. Bohem.
sent yearly under the name of tribute by the Bohemians, to Charles the Great.
That the stealing of Beeves has occasioned a War; Pausan. in Messen.
and that the Low Dutch of the Cheese and Butter they make and send abroad,
make yearly two hundred Sesterties, that amount to ten hundred thousand
Carolines, besides what they easily spend for their own use, as Adrian Iunius
relates.

The Beeve obtains diverse names according to their different ages, Names.
and sexes; the chief are the Ox, Bull, Cow, Heifer, or Stier, and Calfe.

The Ox has his name, Bos, properly imposed from his gelding, Ox.
yet it includes also the Bull, and Cow. As also among the Greeks, Bus is a
general, comprehensive name, and imports sometimes the Calf also.

The Bull is the beeve before castration, the captain and husband of the Cowes;
Bull.
Yet Oppian in this name, as the more worthy comprehends, all neat. He is
called (as the Etimologists say) Tauros, or Tanyuros, from his long tail, or
Garos, i. e. proud; or from the Syriaque, Scaliger.
Tor, and Taur.

The Cow is the Bulls female, and in Greek distinguished from the male, Cow.
only by the article O. Florentinus renders it Butheleian, or Damalin, which
Phocian ascribes to every young beast, some to the Heifer.

Authors speak not distinctly enough of the Heifer, and Calf, nor is Varro
constant to himself: Heifer.
And the Poets call Heifers, Oxen, and Cowes, and Calves, whose horns sprout
not yet out: When Isidore yet calls Juvencus, the Stier that begins to be able,
juvare, to help man in tillage: We shall take it for a Beeve, that is no longer
a Calfe. Iunix, seems to be the same with juvenca, Varro.
the Heifers, or the Neat not yet of age.

The Calfe is the name of the first age of the Beeve, called Vitulus, either
from the youngnesse, or the wantonness, or the life of it. It bears many names
among the Greeks, at least fourteen, as Petalos, Mochos, Roos, etc. though some
of them agree to the Bulls, or rather the Ox; Petaloi, Athaene.
from their slender, or plain, Rhodigin.
broad horns. Mochos, is common to either sex; or so called from Moo, the cry;
or Othmadai, smelling after the dam, or crying, or longing after her. The
Graecians at this day call it Mouskori. Portis is one, very young. Poris,
Hesyth. Stephan. Suidas.
He, and She, from Poreia, coming forward. Enis, is one of a year old.
Preey, is rather a Bull, says Varinus. Killix, an Ox, or Lamb with a
crosse-horn. Kooronios, an Ox with a round horn. Roos, is a Scythian Bull, as
Zetzen relates. Knoodala, are Oxen. Pellis, is an Ox with a black horn.

In describing the Ox, I shall only note the most remarkable things, it being a
beast so well known. Of the differences of their horns hereafter.

It is an hairy beast, that sheds it yearly, which comes thinner, Descrip.
or thicker then the first hair; it is thicker on the back and neck, called
Mollopsi; because thereof hated men to make glue Kolla, or Kollaboi, pegs for
Lute-strings are thence fitted. That double neck-hair is called Mukos. The lips
are thick, and sticking out; the upper-jaw thick and blunt, so that he cannot
pluck short grass. On the forehead is the shape of a V. Caelius.
The gelded have a broader then Bulls. Democr.
The bones are hardest between the horns; very stubborn, Aelian.
and not easily broken. Cardan.
The tongue, when plucked out, will pant a whole day. The skins that hang down
the throat, are called palezar, the dew-lap. See the Greek names in Varrinus.
The teeth are continued, and twice changed. (...). H. N. l. 11. c. 37.
Those of two years old, change teeth, says Pliny. They want the upper-row,
they chew therefore with the four fore-teeth as has been said. Their peezel is
very stiff. They have two udders between their legs, Arist. H. N. l. 8. c.
45.
Pliny says four, calling, it seems the teats, which are four udders. Their
arse gapes, says Horace. Their tail is long, the hair short. The flesh dry
and duskish. The sinews hard and stubborn, though not so long as the Bulls. The
blood full of strings, therefore hastily congeals and hardens. The ham-joynt
not so fast as that of other beasts, therefore he drags his feet more,
especially when he is lean and old. It is said they have a stone in the head,
which they spit out, when they look to be slaughtered. Austin reports they have
one also in the liver, and reins. Pliny says, there is a bone in his heart.
The milt is very long, and blacker then the Swines, especially when he grows
old. The reins resemble man's, each as it were made up of many. The ancles
greater then the Camels. In the Heifers second ventricle is found a rough
sand-stone, Arist.
round as a ball, Pliny.
very light. Aldrovand had two of them in his study, one reddish, the other
black; for that was taken out of a red, this out of a black Ox, since it is
sprung from hairs that they lick in, in chewing the cud, as it sometimes
happens, they with licking themselves swallow something, that gathers into an
ovall chapt, being mixed with phlegm, we need not discourse much of the place,
where they are found. For their meat, they devour all that the earth yields;
especially grass, citisus, pease, knot-grasse, sedge, willow, oke-leaves,
olive-bows, reed, black-elder, vines, barley, hirse, wheat, acornes,
date-kernels, wild olive, missle-toe, these the most delight in. All know,
grass to be their feed in Summer, and hay in Winter. (...)
In the province of Narbon in Fount-Orges, grows an herb so grateful to Oxen,
that they will plunge themselves over head, and ears to seek it. They will do
the like in the River Loir, (...)
about Veluin, and in the Sebusian Fish Ponds: And in the ditches, pools, and
black waters thereabout, grows a grass, with long, reddish leaves, flooting on
the water, (...)
after which they are so greedy, that they will wade belly-deep, and duck in
the whole head to feed thereon, which fattens them strangely; and the Cows that
fed there, yield much more milk, then neerhand. Citisus breeds much, and sweet
milk; but while it flourishes, it is not so good, but dries up milk. Pease are
commended, but not sowed in March, because it makes them wild-headed. Pliny
says, that not only that, that is sown in March, is hurtful to oxen; but
also that that is sown in May is hurtful to Oxen, but also that that is sown
in Autumn, makes them sleepy, steep it, and it is corrected. Therefore
Democritus prescribes such to be given them monthly in their drink, to
strengthen them; five bushells serves a yoke of oxen. Clave grass, or three
leaved fattens a carrion lean ox, and cures a sick one. Th^ophr^st.
Therefore wild Trifoly is diligently sown in many parts of Spain, especially
in Valentia: Yet it must be given sparingly, else it dries milk, and turns all
the meat into blood, fat and flesh. Lotus gives best nourishment, and sweetest,
and being sown once in fallow ground, flourishes many years after.
Elm-leaves, Columel. R. R. l. 5 c. 6.
especially those of Attinia, Greog. ^. Lucr^t. l. 2.
the Romans held much of. If you give it them daily, and then another sort of
leaves, they will be weary of them. Virgil mentions willows; nor has Lucretius
forgot them. Fig Leaves, if they may be had, are very good for them; yet
oke-leaves, and wild olive that is not thorny, are thought better. Black elder
leaves bring a flush of milk: Barley chafe, and that of other grain. Hirse is
sown in Italy for them, says Porta, fitches are given them, in stead of
pease, ground in a hand-mill, and weakened a little in water, in Spain Baetica.
A bushel of pulse serves to put an Ox into good case; weakened three days in
river, P^in.
or seawater, it grows sweet; and then dried again is laid up for this use.
Acornes are advised to be gathered after seed time, and cast into water, and a
half bushel, to be given in spring to each Ox: It is meet about the fall of
the leaf to give each yoke of oxen 24 bushells. The greater make them
unhealthfull; and when ever you give it, if they have it not 30 days together,
they get the spring scab.

The Babylonians give their Oxen datekernels soakt in water, Strabo.
and to their sheep. Theoph.
They are fattened by misletoe. They feed also on fish among the Paeonae, who
dwell by the Prashian marshes. Neither do they abstain from Hemlock, whether
green, or dry: Nor does eating of frogs do them any harm. Briefly, they
delight to drink clear water, nor does muddy hurt them. Vegetius.
About their manner of feeding see Aldrovand, and writers of husbandry. For
their age, the Cow lives 15 years at most, the male 20; they are at their best
at five. Their age is known by changing their teeth; Pliny.
the foreteeth they cast within a year, and eight, or ten months; Arist. H. A.
l. 6. c. 21.
then after six months by degrees they loose the next, till within three year
they have changed them all; when they are best disposed, and so hold out to
fifthteen. At best, their teeth stand fair, long, and even; but growing old,
they diminish, wax black, and rot. The Helvetians judge of their Cows age by
certain circles almost at top of their horns; they are three at five years old,
after more. Some think they get a circle with every calving. About their
gendring, lust, coupling, and calving, I meet with these observations. The Bull
feeds with the Cow only in engendring time; they couple with the elder twice a
day, with the younger oftener, and that with one, and the same, and quietly. A
geld one has egendred, says Aristotle. One Bull may serve 15 Cows. Varro
allows many more. Varro. R. R. l. 2 c. 5.
He abstaines from the cows that are with calf at first, and as it were
voluntarily divorces himself, as it is to be seen in Epire especially, where
for most part he is not to be seen for three months, but feeds by himself. The
Cows salacity is famous. See Aristotle about the excess and signs of their
lust; as also Aelian. H. A. l. 10. c. 27. About what heats then see Columella,
R. R. l. 6. (thither I refer the reader, for I list not to translate such
stuff.) The Cows are known to be with calf, when their terms cease, Arist.
within 2, 3, 4 half a months space. They go 10 months, and in the tenth they
calve: they bring forth nothing alive sooner, says Pliny: Some say they calve
when the tenth month is complete. How the calve lies in the belly is expressed by
an image, and the skin wherein it is enwrapped, is also shown hereafter.
Though the Cow bring but one at once, Diogenia^^s.
seldom twins, yet in Ptolomy the younger his time, a certain Cow calved six at
once; and in Hispaniola this cattle is strangely fruitful; for the most part
they bring two at once; in the eleventh month they go to Bull, and though they
carry a couple, yet they say, they ly both on the right side. They guess by
the Cows frisking after coupling, whether she shall have a Bull, or Cow-calf;
if on the right side a Bull-calf; if on the left, a Cow-calf. They love bees,
but hate hornets, gad-flees, flees of all sorts, tikes, bears, swine, crows,
and some kind of plants, and some sorts of colors.

Pliny writes, that it is best to smear behinds with cow dung, Pliny.
this kills the Vermin that breeds of their bodies, and Spiders, Butterflies,
and raises the Bees themselves. Cael.
They are repaired by ox-paunch, Rhodig.
fresh, Antiqu. l. 23. c. 30.
and covered with their dung. Virgil said the like of a young Heifers carcass,
as also of Horses. Neat being stung by an hornet, as in great anguish, fall a
running, Flies vexed them so, that in Leucadia it was a custom to sacrifice an
ox to the flies, which being swelled with their blood, are thought to vanish
away; bitten by the like, they pine away, and are disabled for labor. Bears
hanging with all four on bulls horns, and necks, tire them out with their
weight. Swines-dung is harmfull to them. Crows pick at their eggs. Some say,
that if a bulls tongue be smeard with tallow (whether swines, or other I know
not) they will sooner die, then eat, unless washed with salt, and vinegar. For
plants, if a bulls nostrils be smeard with oil of roses, he becomes giddy;
Lady-glove put into their nostrils, makes them maddish. Black hellebore kills
them. The juice of the Chamaeleon kills young Heyfers with the squincy. The wild
fig makes them tender-flesht. Plin.
Ash-leaves are deadly to Neat, that other cattle may safely chew; it is true
of the gew-tree. There is a place, they say, a Thracian Province, near the
Scythians, and Medes, almost 20 furlongs long, that brings forth barley, that
men eat, but horses, and oxen will not taste of, nor other beasts. Tragus,
amongst the hurtful fruits, describes an herb, leaved like pulse at first,
sharp, and long eared, the ears cleaving like burrs, commonly found in fields
sown with pulse, and barely, very hurtful to oxen, and shund by them. At
Waltham-Abby in England grows a grass so l^snious, that beasts in 24. hours
will eat, if not watched, til they burst.
Of the grass that is good for them, the Alpine violet, and great burre,
called by the Germans Blakken, read Gesner, oxen eating bedewd, swell till they
burst sometimes, unless they be driven up and down, till they be warm, and void
it. Seneca, writing of Anger, says, that oxen are much enraged by red, or any
color like it. But it is strange, that oxen that have been made to draw any
man to execution, will not plow after, or if they be forced to it, the ground
will not thrive. The Geroponici advise to take heed in seed-time, that the seed
fall not on ox-horns; such they hold will never come to good, they call it
Kerasbolon, horn-fallen. Pliny says, that, if when a stable is on fire, and
oxen, or sheeps-dung be cast out, they are more easily drawn out, nor will
return thither, which is no wonder. About their motion, and voice, a few words
shall suffice. Their pace is slow, not to say sluggish; whence we say, this is
to hunt the Hare with the Ox; their voice is different according to the age and
sex. The Calves sounds deeper then the grown; the cows, then the Oxes, Plin.
their voice changes when they are geld. Arist.
Their proper voice is lowing, in Lat. boar, bovare, boire; in Gr. Mukima,
etc. They yield us many things for food, namely flesh, brains, tongue, heart,
liver, milt, reins, cale, inwards, feet, and marrow, besides milk, to make
cheese and butter. Their flesh is prime; and though the Egyptians abstain from
Cow-beefe, and feed on Bull-beefe: Yet the Romans have forbidden the latter to
be sold, because under Tarquin the proud, by eating thereof, women great with
child, got the pestilence. In Homer, beef was set before Nobles. Lysander going
into Jonia was presented with beef among other varieties. In the kingdom of
Senega, they eat nothing else. Prometheus, says Pliny, was the first who slew
an Ox. Of old in their choysest Feasts, they set whole oxen roasted on the
table. Arist.
The Turks also in the lesser Asia, B^llon.
or Natolia, obs. l. 1. c. 60.
when a child, whose parents were of any fashion, was to be circumcised, would
roast on a great pole a whole ox, with a whole belweather in his belly, that
had a hen with an egg in her, in his belly, and this is eaten by the kindred.
Beef yields the best nourishment, Celsus.
and agreeable to the stomach, and not so subject to purify. Hippocra. de rat.
vic. lib. 2.
It is strong, Galen.
and fast food, but not soon concocted. It is not waterish indeed, flegmatique,
or slimy, but yet it is hard of disgestion; very nourishing, but breeds thick
blood. But if a melancholy person feed too freely on it, it shall hasten his
fit. In some it swells the Spleen, and breeds a consumption. Beef is not so
good while fed in the Spring with the first, thin grass; best, when fed with
thick grass, and near seeding. The Dutch, Scotch, English, and other northerly
people pickeld, and smoke it, and so eat it. They pickle it most in midst of
October, and November; when they hang it up, some smoke it first^with juniper,
which they strait quench again. Some think it gives it a good color to fume it
with bundles of dry netles, and that it makes it redder; but you must feed but
sparingly hereon, for it nourishes little, and lies long in the maw, being very
hard to digest, and then yields but ill juice. The middle-aged is thought
best, that has not been over-laboured, yet old one will hastily fatten.
Bruierinus saw some, that the Avern* sent, that were so fat and heavy, that the
buyers must carry them in carts. It has been forbid, on great forfaits, to
kill, in cities of note, diseased oxen; and the guilty taken, have been hevily
punished; since tainted flesh lies heavy, and breeds corrupt humors, and
spirits. Veal is temperate food, juicy, favoury, light of disgestion, breeds
good blood, esteemed so by all, and preferred before Kid by many. Crescentiensis
would have it killed fifteen days after. Others would not have it weaned till
thirty days old: In many parts of France, they are brought to the Buthchers of
a month old, sometimes less, sometimes a month and an half old. Bruierin.
At Rome they let them suck often a whole year; and keeps them from grass, and
other fodder: they are after that a delicate food, and used by Francis the
first of France. Donat.
One magnifies their flesh, if weaned at three or four months old, and killed
at a year old complete. As for Heifers, they are better food, then grown, but
fall short of Veal. At Lions they like yearlings, and those of six months, and
of two and three years old. Bruier* commends those that never took Bull. Their
parts we shall now consider.

A Calves-head boiled, and eaten warm, is known good food; the brain taken
out, boiled a while in water, and then skinned, and sod in wine, and seasoned
with spice, is good: The jaw is counted a dainty; but an Oxes is disputed of.
The Neats-tongue is prized in Germany, both in the high and Low Countries. Of
old it was not sacrificed, the Priests under a pretense of Religion, preserving
it for themselves. Some stuff it with spice, and roast it. The udder uses to be
par-boyled, and with fat or butter fried, and sprinkled with spice, and so
served in. The paunch was in old times cried up: Plin.
the tripe among the Romans especially was a dainty. H. N. l. S. c. 45.
Their Ancestors had such a special care of this beast, that there are
Presidents of some condemned by the people of Rome, for killing an Ox, and
denying they had eaten the tripe, and were banished as if they had murdered a
husbandman.

The sweet-breeds were a service at great men's tables, and of old magnified:
Nor are Neats-feet cast away. Diogenes the Cynick is said to have died with
eating one raw.

As for their use in medicine; Beef allayes a swelling; and laid on hot,
disperses impostumes, and boyles, if Pliny be to be believed. Cowes-flesh laid
on the privities, strangly heals the ulcers and coupissing. Beefe-pottage stops
the flux, says Simeon Sethis; Pottage of Cow-beefe heals sore and chapped
mouths; Calves-broth is reakoned among the helps of the Colic, and
Bloody Flux; Veal new killed, sod in vinegar, and laid moist under the
armpits, takes away the rank, rammish smell; If women about the time of
conception, eat it well roasted with heart-wort, they shall bear males. See
Aldrovand. about Neats-feet broth among the Portugeses: Arist.
And also, the oil of Neats-feet is good against all aches and lamenesse. Holy
says, that Ox-liver burnt, and drunk, is good against loosnesse, and
bloody-issues. A distilled-water made of a Bull-calfs-liver cut small, with a
like quantity of Sage-leaves, helps the hard swellings that lie cross the
bottom of the belly. The extract of the Ox-spleen, suppresses the monthly
terms.

Pliny writes of superstitious, Pliny.
and magical uses, or rather abuses. The paunch, or tripebroth taken in thought
to expel venom; especially poison from Henbane, and Hemlok. Gesner.
The intrals of a Calfe, fresh and warm, chopped small, yields a juice, that with
a like quantity of Sage and Parsley, are good to rub cold, wasted, Sextus.
and palsied parts. The pissle weakened in vinegar, and smeared on, makes a
smooth face. Sextus.
A red Bulls dried to powder, the quantity of a piece weight, some say quench,
some say kindle lust. Their marrow, especially the Calves, is a softner: the
Cowes marrow kneaded in flower, and eaten as bread, cures strangly the
bloody-fluxes, especially eaten with new cheese: Marcell.
the Bulls is dryer, Empir.
and the powder taken in wine, helps strangury, and gut-wringing; dissolved,
and with a fourth part of red myrrh, and of oil of Bay, or Laurel, as much
loosens the shrunk sinnews, if you anoint the feet and hands morning and
evening. Pliny says, the Ox-marrow out the right forethigh, poudered with
sowte, is good for the hair, and the eyelids, and corners, if they aile any
thing. Of the sewet, and the preparation of the Bulls-tallow, thus Pliny: The
way of fat, the same is used about the sewet, and tallow of the beasts that
chew the cud; the veins are taken out, it is washed in Seawater, or brackish;
beaten into balls, sprinkled with Sea-waters, then sod often, till the rank smell
be gone; then by continual salting it, is whitened; that is most prized, that
is taken from the reins: If you resume the old, you must first melt it, then
often wash it in cold water, then try it again, and pour very sweet wine, or
perfumed on it; thus by often seathing, the malignity is boiled out.
Dioscorides shows how it should be sweetened. It is much hotter and dryer then
Swins-grease, and cooler then the Lions; good for fiery, and hard swellings,
with rosin, and fullers chalk it is soften; Aesculapius adds wax; and perhaps
it comes near to Galens fourfold medicine. It takes spots and freckles out of
the face, with feed of Cunila, and ashes of harts-horne, if it be burnt in the
beginning of the dogdayes, with gum and honey it helps wax kernels, and the
like; mixed with bears grase, and wax, a like quantity, it strangely suppresseth
impostumes, and with nightshadened rue it helps freckles, warts, bunches and
the like. Calves fat take out of the flank, boild with three pints of water,
and taken in as broth, helps the colic. Bruised, and with salt it is good for
lowsinesse, and sore-heads, mixed with a little nitre, and like ser-cloth it is
said to heal the swellings, and other griefs of the cods. It helps against
poison that uses to kill with exulcerating calves-sewet with goose-grease
closes the chaps in the mouth. Ox-sewet rubed on, takes away the stiffness and
pain of the neck. (...)
It helps the griefs of the fundament, with flower of frankincense it heals
corns, and leprosies, morfew, tetters, fellons, scurft, taken with salt,
raisins, origanum, leven or bread. For fellons this sewet with salt, and
goats-grease is smeared on, or burnt in the Sun with roses. ^^^rcell.
The Ox-gall cures sore-heads presently, if mingled with juice of Asses-dung,
and a little powder of Sea-onion and Bulls-gal; or with nitre, wine and oil,
well mixed with fullers-earth and nitre, it piels of the leprosy and scurfe.
^^^scor.
It is applied to cankers and fiftulaes with juice of leeks and breast-milke,
(...).
rubed on with a woollen-cloath on the navel, it voids worms; smeared on with
honey, it helps the squincy, closes the chapt fundament, opens stopped emrods;
makes loos-bodied, laid on the bottom of the belly with butter, Deer-marrow,
and oil of Bay rubed on the knees, it helps them; it helps the griefs of the
privy parts, anointed on with oil, as also of the cods; dissolved in hot
water, it takes away the dead-flesh of the fingers; and women's terms it helps,
laid on with moist woolen.

Ox-gal mixed with, draws splinters of iron, Pliny.
and thorns; and kneaded up to the thickness of honey daubt on, with allom. And
Mirrhe is a speedy cure for worms in the privy parts, it disperses kernels,
and impostumes in any part; as also ox-blood, and flesh laid hot on; with oil
of palma Christi, and roses, it helps the hearing; and laid on with cotton,
takes away tinkling noyses in the ear. There are who think that the
Kings-evill is helped by a linen band, dipped in a warm ox-gal, and tied under
the hips, shifted, and laid fresh on three days. Hippocrates advices, that, if
a woman has not conceived, her months showing themselves, on the third, or
fourth day, all umbray'd moystened with ointment, is to be laid on with a
woollen cloth, and so three days renewed; and the third day, an ox-gall is to
be shaven, and the shavings mixed with oil, and put in a linen cloth, and
three days together laid on, Prosper.
and then she shall conceive. Alpinus de Medic.
Finally, Aegyp. l. 3. c. 3.
it is strange that is written, that some Egyptian women, to become fat, take
in a bath 9 days a chirat of Cows-gall, dissolved in Cow-pisse. About the
calves-gall, understand that with vinegar warmed, it takes away Nits, it lesses
the chops of the eyes, bruized with honey, and especially Mirrhe and Safran; and
is very good to put into the ear with a Snakes-slough, sprinkled with lees
mixed with oil, it drives away gnats. The stone in an Ox-gall, the Philosophers
call it Alcheron, it is like a ring, bruised to powder, and snuffed up, helps
the sight, and prevents eye-rheums: and is good for the falling sickness, if
you take thereof the quantity of a pea with the juice of into the nostrills.
The hide, and glue also has it is use in Physic: Plin.
Burnt, it heals kibes, especially out of an old shoe: with honey it eats off
cankers in sores; the ashes of an old soal burnt, helps against a bruise from a
pinching shoe. Glue sod out of Ox-hides, especially Bulls, and that out of
their ears, and pizles of very soverain; nor is any thing better against
burnings. But it is often counterfaited, nothing more taken out of other
leather to cozen you. That of Rhodes is truest, and therefore used by Painters,
and Physicians. The best at this day, called German, is of a light-red-colour,
very hard, britled as glass, and blackish, and twice as dear as the other.
Dioscor.
It is called Xylocolla, or wood-glue, because it is used in gluing wood
together; others call it Taurocolla, or Bulls-glue: we owe the invention of it
to Daedalus; it joins things firmer then any other thing can. Plin.
Melted in vinegar it heals the scab, adding lime-wit, if it be not gone too
far, weakened in vinegar, and with brimstone, boild on a soft fire, to the
thickness of honey, and stird boiling, with a fig tree sprig, applied twice a
day, it cures itch, melted, and dissolved the third day, it heals, and closest
wounds, made by iron. Mixed with vinegar, and honey, it removes Nits. It helps
teeth, boyld in water, and rubed on, and presently taken of again, and then the
teeth washed with wine, wherein has been sod sweet Pomegranet-roots, drunk with
three cups with hot water, it helps spitting of blood; as also the hot
collique, and belly-ake, if laid on. The horn, the top of it, Plin.
burnt, two spoonfulls weight, with honey, swallowed in pills, helps the
Ptisick, or short-breath, or wheezing; as much burnt to powder, with three cups
of hot water, and a little vinegar, helps the Spleen, taken three days in, if
fasting. The hoof is also medicineable; boiled, and eaten with mustard, it
resists poison: burnt, and drunk in pottage, wine, or other liquour, it
restores milk to women's dried breasts; the smoke thereof kills, or chases away
Mice. The Ancledust drunk with honey, brings away worms; with mulled vinegar, it
lessens the Spleen; with wine, it fastens the teeth. It is frivolous, but not
to be left out, says Pliny, if it be but to please women, that the ankle, of a
white heifer, sod 40 days and nights, till dissolved, rubbed on with a linen
cloth, makes a clear smooth skin. Phrasis.
The Hips burnt, and drunk, stopped fluxes of blood. The thin skin moist from the
calving, heals a sore face. The Stone, found in the head, drunk out of the same
water that the ox drinks, helps effectually the head-ake.

The milk, being thick, and fat passes not so easily through us; yet Pliny
says it loosens the belly, and is drunk in the spring to purge, because it
comes from many herbs whereon the Cows feed heartily. D^o^co^.
It works out poison, especially, that that corrodes, and inflames;
particularly it helps against Doryenium, Colchicum, Hemlock, and the sea-hare.
Warmed, and gargled it soon allayes the pain, and swelling of the almonds under
the ears. Taken warm from the Cow it helps an exulcerated stomach. A cupfull,
with so much deer-sewet, tried, and moist pitch, and Scythian red-oker, helps
strangely a consumption. Hippocc.
A black Cows milk with powder of Sesamum is good to drink for a women that
after childbirth vomits blood, after forty days. Marcel. Dioscor. Plin.
The same boiled mitigates, and removes fluxus, and desire to stool, if newly
milk, and two parts boiled away, for the strangury a little honey must be added;
and if the pain be great, lay on the navell dust of Hartshorn, or Ox gall mixed
with cummin-seed, with flesh, up-goared. Nor are these the prescriptions only
of Aetius, Galen, and Pliny, but our late Physicians prescribe the like, and
therein they quench a gad of steel nine times, and apply it hot to the patient,
or glister wise. Hippocrates prescribed it of old, and others mixed with
liquour. For he when the guts were wounded, and the breath came forth beneath
apparently by the wound, and the breasts emptied, advised it to be given with a
like quantity of milk, wine and water. And Gesner also testifies, that some
cried it up, if the liquour mixed with wine, and milk were drunk certain days
in Maries-bath. Butter, although Pliny say it was a food prized only by
Barbarians and poor common people, yet Galen, and Diosco. and others proclaim
great virtue to be in it. Vitalis de Furno Cardinal, and a famous Physician
says that butter is naturally warm, and moist; heat is predominant in it, it
is viscous, and oily. Often eaten it moystens the stomach, and make loos-bodied,
softens the breast; cures ulcers in breast, and bowels; especially, when fresh
and new, agreeing to man's complexion, helps apostumate breasts and lungs; it
being the proper quality to ripen, disperse, and cleanse all superfluous
humors, especially if eaten with honey and sugar. Butter resists poison,
supples the members, softens, and helps, smeared on eye-smart, disperses, and
ripens impostumes, eases sore breasts, and lungs, and gripings of the bowels,
supples, and loosens shriveled up sinews. It is a special remedy against
inward poison, if heartily drunk melted in hot milk, after you have drunk
venom, for by its fatness it stops the passages, that the venom reach not
suddenly the heart. But, new butter is thus praiseworthy, not so the old, etc.
Thus far the Cardinal Cheese is good against flaxes, strangury, and colique.
Hippocrates uses the same against his third sort of consumption. Donatus writes
that he gave a pellet of Sicilian cheese dipped in honey to a boy troubled with
worms. G(...).
Of the whey, hot, or cold we shall elsewhere discuss; certain it is, that it
thins and cleanse away the thick humors, and brings down the belly; to this
last purpose the ancients have used it often, especially in those, which they
would purge gently, as the melancholy, and those that had the falling
sickness, the leprous, the scald, and those that brake out with blisters over
the whole body; above all it is good for shortwinded taken with neezing powder.
Ox-pisse allayd with amber burnt, D(...).
and quenched therein removes impotence. Hippoc. P(...).
purged therewith female wombs, that conception might follow. Bulls-pisse takes
away leprosy, and scurf; heals sore running-heads; allays grief, of the ears
dropped in with myrrh. Finally, if the hearing be very thick, Plin.
the Hee-goats, or Bulls, or man's old urine hot, and vapouring out of a long
necked bottle helps: they mixed with it a third part vinegar, and some
Calves-pisse that never tasted grass. Ox-blood, men write, that taken with
vinegar, and moderately it helps against blood-vomiting. it cures dogs newly
fallen mad: it concocts ulcers, if a plaster be made of it with sewet by the
fire. Dio(...)
Bulls-blood with meal smeard on softens hardness, and dried it scatters
impostumes in any part: it kills serpents; takes away face-spots; and that it
is deadly to drink, by reason that it soon congulates, and hardens. Midas King
of Phrygia, and Psammenitus of Egypt, Themistocles and others, who died by
drinking it, H. N. l. 20. c. 13. and l. 29. c. 13.
are sad examples. Pliny excepts Aegyra, a city doubtless of Achaia, which Homer
calls Hyperesia, where the Priestesse being to divine, drinks bulls blood before
she descend her prophesying cave. Signs that you have drunk it are stopping
of breath, even to choking, closing the jaws, and ears, almonds, rednes of
tongue, infecting the teeth, etc. They help against ik, with mariorane, cole,
wildfigs, calamint, ladyglove, salpeeter, pepper, copperas, black southistle,
thorn and time. A few words of the Dung: The bulls dissolves swellings, and
callow hardness; the ox-dung is laid on, made up with vinegar cataplasme-wise,
for hand-greefs, and hard-swellings. Laid on coals with melantine, snuffed up,
it heals megrim, freck, pressed out, and weakened in urine, it is commended for
gut-ake, men use of it bruised, and sifted for a purge for the barren. The
calves dung differs little from the oxes in virtue, Marcellus says, that it is
a present help daubed on sore joints. Some parts are for many other uses, to
say nothing of husbandry, treading out corn, carriage, war, sights; of the
horns are made, besides cups, lavers, cupping glasses, lanterns, cornets,
buglehorns, trumpets and bows: Of the hide are made shields, bucklers, helmets,
tents, ships, ladders, belts, girdles, money, pouches, bottles, bellows, whips,
shoos, and other things; nay the Pyraeaean siege in Greece, and that of Ripella
in France witness that they have been for food. Out of the fagg-ends of hides
comes glue. Out of the sinews are made both tough and yielding whips. The teeth
smoothen paper. Cleanthes the Philosopher, wanting money to buy paper, wrote
what he heard from Zeno, with ox-bone on tiles, or slate. The powder of the
same helps rheums and gout. The blood, being thicker then other, and soon
coming together and stifning, is very fit to make mortar. And calves blood with
minced veal kept ten days in an earthen pot, makes fit baits for fish. Ap^^^^s.
The sewet, especially of the heifer, and that about three year old, makes the
best candles. If you mash your seed with ox-gall, before you sow it, it is good
against field mice: nor will Ants come near a tree, if you rub the root with
cow-gall. The same and lees counterfeit Lyciam, and make a golden color. Of
old they made brushes of ox-bristles, and painters their pencills. The
Troglodites spent with age, used to strangle themselves with an ox-tail.
Dio^lor.
The Chinois feed their fish to fatten them with cow dung. Some smear their
walls with it against flies. (...).
Their hoofs drive vermines from vines.

Oxen admit of many differences from their bignesses, Differences.
variety of horns, monstrous shape of parts, place, and otherwise. In the Isle
Aden (of old Madoce, and Ocellis) their Cows are as great as a Camel,
snow-white, with horns, and ears, Francis A^varez, de Aethio. c. 119.
some pricking up, some hanging. Aristot. says, that the Egyptian are greater
then those of Greece. Those of Ethiopia in Prete Began his domin^ons, bear such
great horns, that thereof are made vessels that hold many galons. The African
Cows are so little, that they scarce reach the greatness of our calves, but
can bear any labor, and hardship. Plin.
And such are the Alpine, (or rather Altine;) Altinum being an old city and a
flourishing one on the Venetian coast, near Aquileia. The English Oxen pride
themselves in their horns, and admirable savoury flesh, called Beef. Those in
the north of America want a dewlap, and are bunsh-backed. In Dariena they are
said to be whole-hoof'd, not unlike Mules, great eared, trunked like Elephants,
ash-colored, and of a delicate flesh. Out of Spain are transported into
Hispaniola, Cows so fruitful, that one common Cow in 26 years shall calve 800
calves, while their race is still breeding also. The Aonian Oxen are many
colored, whole-hoof'd, have one horn, coming out of their mouth. Aelian.
Vartomannus saw the Sultan in Arabia, presented with Cows-horne like Deer, and
black; and some had but one horn, and that on the forehead. Among the
Arachatae are wild Oxen, black, ginning, flat-horned. The Armenian have a
double-horne, Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 1.
writhed, bending, and entortled like an zuy, and so hard, that it can turn a
swords-edge. In the Province of Bengala, P. Venet.
their Oxen are as thick as Elephants. In Holland the Cows, especially the pied
ones, yield a great soop of milk. In some parts, in summer-dayes, each Cow
yields to the pale 44 quarts a day. In the Lazerhuys at Amsterdam, Ponta^^s
Amstel. l. 2. c. 23.
they hold 22 Cows, out of which they gain in milk and cheese, beside what
themselves daily spend, about 500 crowns a year. It is not wonder then that in
butter and cheese, they export to foreign parts each year, for 200
Sesterties, that is, 1000000 Carolusses. Had^^^n. Gun.
They make it out of Butter-milk, that we in England give to the poor, and to
our swine. In Scotland there are very white wild Oxen, of thick and long Manes,
savage, and fierce, so hating mankind, that they will for many days abstain
from that, that man has handled, or breathed on, and being taken by wiles,
they die of themselves; they have a sinewy, gristly kind of flesh. In the
Camanduan quarters there are vast Oxen, Scalig. Exerc. 206.
short, and blunt-horned; of aspotles whiteness, bunched-back'd, and strong as
Camels, that will take up burdens, Camel-like, with bended knees at their
keepers command. Plin.
I know not whither he mean those of Caria in Asia, ugly, with a bunch on the
shoulders, reaching from their necks, with loose horns and laborious: The
other, black, or white, are condemned to toil. Those of Cyprus feed on man's
dung. In the City Diu, are small Oxen, with great and strait horns; but,
besides their fitness to carry, and toil, they will be taught to obey a
bridle, and to pace like horses. Arist.
The Cows of Epirus, each fill a payl with milk; the milker stands upright, or
stoups a little, for sitting he cannot come by the udders. The Oxen of the same
place that are called Pirrhique, from Pyrrhus, who held (men say) so much of
them, Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 45.
are highly cried up; they come to that perfection at four years old. They
were very great, and there are of the race yet left. But now they desire
yearlings for breed; but those of two years are better.

In Eubaea the oxen are almost all white; whence Poets call Eubaea
Arggroboaeon, silver-oxed. In Galata a hill of Africa, Aelian. H. N. l. 12. c.
36. Herod. l. 4.
the oxen, when oldest, are not so great as those of eight months in Italy,
says Leonius. In, or near the region of the Garamantes, they feed
praeposterously; for if they direct their mouths strait to their pasture, their
horns bending downward hinder them. The Helvetian oxen, specially those by
Zofinga, a town of Bern, are prayzed for tender flesh. Plin. Aelian. H. A. l.
3. c. 34.
In India there are oxen with one and with three horns, and whole-hoof'd, they
are as tall as Camells, their horns four foot broad. One of them was brought
to Ptolomy, that held three pitchers full of water. They run there with horses,
being equally fleet, perhaps Pliny means these, speaking of Indian wood-bulls,
greater then wild ones, swifter then all others, yellow, blew-eyed, their hair
turning thwart, their chaps gaping to their ears, their horns wagging, their
hide as hard as a flint, and wound-free; they hunt all wild beasts; they are
taken only in pits, and kill themselves with their fiercenes. I know not
whether they are those, the Sangiaci and Bassae use by Damascus, with thin
tayls and hair, valued each at four or five Ducats. We read also that in India
is an Ox, called in their native tongue Ignaragna, near the Fort of the Holy
Ghost (so called,) and elsewhere, where it is less cold, of a monstrous bulk,
feeding on grass, that is red, far bigger then our oxen, skinned like the
Elephant, having two arms near the breast, the teats hidden, wherewith she
suckles her young; headed and mouthed as ours, sweet of flesh, that the Indians
much long after; yielding fat like butter, wherewith they season their food;
the bones as firm as ivory. The Umbrian Oxen, chiefly by the river Clitumnus,
are famous; they are the greatest in Italy, Plin.
and most white. The Sabine are also cried up; there was one of old bred by a
househoulder, of a strange size and shape, whose horns were many ages kept for
a miraculous monument in the porch of Dianaes Temple. The Leutrican Oxen, their
horns and ears are alike, Arist.
and of apeece. In a Province of Catay are white and black ones, tayl'd as a
horse, but bushier and long, bearing fine hairs, like feathers, of great value,
which the Cavaliers hang on their lance top, counting it an ensign of high
gentility; the horns, as they lift up their head, reach to their tail; the
horns are so great, that the inhabitants use them in stead of buckets. Aeli.
H. A. l. 2. c. 51.
The Mysian have no horns. Among the Negros, the cows are all black, or white,
or mixed, none red. They winter them by the marsh Maeotis among the Nomades, and
summer them in the plain fields. Of the Oxen, some have no horns, some they saw
off. The Poeonian bulls are shagged bodied, especially on breast, and chin; and
carry so great horns, that scarce three or four quarts of wine can fill them;
whereof the Poeonian Kings and Nobles make cups, tipp'd with ivory and silver,
says Theopompus. Hungary abounds so with them, that Sigismundus, Baron of
Heberstein, affirmed, that he saw one only way toward Vienna, driven above
80000 in one year. Pa^^l. Venet. l. 1. c. 22.
Comandu, a Persian region (so called of a city there) has many vast ones, all
white, short and blunt-horned, bunch'd-backed like Camels; whence they become
so strong, and fit for carriage. Such are also in Quivira. The Bulls there are
wild, yellow, low, crookbacked, great mained, and hanging; their flesh good
wholesome, and not unpleasant: the Natives eat the tail, drink the blood, wear
the hides. The Phaenician Cows are so tall, that the tallest shepherds milk
standing; lower men must have a footstool. In Phrygia and Erythraea, Aelian. H.
A. l. 16. c. 33.
the Oxen wag the horns as the ears, says Aristot. and Aelian. In Norwey,
Island, Gothland, Feronia, Oxen are wild, untameable, and long-bearded. The
hunters skulk among the trees, and when they are stricken, they either revenged,
or kill themselves.

There is also a Sea-cow, a great, strong, furious, dangerous monster, spawning
the like, not above two at once, oftener but one, which it tenders, and caries
carefully about, wherever she swims, or goes aland; she carries her fry 10
months, she is known by cutting of her tail, to have lived 130 years. On some
Northeren-Coasts, they have teeths like Elephants. In Caricta, a Scotch
Province above Galloway, are Oxen of tender and sweet flesh; but the fat never
thickens, but slows like oil. About Torona, lastly, are some that a few days
before calving, have no milk, but at other times are flush, they go ten months
with calve. Of the Tartarian Oxen, V^r. o.
tall as Elephants, black and white-hayred, and hanging thick on their
shoulders, like Lions, three foot long, soft as silk, I have spoken already. As
also of the Tartarian, (that Scaliger calls Syrian) that have no dew-laps. Plin.
Thus far of their differences in a promiscuous way. Hitherto belongs the beast
called in Corgo Empalanga, shaped like an ox, and of the like bulk; only he
carries his head, and neck aloft, like a Stag; the horns strait, and long,
knotty at top, bending a little inwards, wild, but not harmfull, nor fierce;
and might be brought to the plow, if the inhabitants had the wit to use them.
Monsters.
As for monsters, there was seen at Millian, and Satura, a calf with two
heads; at a village of Thuringia, one with six feet, two heads, and but one
passage; and one has been seen with seven feet, and a bunch of flesh on the
side, also one nose, and ear like a man, with two heads and faces, and
double-bodied; only two hind-feet, and faced like a Lamb. Anno 1551 was seen
at Basil of the Rauraci, an Ox with five feet; such as we saw once in London in
England; and another with a horn in the neck, and short legs like a dwarf. You
shall here also have the print of a monstrous calfe with two bodies, upright,
and with five ears.

ARTICLE II. Of wild-Oxen.
POINT I. Of the Wild-Ox, or Bugle.
WId-Oxen, in Greek Agrioi, that differ from the wild Agrayloi, in this, that
these though tame, and bred of such, yet running loose among the hills a
pleasure are left to feed in woods and fields, but those are not wild so much
from the nature of the place, as their own natural disposition; such are
Bugle, Bison.

The Urus, or Bugle, Macrobius makes a French, and Aldrovand a German name: For
Ur signified among the old Dutch wild, or great, vast and strong. Servius yet
will have it to be Greek, fetching it from Oroi, the mountains. The Poles, at
least about Mafovia, Samogitia, call him Tur; which Gesner thinks to be the
Tarand among the Ancients. The Liturnians calls him Zumbro. Sc^^g.
Whether it be Iphicrates his thezes, we shall inquire elsewhere. S. Hieronymus
calls him Bubalus, or Buffe, as also Martialis; and the unskilful common
Romans, says Pliny. Authors differ somewhat about the description, unless
happily there be several kinds of them. Caesar and Pliny mentions no shagge
hair on them; Eras. Stella ascribes to them shaggie temples and beards; Caesar.
Albert. M. A. l. 22.
as also Albertus Magnus, who confounds him with the Bonasus. For the rest, he
is little less then the Elephant, shaped and colored like the Bull* Some are
fifthteen cubits high, three men may stand between his horns; rough of hide,
and dew-lapped. Horned thick, black, short, red-eyed toward the outer corner;
great-headed, broad-faced, almost black, especially his temples, chin, neck.
The face, sides, thighs, tail, einclining to red. He is found in the Hyrcinian
wilderness, in Podolia, Samogitia, Masovia, and Hungaria. They are not
tameable by man, not the least of them: they are exceeding strong, and swift;
he can toss with his horns Horse and Rider, and turn up reasonable great
trees by the roots. Great men count his flesh seasoned a dainty. The northern
Barbarians drink in the horns, some head their darts with them. Among us, says
Pliny, they make clear lanterns of them, P^iny.
that cast light very far; and the shavings are used to many delightful
purposes, now painted, now smeared, pictures called Cerostrata, or horn-peeces
are made of them: It may be that wild-Bull, that did so much mischief in
Macedonie, that King Philip killed at the foot of Orbel, whose hide, and horns
of fourteen hand-breadth, dedicated in the porch of Hercules his Temple, De
Bicul. l. 1. c. 2.
was a Bugle, or Urus. See Aldrovand. of the manner of taking him.

POINT II. Of the Bison, or Buffle.
THe name Bison comes from the German word Vicent. Aldrov.
The Oppian coppies have it Bistoon, from Bistonia (happily) a Thracian wood,
but it is a mistake. Plin. Solin.
Dion calls them Bissones. Like wild Oxen they are, bristled, and have rough
long manes, which they shake on their thick neck and shoulders, that it is
terrible to behold; so busht also they are about the cheeks and chin. Oppian.
Their horns crooked, but bending upwards, Gyllius. Gesner.
and sharp as swords; not broad, and cross as other Oxen; but starting
upright, and hooked only about the tip. Their shaggy hair smells of musk,
short-headed, great and fierce-eyed, and sparkling, broad fore-headed; the
horns so wide from one another, that three men may sit between; A bunch on the
back; the hinder-part of the body lower then the fore-body. Gesner saw a horn
of them at a Goldsmiths to be tiped with silver, of a glistering black,
eighteen inches long, hooked like a bird of preys talends. The tongue so rough,
that were it licks, it fetches blood. The Greeks used not these, Plin.
nor Bugles in Physic, not having tried their virtue; though Indianwoods are
full of such; yet parts of them are of more efficacy in medecin, (it is
thought) then any part of ordinary Oxen. Of this kind are the Bulls of Florida,
an Isle of the new world, Ambros. Pare.
the natives call them Butrones. They have horns of a foot long, bunched backed
like Camels, long and yellow haired, tailed like Lions; they never become tame;
the wild cloth themselves in winter with their hides; they conceive the horn
sovereign against poison, and wears them for defense against it.

Hither may by referred the Scotch Bison, or wild-Ox, who is said to be
milk-white, mained and crested like the Lion, otherwise like the tame Ox; but
so wild, and untamed, and opposite to mankind, that he shuns grass, or shrubs,
that a man's hand has but touched; but taken by wiles, he pines to death, and
finding himself aimed at to be caught, makes at his hunter with all his might.

POINT III. Of the Bonasus.
ARistotle calls him Bonassos, and Bolintos; Aldrov. de Besul. l. 1. c. 4.
the Poeones Honapos, the derivation of the name is uncertain. Diverse mistake
him for the Urus, or Bugle; and some later Writers calls it the Indian Cow. He
is bred in the mount Mestapius, that parts Poeonia from Media. The Poeonians
call it Monapus. Arist.
Of a Bulls bulk, thicker then an Ox, Arist. H. A. l. 4. c. 71. Scalig.
Not high. His hide stretched out, holds enough food for seven Guests. Like an
Ox, only mained like a Horse; but softer haired, and lower; yellow haired. His
eye-haires long, tween ash-colored and red, rougher then that of the Paroa
Mares, but wholly under: None of them are very black, or carnation; voyced like
the Ox. The horns crooked and thwart, and unfit for fight; a palm breadth, and
not full longer; each as thick as may be grasped: Of a handsome shining
blackness. His ancles rather spreading, then bending down-ward. He wants the
upper-teeth, as the Ox, and other horned cattle. The thighs are shaggy; he is
cloven-footed; his tail is not great for his bulk, but greater then the Oxes.
He casts dust about, and digs up the earth like the Bull. Her hide is
stroke-proofe. Her flesh sweet, and therefore men hunt her. She flies when
stricken, Pliny.
till she tire her self. She defends herself with her heels and dung, which she
casts from her four paces; (not three akers, as Pliny faines.) The use whereof
is good; it burns so strong, that the cole can scorch a dogs-hair; that it is,
if you stir, and fright her; otherwise the dung burns not. Such is her look and
nature, when her calving-time draws near; she seeks the mountains, and dungs
about the place where she calves, as if she would so fence herself; she dungs
in a large measure. All this Pliny doubtless, Solian and Aelian have taken out
of Aristotle. Arist.
It is uncertain whether the horns, joints, and shoulder-blades, and ribs, as
Cainius on Gesner describes them, are this beasts or no. The horns are two foot
long, and three hands and a half finger round, near the head, a foot and half a
palm. Between the horns on the forehead, 3. Roman palms and a half. The
turning joint 3. Roman foot long, and two hands-bredth and a half about. A rib
six foot long. To say nothing of the omoplata, or shoulder blade: We have added
here a figure of the head and bones.

POINT IV. Of the Wild-Ox of the Ancients, or Bubalus.
THe name Bubalus is at this day an uncertain thing, Aldrovan. quadr. l. 2.
cap. 5.
as also it seemed to be in Pliny his time; nor had it any peculiar sense among
the Greeks. Many call diverse wild-Oxen, especial there where they were brought
from abroad, Bubali. Some make them Goats. We shall distinguish them; calling
the Bubalus, that Aristotle calls a timorous beast, having blood without
fibrae, or string-veins; the same with the African Ox. Scaliger speaks of the
Bubalis, whose blood and horns are described by Aristotle. Pliny makes him like
a Calfe, or Heart. What is it then? the Gazella? No surely, wherefore what I
could learn out of the African stories, I will freely impart.

The African Oxen are scarce so great as our Calves; but very strong, and can
endure hardship. I find him called Dant, and Lant, and Elant; Has an Oxes
face, but is much less and nimbler; yea, swifter then all other wild-beasts.
The hide impenitrable, iron cannot pierce, only a bullet can; White-haired,
taken in Summer, because their hoofs are loosned by the burning of the sand.
Bellonius describs another African Ox to be old, less then the Heart, neater
and greater then the wild-Goat; of a square and well-shaped body, goodly to
behold, yellow-haired, and so shining and smooth, that she seems sleeked over.
The belly has red-wrinckles, and seems to incline more to yellow then the
back, that is dusk-coloured. It is short, but strong thighed; thick and
short-necked, and has a little dew-lap* headed like an Ox, the horns black and
very crooked as the Gazella, bending like a Moon in the increase, wherewith he
cannot well defend himself, so crooked they are. Ox-eared, full, and
high-shouldered; the tail, like the Panther, or Camel, Horses, hanging to the
hams; black-haired, twice as thick as the Horses; lows like the Ox, but not so
loud. He is not the same, whose picture Horatius Fontana sent to Aldrovandus;
for it was of much higher and slender neck, and the horns bending back, and
crooking as in a wild-Goat. It had great ears, the proportion of the head near
the beginning of the neck; faced rather like the Kid then the Ox; wherefore
reckoned by some among the African Goats. The whole body yellowish, except that
the musle and horns were blackish: It was very long-haired.

POINT V. Of the Buffell, and Strepsicerot.
THat the Buffell, or common wild Ox, is not that Bubalus in Aristotle,
Aldrovan quadr. l. 2. cap. 6.
shall be manifest by comparing the History of either; but it seems that he
gave him no precise name among the wild Oxen, while he says, that among the
Arachoti (an Indian City,) are wild Oxen, that differ from the tame, as much
as wild Swine from others, black, and stout-bodied, with a muzle, somewhat
crooked, the horns uprighter. And perhaps this of ours shall be that wild black
one, of the strange operation, of whose blood on women, if their loins be
nointed with it, Osthanes speaks in Pliny. To describe our Buffell, he is like,
but greater and higher then the Ox, thick of body, hard-skind, and the parts
lean, and spare; his hair black, thin grown, and small, little, or none on the
tail. The forehead rough, and curled with intricate hair. The head hanging
earthward for the most part, and but small for such a body. Albertus.
The horns long, crumpled, and black; sometime hanging near the neck inward,
toward the inner-part of the breast; sometime upright. The neck thick, and
long, lower toward the rump. The tail short, small, and has almost no hair.
The thighs thick, strong, and short for such a body. They are often found in
Asia, Greece, Egypt, the Isle Borndo, and cities of Italy. We have seen many
about Fundi, they love to bide among waters. Their low is frightfull. The
female has milk, and in coupling-time, Niph^s.
and at first calving. At first they seem gentle; but provoked, (and that they
are by red) there is no taming them; chase them, they fly strait on, and never
turn. Enraged, he takes water, and dowses into the head, to cool his boiling
blood. The female endures not a calf of another kind; knowing it by the smell,
but smear it with cow dung, the smell deceives her, and she suckles, and brings
it up for her own. They will labor hard; they are lead, and ruled by an iron,
or brass ring-strook through the nostrils, with a halter, or bridle fastened
to it. Men say, that, if he be overladen, you can not beat him up; he will not
stand up, till you disburthen him. Their flesh is sold at Rome; and the Jews
like it; but it is so slimy, that it cleaves, if you clap it on the wall. The
cheeses, that abound in the Pistorian Province, called Marzolinis, of an ovall
shape; (that is, shape like an egg, are preferred before those of other cows,
are better tasted.) They make rings of the hoofs, and horns, which worn on
fingers, or toes, are excellent against cramps; some tide on four sorts of
threads, of gold, silver, brass, and iron; thinking them more effectual so.
Clothes, especially doublets are made of the hide; and horse-trappings in
Narzinga. The Siamenses make bows of the horns.

The Ox called Strepsiceros, or sharp-horned, is faced rather like a wild Goat,
then an Ox; yet tayled like the ox, though very short. Colored he is all over
like the Dear.

ARTICLE III. Of the Sheep.
FRom the History of the Ox we pass to the description of the Sheep, of old
sacred to the Egyptians; and with the Athenians of such esteemed, that an
action was ordered to be commenced against him, Pl^^ar.
who flead a live Ram. And it was enacted by an old law, that none should out
of a flock of a 100 head, kill one uncliped, or that had not yeaned. Which
Athenaeus writes also, adding that in his time in the sacrifices of Palace,
neither might an ew-lamb be slain, nor cheese tasted. Agel. l. 11. c. 1.
And among the Romans of old, no mulcts were imposed on delinquents, but paying
sheep, or oxen, where also by the laws of their King, a manslayer was to pay a
ram. The tribute among the Persians and Medes, Ambr.
was sheep. Those paid L. M. These as many more. And the Staby (to speak of
places at hand) sent yearly to Nola, to the President under the name of
tribute, and respect a great white lamb with gilded horns. To say nothing of
the custom of giving for a reward lambsflesh to the unridlers of r^ddles, and
to Poets. Whence they that sung for, or of such rewards were called Arnothooi,
alluding to sheep.

Among the names of this beast among the Latins are Ovis, the Sheep, Aries, the
Ram; Agnus, the Lamb; Adasia, or an old Ew; minae, smooth-bellied; Aspicae,
Lanata, woolly, or fleeced; Bidens, two teethed; Pecus, cattle* Onis, is the
name of the female, or ew. Though Festus says it was used in the Masculine of
old, about mulcts. Whence Oviaria denotes a flock. The Ram is the male. The
Lamb is not yet a year old. Adasia is an old ew, newly yeaning. Matrices were
those that suckled lambs for the Palladium, called Tokades, or paschals,
nourisht everywhere. Minae had no wool on the belly. Apicae, the small ones,
and thin-wooled. Lanata, from the fleece. Bidentes, that had two teeth longer
then the rest, and such only were to be sacrificed. Also Ambidentes, and
Duidentes. Festus takes them for those that had upper, and lower teeth. The
name pecus is given to grazing cattle, and useful to man. Often to sheep
only. Plin.
The Greeks have as many names for the sheep and ram. As the Laconians Amnoa,
(...).
Amnos, Bara, Probata, or Bota, Goita, the sheep; Didoees, two-teethed; Dikuma,
ews that yean twins; Eggalon, milse; Eniron, soft woolled; Iereion, for
sacrificed; Metassai, ews with lambs under their teats; (...)
Meselikes, middle-aged, between lambs and sheep; Kar, Karnos, Karos, Ois, Ox,
Poon, Renes, simple names for any sheep. The Ram is called Aricha, Krios,
Arneios, Dedmaoon, Ethris, is the bel-weather geld; Ktilos, the leader of the
flock; Mischias, Okribas, is the wild sheep. The boors pig is nefreus in
Latin. (...)
Ars, Amnos, Ersai, Kathetos, Killix, Pratinion, Tranon, Phagilon, etc. are
Greek names of lambs. Not to stay long on the description; Descript.
this beast being so well known. Yet we shall set down the most memorable
things we meet with in authors. Nature has given the sheep a most weak head.
The brain is lean. The horns of the ews are commonly smaller; many have none.
Some lambs are yeaned with horns, the rams crooked, and sometime more then
two. Cardan writes that he has seen some choice ones with four, we show the
figure of three, and six-horned. The gelded change the place of the horns,
bearing them on a quite contary fashion; their eyes look a side downwards, far
one from the other, Aristot. de genesis anim. l. 5. c. 1. Aristo. H. A. l. 2. c. 3.
darkish, or blackish, and broad. The lips thin, contrary to ox-lips. The teeth
continued; the ew having fewer then the ram. After a year and half they change,
(says Crescentius,) namely the two fore-teeth, and six month after, the two
next, then the rest; in three or four years at most, they shed them all. The
teeth of the younger are uneven, when they are bigger, equal; when they wax
old, ungummed, lessened, and rotted. Their bellies are as of all that show the
cud. Those of the lamb we hereafter lay open. Know that A denotes the stomach,
B the gummes, C the salter, D the Tripe. The testicles fall to the ancles. The
udders of the ew are two; as many the teats. Those of Chalicis a part of
Euboia, have no gall; those in Nexus, a great and monstrous gall. Aristo. de
part. l. 4. cap. 2.
Aelian says that here they have a double gall; Plin. H. N. l. 11. cap. 37.
in Pontus none; Aelian. H. A. l. 17. c. 26.
and that in very cold countries, in deep snows, and hard winters, they have no
gall, nor being folded, eat; but in Spring, as they come to pasture, they get
great galls; and so it is with the Scythian sheep. In Scopsis their spleen is
very little, and round. Their reins are even, and the sewet lies thicker about
them; if they be quite compast with fat, it kills them; which comes from rank
pasture, as in the Leontine Land in Sicily: wherefore the Shepherds there
drive them late to pasture, that they may not eat too much. Bellunen.
In Syria, the fat lies thick between the skin, and flesh in geld-rams, as in
hogs. In their ford, and hind-legs sticks a bump, near the bottom, shaped like
a round worm, within woolly and hairy, like rose-cups, that hold the seed,
enclosed in a softy and thin down; Lemnius de not. mir. c. l. 3. c. 5.
It is often taken out, when the sheeps-feet are sod, and resembles the
rottenness in worm-eten, rottenwood, or chest-nuts. Shepherds are of opinion,
that for this cleaving to the joints, no creature alive would be swifter then
the sheep. The tail is thick of wool. Hesiod. denies, that the North Wind
pearces their skin, by reason of the hair, or rather the wool. There is scarce
a place where they are not found, more or fewer, and of great difference
according to the place, as we shall hereafter show in the differences. Their
food is grass, whence called Poephaga, grasse-eter; yet they eat leaves also.
That grass is sweetest to them, that grows where the plow has gone, next that
in dry medows. Colum. R. R. lib. 7. c. 2, 3.
To prevent fulsomnesse, men lay salt in summer in wodden gutters, which they
lick when they come from pasture, that as it were seasons it to them. In winter
they nibble, or browse on elm, ax, leaves, and the second cut-hay, called
Cordum. They eat also the Cytisus, tame fisses, and, if need be, pulsechaffe.
Some give them a little kern of resins, and bran. Those that are pastured in
salt marshes, yield more milk, and more savoury cheese, and are more
fruitful, and more tender, and sweeter fleshed; such are those fat ones by
Ostia, and the neighboring Portuensian Land, by the tenth mile-stone from the
city (Rome) which land the Tiber runs through, Gome. l. 1. de Sale.
where are many brackish marshes round about, which Gomesius says he tasted
of. Arist.
The Sheep that drink river-water, couple soonest, and being used to salt from
yeaning-time, yield much more milk. And on some Seacoast, where are dry and
salt medows, Sheep lives twinty years, and bring young. Albert.
In Scotland they feed in the wild on Cytisus. In India they feed most
(especially among the Praessii) on grass well wetted with rain. In Pontus they
fatten on the bitterest wormwood. They that feed on Laserpitium usually, are
first cleansed by it, then fatten on a sudden, and their flesh is wondrous
sweet. When they will breed, is known by this, they after feed will neese, and
then fall a sleep. Pliny
The Jews give theirs palm-nuts, which the Babilonian-Smiths use for their
coals. They delight also in Coluthea, Aphax, wool-herb, vine-buds, Adianthus,
and with the Brabanti, in juy, and rosemary; and lastly Eryngius. Strabo. Geog.
Thcocrit.
Among the Ichtyophagi, or fisheaters, and about the Calami, an Indian village,
and in the Province of Aden, they feed on fish; whereon also they wax fat in
Lydia, and Macedon. For their drink, they batten on troubled water, and where
much is. Also on rainwater after wind; in summer after Northern cool showers;
in winter after Southern warm showers. Change of water is thought to hurt them,
Vanto.
especially about coupling-time.

Ews of a year old may yean lambs; but the lambs are better, if the sire, and
dame be older. Columella thinks the second year as a good breeding-time, and
so till five, and at seven to cease breeding. Florentinus is for breeding when
two years old. Arist.
Aristot. and Palladius affirms, that they may held on breeding till eight, nay
to eleven, if well tended. It is worthy noting that lambs slight young, and
seek old ews; and themselves are better, and more useful, when old. P^in.
They all couple from the setting of Arcturus, that is, from the third of the
Ides of May, till the setting of the Eagle, that is, Arist.
to the 13 of August; and those that are conceived later, are huge and weakly.
Columella yet says, that the young couple in Spring, the ews that have had
lambs, about July. They go five months with lamb, and yean commonly but one at
once, yet sometimes two, three, nay four. In some places the goodness of the
pasture, and their natural strength enables them to breed twins. In some
places they yean so, twice, or thrice. After the third or fourth coupling, they
conceive; and sometimes one Ram serves a whole flock. Sometimes they yean
monsters. Albertus calls that Cinirus, Ges^^.
that comes of an ew, and a hee-goat. In Helvetia, some lambs are yeaned like
goats before, and sheep or rams behind; but such live not long. The Musmon is
engendered between the shee-goat and Ram. From the coupling of sheep with wild
rams, comes a brood of the sires color, Albert. Co^^^^.
which holds also in the succeeding breed; the wool, in the first young,
rough; in the following ones, softer. The brood is of the color of the veins
of the dames-tongue, when pregnant-Males are engendered by the ability of the
dame, and fire, and the virtue of the waters they drink. Aristotle teaches
that they must take in southwinds, if females, and northerne-blasts, if males
be engendered. Pliny.
The same happens, if you tie the rams left, or right testicle; water also does
much in it, since the cattle that drink of the River Charadrus bring all
males. Rubbing on salt, Arist. Pausan^^^.
and nitre helps herein; and overfatnesse hinders conception. Men take a
presage of a happy year from their coupling; for the Shepherds say, that, if
the older begin betimes, it will be a good year; if the younger be forward to
couple, they shall have a bad year. The ancients call the conception after the
ordinary season, Cordum. There is a secret liking between Sheep and Shee-goats,
therefore they willingly come on together. From Rams-horns bruised, and dug
out, some say Asparagus sprouts; Alber. M.
Dioscorides denies it. If the same be buried at the root of a fig tree, the
fruit shall the sooner ripen. What is related of the Fliter-mous, Pliny reckons
among magical experiments. They are thought to hold enmity with the Wolf,
Bear, Tiger, Elephant, especially the Wolf, Raven, Eagle, Serpents, Bees.
These plants are hurtful to them, wolf-bane, pease, acorns. What is said of
the wolfes entralls, and some other things, we shall elsewhere examine. If they
eat Sanguinaria, their whole belly is distorted, and they void a most filthy,
unsavory foame at mouth. If they eat Calamogrostis, it makes them thirty, lean
and rascals, and draws blood up into their stomach. Duva (a French herb, and
name) but tasted by them, breeds in their liver little black living things,
called also Duvae. Pease sown in March is unwholesome for them. Acorns make
them cast their lambs, if they eat too freely of them. In Attica they will not
touch the root of Thapsia; if strange ones to happen to eat of it, it either
cast them into a loosnesse, or kills them. They cast their lambs, if frighted
with thunders, if not looked to. In Thrace, the Turks conceive, (...). l. 3. c.
51
there are two stars, appearing in July and Agust, just over their heads, or
vertical to them, on whose luster, if sheep chance, lifting up their heads,
but once to see, they die upon it. Therefore then they are held in house. They
may live 10 years, but for most part they die sooner; yet the place contributs
much to the lengthning out of their life. Some in dry pasture, Arist.
and by the seacoast lives 20 years. Some Ethiopian sheep last 12 or 13
years. Bleating is their voice, in Greek Blechathai. Homer yet calls lambs
Mekoomenas, or meakers. Claudian says, they grunt. In coupling they have a
peculiar voice, Arist H. A. l. 4. c. 4.
says Aristot.

As for their nature, dispositions, and usages; they are so silly, that thence
a fool is called, Probatoodes, sheepish; and it is become a Proverd, There is
no profit of sheep, if the shepherd be away; gentle they are, and they only of
all beasts rage not in yeaning, nor presently after, says Aristotle; but every
slight occasion scares them, yet- Horace calls Lambs bold. Beside the shepherd
and his dog, they have a Ram, or bell-Weather for their leader, whom the
shepherd yet first teaches; and you may see them march out of their folds, or
stall, as in martial array; especially if the shepherd conduct them, whose
very hiss they understand: That the Rams are given to fight as soon as their
horns peep out, all know. They will but at, not only their own, but sometimes
at mankind. Their rage is taken off, if you bind with prickles abord a
foot-broad cross their forehead on their horns, or bore these through in the
crooking near the ears; of, if you geld them. Macrob. Aelian.
Experience proves it untrue that some write, that in the six winter-months
they ly on their left-side, and at springtime on their right; as the Sun about
that time takes the right, after the left-Hemisphere.

This Cattle loves coole-springs, bites up grass by the roots, spoils trees,
has milk eight months; in the fore-winter feeds greedily, as if it foresaw the
hard weather and want; is impatient of cold, though best cled of all beasts;
yet those fear it less that have large tails. Mizaldus says, they will
follow him who shall stop his ears with wool. The wild ones growing old, are
nourisht by their own breed; They know their own Lambs by smelling on them
behind. Albert.
They use harder layer then goats. The Ews make a thicker water then the Males:
Both they and Goats show their months at coupling-time, and after for a time,
then they cease till yeaning-time; then have a show of them again, whence
shepherds knows that the time draws near; after they purge exceedingly, Arist.
first redish, then very red stuff.

Lambs-flesh, the Ancients cared not for, say some, as Turnebus. Yet Plautus
speaks of eating it at Rome; and Horace reckons it among delicates, as Plautus
mentions Lambs inwards, At Athens, none of old might eat of an unshorn-lamb.
The flesh is hot in a low degree, but over-moyst, Athaene.
and the younger the moyster; therefore though good for the strong, ill for a
weak-stomack, being slimy and cleaving; though Crescentiensis commends
yearlings. Columella preferres Autumn before Spring-flesh. A Lambs-head is
counted a delicate dish in a feast. The Syringatus, Terpianus, Pasticus, are
but names of several dressing the Lamb.

Rams-flesh is not moist, and well boiled, breeds good blood, Donat.
especially if well gelded. Anton.
Weather-flesh is wholesome for people of all ages, Ferrus.
places, and at all times; if young, two years old, not too far, and bred in a
dry air, fed with good grass. Those are best that are bred in the high
Trivican mountains, says Ferrus. Those in moist places in Campania are little
set by. Bellonius holds those most savoury that are roasted whole, Obser. l. 1.
c. 60.
as the shepherd in Trace, above the river Nessus use to do. The Lambs-stones
are counted dainties. Athen. l. 4.
Arnoldus says, their marrow is poison, against which Phesants-flesh is an
antidotes: Yet Homer says, that Assianact used to feed on it. Homer. Ilia. 10.
Sheeps-flesh, or Mutton for the taste, and over-moysture has been forbidden
to be killed after the fifthteenth of July, or S. Iames-time, as fitter food
for Springtime, then Summer. The feet trouble the stomach, unless the worm
before spoken of be taken out. The shoulder of Mutten roasted, and cold again,
is much eaten. The Lungs minched. The Tigurine Helvetians, of the Liver make
puddings, rouling them up in the call, spitting them on sticks, and roast them
upon the grid-iron, they mince sweet-herbs in. Some bray it whole, with bread
crumed, and strain it, and besprinckle it with spices to give a good taste, and
handsome color, then make it hot, and lay thereon thrushes par-boyled in
flesh-pottage, and fried a while in butter. The Milk, the newer the better,
and the same is to be thought of the cheese. Over-salt is disallowed. As for
Medicine, a Lamb laid warm with gourds on a part bitten by a venomous
creature, Aetius.
fetches out the poison; Brunus.
and the pottage is very good in quartan agues. Pliny.
The brain furthers madness, as Gesner has it out of a Manuscript. Their
feet yield a decoction, good against the pains in the bladder. The Rams-stones
poudered, and drunk in water, are good for the fallingsickness. Their lungs
take away bunches in the flesh, roasted prevents drunkenness; shreded, helps
bruises, and makes black scars white: And is used for purges. The Liver helps
blood-shot-eyes; Hippo.
and is good for a woman swelled in childbearing, taking in drink, and with
meat. The Milt tosted, Plin.
and powder taken in wine, resists the colic; which yet Pliny somewhere
counts it superstition, it being among the Magical precepts, that the patient
must say, that he maks a remedy for the spleen, and then he must hide, and
steal it up in his chamber, and repeat a Verse three times nine times. Mizaldus.
The Sheeps-bladder Galen advises them to take in drink, burnt to powder, Pliny.
who let water go from them in sleep. Their Gall, and honey, cleanses the ears;
and smeared on the head with earth dryes up scurffe; with the sewet, it eases
the Gout. The Milk is cried up for wholesome against all kind of venom, except
the Buprestis and Hemlock.

Before your quartan-fit, Plin.
take three cups of it with a dram of Swallows-dung: If to a sixth part you add
four penny weight purified Cnicus, and you drink the decoction, it loosens: The
same boiled on hot stones, is good against fluxes, and of an exulcerated belly.
The Butter that comes from Sheeps-Milke, Dioscor.
smeared on with honey, Plin.
together with ashes of a dogs head, or the womb, boiled in oil, takes away
dead-flesh growing about the fingers. Old Cheese taken with our meat refreshes
disentericks, or eaten, and scraped, and taken in wine, helps the colic.
Rams-horns burnt to powder, with oil some give to make the hair curle. The
ashes of the Trotters with honey, heals the bite of a Mouse and a Spider. Plin.
The Curd in a dram of wine, helps against pricks and all strokes and bites of
the Peterman, and other Sea-fishes. And is good for Infants drunk out of
water, when troubled with pend, or curdled breast-milke, or given out of
Vinegar. Put under, or into the nostrils, it strenches blood, when other things
help not.

The Sewet is taken either simply, or for that that is taken from the ribs, or
call. One says that melt it, and dip a cloth in it, and lay it on a burnt
part, it helps: It is laid on the kibe-heels with alum; Plin.
If mingled with ashes of women's hair it cures fellons. It heals all kind of
griefs about the privities, mixed with ashes of the pumice, and salt, that fat
taken from the call, especially that from the reins.

The Lambs marrow melted by the fire drunk with oil of nuts, Albert.
and white sugar, dissolves the stone in the bladder. The urine of a red or
black sheep, mixed with honey, is good for the dropsy. Galen.
Their dung a Physician in Mysia used, weakened in vinegar, to take away Corns
and hard knobs; and mingled with rose-salve to close, Dioscor.
and skin over an ulcer from burning. Galen.
Out of vinegar smeard on it works the same effects. The powder out of oil,
applied as a cataplasme, cures a fresh wound. The ashes of the same, with
salpeter, Pliny.
or the ashes of lambs hucklebones are good against the canker, Marcell.
and ulcers, that will not close. Sheeps dung also heat, and kneaded, allays
the swelling of wounds. And is good for the colique. A mountain-sheeps dung in
September shut up, the Moon decreasing the day before, gather up early, and
harden in the Sun, and pounce it to powder, and keep it in a glass, or tin
vessel, for use. A spoonful of it given three days out of water, cures the
colique; if a fever go with it, Pliny.
use wine. The wool only laid on, or with brimstone helps many unknowen griefs;
and is of that virtue, that men put it on medicines. The wool of a butting ram,
taken from between his horns, and burnt, is good for the head-ake. The ashes
(in Dioscor. opinion) draws over a crust, hinders dead flesh, closes ulcers.
Men burn it, when clean and picked in a new earthen pot, to use as before. Some
shear it, some pluck it off, and clip of the top, dry, and pick it, and put it
together into a new earthen pot, and drench it in honey. Others with lincks set
it on fire, it being sprinkled with oil, and rub the ashes with their hands,
putting in water, and then let it stand, and often shift the water, till it
lightly touch, but not bite the tongue, then they lay up, and keep the ashes. It
has a cleansing virtue to the cheeks. Wool taken after sheep-shearing, between
the spring Aequinoctiall, and the Solstice, when they begun to sweat, that from
the neck is most commended. Such wool helps green wounds, Dioscor.
cleansed, and broken bones, with oly, vinegar, or wine; since they soon suck
up moisture, and by reason of the ranknes of the cattle (called Oesypus)
soften, Pliny.
changed, or applied seven days, Marcell.
it heals the bite of a mad dog, and out of cold water heals the splents
fingers; out of hot oil it helps running sores. Herodotus relates, that the
Carthaginians sheephards with such wool sindge the veins of the crown of the
head of their children, when four years old, and some the temple-vein, to
prevent rheums and catarrs. And if the children in finging chance, with
crampes, the sprinkling of goats-pisse helps them. If a plowsheard hurt, an ox
his legs, or hoof, stoned pitch, and grease with brimstone, wound up in shorn
wool with a red hot iron thrust in, cures it. Collume^
The same wool with oil of roses, stanches blood in the nose; and another way
is good to stop the ears of hearing: Plin.
Blood is also stanched by binding the joynt-ends. Oesypus, or the foul that
cleaves to wool, helps disgestion. It eases, Galen.
closes, supples ulcers. It helps the inflammation of the matrice, Discor.
Aetius.
taken with butter, and Melilote. It cures wounds also taken with barley ashes,
and rust, equally divided; it helps also the canker and ulcers. It eats out the
swelling about ulcers; and evens knobby flesh. It cures Sint Antonies fire
taken with Pompholyx. It provokes sleep, used with a little Mirrhe washed in two
cups of wine. It lessens face-spots, with Corsick honey, that is counted
stronger. About gathering and preparing it, see Aldrovandus. The skin of the
feet, and musles of the ox and sheep, long boiled on a soft fire, to a gelly,
taken out, and dried in the open air when it whistles, is commended agains
ruptures. So much for the medicinal use.

Sheep are also useful otherwise outwardly; both their fleece and pelts, or
skins yield us stuf for clothing. The Arabian Bedevini wear no other, as
Vitriacus relates. Zeno Citicus, and Crates of Thebes, sewd Sheeps-skins within
their cloaks. Wolstan also Bishop of Worcester in England, was ever clad in
Sheeps-skins, because not Leopards, but the Lamb of God is celebrated in the
Temples. They were also used in Tragedies, whence the wearers were called
Diphtheriai. Only beware of the skins of sheep that die of the plague; for such
breed not only lowsinesse, but also Sint Anthonies fire. That out of Aelian is
strange, a garment of the wool of a Sheep bitten by the wolf, brings an itchon
the wearer. New married women among the Roamns wear girdles of wool. The
Pescia, or Capucia, were made of lambs-skins. The Molostans was (says Festus)
sheeps-skin, wherewith helmets were covered. The same skin has been used in
stead of paper. The Belly Diophanes makes good for killing vermin. (...)
Purses have been made of rams stones: And bellows, says Festus. The smallguts
make lute, and bow-strings. In May make Sheeps and Goats-cheese. Their piss
yields matter for salpeter. Their dung fattens the ground. If you close a
candle of pure rams-sewet in a linen cloth, Mizaldus.
and put it into your chests, it keeps your cloth from moths. Their
differences we shall take from their hair, or wool, or place, and handle them
promis-cuously. The Scythian Sheep are soft, Arist.
the Sauromatan hard wooled. Those of Tarentum soft-wooled. The Colonian
rougher, because kept ever aborad. (...).
We shall represent their shaggy shape to you. They are called Montaneers from
their rough, Gailex. Oppian.
and unkemed wool. There are also Wild-Sheep, not much greater then ours, but
swifter, and with horns bending back, armed with butting, and strong
foreheads. They often in the woods strike to the earth fell Bores; sometimes
they combat fiercely with each other. In the Gordian forest memorable in Iul.
(...) Capi^ol.
Cap. ^calig. Ex. 2. 17. N. 8.
time, ^^oh. Leo. Assi. l. 7.
were many painted beasts kept, and an hundred wild sheep. In the Lybian
deserts called Adimain, was a beast shaped like a Ram, as big as an Ass, with
long dangling-ears, and short wool, she would suffer herself to be backed,
though she was not kept for that use, but only for the Milk. Contrary to ours,
the Ewes are horned, the rams not. There they are commonly seen, in Numidia
also sometimes, Plin.
but counted prodigious. The Egyptian-fleeces resembles rather hair then wool.
Garments of them being thredbare and died again, last an age. They are greater
then those of Greece. About Damiate the weathers have tayls round and so great,
they can scarce carry them. Leo Affricanus says, he has seen of those tayls
that weighed some 50. and an 100 pound. In Aethiopia they have no wool, but
wear all rugged camels hair. Their Sheep are very little, Dioscor.
and the natives cover their privities with the tayls. Sicul.
In Nubia the rams are yeaned with horns; Bibliot. l. 4.
the Ewes also are horned, Aelin.
and which seems a miracle, Strabo.
they drink but once in every four days. Plin.
At Tunis they are so laden with their thick tayls, that they can hardly stir
themselves, but those that tend them are feign to bind their tayls on little
carts, when they would remoove them. In England they never drink any thing but
dew, Bellon. observat. l. 2. c. 60. Hero. l. 2. Aeli. H. A. l. 10. c. 4.
and they of purpose keep them from water, finding by experience, that it hurts
them. In Arabia some drag tayls after them three cubits long, some of a cubite
broad. Such are found in Arabia the stony and the Happy; the tayls weighing
some 26, some 44 pound. Where also are Rams whose hair hangs to the ground.
That, that is called the Indian, but is indeed the Arabian Ram, has no horns,
but long fleece, and a tail reaching to the ground. Nier. H. E. l. 9. c. 52.
There is a kind of smooth-rams, called Moromorus, who stands stone still, and
stays till any come near him; sometimes he is shy, and flies for fear with
his burden. Marckgr. H. Bras. l. 4. c. 10.
The Ram of Angola (called Guineensis) is of the bigness of ours, thick of head,
the after part sticking out more then ours; ears dangling; the tail reaches
but to the anckles; with a great tripe; the yard in the midst of the belly; the
horns small downward, bending toward the eyes, and as it were crumpled; at the
bottom of his neck a long hairy maine, the rest of his body is short-haired
like a goat, but he carries no wool, black-headed and eared, and the
upper-half of his tail, the rest white, as also the hinder-part of the head;
the forelegs white to the knees, the lower half black; the hind-legs all
black; about the dock and back white, the sides have black spots; footed like
the goat, black-hoofed. Yet these Sheep are as ours, some colored on one
fashion, some on another; and one kind is thick-legged like a man and fat,
having no hanging mane, nor wool, but is haired like a goat. Greater then ours,
their belly strutting out like an ox. In Asia some are red-wooled. The region
Camanda feeds some as big as Asses, and those fair and fat, with tayls of 80
pound wight. The Canusinian fleeces are reddish, or yellowish. Those of Chios,
for want of pasturage, are very small; Aelian. Hermola.
but their Cheeses is much cried up. The Clazomenian, are some white, some
cole-black, Strabo.
some Raven-black. The Coraxine wool is of all the purest.

Therefore the Rams for breed are not bought under a talent. Those of Creet on
mount Ida, called by the shepherds Striphoceri, have straight-horns like a
Unicorn, round and hollow, and wreathed like a shellfish, no bigger then our
Rams.

In the Isle Erythraea (it may be Gades) their milk is so fat, Strabo.
it yields no whey, and they choke within thirty days, if you blood them not.
He. Boe. Aelian.
In a part of Scotland, Oppian. de Venat. l. 2.
the sheep are yellow, Olaus M. Boet. de Scot.
their teeth gold color, the flesh and wool like saffran. In Gortynis, they
are red, and have four horns. In Gothland are Rams with four and eight horns,
which makes them so fierce, that to prevent mischief, which they else do to
each other, and to other creatures, they are fain to saw them off. They bear a
soft and long wool. Hirta, one of the Hebrides, has sheep taller then the
greatest hee-goats, with horns as thick as those of Oxen, and somewhat longer,
and tails touching the ground. In Spain in Marineus his time, there was such a
glut of sheep, that he knew many shepherds owners of thirty thousand, where
their Lambs ar better then elsewhere. Iul. Alex. Arist. Mirab.
In Illyria they report, the Ewes yean twice a year, and for the most part
couples; nay, many three at once, and four, and sometimes five. And give two
quarts and a half of milk at one time.

The Indian reached in bigness the greatest Asses, Aelian.
and yean commonly four at once, ever three at least. Their tails reach their
feet which they cut off, both that the Rams may come at them, and that oil may
be fetched out of their fat: The Rams tails also are cut off, and the fat
taken out, and are so neatly sewed on again, that the seam is not to be seen.
Of which Rams we shall give a figure; one without horns and tail, but having
something growing in stead, with a kind of dew-lap under the chin; all white,
except the head, and hoof-ends which are black. Another notably fenced with
bending and wreathed horns, they and the head of horn-colour; the muzzle, feet,
testicles, and bottom of the tail of a shining white, the rest all red. Pliny.
Gesner.
The fleece of the sheep of Istria, or rather Liburnia, is liker hair then
wool. There is a kind said to be in Italy, that carries four or six horns, but
weakly ones, and their wool is useless. In Laodicea in Asia are small ones,
with noble choice fleeces. Pliny. Athenae. Theophr.
Lusitania has been so fertile, that a Lamb has been commonly sold for four
pence, and a Sow weighing a hundred pound, for twelve-pence, a sheep for
sixpence. In Lybia the Rams shoot their horns early forth. In Macedonia, they
who would have their wool white, drive them to Aliacmon; they who would have it
black, or dark, to Axius. The Madagascar sheep have the heaviest tails. In
Magnesia, and Mesopotamia, they yean twice a year. Those of Milesia hold the
third place in goodness.

In Moscovy in the deserts about the rivers Bonistenes, Tanais, and Rha, is a
wild-sheep, they call it Seigios, about the row, but shorter-footed, with lofty
strait-hornes, marked with ringlets, (whereof the natives make knife-hefts that
are transparent) very swift, and leaps high. The Nabathaeans (says Strabo)
have all white sheep. In Naxus, they have a double gall. In Panchaea, are much
softer wooled then elsewhere. In Peru, they are as big as Asses, long-ledged,
grosse-bodied, long-headed, Camel-necked, and shaped; their flesh is excellent,
especially their lambs. They plow with the Wethers, which also carry their
wood; they never bleat, their color is white, black, and ash; they can carry
fifty pound weight, and let them rest a while, and lay on their burden again,
they shall bear it some miles; they can make them sit, and eat, and turn their
head about, and grin; if over-loaded, they stink and squat down, and till
unloaded, can by no blows be forced to rise up. Their wool exceeds ours in
finenesse, length, and abundance. They are fed with corn, but are fed with
little; and can three or four days together go without eating or drinking.
Mathiolus exactly describes them, telling us that they resemble partly a Camel,
and partly a Deer. They may be well called Elaphokameloi. He is six foot long
from the neck to the tail, but four foot high from the back to the foot-sole,
the neck two foot long; like a Camel in head, neck, and mouth; especially in
the parting of the upper-lip, and the genital; but somewhat longer headed: he
has Deers-ears, and is Ox-eyed, having no foreteeth in the upper-jaw, but
grinders on both sides, as most cloven-footed beasts have, and it also chews
the cud; the back riged, which they the cutter has forgot; the shoulders near
the neck deprest, or flat; the sides swollen, broad bellied, high buttocked;
the tail but a span long, in all which in resembles a Deer, as also in the
thighs, especially in the hind-legs; cloven-hoofed, the cleft before drawn far
out; it has claws round the foot, pointing and ending in a thick skin; the
sole as the Camels covered with skin, pisses backwards as the Camel; the
testicles pinching inward; broad-breasted, and bunched at the knitting, tween
the breast and belly; whence a kind of excrement seems to vent it self; the
neck, breast, and fore-feet white, the rest of the body reddish, or darkred,
the muzzle black, and the forefeet from the knee shining bright. It is tame and
gentle, but can endure no cold, as others that are brought us out of
hot-countries. Offends no man, but revenges it self strangly on those that vex
it, or wrong it: about the buttocks, not defending it self by biting, or
kicking; but by spewing, or squirting on the vexer with a force, to the utmost
length of the neck stretched out. So lustful it is, that where there are no
females of the kind, he will couple with Goats: His coupling-time is Spring,
and Fall; yet those shee-goats conceive not by him, being even forced, as
appears by their crying; and it is a kind that has no agreement with this
beast. They call it an Indian-sheep, who brought it to us (says Mathiolus) but
you may judge how vast the difference is between it and our sheep. Those
Chilensian-sheep, whose picture the Hollanders brought over, differs much from
these. They are somewhat in make, or bulk of body, but that their hind-feet are
cloven in twain, and their fore-feet in four, and the wool very long and
shaggy, which they highly commend: but they are a like natured, and are
questionless of one and the same kind; only the climate makes the difference,
unless they differ in that bespattring revenge, whereof I speak even now, and
is thought where it lights, to breed the scab. Martial. (Epig. l. 14. ep. 157.)
writes, that the sheep of Pollentia near the Alps, are all gray-fleeced. The
Rhetian sheep of six or seven years old, get new horns to their old. They yean
two or three at once, small ones, and not till after six or seven, the first
being strongest, and of thicker bulk. The Sauromatan sheep are hard haired. The
Syrian have tails of a cubit long, and most what wooly in that part. (...).
About Tarnasar, a City in India, are seen sheep, horned like bucks, much
larger then ours; and monstrous Lambs, whose shapes we hereafter represent; one
headed like a Sow, another with two heads, and five feet; a third footed like a
Horse, and headed like an Ape; a fourth, three headed; a fifth, double backed,
with eight feet.

ARTICLE IV. Of the tame Goat and Kid.
IN this history we shall first deal with the name, (...)
Copra, or Goat; then with Hircus, or Hee-Goat; after with Hadus, or Kid.
Varro, Cicero, and Nonnius fetch Capra, a Carpendo, from cropping, Festus from
crepans, because the Goat makes a noise with the things; Martinius from kapto,
(...).
from devouring, because it is a beast that eats much. It changes names from
age and sex. The Greeks call it aix, from aissein, (...)
to rush on with a force. But the newborn are called Aiges, and Erriphoi, and
Chimaroi; the yearlings, or middle aged and grown Tragoi, yet this seems to
be the name of the males only. It has many Synonimaes, the late Greeks call
him Gida. The Turrhenians Kapra, the Cretians Karrano, Hesychius Meklas, and
Astignas. The Kelades are shee-goats, and horned for most part; the Kelades are
marked in the forehead, as with a bunch, or hard-skin; the Mnaades are milked.
The Ynnas is wild; the Chimara borne in winter, though the Grammarians take it
for the name of the whole kind, of what sex or age soever. Called Hircus, (or
as the Sabine Pircus) either from the roughnes ( Hirsutus;) or from the Hebrew
(...), to burn, since it is a lustful beast. Called Tragos, from Tragein, to
eat; it being a ravenous beast; or from Trachu, because it is rough skind; or
from Trechein, running. The geld-one is Kaper; the Egyptians call him Mendes.
Haedus is that that comes of the Kapra and Hircus, the he and shee-goat, or
the kid, borrowed from (...), filthy. Varin.
That of three or four months age is Eriphos; after called Chimaros, till it
have young, and is milked. They of Rhodes call it Karannos, and Kekrykephalos,
and, in a certain law, Diakala maserkes, from feeding on fruits-talks. Arist.
Description.
They are all clovenfooted and horned. They change color, and are sometimes
variously generated. The hair differs according to the sex, thicker in the
males, softer and finer in the she is. Festus calls hairy men goatish. Pliny
denies that they are all horned, but you may guess their age by the horn,
Varinus.
which is long and sharp. In Delos one of the horns is two cubits, and weighs
six and twenty pound. Their eyes, which they ever thrust into their corners,
look diversely at times; in the dark they shine, and dart forth light. They are
flat-nosed. The she has no upper- teeth besides the double-ones before, Pliny.
l. 28. c. 11.
and the rest are fewer then those of the hee-goat. They have all a
shaggy-bard; the Latins call it, aruncus, spirillus; the Greeks Ereggos, Arist.
Krygkes. The little that hang out of their jaws, Festus calls Noneolas; Varro
Mammilias, teats; Pliny Lacinias, rags, others Warts. The females have two
dugs, slender feet. Some have thought, as the Egyptians says and others, that
they breath by the ears. Philes says, the sign is, Alc^maeo. Archel.
that if you stop their noses, you offend them not: Especially the wild ones,
who are said to have a passage betwixt the horns to the lungs, which if you
stop with wax, you choke them. Barthol. Oppian.
Eustathius credits it the rather, because he says he has found some such
thing in man, though Aristotle is against it. They say, the liver, if you take
it out, stirs long after. They have more bellies then one. Arist. H. A. l. 1.
c. 11.
The milt is round. The sharp artery is like that in man. As for their place,
they abound in the North. In Candy is great store, because there are no Wolves.
In Ithaca Homer calls Aigiboton, goatish. The best Goats-cheese is in the
Helvetian, Rhetia, Switserland, especially in the hilly-ground about the
Fabarian baths: They are found also in Achaia, Africa, Nubia, Sardinia,
Cephalonia, Miletum, Damascus, India, the Newworld, in Spain, Corsica, and
elsewhere, as we shall see anon in their differences. The ground fittest for
them, the Greeks call Aigiboton, etc. Their food is manifold: they delight most
in shrubs, the wild Cytisus, Okenleaves. If they eat too many Acorns, it causes
abortion. Coisumel.
They love the Olive, and so were said to be hated by Minerva, and they will
crop young Vines, wherefore they were sacrificed to Bacchus, Figs and Wheat,
Ash and Tamarisk, Goats-beard, Aelian.
and Dogs-rose. Beans make them full of milk, and cinque foil, if you give it
five days together, before you let them drink. And to this end some ty dittany
under their belly. In some places they are greedy after Hemlock, etc. Lucret.
Plin. H. N. lib. 12. cap. 17.
Ladanum also (a sleepy plant) such as Arabia boasts of; it may be this chance,
because of the offensivenesse of the smell. Goats hurtful otherwise to all
green things, covets most sweet shrubs, as if they knew their worth; they will
crop the stalks of sprigs, that are full of sweet juice, and wipe from their
stinking beard that that thence drops thereon: This they roll in dust, and bake
in the Sun; and therefore are goats-hair found in Ladanum. Later Writers tells
us, that the Arabian woods are made waste by the feeding of Goats, and that
juice cleaves to all the beards. Thus is it also at Cyprus (they say) and that
there sticks to Goats-beards and knees, the flower of the Ivy being croped off,
before the dew be off; after, the Sun dispelling the mist, and the day clearing
up, a dust cleaves to the dewy goats-beards, and thence ladanum is kammed out.
Ruelli^s.
Their commonnest food is Spire-grasse, and Capriola, because better tasted
then others, that they delight in salt, torturers well know; for Dracula the
Hungarian Governor, often cut out the soles of captive Turks feet, and rubbed
salt in, and used Goats to lick it out again to increase the torment. For their
drink, puddle, standing water, or long keept is disallowed. After noon, when
stirred, they drink most. It is strange, Albert.
that at Zant, about the season when the Etesiae wind use to blow, Antigo.
the Goats stand gaping toward the North, and that serves them without drinking.

The Goat is very lustful; for they at seven months old, and while they suck,
begin to couple, and with greater heat then sheep. The yearlings couple three
or four times; Pliny.
if presently after a great rain falls, it causes abortion. They go five
months; and bring, Varro.
for most part, but one at once; sometimes two, three, four. In good air, and
well fed, they bear twice a year. Arist.
It continues eight years. Aristotle says, all their life long, and that they
bring twins, if the Sire and Dam be of a lusty kind. In the third year it
fails. Fatness makes them barren. The meetest coupling time is the Winter, or
Solstice. They conceive in November, and bring forth in March when the shrubs
begin to swell. Pliny.
Some use one He for ten females, some to fifteen, some to twenty. Rubbing
their genitals with much salt and nitre, and anointing them with peper and
nettle-berries, makes them lusty. About their venery and coupling, read
Aristotle his History of fourfooted-beasts. They are lovers of sheep, the
Tiger, the Sargus, with the Poley and Fringo. Offer a kid to a Tiger to eat, he
will fast two days after, the third day he will desire some other food; if he
have it not, he digs a hole; yet he spares the kid, as if it were his own
kind, says Plutarch. The fish Sargus delights in their very shadow, and loves
to touch it while they stand on the shore, but is by nature disabled from
leaping ashore. The Pulegium, Pliny.
or Poley, being tasted by the Goat, makes them bleat, whence some Greeks call
it Blechon. Theoph.
If a Shee-goat crop an Fringo stalk, and carry it in her mouth, the whole
heard shall straight leave their pasture, and as astonished at a new sight,
shall not give over gazing till the Goat-herd take away the stalk. They hold
enimity with the Wolf, Pliny.
Pard, Elephant, the Goat-sucking-bird; they hate man's spittle, honey, Aelian.
and the Evonymus, the Vine, etc. For the Wolf devours them, the Pard seazes
them, the Elephant terrifies them, the Caprimulgus sucks them so, that the
udder mortifies, and the Shee-goat turns blind upon it. Aelian says, they
avoid man's spittle, Albert.
Honey taken in, weakens them; the leaf, or fruit of the Evonymus were but
tasted by them, kills them, unless they purge it out again by Anochus. If they
drink water, Aldrova^*
wherein Rose-tree-leaves are steeped, they die Savine is also poison to them. A
young sprouting Olive Tree will not bear, if a Goar but lick it. The lung
roasted, prevents drunkenness. If they eat Conyza, they die with thirst. The
herb Aegolethrum in Lycia, is their bane, whence it has the name Goat-bane.
Their voice is a kind of muttering, or murmuring; whence Homer calls them
Mekades. In Latin, Hos^^^.
they and sheep are said, balare, to bleat. The He Is are said Phrimassein, to
grumble. Varinus says, they cry Ena, ena. (...)*
They are ever stirring, and swift, and nimble. Varro says ( R. R. l. 2. c.
3.) that wild-Goats will frisk away from a stone above sixty foot. They can
better away with cold, then sultry heat; especially the breeders, that conceive
in deep winter. They love woody, furzy, shrubby places much better then plain
pastureground, or meadow, and thrive best on clifty, shadowy-land. Col^^^.
They hang so strangly on clifts, and rocks, that they who view them from
beneath, would verily believe they were falling; whence the rocks are called
Aigilipes, and the flock Aipopolion, from their loftiness, and clambring. They
skip, and frisk wantonly about near brinks of rivers, browzing on the banks.
Authors are not agreed about the quality of their flesh. Hippocrates holds it
raw, windy in the stomach, begetting crudities and belching; but more harmless
in Summer, their feed being better. At the falling of the leaf, it is most
unwholesome. In Winter it breeds somewhat better blood. Gale^.
Some affirm, that though it be rank, it nourishes and strengthens much.
Clitomachus of Carthage, Athae^ Dipno. l. 9.
a follower of the new Academie, says, that a wrestler of Thebes outwent all
of that age in strength, because kid, or goat-flesh was his diet, and that the
toughest, and hardest of digestion; with eating whereof, his sweet was rank and
rammish. Homer, in A^hillus his entertaining of Agamemnon his Ambassadors,
shows it to be soldiers diet. The milk is as moderate as most kinds, Galen^^
bon. (...) mal. ^^^cibus. ^.
except women's breast-milk. Yet is very different according to their age, feed,
season of the year, and length of time after they bring forth their young,
without honey it is dangerous food, curdling in the stomach. And it troubles the
belly a little, Galen.
unless eaten with scammony, and other things. In some parts of the East,
those that are weaned at three months, are wont to be fed with it.

The cheese follows the nature of the milk. But hee-goats flesh is worst of
all to dress, breeding ill blood, and is most corrupt, and offensive at
coupling time. And yet it has been a dish at a feast in Antiphanes, as bad and
rank as it is. The testicles and liver also are much condemned. About kid,
writers are not agreed: It was a delicate with the Patriarchs under the old
Testament. (...)
And Ascraeus the Poet calls it good juicy nourishment. And Platina after
Galen, cries it up for the best household fare, easily disgested, as having
little dros in it, nourishing and breeding well tempered blood. But Brujerinus
cries it down, because shee-goats are feverish, and therefore the kid cannot
but be unwholesome. Ial. Alex. Sal^ber. l. 11. c. 7.
Yet Jul. Alex. confessing it indeed to be hot, yet the tenderness of the kids
age is an allay to the hot, and dry quality of the dam, and especially if the
kid suck yet, not so much for the age, as the nourishment, which takes of from
the heat, and makes tender, and juicy. Heathen also of old made it a mess in
their feasts, seasoning it with Laser, and other herbs. The blood made into a
dish, was called Sanguiculus or blooding; which the Laconians call Melas
Xoomos, (...)
or black-meat; and Pollux A^matian blood-meat. Apycius will tell you how to
dress the liver and lungs. The use of this creature in medicine is great,
Pliny speaks of a thousand medicines to be fetched from them. Democritus
magnifies that is borne alone. The Magitians prescribed goats flesh roasted
against a man's carcass burning, against the falling sickness. Hee-goats flesh
sod in water, breaks impostumes, and diverse ulcers. The Porredge drives away
Spanish flies. Drusus the Tribune of the people is said to have drunk goats
blood, when he with wannes and envy accused Q. Cepio of poisoning him. The
same washes out spots. (...)
And fried, it stops the pain in the bowels, and the flux of the belly, as
Galen and Dioscorides relates. Hee-gaots blood soon ripens, make it hot,
mingled with somewhat waxy, it eases the gout, helps ill-eyes, that of one fed
with diereticall herbs, dried to powder, and taken with parsley in wine, is very
good against the stone. See in Aldrovand how and when it must be gathered. Some
call this medicine Gods hand. Authors of great note (as Scaliger and Ioubert,
etc.) say that goats^blood can soften and dissolve the Adamants glass heated
therein, and in juice, may be made as soft and yielding as wax, or clay, and
wrought into any shape; but dip it in water, it shall return to its former
firmnes. This is a secret of Geberus, (...) 8. (...). 18.
Albertus, and an ingenious Bituricensian glasmaker, which when he was near
death, he freely revealed to Ant^Mizoaldus, as himself relates. The same mixed
with vinegar, is good against vomiting, ^^den.
and hauking, and spitting. The whey is good for them that have been bitten, in
right gut, or the colon, because it soon congeals. It is very loosning taken
with melanthins and brimstone, ^icen.
and takes away morphew and spots, and itch: ^^ny.
With goos grease, deers marrow, rosin and chalk, it closes chapped lips. If an
oxes neck swell, ^^mel. R. l. 6. ^4.
it is a golden sovereign help, with soft pitch, and ox-marrow, and goat-sewet,
and old oil, of each an equal portion, and unsod. Pliny. Marcel.
With chalk it scatters swellings; with wax it stops spreading of ulcers, with
pitch and brimstone it is through healing; and with honey and juice of bramble
it stops the running of the reins.

The fat of it self alone helps the sting of the green Spanish fly. Dioscor.
Magitians commend it against the falling sickness, with bulls gall, boild in
equal portions, Pliny.
and put up in little gallbags, it must not touch the ground, (forsooth) and is
to be drunk out of water at door. The same with Ptisana, or barley unhusked
boiled, is good for the colique. Marcel.
Goats-fat boiled with barley, rhoe and cheese, they give for the bloody flux,
and taken in with juice of barley unhusked. Dioscor. M. M. l. 2. cap. 94. Pliny.
Sext. Empiricus Cadamust.
And helps much against diseases in the bowels, supt in in cold water. It is
also good against the dropsy. Those of the Canary Islands anoint their flesh
with goat-sewet, and juice of certain herbs, to thicken their skins the better
to endure cold; because they go naked. It is used also against the gout, with
shee-goats dung, and saffran, and mustard, with Ivy stalks bruised, or the
flower of wild-cucumber. The same is an ingredient into Pomatum, good for
chapped lips. The marrow next to deers and calves-marrow, is commended. The
liver roasted, and laid with oil of mirrhe on the navell, helps the cholique,
and is better then the same boild with sour wine, and drunk. The same is good
for Nyctalopia, and against the falling sickness, and for convulsions. It is
also commended against the biting of a mad dog, and laid on, it takes away the
fear of water, they say, which the bitten, dread. Hippocrates prescribes
sheeps, De natu. muliebri.
or goats liver buried in embers, to a woman in childbirth, sweld, to be eaten
for four days, and old wine to be drunk therewith. The gall yields many
medicines. Pliny.
It helps against venom from a wild Weezel; with allom ashes it remooves the
itch; with fullers earth and vinegar it helps scurf, so that the hairs by
degrees dry. With cheese and brimstone it takes away morfew, with sponge-ashes
thickened as honey. It scatters swelling, if often touched therewith at first
rising. Laid on the eybrows, it takes away hair. To say nothing of the squincy,
and eare-diseases. Dydimus.
Lastly, smear your beds or walls with goats or bulls^gall, steeped in
keen-vineger, you shall not be troubled with wall, or bedsted-lice. The spleen
fresh taken out of the beast, and laid on man's spleen, in a few days strangly
removes the spleenative pains, if you after hang it up in the smok, and there
dry it. The head, with hair and all boiled, and pounded, strengthens the
bowels. The brain dropped through a gold-ring into Infants, before they have ever
sucked, the Magitians prescribe against falling sickness, and all other
Infants-griefs. Aescula. Sextus.
With honey, it heals carbuncles. And water poured out of a goats palate; and
what ever it eats, if mixed with houy and salt destroys lice^f you rub the head
and body with it in whay, and is a remedy against belly ache. The ashes of the
skin smeared on with oil, rids strangly the kibe-heel. Shaving thereof, pounded
with pumice, and mingled with vinegar, helps the Mazels. Bind a woman's paps
with a thong of goats-lether, and it will stop excessive rheums out of her
nostrils. The hair burnt, heals all fluxes; and burnt with pitch, and vinegar,
and put into the nostrils, stanches bleeding. When burning, it chases Serpents
away. The horn burnt, mixed with meal, laid on, mends scurffe, and scald-heads.
Pieces of it scorched in the flame, with vinegar, are of good use against S.
Anthonies fire. Laid under a weak man's head, it causes sleep. Shave, or burn
it, and mingle it with goats-gall, and myrrh, and rub the armpits, it takes
away the rank-smell. It helps against the Epilepsy, and the sent of it rowseth
out of a Lethargy, or dead-sleep. And burnt, if you rub the teeth therewith, it
makes them clean and white. The hoof burnt, Pallaelius.
it drives away Serpents; and the ashes smeared on with vinegar, helps
baldness, and shedding of hair.

Goats-milke also is many ways medicinable. Democratis to my knowledge (says
Pliny) caused Con^idia, Pliny. H. N. l. 24. cap. 7.
M. Servilius the Consuls daughter, who could not bear strong physic, to use
goats-milke, which sustained her long in her weakness. The goats were fed with
Mastixtrees. There is a healing virtue in it. A draught of it with uva taminia
grape, cures a Serpents bite. That which is first milked, lessens the fits of a
quartan ague, whether eaten or drunk. Sexus Empiri.
Some Magi give swallows-dung, a dram out of goats, or sheeps-milk, or sweet
wine, three measures before the fit. Anoint the gums therewith, and the teeth
are bred with more ease. Drunk with salt and honey, it loosens the belly; it is
given against the falling sickness, palsy, Melancholy, leprosy, etc. Hot in
barly-meal like pulse, it is given against the pain in the bowels. It cures the
spleen, after two days fasting; the third day the goats being fed with Ivy, if
it be drunk three days without any other food.

The cheese being fresh, heals bites; being dry, with vinegar and honey, it
clenses wounds; soft, and kneaded with honey, and laid on, and covered with
woolen or linen, it speedily helps bruises, etc. newly curdled, laid on, it
helps sore eyes. If a woman has eaten what goes against stomach, so that her
belly ache, and she be feverish, Hippocrates prescribes a fifth part of white
Peplium, and half a chaenix, and as much nettle-feed, and half an pound of
goats-cheese shaved, mixed with old wine, and supped up. And if in the womb any
thing be putrified, or blood, or corruption come forth, he prescribes
goats-cheese tosted, or scraped, alone, or with as much barly-meal, and taken
in with win fasting. As for the curd, a dram out of wine is good against the
bite of the Pieterman, and other Sea-fishes: It is drunk also for fluxes and
taken against curdled-milk. A third part drunk out with vinegar, is good
against rank excess of blood; the bigness of a bean, steeped in myrtle-wine,
taken fasting, eases the colic. Hippocra.
It is good against the lask. The piss drunk with Sea-Aquin vinegar, helps
against the biting of Serpents, and breakis impostumes where ever they are;
poured into the ears, it helps the pulling of the sinews. Herod. l. 4.
The Carthaginian shepherds burn the crown veins of their children of four
years old with unwasht wool, and some the temple-veins to prevent rheums: If
they faint under the pain, they sprinkle goats-pisse on them, and fetch them
again. Dioscor.
The same drunken two cups a day with spicknard, is good against the water
under the skin, drawing it away by urine. Sextus thinks it helps women in their
months. Their dung is of frequent use, Spurathoris, the Greeks call it, it is
of a digestive and eagre property, softning the hardest swellings, not only of
the spleen, but also of others parts. Being burnt, it is thinner, but not
stronger. Given in vinegar, it cures the vipers bite, in wine with
frankincense, female-issues. Ty it on a cloth, it stills children, especially
girls. Piny.
They daub it on parts out of joint. Sod in vinegar, it disperses throat, and
other swellings; And warmed and smeared on, it cures spreading ulcers. Prepared
with honey, and laid on, it heals cancers, and belly carbunckles, and disperses
them. Bruised to powder, and mixed with vinegar, and applied to the forehead,
it takes away the migram: It cures burns, and leaves no scar: kneaded with
vinegar to the thickness of honey, it loosens contracted joints, and removes
tremblings with barly-meal and vinegar, especial in tough and rustical bodies,
it helps the sciatica. Hippo^.
Pills thereof are a remedy for the months and second-birth. Add hereto, that
in Plague-time, if you keep a Goat at home, his breath and smell is good
against infection. Besides all this, of the Goats-hair are made sives, of the
skin garments, shoos, coverlids, bottles, boots, bellows, sails, paper, and
whips. Pirrhus, of the horns made him a crest. The Locrians (the Ozoli) wear
sheeps and goat skins, and live among flocks of goats. The Sardi, Varro R. R.
l. ^ c. 3.
and Getuli had no other clothes. In Cypris they make Chamlets of goats-hair;
and to that purpose, near the rivers Betolis, and Issa in Armenia the less
they keep, and shear a multitude of goats yearly. The Turks also at Ancyra, the
head-City of Capadocia, make their choysest watered stuffes thereof, and also
their tapestry. Observe. l. 3. c. 12.
The paper or parchment, I speak of, were first found out at the Trojan
Pergamus, and thence obtain the name.

We read little of their differences. The Egyptian bring five at a birth,
because they drink the fat fruitful water of the river Nile. In Phrigia there
are four horned goats, as Scaliger relates, Sc^^*
with long hair, and snow-white; in the Weveries they shear not, but pluck the
hair out. The Egyptians say, that when the Dog-starre arises, the goats turn
ever Eastward, Plutar.
and their looking that way, is a sure sign of the revolutions of that Star.
In the Nothern-coasts they are great bodied, thick thighed, full, and short
shouldered, bending eared, small headed, thick, long and bright necked, high
and broad horned. They are almost all white. In Winter they live on Pinebark,
Moss, and Poplar-boughs. The skins are carried by great shipfuls into Germany,
and yield great gain. The Caspian Goats are whitest, Aelian.
not horned, and as big as Horses: So soft is their hair, that it may compare
with Milesian-wool; so that the Caspian Priests, and the richest make it their
wear. In Cephalenia the Goats drink not daily, Anist. Mitab. Aelian. H. A. l.
3. c. 32. Plin.
but gape. and take in the wind. Theophrastus therefore says, they drink not
in six months. In Cilicia, and about the Syrtes they are as shorn. At Damascus
they have long ears, manifold teats, and are very fruitful. The owners carry
forty or fifty up and down to sell their milk; and they will milk them where
you please, in your dining room, though it be three stories high, before your
eyes in tin vessels. At Narbon, they have broad and long ears. Gesner. Alex.
In Illyria they are not cloven-footed; they bring sometimes three, four or
five at a birth, and give a gallon and a half of milk. The same is said of the
Indian, near the City Tarnassuri; and of the Affrican at the Promontory of the
green-head. Xaverius the Jesuit testifies, that he has seen at Amborna an
Hee-goat suckling little kids, in that corrupted History of Christ and Peter,
which the Author wrote in the Persian language. He had but one udder, and gave
a great sop of milk daily. The Mambron Shee-goat in the Region of Damiata, they
may ride with saddle and briddle, and other Horse-furniture; the ears dangle to
the ground, the horns hang downward, and turn up again under the mouth. Pharos,
an Island in the Aegean-Sea, breeds Goats colored like the Deer, and greater
by much; with an horn twelve handful long, straight, having but on knag
reaching right forth. In Sardinia, their skins are hot in winter, and cold in
summer; like the Musmones. And some are swifter then any beast. Among the
Monsters we give hereafter the figure of one with three horns.

ARTICLE V. Of the wild-Goats in general.
We are now to treat of wild-Goats both generally, ^drovan. Hist.
and specially with many names, whereof we meet among the Greeks; as Aix
agrios, (...) ^olin. ^ristot. ^heoph. ^cero. ^irgil.
Wild-Goat. These have the wit with Dictany, to draw arrows out of their
bodies, those namely that live in Candy, and on the hill Ida. Aristotle denies
there are any in Africa, Virgil affirms it; who takes the wild for those that
are liker tame; which Varro says are a breed of the tamer, We call them Roes,
Aigagros; (...).
Oppian takes for a peculiar kind, called Camozza about Trent. The Aigokeroas,
or Capricorn, is a wild wood-goat, of a several kind; in Suidas D^rkas;
Hermolaus conceives to be a diverse kind, but it seems to be but another name
Scaliger takes Dorcas for a kid; (...). Aldrown. Oppian. (...). Aelian.
Dorcus for a Roe. However it seems to have the name from sharp-sightednes; for
it has a moisture within the bowelles that helps the sight. The name is used
in the Canticles. The Dorcalides are short-tayled. Proches-Gaza, turns a Do,
having the name from Proixesthai, the swiftnes. P^oox, from fearfullnes, the
Epithet that Homer gives the Hare. It is as swift as a whirlewind; yellow
haired, white tayled, the eyes white and blew, the ears stuck with long hair;
it swims very swiftly, and with the feet can stem a stream; it delights in
lakes where it seeks repast among the bulrushes. The Nebros some make a fawn;
some a kind of goat: Marcel. Dioscor.
of Solinus a Do, Kolos is a Scythian wild-goat, of bigness between a Deer and
a Ram, of a bright body, very swift, drinking with the nostrils, and holds the
water there many days, and can make long shift in dry pasture: With the
Latins Caprea, Strabo. Geogr. l. 7.
is a Rodi Rupicapra, a wild-goat, living among rocky places, as the name gives
it. They love to clime high, and to live on the loftiest mountains, where your
eye can hardly reach them: yet if they be pursued by beast, or man, it can cast
it self headlong from the steepest crags, and yet help themselves so with their
horns, that they catch no harm. They fall out often about the females in
coupling time: By consent of all they excel the tame in goodness of taste,
savourines, and nourishment, in delicacy of temper, easines of digestion, and
in paucity of excrements; yet is their flesh somewhat drier; therefore the
Arabes invented the boiling them in oil, to make them juicier. Yet some think
that what is sod in oil becomes dry, and looses the glutinousnes, as Psathuron,
Galen.
and Kauron. As for their use in physique, wild Goats-flesh is good food for
those who have the bloody flux: The liver, either unrosted, or beaten to powder
helps the cholique. The steame thereof boiled in salt water, helps thicksighted
eyes: Burnt, and sprinkled on it, stanches blood, especially if you snuf up the
powder. Pliny.
The blood with sea-palme takes away the hair: It helps to an easing by stool.
The gall is sovereign against venomous bites. The same helps against
bloodshotten and dim eyes, and against ruggednes of the cheeks and eyelids,
with conserve of roses, or bruised with juice of leeks, and droped warm into
the nostrils, it takes away the tinckling of the head; with Athenian honey, it
eases the pain of the jaws, and cures the exulceration of the pizzle. The dung
dried, stamped, and sifted, and taken in a cup of hypocras, Galen.
takes away the yellow-Jaundice.

ARTICLE VI. Of the wild-Goats in particular.
POINT I. Of the Roe-Deer, Fallovv-Deer, Bucks, and Do.
THe kinds of wild-Goats are the Rupicapra, etc. The Rupicapra, or Dorcos; in
Greek, Dioscor. (...). Oppian. Aldrovan. Hist.
Aigastros, or Aigagros, that is Wild-goat. It is of the same greatness with
the shaggy-goat, only a little taller, and in shape liker the tall wild-beasts.
Bellonius takes it for a Buck. The color is between dark and red; it inclines
more to the red in Summer then in Winter, to the dusky. But Scaliger says,
Scalig. Bellon. ob. l. 1. c. 54.
it is in Summer yellowish, in Winter ash color. Gesner saw one black and
white. Some are all white, but few. It is red-eyed. The ears are longer then
the Rams, and carnation colored, and on either side a streak above the eyes
from the root of the horns, straight to the end of the mouth, and ending in the
upper-lip. The forehead marked with a kind of star. The upper part of the tail
hairy, black and round, and as long as that of a Buck. The horns blackish, nine
or ten fingers long, rough with knotty ringlets; none in the hooked part, which
is smooth, and sharp like a hook. Almost parallel, rising in equal spaces; firm,
only at beginning, only a thumbs length, hollow; and rounder then those of the
tame. Some say they can, Scal.
as we see Goats, scratch their backs with them. It is note-worthy what
mischief they do themselves by that scratching; they are thought to delight so
in the tickling, that they fasten the horn-tip so in their skin, that they
cannot pluck it back again; so that they through anguish will cast themselves
from the highest clifts, and taken, they die of pain, or famish to death. They
haunt rocky mountains; yet not the tops as the Ibex, nor leap they high, or
far; they come down sometime to the lower Alps. They meet often about some sandy
rocks, and thence they lick sand, as Goats do salt, whereby they rub off their
sluggish phlegm, and sharpen their stomach. When they are hardly chased, they
climb so high, that no dogs can come at them: Then when they see the hunters
creep on all four to pursue them, they frisk from stone to stone, and make to
the mountain tops, where no man can follow them, there they hold, and hang by
the horns till they are shot with guns, or driven headlong from their hold, or
famish to death. Presently after S. James time they betake themselves to the
colder clifts, to inuse themselves by degrees to cold. Being taken, they are
sometimes made tame. Of the skins are made gloves for horsemen. When they stray
to find out new pastures, the next rock they look wishly on, putting forth a
foot, they try often whether it be fast, or loose, and slippery. It is
pleasant, says Scaliger, to see how in my uncle Boniface his hall, they that
are kept tame will leap at the hangings, wherein the like wild are woven. As
for their use, their flesh is somewhat dry, and a breeder of melancholy, and is
of a wild sent. Hunters drink the blood afresh, springing out for a present
help for the swimming of the head. Pliny.
A cup of the sewet mixed with the milk, it is said to cure a deep consumption.
We represent here a double figure, of the Rupicapra, or wild and
mountain-Goats. The Buck is twofold; one that the ancients write of, whereof
here; the other, the common one that the Moderns write of, called Platykeroos,
or broad-horned; men (it may be) by Gaza, who translates Proka, (in Aristotle)
Dama, or Buck. Pliny reckons it among the wild outlandish goats. It may be it
is that that Dioscor. calls Nebros. It is like a Goat, and colored like the
Do. Nic^n.
Ovid calls it a Do with a yellow back. They are famous for their
fearfulness; therefore they are seldom tamed. They catch hold of Crags with
their horns, Pliny.
as if they were hooks; nor do they any other ways clim the inaccessible
ridges of mountains.

POINT II. Of the Ibex.
DIoscorides in his Chapter of Curdles ^akes no mention of this Goat, Ald^^.
Hist. B^^. c. 13. (...).
and scarce any other of the Ancients, except Homer, who calls it Ixalon Aiga.
But the learned witness, as with one mouth, that it is the same that the
Germans call Ston-Buck. Pliny comprizes the whole story in Pliny.
short, saying, that among the wild-goats are the Ibices on the Alps, of a
wonderful swiftness, though their heads by burdened with huge horns, where
with they defend, and poyze themselves; and can safely tumble, and frisk as
they lift from clift to clift, most nimbly. It is a gallant creature, and
great-bodied, almost shaped like an Heart, but not so great; slender thighed,
and small-headed, the skin dark-colored; growing old, they wax gresly, and
have a black list along the back; clear, and fair-eyed; cloven, and
sharp-hoofed: The female is less then the male, and not so dusky of color. He
is bigger then the shaggy goat; not unlike the Rupicapra. The he has along
black beard, that happens to no other beast, so Bellonius writes, haired like
the Heart; unless Bellono^l. 1. c. 13.
happily to the Hippelaphus: His vast massy horns bent toward his back, sharp,
and knotty, and the more, the older he grows; for they wax yearly, till that
they grow to about twenty knots in the old ones: Both horns, when grown to
their utmost, are well neat sixteen or eighteen pound weight. Bellonius had
seen some horns four cubits long; they have as many crosse-beams, as they are
years old. Fleet they are; nor is their any rock so high, lofty, or steep, that
they will not reach with some leaps, if it be but rough, and just but so far
out, that they can fasten their hoofs on. They are wont to leap from clift to
clift six paces distant from each other. Falling, he breaks the force of the
fall with his horns. See Aldrovand about the manner of hunting them. There are
two kinds of them in Candy. Bellonius writes, having seen of their horns
brought out of Cyprus: If they are surprised, and have space enough, they
venture on the hunters, and cast them headlong from the rock; But finding
there is no escaping, they easily yield themselves.

Of the same kind is that African wild beast, which Aelian H. A. l. 14. c. 16.
describes thus: Wild-Goats abide on the tops of the Lybian mountains; they are
well near as great as oxen, their shoulders, and thighs extreme shaggy, small
legged; their foreheads round, thin and hollow-eyed, not bolting much out; the
horns from the first sprouting, very unlike each other, scambling, and crooked,
and not uniformed and strait, as other goats horns; but bend-back to their very
shoulders. No Goats so fit, and able to leap, and so far as they from clift to
clift; and though they sometimes leap short, and fall headlong down between
the crags, they get no harm, so made he is against such brunts, so firm
bodied, that he hurts no horns nor head. The Goat-heards have many arts to
take them, as high as they are, with darts, or nets, or gins, being very
cunning in that hunting. On the plain ground any slowfooted hunts-man can
overtake them. Their skins and horns are of some use; for the skins are very
good to make gloves for shepherds, and carpenters in cold winters. The horns
are as fit to draw water out of rivers, or wells to drink in, as cups
themselves; for they hold so much, as cannot be taken in at one draught; if
well fitted by a good workman, it may hold three measures. It has it is use
also in physic. The curds as useful as those of the hare. (...)
The blood with wine, and rosemary is commended against the stone. The only
help for the Sciatica and the gout: gather the dung when the moon is 17 days
old, or when the moon is oldest, if it be needful, it may be of like
efficacy, so the medicine be made on the 17 day, a handful must be taken,
stamped in a mortar, with 25 pepper corns, make it into pills, the number odd,
adding three, quarters of a pint of the best, and of the most generous old
wine, a pint and half; first making all into one mass, lay them up in a
glass; but to make it more effectual, do it on the 17 day of the moon, and
begin on a thirsday to apply it, giving it for seven days together, so that
the patient stand eastward on a footstool, and drink it; which are mere
fopperies, though Marcellus prescribe so.

POINT III. Of the Buff, the Bubalides, and the Pygargus, or Roe-Buck.
ALdrovand says c. 14. p. 303. that he thought once that the Bubalus, or Buf,
and the Bubalides, differed in former times in the shape; but he confesses
he was mistaken. For the nature, he is much taken with old home, and bring
him into good pasture, he will return; when frighted he thinks himself safe,
if he can hide his head, like the Ostrich. He shuns all fierce and
quarrelsome beasts. The blood is somewhat thicker then that of the Hare and
Heart; thickning well near as much as the sheep. The Pygargus (as Pliny also
says) is a beast always given to be lonely, and keeps in the woods.

POINT IV. Of the Caprea, or Roe, in Pliny, the Goat half Wild and half tame,
and the common Buck, or Do.
PLinies Caprea, or Roe, is no other then our Capreolus, or Kid; which the
Germans call Reh, not unlike the Heart in color, but far smaller, scarce so
great as the Goat. The male his horns commonly have six branches. There was one
had 17 horns, whose picture the Duke of Bavaria sent to Aldrovand. The horns
are branched indeed, Pliny. Virg.
but small, and they cast them. Sharp-sighted they are; small voyced: they shed
not their teeth; spotted; some spots are white. In time they change color, and
the spots become not so sightly. Many are taken in the Helvetian Alps; yet they
love lower places then other Wild-goats. The She, if her Male be taken, seeks
another, bringing him to her old place; and if the She be taken, the He seeks
another. Their horns they either know not how to use, or dare not. They love to
feed, Bellifar. Iul. Alex.
where Partridges haunt. They run only when the wind blows, to refresh
themselves in their toil. They are as well tasted as the Boor, and their flesh
sooner digested. Of this sort are those in Brasile; two kinds are of them,
Cagua-cuete, and Cagua-capara: Almost like our hee-goats. The head about seven
fingers long, great and blackeyed, large and wide nostrild; the mouth black,
the skin shining; the ears four fingers long, two and an half broad; their
veins easily seen; the neck round and smoother haired then the rest of the
body; five fingers and a half long. The body but two feet from the neck to the
rump. The tail short, as of other Goats. The forethighs a foot, the hinder a
foot and half long; the hoof cloven and black; and on those two other lesser
ones. Smooth-haired, red on the thighs and feet, dark on the neck and head,
white under the throat, and the bottom of the neck; the tail white below; the
ears whit within, dusky without, and almost hairles; the mouth a little longer
below then above. He chews the cud, and is easily tamed: After one or two
months old he becomes delicately whitespotted, which in time wear out. The
Brasile Cuguacu apara is a horned Hee-goat, colored as the former, but
somewhat less; the horns have three shoots on them, the lowest is longest, and
parted at top; the main horn is a thumb thick, and eight or nine Rhineland
fingers long. The Strepsicerote, or Roe-buck, is described by Aldrovand out of
Pliny, Aldrovan. Plin. Bellon.
and reckoned among the wild-goats, that are outlandish. The picture of the
Cretian one is taken out of Bellonius.

The common Buck resembles in shape the Heart, is greater then the Roe, but
differs in color. The Buck is smaller-headed then the Heart; he casts his head
every year, the horns stick foreward out, and not as others use: The ridge of
the back is blinking yellow, and has a black list all along. The tail reaches
to the hams, as a calves. The sides sometimes are checkered with white spots,
that with age wear away. Sometimes the Does are all white, that you should take
them for goats, but that the hair is short. Their horns are in many places
shown of a vast greatness and beamy, as at the ascent and steps of the
Ambosian fort. The flesh very like the Kids; the blood of a deep black.
Sometimes he is fat as a Wether. The dung prepared with oil of mirrhe, is said
to make hair come thick.

POINT V. Of the Goat of Muskus, or Musk-Cat.
THe Arabians only have written of him among the old Writers. A^^ro H. Bis. c.
19.
The later Greeks, as Aetius, and Paulus Aegineta, have borrowed what they have
from them. Call him Wild, or Goat, or Indian, or outlandish, or eastern
Gazella, or Goat of Moschus, it skills not much. Some call him Moschus from
Musk, S. Hierome reckons his skin for the most delicate of perfumes, and calls
him an outlandish Mouse. Gesner says, Gesner.
the Musk lies in a bag in him. Writers differ in describing him, and some that
have seen him, they say: But all agree, that he is a kind of Goat. Men report
that he feeds all on sweet herbs, especially Nard; and that the sweet musk is a
blood gathered about the navil. They are so swift, that they are seldom taken
alive. He bites at his pursuers with a fury. Take his longer teeth out, and you
may tame him. In the Province Thebet they hunt them with dogs: Some say, they
are found in Persia, Africa, Egypt. The perfume we call musk; perhaps because
of old they use the moss of the Cedars and white Poplar, etc. in composition
of perfumes and thickning ointments. I have seen the like growing on beasts.
The bags in this Gazella are full of musk; He is of a middle nature, between a
Hee-goat and a Calfe, and yellowish, Moschus. (...).
which the Greeks call Moschus; whence musk may have the name, or from the
likeness the bag bears with the small cups on Ovian-tops where the seed is,
which the Gr. call Moschai; or as Etimologists will have it, because it lies En
Mesu, the middle, or the navell: Not to say it comes from the Verb Moo, because
all desire it; or from Ozoo, smelling, senting, of the Original writers differ.
And as much about the choosing of it. Aldrovan.
Platearius likes not the black, but that that is colored like Spikenard
Brasavolus holds that the blackish has the best sent, that brought out of
Cataia. Some prefer Tumbascin musk, because of the abundance of pasture there,
which is ripe in the bag, and better then that that is hanged up in the air:
The unripe, though in the beast, smells not well. The Antebian musk is better
then the Abensin, then the Jurgian; next the Indian by the Seacoasts.

That of Elluchasis among the Tacuini is thin, and the bag thin: The Gergerian
quite contrary, and not so aromatical. That of Charua is a middle sort; The
Salmindian, not so good. For the proof of Musk, see Aldrovand. It is many ways
adulterated, especially the black, and reddish; by mixture of a little
goats-blood a little roasted, and stamped, three of four parts for one musk: But
roasted bread makes it moulder; the goats-blood broken is bright, and clear
within. Alex. Bened. G^sner.
The Saracens vent it often, bag and all, but sophisticated. Some falsify it
with a kids-liver dried, and birds muting. Some increase it with Angelica-root.
It will loose the sent, if you add any sweet thing to it. It is best kept in a
thick glasse-bottle, waxed over. It recovers the lost sent, if you hang it in
an open pot in a house of office.

For the use of Musk, Authors differ about the temper of it. Averroes holds it
hot, and dry in the end of the second degree; Sethus in the third. All confess
it to be a thin substance. It draws out blood, put to the nose; and opens the
vessels of the body. It is besides used to strengthen, and against trembling,
fainting, wind; to purge the head in sweet-balls, and wash-balls; in censing,
in pomanders, and sweet-oyntments. Yet it is ill for the mother to some women;
as the Venetian, and Northern women.

POINT VI. Of the Bezoar, or the Pazahartica-Goat.
MEn write diversely in the describing of the Bezoartican-Goat. Aldro^^^.
Bell^nensis seems to deny there is any such beast, while he relates out of
Thiphasis the Arabian, that that they call the Bezoar-stone, is taken out of
the veins. The Arabs fetch it from the Hearts. Monardes from the testimony of
eyewitnesses, reports it to be as great as the Heart, and resembling him.
Bontius says, that he is shaped like our goats of Europa, except that they
have more upright and longer horns, Bontius Med.
and that some of them are partly colored, as Tigers, and goodly to look on;
two whereof are to be seen in the fort in Batavia. The greater, or lesser the
stone is, that they carry the nimbler, or heavier they go; which the wily
Armenians, and Persians well know. They feed on an herb like Saffran; the
eating whereof breeds that stone. Whence it comes to pass, that because an
Isle between Cormandel, (...)
and Ceylon, called by the Portugals, Isle de Vaccas, (or of Cows,) is
sometimes overflowen, that the goats must be transported thence to save them,
they being deprived of that herb, breed not that stone; and when the waters are
down, and they are brought back thither, they yield the Bezoar-stone again,
which is as troublesome to them, as to us the stone is in the bladders or
reins. Whence we may gather, Monardes.
how vain their relations are that tell us that it is bred in their bowels, or
reins, or the gall. Some call it Pasani, some Balsaar, some Pazaher, that is,
an antidote against poison. It is bred especially in Persia in Stabanon, three
days journey beyond Lara, where the Persian Kings are watchful to challenge
for themselves all the stones that exceed a certain weight. They are of several
shapes, and kinds; some much costlier then others, Aldrouan
and of greater virtue, and efficacy. There are counterfaits made. Monardes,
from the relation of Guido de Lavaretus, writes, the right ones are made up of
kind of lates, or barks folded within one another, very bright and shining, as
if they were pollished; having within a dust, or a chafe. Bontius thinks that
Genuine, that rubed on a piece of chalk, shows a light-red; cast into a basin
full of water, and left there three hours together, looses nothing of the
weight. When the counterfeit becomes hevier, or lighter taken out of water; and
rubed with chalk, splits. Much is written by many of the virtues thereof; that
laid on any bare part of the body, it defends it against poison: G^^ia.
That the powder cures bites, sprinkled on the bitten place; That cast on wild
beasts, it benums them, and kills vipers with any liquor: That all receipts
taken against poison, and malignant Fevers are vain, unless Bezoar be also
used. Monard.
Monardes gives examples of diverse hereby rescued out of the very jaws of
death. It helps melancholy, quartons, fainting fits, epilepsies, giddiness,
stone, worms, and what not: But it is observed to be more helpful to women then
men. Some in India dream that it makes them young again. Monardes has a whole
tract about it: But Bontius writes, that he finds by a thousand experiments,
that the virtue thereof is not so great. He says, that the stones called
pazahar bred in the stomach of the Simior are round, and above a finger long,
and are counted the best.

Hither may be referred the Vicuna, (...) E. l. 9. ^p. 59.
and Taruga. The Vicuna is a swift beast of Peru. It is hornlesse, else like a
wild goat. Nether is that any hinderance, that he wants horns; since there are
dogs that are said to have horns, when most have none. He delights in
mountanious and rocky places: She loves cold and deserts: She seems to be
refreshed with snow, and frosts: She loves company, and the Herd. She runs from
all men she meets, putting her young ones before, being careful of them. She is
taken by a swift chase; to which end three thousand Barbarians compass a
mountain, and by degrees make all the wild here together, sometimes more then
three hundred; they send the females after the young ones; They are taken also,
when they come to a convenient space, and toils of cord, and lead laid for
them. They shear them to make coverlids; their wool is fine as silk, of a
lasting color; being natural, it needs no dye. In hot whether it refreshes,
helping the inflammation of the reins: wherefore they stuff therewith tikes
for beds. It is said to ease the Gout. The flesh has no good relish; yet it is
an Indian dainty. And a piece of it new killed, and laid on the eye, removes
suddenly the smart. They breed the Bezoar in the bowels, next to the eastern
Vicuna is the Taruca, of that kind, but swifter, and greater, and deeper
color; of soft and dangling ears, not delighting in company, she wanders among
rocks alone. In these is the Bezoar-stone found both of greater virtue, and
bulk.

POINT VII. Of the Scythian Suhak, and the Goat with dangling ears.
OF the Scythian Suhak, Aldrovan. H. Bis. c. 23. Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 28.
see Aldrovan. page 313. We owe to Aristotle the mention of the Goat with
hanging-ears, a palm, and more broad, and reaching near the ground; Probably it
is that in the print here following, which they call the Indian Goat, and the
Syrian Mambrina. By the wool, hair, face, and horns, it seems to resemble a
sheep rather then a Goat. The color is white.

POINT VIII. Of the Oryx.
THree sorts of creatures are by the Greeks termed Oryges. Strabo.
One a water one, two land ones. Of the first Strabo writes treating of
Turdetamia, Geo. l. 3.
which some suppose to be the Sea-orke. Aldro. H. B. c. 24. Pliny. (...).
Of the two latter kinds Pliny, and Oppian mention. The name Oryx comes from To
Orytte^n, or digging, because, at new Moon it turns eastward, and digs up the
earth with the fore-feet. For the shape, it is one-horned, and cloven-footed.
It is of the kind of wild Goats. But of a contrary hayr, turning toward the
head; as it grows on the Ethiopian Bull. Plin. H. N. l. 11. cap. 46. Arist. H.
A. l. 2. c. 1. Pliny.
He is engendered in the driest parts of Africa, ever without drink, and
strongly useful against thirst; for the Getulian thieves hold out by a draught
of wholesome liquor found in their bladders. Albertus says that he is as big
as a Heart, bearded, used to the deserts, and easily taken in a net. Herodotus
makes him as great as an Ox; Nor have we any certainty of his shape. The horns
are black, and to be seen in most libraries, like a swords blade at top,
diverse, according to their age, both in length, breadth, and number of knobs.
We give you here the images of two of them. But Aldrovand himself durst
define, whether they are Indian Asses horns, or no. But, since the Aethiops,
called Sili, used them for weapons against the Struthiophagi, or
Estridge-eaters, and they are very hand, and beamy, long, sharp-pointed, and
hollow, they seem to belong to the Oryx. The Egyptians fain many things of
him, that they know, when the Dog Star arises, and then cry out; that they gaze
on the star, and adored it like a God; Albert.
whether by a peculiar sympathy, or that they know cold weather is past, which
they cannot well endure. He seems to despise the Sun, Aldrovan.
and Moon; they dung against the rising Sun, and never drink. Columella, and
Martial mention the Orus; but I believe it is not the same with this. The later
calls him Cavage; the former reckons him among the beasts kept in warrens, or
parks for food. He is said by Oppian, Aldrovan.
to be wild, a great foe to wild beasts, and milk white. So different are the
relations about the Orus, which must be a double kind; one fearful, the other
fierce. Some in India are said to have four horns. Ambr. Aelian.
Pareus (T. 1. l. 5. c. 5.) mentions a wild beast in some Island of the
Red Sea, called by the Arabs Kademotha; by the inhabitants called Parasoupi; as
great as a mule, and headed alike; haired like a Bear, but not so
dark-colored, but yellowish; footed like the Heart; having two lofty horns, but
not beamed, akin to the Unicorns horn. The natives being bitten by any venomous
beast, are cured forthwith by drinking the water, wherein the horn has lien
soaking certain days.

ARTICLE VII. Of the Heart, or Deer.
THe Latin name Cervus is taken from the Greek Kerata, (...) Aldro. H. Biscul.
c. 27.
horns. The Greeks give him very many names, as Elaphos, because of his
nimblenesse, or his delight to be about lakes, or waters; or because he drives
away the serpent with the smell of his horn, who rubs it on purpose against a
stone, to raise the sent; and Beirix, Bredos, etc. The Hinds first fawning,
they call Ptookas, that is, Procas, Varinus. Descript.
the Calf, or Fawn, Nebros, etc. The Deer, or Heart is cloven-footed,
tong-hoofed, soft-haired, and hollow within, if you believe Junius, which makes
him swim well. Pliny.
He is light colored, sandy reddish, yet there are white ones, as Sertorius
his Hind, which, as he persuaded the Spaniards, was prophetical. No beast
carries greater horns: The Hind has none ordinarily; though some have been
seen horned by Maximilian the Emperor, and by Scaliger. The Fawn of a year old
has beginnings of horns budding, short and rough; The second year he is called
a pricket, and has plain horns, called spellers, or pipers; The third year he
is a sorell, his horns branching once; and sox increase to the sixth year. ( We
say there are in a stages head the Burre, or round roll next the head; then the
Beam, or main horn; then the Browanteliers; next above the Bezanteliers, next
the royal, above the surroyall top. In a Bucks head are Burre, Beam, Branch,
Advancers, Palm, Spellers. The fourth year the Buck is a Sore; the fifth year,
a Buck of the first head; the sixth, he is a Buck, or great Buck.) But the
branching is very different. William Duke of Bavaria has two, each horn has
one and twenty branches. Albertus speaks of eleven such in Germany.

Aemilian saw in the Duke of Ferrara his storehouse a Heart, little less then
a Horse, and so branched as the German heads. At Antwerp is one with 15
branches. Other horns are hollow, Gesner.
except at top the Hearts solied throughout, Aristo^.
others cleave to the bone; the Hearts sprout only out of the skin. No beast
casts the horns so as he. Pliny
The horn is as firm, and hard as a stone; growing old, it is lighter,
especially in the open air, and sometimes moist and dry again. Gesner has
observed in a grown Heart, at top of the horn, two, three, or five branches, and
the beam six fingers broad, beside the antlers and spellers below; and he has
marked between the brain-pan, and the horns, little bones, or double-bony knobs,
about two fingers long, smooth; and the shorter, the older the Heart is. ( We
English divide the Deer into red, and fallow Deer; among the red, we call the
male a Stag; the she, an Hind; the young, Calves; among the f^llow Deer, we
call the he a Buck; the she, a Do; the young, Fawns.) And they all differ in
horns, and in some they are grown together. Gesner says he has seen a
Stags-speller of 9 inches; and of one of three years old, with the speller of
18 inches. Those we have mentioned are smooth, white, not rugged. They cast
their horns yearly at a certain time in the Spring. One has been taken, Arist.
in whose horn green Ivy grew. It is said, that if you gueled them, their horns
fade away. Pliny.
Their face is fleshy; the nose flat; Oppia^.
the neck long; the nostrils fourefold, and with as many passages; their musles
slender, and weak; Cyn^g.
the ears as cut, and parted, as no other beasts have. Arist.
They that are about Argenusa on the hill Elapsus, they have four teeth on
each side, Albert.
both below, grinders, and besides two other above; greater in the male, then
the female, they bend all downward, and seem bent: Arist.
They have all live-worms in the head, bred under the tongue, in a hollow of a
turning joint that joins the neck to the head; others as great bred in the
flesh, at least ^0, some have seen more, Plin.
and severed; though some have none. Some say Wasps are bred within theirs
eye-bone, and fly out thence. The blood is like water, having no strings, but
is curdled, Arist.
as many have observed with Baldus Angelus. The eyes are great; the heart as
great as uses to be in all timorous creatures. Diverse write diversely of a stone
in the corner of the eye, Plin.
called Belzahart, or Bezaar. Scaliger denies it, (...)
that there is any stone there, till the Dear be an 100 years old; and then it
begins to grow, and waxes harder then a horn, swelling out of the bones, and
over the face; where it bunches out, it is round, and shining, yellow, and
streaked with black so light, that it scarce abides the touch; you may see it
withdrawn it self. Scribonius calls it, the eye-filth. Almost in all Deers
hearts are found bones, the greater in the older, sometimes shaped like a
cross, interfering. I have seen them, says Iordanus, as big as a pigeons egg,
and framed of plates, and, which is pleasant to see, break them, and you find a
bone in the midst, like the other heart-bones, about which those shells clings,
the heat of the heart ingenders them. G^sne^.
They are found from the midst of August, to the middle of September.
Brasavolus calls it a sinew, or sinewy gristle. Andernacus shows you how to
find it, laying open the left side, and tracing the roots, and membrance of the
artery, whereabout it lurks. The Deers tail is but little, like the Sea-calves;
the thighs very slender. They have more bellies then one. The genital sinewy
like the Camells. (...)
The gut is so small, and britle, that you may break it, and never crack the
skin. Men say they have no gall, but the bowels are so bitter, (...)
that a dog will not touch it, unless the Dear be very fat. Those of Achaia
are thought to carry theirs in their tail, but liken the fourepart of the
spleen, then the gall. The Do is less then the Buck, a handsome beast, only
hornlesse, sharp-sighted, of wondrous swiftness, she has four teats as the
Cow. (...)
Galen speaking of the tunicles of a birth, and of veins, and arteries, which
issuing out the womb, are fastened to it, affirms, that in all animals given to
leaping, as Dear, and goats, the ends of the vessels are joined with the
matrixes, not only by thin skins, but by tough flesh, like a kind of fat; a
token of admirable divine providence. (...)
The back of either sex is fat.

Arist. (...)
and Pliny write, that there are none found in Africa, but Virgil and modern
authors say the contrary. Some write that in Apulia, they show themselves like
armies; and that Ferdinand King of Napels was deceived by them, (...) 2. de
Bell. ^^ap. (...) 1. c. 61. Cpitoli. (...) ^ispal.
and James Caldor, the wisest Prin^e of that age. In Bargu, a Province of
Cataja, they are numerous, and so tame, that they ride on them. In Batavia they
have abounded all along, that tract of sand-hills, and valleys, laying between
the Haghs-wood and Egmond. In Britain, checkered have been white, and black
ones. In the region of the Chicoriary in the new world, they are kept tame like
goats. Solinus writes, that there are none in Candy, except among the
Cydoniatae. Yet Varinus mention Does in Achaea on that Isle. Bellonius said
there are many there, there being no harmfull creatures in Creet. They swim out
of Syria to Cyprus, because there is plenty of pasture, that they fancy. In
Elaphus an Asian-hill by Arginussus, Aelian.
they are cloveneared; and by the Hellespont. They are there tame by nature,
says Aurelius the Emperor. In Scotland the Dear are great, Arist.
and so numerous, that at a solemn hunting 500, 800, sometimes a 1000 have
been killed; some are 10 thumbs thick of fat. They abound also in a hill on the
Islands, the Hebrides, which bears the name Cervus from the Deer. Xapita in
America has herds of them, as we of Oxen; they breed at home, Martyr. Decad.
Ocean. 7. c. 2.
are fed near their houses, by day let out into the woods, at night they return
to their fawns, are shut up in huts, and suffer themselves to be milked. In
France about Fountaineblea^ they swarmed. In Florida there are tame, in
Xapitum, and wild, some as big as an ox, some less. In many parts of Germany,
they are kept tame in dry ditches about their walls. In Helvetia they lessen
daily, inhabitants increasing, and woods decaying. In Hercynia they are
blackish. Among the Dikilappi, Gesner.
there are many herds of them. In Norw^y they are called Rhen, they are
somewhat greater then ours. The Laplander use them in stead of beasts of
carriage, they yoke them in a wagon, like a fishers-boat, whereon they bind a
man fast by the legs; Sigism. Herberstein.
he holds the reins in his left hand; in his right he holds a staf to keep the
wagon from overturning: Thus they can ride twenty miles a day; and they let the
Dear loose, which return to their owner, and usual stables of themselves.
They are so lustful, that they go the whole day a rutting, Engengendring.
Badaeus.
a whole month together, and are raging, and wast away with it, almost another
month. They will fight for their Does, and Hindes; and the worsted Dear will
attend, and serve the conqueror, if we believe Albertus. The females being with
fawn, they separate themselves from others, Arist.
and keep by their males, they dig holes in lonely places, they smell rank like
goats, their faces sported with black; so they live, till a sound shewr of rain
fall, and then they return to their pasture. They gender in August and
September. The same Bucks follow diverse Does, and return again to the first.
The tame are usually barren, Plin.
unless they be from the very first brought up tame. They go with fawn eight
months. They bring forth most part but one at once. The fawns grow apace. The
Do in fawning is cleared of a flegmatique humor, otherwise she never purges.
About suckling, and her posture, therein Pollux, and Gesner write
contradictions. Authors write much of their longlivednesse. A Raven may live
nine of our lives; Age Hesiod.
Deer, that is, Stags, four times as long. By that reckoning they should live
3600 years. Pliny speaks of some, taken some hundreds of years after Alexander
the Great his time, who had caused golden collars to be put about their neck,
which were found covered with skin, and sunk in great fatness.

In the reign of Charles of France, who lived in the time of the Schism,
between Clement and Urban VI. there was a Stag taken at Sylvanectus, on whose
collar was inscribed in Latin letters; Hoc me Caesar donavit; Caesar bestowed
this on me. Theophrastus who lived 80 years, yet complained of nature, that
made Dear longer lived then man. Not to stand long on the sacred Do, Dominae
Sacra.
mentioned by Pausanias, that was a fawn in Agapenons time; or Diomedes his
Stag, taken in Agathocles time, some ages after. It is said that a Hind of
Augustus C. was taken many lustres of years after his reign, with this
inscription on the collar; Touch me not, I am Caesar's. Some guess at their
age by the number of the branches of their horns. Though Aristotle likes it not.

Authors give several names to their voice; Their voice.
as Glocitare, yonking; Virgill calls it braying. We give different name to
the voice of Bucks, Does, Fawns, Stags, Hinds, and their Calves. Sympathy, and
Antipathy.
They are friends to the Quail, but hold lasting enmity with the Eagle, Vulcur,
Serpent, Dog, Tigre, wild beasts, Foxes, the Gew, and whitet-horn, and red
feathers. The Quail sits often on their back, and pick their hairs. The Eagle
gathers a lump of dust, and sitting on their horns, shake it in their eyes, and
strike them on the face with their wings. Plin.
They fight with Serpents, search after them in their holes, and draw them out
by the snuffing of their nostrils. The very smell of Hartshorn burnt, will
drive away Serpents. In Lybia, they make at Serpents, Oppian.
where ever they ly. If a Deer tread on Cactum, the Hartychoke, and it pierce,
their bones never be sound after. Aspalathus kills them with the touch. Their
ingenuity, and disposition.
They delight in covert, in wild woods, forests, chases, where the soil is
fat. They love vineyards and lawns, and pastures in woods, where the Sun comes.
The Buck leaving his pasture, hids him to the woodside, but the Does run into
the thickets; they seek after fresh pasture, but ever return home again. One
uses like a Captain to lead the Herd, they feed all day, at high-noon they seek
shade; they are fearful even to a proverb. Cantharion Arcas, was by the oracle
nicknamed a Dear. They are good at leaping, whence a place near Frankfort has
the name; where two stones are erected, Gesner.
in memory of one that being hunted leaped 60 foot, and upon a laden cart to
save himself. When hardly chased, they will rest themselves, till the dogs
draw near them. When they despair of escaping, they leave the woods, fly into
the fields, and sometimes into towns, and houses for shelter; for most part
they go with the wind. Their sagacity and wit, in deluding the dogs, is
strange. If they are hunted by Eager-dogges, Budae^s.
they gather into parties; then if pursued, they fly among the Dear, kept tame
about house; sometimes they mingle with the Herd, to shrowed themselves,
sometimes they will drive the hunted Dear from them; they will amuse the
dogs by their uncertain steps, going back the same ways, or where other
Dear use to tread, to confound the dogs sent; they will run round, and leap
to put the dogs to alosse. There has been one seen to run among a Herd of
oxen, and leap on an oxes back, and to ride him along way, and trailing the
hinder-feet on the ground, to put the dogs to a cold sent. They have been seen
to leap into trees in shady places. They eat Cinara against venomous grass;
and crabs against the bite of Spiders.

They are very careful that the Sunbeams shed not on their fresh wounds, Aeli.
to purify them before they be closed. With eating Dittany, they can draw
arrows out of their bodies, which goats also do. Dios^^. Plin.
They swim over seas by herds, one resting the head on the others buttock, and
take turns when the first is weary. This is most observed in the passage from
Cilicia to Cyprus; though they see not land, they smell it. They put the
weakest last, and venture not out till the wind favors them. They fatten in
summer, Aelian.
and then lurk in corners, that their weight may not make them an easy prey to
the dogs. Arist.
They hide themselves also by day, when they have cast their horns, and keep in
shady places, to avoid annoyance from flies; and feed in the night, till their
horns sprout again, then they come into the Sun to confirm, and harden them.
And when they can rub them against trees without pain, they dare venture abroad
again. Some say they bury their horns, some say but one; the horn is seldom
found, which is medicinable. Plin. Arist.
In Epire they bury their right, elsewhere their left horn; In Parks neither,
though they cast their horns yearly. When they have eat a Serpent, that the
poison hurt them not, they go to a river, and plunge themselves in all but the
head; yet drink not, till by tears they have sweet out the venom, which the
cold water expels at the eyes. Eating serpents, Vinc^^.
clears their eyesight: when taken, they become not only tame, but will come
when called. Nay, you may briddle, and sadle them. It is certain that in
Ptolomeis Triumphant-shew, there were seven brace of Stags seen coupled in
chariots. Athen^^
Heliogabalus exhibited them by quaternions so yoked together. They were to
Mithridates, as it were a lifeguard. Sertorius the General of the Spanjards,
Ae l. H. ^ l. 7. c. 46.
the Roman, carried a white one always about with him, making the world
believe it was Diana. Ptolomy used one to understand Greek. In fawning they
forsake not beaten ways, Aelian. H. A. l. 11. c. 25*
no more then coverts. They purge themselves with the herb Seselis, that they
may fawn with more ease; after fawning, they eat their afterbirth, that
enwrapped their fawn, then taste of a certain herb, and then return to their
fawns. Soli^^
These they bring not up all one way; the tenderest they carefully hide among
thick shrubs, Aelin. H. A. l. 12. c. 46.
or grass; and chastise them with taps of their feet, to make them ly still,
and not disclose themselves. When grown up a little, they exercise them to run
and leap gapps. A Shepherds Pipe, and singing, will entice them from their
pasture. As for their senses, if they prick up their ears, they are quick of
hearing; if they hang them down, they are easily surprised. That they are
sharpsighted, their great ey is a token. Authors are of diverse opinions about
their usefulness in food. Some say their flesh is tender, Their use.
and light of disgestion; and better tempered, if cut before their horns come.
Isidore. Galen.
Galen holds it to be hard of concoction and melancholy, like Asses-flesh.
Simon Sethi said, it breeds black collar; and that you must beware of it in
summer, because they eat serpents then. If often eaten, it brings the palsy;
in winter it is safer food. Iul. Alex.
Some say, fawns-flesh is best. Of old they praised the flesh, till they were
three years old. The older, the dryer, and harder. In rutting time their flesh
is rank, Arist. H. A. l. 6. c. 29.
and rammish of smell, like goats-flesh. Avicen thinks it breeds quartan-agues.
But Pliny says that he knew Gentle-women, that used to taste it every morning,
and were, for a long time free of agues; especially if they die of one wound.
Others, by constant eating of venison, promise themselves vivacity, and
spritefulnesse. The liver is thought to be naught. The horn newly shot forth,
has been counted a delicate, boiled, and then fried in gobbets.

In Medicine, (...)
many parts thereof are useful. The hair burnt under the belly, prevent
miscarrying of women. (...)
The skin shaved with a pumice with vinegar, cures S. Anthonies fire. The same
fastened on the door with the right feet, scare away all venomous creatures.
The same helps against urine going from a man against his will in bed. The
marrow easens pain, drives away serpents, helps against scalding; taken in
water eases the pain in the bowelles; allays the bloudy-flux taken glisterwise;
softens the womb; helps in Lint monthly terms. The sewet eases the gout, takes
away face-freckles; burnt and mixed with a tosted oyster, (...)
cures kibes and chilblaius, laid fresh on, cures the exulcerations of the
womb. (...)
The brains Rhasis commends against the pain in the hips and sides, and against
bruises. The lungs Pliny praises against corns, chappings, and hard flesh.
Marcellus says it helps feet pinched by, strait shoes, laid often fresh on
it. Dried in the smoke, and poudered, taken in wine, it helps the Ptisique. The
ashes burnt in an earthen pot, helps against sighing, and pursines. The pizle
dried to powder, taken in wine, is given against the vipers bite; smeard on
with wine, it makes a bull lusty, dried it provokes urine, and helps the wind
collique, if you drink the water wherein it is washed. Pliny speaks of the
Magical use, or rather abuse of it. The bones are good against fluxes. ^a^en.
Sextus says the knee- blade is good against priapisme, if carried about one.
The heart burned with the skin and horn, smeared on with oil, cures wounds. The
heartbone is counted a preservative: The stone in the heart, or the other
prevents abortion. The crudled blood of a fawn killed in the Does belly, is a
special remedy against a Serpents bite; and drunk, is good against the bite of
a mad dog; as also if you have eaten hemlock, and toadstools. The urine helps
the spleen, and the wind in the stomach and bowels. The tears in wine, Heurn.
method. l. 2. p. 245.
bring vehement sweats. It is round and bright-yellow, and has black streaks,
if you but touch it, it withdraws, as if it stirred it self. The Harts-borne is
of special use. It helps burning fevers, provokes sweat; is sovereign against
poison, and many diseases. The inhabitants of Florida bore holes in their
childrens lips, and fill them therewith, persuading themselves that that makes
them poison proof. Aldernacus makes an eye salve of it with frankincense, burnt
lead, opium, etc. in rainwater. Infused in vinegar, or poudered some, smear it
on against freckles, and ring-worms; burnt, the smell helps the falling
sickness; with lentile, and deer-sewet it takes spots out of the face. Poudered
with spunges, wherein there are stones, in a like quantity of wine and water,
daily drunk, it helps the kings-evill. Snuft into the nostrills with
Sandaracha, it takes away swelling there; with mastick and salt-amoniack, it
whitens the teeth. With vinegar it eases toothake. Burnt with wine it fastens
the teeth. With tragacanthus it cures the Haemoptoicum; half-burnt it helps the
bloody flux: with a little livesulphur, and a newlayed eg, it stops vomiting.
Burnt with oxymel, Sextus. Marcellus, Aldrov. Galen.
it dries the spleen: It helps the collique. Drunk with yvory, it is good
against worms. Some make cakes of it with chalk, holy seed, a roasted eg, and
honey. It is used also against women's greefs, stopping of the mother.
Differences.
For the differences of Dear. In new Spain is a kind called Macar. Some are
red; some white all over. These the Indians call Kings of Hearts and Yztak
Makanne. Others they call Aculhuame. The lesser, Quauhtlamacame, that of
timorous become generous, and wounded are so fierce that they assault their
hunters, and often kill them. Others like them are called Thalhuicamacame, of the
same bulk, and nature, but not so courageous. The least are Tamamacame; perhaps
a kind of goats. In Duarhe, Xapida, and other parts of America they herds of
Dear, as we of oxen; breeding, and fed in, and near the house. They let them
loose by day to seek their pasture in the woods; at even they return to their
fawns shut up in stalls; they milk them, and have no other milk, nor cheese
made of any other milk. In some western parts there chased, and wounded in
hunting they seek an herb, called by the Barbarians Atochielt, whereby they
refresh themselves, and recover their swiftness. It is more useful to them
then Ditany. In Virginia the Deer are longer tayled then ours, and their
horn-tops bend back. In America is a race of them called Seovassen, much less
then ours, and with less heads, their hair hanging down like Goats among us.
In new Mexico, they have hairy long tails, as Mules, and they are as great, or
greater then Mules, and very strong. A Spanish Captain had a brace to draw his
coach. Aldrovan. H. Bisulc. c. 28.
See Aldrovand about the Cervopalmatus. We have said already out of Julius
Capitolinus, that the memorable wood of Cordianus is painted in the
Beaked-house of Cn. Pompey; that among other pictures, there are two hundred
Palm-herts; the which Gesner at first thought to be all one with the
bread-horned Goats; but after, when John Caius a British Physician sent out of
Britain these horns to him, he changed his mind, yielding it to be a
Palm-deere. The horns being longer and thicker, then a Deers usually are. In
Persia, about Schamachia, Karabach, and Morage, there are beasts like Does,
yellowish, with horns bending backwards, without knobs, which the Turks call
Tzeiran; Olearius.
the Persians Aku.

ARTICLE VIII. Of the Tragelaphus, and the Tarandus, or Busse.
THe Tragelaphus seems to have taken his name from his resembling the
Hee-goat, and the Heart. Aldro. Bis. c. 29.
Some call him Hippelaphus, because he is somewhat like a Horse, he having a
mane, and being greater, and grosser then a Stage. The Germans call him
Brandthirsch, Gesner. Arist.
either because he is blacker then the Deer, or because he haunts the places,
where charcole is made, and feeds on the grass growing thereabout. He is of
greater bulk, and strength then a Deer. He has thick, black hair on his
throat, and long on the shoulders. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 32.
He differs from the Deer therein only, and in his beard. The ridge of his back
is ash color, the belly duskish, the hair about his peezle cole-black. They
are found, not only about the river Phasis, as Pliny mistakes, but also among
the Arachosians; and are taken also in the Torantine, and Konigsteinian wilds
of Misnia near Bohemia. The blackish Deer in England differ little from them.

De Tarandus, or Busse, is called by the Barbarians Pyrandrus, (...).
and Pyradus, by the Northern folk Rehenschier; by Hezychius Chandaros. He is
as big as an Ox; headed like a Stage, nor unlike; shaggy like a Bear, but
white-hayred. His hide so tough, that they make breast-plates thereof. Thick
breasted; cloven, and hollow hoofed, and loose; for in going he displaies them.
Aldrovan. H. Bis. c. 30.
So fleet, and light of foot, that he scarce leaves any print of his footsteps
in the snow; outrunning the beasts that ly in wait for him in the valleys. His
horns are lofty, that are cross beamed from the very forehead; a knotty branch
is in the midst, that branches out again into broader. The horns are white, and
streaked as with small veins. They differ from the Elks-horns in height; from
the Hearts, in breeth; from both, in color, and numerousnesse of branches. When
he runs, he rests them on his back, for while he stands still the lower
branches even cover his forehead; with these lower he is said to break the ice
to come by drink. His food is wood-fruit, and moss on trees. He makes himself
lurking holes in the Northern mountains, and in hard frosts comes to Mosiberg,
and other hills in Norwey. Men take them for household uses. They bring him to
highway journies; and the Husbandmen to work of husbandry. No wild flesh is
more delicate: They live together in herds, and are seen in the vast Northern
wildernesses by thousands together. The females branch not. They are found in
Norwey, Swethland, Lapland, and Poland. There were once a brace brought
bridled, sadled, and trapped to Augusta of the Vindelici. Solin. (...). c. 33.
They change color through fear, taking the color of what they come near, be
it stone, or wood, white, or green, to shroud themselves, like the Polypus in
sea, and the Chamaeleon on land; but these latter are smoother, and fitter for
that purpose, those are rough, and it is strange they should change color. But
what for a Busse this is, whether the Turo, or Rangifer is uncertain. I have
given you his print here, as near the truth as I could.

ARTICLE IX. Of the Rangifer.
IN the description of the Rangifer, Aldro. ^ Bis. c. ^
or Reen, Writers agree not. Albertus says, it resembles a Deer, but is
greater, and of remarkable color, and very swift of foot. He is attired with
three rows of horns, on each are two horns, so that his head seems made up of
little rocks. Of these two are greater then the rest, standing where the Deers
horns use, which grow to five cubits length, and there are seen on him five and
twenty branches. Those two in the middle of his head are short, and weakly.
Others he has on his forehead, liker bons, then horns, which he uses most in
fight. Olaus M. says, he is three-horned, and that he is a kind of Stag, but
much taller, fleeter, and longer. He is called Rangifer, both because of his
lofty horns, that resemble the branches of the Oak; as also because the
harness that they fasten their winter Carts with, to their horns or breasts,
are in the country tongue, where they are called Ranga, and Loga. He has a
mane, and round hoofs. He has a trident on the top of his horns, and is found
in the Forests of Poland. Ioh., A^cola. C^sar de ^ Gal. l. 6.
Julius Caesar makes him a kind of Ox, shaped somewhat like a Heart; from the
midst of his forehead, between the ears sprouts out one lofty horn, straighter
then those known to us; the top spread, and branching. Some make him like the
Elke, some like the Ass, in stature, bulck, and slenderness of legs; headed
like a Calf; necked, and mained like a Horse; the horns shadowing, smooth,
slender, long, stretching to the back, otherwise like the common Deer. Scaliger
ascribes to him all that Olous M. does to the Elke. They are found in Lapland,
Swethland, Norwey, and near the North Pole. Their meat is mountain-mosse,
white, especially in winter when the ground is covered with snow; which though
never so thick, nature has taught them to dig through to come by their food.
In Summer they browse on trees, leaves, flowers, and herbs; rather desiring to
stand upright, then to bend in feeding, because their horns stricking out before
hinders them; so that they must feed with their head wryed on one side. If you
bring them into other lands, they live not long, as men find in Holsatia, and
Prussia. Hither some were sent by King Gustavus in the year 1533. and turned
loose into the woods, but none of their breed have been found there. Because
they are both wild and tame; their milk, skin, sinews, bones, flesh, and hair
are made serviceable to man. The milk and whey is for food. The skin serves for
clothes, bedding, and saddles; being strong and lasting, they make therefore
sacks, and bellows of it. With the sinews they sew garments. Of the bones and
horns they make bows. The flesh they dry in the wind and the smoke, to last
many years. The hoof helps the cramp. With the hair they stuff saddles and
cushions.

ARTICLE X. Of the Elk.
SOme make the Elk a wild beast, Aldro. H. Bisul. c. 32. Pausan. in Eliacis,
and Baeoticis. Caesar. l. 6. de bell. Gal.
a kind between the Heart and the Camel; bred among the Celtae, hardly found
out; if they smell a man, which they do afar off, they hide themselves in deep
caves, and dens. They are in the Hercynian wilderness, somewhat like the goat,
but so me what bigger, and of another hew; not horned, their thighs without
joints, never lying down to rest; nor if they chance to fall, can they rise
again of themselves. Pliny makes him like a beast of use in husbandry, Plin. H.
N. ^. 8. c. 15.
only differing in height of ears and neck: Not unlike the Machlin in the Isle
Scandinavia, the like never seen in these parts, but without bending knees,
sleeping standing, leaning against a tree, and so taken by cutting the tree
then down, otherwise very swift. The upper-lip very great, which in feeding
turns back, which else would be wrapped about what lies before him. He is found on
the Alps, says Dodoneus, has under his chin a gobbet of flesh, ^ol. Pol. ^
and 33. ^trabo Geog. l. 4.
so big as a hand, hairy, gross as a foles tail. Scaliger speaks of two kinds
of Elks, but calls this Bison. Olaus, a kind of wild Ass. Erasmus Stella, a
kind between the Horse and the Deer, casting his horns yearly. Lemning takes
him for a kind of Goat. ^emn. in (...). not.
The Dutch call him Elend, or Misery, both because he is daily sick, and
remains so till he put his right after-hoof to his left ear, as also because
the slightest wound kills him. Cardan calls him a great beast like a Heart, bred
in the North, having long forelegs, and a fleshy trunk, but little, and horns
unlike all other beasts, thick and broad from the bottom. The shoulders sink
downward; as big, and tall he is as a reasonable sized fat Horse; he goes
hanging his head down. His head and neck to the shoulders is thick of hair, and
that long, and has a beard like a Goat. His color white-ash, but at times of
the year his hair changes color. His head very long, and slender for such a
body. The lips great, hanging, and thick, chiefly the upper-lip. The mouth
long. The teeth not great, nor long: Ears long, and broad. The male has
various horns, and full of branches, but nothing near the Stags; the female
has no horns. The horns are two fingers thick. One horn is almost triangularim
shape, and extend like a great birds wing, of twelve pound weight. Like Stags,
they cast their horns at set times of the year. One I had a while by me, that
fell from the Elk, like a ripe aple from the tree of it self, known well by the
root; other two small ones I have, of two or three months growth, cut off a
while before the Elks death; which have a soft down on them, and blood. He is
big-bellied like a Cow: his tail strangly small: cloven-hoofed he is as an ox.

The skin is thick, Dodoneus. Gesner. in Alce.
and tough, and can defend against cuts and stabs, as if it were an iron
breast plate; the Tanners prepare it with fish-fat so, that it can keep out any
shower of rain. It is like a Deers skin, but differs from it thus; it sends
forth a breath, that may be felt by a hand opposite, because it is full of
pores, and the hairs are hollow, though Gesner deny it, who has a foot by him;
but he might be deceived, because pores are shut in dead Bodies. The horns
weigh about twelf pound, and are two foot long, Gesner.
not branched, as the stages, yet divided with some flat blades, more like a
shoulder, then a horn: They are brought out of Lithuania. But the horn of a
great Elk sent to Aldrovand, weighed but seven pound twelf ounces; the part
near the head, a man could scarce graspe, adorned with five blades, two on each
side, beside a little one shooting out. The leg weighed three pound and an
half. The nature of the Elk is, being hunted to betake him to the water, and to
take a mouthfull, and to spout it hot at the dogs. He is seen seldom alone;
in snow they go many together in company. One hastens before, as occasion
serves; the rest tread in his very steps, and hold the same pace: They can hold
out a day and a night, without eating or drinking. If you take the young one,
you may make the dame so tame, that she will be brought to drink beer with
you. He has such a strength in his hoof, that with one blow he can kill a
wolf, and bruise a tree, as if it were a toad-stool. The natives, where they
are, eat the flesh, both fresh and salted; but the juice seems to be but
gross, and melancholy. In Physic, the horn is binding, and good against the
epilepsy, if cut off between the feast of the birth, and that of the assumption
of the Virgin Mary: Some say, on Aegidius his day. Olaus M.
The sinews are used in Swethland against the cramp, made into a girdle, and
tied about the part in pain. The hoof helps against the falling sickness, and
the stopping of the womb, or hystericae. The outer right hind-hoof of the male,
before he has coupled, choped of from the live-foot with a hatchet, after
mid-August, is a present help for the cramp, and fainting fits; if you make a
ring of it for your left hand, or if you grasp it in your right hand; or put a
bit into the left ear, and sometimes pick the ear therewith. The shavings of
it with zedoary, helps women's griefs.

ARTICLE XI. Of the Rhinoceros.
THe Rhinoceros borrows his name from the horn in his snout. Diacon. l. 16.
Pausanius in Baeoti.
Some call him an Egyptian Ox, some an Ethiopian Bull, but they mistake; for
there are none in Egypt, except by chance. In Aethiopia indeed is a bull like
him in the horn, which the unskilful miscall a Rhinoceros. Authors are most
uncertain in their description of him.

Pliny in short thus; Pliny.
That he has one horn in his Nose, he is as tall as the Elephant, his thighs
much shorter, box-coloured. Others add, that he has a swines-head, Aeli. H. A.
l. 17. c. 44. Tertul. l. 3.
an oxes-tayl, the Elephants hew; his horn is two foot long, that he is in the
Province of Mangus; that he is cold of temper; the horn on the tip of his snowt
is sharp, strong as iron, his skin so tough, that no dart can pierce it; that
he has another shorter horn on his right shoulder. Some say, two in his nose,
others say, one in his forehead. Some make the horn strait, like a Trumpet,
with a black cross streaked. Martial.
Some say it is crooked; some flat; Strabo.
some, turning up. Some write that he has two girdles on his back curling, and
winding like those of Dragons; one turning toward his mane; Diod. Solin.
the other toward his loins. But Bontius, who has seen the Rhinoceros a
hundred times, both kept in Den, and loose in woods, Bontius.
writes that his skin is ash-colored like the Elephants, very rugged, full of
deep folds on the sides, and back, thick of hide, that a Japons sword cannot
enter; the folds are like shields, or shells. He is hog-snouted, but not so
blunt-nosed, their horn at the end is different according to their age: in some
ash-colored, sometimes black, sometimes white, he is not so long-legged, nor
sightly as the Elephant.

He is found in the deserts of Africa, Place.
in Abasia, in many parts of Asia, in Bengala, and Jacatra; Not known to the
Greeks in Aristoteles time; nor to the Romans before the year DCLXVI after the
building of Rome. Some say Augustus showed on in a Triumph. Some, Dio. Hist. l.
51. Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 20. Soli. Pol. c. 30.
that Pompey was the first, who presented him in his Palace. He has a rough
tongue, and feeds on grass, and briars. He holds enmity with the Elephant. He
hurts not mankind, unless provoked. When he is to fight, Nature.
he sharpens his horn on the stones: In combat, he aims at the belly, which
he knows to be soft; out of which he lets all his enemies blood. If he cannot
come at the belly, the Elephant with his trunk and teeth dispatcheth him.
Provoked, he makes no more of a Man and an Horse, then of a flea; he can with
his sharp tongue lick a man to death; fetching of skin and flesh to the bare
bones. Shoot him, and he with a hideous cry lays all flat, that comes in his
way, even the thickest trees. Read stories of his fiercenes in Bontius. He
delights strangely in mud. Being to fight, she secures her young one first: He
grunts like a hog. The Moors feed on his flesh, which is so sinewy, that they
had need of iron teeth to chaw it. The skin steeped in wine is given in against
malignant fevers. Zacurus.
The horn some prescribe against poison. The dainty ones among the Romans used
it in bathing for a cruize; They kept oil in it for them that bathed: I cannot
say there are different kinds of these beasts. Yet they say, there was one
taken in Africa as great as a wild Ass, the horn two cubits long, the feet
like the Deers, eared like the Horse, tayled like the Ox.

CHAPTER III. Of the fourefooted Beasts chevving the cud, that have no horns.
ARTICLE I. Of the Camel.
THus far of the Horned-beasts chewing the cud. Aldro. H. Bis. c. 34.
Those that have no horns, are the Camel, and the Camell-panther.

The Camel is so called either from the Hebrew Gamal, Name. (...).
or the Greek Kamnoo, to labor, since he is a Beast of carriage; or from
Chamai, lowly; because he kneels to take up his burden; (...),
or from Kammeros, crooked, from his manner of bending. Artem.
He is cloven-footed, but behind on one fashion, before on another; the clefts
like the Gooses are filled. Descript. Arist. H. A. l. 5* c. 1. 2.
The Bunch on their back differences them from all other beasts: He has
another below like it, that seems to support his body, it is about the bending
of the knee. The female has four teats like the Cow: Tayled like the Ass. The
Genital behind, and so sinewy, that with it men bend the strongest bows: Herod.
in Thaliu^
On either thigh a knee; nor more folds, but they seem so many, because they
come under the belly. The ankle like the Oxes. The buttock answers the bulk of
the body: The gall is not distinct, but confounded with certain veins. Arist.
He has no fore-teeth above. He alone of the hornles beasts has a double
stomach, to digest his thorny hard food. Plin.
Therefore the skin that covers his mouth and stomach, is througout rough: Some
write of their marrow and sewet. They are found in Africa and Asia, Place.
in Bactria especially and Arabia, and in Ionia by the city Clazomenia, where
they leave whole fields for them to feed in. Mithridates Anax.
being overcome by the river Rhijndacus, they were first (says Salust) seen at
Rome; but there we of them seen in the Achaian and Asian war. Ptolomy at
Lagus Plutar.
showed a Bactrian one all over coleblack among his sights. They delight in
thorny and woody food; they brows also on bulrush tops, nor refuse they barley
alone, or with hay, or thin low grass; sometimes content with thistles: Varro.
Now a days they that travel through the deserts of Arabia, give each five
barley cakes a day, as bigh each as an Quince: They can go four days together
without drink; but when they come to water, they drink so much, as not only
quenches thirst, Solin. Pol. c. 62.
but serves for the day following. They love muddy, and avoid clear water:
they stamp on purpose in their water to thicken it. The later ones they say can
refrain from drinking 12, nay 15 days together, if need be; and some
eyewitnesses affirm that in Biled Elgerid, if they feed on fresh grass, they
never drink. About their Engendring, the postrue and manner read Pliny, and
Aristotle. In coupling-time they retire into lonely places; Gendring. Plin.
when none can safely come near them, but their keeper. Some say the female
goes ten months, and in the eleventh brings forth; and a year intermitted
couples again. Arist.
They bring forth in the spring, and some say, they presently after couple.
Writers differ about it. They have three enemies, Suidas. Arist.
the Horse, the Lion, and the Gadfly. Cyrus with his Camels worsted Craesus his
Horse; Aeli.
for Horses cannot endure their smell And the Arabs smeare their Camels with
fish fat, to keep away the flies from vexing them.

They are troubled with the gout, whereof they die, Diseases.
and shedding all their hair, is another of their diseases. Arist.
They run mad sometimes through lust, and remember a wrong, and kill whoever
they meet, even their guides. This frenzy lasts forty days. Hieron. (...)
vit. Hilarion.
Some say, Hierom writes of one in Bactria, that had killed diverse men; there
were above thirty men to master him with strong ropes, and a great outcry. His
eyes were blood-red, he fomed at mouth, his tongue swelled, and he roared
hideously. Some live fifty years, Age.
some last hundred, unless change of hair bring them into diseases, they live
longest in Bactria. Arist.
Their disposition, nature, appears in their revengefulnes, teachablenesse,
love of music, modesty, and natural affection. He lays up an injury long,
Plin.
being stricken, and watches occasion to be revenged. He may be taught by a drum
to lead a dance; Aeli.
they use a young one to tread on a hot floor, which makes him lift up his feet
by turns; Nature. Basil.
a drum being still beaten at door. They use him to it a year in this school;
and after, when ever he hears a drum, he falls a capring; when he begins to
tire, music will invite him on, when blows cannot force him. Arist.
He will not couple with his dame. If being blinded he be betrayed to it, in
revenge he will kill the causer of it. He is compassionate. He eats all night;
but forbeares, if any in the stable be sick. This the Indians observed. When
they would have them speedy* they take their young ones along some miles with
the dame; She will double her pace to return to her young ones. He is very
useful. In medicine, the flesh provokes urine. Use.
The fat of the bunch smoked helps the Hemrods. The brain dried, with vinegar,
the falling sickness. The blood furthers conception, and is good against the
stoppings of the mother, if used after the months. The milk eases the belly,
being thin and waterish, it helps the cramp, and wakens appetite. The urine,
(which fullers also use) whitens and cleanses the teeth. The tail dried
loosens. Plin.
The dung with oil makes the hair curl. The same, white, pounded with honey,
allays swellings, and clenses wounds. It is said, Apul.
that the bristles of the tail wreath, and tied to the left arm cures the
quartane; if you will believe it, we know that the Arabs eat the milk. Galen.
Galen says, the Alexandrians eat the flesh. Heliogabalus, Apicius like, fed
on it sometimes at supper; and the heels being tenderest. The Jews of old made
it their food. Some reckon that, Lamprid.
and the milk among dainties. This, in those that are near foaling, is of a
less cheesy, and buttery substance. Historians relate their use in war. Hence
some arms have their names, as we shall show, if God give leave, in our
Philology. Solin.
In Arabia, Egypt, etc. they travel not without them. They are good for
carriage, but stinted to so much weight; usually six hundred pound; for a need,
a thousand. While they are laden, and unloaden, they ly down on their belly;
and feeling they have their just load, they rise up, and will carry no more.
The African Camels will travel with ease fifthy days together without
intermission. Some are fat, Differences.
some lean, there are reddish, and white. The swiftest are called Dromedaries;
these are lower then the other. They will travel above an hundred mile in one
day. They are fleeter then Nisaean horses. Isidore.
The females are swiftest. Arist.
The Arabian are double-bunched on the back, called thence Dityloi. The
Bactrian are held strongest, and have one bunch under the belly to ly on. The
Caspian are as big as the greatest horse. The African are of three kinds; the
first is called Hugium, who are indeed huge great, Solin. cap. 62. Aelian.
and strong, able to carry a 1000 pound weight. The second sort are less,
double-bunched on the back, called Bec^eti, fit for carriage, and to ride on;
the Asians know no other. The last they call Raguahil, they are lanke, and
slender; fit only for the sadle, he will carry a man an hundred miles a day.
On these the King of Tambutus uses to send his messengers to Segelmessis, or
Darha, 900 miles of, in the space of eight days, without any baiting, or
resting by the way.

ARTICLE II. Of the Camel-pard.
He borrows his name from the Camel, Aldrov. c. 35.
whom in bulk he resembles, and from the Pard, or Panther, whom he resembles in
his spotted skin. The name, and the beast came first from Alexandria to Rome.
He bears other names, as, wild Sheep; from his gentleness, and living in
deserts, and Nabis, Pliny. Albert.
Nabuna; by the Ethiopians, Anabula, and Saffarat, and Orasius, but falsely.
Since that is a beautiful, this a misshapen beast; of late, Giraffa, corruptly
Saffarat. Nor Aristotle, nor Aelian mention him; Strabo, and other ancients,
Vincent.
differently describe him. One writes, that he is so long-necked, that he can
reach his food from the highest trees, and that his skin is checkered like a
hinds, and streaked; he is lower behind, Strabo. Geog.
then before: sitting, he seems as high as an Ox, he is taller then the Camel,
and gentle as tame cattle. Pliny makes him horse-necked, ox-thighed,
camel-headed, with glistering white spots. He is slender, and swannecked.
Bellonius says, Phot.
he saw three in Cair, each had two small horns, sticking six fingers long out
the forehead, Plin.
and a bunch out the midst of the forehead, like another horn, about two
fingers long, Dio. Hist.
the neck seven foot long; and when he stretches it out, it is sixteen foot
from the ground, he is eighteen foot from the tail to the top of his head; that
his legs are of an equal length; Heliodor.
on his thighs before stand much higher then those behind; his back, from his
tail to the top of his head, rises like a ladder, and as a ship-keel, the whole
body marked with great spots, like a deers, fouresquared, nine inches broad,
the ends white, and a finger broad. The whole body, like a net, the spots are
not round like the Leopards, the foot cloven, like the oxes. The upper-lip
hangs far over the lower. The tail is thin and small, hairy at top. He has a
mane like a horse, reaching from the back to the top of his head. He seems to
halt, as he goes, now on the right side, anon on the left; but on legs, and
sides wagling; and when he would either eat, or drink any thing from the
ground, he straddles wide before, and bends his legs; otherwise he cannot eat.
His tongue is two foot long, of a dark violet-colour, round as an eel,
wherewith he licks in boughs, leaves, grass, nimbly, and even undiscernally.

Purchase, out of Fernando the Jesuit, writes, that he is so vast and tall,
that a man on horseback can pass under his belly; he is found in Africa among
the Troglodites, and in Ethiopia. Caesar the Dictator, Place. Strabo.
made them first a part of his Show at Rome. After him Gordianus showed 10.
Aurelia also led some of them in Triumph. The Ethiops presented one to Leo the
Emperor. A Sultan of Babylon, another to Frederick; Suidas.
and another Sultan, another to Laurence de Medices. His keeper can easily lead
him with a head-stall, Heliod.
as he list. The Jews might not eat of them, whence perhaps they come to abound
so in Judaea.

CHAPTER IV. Of the foure-footed Beasts that chevv not the Cud.
ARTICLE I. Of the Swine.
THe Latins give the Swine five names, Name*
Sus, Porcus, Scropha, Verres, Majalis; in English, the Sow, the Hog, the
Barrow-hog, the Boar. Sus the Sow; in Greek Us, common also to the Boar. Of
old, (...)*
called Thysus, from Thyein, to sacrifice; since a Swine in the rites of Ceres
was offered, Varro.
and in entering covenant; and in Hetruria, at marriages by the new-wedded
couple. The like did the ancient Latins, and Greeks in Italy; for the women,
the nurses chiefly called, the female nature Choiron, which signifies a swine,
(...).
and one that deserves a good marriage. Porcus, Isidor.
a porke, from Spurcus, wallowing in the mire. The Sabines, Poridus; the name
they give brawn. Scropha is a Sow that has of^ had pigs. Verres is the Boar,
or Boar-pig: Majalis is as the gelding among horses, or the capon among pullen.
Hybridae were of old swine half wild, or engendered tween, a tame, and a wild.
Description.
We shall in brief describe the Swine, it being so well known, in the Bones
is not much marrow. The hairs are stiff, and bristly, thicker then the Oxes,
and Elephants; amongst us for the most part yellow. In France, and Italy,
black; most are party-colored, if you observe them well. The fat lies between
the skin, and the muscles, called Lard; the grease is old, or salted, or
simple. The brain is fattish, and decreases in the waining of the Moon, more
then any other beasts. The eyes are hollow, and sunk, not to be taken out
without hazard of life; no not one only. The eyebrows move downwards toward
the nose, and are drawn backward toward the temples. The tip of the nose is
thick, the forehead narrow, the lips broad, the mouth stretched out, and broad,
to root withal, called the snout. Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
The Sow has fewer teeth, and never sheds them; the neck-skin is toughest. The
Sows hearts are inarticulate. In the ears is a moisture like gall, Arist. H. A.
l. 2. c. 1. and l. 3. de parti. c. 4.
of the thickness of that of the spleen. The stomach is large, and winding. In
the liver are white stones. The flesh below the navell is without bone. The Sow
has many paps, Arist.
on a double row, having many Pigs to suckle; the best, twelf, the common ones,
two less. Of their genitals, see Aristotle. Their tail is crooked, they have
no ancle, and are a middle-kinde between the whole, and cloven-footed.

They have ten ribs. The Sow has circular gristles, Plin.
whereof read Severinus. In the small guts of one he has seen two worms, one
a palm, another a finger long, both hollow, and full of white juice, Democr.
p. 299.
as chile, or first milk, both shaped like an earth-worme. Learn hence how
worms breed in, and cleave to our bowels. The thin skin of the Sow, is of the
same color with the hair. He anatomized a Sowes belly, and found in the utmost
ends certain thin skins, wherein it seems, were preserved the superfluities of
dregs, and piss. The navel-vein is parted near the womb; the navel-vessels
first bend toward the left pinion, then encompassing the neck croswise, they
lead back toward the right leg. In the Birth almost all the bowels are
conspicuous, the Liver, Stomach, Bowels, Milt, Reins, Mid-rif, Heart, Lungs.
The heart whitish, the Lungs liver-coloured, the Liver dark-red, the Reins
great according to the proportion of the vein appearing by the right forefeet,
but more by the hinderfeet; the throat veins that ascend to the head, are of
the shape of a lambda (l). In a perfect shaped pig, the breast laid open by two
crosse-sections, you see two sinews, that passing through the throat, and
cleaving to the heart-skin, descend directly through the sides of the heart to
the mid-rif, by whose sinewy-ringlet they are fastened through two or three
branches, or sprigs; whence passes another to the upper-mouth of the stomach.
Here perceive you plainly the severing of the axillary vein, and the thymiaean.
The lappets of the heart are hollow, divided from the forepart of the heart,
conjoined behind. The passage of the urine from the bottom of the bladder after
two fingers breadth is set into the arteries. At the end of the yard is a round
kernel, and two in the neck of the bladder, etc. In the Stomach is a slimy
juice like bird-lime, or the white of an egg; in the bowels another like thin
honey. A vain unparalled runs along the backbone, branching toward the
several ribs. Swine are found every where among us. In Strabo his time, Gual
was so full of them, Place. Strabo. Geog. ^. 5.
that they furnished Rome; the best came pickled thither from Lions. So good
were at Syracuse, that Sicilian-cheese, and Syracusan-porke grew into a
proverb. Solinus says there are none in Arabian; Aelian, that there are none
in India; and if brought thither, they die. In the Southland there are none of
the four-footed beasts, that are in our world, except Buffles, Cows, Goats, and
Hogs.

Swine eat all things, plants, fruits, roots, acorns, Hessel. Gerar. descrip.
Austr.
chestnuts, dates, grane, bran, what not? Beech-acorns make Sows lively, and
pork light of digestion; the Holmed-acorns make them well trussed, Plin.
and weighty, and plump; the Oken ones, well spread, large and heavy. Fast
flesh, but hard comes from Mast. Holmberries are best, given a few at once.
Acorns from the Esculus, the Oak, the Cork make light, spungy pork. The
Haliphlaei give them acorns only, when they want other food. Pliny among
chestnuts commends those with a stony shell. In Egypt, Cyprus, Syria, and
Seleucia in Assiria, they are fatned with dates. The Ash-fruit also fattens
them. Dry Cytisus is commended by Aristomachus the Athenian. Scalions they eat
in Bavaria. Wild rape also, have leaves like a violet, sharp, a white root, not
without milk. Henbane makes them run made. Green pasture hurts them. Columel.
R. R. l. 7. c. 9. 10.
They eat flesh also, men's carcases; nay, they spare not their own pigs; nor
hens and geese in winter. They root up worms, they feed on snails, and
wood-tartoyses. Sixty days will fatten them, especially, if you hold them
fasting three days in the beginning. To fatten them with figs, till they burst
again, was Apicious his invention. The English are a year fatning them, which
makes their pork firm and dainty, where a Sow becomes so fat, that she cannot
stand nor go, but must be carried on a cart. In Lusitania the farther end of
Spain was a Swine killed, two ribs whereof were sent to Lucius Voluminous the
Senator, Attil. Hisp.
that weighed three and twenty pound; and there were two foot, and two fingers
from the skin to the bone. Varro saw in Arcadia a Sow so fat that she could not
rise. and that a Rat had eaten into her flesh, and made a nest therein, and
laid her young ones there. Gesner relates the like of Basil. Thirst in Summer
troubles them. Plin. l. 11. c. 37.
Grape-kernels in wash makes them drunk. They gender from eight months old to
their seventh or eigth year. Engendring. Plin. l. 8. c. 51. Arist. H. A. l. 2.
c. 1.
They litter twice a year, and sometimes twenty at a litter; they go four
months with pig. They are prone to cast their farrow; the pigs are piged with
teeth, says Nigidius. One Boar serves ten Sowes. They couple when the Moon
wains, and that often, and aforenoon commonly; when the Boar of rages, and will
tear a man with his tusks, especially one in white clothes. They litter fewest
at first time, more at next, and though old they bate not; they pig eight and
ten, sometimes eighteen at a time; Plutarch.
some say, as many as they have teats. A white Sow is thought most fruitful.
The Winter-pigs are small, and thrive not.

The Helvetians prefer March-pigs. In hot Regions, winter ones are best. The
Sow having littered, gives to the first pig the former teats, being fullest of
milk. Every pig knows it is teat, and keeps to that alone. Take away the pigs
she grows barren, leave her one only, she brings it well up. If you give acorns
to a Sow big with pig, Plin.
you hazard the casting her farrow. Antipathy* Aeli. l. 9. c. 28. Plin. l. 10.
c. 74. Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 29.
Swine hold antipathy with the Elephant, who also cannot endure their grunting.
A Wolf also fears it, and dars not venture on an herd of them. Salamanders they
devour without danger. Ointment of Amaracus is bane to them. The Weesel and
they are foes. Hemlock kills them. In Scythia, Scorpions dispatch them with one
stroke. The Horse abhors his filthy smell, ugly grunting, and filthy breath.
They cast not their teeth; but after eating new corn, their teeth are ever
weak, nature so punishes their otherwise untameable greediness. If they loose
not their eyes, nor eat themselves dead, Age. Plin.
they live fifteen, some twenty years. The disease that most troubles them, is
a swelling like hailstons, that lurks unseen while they live, but cut one up it
shows it self; nor is there scarce any without three at the least, whereto
those are more liable, the flesh of whose thighs, neck and shoulders are moist,
we call them meazles. They cleave to the lower part of the tongue; a Hog is
known to be meazled by the bristles plucked from the back, if the roots be
bloody. If they come out of a hot into a cold place, and are suffered to ly
down, if you stir them not, there is a kind of convulsion in all their members.
They are also troubled with hog-lice; and in Summer, unless you often stir
them, they are taken with a lethargy. They are troubled also with cough,
sqincy, swellings and loosnesse; unless they drink their fill, they become
shortbreathed. They are most brutish, Plin. l. 8. c. 51.
filthy, lustful, and greedy by nature; and seem to have a soul only as salt to
keep them from stinking. As bathing is man's delight, so wallowing in the mire
is theirs. Gryllus in Plutarch praises their modesty and continence, and
prefers them before men and women. Though they are ravenous, yet they will not
eat a dead hog. Their greediness is insatiable. They know man's voice. They
have been known to swim home again, Rhodigin.
having been stolen, and the ship cast away. Their voice is grunting: And to
say the truth with Pliny, no creature yields more matter for gluttony to work
on then it; near fifty several savoury dishes may be made of Swins-flesh.
Lipsi. in Macrob.
Livy celebrats a feast of a Chalciden-Hoast set off with exquisite variety
consisting hereof. Homer tells of what value it was in the Heroique-age of the
world; the servants fed on lean, the Masters on fat pork. The solemnity of the
Saturnals was celebrated almost with no other, however no daintier food; and
their riot came to that height, that they set whole ones (and those stuffed,)
on the table, whence came the names Garden, and Trojan-pork: One part roasted,
another boiled, and killed after a peculiar fashion. Athen.
The Pigs are counted daintiest: Yet the Jews will not touch Swins-flesh, it
being forbidden by their Law; the Arabians forbear it; the Mahumetans also, who
feign that Mice breed in Swins-snouts; Solin. c. 46. Pausan.
and the Moors, Tartars, and the Pessinunty of old. But that of the Delphaci is
too moist, and breeds raw humors. Some kind is good of digestion, by reason of
the similitude it has with man's body, Galen.
and nourishes more then other food. How strengthening it is, the example of
Wrestlers shows that used to feed thereon; Hippocr.
It is not so gross as Beef. Hippocrates condemns pork. The Sow of a middle
age is sweetest; younger, if it ly long in the stomach, Athen.
corrupts. Choice ones come from Cicilia. Apicius dressed Pigs on sundry
fashions, whence the names of farcil, liquaminous, roast, Vitellian, Flaccian,
Laureate, Frontaninian, Oenogerate, Celsilian, and the rest. The liver is
preferred before all the rest, if the Hog be fed with figs dried. Aetius.
The Ancients prized the neck, the gammon, the flitch, etc. Of the flesh, and
the rest are made sausages, puddings, etc. Of all which elsewhere, God willing.

Of their Medicinal use Gesner treats most accuratly; Physic Galen.
a decoction of their flesh helps against the poison of the fly Buprestis. The
warm blood is good against warts smeared on, keeping them from growing. The
grease of a male sucking pig gelt, that especially about the rim of the belly,
is by Apothecaries used in their ointments, and by Physicians to soften, and
disperse humors. The bones broken, Plin. l. 28. c. 9.
tied about bacon in boiling, makes it firm on a sudden. Bruised with broom,
it helps the pain in the knees. With chalk smeared on, it is good against
wax-kernels. Drunk in wine with salt on, it helps cattle that have eaten
Hemlock. The Liver taken with wine, helps against the biting of any venomous
thing; roasted, it stops a loosnesse. The Bladder provokes urine, if it have not
touched the ground, laid on the privities. Any thing about a Boar burned, helps
those who cannot hold their water. The Stones kept long, and stamped in
Sows-milk, is good for the falling sickness.

The greatest bone of the gammon of a barrow-hog, burnt dries, and fastens the
gums. The ankle burnt till of black it become white, easest the pain of the
colon; the milk smeard on the temples, makes drowsy. Hog-dung made into a paste
with vinegar, is good for the bursten. See more in Gesner. As for their
different sorts, some are tame, some wild. Later writers mention Guinee swine,
Kinds.
and the Sluviatil, and the Tapierete; Mar^gra^ Hist Brasil. l. ^ c. 7.
the Guinee-hog brought to Brasil, is shaped as ours, but of a yellowish
color; the head not so high as ours, the ears long, and sharp at top with long
tips, the tail reaching to the ankles without hair; the rest of the body hairy,
and sleek, and glistring, without bristles, even on the back, the hair longer
toward the tail, and on the neck. He is very gentle. The River-hog the
Brasilians call Capybaria, is so big as ours of a year or two old, two foot
long from the head to the dock, the belly a foot and half thick, he has no
tail, his forefeet have four hoofs, the hinder but three, the midlemost before
is longest, the fourth is least; so behind, the middlemost is longest, he has
a hard skin, even to his hoof, his head is ten fingers long, and almost as
many thick, very disproportionable, the mouth is also long, and thick, the eyes
great and black, the ears small and round, the under-chap shorter then the
upper, either has two forefeet crooked that hang out, from their sockets a
finger and half, and sticking in almost two fingers; but the tuskes stick not
out of the mouth, but are set as in hares. The other tuskes are strange, in
each jaw stands eight bones, on each side four, and each bone holds three
teeth undivided, so that in each jaw stand 24 teeth, in all 48, all plain at
the ends; they eat grass, and diverse sorts of fruit, they eat the flesh,
though it have no good taste, the head is best. The Brasilians call one kind
Tapierete; the Lusitanians, Anta; he is fourefooted, as big as an heifer six
months old, shaped like a hog, and so headed, only thicker, and longer, and
more copped; his snout hangs over beyond the mouth, which by a strong sinew he
can draw in, and thrust out, the snout has long clefts, the lower part of the
mouth is shorter then the upper, both jaws are pointed, or sharp before; he has
in all forty teeth, grinders, and others. His eyes are small, as an hogs, his
ears great and round, sticking forward, the thigs are thicker then a hogs, and
as long; in his forefeet are four hoofs, in the hinder three, the middlemost
greater then the rest, all black, and hollow, and may be plucked off: He has
no tail, but in stead a bald stump: Genitaled as a Baboon; goes with the back
ridged as the Capybara; the skin solid, as the Elke, the hair short, in the
younger colored as a lightsome shadow, spotted with white; in the oulder
darkish without spots. He sleeps by day in shady thickets, night and morning he
comes forth to feed. He can swim excellently. He feeds on grass, sugarcanes,
cole, etc. Men eat his flesh, but it is not well tasted.

ARTICLE II. Of the wild Boar.
THe Latins call him Aper, Aldrovan. Hist. Bis. c. 3^. Name. (...). Pi^tar.
etc. the Greeks Kapros, etc. They are for the most part black, or blackish.
Some brasse-coloured says Pliny. Pausanias writes, that he has seen white
ones; their eyes fierce, and staring. The tuskes great, turning up, sharp, and
white. And, which is strange, while the beast lives, they have the keen force
of iron, but pluck them out of him dead, they are thought to loose their
keenness. Some tuskes are said to be so long, that they turn back into a
ring. Descript.
In India some have double bending tusks, a cubite long. Gyllius relates, that,
Oppian.
when he is mastered by the dogs, and spearmen, and falls, his tusks through
his inflaming breath burnt as fire; and if any pluck a bristle out of his neck,
and hold it to his tusk, while he breaths, it shall shrivell up, and scorch;
and if he touch but a dog with his tusk in hunting, it shall set a mark on
him, as if he were branded. His mouth is like a shield, wherewith he withstands
spear, and sword. He has no gall. His blood has no strings in it.

Pliny says there are none in Creet. P^ace.
Some say, but mistake, that there are none in Africa, nor in India. Theoph. H.
P. l. 4. cap. 13. Aelian. ^. 17. c. 10. Plin. l. 11. c. 51.
But they are by herds in Islands in the Nile in Egypt. Some say they are mute
in Macedon. The Spaniards in West Indies have found some less then ours, with
short tayls, that they thought they had been cut off; not footed as ours, not
cleft behind, but wholehoofd; Pet. Mart. Decad. Ocean.
the flesh much more savoury and wholesome then ours. Near the Seashore there
grow many palms, and marishy reeds, where many of them wander. Lycotus, in
Calphurnius his husbandry, says that among the Roman shows he saw snow-white
hairs, and horned wild Boars. These wild feed as the tame swine on acorns,
apples, barley, herbs, roots, and the rest. With their snouts they root also
worms up. Aelian. l. 17. c. 31.
They long excessively after dry-figs. But they are of a more cleanly nature
then the tame. They are found sometimes among fern leaves, which themselves
have gathered together, and spread to ly on. They avoid a kind of sharp-eared
corn, that the Germans use to feed on. Engendring.
When they would engender, their neck bristles start up, and stand as the crest
of an helmet; they foam at mouth, gnash with their tusks, and their breath is
extreme hot: After, they abate of their fury; being rejected they force,
Aristotle.
or wound the female. They couple in the beginning of winter; bring forth at
spring, seeking lonely, craggy, narrow, darksome places to litter in. They
keep company thirty days. The wild swine carry their pigs as long as the
tame, and litter as many. They pig once a year; The Boar is a year old ere he
genders. They grunt, and snuft as tame; but the Sow more, the Boar is seldom
heard. They haunt out-places, and those deep and steep. They are quicker of
hearing then man is; they herd together, but commonly with their own brood.
Their tears are sweet; they foame when chafed with hunting, and it is cleaving.
Plin.
Their urine is so troublesome to them, that unless they can water, they
cannot fly, but are taken, as if they were tied; some say it burns them. They
are hardly ever tamed, and you must begin from the first, while they are pigs.
Hemlock, and the root of Syanchus kills them. If they chance they eat hemlock,
they strait shrink up behind, and pine, and hasten to water, Plin. l. 8. cap.
27. Var.
and eat crabs. They cure their diseases with Ivy: they grow till they be four
year old; they are taken with, and by music. In a Borrough in Tusculum they
came together to their meat at the blowing of a trumpet. They know how to
confound the hunters by their footsteps in marshes. The females, though many
in a herd, fly with their pigs, if they see a hunter; but if one of their pigs
be hunted, they fly not, not though one be alone, but she will rush on the
huntsman, they whet their teeth ere they fight: though they in combat among
themselves, yet if they spy Wolves, they combine against the common foe, and
hasten to help as soon as they hear the cry. Fulvius Hirpinus was the first of
the Gowndorder that had a park for wild Boares, and other wild; and not long
after L. Lucullus, and Q. Hortensius imitated him. Use. Plin. l. 8. cap. 51.
How savoury meat they are is well known. Servilius Rullus, father to that
Rullus, who in Cicero his Consulship proclaimed the field, or Agrarian law, was
the first Roman who set a whole Boar on his table at a feast. Some such were a
thousand pound weight, that the Romans had to their suppers; thence called
Milliary, from their weight. Consult Apicius about the manner of seasoning
them. The flesh is much better then common porke, soon disgested, and very
nourishing, begetting a thick, and glevy juice. Heliogabalus for ten days
together showed on his table the paps of sowes that had newly farrowed,
Lamprid. in Heliog.
three hundred a day. On the day of Lentulus his instalment, when he was made
Flamen, he had at his supper such pappes, and teats, with loins, and heads of
brawn. Wild Boares have also their place in Physic. The brain with the blood
is commended as souverain against serpents, and carbuncles in the privities.
Bacon boiled, and bound about broken parts, Gesner.
suddenly, and strangely settles them; heals men anoint with the fat of roses.
The powder of the cheek-bones heals spreading sores. The teeth shavings
disperses the pleurisy. The lungs mixed with honey some put under their feet,
when hurt by a strait shoos. The liver rayses from a lethargy, and helps
matteryears if dropped in. Drunk in wine, fresh, and unsalted it stays a
loosnesse. The small stones found therein poudered help the stone. The galle
warm dissolves swellings; the ashes of the hoof burnt sprinkled in drink
provokes urine. The claws burnt, and bruised helps those that piss abed. The
dung dried, drunk in water, or wine, stanches blood; eases an old pain of the
side, taken in vinegar helps ruptures, and convulsions, and parts out of joint
with a serecloath and oil of roses. Fresh and hot it is good against running of
the nose. Kneaded with wine, a plaster of it draws out what sticks in the body.
Poudered, and searsed, and kneaded with grasse-hony, it helps the joints. Men
pour the piss into mattery ears. The bladder boiled, and eaten helps those
that cannot hold their water. Differences. Nieremb.
See more in Gesner. The Indians have a wild Boar of a strange nature on their
mountains, they call Koya Metl, and by six other names, like ours, but less,
and not so handsome, with the navell on the back, and about the reins, strange
to behold, pinch it, and a watery humor gushes out; yet it is properly no
navel, but a kind of soft grisly fat, and under is nothing but as in other
beasts, as is well known by the dissecting of him. Some think that he breaths
that way. He is noisome; Anton. Herrera.
he gnashes with his tusks horridly, and is leaner and slenderer then ours. He
is fierce. The huntsmen climb trees; a herd of these Zaini bite at, and tear
the body of the tree, not being able to come at the men, who from above wound
them with borespears. They go in herds, and choose a leader, and as men report,
the least, and vilest of the herd, old, and feeble, nor part they company till
he be slain, Pet. Simon.
they will die ere they forsake him. Some ascribe the like to the Bachirae. They
abhor the Tiger. The captain of the Zaini calls of his kind more then three
hundred together, and conducts them, as a General his forces; with these he
sets on the Tiger, who, though the fiercest of all American wild beasts, is yet
overmastered by multitude, but not with a great destruction of the Zaini; many
of whom have been found lying dead with the Tigre, and but a few left to ring
their knell. Franc. Hernand.
He bites shrewdly, when first taken; but when tamed, men take pleasure in
him. His flesh is like porke, or brawn, but tougher, and not so sweet; his
bristles are sharp, and party-cloured, black and white. He feeds on acorns,
roots, and other mountain-fruit, and also on worms, and such vermin as are
bred in moyst-fenny places. Their toes are some longer then other, their tayls
are short, and their feet unlike those of ours, one of their hinder-feet having
no claw. The flesh of the Indian wild Bores is moyster, and wholesomer then
ours; but unless the navell of the Zainies be pared off, they putrify in one
day. We give you the picture of him, with the Jajacu Kaaigora, of the
Marckgrave. Ampliss. de Laet, had one very tame, but died with eating moist
feed, as it seemed. Valckenburg calls that navell an udder, but he mistakes;
since it is well known that the young suck not at that part.

TITLE II. Of the vvater-cloven-hoofed Beasts.
CHAP. I. Of the Hippotame, or River-Horse.
FOllowing Aristotle, Aldrovan. Digit. l. 1. c. 12.
hither I refer the River-Horse; though others, and perhaps more properly, to
another head. He is called an Horse, not from his shape, but his greatness.
He is styled the Horse of Nile, Bellon.
and the Sea-ox, and the Sea-hog, that before resembles an ox, in the rest of
the body, a swine; called a Sea-Elephant, from his vastness, and the
whiteness, and hardness of his teeth; and the Elephant of Egypt, the
Rosmarus, Alvaresius. Descript. Aelian. H. A. l. 11. cap. 44. Aristotle. Leo de
Asr. l. 7.
the Rohart, the Gomarus, in Pretebans country. Writers differ in describing
him. Some say that he is five cubits high, and has ox-hoofs, three teeth
sticking out each side of his mouth, greater out then any other beasts, eared,
tayled, and neighing like the horse, in the rest like the Elephant; he has a
mane, a snout turning up, in his inwards not unlike an horse, or ass, without
hair; taken by boats. Bellonius saw a small one at Byzantium, cow-headed,
beardard, short, and roundish, wider jaw'd then a lion, wild nostrills, broad
lips turning up, sharp teeth as a horse, the eyes and tongue very great, his neck
short, tayled like a hog, swag-bellied like a sow; his feet so short, that they
are scant four fingers high from the ground. But Fabius Columna describes him
most accurately from the carcass of one, preserved in salt, brought by a
Surgeon called Nicholas Zerenghus from Damiata into Italy; he says, that
he was liker an ox then a horse, and about that size, legged like a bear,
thirteen foot long from head to tail, four foot and an half broad, three foot
and an half high, squat-bellied, his legs three foot and an half long, and
three foot round; his foot a foot broad, the hoofs each three inches,
groutheaded, two foot and an half broad, three foot long, seven foot about in
compass, his mouth a foot wide, snout-fleshy and turning up, litle-eyed, each
an inch wide, and two long, the ears about three; the bulk thick, the foot
broad, parted into four toes, the ankle hard of flesh, tayled like a tortoys:
skin thick, tough, black. The nostrils like an S, snouted as a lion, or cat,
with some straggling hairs, nor are any more in the whole body, in the
under-chap, thwart half a foot long, etc. like a boar-tusks, not sticking out,
but plainly seen, the mouth opening, etc. On each side seven cheek-teeth,
thick, broad, and very short. In the upper-chap, which he moves like a
crocodile, wherewith he chews, stand six fore-teeth, aptly answering those
beneath, etc. The teeth are hard as a flint, and will strike fire, so that by
night rubbing his teeth, Plinv. Herod. H. N. l. 2. L^o Asri. l. 9.
he seems to vomit fire. Plin. l. 32. c. 11.
His proper place is said to be Saiticae in Egypt. There are of them also in
the River Niger, and in the Sea that washes Petzora. Barbosa has seen many in
Gofala.

He observed many there coming forth of the Sea into the pasture-grounds, and
returning again: Aelian.
They feed also on ripe corn, and yellow-ears. When he is grown up, he begins
to try his strength with his Sire, if he can master him, he then proves his
masteries with the Dam, and leaves his Sire; if he offer to resist, he kills
him. Gendring. Nature. Aelian.
They bring forth young on the dry land, and there brings them up: They are so
fruitful, that they teeme every year. He comes out of Nilus into the fields,
and having filled his belly with corn, he returns backwards, that the
husbandmen may not surprise him, or by his averse footing to amuse the
hunts-men; since he is as harmful as the Crocodile. He being overburdened with
his own gross bulk, he rubs himself against the canes, till he has opened a
vein, and having bled enough, he stops the vein with mud: whether he neigh, or
no, is disputed.

The Ethiops eat him. Use. Clusius.
About the promontory Cabo Lopez in Guinee a Schipper of the Hage and his mates
saw it; and in the town Ulibet they saw many of their heads, wherein were teeth
of a wonderful bigness. One Firmius Seleucius eat an Hippotame. Capitol.
They are also medicinable; the Egyptians use the teeth against emrods, shut or
open, tying them on, or wearing a ring made thereof. The Blackmoors use it also
as a preservative against a certain disease. Pliny extolls those teeth for a
special remedy for toot-ache; and the fat against a raging Fever. The ashes of
the skin with water smeared, dissolves waxen-kernels. The skin of the forehead
slakes lust: the stones dried, is good against the bite of a Serpent: the parts
as otherwise also useful. Diosco^.
Pausanius says, that the face of his mother Dindymena was formed of the
Hippotames teeth. Pliny says, that the Painters use the blood dissolved in
gumwater instead of red-lead. They that are besmeared with the fat, may safely
go among Crocodiles. Some say, Iuli. Capitol.
that they who are covered with the skin, are thunder free. Pliny says, that
the hide, especially about the back is so thick, that therewith strong spears
may be shaped, and shaved by the turner.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.
THE THIRD BOOK. Of the Clovenfooted, Fourfooted Beasts.
THE FIRST TITLE. Of the wild Beasts with paws that bring their young alive
into the World.
CHAPTER I. Of the Lion.
THus far of the hoofed Beasts, (...).
the four-footed follow that have paws, and toes: (...).
These are either such as bear a livingbrood, or such as lay eggs. The former
are either wild, and never wholly tameable; or those that may be tamed, at
least in some measure. Among the former are reckoned the Lion, the Leopard, the
Ounce, the Tiger, the Bear, and the Wolf.

We begin with the Lion, Name.(...).
whose name in Latin is Leo, in Gr. Leoon seems to be derived from Laoo, to
see by reason of the rigor of his sight. The young are called Whelps.

Of the Numidian Bear, Descript.
or Lion, see Pliny and Lipsius. His head is of a middle size, his forehead
square, lofty of brow, and toward the nose like a cloud; Aristot. H. A. l. 6.
c. 31.
the eyes not hollow, nor goggle; his nose not great, his gape, as a sheeps,
wide; lips thin; his upper, and lower jaw alike, stif and great necked, and
reasonable thick, strong of breast; the part of the back against the heart
broad, slender flankled, thighs stout, and sinewy; the hair yellow, not much
curling. The forefeet are parted by five toes, the hinder by four. The Lioness
is differenced from the Lion, by the smoothness of her neck and shoulders, the
male having there a thick hair, mane, as also by two teats in the midst of
their belly, whence we are not to argue the number of Whelps. She has little
milk, so that the Whelp must have other food, but little serves the turn. As
for the inward parts, the Lion has exceeding strong temple-muscles, Galen.
part. l. 9. cap. 19.
that enable him to bite so hard; his tongue is sharp, and rough; his bowels
are like a dogs; his milt is black; Aristot. A. l. 5. c. 80.
his neck consists of one bone, but made up of many turning joints; his bones
have little, or no marrow in them, which even melts away. The inward passages
are so narrow, that one would think there were none.

Lions grow up in Europe between the Rivers Achelous and Nessus, Scali. Aeli.
l. 2. cap. 12. Fallopius. Michael. Ephesius.
but seldom breed in Europe, but in Mooreland, Parthia, Massylia, India,
Marmarica, Caspia, Lybia, Getulia, Syria, (where are black ones, if we credit
Pliny) and in Tartaria, says Paul Venetus. In Caragol the Contrymen for
fear of them are fain to arm themselves, when they till their land. In the
Wilderness of Angad by Telessin, they prey on herds of cattle, Place.
Aristot. H. A. l. 8. c. 2^. Leo Af.
and on men. And by Feez, many that make Char-cole in the Woods, are devoured
by them. They are in the Kingdom of Senega, on a high mountain near Aden; and
in the Holy Land, and elsewhere. Martyr says, that in Coba they are
harmless; Aelian says that Agla, and the adjacent parts, breed Lions so
timorous, that they are grown into a Proverb.

They are of a most hot and dry complexion Temper.
that proceeds from the extreme heat of the heart. Hotter in the foreparts then
the hinder. Gesnei.
Nor are all alike fierce, as the mountain Lion is not so fierce as others.
Food.
They feed on beef most, but hunger makes them prey on Camels, man's and birds
flesh. Therefore many in Africa were seen by Polybius and Aemilian to be
crucified, Aelian. H. A. l. 2. c. 1^ Aristor.
that the rest might by that sight be frighted from killing of men; many things
they devour whole without tearing, which within two, or three days they
perfectly digest.

It is not certain that they will feed on carcasses. Aelian. l. ^ c. 3. Strabo.
Ge. l. 1^.
It is thought that they refrain either because of the stink, or in pride.
Some say, that having eaten their fill, they hide the relics, and breath
thereon, that other wild lighting thereon may not eat them. They venture on
young Elephants, but if the Dam come, they fly. A whelp will forsake the teat,
and prey on weaker cattle, and feed also on palms. He is sparing in drinking;
he can refrain three days, Drink.
especially in summer; in winter he drinks more. They couple averse, as all
other beasts that piss backward, Arist. Aeli.
and commonly in springtime, when they fight cruelly, eight, or twelve
following one Lioness. The first of the year being past, Gendring.
in hot weather, the males forbearing, the Lionesses couple with Pards, whence
come Leopards; and with Panthers, whence comes a brood without mane, Ael. l. 2.
c. 2. Plin.
and with Hyaenaes, whence the Crocuta, and sometime with the dog. They alone
among all fourfooted crooked clawed beasts bring forth their young seeing, (...)
whence called Sun-beasts. They whelp within six months an imperfect brood; not
that the young tear their passage, but for want of nourishment, Ael. 2. 2.
some say they are whelped no bigger then a weesell; seldom above one at once,
Arist. Wocton. Ph^^ost.
sometimes six. There have been eight found in a Lioness taken and killed.

At Florence an old one beyond all expectation whelped six. In Syria the
Lionesses bear five times, first five, then four, then three, then two, then
one. He loves a Dolphin, both of them, Arist.
when old, and diseased devour an Ape to help them. He hates a woman's secrets,
on the sight whereof he runs away. He cannot abide a bristled Sow, nor a Wolf,
nor a wild Ass, AE^.
nor a Bull, nor an Ape. If he but taste of the herb Leontophonus, he dies, so
strong it is. Some count it a beast. (...).
The Greeks of old were so confident that the Lion feared the crowing of a
Cock, that they thought verily, that by sacrificing Cocks, they called Cecrop's
soul forth, which they believed was transmigrated into a Lion. Some conceive
that the red, glistring sparkling Cocks-comb frights him. Camerarius knew the
contrary, who relates that in the Duke of Bavariaes Court a Lion by strange
leaps got into a neighbors yard, and devoured both Cocks, and Hens. In Africa
the Gnats drive them away. He will not touch a man rubd over with garlic; or
is taken with a heaviness if he unawares tread on the leans of Scilla, AE. H.
A. ^. 1. c. 36.
or Seaonion, or of the Ilex. The creaking of wheels frights him. A bright
table-cloath drives him away. He abhors fire, and dares not come near it. They
are thought to be longlived. Life.
Some have been taken without teeth, and some with perished knags. The Lioness
big with young will fight with the males that would couple with her: they are
said to look downwards, that the hunting spears may not amate them. S^ceped.
They sleep in the open air, and with the eyes open, because their eyes are so
great that the lids kan hardly cover them; and while they sleep they wag their
tail, that they may seem awake. Their voice is roaring; the Latins express
it by diverse words. Voice.
As for their nature, one African Lioness set on two hundred Horsemen, having
received her deaths wound, and would not leave her whelps. They cannot endure
to be scorned; Nature.
the wantonness of the Apes playing vexes them. He goes alone to hunt his
prey. He looks you in the face, Leo Afr. l. 9.
and fears not. His generousnesse appears in danger, when he despises weapons;
slights dogs and hunters makes a stand in the open field, when pursued; if he
enter a thicket, he rusheth through with a disdaign that he should take covert.
He pursues his prey leaping, Aeli. H. A. l. 2. c. 17.
but walks away when hunted. He observes who wounds him, and singles him out in
a troop, and sets on him; He will make him sure, who aims at him, and misses;
as one did to a young man in Iubaes army. One hurt with an arrow by a passerby,
revenged it a year after, Aelian.
tearing the same man, lighting on him again amidst a troop of men.

Another endeavored to pearce a Lion with a lance, Albertus.
and missing the Lion, griped with his paw his helmet, which saved his head;
while they walk they withdraw their claws, that they may not be blunted. They
go not strait on, but sideling, shifting their steps to amuse the chasers. No
doubt but they may be tamed. Onomarchus, King of Catana had them for his
familiars. One used to sit like a dog by the side of John II. of Portugal.
In Adonis Temple in Elimeae, they fawned on all that entered. Berenice her Lion
licked her face. One converts with a Ram, Mart. Epig. l. 9. c. 73. Plin. H. N.
l. 8. c. 16.
as if they had forgot their natures. Marcus Anthony at Rome coupled them to
draw a chariot, he was the first that did so, and it seemed ominous, that in
civil war, when the Phatsalicks field was fought, that generous spirits
should be subdued to the yoke; and it was a monstrous show above those
monstrous calamities, that he should then ride so in state with his Mimed
Citheris. Hanuo that famous Carthaginian, was the first who durst familiarly
handle a Lion, which rendered him more suspected both of craft, and cruelty.
There are examples also extant of their gentleness expressed to diverse, who
have met them by chance. Mentor of Syracuse, lighting on one in Syria, was
astonished, and would have fled, but the Lion met him at every turn, fawned on
him, and licked his footsteps; at length he spied a swelling, and wound, and a
thorn, whereof he eased him. Which is kept in memory in a picture at Syracuse.
Also Elpis a Samian arriving in Africa by the shore-side, a Lion came with open
mouth, he clomb a tree, calls on father Bacchus, having no hope but in prayer;
the Lion left him not, but seemed to crave his pity and aid, having a bone
sticking in his teeth, that put him him to excessive pain, and drew lamentable
cries from him; the man took heart, come down, plucked the bone out, and they
said, that in gratitude the Lion hunted, and brought prey to that man, so long
as the ship rode there. The story of Androdus also is well known, the Roman
slave, and the Lion. Gel. noct. Attic. l. 5.
Seneca also was eyewitness of a Lion, that in the Amphitheater owned a man,
destined to die there, Plin. l. 8. c. 16.
and protected him from the assault of other wild beasts. The Lion alone among
all savage beasts, is gentle to suppliants; sparing those that ly prostrate at
his mercy. He will assault men first, and spare women; and unless he be very
hungry, he will not meddle with infants. In Lybia they believe, that they
understand requests. A Getulian captivessed is said to have escaped the fury of
many Lions, by pleading thus for her self; alack, I am a silly woman, banished,
weak, and a petitioner to the noblest, and most generous of beasts, that rulest
the rest; thou can have no honor in such a worthles prey. It used to be an
hard task to take Lions; the common way was in pits. A Getulian shepherd
mastered a Lion, by casting his coat on his head; which was also shown in a
Theater, where a Lion being so muffled, was ridiculously and incredibly bound,
without making any resistance. It seems all lies in the eye. There have been
of old Cannibals, that would eat Lions-flesh, all but the milt. Use.
In Physic they are of admirable use. Solinus Polyh. Br^^erin. de recib. l.
12. c. 17. Porta Phitog. l. 3. c. 41.
The Dogge-tooth helps children in breeding their second teeth without pain,
being tied about the neck. The heart bruised to powder, is good against the
falling sickness, and quartain fevers. The fat washed, put into the ears, cures
their maladies, and smeared on parts frozen, happily helps them; they use the
same for hard swellings in the skin, and kibes. It is said that those that are
nointed over therewith, may walk safely among other wild beasts; and (if you
will believe it) come in favor with Princes. Plin.
The flesh is commended by Sextus, for driving away fear, and fantasies. The
blood helps the cancer. D^oscor.
The powder of the bones with Agrimony-water, helps a fever. Sitting in the
skin, eases the Emrods. Shoes thereof, ease the Gout. The dung with oil of
roses, is good face-phisick. We need not to say much of their use in
recreations, plays, triumphs, and punishments. Heliogabalus delighted in them,
when they disarmed of their claws, and taught them to sit at table. Augustus
made them so tame, that they harmlesly played with hares. Bellonius writes that
he has been an eyewitness thereof. Observe. l. 1. c. uit. Plin.
At Constantinople, when Q. Scaevola was Aedile, he in his shows presented
diverse Lion-fights. L. Scylla, who was afterward Dictator, in his Praetorship
made a show of an hundred male Lions. After him Pompey in the Circk showed DC,
whereof 315 had thick manes. Caesar the Dictator, 400. Differences. Plin. l. 8.
c. 16.
There are many differences about them among writers. The Lions chief honor
is in his hairy shoulders, and neck, which right bred Lions in time grow too,
but mungrells want. And the manes also differ, some are longer, and more curled
then others. Some are much fiercer then others. In Africa, and among the
Abyssines there are yellow as gold, white, and black ones. In Lybia
party-colored ones, with red mouths, and black and blew spots like flowers. In
West Indies they incline to ash color. Those of America are not so vigorous.
In Puma in Peru are none so great as those in Africa; they are more timorous,
and harmless, if you let them alone, degenerate, dusky rather then yellow. The
Indians meet by troops, and hunt them, and kill them with stones and clubs. The
Barbarians climb trees, and thence gall them with their spears, and arrows,
they make merry with the flesh, and feast on it; reserving the fat for
medicines, and with the bones they sport, and daunced. A Spanjard having taken
a tree, kept of an huge lioness, having pierced her through with four arrows,
in her belly were found two Tiger mungrell-whelps, as appeared by the spots.
Hollanders have eaten of Sea-lions.

There are other wild beasts that come somewhat near a Lion, Nierem. H. E. l.
9. c. 24.
as the Mitili, not hairy as our Lion, but a kin to him, whelped duskish, after
grows yellow, sometimes red, and whitish, bigger then the common Lion, (which
may be from the nature of the region) and not so fierce. There is the
Quamitzli, he is tamer, and nimbler then the lion; Some Spanjards took him
for the Panther. Then the Macamitzli, taking name from the Heart, and Lion; and
the Cuitlamitzi, so called from the lion and wolf, thicker, but gentler, and
less then the lion; He lives by Hunting-deere, and crotales; and when full,
he yet kills any harmfull creature; when he has filled his belly, he sleeps
two, or three days, till he is hungry again. Then the Tlalmitzli, less then a
cat, but faced like a lion, his look and fierceness seem strange in so small
a body. There is the Cacamitzli, like the lion and cat, living among the
bulrushes, he is but four spans long, small, yellow-haired, but long,
small-eared, headed like a Swan, long and rough-tayled; so fierce, that he
sometimes dare set on a Stag. In Mexico, Mixtli, signifies both cat, and lion,
whence that beast has his name. He lives also among the Pannicenses. Some of
these kinds it may be are reducible to the Baboons, or Bavians.

CHAPTER II. Of the Libard, or Leopard.
CAlled Pardus from Ardoo, to be sprinkle; or Arbaloe, to defile. Leopard,
Pordalis, (...).
the male; the she, Pardalis, some say, Name.
Panther; (yet to be distinguished from that beast that resembles a spotted
wolf) called Panther, from his being endued with all kinds of savagenes, never
to be tamed; or, because he seems to be adorned with the colors of all kinds
of wild beasts, called Thronon, from his spottednes; small-faced he is, wide
mouthed, his eyes little whitish, and wandering; forehead long, ears round, neck
long, and slender, his breast has small ribs, Description.
long-back'd, buttocks, and thighs fleshy, belly-squat, color diverse, his
whole body unproportionable. Having four paps in the midst of the belly,
Worton.
five toes on the fore, and four on the hinder-feet. His eyes glister more in
the dark then any beasts; but dull in the Sun. His skin is enameld with black
in white, and gold in dark color. In Hircania are many painted with small
round yellow, blew, white spots like eyes, and some like increasing moons. As
for the inward parts, he has a tongue like a gutter-tile, exceeding sharp
teeth, and claws, an heart great in comparison, Gyllius. Oppi. n. Soli^. Plin.
with beasts of his bulk, little fat, it being spent by his excessive heat, his
bones are somewhat thick. There are none of them in Europe; in Africa many;
there being but few waters, many wild beasts meet at the same watring-places
to drink, Place.
where they couple promiscuously; whence the proverb, that Africa sends daily
novelties into the world. They live also in Asia, Arist.
Pamphylia, aboundes with them, and the Province of Comerus, and the Kingdom
of Bengala, and Mount Caucasus, the sent of whose odoriferous herbs invites
them thither. Salomons song intimates that there are many in Mount Hermon,
Lopes.
which the Amorrhaeans call Sanir. Their food is most dogs-flesh, and lambs,
and Apes, whom they take by faining themselves dead; then the Apes drawn by
the sent, Philost.
come of themselves, and are surprised. Feed.
They assault men also. They couple often with the lion, sometimes with the dog,
and with the wolf; they whelp more then one at a birth, L^^ Af.
as appears by their many paps. Isidore fables (Orig. l. 12. c. 2.) that the
whelps prevent the season, Aelian.
and through impatience tare their passage out of the dames belly. They hate
mankind so deadly, that it is said, they will tear the very picture of a man.
(...).
Some say, the sight of a man's skull makes them run away. Some conceive that
it is the face that he most abhors; for the King of France his
beast-keeper, being sent to hunt them, could take none without turning his
back toward them. Ge^ner. Plin.
The like enmity he holds with the cock, and serpents, so that he will not
touch one that is anointed with cockbroth. Nor will serpents hurt one in a
leopards skin. Some say, he will not come near a wall, rubbed over with
garlic. There is such an enmity between him, and the Hyaena, that, if their
two skins hang together, Nature.
the Leopards hair falls off. Those in the hilly-part of Armenia, are much
taken with the tears of Storax, destilling from the tree, (...) Apo^l.
the sent whereof the wind brings them. His voice is roaring. He walks as the
lion, withdrawing his claws, and runs aside to amuse hunters; Voice. Wo^ton. ^.
5. c. 82.
only for prey he stretches out his claws. In sent he excells all beasts,
but the civet, and mush-cat. He has wiles, when he waxes old, to inveagle
beasts to come to him, and then preys upon them. By his sent he invites them;
Plin.
and no wonder, for we see dogs diverted from their chase by sents. As for
their nature, if they aile any thing (as they are sometimes distempered, and
mad, Manners.
or have eaten the herb Pardalianche) they betake themselves to wild
Goats-blood, or many ordured; they ever lead their whelps, and defend them to
the death. They after whelping keep their Den, Arist.
and the male provides food. They seldom are wholly tamed. After the death of
a King of France (Francis) the Kings Leopards got loose, Gesner.
a male, and female, and tare very many about Orleans; and there were women's
carcasses found, whose breasts only they had devoured. But it is memorable that
is reported, Plin.
of a Leopard lying by the way, and seeing the father of one Philinus a
Philosopher, came to him; he affrighted steped back; she fawned on him,
seeming to make great moan, she pulled him gently by his coat, inviting him
to follow her, Demetr. Physic.
he did so; she led him to a pit, into which her whelps were fallen, he helped
them out; she jocund attends him with her whelps, till he came to the borders
of the wildernese; and after her fashion expressed her gratitude toward him;
which in man is rarely found. Read also in Aelian of the kid that a Leopard
would not touch dead, Aelian. H. A. l. 2. c. 24.
because alive it had been his play-fellow. Savages use to feed on them, as
they between Caucasus, Use. Plin.
and the river Cophena. In India also, where they sees them twice, the better
to digest them. Philost.
They are also of use in Physic, as the brain with the juice of rocket. The
right testicle helps women's terms, says Cardan. The blood helps swollen veins;
the fat sleeks the skin. The Moors use the skin for clothing; the Ethiops for
armor. Galen.
They were of old presented in the Cirk at Rome. Scaurus showed fifty of them.
After, Pompey showed four hundred and ten; Augustus four hundred and twenty.
Some make three kinds of them, the Panther, the Pard, and the Leopard; some
four, Panthers Pard, Porta. Phytog. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. genial.
the Leopard without mane, sprung from a Pard, and a lioness; and the spotted
one, the issue of a Pantheresse, and a lion. Some call the males Variae, and
Pards, as those in Africa and Syria. Some difference them only by color, and
brightness. There was an order of Senate, that transporting them out of Africa
into Italy; Plin.
but Cneius Auffidius the Tribune for all that allowed it to gratify the
people in the Cirk-shews. Perhaps we may aptly refer hither the beast, Hierem.
H. E. l. 9. c. 1.
that the Spaniards call Dazypodes; and the Indians Theotochtli; he is about
the bigness of a Tumbler, round, low, thick, small-eared, Lion, or Cat faced,
with lively eyes, and red circles, thick thighed, crooked claws, duskish hair
about the neck, white about the belly, the rest of the body ash-colored,
everywhere black spotted, the muzzle, and tail short, the tongue rough, rather
grumbling then roaring, and of incredible swiftness. He lives on the
Tetrocamian hills; hunts Dear, and other beasts of that bulk, and sometimes
men. The tongue is so venomous, that a lick on the ey of his prey, blinds, and
kills it. He covers the carcasses of the slain with herbs, hay, and greensward;
then climbs the next trees and houles; when the beast within hearing, by
instinct of nature, come at the call, hastening as to a feast, and fill
themselves together with the provided prey: Then the Tocotochtli comes down for
his share, and not before knowing that should he eat first, all the guest beasts
should be poisoned. So civil, charitable, and providently kind is he to the
rest. None, but can profit others, if he will. We stand not so much in need of
power, and riches, as of a good heart to do good. Most rich are unprofitable it
were well, if they were not mischievous; but all that are benevolent can in
some degree be beneficient. Love is ever liberal.

CHAPTER III. Of the Lynx, or Lyzard.
THis wild Beast has his name Lynx, from Lykes, light; he being the most
quick-sighted of all creatures; Name. (...). Scaliger.
Called also a Deer-wolfe, not from his shape, but his greediness, and preying
on dear. It is not the Thois, as we shall see hereafter. I question whether it
be the Chaus or no, that the French call the Raphius. Plin.
Pompey showed one in his plays, faced like a Wolf, and spotted like the Pard.
He is smallheaded, his eyes glister, his face cheerful, Descript. Scaliger.
Gesner.
has teats on the breast. The spots are more distinct, and round on the He.
The skin from the nose-tip to the tail is three foot, four inches long; the
tail seven inches long; the neck-skin, half a foot, the back-skin fifteen
inches about, the thighs before fourteen, and the hinder twelve inches. The Hair
soft, and downy, the back hair tips bright, the belly middle white, but varied
with black spots, most, near the belly on the sides; the ears little, and
triangular, and round black and shaggy, a few white hairs intermixed; the beard
like the Cats, with white bristles, the feet very shaggy; the forefeet having
five, the hinder four toes; the tail blackish at the end, of the same
thickness everywhere; the temples has weak muscles; Ambro. in Digit. l. 3.
cap. 3.
the skull three futures, or seams, armed with twenty teeth, whereof twelve are
foreteeth, but the first, and sixth both of the upper, and lower jaw, are lesser
then the middlemost, as we observe in Weazles, four dog-teeth longer then the
rest, ten grinders, four in the upper-jaw on each side; the first next the
dog-teeth of a trigon figure, the last parted and broad,; six in the under-jaw,
the second shaped like a lily; the third broader and greater, cloven in the
midst, sharp-pointed. The lower jaw is little, because hanging, Galen.
and not so employed in chewing. The foot armed with sharp, clear claws covered
with a thin skin, like those of the Eagle, and Vulter; the under part
hard-skinned.

They are found in the Eastern parts, thence brought into Europa; Place. Ovid.
Also in the mountains of America. Those in Lithuania are black, and marked on
the back with handsome spots. They are also in Poland, Muscovy, Swethland by
Helsing; they call them Rattluchs. Also in Wittemberg, where one set on a
countreyman, who knocked him down with his bill. Gesner. H. Quad. Olaus M. Food.
They feed on flesh, especially of wild Cats, whose flesh is sweeter. They love
also beasts brains, and lurk on trees, and catch at beasts as they pass by,
fastening their claws on their necks, and hold them till they tear them, and
eat their brains. Some say they wound not, but only suck the blood out. In
Scandinia are few beasts that they prey not on. Gesner. Engendring.
They engender as dogs and bitches, and as Hares admit of superfaotation. Scal.
They bring at birth two, three or four. Arist.
No beast is so sharp-sighted; whence it is fabled that they can see through a
solid body. Isid. Orig. Plin. Odonus. Sight.
They are so swift of foot, they run headlong. Pliny says their piss congeals
into gems like carbuncles, sparkling like fire, called Lyncurium, like a kind
of amber. They themselves know it, and as out of envy, bury their urine, which
hardens it the sooner. Some say it, Aelian. Isidor. Dio^co^.
and some deny it: Some grant it to be an Amber, and that it will draw and take
up feathers; but count the other relations frivolous. They are so forgetful,
Brasavolus. Manners.
that if they spy another prey, they forget what is before them; but that is
rather their overgreedines. In summer they cast their hair, but are shaggy in
winter; Lucan. l. 6.
which Odonus affirms of all shaggy beasts. Lucan says that their bowels are
as venomous as the foam of a mad Dog. Use.
They are of some reasonable use in Physic. Evonymus mingles Saxifradge with
the blood against the stone. Wekerus makes an ointment of the fat for the same
grief. Crollius makes salt of the stone, and crabs eyes. The claw of the
greater toe of the right foot, shut in silver, and worn, helps convulsions.
Pliny.
In the Isle Carpathus, the claws, and hide, and drink the ashes against
running of the reins; and sprinkle them on the body to cure itch; and their
piss is good against Bear-pissing, and sore throats. A skin was sold at
Bononia for 120. pound, some are greater, Differences. Oppian.
and some lesser. In Italy they show two kinds of skins; a larger, and
inclining to white, thought to belong to the Deer-Wolfe; and a lesser,
yellowish, which some think to be the Cat-pards.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Tiger.
THe name of this beast is imposed by the Medes from his swiftness, Name.
they calling an Arrow Tigris. Descri^^.
Some say he is of the bigness of a Dog; Nearchus, of a Horse. There has been
a skin seen five foot long. He has fiery glistering eyes, a short neck, as
other beasts that feed not on grass; his claws crooked, teeth keen, feet
cloven. There is great store of them in the East, Place.
and South, in India within Ganges, and Hyphasis; on mount Caucasus, by the
Besi^gi near the Peninulei; in Java, where the fear of them makes less Gum
Benjuin; also in Bengala, and the hill of Peru, and ever in Taprobana. They
prey on, Food.
and devour all kind of living creatures; they are often too hard for Elephants;
they draw Mules away by the legs, as also Sheep, Oxen, Dogs, etc. which they
tare; not sparing men, but they love kids-flesh best. So greedy they are, that
if they see but blood, (...)
they devour the whole body. Because no males are ever taken, some fancy they
are all female, and engender by the wind, because of their fleetnesse. They
couple averse, and whelp many at a birth. They lust also after Bitches, which
men ty in woods which they haunt; these they either tare, or couple with.

The first and second brood from this commixture, the Indians think too fierce;
Gendrin^. Ae^^an.
the third they bring up. Linschot relates, that in West Indies they do the
Spaniards no hurt, but infest the Natives; (...).
that in Bamba they will not touch white men, but assault the blacks; yea, if
they find a black and white man sleep together, (...)*
they spare the one, and fasten on the other. They are enraged at the sight of
an Elephant; (...)
the sent of Ox-dung drives them away; the noise of a Drum mads them, so that
they wound themselves. Their voice is called rancatus, a kind of roaring; they
change it, and guash the teeth when enraged. They are of an admirable
fleetnesse; the young ones are taken, and fresh Horses are laid to carry them
away, because the Dam finding her Den empty, her Welps gone, hastens headlong
by the sent after them, (for the He regards not the brood.) He that seized the
young upon the approach of the Dam, casts away one of them, (for they bring
many at one whelping) that she snatches up in her mouth, and hids back with it
to her Den; then hastens in chase after the rest, and they being shiped, she
raves, and complains on the shore. This is the opinion of the Ancients, but the
Modern report the contrary; that the Tiger is heavy-paced, that a man (much
more other wild) can out-runne them; (...)
that the Boor, wild Bull, Deer, senting them, run away, and escape their
clutches; wherefore the Tigers lurk in sedgy places, among reeds, and with a
side-leap surprise beasts, as a Cat Mice and Dor-mice: So also they seize on
men; and if with over-greedy have they miss their prey, and leap wrong, they
retire softly, roaring; and finding themselves detected, they go away. This I
have out of Bontius, who being dead, it is sad to think how many exotic
rarities about Plants, and Beasts died with him. The Tigresse is very fond of
her Whelps; wherefore upon sight of a man, she forthwith removes them; and if
they be taken away, Manners.
she cruelly rages at whatever comes in her way, and dies mad. Now, though they
are for the most part untameable, yet they have been tamed, and obeyed a whip,
Ovid. Seneca. Plin. Ius. Capit.
and their keepers have dared to kiss them. Augustus, Q. Tubero, and Fabius
Maximus being Consuls, first showed a tame Tiger in a Cage at Rome at the
Dedication of Marcellus his Theater. Claudius also showed four: Under Gordian
ten were seen at Rome: At Aurelians triumph four. Heliogabalus yoakd them
together in a Chariot. Yet they never lay their fierceness so aside, but that
they start out, and show their savagenesse, when we least think of it. When
they have been led to be seen, men have surrounded them with bells, Abdias
Babilo. l. 6. Hist.
to warn the beholders from being surprised by them. Sometimes chains cannot
hold them. Men must stupify them with juice of Mandragora, and Opium to prevent
doing harm, when led along the streets. The Indians ate their hind-parts, and
consecrated their fore-parts to Phoebus, holding them up toward the rising-Sun,
but ate them not. Petr. Victor. Var. Lec. 4. c. 3.
The Congitani ate all, but the parts under the armpits, or mustachio, because
whosoever did eat them ran mad; wherefore it was ordered by Edict that none
should be allowed to sell the skins without those parts. Use. Philos. Apol. l.
2. Pet. Mart.
Ledesina the Spaniard thinks the flesh so good as Beef; the Cerebrarians wear
the teeth into Garlands, and think the wearing makes them courageous.

Some count the Manticora a Tiger, that has three rows of teeth, and hairs in
his tail as sharp as darts. Among the Prasy are said to be Tigers twice as big
as Lions; Linscho^, Kinds. Pausan.
they differ in fierceness, and shape, and bulk. The lesser sort the Indians
call Tilaco-ocelotl, or little Tigers, marked with black, and dusky spots, and
not pale, and bright as others commonly are. Strabo. Geogr. l. 15.
The Perunians call them Ururuncu, as Bears Aboronocus: they are fiercer then
Lions, and are greedy after Indians, Nierem. Hist. l. 9. c. 15.
seeking them in their houses, and cottages; and if they keep not their doors
shut, then slink in, and snatch an Indian away in their mouth, as a Cat would a
Mouse. Nor can men take sanctuary in trees, for they climb them, and fetch men
down, and rend them to pieces. In the expedition of Fedreman, a Tiger assaulted
a troop of Soldiers, and in the midst of them tare a Spaniard, and three
Indians, and escaped away unhurt: Yet swadle them about the reins with a stick,
you cool their courage, and master them; there is no other way. The Indians
dread no beast more, and even worship it.

The Devil very often confers with them in the shape of a Tiger: their claws are
thought venomous, and the wound they make incurable. The Barbarians reverence,
nay dread this beast less, since the Gospel came amongst them. They are taken
in nets, and in some places in traps. In Bengala are the fiercest found, and
implacably revengeful. One has followed along the shore-side thirty mile a
Ship, wherein any have been embarked who wronged her. Cruel to all they meet,
man or beast: Nature yields some prevention to this mischief. A little beast
ever accompanies the Tiger, and by constant barking discovers where he is; and
both men and beasts take the warning, and hide themselves, or run away. They
are most greedy after mans-flesh, especially the black-Moors, and know their
ships, chasing them twenty leagues together, watching if any come ashore, to
devour him. By night they leap into ships, and surprise, and destroy the
Mariners. To give a memorable example of what hapened to one of our men, while
we were trading in Bengala. A certain Moor, a servant dreamed that a Tiger
snatched him away; the night after he hid himself in the prow of the ship;
being asked the cause, he told his dream, which the some night was verified;
for all being asleep, a Tiger leaps aboard, touches not any else, though thirty
lay asleep in the ship, but seazes the wretched Moor.

The lot of another was Luckier, as divine providence ordered it; he being
ashore, not far from the ship, a Tiger assaults him behind, and a Crocodile
out of a river before; the Tiger, to prevent his foe, and bear away his prey,
for overhast, runs quite beyond the man, and running against the ships-side,
falls into the Crocodiles jaws, and so the man escaped. It cannot be said how
those of Bengala, dread the Tigers rage; whence they call him by sundry names,
fearing, that, if they should call him by his own name, they might be torn in
pieces. In Brasil there are multitudes of them, and those hungry, ravenous,
dreadful, and swift, and very strong. But once full fed, they are said to be
so sluggish, that common curres can drive them away. Gluttony destroy not
mankind alone. In new Spain they lurk in trees by rivers-sides, watching the
Crocodiles, and leap down, and surprise, and kill them. Pet. Mart.
Time was, when Darien was as much pestered by Tigers, as Nemaea with Lions,
and Calidonia with wild Boares. In six month there passed not one night free;
wherein a heyfer, horse, dog, or hog, was not devoured in the town-wayes; their
herds, and flocks were wasted, not a man could with safety step forth a doors;
especially when the Tigresses had whelps, when hunger forced them to sease man,
and beast. At length necessity put the natives on this invention, to revenge,
and save the blood of them, and theirs; they observed strictly the Tigers track
from their dens, and dug a ditch, cast up light earth, covered it with
hurdles, fastened sharp stakes at the bottom; there came a hee-Tiger, he fell
in, stuck fast on the stakes; the Indians threw down great stones on him, and
dispatched him in the pit, they cast many darts at him, which with his right
paw he shattered into a thousand pieces, and chips. If when half dead, and
bloodlesse, he bred such a terror in the beholders, how dreadful, think we,
was he when loose? One John Ledesina, a Spanjard, who was present at the
business, reports, that he ate his share of that Tiger, and that it tasted as
well as beef. Ask them, who never saw a Tiger, how they know one, they tell
you, by the spots, fierceness, nimblenesse. When many have seen Leopards,
Panthers, Ounces so marked also; the male-Tiger dead, they traced his footsteps
to his den, where female also dwelt; she absent, they took away two sucking
whelps; changing their mind, and that they might send them to Spain, when
bigger, they fitted ironchains carefully to their necks, and left them there to
the dames nursery. A few days after returning to the den, they found them not,
supposing that the dame in a rage had torn them in pieces, and taken them
away, that no man might have them; for they affirm, that they could not
possibly be tame, alive out of the chains. The skin of the male was stuffed
with dry herbs, and sent to Admirantus, and the Governers of Hispaniola. See
more of this subject in Nieremberg, and Marckg. H. B. l. 6. c. 10.

CHAP. V. Of the Bear.
THe Latins call this beast Ursus, (...).
from urgeo, to force, or dirve, or urge, as they do their prey, till it fall
before them; or from Orsus, because they lick their cubs into shape, etc. The
Greeks Ark^os, (...).
from Arkoo, to drive, or Arkeomai, because he passest the winter without
eating. His body is gross, and unwieldy, and (some say) ever waxing; some have
been found five cubits long, Description.
and as broad, beyond any ox-hide; and such a one was presented to Maximilian
the Emperor, at the Baths of Baden. The skin is thick, and shaggy, the teeth
hidden: the mouth long, eyes quick, the feet like hands, his chief strength
lies in his arms, and loins; sometimes they stand on their hindfeet, Solin.
Polyb.
their tail is short, having four paps, a large stomach, and gut; when taken
in their dens in winter, sleeping, and being unbowdled, Arist. H. A. l. 8. c.
1^.
their stomach is empty, Scaag. l. 8. c. 21. P^in. ^. ^. l. 8. c. 36.
and clinged together. Galen observes sinews in them, so turning, as in any
other beasts are hardly seen. Their heads seems weak, especially before,
(which in a Lion is strongest) therefore falling down in any precipice, they
tumble down with their arms, covering their head. Theo^^de (...).
While they keep in their coverts, small drops of blood are only about their
heart, the rest of their body is bloodles. Grease, and fat they have, but no
marrow, says Pliny. Place.
They are found almost all the world over; most are in Poland, Germany, Plin.
8. cap. 58.
Lithuania, Norwey, and other Northern parts, Herod. Solin. c. 29.
especially in Nova-Zembla. In England are now none; nor in Candy.

It is a mistake that there are none in Africa, for the Moors wear the skins.
Strabo. Geog. l. ult.
They delight more in hilly then plain land; whence it is that the Alps so
swarm with them, and those stout ones. In the mountains of Peru are many black
ones; and Pernes an Attick hill is famous for Bear-hunting. Pausan.
The Bear eats all kind of things; among plants, they fancy a red, and sweet
berry growing on a bramble; Feed.
and the herb Cuculus, a kind of Trifoyl, and a root that provokes sleep.
Albert. Gesner. Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 1^.
A Cow-herd on the Helvetian Alps having spied afar of a Bear eating that root,
after the Bear was gone tasting it, was so sleepy thereupon, that he dropped
down where he stood. When they come out of their holes they feed first on the
herb Arum. About Trent grows a thorny shrub with a white flower, and red
berries, called Bears-bread. They climb trees, (...) l. 10. (...). 73. Ar^st.
^. A. l. 8. c. 5.
and eat the fruit, and pulse, and honey, crabs, ants, and flesh fresh, or
rotten, especially hony-combs. Jovius tells a merry story of a Boore in Muscovy
who slipping into a hollow tree up to the neck in honey, and living there two
days with no other sustenance, a Bear came gently down into the same tree to
eat honey, on whose rugged hide the poor man catching hold was drawn out. In
Island, and the frozen seas they live on fish. They drink water, Martyr. (...).
36. (...).
but neither sipping, as the sharp-toothed, nor gulping in, as the beasts, that
have a continued rue of teeth, but champing it. They are very venerous, since,
because wild beasts, (excepting the Lizard and Hare) when big use not to
couple, these are thought to hasten to bring forth their cubs the sooner by
some force on themselves, A^^st.
that they may engender a new. (...).
It is reported that the males lust after young virgins, Oppi^n.
and that one took a maid away of the Allobroge, and lay with her, and fed her
with wild apples, which Philip Cosserus, Bishop of Constance, related to
Gesner. Saxo tells that a race of Danish Kings is derived from a Bear; Saxo.
Gr^m. H. Dan. (...)
and some say the same of Gothish Kings. They couple in February, or in the
beginning of winter, (...)
not as other fourfooted beasts, but as mankind. Being with young, they hide
themselves, and the males seemed to hold them in great regard. They go 30
days, and bring one, two, sometimes five cubs together: They breed and bring
forth in have, which makes their cubs so ugly, and misshapen; little lumps of
white flesh, without eyes, or hair, only clawed after a fashion, which they are
said to lick into shape, and to lay to their breasts to cherish with their
warmth, to bring life, and breath into them. (...). c. ^9.
But of late experience shows the contrary; and that is but a fancy, that Ursus
comes from Orsus, begun, or unfinished. Above Trent one was taken in a valley,
and ripped up, and all her cubs were found full shaped within her. In a library
of the Senatehouse in Bononia a young cub cut out of the Dams belly, ^^bro.
(...).
exact at all parts, is kept in a glascase. Camerarius his guess is not
unlikely, that the bed wherein the cub is wrapped is so thick, that the dame is
many days licking it off, which occasioned the vulgar error. They hate
mortally the Sea-ox, Antipathy. Oppian.
Horse, Boor, the Dead, and a Table-cloath. They abhor the Sea-calfe most of
all. The Horse can smell them, that never saw a Bear, and fortwith prepares to
combat, and kicks him on the head with his hinder feet, mastring him more by sleight then strength. They are thought to hate the dead, Ae^ian.
because they will not touch a man laid at length with his face downward.
Seneca says, a Table-cloath incenseth them. Hemlock kills them, and the Bear
called Marcillium, or Consiligo, Gesner.
There is also a black fish in Armenia, the meal whereof sprinkled on figs if
they eat, it is their bane. Experience shows that they delight in music. Their
voice is roaring or rather grumbling. Voice Nature.
Having tasted Mandragora apples, they lick ants. When they are qualmish, they
go to Myrmesia, Solin. c. 39. Psutar.
or Myre-hools, and sitting they loll out the tongue dropping with that sweet
juice, lightly holding it so long, till they set it swarm with Pis-mires.
Being wounded, they heal themselves with dry herbs. The Shee-bears after their
helping in to whelp, coming into the light, are so dazeled, Pli^.
that you would think they were stark blind. Because they are often hevy
sighted, they hunt so after honey, and that having stung their mouth with bees,
they may be rid of that blood that oppresses them. Aelian.
They tumble into their dens, that their footsteps may not be tracked, where
they ly quiet, and at ease forty days, and for fourteen days stir not,
sustaining themselves only by licking their right foot, so that through
fasting, their guts are klinged together and even shriveled up. The males ly
hid forty days, the females four months. Pli^.
They furnish their dens with heaps of bows, and shrubs, or soft leaves, making
them weather proof, and then lay themselves along, and sleep the first seven
days so soundly, that wounds cannot wake them, which strangely fattens them,
after they live by sucking their forefeet; strange to say. Theophrastus thinks,
that for that time Bears flesh boiled and kept might increase, there is no show
in them that they have eaten, but only a little moisture found in the paunch,
and a few drops of blood about the heart, and none in the rest of the body. In
the Spring they come forward, and the males grows so fat, that they hardly
stir; the Shee-beare is leaner, because they breed. Solin.
They hold their lodgings in their dens severally, divided by trenches. Coming
abroad, they eat greedily the herb Arum, to loosen their guts, that are so
shriveled up; and when they breed teeth, they champ on slips thereof. If they
assault Bulls, they make at the horns to tire them out, and at the mustle,
because they know it to be tender. Their very breath is so contagious, that no
wild beast will touch what they have blown on. In Mysia, they say, are a kind
of white bears, that being hunted, send forth such a breath, that the steame
that rots the flesh of the dogs. Although their flesh be cold, Use.
rank, hard of disgestion, and ill for the spleen, and liver; yet those about
the Alps, Galen. in aliment. l. 3. c. 2.
and the Helvetians count it a delicate. And Bruerius says, that he at supper
at of it, Br^^er. de cibi^. l. 13. c. 41.
well seasoned, at Symphorianus Campejus his table; but it was of a young one,
killed in witner, which indeed they use to eat. Barthol.
For though they are fatter in July, yet for their rammish sent, they are
banished the table usually; only the forefeet are held the best food, and
affected by some great men. Aeli.
Some say, that salted, and hung in the chimny to be smoaked, they are a
delicate, Mich. Herus. Gesner.
and that they wonder not, that in winter they suck their own feet. Savanorola
says, the brain is poison. Diverse parts of the Bear, are of great use in
Physic. The eye dried, and hung about childrens neck, is said to free them
from fear in the night, and bound on the left shoulder, allays a quartan ague.
The blood dissolves waxen kernells, and impostumes, and helps against hairs
bred in the eyes, and kills fleas. The fat takes out spots, and with
Lilly-roots, is good against a burn; some sudar it on against S. Anthonies
fire; mixed with red oker, it heals ulcers on the skins, and thighs; with Allom,
it closes chaps in the feet, it helps against baldnes; they use it also in the
weapon-salve. Men spread the skin under those that are bitten by a mad dog. The
powder of the lungs, keeps feet, pinched by shoes from inflammation. The gall
helps against the aches in the joints, and is commended against the
falling-sicknes; Arnol. Villano.
and with honey is good for a cough, but is wrongly used to help conception.
The hairs with Venushair, and roots of reeds burned, make hair come.

To omit Pliny his fable about the easening of childbearing, by laying the
stone whereon a Bear is killed, in the chamber. The Samodides, and Laplanders,
wear Bears-skins; some use them for coverleds; of old they covered their
bucklers with them, to appear more dreadful. Some daubed the fat on their
ironworke of plows, Palladius.
and harrows, to fence them from hail, and frost. Some smear it on their
Vine-barkes, to defend them against vermin, worms, and frost. Some showed them
in their sights, and used them in their punishments, Domitius Aenobarbus
October 14. The Pisods, and M. Messala, being Counsulls, presented in the Cirke
an hundred Numidian Bears, and as many Ethiopian hunts-men. There are some
greater, some smaller, black, and white ones. Plin.
They troubled the Hollanders in their passage, through the frozen Sea to
Catay. Some are of a stupendous bigness; Differenc^s.
skins have been seen thirteen foot long. On a promontory, in the utmost
confines of Arabia, are Bears gold-yellow; Purchase. Nav^g. T. 3. l. 4. c. 5.
Strabo. Geogr. l. 16. Maiol. Col. 7.
Some are dusky-coloured. The Helvetians call the small Rock-bears, the great
Capitals. In the new world are some slugs, that live on ants, dogs can master
them, and a staf drive them away, having no tayls, called Myrmeciphagi.

The greatest are found in the Province of Vera-Pax, or True-peace, having of
black hair, or wool upon them; their tayls a palm long, flat-nosed they are
like the blacks, their muzzles round, hairlesse, and wrinkled. Nieremb. H. E.
l. 9. c. 28. Paul. Ven.
In Virginia they eat them. They are there timorous, avoid men take trees, and
are with darts driven thence. The Province Beach, is said to have harmless
Bears. Suidrigellius Prince of Lituania, had a Bear, which coming a mornings
out of the wood, near the Court, would with his forefeet paw on the doors;
and having meat given him, returned to the wood. Among the Turks, a sect of
Hermites, used to lead a Heart, or a Bear with a bell about the neck, through
the cities and villages.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Wolf.
ARTICLE I. Of the Wolf in general.
THe Wolf the Latins call Lupus, Aldrov. l. 1. c. 6. Name. (...).
or Leopus, or Lion-footed. The Greeks Lukos, from his ravenousnesse, or Apo
Tees Lukees, from the morning, either from his color, or because at daybreak
he comes forth to his prey. Or because their eyes are bright in the dark: they
are like Mastives, and of diverse colors.

Their eyes glister, Description. Aelian.
and dart forth beams, and russet: their teeth like an sow, sharp, and uneven,
and round: He has a wide gape; His neck so strait, that he cannot turn it
about, but must turn his whole body to look behind him, as if he had no joints;
though Philes, and other Anatomists say he has turning-joynts. In his temples
he has great sinewy-muscles; Clamor.
His brain are said to wax and wain with the Moon; his heart dried, has a good
sent, his liver is like a Horse-hoof; Galen.
his genital bony; his forefeet have five toes, his hinder four; his bones
thick. In his reins, when old, breed worms, or serpents, Plin.
which Clamorgon says he has observed in three or four carcasses. In his
bladder is a stone called Syrites. In Sardinia, Creet, Albertus. Gal. de usu
par.
and Olympus in Macedon are said to be none. England now breeds none, under
Edgar they were wholly rooted our, both in Wales and elsewhere. They abound in
the North-countreys, especially in Muscovy, Plin.
where how they ly in wait for cattle, and men. Olcarius in his Eastern
Itinerary, Place.
p. 119. declares. Cadamustus, c. 29. tells, how they swarm in the Kingdom of
Senega: Boethi^^. Feed.
In Augusia a Provence of Scotland, and in the valley of Glamore they are, and
live by preying on wild beasts. They devour flesh; but love mutton best, and
takes them out of the folds; they ly in wait also for Horses, Oxen, Geese.
Having once tasted a Manscarcasse; Man's flesh savours best with them. If they
smell Women with child, Olaus de gen^.
they watch for them; Nor spare they their own kind, if they be hungry. They
go out by troops, and if any one of them chance to faint and fall, the rest
tare him. They feed their sucklings with flesh they have newly swallowed,
vomiting it up again; but grown up, they feed them with Lambs and Geese. They
desire also the Scythian herb Bosametz. In Congo they swallow Palmoyl. Porta
Physiog.
They eat also potters-earth. Whence it may be the stone, is the stone called
Lithargilus, full of turnings and folds, weighing eleven ounces, found in the
stomach, spoken of by Schenkius. Linsch. Navig. Schenk. Hist. Monst.
Albertus thinks he does it not for hunger, but by natural instinct, to make
himself heavier, the better to oppress his prey. Being full he can fast long,
then is his belly widened, and his tongue swells, his mouth is stopped, and he
becomes tame; when his tongue is lessened, he turns Wolf again. Whether they
bury, and dig up their food, and equally divide it, and by houling call others
to the orts, as Albertus relates, I leave to hunts-men to determine.

They couple as Dogs do, Gendring. Arist.
and quarrelling, twelve days in a year; beginning, as some reckon from
Christmasse; and at that time are fiercer against others, though not among
themselves. Gesner.
They carry their burdens two months, and bring as many as dogs puppy, and
those blind; the Helvetians speak of nine whelps at once; and one of the
Rhaetian Alps in May found seven or nine in a covert that came of on litter,
and the same man reported, that it is commonly said that at first draught they
bring but one Whelp, and that blind; at the second, two, and so onward, every
time more, till they come to ten, and then bear no more. (...).
That in twelve days they litter after gendring, as Latona under that shape in
Delos, is a fable. Antipater affirms, that they cast their belly when the
Acorn-bearing-trees cast their flowers, which they tasting, their womb opens;
when there are none, their whelps die within them, and they cannot bring forth;
and that Wolves do no harm where is not plenty of Acorns. They drink very
little. [Poet Pliny, Antipathy. So^n. Polyb. (...). l. 2^. c. 14.
and others report many things more strange then true, more fitted for a Poem,
then a History.] As that he is first struk mute, whom the Wolf sees first,
etc. That the Wolves eye plucked out, affrights four-footed tame beasts; that
she that haps to water on Wolves warm piss, shall not conceive with child.
That the tail hanged by a manger, keeps beasts from eating; Of the charming of
Horses that treads in a Wolfes footsteps. Aelian. l. 1. cap. 6.
That mutton that he has feed on tastes sweet, but the wool breeds lice, and
itch. A skin put on a Wolfes skin, sheds the hair. The dung hid in stalls,
holds cattle in quiet. All harmony is marred, if you mingle in music strings
of Sheeps and of Wolves guts: Fopperies! If he touch Sea-onion, he is straight
shrivelled together. He fears stones, because worms breed in that part that is
struck with a stone. Sparks struck out of a flint frights him so, that he dare
not approach, Opian.
be he never so hungry. A Drum made of his hide, drives other beasts away. A
Pipe, Gesner.
or any music, or a Drum frights them away, when flinging of stones cannot.
They are said to love Parrats; they run mad sometimes; Diseases.
they get the Gout, and are troubled with the Squincy; Wolf-bane, or Lycoctonum
kills them. When wounded, they stench the blood by wallowing in the mire. They
live long; and when old, they are troubled with the toothache, and cast all
their teeth.

Having weake-inwards they eat herbs, Nature.
especially Dracontium to sharpen their teeth. The lowest are thought bouldest.
Fallen into a pit, and seeing themselves enclosed, Gesner. Q. p. 721.
they are stupied, and harmless. They observe who strikes them, and watch to
be revenged. Plin. l. 8. c. 22.
They love their young, the females stay by them, and the males cater for them.
Flying they take their young with them. They are soonest taken in cloudy
weather, then they hide themselves most. Walking among leaves they lick their
feet, that they may not be heard. Being to pass a river, that the stream carry
them not away, they hold one the other by the tail with their teeth; Suidas.
Aelian. H. A. l. 8. c. 14. Gesner. p. 723.
and so hanging on another; they will drag an Ox out of a marsh. While they eat
they are angry with lookers on, meeting with a man, and a beast together, they
ever spare the man, says Albertus: One related to Gesner, that he saw a Wolf
in a wood bite off a piece of wood of thirty, or forty pound weight, and
practiced to go to and fro upon it, as it lay, and then hide it, when he was
perfect; and a wild Sow coming thither with her Hogs of several ages,
because oats were sowed there, he brake in, and took a Hog away about the
weight of that block, and leaping took the wood back, and devoured the Hog.
Sometimes they grow familiar with dogs, and so enter the folds without
resistance, and worry all the sheep to death, before they fall to eat any one.
Aelian. l. 5. c. 19.
They dare not make at the face of a Bull, because they fear his horns, but
they first seem to threaten him before, and then suddenly take advantage of him
behind. Like Horses, and Dogs, they wax gray through age. When hungry, they can
sent their prey by night half a mile against the wind: Ambro. de Digit. l. 1.
c. 47.
One will houle, and call many more, and set together on a troop of Horses,
which happens often in Bononia. At midnight they will go by troops to a village,
and stay at the entrance; one shall enter, and awake the dogs, and so entice
them forth, and devour them. Albert. de Animal. l. 2.
They will hold willow boughs forth to goats to enveagle them within their
reach.

Their voice is houling. Voice. Use.
Fashionable people admit not the flesh to their table, it being a dry, gross,
rank food; yet in Savoy some eat it. They are very useful in Physic. Boiled
alive with oil, and wax, it is commended against the gout. The Hide binds,
Rhasis.
and helps the colic. The flesh eases childbearing eaten by the teeming
woman, or any that are by. The fat is mixed with salves against the gout; the
blood with oil of nuts helps the deafish; the Head laid under your pillow
provokes sleep; the right Ey salted, and tied on, helps agues; the tooth takes
away the swelling of the gums, making way for the teeth to come with ease; he
who drinks through a Wolfs throat, escapes the danger of a Squinsy. Agricola
confesses he learnt that experiment of Adolphus Occo. Gesner.
The heart, a dram of it mixed with an ounce of the gum of an oak, and another
of that of the Pear Tree, and two drams of Harts-horne helps the falling
sickness. Galen. Marcellus.
The Liver is good against a furred mouth; the same in warm wine helps the
cough, and Tisick; the gall bound with Elaterium on the navell makes laxative.
The dung gathered up among shrubs and briars, has helped the colic, drunk, or
hanged on; nay the bones found in the excrements, if they have not touched the
ground, tied to the arm. The bones dried to powder remove the pain between the
ribs; the head hanged up in a Dove-coot drives away weesels, and cats. I omit
the use, or abuse rather about venery, and witchcraft, and the heathens
sacrifices with them, Plutar.
when they invoked Devils. The newly married among the Romans smeared their
posts with Wolfs-fat; the tail hanged over mangers, keeps away the Wolf. The
Differences follow.

ARTICLE II. Of the wolf in special, and of the Gulo.
AMong Wolves, Ambros. H. Digest. l. 1. c. 7. Olaus de gent.
some are wild, as on the Doff^inian mountains, that part Norwey from Sweden,
and in Sardinia. They are more shaggy then others, yellow, and their tail
standing up. In Media they used them in their sports, armed men fighting with
them. Some are called from their elegant color, Golden-ones, less then
ordinary Wolves, but as greedy. They go in troops, hurting neither men, nor
herds. They seem to bark like dogs. They are seen in Turkey and Cilicia.
Bellon.
They visit the Turks cottages by night, and eat what is eatable, that comes
in their way; if they meet with nothing else, they carry away caps, clothes,
shoes, and what ever is of leather. Men make garments of their skins. There
are also Scythian wolves in the utmost borders of Scandinavia, Ambros.
behind Norwey, and Gothland. It is a beast as big as a wolf, and very angry;
the Germans call them Grimmeklaw, because the edges of the nayl make them
teachy. There is also the Sea-wolfe, a mungrell, as big as a Bear, so
hardskind, as a sword can scarce pearce it. Bellon.
He has a wondrous great head; his eyes are shadowed with very many hairs,
nosed, and toothed like a dog, sharp-shagged on his skin; Lop. Hist.
black-spotted, his tail long, thick, and shaggy. Small stones are found in his
stomach, very fat he is, found on the British coasts. Bitterus.
In the Isle of Angra a thousand of them have been seen in a troop. They are
also seen in an Isle behind the Port of S. Crux, and in the Sea-tract of Peru.
The Birds called Buitri kill them sometimes; they have wings fifteen foot
broad. If they spy a wolf, one takes him by the legs, another with the beak
blinds him. The old ones roar like Lions, the young have a kids voice; the
liver is eatable. Those of Angra eating their flesh fresh, and salted, live
long. The skins are worn.

The Gulo, or Gorbelly has the name from greediness. Glutton.
Scaliger calls him a fourfooted vultur; Boophagon. Miech. in desc. Sarmat.
Crollius an Ox-eater; the Germans Vielfrase. Found they are in Lituania,
Moscovy, and other Northern Regions. They feed on carcasses, and so cram
themselves, that they strut like a drum. They squeeze out their excrements
between two trees by force, and then return to their carcass, and cram
themselves again. Akin to this is the wild beast, that the Arabs call Dabuh,
Leo Af. l. 9. Olaus 13. c. 6.
the Africans Sesef, shaped like a wolf, and as big, he digs up carcases also;
Gesner takes him for that ancients, called Hyaena; his blood hunts-men use for
drink. Seasoned with the finest honey they drink it at wedding-feasts. They
anoint ulcers with the fat. They make strings of the guts. The hoofs newly
plucked off from it, while living, showed to dogs, and cats, drive them away;
and hanged on remove the tinckling of the ears. The skins make handsome
clothes, and the most honored guests are entertained with such carpets.
Therefore they suffer them not to be transported to other lands. It is said,
that they that sleep under coverlids made of the Guloes skin dream of
gourmandizing.

TITLE II. Of the half wild Toed-beasts.
CHAPTER I. Of the Fox.
ARTICLE I. Of the Fox in general.
We call the Semiferae, Ambros.
or half wild, those beasts that though wild, yet being of small bulk, are
easily mastered, and tamed by man. Name. Isidor.
I begin with the Fox, called in Latin Vulpes, or volpes, either from volupes,
because he is so full of doubles in his goings; or from volipes, he being so
swift of foot, or from v^lipes, because he is strong-footed. The Greeks give
him many names, as Aloopeez, from Aloo, and Oph, deluding the eyes, and sundry
others taken from its craft, and tail. He is so well known, that I need not
stand long on describing him. Description.
The genital is bony as the Wolves, and Wezels. The tail bushy, ears short, he
loves to eat Hens, Geese, and other foul, and hayrs, wild Mice, Cats, little
Dogs, that he can gripe, Feed.
and locusts. At Marsellis a Fox hunting in a fisher-boat for Buopes, among
great Lobsters, was taken in a Lobsters claw; they refrain not ripe grapes, nor
pears, says the proverb. Place.
Solinus says, there are none in Creet, or Candy. But in Russia, and the
Helvetian Alps they abound. Whence Merchants buy the skins, and sell them in
all parts. They couple in diverse postures. Gend^ing. Pliny. Arist.
They mix with other creatures, as with dogs, whence come the Alopecides, or
dog-foxes; they bear blind whelps, four at most at once, and then retire, so
that few are taken great with young. They lick, and carefully foster their
brood. Sympathy, and Antipathy.
They love serpents, and live in the same cave with them. They hate rue, which
if you bind under Henswings, the Fox will not touch them. They hate the kite
and eagle, because sometimes they snatch up their young, and Hauks, because
they pluck of their hair. Avicen saw a fight in a cage, between crows, and a
Fox, he wounded their heads; but they bound up his lips, so that he could not
queach. They have many combats with badgers, and with the sent of their dung,
drive them away. Hares haunt those Isles most, where are fewest Foxes. They
bark like dogs, (...)
when vexed, or in pain, when they desire any thing f^ame, they use a fawning
murmur. They are very crafty. In Thrace, being to pass over frozen rivers, or
lakes, by laying their ear to the ice, (...).
they guess whether it be thick enough to bear, or no. In his hole he makes
many outlets to escape traps, and gins. Because the Wolf by the touch of the
Scillais vexed, (...). l. 2. (...).
they lay it in their holes; when troubled with fleas, they take a lock of hay,
or hair in their mouth, and dip it in the water, and drown them. When
Hedge-hogs roll themselves up, they piss in their mouths, and choke them. He
will play with a Hare, (...).
and then snap him. He will roll himself in red clay, to seem bloody, and
then ly down, and stretch himself out, as if he were dead, and loll out his
tongue, and so he catches birds. So in Pontus, they delude Buzzards, lying with
the face another way, and sprauling, with the tail stretch forth, as a birds
neck. Taken in a snare, to get loose, he will bite off his leg, or fain himself
dead, holding in his breath. He worries Hens at roost so with his tail, that he
casts them down, and eats them; and has tricks to catch fish, and wasps with
his tail. On a tall tree he will show himself sportive, and stand on his guard
as in a castle; he fears not fire, unless very near him; he will rather be
thrust through, then come down to become a pray to the dog, and if he must
come, (...).
he falls like lightning on the best nosed dogs, and dies not unrevenged.
Neat tables admit not Fox-flesh, yet the Sarmatians, Vandalls, and Rustique,
(...)
French, eat it boiled, or roasted, as the Booetians of old. Those Islanders of
S. Crux eat of it, raw, or a little hardened in the smoke. Some decry it for a
savage food; but Galen says, it is like Hares-flesh. The brains given to
children, preserve them from the falling-sicknes. The Tongue-worm in an
bracelet, is good against thick sightednesse, and dried, and hung about the
neck, against white in the eyes; the Lungs is commended against Ptisick,
wheesings, (...).
short-breath, and liver-grown: the gall with honey, helps dim-cloudy-sight; and
some put it in suppositories, to have male-children; the reins with fat, help
knee-gout; and some rub the throat with them, to take down the swelling of the
jaws. The genital, testicles, and the other secrets, some use to help
conception, and months, and headache; the blood help the stone, the fat melted,
and dropped into the ears, removes old griefs thence, and helps the sinews,
and the stone, and is good against shedding of hair, and the frost in hands,
and feet, if you anoint them before they be swollen: the dung with mustard, cures
foreheads; the skin is good for the hair, and shoos made thereof, eases the
Gout, and Sciatica. The tail also has its medicinal use: Fox-oyl is very
effectual for all diseases in the joints. Galen.
Fox-skins make costly furs, especially if black. Foxes are of diverse
colors, sizes, and natures. Differences.
They are less in Egypt then in Greece. In Peru very little, and of a noisome
sent, and the stink of the piss is not to be washed out. In the
Northerne-woods are black, white, Scalig. exer. 217.
glistering Foxes, and some with crosses; and those called Isatides, and some
black, with some white hair sticking in order: Of reddish, are two kinds, one
with black, and white throats, as if besprinkled with ashes. The other
white-throated, which is rarer. There is plenty of white ones in Swethland, and
Norwey, especially about Nova-Zembla, seen most, when the Sun dis-appears.
Hollanders say, they taste like rabbets. Some are crossed from the mouth by the
head, back and tail with a straight black streake, and another thwart by the
shoulder to the forefeet; which two streaks make the cross. Aelian l. 7. c. 3^.
By the Caspian-Sea they are as familiar as little dogs, and as harmles.

ARTICLE II. Of the Indian Foxes.
THese are of sundry kinds, distinguished by name. The Coiotl has a wolfshead,
great, Nieremberg. H. Exotic. l. 9. c. 10.
pale, but lively eyes, short, sharp-ears, black, long, thick-muzl'd; sinewy,
hoocked-thighs, thick-claws, bushy-tail, dusky, long, and bright-hair, and
bites shrewdly. For bulk, between a wolf and a Fox; frequent in new Spain, in
places less cold; He lives by preying on weaker beasts, and on Sugarcanes,
and Mazium. He sometimes sets on Deer, and Men; He is cunning in avoiding
hunts-men; of the wolfs nature, revengefull, and mindful of the loss of his
prey, long after hunts him that took it; and with others falls on him, kills
him, watches his house, kills all the tame cattle about it. But is so grateful
to his benefactors, that he leaves part of his prey to them. His pizzle rubbed
on the teeth, is said to give present ease to the touth-ach. The
Cuit-lax-caiotl, is of the like nature and shape, but of another hair; thick,
and shag-necked; the hair so long on the breast and face, that it is hideous to
behold. The Azcacoiotle sits on Ants holes, and by night houles in several
voices. The Ilpemaxtla is of a hair white, black, and gold-yellow,
small-headed, and joynted, slender-bodied, and short, but long-muzzled, and
thin; He is found everywhere mostwhat in hot places. The Oztoa is a kind of
shape and bulk like a Fox, about thirty inches long, white and black-haired,
and a little yellow, haunting ditches, and feeding in fenny-places; They nurse
up their young in hidden holes, and bite shrewdly, and fain themselves dead, if
they have no other way to avoid the hunter; He breaks most stinking wind, yet
they eat him. The Izquiepatl is colored like tosted Maiz, he is eighteen
inches long, low, small-muzzled, small-eared, hairy, and black-bodied,
especially near the tail, short-thighed, black and crooked-claw; he lives in
rockydens, and there their young are nursed up. They feed on Horse-flies, and
worms, and they kill fatted-fowles, and eat their heads only; Reduced to
extreme hazard, he darts his piss and dung eight paces off, and spoils the
clothes of the hunts-men with indelible spots, and a stink never to be gotten
out. They that have the Spanish-scab, find good by eating the flesh, and dung.
There are two other small Foxes, the Izquiepatl, and the Conepatl, one with two
bright gards, the other with one drawn along the tail. The Brachirae are like
Foxes, but rounder, and of sweeter flesh; The Annae are somewhat less then our
Cats, and of a pestilent smell, haunting towns by night; their sent betrays
them an hundred paces of, nor doors or windows can keep them out.

ARTICLE III. Of the Beasts akin to Foxes.
POINT I. Of the Cary-gueja, and Tajibi.
IN Brasil are five sorts of Beasts akin to Foxes; Marckg. H. Brasil. l. 6. c.
2.
the Cary-gueja first, or the Jupatuma, or Sarigoy, or Tlaquatzin, about the
bigness of a Cat, having a Foxes head, a pointed mouth, shorter below then
above, a long tongue, that he withdrawes threatening to bite; teeth as a Cat, or
a Fox, small ones before, then four long Dog-teeth, then six other, and then the
grinders, which are sixteen, twelve middle-teeth, four Dog-teeth, and lesser,
eight in the lower, ten in the upper-jaw, and two greater middle ones, like the
Hare. He is wide-nostrild; has fair, round, black-eyes; wide, long, Fox-ears,
starting up, proportionable to his bulk; thin-skinned, smooth, transparent, a
little dusky; bearded like a Cat; the hairs longer above, some on the eyes and
cheeks; the head a little more then three fingers long; each ear two fingers
long, and a finger and half broad; the neck but a fingers length; the rest of
the body seven fingers to the dock; the tail crooked, a foot long, whereby he
hangs on trees like an Ape; broad-breasted; the two fore-thighs shorter then
the hinder; the fore-feet five toed, as a hand, nails white, as a birds claws
with tufts; the hinder-legges longest, as a Baboons; the hair in some parts
longer, in some shorter, those of the head, and part of the neck, and tail
yellow; along the head runs a large black-streak; the back, sides and tail most
what black, but other colored hairs mixed; the tail part hairy, part skinny,
half black, half white, some hair dusky. Round bodied, insensibly slenderer in
some parts. Male and Female alike; under the belly is a double skin, cloven
like a purse, big enough to hold an Orange, hairy within, where are eight
nipples, the purse closed, scarce discernable; herein are the welps conceived;
six at a time are brought alive forth, and perfectly shaped, but hairlesse,
there they move too and fro, each two fingers long, and stay there till they
can feed themselves, and sometimes go forth, and come in again. The testicles
ly under the dock; It is easy to be flead, as the Cony, or Hare, if you begin
at the belly. It stinks as a Fox, or Martin. He bites hard. Feeds gladly on
Hens; climbs trees to go a birding, Mark grave fed on in his chamber a month
with Sugarcanes; at last he tangled himself in his string, and died.

He is found in Dariene in Brasil, and in Florida, and new Spain. The
Brasilians call him Cerigona; His tail is Medicinable steep in water, and take
a dram of it, cleanses the Ureteres, helps the Stone, and Colic, breeds milk,
easens Childbearing. Champed in the mouth, and laid on, it draws out a thorn.
The Tajibi, Marckg.
in Portugees, Rachorro do Mato, is round and long; white glistering-haired,
the tips black; headed like a Fox, sharp-mouthed, Cat-bearded; the eyes clear,
black, bolting out, goggle; the ears round, soft, thin, white, tender as soft
paper; the tail five fingers long, hair white, tiped with black; the end of the
tail is a thin hide, bright, scaly, like a Snakes slough. The flesh is
stinking, yet eaten. The hair sticks in a thin skin, and may be plucked out
without defacing the hide.

POINT II. Of the Tamandua-guacu, the Tamanduai, and the Coati.
THe former is as big as a Butchers Dog, De I^^ Ind. O^ p. 151 (...) 618.
( Abbe^illanus says, as a Horse,) round headed, long snouted, sharp mouthed,
toothlesse, round tonged, seven and twenty fingers long, two feet, and half of
it like an Owl, lying double in the mouth; eyes little and black; ears
roundish; the tail like a fly-flap of Horse-bristles, almost a foot broad,
wherewith he can cover himself all over; the thighs round; on the fore-feet
four crooked-claws, the two greatest in the midst, two foot and a half long;
the hollow of the foot round; the hair of the head and neck short, and dry,
turning forward; he is white before; he is slow of foot, and eats Pismires.

The Tamanduai is of the bigness of an American little Fox, round,
copped-headed, bowing somewhat downward; the mouth black, very narrow,
toothlesse; eyes small, and black; ears pricking up, about two fingers long;
the hair hard, bright-yellow; the tongue long, round; like an awl, lying as a
pipe between the cheeks; on the forefeet are four turning claws; fierce he is,
but cannot bite; touch him with a staff, and he stands as a Bear on his
hindlegs; he sleeps all day, hiding his head with his neck and forefeet; romes
about by night. Drinking, part gushes out of his nostrils; Markgrave says,
that after he had killed and flead one, a great part stirred after, though he
had been kept fasting 8 days before. In the left rein, (says he) I found above
a three cornered passage, fastened to the side by a double thin skin; in the
bowels, many long round worms; the lappings that folded in the hair, fair
ones; the gall-bag great; the hide thick; the flesh smells like a Fox; none eat
it.

The Coati is a Brasile-Fox, Marckg. H. l. 6. c. 6.
as big as a Cat, with short thighs, and hands like a Baboon; coped-headed,
Fox-eared; the mouth shorter below then above; long and sharp muzzled; nostrils
wide, and cloven; eyes black; the tail longer then the body, which he sets up,
and crooked; with ringlets on it, raried with shadow and oker. Eating, he holds
his meat in his forefeet. He can climb the tops of trees. The Laet says, he
kept one tame, that would take meat out of his mouth; but when he began once to
gnaw his tail, he could not be kept from it, till he had eaten it all up, and
so died.

CHAP. II. Of the Ape.
THe Ape, Name. (...). de (...) propr.
in Latin Simiae, or Simius, from the flat nose, or from imitating, or his
resembling of us. Festus calls them Clunas: (...).
The Greeks Pithekos, from being easily persuaded to imitate man; Emimoo, (...).
from the gestures, Arimos, in the old tongue of the Hetruscis, Bates, from
climing-trees, Kalliar, by the Laconians. Hairy it is above, and below, back
and belly; D^cript. (...) H. A. ^ c. 8.
the hair is thick; nosed, eared, toothed like a man, two paps on the breast,
arms like a man but hairy, which he can use, and turn as we, fingered, toed,
nayl like man, but those ruder, he steps like us, but treads more backward,
arms short, and thighs answerable, he has something hard like a navell,
slenderer in the lower parts, they want a tail, as being two legged creatures,
the heart is Pyramide-wise, (...) Hip. and (...) l. 16. ^6.
some found with two tops, veins, arteries like ours, the vein that goes into
the right-lappet of the heart, and then into the right breast, is in them above
the heart; those that are joined to the reins, are widest, and pass to the
stones: the substance of the ear is unmovable. In many parts he is like a
man, and in many unlike, as in the breast, ^es^l. de ^^bri.
and arme-muscles, and those that move the elbow, and thigh, those within the
hands, and feet, in the mid-rif, lungs, as also in the bones; for in the loins
are six turning-joynts, the shoulder-joynt is far from the breast, the thighs
tend not straight toward the backbone, thence it is, that going on the
hind-feet, he waggles, his feet are hollow, the toes much cloven. Aquapen. l.
2. c. 8.
Bred they are in the eastern, and other warm parts, as in Lybia, Mauritania,
in that part of Mount Caucasus, that looks toward the Red Sea, in the Kingdom
of Basman, in the tract between Egypt, Ethiopia, and Lybia. In the Indian-hills
were so many, that they scared Alexanders army often. In Basman they kill them,
pluck off the hair, all but from the chin, dry them, and embalm them, and sell
them to merchants for mermen. They like hilly better then low-land; therefore
they frequent the hills of Enisa. Leo Af. l. 3.
They love herbs, and barley, they go by troops to the ripe ears. They eat
lice also, Feed.
from men, and worms, and spiders, apples, nuts; but if the paring, or shell be
bitter, they cast all away; they love flesh also, after eating, whereof they
shed their hair. They drink wine too. They gender in Spring, when day and night
is of a length, and bear a coupled about the summers solstice. Natal. Comes.
Aelian.
The he is reported to huge one for love, and to leave another with the she,
and never to look after it. Being led through towns, they run a madding after
women. They hold friendship with daws, and conies; but dis-agree with cocks,
tortoyses, snails, etc. A noble man in England kept one, that keeps his Rabbits
from Weesels. When a Parricide was sewd in a sack, Ambr. l. 2. c. 5. Porta
Physilog. l. 7. c. 8.
they used to put in with him a Cock, an Ape, and Viper, that the Ape might
fall on the Cock, and the Viper avoiding the Cock, might seize the man. At Rome
one of them, spying an Ape on a boys head, was so scared, that he pist, and
shit. Galen. l. 5. c. 2.
He dares not touch a Snayl. They are troubled with the hernia, or bursting,
having a heavy kall, and with the falling sickness, and inflammation of the
liver, spleen, bladder, etc. Ill disgestion, etc. Galen anatomised a lean one,
and found in the skin about the heart a praeternaturall swelling with moisture
in it, such as Hydatides writs, did use to send forth. I say nothing of their
biting, it is said to be venomous. Avicen, to prevent rancling, prescribes a
plaster of ashes with honey, and bitter almonds. They hide their meat in their
cheeks, whence by degrees they fetch it to chew. Their nature.
They are extreme lustful, and will gender with Lions. They remember a wrong
long; Albert.
some say they soon forget, when tamed they show their young to every one. They
severally affected at diverse seasons of the year, jolly, and gamesome at new
Moon, very lumpish and dogged before. So soon as they find approaching death, or
any infections diseased, Aelian H. A. l. 7. c. 27.
you may hear from them an unusual snuffling in the noce. Whence Crollius
thinks Physicians learn the pulses of arteries; Plin. l. 8. c. 34.
they go awray, or sideling. Some can guide a cart, and play at chesse. One
seeing a nurse wash, and winded a child, when she was absent, undrest it,
washed it in scalding water, and killed it.

They are taken by imitating what they see hunters do. Ambrosin.
They never are so tame, but that they quickly go wild again. They love to play
with children, and dogs, but, if you look not to them, they shall choke them,
or break their necks. They will make themselves drunk. The Zabeces, Use.
Herodot. Porta Phys. l. 1. c. 17. Arist.
and Zygantes of Africa eat them. Rhasis judges it but cold, and harsh flesh.
The heart roasted, and boiled with honeycomb is said to sharpen memory. They
differ in shape, color, neck, hair, and bulk. Some have tayls, some none, some
are gray headed. Some among the Orsei in India are white: Polus says, some go
upright. To these may be refered the Orang-outang brought out of Angola,
presented to Frederick Henry, Plin.
Prince of Orange. Tulp. obser. l. 3. c. 56.
Tulp calls it a Wild-man, long as a child of three years old, thick as one of
six, square bodied, nor fat, nor slender, but very active and nimble; having
such well trust limbs, and great muscles, that he durst attempt any thing, and
do what not all smooth before, and shaggy black behind, faced as a man, flat,
and crooked-nosed, eared like a man, two fair swelling paps were on the breast,
like a woman's, (for it was a female) the navell deep, and limmed so like a man,
that an egg is scarsely liker an egg, resembling man in elbows, fingers,
thumbs, thighs, calves, heels. She walked often upright, and with ease could
hoyst up, and bear a burden. Being to drink, she with one hand took the can
by the ear, and put the other under; and wiped her lips handsomely after. Going
to ly down, she would lay her head orderly on the pillow, and cover herself
close with the coverlids. The Sambacensian King reported, that they are so
valiant, that they adventure on armed men. So given to women, that they often
ravish them. In Guinee some of them will bray any thing in a mortar, P^arricus.
Nierem. H. E.
and carry pitchers of water on their heads, and empty them at their doors, to
prevent spilling. These are called Baris. Strong they are, and brawny thick
set. In India there is also cried up to the skies; Zeilan keeps his relics,
namely a tooth, which Constantine the Portugal Viceroy took amongst the prey
from a Barbarian Prince; so honored and adored was that Ape by the chief
Kings there, that yearly Ambassadors were sent laden with rich presents, only
to be permitted to take his print in piece of clay perfumed, and enclosed in
gold, to solace themselves, forsooth, with his shadow only. After the King of
Pegu being conscious to himself of an oath he had passed to the Portugees, sent
Ambassadors to the Viceroy with ships laden with wares, and 300000 pieces of
gold to redeem the tooth. Many Portugals were of opinion to send it, but to
demand a greater sum, even a million, but the Viceroy (though he knew the
King would have given it, and himself wanting money, yet) prefered piety to
gain, and that it might appear to all, he caused the tooth to be brought
amidst an assembly openly, and to be taken out of the rich case, beset with
jewels, and gold, and with his own hand cast it into a brazen mortar, and
commanded it to be pounced to powder, which was cast into a fire, and so
vanished into smoke.

CHAPTER III. Of the Baboon, or Bavian.
HE takes the name of Cercopithecus from his tail, Names (...)
for Kerkos signifies tail, and Pithekos Monky, or Ape. The Greeks call him
also Kepos, which some fetch from Kebos, (...)
Nimble. Albert calls him Mamonet; the Italians Spinga; the Celtae Abranas.
(...)
We shall describe him anon under the kinds of Aurelius delineates his
Genitalls. They are found in Aethiopia with black heads, Ambro^^. lib. 2. c. 6.
Place. Strabo. Geog. Plin.
and Asses hair, and in the woods of Iava, and the kingdom of Congo; and in
India on the Emoden hills, and on that lofty mountain near Aden a city of
Arabia, and all about the Indian Continent. In Malabar they are very cheap,
because they hurt the Indians Nut, that is the gain of the natures. They eat
any thing, and gnaw their own tail when they are lustful. They abhor
Crocodiles so, that they are almost struck dead with the sight. In
East Indies, under the Portugals, they eat them, and use them in Physic. What
sport they make is well known. Their bones brayed, and drunk by provoking
sweat, ease the French pox. They dote on their young, Nature. Nierem. H. I. l.
9. c. 44.
and hug them hard; they feed on fruit, and birds eggs. Many of them eats and
drink their own excrements. Sometimes, if they see a man alone, they come down,
and play with him. They are full of crafty tricks. It is strange to see how
they cast stumps of trees at passengers; they pass rivers holding by each
others tayls, and get over by bows, and a chain by wondrous arts. Above all, if
one of them be wounded by an arrow, or dart, no men can help one another better
then they, knowing how to stanch the blood with leaves, and moss, and save, if
possible, the life. They bring but one at a birth, and embrace their young, and
carry them to the craggy tops of hills, where the huntsmen raise a heap, and
compass it with maiz, and lay there the stone Cacakoatl, the nature whereof
is, when heated through with fire to crack, and fly asunder, the Baboone run to
it, and to eat of that stone, but terrified with the crack, forget their young,
and run away, leaving them a prey to hunters. They carry also their young on
their back, till they can safely dispose of them. The young hang with the hands
about the dames neck, and with the legs cling about her back. Some are nimble
as a bird in climbling trees, and scipping from tree to tree. One has been
seen to leap a river. The captains of them perceiving a troup of men pass by,
(for men dare not pass by them alone, nor a few) they call their fellows of
diverse shapes together, outface the men, and with hideous moyse skip from tree
to tree, and follow the men, mocking them with a thousand Apes tricks,
moppings, mowings, waggings of the tail, and make as if they would assault
them; but coming down, and see the arrows, and guns, (which they have had
occasion before to be acquainted with,) aimed at them, they fly swifter then the
wind to the tree-tops, where they complain, chatter, and threaten. It is said,
they are so dexterous, that they can decline, and avoid arrows-shot, and catch
them flying, as if they were reached to them; but the bullets put the younger
beside their skill. When they see any of their fellows fall, and taken up by
the shooters, they thunder above, filling the skies with hideous noyses; as if
you heard the roarings, and yellings of a thousand Lions, and Tigers. But one
thing is worth hearing; each Ape, when they take a tree, carry up stones in one
hand, and some in their mouths, and pelt the passengers, when they have done
shooting. One levelling at a great, long-tayld Monkey with a gun, he made as
if he would stand it; but when the man winking with one eye, was taking aim,
he threw a stone in his face, and brake it, and dashed out some of his teeth.
But since he perished by a new stratagen, and was shot, just as the stone fell,
and was eaten for a dainty with mirth. Some would have eaten then toads, or
worse, so hungry they were. Such tricks persuaded the old world, that these
were a humane race, which occasioned in fables, mention of the Baboons
birthday. I thought once that they were happily a kind of Pigmees. It is
strange how they can handle merchandise. They play with the savages for money,
Ioh. Ard. no^s.
and winning, invite to the Tavern, and pay the shot. Among the soldiers of
Havana, a Baboon marked that one won apace, and sat close to him, to have his
share, according to the manners; if he denied, he would fight for it; if he
received it, he ran strait to the Tavern, and took a pot, Ios. A^osta.
holding it to the vinter, to pour wine; the pot being brimfull, he drank it
up, paid his winnings; if it came to more, he expected more wine to the value,
which he did twice, or thrice.

Another being sent to the Tavern, and not using to pay till he had his
bottle full, would gather stones to defend it against the boys; and though he
loved wine well, he carried it safe and entire to his Master. He could not
abide painted women, P. Martyr.
but tore their hair and clothes. One great Baboon, with an extreme long tail
hanging by it, on an Oak, turning and swing himself three or four times, caught
hold, skipped from bough to bough, and from tree to tree, as if he had flowen.
An Archer shot one, who being wounded, in a fury set on him who hurt him; he
drawing his sword, cut off the Baboons arm, and took him, but strongly
resisting; but being brought to the Navy, he grew tamer, being chained: and the
huntsmen bringing a Boar home, he and the Baboon were ever fighting; this with
his tail tangled the Boar, flew at his throat, and throatled him. Another
seeing some hunt after him to shoot him, got into a window, snatched up an
Infant, Aelian. l. 7. c. 20.
ran to the house top, and held the child for a buckler between him and the
Archer, to make him hold from shooting. Baboons differ in bigness, color,
tail, and otherwise, some in Prassiana an Indian Region, are as big as the
greatest Dogs, having tails five cubits long. Scaliger.
Some are black, some ash-colored, some gray, some party-colored, some
spotted, some yellowish, some dusky, etc. Some longer tailed then others. Some
bearded; some go upright; some Lyon-like; some mostaccioed; some of a mixed
kind. The bearded, the Brasilians call them Guariba, Marckgrave. H. N. Brasil.
l. 6. c. 5.
are manifold, having a round goats-beard, they are as big as our Foxes,
high-browed, with black sparkling-eyes, ears short and roundish; tail long,
bare at the end, which they are ever swinging about; the hair black, long,
sleek, and shining. There are swarms of them in the Woods there, and make a
hideous noise. They meet daily again, and again before and after midday.
Marckgrav.
One of the lesser sits higher then the rest in the midst, and begins a singing
note, giving a sign with the hand openly, the rest follow his note, holding on
till the first makes a sign, then the rest are hushed in a twinkling, and the
first concludes aloud. They carry their young on their back, frisking from
bough to bough. It is a biting and untamed beast. Some of them are great, and
black, having a long, black, shaggy beard. If they find a Moor woman alone,
they force her. Clusius describes a kind, long tayled, with a tuft at the end,
like a Lion. The Guinee Exquina in Congo has dark hair, as it were burnt,
sprinkled with white tops. The beard very white, the hair two fingers long, as
it were kemed. Anger him, he gapes wide and chatters. Another sort is as great,
or each cheek stone of hair white, and yellow, bearded like a Goat, reaching to
either ear; black leged: Toyish, and clamorous as the other. Ambrosine
represents three prints of them; one he conceives to be the Callitriche (or
fair-haired) living only in Aethiopia. A second a kin to that. The third faced
like an old man (a Marmoset) with a long black tail. Gesner.
He walks upright, very nearly resembling a man. He loves boys, and women
everywhere, and if he get loose, endeavors to ly with them. Industrious they
are, and wittier then some men. Of the Lion-kind are first the Cagui, as the
Brasilians, or the Pongi, as the Congians call him; one is greater, like the
Baboon, Marckg.
called Cay, round, and Lion-faced, black and bald-eared, Lion-mouthed,
black-eyed, the tail a foot, and four fingers long, and reddish. There is a
lesser, a like faced, but with a less head, like a small apple, a little nose,
sharp teeth, roundish ears, the tail ten fingers long, with white, and dusdish
ringlets, fed with bread, and mandos meat. The whole body six figners long.
Another sort is called the Sagovin; Nierem.
Lion-like before, but so tender, that he brooks not the tossing of a ship at
sea, and so proud withal, that never so little troubled, he in ^ullennesse
starves himself. That that Rod. Lincius brought over was less then a squirell,
Nieremberg.
and so dainty that it must be kept in furre. The snout, and fore part of the
head was Lion-like, dark-colored, mixed with red; the ears shaggy, and bright,
and reddish; the throat, and breast shaggy, dush, and white; the other hair of
the body black, and white, and sparkling, and party-colored from back to
belly; the tail long, and so colored; the belly black-haired, the thighs
white, and red; on each foot five toes, not very long; the nayls white, scarce
a handsomer to be seen. The Moschatus the Brasilians call Caitaja, long-haired,
white, and yellow; Marckg. H. Bras. p. 227.
roundish headed, low fore-headed, nose little and flat; tayl-bending, shrill
voyced, and pettish. I saw one at General Warden-burgs at Amsterdam. There is
another of the kind darker-haired, like the Zobellines. Of a doubtful kind are
the Macaquo in Congo; of a wolfs color; the nose high and parted, the head
like a bears, buttocks bald, the tail bowed; a foot and somewhat more long from
head to tail; a foot and nine fingers thick. He cries Hah, hah: the Brasil Cay
in Toupinambuti is common, little and black, Lerius. H. Americ. c. 10.
living most in the woods, and sitting on certain trees, where on a thick mast
grows, like our greatest beans, whereon they feed. There is also another Guinee
Baboon, grisly, dusk-shadowed with yellow, almost like a hares back,
small-headed, and long-tailed.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Cynocephalus, (or Dogs-head) the Papio, and the wild Vpalim.
THe first has the name from a Dogs-head. It is called also the Tartarian;
Name. Gesner. (...). Append. Quadru. Aelian. Arist. Description. Place.
Solinus. Strabo. Herod. Aelian. Feed.
because it comes thence. Also Kunopros^pon, or Dogs-face: And Cho^ropithekos,
or Hog-ape. Almost of the shape of a long tayled Monkey, but thicker set,
stronger, fiercer, and faced like a dog, or a Satyr, as Strabo makes him. Open
arsed he is. Found in Aethiopia, and in Arabia from Dira to the Southern
corner; and especially in the utmost promontory; also above Dachinabades, and
in the South of Lybia. He feeds as other Apes, eating stone-fruit, he cast away
the shells, and parings. They eat also flesh boiled, and roasted, especially
the delicatest. They can drink wine also. Voice.
They have many voices, and those rude; sometimes shreeking, then houling. Orus
says they bark; Aelian. l. 6. c. 43.
they are soon moved to fury, effeminate, lustful, petulant, fiercer then
Apes. By natural instinct, Nature.
when days and nights are of a length, on set hours, night and day, they
piss, and make a noise. The He in times twixt moon and moon, not eats, nor
looks any way, Plin.
but moping looks downward. They are said to congratulate the moon rising,
wherefore the Egyptians in their religious rites made much of them, to learn
from them the heavenly conjunctions. Of a singular wit they are, coming
nearest man, Strabo. Geog. l. 15. Bellon. obser. l. 2. c. 52.
except the Elephant. In Egypt they write letters, and receive money of the
spectators for their masters. Akin to these is that Alvarez in his Ethiopian
journey writes of, and another in Clusius. That Is as big as a Bel-wether, and
shaggy as a Lion, going by herds near Calote. This shaged, and ash-colored,
not so long tailed as a Baboon, long snowted and blunt at the end, bal'd
buttocked, blood-coloured, as if flead. The Papio (in Dutch Paphon) is great
rugged, Ambr. H. Digit.
ugly headed, short thighed, almost Fox-tailed, but short, and commonly lifted
up, footed like a man, no way answering his height, Gesn^r.
doting on women. He feeds on apples, pears, and other fruit. The She brings
two at a birth, a male, and a female. The wild Upalim is as big as an Ethiopian
Baboon, the skin red as scarlet, Ambrosin. l. 9. c. 9.
spotted in some places, the head round as a ball, the feet round, and broad,
the claws harmless. The Moors beat the flesh with planks to make it tender,
and eat it. What it feeds on is unknown.

CHAPTER V. Of the Ignavus, or Slug.
THey are of two kinds; one the Portugees call Perillo Ligero, Marckg. H.
Brasil. p. 2^1. Clusius.
the little swift dog by contraries; and Friguiza. Of the bigness of one of our
midling Foxes, short-necked, two fingers long at most, small, and somewhat
round-headed; narrow mouthed, toothed as a Lamb, blunt, smooth, high,
black-nosed. The eyes small, black, drowsy, having no ears; the tail blunt,
like a sugar-loof, on each foot are three nayls, white and yellow, crooked,
bending, and hollowed. The hair about two fingers long, ash-colored,
badger-like, but softer, and whiter. The most sluggish, and slow-paced of
beasts. He creeps up trees, and eats leaves, never drinks. Seldom send forth
any voice; holds fast what he catchest, fears the smallest rain. The heart
taken out of the female, stirs half an hour after. The paunch red-streaked
like beans, into which the navelvessells in many sprigs are fastened. They bear
young-haired, Marc^^.
toothed and clawed. The heart of the she has two plain ears, hollow. In the
stomach the upper-mouth is two fingers cross from the gullet, and where the
opening uses to be, is a gut a span long, but has no passage. In the stomach
is plainly seen green matter of leaves. Two paps are on the breast. Tough of
hide. So lively, that, if all the guts be taken out, it stirs, and draws the
feet together. De Laet, who says, he saw one alive, says, the neck is
longer, as we have made it. He clings so fast, that he looses hold, and life
together. Hermaneus says, Hier. l. 9. c. 15.
he in a whole day cannot move fifty paces forward. By night he is heard, and
the latter syllables still lower then the former. He stays sometimes in a tree
twenty days without food, and is thick-sighted. Another of the kind, Lerius.
called Hag, has an Apes face, a rough-shaged skin, hairy-thighs, claws, on
each foot three, and those sharp, and long, is easily tamed, when taken.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Badger.
THe Greeks have no proper name for it; Ambros. H. D. l. 2. c. 11. (...).
Albert. Descript. Isidor. Barthol.
the Latins call it Taxus, perhaps from Dasus, hairy, and shaggy; and Meles,
or Melis, Melo, and Melotus; from the roundnes of the members. It is greater
then a cat, or fox, whose nature it comes nearest, the skin being rough-hairy;
it has more white, then black hairs, the head black in the midst, white on the
sides, broodbacked, sharp-toothed, it is a mistake, that the left legs are
shorter. They are found over all the hills of Italy, Place.
and Helvetia, and elsewhere. They live on hornets, and worms, apples, and
grapes, Feed.
being fattest in Autumn. They love Rabbits-flesh, and Geese, chickens, and
other fowls. Breeding.
They breed their young as foxes, and bring forth in three months, sometime
two, sometime three in autumn. They hate foxes, for these watch when they are
gone abroad, and so bedung their holes, that they must seek another for the
stink. They are so thickskind, that you can scarce hurt them, but their nose
is so tender, then there you may kill them. Their skin is so pufd, that dogs
cannot fasten on it. Nature.
He turns on his back, and with teeth, and feet, resists the beasts that vex
him. Knowing himself to be short-legged, Plin. H. N. l. 8. c. 28.
he goes not far from his hole. When cold weather presses him, he skulks, and
fattens by-sleep. Bring him in winter by the fire, he casts himself among the
coals. The Moon waxing, he fattens, in the wain he grows leaner; men say, but
it is uncertain. Carol. S^ephan.
His bite is mortal, because he feeds on hornets, and venomous things. Olaus
shows their ingenuity in digging, Olaus M. l. 18. c. 18.
and voyding their house of the earth, and strewing themselves a bed therein
with chaff, and leaves, bringing so much on their heads, and with their feet at
once, as a man can carry under his arm. They ever have two doors to their
house. When the South Wind blows, they open the North-doore; and when the
North-winde, the South-doore. They lay up winters-provisions; and the male keep
the female from eating too much, least they should want before Spring. When they
grow blind for age, they keep house, feeding one another at home. When they are
spied, and hunted on hills, they lay their forelegs over their head, and ly
round like a globe, and as Bears tumbled down. In Italy, Germany, and
elsewhere, their flesh is counted a dainty, Use. Bruyer. l. 13. c. 3.
if taken in Autumn. They sees it with pears in Switzerland. Savanarola
likens it to wild porke; Platina to Porcupines-flesh. In Physic, they put the
fat into glifters to help back-each; it helps chapped nipples, and gouts, and
shrunk-members. The blood dried, Weeker. antid. Spec. 2.
heals leprosy. It is given with salt, and beasts-horn against the plague.
Lonicerus deftills it only in the dog-dayes, and prescribes two drams.

Ges^er says, that the same blood in a composition with Armeniack-earth,
Saffran, and Tormentil, is a receipt in the most raging Pest. Albert.
The ashes stench blood. To say nothing of the brain, tooth, or left foot,
which tied under the arm, is said to help memory. Of old they wore Badgers
skins. Dog-collars are made thereof.

Some are tame, Differences. Ola^s. Bruierin.
you may play with them; some are wild, and rough-bristled; some are Dog, and
some Hog, Badgers or Grays, both taken in the Matisconensian Territory. The
Dog-Badgers have a Dogs grin, and dig their holes in gravelly places; they have
not many borroughs; feeding on carcases, and Dogs-meat. They are whitish, and
biger then Dogs; with their snout they dig a small hole near their house door,
where they hide their dung. They eat roots, and fruits, and what swine love to
feed on. Gesner.
The Heygrat, (or hony-devourer) in America, of a Chesnut-colour, as big as a
Cat, is a kind of Badger. They ever hunt after Beehives, or the trees where
wild honey is, Nierem. l. 9. c. 43.
of the like kind is the Quanpecotli about eighteen inches long, long snouted,
slender, writheld upwards, long tailed, and haired, shining about the belly;
the rest dusk, or black, and glistering; the back blackest; black-footed, and
crooked-nailed; easily tamed; ravenous; spares nothing eatable; gamesome a
thousand ways; harmful to strangers; found in New-Spain among the hills, where
he delights to be. Akin to this is the Tacuintecuani, or Cynodaticus in bulk,
snout, qualities, and feet. It is white, but has large black spots; having the
name from biting. Lives not far from the South Sea: Like to these is the
Tlalcoyotl, hairy, two spans long, Badger-clawed, short-legged, and black,
short-tailed; having a small head, a slender, and very long snout, teeth
sticking out; his body of a yellowish white, but on the back, and upper-parts
of the neck black, and bright streaked, and feeds as the Quanpecotli.

CHAPTER VII. Of the Castor, or Bever.
CAlled by the Greeks Kastoor, from Casteros, the belly, Name. Ambros. l. 2. c.
13. (...).
because he is almost belly; not from castrating himself, when pursued for his
stones, as some ridiculously derive it, for they are so small, and cleave so
close to the ridge of his back, that he cannot come at them, nor while he
lives, can they be plucked from him. He is called Fiber, not from frequenting
the brinks of Rivers, that of old were called Fibri, but from Fibros, soft,
because his hair is so. (...). Salmasius in Solin.
Some have mistaken him for the Otter. Nor is it the Latax in Arist. nor shall
I decide it, whether it is the Orchia, or no: Some have counted him an
Amphibium, or half a fish, because he lives both on land, and in the water. He
is of a bright ash color, but blackish-backed; Description.
finer haired then the Badger, and the blacker the skin, the coftlier. His
teeth are very sharp, wherewith he can cut wood; the foreteeth are red: The
forefeet like Dogs-feet; the hinder skinned like Goosfeet, each five-toed.
Tailed like a fish. In the greater, Plin. l. 8. c. 30. Bellon. H. Aqua.
a foot and half broad, and six fingers, two thick; sometimes weighing four
pound; thin at the edges, a thin skin, and smooth, and pale, streaked with
admirable artifice. In the privy parts he has two swellings as big as a Goose
mouth, on each side one; these are lappets covered with a thin skin, in the
midst a passage, whence sweats out a fat, clammy-moysture, wherewith, after
wiping his mouth, he annoints all the parts he can come by; as some Birds that
have in the same place a small bag with a moisture in it, fetch it thence with
their bill, and anoint their feathers, to keep them moist, while they remain
in the open air. In tongue, heart, stomach, guts, and liver divided into five
laps, or strings, he resembles a Hog most. His gall lurks under the lesser laps
of the liver. His spleen is but small for a beast of his bigness. His reins as
great as a yearling-calves, and fat. The bladder like a Sowes. The testicles
small, and cleaving to his backbone. The femal has but one passage for all
natural uses; Matthio^^^.
the necks of the womb, and bladder meeting there. Gesner in dissecting a
Bever, found in a bag a yellow matter, solid, waxy, sharp, not earthy, of a
pound weight; and the genital to consist of one bone, and in each knob another
small bag with a honied-kind of substance in it, smelling like moldy rotten
cheese. The like is in the femals, but weighing hardly an ounce. Wherein
Bellonius found stones as big as an egg, but without doubt it was counterfeit.
Bevers are found in Burgundy, about the River Matrona; Place. Scal. ex. 215.
Bruyer. Rei. Cibariae l. 18. c. 4.
and by the Sein in Cabillon, and in Lorain. Austria, about the Danow, where
they are called Biferi; in Helvetia, about Arula, Rusa, and the River Lomagus;
in Poland also, Russia, Prussia, and Italia; especially where the Po
disburthens himself into the Sea; Finally, the best are about the Rivers of
Pontus, and in Spain. They haunt rather the Northern-waters, Olaus M.
then the Rhine, or Danube, or other Rivers troubled with Navigation. But where
ever he lives, he lives partly in the water, and partly on the land. Therefore
they make their holes by River-sides.

They feed on tree-leaves, Food.
as the Poplar, etc. but they covet most the broad-leaved Willows, because
bitter. Not on fish, as Albert mistakes; for Pelicerius, Bishop of Montpellier,
laid often before them fish alive, and dead, but they would not so much as smell
to them.

In the beginning of Summer, Engendring.
under the constellation of the Dolphin with Sagittarius declining, they
couple. They bring forth at the fall of the leaf. The voice of the Beaver is
like the crying of a child. They never leave their hold in biting, till they
hear the bones crack; when you keep them tame, Iul. Pompon. Nature.
they are so modest, that they never foul the house with their ordure, and they
cry, and whine, if they cannot get abroad. They love their young so, that they
will break through doors, and grates, and cast themselves down headlong for
their sakes, as the forenamed Bishop relates. They feed themselves with their
forefeet, as with hands. They wet their hinder-parts often, because the barks
of trees bind their bodies, or for that but little gaul flows to their guts.
That opinion of his biting off his testicles, Aelian. l. 13. c. 4^.
when hunted, is false, rising from his craft in hiding them. He is observed to
be very cunning. As appears by the wise building, and preparing of their house,
in carrying of the materials on the old ones lying on their backs, and packing
the wood handsomely between their thighs, and dragging them by the tail to the
appointed place, which makes the old ones backs so sleek. Those that the
Scythians call Drudges, gather apples, cut bark, others lay them on the backs
of two yoaked, having framed a hurdle of sticks to that end. The same by the
black ones, which are called Masters, direct by their gate, and posture the
rest; being to cut wood, they ever hold the same track from the river to the
tree; never leaving a tree, till they have gnawed it almost asunder; and when
it is near falling, they take care that it may not fall on that side where they
stand. In a word, they build their houses higher, or lower, as the river runs,
and shift lodging the day before it overflows.

The flesh is not unsavory, if in dressing the venom be removed. Use.
The foreparts are hot, the hinder so cold, that, like Tortoyses, they eat them
only on fasting-dayes. Matthiol.
The Loranois count the tail a delicate, it co^^ming near the taste of a
Lamprey. Some sprinkle it with Ginger, and roast it. Gesner says it tastes like
eel. In Phis^ck the Bevers-gall, piss, tail and skin is useful. Bever compast
with many natural skins, with a waxy moisture within it, of a tart taste, and a
strong sent, Diosco^.
is said to be the choysest; which is to be plucked from the beast in his ripe
vigorous age, and to be dried with the Honey liquor in it; it will hold the
virtue seven years, it helps the fallingsicknes, and lethargy, if boiled with
rue in keen vinegar, and the swimming in the head, if the crown be anointed
with it, and vineseed, and oil of roses; and it helps loss of memory after
chronicall tedious diseases, and against short-breath with Ammoniack, and
honied vinegar; also against hickok after much eating. Easens colic, in juice
of vine, and boiled in vinegar, applied as a cataplasme on the breast, and
secrets, is good against running of the reins. A perfume of it, furthers
conception. Eases women's griefs, rising from cold causes. Purges a woman in
childbed. Opium corrects it best. Rondeletius.
Finally it is an ingredient into many medicines, as waters, extracts, oils,
ointments, waxes. The curd helps the falling sickness. The piss poison; the
tail wounds in the guts. The ashes of the skin burnt with soft pitch, and leek
juice stanches blood. It is a good wearing for the palsied. The teeth are worn
for Amulets. The fat is a good bait to catch fish. The softest hair makes hats,
and breeches. The Geloni make of the skins furred coats. We find no
differences of the kinds; only the Scythians distinguish them into black, and
reddish, or yellowish, and party-colored, calling those masters, these
servants.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the Otter.
CAlled Lutra from Luein, Name (...). Ambrosin. Hist. Dig^. l. 12. c. 13. (...).
either loosning-trees at the roots, standing by the river-sides; or from often
washing it self. In Greek Enudris, from living in the water. Suidas mistakes
the Ictis for it. Sylvaticus miscalls it Hydria. Gaza calls it Lytria: S^idas
l. 37. (...). Descript.
Aetius, a river-dog. He is slenderer, and longer then the Bever; toothed, and
headed like a waterspaniell; square-mouthed, eared like the Beaver; the tail
long, round, and pointed at the end; the legs like a foxes, but somewhat
thicker, the hinder-feet flat, and skinny, he is not so thick-skin'd as a
Castor, hair thick, and short, almost chest-nut color. They are found
everywhere in Europe. They swarm in America, P^^ce.
especially in Canada, most about streams, and lakes, reckoned among those that
live both in water, and on land. They abound in the Napleshy territories.
Brasa^.
They feed on fish, whereof they carry so much into their holes, that they
infect the air. They eat also the soft tops of herbs, Food. Bellon. Aq^at. l. 2.
and fruits, and bark of trees. In winter he forrages for his provision. In
diving they draw air by degrees into their nostrills, to prevent drowning. In
their hole they frame a table-worke of bows, and rods to hold them dry, Nature.
as they ly. They can out of a river smell a fish pond some miles off. They
draw breath easiest with the stream. Scal. Exer. 215.
When hungry, they swim against, when full, with stream. Entering a fish pond,
they sease the best fish with a strange ni^ublenes, and fright them all. They
are easily tamed, and are taught by signs to dive, Use.
and catch fish. In Swethland, at a Cooks-beck they fetch fish out of the pond
into the Kitchen. In Germany, and France, Pesants eat the flesh, but it is
gross, and flegmatique, Carthusians are allowed to eat it. (...). de ^b. l.
13. c. 31. Gesner. Holler. Aelian.
In Physic the fat helps the joints. The blood mixed with water and vinegar,
takes down the swelling of the nerves. The testicles are approved against the
fallingsicknes, but fall short of the Bevers. The liver baked, is good against
the Dysentery; a cushion of the skin, eases the Emrods; the skins help the
palsy, giddiness, and head-each. Shoes thereof ease the pain in the feet. We
in cold climates make gloves, and half sleeves of the whole skin, tail, and
all. The American beasts, Ambrosin. l. 2. c. 13.
the Saricoujeme, and the Carygueibeju, seem to be a kin to them. The former
is as big as a cat, soft-haired, whitish, skinne-footed. In Amphilbia they are.
Marckg. Brasil. l. 6. c. 9.
The latter, called also the Jiya, is as big as a reasonable dog, roundishhead
as a cats, but more coped; ears round, and standing lower; footed like the
Baboone, each has five toes, the inner most shorter then the rest,
soft-haired, not long; black all over, except the head, which is dusky. He
has a yellow spot on the throat. He lives on lobsters, fish, and mandow meal,
moystened in water. Of the S^ elsewhere.

CHAPTER IX. Of the Ichneumon.
HE has his name from Ichneuein, from searching; (...) Ambros^^. Dig. l. 2. c.
14. Name. Albert. (...). Manardus. Bellon. obser. l. 22. c. 22. Descript.
he being able to distinguish between foyson and poison. Called also a swine,
from his hair being so like. Miscalled Ibis; and Anschycamus. Called also
Thyamon, and Alcasis. In Greek Ullos, little hog, because with his snowt he is
ever rooting. At this day styled the Mouse of Pharoh, or Otter of Egypt. Of the
bigness of a Cat, but longer, hair hard, as a Wolfs, bright, and yellowish by
spaces, and russet; blacksnowted, and like a hog; short, and round-eared, legs
black; on the hinder-feet five toes, the last inner one very short, the tail
long, and thick; the teeth, tongue, testicles, like a Cats; having, beside the
passage of the excrement another wide one without, which in hot weather he
uses to open; whence writers have thought them all double sexed. Place. Arist.
H.
Some think that Egypt only produces them; but they are found on the other
side of Atlas, near the heads of the Nile. It is an Amphibium. They feed on
Mice, Snakes, Snails, Lizards, the Chamaeleon, Frogs, and the like: Vitruv.
Food.
They love fowls, especially hens, and the Crocodiles liver; and therefore, as
it is thought, they creep into their bellies, Oppian. Cyneget. l. 3.
while they sleep, whence there is great enmity betwixt the two creatures; so
that if one finds the others eggs, he breaks them, which is well for the
Egyptians, since it prevents the increase of the Crocodiles. Oppian. Cyn. l. 3.
Antipathy. Aelian. l. 9. c. 1. Nature, and manners.
He is also at enmity with the Asp, and all kinds of serpents. He hates the
wind most, so that it begins to rise, he hastens to his hole. They are tamed
easily in Egypt; they destroy rats, like cats, or weesells; they love to be
played with; they shun cold, hide their heads between their legs, rouling
themselves up like a Hedgehog in a ball round; set up their bristles when they
spy any beast; dare encounter one great dog, and choke a cat at three bites;
venture on horses and camells, and any sort of beasts. They whelp as many at a
time as bitches do. The relations about their changing of sex are fabulous.
Their wit is seen herein, that they stand on their hind-legs to prey, Arist.
H. H. l. 6. c. 35. and 9. 6.
and creep slily till it be within reach, and then furiously fasten. He never
venters on his foe, till he call his fellows. Being to fight with the Asp, he
wallows in mire, and then drives it on in the sun, till it serve him for an
armor of proof. If there be no mud near, he wets himself, and roules, and
tumbles in the dust; knowing his nostrills tender, in fight he saves them with
his tail. In Physic his piss some drink with a black cows milk against the
colic. Use.
The ashes of the skin burnt in vinegar, cures a sting of a Serpent, smeared
on. A fume of the hair is good against worms. Aegineta. l. 4. c. 58.


CHAPTER X. Of VVeesels.
ARTICLE I. Of the common VVeese^, or Ferret.
ALmost all Dictionary-writers fetch the name Mustela, Ambrosin. H. Digit. l.
2. c. 15. Name.
(Weesel) from Mus, and Telum, a Mouse, and a Weapon, because of his length:
some from Teele, (...).
long; at length, or from far; or from Mus, and Stelloo, mouse-stealing,
because they draw them out of their holes. Of old Galeoe, from the milky
whitenes. (...).
Some Kedroo, from his fox-craft. Of late Numphitza. It is reddish on the
sides, and back; Description.
sometimes yellowish, ever white about the thraot: Slender-bodied,
short-tayled. Albert.
The teeth less then the mouses; the heart small, yet in comparison with that
of other beasts, Place.
great enough. They are found everywhere; but the white most in Northern
Regions. The great ones are in Mauritania, the greatest, in the Tartesian
territory without Hercules his pillars, by Cales. In Java woods they are. In
the Isle Pordeselene they pass not their bounds. Suidas.
Bring them into Baeotia, they die, or fly. They dwell in holes, clefts of
rocks, haymows, and stables. He eats all things; mostwhat mice, Food. Plin. H.
N. l. 29. c. 4. Aelian.
and moles; he abstain not from serpents: he lies in wait for bats; he sucks
Pigeon-egges, and the blood of birds killed, picks out dead men's, eyes, catches
hares; he has been seen with one in his mouth. That they bring forth at the
mouth, is a tale forged out of the fained turning Galanthis Alkmenas Gendring.
Maid, by Juno into a Weesel. That they have a womb, is certain. The Raven, and
crow hate them for sucking their eggs: their voice frights hens; Antipathy.
Arist. H.
they fight with Cats. They fight with serpents, armed only with a sprig of
run, or with so wthistles; if they want these, they are worsted. Their dung, if
they live in fields, and woods, smells like musk. With their age they change
color. Nature.
They recover their whelps sight with an herb; are easily tamed, if you rub
their teeth with garlic. They dare set on greater beasts. They build their
holes with two doors, one North, the other South. They transport their young
thence for a days space. Their bite is mortal, and makes mad; if it but touch
a Cows udder, it is inflamed. Oil wherein the Weesel has rotted is a remedy,
or rubbing the place with the skin dry. Aristides of Locris died of the bite of
a Weesel. Use.
The Mexicans eat them. Galen says that corned with salt, and dried the flesh
tastes like Hare. The brain dried helps not a little against swounding fits.
Galen. de There. c. 9.
The stomach stuf'd with Coriander-seed cures serpent bites. The lungs are good
for the lungs. The liver helps giddiness, Dioscor. M. M. l. 2. c. 24. Glycas
l. 1.
and swounding, because it increases, and decreases with the moon. Pliny
commends the gall against all venom, Matthiolus used it with Fennell-water
against dimnesse of sight, and skin spots. The yard dried is soverain against
the strangury. The stones, and womb, like the Eagle-stone, prevents a woman's
miscarrying. Lonicerus cries up the blood with juice of Plantan against the
gout, Galen, against catarhs. Mathiolus magnifies the dung taken in honey, with
pulse-meal, and feny-greek against swellings, and wens. The Weesel whole is of
use. Dioscorides commends it unbowelled, and long pickled against sting. Gal.
l. 3. c. 2.
Galen used the dust dried against the falling sickness. Matthiolus the ashes
of it burnt made with water into a dow, against headache, dimnesse of sight,
and blood-shot, smeared on. Marcellus burned it to ashes in an old pot, and
mixed them with honey on a thirsday, in the wane of the moon against swellings of
the jaws. See Ambrosine about the diverse uses of it. Por^^. Phy^oga. l. 6. c.
4. Galen.
A Weesels foot hung with rose, and mustard-feed on the branches of a barren
tree make it bear. Farriers with a piece of the skin have cured Horses of the
parlous disease, called Tach. Some sprinkle seeds with the ashes on their
ground to drive away field-mice; others sees them in much water to that
purpose. Some make the Weesel, and Ictis herein to differ, Differences. Plin.
Galen.
that the one is kept tame, the other goes wild. Others call the white one
Hermellani; that that is white only on the breast Visela. The Rosola, or
Guisela, his dung smells sweet. One is called a Salamander, Figuli. dial. de.
Mustela.
for his many colors. The Austrian Girella, is of the bigness of a Weezel.
The Italian Curriers show a skin black, and glistring brought out of the cold
Coasts, called the Rosoleus, or Romulus. Some count the Chiurca a Ferret. The
Vormela mentioned by Agricola, is another; and Cardan adds the Lardironi, and
the Genet^a.

Scaliger writes that the Chiurca has a ferrets face, and bulk, a foxes head,
lives under ground, is very fruitful, bringing at a birth twelve at once. The
tail small, and almost bald; It self is black-haired, carrying her young under
her belly in a bag. The African Ferret is as big as a great Mouse, resembling a
Ferret, Hier. H. E. l. ^. c. 32. Clusius.
and a Squirrell, lifting up the tail, but not over the head as the Squirrell;
but high, and spreading it abroad, and sitting eating on the breech, holding
his food with the fore-feet squirrell-like, and tossing it. In either jaw were
two longer fore-teeth, the ears roundish, the hair party-colored from head to
tail, sandy, dusk, and white with streaks. The tail very handsome, he could
display it like a Pea-cock; five toes on each foot; four forwards, the
middlemost longest; the fifth like a spur behind. He refused no food, but
liked bread best; he was tame, and went loose. On shipboard they come into the
mariners laps, and stockins, so tame they are. Nieremberg calls it a Lybia
Weezel.

ARTICLE II. Of the wild Ferret, or Fitcher.
SOme call it Putorius; some Furo, Ambrosin. H. Digit. l. 2. c. 16. Name.
either from his theeving by night, or his dark color, from his digging, and
myning in burrows; some Viverra or Ferret from verrunco, ferriting, and driving
beasts out of burrows. (...).
Also Iktis, from a bird of that color; and Pholita, or Pholenta, Colored
between white, and box, Grapald.
white-bellied, reddish-eyed; greater then a tame Weesel. Aristotle makes it of
the bulk of a Malta-whelp; Descript.
but in hair, shape, color (white below) very unlike the common-Ferret. In
Italy, France, and Germany, Place. Gesner. S^rabo. Food.
they are not, but only in Africa, and in England. He lives on honey, fish,
pigeons, and Conies, which he likes best of all. The females die with heat, if
they couple not, when lust is on them. They mix as cats, and bring seven or
eight in a lutter, they carry them forty days; Gendring.
the young after for thirty days are blind; and the fourtieth day after sight
comes, they go a hunting. Provoke them, and their dung sents well; when time in
boxes, they sleep away most of their time. In Narbon, France, they hunt Rabbets
with them; and elsewhere they fetch with them dirds out the high nests, that men
cannot come by. There is a peculiar kind in Zeilan, Differences.
foe to the crowned Serpent, he bites on the root of snake-wood, when he goes
to combat with him. The Hamester is of this kind, bigger then a tame Forret;
Agrico. de any. s^bter.
the back is Hare-coloured, the belly black, the sides shining, feet short. He
is a great gatherer of grain into his burrow. Thuringia is full of them, called
Putorius from his stinking breath; and Icktis, because he loves fish. Ambr. H.
Digit. l. 2. c. 17.
Scaliger calls him a stinking cat. Bodied like a Mattern, but bigger; narrower
necked, broader bellied, blacker on the tail and thighs; the sides yellower. It
has a double rank of hair, some shorter, and yellow; other longer, and black,
the left legs are not shorter, as some think. They inhabit garners, stables,
woods, and bank-sides. They feed on Mice, Hens, and other fowls (whose heads
they strait pull off) fish, frogs. In Spring their skin smell strongly, in
Winter not. There also the Noerza, as big as a Pole-cat, of an Otters-colour,
is a stinking beast, lurking in wood-corners.

CHAPTER XI. Of the Mattern, or Pole-Cat; and of the Zibelline-Ferret, or
Musk-Cat.
THe Martes, Ambrosin. H. Digit. l. 2. c. 18.
or Mattern, has the name from his fiercenes; called also Martia, Marta,
Marrus, and Foina, Gainus, Scismus. His teeth pure white, even set, and keen.
The dog-teeth in either jaw hang out, six smaller of diverse length are
between, in stead of cutters, and are very small in the lower jaw. The grinders
are eight, and like saws, some single. The utmost above stand more inward then
the rest by much. Under the skin are sinewy small veins, Zootom. Democr. p. 317.
stretched out, answering all the ribs in number, and order; the ribs are
fourteen. No membrane fleshly. The muscles of the paunch are between the two
tunicles of the rim, which makes it seem thicker, and grosser, as the
horny-film of an Ox-ey; fleshy in length by that line, that answers the navell,
but not abroad, and only below. The kell fastened to the stomach, entralls,
and milt; the milt very small, hanging on the left side of the stomach, and a
part of the kell fastened to it. The stomach bigger then ordinary for such a
small body, consisting of a doubled coat, the outmost whiter, the inmost
smoother, both thin. The guts fastened behind to the backbone by a thin skin.
No blind gut, all uniforme. The bladder very long, thin, but inclining more to
the stomach. The liver of seven films, the weakest three-parted, like a
chicken-foot, the middle three-cornerd, annexed to the hollow vein, a little way
by a thin skin. The right Rein is higher. The left Emulgens longer then the
right; both sprouting from the great artery, not from the hollow-vein. Yet I
doubt of it. By the hollow-vain are here and there reddish, and yellow
kernells; the uppermost on the right side joins to the liver by small veins.
The hollow vein sends many sprigs through the loyn-space of muscles to the back
bone; and the great artery lies under the hollow. The seed-vessels descend from
the midst of the reins, but are parted in two on either side below, one branch
joined to the stone, reaching without the paunch. The yard arising from strings
of os sacrum, is gri^tly, and hard as a bone, writhed at top like an
wimble-skind, close, sharp as a needle. The right uritory sit higher into the
bladder, then the left; a fine sinew comes strait down, tied to the right side,
sit into the beginning of the hollow vein. Also a small sinew on the left-side,
descends to the stomacks-mouth. The hollow-vein is set into the right ventricle
of the heart, near the right lappet, which is black, and full of blood, and
greater then the left; this is white, and bloodles, hollow, spreading on the
right side into the lungs. The great artery is set into the hearts left
ventricle, bending downward. The hollow vain on the right, passing a little
above the lungs-branches it self, into six springs, rising to the lower jaw. On
the right side the lungs, consist of four lesser veins, on the left of two
greater. They are most in the North, and in the German-Alps, Southward, and
toward Italy. They inhabit the roofs of greater houses, and beech, and
firre-woods. A Boor told Gesner, that in a very high firre-tree, he took a
Mattern, and four welps. France has no such. Out of Poland are some brought
of a slight dusk-colour.

Beside other Weezels-food, they are said to eat shrubs, Renod. l. 3. Pharmacop.
their dung smells like Musk; they are easily tamed. Gesner had one that loved
his dog, that went about with him; let loose, she would come to the chain
again, and play with him like a cat, lying on the back. But there is no
trusting them; therefore some advise, to take out their dog-teeth. The skin is
of use; that under the throat, makes caps good and wholesome for the head.
Differences.
In Canada the women show their babes in them. There are two kinds; one tamer
of a dark yellow, except a white part of the throat, which curriers and
skinners call Faina. Bodies like a cat, a little longer, and shorter legged. It
rooms about the country, kills Hens, and sucks their eggs. The other is wild,
of a brighter, and softer hair, and a clay-coloured throat. Some inhabit
Beech, Ambrosin. H. Dig. l. 2. c. 19. Arist. Niphus. Alciate. Agricola.
and Oak, and Holm-woods, some pitch, and firre-woods. About the Bregantine
Lake, they shine by night.

The Zibelline Weezel, or Satherius, or Sebalus, or the Sarmatick, and
Scythian-Mouse, is somewhat less then the Mattern, of a dark yellow all over,
except the throat, which is ash-colored. Found in the North, in the utmost
woods of Moscovia, in Lithuania, white-Russia, and near the Cronion-Sea, and
in Laucerusa, a wood of Scandinavia. The Tartars, and Laplanders send the best
skins. The Guinee story tells of store, in a Province of Congo; they lurk in
shady Forests, and catch birds. They are very nimble, and restles. It is said,
that, if you lay the skin under other clothes in a chest-bottome, in three
days it shall be found uppermost; Handle them, yet they remain even. The
long-haired, and inclining to black, are the best skins. You spoil them, if you
lay them in the Sun. To keep them from the moth, shake them often, and lay them
up wrapped in wormwood; they are very costly. Agricola saw forty sold for a
thousand crowns. Ambrosine, a half sleeve trimmed therewith, worth four
hundred pound of Bonony-money. They of Obdoria, offer this Mus-cats-skins to
their Idol, called Zlata Baba. M. Paul. Venet.
The great Cham of Tartary, his Tents are said to be lined with them.

CHAPTER XII. Of the Genetta, and the Zibethus, or Civet-Cat.
SOme conceive that Genetta, being a Spanish name, Ambrosin. H. Digit. l. 12.
c. 21.
borrows the name from some place there. Others call it a Spanish, or
Genet-Cat. Some a lesser Panther. The Oppians suppose it to be a lesser Wolf.
The whole body is handsomely, marked with black spots.

The whole skin is of a soft and thick hair, and downy, breathing forth a not
unacceptable sent. It is found in Spain in waterish places, where it seeks the
food. A winter halfe-sleeve furred therewith is sold for 25, nay 30 pound
Bononian money. lb. c. 22. Scalig. Ex. 211. Ludov. Romans Gyllius. Bellonius.
The Zibet, unknown perhaps to the ancients, is by the Greeks called Zapetion;
by others a Zibet-Cat; or a Civet-cat, a kind of Panther, which the ancients
thought the only well-sented beast; this is thought the same with the Hyena of
old. It is armed with sharp teeth and hair. An arm long from head to dock; the
legs to the feet, a third part of an arms length. He is about the bigness of a
fox, colored like a wolf, but black-spotted. He carries a bag about his
privities, wherein lies the Civet, that is so fragrant. Rondel^. Pharmac. l. 3.
c. 16.
He has a wide mouth like the Badger, the tongue not quite so rough as a
cats. They are found in Pegu, Leo Af. Cardan.
Congo, China, Cambaja, and in the Ethiopian woods. Brought also out of Egypt,
where they breed plentifully, and out of Spain into Italy. He loves raw flesh,
and field-mice. Cardinal Galeotto feeds them at Rome with chicken-flesh. In
China he eats sweetmeats, and rice, and eggs, and the sweet wood called
Camaron; if that be the beast Pigafetta, mentions in his journall. Scaliger
has seen them so tame at Rome and Mantua, that men carry them harmlesly on
their shoulders. A Florentine Consul at Alexandria had one so gentle, Bellon.
Obser. l. 2. c. 20.
that he played with men, taking them by the nose, ear, lips, teeth, and did
them no harm. Ever fed from the first it was with woman's breast-milk. The sweet
excrement lurking as before, Fallopius.
is first white, after of a clayish color, at length waxes black. It smells
strong at first to wonder men; being laid in the open air, and hardened, it
obtains that most grateful fragrancy. Some will have it to be his seed. It is
gathered in a silver spoon, or one of brass, or horn, every day a dram. If you
vex him with a small rod, he yields more at a time. Some are said to piss
civet at a set time of the year. Civet is best kept in horn. There are some
nobles of Ulyssipone that gain thence yearly fifteen hundred pounds. It is of
use in Physic, and otherwise. A grain put on hot bread, applied to the navell
eases the collique. Maiol. Coll. 7.
It is one good ingredient against giddiness, and apoplexy, smeared on the
nostrills, temples, and crown of the head. It opens the mother. Some adulterate
it with ox-gall, storax, and honey. It is used in preparing Cypres-pouder,
sope-balls, Ambro^^
strongwaters, oils, spirits, and perfumes.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the Hare.
HE is called Lepus, and Levipes, Isidor. Origin. l. 12. Name (...).
lightfoot from his fleetnesse, or his soft going by reason of his shaggy feet.
Derived from the old Aeolick Lepori; or from his uncertain footing Leioos, that
it is hard to trace him. In Greek Liporis, Lagoos; by the Athenians, by the
Ionians Lagos. And Dasypous, from his shaged feet; and from his swiftness
doubtless, Dromalos, Ptox, Tachines. In Candy Kekenas; by Aristotle Trochos.
His head is short, Varro de I. D. l. 3. c. 12. Scalig. Albert.
and round; neck narrow, round, soft, long, prick-eared, legs strait and light,
breast not fleshy, backbone round, breast sinking; thighs light; those before
near one another, behind stradling; the whole body pliable; heart very great.
About Briletum, Therne, the Chersonesus, the Propontis they seem double
livered. Zootom. Democ. ^^9.
The gristle under the fore corner of the ey is broad; there lies somewhat near
the brain like a worm; the body round like a vault, Arist. l. 3. ^ 9.
not found in other beasts. The ear-tip thin, and transparant as a cats. Among
the toothed, and single-bellied beasts this alone has cured. They are
everywhere, both in hot, and colder climates. White ones are brought out of
Africa. In the Indian Isle Mazzua they abound so, the natives everywhere kill
them. Place. Paerzan. Lapez. Ovid. art. am. l. 2. Arist.
Their plenty on mount Athos is grown to a proverb. They frequent uninhabited
places most, where huntsmen least trouble them. In Ithaca are none, nor live
they, if brought thither. Of their food Bargeus has composed nine queint
Verses. The sum is: They nibble on rank grass, and corn-stalks, and strings
of herbs in the earth, and soft barks of trees, and moist books, apples,
acorns, fitches, milt, Food.
elms-leaves; especially wild mint, watercresses, and betony, and pennyroyall.
They gender averse, as all other beasts that piss backward. Gendring.
Xenophon. Po^lux. Athenaeus l. 9.
They couple all the year, especially in spring. They admit of superfaetation.
Aelian speaks of pregnant leverets found in a Hare cut up. In the time of
Antiochus Gonata two Hares in Astypalaea in a short time bred above six
thousand. And all Geron an Isle of the Scarian sea was within a while pestered
from one Hare big with young. They breed in forests in the most solitary
places, two, three, sometimes four at once; you may know the female by the long
head, Sex.
thick body, longer ears, and grisly hair inclining to black on the back, and
by her many doubles when hunted. The male has red shoulders, and long hairs in
the midst, the head shorter, and blunter; the beard, and brow hairs longer, the
ears shorter, and broader. Before the hounds he will run strait on ten miles
together. They hate Eagles, crows, Weesels, Foxes, and Dogs. They live seven
years. Archel. Albert.
Their age may be gues'd by the clefts of their dung by the mouth of their
form. Their voice is squeaking or mourning. Philomel. author.
They are well-sighted, and sleep with their eyes open, and are quick of
hearing. The noise of shaken leaves makes them run, Nature.
and use their ears to guide them in their course, when they go to sleep, that
their form may not be found, they run too and fro with doubles, and then take
a leap into their hole, where they lies with their forelegs together, and their
ears laid squat on their shoulders. They love to sit abroad in the Sun in fair
weather. They love the place best where they were bred. Are easily tamed; but
die, if too fat, yet, on the least scope given, they run away to their old
liberty, and fall to their first wildness. They seldom grow fat in the woods,
because perhaps they live in fear. Against winter they provide their house in
Sunny places, Wit.
in summer Northward. They run far for food, on purpose to keep themselves long
winded by daily breathing, and to use their feet. To amuse the hunters they run
through windy ways, shunning shrubs, least their hair should stick thereon,
and so yield sent to the dogs. They know how to proportion their course, as the
dogs are slower, or fleeter, and they lurk, when hunted, among clods, because
they are of their color. Jews may not eat them; but among the Gentiles, after
Attalicus the Cydonian had made Hare a dish at his feasts, it became a dainty
ever after, and was thought to make the face fair. For certain Alexander
Severus ate it daily; Lamprid. Mar. Epig. 30. Brui. l. 13.
and Martial writes something, that sounds that way. As for the temper of
Hares flesh, those of two, or three months old, leverets, of six at most are
most juicy, and of easiest digestion; if older, as above a year old, it breeds
gross blood, yet there are jolly huntsmen that eat it every day.

But that Cato Censorinus prescribes it, and pot herbs to the sick, it must be
meant of young Leverets. But those that live on hills, or heaths, feeding on
Pennyroyall, etc. are much better then those that frequent waterish places.
They taste best as cold weather comes in. See Ambrosin about the dressing of
them. Galen. l. 11. de Simpl. med. facul.
In Physic no part almost of the Hare that is not useful, even the very
excrements. The Head burnt with Bears-grease, or vinegar, helps shedding the
hair; the Brain helps children in breeding teeth, if often rubbed on the gum;
drunk in wine, it helps those that cannot hold their water; the Heart is tied
on those that are troubled with Quartains; the powder of it dried with a third
part of Manna, Frankincense in white wine, men drink seven days against the
Falling Sickness; Sextus.
the Lungs helps sore eyes; the Liver with sour wine, the Colic; the Gall in
sugar, pearls, and dimnesse of the eyes; the curd of one that has eaten
nothing but milk, dried in the Sun, or smoke, is sovereign against
bloodyfluxes; It draws out a thorn, Dioscor.
mixed with flower of Frankincense, and Oke-gum. Some use it against the sting
of Serpents; and to help conception: But it is said to kill what is conceived,
if drunk in; the Reins boiled, Idem.
are ministered for the Stone; stale, and tied to the feet, Matthiol.
eases the Gout; From the Mother, some make medicines for the griefs of the
bladder; Olam. Quercetan. Albert. Diosc.
the Flesh fried in oil, is ministered glister-wise against Dysenteries, and
Ulcers in the bowels, to the same purpose is the blood roasted good; some
mingle it with Barly-meal; The Milk makes women fruitful; the Fat with
Bean-flower, helps to draw out stings; the Tooth hanged on, eases toothache;
the Ancle-bone tied on with a string of Hares hair, Marcellus. Tragus.
mitigates the Colic; and distilled with Pennyroyal, and drunk, it allayes
sharp child-bearing-labour, and is prescribed with Oke-lime, Pearl, Coral, and
Paeony-seed against the Falling Sickness, and provokes Urine; the Skin in
sere-cloth, is good against burstings; the Feet cut off while he lives, easens
the Gout; the Piss with Spiknard is a wholesome drink against Dropsy;
Matthiol^s.
the dung born by a woman, hinders conception, but put under, helps the months,
and dries, burn the whole Hare, the ashes taken in warm wine, helps the Stone;
whereof also is compounded an electuary, Montag. l. 2.
whereto Jews-stone, and spunges found among small stones are added.

Hares differ in color, Differences.
bigness, fatness. Some are blew, others in a black-soyls, duskish, others on
red-soyls, glistering. In America are found some with the black Hare colored,
the sides white and black, the rest white. There are white ones on the Alps,
Plin. l. 18. c. 55.
and on the hill tops by the valley of Anania* Gesner saw one milk-white, with
black hair on the ear-tips, and found the flesh tenderer in taste then other;
the Elymaean are as big a Fox. In Macedon, and Transalpin-Gual are great ones;
in Italy, and Spain, less. In lower Hungary they are observed to be fatter
then in Italy. One kind is said to sent so of Musk, Manard.
that they make the hounds mad that hunt them. Ambrosin. de Digit. l. 2. c. 23.
Some are called mountain, some field, some marish, some Italian, French,
Spanish, Indian Hares. The Italian are low-footed before, black-backed, and
white-bellied. The Mountaneers differ from others in their black-hew, Varro.
bulk, wildness, and thick hair; the French are most what bright. The Spanish
comprehend Rabbits, there is one in New-Spain called by the Natives Citli,
shaped as ours, and feeds so, Nieremb. H. exot. l. 9. c. 8.
but with ears very long, and broad for such a body: The Indians weave the hair
into clothes and sheets, which they wear for cloaks. The Brasilians have their
Cotias of the bigness, shape, and taste of the Hare; yellowish, little eared,
and almost no tail. There is a greater kind called Pacae, round mouthed,
Cat-faced, dusk, with white spots; tender of flesh, and skin also, therefore
fought after as a dainty. There is also a kind that the Indians cudgel to
death; then flea it, Amat. Lusitan.
and work the blew-beaten-flesh into a Paste, which they wrap in the skin, and
call Musk.

CHAPTER XIV. Of the Cony.
Has the name from myning, Name.
and burrowing under ground, and dwelling there; called by Aelian a little
Hare, or Leveret; by the Greeks Sunax, (...).
Dasupous; which yet Pliny seems to distinguish from both Cony, and Hare.
Strabo calls them digging Hares, and Leberidas, (...).
perhaps from the Serpents-slough; whence a young one newly kindled, Strabo.
Geogra. l. 3.
and hairlesse, is termed liberis, laberis, and laurix, or glib. Also Adapis,
perhaps from Adapanos, (...).
that cannot be spent; so fruitful, Hemol. in Dioscor.
and numerous they are. By Erotianus, Limopoios, (...).
dearth-bringer. All the Belly-muscles cleave fast between the two skins of the
Peritonaeum. The strait gut small; the heart little, the liver great, and the
reins, Zoor^m. Democ. p. 327.
the milt long like a Swallows, or Cocks; the Parepar, or Byliver, shaped like
a shoe-makers broad handled knif, lying in the midst between the broad liver
strings; the stomach not unlike a Hogs, very like a Mouses, or Dormouses; the
Cystis small fastened to the liver; the blind-gut more then a palm great,
celled, and has an appendix of three fingers; the turning-joynts of the loins
long, between which ly fair muscles. Pliny denies there are any bred in the
Isle Ebusus; Place.
but they swarm in France, Italy, Mauritania, Muscovy, Poland, England, etc.
About Mosaiscus, a Muscovy-town, they are numberless; Scaliger.
but they abound most in Spain. In the Baleares, Majorca, and Minorca, they
devour their harvest. In Zeland by the Seaside there are many, enough to
furnish all Brabant in Winter.

They feed on grass, three-leaved grass, cabbage, lettuce, cicory, turnips,
and apple-parings, and especially bay berries. Food.
Mans-blood fattens them apace; they cannot away with moisture; they couple
every six, Gendring.
or rather twelf months, and kindle monthly in hot-countries. One that kept
Conies, relates that some have brought three young at once; and after a
fortnight as many more. But in Germany, and Italy, they seldom breed in
winter, Niphus.
they bring five or nine at most; that of their double-sex is a fiction; they
suck oneantwenty days; if any handle them, the dames are angry, and either
forsake, or hurt, or kill their young: And the males do the same, if the
females are busy about their young, and neglect them. By leaping Rabbits,
Nature, and Wat.
escape taking; they forsake places, where they are in danger; and one going,
all the rest follow. It is known that they chew the cud; through envy they will
bite one another ears, and legs off, yet are easily tamed. Cardan knew one of
it self follow the dogs; they dig them burrows with many outlets. In Spain they
in sandy soil undermined, and subeverted a fair town, M. Varro.
so that the natives must seek other dwellings; they come not abroad, but
mornings, or evenings; and go not far from burrows, and stop up the entrance,
to prevent discovery by the passengers; their flesh, especially of the young
ones, is tenderer then Hare. Use.
A Spanjard was the first who made it a dish on his table; they care not in
Spain for tame Conies, they taste too much of their food, but wild are a dainty.
They parboyl them, and stuf them with sweet herbs; and lard them with pork. In
Physic, the fat refreshes the sinews, and helps watering: Burned, Marcel.
Ambrosin. Differences.
it cures the inward ague; they differ in color, bigness, inwards, and
places: there are white, black, yellow, ash-colored, pied, bright, stated with
black, and glittering spots. Nieremb. H. E. l. 9. c. 8.
Valerian saw at Verona with a Jugler one fouretimes as big as ours, and
strangly fat. Pliny thinks that the Betick-Conies have double inwards. Some
called Vtiae in India, are no bigger then Rats. I leave to the reader to judge,
whether they are Conies that Scaliger describes, of Hare-colour, short-eares,
thick-body, and well set, long-tails like the Squirrels. Some call them
Pharohs-Mice, some Indian-Hares; there those they call Indian-Pigs, of the
bigness of our Conies, but shorter-legged, on the fore six toes, on the
hinder-feet five; they have Mice-teeth, no tail, a sharp Muzzle; Ears little,
and round, rather bristled then hairy; they gruntle like Pigs, they eat all
herbs, fruit, bread, oats, living many month without water. One male is enough
for seven, or nine females; admitting of superfetation like Conies. In winter
they kindle, in 60 days all seeing. The males fight before the female. We have
added the picture of another Indian-Cony. Some make nine sorts of
Indian-Conies. Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 7.
1. The Pacfli, as dainty as those in Spain, if it live where good grass
grows. 2. The Eliztactotli, or white-breast. 3. The Cuitlatepotli, or short
tail. 4. The Tocant^ctli of Peru, shaped like the Mexican Mole, called Tuca. 5.
The Quau^toctli. 6. Metochtli. 7. Cacotochtli. 8. Another Cuitlatepotli. All
differing in shape, and name, not so savoury, and delicate of taste as ours. All
this I had out of D. Franc. Hornandus his manuscripts. Out of another, that
there are some somewhat less then the Castellani tail like a fish,
well-tasted; living on hills, and grassie places, and not in burrows. There are
four sorts of them. ld. lb. c. 9.
1. Quemi, greater, and harder. 2. Utiae. 3. Mohlas. 4. Cuties, little,
daintier, and wholesomer. There are Viscachae, long-tailed like Cats. They love
snow, and batten on it. The Hair of old has been valued, and of use.

CHAPTER XV. Of the Squirrell.
THe first who called this small beast Sciurus was Oppianus, Ambrosin. Dig.
Name.
who lived in the time of Antonine C. so called from the shadow of his tail;
(...).
and Kampsiouros, from Kamptein, because he bends, and turns up his tail ever
on his back; and Eleion, a Dor-mouse; and Nitela, from climing; and Pirolus;
and Spiriolus; and Scurulus from running. A kind of Mouse he is. His
lower-teeth are longest; Belluacen. Descript.
and the blinde-gut, answering the stomach. They are found almost everywhere;
especially Northward, where their color is fairest. They feed on apples,
chesse-nuts, Place. Food. Gendring.
and other nuts, beech, and pineapples, and acorns; and in Summer they hoard up
against Winter. In Spring they gender, and build nests of sticks, and leaves,
on the highest boughs of trees. They bring three, or four young at once; that
are said to leave their nest after they are three or four days old. They can
use their fore-feet like hands, are easily tamed, Nature. Wit.
and chatter: going, they drag their tail after; sitting they turn it upon
their back, in leaping it is in stead of wings; in schorching weather it yields
them shadow, passing waters it serves for a sail, they make a bark of a tree
their ship; in their holes they have many outlets, which they stop, or open as
the wind stands, or foreseeing a storm.

Some dress them to eat, the Velleians hold them for a delicate. The fat
mollifies. Use.
Galen commends it highly against ear-ache. Bruyer. l. 13. de recib. c. 29.
Iuglers abuse the teeth to fortune telling; they differ in color, and
according to their place. Differences.
In Germany they are in the first year black, Cromerus.
when bigger, red. Arist.
In Poland gray, and flame-coloured. In Russia all ash-colored. Pliny.
In Podolia spotted. Amb.
Some are called Pontick mice; the Getulian, and Indian are pied. The Pontick
lives about Pontus, and used there for wear, called also the Laffican-mouse,
and the Venetian, and by the Pole, Popieliza. He is ash-colored in bright, the
tail not so bushy as others, but natured as the common squirrell. He is buried
all winter in a deep sleep, some on the back are more ash, some more fire red.
The Getulian is party-colored red, and black, streaked handsome with white,
and dusk from the shoulders to the tail through back, and sides, less then the
common one, with hanging ears, almost as big as his head, round, fetched
through the surface of the skin, long headed like a frog. Of the Indian are
five, or six kinds.

1. The Quauhtechallotl, the Tliltik, or Tlilocotequillin, so called from the
black color, Hier. H. E. l. 9. c. 34.
and the pine tree, where he dwells. He eats the pine-apples, in the hollow
there he lays up his winters provision, there they keep their brood, and gnaw
all round. They are subtle, chirp like sparrows, the tail is woolly, and can
cover the whole body. They are easily tamed, and brought to eat any thing.
Eating, he stands on his hind-feet, and holds his meat with the forefeet,
lifting up his tail, but running he stretches it out at length. Anger him he
raises his hair. They make winter-furres of the skins, which are warm, and
handsome.

2. The Quauhtechallotl, Quapachtli, or Corticolotequilin, so called from the
clay-colour of the belly, twice as big as others; and except the belly is
white, black, and dusk; the tail long and bushy, that can cover him all over.
They live with their young in burrows, eat Indian wheat, which they take out of
the fields, and lay up for winter, they are subtle, and never tamed.

3. The Tlechallotl, with a tail half bald, and shorter, not about nine inches,
is never tamed, bites cruelly, gnaw all things, is bright, and dusk, eats as
squirrells, and most maiz, has great eyes, digs himself a burrow, strews it
with wool, cotton, or any soft thing, lives there, and chirps like a sparrow.

4. The Thalmototli, of a span long, great-headed, and eyed for such a small
body; the tail long, bushy, with white, dark, and black streaks, and can cover
himself therewith, the body is pied, sometimes inclining to yellow.

5. The Quiniichpatlan, or flying mouse, black, shaped like a small bird, long
near the arms, and thighs; he goes from tree to tree, as if he flew; less he
is then the rest mouse-headed, great eared, feed as the other. The ashes of the
tail burnt, are said to easen childbearing.

6. The Yztactechalotl, like the rest, only the head, neck, and buttocks at
top, yellow, and the tail has blew spaces, and whitish, and yellow streaks;
the rest of the body is whitish, whence it has the name.

CHAPTER XVI. Of the Dormouse.
CAlled Glis from gliscere to wax, or grow fat, Amb. Dig. Vi. l. 2. c. 29.
resting, and batning all winter in its hole. In Greek Eleios, of old Gelaios,
Name.
(whence happily Glis,) so called from living abroad, (...).
in woods, or in winter in hollow trees sleeping; Isidor.
some call him Lagoneiron, (...).
the sleepy Hare. Some Muozon, from the sharp Muzzle, for such it is, and long;
the Ears very sharp, the tail not so bushy; Described.
the belly strutting out more then the Squirrells; sides and back ash-colored,
some yellowish on the belly are taken. They are not only in woods, but also
about country-houses. It is a mistake, that there are none in Yreland, nor
where Yrish wood is; Place.
I know the contrary. They swarm near Goricia, and in the Alps of Carniola,
Styria, and Carinthia. They eat beech, acorns, nuts, apples, etc. Some say,
they open apples, Food.
only for the kernels. In Winter they ly snorting, and fattening in
hollow-trees, in so deep a sleep, Nature.
that fire can scarce wake them, nor cutting; Wit. Arist.
till you cast them into scalding water, they stir not. In summer they couple,
and bring forth at fall of the leaf. They are prously tender of their old
fires, and dames. Like Mice, they quit a ruinous house, three months before it
fall by a prophetique instinct; that winters-fatning by rest, lasts not above
six years. All that inhabit one wood, meet sometime, and maintain a flight
against those of another hill, or river. All authors hold that there is poison
in them about their tail, and that their piss sprinkled on any part, makes it
incurably, putrify to the bone. Some write, Epiphan.
that the Viper blinds, and fosters up their young, and thence the venom
comes. Q. Scaurus was the first who set their flesh before his guests, Use.
at his sumptious Feasts: the Romans held them for delicates, whence their
Gliraria, or Dormouse pens. They are thought best, and fattest from October to
January; and the younger the better meat. In Physic they have also place.
Eating the flesh frees from dog-hunger; the fat provokes sleep, if you anoint
the soles of the feet therewith: the dung drunk, breaks the stone; the same
with vinegar, and rosemary, cures shedding the hair; Plin.
the ashes clear the eyesight. There are several kinds of them. Differences.
There is among the Allobroges, the Savoyards, and the Tarantesians such a
beast, Bruyer.
that sleeps a great part of the year, Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 75.
and is of a delicate taste. In East India are some as big as Pigs, that
overturne houses, and dig through walls. There are some reddish-haired,
senting like Musk. In Chiapa is a little beast, the bigness of a Cony, shaped
like a Dor-mouse; that, when she seeks her food, carries her young on her back.

CHAP. XVII. Of Mice.
ARTICLE I. Of House-Mice.
MIce we divide into House, Ambr. l. 2. c. 32.
Field, Nut, Spider, Alpine, and Water-mice. The first called in Latin Catus,
Name.
and Sorex and Mus, (...).
from the Greek, Mus; Ratus is the name of the greater, so called from
ravening; (...).
now of late called Riskos in Greek. Sorex is from the noise in nibbling, like
sawing, or from the rotten matter, that breeds them: in the Aeolick Vrax, (...).
from the muzzle like the Swines-snout; by the Thracians Arklos; (...).
by some Sminthos, and Lamas. No need of describing the outward parts; as for
the inner, the heart is very great; it is said to have no gall. Varin.
Only in horned-beasts, Described.
having teeth on one side; and in Hares, Arist.
Bats, and Mice, Plin.
that have teeth on either side; is there a womb, Sever.
having a hollow, Zoo^om. p. 323.
whereon the embrio hangs in the midst. The lappet of their heart is far
greater on the right then the left side, and that black, as gore blood. At the
stomacks-mouth above is a certain round passage, turning back into it self,
having the shape of a Bird turning, and hiding the neck and head in the breast.
The hollow vein, rising from the liver, wide in the beginning, then slenderer,
but even all along. The blind-gut is like a Swines-stomack, though less. The
stones as big as a Chickens, and the skins hang lower as the testicles; and the
right is fuller of veins then the left. The right rein is nearer to the hollow
vein then the left. The privy part is gristly, with a threefold parting, and
sharp at end, the rest consists of two sinews. The bladder-neck has fair
kennels before: the mid-rif is transparant in the middle, long, and round. In a
dissected Mouse, in the right horn of the womb were found four young, in the
left, two; each had it is cake of flesh round, disposed before the navell, and
covered. Some write, Place.
there are no Mice in the Isle Parus; that about the Castle Slane in Scotland,
Hect.
if you bring a great Mouse, he dies. Boer.
That there are none in Peru, but those that were brought out of Spain with the
Merchants-Wares; they eat corn, Food.
bread, flesh, and pulse, often onjons, and garlic; they nibble on many cheeses,
they sup wine, and lick oil. If hunger-starved, they fall on each other. The
females can fill themselves with licking of salt; which made Pliny think that
by licking they gendred: Gendring.
But it is certain, that they couple, and bring many at once, Plin. l. 10. c.
65.
hundred-and-twenty at a time. And some in Persia have been found with young in
the dames belly. They breed also out of filth in houses, Anist. H. A. l. 8. c.
37.
and ships.

As in India, Worms a finger thick, breed of a rotten stuf in reed, Pausanias.
which after turn into Butter-flies, and Mice. In Jonia, through the
overflowing of Maeander, Mice multiply so, that men are fain to shift their
dwellings. Those that breed of filth, gender not; or if they do, their young
do not. Cardan.
Their noise is squeaking. They hold antipathy with elaterium, Sea-Onion,
coloquintida, (...).
the Weesel, Hawk, Cats, etc. but sympathy with sweet majoram, to the root
whereof they betake themselves, when they ail any thing; and they agree with
Swine; for offer a mous-liver in a fig to a Sow, she shall follow you without
grunting; as Pierius Valerian at Padua has experimented. They are quick of
hearing, Nature.
and hate light by night, because it dazles them. In goldsmiths shops they eat
fileings of mettles, and doubtless digest them. In the Isle Gyarus, Plin. l. 8.
c. 57.
they drove out the inhabitants, and nibled on iron, and steel, in the
iron-mongers shops. Golden metalls, their bellies can cut through. Their piss
sprinkled thereon, eats through. If they slip to the water, they hold by each
others tayls, so that if one escape all escape. Amoldus.
Albert saw in the low countries a Mouse, hold the candle to his master at his
nod, and bidding. They differ in bigness, color, hair smell, and place. In
Arabia are Mice much greater then Rats. Differences.
Vitriacus speaks of some in the East, as big as Foxes. Anist.
Americus found exceeding great ones in a certain Island, most are of the
color of the Ass, some black, some dusk, some ash. Gesner saw one very white
in Germany, taken in April, with reddish bolt-goggle-eyes, and a beard rough,
and full of rough hairs. Scaliger saw another very bright, with flaming eyes.
Albert writes of white, and very lustful; and white stones found in their
excrements. Some are softer haired then others, Ae^ian.
and some as bristled, and sharp as Hedge-hogs in the region of Cyrene; and a
kind of Mice are called Echines. Hedge-hogs. The dung of some is sweet. In
Italy is a kind called Moschardine, Plin.
from their sent. Heriod.
Bellonius saw one that lived on Hoscyam-seed only, Ruell. H. P^ant. ^. 4.
white-bellied, ash-colored, backed, long-bodied, and tayled, and
sword-mouthed, called Skalopes, (...).
by the Scholiast on Aristophanes. (...).
In Cappadocia is a kind called Muexis.

ARTICLE II. Of water-Mice, and other wild Mice.
VVIlde Mice live abroad, Ambrosin.
called Nitedulae, Digit.
they with their feet dig themselves holes. The field-Mice are called
Arourai^us, (...).
the wood-Mice Agrious. (...)
They abound no where so as in Egypt. Near Thebes, after the overflow of
Nilus, in warm weather, Name.
they come numberles out of the clefts of the ground. Aelian. l. 6. c. 21.
Between Gazara, and Belba they swarm so, that, Place.
were they not devoured by the Perenopters (Birds) they would eat up all kinds
of seeds; they devour Hops, Parsnips, and the roots of all sorts of Pulse;
Food.
they affect Artichokes most. In the year 1271. they destroyed all kind of
Grain, so that a great dearth ensued. In the North they lurk under the snow,
and feed on worms. Cardan. de rer.
They are in some places bred after sudden rains, and floods. Variet.
The forepart of a Mouse has the full shape, the hinder not. Sometimes they
propagate of seed. Arist.
It has happened, that, when the movers have intended to reap a field next
day, the Mice have in one day prevented them, and devoured all in one night, at
Calenum we have seen it done, says Niphus. In Cantabria, men are hired to
hunt them. The Aeolians, and Trajans were so vexed with them, that they
sacrificed them to Smynthian Apollo. They entrap them, and knock them on the
head with a Spade; when they are hurt, they betake them to succoury, that is
their nature. Not to speak now of the Rats, Kinds.
with tails tufted at the end, and have a peculiar cry; nor of the leem that
falls from the clouds in hasty rain, Olaus.
and lives till it taste new grass; nor of the Napel-Mouse.

There is the Filbert mouse, of which kind there is a greater, Ambr.
and a lesser. Gesner kept a great one some days alive, Dig. l. 2. c. 32.
it was like a Rat and Mouse-coloured on the back, the sides yellow, and
especially the head, the ears great, and smooth, the belly white, feet reddish,
the tail hairy, eyes broad, black, goggle, the beard white, and black, smelling
like the house-mouse. The less is reddish, some, but few, have a sweet sent,
Albert.
called by the Italians Muschardines, by some Lucioli from their bright
glistring eyes; it is very like a Spider-mouse. He nestles among the bows of
the Filbert-tree, or the Flax, and also under ground, and eats Nuts. Some of
them sleep from harvest to spring, Avicen.
some say without waking; but those that have kept them say they wake
sometimes. There also a Spider-mouse that is so nimble and light, it can walk
on thread, and not bent it, or on a sword edge, Sipontine.
without taking harm. Others say it is venomous, Gesner.
and has the name from a fish, called Aranaeus, or a Spider, it is much less
then a Weesel, inclining to ash color, teeth small, (...).
the tail short, and slender, the muzzle long and sharp. Aetius.
The eyes so small for such a body, Albert.
that Pliny thought it pureblind, and others call it the blind mouse.
Maethiolus.
It is dusk, and yellow, the belly white, Swine-snowted, thick of hair, (...).
the tail twice as little, as of other mice. In either jaw are two foreteeth
sticking o^t. Between the cheek teeth is no hollow place, Ambrosin.
but they are all as one bone; in one part are three knags so small, that you
cannot see them. there are four other cheek teeth unequal, and knaged, in all
twenty teeth. They are not beyond the Appenine hill, Plin.
but everywhere in Italy, Matthiol.
especially about Trent, also in Germany. They winter in stables, in summer
they haunt gardens, and Cow-dunghills, feeding on roots, especial eatable
thistles, to the Husbandmans great damage, also on carrion. Those by Trent are
not venomous. Matthiol.
They hate the track of wheels. Barbarus.
Their squeake is shriller then of other mice, but by reason of its dim
sight, it is sluggish. Their bite is venomous, for a Cat will catch, but not
eat them. Their bite is worse that are great with young to any other creature
that is so. The Alpine Mouse lives in the Alps, is called also Marmota, and
bear mouse, it being shaped like both. Ambro. dig. vi. l. 2. c. 34.
Albert refers the Empetra to these, a beast now unknown headed like a Hare, as
big as a Cony, the ears so small, scarce seen above the hair, like a badger
long, and party-colored haired, short-tayled, sharp nailed, and dig deep. In
winter it grows monstrous fat. Aurel.
The foreteeth like the Hares, Sever.
and if cut off, will grow again in one night. Zootom.
Their stones ly high. The blind gut is large, Democ. p. 325.
like a stomach, rough within and netlike, there in a large womb. The liver
has seven lappets distinct, the greatest toward the left side. The gall-bag
is the fold to the duodenum, the spleen long like a large Swallows. The
water-vessels, or Uriteres not coming strait down from the reins, but
cleaving to the back, and small. Most of them about Trent, and in the snowy
cold parts of Germany. They feed on fruit, especially milk, that they suck as
pigs, therefore haunt they sheep-coats. Being tamed they eat pulse, bread,
fish, etc. About Christmasse dig, you find them asleep in the ground, nothing
wakes them, but the heat of the sun, or fire. A little thing frights them, vex
them, they squeak like a pipe, or against change of weather. They stink so,
that in summer they are not to be endured; nor want they wit. Toward winter
they convey hay, and chaff into their holes. They lay one flat, and load him
with hay, and drag him by the tale into their hole, which has two entrances;
through the one they all pass too, and fro, out of the other they carry their
dung. When winter begins they stop up the door, and in the depth of winter
they stop up the other so fast, that a spade cannot pearce it. About the end of
September they meet seven, or more in one hole, commonly the number is odd, and
there on straw they ly snorting till spring. One still stands centinell, while
the rest go abroad; if he spy any thing, he squeaks aloud, and warns the rest,
whereupon they all come running, and he enters last. In fair weather they play
together, and murmur, and bark like little dogs. Stumpfius.
When tame they will look your head, like an Ape. About approach of winter
they come, and eat with those who live on the Alps. They roast and boil them in
black pottage, and sprinkle them with salt, and hang them in the smoke, and
give them to women in childbed. The fat softens shriveled sinews, and smeared
on the navell provokes sleep. The stomach eases the colic.

Aristotle in his book of wonders, mentions the water-Mouse. He has three
passages, one for his filth, Ambr. (...) c. 35.
one for his water, one for bearing young. B^llon. aquat. l. 1.
Near the bigness of the Mole, of a dusk-colour, all but the belly, which is
bright ash color; Cl^sius in Auct.
it is thick, and soft-haired, the head small for such a body; Exot.
the upper part of the musle hangs over; in each jaw two teeth, in the lower,
lesser, and blunt. Their eyes are hardly seen; the sides of the mouth are of a
long ash-colored shagge; the tail thin of hair, and a bony sinew in the midst;
the hinder-legs are longest, and flat, and skind as a Ducks. They are common in
Strymon, and Nile; they go abroad in fair nights. There are of them in smaller
rivers, and in Lusae an Arcadian-Spring. They feed on water-plants, fruit, and
fish. The Magi that followed Zoroastres, Holler.
thought these Mice devils, Arist.
or Tortoyses. In some parts of France they eat them. P^utar.
There is also the Coyopillis, Sympo* 4. q. ult.
it uses the tail for hands; the young, Nier^m.
when frighted, embraces the dame. It resembles the Tlacuatzis in tail, Exo. l.
9. c. 3.
ears, and mussles. The tail is thicker, and stronger then the Mouses, the
belly palish white, the ears so thin, you may see through them; the feet and
thighs white. They are found in the Tepoplan-hills. The Crocodile also uses the
tail as hands, therewith catching beasts, and men as a prey.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of the Mole.
THe name Talpa, Ambros^^ de digit. vivip. l. 2. c. 36.
the Latins have put on it, either from Thaptoo, to dig, or Tophlos, blind;
or Thalpae, nourishing it self under ground; Name.
or from the Chaldee Talaf, (...) Describ^
to cleave the earth. The Greeks call it Spalax, from Span, scraping. Some
Siphncus, from hollowing the earth; and Blacta. It is not unlike a Mouse; the
body broad, and flat, feet like a Bears; short-thighed, toad-headed; Scal.
having on the forefeet five toes, on the hinder four, the fifth crooks so
inward, it is hardly seen. The palm of the forefeet is flat like a hand, the
neck very short, or almost none, hair short and thick, and glistring black; the
teeth, as the Dogs, and Wesels, are all on the sides, none before, and
sticking up; the lungs, tied with many several strings to the heart; the
fore-thighs consist of two bones, set into the shoulder bone, whence he is
stronger to dig: his hinder-thighs have a bone, that a little below the
knee-parts in two: All the bowels are as in other beasts; Only 1. they have
no colon, Severin.
no blind-gut. 2. The stones hid, Zoot.
on the bladder-side, Democ. p. 317.
and black. 3. The reins joined to the next hollow vein. 4. The gall great for
such a body with fair Cholidochs. 5. The porter of the stomach, is as tied by
a thwart line. 6. The water-conveying-vessells, propt with uriteres. 7. The
Larinx, as in a Land tortoyse, for it is a mute beast. 8. The hammer, and
anvill within the inner-eare are strangely small; the bone in the midst like a
pumice-stone full of pores. 9. Three passages are in the nether jaw. 10. The
eyes stand in the right place all black, Pliny.
covered with a skin, small as a fleawort-seed; I could perceive no optic
sinews, nor know I whether they can see, or no, not only, because their eyes
have a film over them, but they want many things, conducing to sight. They
seem rather natures sportive essays, to show what she can do, then eyes. In
a Mole found 1617, were observed a fleshy filme, strangely set into the skin;
the brain great, distinct, and fair; the ears lying inward, hide the bones
extreme small, the bowels small as strings. In Thessaly they with heaving,
have overturned a whole Town. Place.
In Lebaica are none; Plin. l. 8. c. 2^.
if you bring any thither, they heave not, perhaps because it is a hard soil.
They feed most on worms, and therefore haunt dunghills; and worms failing, they
eat earth. They have been seen also to make at roots of herbs, Food.
and fruits, and toads. They are commonly bred in ground, rotted by rain, long
lying. Albert says, they cannot live an hour above ground, but he is
mistaken. They have but dim sight, but are very quick of hearing. They are of
use in Physic; a Tooth plucked out of a live one, Use.
is thought to ease the toothache. Pills of them with honey, wear away
swellings. The head cut, and stamped with earth of his heaving, made up into
balls, and kept in a tin box, is given against all neck-griefs, the blood
brings hair, and helps felons: the fat keeps hair from growing, as also batfat.
M^rinel.
The ashes cures fistulaes. Some lay a Moles-heart, Mizald^s.
and Saladine, under a sick man's pillow, to know if he shall die, or no,
conceiving that he shall recover, if he sing, or cry out; if he weep, he shall
not last long.

The water wherein a Mole has been, and left hair, Ag^icola.
restores hair. Of the skins are caps made.

CHAPTER XIX. Of the Land-Hedg-hog, or Vrchin.
CAlled Echinus, because we cannot hold him for his prickles. Ambrosin. l. ^.
c. 37.
In Greek Akanthochoiros, a prickled-hog. (...).
Lycophron calls him Naplium from his surpassing cunning. Some Herinaceus, and
not improperly from his roughness, or cleaving. It is as big as a rabbit, Plin.
full of prickles, except the mouth, and feet below, where grows a thin down.
Described.
It is observed in him, that the muscles are knit together over all his body.
Severin.
The bowels all of a thickness, Democ.
and very long, like the Mouses. Zoot. p. 319.
The dung, and testicles all of a bigness, the rise of the yard long, the seed
like yellow snivell; the liver sevenpointed. In the yard are whitish bits of
flesh, craggy like a rock, and resembling somewhat the lungstrings. The
testicles ly hid, and are fastened to the loins. The bones are some round, some
flat, some sharp, some blunt. They are found everywhere, except in Candy. Plin.
l. 9. c. 12.
Aristotle writes that they can last a year without food. They live most on
apples, Food.
and grapes, which they shake off, and stick on their prickles, and carry to
their hole. They have been also observed to drink milk, Aelian. l. 16. c. 69.
and wine in houses; they hold enmity with the Bear, Wolf, Fox, the viper,
and the herb water-grasse. When he hears the barking of dogs, or smells the
approach of wild beasts, or hunters, he forthwith rouls himself up like a ball,
and lies, as if he were stark dead. He shifts his layer, as the North, and
South wind change, and from wall to wall, if you keep him in house, accordingly
as the wind sits. When you take him he pisses, Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. 6.
and that wet slackens, and opens his prickles. They meet, and engender, as
mankind does. Some eat them, but they breed the strangury, unless they be
carefully dressed, Use.
that is killed at one blow, as some are of opinion, and washed in whole
vessels of urine. In August they are fattest, when they get plenty of food.
Some spice, and bake them in crust. Gesner warmed them in vinegar, Durantes.
and wine, and larded them, and stuck them with cloves, and roasted them. They
are very useful in Physic, the liver helps the reins, the gall dries up
warts, the spleen roasted, and pulverized is good for the spleen; the flesh
prevents miscarrying, and if killed at a blow, the strangullion, if you hang it
about you conveniently; dried it helps rumples in the skin. The Polonians use
the fat to that end, it is also good for the stone; the blood is not unusefull
for the stone, the reins, and the scorching of the urine; the ashes with
Bears-grease sleeks the hair; many use the same with oily fat to prevent
miscarrying; it is used also in the pain of the reins, and against the water
between the skin; the dung newly voided with the herb Sandarucha, vinegar, and
tar hinders shedding of hair: with the hide and prickles men used of old to
fetch spots out of clothes. They are distinguished into the swine, Kinds.
and the dog urchine from their shape. A vile stink vapors from them. In
Brasil is such a beast resembling the hedgehog with very long bristles, pale
haired, black at the tops, Majolus.
and very sharp, and prickly. Nature has laid up a wonder in them, one
prickle plucked from them alive, but laid on anything, especially flesh,
pearcheth it, and in one night it has been known to pearce through a very
thick hide, as if hands has pricked it in.

CHAPTER XX. Of the Porcupine.
SOme reckon this among the Hedgehogs, Ambr.
as Pliny, Digit. l. 2. c. 38. (...).
etc. The Greeks call it Ystrix, from Is, and Thrix no doubt; some think it to
be the African mouse in Plautus. Isidore writes it without an aspiration, and
derives it from the noise he makes, Described.
and rustling in shaking his bristles. Claudian describes him to be long
snowted, like a Hog, his bristles like horns stif, his eyes fiery red; under
his rough back are seen the prints of a small whelp. But Agricola makes him to
be Hare-mouthed, with four teeth, two above, two beneath, eared like a man,
footed before like a Badger, behind like a Bear; his bristles, or prickles on
his back, and sides partly white, partly black, sometimes two palms long,
which he can make to start up as a Pea-cock his train. They are common in
Ethiopia, and are in all Africa, and India to be found; in Italy, and France
now, Place.
and then, but seldom, also in Galicia, Solinus.
as the pilgrims of Compostella testify, who wear their prickly quills in
their caps. They lurk in groves among the bushes. They live on apples, Food.
turnips, pears, parsnips and crumbled bread, Agric. ^de an^. subter.
they drink water, but if mixed with wine, Nature.
most greedily. They can dart their quills at their enemy, and aim them like
arrows; whence, it may be, the Archers art came. By night, they feed most, in
winter they lurk in their holes. They carry their young as many days as the
Bear.

Gluttony has not spared it neither, some have eaten it, Use.
and they cry it up for a dainty, you may see how to dress it in Ambrosine out
of Scapius. In Physic it seems to conduce to the same maladies as the
Hedgehog does. Pliny made tooth-picks of the prickles to fasten the teeth. And
women use them for bodkins to part their hair. There is small difference
between them. Differences.
Some distinguish them into sea, and land Porcupines; but too confidently, no
good Author mentions the sea one. Such a kind of beast Cardan saw at Papia
fifteen hundred and fifty, as big as a Fox, mouthed like a Hare; the teeth
sticking like the squirrells, the eyes black, and serpent-like; the hair like a
Goats beard, hanging in the neck, the forefeet like the Badgers, the hinder
like the Bears, eared like a man, beset with almost an hundred pricklequils,
some crooked at top, else fast, but rustling as he went, Goos-tailed, the
feathers spiny, the voice grumbling like a dogs, he hated all dogs, probably it
was some mungrill sprung from the Porcupine, and some other beast.

CHAPTER XXI. Of the Tatus, or the Brasil Hedgehog.
THere is a kind of an armed beast, called a Tate; Nierem.
by the Spaniards Armadillo; by the Portugese Sneubertado; Hist. exot. l. 9. c.
6.
by the Italians Barbato; by the Brasilians Tatau, by some Tatusia, and Tatus;
in new Spain Chirquincus, and Cassamin elsewhere, by other Indians Ajatochtli,
Gesne^.
or a Gourdcony, for he as they lives in burrows. Maphaeus.
He can dig in one night fifty paces; if he be not tied, no place can hold him,
he mines through all in houses, and towns, and gets away. There are sundry
kinds of these armed beasts, but the Ajatochtlus seems to me the strangest,
rarely written, or found. He is armed with hard plates, as I my self have
seen; As big as a Malta dog, the feet small as a swines, the snout long, and
slender. He is all over armed as with male, or armor like a Cavalier, plated,
the plates joined close, distinct, which he can move, and every way fence
himself with. His belly is bright, and soft-shined as ours, having here, and
there long slender hairs. He hunts after Ants, lies on his back, with his tail
on his mouth, so that the pis-mires coming on fall strait as a prey into his
power, Anton.
which he eats. It is said also that he fills with his own water the hollow on
his belly between the plates, Herrera.
and so the ants, the moisture lying in their way, come directly into his
mouth: when he flies, in all have he claps his head, and tail on his belly, and
fences himself with his shell, rolling up himself round. If he be chased hard,
he flies at the hunters breast, and often strikes almost the breath out of his
body. He haunts marshes. Feeds on worms, fish, berries, and apples. The flesh
is very fat, and sweet, but phlegmatic, and breeds crudities. The ancients used
the tail to fence those they called their Zebratanae, which were of frequent
use among them. Their shall is many ways useful both in war, and peace.
They say that a dram of the powder thereof taken in, helps to sweat out the
French pox. He is found in hot boggy places.

There are among the Lucatanenses two sorts of them; some are as harmless, and
acceptable nourishment, others unwholesome, and poisonous, provoking to vomit,
and filling the belly so with wind, that they bring swounding fits, and at
length kill. The Antidote is oil of olives, unless the venom have too far
prevailed, then there is no remedy. If happily any recover, their hair falls
off, the color fades, and they pine away by degrees. Those that bear eight
shells or plates, are harmless; those with six venomous. The harmles also want
a hip-bone, and have red spots about the belly: this beast is beloved of the
Vipers, that have a voice, that they can live together in the same hole, and
never injure each other.

The former kind is armed round to admiration, other gates then those in
Spain, Consalv.
or elsewhere in Europa. Ferdinan.
He is fourefooted, covered all over, Oviedus.
tail and all with a hide like the slough of a Serpent, called the
American-Crocodile, betwixt white, and ash color, but inclining more to white,
like a Barbed war-horse, as big as an ordinary Dog, harmles, burrowing himself
in the earth, like the Conies; they are taken in nets, and with Cros-bows,
killed commonly in seed-time, when the stubble is burnt, or the ground tilled,
or husbanded, to bring grass. Consalvus writes, that he had often eat of them;
and that it is better tasted then kid, and found wholesome. He thinks that men
might hence learn to Arme-horses, completely capable. Others are otherwise
opinioned about them. Some say, he was never seen to eat, but lives ever under,
and on earth. Monardes.
Others say, some few have been brought into France, and been seen to eat
seeds, and fruits. I refute neither; they may speak of diverse kinds.
Platean, and Clusius acknowleged three sorts of them. One short-tayled, one
foot, and four inches long, and fourteen inches about; covered with a dusky
hard crust, so grown happily by age, and often handling, after a manner
checquered; from the neck to the midst roundish, the shells party-colored, the
middle of the body set with three rows of diverse colors, fouresquare plates;
the hinder-parts as the first; the head so plated to the nose; the ears wide,
and pointed; the tail short, not greater then a man's two fingers ends, round,
and armed; the belly soft, and shaggy, as the picture presented it; as also the
hinder-part of the thighs, and the throat, and nostrills; three toes on the
hinder-feet, and spurred, two on the forefeet, and a spur; the yard long, and
stretched out. His chief strength lies in the tail-bone, a pill whereof made of
the dust, as big as a birds-head, and put into the ear, asswages eare-paine,
and takes away tingling, and thicknes of hearing, as it is said; but it is
known to give certain ease. I add the craft of the Chirquinchus, they that
have seen it and report, that when it raines, he lies on his back, gathers
water on his soft belly, that lies between the plates, and remains so, while
the shewre lasts, though it rain the whole day, till some Dear thirsty, comes
unawares to drink, then he closes his plates, and snaps the Deers slips, and
nose; and let not go the hold, till he stifle him. And, as the Hedge-hogge
also, he craftily rouls up himself round, like a ball, and nothing but fire can
loosen him. The Indians abuse the shells to their witchcrafts, especially to
discover, and punish thieves; first touching the ground therewith, that the
suspected person had touched, or any thing else; they fill his mouth with the
drink Chicha: then beat they drums; the shells the while skip, and dance.
Hereby is the thieves face marked with a whelk, that runs along his cheeks
through either jaw; if the charm hold.

ARTICLE III. Of tame foure-footed Beasts.
CHAPTER I. Of the Dog.
SO much for the half wild Beasts; Ambros.
the tame follow, Digit. vivi. l. 3. c. 1.
namely the Dog, and the Cat. Varro fetches the Dogs name Canis, from Canorus,
The Name.
shrils in his bark. The Greeks of old called him Kuoon, from Kuoo doubtless,
(...).
to love, or lust. Of late Ekilos, from his masterfulnes, (...).
Ulaktoor, from barking, and Akanthis, from fawning with his tail; not to
insist on the description of so known a beast. In dissection it is noted,
Suidas
that the belly within forked the neck in shortness, Describ.
and narrownes, answering the middle-finger, Sever.
the corners are an handbreath, Democ.
a palm long, of like thicknes, not wreathed like a Swines; Zootom. p. 306.
the forkends reach to the reins, tied by veins, that come as far as the womb,
the testicles resting thereon by a thin skin. At the first opening of the neck,
the body shows it self in bulk, shape, and color, like a Snails-head thrust
forth out of the shell; you cannot thrust a bodkin in, till you cut it up a
little. Dissect a bitch, you find the puppies wrapped up in three beds called
chorion, allantoides, and amnion; the former can scarce be parted, they are so
thin. In the right corner ly usually five whelps, in the left four; each has
its bed, the chorion in the midst, girdles ly thwart two fingers broad,
streaked with black from the end, and red in the middle; each as blood-spotted.
The kell like a bag, covering the upper-guts; the top sprouting out of the
stomack-bottome, compassing the whole; the hinder-part is set into the Spleen,
and the sweetbreads; which latter show themselves presently at the rise of the
duodenum, being fastened thereto, and to the porturine, which sends a
trebble-branch to the neighbouring-parts, Meseraick, Spleen-guts, the
Paunch-branch runs beyond part of the stomach; the Spleen-branch runs up strait
to the mouth of the stomach. The Spleen is tied to the mid-rif by a film two
fingers broad, and to the stomach by the kall; the Spleen is like a foot with a
wide shoo on. Colon-gut it has none; the blind-gut receives the end of the
strait one, which unfolded is as long as your middle-finger. At the end of the
streight-gut within, is one fair lappet, and another less in the beginning of
the blind-gut. The streight-gut is much rumpled. There is a fold of arteries
from the aorta wound, to the hollow of the liver, approaching the pancreas;
pluck one, you draw the other, and the upper-bowells. Above the upper-mouth of
the stomach are two kernels, both Spungy-moist, the right harder, and greater
then the left. Dogs-blood is black, as burnt. At the tip of the Tongue, is set
in a round muscle, descending in a middle-line. The right lappet of the heart,
is twice as big as the left. On the parts of the pan, that the temple-muscles
cover, appears no thin skin, to enwrap them, besides what is proper to the
muscles; but on the other parts of the brain-pan there is. At the tongue-root
is a small kernel on either side, drawn out sideling. The ringlets of the
sharp artery lie thwart, but not awry as in the Swine. The brain is greater
then a Swines. Turn the brain up, and certain mamillary-passages show
themselves, and the beginning of the backbone, if you cut deep, there you
shall spy two small passages, one coming from the paps in a strait line,
reaching to the end of the inner-brain; the other a little on this side, lying
upward thwart of that. On the fore-feet are five toes, on the hinder four. The
Bitches-belly has two rows of paps on either side. Albert says, that the
nostrils of a Dog of a good breed, are at the ends, round, firm, and blunt.
The temple muscles, are noted to be very strong, as in the Wolf, Galen.
and the Lion, which inables his jaws to break bones. There were no Dogs in
Brasil, till Vilagagnon's voyage. If any come by hap into the Arabian Island
Sigaron, they wander, Place.
and die. They eat any thing, even fish, and carrion. Only they refrain
dogs-flesh, and what is thunder-strooke. Lerius. Textor. Food.
They eat grass also, and it is their Physic. From Ash-apples they abstain,
because the turning-joints of their hips are thereby pained. Drinking wine, or
strong water, makes them run wild, till the vapor be spent. They are ever
given to gendring, Gendring. Arist. H. A. l. 5. c. 14.
seldomest in Autumn. They hold on so till twelf years old; sometimes give
over at nine. If they begin at four, the breed is better; if at a year old,
not. They are foureteen days hot; and the Bitch six months after puppying,
Id. Ib. l. 18. c. 28.
go to Dog again. They couple also promiscuously with other beasts; as with
Wolves by Cyrene, whence spring, Crocutae, with Lions, whence Leontomiges come;
with Beavers whence Castorides; with Foxes, whence Fox-dogs. They carry their
puppies sixty days, some three-and-sixty. They bring a litter of twelf,
sometimes sixteen. A Hare-hound in Bononia, puppied seventeen at once. Albertus
saw Mastives, that brought in the first litter nineteen, at another eighteen,
at a third thirteen. Arist. l. 5. c. 14. Pliny.
Those that women dandle, puppy one at once. First they breed males, next
females; then males again, if they couple in due time. The first resembles the
sire; the rest are, as it happens. They are all puppied-blind, and the more
they suck, the longer they remain so, yet none longer then one-and-twenty
days; nor do any see till seven days old some say, if but one be puppied, at
nine days old he sees; if two, the tenth day, and so on, but it is not
certain. They have milk commonly five days ere they litter, some sooner.
Their milk is thicker then other beasts, except the Sows, and Hares. They
seldom live above fourteen years, some have lasted two-and-twenty. The Dogs
of Laconia ten, Age Pliny.
the bitches twelf, other kinds fifteen. The whelps have white teeth, and a
shrill bark; the elder, their teeth blunter saffran-coloured, the bark greater.
Which voice we call barking, Voice.
in Latin latrare, and banbare. In Greek Whelps, are said, (...).
Banzein, older Ylaktein, to yelpe, etc. when they drink they lap; when they
quarrel, or fawn, they grumble. We say, a salt-bitch hot, (...).
go to dog, in hunting they open, ( Prokunein) provoked, they snarl, (
Ararizein.) They dread the Hyaena so, that the very shadow strikes them dumb.
In Nilus they give but a lap, and away, for fear of the Crocodile. A Wolf they
hate. Antipathy. Plin.
Porta says, a Wolfs-skinne hanged on one, bitten with a mad dog, removes
fear of water. They dread the Buzzard for her slow, and low flying. Blondus his
dog would not come near Hens-flesh. Some refuse the bones of wilde-fowles. Of
old they would not enter Hercules his temple, either by reason of his club; or
they sented something buried under the threshold that they hated. Some complain
lamentably if you strike a Harp; some houl, if they hear a Trumpet. The report
of a Gun, makes them run. Well they agree with mankind, we shall see anon.
They are soon vexed, and will fight long about a bone. They are watchful
housekeepers; they are soon waked. Nature.
They drive them in Sparta from their temples, for their lust after women. They
are skillful in senting, and by smelling behind, distinguish of the disposition
of bodies. They are ever hunting with their nose near the ground, and so soon
infected. Quick of hearing they are. At four months old they shed teeth, and
hayr. If crop-sick, they devour grass. They soon cast puppy, if the dog be
killed, they coupled with. They are very cunning, Wit.
and have a good memory, and are very teacheable. That in Plutarch cast so many
stones into the oyl-cruyze, till the oil swelled high enough, that he could
lick it. They forget not a way once gone. Man only exceeds them in remembering.
One in Venice knew his master after three years. Ulisses his dog after twenty
years absence. On Vespasians Theater was shown a dog, that was taught all kinds
of daunces, and fained himself sick, and dead; suffered himself to be draged
about by the tail, then started up as out of a deep sleep. Francis Marquess
of Mantua, becoming dumb in a sickness, taught a Dog by signs, to call any
courtier to him. Another in the presence of Justinian the Emperor, and the
people having rings from the spectators, which his master jumbled together,
returned each his own ring. Being asked which of the company was poor, or
rich, a whore, or a widow, he showed each, taking their clothes in his mouth.
They are very faithful to their masters. Plin. l. 5. c. 4^.
We have heard of one that fought with thieves for his master, and would not
leave his dead body, but drive birds, and beasts of prey from the carcass. Of
another in Epire, that discovered one that killed his master, and never left
rending and barking, till he confessed the deed. Two hundred dogs rescued the
Garamant King from banishment, withstanding all resistance. Those of Colophon,
and the Castabale^^es, made use of squadrons of Dogs in war; they set them in
the front; neither would they give ground; they were the most faithful forces
they had, and asked no pay. When the Cimbrians were slain, their Dogs defended
their houses, lying on Carts.

Jason the Lycian his dog would not eat when his master was slain, but starved
himself to death. Another called Hircanus, leaped into King Lysimachus his
funeral flame, the like is said of King Hierons dog. Pyrrhus King Gelons dog
also is famous, D^ris. Philistis.
and that of Nicomedes the Bithinian King, his Queen Consinga being torn
wantonizing with her husband. With you a dog defended Volcatius a Gentleman, a
Civilian, from a rouge who assailed him returning out of the suburbs homeward.
And Caelius also a Senator of Placentia, who was sickly, and oppressed with armed
men, nor was he slain, till his dog was first killed. But above all that
surpasses any instance in our age, that the Roman Chronicle testifies, that
when Appius Jenius, and Publius Silius were consuls, T. Sabinus, who was
condemned for Nero Germanicus sons sake, to be cast down the Gemonies, had a
dog that hold piteously for his master there, many Romans standing about, and
being offered meat, he put it to his dead Lords mouth, and the carcass being
cast into Tiber, the dog swam to it, and endeavored to keep it from sinking,
all the people ran to beholds the dum beasts faithfulness. Another discovered
and killed the murderer of his master. That of Corsica, that would not suffer
the nearest friends to take away his masters body frozen to death, till they
killed him. I mention not yet those that would be burnt, or buried with their
masters, as that of Polus the Tragedian, that of Pyrrhus, and Theodorus his
dog. Athen. H. A. l. 7. c. 33.
Eupolis the Poets dog would never eat after his masters death, nor Jasons the
Lycian. Darius the last Persian Monarch had no companion at his death but his
dog. Xantippus his dog swam after him, and was drowned. Few, or civilized
people will eat dogs flesh, unless need compel them. Use.
Yet those of Senega eat them, and those of Guinee. Some nations gueld and eat
them. Cadamust^s. Galen. Alim. l. 3. 2.
But in medicine they are of special use. The brain-pan powder takes down the
swelling of the cods; a plaster of the brain sets bones; the greatest tooth if
you scarifie the jaw bone, eases toothache; some hang a black dogs longest
tooth on those that have a quartan ague; the dogtooth of a mad dog hung in raw
leather allays frenzy; the congeal stuff dissolved in wine eases colic, and
in vinegar is taken in against dropsy; Sextus lays it on their belly, and by
vomit draws out the hydroptique humor; the liver of a mad-dog roasted is
souverain against madness; the gall with honey cures inward ulcers. Marcellus
applies the milt when fresh to the spleen; the blood helps parts hurt by a mad
dog, the fat eases the gout; a Puppies fat removes skars, and face freckles;
Aescu. c^lap. Plin. Sextus.
the milk is good for sore eyes, and to rub infants gums with all; and drunk,
brings away a dead child. The piss fetches off hair, and warts, and mixed with
salpeter cleanses leprosy. The powder of their dung is excellent against
squincies, ey-sentery, and old sores, if the dog be kept up, and fed three
days with bones. Marcellus prepares it dried in the Sun and sifted, with red
wax, by bits, and a little oil for the sciatica. Pliny thinks, that the bones
found in their dung tied on helps the Siriasis in children. The skin helps
rheums, if drawn on the fingers, and thongs of it tied thrice about the neck
helps the squincy. The hair laid on the bite of a mad dog draws out the venom,
and stanches blood. Mizaldus. Centur. 6.
Some cure a quartane, or remove it by making a cake of meal kneaded with the
water the sick person makes in one fit, at once, and giving it to a hungry dog.
See the rest in Gesner. Some take two puppies newly puppied, Wecker. Antidot.
and four pound of oil of violets, and a pound of earthwormes prepared, and
make an ointment for wounds made by gunshot. Andrew Furnerius cries up the
destilled water out of whelps to prevent growing of hair. Dogs differ in many
respects. Horned ones are said to be found in the Hellespont. Differences.
Ovid. Clusius.
In Hispaniola are some that bark not. In Guinee some strive to bark, and
cannot. Some (in regard of their qualities) are Wind-hounds, some coursers,
running-dogs, some tumblers, some house, some gate-dogs, some hunting, some
setting dogs, some bloodhounds, some shoks. If we regard place, there English,
Scotch, Epire, Cyrenaick, Arcadian, Indian, etc. dogs. We shall in order treat
of the several sorts, and first of mad dogs, which become such by eating
rotten, and worm-eaten meats, and flesh, chiefly in the dog-daies. Ambr. l. 3.
c. 2. Quad. Digit.
Then they hate to eat, and drink dread water, rome up and down, bark hoarsly,
foam extremely at mouth, and ears, look fearcely, their tail hangs down, they
bite men without barking. Aetius.
Many used manifold remedies, as white hellebore with barley boiled to make them
spew; Mysaldus. Blondus.
Hen-dung mixed with their meat, blooding them after the third day in the
swelling veins on the thighs, casting them in a pond where many hors-leeches
are to suck their bad blood away, anointing them over with oil of poplar,
washing them in a decoction of fumitory, sorell, Plin. Colum.
and Elicampane root. To prevent it some prescribe giving them while puppies
breast-milk of one has lien in of a son; some cut off whelps tails, when
forty days old. Some pinch it off with their fingers the utmost joint of the
tail. Ambr. ib. l. 3. c. 3.
There are Malta dogs, bred in that Isle over against Pachynus a promontory of
Sicily; some of them short, some long haired, with shagnecks. Blondus praises
the black, and white ones, now the red, and white are cried up. As big as a
wild weasle. They keep and feed them in baskets to keep them little. They are
dainty of food. If they whelp more then once, they die on a sudden. That they
may be whelped shaggy, they strew the place where they ly with woolly fleeches,
that the bitches may have them ever in ey. At Lions in France they are sold
for ten pieces. In Bononia for four hundred pound. They are women's delights.

Hunting-dogs, Ambr. ib. c. 4.
or Hounds are almost everywhere. Those are best that are bred in Hircania,
between a Bitch, and a Tiger, and those of Epire, and the region of the
Molossi, and Chaonia. The Persian are stoutest, and fleetest; The biggest are
in Thebeth. Megastenes.
Those in the Province Gingue, are so bold, they dare venture to fasten on a
Lion. The writers of Husbandry, show how to breed such. Alphonso King of Naples
prized them, and the great Cham of Tartary keeps five thousand of them. They
are diversely distinguished. In relation to the sundry wild that they hunt, or
chase; there are Hare-hounds, and little Badger-dogs; some good at a fowl, that
hunt them softly into the nets; there are Water-spaniells; others are to bait
great beasts, (as Bull and Bear-dogs.) In respect to places, there are those
called Arcadian, Ausonian, Carian, Thracian, Iberian, Hungarian, Argive,
Lacedemonian, Tegeatians, Sauromatan, Candian, Celtan, Magnetian, Amorgan,
Hounds. If you regard their colors, there are ash-colored, hony-colour'd,
yellow, white, black. The white are somewhat afraid of the water, and will not
willingly take water. Those with black spots are thick, and tender-footed. The
ash-colored, or russet, are strong set, and bold, but slow-footed. The black
are stout, but not so fleet as the white, being lowthighed. Men choose a Hound
by his eager look, great head, hanging upper-lip, red-eyes, wide nostrills,
sharp teeth, thick neck, broad breast, lion liked.

That is the best Hare-hound, Id. Ib. ^. 3. c. 5.
that is long, and plain-headed, sharp-eared, behind strait, and little; the
upper-lips not hanging over the lower, long and thick necked, copped breast,
strait guts, high, and lean thighs, tail not thick, nor too long, not always
yelping. Some of them go out a hunting of themselves, and bring Hares home;
they call them Tumblers. There are as many sorts of wind, or sented, as of
hounds. In Scotland are three kinds; some bold, and very fleet. Some will catch
fish. Some red, and black-spotted, or black, and red-spotted, are lime-hounds,
that will hunt out thieves and stolen goods, and take rivers to chase them. The
English, and Scotch, usually breed such bloodhounds up, and count him a thief,
who is sky of letting them, have access where ever they would hunt, though
into their bedchamber. Such a lime-hound must be low, Blondus.
flat-nosed, neat-mouthed, the hind-thighs of one length, not big-bellied,
plain-backed to the tail, dangling ears, quick eyes. The British, Spanish,
Gnosian, and Tescan excel. There is the Village, and Shepherds Dog. The white
Dog is approoved, being better distinguished from the Wolf. Among the Turks no
one master owns them, nor come they into house; Bellon. obset. l. 3. c. 40.
they lay in yards on mats. Of old the Romans kept five hundred of them, to
keep their stables. We read little about the Warre-dogs, and the useles Curres.
England breeds some that thieves, murderers, and traitors breed up for their
cursed purpose, and some that thirst after royal blood this very year. Such
the Spanjards in battle against the Indians, which they feed with man's flesh,
to train them to hunt men. Vazquez Nunnez used them in stead of hangmen. The
Indian Dogs in America, Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 36.
are a new breed, yet almost like ours in nature, qualities and shape. The
Xeloitzevintly is great, most what above three cubits, without hair,
sleek-skinned, with yellow, and blew spots. Another sort they call from the
country Itzcevinteporzotli, michva canem; like those of Malta, white, black,
and yellow, a little misshapen, yet sportive, pleasing, fawning, with an ugly
bunch, sticking out from the head and shoulders, having almost no neck. A third
kind is the Tetichi, not unlike ours, but with a surly look. The Indians eat
him, as the Thracians of old. Sextus. Empyr.
Diocles the Physician, of the Asclepiad Schole, prescribed Puppies-flesh to
some Patients. But the Cozumellol are a dainty with the Indians, they fatten
them as the Spanjards Conies, and geld them, to fatten the sooner: and keep
many bitches to breed, as shepherds with us, for want of children they foster
these, and are found of them. The Alco is a little Dog, they are much taken
with, they pinch themselves to feed them; travel with them on their shoulders,
or in their lap; never are without them. They have also dogs like Foxes, that
never bark; bred in the Isle Cozumella. If you strike them, Ovie^^s.
they will not complain, nor cry. These are called in Hispaniola, Calamitan
frogs, spawned like Vermin by nature; no need of an after^birth dogs thin
skin, nor Hares-dung, nor hair. Pliny superstitiously seeks after them, to
strike dogs-dumb. In Hispaniola are little dogs, that grumble only, and bark
not, they taste well. In Quivira, they lay packs on their greatest Dogs.

CHAPTER II. Of the Cat.
THe Cats Latin name is Felis, Ambro. l. 3. c. 10.
comes from Phaelos, Salmas. in Solinus. Name.
cozener-deceitfull impostor; or Ailis, flatterer; in the Aeolick dialect,
Phailis, called catus, Cat from cautus, wary. In Greek Ailouros, from
flattering with the tail. A known beast found almost everywhere. At first
probably wild. The greatest, Place.
all say, are bred in Iberia, among the Tartessians; they feed on flesh, fish,
Mice, Food.
birds, snakes, and kill toads. In Cyprus they hunt Vipers, and Chameleons.
They ly in wait also for leverts, and spare not their own kind. In Bononia
they are known to play with kitlings, Ambr.
and then rend, and eat them. They live six years, sometimes ten; the gelded
longer.

In Europa they go a caterwalling most what in January, Plin. l. 1^. c. 63.
and February. Gendring. Arist.
In India all the year long. The females in gendring ever wawl, whether for
pain, or that the He scratches them. He stands, she lies. The she is are most
lustful. They kitten after two months or six and fifty days. The march breed
is prefered; those in August not, for the fleas. They kitten five, or six at
once. The She is fondest of the kitlins; the He often kills them to make the
She covet others, and affect him. They hate mice, Sympathy.
toads, Antipathy.
serpents, Fox-geese, eagles, rue, their own gall, sweet smells, and wet. With
rue you may drive them from your Dove-cotes, sents of ointments sometimes make
them run mad. Duck them a while, and you drown them. On the contrary, they
willing rub themselves with setwol, and delight in mint. The She casts her
kitlins, Valerian. Mizal. Cent. 4.
if her male mate be killed. We meet with singular passages about their
qualities. Cats eyes wax, and wain with the moon; nay the sun, and stars, breed
changes in in their ey-balles. Nature.
In the morning they are stretched out, at noon are they round, at sunset,
duller. Cardan imputes it to want of muscles, that they cannot govern their
eyes as they list. They glister by night. Carry them in a bag far from home,
they come back again. They stay in the old house, though you remove. They love
to be stroaked; subtle they are: Plin. l. 10. c. 73.
How slily they steal upon birds. How softly they tread, and catch mice; how
they watch them. They bury their own dung, knowing that the sent discovers
them, some, especially in Spain, Holland, Brabant, eat them, as tasting like
Hare. Their breath is pestilent, and breeds consumptions, Bruier.
and no mervail, for the brains are rank poison, and made an Uratislavian Girl
mad, as Weinrichius (I think) relates. Porta Phys. l. 5. c. 25.
In Physic they have place. The ashes of the head burnt in a pot, and blown
into the eyes, clears them; the flesh sucks weapons out of the body, Galen.
and eases emrods, Sampl. 11.
and back-ache; the liver burnt to powder easens the stone, the gall fetches
away a dead child, the fat is smeared on gouty parts; the piss styled helps
the thick of hearing, the dregs of the paunch with rosin, and oil of roses in a
suppository, stops woman's flux of blood. Some mince the flesh, and stuf a fat
Goose with it, and salt, and roast it by a soft fire, ^^ony^us.
and distill it, and anoint gouty joints with success. The fat keeps iron
from rusting, nothing better.

There are tame, Differences.
and wild, and outlandish cats. Among the tame, the Spanish are greediest,
nimblest, and have softest skins. Among the exotiques, or outlandish the Syrian
are chief, and diverse, round mouthed, strong big-breasted, large footed, and
content with a little meat. The wild are bigger then the tame, their hair
thicker, and longer, dark-colored, the tail thicker. They feed on birds, and
other living things. Scal. Ex. 217. ^. 9.
Perfume of rue drives them from trees. In Malabar they live on trees, nothing
so fleet as they. They are best at leaping, and even fly without wings. They
stretch forth a thin skin from before to behind, when they would fly, and then
draw it together, and hover in the air; when they rest, they draw it up to
their belly. There is also a kind of cat in India, black-haired, here, and
there bright hairs, the muzzle long, Nierem. H. E. l. 9. c. 30.
ears small, thighs short, the tail streakt, and striped with black and white.
The powder helps fevers. Then there are monstrous cats, one sort has
misshapen, another six feet. In Singui is a beast like a Cat, M. P. Venetus ^.
1. c. 62.
haired like a Deer, with many toes, two teeth in either chap, of the
greatness of two fingers, having a fleshy bladder near the navell, full of
blood, senting like musk. We have put the print of it down, like a Cat, very
coped-headed.

In dissecting a Cat are found these observables. Anatomy M. Aurel. Sever.
The milt resembles the lower part of an oar. The neck of the gall-bag has
very swollen veins; Zootom. Demo. p. 4. c. 309.
at the bottom come down straight veins running outward, two sinews are on the
sides of the sharp artery, on either side one, descending to the upper-mouth of
the stomach, sending also branches to the said sides of the sharp artery. The
said sinews are knit by one common nerve descending awry; then are set into the
left side of the stomach, tied by many strings, where the sharp artery first
parts appear great kernels, and some small ones white, red, ash-colored,
mixed. In the sharp artery are half circles, parted as in man, but behind
wrapped in a double coat; the one outward, and fleshy, the other inner, and
sinewy sprouting from the circle-brims. In the heart are
lappets-party-coloured, the right more spotted with black, and white, then the
left; besides the right is thicker, and rounder, the left slenderer, and
longer, like the dogs, both hollow, and stringy. In the right creek of the
heart is fold, like net-worke, longer, and plainer to be seen then that in the
dog; but not with such laps. The great artery is almost in the midst of the
heart, inclining to the left side. The inner-coat of the stomach is rough all
along, like the plaits in an oxes paunch, turning up into a round. Those
tunicles are very fast, tied to the upper orifice of the stomach; the pleats ly
cross. The Liver is colored like that of the dog-fish. In the eare-bone a
shell, a maze, a little window, a ring, a round muscle, three small bones, and
a stirrup, but not bored through. In the brain are three creeks, Casserius.
two round with net-folds. In the eye the uvea or thin skin, cleaves not before
to the cornea, or horne-tunicles, whence the less dilatation to this greater
kind; in that part is the uvea, colored like a pale leaf. The optic nerve is
almost in the midst, inclining downward, the outter thick skin somewhat
covering the eye, as in the Cock. In the Heecat we observe, that there is
something peculiar about the spermatique vessels, testicles, etc. A white
streake, the third part of a finger broad, descending by the right side of the
paunche, lies under the muscles of the Peritonaeum; the membrane is very thin;
the Peritonaeum under the ensie form, or sword, is fat. The Kall is very fast,
tied to one right liverstring, and to the spleen, and stomach, and the gut
duodenum, like a purse, or bag. The bladder fastened above to the Peritonaeum,
and below to the straight gut. The stones are covered with four skins; the
outmost called scrotum; the next dartos, the third, erythroides, or the red;
the fourth is the inmost. There is somewhat also considerable in the vessels
preparing, and conveying the seed, etc. We saw the uriteres descending from
flat, or hollow of the reins to the bladder-neck: also the milk-veins, tending
toward the bunchy-part of the reins, both sprouting from the body of the
hollow-gut, but the left is higher then the right, and all most twice as long.
The straight-gut is tied to the beginning of the tail by a middle-string; it
has veins, and sharp kernels. We saw the mid-rif, and meseraicks, and
sweetbreads, being a kernelly substance. We saw the blind-gut a thumb-breeth
long; the other guts are uniform, but winding, and brittle. The reins large,
bigger then a great nut, wherein are a few creeks, through which the piss is
strained. We saw the vein porta with it is meseraick, and Spleen-branch; hereout
sprouts the coeliacus; a branch compassing the stomach, and conveys the
melancholy humor thither to provoke appetite. We saw the vein ascendent,
pearcing the mid-rif, and reaching the heart, and set into the right side
thereof. We saw the peerles vein-branched from the hollow vein by the heart,
and turning backagain, and descending by the backbone on the right side, which
sends forth sprigs to the ribs to nourish them. The liver is distinguished by
six strings, out of the midst of two of them on the right side goes the gall
forth; the bottom shows like a bolt-eye. The gall-bag has two branches, the
one passes from the liver to the duodenum, carrying the dregs away. The other
running back to the bladder, to be kept there. In the duodenum, four fingers
below the pores called cholidochi, is found a worm, little, but of the bigness
of the ureteries: from the sides of the ascendent hollow vein, descends a
sinnew to the fleshy ringlet of the diaphragm; and another on the left side
proped with the thin skins of the sharp artery, conveying feeling to the
diaphragm. We saw the turnagainsi news, which propagated from the sixth
conjugation of sinews, are set in at the head of the sharp artery; the one on
the left turning upward about the great artery; the other about the branches of
the artery, tending toward the throat; the heart with a double lappet on the
right, and left side, the right is greatest, and blackish; the left of the
color of the heart. The heart has a right venticle to beget vital spirits,
and a left one whether the veinblood is conveyed, and it has four large
vessels; the first is the hollow ascending vein, which is set into the left
ear; the third, the arteriall vein, containing blood, having a double coat,
whence it has the name; this is set into the lungs, to nourish them. The
fourth is a vein-artery, set into the left ventricle of the heart, to convey to
the brain blood, prepared there, to beget animal spirits. In the right venticle
are lappets, or partitions, which keep in the blood, and so in the left. The
lungs have six fins. We saw the inner-muscles about the larynx, or the head of
the sharp artery, which being inflamed, breed a squincy. There are kernells in
the yard like a Cats-tongue. We marked the passage, leading to the bladder.
The Cats brain-pan has red streaks like veins; the inner-eare is rarely
fashioned, whereof they have such use to listen, and looked, and prey by night.
Herein we marked the communion between the great artery, and the great vein,
where the first parting is into the bowels.

I believe it is common to all living creatures what I observe in the tame
Cats-back bone, for with the own membranes, it being covered at the end, that
which answer the hard menynx, the inner sends forth nerves from it self, but
since there are companies of them, like strings, we note that they having
passed a little way, meet as in one knot, as we in top of grain. And, since
those several strings are covered with the same skins, if you strain one, you
spoil the other, till they come to the knot. In one rib of the house cat was
noted a round knob, like a tree-knot, the midst whereof being broken asunder
was porose, and full of pits with drops of blood. My fellow dissecters doubted
whether it was the breach of a bone in anatomizing, or some error in the first
shaping, and superfluous stuff. In a man on the flat part of the forehead
bone, that lies between the two eybrows ly equally on the right root of the
nose: Bruize but that bone, or pierce it, you find two long pits, passing
sidelings above under the skull, and below blind ones with partitions. These
are doubtless the chambers of smelling, where the breath is, as also in the
ear, which is but of late discovered. That which strengthens my opinion is,
that in a hound these cells are broader and more conspicuous then in man; dogs
excelling in sent. This is not found in a Monky, perhaps because he needs not
excel in that sense.

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE FOURFOOTED BEASTS.
THE FOVRTH BOOK. Of the Fourfooted Creatures that have toes, and spring of an
Egg.
THE FIRST TITLE. Of the skined ones.
CHAPTER I. Of the Frog.
ARTICLE I. Of the VVater-Frogs.
THus far of the Fourfooted beasts that bring forth living broods; Ambr. Digit.
Ovipar. l. 1. c. 1.
those that lay eggs follow. These are either skined, or shelled: Those that
are covered with skin are the Frog, Lizard, Salmander, Chamaeleon, Crocodile,
etc.

The Frog is either the water, or Land-frog. Called Rana, Name. Isid.
either from the summer-croaking ra, ra, or the Hebrew (...), that is, to cry
out. In Greek Batrachos, (...). Varin. Described.
from his shrill voice, and Boox, etc. By the Cypriots Brouchetos; the Ionians
Bathrakos; the Phocians Brianchone; by those of Pontus Babakos; by the late
Greeks Bordakos, and Gurinos, and Brinoi, and Parphusides, from their
puffed-cheeks with croaking. It is an Amphilium, living both in water, and on
land; before not fleshy but behind; the hinderlegs nature has made thick, and
longer the forelegs. They have five toes long, skined between, to help their
swimming. The She is biggest; Arist.
they have no neck, the belly white, the tongue, as infants tied before, but loose
by the throat, Plin.
the milt small, the liver imparted into three laps, Bellon.
whereunder on each side part of the lungs is seen, frothy, not very bloody;
the guts knotly, the testicles, and other parts like those of other beasts.

In England are no green ones, Place.
but they abound in Germany, Italy, especially in Bononia. They swarm so in the
waterish places of Egypt, that they would destroy all, if the storks did not
devour them. They are said to be dumb in the Island Seriphus, and Cyrene,
perhaps because the water is cold. They are in streams, but delight in puddles
where bulrushes, reeds, and sea-gras grows. They are ever found in the waters
that never freeze, but not in brimstony, or mare-waters, they being too clammy.
They eat any creature that swim, Food. Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. 40. Gendring.
Arist. Ib. l. 5. c. 3. Plin. l. 9. c. 51. Arist. Ib. l. 7. c. 14. Antipathy.
are greedy after Bees, and dead Moles. Probably they eat herbs also. The male
covers the female, which lays eggs after, and often black flesh, with fair
eyes, and tail, and after they get the Frogs shape, the tail being parted into
two hinder-legs. Strange it is that after six months living they are
indiscernably resolved into slime, and again reingendred in the spring puddles.
But some in warmer waters last all winter, and in spring the old ones swim
about. The eggs are shed about the banks of pones, and marshes, hanging
together as in a string, like black bits of flesh; Chemists call it spermas, or
spawn. They hate Storks, Swans, the Buzzard, the Salmander, Putter, Pike, Eel,
and fire. Storks devour them. The Swan by eating them cures himself of a
certain malady. They combat often with Salamandres. Glyca.
It is well known how the Pike, and Eel swallow them. Kindle a fire by night on
the banks where they are, they croke not, nor stir, you may easily take them in
your hand. Mizald.
Their voice is brekekex, koax, koax, croaking; Aristotle calls the noise the
he is make in coupling time ololygon, Cent. 9. Memora^. Voice.
hurt them, they squeak like a mouse. About Cyrene they are mute. (But bring
crokers thither they abide so.) In Seriphus also, and a certain lake of
Thessaly they croke not; Plin.
their flesh is loose, whitish, moist, and subject to rot, Arist. H. A. l. 8.
c. 28.
so that they that often eat them grow wan, and feverish: their lips are so close
in August, that you can hardly open them; they ly with the belly above, and the
sides under water. If you stop their breath you choke them. Aelian. l. 3. c.
37. Nature. Ael. l. 9. 13. Plin.
They love warmth, and therefore croke in summer, against winter they skulk.
Busbequius heard them by Strigonium in December, the waters there being warm,
and sulphurous. They are clamorous against rain, either because they feel it
colder, or are much taken with sweet water. They can dive long having but small
lungs. They are thought to die in winter, and revive at spring. They lurk also
in the ground, and come with their young abroad then. They couple by night, and
on land, not for shame but fear. In Egypt, when they see the water-serpent,
they carry a piece of reed thwart to prevent being swallowed up. Plin. l. 8. c.
29.
In France they drove away a whole city. To know their sex, prick the back with
a needle, from the He shall spurt out red blood; out of the She yellow water.
Galen has omitted their use in food. The common opinion is that they are light
of disgestion, Use.
yield good juice, but cold, and moist. The Romans never used them, but now
from May to October they are eaten roast, or boiled all but the head; the hips
are best liked. Mundella counts them most harmless of cold things, and when
they gender not. Others forbid the eating as venomous. See how to dress them
in Ambrosine. Amar. Lusit.
In Physic both in whole and parts they help against sundry maladies. They
remove the blewnesse after blows. Galen. l. 9.
Tied on the jaws they ease toothache, and sod in vinegar they fasten loose
teeth. The juice removes squincy, and helps the almonds of the ears, and abates
swellings. The soft pulpis given against tisick, Porta.
with Capons-flesh, Pine-apples, and Sugar; Boiled in oil easens pain in the
sinews. Against every poisonous bite it is cried up; the ashes stanch blood,
Galeatius of S. Sophia says it was tied to a Hens-neck, Dioscor. Aetius. l.
13. c. 55. Habdarrham de propriet. an. c. 41. Plin. l. 32. c. 10. Villanovanus.
which being after cut off, there gushed no blood out. Some blow it into the
nostrils for the Haemorrhagia, and with oil of Lilies kept in an leaden box,
for the Interemta, and with conserve of Roses to help the writhing of the
countenance. Ambrosin shows how to prepare the oil. It is also cried up against
joint pain from a hot cause. The eyes men hang in fine linen about the neck
of the ill-sighted; the heart bound on the heart allays burning fevers, and
has helped fistulaes; the lungs taken out through the back, wrapped in an
cabbage leaf, and burnt in a pot is given in the falling sickness, others take
the liver. It helped the Elector Palatine. The dust of the liver some take, as
a quartan fit comes, lay it before pis-mires, and that part that they desire is
an antidote against all venom; Plin. l. 32. c. 5.
the gall helps the bloody flux, and kills worms in old sores; the fat dropped
into the ears removes pains; the Spawn is good against the Erysipelas and other
inflammations, emrods, scab, itch, morfew; the water helps the redness of
face. A staff on which a Frog shaken from a serpent has been eases women in
travel. Q^ercetan^s.
Pliny relates fables about the tongue; as that Democritus says that if you
take the tongue clear out, that it touch not any other part, and throw the Frog
into the water, and lay the tongue on the panting of the heart of a sleeping
women, she shall in her sleep answer you all you ask.

Some spring from eggs, some out of mud, Differences. Diod. Sicul.
as in Egypt. There are green, and pale, and ash-colored Frogs. In Stochornium
a hill in Bern are two lakes, wherein are Frogs with great heads, and long
tails.

ARTICLE II. Of Land-Frogs.
POINT I. Of the Toad.
CAlled Bufo from blowing perhaps; Ambr. l. 1. c. 2. Name. (...).
and Rubeta from being among bushes, Phronon, and Phrunen, the poison running
to the head, and causing giddiness, or from the shrub Phruganon. By Lucian,
Phusalos from swelling, if but touched. It is thick skined, (...). Arist. Plin.
Described.
hardly to be pierced by the sharpest stake, pale, spotted, as if pimpled, the
belly swollen and pufd, thick-headed, broad-backed, without hair. One sort lives
on land, and in marishy puddles. The phansy shady, Place. Plin.
rotten holes. There are none in Ireland; bring any thither (they say) they die,
sprinkle but irish dust upon them.

They feed on earthy moisture, herbs, worms, Food.
bees. It is said they eat so much earth a day, as they can grasp with the
forefoot. They lurk often under sage; there are sad stories of diverse dying with
tasting sage leaves, (...).
whether they eat it, or no is not known.

They are bred out of eggs, and rotten stuff; Mizaldus.
and out of buried ashes; and in Dariene, from the drops falling from slaves
right hands, as they water the floor, Pareus l. 20. c. 24. Generation. Pet.
Mart. Port. Not. Mag. l. 2. Sympathy.
and from a duck buried; and from menstrue, we read of woman's voiding toads.

They hold enmity with salt, for being sprinkled therewith, they pine away to
the bones, if we believe Albert. Strong sents, as of rue, etc. drives them
away, as also of a blooming vine. They fight with Cats, and die for it; Moles,
and they devour each other. A Spider strikes him dead at a blow. Sympathy.
They love Sage, Weezels will slide into their mouths. Plantan is their
antidote against Spiders. Plin.
By day, and in winter they skulk, and ly in the paths by night, and rome
about; Nature.
they hate the Sunbeams. Hevygated they are; sometimes they leap. Agrico.
Strike them, they swell, and spurt poison out behind, and then certain
stinking drops. They infect Sage, and make it as deadly as wolfbane; they cry,
or croak gru, gru. When they crawl about in the evening, it presages rain.

Their poison is not much, nor strong; Poison. Albert.
especially of those in colder regions, but in hotter, stronger. The very salt
wherein a toad dies, melted in water, so infects it, that wet a rag, or shirt
with it, it brings an incurable scurf. If you would take it off, either prick
the skin, or whip it, or prick the outside, and cast it into water. One
poisoned swells, looks wan, sighs, is shortbreathed, and taken with seed-flux;
sometimes with the bloodyflux, inflammation of throat, and giddiness. There
was one, who with the cane, that pearched a toad, so venom his hands, that he
vomited up the meat he had handled, and never ceast spewing, till he took his
meat from others hands; they who escape death, most commonly shed all their
teeth.

For cure, (...). 3.
men use River-crabs, stamped and drunk; and toads-ashes, and right Hartshorn,
breast-milke, fasting spittle, reed-rootes, the herb poterion, or phrynion,
taken in wine, Malta earth, Emerald, triacle, and without oil of Scorpion. Some
cry up the toads-stone; adds Mithridate, and the quintessence of Treacle.

As harmfull as the toad is, (...).
and venomous, it helps against venom, and otherwise useful. (...).
Some sees it in a plain pot with Bears-grease for the joynt-gout. Boiled in
oil, men anoint with it, swellings with success. Cut it up, and clap it to
the reins, it provokes urine; which also cures the dropsy. Boiled, and made
into a plaster, helps the Squincy; the string also whereon it is hanged.

The inner-fat, (and stuff one Laureola-root, and Hens-dung, (...).
salt, and oil of Dialthaea) dropping from it, when roasted, is good ointment
for a fistula; also the powder thereof roasted to a cole. Dried in the shadow,
and wrapped in a linen, and held in the hand, it stanches blood; the ashes
prevents the emrods overbleeding.

Nicolaus makes a plaster thereof. Others hang it dried about the neck, for an
amulate against the pest. Crollius sprinkles the dust of it on all venomous
bites. Some against a Cancer, take a thick toad, weigh it, and take Crabs alive
of the same weight, and dry them to dust over a soft fire in a plain pot,
leaving a little hole for vent. Helmond was taught by Butler of Yreland, out of
a toads-carcasse, and earth, and those small creatures, that he uses to vomit
out in three days, hanging by the fire into a waxen-platter, Helmon. (...) p.
76.
makes pellets with the gum tragacanthus, and that dish, and hangs them at
the left pap, to repel contagion, and draw out the venom; the older, and more
used, the more powerful; the toad taken in July, afternoon. He took some
also at the waining of the Moon in July, whose eyes swarmed with white worms,
with black heads; so at least, as if both eyes had been turned into worms; they
clinged thick together in either eye, their heads sticking out; and as any
endeavored to come forth, the toad with his paw hindered it. He vomited flies
with shining wings, handsome, and greenish; and by and by, after died of
vomiting. The feet of a living toad, when the Moon is in the last quarter,
being cut off cures neck swellings, if they be hanged on of the toad-stone
hereafter.

In the new world, Use in meats.
in the Isle Peragua a Spanjard for hunger, ate boiled-toads, says Pet. Martyr
in his Decades 3. l. 10. And Lerius, that the Brasilians eat them roasted, and
never unbowell them; they give a burnt-toad to their Falcons, to prevent the
moth-eating of their feathers. There are that shut a toad in an earthen-pot,
and hide it amidst their standing corn, to prevent blasting in tempests; to
omit the foppery about the right side-bone; they are differenced from place,
shape, Difference.
and bulk. For place, some are found in and about sacred places, and things. In
Sneberg, and Mansfield, bring them out, they swell, and die.

At Toulouse was one with white spots, Place.
found in a red sand-stone. A Mason of Antwerp found one in marble. Agricola
says, they are in those they make millstones, and before they shape them, they
had need look well, if they lurk not therein. About the shape, and bulk,
writers mention many things; Shape.
as of a bunchbacked toad; see his figure hereafter, etc.

POINT II. Of the green small Frog, and the temporary Frog.
THe green Frog is very small. Ambrosin. Ovied. Ind. p. 608. Gesner. Ambr. l.
1. c. 3. Plin. Isid. Names. (...).
Some call them calamites, from their being among reeds, and canes; some
agredula, or field-frog, some wood-frogs; they delighting much to be there; or
as to difference them from the green Frog that men eat. The Greeks call it
Kanthis, from croaking against rain; and Druobataes, from their skipping
amongst trees; and Diopetaes, as dropping from the sky; and Brexantes, from
croking.

It is all green throughout, except the feet. It is useful against many
griefs. Described. Ambr. p. 622. Use. Plin. Sylv. Guiner. Timoth. Marcellus.
Spit into the mouth, it helps a cough: Held in the hand, it allays a
burning-feaver. Some Cran-hens with pulls of barley-meal, and the flesh hereof
boiled, and give the hen to those in hectique fevers; some cut it in the
midst, and apply it to the reins in dropsies, to fetch out the water. The liver
tied in a Cranes-skin, makes lusty. The fat is good for toothache. The blood
dropped in, where hairs on the cheeks have been plucked out, keeps them from
growing again. Some prick the Frogs with a copper pin, and anoint those
places with the blood. The temporary Frog has the name from its short life.

CHAPTER II. Of Lizards.
ARTICLE I. Of the common Lizard.
CAlled Lacertus, Ambr. l. 2. c. 4. p. 623. Id. Ib. c. 5. Name. (...).
Difference. In Arist. H. A. and 204.
because it has arms, and hands, that it bends, and turns like a man. In
Greek Saura, Smulla, etc. Leaving Pliny, who writes of rusty, iron-coloured
ones, and Scaligers division into lesser, and greater; we shall distinguish
them in common, green, and brasse-coloured, and Brasil, or Indian ones. The
first have five very small toes, with nails in the foot, and hinder-feet; the
thumb short, the forefinger longest, the tongue hairy, and cleft; dry lungs,
small and round milt, testicles, cleaving to Spondyls; Plin.
the secrets of the She, like a fowls; and the eggs so lying, and fenced. There
are store in Italy, great in Capreae; Arist.
and so common in India, that they creep into the beds there sometimes. Those
of Arabia are a cubite long; in Nysa an Indian Hill, four and twenty foot
long, and yellow, or blew. They inhabit commonly graves, Albert. Place. Lin.
chot. Plin.
dens, thorny places, and ruined heaps. At Genua in the Prince of Doria his
Fort, we saw very many in the open air. They eat flesh, herbs, bees, antz;
they gender about the end of March; they close as one body like serpents, they
lay eggs, Arist.
and hide them in the earth, and the young come abroad; (though they sit not on
the eggs) at set times. Food.
That they bring forth at the month, Gendring.
and devour their broot all, but the one slug is a fable Arist.
. They hate the stork, that feeds her young with them, and spiders with their
webs, entangle young Lizards in holes, and crevises of walls, and strike them
dead, also toads, Scorpions, and Serpents, with which they fight; whence called
Ophiomechi. They love flesh of shellfish, and dittany, Sympathy.
which is their refuge after combating with Serpents; and man they lvoe, and
protect him from serpents. They will lick the spittle out of your mouth
greedily: Scal.
In time they loose their fight, Erasm. Disposition. Aelian. Arist.
and recover it again, either by course of nature, or by the sun, in whose
beams they ly lurking till they be recovered. They lurk the six winter-months
under ground, and there lay up store. The female is greatest. They go in
couples, and defend each other; and are mad at any that take their fellow. They
forget the eggs they lay; cut an egg in two, it is not lost, by reason of the
glewy humor; they naturally cleave again, Plin. Aelian. l. 9. c. 58. Theocr.
as may be seen by the scarre. Their tail are said to grow again, though often
cut off. It is not true that a dried one turns Viper. At Paris have been seen
some as big as a great fish. Some have three tayls, and some two heads. Torn in
twain, it cures a Scorpions bite, and eaten it is good against the Salamanders
poison. The oil of them drowned, Schenck Use in Physic. Plin.
and boiled in oil with Sheep-dung, is a good anointment for swellings of the
neck, and face morfew, and pimples. The powder with crematartar, and candy-oyl,
helps dim sight; the green are best. The brain helps Syffusions. Diosc. M. M.
l. 2. c. 58.
The head bruised to a poultise, and laid on alone, or with long aristolochia,
root of reed, bulb of Narcissus, draws out arrows, and thorns, stick they never
so fast. The heart burnt, and mixed with dreges of wine, benums, that you shall
not feel the chirurgions probe. The blood keeps rickets from growing, if you
anoint infants-thighs carefully therewith; and is good, if they be bursten:
the dung is put into the medicine for horses strangury. Kill one in a
mans-pisse, it abates your lust.

ARTICLE II. Of the green, and the Brazen-coloured Lizard.
THe green Lizard, (...) Ambr. l. 1. c. 6.
or Chloorosaura, is called also the Greater; and the Serpent-fighter, (they
worstling serpents.) They haunt hot places, as Italy, where coming of many
abroad at once presages a sickly time. In summer they bide in trees, and croak
like frogs; and have two tails. The figure below shall save a labor to
describe them. It is useful in Physic; ty it on thirty days for
neck-swellings, and then change it. Childrens burstings are cured by a bite,
then shoot him through with an arrow, Plin.
and bloat him. Boiled alive with wine, and given fasting, it helps wheesings,
and sod with oil, face pimples. With tar, and an old sows grease it takes
away tenderness of Horse-hoofs: It makes the hair black; ^sran^. Hier^^^.
And it renews hair. See in Ambrosine the ointment for the falling sickness.
The ashes help exulcerated neck-swellings. The bones help them in a swound,
after you powder him alive in a stone pot, and the flesh fall off.

There is a Lizard with brasse-coloured streaks down the back, called Ziglis,
Chalcid. Ambr. l. 1. c. 7.
Samiamithon, and Seps, a serpent, because the flesh it bites, rots, and
Tarantula, but amiss. It resembles the small Lizard, and is colored like the
serpent Caecilia. It is bred, and lives among the stones in Syria, Lybia, and
Cyprus. It bears young, as the viper does, but carry eggs in the belly, as
other animals that lay eggs. Fabius Columna killed one in a French camp, and
cutting it up found fifteen young within her; some has a thin transparent
skin, Gal. Med. Simp.
some none, cut it in two it cures a bite. Galen praescribes it among pickled
meats.

ARTICLE III. Of Indian Lizards.
POINT I. Of the Senembi, or Igvana.
THere are many kinds of Indian Lizards; the most famous are, Marckg. H.
Brasil. ^6. c. 11.
the Senembi, or Igvana (the Portugees miscall it Cameliaon, and the Dutch
worse, Legvan) long from the mouth to the tail end three foot, eight fingers,
compass ten fingers. The whole skin of a delicate green, with black, and white
spots, chequered, like chamelet; it is scaly, the greatest scales are on the
back, thighs, and tail, and here all equal. From the neck to the tail end a
new of plain ones, like saw-teeth, and green; the head about two fingers long,
and scaly; the scales greater then elsewhere; the neck a finger and half long,
five thick, their eyes large, clear, and blackish, nostrills wide, the teeth
many small, black, short; tongue thick, the head on each side black spotted, a
gullet hanging as fish gills, or a crop down to the breast, most part blackish,
that he can gather up, and let hang out, when vexed, or frighted. From the
mouth to the crop it has bristles, and on the back, it has four thighs, and
four feet, on each five toes, all scaly, the fore-thighs are shortest, and
slenderest, four fingers long, and the middle toes shorter then those on the
hinder-feet; the nayls black, and crooked, like bird-claws, etc. The
hinder-thighs like a man's calf, the foremost not; the dock five fingers thick,
and so the tail thinner and thinner, and ending like an aul. One being kill and
flead, yet waged after, and the heart taken out leaped; it had in either side
above ten eggs, some as big as a cherry, some less; the fat plainly seen, as a
Hens; in the stomach was much fruit, especially sweet Limons, which was the
usual food. They eat also meal and Mandioca-water. They can fast two, or three
months together. The flesh is well tasted, boiled, and long fried with butter,
it tastes as well as chicken, or cony. It has heart, lungs, liver,
gallbladder, reins, bladder, genitals, as other beasts; a large liver, a
double stomach, one before, receiving the food, whence a gut as big as the
little finger, and about ten fingers long, whereto is knit the other ventricle,
that disgests food, hence pass the other to the strait gut. In the
fore-stomack of one was found great store of Mandoa meal, and Angolas milt raw;
the hindermost, the greater, was stuf^d with half disguested meat, whereto
cleaved many mites, as in cheese; the last gut held the dung. Being flead, and
the tail cut off, it stird yet, five or six strokes on the head could not kill
it, till a cut was given in the neck; the tayl-flesh is stringy, and sinewy.
Anno 1641. was a stone taken out of a Senembies stomach, as big as a reasonable
hen-egge, and so shaped, but not so round, but squatter, without smooth,
bright; within made up of coasts, like an onjon, to be pilled off; within it
was bright gray, hard as a Bezoar-stone; they fit in trees, and are taken in
lines, that the Brasilians know how to fit a club, which the beast spying,
wonders at, but stirs not, suffering it self to be ensnared and taken, else he
is very swift; the younger are all over green, the elder party-colored, Fr.
Ximenes.
or ash-hewd. In their heads are sometimes found small stones, that lessen, and
void the stones in the reins forthwith, either by the juice drawn out, of a
dram weight; or tied to the body. It were good to try, whether those found in
the stomach, have that virtue, or no.

POINT II. Of the Tejuguacu, Taraguira, and Americima.
THe Tejuguacu, Marckg. H. Bras. l. 6. c. 11.
and Temapara Tupinambis, is a choice Lyzard, shaped like the Senembi, with
this difference, that this is all black, but sprinkled with goodly white spots,
and toward the tail seems to have white prickles. Next the tail is thicker at
the dock. 3. It wants those sharp bristles along the back. 4. The outertoe on
the hind-feet, stands a little a loof from the rest, and is shorter. 5. It has
a long cloven tongue, red, smooth, which snake like, it can suddenly thrust out
a finger long, and withdraw it. It yields no voice, is patient, loves raw-egs,
can fast long. The Markgrave kept one in his chamber, tied, and sometime
loosed, gave it water out of a glass; unless, when thirsty, it used to sit
all day, moping in a corner. It loved to ly on hot ashes. One trod of a piece
of the tail, yet it grew two fingers after: In two month it ate not, and so
pined to death; only it sometimes licked in a little water; the flesh was eaten.

The Taraguira of Brasil is a Lizard, in, and near their houses, common in
their gardens, and everywhere; about a foot long, and some less: the body
round, all full of three cornered ash-colored scales: has no crop under the
chin, the back plain; they nod nirably with the head, when they spy any things,
and run swiftly, and wagging. They wake a man, if they see any Serpent, or
venomous creature, making toward him. As they couple, the He bites the She
gently on the neck, and pulls her to his side.

The Brasil Americima, is a small Lizard, three fingers long, and no thicker
any where then a Swans-quill; footed, and ledged as the Senembi; blacke-eyed,
almost square-bodied, the back clothed with ash-colored scales, the sides
with dusky ones: the head, legs, and tail with blew ones, all bright and
smooth, the toes like hogs-bristles. The Portugees say it is venomous, and
longs to suck the blood of women great with child; they report that if it but
touch a woman, nay her clothes, she never after conceives more.

POINT III. Of other Indian Lizards.
THe Carapopeba is with the Brasilians a venomous Lyzard, Marckg. H. Bras. l.
6. c. 12.
three, four, five fingers long, shaped, as the other, with five toes on the
fore, and four on the hinder-feet. It is all liver-coloured, with white spots,
and on the tail white streaks mixed with yellow, eyes glistring, and like
glass. The Ameiva with the Brasilians, and the Tupinambi is everyway like the
Taraguira; only this is forked tailed, ending in two strait horns. The
Taraguico Aycuraba in Brasil is like the Taraguira, only the scales on the tail
are small, and triangular at top, but the tip plain, with four dusk spots, the
back chamleted. The Brasil Tejunhana is as thick as your little finger;
coped-headed, black-eyed, with golden ringlets, fourfooted, three fingers long,
the tail six fingers and an half long, round, and at the end sharp as a birds;
the head scaly, sides, thighs above skined soft as silk, the tail has
fouresquare small scales, the head greater and duskish; the back and sides
above shadowed with three streaks, and checkered, below green, above one green
streak from the head to the thighs; there is another green streak at the
parting of the dusk, and green; between the two streaks is a rank of green
pricks in dusk, and under the lower green streak a rue of black spots in green;
the thighs above wax-coloured with small dusky spots, below white* the tail
above wax-coloured, and also below, but mixed with white; the head beneath the
throat and belly, bright, and blood-spotted; it has a cloven tongue.

CHAPTER III. Of the Salamander.
IT is uncertain whence it borrows the name, Ambrosin. de Digit. ovip. l. 1. c.
5. Name. (...).
whether as Valincendra, from the ability to withstand fire, or as a sole lover
of fire, or as Saulamandran, from quiet lurking, or as Selamandra, as living
between the void spaces of sheep-coates, and caves; or (which is but too
ridiculous) from Sela Mana Dera, from dimming brightness; or from the Arabique
Saanbras, or Samabras, which is likely, but not sure. Pliny calls it a starry
beast; Aetius a venomous Lizard. Stellatum.
There are two sorts, the Land, and the water-Salmander. The Land one resembles
the green Lizard, only the head, The landone described.
and belly of this are thicker. It has a short tail, it is black, spotted with
clay-spots, but smooth, and transparant. Gesner found one on the Alps, all
duskish, and dark, short-tailed, and striking it, a milky juice flowed out.
Some in the Germane forests have black backs, (...)
and red bellies. Some have long, and crooked tails, and claws. (...)(...)
Nic^^^^^.
Some call it Liporrinon, because it is shining, and glistring, as if greased
over. They haunt cold moist, gloomy places.

In Dutchland are many found, Place.
knotted together. They are often seen about Trent, and in the Ananiensian vale.
Food.
Some think they breath only at the mouth, and so live, others write that they
covet hony-combs, Gendring.
bees, and milk, and annoy hives, and cows. Plin. l. 10. c. 68. Bellon. obs. l.
3.
Pliny mistakes in saying they breed not, and have no distinction of sex; for
some have seen their brood; they lay eggs, wherein the young come to maturity.
Whether it live in, or can put out fire, we shall hereafter inquire. Nature.
They come abroad in rainy weather, and before storms. It is never seen in
winter, Cardan. rer. var. l. 7. c. 33.
or summer; it is slow-gated. In Cumana, they crow. If you cut them in two, the
forepart goes forward, the hinder moves backward. By nature it hates Frogs, and
tortoyses, and fights eagerly with them. It is found venomous, whole families
have been poisoned to death, by drinking the water, wherein one had fallen. Nay,
the fruit is thought deadly, whereon their spittle is sprinkled. They bite also
to death, Plin. Aeans. Nican.
as many testify. Gesner was told, that, where the tooth once fastens, and
bends, it is mortal to it, but he kept two at home, that were never prone to
bite, if not provoked, nor heard he of any in Germany, bitten by them. But in
France the bite is deadly. And the Rhetians have a proverb, that, who so is
bitten by them, needs as many Physicians, as the Salamander has spots.
Physicians use the spittle among their psilothra. Use.
Kiranides hangs the heart, wrapped in a black skin, on the arm, against a
quartan. Not to speak of the fables of girdles, of the skin, to quench fire.

The Water-Salamander, called the water Lizard, The water-one. Ambr. l. 1. c.
^. Be^^o^.
and Cordulus, and the water-Scincus, or Crocodile, has a broad tail, and is
of four kinds. 1. That with a tail like a Rhomlus, the tongue short, and
broad; the teeth so small, you cannot see them, on the forefeet are four, on
the hinder five toes; the heart is spongy, and lies on the right side: whose
left ear-lappet takes up the greatest part of the pericardium: the milt
reddish, reins spongy, liver black, it has eggs in the belly big as peace,
Agric^^^.
lying orderly, whereout live young break; the back has ugly bumps on it, it
is ash color, or dun. That Gesner dissected, was seven fingers long, black,
with white spots on the belly, the rest spotted with black, and rugged. There
is another sort with bright half circles on the back, and there is of those,
the greater, and the lesser Salamander. The last is that of Matheolus, common
among the Utinenses, the head rounder, and shorter. The Land-ones, tayled like
the eel, black-backed with murry-spots; they love dark ditches, and fat soils,
and ponds with white mud, there they cleave under stones, and seldom swim
above. Gesner cast one into a tub of water, and it put forth the mouth. They
are slow on ground, and hold their mouths close shut, you must force them open.
Agricola.
Cast them into salt, they wagge the tail, and die. Beat them long, they live.
The skin so hard, a sword cannot pierce it. Out of the wounds comes milky
matter. Provoke them, they swell, and start upright, and pour out poisonous
sweat, and look wistly on the provoker. If a Sow eat one, she dies.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Stellio.
THis goes for a Lizard, called Stellio from his starry marks; (...) 29.
and in Greek Askalalotaes, or Koolobataes, from the soft, and silent gate,
and creeping through walls; and Galeotes, because Weesellike, it is ever
climbing softly; there are diverse kinds of them. That of the Greeks called
Colotes, and Ascalabotes, it is full of spots, and has a harsh voice, and
feeds on every thing. That of Italy, resembling Chamaeleon, living on dew, and
Spiders, and is said to be venomous, as the other harmles. Hither refer the
little white beasts like small Lizards, of a bright, and brittle-body, about
Rome, called Tarantulaes; (...)
but the small Lizard is silver-coloured, called Liakoni. In Gazara was seen a
black Stellio, as big as a Weesel, great-headed, and big-bellied. We give below
a Print of the Mat^^^oli, and Facetan Lizard. There are none in Germany,
France, nor England, but in Thrace, Sicily, and Syria, and those more deadly
then they of Italy. (...)
They keep in chinks of doors, and windows, and chimnyes. That that is foe to
the Scorpion, is not in Italy bred. There are venomous ones. In winter they ly
hid, and eat not. Like snakes they grow young again, (...)
they help the falling sickness, they ly in wait for Spiders, and Bees, and
hunt them, and Scorpions: they seldom bite, having bent teeth, which they
leave in a wound; their bite benums, but seldom kills. The flesh plucks
splinters out man's body, it cures its own bite, and putrified in oil, cures the
Scorpions bite. (...)
In Quartans, some laid it in a box under the patients head, to prevent the
fit. (...)
The ashes held in the left hand, provoke, in the right, subdue Just. The parts
make sleepy, and benum; the liver-pounct eases toothache, sprinkled on. The
dung takes away warts, the older the better against epilepsy: drowned in wine,
the wine drunk, breeds spots, or freckles on the face: the gall dissolved in
water, gathers Weesels.

CHAPTER V. Of the Scincus, or Land-Crocodile.
THe Scincus, so called perhaps from Tinsa in the Arabique, (...)
is also called the land, or lesser Crocodile, either for being like, or for
dreading Saffran. It ^s of the bigness of a green Lizard, ^ame.
or the Salamander, fourefooted, a thumb thick, Dioscor. Bellon. Described.
and not above a quarter long, the tail round, and scaly; the scales small on
the body, many, and clayish colored; the head long, little thicker then the
neck, the belly as it were winged, the tail round, as of the Lizard, but
shorter, and crooked at the end; a streak from head to tail, Gesner saw one
with five toes and nails, a thumb and half broad, two palms long; and another
six palms long, at Constantinople. The are bred only in Arabia about Mecha,
Place.
and are brought thence to Alexandria, and Venice. They live on sweet flowers,
therefore no wonder their dung sents so, on dry ground they lay eggs, Food.
and bury them. The flesh is a great antidote. Rhasis uses to hang the young on
those, Use.
that are frighted in their sleep. Pulverid, it makes lustful; the same flesh
helps the falling sickness in India, and makes fat: The heart in black
Sheep-wool, of a Lamb first yeaned, being worn, Plin.
is thought to chase away quartan-agues. The gall with honey, is cried up
against bloodshot-eyes: the reins increase seed; the blood with borax, smeard
on the face, removes freckles; the fat helps reinpain: the ashes of the skin,
some sprinkle on parts to be cut off, to make them less sensible. Aegineta of
the tail, make his ointment Entaticon: out of the bowels is a perfume made
against stopping of the matrix: the dung is antiepileptick, and clears the
eyes, the best is the white, and mouldring, that soon melts in water: Plin.
whores use it, to keep their faces sleek, and unwrinkled, as you bruise it, it
smells like old leven. Of old it was sophisticated with dung of stares, fed
with rice. The Indian, Differences* Plin.
and Arabian, are the biggest. In India is bred a beast like it, as great as a
Malta Dog, with a rough scaly skin, called by the Indians Phatagen, happily it
is the Candiverbera, or smitetayl. In Cyprus is a Lizard, everyway resembling
the Scincus. In the Lake of Vicenza is a diverse sort, a kind of Salamander. The
Scincus Rhasis, has a tail not round, but flat, or squat about the sides.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Foure-footed Cordylus, and other Lyzards.
IT is like the fish Cordylus, called by some Latermen, the land-Crocodile; and
the Candiverbera, Ambrosin. l. 2. c. 12.
because it is ever whisking, and clapping with the tail, which is like a
knotted club, and beats all that come near him. Some say, he has gils; but
there hangs one in a public library, Bellon.
with only two holes by the corners of the mouth. It is like a Crocodile, but
less, and moves the under-jaw; headed, and mouthed like a Tortoyse, the neck
short, and swelling below: each foot has five toes, the body scaly, skin hard,
like a snakes slough, tail round, with scaly ringlets inexpressible; the scales
are hard as bones, and fouresquare, hollowed a little, to make the tail round,
joined like tiles, the corners sharp as thorns, they are transparant, and of a
pale yellow, as horn; the belly struts out more then a Crocodiles; the back
broad, and flat. This may prove Aelians Indian Phattages by the description,
whose rough skin they use to cut with.

CHAPTER VII. Of the Chamaeleon.
TE name imports a little Lion; the notation from a Camel, Ambr. l. 1. c. 14.
(...) Ovip. l. 1. Name. Described. Plin. l* 8. c. 33.
and a Lion is ridiculous; of late the wild call it Gamaleon, Zamaleon,
Hamaleon, and Maleon. It resembles a Lizard, only the thighs stand uprighter,
and higher; the sides are joined to the belly, as a fish, and the backbone
such snouted like a hog; the tail long, and pointed, with rounds, viperlike, it
is crooked clawed, it is rough-bodied as the Crocodile, the eyes hollow, and
sunk, great, and colored as the body; the flesh is but little about the head,
jaws and dock, elsewhere, none; it has blood only in the heart, and about the
eyes; the bowels are without spleen. The lungs take up almost the whole body:
Arist. H. A. l. 2. c. 11. Theoph. de mutant. color.
Thus Arist. and Pliny. Others write, that from the midst of the head backward
there sticks out a three cornered part bony, and the rest before is hollow as a
pipe, the brims on both sides sticking out bony and sharp as a saw-teeth: It
moves not the ey-balls, it is ever gaping, has a long tongue, like that of an
earth-worm; at the tip is a spungy glewly knot, wherewith it preys. In stead of
teeth and gums it has one continued bone, knaged; the upper-lip is shortest,
the throat, and artery like the Lizards; the heart as big as a house-mouses;
the liver has two lappets, the left greatest, the gall-bag as big as a barley
corn, cleaving to the left liver-lappet, bowelled as a Lizard; Arist. Bellon.
Gesner.
the forefeet very different from the hinder; the forefeet having three toes
inward, two outward, the hinder three outward and two inward: It is from the
snowt to the dock seven, or eight fingers long, five fingers high; it has
about sixteen ribs bending between the bottom of the belly, and the ridge of
the back, and it is spotted like a Leopard; the teeth stand comlily, he has
but one gut with bendings, Gassendus.
the excrement moist, unless near the fundament; the liver parted, and on the
bunchy side pouring the blood into the heart that has ears, and not veins; the
lungs being puffed passes into a thin skin reaching round almost through the
whole body; there is no rim at the belly bottom, only a thin skin severing
the right from the left parts: He has no milt, no bladder, no reins to be
seen, but small bits of flesh, that, it may be, are genitals; the tongue is
near a foot long. They are in Asia, Africa, India, and Madagascar. Place.
Bellon. obs. l. 2. c. 34. Food. Plin. l. 8. c. 33.
They sit on the garden hedges at grand Cair by the banks of Nile; as also on
bramble-bushes. Of old they were thought to live on air, but they prey on
flies, locusts, but they fancy most the worms in meal tubs. They keep above for
fear of serpents and vipers. They use their tongue as a trunk, darting it forth
with that nimblenesse that you can hardly perceive it, by the means of a small
forke bone planted on either side the ends of the jaws, the tongue is hollow,
like a gut, which he can infold, and unfold at pleasure; at the end is a slimy
bit of flesh to prey withal. Peirescius kept eight of them to observe their
breeding, (...)*
there were in one female within a thin skin above a hundred eggs, some as big
as an olive kernel, all yolk, no white seen in them, yet resembling milk. They
hold enmity with the hauk, which will die, it is thought, if he but taste a
Chamaeleon, (...)
and a crew also, unless bay-leave fence him. The Elephant is fabled by
Solinus to swallow them they being of the color of the leaves, and they cost
him his life, unless he help himself by wild olive. Fear of vipers, and
serpents makes him live on shrubs, and trees. His spittle let down on a
serpents head, (...)
like a limed thread, kills him. Wild figs make him wild, who is otherwise
harmless. He turns his whole die about, sits high, ever gaping, when dead he
is pale. In winter he hides himself, as Lizards use. By nature he admirably
changes color but in eyes, and tail, and whole body according to the color of
what lies next, except red, and white; yet Ambrosine affirms from a Gentleman's
testimony that he changes to white. But Peirescius his eight changed not
color. Whether they be green, or ash they put on a black, if you turn them to
the sun, or fire. It is strange, that their eyes being combined move not but
one looking any way, the other is fixed, or bends the other way, which
deflection comes from the four pullies in them, there being no distinction of
Iris, but only a ball, wherein the horny part ends, which is glistring, and
various, as the rest of the body. Those of Cochin eat them. They bind many
together, and sell them, being bought, they are cast into the fire, Use in (...)
and roasted. Flea one, the flesh is very clear, which they sees in a liquour
like our butter. Sod away with oil in a new earthen pot, it drives away an
Epilepsy. It makes a rare ointment for the gout; see the composition in
Trallianus. The tongue hanged on helps memory, and women in childbirth: the
gall stops fluxes. The heart wrapped in black-wool first shorn helps a quartan
ague; to omit fables about raising storms, making mute, etc. Plin. l 2* c. 8.
with the heart, tongue, etc. you must know it is Pliny, who, though learned,
and useful, studied too much to delight men. Difference. Bellon.
In Egypt they are pale. In Arabia much smaller, and of another color, as
bright, yellowish, and red-spotted. We have given here the shapes of the pale,
and black Chamaeleons.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the Crocodile.
HE is a kind of Lizard, Name. (...). Kircher. ^. 172.
so called from dreading the shores. The Egyptians term him Chempsa, the
Turks thence Kimsak. Kircher, Picharouki. Statius the Pharian wild-beast,
others Tenchea. In Arsinoe, Suchus, in India, Cayman. It resembles a Lizard, it
is of a Saffran color, but white-bellied, Described. (...).
and there soft-skined, elsewhere musket proof. Some have been seen six and
twenty cubits long. By Panama there are some of above a hundred foot. The head
is broad, the snowt as a swines, the gape reaches to the ears; the eyes sharp,
and piercing, and like a hogs; (...)
he has a rue of great, bright strong teeth, like a comb, about sixty in all;
more in the upper jaw, and sticking out, seen when the mouth is shut. The
tongue cleaves, and is useless. (...)
The under jaw he stirs not, the testicles cling to the inner-loyns. The
backbone is made up of sixty turning joints, tied by as many sinews; the claws
are very sharp bending somewhat toward the sides; the tail is of the length of
the rest of the body, wherein is a finne of seven fingers to the end. (...)
M. Scaurus was first who in his Edil-ship showed five in his plays in an
Euripus made for the time. They are found in Africa, Asia, and America; (...)
especially in Nilus, and neighboring pools; in Niger, in Ganges about
Bengala, in the river Bambotus near Atlas, and not far from Chalcedon, but
small ones, They love warm waters. In Peru are none till you come to Pacra,
then they are frequent. Some live in miry plashes on fish, but are most greedy
after man's flesh. They prey also on beasts on land. There was one taken that
had swallowed three young ones. (...). l. 2.
About Arsinoe they were held holy, and nourished of old by the Priests with
bread, flesh, and wine. Some gave them dainties, rost-meat, and mingled drinks.
The She lays sixty eggs, (...)
as big as Goose-egges, and by a kind of divination, where the Nile, when it
swells, comes not. She lays and hatches sixty in sixty days. ^^ndring. (...).
Gyllius has marked that the young have crept out of the sand, where the eggs
have been hidden, the eggs grow not greater. They hate the Ichneumon for
spoiling their eggs, (...).
and endeavoring to creep into their mouths, while they sleep, and gnaw their
bowell; and the wild Ox, (...)
that can over-master them. The Tiger, because they tear them, when they take
them lying on their backs, and hauks, and therefore the Coptitae, that worship
the Crocodile, kill up the hauks. They that carry the gall of water-serpent are
said to be safe from the Crocodile. They let the Porpisci alone for the
prickles on his neck.

Dolphins get into Nilus under their bellies, (...).
and tear them up, Babillus, Gouvernour of Egypt, was eye-witnes of it.
Scorpions wound the young, as they break out of the egg. They fear a man's
voice, and fly if a man pursue them; Sen. Not. quaest. l. 4. Phil.
the Tentyritae they hate, who dwell on an Isle in the Nile, a people of small
stature, but courageous against Crocodiles, that are terrible in pursuit of
those that fly them, Plin. l. 8. c. 25.
and fly those that pursued them, but that people alone dare encounter them,
and swim, and ride them, and thrust a club in their mouths, and as it were
bridle them, and captivate them, and terrify them with their very voice, and
force them to disgorge bodies, newly devoured, to bury them, so that Crocodiles
shun only that Island, and fly, if they but smell those men, fly them as
Serpents the Psylli. When in Scaurus his time they were brought to Rome,
Tentyrites kept, and managed them in shows, in fish ponds. Among plants they
avoid the prickled bean. Diverse use to carry Potamogeton with them as an
amulet, Crescentiensis. Sympathy. Plin.
or preservative against the Crocodile.

They agree well with the hogs, so that they are saved by the Niles, and with
the Trochilus, (called king of birds in Italy,) that, while they ly gaping
after eating, picks their teeth, and jaws clean; which the Crocodile likes so
well, that they invite the bird, and gape on purpose. With eating of much fish,
worms breed in their chaps, Leo Af^* l. 9.
which the Trochilus eats out; which having done, the Crocodile would devour
the bird too, but that it has a sharp prickle on the head, and makes him open
his mouth, and so she scapes. By night they keep in the water, by day on land;
the same way they come forth of the water, Nature. Mart. Leg. bab. l. 3. Arist.
they return, keeping a track. Their legs are short, and they cannot easily
turn aside, they leave a sweet sent, where they go; especially the female, so
that no Arabian sweets excel it, Aelian.
as the Inhabitants by the River Nilus say four months, some say forty, some
sixty days, they hide themselves, and eat not. Artemidore the Grammarian, was
so affrighted with the sight of one, that he lost his wits, and learning, and
verily believed, that the beast had bit off his left leg. When they feed on a
man's carcass, they with their tears, some say, break the brain-pan for the
brain. They do more harm to those that go up the stream, because the fishers
catch the fish, they would prey on, and so ravine fiercely on man, and beast;
and so after Niles overflow, when it returns within its channel, for want of
fish, in the shallows at the rivers mouth, where they lurk in the slime,
watching for what ever comes to drink. They follow boats against stream, when
the boatmen thrust with poles, and with their tail strike man, and pole
overbord. It is a tail that they hurt no man, Plin. l. 11. c. 4. Scal. Exer.
196. Aelian. l. 8. c. 8. and 9. 3.
while Apis, his birth is solemnized. Achmed Ben-Tolon; finding a leaden one at
the foundations of Temples, commanded it to be melted. The Priests guesed, that
one of the Ptolomees was near death, when their old, and cheef Crocodile being
called, came not, and refused the meat, offered him. Being tamed, they know
man's voice, and will let men handle them, and rub their teeth with a napkin,
and gaped to that end. No wonder then that in the Ombitan Marshes, that they
are brought up by art, and tamed, and fed with the heads of their sacrifices.
In the town Anteum, and old woman was taken in bed with a Crocodile. Many
learned say, they live as long as man, some sixty years, Gyllius Diod. Bibl. l.
9. c. I. Use.
some eat them. The Apollonopolitae were bound by their law to eat them,
either, because the daughter of King Psammenitus was devoured by one, or out of
hate of the tyran Typhon, who was fained to be turned into a Crocodile.
Herodot. Lopez. Leo Afr. c. 9. In Physic.
In India they roast them, and in Florida they dry them, and in winter feed on
them. The eggs also in the new world are eaten, and in Egypt. Sodden, they
cure Spider-biting; the dogs-teeth stuffed with Frankincense, assuaged Fevers.
The blood clears eyesight, and helps stung-parts. The fat anointed on, is
good against shaking in agues, and old sores, and cancer. The skin burnt,
mixed with dregs of oil, stupefies a lirib, to be cut off, or feared. In India
they cast delinquents, bound to Crocodiles. Baldus Itin. c. 35.
In Pegu they keep them in their City-ditches, that no man may swim over in the
night. The Inhabitants, because they worship them, drink the ditch-water; and
believed that all killed by Crocodiles, fly strait to heaven. Firmus a Tyrant
of Egypt, being anointed over with their fat, swam safely among them. Some are
greater, Differences. Plin. Albert. Aelian.
some lesser, as Scinci. Some called Tenchea. In Ganges, there are harmles
ones, and harmfull, with a horn on the snout. In the Province of Xanagarra,
they leave a sent like musk where they go.

THE SECOND TITLE. Of the Beasts that have Toes that come of an egg, and are
shelled.
CHAPTER I. Of the Tortoyse in general.
He is called Testudo, from testa, his shell. Ambr. l. 2. c. 1. Name. (...).
Isidor. Described. Paucunius.
In Greek Chelis, etc. from Cheoo, to be capacious. It is no sightly beast,
covered with an ovall shell, like a target, whereunder it hides head, feet, and
tail; the head little, the tail as a snakes, the look rough. Several writers
give the shell several names, as hided, covering, shell, etc. In Greek
Cheloonion, and Ostrakon: (...).
In stead of teeth it has one continued bone, the lungs are very large, Plin.
and bloodles: Liver tainted, testicles cleaving to the loins: milt very little;
they have reins, and bladder, and but one passage for excrement, Arist. l. 3.
c. 8.
which is therefore ever wet. It is footed like the Lizard, having five toes
and nayls. Cardan saw one with a nayl in the tail like a cocks-spur; and the
tail of such as of Lizards, cut off, grows again, and harder. Place.
They are found on land, in Sea, lakes, Arrian. Mar. R^b. Herbe^^. Itin. p.
349. Gendri^g. Arist. Plin. Aelian.
or muddy places; they abound in the Red Sea, and are sold in the Markets. They
are in the Isle Dioscoris, now Socotora, and Mauritius, once Cerne: they meet
to gender, as others that lay eggs: they delight not in coupling: they lay
eggs like Henne-egges, but less, and longer, with shell, white, and yolk: the
shell is so hard, that a Cart may drive over it, without bruising it; Nature,
and qu^lities.
it never changes it, as other shelly creatures use. In winter-moneths they
hide themselves in the earth, and eat not, coming forth, they creep slowly,
whether from feebleness, or their nature. They are at variance with Partriges
and Eagles, that snap them often up, to crack them on Rocks; Aeli.
as one let one fall of the bald-pate of the tragic Poet Aeschylus, mistaking
it for a stone, and killed him; Arist. H. A. l* 4. c. 6.
who abhorred to lengthen life, according to Hyppocrates directions. Their
voice is a little louder then a snakes hiss; they fight with Serpents,
fenceing themselves with origanum, Plin.
etc. Some parboyl them, and then fry them in steaks. Some reckon them among
fishes, (...).
and allow them on fasting-dayes, others not; they have bones, and breath. Not
to speak of their eyes. Some Americans count them dainties: Bru^. c^ l. 22. c*
^.
the flesh is useful against dropsy, and short-breath, or wheesings. Boiled,
they remove the loathsomnes of glutting of honey. The ashes of the shell are
used against fistulaes, and shedding of hair; Plin.
and with oil, and wine, against sore legs; and in a fume, against Emrods.
Burn them, they close chapped-nipples, G^l^n. E^p or.
with the white of an egg; and they help bursten people: the blood of the head
cut off, when it lies on the back, and dried in the Sun, quenches S. Anthonies
fire, and removes warts, and morfew; and is good for a sore-head, and with
ants-egges, Henbane, Hyoscyamus, and Hemlock, is made an excellent ointment:
the shell makes a good potlid that keeps the pot from boiling over: the blood
in wine, makes abstemious: the flesh fattens Horses, and Hogs. Vegetius makes
an ointment of the live Tortoys, burnt on chips, and raw Alum, and
Deers-marrow, and wine, to make cattells hair grow. The shell-shavings drunk in
wine, allay lust. Of the greater, some have framed tables, vessels, and beds.

Pliny, Plin. l. 16. c. 43.
and Seneca, complain of the luxury in this kind under Nero; and of
counterfaiting the color of the shell, to make coverings for cup-bords. The
Amazons made shields of the shells, and cradles for their children.

Pliny divides them into land, and Sea, and Ponds-tortoyses, and such as live
in sweet water, Difference. Plin. Ambr. ex Boh^^. l. 2. c. 1.
called Emyclae. In the Isle Zambol, are seen small beasts like them,
round-bodied, crosse-streakt; at the end of each streak is an ear, and an eye;
they have but one belly, many feet, and can go every way. The blood is
sovereign to close any wound. Gesner calls it the many-footed-Tortoys. In the
Isle Mauritius, under the line, Herbert. Itin.
they are so large, and strong, that they carry men too, and fro; the Portugees
speak of fifteen such.

CHAPTER II. Of Tortoyses in special.
ARTICLE I. Of the Land-Tortoyse.
THe Land-Tortoys is called by some the hill, Ambros. O^ip. D^git. l* ^. c. 2.
Name. (...) Described.
wood, field, wild-one; in Greek Chersaian, etc. It is as the Salmander marked
with yellow, and black spots on the back, shelled like the sea-one. The
under-shell of the female is plain, but of the male hollow, and heavier; under
the under-shells are two moving muscles before, on each side one, either seems
double, (...). Z^ot. Da^ocr.
the greater outward, the less inward; both rising sideling as out of the
armpits, springing from a thin skin clinging to the shell, and ending in a
sharp tendon; under these long, round muscles six other appears long that
happily bend the arms. Two come to the thighs sprouting from the foresaid
membrane, these are less then the former, but more fleshy, and are set into
the thighs. The backbone is compact, and fastened strongly to the shell, in
the middle of the length. Below the head in the midst a fingers breath from the
sides descend two muscles, plucking the head inward, and two other a little
below, all long. The liver is parted but alike big on the right, and left side,
without bunched, within hollow, on the right side craggy containing in a
strange workmanship the nether mouth of the stomach, and a part of the
duodenum; the left side holding the greater hollow of the stomach, like a
hollow eyebrow. The gall-bag lies deep in the right string of the liver. The
stomach nearly resembles a man's, or swines; but after it comes to the bowels
it has three large hollows, wherein are perfected the three digestions. In the
two first is a herby substance, the latter better wrought, and from hence
cleaves the milt round, and black; in the third a certain moystish, and very
white substance, like a chewed chestnut, but washy. It is thought this serves
for a bladder, that, as Hens use, darts out sometimes a white moisture. It is
large, and shaped like a chestnut, thin, and of a large conveyance. It clings
fast to the peritonaeum. The straight gut at the end has such side passages,
as all Cocks have, but parted, and reaching into the sides, even to the reins.
Here on each side ly their eggs. The mid-rif is interwoaven with great veins.
The heart is roundish, and whitish, hollow on one corner, placed just above the
liver. The sharp artery (which is worthy marking) a little after the beginning
is cloven, and the branches are twisted. The lungs above cling to the
backbone, thin, not fleshy, but rather skinny, set into the sharp artery, like
a blackish net-worke. The disposition of the Hyois-bone, and shield-gristle is
remarkable. In the skull of the Sea-tortoyse is a partition. These come about
in the deserts of Africa, and in some part of Lybia. Place.
Also in the Arcadian woods; Plin.
they of old made harps of them. They are most in the Isle Dioscoris in the
red sea. Living in the deserts they have been thought to feed on dew. Pausan.
in Arcad. Food. Bruier.
Others say they crop young sprouts of pot herbs, and Pompions, etc. Worms also
they eat, and shellfish. In house they kept with bran, and meal. To pass by
fables, of their being gendred of Geranus a woman turned into a Crane, and
Nicodamas. They lay hard shelled, and party-colored eggs, which they hide in
the ground, and at times sit on, and the following year they foster them. It is
a mistake that they conceive only when the wind blows. Gendring. Athen. Dipros.
l. 5. Nicander. Aelian. l. 5. c. 32.
It is certainer, that the female being very slow to coupling is of the male
quickened by an herb. The Greeks eat them not. Certain Hungarians seeing Clusius
taste of one, Use in Food. Bellon.
believed he should die of it. In India they are commonly eaten. In August, and
September, when corn is ripe, they are fattest, and most cried up. Some say,
from February to May the She Is are best, being then full of eggs, and from
June to Autumn, the He Is. Ambrosi^.
Some praise them with garlic sauce. At this day at Bononia they behead the
female land-Crocodile, and throw away the blood, and sees it till the shell
fall from the flesh, and wash the inward, and boil all together with saffran,
sweet spices, pines, and raisins in Malmsy, and so serve it in.

The flesh makes good perfumes against witchraft, In Physic. Plin.
and poison. In Africa they cut off the head, and feet, and make an antidote of
them. In pottage eaten they disperse swellings, and help the falling sickness,
and spleen; the blood clears the ey-sight, and removes blood-shot, redness in
the eyes, and helps against all venom of serpents, spiders, toads, the blood
wrought with meal into pills, and take in wine; the gall with Athenian honey is
good for the yellow in the eyes, and the stroke of a scorpion; the ashes of the
shell kneaded with wine, and oil, closes chaps, and ulcers. The scales shaven
off at top in drink allay, as the the powder of the shell inflames lust. The
urine I think is not seen but in dissection, but is thought good against
aspick-bites, better, if mixed with hog-lice; the eggs hardened make an
ointment for swellings, and ulcers coming from cold, or burns. Some swallow
them in stomack-aches.

Among the Bononians there is syroop of Tortoyses for short-breath, and
consumptions. Some also made a decoction for rheums, and cough, described by
Amatus the Portugees. Wecker compounds an electuary against sharp uds of seed.
Galen stamped the liver to drink for the suffocations of the mother.

In India are great ones. They pluck off their shells with spades, Differences.
Aelian.
they have fat, and sweet flesh. In Brasil is one called Jubeti, by the
Portugees Cagado de terra; it has a black shell with many six cornered marks
thereon, snowted as others. Mar^kg. Brasil.
The head, and legs dusk, but shadowed, and spotted. The liver has a more
savoury taste, thenof any other beast.

ARTICLE II. Of the VVater-Tortoyse.
POINT I. Of the fresh water, and Pond-Tortoyse.
PLiny calls it water-mouse, Ambro. Name. (...).
and Emyda. The clay-coloured is called Myda. In Greek Potamia Cheloonia, or
river-Tortoyses. They live in fresh water, in lakes, Place. Gesner. Leo Afr. l.
5.
and rivers, as near Adelfing in a small lake in the Tigurine territory. And
near Constance in a hot that runs long, and wide among the rocks, there are
plenty of them; the women of that city call them devils, and ascribe all their
sicknesses to them. They wander also in Ganges, Aeli.
and Nile; they breath. In breeding time they dig a hole on dry land, where
they lay and hide their eggs, and after thirty days they uncover them, Arist.
and bring their brood presently to the water. Of the fat bruized with Aizoon,
or the everliving herb, and Lily-seed some anoint those that have quartans all
over, Plin.
but the head, before the fit; then they wrap them warm, and give them hot
water to drink. They catch it on the fifteenth day of the moon, when it is
fattest, and anoint the patient the day after. The blood droped in, eases
head-akes, and swellings. Some behead them lying on their backs with a brazen
knife receiving the blood in a new earthen pot, anointing with the blood cure
all kinds of S. Anthonies fires, and running sore heads, and warts. The dung is
said to disperse waxen kernels. some believe that ships sail slower, if a
Tortoyses right foot be aboard. The Indian river-Tortoyse is just as big as a
Boat, and holds sixty bushells of pulse. The clay, or Pond-Tortoyse Pelamida,
and Amida, is alike broad on back and breast, the shell makes a handsome cup.
It abides in muddy places, Plin. l. 32. c. 4.
but at spring seeks running-water. They want bladder, and reins. They are
seen about Ferraria, and in France, Poland, Hungary. Some think to drive over
a shore of hayl by laying one with the right hand about their garden, Mizald.
Cent. 5.
or field on the back, so that it may see the cloud big with hayl. Some lay
three on a fire of chips, and take the bodies from the shells, Plin.
and parboyl them in a gallon of water, and a little salt to a third part, and
make a drink for palsy, and gout, for those that have feeling. The gall is good
for phlegm, and corrupt blood. Drunk in cold water, it stays a loosnes.

POINT II. Of the Sea-Tortoyse.
PLiny calls it the Sea-mouse; Ambr, l. c. 4. Name. (...).
the Greek Cheludros; the German and Flemish Fishers, the Soldier, because it
bears a shield, and helmet; and Barchora, and of old Zytyron, that, or such
another with rugged, hard armed-head, and a buckler hanging at the neck. It
resembles the Land-Tortoyse; if you Albert. Described.
except the feet, and bigness. In stead of teeth it has a bone so hard, it
breaks asunder the thickest staff with one stroke. The snout brims seem like
teeth. The eyes sparkle from far; the balls being exceeding bright, and
glittering. The feet like wings, Aeli.
wherewith they swim as with oars; turn him on his back, and cut him up cross,
taking away the shell, you see a peritonaean membrane covering all the
fore-parts from the throat to the secrets, Severin. Zoo^^. Den^^^. Par 4* p.
321.
tied to the shell by fleshy strings, especially by the breast. Kall it has
none, nor blind gut, but slender bowels from above downwards, contrary to
other fourfooted beasts. Nay from the gullet top, which is two thumbs thick, it
reaches to the beginning of the straight gut, and lessens all along; it has
also double tunicles, the outer sinewy, the inner fleshy, and this is hairy,
and limber, and moist, like a fat Cows right gut. In the beginning of the
Oesophagus are many thwart prickles, bigger then in an Ox-tongue, which is
strange, they serve happily to chew the gross food they use to gobble in. The
neck of the bladder answers the straight gut within, and have both but one
outlet; the milt round as an egg, tied to the upper-gut: Reins plain, and
long, as if made up of many small ones; heart moist full of intricate vessels
in the entrance; the lappes large, blackish, dangling by a thin skin; lungs
large coming down much lower then the heart; the neck bent with many muscles,
and two very long plucking the head in to the shell. Place.
They live in salt water, and about Moluris, and live on small fish,
shellfish, and being brought a land they eat grass.

They at breeding-time lay about an hundred eggs on land, Gend^^^ Arist.
and hide them in a pit, and by night sit on them; and with their foot make a
mark on the covered-place, to find it again. They plain the earth with their
breast. In forty days they are hatched. Plin. Plutr.
In America are hide often above three hundred eggs in one hole, and are hatched
by the Sun, with the dams sitting, so that an army seems to be poured out at
once. They sleep sometimes on land, but cannot live long there, P. (...). l. 6.
c. 3.
like Sea-calves; they come by night on land, and feed greedily, and being
full, and weary, they float on the water on their backs sleeping, and snorting.
If they ly long, dried by the Sunbeams, Arist.
and cannot get into the sleep, they die. They thrust forth their heads, to take
air, like Sea-calves; and are so bold, they dare set on three men at once. Cut
off their heads, they die not presently, but shall bite, Oppian. Hali. E^. l. 1.
Aeli. l. 4. c. 28. Use in Food. Bell. o^. l. 2. c. 63.
if you put your hand to them.

The Armenians, by the Patriark of Alexandria, are forbidden to eat them, on
pain of excommunication. Between Spring, and fall, they are good meat. Some
make pies of them. In Brasile they catch some that may suffice 80 men. They
lard, and roast them, they taste like veal. Their flesh and Frogs-flesh, help
against Salamanders: S^ppi^s. (...). l. 5. c. ^. ^ In Phi^ck. (...). l. 32. c.
4.
the blood against shedding of hair, itch, and foreheads; but dried, and washed
with breast-milk, men drop it into the ears for pain there. Some eat it with
corne-meal, for the falling-sicknes: some mixed the blood with vinegar, wine,
and barly-meal, and eat a pellet as big as a bean, morning, and evening, and
after some days, at evening. It is taken in a castor-glister, for the cramp,
wash the teeth long with the blood, you shall have no tooth-ake; and in
barly-meal soked, and fried, it removes shortness of breath: the gall makes eyes
clear, lessens scars, swellings of the amonds of the ears, squincies, and all
sorenes in the mouth: sorenes creeping on by degrees, and the burning of the
cods. Smeard on the nostrils, it is good for the falling-sicknes; and for
mattery-ears, with snakes-sloughs, and vinegar: Some add ox-gall, and juice of
tortoyse-flesh, long boyld in wine. The gall with honey, is good for the eyes,
and for the pin, and web, with the blood of the river-tortoyse, and
breast-milk: women's hair is poysond by the gall. Some drink Salamanders, and
the sop: the brain with Sa^^^an, (...)
and Egyptian-salt, makes a suppository for the stoppings of the mother. The
eye balls worn in gold, are good for d^maes of sight: they give the blood with
wild-cymine, for viper-bites. The liver powder, in breast-milke kneaded with
rainbow ointment, and wine, purges a ch^lde-bed-woman. Some give the eggs in
an Epilepsie.

Of old, (...)
they trimed their posts with the sh^lls. Those of Taprobana Isle, cover their
houses with them. The Tortoys-eaters use them for ships, and water-vessells,
and tents: they wash newborn B^bes in them. By Gambra River, they make
shields of them: the Turks make Sword handles of the transparent shells. (...)
They are of a different bigness, and shape. In Taprobana one weighed an hundred
and three pound. In the Red Sea are shells as broad as a door. In India some
hold ten bushels. The Sea-tortoyses are longer, the shore, rounder. Among the
Trogodites are horned ones, the horns, as on a Harp, broad and loose. that help
their swimming: that kind is called Costium, vast, but rarely found. The sharp
Rocks of the Chelonophagi fright them away: they frequent the Trogodites, that
even worship them. Her-Barbarus bids us to call them Cheleta, or Cavaleers,
that use their horns, as spurs. One sort is covered as with a tanned hide,
(...)
and is like a Lobster, the head, and feet gone: the back consists of six
tablets joined; and the tail like that part of the harp, wherein the pegs
stick: there a^e two sorts, the Brasilians call one Iuru^ua, with legs like
wings; the forelegs about a foot and half long, the tail sharp, and conick,
eyes great, and black; mouth toothles, and like a birds bill. I have had of
them, whose shells were three foot long, and above two broad: the shells set
into the ribs, on each side eight, the former shorter; middelmost longer, the
hindmost also smaller. They eat the eggs as flesh, they lay their eggs on the
shore; digging a pit in the sand, and burying them. I have often trackt them in
their walk. Some I have had four foot long, and three broad, of such a bulk,
four strong men could scarce stir one. The shells as carved in diverse
geometrical figures; some black, and glistring with yellow streaks, goodly to
see too: others, otherwise shaped. The other sort the Portugees called Iuruta
Cadago d' agoa, it is less then other Tortoyses; the shell the upper-shell, is
ten fingers long, and broad: the hollownesse considered; the lower shell nine
fingers long, four and an half broad, and flat. The upper has an crooked
longsquare shape. It can hide it self under the shell, and thrust out the head
three fingers; the head is three fingers thick, and longish: the nose rising,
and pointed, mouth wide, eyes blackish, balls cole-black: on the feet are four
very long black nails: the tail short, and copped; the skin rugged, and
scaly: the upper-shell dusky, the undermost yellowish: they lay roundish eggs,
half as big as Hen-egges, white-shelled, they taste well fried. Marckgrave ate
often of them.

AN ADDITION. Of certain Outlandish Foure-footed Creatures of a doubtful kind.
CHAPTER I. Of the Tlacaxolotl, the Cabim, and the Sea-secker.
HAving through Gods grace finished the History of the Foure-footed Beasts, as
many sorts as are, as yet known, I thought good to add this appendix about
foreign doubtful Creatures, which I am yet thinking to what head, or kind to
refer. As first: The Tlacaxolotl, it is roundish-faced, bigger then a Bull,
great-headed, long muzzle, broad ears, cruel teeth; faced almost like a man,
whence it has the name: the neck thick, the nails like the Bulls, but larger:
the buttocks great, and broad, tail thick and long; skin thick, hair yellowish,
and brisly. It is seldom found, living among stones, and in desolate places.
The Atzaceani, Tepotzonzotla, and Haquelagani, are not far from the Honduras.
It feeds on Kacaotli, Quapachtli, and green-Hoali, in the wide fields, and
sown grounds; and where they are not, on leaves and shrubs. The flesh is
eateable. It fears not the face of man; Arrows cannot pearce the hide;
therefore they catch them in pitfalls, and holes covered with leaves, as the
Indians do Elephants.

The Cabim, or Sionium, or Thabal is bred in Java. It has one strange virtue,
if any carry with them the tip of the mouth thereof, wound him in a thousand
places, he shall not bleed one drop. Nierem Ex. l. 9. c. 3.
There have been many trialls of it, and it is famous, and well known; for
when Naodabeguea Malacensis, an enemy of the Portugees, in a manfull fight
against them, was at length overpowered, and wounded in many places, and fell,
no blood started out of the widest wounds; after in rifling him, as they
plucked from his arm a gold arm-let (strange to say) the blood with his life
gushed all out suddenly, as out of a broken vessel, which they being
astonished to see, they understood by other captives that in that arm-let was
closed a Cabims mouth, that is so potent in stanching of blood.

As for the Maripetum, Nierem. Hist. Ex. l. 9. c. 49.
Aloysius Almeida writes, and others affirm, (both with what truth) that among
the Japons in the Gotian kingdom is a wood wherein is bred a beast as big as a
dog, short-leged, good to eat, gold-coloured, soft-haired. Growing old, it
leaves the land, and takes the sea, and by degrees turns fish in a certain
space, loosing his beasts shape, and that some have been taken not wholly
transformed, the full time being not exspired, one part beast, the other
scaled, and fined.

CHAPTER II. Of the Danta, ^and Cappa.
THe Danta, Nierem. Exot. l. 9. c. 65.
or Capa, or Tapiroussu, or Doueanar, resembles the Mule, having such ears, a
Calves lips; the upper-lips hangs a handful over the lower, which he lifts up,
when angered, in the rest like other beast, but a Calf most; he has no harm.
The hoof helps heart-pain, the skin makes an impenetrable target. It has two
stomachs, one receives the food, the other is found, none knows how, stuffed with
wood, and twigs. The use of this stomach is not known. Nature uses not to make
any thing needless. The hunter must wound him before he takes water, for there
he bites dogs to death. Men have been taught breathing a vein from him, for he,
his blood is rank, and he even swells, lets himself blood on the inside of the
thighs with a splinter of a reed, as the Seahorse does. He is reddish-haired,
and that hanging down, and resembles a Cow in bulk, and shape. But that he is
not horned, Lerius.
and has a short neck, and long daugling ears, by his dry, and slender legs,
whole hoof, a man may take him to be of the breed of the Cow, or Ass, yet
differs much from both, having a very short tail, (though in America many
beasts are bred, without tails) and has much keener teeth, yet none need fear
him, he trusting more in flight, then fight. The wilds shoot them, or catch
them in pits, or grins, and have handsome devices to hunt them. They value him
highly for his skin, which they cut round, and lay a sunning to make targets as
big as a reasonable tun, which they use in war, as being hardly to be
pierced. I brought two of those shiels carefully into France; but returning,
the famine was so sore, that all provisions being spent, we must eat apes, and
parrets, and we were fain to fry those two targets, and other skins in the
ship, to eat. The flesh tastes like beef, especially the feet well boiled. Franc.
These Dantes are in many parts of the continent. The Cappa is bigger then the
Ass, He^^andus. Nier. Exot. l. 9. c. 71.
black, shaggy, fierce, fatal to dogs, snapping them, as a Wolf a Lamb. The
hoof is whole, like a French shoe, and sharp in the spur-place. He is affrayed
of a man.

CHAPTER III. Of the Howler, the Su, and Peva.
THe Howler is cunning, Nier. Exot. l. 4. c. 72.
faining an infants cry in the beginning of the night at towns ends, and kills
those that in pity run out to help upon hearing the moon. But now the townsmen
are well warned, and go forth armed with firebrarnds. It is like a Hare-hound
in shape, and bulk.

The Su, i. e. water, because living by rivers most what, Id. l. ^. c. 47.
is found among the Patagons. Some call it Succarath. It has a fierce Lions
look, yet is bearded from the ear like a man, short-haired, the belly
strutting out, lank flanked, the tail large and long, as a squirrells. The
giantlike men there, the climate being not very hot, wear the skins, for
which, when hunted they lay their young on their back, and cover them with
their tail, and so run away, but are taken, whelps, and all in pits covered
with boughs. Being fast in, for rage, or generousnesse they kill their whelps,
and cry hideously to fright the hunters; they shoot him dead with arrows, and
flea him. Some fain that they in fondness carry their young to medows, and
there they dress each other with garlands of fair sweet flowers.

The Peva is as big as a small Cat. Id. Exo^. l. 9. c. 46.
Spying the Tiger, she traces him, ever barking to warn all creatures of the
danger. Hence we see often, that they die in the fields for hunger.

CHAPTER IV. Of the stinking beast, the Graffa, and Caoch.
AMong the Chiribdes is a lean beast that voids serpents a cubit long. Id. l.
9. c. (...). Pet. Man.
The Dominicans brought up one in their cell, and say that those serpents creep
to the next wood, where they live a while. They caused it to be killed, because
it stank worse then any carrion cast out on a dunghill. It resembles a Fox in
the muzzle, a Wolf in hair. I wonder not much at this beasts dung, when
consider what worms children, and old folks commonly void.

The Graffa is found most on the Isle Zanzibar. It is small-headed, Ib. c. 32*
and long-necked. The forefeet are greatest. It is party-colored, white and
red, and marked with red-rose spots. It is a gentle beast.

The Caoch is thirty inches long, Ib. c. 9^.
black-haired, the belly yellow, and shining. By night it fains a humane cry.
Like the Sow, it eats unripe mayze.

And so much of the fourfooted Beasts. If any thing shall be farther discovered
to me about them, I shall God willing add it.

AN APPENDIX PETER CASTELLUS OF ROME His discovery of the Sweet Hyaena, the Dam
of the Zibeth, commonly called the Civet-cat.
CHAPTER I.
IT is well known how needful serious, mature, and long deliberation is in
the accurate search after difficult matters; and that the more judicious, and
rational any one is the easier is it for him to unlock secrets, to bring to
light hidden things, and to climb otherwise in accessible heights. Whence it
is, that when inquiry is made: Whether the Hyaena of old be known to us, or
no; and on the other side, Whether the fruitful Zibeth were known to the
ancients, or no; (...)
it seems hard to many to resolve. We had need search diligently, relying more
in judgment, and reason then sense to perfect our wished discovery. Wherefore
we take our rise from the manifold names of this beast, (...)
namely, Civetta, or S^vetta, whence Zibeth, and Civet-cat, and Weesel, and
Zapetion, and Cadopleptus, we style it the Odoriferous Hyaena.

Zibeth is an Arabique name, (...)
read in diverse significations. Zebet is a sweet-sented A^galia administered in
Physic to staunch blood, and against shedding-hair. It is called Saderva in
Persian language; it is a black thing, wherewith they die cloth in Haaman, or a
black juice, an ingredient into sweet medicines. Rasis calls it S^^dra, (...)
and Scedegura; others, Severa. The Arabians, Galia, and Algalia, whence the
compositions Gallia Moschata, Gallia Alephangina, and Sebellina, etc. so that a
sweet pit is, (...)
called by some the Arabian Beasts sweat. Serapions Galia, is the juice of an
herb, Zebeth, when the beast first obtained the name Z^bet, and corruptly
Civette. (...)
Zelet Allahar is sea-fome, and not unfitly applied figuratively to this,
Z^beth being taken when the beast is angry, and fomes.

He may be like a wild Cat in head, otherwise very unlike. Others call it a
Cat; we rather the Sweet-Hyaena.

CHAPTER II. Whether the Civetta be the ancient Pard, or Panther, or no.
ARistotle demands, (...)
why other beasts yield not a sweet sent as well as the Pardal, or Panther,
that thereby entices other beasts to him; no other, or rarely, but he, senting
sweet, unles by chance, having eat some sweet thing, Theophr. l. 6. de cause.
Pla^t. c. 5. Plin. l. 8. c. 16. Arist. H. A. l. 9. c. 11.
unless it is, that man is weaker of sent then other creatures, and knows not
sents. Pliny said, all beasts are strangely allured by this sent, but frighted
by the misshapen head, which he therefore hides. Aristotle says, the Panther
knows, that he smells so sweet; when he wants meat, he skulks in fruitful or
leavy shady thickets; then fawns, and goats, Aeli. H. A. l. 5. c. 40. Plin.
etc. invited by his fragrant sent draw near, and become a prey to him. The
Panther, and Tiger have a peculiar kind of spots; the Panther has small spots
like eggs set in white: But they are mistaken, who take him for the Civetta.
Some deny the Panthers senting sweetly, Gesner.
only beasts follow him, but men smell no such sweetness in him. But, to say
truth, diverse beasts void sweet dung, that Aristotle, and his Scholar
Theophrastus knew not off; as the Cordylus resembling the Crocodile, but less,
Plin. l. 28.
and living only on land on sweet flowers; he is sought after for his sweet
guts, called Crocodilea, or for his dung. Also wilde-yellow Mice, (that our
boys play withal, called Sorcimoscaroli) voids dung like Musk. And so of some
Serpents: And of the greater Weezel, that kills great Hens, (called Marter
Martorella, and Fovina) and of some Baboons. Renod. M^t. Med. l. 3. c. 15.
S^al. Ex. 211. p. 2.
The excrement of the Gezella is a Musk. And some insects handled smell sweet,
as the flower Dipcas, or Greeke-Musk. So that many beasts, beside the Panther,
send forth fragrant smell, and the Zibeth among the rest. To let pass that
needles quarrel, between Cardan and Scaliger, above the smell of beasts, and
natures essays in their generation.

Some think the Zivet to be Plinies Chaum, Dalecamp. Plin. l. 8. c. 19.
in French Raphium, like a Wolf, spotted like the Panther, that Pompey showed
at Rome; but there is no mention of the sent. Nor is the Civetta, headed like
the Wolf, and they differ also in the spots. Perhaps Thoe is put for Chao; the
Hart-wolf, and seems to be our Civet. But of the Thoe, Philes has composed
Greek verses, the sum whereof is: How shamefast is the Thoe, if he but see a
man; How true a friend is he to man, Herodotus l. 4.
aiding him, if any beast assault him. The Thoe comes of an Hyaena, and a Wolf.

CHAPTER III. Whether the Hyaena was known of old.
BEllonius says, Obser. l. 2. c. 20.
yea; though the ancients observed not the sweet excrement of the Civetta; see
thence the shape is the same with the old Hyaena, Arist.
of the color of the Wolf, but shaggier, and longmained, with black spots, two
under the eyes, the feet black-haired; thighs spotted, the tail very long,
black above, with white spots beneath; on the neck, and ridge of the back
black-haired, which, when he is angry, start up as Swines bristles: whence the
fish Glanis is called an Hyaena. Besides all old writers call the Hyaena a
wild Savage beast, that the Panthers strangely dread, and dare not stand its,
but fly, nor dare come near a piece of the skin; nay, hang up the skins over
against each other, Plin. l. 28. c. 6.
the Panthers hair falls off. Diverse write of this enmity, and that the
Civet-cat is untameable. The best reason is, that the Hyaena of old is said
Aeli. l. 6. c. 22. Cardan. 10. de subt. fer. Arist. de g^n. any. l. 3. c. 6. Et
K. A. l. 6. c. 132.
(as by Ovid, and Pliny) yearly to change sex, and to gender with a male;
which though it be false, and disavowed. By Aristotle's yet there is a vessel
in the Hyaenam, that makes the heedles think it Epicene, or double-sexed. He is
genitaled as wolves, and dogs; and that other passage is but for the
excrements. And there is female Hyaena, and under the tail of both is a
streake, but it is seen more in the males, which are oftener taken then the
females.

On the other side, Exer. 117. p. 7. Gesner. Busbeq. Clusius. Arist. Solin.
Aelian.
Scaliger derides those that think the Hyaena, and Zivet to be the same, and
many others confute that opinion; many things being said of the Hyaena, that
fit not our Civet-cat. As first, a hard skin, and a main, and neck, that are
not the Civetta. Besides that there is no gum in the mouth, and but one tooth,
or one bone all along, shutting like a box, but the Zivet has many teeth.

And some write, that the Hyaena fains a man's voice, and learns Shepherds
names, to entrap them; and imitates man's vomiting, to entice and catch dogs.
But none of these are, as yet observed in the tamest Civet-cat. But Bellonius
might easily confute all this: saying that those things are falsely ascribed to
the Hyaena, as the stifnes of neck to the Lion by Aristotle; and that Solinus
speaks not of the Hyaena, but of the Crocuta, gendred between the Hyaena, and
Lioness. That those passages are rather to be admired, then believed, as
denied and confuted by some writers, and in silence passed by others. Scal. Ex.
211. p. 2.
Add, that the Hyaena is so far from being untameable, that Nicolus Ancisa,
Marquis of Mantuaes bastard son, carried one on his shoulders. And a Florentine
Consul at Alexandria, Bellon.
had a Civet-cat, that took man by the nose, ears, and lips, without harm,
playing with them. But these are but toies, for this is by nature wild, but
may be tamed, especially the female.

And for that above the mane, Arist. H. A. l. 8. c. 5.
Bellonius might probably answer, that the Hyaena is as big as a Wolf, yet but
two handfulls high, and the mane is longer then the other hair, and may hang to
the ground; as we see in Swine, the bristles on the back are longer then other
hair; and so in our Civetta you may say, why then did not Aristotle rather
liken the Hyaenaes mane to the Swines bristled crest, then the Horses mane: I
answer, that perhaps he took his description from some Indian Author, that
had seen a Horse, but not a Swine; for it is not certain, that such Swine as
ours are in India; so that Aristotle changed not his expression about the mane.
Besides Scaliger gathers out of Aristotle, In l. 15. (...). Ovid. Faber.
that the place of the genitalls of the Hyaena, and Civet is diverse. And Faber
finds a contradiction in Scaliger, Ex. 217. Cardan. p. 7. But truth is, either
Aristotle was deceived by a false relation, or some fault is in the text; or he
is not to be understood literally, and strictly; but thus it may be taken, that
the Hyaena has a streak behind, but no passage, but the Civet has two
passages, and hollows; one wherein the Civet is gathered. But Busbequius says,
he saw two Hyaenaes at Constantinople, a little lower, but as long as a wolf,
skind like the wolf, but rougher haired, thicker, and spotted with black; the
head huge, close to the backbone, without turning-joynts, that without turning
the whole body about, they could not look behind them: and that in Galatia
are very many, found easily out by their gathering of carcasse-bones, men's, and
others, to their den. And Jo. Leo says, Nova (...).
he has hands like a man, and delights much in humane carcasses, that he digs
out of their graves; that they are but silly, and are enticed out of their
holes by singing, or a drum, which they love to listen too, and so are killed.
Yet it is doubtful, whether this be the right Hyaena, having no mane, nor
genitals, nor qualities ascribed of old to them, as if it were a mischievous,
and subtle beast; that in Africa destroys many wild Asses; Plin. l. 8. c. 3^.
certain males domineering over flocks of females, jealous of corrivals,
guarding their females great with young; guelding their male-brood with their
teeth, seeking out the females haunt, big with young, and being extremely
lustful. Herein like our Civetta, whose Civet makes not themselves only prove
to lust, but mankind also, if anointed with it. Refer hither Philes his
Greek verses of the property of beasts, and of the Hyaena, no way agreeing to
the Zibet-cat; (Chap. 43. of the Land, and Sea-Hyaena) the sum is, that the
Hyaena changes Sexes, finding a man asleep, puts the right hand to his
nostrils, to make his sleep sounder, lays the earth that was under his head on
his throat, and with embraces throttles him sleeping. And the finnes of a
Sea-Hyaenaes right-side with a touch, provoke sleep, stupifie, and bring
terrible dreams. The Hyaena deceives, and devours dogs, amazing them with the
shadow by Moonshine. Aelian relates the like, l. 6. c. 14. and l. 15. de An.
c. 14. other fabulous things; as about the Hyaenaes horns, which P. Cillius
has past over in his translation; and Gesner confuted as ridiculous. However
many things noted in the Hyaena, are found in the Civetta.

CHAPTER IV. Under what kind of Beasts the Civetta is to be reckoned.
SInce it is clear by what has been said, that it is neither the ancient
Panther, nor Plinies Chaus, nor the true Hyaena, we may now fitly inquire, to
what kind it is to be referred. (...)
It seems to many to be a wild Cat; and indeed in face it resembles one,
having such long hairs on the beard, and three long ones on the cheek* as the
cat has, otherwise they are nothing alike, not in skin; for the Cats is
smooth, the Civets rough, the hair very long, and thick, nor nail, for the
Cats claws are crooked, the Civets blunts, nor genitalls, nor shape; (...)
this being liker a dog, or wolf, then a car, being long, not round-mouthed. It
is wild, sharp-toothed, but unlike a cat, greater often then a Fox, unlike in
head, neck, feet, and other parts; long-snouted as a Badger, long-bodied, the
jaws below white, and the beard, the feet black, the belly-sides bright, the
back dark-ash with black spots, and toothed more like a dog, then a cat. I
indeed refer it to the Hyaenaes, and these to the general kind,
comprehending Wolves, Dogs, Foxes, and other beasts that prey on flesh. Now
there are diverse kinds of Hyaenaes.

The Thoes is genered between the Hyaena, (...)
and the Wolf. But I say there is a sweet Hyaena, and one that has no sent.
The sweet one is either the Arabian, and Eastern, or the Western, (...)
and American one. The other sort is, that the ancients write off, which
perhaps is also twofold, since that Busbequius writes of wants many marks,
described of old, and seems to be an Arabian Wolf.

But the sweet Hyaenaes, Arabian, and American breed, Zibeth, or Civet; but
differ somewhat in shape.

The American has a slender-copped head, (...)
liker a dogs then a cats, reddish. Ringlets are about the eyes, that are not
fierce, nor great, but whitish. The head ash-colored, with scarce any hairs on
the beard, the neck longer then the Tigers, or Catpards, beautiful with black,
and white wreaths, like bracelets painted; from the head to the back on the
neck are such colored streaks; and another on the back from the neck to the
tail, blackish, and hairy. Handsomely set off toward the tail by the streak with
blackish, round, ovall spots in order on a bright ash color. The uppermost
nearer the back are greater, the middlemost less, the lowest by little, and
little lessening to nothing. The tale streakt, and so party-colored, and long,
under the tail are visibly three passages, whereof one is the Civet-bag; the
middlemost seems greatest. But the African sweet Hyaena, our Civetta is liker a
wolf then a cat; long-headed, sharp-muzzled, toothed as a dog; two handfulls
high, as I who dissected it, found it; and as long from the shoulders to the
tail, and the tail as long as the whole body, the neck above half a palm long.
The beast seem to stoop. The length of the head was double to the breeth. On
the beard, and cheeks grew hard hairs, white and long as on Cats; the muzzle
bald, nostrills blackish, black spots under the eyes, the eyes glistring, and
reddish.

But Columna saw at Fabers, B^llon.
saw one with chesnuts-brown eyes, mixed with yellow, and dull, heavy, and down
cast. But out of the eyes of our dead one, were pulled gems as big as a dry
peace, round, and angeled, like crystal, which I yet keep; which confirm me
in naming it an Hyaena, since others speak of such in the Hyaenaes eyes, P^in.
H. A. l. 37. c. 10. Albert. de lap. Alex. 1. Probl. 6.
that put under a man's tongue make him prophecy; (if you will believe it) I
say not these are true gems, for they hold their firmues, and cristalline
transparancy, but two, or three days, and then grow dim, and are cut into
bits three, or four like snails-shells. Some have indeed put the question, why
Cats, Hyaenaes and Bats, see clearly by night. Besides the Civets-eares are
little, round, and haired as a Badgers. The body is whitish, and ash as a
wolves, sprinkled with black spots, the feet but little, and short, and
black-haired; four toes on a foot, and a small thumb inward, as on a cat. The
nails, as the dogs, black, short, thick, and blunt, not as claws. Next under
the tail is the excrement-passage; then the testicles, then the Civet-bag, etc.
In the figure we have printed all accurately, according to their natural
proportion. The Civet-bag lies between the genitall, and stones, which are
large, these I cut out, and found them sentles, the seed-vessells were very
thick; below was a small bladder. The whole genitall is hide within the body,
as in cats, while the beast is quiet, only a kernel seen; but in the carcass
it hangs quite out. The hair of the whole body is long, rough, bristled, as a
Boars, and on the neck, and by the backbone black, very long, and stiffer,
which starts upright, as on the Swine, when the beast is angry. The tail is
very long, and pretty hairy, reaching to the ground, and marked with various
spots.

Hence we conclude these to be Hyaenaes. Perhaps the Bever may be referred to
this kind, it having about the same place a bladder, which opened, a kind of
a hony-moisture drops out.

CHAPTER V. Where the Hyaenaes are bred.
HErodotus, L. 4.
Pliny, and Solinus write that many of them are bred in Africa. But our sweet
Hyaena is called the Syrian Cat; they are brought out of Syria. Scal.
Some are sent from Spain. The Portugees bring them out of the Indies. A
Lituanian Apothecary sent a Zibet-bag, and an Elcks-hoof to Rome to Henry
Convinus, writing that they were the fruits of his country; so that I guess
they are bred also in those cold Regions.

The American Zibeth is bred in many parts there, I. Faber.
as also in East India in Bengala, Ceilan, Sumatra, Java the greater, and
less, in Maliput, and elsewhere.

And in new Spain, in Quatemala, Campege, Nikaragua, Vera Crux, Florida, and
the great Isle S. Dominick, or Hispaniola, Cuba, Matalino, Guadalupa, and
elsewhere.

In Peru is plenty, in Paraguay, Tucamam Chiraguanas, S. Crux de la Sierra,
Yungas, Andes, Chiachiapojas, Quizos, Timana, Novo Regno, and in all the
Provinces bordering on the great river Maraguon, which are almost numberless
hereabout reaching two thousand leagues. Many more of them are in Brasil, where
the Civet trade is driven. They abound also in Guinee, in the Provinces of
Loango, Congo, Manicongo, about the rivers of Angola, even to Cafres, and to
the Cape of good Hope, especially on the high, and vast mountains there,
Fragorae. Cuspides.
called the Craggy-spears, and on part of the hills of Gafres, called the
Torea, or of the Moon, where so much Algalia is.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Zibeth-vessell, or Civet-bag.
ZIbeth is gathered only out of one small part of the beast, we shall see
whence. It is a foul mistake, that the Gazella voids Civet, Riolan. Patholog.
c. 11. Renod.
as dung; nor comes it out the genitalls, but it lies thereabout. To let pass
Columna his discourse of the testicles (Epist. 1. ad Fabrum.) It is clear, that
the Civet in the males lies between the Genitall, Alex. Bened.
and the stones. The testicles are conspicuous in the males, and taken out, but
ly hid within the females. In these between the anus, and the secrets are
swellings, are bags framed by nature, wherein by little and little the Zibeth
is gathered, and thence voided. And being but two, the unexperienced may
mistake them for testicles, and some that have seen the beast often, much more
those who never saw it before; so has Columna mistaken. The Zibeth part at
first sight seems a feminine pass, having a long streak, and thick lips,
which feels as big as a small egg, gristly it is, and somewhat hard, which,
if you open with your fingers a little, there show themselves two very long
holes like nostrills, hollow underneath, where are the seats of the Zibeth.
These vessels if you squeese out with your fingers they open themselves wide,
and show the hollownesse, which may well hold an almond kernel; in these bags
is no pore, and no passage appears, but it being cut, I found a hardish body as
big as an egg, feeling griftly, divided into two bags, as big as two Spanish
olives, and those not at all grisly, but fleshy, stuffed with small, white,
hard kernels, much harder then the stones; distinct they were those bags, but
joined with thin skins, or films, and the inner was common to both bags, which
I keep still by me dried, which sent yet strongly of Civet, when the stone
dried smell not all. And (which is strange) the beast being spent by a dropsy,
and all the bowels putrified, and it stinking unsufferably as it was cut all
over, only the Zibeth vessel sented wonderfully, and yet holds its fragrancy.

CHAPTER VII. Of the Beaver.
SInce the History of the Castor, Fiber, or Beaver conduces much to the
knowledge of the kind, and quality of the sweet Hyaena; we say that the Beaver,
both He, and She have in their privities certain receptacles, whereout,
through the small bones, an honey moisture flows, which the Beaver uses to
lick. The males have besides their testicles shut within under the skin so, as
you cannot touch them, Dios^^. l. de Amph^^ c. 8.
as swine have. Rondeletius says such bumps are also in Hares, whence the
vulgar bruit of their double sex, and he writes the like of the Moschus, and
the Beaver, that this has two such swellings in the groyn, each in his thin
skin as big as a Goose-egge, between which are the privities. These swellings
sweat out a fat moisture, which he licks, and sucks out, and after annoints
therewith all his bodies as far as he can reach. These are not testicles, for
they are there besides, and these have no passage to convey, are send forth
water. That liquour at first is like oil, after it is of the color of honey,
and as thick. The like is in the Hare (says he) and the Moschus, whence a
sweet substance flows. Nor are they to be heard, who take these swellings, for
inflamed pushes, or hot matter from the navell. That the swelling is like a
kernel, or testicle they know, who sophisticate musk, making it up round in
such a shape, and calling it the Moschus-stone. But we know that the testicles
ly so, that you cannot take them thence, and the beast live. So that many
beasts, as the Hyaena, Zibeth, Plin. l ^ c. 3.
Castor, and Hare, and others carry sweet moisture in bags about the groyn, as
among fishes, the Cuttle, the Calamary, and the purple fish.

We grant the Moschus to be a strange Indian beast in Pegu, frequent with the
Tumbasci, not unlike a shee-goat, great-bodied, called the Dorcas Moschus, the
Indian Gazella; the wild Goat-Moschus, out of whose underjaw stick tushes, as
in swiny, but when the tell, that when he has lust, his navell swells, and
apostumates; and he then refrains food, and walloweth on the ground, and
delights in the tickling in rubbing the swelling against stones, and
tree-stumps, and breaks it, and thence comes true musk, and that the same loft
on stones, and trees is by the sun, and air perfected, and all ill in it
dispersed, and that this is the best musk. That the beast killed, the hunters,
cut a piece off, with the skin, squeeze out the blood, gather it, dry it, keep
it in bottles made of the skin of the same beast, or dry the blood, and put off
to chapmen that stuff for pure musk, etc. However it be these are by these
men's relations of a like nature, and the musk comes not from an apostume in the
Moschus, but out of a peculiar part determined by nature.

CHAPTER VIII. What the Zibeth is.
ALl not agreed about the matter of this sweet called Zibeth, (...)
and Zibet, and Zapetion, and Algalia, and Civet, and by several writers
severally. Cardan is justly taxed by Scaliger for calling it seed, that
diffected the beast, (...) etc.
know better, nor assent I to those think it sweat, because (say they) it is
most gathered from the beast, when tired, vexed, and sweating, and also under
the hippes, arms, (...) Greg.
neck and tail, for then all that sweat should be sweet; unless you call it
sweat, because it sweats out of a glistly, spongy part through invisible pores
into the bags, but then it is not simply sweat, but the sweat of the Zibeth
part, (...)
nor do those that call it excrement descend to a description of the particular
nature of it; for there is excrement profitable, as seed-milk; and useless, as
snot, sweat, filth, etc. Corruption this is not, there being no sore. I take it
to be an excrement proper to that kernelly substance of the foresayed bags,
that breeds by its innate, proper power such a thing, as the stomach makes
chyle, the liver blood, breasts milk, testicles feed, ears, ear-wax, the
cuttle fish ink, the viper poison in the teeth, and the like, as the Beaver,
and Moschus, etc. breed on honey, sweet excrement. But I dare not determine,
whether it be useful, or useles to the sweet part, or the breeder. But we may
guess, that it is unprofitable to the beast, it seeming burdensome to it,
whereof it would case it self, and the female, when tame, seems to delight,
that the Civet with an eare-pick should be taken out of her. On the other side
the sweetness of the sent, shows it is no preternaturall rottennes, but an
exact concoction, and natures masterpiece; and it puts forth it self naturally
and copiously after that part has concocted it, as milk, etc. Useful no
question it is, nature gave not those bags such a virtue to breed such a sweet
in vain. But to what purpose? Seed begets milk-nourshes; whereto serves this?
whether to provoke the beast to generation; as we find Musk awakes lust, and
the Castors-hony; or whether to allure other beasts to him; as was said of the
Panther. We shall praise his wit, who shall suggest other, or better reasons.

CHAPTER IX. Of the collecting, and electing of Civet.
WHen the vessels are full of Civet, How togather it.
the beast it self is unquiet, and seeks to disburthen it self. The eagernes of
it seems to swell, vex, and prick, and provoke evacuation; and the tame ones
take delight to have the bags emptied with an eare-picker. The Blacks, or
Moors, Faber out of Father Greg.
search after old, and dry stumps of trees, and mark the large and oily spots,
and take thence a round substance cleaving there as big or small as a chestnuts,
they let it boil out in water, and take that swimmes, being fat, and oily, and
pour it into clean pots, and keep it for their use, and this is the purest
Civet. For on thoes trees the beast rubs, and leaves it, when the bags are
full, and urge him. And keep them tame in a cellar, when the Civet abounds in
the bags, it troubles them, and they cannot stand still, but run up, and down,
and rub against the walls, to ease themselves of it, and so it is lost. The
servants of D. Barnardine of Corduba fetch the Civet out thus: F. Columna.
One drew the chain, wherein the Zibet was tied, another held the hind-legs, a
third chased the bags, and with a large ear-pick fetched the Civet clean out,
scraping on all sides, then wiped the short-hair of both bags with cotton wool;
and after six times fifty emptying the bags they gather Civet enough to full a
chesnut-shell. In summer it is moyster, and every two days in warm weather
they gathered half an ounce, but in winter they got it scarce once a week, nor
so much, the female yielded less, but without striving.

The Civet seems fat, and ^nctunous, and swims at top in water, and serves it
self from all other things; it is as honey, or butter, it is thinner in summer,
at first gathering, but after thickens. I fetched out of a dead one above two
drams of Civet, whitish, and fast as honey. Scaliger etc. likens it to black
soap, but he saw only the outside, and that old. Some say, the fresh is ugly,
and stinking, and after comes to smell sweet, contrary to amber, Amatus.
Quadramius.
and musk, which are the newer the better. Donatus (out of Eremi. l. 1.
Antidotary, c. 10.) says the stayler is best, and of a Lion, and palish
color, fat, thin, thickning in time, being laid on a paper, and chased melts,
Id. de. Theriaca. c. 11.
and dissolves, which distinguishes it from the adulterate, false Civet. It is
said the Civet of the male is whitish, that of the female Lion-coloured at
first after a weak, but white also at first gathering. An ounce of the females
is worth four of the males. They mix six ounces of this with one of that, and
so it is perfect; the males alone is little worth.

It is many ways sophisticated, How sophisticated.
as mixed with butter, or the soft pulp of larger raisins, or Zibbibus, and
with rank fat, or butter, or cheese, put a little in a silver spoon on embers
with those foresaid things, it renders them sweet like it. Right.
The sweetest Civet is right, and best. It is said that the right, if put into
seething water, flotes at top, and all heterogeneous stuff sinkes from it; but
we have found in some the rank butter, so that it seems the separation is not
so perfect. The best Civet gains a color, as a dusky web, but at the bottom
waxes white; the sophisticate is of the same color at bottom, and top. It is
to be kept only in glass.

CHAPTER X. Of the use, and power of Civet.
IT has a double use, the Druggists regard only the sent, Physicians the
virtue. Druggists say a little Civet overcomes many sents in compositions, so
that you shall smell only that simple pounder of Civet, is made of Sugar Candy,
Alexius Rosellus.
and Civet beaten together to powder, which is kept in a glasse-viol close
shut. Some take eg-shells washed, and dried, and bruize them to a fine powder,
Powder.
and in each ounce put three caracts of Civet; a caract weight four grains; or
they take two ounce weight of prepared eg-shells, infusing them in Rose Water,
musked ten, or twelve days, they dry, crumble, sears them, put an ounce of
refined sugar to them, then put embers into a brass mortor, till it be so
hot, as you can endure to handle it, then wipe it, and put in the eg-dust,
smooth it with the pestle, put to it four caracts of Civet, mingling it by
degrees with the pestle end anointed, the spaced of an hour, then keep it in
glass close shut, and sprinkle the powder on whitened sheets, shirts, and
other garments.

Some take the best ordinary soap, Soap.
slice it small, dry it in the sun, or shade ten days, bruize, searse it, then
add Civet-pouder, and ball it with Rose Water.

Of Civet also are made oils, ointments, and perfumes.

The skin of the belly is souverain in all cold greefs. The virtues. F. Gregory
in Faber. Scribon. Larg. c. 171.
A bit of it worn on the stomach strengthens it. The Guinee, and Brasil Blacks
eat the flesh, though it be unsavory, and hard of digestion to make them
lusty. The Hyaenaes skin is also good against the bite of a dog. In Candy a
ship-wracked Barbarian being driven on shore, that being elderly, and
maintained on the public purse, related that a piece of the Hyaenaes skin tied
in a cloth, and bound about the left arm helped against bites, cramp, etc.
Mar^el. Empir. c. 36. Aetius ^erm. 2 c. 162. Noni^s c. 259. Avicea. l. 2. c.
326.
It is said, shoos made of a Seacalfs, or rather of an Hyaenaes skin, drives
away the foot-gout. It is good against the bite of a mad dog, if bound on. It
is past belief that the Phocas, and Hyaenaes skin make thunder proof, and that
they carry them about in ships to that end. Surely Avicen knew Civet liavour
under the name of Galia, and Algalia, which was not Gallia Moschata, for he
speaks of simple medicines, not compounds. And Algalia is not Serapions
Sederva, which is a cold juice of an herb, and astringent, as Acacia. Besides
the virtue is the same of Civet, with Avicens Algalia, as to soften hard
impostumes, and dissolved in Ben-oyl, or Keiri, and droped in, eases a sore
ear; the sent helps epilepsy, enlivens, and asswages the cold soda; in
toxicates the brain in wine; the sent cheers the heart, and in suppositories is
good for the mother, and against phlegma, and provoke terms, cleanses the
mother, helps conception. So that Civet, Algalia, and Galia are all one, for
all is but an Arabique article.

Some count Civet hot, and moist, others dry, The Temper. (...) and^
some, a kin to Musk; but Avicen holds Musk hot, and dry in the second degree.
But if it be a sweat, the Hyaena being very hot beasts, and that abounding in
hot weather; and when the beast is heated by anger, or motion, it must needs be
chollerick, hot, and dry, and of a disgestive nature.

But there is no certainty, (...)
because none know the taste of it. In all sweat is some salt, and when the
beast sweats, the Civet has some eagernes in it. It is certainly hot, dry,
and harsh. Besides, sweat disgests, and allays swelligns, as Algalia. But
Castor Durantes his medicine for the matrix, seem to be made of the genitals.
Rucil. Matthew. Renod.
Lay but Civet on the hollow of the navell, it turns the mother. It is used
also against the stoppings of the womb, and barrennes. Read Red, a Castro l. 2.
de mor. mul. c. 1. The shape of it in the beast, speaks for what parts it is
good. How it helps generation, Roder. a Fonseca consult. 10. shows. And many
write how useful it is against all womb-griefs. Briefly, it easest the Colic.

We read nothing in our late writers of oil of the gall and fat of the
Civet-cat, (...) Medicochin.
but among the ancients of the Hyaena, as in Galen de comp. med. loc. c. 7.
etc. Aelian. H. A. l. 6. c. 46. writes, that the gall kills the Ibis. Galen,
that the Hyaenaes fat breeds hair, it being thin, and pearcing to the roots of
the hair. The same does the whole Hyaena, Aetius ^er. 2. c. 164.
boiled in oil, as the Fox. There are many virtues in Fox-oyl, all which are
found in Hyaenas-oyl. The live Hyaena boyld in oil, makes a discussory oil,
excellent for the joynt-gout.

CHAPTER XI. Of the bones of the Civet-cat.
IT remains now to treat of the Sceleton of this beast prepared by me, which
conduces much to the discovery of it is nature; to know the place, seat, and
posture of the bones, and to see wherein it agrees with, or differs from the
Dogs, Wolse, Fox, Cat, and other beasts.

When in all other beasts the number of the turning-joynts of the backbone is
not the same, in our sweet Hyaena were reckoned 49. but in the Sow, and
Hedge-hogge but four, in the Horse, and Camels fifteen, six in the neck, as in
Dogs; in the breast twelf, after the usual way; seven others on the back, as
in the Dog. But the Hedge-hogge has eight; the Cony ten. Finally the tail
consists of four and twenty small bones. In a Dog I told but fifteen. In the
jaws were six sharp cutters on each side, but very small, as in the Cat-pard,
and in Dogs.

Next stand the dog-teeth, in bigness, and shape as the dogs: Then grinders on
either side six; the first whereof next the grinders, but small, as the last,
saving one, is the greatest of all. The shape of the whole seemed to resemble a
dog, and such kind of beasts nearest. And so much briefly of the Anatomy. Let
the reader excuse us, that we give no account of the inwards, since such was
the stink of the putrified bowels, that the offense so nau-seated, and turned
the stomachs of my scholars then present, in Dr. Dominick Panarolus, who cut
it up, and also in the by standers, that it scarce suffered us to make that
speedy dissection.

FINIS.
Tab. ^ Equus Frisicus Frisich Pferd

Equus Pannonicus sive Hungariq Hungarisches Pferd



Tab. III. Equus Pferd

Equus Aethiopicus Aethiopisch Pferd



Tab. III Equus Pferd

Cantherins Wallach



Tab. V Zebra Indica Indianisch Maulthier

Equus Indicus Indianisch Pferd

Equus Hirsutus Rauh Pferd



Tab. VI Asinus Esel

Asinus Esel

Mulus Maul Esel



Tab. VIII Elephas Elephant



Tab. X Monoceros Unicornu Einhorn

Capricornq Marinq Mere Steinb^^k

Monoceros Unicornu Einhorn



Tab. XI Onager Aldro Wald Esel

Monoceros seu Vnicornu Inbatus Einhorn mit mahnen

Monoceros seu Vnicornu aliud Einhorn mit mahnen ein andr art



Tab. XII Onager Wald Esel

Lupus Marinus Mere Wolff

Capra Sijlvestris wild Geiss art



Tab. XIII Taurus Castratus Bos Verschnittener Ochs

Kuh und Kalb



Tab. XIIII Bos Domesticus



Tab. XV Bos Stier Iunger Ochs

Vitulus Kalb

Taurus Ochs



Tab. XVI Bison Wilder Ochs Wisent

Bubalus Indicus

Vacca Indica



Tab. XVII Bisons Magnus

Bison Iubatus

Locobardus Bison



Tab. XVIII Bonasus Munister wild Ochsen geschlecht

Bubalus Africanus

Taurus



Tab. XIX Bonnafuf alius

Vrus Iubatus Gewohnter Awer Ochs

Catoblepa Vras Lijbicus



Tab. XX Bubalus Buffel

Alius Bubalq Taurus Sijluester

Vrus Awer Ochs



Tab. XXI Bos Scijthicus

Bubali Iuveu^i Iunge Buffel



Tab. XXII Aries Wieder

Ver^ex Hamel

Ajnus Lam

Ovis Peregrina



Tab. XXIII Vervex aliud

Vervex alius Peregrinq

Ovis Arabica



Tab. XXIV Capra Strephiceros

Eale

Alicorn



Tab. XXV Ibex Steinbock

Capra Lijbica

Flirus



Tab. XXVI Capra Geiss

Capra Canis

Capra Hispanicq

Capra Mambrinq

Capra Mambrina



Tab. XXVII Hircus Bock

Rupicapra

Caper Mumon dictus Bubalq Cerus Aldr

Dama Veterum

Hircus Cotilardicus

Culor



Tab. XXVIII Ibex Sijluester Sardus

Musimona

Trais Vel Ibex



Tab. XXIX Gazella

Cervo Camelq

Capreolus Moschi Bisem their



Tab. XXX Taurus Peonius

Alces

Alce. Elend geschlecht



Tab. XXXI Dama Cervq Damhirsch

Caprea Rehe-Kalb

Alce Mas



Tab. XXXII Cerva Hind

Colopus

Rupicapra Gems



Tab. XXXIII Capreolus Rehe

Capreolus Marinus

Capra



Tab. XXXIV Pijgargus Weiss Zars

Tragelaphus Pijgargi species

Hippelaphus Faemina



Tab. XXXV Cervus

Hippelaphus mas Ross Hirsch

Cervus Burgundicq



Tab. XXXVI Alce Elend

Ceruus Mirabilis

Orijx Cervi Species alijs Alco



Tab. XXXVII Rangifer Reinthier

Cervus Palmatus

Tarandus Tarandthier

Reinthiers geschlecht



Tab. XXXIX Camelo pardus seu Gierafra

Camolo-pardalus



Tab. XI Camelus Iudi Kamel their

Camelus Indicus Indianisch Camel

Camelus Indicq Versicolor

Alius Camelq



Tab. XLI Dromedary



Tab. XLII Dromedarij

Camelus K^m^^



Tab. XLIII Camelus Bactrianus seu Dromedarius

Camelus

Camelq



Tab. XLIV Dromedarius

Camelus



Tab. XLV Lea Capra

Ouis Cretensis

Camelo Pardalis



Tab. XLVI Ovis Peruana

Aries Guineensis

Zainq. s. Tajacn Percus suluester

Porcus Guineensis



Tab. XLVII Verres Eber

Aper Wild Schwein

Scrofa Mock



Tab. XLVIII Sus Cornut

Porcus pumile Taxus porcinq

Aper Wild Schwein



Tab. XLIX Grijphus Grijps

Wasser Ochs Hippopotamus

Hippopotamus



Tab. LI Le^ena

Leo



Tab. LII Leucurcuta

Leo Minor

Martigera



Tab. LIII Pardus Leopardus Parderthier Leopard

Pardus Parderthier

Tigris Tigerthier



Tab. LIVE Lijnx Luchs

Tigris Gesneri

Panthera



Tab. LVI Lupus Wolff

Zilie Hyaena

Vulpes Fuchs

Hyaena



Tab. LVII Lupus Marinq Gesneri et Bellonij

Hyaena

Gulo ^i^lfracs



Tab. LVIII Lupus Scijthicus

Semivulpa

Veruex Aethiopicq



Tab. LX Cajtaia

Cagui Brasil

Cercopithecus barbatus Guin

Iuja sieve Carigulbeiu Lutra Indica

Capij-bara Parcus flu. Viatilis Bras.

Cuandu s. Qurico cachiero Eijsern Vercken



Tab. LXII Tamandua 1

Tamandua guacu 2

Ai sieve Ignavus

Tatu seu Armadillo



Tab. LXIII Ap^rca Cuniculi species Veld Ratte Carigueija

Aguti vel Acuti Cunie Bra. spe. Cavia C^baija Cunic. Brasil spec

Cuniculi Indq Gesneri. Paca Cunic. Bras spe

Tatu Apara Dachs



Tab. LXIV Mustela ^iesel Putorius Iltis.

Martes Marter Martes

Porcellus Indicus alius T^xus suillq Hijstrix



Tab. LXV Lepus Hasc

Lepus Cernutus

C^n^^lq porcellq Indicq Kaninich Kuniglei^



Tab. LXVI Glires Ratten Mures Meuse

Mus avellanarius Haselmaus Scivrus Eichhorn Nulmaus

Mus araneus Spitzmaus Talpa Molckworff M. Noricus Gross Haselmaus Zijselmaus



Tab. LXVII Sciurus Getulus Mus alpinq Marmota Murmel their

Mus Indic. Glis Aldr.

I^hneumon. s. lutra Aegypti Mus Muscatulq



Tab. LXVIII Lutra Otter Vitulus Marinus Zee Kalb

Lonx Lonza Castor Fiber Biber

Hijstrix Dorn schwein stachel schwein Herinaceus Igel Sewin Igel



Tab. LXIX Canis Leporariq

Canes

Canis



Tab. LXX Canes Hunde



Tab. LXXII Felis Domestica Zahme Katz Felis sylvestris Wild Katz

Felis Zibetti Zibet Katz

Genetta Geneth Katz Meles vel Taxus Canin Dachs



Tab. LXXIII Hyaena Odorata Africana

Catus Zibethicus Americanq Genitale Vas Zibethi Testes Anus

Tlaquatzin Mus Aquaticus



Tab. LXXVI Lacerta

Eijdexen

Lacerta

Lacerta Chalcidica flexnosa

Lacertus Biceps

Lacerta Biceps

Lacertq Viridis Liguro Boneniensibus

Lacertq Viridis Cauda bifurca

Lacertus Viridis exiccatus Cauda bifida

Lacert^ et Stelli^nes

Lacertae et Stelliones

Lacertus Cijprius Scincoides



Tab. LXXVII Teiunhana Brasiliensibus

Americima Brasiliensibq

Lacertus Tarantula quibusdam

Teiuguacn et Temapara Tupinambis

Senembi Brasiliensibus

Lacertus aquaticus wasser Eijdex

Lacertus Viridis Grune Eijdex

Salmandra Molch Moll

Salmandra aqnatica Wasser molch

Salmandra alia aquatilis Minor prone

Salmandra Terrestris Veranig Maculis Luteis distincta

Salmandra Aquatica

Salmandra Aquatica prona



Tab. LXXVIII Stelliones ex Matthiolo

Stern Eijdex

Frembd Eijdex

Scincus

Candulus

Lacertus Indicus Cerdijlo Similis

Cordijlus sieve Vromastix

Chamaeleon niger

Chamelon Varius



Tab. LXXIX Chamaeleon Cinerens Verus

Chamaeleon

Crocodilus Crocodijll

Laudiuerh



Tab. LXXX Tatus

Testudo Schildt Krotte

Testudo Aquatica

Testudo Marina




