CLARAPHIL AND CLARINDA: IN A FOREST OF FANCIES.

By THO: JORDAN, Gent.

Sat mihi sunt pauci Lectores; est satis unus;
Si me nemo legate, sat mihi nullus erit.
Owen, Epigram.

London, Printed by R. Wood.

To the Worthily Honored Mr. GEO: STRIPLING
SIR,

IF the Name of Stranger (a word in its genuine sense never despicable) do not
deface the formality of this present Oblation, and put the to the expense of
such an Apology, as shall render me ruder then that Act which may be the
object of my Accusation. I hope these imperfect mixtures of Fancy, may gain a
liberty to approach the presence of your leisure, and attend the truce of your
neore serious retirements. I dare not manifest the multiplicity of motives that
have induced me to this uncustomary confidence, lest the representation of your
own clear deservings, cause me to be accused for flattery (a practice, which to
me, is equally detestable with Rebellion, and Sacrilege:) Sir, you will, in
this weak Volume, find such a little Wilderness of vain Varieties, that you
will think the Author was only studious, to contrive an orderly Confusion. If
any thing in it may be the object of your Approbation, I have an absolute
accomplishment of all my Expectations; how ever, I shall cherish my self with
hopes to enjoy the benefit of your pardon, and have license to subscribe my
Ambition, in the honor of being

SIR, Your much devoted Servant:

THO: JORDAN.

CLARAPHIL AND CLARINDA.
TO CLARINDA: On Her Perfection.
I Will not Saint my fair Clarinda, SHE
More glorious is in her humanity;
Nor (in the heat of Fancy) pluck a Star
To rob the needy World, and place her these,
These are the subtle Raptures of the Times,
With which the wanton Poets make their Rhymes,
Rise high as does their Blood, 'till some proud She,
Pampered with such new-cook'd Divinity,
Surfets; believing (in a pride of Soul)
These fictions true, and Sins without control;
Do Angels boast habitual purity?
No it is in them impeccability,
And therefore not praiseworthy, they have, nor will,
Nor power to think, much less to practice Ill:
With thee it is otherwise, for thou may sin
Beyond hope of Repentance, and therein
Appears the odds, for maugre Flesh and Blood,
Devil, Temptation, Beauty, thou art Good.
To Clarinda (his Love) upon Refusal of a Kiss.
WHat not a Kiss? Clarinda, this is strange,
What is the slender motive of this Change?
Nay, I Will not strive with you, it is no content
To me to take a Kiss by Ravishment:
Did ever think I joined my Lips to thine,
But when I thought thy Bliss as large as mine?
How strangely Courtesies mis-construed be;
That Is thought Offense, which I meant Charity*
Not long time since, if I did once neglect
This kind of Kissing-duty, I was checked,
And not enforced only to restore it,
But (as a fault) to pay a Million for it:
And let me never be recorded where
The little God unsolds his Register,
But I did pay this amorous Duty down
As much for your Delight, as for my own:
And must your self-conceit make you so rude,
To pay my Merit with Ingratitude?
Forgetful Vanity, can you deride
The Man whose Folly gave you cause of Pride?
Was it not I who (when ye did despair
To have the last fruits of an undone Heir)
Saluted ye with love? though since indeed,
Ye are well-furnish'd Suitors ride full speed:
Who yet cannot conceive Merit in you,
But trust my Judgment, love ye' cause I do:
Before I brought ye choice, you had not any;
I was that One Fool that has made your Many:
Had not I been, your Maidenhead would be
Fifteen years hence, of some Antiquity;
Perhaps lead Apes (Virginities perdition,
According to the Country superstition)
I did not only love you, but did strive
To make you worthy of me, did contrive
To mend Heavens work, changing that Eye, that Lip,
Controuling Nature's courser Workmanship:
I did applaud you 'bove a Deity
And make you Sacred, with my Heresy:
But now I see Fate will not be withstood:
Nature, nor I, nor both, can make you Good:
I stole a Constellation for you Eye:
Pollish'd you Brow with Indian Ivory:
Feigned from your Lips, Nectar to Flow and Ebb;
Made your hair softer than Arachne's Webb;
Fetched Pyramids of snow, to vail your Breast,
Brought the red Morning from the early East,
To deck your Cheek; your Lips (that wanted blood)
Had liquid Coral from the furious flood,
To make them ruddy; I perfumed your breath
More sweet than is the Phoenix at her Death.
I sent you Summer spices from Sabea,
Arabian Aromats, Balm from Judea;
Such Odors for your Breath, I did invent,
Till they became a gluttony of Scent:
Your Voice, so full of Concord, some might be
Brought to believe, 'twas Heaven's Hierarchy.
Nor only gave these to your Outward Feature,
Within I made ye a more glorious Creature;
I did conceit you Innocent to be,
As Angels in their immortality;
Chaste as the Virgin Infant, newly hurled
From the warm Womb, to weep in the treacherous
Or the first Man, ere Misery made suit (World;
He should know Eve, the Serpent, and the Fruit:
I thought Thee as constant (without variation)
As rising Titan to his declination.
And the great cause of thy Ambition, is*
Thy Vanity made thee Believe all this:
But (by the Magic of that Poesy
That brought them to thee) from thee they shall
And never see thee more, thy Glass shall be (fly,
The only Mirror of Deformity;
This recompense I will return thy Ill,
Thou shall have leave to say, I love thee still,
That thou mai'st keep thy Loves, who (if they know
How thou quitt'st me) will quickly leave thee to,
Whilst I with humbled Knees, in devout Prayer,
Purge out the sin that made me feign thee fair.
A Wish for a Widow, in the Character of a good Husband.
IF a white Wish, winged with a Zeal, more bright
Than Prayers, proceeding from an Anchorite,
When he bedews with tears the sacred shrine,
May prove propitious, pray accept of mine:
If It be decreed, Himen shall once more light
His holy Tapers for your Bridal Night,
May he be such a Consort, as excels
The vast extent of largest Paralels;
May the renowned Endowments of his Mind,
Be the epitome of all Mankind:
May the Effigies of his Beauties, be
The Exact Idea of a Deity;
Let him in such high seas of Learning swim,
That all the Sciences may study Him.
Next, I would him Valiant, and further
From Tyranny, than Mercy is from Murder;
And his own Actions such a Vollume be,
As shall exceed all Rules of Heraldry:
May he be one, whose most auspicious stars
Designs him to compose these Civil wars;
For you are Mistress of such merit, that
None but one destined to erect a State,
Is worthy of you; But if he should prove
Short of all this, May he supply't with Love,
And Court you with such a divine respect
As (at last day) the Saints shall the Elect:
So loyal to your Bed, that he may deem
No Woman but your self was made for him,
So shall you nere be jealous, but expel
That plague which turns a Marriage to a Hell:
May you live free from Sorrows, nay, from Fears,
Growing no less in Graces, than in years:
But if a widowed life you think more bliss,
May that prove full as happy to you as this.
An Epithalamium on the much honored Pair T. S. Esquire, and Mrs. D. E.
SO at the first the Soul and Body met,
When the Creator did in Council set
To make a Little world command the Great.
Nor are your Flames less Innocent than they
Before the Grand Impostor did betray
Their fatal Freedoms to the Worlds decay.
Therefore let all that Heaven can dispense
To royal Mankind in the Soul and Sense,
Possess ye with Seraphick influence.
May all the promised Blessings on each Nation
From Genesis, to John's high Revelation,
Contribute to your Cordial Coronation.
May both your Brows be circled with such Beams
Of Glory, as appeared in Jacob's Dreams,
Or the Dove darted upon Iordan's Streams.
May Lovers light their Torches at your Flame,
And may the power of Stanley's single Name
Prove the sublimest Epithet of Fame.
May your hearts fix above the force of Fate,
May neither Princes frown, nor Peoples hate,
Your fair Affections dis-unanimate.
May ye have all ye can desire, And when
Your wishes have out-vied the thoughts of Men,
Some Power direct you how to wish again.
An Acrostich on two Pairs of Inseparable Friends married in one Day.
Jove Join these Pairs, and May each Blessed Bride, Obtain A Guard of Angels
for A Guide: Heaven, Nature, Virtue, Reason (in communion) Nobilitate, Enrich,
and Love Your Union: Grace, Faith, and Knowledge, Bind ye; may ye be, Each
Others Bliss; No Evil Injure ye: Let nothing Re-divide; Eternal Rest, Love,
Dwell, and Last, in each Diviner Breast.

An Epithalamium in a double Acrostich, written on the noble Names, and sacred
Nuptials, of the worthily honored Edward Marrow Esquire, and the truly
virtuous Mrs Anne Grantham.
E minent Palr, what ever Sidney saw, I
In ARGALUS and his PARTHENI A
D lineate your Excellence, how then
Shall I depict ye, with so poor a Pe N
W hat Power shall I implore? Apollo's gone
For whom my Muse lies drenched in Helico N
A rts are malignant, Poems, out of Date,
The Layman calls Learning a Reprobat - E
R eason is banished, and what ere did spring
From those fair Banks where Peace was flourishin G
D ivinest Pair, whose bright Perfections are
More luminary than the morning Sta R
M ay all the Pleasures Phoebus ever saw
In Europe, Asia, or Americ A
A ttend your Genial Joys; What Nature can
Contribute to the Excellence of Ma N
R edouble your felicity, May Night
And Day, contend, which shall yield most deligh T
R iches, and Honor, Virtue (the best Wealth)
Beauty, with all the circumstance of Healt H
O bey your wish, and he that will not pray
As I have done, is Love's Anathem A
W ar never fright ye, wheresoere ye come,
May bright Apollo's Harp drown Mars his Dru M
An Aerostical Eulogie, written on the worthy name of Mr. William Legassick,
second son to Mr. Henry Legassick, of little Hempstead in the County of Devon.
W ith a heart free from Flatteries fair crimes,
L et me salute you in these rural Rhymes;
I must confess the favors you have done,
E xceed my best Congratulation.
L ove (whose bright Laws you never disobay)
G uides you to do more then a Verse can pay:
L earning and those accommodations which
A mplifie Nature, and make Spirits rich,
I mprove their fertile Faculties, and do
S hine forth the brighter, 'cause they dwell in you:
A great Apostle 'twas, that said, if I
S peak Angels language without Charity,
M y words are but as tinkling Cimbals. You
I mitate him, have Love and Learning too:
C HRIST guard your Family, and may your Name
K eep up, till all the world fly in a flame.
Sic Vaticinatur: T. J.

A double Acrostick, composed on the Names of Mr. Francis Jordan of Ensham in
the County of Oxon, and Th. Jordan the Author.
F Aith, Hope, and Charity, Wealth, Worth, and Wit,
Wait on their Names for whom this Poem's wri T;
R eligion, Reason, Temperance, and Truth,
The peace of Conscience, and the joys of Yout H,
A ttend upon their Actions; may they know,
No change, that bears the name or badge of w O;
N o ill approach their Natures, may the jem
Of mutual friendship ever dwell with the M;
C ontent be their beatitude, and may
Their loves increase, and meet no Remor A;
I oy crown their days, and may no sad distress,
At any time expel their happiness S;
S aints be their Guardians, let nothing be
Obnoxious to their lawful amit J;
J ehovah join their spirits, may they grow,
Brighter then Lillies on the Banks of P O;
O mnipotence defend them from that Star,
Whose influence brings Famine, Plague, or Wa R.
R ebellion and those bloody crimes that stand,
Upon the red Account of this black Lan D,
D epart from their designs as large a way,
As it is from Europe to Americ A.
A ll happiness that ever has been known,
From Adam's death to Christ's Ascenscio N,
N obilitate their souls; enrich their lives,
And grant them handsome Graves, or chaster Wives.
A Cross Acrostich, on two crosst Lovers.
Though crossed in our Affection, still the flames,
Of Honor, shall secure our Noble Names*
Nor shall Our Fate divorce our Faith, Or cause,
The least Mislike of Love's Diviner Laws.
Crosses sometimes Are Cures, Now let us prove,
That no strength Shall Abate the Power of Love.
Honor, Wit, Beauty, Riches, Wisemen call,
Frail Fortune's Badges, In true Love lies all.
Therefore to him we Yield; our Vows shall be
Paid, Read, and written in E ternity:
That All may know, when men grant no Redress*
Much Love can sweeten the unhappines S.
Another kind of Acrostich.
S weet S oul of goodness in whose Saintlike brief
V irtue V ows dwelling to make Beauty blessed:
S ure S ighing Citherea fits, your Eyes
A re A ltars, whereon she might sacrifice;
N ow N one will of the Paphean Order be,
N ature's N ew work transcends a Deity;
A rabia's A romaticks Court your scent,
B right B eauty makes your Gazers Eloquent;
L et L ittle Cupid his lost Eyes obtain,
V ailed, V iewing you, would strike him blind again,
N ay, N ever think I flatter, if you be
T hus T o none else, by Love you are to me.
A New Years Gift in the ordinary Acrostich to his Friend Mr. John Curling.
J f I were one of those that lately sold
C onscience and Country for a Gripe of Gold,
O r had I now a power to surprise
U npittied England with a worse Excise
H appily I might lend ye from my store
R esplendent Jewels, or the Indian Oar,
N ow I can send ye naught but empty Dishes,
L ove, larded ore with Language and good wishes.
I ehovah grant that upon Sea and Land,
N othing prove profitless you take in hand:
G o forth and prosper, May your Labors end
E rect more wealth then wit, or Time can spend
May all the Good you can attempt, prevail,
Fate find you fraught, and fair Winds fill your Sail.
On the hononored Services of the most worthy Col. Rokeby, under the Command of
Monsieur Gashion the French General against the Spanish Forces. Anno 1646, and
1647
SIr, since in Ages past, Verses have been
The Balm to Valor, and preserved green,
The Acts of antique Heroes, such as made
The Reader ravished with the Royal Trade
Of righteous War, upon the Crest of those
Whom Fate and Dis-affection made their Foes,
I hope my maimed Muse (late trodden down
By the red fury of Rhamnusa's frown)
May re-erect her drooping head, and be
A Tomb to Royal Rokeby's Memory,
Whose Acts do want a Homer to rehearse,
Being fitter for a Volume, than a Verse:
Witness the wise Entrenchment that was made
Before Country, Where the ingenious Spade
Furrowed the fiery Field, and did engage
The slow-paced fury of Spain's subtlest Rage;
Which soon approached in a relieving Power,
Fleshed with four Thousand Men, whose fatal hour
Rokeby commanded, whose Magnetique Sword
Drew blood at any distance, and whose Word
Gave life to all the Cavalry, in brief,
He forced their Retreat, and killed their Chief;
This is not all, nor must his faithful Fame
Content it self with such a single Flame,
Mardyke looks big, a Fort that did impart
The Labyrinths of Mathematique Art,
Whose well-man'd Bastions might Defiance give
To all the World, and (unsupported) live
Upon their thrifty Store, 'till Rokeby's Men
Made a fierce Onset, and into their Den
Shot so much fire, that all within it, say,
The French Compounded with the Latter Day;
Next Dunkirk, (which so many years has been
The Trap of Flanders) strait was taken in
By Rokeby's bold Assistance, whose fair Fate
Attempted naught too early, or too late:
Labassay (next to this) the French oblige
With the hot Complement of a close Siege:
Lans being then re-taken, there was slain (Spain,
A Man whose worth out-weigh'd the Crown of
Royal Gashion, whose Name the Army would
Rather than Tears, enbalm with Spanish blood:
Which shall not cease to run 'till all are made
The Subject of a Charnell-house and Spade;
Until which time, my due Devotion sues,
That (He who now is Subject of my Muse)
The noble Rokeby, may (undaunted) stand;
The fixed glory of his Native Land,
Till honored Age conclude his Life, and then
I wish his Worth may meet some better Pen.
The Anti-platonick by I. C. with an Answer by T. I.
FOr shame thou Everlasting Woer,
Still saying Grace, and nere fall to her:
Love that is in Contemplation placed,
Is Venus drawn but to the Waste,
Unless his heat confess his Gender,
And the Parley cause Surrender:
They are Salamanders of a cold Desire
That live un-scorch'd amidst the wildest Fire.
What though she be a Dame of Stone,
The Image of Pigmalion,
As hard, and un-relenting She
As the new-crusted Niobe;
Or (what does more of Statue carry)
A Nun of the Platonic Quarrey:
Love melts the rigor, which the Rocks have bred*
A Flint will break upon a Feather-bed.
Then leave ye pretty Female Elves,
To candy and preserve your selves,
Women commence by Cupid's Dart,
As the King's Hunting dubbs a Heart:
No more ye Sectaries of the Game
No more of your Calcining Flame:
Lov's Votaries enthrall each others Soul,
Till both of them do live upon Parol.
Virtue's no more in Women kind
Then the Green Sickness of the Mind,
Philosophy, they are new Delight:
A kind of Charcoal Appetite:
There is no Sophistry prevails
When Love a loving heart assails:
But the disputing Petty-coat will warp,
As skillful Fencers use to check at Sharp:
The Soldier, that man of Iron,
Whom Ribs of Horror all inviron,
Who strong with Wire instead of Veins,
In whose Embraces y' are in Chains,
Let a Magnetique Girl appear,
And he turns Cupid's Curaseer;
Love storms his Breast, and takes the Fortress in
For all the bristled Turn-pikes of his Chin.
Since Love's Artillery (their Cheeks)
The Breast-work which the firmest seeks;
Come, let us in affecton Riot,
They 're sickly Pleasures, keep their Diet;
Give me a Lover bold and free,
Not impeached with formality;
Lik an Ambassador that beds a Queen,
With the nice Caution of a Sword between.
I. C.

The Answer.
LEave thy salt lascivious Lover,
Is It no more but Come and Cover,
Love that is by Lust mislead,
Is Hellen drawn upon her head:
And the luxurious Garb is stranger
Than the Horse-tail tied to the Manger:
That scorching Salamander kills his Sire,
Who will confound his alimental Fire.
Although she be no Dame of Snow,
Which with every Smile will flow;
Or be transformed (by brackish blood)
From a Figure, to a Flood:
Her Love will last, when (after loathing)
Thy Marchpane Mistress melts to nothing:
Love is a Gem in the Celestial Crown,
A Diamond is never broke with Down.
Then cease to frisk it so like Elves,
And make French Monkeys of your selves;
Why should Cowardice prevail?
Valiant Men do nere turn tail:
Love is no Faction, the direct
And true Religion, is no Sect:
Luxurious Lovers do (like Rebels) frame
A War against their King in his own Name.
Virtue is a Virgins Wealth,
The Magazine of mental Health;
And (since Philosophy should be
The Handmaid to Divinity)
Her sacred Sylogisms shall
Maintain, Lust is Apocriphal:
The party-colored Cod-piece then shall be
Struck dumb, with Farthing all Philosophy.
Your pineer-finger'd Soldier which
Does deal in heat of blood, and itch:
May, when the Dog Days do increase,
Court Venus in her Verdigrese;
Or find some Tyndar-hearted Saint,
Where he may wallow in her Paint:
For such a piece of potent Pleasure can
(It Is ten to one) charge both your Horse and Man.
Since Lust is nothing but the foul
And fierce Consumption of the Soul,
Let our embracing Spirits prove
The Ioys of incorporeal Love;
Let Wantons in their wild Desires
Call us Cupid's Crucifiers:
We will the Wonders of our Love rehearse,
When Fire shall vitnifie the Universe.
A Blessing to my Creditors.
THe Debtor to the Creditor did fall,
Crying, Be patient, and I Will pay you all;
With such humility come I to you,
Believing Men, and, with his Words, I sue,
That you will have Patience, it is a Virtue which
Will not Impoverish, but make ye Rich
In Heaven's high esteem, And from that Store
Who ever has his Wealth, cannot be poor:
You know the Scripture does these words afford
Who gives the Poor lends Money to the Lord;
Then whatsoere is scor'd for their Expense,
Your Interest, shall be treble Recompense:
Is not this well now? Who would not give all
To have his Use exceed his Principal?
And yet there shall not on your Conscience lie
The burden of extorting Usury:
If Giving get such Gain, be not afraid,
For what ye lend, shall surely be repaid;
I, but you will ask me when? why there is the offense
You Are guilty of, ye must have patience.
Ye tell me, when I say, I cannot pay;
You Will take an Order with me, What, I pray?
You will imprison me, where I shall lie
As much indebted to your Charity;
This is the way to have God's Curse to sink ye;
But is it the way to have your Money, think ye?
Will it not make your very Souls to quake,
When I shall ask ye Bread for the Lord's sake?
An hundred hungry Christians likewise lie,
And you must make me keep um Company:
Have Patience pray, if ye do chance to die
Before you are paid, I Will write your Elegy,
And such a serious one, void of all Flashes,
That shall revive ye; when your Tomb's turned Ashes;
I Will make your Names to Men sweeter than Spices.
Who else would curse ye for your young beirs vices
But what is all this to Money? 'twill not pierce
Your greedy Minds, you will not be paid in Verse,
Nor yet in Prose, I see; you hold it sweeter,
To have your Debt in Money than in Meeter:
Why, ye shall have it: Nay, do not thank me, prey,
Not yet I mean; you know there is a Day
Shall pay for all; and then kind courteous Men,
In every Hundred I Will allow ye Ten:
Why now, your Looks plead pity, ye shall see
The blessings I have kept in store for ye,
Blessings that shall prevail beyond your Purses,
And free ye from Tom Randolphs witty Curses,
May all your Wives turn honest, and your Mothers,
And waste your wealth no more on younger Bro
I wish a blessing upon all your Seed, (there is:
May all your Children learn to write and read,
And cast Account well, which, in vulgar sense,
Is to dispose your Pounds, Shillings, and Pence.
May they to Riot never be inclined,
Or to the female Gender give their Mind,
But if it happen so, they needs must turn
Their Minds to careful Marriage, or else burn,
Let them in Heavens name wed, and never cease
To be laborious for the Worlds increase;
And (though you nere were any) I wish then
Their Children may be Sons of Gentlemen,
Have all their Carriage lie in the French Road,
To wear their Gloaths Gentile, and Al le mode,
These and such other Blessings, sure will stay ye,
Alas these may come to pass yet ere I pay ye.
The Eccho's Oracle, an Eclogue betwixt Melancholicus and Aulicus.
Mel. REport relates that in this Forest lies
(Hid in mysterious Concavities)
A famous Echo, she they say that is
Recorded in the Metamorphosis.

Aul. It Is said, she is Oraculous, and can
(By a most queint Reflection) give a Man
Such Answer to his Question that affords
Another Sense extracted from his Words.

Mel. Prithee let us try: what shall we ask?

Aul. No matter
What, ask her any thing.

Mel. Why then have at her;
I Will whisper first -- Mysterious Mother, thou
That mock'st the bleating Lamb, and lowing Cow,
Or any sound that does thy Cavern pass,
Hearken --

Aul. Unto the braying of an Ass.

Mel. Prithee be silent.

Aul. Prithee speak in season;
Ask her who shall be King.

Mel. No, no, that is Treason,
She dares not answer.

Aul. Why? She need not fear,
For an whole Army cannot wound the Air.

Mel. What Heir?

Aul. Air of this Forest.

Mel. Yes they may
Cleave it with fire.

Aul. She Will be as fierce as they,
Besides she is so able to retort,
Do what they can, she will give the last Report.

Mel. She Is very old, I Will ask her if she know
Acts that were done a thousand years ago:
Tell me (Great Echo) where (with such high fury)
Did Christ receive his Injury?

Echo. In Jury.

Mel. A perfect Oracle; She that so well
(With direct Readiness) things past can tell,
Knows something yet to come, I am on fire,
'Till I hear more of this: Now do you try her.

Aul. Come Echo, say, what is a more monstrous Evil,
Then we have read in Mandevil?

Echo. Man-Devil.

Aul. What are those men that Faction so inspires
To be our Churches Edifiers?

Echo. Fires.

Aul. What did they think of our Comunion-table
When they were so un-affable?

Echo. A Fable.

Mel. Thou knew'st the Jews in the days of great Herodias,
Will Scotchmen be Commodious?

Echo. Become odious.
But if our Persons in their power fall,
Will they prove Rational?

Ecch. Prove rash on all.

Aul. How can they be our Commonwealths deflourers?
They were our Peace- Endeavourers.

Echo. Devourers.

Mel. Peace is pure sweetness, though we care not for her,
What is their due that do abhor her?

Echo. Horror.

Aul. Come come, I Will ask no more, for she affords,
Nothing but by advantage of our Words;
Let us depart, it is likely we can find,
Little to do, that wanton with the VVinde:
No, prithee stay, I have two questions more
To ask, and I have done.

Aul. Prithee give over.

Mel. A Lady loves me, Echo, shall I choose her,
To be my Mistress, or refuse her?

Echo. Use her.

Mel. I call her Dear, and she styles me her Honey,
What can be greater Harmony?

Echo. Her money.

Mel. Whilst that is lasting, I will never forsake her,
If thou will have me undertake her.

Echo. Take her.

Aul. This is mere humor (and indeed) no more
Then what is daily practiced, for before
Some do propound, those thoughts that do disease um,
They angle for such Answers as may please um:
And do commit unto the Hearers trust,
The charge of pleasing, not of being just:
So a weak Prince, and Parasites accord,
He asks is it well? They answer, Well my Lord.

A Bill of Love.
Be It known to all men, by these Presents, I
Franck Wild-love, late of Infidelity;
In The County of Inconstant, Gentleman:
Acknowledge (with the greatest zeal I can)
My self to ow and be indebted to
Maria Eair-chast Virgin, late of True,
In The County of Credulity, the Sum
Of my Affections, and to tender um
Upon her first Demand, to which, I bind
My Body, Heart, Life, Soul, in this most kind
And amorous Obligation, such a Debt
No Heirs, nor yet Executors are set
To see discharged, but only He that owes
Must pay, or the fair Creditor must lose;
Dated the one and twentieth year oth' Reign
Of Cupid, King of Hearts, (our Sovereign)
Witness the Cherubims, and Commonweal
Of Angels, here I fix my Hand and Seal.
Fr. Wildlove.

A Farewell to his worthy Friend, Mr John Curling upon his Voyage to the Indies.
IF I were more enamored with thy sight
Than with thy safety, I should much invite
Thy stay in England, and dissuade thee from
Those motives which divert thy feet from home,
But since I see the sullen Wars increase,
And sad Destruction mortify our Peace,
I do applaud thy Providence, and pray
That thy Negotiations Night and Day
May prove propitious, thou I hope, wilt find,
Though amongst Heathen, Spirits more inclined.
Unto Humanity, then some that here
Usurp the name of Christians, May the clear
Beams of divine Protection ever dwell
In all the Good you can attempt, Farewell.
The Pursuit betwixt Claraphil and Clarinda.
Clarinda AY me, fly me not,
Good faith, I do mean no harm;
I am out of breath,
Support me from death,
With thy all-curing Arm:
Alas, I faint,
My tyring Limbs do tremble,
Then prove
My Constant Love,
No true heart can dissemble.
Once more turn thy face,
Encourage my failing Feet,
That now are grown faint
With Brambles restraint?
For every Bush I meet
Does throw me down;
And ere I can recover,
Thy flight
Out-goes my sight,
What Sorrow has a Lover.

The Reply of Claraphil to another Air.
Claraphil. THough I wish fair Venus guide all,
Those bright flames we sacrifice,
And confess no other Idol
Than the Altar of thine Eyes:
Though I know thy Glories can
Provoke a P^oselyte from Prayer,
And the Destiny of Man
Does lie tangl'd in thy hair:
Though thy Mental Merit may
Mollify immortal Ire,
Mitigate the Latter Day,
And reverse the Rage of Fire.
Look up to your Saphir VVindow,
Where the Destinies appear,
Thou on that shall find Clarinde
My red Ruin written there,
That no Virgin can be true,
If my favor she implore,
But will wander for a new,
And invite a Million more;
Though thy sacred Soul may be
Fixed, yet thou in me wilt find
Something (though unknown to me)
Will make thee wilder than the Wind.

Chorus by Both, with a through Bass.
THen let thy bended Knees the Gods implore
That thou may love me no more:
And we with Incense will their Altars warm,
Till they have losed the Charm,
Panchean Spices, and Arabian Gums,
Shall sweat, in whole Hecatombs,
Our Optic faculties shall nere be dry,
We thus will do till we die.
A Kiss, by Mr. T. S.
A Kiss I begged, and she did join
Her Lips to mine,
Then (as afraid) snatched back her Treasure,
And mocked my Pleasure;
Again, my Chariessa, for in this
Thou only gav'st Desire, and not a Kiss
The Answer.
A Kiss you had, the fair One gave
What you did crave,
But (wisely) limited her Treasure
For further Pleasure,
Extract no more of Honey from those Hives,
For fear you surfeit on Preparatives.
The Senses.
CLarinda, in thy face,
Is all that ever was,
Pertaining unto Beauty, Youth, and Grace,
I prithee let me Gaze?
No Angel in a Sphere,
Does sing so sweet and clear,
His heavenly Hallelujah to Heavens ear;
I prithee let me Hear?
Thy breathing does excel,
The Air where Roses dwell,
All pestilential peril 'twill expel;
I prithee let me Smell?
Upon thy Lip is placed,
Prevention for a Fast,
It Is so Divine a Julip, I shall last,
For ever, if I Taste.
Although thy heart is steel,
Each Limb, from Head to Heel,
Is soft as Down, that falls from Arachne's Wheel;
I prithee let me Feel?
Give Ear unto my moan,
Let me no longer groan,
Surprise me with thy Senses one by one,
Or I shall lose my own.
Solitude.
POor Swain, thou must repair,
Where neither Ear nor Eye,
Thy sad Laments can over-hear, or spy;
Into some silent Air.
That kindly entertains,
Thy sighs, and with no Echo mocks thy pains:
Since thy Clarinda scornfully professes,
She cannot choose but laugh at thy distresses.
Blessed be thou Solitude,
That to thy Cypress Grove,
Invites the Melancholy soul of Love;
No murmur shall intrude,
No flattr'ing Wind invade,
To spoil the happy quiet of thy shade:
Here will I sit, and Venus Son importune,
To torture her, that laughs at my misfortune.
Kind Cupid bend thy Bow,
And with thy keenest shaft,
Transfix her breast, that glories in her craft;
Shoot home, that there may flow,
From her obdurate heart,
A Stream to drench the feathers of thy Dart:
That when (like me) her flame she cannot smother,
We both may love, and laugh, at one another.
Eliza and Alexis, a Dialogue.
Eliz. WOrthy Shepherd, cast thy Eyes,
Here thy scorned Eliza lies,
And without thy Love she dies:
I prithee then draw near me.

Alex. Oh! no, fly away, I never more will hear thee.
Faithless Shepherdess, I fly,
'Cause I fear to cast an Eye
In thy Love does Ruin lie,
I may no more mistake thee,

Eliz. Ay me! I Am undone, My Shepherd will for sake me,
What though I have gone astray,
Will thou work my Life's decay,
Prithee do not turn away,
But once more come and cheer me,

Alex. Oh! no, fly away, thou never shall come near me.
Did thou only go astray,
When thou wrought'st my Love's decay,
And my Life thou would betray,
What Answer can thou make me?

El. Ay me! I Am undone, my Shepherd will forsake me.
I will help to fold thy Sheep,
And my self in Garlands keep,
I will watch whilst thou do sleep,
No Danger shall come near thee.

Alex. Oh! no, fly away, I never more will hear thee.
Thou shall nere come nigh my Sheep,
Least thy Magic work so deep,
That they devour me in my Sleep,
When none are near to wake me.

El. Ay me! I Am undone, My Shepherd will forsake me.
Do remember how by slight,
Thou made me thy Quarrel fight?
In hope to have me killed outright,
By Sheep-hooks in a Duel.

El. Sweet Shepherd now forget, or thou will be too cruel.
This is only thy pretense,
That I may be banished hence,
Prithee pardon one offense,
I never more will grieve thee.

Al. Dear Danger get thee gone, I never will believe thee.

El. I will rob the choicest Bowers,
To make Coronets of Flowers,
Merrily we'll spend the hours,
And thou shall be my Shepherd.

A. Sweet Siren get thee hence, you are spotted as a Leopard
If thou do but touch a Bower,
Guilt will all the place deflowre,
Thy very smelling does devour,
And I shall never be merry;

Eliz. Deer Shepherd take my life, my soul is sick
(and weary.

The Adulteress.
WHo would have thought Luxuria, when
Thy choice made me the best of Men,
Thou could contrive my life's decay,
And wound that heart which once did pay,
A price for thine? What Souls have they,
That do with tears betray?
Thou did petition me with Prayers,
With blubbered Eyes, and torn Hairs,
That both our Hearts might join in one:
Thou were so full of melting moan,
For fear thy life should be overthrown,
I did destroy my own.
Yet she that then did so profess,
Faith, Truth, and Love, knows nothing less;
But all her Blood with poison flows,
For in the Bride-bed where the Rose,
And Violets did their sweets disclose,
Henbane, and Hemlock grows.
Such Woes are only known in Hell,
My Love had never parallel;
And how I hate, no tongue can tell.
That were the World from women free,
As 'twas at first, my soul should flee
Her salt society.
I would embrace a Body first,
By Brothels twenty Winters Nursed;
And all the plagues completely, cursed
Whose mortifying breath at ten
Miles distance might destroy strong men,
Ere we would meet again.
Add to my Life ten thousand years,
With health, and treasure, free from fears;
I would not have them to be Hers:
Nay should afflicting Furies frame
A fire, and force me to my shame,
I Would wallow in the flame,
The Comparison.
Fond Love that blinded Boy,
So many keeps in Bands,
Is like the Cold, and Christiall Ice,
In wanton Childrens hands;
Which though it hurt their tender joints,
It so delights their Eye,
Although they seem to let it fall,
They hold it fast and cry.
The Rebel.
LOve? No; I am not such a Foe,
To my Peace, Prithee cease,
Say no more,
Though her Eyes
Are the Skies
Where Love flies
And Inveagles
All the Eagles
That in her Airy soar,
I dare not fly, in her Sky,
It Is too high;
Once her frown
Threw me down
So low,
That I swore, Never more
In a Sunbeam to soar,
Love and I, will each other never know.
He brings such Woes with him
Naught can exceed um;
Souls do in sorrow swim,
And Tears do feed um;
That every sense is dim
To Peace and Freedom.
Eye me, Try me,
Can you deny me?
Thus he beguiles the Wise,
But if you
To his Bow do bow
Your Soul becomes a Sacrifice
Fires, Mires,
Brooks, and Briers,
Kinder are than he,
Then shake him off,
With scorn and scoff,
Sing, and drink Sack with me,
The Departure.
BY all thy Glories willingly I go,
Yet could have wished thee Constant in thy Love,
But since thou needs must prove
Uncertain, as is thy Beauty,
Or as the Glass, that shows it thee,
My Hopes thus soon to overthrow,
Shows thee more sickle, but my flames by this
Are easter quenched than his,
Whom flattering smiles betray,
It Is tyrannous delay
Breeds all this harm,
And makes that Fire consume, that should but warm.
Till Time destroys the Blossoms of thy Youth,
Thou art our Idol, worshipped at that Rate,
But who can tell thy Fate?
Or say that when thy Beauties gone,
Thy Lovers Torch will still burn on?
I could have served thee with such truth
Devoutest Pilgrims to their Saints do ow,
Departed long ago;
And at thy ebbing Tide
Have used thee as a Bride,
Who Is only true
Cause you are fair, he loves himself, not you.
T. C.
The Ladies Answer.
BY all the Perjuries thy Lips did wear,
Thy formal Favors never aimed at Good,
But what might move the Blood,
To wanton in its own self-love;
Which Virtue bids me to reprove,
Though to reform be to for swear,
Yet in the holy State of Love we may
Not swear our Souls away:
For at the Latter Day
We Damn if we betray
And they that prove
False in their Faith, un-crown the King of Love.
Ere Time have blemished this poor bloom of mine
Your wild Idolatry will worship more
Then Laplenders adore:
You cannot with your words win me,
To think that where no Saint you see
You ean adore an empty Shrine:
No, dear Dissembler, the best Love does tend,
To a self-serving End,
The greatest Power that is
We do obey for Bliss,
He that will be
False to himself, can nere be true to me.
The Fugitive.
FLy, Fly,
Some way, where neither Ear nor Ey
Can ever see or hear thee;
But those Furies that
Daily triumph at
The Tyranny of Truth,
For I
By fainting Famine vow to die,
Ere such a Sed come near me,
In whose bosom lies
All Hell can devise
To ruin Age and Youth;
From thy Lust flows a Flood,
That destroys
All my Joys
In the Bud,
Thou a Civil War do move,
Against the Royalty of Love,
Treason lodges in thy Blood:
She that has bid Adieu
And refused
What she chus'd
For a New,
Let her Lover look to be
In the same Extremity,
Faith, she never can be true.
Then welcome Freedom, Farewell Fears,
I have for Crowns exchanged my Cares,
My Soul shall soar above the Spheres,
And sing whilst he the burden bears.
Who would not pardon such a Thief,
That slily steals away his Grief,
Then he that quarrels for relief,
Resolves to be a Fool in Chief.
The Humorist. A Medley containing ten Airs.
REnounce this Humor and attend
The fair advisings of a Friend;
Thou never wilt have sober Brains:
Whilst Love lies lurking in thy V^^^^
These folded Arms, and broken Lutes,
Are Symptoms of forsaken suites:
Thou sure have seen some Lady, who
As thou would have her, will not do.
Why then be Mute
And cease thy Suit.
Apply thy self to me,
I Will teach thee who
To win and woo
Yet keep thy Liberty.
Ay me!
Will never get her thee
Nor a sigh, nor a shrug, nor a tear,
If she be fair and free,
She must see that in thee,
Or thou never shall come near
The thing that thy Mind
And Desires have dessign'd;
Some will lie down with Language and Ayrs,
Some in Wine
Will resign,
Or if praised,
Will be raised,
With a Puritan fall to your Prayers.
But if a Lady Great
You would encounter,
Whose Fame and Family are seated high;
It Is Honor does the Feat,
With that ye Mount her,
For only Eagles do at Eagles fly;
If you can reach her in the royal Road,
With Panegyric and Seraphick Ode
Ye do it All mode;
But, if the waiting Creature must procure,
Tempt her with Treasure, and ye have her sure,
Avostre Serviteur.
If you meet
With one whose Wit
All Beauty else disdains,
That will suppose
A Fountain flows
Of Violets in her Veins,
Tell her, the Glory of her Face
May make Scithians sue for Grace,
And Treason turn to Truth,
The luster of her Eyes excel
Those bright Spheres where Angels dwell
With ever-yielding Youth.
But when you are wanting One
To be ranting on,
Pity it is you should be barred in,
For you may repair
Unto Lady-Fair,
Go your ways in Gray's Inn Garden,
There the Graces are,
And good Faces are
Which the grim God of War
Never plundered,
Have but care enough,
You Will find Ware enouh,
And you may spare enough
For five hundred.
That will love half an hour,
If ye bring Treasure,
Or else they bar the Door
Against your Pleasure,
Yet much I fear, they have met with their Matches,
Since Musketeers of late plundered their Patches.
Besides enacted now they see,
The downfall of Adultery;
And it is a Paradox they vow,
For to be fair and faithful to:
They say the Sword destroys the Gown,
Their Love and Liberties go down,
Then they frown.
But bid defiance you that can,
Unto the Farthingall and Fan,
For no Commodity we see,
But has its Dis-commodity;
Then ho!
Toth' Tavern let us go,
And drink down Disasters,
For Madamazella is meat for your Masters,
Be then Freemen,
And let the Women,
Sue for an Act of Grace;
Or not deal
With those will tell
Of Crime, or Person, Time and Place;
If I can but
Well allure thee to it
We'll endeavor such a brace of Lives
So fair and high
We'll skorn to lie
With Wenches or with Wives:
I mean but those
Whom the Fates dispose
In a very noble Nuptial flame;
All other Fires
Are wild Desires,
And crucisie the Fame.
The Invitation.
OH my dear Cloris,
Show where the Store is,
Of all those Sweets which man prone to adore is,
Love makes me slavish,
Oh! let me lavish
Those Joys that would make an Anchorite ravish,
Sweet, do not lose um,
For in thy bosom
Are all Delights
Of Lovers Nights,
Time will destroy them;
Shall I enjoy them,
Let me enshrine
Thy soul with mine.
I Will build thee Bowers,
And tinsill Towers,
To let in twilight, and keep out the Showers;
No Hag shall haunt thee,
Nor Danger daunt thee,
Such sacred Circles I Will set to inchant thee:
Here Health and Treasure
With pliant Pleasure,
Shall ever spread
Their flowery Bed;
Then leave beguiling,
And grant in smiling,
The thing that I
Must do or die.
A Song, sung by Mr. Bushel's Miners in Devonshire, written in 1645.
LAdies of Love and Leisure,
Where is your Greatness gone?
What sudden high displeasure
Has forced ye from your own?
Whilst we live here obscurely
In Cottages unknown,
No Cares or fears
We ever think upon.
Our Walls are highest Mountains
For we live in a Coomb;
We drink of flowing Fountains,
Our dwelling is our Tomb,
Nor look to be exalted
Before the Day of Doom;
Where Scibes, for Bribes,
Shall nere deny us Room.
We hear a dreadful Summons,
Up in the high Country,
Our gracious King and Commons
They say cannot agree;
This Harvest is for Cedars,
And no such Shrubs as we,
Yet still we will
Pray for a Unity.
The Day we spend in working,
And chanting harmless Songs,
No Malice here lies lurking,
Our thoughts are free from Wrongs;
And those that Civil Wars do love,
We wish they had no Tongues,
No Drums, no Guns,
Or what to War belongs.
We wound the Earths hard bowels,
Where hidden Treasure grows,
With Twibell, Sledge, and Trowells,
Pick-ax, and Iron Crows,
We search for sinful Silver,
Which all Dissension sows,
Their Health and Wealth
Men do so ill dispose.
We eat the Bread of Labor,
And what Endeavor brings,
Sorrow is no next-Neighbour.
Our Eyes they are no Springs;
Unless we shed a tear or two,
When as we pity Kings,
The Fates of States
To us are Hebrew things.
A Ramble by Mr. A. B.
STay, shut the Gate,
The Other Quart, Faith it is not so late
As your thinking,
Those Stars which we see
In the Hemisphere, be
But the Studs in our Cheeks by good Drinking,
The Sun's gone to tipple all night in the Sea, Boys,
To morrow he will blush, that he is paler than we, Boys,
Drink Wine, give him Water, it is Sack makes us. The
(Boys.
Fill up the Glass,
To the next merry Lad let it pass,
Come away with it,
Then set foot to foot,
And but give your Mind to it,
It Is heretical Six,, that does slay Wit,
Then hang up good faces, let us drink till our Noses
Gives freedom to speak what our Fancy disposes,
Beneath whose protection now Under the Rose is.
Drink off your Bowls,
'Twill enrich both your Heads and your Souls,
With Canary,
A Carbuncled face
Saves a tedious Race;
For the Indies about us we carry;
No Helicon like to the Juice of Wine is,
For Phoebus had never had Wit, or divine is,
Had his face not been Bow-dyed as thine is and mine
(is.
This must go round,
Off w'your Hats till the Pavement be crowned,
With our Beavers,
A Red-coated Face
Frights a Sergeant and his Mace,
And the Constable trembles to shivers;
In State march our Faces like some of the Quorum,
When the Whores do fall down, and the Vulgars adore uni
And our Noses like Link-bayes run shining before uni.
The Answer.
HOld, Quaff no more,
But restore
If ye can) what you have lost by your Drinking,
Three Kingdoms and Crowns
With their Cities and Towns,
Whilst a King and his Progenie's sinking;
The Studs in your Cheeks have obscured his Star Boys,
Your Drink and Miscarriages in the late War, Boys,
Has brouht his Prerogative so to the Bar-Boys.
Throw down the Glass,
He Is an Ass
That extracts all his worth from Canary,
That Valor will shrink
Which is only good in Drink,
'Twas the Cup made the Camp to miscarry;
You thought (in the World) there was no Power could tame ye,
Ye tippl'd and whor'd till the Foe overcame ye,
Cuds Nigs and Nere-far-Sir, has vanquished God
(Damme.
Fly from the Coast,
Or you are lost,
And the Water will run where the Drink went;
From hence ye must slink,
If you swear and have no Chink,
It Is the Curse of a royal Delinquent,
You love to see Beer-bowls turned over the thumb well,
You like three fair Gamesters, four Dice, and a Drum well,
But you had as live see the Devil as F. or C.
Drink not the Round,
You Will be drowned
In the source of your Sack and your Sonnets,
Try once more your Fate,
For the Kirk against the State,
And go bartar your Beavers for Bonnets,
You see how you are charmed by your female Enchanters,
And therefore Pack hence to Virginia for Planters,
For an Act and two Red-Coats can rout all the Ran-
(ters.
The Prisoners.
IN a Dungeon deep we lie,
Cramped with Cold Captivity,
Where the Bed-less bottom owns
Nothing to relieve our Bones,
Yet such is the sacred scope of the Soul
That we never shrink
At the stink,
When cold water we drink,
'Cause Conscience crowns the Bowl.
Fettered in this filth we lie,
For we know not what, nor why,
But we ghess (if understood)
'Twill appear for being Good;
That Law does strangely on Conscience entrench.
Where known true men are
Planted (far
From the Judge) at the Bar,
And Felony fills the Bench.
By the Pride of impious Powers,
This unhappy Case is ours:
We are lost in Wealth and Fame,
Fort a fault that knows no Name,
If it be Reason that signs our Restraint*
It Is then to be Good
(Understood)
A Disease of the Blood,
The Devil is turned a Saint.
On Clarinda her Answering I and No.
WHat Crosses are in Love; when ere I come
Where fair Clarinda sanctifies the Rome,
(With my re-iterated Love-suit) she
With I and No, so tempts and tortures me,
That I have lost my Patience; If I cry,
Fair Lady shall I leave you? She says, I;
Again, she answers me, When I would know,
If I shall wait on her in the Evening, No;
With these two Words (unpleasingly mis-plac'd)
She gives my fair Affection such Distaste,
I know not what to ask; then do I thunder
Against the God of Love, and (raging) wonder
That such a form where all Perfestion grows,
Should so afflict me with her I's and No's.
An Elegy on a Good Man.
YOu that did love with filial fear
The Soul that shines in yonder Sphere,
Whose shadow is informed here,
Put on your Sackcloth and appear.
Here lies the Map of Martyrdom,
Let all therefore avoid the Room,
But those that can, when as they come,
With Tears, and Ashes, build a Tomb.
For here the Cause of all your Cares,
Lies floating in the Churches tears,
Who did expire, as it appears,
Not for His Faults but Others Fears.
You that are Valiant; Great, and Wise,
Attend his sacred Obsequies,
For on this holy Hearse there lies,
A Theme for Tears in unborn Eyes.
Although he was not understood,
Yet from his Spirit, and his Blood,
Did flow a fair and fertile Flood,
Of all that men call Great and Good.
Religion was his daily Guest,
Within the Treasure of his Breast,
Was more than Language ere Expressed,
Angels can only tell the rest.
FINIS.

