THE Debtor's Apology OR, A QUAINT PARADOX Proving That it is good to be in
Debt, and (in this Age) may be useful for all Men.

By T: I.

Written in the year of Engagements, 1644.

That it is good to be in Debt.
WE are fallen into that dotage of the world, in which the worst thin^s do
overtop the worthiest, Sense does besot the understanding, drink overcomes
the brain, and the eye beguileth and mis-leadeth the sight; And therefore in
tender commiseration of mankind, I will endeavor to rectify their Judgments
in a Paradox, then which there has none more intricate been discussed and
canvased among the Stoics in Zeno's Porch, that is, That it is better for a
man to live in Debt, then otherwise: Ordiar ab ovo, I will begin from an Egg,
that your concoction may be the easier. In the whole course and frame of
Nature, we see that nothing is made for it self, but each has a bond of duty,
of use, or of service, by which it i^, indebted to other; The Sun by his
splendour to enlighten all the world; by his warmth and heat, to cherish and
comfort each living and vegitable creature. Yea, Man himself is so framed of
God, that not only his Country, his Parents, and his Frien^^s claim a share
in him, but he is also indebted to his Dog, and to his Ox, the one for hunting
for his pleasure, the other for laboring for his profit, so that quicquid
babet genii ingenii moris amoris, the abilities of his spirit, the affections
of his mind, he has them for others as much as for himself; nay, the more for
others, by how much he desired to be the greater Lord over others. Let him but
look into himself, and see how his constitutive parts are debtors each to
other; the soul does qui^ken and give life to the body, the body like an
Automaton, does move and carry it self and the sou^; survey him in his parts,
the eye sees for the foot, the foot stands for the hand, the hand touches
for the mouth, the mouth tastes for the stomach, the stomach eats for the
whole body, the body repayeth back again that nutriment which it has received
to all the parts, dis^harging the retriments b^ the Port Esquiline; and all
this in so comely an order, and by a Law so certain, and in so due a time, as
if Nature had rather man should not have been at all, then not to be a Debtor
in every part of him; which has made me resolve, That to whomsoever I mean to
be a friend, I will strive to be in his debt: and what can I do less? for to
him that does me a good turn, I am bound to return him the greatest pleasure,
which I can no way do, but by being in his debt; for what contentment will it
be unto him, when I shall repay him his own again? The Alchimist^ who promise
to themselves to turn Tin into Silver, and Copper into Gold, how will they be
transported out of themselves with joy, if they should but see a happy issue of
their attempt? how much more a Creditor, when he shall recover a desperate
debt? it is like the joy of a Father that receives his lost Child.

Again, he that is in de^t, has this great privil^dge above other men, that
his Creditors power out ^ ear^y prayer^ for him, the^ wish that he may live,
thrive, prosper, and g^ow rich, all for t^eir own advantage, they seem to be
careful for their debtors, that they may not lose their principal with the
interest, for their Money is their life; witness those Usurers of France, who
when they heard that the price of Corn was fallen, went and hanged themselves
for grief.

What a command does the Debtor g in over his Creditors? he becomes in a
manner their Landlord to whom they cap, crouch, and kneel, as if they did owe
him all suits and services, and are as ambitious of their favors, as they who
in Rome did canvase the people for their voices to attain the greatest offices:
but here is their cunning, laudant ut laedant, they praise them that they may
prey upon them. And therefore you brave Gallants and Spend-thrifts, who find by
your woeful experience, that no whip gives a shrewder lash then the labells of
a Bond or Obligation, with a Noverint universi, Skinner and Lacy, whenever
y^u fall into the Mercers Books, never take care or make conscience of paying
your debts, for by that means you shall keep your Creditor in awe; and shall
have him wonderful courteous, officious, and obsequious toward you, and a
great Mint-Master of fair words.

Without debt and loan, the fabric of the world will be dis-joynted and fall
assunder into its first Chaos; the beauty of the Stars, what would it be but
vastness, and deformity, if the Sun did not lend them light? the earth would
remain unfruitful, if it did not borrow refreshing dews from the watery Signs
and Planets; the summer is pleasant and promises great hopes of plenty, but it
is, because it takes up much upon trust from the friendly and seasonable
temperment of the Elements. And, to say the truth; there is nothing good or
great in the world, but that it borrows some thing from others to make it
great, or lends to another to make it good, and therefore I marvel why
Antiquity, 1 Aerugo;
who made Mildew, Fever, 2 Febris.
and Scurvig^asse Goddesses, 3 Phoris.
did not Matriculate Loan and Debt among the rest.

The Elements who are linked together by a league of Association, and by their
symbolizing qualities, do barter and truck, borrow and lend one to another, as
being the Burse and Royall-Exchange of Nature, they are by this traffic and
intercourse the very life and nourishment of all sublunary bodies, and
therefore are called Elimenta, quasi Alimenta, whose happy concord and
conjunction has brought forth those, whom the world for the good done to
mankind, has esteemed Gods, as Bacchus the great Vintner, Ceres the
Meal-mother, Flora the Tutty-maker, Vertumus and Pomona Costard mongers.

Now if every man would render and repay in full weight, that which by due debt
he owes, and has borrowed from others, Saturns golden age would return again,
in which there was no difference of Mettalls, but Gold and Silver were all one
Oar, and made the yelk of the earth, Natures great E^g; neither did Meum and
Tuum bound out, and apportionate Lands and Lordships, by Mear-stones, and
diversity of tenures of socadge and focadge; since when, qui habet terras,
habet guerras, and the King of heavens peace has been disturbed amongst men:
but then all things were all men's, as necessity did allot and award, who was
then the only Judge and Arbitrator, competently allowing to every man, that
which he stood in need of.

With what dearnesse have both Gods and good men countenanced and gra^ed
debtors? to whom Diana the great Goddess of Ephesus, granted her Temple for a
Sanctuary, to keep them out of Pagwell Pigeon Houses, or if they were caught,
Solon, by a sollemn law infacted, would not have their bodies to be fettered or
manicled amongst Malefactors, but that they should enjoy their liberty
throughout all the Parks and Purlues of the Prison, or, to speak more mildly,
of their restraint and indurance; for the Prison is built Purgatory-wise, after
the architecture of Rome with a Limbus and Tullianum; The Dungeon is the
Devils pinfold and the very suburbs of hell, where Varlets, Roarers, and
stiletto-stabbers are let down, as the proper food that stuffs that greedy Man;
the next Room is the Lollard of Trunck-hosed Famelists and Separatists, who
after they have been rowelled in the neck, to cure them of the Megrim of the
head, they are by the gentle flame of this ^^ove, and the heat of their own
zeal, made to sweat our their contumacy and other peccant humors; the upper
skirt and stage of this building, is the Garret of expencefull Wasters,
Gamesters, and unthrifty Debtors, where though they live robbed of their
liberty, as they rifled others of their Money, yet is it their great
happiness, that being glutted, as it were, with an Aplaustick voluntary life,
they have an easy overture made to the contemplative and practick life of
virtue: Who ever lived more like a souc'd Gurn-head amongst men, then Diogenes
the Cynick, barrelling himself up in his Tub like a Kegg of Sturgion? yet was
the happiness of his contented life envyed of the greatest Monarchs, who
having made their throats the through-fare and the Cullenders of meats and
drinks, found an over-gorged Belly to be Wits clog, Reasons Sepulcher,
Lusts-Arsenall, the Magazin of lewd practices, and the Nursery of all Vices:
all which provocations are defaulted by debts, wants, and indigency.

And lastly, the Lumbards, Usurers, and Scriveners, who are the Bedles of
begga^s, and are accounted the Tetters upon the body politic of the
Commonweal, who turn the Kalends and new M^ons, and the festival days of
quarter gaudies, into the octaves of disaster, and Dooms-dayes-reckonings; when
any of these come to heaven, there is a wonderment amongst the Angels, and
they cry out with Sir Guzman of Alfarache, fruta nueva, fruta nueva; here is a
new kind of fruit start up, a Pum-paradice upon a Crab-stock, Lumbards and
Scriveners are become the Popes cannonized and beatified Saints.

Farewell then, Vlpianus, Modestinus and other Pettifoggers of the Law,
Sollicitors and molesters of causes, who account being in debt a kind of
bondage and fervitude. I pity Seneca's weakness, who blushed to borrow,
Miserum verbum, and dimisso vultu proferendum, rogo: That Poet Laureat
forfeited his wreath of Bays and Ivy-twine, who made his prayers to his Purse,
to keep him out of debt, in this manner.

To you my Purse, Ocleve in Chaucer.
and to none other wight
Compla^n I, for you to be my Lady deer:
I am sorry now that you be light,
For certes ye now make me heavy cheer,
Me were as lefe laid upon a beer.
For which unto your mercy thus I cry,
Be heavy again, or else mote I dye.
Now vouchsafe this day, or it be night,
That I of you the blisfull sound may hear,
Or see your color, like the Suny bright
That of yellowness had never pere
Ye be my life, ye be my hearts fler^;
Queen of comfort and of good company
Be heavy again, or else mote I dye.
Now Purse, that art to me my lives light,
And Savior as down in this world here,
Out of this Town help me by your might,
Since that you will not be my treasure,
For I am shave as near as any friar,
But I pray unto your courtesy,
Be heavy again or else mote I dye.
Yet welfare the prodigal unthrift who is Magis promus quam condus, and serves
at the Buttery hatch, whatsoever is in his Bin or his Barrel, and therefore
could never endure the complaint of his Purse, who thus bemoaned her self unto
him.

Materia infoelix, detracta cadavere, forma
Tam varia, ut nec ego me mihi posse queam,
Haud melius fatum, nam pendeo more latronis,
Ingenium sic me fueris habere puyant.
Si dederis servo, servatunt reddo petenti,
Non nisi at auriculis tracta refer volo.
A Skin flai'd off, makes my materials,
My form is various, where my self I loose,
My doom a fellons death and funerals,
For at a belt I am hanged by a noose,
I do not filch for mine own thrift and gain
But what you give, I closely keep and bear,
And when you ask, I it restore again,
Yet not, except you pluck me by the ear.
For the Al-te-maell, and foot of the reckoning, this is the summa summarum,
debemur morti nos nostraque so that whilst I live, I must resolve to live in
debt, in debt to God for my Being, in debt to Christ for my Well being; in debt
to Gods sanctifying spirit, for my New being, and I will ever be ready to pawn
my life for my Countries liberty; I will owe obedience to my parents, faith and
loyalty to my Prince, and when I shall pay my great debt unto Nature, I will
render my spirit into the hands of God, bequeath my Body to be deposed in the
lap and bosom of the earth, and cry Domine Demitte debita mea.

FINIS.

