A SPEECH Spoken to His EXCELLENCY The Lord General Monck. AT SKINNERS-HALL On
Wednesday, being the 4th. of April 1660. At which time he was nobly entertained
by that Honorable Company. Written by Thomas Jorden.
I Can forbear no longer, out it must,
If I shall prove ingenious or Just.
I have with wary eyes observed your steps
Your stands, your turns, your pauses and your leaps
And find (how ever you may mask your brow)
You are a Statesman, and ambitious too,
A right Self-ended person, for be it known
Yours and the Public safety, are all one
You are ambitious to be good, that feat
Our Statesmen mist, for they were to be great.
But yet, as Solomon made that choice, which
Commanded all, VVisdome shall make you rich,
And great, and glorious, and these shall last
As long as Time, and after Time is past.
When such as have their Countries Rights betrayed
Shall receive pay, in Lucifers Brigade.
My Lord, I scorn to flatter, I Will be trae to ye,
All the good deeds you have done, are but your Duty,
But yet your hand stretched in Iehovah's name
Has snatched three burning Kingdoms from the flame.
Our Laws, our Liberties, or what to us
And all Mankind, may be held precious,
Was at the Stake, this Action has out run
All thought; We cannot tell you what you have don
Nor you your self, it may not be expressed
Till diverse years have made it manifest:
Those ravenous Beasts that our destruction wrought
When Church and State were to the Barebone brought
( Praise God) you ransomed, and (without a Club)
Beat down the daring Doctrine of the Tub
The sinking Pulpit too You did restore:
Our Apron Prelates must come there no more;
And now the Ironmonger will not rush in
But cease to make an Anvill of the Cushin,
This you have done quite unknown to the Silly
Prognostications of Booker and Lilly;
Who know not (with all help their Arts can do)
What it is guides Charles his Wa^ne so well as You*
But I forget my Message, Sir by Me
This faithful Hospitable Company
Does bid you Welcome, VVelcome as the Spring
As you your self would Welcome home -- the THING
We all expect, without the which each Nation
Subsi^teth only by Anticipation.
These ten or twelve years our three Kingdoms have
Lived in a Darkness equal to the Grave,
Stifled for want of Breath until the bright
Beams of your presence gave a little light,
It Is yet but Twilight, could we gain the Sun,
And the clear wholesome Air the work were done;
You can dispell these Mists, and make all fair,
We sue for nothing, but the Sun and Air.
Spoken by Walter Youckney. FINIS.
Whereas there are three several Pamphlets in Verse, Pretended to be spoken to
my Lord General at Skinners-Hall, The Reader is desired to take notice, that
this is the true and only Speech made to his Excellency there.
LONDON, Printed by Thomas Leach.


