AN HISTORY OF THE Constancy of Nature. WHEREIN, By comparing the latter

Age with the former, it is maintained tha^ the World does not decay
universally, in respect of it Self, or the Heavens, Elements, Mixed Bodies,
Meteors, Minerals, Plants, Animals, nor Man in his Age, Stature, Strength, or
Faculties of his Mind, as relating to all Arts and Science

By John Jonston of Poland.

Printed for John Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London,
1657.

TO THE Right Worshipful and much Accomplished Gentleman George Pit, Esquire.
Right Worcester:
I Have for a long time had an earnest ambition to offer something unto you
that might be, in part at least, worthy of your self; and I hope you will make
this present to be so, by your gracious acceptance, suffering it to wear your
livery: The Author of it was a very learned man, whose works can be no ways
prejudicial to any person of Honor. The subject of this Book is serious, and
of great Importance, I fear no objection but that it may not be judged so
suitable for your younger thoughts. Yet I presume you will not be offended with
me, that I should conceive such ripeness and maturity of judgment in you
beyond your years, as to tender a Book to your patronage, whose subject may
deservedly employ, and stumble too, the apprehensions of the greatest Sages,
and learned Rabbis of our times: For my own part I never much fancied
Poetical strains, and flashe^ of wit, that are commonly bare outsides and make
a crackling noise in the world, having no solid matter containd in them. Yet I
know such empty vanities can hardly want Patrons; It were then great pity that
such a rare piece as this should fail of a favorable Maecenas. The question
here agitated is, Concerning Natures Constancy, (and not concerning the
Inconstancy of vain men's Manners) which I wish idle brains would seriously
reflect upon, viz. whether this age wherein we live, may not afford persons
(for man is the chief thing here considerable as famous for their valor, for
skill in all Arts and Sciences, and all other Noble qualities and endowments,
as there were in former days. The Author who maintains the Affirmative, has
made it good, as I suppose, beyond all exceptions, and therein has paralleld,
and I may say, exceeded by force of Argument, any that have maintained the
contrary; and that to the vindication of his own particular, in this excellent
Book of Natures Constancy. True it is, that there were many men formerly of
great Honor and Renown in several Countries, and men of our days, are
reputed generally to be as Pigmies, compared with those Giantlike Heroes that
were before us; and in some particulars, I think it cannot be defended, but
they might surpass us. Yet in regard we have the benefit of their labors and
our own endeavors, we, though dwarfs, standing on their shoulders may see
farther than they could. For since the flood, commonly men lived no longer than
we do now, and they wanted the help of many things that we enjoy; God has been
bountiful to every age in some notable discoveries never known before. For
even in that very thing that learned Archimedes, is so much magnified for, his
(...), our Age can justly say (...), that we have exceeded him. Martial in his
Epigrams complains of such who carped at those that were eminent for Parts, in
the times they lived in, and would give them no commendation because they were
not Ancient. Tu solos laudas mortuos Poetas:
Nolo ut tibi placeam, perire.


And in another excellent Epigram he states it at large, taxing the malice and
envy of detractors, from the then present Age:

Esse quid hoc dicam, vivis quod fama negatur,
Et sua quod rarus tempora Lector amet?
Haec sunt Invidiae nimirum, Regule, mores:
Praeferat antiquos semper ut illa novis.
Sic veterem ingrati Pompeii quaerimus umbram,
Et laudant Catuli Julia templa senes
Ennius est lectus salvo tibi, Roma, Marone.
Et sua riserunt secula Maeonidem.
Rara Coronato plausere theatra Menandro:
Norat Nasonem sola Corinna suum.
Vos tamen, o nostri, ne festinate, libelli:
Si post fata venit gloria, non propero.
I confess the nobleness and admirable worth of Ancestors are as spurs to
posterity to set them on upon some Honorable designs, that may make them
worthy of their Progenitors; So Virgil has it in his Heroic verses.

Sis memor, and te animo rep^tentem exempla t^oru^.
Et pater Aeneas and avuncalus excitet Hector.
Yet Ovid clears it, that what they did before times, will not ennoble us, if we
tread not in their steps of Honor and Virtue.

Nam genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix en nostra voco, --
We may, nay we shall honor our Ancestors the more by endeavoring to go
beyond them. For the men of Israel and Judah, had no undervaluing thoughts of
posterity; nor was King David displeased at it, when Solomon was made King,
that the people prayed that God would make his Throne greater than the throne
of his Father David.

Paterculus a singular Historian, seems to hold the Negative, but that is
meant only, as to the rising and falling of particular Generations, that like
to man's life, have their childehood, youth, vigor, and old age. As Physicians
distribute the times of diseases, wherein are to be observed, the beginning,
augmentation, state, and declination of them. For even as a man being to go up
a hill, first comes to the foot of it and so mounts higher by degrees til he
come to the top, and then he must of necessity go down again, as being able to
go no higher. So there is an (...) and top-point in all humane affairs, which
being once gained, they fall back as far as the low rise they first had. We see
this largely verified in several ages, (I will not be tedious to rifle
Histories to set them down here) wherein we read, that Learning and Military
Arts, and purity of Religion have flourished wonderfully, yet by degrees they
have all failed and worn away, and as gross ignorance and pusillanimity;
blindness and superstition have succeeded them, as can be imagined; like to
the seven years of famine in Egypt, wherein the seven years of plenty were
forgotten, as if they had never been. But that this is not so in the general
course of the world, that has a continued revolution, and circular motion, is
clearly seen in the very change of the year; For spring goes on to summer,
summer to Autumn, Autum to Winter, and so comes about again: No spring so good,
but, if not the next, yet some years following, may present us with the like or
better, however the declining Autum, and cold hoary Winters have passed
between. I am of opinion that the Author who maintained this Theorem, not as a
paradox, but as a real truth, has obliged our Age to solemnize his memory,
for giving us this hint to exasperate our endeavors, and for chalking out the
way, whereby we may be able to do more than any Age before us. That they should
not so much reflect on former times, as to forget that God had reserved
something for them, if they would not be wanting to themselves. No Hercules
Pillars are here set up, with a Non ultra engraved upon them; but we are to
make use of Charles the Fifth his Motto, and go on courageously with a Plus
ultra, adding to what our forefathers showed themselves honorable in. Give me
leave for a cloze to make this application, that as your worthy Ancestors were
highly honored for their virtues, and for being good Patriots to their
country, so you may have the happiness to exceed them all, and to raise up
Trophies of honor unto posterity, beyond your famous predecessors, improving
by your goodness those gifts that God has bountifully bestowed on you. Which
are the cordial wishes of him who is,

Your Worships in all Honorable respects. John Rouland.

TO THE Most Illustrious and Noble Lords, D. ANDREAS. D. RAPHAEL. Earls of
Les^um, Palatinat, Belzen: D. GEORGE de Konary Slupecky, Castellanidae
Lablinensi. My most gracious Lords, Health in all obedience.
THough there be nothing almost, Most Illustrious Lords, that does not defend
the Constancy of Nature, yet amongst other arguments, your family may stand in
the first place. From the days of Dambrowca, that you have made Poland happy,
unto this present time, there are as many Senators of the Kingdom, of your
house as you have had Grandfathers, and great Grandfathers in former ages, and
all of them of so great virtues, that all virtues seem to be bred in your
courts. That there were pios men amongst them, the founding of Monasteries, and
their large bounty to the Church can testify, that they were Magnanimous
persons, appears by their laying aside the supreme honors, and undergoing
meaner Offices, for the public good. Your Ancestors far before the Lepidi,
have outrun their years, by the celerity of their wife actions, and were made
Honorable Senators, at that age that Scipio could not think of being Consul.
And why do I speak of former days? Your Grandfather was for this very thing of
most famous memory, who so raised Piety and Magnanimity to the height, that
were his hereditary virtues, that he has the name of the Patron of the True
Religion, and seems to be an example of most prudent Oratory. To say no more,
the most Illustrious Lord your Father lives, and I wish he might live always,
of whom so many and so great things may be said, that the slendernes of my wit
cannot comprehend, nor my low style express. The Church calls him, her nursing
Father and Delight: The Senate their Eye, the Nobility, the light of the common
wealth, the Muses their Patron; and to say what I would in brief; Men think
that in his breast is bred, whatever virtue and prudence can be bred in any
Noble person. But most Illustrious Lords, what shall I say of you and your two
brothers? I look upon your Illustrious and most Noble Mother, descended from
the Lesznii, and the Dukes of Sanguscii, and you proceeding from ^n honorable
Seminary of virtues, do show forth some flowers in the spring of your youth ^or
the good of the Church and the Common wealth, and there is no doubt but fruit
will follow in the Autum of your years. Most Illustrious Lord Slupeck, I have
no need to say much of you, and your most noble family. The Kingdom of Poland
knows the worth of it, and posterity shall thankfully remember your most
Honorable Father. And you whilst ^ll your designs are Honorable, and
engraf^ed into the Family of the Lesznii, what may be said of that family you
justly seem to partake of it. It is yet in your power to preserv a golden ^ge
in the Church and State: and being so, most ^llustrious Lords, This work of the
Constancy of Nature, does of right belong unto you, and being I am come into
the patronage of your Noble family, it is my duty to offer it unto you,
whatever it is. Wherefore I lay it at your feet, and I beseech you to pardon
any weakness in its mean dress. No man was ever unblamed to be wiser than his
mean condition would suffer him; and no man lost his ^abour that offered,
though it were a mean gift to the Gods.

Farewell, most Illustrious Lords; and proceed and continue long to do good for
God, for your Country, and noble families; and to show favor unto me, that am
most addicted to your Honors.

From Leiden in Holland, November: 1632. The most bounden to your most
Illustrious Honors JOHN JONSTON.

I am of the number of those that admire the Ancients, yet I do not, as some
do, despise our own days. For nature is not grown so barren as to bring forth
nothing new, worth commendation. Pliny L. 6. Ep. 21. And as Tacitus says.
There is a kind of Circle in all things, as the Ages for manners turn about;
all things were not better in former times, but our Times have produced some
things worthy to be commended, and arts worthy imitation for posterity, Annal.
The Table.
The Prologue. IT is false that the world universally and perpetually does grow
worse. Page 1 Proposition. I. The world in respect of it self does not always
run to worse. page 6. Proposition. II. The world in respect of Heaven does not
grow worse perpetually. page 10 Proposition. III. The world in respect of the
Elements does not grow to be worse. page 18 Article. I. The Elements in
generally do not grow worse. page 18 Article. II. The Element of the Air is
deficient in nothing. page 21 Article. III. The Element of Water is decayed in
nothing. page 26 Article. IIII. The Elements of Earth has said in nothing.
page 28
Proposition. IV. The world, in respect of mixed bodies, both inanimate, and
animate creatures without reason, does not grow worse. page 31 Article. I. From
Meteors it cannot be proved that the world grows worse. page 32 Article. II.
Mineralls have not failed. page 37 Article. III. Neither Plants nor Animals
have decayed at all. page 39
Proposition. V. The World in respect of Man does not grow worse. page 41
Article. I. The age of Man within these 3000 years has not failed. page 42
Article. II. Man's stature and strength, within the ^eers, are not decayed. page
52 Article. III. Nothing is wanting to Faculties of the mind. page 6^ The
first branch. Memory and Judgment have not failed. page 6^ Part. II. There is
nothing decayed in the three Fa^culties, Divinity, Law, or Physic. page 7^
Part. III. Nothing is wanting in speculative Phi^^osophy. page 8^ Part. IV.
Nothing is wanting in practical Phi^^osophy and History. page 8^ Part. V.
Nothing wans in Tongues and Arts. page 9^ Part. VI. Mechanic Arts and skill in
Navigation have increased. page 10^ Part. VII. Vices were as great formerly, as
they ar^ now. page 17^ Point. I. The Religion of the Ancients was too sottish
p. 11^ Part. II. There were many wicked Laws among the Ancients. page 12^
Part. III. The cruelty of the Roman people wa^ extreme. page 12^ Part. IV. The
covetousness of the people Rome wa^ exceeding great. page 13^ Part. V.
Infinite was the Luxury of the Romans for Venery and Drinking. page 14^ Point.
VI. The Gluttony of the Romam^s in mea^ was extrordinary. page 14^ Point. VII.
The Luxvry of the Romans in the^^ Buildings was extreme. page 15^ Point. VIII.
The Luxury of Romans in their garments was extreme. page 16^ Point. IX. The
Justice, Fortitude, and Prudence o^ the Romans was nothing. page 16^ Point. X.
And the last, It is probable as some thin^ that the Church shall be in greater
glory upon the earth yet, than ever it was before. page 17^



FINIS.
John Johnstons CONSTANCY OF Nature: A General Thesis.
It is false that the world universally and perpetually does grow to be worse.
The Prologue.
REader, it is the common opinion, and is in every man's mouth, that this world,
and all things therein contained, do run toward their end, by a universal and
perpetual declining to worse and worse; and that there is nothing now in
being, or can fall out, that may, I say not be preferred, but be compared to the
days of our Forefathers. That neither the uniformity of the Heavens, is the
same as it was of elder times, nor the fruitfulness of the Earth, nor the same
vigor is in Plants and Animals, nor is the statute or age of man so strong.
The excellencies of Arts, Scion. l. 8. c. 6.
are, by reason of the worlds growing old, exhausted, and can do but little
that is wonderful, and but in few things. Astraea is gone to the gods, and
there is no man, in common society, that may be compared with Aristides or
Socrates; in Policy with the Fabii, Scipio's, or Marcelli; in Household
Government, with Aeneas, the wives of the Myniae, Manlius, or Junius; in the
Church, with Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine: In the Schools, with Aristotle,
Demosthenes, Cicero, Galen. In brief, All things run downward, and they come
not back again. But how true these things are reported, I leave it to every
cordial man to consider, in the fear of the Lord. As for my own part, and what
concerns those that I follow, I see that hereby the Majesty of God is
dishonored, the commendable endeavors of Men are hindered. For if the supreme
God will not have it, that his Name should be honored with as much reverence,
as it was formerly done, why then does he require so much at our hand? And if
he will, wherefore does he not bestow on us as great gifts, as he did on our
predecessors. It cannot stand with his Omnipotency, that the treasure of his
power should be exhausted. As for man's Industry, this is certain, that a
preconceived distrust, will be able to do as much, as Imagination can in women
great with child, that sets marks upon Infants; or the conceits of Melancholy
people, which being strongly printed in their mind, can torment them sometimes
for many years, and sometimes bring them to their ends. This matter is
confirmed not only by the example of Franciscus, Marquess of Saluzzium, who
being bewitched by the predictions that were written in favor of Charles the
fifth, degenerated from Francis the first, from whom he received his
Marquisdom; but also, all those Learned Worthies (I say nothing of others who
make such a pretense for their idleness, or ignorance) who think they can
bring nothing into the Exchequer of Learning, because they think they can say
nothing which has not been already said. Quintil. Orat. 12.
Wherefore Quintilian speaks the truth; If men had thought thus, that no man
could exceed him that was the best, they that are so, had never been the best.
Lest therefore the truth should be in captivity, the Majesty of God
dishonored, and the endeavors of men, and from thence their commodity,
should be shut up in prison; I having borrowed matter, especially from a large
Treatise written in English, by that reverend man, D. George Hackwil, S S T. D.
concerning this Thesis, yet preserving my own meaning, I thought fit to bring
to public view the principal things that are objected against it, and to
communicate the same with the learned world. But while I deny that the world
does universally and perpetually run to worse and worse; I understand by the
world, the whole compass of the Heavens and the Earth, and I mean an
universal ruin to worse and worse, in respect of all bodies therein
contained; and I intend a perpetual decaying, in respect of the duration from
the beginning unto the end; So that the meaning will be this, That this Frame
of Heaven and Earth with all bodies therein comprehended, by succession of time
running along from the first to the last, does not by nature slide and run to
worse and worse. Yet I grant that the Elements are changed one into another,
that mixed bodies are subject to alteration and diminution, that the earth has
lost something by the Fall, and the Flood; That the Manners of men and Arts do
vary; That there is difference in the length of men's lives; And that sometimes
some Arts are lost, But because. Seneca.
All things but for time adjourn,
And what is past, joys to return,
Nor is there made any thing,
But the end and beginning,
Touch each other in a ring.


I think it can make nothing against the universal Ruin of the World. Philo
de Mand. Incorruptibil.
There is a notable recompense in the Element's fourfould qualities, which they
dispense with most equal and just rules, according to their turns. The Sea
has formerly taken away some Islands, and we read in Histories of some new
ones come up in their rooms. God has made Fruitfulness, or Barrenness,
neither in all places certain, In Icon. Anim. c. 2
nor yet perpetually. They are the words of Barclay, Those lands that were most
fruitful in former times, are now barren wildernesses, and dry sands; and
those countries that were once extreme cold and unfruitful, are not now only
fit to bear corn, but abound with those things that are for delight. Formerly
Ireland was a Mart for the Muses, now, unless it were adorned by that one
usher, and some other Stars, we should esteem it to be almost a Barbarous
place. Greece was formerly the famous place for Wisdom, now it is despised for
its idleness and ignorance. So all ages have their Genius, that directs the
minds of mortal men to certain studies: Barclay l. c^
some ages are chiefly exercised in Wars, then again all things are peaceable;
then people are in love with Kingdoms, then with Commonwealths; sometime they
are all born as it were Barbarous, then again they grow more mild, and more
easy of conditions; and then again after some ages they return to their first
blockishnesse. So the world has often been adorned with the refined manners of
Men; and afterward, Industry failing, vanishes as it were in a cloud.
Moreover, there are times in all Countries, wherein men live either longer or
shorter; Veridam in Hist. vitae and mortis.
longer, most commonly when the times are Barbarous, and the Diet more plain,
and more given to bodily exercise; shorter, when they are more civil, and
there is more Luxury and idleness; but these things have their turns, etc. And
this is our opinion: But since the world is considered either in sprect of it
self, or in respect of its parts in special, and these do contain more bodies
under them, there must be many Propositions set down in clearing this Thesis;
and these are the propositions that seem to me, to appertain thereunto.

I. That the world in respect of the whole, does not always grow worse. II.
Nor in regard of the Heavens. III. Nor in regard of the Elements. IV. Nor in
regard of mixed bodies both Inanimate, and Animate without reason. V. Nor in
regard of Man. Wherefore our discourse shall be employed in the refutation of
the contrary, and confirmation of these propositions; And thou, Christian
Reader, read this without prejudice, and consider with judgment.
Proposition I.
The world in respect of it self does not always run to worse.
THis is most true. For the Wisdom of Solomon says, that the Spirit of the
Lord fills the whole world; That which the Platonists calls the Soul of the
world, is nothing else but the power of God, that manifests it self no less in
preserving the Frame of the Universe, than it did in creating it. Whence says
Justin Martyr, As that which is, had never been, unless he had commanded, Let
it be made: So would it not continue, unless He had given order to those
things that do not perish, that they should always abide; and to those things
that come and go, that they should always increase and multiply. And Learned
men in Schools, compare the dependence of things Created upon the Creator,
partly to Light, which is extinguished in the Air, by the Suns absence, partly
to a Vessel that contains the water within it, partly to a Print made in Water.
II. There are two principles that constitute natural bodies; Namely, matter
and form. That, because it is not generated, it is not corrupted; for it is
without any contrariety, and therefore cannot naturally be destroyed: but the
nature of This, is, that when one departs an other succeeds in the same matter.
-- Nothing born can die,
But all things successively,
Are changed but formally.


Nor can it be otherwise in Nature; For it intends no annihilation, nor can she
do that more than she can create; nor where there is any augmentation, can any
diminution happen.

III. But should we grant that some parts of the world do always decrease;
other parts thereupon will increase, or else diminution or annihilation must
follow, and if this be granted, an incredible disproportion will fall out
between them* and an infallible ruin must come upon that. And then for some
thousands of years the Influence of the Heavens had faild, and transmutation of
Elements, and forces in mixed bodies. But Solomon says expressly, 2 Pet* 3. 1^
that there is a Circular motion in things, and as a Poet writes. Boethius.
The Sun sets in the West,
But he there takes no rest.
To rise he does his best.


So we must judge of all other things.

IV. Lastly, Mat. 24. 38.
by the rule of proportion it were an easy matter to foretell the day and the
hour when it shall end. 1 These, 5. ^*
But that is false by the Testimony of Scripture, and of Christ himself: and
diverse men diversely define the Age of the world. Liboravius, makes it 1666.
Ros^^nus, 1656. Cusanus, 1700. or at least the space, that precedes the year
1734. Copernicus is of an other mind. Upon Napere, Baron of March, a
Mathematitian, that was second to none, Owen makes this sporting Epigram.
Ninety two years, this world must last you say,
It seems to set the bounds: you are full wise.
For had you set them at a shorter day,
You might have lived to shame, for forging lies.


But it is objected, that Esdras, the Apostle, and Cyprian a Martyr, did
intimate the decaying of things, and confirm that Principle, Every thing the
more it is removed from its beginning, the more it faints and fails. It is
true, and in express words in Esdras. ^sdras l. 4. ^5. v. 54.
Consider also that you are of less stature than those that were before you,
and those that shall come after you, will be less then you are, for that the
Creatures now grow old, and are past the strength of their youth. ^^m, 8: ^, 21.
It is certain, that the Apostle writes, That the world is subject to vanity,
and that it shall be freed from the bondage of corruption, into the liberty of
the glory of the sons of God. We cannot deny but these are Cyprians words, You
must know in the first place, that the world is now grown old, that it stands
not so strongly as it did stand, nor is it so vigorous as formerly it was, etc.
In Winter, there is no such plenty of showers to nourish the seed, nor in
Summer is the Sun so beneficial to ripen the corn; Nor are plants in the
Spring so prosperous by reason of temperate weather; nor are Trees so fruitful
with fruit in Autumn. There are fewer Marble stones dug forth of the Mountains
that are worn out; they afford less quantity of Silver and Gold; Metals are
exhausted, and the slender Veins daily grow less and decrease. The Husbandman
fails in the Fields, Concord in friendship, skilfulnesse in Arts, Discipline
in Manners, etc. All these things are true, yet this is most certain, that our
Tenent is nothing weakened by this, nor is the contrary any whit confirmed.
First of all that Book of Esdras has nothing but a false Title, and is most
injurious. What we found in the sixth Chapter are mere Fables, concerning
Behemoth and Leviathan; and that is false that is spoken of the consummation of
the world. The Apostle only ^ntimates the impuritie and deformity that the
Creature contracted by the fall of Man, and also the declining of Individuals,
and the hastening of the species to a total and final dissolution by Fire;
Lastly, the abuse of them, with the dishonor of the Creator, joined with the
wrong done to his servants, which are the things he complains of. It is no
wonder also that Cyprian writ such things. L. 3. Exor, Hist. e. 5.
The times were then so bitter by reason of Wars, Famine and Pestilence, that
the Christians of that age expected the end of the world to be at hand, and
Graserus writ that the opening of the second and third Seal happened in that
time. But a few years after, that lamentation was turned into joy. For not only
under Galienus, otherwise a most cruel Persec^tour, was peace restored by an
Edict sent forth to the Churches; but also under Constantine was that Woman in
the Apocalypse brought back into the clear light, which Nero had driven into the
Desert, and which had lain hidden there for a Time, Times, and Half a time, or
245. years. But also unto this, may be opposed the Disciple of Saint Augustine,
Orosius, whose words are these. Let them remember with me the times of their
Ancestors, that were most unquiet by reason of Wars, most heinous for
wickedness, most foul for dissentions, most miserable for a long continuance,
which they may deservedly be afraid of, because they were, and they have need
to beg that they may be no more; to beg that of God only, who then suffered
his secret Judgments to break forth, and now his Mercies are manifest by
removing them. And that that Axiom is false, appears not only by the state of
things, but also by the effusion of the grace of God by the Incarnation of
Christ, in the year 3947. But that it must be understood of violent motion, is
without all doubt.

Proposition II.
The world in respect of Heaven does not grow worse perpetually.
IF such a declining of things to worse should befall the Heavens, it should
either befall the Substance of it, or the Motion, or the Light, or the Heat, or
the Influence. But it falls upon none of these. Not the substance; For though
it be granted, that the first matter of the Heavens, and of the Elements be the
same, and that both in respect of want of action in them both, and for the
needless bringing in of two matters. Yet, that matter is joined to such a
form, that satisfies the whole desire thereof, nor has it any contrary,
whereby it may become subject to any corruption, and though it be subject to
corruption, (which is the truth) as we find it in the Psalm, Psalm. 102.
and thence Generation would follow, because that there appeared new Stars, one
in Cassiopea in the year 1572. which lasted two years: and again, another in
the breast of the Hen, Anno* 1600. which is yet to be seen, and in 1604. one
appeared in the Sphere of Saturn: Yet this would make no more against our
opinion, than the corruption of mixed bodies made of Elements, can make. Not the
Motion; For we see, if we were minded to follow the Common opinion, that not
only the Primum Mobile, by an Eternal decree goes about from East to West,
but the Planets keep their courses as they are Calculated by our Ancestors,
and when for certain years they have wandered in their Latitudes, they will
without doubt pass in the same tarces as they went before. Boethius.
The Sun that runs with Fire hot,
The cold Moon's motion hinders not*
Nor does the Pole Star ever drench
Her flames within the Sea to quench,
Though others do, and Vesper bright
At certain times foreshwes dark Night,
But Lucifer brings back the Light.


Of Saturn the Planet we may say as truly now as Cicero writ of it formerly.
The Star of Saturn in its motion, effecting many things admirable, both
anteceding and retarding, and by lying hid in the Evening, and showing it self
again, in the Morning, yet this makes no change in the large length of Time,
but in the same time it will do the same again. And should we maintain that the
course of the Stars were changed, how then could Mathematicians foretell the
year, day, hour, nay the very instant of Oppositions, and Conjunctions, and
Ecclipses, so many years before. Lactantius concluded from thence that the
Stars are no Gods, because they cannot alter or exceed their bounds or usual
Motions. Lactant. l. 2. Insti. c. 5,
For were they Gods they might wander here and there at pleasure, without any
necessity, as living Creatures do upon the earth, who because their w^lls are
free, they go up and down where they please, and as their minds lead them,
thither they go. And Plutarch wondering at this uniformity, Such a great
magnitude of things (says he) such disposing of them, such a constancy in
observing times and orders, could not either formerly be made without a
Provident Artificer; or remain so many ages, without a Potent Inhabitant; or be
governed for ever, without a Knowing and Skillfull Ruler, as Reason it self
declares it. And if we would hold that the Heaven's standing still, is
agreeable to the Scriptures, and to the opinions of the Ancient Fathers, and
should we assert that the Stars only are moved by their proper Motions, and
that they are in the heavens no otherwise than living Creatures are upon the
Earth, Fishes in the Water, and birds in the Air; yet would the matter be the
same. Not the light. For as at first the waters were dispersed over the Face of
the Earth: So was the Light through the Firmament. And as the waters were
gathered together into one heap; so was the Light bound up in one body: and as
that was called the Sea, so this was called the Sun. As therefore the Sea
loses nothing, though it water the Earth with innumerable Rivers; so the Sun
loses nothing by communicating of his Light. And if it be true, that at Padua
tow Pitchers were dug up, enclosed in one, which Olybius Maximus dedicated to
Plato, for they were full of a liquor wherein a Light then burning, was
preserved* for many ages. And if that be not false also, that is written of
another Candle that was found burning in the Sepulcher of Tullia, what should
we doubt of the Heavenly Light? Especially seeing that the Father, according
the opinion of those who hold the Soul to be extraduce, loses nothing of his
own Soul, when he communicates a Soul to his Child, but it is as Light
borrowed from Light. As for the question concerning Heat, this does of it self
belong to the stars; yet God has given this unto them, that they may be the
cause of it, in things capable of heat. That they do it not by Motion, is
confirmed by the Suns standing still in Joshua's days, and the temper of the
middle Region of the Air, that declines unto cold: but by their light, the
beams whereof, if they fall Perpendicular, if they be reverberated, then is it
stronger, and this is almost a certainty. For the Summer, and Winter
Temperament of the Air, and the effects of the artificial Glasses of
Archimedes and of Proclus, seem to confirm as much. When therefore we show that
the Light is not diminished, every man may easily know, what to think of the
Heat. We need not much troouble our selves concerning the Influence. For if the
substance remains Entire, how can these Operations ceose, that flow from the
form? We may for maintaining of our Theses otherwise, produce that which
Langi^ has written. I do not see, says he, how any Man can exactly calculate
any Man's Nativity, seeing tha^ the Stars are hurried so violently about, day
and night, so that the least moments of time will produc^ mighty changes, Which
hardly any man can comprehend in his very thoughts. Budet. in Polo.
Reginald Pool pleases me well, who answers thus to one, who promised him
great Honors, from the Scheme of his Nativity. Whatsoever is pretended in me,
by my natural generation, is changed, and restrained by a supernatural
Generation made by the Blood of my Savior. But you will object to the
contrary, that in former times the Torrid Zone was unhabitable, that the Sun is
now nearer to the Earth, and not so far remote toward either Pole: and lastly,
that the Pole Star in the Tail of Ursa Minor, is nearer to the Pole; and
therefore the Heavens are deficient. It is so; For there are many that now live
under the Torrid Zone, and there is Merchandise for multitudes of commodities,
Bodinus. l. ^ult. Theatr. Natura.
from hence thither; Bodinus reports out of Copernicus, Rainoldus, Stadius, and
others, that the Sun is now more near to the earth, by 136. Semidiameters, or
26600. miles, and Philippus Melancthon thought, that ought to be referred to
the wasting condition of the earthly and heavenly bodies. It is the common
opinion of Astronomers, that the Sun in Winter is not so far from us toward the
South, as he was in the days of Ptolomie, and Hipparchus; and not so near
toward the North in summer. For Ptolomie about the year of Christ, 140.
discovered the greatest declination of the Sun, from the Equinoctial Line,
toward either of the Poles, to be 23, degrees, 51. minutes, 20. seconds, and
because he found that account to agree with the observations of Hipparchus who
lived 130. years before Christ, and of Eratosthenes, who preceded him, he
thence concluded that the Suns greatest declination was immutable. But in the
year of Christ; one thousand four hundred and thirty, the most learned
Astronomers of the Arabians, found the same declination to be but 23. degrees
35. minutes. To whom Albategnius subscribed, who lived in the year, 880. But in
the year 1070, Arzachel an Ethiopian born in Spain, took the greatest
Declination, which he found to be 23 degrees, 33 minutes, 30 seconds; and that
he might salve the differences of observations, he invented a new Hypothesis.
Copernicus afterward, following him, in the year 1520. concluded that the Suns
greatest declination was mutable, yet never greater then 23 degrees, 52
minutes, nor less than 23 degrees, 28 minutes, and he taught us that in the
space of 1 thousand, seven hundred and seventy years, the Sun would pass from
the former to the latter; and again, in so much space of time, the Sun would go
back again, from the latter to the former. Therefore out of this Hypothesis of
Copernicus, about 65 years before the birth of Christ, the greatest declination
of the Sun was 23 degrees, 52 minutes, from which time, calculating backward,
it has ever grown less and less, until about 1782. years before Christ, the
greatest Declination (...) but 23 degrees, 28 minutes, and from that, counting
backward again as before, it increased, until in the year, 3499 before Christ,
it grew to be 23 degrees, 52 Minutes. Lastly, Molineus writes of the Pole Star,
in the Tail of Ursa Minor, that in the Days of Hipparchus, it was 12 degrees
distant from the Pole of the World, and now a days it is hardly four degrees
from it, and he supposes, that when it shall come to stand in the Poles place,
(which may be within 500 or 600 years,) the period shall be, which God has set
to Nature. I willingly grant all these things, yet I see not what inconvenie^ce
will happen to our cause thereby. Since they, that are of a faction against
this, do defend a universal declining, they must also of necessity say, that
the cold zones by the cold being increased, are become inhabitable, and that
the forces of men are so worn, that they can by no means endure it. The suns
neerernesse to us, is either founded upon false principles, or the Suns
declination is uncertain and changeable. For Ptolomie about the year of Christ,
140 places the distance of the Sun from the Earth, in 1210 Semidiameters of
the Earth, but Albategnius, about the year 880 found it to be 1146
Semidiameters. Copernicus about the year 1520 found it to be 1179. Tycho Brahe,
about the year, 1600 calculated it to be 1182 Diameters. But La^sburgius,
Keplerus, and others, suppose the Sun is distant from the Earth 3000
Semidiameters. Scaliger holds that opinion to be so absurd, that he breaks
forth into these words.

That which some have been bold to write, ^cal. exer^^t. 99.
that the body of the Sun is not far more near than it was written to be by our
Ancestors, so that it may seem to have changed its place, in the body of the
deferent Orb; their very writings ought to be wiped out with Spunges, or
themselves whipped with rods. As for the Suns coming nearer to the South, or to
the North, the most learned, Doctor Banbridge, Astromonie Reader in the famous
university of Oxford, thinks that the Suns Declination is immutable, and that
the difference of some minutes, between us and Ptolomie, might arise from some
error amongst the Ancients in their Observations, whence it will follow that
the Sun is not farther removed toward the South, nor is he come nearer to the
North. Yet however, if we should grant that there were a mutability, it would
follow, that as the Sun was 65 years before Christ, farther off toward the
South, than it is now; so in the years that went before those years it was not
farther off. And when that the greatest Declination is at the highest, the Sun
in winter will be farther toward the South, and nearer in summer toward the
North; But when it is at the lowest, it will be all contrary. Lastly, if any
inconvenience may fall upon us thereby, that is recompensed by the convenience,
that befalls them that live toward the South, and so nothing can be collected
thence, for to prove an universal falling of the World from worse to worse.
The opinion of that Rare man is grounded on a weak foundation, for the Pole
Star will never remove to be in place of the Pole of the world, or be so
straightned that it cannot proceed forward. I grant indeed that after 50 years
are gone, it will be very near to it, but it will go back again, and it will
become more Northerly, as it is now Southerly, and this seems to be most
certain; and if the coming near, or going farther off from the Pole, by other
Stars, do not show the end of the world, what reason will persuade us that this
Star should show it?

Proposition III.
The world, in respect of the Elements, does not grow to be worse.
BEing that the Elements may be considered in general, or in special; that
this Article may be more exactly demonstrated, four other Articles seem to
belong unto it.

I. That the world in respect of the Elements in general does not grow worse.
II. Not in respect of the Air. III. Not in respect of the Water. IV. Not in
respect of the Earth. We shall therefore show all these in their order.
The First Article.
The Elements in general do not grow worse.
FOr if the Elements considered in general, should universally and perpetually
grow worse, they should decay, either in respect of Number, or Qualities, or
Proportion, or Transmutation. But it is not so in any of these. What concerns
their number; The common opinion is, that there are four, but Three is the
truth: for the Fire is but the supronie part of the purer Air, that is more
subtle, hot, and free from exhalations. For since the Scripture does no where
speak of Fire, no not in Genesis where things created are described, why should
we maintain it? And if that solid Element of Fire, should differ in subtility
and thinness, from the Sky, or the uppermost part of the Air, a new refraction
of the Stars must needs follow, by reason of the Fire, and we should be
ignorant of their true places, which is false. Moreover, Nature in the chiefest
things has observed the number of Three. For to say nothing of the
supernatural Mystery of the Trinity; there is a Trinity in Man's Sex, the male,
the Female, and the Hermaphrodite: there are three first principles of natural
things, as Matter, Form, and Privation: also there are three sensible
principles, Salt, Brimstone, and Mercury. There are three principal parts in
Man, and three kind of spirits; the Animal, Vital, and Natural: as also they
have three Channels, or Vessels, namely, the Nerves, Arteries, and Veins. There
are three humors in the Blood, as there are in Milk. The Buttery part of Milk
resembles the Air, and so does the Choleric part of the blood. The wheyish
part of the Milk, and the serene part of the Blood, resembles the Water. And
the Crudly part of Milk resembles the Earth, as does the grosser Choler of the
Blood, Every man knows that this number is found now adays; and in respect of
the qualities, the Earth is now the driest Element, the coldest and the
heaviest. The Air is the hottest moistest and lightest. The Water is cold and
moist. Aristotle makes the proportion between the Elements to be Ten Degrees:
but it is not so. For the Circumference of the Earth is 5400. miles, Barthol.
de Element. c. 5.
therefore the diameter is 1718, the Semidiameter is 859, or 860, which are
chosen for to facilitate the account. Moreover there are many empty places of
the Earth that are without Water, and where Seas are, the Earth is under the
Water, The same de aquis. l. 12. c. 5.
so that the depth of the Sea, as is gathered by the observations of the most
skillful Mariners, in many places scarce amounts to 80, or a 100 pases, more
seldom to two or 300 pases, and most seldom to 500 pases, but seldom or never
to a 1000 pases, and that is but the fourth part of a Germane mile: and if this
be compared with the Diameter or depths of the Earth, it is as the height of a
drop of sweat, compared with the whole body. Moreover, experience shows, that
Air will be made of a few drops of water, that is by many degrees more than
they. And who can deny, but that this proportion holds even at this day? Philo
demundi incorruptibilitate,
As for their transmutation: There is a notable compensation of the four fold
forces in the Elements, dispensing their courses by equal rules, and bounds*
For, as the Circle of the year is distinguished by four quarters, one quarter
succeeding after an other, and by the same Circuit, until the same time return
again; in like manner the Elements of the world succeeding one the other in
their courses, are changed, and you would say it were incredible: When they
seem to die, they are made immortal, running the same race again, and again,
and passing daily up and down the same way. For from the earth begins a rising
way, which melting is changed into water, then the water evaporates into Air,
the Air is rarefied til it he Fire, and another declining way tends downward
from the top; the Fire being put out sinks down into Air, and the Air becomes
thick, and turns to Water, and the moisture of the Water becomes gross till it
be Earth. True it is they are not otherwise mingled, than as Islanders are with
those that Traffic with them; yet this cannot be denied, but it is done for
the great good of the Universe. For pure water were unfit to drink, the Earth
would afford no moisture for Corn, and we could not breathe in the Air. Hence
Saint Augustine. August. de Genesi ad liter. l. 7. c. 2.
The Air on the top of Olympus, is reported to be so thin, that it cannot
nourish Birds, nor yet Men that happen to go up thither, can be nourished with
the Spirit of a grosser Air, as they are wout to be, and is requisite for their
nutriment.

Article. II.
The Element of the Air is deficient in nothing.
IF the Air had failed in any thing, it had faild in its temper. But if we
credit Historians, in former times the dryness of the Air was greater, and the
Infection of it more Pestilentiall: Chronicles write, that in the year 1234,
the Winter was so Cold, that in the Adriatic Sea, the Venetian Factours passed
over the Ice, loaded with their Money. Zona^us reports, that the like accident
fell out in the Pontick sea, and the Sea adjoining, under Constantinus
Copronymus. In the days of Charles the great, there was a great and most
bitter Frost, whereby the Pontick Sea for a hundred Miles Eastward was turned
to Ice, and was from top to the bottom, 50 Cubits thick. In the year 1125, the
Winter was so violent, that innumerable Eels in Brabant, by reason of the ice,
went forth of the lake, which is strange, and got into Hay Ricks, and lay hid
there, till by extreme cold they rotted away, (Robertus De Monte). And the
Trees at last scarce had any leaves put forth in May. But to speak of the
dryness, L. 4. Histo.
I read in Livie, that in the year after Rome was built 322, that the rain from
Heaven, not only failed, but the Earth also wanted her inbred moisture, and
had hardly enough to serve for the perpetual Rivers. And where Fountains and
Rivers were dried up, and Water failed, the Cattle died for thirst. Meigerius.
In the year 1153* the Wood took fire, by extreme heat of the weather, and the
fat earth burned, and no rain could Extinguish it. The Germane Annals report,
that in the year 1228, the Air was so hot, that the harvest was ended, (to use
their own words) before the Feast of Saint John Baptist. In the year 1473, the
Wood in Bohemia burnt 18 weeks, and the Danow was so dry, that in many places
it was Fordable, and the same thing is written of the River of the Thames in,
the Reign of Henry the First. But in the year 1494 in the end of July, the
Lakes and Waters were so bound up with Ice, that all the Fish died for want of
water. You may add to this, what Tacitus writes of Armenia, Tacit. Annal. l.
13.
That the Winter fell out so cruel, that the ground was so covered with Jce,
that without they dug, they could find no place for their Tents. Many men's
Limbs were scorched with extremity of cold, and some upon their Watch were
found dead. And there was a Soldier observed, who carried a bundle of wood,
whose hands were so frozen, that they clave fast to the wood, and fell off from
his arms that were thus maimed. As concerning the Pestilent infection of the
air, it was once so great in Greece (as Thucydides observes) that Birds fell
down with the infection, and birds of prey would not touch the carkases. In the
government of Vibius Gallus and Volutianus, as Pomponius Laetus, and Zonara
testify, the plague continued without intermission fifteen years, Lip. l. 2.
(...) constant. c. 22.
and at Alexandria no house was clear, and those that remained were not more
than there were old men in former days. Lipsius says, He never read of a
greater plague, for continuance, in any part of the Earth. In Justinians days,
at Constantinople, sometimes, 10000 have died. Oros. l. 5^ c. 8.
In Numidia sometimes, as Orosius reports, 800000; In the time of Petrarch at
Florence, between March and July, a hundred thousand died. And it was so
violent in Italy, that of a thousand men, scarce ren remained, In the year 1348
the Plague destroyed so many at London in twelve Months, that in one Church
yard 50000 were buried. Between January and July, there died 57374, What shall
I say of the English Sweat, which thrice passed over the whole Island; the last
was in the year 1551. Nor must we think that the Pox is now more violent than
it was formerly, This very disease, L. 2. de more. contag.
says Fracastorius, will die and be extinct, and again it will revive in our
Posterity, as it is credible it was seen by our Ancestors, of which there are
no small tokens yet remaining. But as for the Scurvey, (which is nothing else
than a Melancholique and Malignant Cachexie of the body) and some suppose it to
be proper to the inhabitants of the North, and the Sea Coast, It proceeds from
obstruction of the Milt, by Melancholique dregs corrupted by some secret
malignant quality, with weakness of the Attractive, and the expulsive
faculties, and is not without some great hurt of the rest of the bowels of the
belly: whence arises an itchy redness of the gums, flagging, corruption and
stinking, falling out of the teeth, or weakness of the Legs, resolution,
wanness, and exceeding weariness, from a very small cause. Lang. Ep. 4. l. 2.
That the Ancients were ignorant of this, is most false. For Hippocrates, as
Langius writes, does describe it under the name of the ^liac passion, or
Volvulus Haematites, in lib. de intern. Galen. l. 3 de simp. cause. ^. 2.
affssect and also under great milts, in the same book. And lib. 2. Prorrhetic,
he confirms it. Galen in lib. Definit, describes the Scurvie: That it is a
kind of Palsy, that if men be affected with it, they cannot walk straight
forward, but sometimes they reel from the right hand to the left, and they
bring about their left foot against their right, and they are forced to knock
their right foot against their left, and when they go forward ^hey lift up
their leg. Some again out of Galen would call it the Black Morphew; But true
(...) is, that a great Plague, this time ten years, spread in England, Italy,
France, and other places: but what does this make for a universal declining of
Air to a worse condition? The violence of Fires underground seem to have
respect to this, which were very raging in former times, Dion. Cass. in Histor.
Plin. Jun. in Epist. ad Tacitum.
as we know for certain. When Titus Vespasian, and Flavius Domitian, were
Consuls, the Mountain Vesuvius in Campania burned, and first breaking up the
top of it, it cast forth stones, after such vast flames, that it set two towns
on fire, Herculaneum and Pompeys towns; and the smoke was so thick, that it
obscured the Suns light. Lastly, it sent forth such abundance of Ashes, that
they covered the neighbor country, as if they were snow, which by the force
of the winds were said to be carried into Egypt, Africa, and Syria. The City
Julianum, Tacit. l. 13. Annal.
they are the words of the most prudent Historian, being joined to us, was
afflicted with an unexpected mischief. For fires breaking forth of the Earth,
laid bold of Farms, Fields; Villages, in many places, and they flew to the very
walls of Col^n, newly built, nor could they be extinguished by the falling of
rain, or by river waters, or any other moisture; until for want of remedy, and
for anger at the loss, some country men did cast stones on a far off, and as
the flames gave way, they went nearer, and with strokes of clubs, and other
things, they frighted them away as men do wild beasts: Last of all, they took
off their clothes from their bodies, and threw upon them; the worse they were
and defiled with wearing, the better they served to put out the Fire. That also
was wonderful that fell out in the Kingdom of Naples near to Puteoli, Sandius
in Itiner.
in the year 1538, the 29 of September. The Sea retreated 200 paces, and a
Mountain at two of the clock, at night, riss up, with a huge noise, and casting
forth of burning stones, and with such a belching forth of ashes, that not
only almost all the houses were thrown down, but also the famous hot Baths at
Tripergula. The mighty Fires of Aetna, and of some other Mountains in India,
are to be seen in my Book of the Lately printed in English.
Wonders of Nature. Let every man consider whether the like has happened in
latter times. Concerning that which is newly written of the mountain of Coals
in the Country of Misena, or of Modernus in Italy, that Agricola speaks of; or
that which is written of Hecla by Bleshaenius, or of S. Michaels Island, which
is one of the Azores, seems not to be compared with them.

Article III.
The Element of water is decayed in nothing.
We see at this day a threefold tide; a daily, monthly, and yearly Tide, that
Posidonius ascribes to the Sea. That it is Salt, as formerly, is discerned by
the taste. It sends forth rivers from it, and receives them again upon their
return. If waters are seen now, where they never were before; on the contrary,
waters do fail from the places where they formerly were. In vita Hilarion.
It is manifest that in the year 1460, a Ship was found in the Alps, with
Anchors, in a Mine where they dug Metals. And Hierome writes that after the
death of Julian, Ships were brought to the Clifts of Mountains, and hung there.
And Though no Fountains last for aye
But all rivulets still decay. Pontan. l. 48. Metror.



Yet the great Rivers, Indus, and Ganges, Danubius, the Rhien, and Nilus have
not at all changed their courses, as is to be seen in the Geographicall
Descriptions. Especially the constant course of Nilus for so many Ages seems to
be one of the wonders of the World. For it keeps its time so exactly, Prosper
Alpinus.
that if you take any of the earth about it, and neither moysten it, nor dry
it, it will keep always the same weight until the 17 of June. From thence is
the weight increased, as the river augments, and gives an infallible testimony
of the ensuing Flood. It is known that some Mineral Baths have perished, but it
is no question, but others are risen in their rooms. Necham writes most truly
of the Baths of England. For to relieve old age decaid, there is none
Before our English Baths were ever known.
If men he be bruised or broke, or fainting lie,
Sick from a cold cause; her'es the remedy.


Concerning the English Spaws. See Edmund Dean, Doctor of Physic at York, his
Spadocrene.

Article. IIII.
The Element of Earth has faild in nothing.
IF the Earth had faild in any thing, it must either be in quantity or
fruitfulness. For Aelian in his time, writes that Aetna, Parnassus, and
Olympus, did appear daily to grow less, as Seamen observed. But Palaestina
though it were but a small Country, yet it was large enough, for Thirty Kings,
1 Chronicles. 13. 3.
that were Idolaters; and withal fed such multitudes of the Israelites, that
in a war between Israel and Judah, 1200000 Men met; to say nothing of the
Sacrifice made at the Dedication of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7, 5.
or of that other spoken of elsewhere in the Chronicles. 2 Chronicles. 17. 14.
Yet the Conclusion cannot by any means be granted. For what is spoken of
Mountains, 2 Chronicles. ^1. 5.
is not confirmed concerning the whole Earth, which has the same Dimensions
now, it formerly had. For, this falls out by reason of rain water and the Sea,
and what departs from the Mountains falls upon Valleys: whereupon Anaxagoras,
being asked whether the Sea should ever overflow the Mountains of Lamsacum, he
answered, Yes, when time should fail. For as nothing is lost by the Sea, when
the Rivers run from it, because they return again; so the earth loses nothing
by things that grow from it, and are fed by it, because all turn at last into
earth, as Lucretius writes. Lucret. l. 2.
Therefore the Earth has gaind the Mothers Name.
For all born of her, return to the same.


That which is spoken of the Holy Land, it seems that we ought to ascribe that
to the particular benediction of God; and also to the promise made for the
supply of the Sabbatical year. Deu. 11. 12
But B^^cardus writes thus of it before 300 years were past. Lev. 26. 3.
The Corn grows and increases wonderfully upon the Earth, Lev. 20. 21
not manured with dung and soil; De terra sancta. p. c. 1.
The Fields are like Gardens wherein there grows every where, Fennel, Sage,
Rue, Rosen, and in brief, Whether the earth were formerly more fruitful.
there are found all the worlds goods; and the Land truly flows with Rivers of
Milk and Honey. And though it be said, that it has lost something of its
wonted fruitfulness. Yet on the contrary, other countries here and there, and
other places, have received new forces, to become fruitful, and it is no
doubt, but that did fall out by a singular curse from God, and for the
wickedness of the Inhabitants. We, says Columella, Columella dear rustica.
Plin. l. 18. c. 3. Aelian lib. 1. c. 33.
assign the business of Husbandry to the basest of our servants, as to a
hangman for punishment, whereas the best and Noblest of our Ancestors used it
themselves. The earth did heretofore enjoy a plow with a Garland and a
triumphant Plowman. We must do therefore as Mises did, if we would have
Pomegranates as great as he offered to Artaxerxes. Should I ad to these that
there was greater famine amongst our Ancestors, and that the price of things
were greater, I should not err. In the year 1625 there was a mighty Famine:
and in 1630, in Poland, which otherwise is held for the Granary almost of all
Europe. For, four bushells of Corn, that were wont to be sold for three Franks,
were prized at 18 Franks: But what is this to things past? In the time of
Valentine, Fathers, in a Famine, sold their children, that they might avoid the
hazard of death. Novel. tit. 11. apud codic. Theodos.
In the time of Honorius, they proclaimed in the Market place, Set price to
Man's flesh. Livy writes that many of the common people at Rome, that they might
not pine away with lingering hunger, Jos. l. 6. annal.
did cover their heads, and cast themselves into Tyber. The same thing, happened
in England, Beda. l. 4 c. 13.
in the year of Christ 514, in the days of Cissa, King of the South Saxons.
Varro l. 3. c. 2.
As for the price, Varro writes that L. Axius a Roman Knight, would not part
with a pair of Pigeons, for less than 400 Denarii, and it may be now Sparrows
are sold for less then a farthing.

Proposition IIII.
The World, in respect of mixed bodies, both Inanimate, and Animate creatures
without reason, does not grow worse.
A Mixed body is divided into Inanimate, and an Animate body: under that,
Meteors and Minerals are contained; under this, Plants, Animals, and Mankind.
Wherefore it seems very necessary, that for the more perfect handling of this
question, these things should severally be demonstrated. But because there is a
proper Article assigned for Man by himself, by reason that he affords such
plenty of matter, we set down here only three Articles.

I. It cannot be proved, by the Meteors, that the world runs to worse. II.
Mineralls have not faild. III. Neither Plants nor Animals have decayed at all.
Article. I.
From Meteors it cannot be proved that the world grows worse.
FOr neither have those things faild that serve for our profit; nor are things
hurtful, less hurtful now, th^n they were formerly; nor are they less
frequent; Rain and Snow do now as well make the earth fruitful; Dew waters it;
the Wind ventilates the Air, and the fiery exhalations purify it. Do we not
now see Rain-bows and other Meteors as well as formerly? As for things
hurtful; In the year N. C. 634, when the Jugurthine war began, it rained Milk
three days, and in the third year that the wars proved successful against
Jugurtha, some write that it rained Milk twice. L. 3. Hist.
See a rain of flesh in Livie. Albertus relates out of Avicennas, that a great
mass of Iron, weighing a 100 pound fell out of the Air, and of that afterward
the best swords were made. When Hannibal with his Army broke into Italy, it
rained fire-Stones. When Titus Annius Milo, Plutarch in Fab. Maximo.
pleaded his cause at Rome, it raind burnt Brick; and it was recorded in the
Acts of that year. Our age speaks no such things. It is true, the Clouds fell
in Selesia, about Goldeberga: but, Was not a greater fall of them seen in
Franconie, Anno. 1551? An infinite multitude, says, Bartholinus, of Men and
beasts were drowned by a sudden tempest, Barthol. l. 2. de Meteor. c. 2.
clouds falling unawares, and rain being powered forth in heaps; so that the
strongest walls of many Cities, Vineyards, and gallant Buildings were destroyed
utterly. In. L. praedict. vener.
What shall I speak of Earthquakes, comets, winds, and thunder. There appeared,
as the Earl of North-Hampton writes, four Comets in four year: And Beda, and
Paulus Aemilius say, that in fourteen days, in the time of Charles Martell,
there were two seen, one at the Suns rising, the other at the Suns setting.
There was such a great one, Seneca quaest. Nat^. l. 2. c. 25.
when Attalus Reigned, that it was as large as that place in the Heavens called
Via lactea. And in the year 1556. there was one so great, that not only all
light exspirations and dry matter, Bodin. l. 2. Thea. Nature.
no nor all Woods and groves, as many as are upon the face of the earth could
serve for. Fuel for its two Months time wherein it shined. Was there any such
thing in our days? Truly I know no example of it: and should I meet with any
such; yet this would conclude nothing for the universal ruin of the world.
For if when the exhalations are consumed, that trouble the Air, the Air grow
clear; if the vapors that ascend, being framed of a more fruitful fatty
substance; can cause fruitfulness, when they are spread about the fields, and
water them like dew; if all matter that burns do not leave behind it stinking
smells, after that it is extinguished; a good temper of the Air, fruitfulness
of the Earth, and plenty of provision may succeed after Comets; and the
prediction of evil may be recompensed with this good success. Concerning
Earthquakes, we have heard almost nothing in these days; if you except that
which happened in Apulia, Cumanus.
Anno. 1627, that devoured 17000 men. Also that was very strange that fell out
in the year 1571, about the twelfth of the Calends of March in Herefordshire in
England. For then at night about six of the clock, the Earth parted in the East
quarter of that County, and a Mountain put forth with a Rock that was under it:
(First with a mighty noise and roaring, that all that lived near those parts
heard it) as if it had wakened out of some long sleep, and it riss to a higher
place, leaving its deep den, and carried with it the trees that grew upon it,
Folds and Flocks of Sheep: Some trees were swallowed up by the ground, others
were carried along with the earth, and were by that means so united to it, as
if they had rooted there at first. From the place it remooved; it left a great
empty cave, that was foury foot broad, and eighty else long: the whole field
was about twenty acres; In the way it overturned a Chapel. It removed a
Yew-Tree that stood in the Churchyard, from West to East; and with the same
violence it drove forward, the common ways, Sheep Coats, and hedges with the
trees planted in them. Thus when it had wandered from Saturday night till Monday
night, it stood still. Yet formerly they were more frequent and greater. In the
beginning of that year, when L. Cornelius, and L. Minutius, Live. l. 44. and 45.
were Consuls, Livie writes that Earthquakes were so frequent, Aristot l. 2.
that men were weary, Metcor. c. 8
not only of the thing it self, but, Plin. l. 2. c. 81.
of the Festivals ordained for the removing of it: and he reports that an
Earthquake lasted 38. days. Others say, some have lasted two years, and come
at several times again. In Tiberius time, twelve Cities in Asia fell down.
When Constantine reigned, as many were destroyed. Antiochia in the days of
Trajan with the places about it, August. l. 2. de Mirac* S. S.
was swallowed up. Augustine writes, that whilst he lived, a. hundred Cities in
Africa fell down. Aeneas Silvius, writes thus, of an Earth quake to Frederick
the Emperor. You shall understand by the bringer of these, what wonderful and
incredible damage happened by an Earthquake in the Kingdom of Apulia: For many
towns were utterly overthrown, and others fell down in part; at Naples, almost
all the Churches, and great Palaces fell; above 3000 are said to be killed in
the ruins; all the people now dwell in Tents. The same may be spoken of Winds
and Thunders. S. Paul in a Tempest saw neither Sun nor Stars, for many days.
Virgil describes a fight of the winds Contrary, which now happens not.

The East and West, and rainy South-west roar, Fighting, they drive huge
Billows to the sh^^^. What great Shipwarks have been in former times, the life
of Solomon, and the approach of Charles the Fifth to Argiers, and his departing
thence, will manifest. He lost in a few howrs a 140 Ships (says the History)
15 Gallions, besides Men and Horses, and other things that were destroyed. I
saw, they they are the words of Bellarmine, and had I not seen it, I had nere
believed it, a great quantity of earth cast up by a most violent wind, and
that was thrown upon a certain Village, so that a very deep pit was left, where
the earth was thrown out, and the whole village remained under ground almost
buried, unto which that earth was brought. He that thinks this History to be of
too late memory; let him think upon that wind that happened in the days of
William Rufus, Anno 1096, at London, it threw down 600 howses; to say nothing
of the cover of the Church, carried away with the Arches, and main beams: six
of these that were each twenty seven foot long, fell with so great a force,
that they made a hole twenty three foot deep in the ground.

Article II.
Mineralls have not failed.
OUr purpose was to speak of Mineralls in the second place. And these before
any other things, if it were true, would discover the decay of the world. For
the unsatiable covetousness of men, seeks for Gold almost as low as Hell; and
the cruel hunger they have after it, does by an unrestrained sacrilege rob the
Earth of her treasures that ly hid in the bowels of her. But it is so far from
winning any thing to the side of those that are patrons of the opinion we
oppose, that these very bodies, are a most strong argument against them. The
Silesian Earth is come to be added to the earth of Armenia, and Terra Lemnia,
and it is also better. The inventor of it, Sennert scient. nature. l. 5. c. 1.
was one Johannes Montanus of Silesia, who has put forth a Book of it, that it
is Gold trasmuted, by the providence of God and of nature, prepared for an
excellent remedy, and changed, being properly good against Venom, no less
than Medicaments are, that are prepared with great cost of the Gold of Hungaria.

There is also at this day Bole of Toccavia in Hungaria, Crato in Epistol.
that is like Butter, and is good against Catarrhs, and is preferred before the
Bole of Armenia. Also there is a red earth found near to Bergas in Norway, not
unlike to Terra Sigillata; and it is a most present Antidote against the
Scurvey. Petrejus dissert. harm, 38 Fallop. de therm. Cardan. l. 5, de subtilit.
II. Also that Minerals have a power in them, to multiply themselves, is almost
out of all doubt. A vein of Brimstone is repaired in four years. The earth Salt
Peter is taken from, laid on a heap, will in five or six years yield Salt Peter
again. In India there is a Mountain, called Oromenum, of natural Salt,
whereout Salt is cut, as quarries are, that grows again; as Caesalpinus
relates: And the same may be said of Stones; and that is worth marking, that
Garzias ab Horto writes of the Diamond. De Metal. l. 1.
Diamonds that in the deep bowels of the Earth should be perfected in many
years, Cap. 6.
are bred almost on the top of the ground, De simp. in India. nasc. l. 1. c. 47.
and come to perfection in two or three years. For if this year you dig in in
the Mine a cubit depth, you shall find Diamonds; after two years, dig there
again, and you shall find Diamonds in the same place. Nor are Metals out of
this privilege. For Gold at Corbachia in Westphalia grows and increases in
heaps every fourth year. Iron in Silesia, at the town Saganum, is dug up after
ten years being bred anew. The same is spoken of Ilva an Island in the Tuscian
Sea. L. 3. de Metallis Cap. 6.
Caesalpinus reports, that the earth that is dug up with the Mine, though it
have no metal in it, in process of time will be changed into the same Mine.
Lastly, it is most certain, that in some Countries, even now some rich Mines
are found out. I will say nothing of the West Indies, the wealth whereof fills
the Cantons of the Spaniards, English, and Dutch.

Norway alone can show the same, if Bartholinus, De Cor. porib. perfect mixtis
inanim. c. 4.
a man of credit, may be trusted. At this day, says he, there is no place in
the earth to fruitful for Silver, as some Mountains are, that are discovered
in the Kingdom of Norway, Anno. 1623, in the reign of Christian the fourth,
King of Denmark and Norway, my most bountiful Lord, that if any man did
formerly promise Golden Mountains, Norway does not only promise Silver
Mountains, but performs them. For great lumps are dug up that are most pure
and the best Silver, without any help of Fire. In other parts it is more
unconcocted; but where scarce a fifth part was, now a third or fourth part is
dross. What shall I say of the Veins of Iron in Sussex, and of Tin in Cornwall?

Article III.
Neither Plants nor Animals have decayed at all.
I Shall not need speak much of these, for if the Earth have not failed, either
in respect her fruitfulness, nor of other accidents, how then shall they fail?
The Simples have now the same temperament, and the same operations, and Animals
are now described as Aristotle described them. Aristotle says, Horses lived
but 18 years, and at the most but 50 years. Albertus says, he saw a Soldier
had a Horse 60 years old. Niphus says, that in the Stalls of Ferdinand the
First, there was a Horse 70 year old. Also Buteo, a man commended by many
writers, going about to show by Geometrical proportion, that the Ark could
hold so many Cattle, and provision for a year, borrowes the foundation of his
Argument from the present Dimension of the bodies of beasts, and their
sufficient nutriment. Goropius Becanus, Pererius, Rawley and others subscribe
to him. But what is spoken of an Elephant in the Book of the Maccabees, 1. Mac.
c. 37.
Junius shows, that must be understood of the Indian Elephants, that are
greater than the rest of Aethiopia. And they that have been in the Kingdom of
the Great Mogull, maintain there are some greater than those we see here. The
influence of Eclipses upon these inferior bodies, and the greater frequency of
them makes nothing to this matter. For first, since an Eclipse is nothing but
the interposition either of the Moon, between us and the Sun, or of the shadow
of the Earth between the Sun and Moon; we have no more need to fear any danger
from an Eclipse, than we should by the interposition of some gross Clowd.
Seneca, l. 5. de benef. c. 6.
This order will continue in all ages, that have such days, wherein the Sun by
interposition of the Moon, is afraid to send forth all his beams. Also it is
false that Eclipses ate now more frequent than formerly. For the Sun Moon and
Earth have the same substance and accidents they had; and Light and shadows
have the same being, they had formerly, and the Moons way or Latitude, from the
Eclipticke, is as it always was. See Bartholinus concerning these points,
Astrolog. Problem. Ultimo. Also it is false, that they are greater than they
were. For in the year 1133, In Chron. regum, Manor. L. Hist. novel.
as Cambden writes, the Suns Eclipse was so great, that day was changed to
night. Anno. 1140. as Malmburiensis relates, it was so great that men feared
the old Chaos would return. Anno. 1415, on the seventh of June, it was so
terrible that birds fell to the ground. We shall conclude therefore that there
is nothing in mixed bodies that can intimate unto us, that the world declines to
worse universally and perpetually.

Proposition V.
The World in respect of Man does not grow worse.
MAn is the Epitome of the whole world, a Marriage of Superior and Inferior
bodies, a Microcosme of a Macrocosme. But for as much as this consists not
only in the body, but also in the rational soul, that is united to it, it is
requisite that in respect of all things, some of each should be enquired into.
But here principally we are to consider his strength, age, and faculties of his
soul. And indeed our opposites maintain that in all these considerations, Man
is decayed. Therefore under this proposition arise these Articles,

I. The age of Man within these 3000. years has not failed. II. His force and
stature are not diminished. III. He wants nothing in the faculties of his soul.
Article I.
The age of Man within these 3000 years has not failed.
THat the age of Man has not decaid since Moses time, may be cleared by many
Arguments. For first, Moses himself speaks expressly. Psalm. 90. 11. 10.
Our years are 70, and if one so strong to come to 80 years, etc. And though he
himself and Aaron his brother surpassed this age, Herodot in Thalia.
but because, as a learned man said, he spoke of the general condition, it is
pertinent to our subject. Hence also Herodotus sets the longest bounds of Man's
life to be but 80 years. Barzillay was said to be a very old Man, and yet he
was but fourscore: and David was full of days, yet but seventy years old.
Solomon, as Divines conjecture, was not 60, 2 Samuel 19. 32.
yet it is said; When Solomon was old. In all the records of the Roman, Greek,
French, and German Emperors, there are found only four that lived to
fourscore years. Amongst the Popes only five, and they were immediately before
our times. Namely, John the twenty third, Gregory the twelfth and thirteenth,
Paul the third and fourth; and that which is most notable, Elizabeth Queen of
England out lived all her predecessors from William the Conqueror; De honest.
discipline.
and she reigned as fortunately as Augustus, as long as David. P^trus Criaitus,
affirms that Egyptis by a subtle conjecture, taken from the weight of the
heart, found out within what bounds the life of Man was included, and he
affirmed, that he could scarce live above a hundred years. For every year till
fifty, it increased two Drachmes, and from thence to 100 years it decreased as
much. Though this be rather curiosity than truth, yet it shows what the
Antiens thought of the last end of Man. L. 5. de lingua latina.
Varro also held the same opinion. They called the space of a hundred years,
Seculum, from senex, an Old Man, because they thought that was the longest time
for Men to live to be old: And Seneca says, We see that thou art come to the
very utmost stage of Man's life, thou art a hundred years old, I say nothing of
Trebellius Pollio, who in his book to Constantius ascribes to the longest age,
but 120 years, by the opinion of Mathematicians. Moreover, the Ancients well
observed the secret stations and progresses of nature in Man's body, not only
in respect of increasing in the Wombes of their Mothers, and in respect of
their being born, but after their birth also.

Hippocrates, ascribes to the time of being born, the seventh, ninth, tenth,
the eleventh month also sometimes; and he reckons the eighth Month to be
dangerous. Some divide Man's age into three, others into four, five, six or
seven parts, according to the consideration of the Planets. Philo produces
Solons Elegiack verses of the seventh year, In opere de fab. mundi.
causing changes in Man's body,

Young children when seven years do go about,
Renew their teeth that serve them to speak out.
When seven more by Gods decree are run,
Hair on their secret parts are first begun.
And in thrice seven years, a soft hair down.
With strength of years their beardlesse chin does crown.
Macrobius, clearly explains the changes of every seventh year in Man's age. L.
1. de Some. Scip. c. 6.
That in the first, the teeth are shed; in the second, hair breaks forth on
their secrets; in the third, their beard sprouts; in the fourth, Man cease
growing; in the fifth, strength is given; in the sixth, consistence; in the
seventh, declining. The Observations of the Learned say, the same is now done.
And although as in health there are degrees of Latitude, so here: yet it is
sufficient if it be infallible, for the greatest part, and uniformity hold; the
other things being considered. At this time we hold the thirty fifth year to be
the flower of Man's age, as being the Mean, between seventy; and the Age our
Savior died at, unto which the Apostle in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
Plutarch de Oracul. cessat.
seems to allude. So it was in former ages. For Heraclitus, as Plutarch
relates, affirmed that thirty was the mean in man's Age. The same may be said of
Climactericall years. Gell. l. 25.
Whereof Gellius writes thus: Noct. c. 7.
It has been observed for a long time, and it has been approved in most Old
men, that the 63d, year of their life was with some danger and hurt, either of
their body, or with some great disease, or loss of their life, or grief of
mind. See Baptista Codon chus, concerning these things in a special Treaty,
concerning Climactericall years. To this may be added the Age of his Marriage
and Generation, which is the same now, as it was formerly. The third Council
of Carthage, Chap. 9. Ordained that Readers in Churches, when they came to
fourteen years, should be forced to Marry wives, Proem. l. ^.
or to Vow Chastity. Quint. writes, that his wife dyed leaving two sons, being
not full nineteen years old. Epict^^us says, that women, so soon as they are
fourteen years old, Enchirid. c. 55.
men called them Ladies.

The Civil Laws approve of women to marry at twelve years old. Digest. l. 9.
de spons.
So does the Jews Talmud, and the Canons of the Church. Buxtorf.
Hesiodus 15. l. Under Tiberius, by the Papian Law, Synag. 3.
it was forbidden men at 60 to marry. Lancel. l. 2. l. 11. Sancinus 27. C. de
Nuptiis.
And women, of 50 years old, were likewise forbidden. But that law was repealed
in Justinians Reign. Also the same may be proved by the Taking of Church
Offices, or Military and Civil Offices: For anciently they were as soon
admitted, In Antiq. Br^an.
and discharged as soon. Parker writes, He that must be promoted to be a Bishop,
must not be under thirty. But now adays they are seldom under fifty. Venerable Bede who lived about 800 years since, was made a Deacon at ninteen years old.
Origin, says Eusebius, was made a Catechist at eighteen years. The Levites
were discharged after fifty. Number. 8. 23.
As for Soldiers: The French at fourteen years, prepare their sons for War.
^n. Pompeius, at eighteen; Augustus at nineteen, endured war. The Romans at
seventeen, made them take up Arms. Whence was the Law of Gracchus, Lib. 25.
A Soldier must not be chosen under seventeen. Yet Livie writes, that when the
second Punick War was, it was Decreed, that the Tribunes of the people should
publish to them, that all that were under seventene, that should take the
Military Oath, should have their pay as well as if they were seventeen or more.
The Athenian Law, discharged men at forty, and took them on, for Wars at
eighteen. By the testimony of Polyhistor, Cajeta^, Pererius. Simeon and Levi,
were hardly twenty years old when they killed the Sichemites: What shall I say
of Alexander, C. Caesar, Julian, and others? As for Civil affairs, as
Plutarch writes, Romulus reigned thirty eight years, and died at fifty,
therefore he began to Reign at twelve. Cicero, as Cornelius Nepos writes, made
his Oration pro Roscio at twenty three years old. Euripides, says G^llius, at
eightteen years old writ his Tragedies. Suetonius.
Augustus at sixteen put on his Toga Virilis, and was made Consul at twenty.
Josephus writes that when he was nineteen, he bare Office in the Common Wealth.
Lastly, Tertullian de Veland. Virgin. says: Also the Heathen observe the
seasons, that according to the Law of Nature, they may give laws to several
ages. For they receive Women at twelve, and Men at fourteen, for Employments.
But here are two principal Objections, especially against this. Namely, that
the Patriarchs before the Flood, lived very long: and that Men now marry sooner
then they did formerly. I answer briefly to this. I grant the first; and say,
that is most false that some maintain, Whence it was the Patriarchs lived so
long.
that their years contained only thirty six days. For were that true, it
would follow that Enoch and Cain begat children at six or seven years old at
the most. For the Scripture says, This got children at sixty five, Whether the
years they lived were only of 36 days.
and the Other at seventy years. Nor had any of the Patriarchs lived to ninety
seven years old, and many now live above a hundred: and that would be false
that the Scripture writes, that Abraham died full of days, a good old Man. For
according to their account he should be but seventeen years old. And should we
grant this to be most true, yet this would evince nothing for a general decay
of the world. Joseph l. 1.
For it seems that was done formerly for Virtues sake, Antiquit. c. 4. L. 1.
and the glorious Profits they sought after, Chronol.
that is, for Astrology, and Geometry, or for the increase of Man ki^de. Hence
Rabbi Levi as Genebrard quotes him, calls the long lives of the Patriarchs, a
work of Providence and not of nature: or else by reason of their diet. Hence
Roger Bacon writes, That as they had great wisdom, they found out all Regiment
of health, and secret Medicaments, whereby their old age was retarded, and by
which when it came, it might be mitigated, and their children had this
Regiment, and Experiments against old age; For God gave them all wisdom, and so
they might live long. Moreover we find by constant observation almost in all
times, that in some Countries, there were some that lived longer than others,
Epimenides of Crere lived a 150 years, Gorgias Siculus a Rhetorician a 108,
Verulam. in Hist. vit. and mort.
Hippocrates a 114. Terentia wife to Cicero, a 103. Clodia daughter of Osilius,
a 115 though when she was young she had borne fifteen children. What shall I
say of Luceia or Galeria Copiola? She lived not a little more than a hundred
years; For it is reported that for a hundred years, she played the Jester upon
the Stage; it may be at first she acted the maids part, and at last an old
Wives. Isra, the Player and Dancer; was in her youthful days brought upon the
Stage: how old she was then, is not known, but after 99 years from that time,
she was again brought upon the Theater, not to act her part, but to be showed
for a Miracle; when Pompey the Great dedicated the Theater. Also she was again
showed at the sports ordaind for to pray for the health of Divus Augustus. In
Scripture, we read that Levi lived a hundred thirty seven years. Phin^has,
three hundred. Job after his restitution, a hundred and forty; yet he had sons
and daughters marriageable before his fall. Anna the Prophetess, lived a
hundred and six years: John the Evangelist, as many. But the times of Vespasian
the Emperor will best show this, when the Muster Roll was made. For then were
there found in that part of Italy, which lies between Appe^inus and the River
Po, Men that were a hundred years old, and others above a hundred twenty four.

Nor do the later times fail in this: for John of Times, that was Armor bearer
to Charles the Great, lived 360 years. Verstigan writes that at S^govia in
Spain, it was repor^ed that a woman lived a hundred and sixty years. Franciscus
Alvarez, reports that he saw an Archbishop of Aethiopia, a hundred and fifty
years old. Buchanan, ^estifies that one Laurentius, of the Orcades, when he was
a hundred and forty years old, went a fishing in his Boat in the coldest
Winter commonly. A few years since in the County of Hereford, Verulam in Hist.
vit. and more.
(they are the words of the Lord Verulam) for a May dance, there were eight men
chosen, whose ages counted together, made eight hundred years complete, so that
what one wanted of a hundred, the other exceeded a hundred as much. Lastly, the
Countess of Desmond, lived in the year 1589, and after: she married in the
days of Edward the fourth, Verulam says, she thrice renewed her teeth, and
lived a hundred and forty years. To the cause taken from Nutriment may be
added, our dainty Breeding now adays, too soon Marrying, and Luxury.

Many dishes make many diseases.

Seneca, Epist. 95.
again, that great Physician, and inventer of this Art, said, that women never
shed their hair, nor did their feet ache: but now they want their hair, and
their feet pain them, yet the nature of women is not changed, but their life.
That which is spoken of their marrying too soon is commonly false. Whether we
marry sooner now than of old time time.
For when Jacob descended into Egypt, Er and Onan are numbered amongst Judahs
children, (they were dead) Scheclak; Phares, and Serak, and of Sharer, Hesron,
and Hamul. And Judah was then at most but forty years old, for Joseph was
thirty nine. And he was born at the end of the fourteenth year, when Jacob
lived in Mesopotamia, and the other in the eleventh year. In that time
therefore, Judah had sons that married wives, they were Er, and Onan, and by
the same Thamar, he had Pharez, that bare two children.

II. Benjamin in the same Chapter is said to be the Father of ten sons, and he
was then but twenty three, or twenty four years old. He was born in the hundred
and sixth year of his fathers age. Dinah, says Polyhistor, was ravished at ten
years old. Josias died at thirty years old, but his son Eliakim was 25. when he
began to reign. Ahaz also lived but thirty six years, 2 King. 22.
and Hezekiah succeeded him at twenty five years, therefore he begat him at
eleven years old: as for this example, Junius and Junccius seem to think the
contrary, but Hicrome in. Epistol. ad vitalem, has recourse to Gods
Omnipotence. For Nature can do nothing against the God of Nature.

Article II.
Man's stature and strength, within these three thousand years, are not decayed.
WHat we said of Age, the same may we speak of Man's stature and force, Whether
Adam were the greatest of all men?
and that very well, For first, if the stature and strength of Man should
universally and perpetually fail, it would follow that Adam was the greatest of
all men. Yet that seems to be false. For what Johannes Lucidus speaks, L. 1. de
Emend. temp. c. 4.
he does it from the vulgar Translation of that place, Hebron was before time
called Cariath Arbe. He says, from thence it may be collected, Adam the
greatest among the Anakims was placed there. In. lib. de Paradiso.
It smells of Fables of the Rabbis, who report that the Sea divided Paradise,
and that when Adam was driven forth, he was forced to swim over. The place
should be thus translated, He was the greatest man amongst the Anakims. Most
also hold, that Adam was not buried in Hebron, but there where the new Adam was
to suffer. Nephillim that were before the Flood, were men, as the Interlineary
gloss expounds it, of huge bodies and proud minds, great strength, unruly
manners, yet is not the opinion of Chrysostom against this, who says that the
Scripture calls, Noble strong and warlike Men, Giants.

II. Though we should grant that men before the flood were like Giants, yet
this concludes nothing against our Tenent, since there have been such in other
ages; Nimrod is called a strong hunter before the Lord, The Names of Rephaim,
Jumjummims, Jamjummims, Emims, and Anakims, signify the same. The prophet Amos
found one amongst the Amorites whose height he compares to Cedars, and his
strength to a Yoke of Oxen. What think you of Og, King of Bashan, whose bed was
nine Cubi^s long, four br^ad, not according to his own measure (as the Chaldees
Pharaphrase and Complutensia would have it) for so the mesure were uncertain,
but reckoning according to the common measure of a Man, as Tremelius, Junius,
and Arias Montanus interpret it. What shall we say of Samson, Goliath, and his
brother? In the days of Augustus Caesar, there were Pusio and Secundilla, who
were nine foot and a half long, and their bodies were preserved in the
Sallustian Garden. In Claudius his days lived Gabbara an Arabian who was nine
foot high: and in the days of Theodosius one in Syria was five Cubits high.
Scaliger at Millan saw a young man in an Hospital so tall, that he could not
stand. Goropius Becanus says, he saw a Woman sixteen foot high. Cassanian
says there was at Bordeaux one so tall, De Gygant. c. 6.
that an ordinary man might stand upright between his Legs. I saw at London the
Kings Porter, who was seven foot high, and two fingers breadth. In China, some
of the Kings guard are fifteen foot high; and the King is said to have five
hundred such about him. In the Country of Paragonia they are commonly above
thirteen foot high, and in Symmatra some are twelve foot high.

III. Among the Ancients, a Cubit, a Foot, a Fingers breadth, a Hands breadth
were constant and certain Measures; nor was it lawful for every man to measure
by his own measure. That appears by the Amphora of the Capitol, and the Roman
Congius* and other things. And those measures were taken from a Man of an
ordinary stature. But because the bodies of Men are different, in several
Climates and Countries; they began the measure from a certain principle, whence
other measures were made, as from parts that were certain. Wherefore
Geometricians make a Barley corn atwhart to be the least Measure that is,
measuring the breadth of it. Hence, Guaric.
A fingers breadth are sour grains.
Four fingers a Hand breadth contains.
A foot is four hand breadth, etc.


Since therefore the earth, in respect of fruitfulness is not decayed, and we
use Grains to weigh Gold as our Ancestors did, and the best Architects observe
Vitruvius his measures, there can be no exception. Wherefore the mean stature
must be the same now as it was formerly. I confess the Jews had holy weights,
or of the Sanctuary that exceeded the ordinary weights, and the Greeks had
Royal Cubits; yet I affirm that their ordinary and common ones did not exceed
ours. For if the Ark were measured by the common measure it amounted to 540
Cubits, and showed that it was capacious enough. And Agricola lib. de mensur.
writes that Phya the wife Pysistratus was accounted so tall, that they honored
her as Minerva: yet was she not above four common Cubits high. Also Artaches
the chief Officer in Xerxes Army, was reported to be very tall, yet was he but
four royal cubits high, abating four fingers breadth. As for the Roman
measure, the same Agricola writes, that a Roman Foot was less than a French
Foot, by two fingers; and it is to be seen yet at Rome, in the Marble
Monuments, chiefly in the Gardens of Angelus Coloccus. But Goropius Becanus,
found so me that were measured to be shorter by four hands breadth, and yet he
was but a short man in respect of ordinary Men. Lastly, Nero, witness
Suetonius, mustered a new Legion of Italians that were six Cubits high: In
Gygantomachia.
he called that Alexanders Brigade.

IV. The measure of diet, all things considered, was allowed for Men, according
to the proportion of their bodies, and questionless it was proportioned
amongst the Ancients, after the usual custom, Homer sets before Hercules, a
man of mighty stature, an Ox for his dinner. Capitolinus and Cord^s allow
Maximinus, every meal forty, and sometimes sixty pounds of flesh. Athenaeus
and Theodorus Hieropolitanus, assign to Milo of Croton, twenty pound, and
three gallons of Wine. In the days of Maximilian the first, Emperor, there
was a Man at Auspurg, who eat a whole Calf raw, as Surius writes.

And the Ancients allowed as much food. For the Greeks as Suidas reports,
allowed a Chaenix by the meal. Whence Clearchus calls Trophis in Homer.
Herodotus, says the same was observed in Xerxes his army, and as Polybius
writes, In Polymnia.
two thirds of a Medimnus of fine Wheat, amongst the Romans were allowed for
every Foot Soldier by the Month, that is four bushels; for a Medimnus
contained six. And this is the same with the former. For four Modii contained
thirty two Chaenices. But that which Rabanus writes of the Israelites, that
three Chaenices of Manna, were allowed every Man in the Wilderness, that was
Gods singular blessing, as Junius expounds it. Also a Horsman amongst the
Romans was allowed two Medimni, as the same Polybius writes, L. 6.
but it was because he had a servant or two as Lipsius says.

V. Lastly, Weapons, Gates, Sepulchers, Beds, L. 5. de mil.
etc. can show as much, all which were anciently of the same dimensions. Romans
c. 6.
Aristotle writes that Beds in his time were but six foot Miscel. c. 4.
long. Magius who has written a Tract for the contrary opinion, reports that
the Tombs at Pisa in Italy are no longer than ours are, and he adds that at
Pisaurum, in a Magazine for Armor, he saw the Helmets of the Duke of urbine
dug up in the fields, near Metaurum, where Asdrubal was conquered by the
Romans; his words are these, They were no greater than our Soldiers more
commonly. D. Hawkewill saw in the Church of the Abbey at Malmsbury, a Tomb that
was said to be King Athelstanes, and it was not greater then ours. And in the
place for dead bones in the Monastery at Glassenbury, there could no bone be
found that represented any great stature. Sands in his Travels writes, that
entering the Pyramids he met with such low and narrow entrances, that he was
forced to stoop as he went. And he adds that in a spacious place built of
Theban Marble, that he saw a Sepulcher seven foot long, and scarce four foot
broad. It was reported to be the body of the Founder, Charops. I saw at Leyden
two dead bodies Embalmed, that were buried before Christ, one was of a small,
the other of a bigger stature, but neither of them greater then ours. Those
arms that are sometimes showed of a vast Magnitude, as we saw in the Castle of
the Earl of Fenton in Scotland, the Sword of King Robert, they were made to
fright Men, or to vaunt with, as appears by that Alexander did in the Indies.
Exodus 27. 1
Yet the Altar of the Tabernacle was said to be three cubits high. But if those
Cubits were then taken by the stature of the men then living, and men were then
four Cubits high, the Priest was but one Cubit above the Altar, which was a
cause of trouble, certainly, in his Administration. Solomon's Altar was ten
Cubits high, 2 Chro. 4. 1 Exodus 20. 26.
but it had steps from the ground. And though God may seem to have forbid men
to go up by them, yet that was only that their nakedness might not be seen.
Against what we now have said, five things are chiefly objected.

I. That ofttimes, Sceletons of vast stature, and mighty great bones are
commonly found.

II. The Bible speaks much of Samson and others; and the Heathen speak of
Diomedes, Ajax, Hector, Hercules.

III. Physics were given in greater quantities formerly, and blood drawn in
greater abundance.

IV. The duodenum gut is called so by Herophilus, formerly because it was
twelve fingers broad in length; and now a days, it is hardly four.

V. That impurity is contracted in the seed by propagation in successive
generations; and, thence must necessarily follow diminution in magnitude and
strength. Yet though these seem brave arguments, they are not so co^siderable,
In vita Sertorii.
that they can disprove our opinion. As for the first, we grant it is so. For
Plutarch out of Gabinius, which Strabo says, is full of Fables, reports, that
in Africa the body of Antaeus, was found of sixty Cubits; Fazellus says,
seventy. In the fourteenth year of the Emperor Henry the Second, Malmes. l. 2.
c. 17. de gestis Reg. Angl.
the body of Pallas was found at Rome entire, to the wonder of all men, that it
had lasted so many ages uncorrupted. The wou^d that Turnus gave him, was said
to be four foot and a half. Herodotus writes that the body of Orestes was seven
Cubits, and for this Gellius calls him a fabulous writer. Orion's body was
forty Cubits, and Macrosyris a hundred. B^ccace writes, that one of his teeth
weighed a hundred Ounces, and his staff a thousand five hundred pound. I will
say nothing of that Tooth S. Augustine saw, which were it divided into parts,
would make ten of ours. Nor any thing of Christopher, whose tooth Ludovicus
Vives, on that place of Augustine says, Aug. de civit. Dei l. 15. cap. 9.
he saw, bigger than a Man's fist. I grant, it is so written. Nor do I speak as
boldly as Becanus who writes; I believe not that in Pliny concerning Orion,
though L. Flaccus, and Metellus, who said they went to see it, should swear it
by their heads. We must so deal with our Ancestors, as we would have our
posterity deal with us: But what does all this make against us?

I. It is apparent that Many things were not rightly understood: then, many
things were added, that were Hyperbolically spoken, when as the very ancient
writers did not believe what was reported. There might be some Money found in
the Indies, was presently added that Augustus his image was upon it.

II. These monstrous Figures may be ascribed to Natural or Artificial causes,
or to both jointly. Also great Princes might make these things of ambition, or
Skillful Artificers of curiosity, or Infernal Devils of Malice and deceit.
Truly that mad building near Amsbury, which the Ancients call the Giants dance,
seems to proceed originally from thence. What strange bodies a thousand
Artificers do often present us with, Delrius in l. 9. Mag.
may be collected from the history of two Maids that were taken away, in whose
places other bodies were laid.

III. I know not whether it be wholly impossible for Nature to make such bodies
in the very bowels of the Earth. Whether prodigious bodies like Men can be
framed in the bowels of the Earth?
For it is without doubt, that many bodies have been found that represented the
parts of Limbs, and others that were like entire living creatures. In the
Dioces of Trevirs when caement was dug forth to repair buildings, they dug up
black stones, like women's privities. Diphyes, represents the Genitals of both
Sexes, Agricola.
with a line to distinguish them, At Salfelda in Thuringia, a stone was dug up
out of a Pit that was twenty fathom deep, that was like a firm breast, a foot a
half long, three hands broad, on the fore part; where the ribs ended it was six
fingers thick, and three where the whirlebands on the hinder part were pierced
in the middle. The back bone was empty of that should represent the marrow;
Also Goropius Becanus, saw in England, a Stone cut out of the top of a
Mountain, that was exactly like to a Perch, and not the least line wanted for
its perfection. I will say nothing now of a Turnep near Harlem that was dug up
in the year 1583. It was like a Man's hand with nails, and all the distinctions
of fingers, and the lineaments; I saw the picture of it at Lions, with CL. D.
Baudarcius my Patron. I will say nothing also of that of Agricola: we saw a
small stature of a Man, that carried a Child on his shouders, made of silver
by nature. And if these things seem only to be understood of the outward forms
described, and the matter to be wholly different, let I beseech you Fossill
flesh answer that exception, which was reported to be found sometimes, and of
which in the fifth Classis of our Thaumatographia, we spoke some things out of
Libavius.

IV Lastly, D. Hawkwill thinks that such vast bodies may be ascribed to the
Devils copulation with women. And truly, says S. Augustine, De civit: Dei l.
15. c. 23.
it is a most frequent report, and many say they have tried it, or heard it of
others, of undeniable credit, Whether women may conceive by the Devil?
that the Sylvani and Fauni, which they commonly call Incubi, have commonly
committed wicked actions with Women, and have desired, and obtained to lie with
them, and some Devils which the French call Dusii, do daily attempt and effect
this uncleanness; and many such men affirm it, that it were great impudence to
deny it. Also Tostatus, writes that of such monstrous copulations, In c. 6.
proceed the strongest and tallest Men. Valesius and Delrio agree with him.
Genesis q. 6.
It is no doubt, Vales. sac.
but if any such things have happened, Phil. c. 8.
it happened in the time of Heathenisme especially, Delrio in disq.
when the Devil had most power, but not so after Christ was come. For that the
Oracles ceased, Magic.
and great Pan was dead, not only Plutarch writes in a particular Book, but
the History of Epitersis. shows the Proclaiming of his death about Paxa. D.
Hawkwell rests in this opinion, But to speak truth, and to confess
ingenuously, I scarce dare agree with him. For though it were granted that the
Devils should lie with Women, yet it follows not that they should conceive,
and that for the unfitness of the prolifique matter. The Devils are spirits
and cannot have it of themselves. First therefore they must be Succubi, and
steal it; and then Incubi and inject it. And in the mean while the Seed is
spoiled of its inward heat and spiritall, as being easily dispersed: whence it
is, that some Witches say they felt it cold. Further, that seems to be a work
of Imperfection. For if Giants exceed so much, in magnitude, that it hinders
any actions, they are to be called Monsters; And truly, Bartholinus calls him a
Monster, whose grinding Tooth, Augustine says he saw. In the interim every man
may think what he pleases. Phys. gener. 6.
He that desires to know more exactly of the Devils copulation with Women, let
him read, Ambrose Pareus, and Caspar Bauhinus concerning Hermaphrodites. As for
the second Objection, it is no more forcible then the former; for neither did
the latter times yield to them, nor do our times fall short of them. Tribellius
Pollio speaks the same of C. Marius, Capitolinus of Maximinus, Vopiscus of
Aurelianus, Barletus of Scanderbeg, and Fazellus of Galeotus Bardesinus a Noble
Man of Cathay; and others of Tamberlane and Ziska, etc. Georg. le Fuer writes,
that Anno. 1569. there lived at Misni^, Nicolaus Klunherus the President of the
Cathedral Church, who without any help lifted a Tun of Wine out of a Cellar.
Canicul. colloq. 6.
Majolus says, that at Asta in the presence of the Marquis of Pescaria, a man
played with a pillar of three foot long, and one foot diameter, as another
would play with a ball. He reports also that one of Mantua, called Rodomant, of
a mean stature, would break a rope as big as a Man's arm, like a thread.
Ernaudus Burg, a Spaniard, Servant of the Earl Faux, as Frostardus relates,
carried an Ass loaded with wood, up 24 stairs into a Chamber, upon his back.
Lobelius, a Polander, writes in describing the things were done Anno. 1582, at
the Circumcision of Mahomet, son to Amurat, that one man took up a piece of
wood so great as twelve men could hardly carry it, and he laid upon his breast a
stone that ten men could not bear. Camer. in Medit. Historicis.
Forsbergius with his middle finger of his right hand could thrust any Man out
of his place. Pothowa Captain of the Cossakes, sath Leunclavius broak an iron
Spurr, as a man would tear paper: Johannes Romanus in England could carry an
Ox. Lastly, Anno. 1575, there was a Man killed of vast Magnitude by James
Niazahilovius a Polander, Scythian. His forehead was twenty four fingers broad,
Thuan. l. 6. ex Leon. Gerecio.
and the rest of his body was so great, that his carcass lying on the ground,
would reach as high as a Man's navell, when he stood.

The third cannot be granted.

For I. Goropius Becanus speaks expressly. Whether Physics now a days may be
given in as great a dose as formerly?
Bodies will endure Helle^^r now as well as they did formerly, in the same or
greater quanlity, as I have tried in others. And Jacchmus is of the same mind.

II. I remember, says Galen, that blood was drawn to six pound weight in some
men, and so the Fever was cured. But he took less from others. Where the
forces are strong and age will allow it, C. 14. de Curat. per venae sect. ^. 9.
c. 14.
it is fit to draw blood till they faint.

III. Pareus writes that in four days he drew seven pounds of blood from a
Man, and D. Deodate affirms that from a Man of seventy six years, in three
days, he took sixty Ounces of blood. In observat.
Also Schenckius mentions strange bleedings at the nose, when sometimes
eighteen, sometimes twenty, sometimes forty pounds of blood have run forth.
Lastly, Pasquier in Epistol. ad Turnerum observed, that blood was drawn, now
more commonly than formerly; for of old, to open a vein was dangerous before
fourteen year old; and it is usual. What concerns the Gut, twelve fingers
broad, It is true that Archangelus Picolominie concludes thence, that men were
greater then, and lesser now; but how truly, let him see to it.

I. It is certain that Pliny and Tertullian; L. 2. lect. Annot.
mention Herophilus, yet it is uncertain what age he lived in. And should we
suppose that he lived a thousand years since, it will follow that two third
parts of men are lost in their statures; Whether the gut duodenum be now
shorter than of old?
and if men be now five foot high, they were then fifteen.

II. If that happen to us by reason of those times, then that happened to them in
respect of former times. And it is wonder, nor Galen, nor Hippocrates should
speak any thing of them.

III. Riolanus seems to decide this controversy, when he writes, And take
nothing from the Ancient Measure, L. 2. Antrop. c. 12.
unless you add the more slender and narrow part of the Ventricle which
reaches forth from the bottom below, to the very beginning of the windings of
the guts, which I have often seen to be twelve fingers breadth long.
Laurentius, and many others, think that the Ancients took the Pylorus with the
Duodenum. The last thing of the Impurity of Seed is false.

For I. We see sometime that sickly Parents beget strong and healthy children.
L. 6. c. 13. Whether prolifick seed be now more impure than formerly?


II. The same may be said of Animals: and doublesse Men had faild by this time,
and there had been an end of the dispute.

III. There are many Examples, of women that have exceeded in bearing of
Children. Vives relates of a Country Man in Spain, whose progeny had filled a
Village of a 100 houses whilst he yet lived. In the Temple of the Marschall in
Essex, there is a Sepulcher sen of one Mary Waters, who when she died hd of her
Legitimate posterity, three hundred sixty seven children, sixteen of her own, a
hundred and fourteen of her childrens, two hundred twenty eight, in a third
degree; nine in a fourth. Also that is common. The Mother said to her Daughter;
Daughter, say to your Daughter, that she must mourn for her Daughters Daughter.



I let pass other examples. And I conclude, that strength and stature have not
failed for some thousands of years.

Article III.
Nothing is wanting to the Faculties of of the mind.
THus much is spoken hitherto concerning those things are principally to be
considered in the body of Man: now follows the rational Soul. Wherein we are
to consider whether the faculties thereof have failed in general or in
special; That is principally known, both by the proceedings of Arts, and
manners; yet not omitting those things that are requisite thereunto, as Memory,
Judgment, Imagination, wherefore these parts are to be considered.

I. That Memory and Judgment have not failed. II. Nor any thing in the three
Faculties. III. Thirdly, nor in Speculative Philosophy. IV. Nor in practical
Philosophy and History. V. Nor in Languages and Arts. VI. Nor in M^chanicall
Arts, and Navigation. VII. Nor in Manners.
The first Branch.
Memory and Judgment have not failed.
HOw have they failed, when as greater things have fallen out in the latter
times, and in our own, than were the vast examples mentioned by the Ancients?

Seneca the Rhetorician says, In prooem. l. 1. controvers.
that he rehearsed two thousand words in the same order they were spoken; and
that he repeated from the last to the first, all the verses that each man
propounded, that came to hear his Master, and they were above two hundred
persons. L. 3. var. lect.
But Marcus Antonius Muretus, reports of a certain young man of Corsica, who
studied the Civil Law in the University of Padua, who could repeat thirty six
thousand names without any staying, in the same order they were spoken. To
which Muretus adds, I know not any of the Ancients I can oppose to this,
unless it be Cyrus: of whom Pliny, Quintilian, and the Latin Writers relate,
that he remembered all the Soldiers names. Xenophor says, Only of his
Officers. But Aenaeas Sylvius testifies, In histor. Council Basil.
that Ludovicus Pontanus a Counselor of Spalato, did not only repeat all the
Heads of the Laws, but the whole body of them; he died at thirty years old.
Famianus Strada writes, that Francis Suarez, L. 1. Academ. prolus.
that famous Jesuit, had so strong a Memory, that he recited Saint Augustines
works in the same words they were written. We have often (says he) seen him
readily to teach and show with his finger the very place and page, wherein he
spoke of such a thing. Greater, and more things may be spoken of Johu Raynolds,
a Famous divine in Oxford University. For men say, he was so conversant in all
Classical Authors, that he might truly be called a Living Libray, or a third
university. Gentilis confessed, that he knew* the Laws better than himself, yet
he was professor of them. To confirm the force of Judgment and the other
Faculties, In 2. de C. D. c. 17.
it shall suffice to Instance in Budaeus, Tostatus, and Scaliger. Ludovicus
Vives says, that France never brought forth any man that had a more sharp wit,
strong jugdement, more exact diligence, or more learning; nor yet Italy in this
Age* And indeed he had more knowledge of the Latin and Greek Tongues, than of
his own. Wherefore what he writ in them was extemporary. If you read his Books,
De Ass, you shall find he had read all the Philosophers; and was employed in
public Affairs both at home and abroad. But this is the greatest wonder;
which he found in him only (they are the words of Vives) Both the Master and
the Scholar, and the method and reason of teaching, and the tenth part of
those things Men can hardly learn under other great Masters, that he learned
wholly, Possev. in Appar.
being his own Master, from himself. Tostatus in the 22, year of his age had
the knowledge almost of all Arts and Sciences, Bell. de Eccles. script. De
Vivers. and doctis viris Hispan.
whence one writes of him, This the worlds wonder, knows all to be known. And
Metamorus writes further of him. Had he lived in any age than in in that he
did, we should never Envy at Augustine of Hippo, nor Hierome of Stridon, nor
yet any of the Ancients. By Scaliger, I mean Joseph (though his father was a
Man of so great learning, that Lipsius reckons him to be the fourth, with those
three that he admires amongst the Ancients) whose commendation ^ounds in the
mouths of learned men, (if you except Schoppius, who was the shame and spot of
his Country.) In praesat opus Scalig.
There is nothing (says Casaubon) that any man would learn, that he could not
teach; he had read nothing, (and what had he not read?) but he presently
remembered it; there was nothing so obscure or difficult in any old Author,
Greek, Latin, or Hebrew; but if he were asked, he would presently answer to
it. He readily remembered the Histories of all Nations, all Ages, the
successions of Empires, and the Estate of the Ancient Church. He held a record
of all Animals, Plants, Metals, and of the properties of all natural things,
with their differences and names, were they new or old. He knew perfectly the
situation of places, the bounds of Provinces, and the diverse divisions of them,
at several times. He left none of the more weighty Arts or Sciences, that he
attempted not to learn; he had the knowledge of so many tongues, so exactly,
that had he done nothing but this all his life time, L. 2. Hist. sui tempor.
it would worthily be accounted a Miracle. The same is is witnessed of him by
Julius Caesar Bullingerus, a Sorbon Doctor, and Professor at Pisa, but in
fewer words: for he writes thus. The year 1609 follows, which was fatal by
the death of Joseph Scaliger; than whom our age brought forth no man of a
greater Genius, and Ingenuity for Learning; and it may be the Ages past, had
hardly his equal for all kinds of Learning. Pasquir. l. 5. c. 38.
To these I may add, that young Man, who in the year 1445 was at Paris, who
though he were but twenty years old, yet was he very well versed in all Arts
and Sciences, and therefore he was thought to be Antichrist, and born of the
Devil. Castellanus who then lived, writes thus of him.

A youth I did behold
But twenty years old
Who could all Arts unfold.
And the Degrees uphold.
He boasted that he knew
What ever had been writ
Had he but once the view;
As a young Antichrist.
But if we consider the whole matter exactly and shall compare the condition of
the later times with the former, we shall find that we can do as much and more
than they could. For we have many helps the Ancients wanted. Amongst which the
Art of Printing is the chief. For by this the prices of Books are eased, which
were so high in former ages, that Plato paid three thousand Florens for three
Books, and the Books of the Ancients are preserved for our use. Only this is
necessary, that we may employ less time in gaining languages, and that
Controversies in Religion may be shortened, and that equal diligence may be
used, and the like Patrons may be found. Aristole received from Alexander,
eight hundred Talents to compose his natural History: Roscius the Comoedian
had a daily sallary of three hundred florens. Aesop the Tragoedian, left to his
son 1500000 Franks. How much hard Labor can do, we may learn by the example
of Joseph Scaliger. For he in twenty one days time, learned all Homer by
heart, and in four months, he learned all contained in the Greek Poets
besides. Hence, says Vives, good wits grow in any place, if they may be
adorned, it may be in some places more frequently, but every where some. Orat.
2. 5.
And Quintilian writes. Nature has not rejected us, that we should be
slothful, but we indulge more to our selves than we ought: so then, they did
not so much exceed us in wit, as in resolution. In the mean while certain it
is, that there is a circular motion also in habits; For first, the Egyptians
floruished; Then the Greeks; At length, Learning forsook Athens, and passed
into Italy, And now in the principal parts of Europe, there are most learned
Men. In praef. Schol. Mathem.
And I dare say with Ramus, we have seen greater increase of learned men, and
of their labors in one Age, than our Ancestors saw before in fourteen ages
that are past.

Part. II.
There is nothing decayed in the three Faculties, Divinity, Law, or Physic.
IT is almost clear concerning Divinity, that it is now in greater perfection.

For I. The Gentiles were employed in vain disputes concerning the number and
nature of their Gods; They became vain in their Imaginations. Now women
understand better the most secret mysteries that are worth the knowing and
needful, than formerly the greatest Philosophers did. They were all always
eloquent in speaking against their vices; we appear not in a habit, of wisdom,
Minutius in Octavio.
but in our minds, we do not speak great matters, but we live so.

II. The Church of the Jews had the Oracles of God committed to them. But the
Thalmudist, Cabalist, Pharisees and Essens, etc. did strongly wrest them. That
they held a transmigration of souls, not only appears by the opinion of Herod
and of others concerning Christ, Math. 14. 2
as though he had received the soul of John Baptist or Elias, John 9. 2.
But also the question of the twelve Apostles declares as much. And that they
supposed a Temporal Kingdom of Christ, should be upon the earth, that question
shows after Christ's Resurrection, Concerning the restoring of the Kingdom of
Israel. Actor. 1. 6.


III. The three former Centuries are commended for their piety and Martyrdom,
the fourth for learning. For that age, if ever any, had most excellent and
famous Doctors. Thence were Arnobius, Lactantius, Eusebius, Athanasius,
Hilarious, Basilius, Nazianzene, Ambrose, Epiphanius, Theophilus, Hieronymus,
Augustine, etc. Yet Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, are condemned for their
enormous Errors; And then the principal Heresy concerning the Trinity and
Christ's Incarnation was so rife, that in those days, it was an ingenious
matter^ to be a Christian. Erasmus.


And at that time was the opinion of the Millenaries maintained: and that they
were Angels that were called the Sons of God, in Genesis, Chap. 6. Whence,
Peternus on the place. I am ashamed to speak what I am about speak here,
concerning the best writers.

IV. About the ninth Century, Bell de R. l. L. 4. c. 12.
men were so ignorant, that if any man studied Philosophy, they commonly held
him for a Conjurer. Chron. L. 4.
Genebrard says, This is called an unhappy age, and drawn dry of men that were
famous for wit and learning, wanting hoth Famous Princes and Bishops.

V. So soon as Divinity was wrapped up with distinctions, there followed a great
contempt of Gods Word. For Albertus M. brought Aristotle into the inmost and
secret places of the Church of God, whom former times had brought to the door.
The men of former days, did only equallize the sayings of the Fathers of the
Church, with the Word of God: But he with his followers took away that small
Reverence was left unto the Word of God, and compared Aristotle's writings with
it, as if these were founded upon demonstrations, and that concluded only by
probable Arguments. Hence the most famous Graserus supposes that the third
Viol in the Apocalypse was then powered forth; L. 4. Isag.
To this contempt was joined a wonderful ignorance of Tongues; Exot. c. 14.
To understand Greek was suspected; and Hebrew was almost Heresy. Remigius
being ignorant of those Languages, in his Comment upon those words, 1 These. 1.
8, From you sounded out the word, says, that Paul spoke something improperly,
for he should have said divulged; being ignorant that S. Paul writ in Greek. 3
Part decret. de consec. did. 4.
In a part of Germa^y, as appears out of the Rescript of Pope Zachary to
Boniface Bishop of Germany, One Baptized in this manner. Ego baptizote in Nomine
Patria and Filia and Spiritua Sancta. King Alfred in the Pastoral Preface
prefixed to St. Gregory, writes that in his days there was noe Priest in the
Southpart of Humber, who understood the Sacred Office written in Latin, De
corrupto Ecclesiae statu.
or could interpret it. And Clemangus, They came not from their Studies or
Schools, but from the Plough tail, and baser arts almost every where, to take
charge of Parishes who understood little more Latin than Arabic, and they
could not read, and (it is a shame to speak it,) they could scarce distinguish
Alpha from Bets: and if they had a little learning, their manners were naught,
forasmuch as they were bred without learning in idleness, and followed nothing
but ribaldry, plays, eating and drinking, and vain controversies. I shall here
set down the example of Du Prat, a Bishop and Chancellor of France, wh^ when
he met with these words, in the Letters of Henry the eighth, King of England,
written to Francis the First, King of France, Mitto tibi duodecim Molossos, He
thought he m^^nt Mules by Molossos; and afterward observing his mistake, he
mended the matter well, taking Molossos for Muletis, and so doubled his
ignorance. But all men will excuse themselves with that saying of Saint
Gregory. The words of the Heavenly Oracle must not be subject to the Rules of
Donatus. He that would know more herein, let him read Henricus Stephanus, in
his Apology on Herodotus.

VII. Lastly, it is beyond all doubt, that no longer than about two hundred
years did Greek and Hebrew begin to revive. And, as St. Augustine said, before
Pelagius arose, the Fathers spoke more carelessly; and that may be said also of
the times that preceded Luther. I need not speak much of the knowledge of the
Imperial Laws, He that shall compare Baldus, Bartho. Jason, Accursius, with
Cujacius, Alciat, Ho^toman, Duarenus, French men, he shall see the phrase more
polite in these, and the method more exact, and the sense of the Law more
quick. For Cujacius said, as Thuan testifies, that Govianus, of all the
Interpreters of Justinian his Law, as many as are or were, is the only
Civilian, to whom the Garland, must be ascribed, if the question were made
concerning the best. Yea Pithaeus, in his Epitaph made upon him, calls the same
Man the first and last Interpreter of the Roman Laws, from the first
founders. Massonius writes thus of him: Jacob Cujacius, dug up the Roman Laws
by the Roots, and brought them to the light with so great care, that others
before him may seem to be ignorant of them: he alone, after many men, seems to
have sought them out more diligently, and more nearly to have discovered them.
But if we enquire concerning the practick, from the decisions and judgments
that now are at Rome, Naples, Florence, Genoa, Bononia, Mantua, at Perussium in
Italy, Spires in Germany, at Paris, Bordeaux, Gratianapolis in France, we shall
easily perceive, to whether the Goal must be delivered We acknowledge that
Physic flourished in the days of Hippocrates, and was renewed as it were by
Galen, but that it is now come to the top point, may be demonstrated by most
firm Arguments.

And I. Whether the Ancients understood Anatomy.
Anatomy or artificial Dissection of bodies was scarce known to the Ancients.
For the Egyptians Dissected and Anointed bodies to preserve them from
corrupting; The Greeks burned them; witness, Herodotus and Thucidides.
Plutarch intimates that the custom was to burn one Woman's body with ten Men's,
as being fatter; and Hippocrates speaks nothing of these things. Democritus was
found by him, dissecting many Animals, and when he asked him the reason of it,
he answered. I dissect these Animals you see, not that I hate Gods works, but
to search out the nature of the Gall and of Choler. Amongst the Jews, the
custom was either to burn Malefactors, or to stone them: if they were hanged
they were buried the same day: It was sin to touch the bodies of the dead.
Amongst the Romans also, bodies were burnt; The place where, was called,
Puticulae, or Culina; and the vessels their ashes were put into, 2 de Legibus.
Urnae. And though Cicero writes that Sylla was the first, who amongst the
Senators of the Cornelii, 4 De Fast.
would be burnt with fire; Yet Ovid, writes of Remus. The limbs must burn he
did anoint.

And Numa who was addicted to the Sect of Pythagoras, forbad men to burn his
body. Tully himself says, 2 De Leg.
that the Laws of the twelve Tables forbad to bury a dead body in the City, or
to burn it. And these were given in the 300. V. C. year. Lastly, Vignerius,
shows out of the eighth Book of Livie, that the body of the Son of Manlius the
Consul was burned in the fields, and that was done in the year, V. C. CCCC.
XII. Before Syllas death, Pliny prooem. l. 28.
CCLXX. It was not lawful for them to behold the Entralls of man. This custom
began to be antiquated after the Antonini. Macrobius says, it began to fail in
his days: Yet fifty years after, the bodies of Pertinax and Severus, were
burnt, as Dion and Herodian testify. Then lived Galen, who, as some write, did
dissect many Apes and Monkeys, and no bodies of Men, unless perhaps he did
One. Whilst Laurentius writes that he did that often: he says only, it is
probable that he did so. As for the Primitive Church, Tertullian calls
Herophilus a Butcher rather then a Physician, Libro de Anima.
who hated man, that he might know him. And Augustine, Though the diligence of
some Physicians be cruelty, De civit.
yet those men called Anatomists do butcher the bodies of the dead. Dei 22. c.
24
Boniface threatens those with Excommunication, who should take out men's
bowels; Which is not only (says he) made very odious in the sight of the
Majesty of God, but ought also, as being obvious to the eyes of men, to be
exceedingly abhorred. Therefore, in our and our predecessors days, that
Science began to be adorned, and it was adorned by Vesalius, who was the
restorer of it. Valerius, Sylvius, Fallopius, Columbus, Riolanus, Hieronymus
Fabricius ab Aquapedente, Remmelinus, Spigelius, Casserius, and others.

II. The knowledge of Plants, though it were first known to Theophrastus, after
that to Pliny, and most of all to Dioscorides: yet in the Age newly past, this
also is brought to greater perfection: And this is not only apparent by the
peregrinations of Ravilius, L^on^ardus, Fuchsius, Clusius, and Americus, by the
Discovery of the New World, and by Navigations into both the Indies, which
amongst the rest, have brought four most excellent Sudorificks unto us,
Guaicum, China, Sassaphras, and Sarsaparillia: but also by the writings of
Mathiolus, Thurnheuserus, Lobelius, Clusius, Carrechterus, and Bauhinus, who
was forty years composing his Table of Plants. To these I add the most Famous
Man, Adolphus Vorstius, the Botanist at Leiden University in Holland, who was
my Tutour, whose Skill I often wondered at, and that not without amazement.

III. To this, Chymistrie may be joined; which though it were somewhat known to
the Ancients: De Consensu and diss. Chy and Galen.
For Sennertus writes it is probable that Tubal Cai^, was the first founder of
it, and that it flourished in Egypt and chiefly in Arabia, as Geber, Avicenna,
Rhasit, etc. do witness. Yet in these later Ages it was most adorned, by
Lullius, Rogerius, Basilius, Valentinus; but above all by Paracelsus, and his
followers; Suchtenus, Dornesus, Thurnhes^erus, Severinus and Crollius, and also
by those Chymicall Physicians, Andernacus, Quercetanus, Sennertus, D^odate, and
is brought now to this height. From whence diverse Medicaments have sprung,
Tinctures, Spirits, Extracts, Salts, Magistrals, Praecipitates, Glasses,
Reguli, Flowrs, Milks, Sugars, Gills, etc. And though it must be confessed that
some of them are dangerous to give; yet this must not be denied, that it is
only when an unskilful Physician uses them, and they are prepared by an
unskilful Chemist. Otherwise Extracts and Tinctures are stronger than Syrups,
Decoctions, or Infusions. Senner. in Pharmacopaea.
For when the profitable parts are parted from the unprofitable, strange,
gross and earthy parts, or as Schegkius says, as it were from their
excrements, and reffuse, as one may say, it cannot by any reason be denied, but
they must be more effectual, pleasing, and durable. To this belong Magnetic
cures, transplanting of Diseases, Cures of such as are lame, etc. Of these the
Ancients speak very little, but Paracelsus, Crollius, Bargravius, Taliacotius,
Petraeus, and others have spoke abundantly. Wherefore Quercetanus seems to have
said well. If Hippocrates, Aristotle or Galen, himself were now alive, he would
be amused to see this art augmented and adorned with so many Ornaments,
enriched with so many new Inventions, and confirmed with so many wonderful
operations.

Part. III.
Nothing is wanting in speculative Philosophy.
WHat we said of the three Faculties, we can boldly affirm of Philosophy. But
Philosophy being either speculative, or practical, and that we speak of in
this part comprehends under it, Metaphysics, Physickes, and Mathematickes; We
must demonstrate this of each of them in particular. As for Metaphysics, after
Averroes, both the old Scholiasts, and Thomas, Scotus, and the modern Spanish
Philosophers, Sanchiez, Suarez, Fonseca, Masius, etc. have adorned it. And
amongst other Nations, very many are found, as Shieblerus, Timplerus,
Cornelius, and Jacobus Marnii, Scharfi^s, Lippius, Jacchaeus, Capsius, etc. Who
partly have included it in an exact method, and in part have illustrated it
with most exquisite precepts, and in part have adorned it with most large
Disputations. If Keckerman had finished his that he began, there could be
nothing wanting, as many suppose, that were needful to the perfection of a
complete work, directed to its proper end. And I think that no man will deny
but that Sagittarius has been a great help on his Canals. A special part
which others call Pneumatica, is so illustrated and corrected out of the
Scriptures, that it may well be written on the Altars of former ages, To the
unknown God.

The Doctrine of Angels, which many of the Ancient Divines, thought to be
Corporeal, is admirably described. It is most certain that no writing of the
Ancients, can be compared to that of Delrius, de Disquisitionibus Magicis, of
Peucerus, and Julius Caesar, Bullinger de Divinatione. Natural Philosophy is
far more excellent now, than formerly it was.

For I. In Aristotle, innumerable speculations, concerning Matter, the World,
Heaven, and other things are false. We have them now corrected by Aslachus,
Danaeus, Campanella, Verulam, Bartholinus, Nollius, Buthardus and many others.
I know not whether Drebbellius has not exceeded the Ancients in his Book of
the Elements.

III. Natural History before Pliny his age began again to spring up, at length
in his days it increased. Yet because the new world was not then open, nor so
great search made, all could not be discovered by Pliny, that since that time
hitherto is very exactly known by Aldrovandus, Gesner, Agricola, the Anatomists
and others. Boethius most accurately searched out the nature of Stones. The
wonder of the Loadstone were searched by Gilbertus and Cabaus; and Gesner found
out more clearly the nature of Coralls.

III. No man will gainsay that the chiefest of operations is that whereunto the
knowledge of things natural must be directed. He is the legitimate son of
Natural Philosophy, who knows how to produce new Metals, can multiply and
increase Winds, can make artificial Baths of Vitrial, B^imstone, Alum; Can
let fall Artificial Snow, Rain, Hail, Frosts, etc. Can produce new Plants, and
Animals: But the practick part of Philosophy was, till now, in the greatest
darkness; at last in our age the way to it was opened by famous Vernlam,
Vicount of S. Albanes, Chancellor of England in his New Organum, his Sylva
Silvarum, his History of Life and Death, and of Winds. And those that have
afforded any thing notable therein, were either of the age newly past, or of
our times. Histories are full, that Paracelsus, Kelleyus, Setonus, did
Transmute Metals into Gold. Johannes Hunniades a Hungarian, the chief of all
the Chemists in England, our friend, did Enliven a Metal that run. He showed
the same Art, concerning whom, Roger Bacon speaks thus; In sec. plan. terrest.
re-
It is more easy to make Gold, than it is to destroy it. Which Angelus de
Sola, thought to be impossible reason of the fixednesse of the Mercury of Gold,
the maturity, and the so straight Conjunction of it with the other substances
of the same body, that it can never go back. I think but a few are ignorant
what a Polonian Physician did for the r^renewing of plants again. See more in
Rhodologia Rosenbergeri.

Lastly, this Winter an English man is reported to have found out a new and
easy way to make Salt of Seawater. As for the Mathematics, there is no
doubt* but our Ancestors came short of us in knowledge of Geography.

For I. Strabo oftimes refutes Erastosthenes, Hipparchus, Polybius, and
Posidonius: so does Ptolomy, Marinus Tyrius; yet they also are imperfect, being
compared with Mercator, Merula, Ortelius, Maginus, Cluverius, and Carpenter.

II. In the time of Pope Clement the sixth, as Robert Avesburiensts testifies,
when Lodowick of Spain was chosen to be King of the Fortunate Islands, and
raised an army in Italy and France, the English that were at Rome then with the
Ledger Ambassador, departed, supposing him to be Elected Prince of England, as
being one of the Fortunate Islands.

III. One Ephorus an accurate Greek writer, supposed Spain which he called
Iberia, to be some mighty City. Also the beginning of Nilus was formerly
unknown. But now adays they are discovered. The originals of Nilus are near
the Mountains of the Moon, not far from the Promontory of Good-hope.

IV. Of the Antipodes, Divin. Instit. l. c. 2^.
Lactantiu^ of old speaks thus. What do they say that think the Antipodes to
be Men, whose feet walk against ours, do they say any thing? Or is any Man so
foolish to think there be men whose feet are higher than their heads? or that
their weights ly against the places ours do, turn the contrary way? That Corn
and Trees grow downward, that Rain, Snow, Hail, fall upwards upon the earth?
And Virgilius, Bishop of Salisbury was condemned for this of Heresy, by Pope
Zachary. Yet now adays, we are sure there are such, I can speak no otherwise
of Astronomy.

For I. The Ephemerides were not known to Ptolomy; Purbachius, was the first
that brought them forth.

II. Many Instruments within these few years have been found out by Tycho Brahe
Galileus and others, whereby new Stars have been discovered, and Milkie ways,
which reason of Meteors was hid from Aristotle and the Ancients.

III. The Quadrature of the Circle was a thing to be known in Aristotle his
days, b^t it was not known. Nor is it yet known.
Scaliger writes, that he first found it out. Yet Pancirollus says, not above
thirty years since was that art invented, which contains in it some wonderful
secret. What things were less known in the Mathematics by the Ancients?


IV. Lastly, the most learned Brigs, late Professor of Geometry, in the Famous
Universitie of Oxford, says, that the Ancients knew not these things so well.

Copernicus Astronomy which teaches us that the Earth is the Center of the
Globe of the Moon, and that the Sun is the Center of all the other Planets:
which may be discerned by our sight by help of an Optic Glass, lately
invented, in Venus and Mercury, when they are in the lower part of their Orbs.
He shows also by the Diurnall Motion of the Earth, the Rising and Setting of
all the Stars: and by the Annual Motion of the same in its great Orb, to find
out far more easily, the motions and distances of all the Planets, and their
progresses in the Heavens, their Stations and Retrogradations, than we can by
the Epicycles or other Hypetheses, of Ptolomy or of any of the Ancients.

The four Stars (which Galilaeus Galilaei the Florentine calls, Medicea, who
first found them out by his tuba Optica) are always carried about the Star of
Jupiter, and when they fall within the shadow of him they are Eclipsed, Jupiter
intercepting the Sun beams, as the Earth does when the Moon is Eclipsed.

To find out the value of Algebraic Aequations of all things, if it be
rational: and if it be not, yet to express it next unto that in Numbers
absolute: and that as accurately, as we can do any side of a surd number, or
the length of any Irrational Line.

Any Subtendent Line being given in a Circle, to find out the Subtendent of
the third part of the Circumference given (whc. Theos in his comment upon
Ptolomy thought to be impossible) and not only of a third part, but of any
part, be it even or odd. The very Subtendent line is found of an odd part;
but the very subtendent of an even part is not found at one operation, but
only the Square of Subtendent: and the greater the number of parts be, so much
harder it will be to find out the subtendent.

The Canons of right lines, Tangents and Secants to the circle, were not known
to any of the Ancients. Erasmus Reinoldus first framed them; and the Canon of
Sines, (that is far more commodious than the Canon of Subtendents in Ptolomie)
was first discovered by Johannes Regiomontanus, and afterward was most
accurately calculated by many men.

The total doctrine of Logarithms was first invented by John Napier Baron of
Merchiston, a Scotchman; whereof none of the Ancients ever so much as dreamt
of, whereby many Problems in Astronomy, Arithmetic and Geometry are resolved
with very little bour, which otherwise were thought to be impossible, or else
to be exceeding hard, and not to be unfolded but with much toil and loss of
time. Thomas Hariottus a most skilful Geometrician was the first who taught men
to find out the Arpha of a Sphaericall Triangle, or the quantity of a Solid
Angle; no man before him attained this. The ignorance of this proposition
deceived Aristotle in his L. 3. de caelo C. 8. supposing that a solid place
could be completed by a Pyramid. And Petrus Ramus, committed the same error,
16. and 4. lib. of his Geometry, who affims the same thing may be done also by
an Octaedron.

He teaches also to find out the proportion of a Segment of a Circle, by that
way which for Subtle and Accurate truth is equal to Archimedes way (prop. 31.
and 33 lib. de Conoidib.) and for easiness is far beyond it.

Thus far Brigs, to these we might add those things that the most Famous
Gulielmus Avianus, Rector of the College Thoman at Lipsia, my honored friend,
of his own invention has inserted in his Universal Directory.

Part. IIII.
Nothing is wanting in practical Philosophy and History.
Practical Philosophy without all doubt is in the same condition. For should
we read the Books written upon this subject, by Lipsius, Guazzus, Althusus,
Thomas, Henricus, Timpler, Keckerman, Donaldson, etc. who writ in Latin; or
Verulam, Montanus, the most Reverend Hall, Robinson, Feltham, Gentius, Wright,
who writ in French or English, and should add thereunto what Verulam has
written in his Augmentations of Learning, we shall find that Seneca,
Epictetus, Plutarch, and others of the Ancients fell short of them many
degrees. As for the Military art which is part of Politics, the Romans
surpassed the Greeks therein, Histor. p. 1. 5. c. 9. l. Sect. 1.
and Raughleigh is reported to have showed that the Romans were surpassed by
the English in Edward the third, and Henry the fifth his days: Whether our
times in Soldiery are short of Antiqui^y?


It is a question whether the Low Countries fall short of Antiquity. Hunniades,
Temincharius, Scanderbeg, Ziska, Polislaus of Poland, Henricus M. King of
France. Frederick or Nassau, etc. nay be compared with Julius Caesar. For he
fought forty seven battles with success, and was never put to the worst,
except in the Russian war, by the running away of one of the Palatinate. But of
the other, compared to Alexander the great, Pytheus, writes thus. Which of you
two the Garland first should have;
The warlike World long strove; at last it gave,
The same to thee, Henry* by death thou wast.
So made at once, the first Captain and last.


Who of the Antiens better knew the Art of Fortification, than the Dutch and
Italians do? Who used more Noble Stratagems than the Low Countries, in taking
Breda and Zutphane? than the Spaniard did in the interceptions of Amboina: and
the English in the conquering of the thundering Navy. And as for Fights at Sea,
not despising other Nations, the Dutch confederates have the preeminence given
to them, in many men's judgments* They would sail to Heaven with their ships,
if men could sail thither. History is three fold, Natural, Ecclesiastical,
and Civil: Of that we spoke already. This in old Writers is full of Fables;
Now we have the works of Baronius and Ezovi^s, the Centuries of the
Magdeburgenses, revised lately by Luciu^, Hospinians labors, concerning
Temples, Feasts, Jesuits, Monks, the Sacramentary war, etc. Foxes Martyrology,
that is about to be enlarged: and it is no doubt, but some man will be found,
that will accurately perfect i^. The Civil part was of old written by many
particular men: Tacitus is most commended amongst them all. Yet Lipsius calls
him, Forgetful, and one that writes Contradictions; and Tertullian, A most
babbling Liar. Nor does Guicciardine, Cominaeus, Cambden, Thuan, and other, seem
to fall short of him, who without anger or passion, writ the Histories of their
own times, Melior Adamus excellently described the lives of the Learned: to say
nothing of others who writ in their Mother tongues. And if we speak of
Universal History, Johannes Cluverius, professor of the University of Sora in
Denmark, has excellently drawn that forth. Yet C L* Conradus Graserus, our
Reverend Master, seems to outstrip him in some things. For to speak nothing of
Chronology, deduction of Histories, and the Prophetical part of History, in
the Exotic part, he has bound together the acts of the four Monarchies, and
of things concurrent, then from the destruction of Solomon's Temple, unto the
Reign of Ferdinand the first, by certain heads, according to lines drawn upon
the Statue of Daniel, besides the Holy Writ, taken out of profane writers. Also
he has most accurately deduced Ecclesiastical History according to the three
sold period of the Church by John the Divine in his Apocalypse, Revealed by
Seven Seals, Trumpets and Viols. He that shall join together these two parts,
like to Castor and Pollux, I dare promise to him security in the Ocean of
History that otherwise is very unquiet. Commentaries now hot under our hands,
do promise, if God please, a larger deduction. Hitherto appertains Chronology
the Eye of History, which that it is now more augmented and more polished than
it formerly was, is confimed by the writings of Scaliger, Pavellus, Helvicus,
Calvisius, Alsted, and others. The Calculation of the year was along time
uncertain amongst the Grecians, and though it were first invented by Meton,
Calippus, and Hipparchus; yet it was after that mended by Julius Caesar, and
Lilie is said to have mended his Computation; Lastly for History, Keckerman,
Alsted, and (whom I name by way of gratitude) the famous Vossius have done
excellently therein, who also has set forth two incomparable volumes of Greek
and Latin Historians.

Part. V.
Nothing wants in Tongues and Arts.
I Need not say much of Languages. Every one understands Latin* Greek in its
own Climate is rude and barbarous, but in our world, it flourishes in most
places. Amongst the Fathers of the Primitive Church, but two, namely Hierome
and Origin, understood the Eastern Languages. But in these days innumerable
are they that have great skill in them. Amongst whom I place the Buxtorsii,
Amama, Hierome, Avianus, L' Empereur de Dicu, as the chifest Leaders. The
Christians hardly ever saw an Hebrew Grammar before Caprio, scarce a Chalday
one before Munster, or a Syriac one before Tremellius and Masius. But now they
are not onelo Grammarians, but have set forth particular work themselves. And
this will be demonstrated by Hutters Cube, which he set before his Bibl^;
Johnsons, That I saw hanged up in the Library at Leyden; Lubinus his Clavis of
the Greek Tongue, Mulfuretus his of the Hebrew, The Horologium of Scikkardus,
the circles of Stephanus Colerus; The Harmonia linguarum of Cruciger, The
Lexicon of Francus disposed by proper Names. As much may be said of Arabic,
for before Raphelengius, Baptista, and Erpenius, no man set forth a Grammar of
it. Now men are excellently skilled therein, as Golius Professor at Leyden,
Brodardus with the Cadomenses, Schikkardus with the Tuingenses, and others. To
Arts I refer Grammar, Logic, Rethorick, Poesy. I have now explained the
condition of the former. I add only this, that it was an admirable Artifice
that the Irish Fathers observed in their Janua Linguarum: but that is far
before it, that Johannes Comenius, my friend, has communicated in his. For he
has not only in Sentences set down the Primitive words, but he has so
disposed them, that it seems as it were a Synopsis of Philosophy. The Ancients
had notable skill in Logic, and the Scholiasts have writ many things
concerning the precepts thereof very wittily, and subtilely; yet we are nothing
behind them. For since the virtue of an Instrument consists in the use
thereof, and Logic Rules are but as it were certain Measures of things, and
such as are indivisible; there is less due to that age that was overmuch in
disputes, and neglected the use, calling the Rules into question; More to that
time, in which the rules are directed to their use, and the use is diligently
and accurately inculcated. But Keckerman alone has done this: His book of
Logic is of so great Esteem, that in the University at Glascow, it is
expounded, and it is urged in the Evangelicall Schools in Hungary, is extolled
by the Socinians themselves, and is in the hands of all their Students. To
pass over the testimony of Johannes Valentinus Andreas, In Theater Scholastico.
his own scholar Alsted spoke truly of him. I say of thee Rare Keckerman,
That of three breasts thou art a Man.
Of Aristole, Ramus, and Melancthon.
Melancthons brevity, Ramus Method, one;
That surpassed Aristotle alone.


To these we may add the Logic of the Famous Burgersdicius, Philosopher in
the University at Lions, wherein he has corrected some errors of Keckerman.
The Axioms of Hunnius and Sagittarius, the Logical Works of Alsted and Pareus;
All these works are so written that they may show the right use of Logic.
Rhetoric and oratory, flourished in Greece principally in Demosthenes his age;
in Italy, when Tully and Salust, lived, and some others: But now we must needs
acknowledge that it flourishes more, than it did formerly under Monks and
Scholars. It is well known, what Lipsius writ truly of himself, though he did
it blushing: and there is no Man ignorant of the Modern Orators, Putean,
Baudius, Heiens^ius, Vernuleius, Barclay, etc. Poetry excelled in Homer amongst
the Greeks, in Virgil amongst the Latlne Poets. L. 3. Poet. p. 1.
Virgil, says Scaliger, brought up to the top of perfection by his choiser
studies and judgment, that art that was but rude when he received it. And
again, I think that he only knew what it was not to trifle: he is the only
Poet amonst all the Poets, and compared single, he may stand for all. If we
speak of Comaedians, Plautus is admired by most. Erasmus thinks there is more
exact Judgment in one Comedy of Terence, than in all Plautus his works. But in
the following ages, the Art of Poetry was hid as under Cimmerian darkness, and
Verses were written which, brand the Age and the Authors with a mark of Infamy.

King Ethelberd his Epitaph is this. Rex Ethelbertus his clauditur in Poliandro.
Fana pians certus, Christo meat absque Meandro.


And this was made on Gervasius Blessensis, Abbor of Westminster. De Regum
genere pater hic Gervasius, Ecce,
Est and defunctus; mors rapit omne genus.


Venerable Bede* had this Epitaph. Presbyter h^c Beda requiescit carne sepultus.
Dona Christ animam in coelo gaudere per aevum.
Daque illi Sophiae d' ebriari font, cui jam
Suspiravit ovans intentus semper amore.


But we in the last age had two Poets, Ronsard and Buchanan (To say nothing of
Bartus who writ excellently in French, or of Torquatus Tassus in Italian, or of
Spencer who writ in English, of Kochonovivs in Poles Language, of Opitius who
is yet alive, who writ in the German tongue) who might be compared to Homer and
Virgil. Of the former, Pasquire speaks thus. Would thou Virgils verses make
Or wanton Catullus take.
Or delightful Petrarch show,
Or Pindarus Modes renew.
Ronsard Virgils verses can
And wanton Catullus skan.
And pleasant Petrach he does
With Pindarus grace set forth.
He does so well Pindar write,
And as Petrarch does end^te.
Catullus, Virgil, present,
As if he to them had lent.
Virgil gravely he does sing,
Like Catullus in no thing;
Then wanton Catullus He,
Far from Virgils Poetry.
He Is Virgil and Catullus,
And Petrarch with Pindarus.
Yet is Ronsardus alone,
Besides him there can be none.
If Virgil and Catullus,
And Petrarch with Pindarus,
And all Poets were before
Should live again over and over,
All could not Ronsard aquall
Yet he alone does them all.


Scaliger writes thus of Bucha^an. Unto the highest Pinnacle was Poesy
Come, but in thee it stands, can go no farther hence.
Scotland the bounds of Romes Empire was formerly,
Scotland the bounds shall be of Romes Eloquence.


Yet we have now adays, some that you may reckon amongst the Laureate Poets.
Amongst Comedians, Vernuleius and Frischlinus are not the least. As for
Poetical Invention, the Euphormio and Argenis of Barclay, Sidneys Arcadia,
Montgomeries urania, Astraea, Gurmannus de Alfarache of Alemannus, are as good
as any written by the Ancients.

To conclude, I will add something concerning the Art of Teaching, which many
men have adorned, principally in Languages* yet Petrus Glaumius seems to excel
them all, who so taught the Italian Tongue in half a years space in the
University Giessena* that his Scholars would accurately controvert their
Theses, written of any matter in that language.

The same did so instruct his Scholars at Halla in Saxony in the doctrine of
Copyholds in two weeks space, they having learned nothing but the principles of
Logic before, that they composed Theses of the same matter and would defend
the same miracuously, without any Helper. I was informed of this by that famous
friend of mine, Master Sigismund Evens, who was as it were the Rector of the
College then, and directed all that business. Also he showed me some examples
of the Positions, with a Table that Glaumius had set before it. Holstenius his
Scholar has professed in a Book he newly set forth, that he ca^ do as much.

Part. VI.
Mechanic Arts, and Skill in Navigation, have increased.
BUt, it may be, Manual arts in these latter times have suffered some eclipse.
For the art of Painting was excellent amongst the Romans when their Empire was
at the height. Whence Horace; Ep. 1. l. 2.
Now are we come to the top of Fotunes wheel, we Paint,
Wrestle, and Sing full well, as nointed Greeks more quaint.


Graving and Casting were of old in the greatest perfection, as may also appear
by the Marmora Arundeliana at London, set up in the Garden of the illustrious
Earl of Arundel, that were brought out of Italy and Greece. We saw, amongst
many Inscriptions Urnes and Statues, the Statue of C. Marius, VII. Consul, of
Theseus, and of Hercules, when he was young: I saw also the Faces of Scipio,
Ahricanus, Seneca, Socrates, Aesop, etc. carved and cast to the life. Amongst
them all, the handsome proportion of the statue of Hercules, is most commended,
and of a certain Feminine body; also the head of a Macedonian King, cast in
brass, and it was found in a pit at Smyrna, by Petty who lived there five
years for such purposes. The English carvers do as it were by rule direct their
chiefest works thereunto. One of the most excellent workmen of them in the art
of casting, by the judgment of all the rest, confessed he could not equal the
Lineaments thereof. For that, though the the head were maimed, the Earl of
Pembrok offered 300 pound, and it was refused, as D. Junius the son of
Franciscus, a most courteous Gentleman reported, who showed to me these and
many more rarities.

Lastly, for Architecture, Vitruvius is chiefly commended, nor are the
Pyramids, and Obeliscks of the Ancients things forgotten. Yet though these
things be so: Nothing can be concluded that can any way prejudice our opinion.
For the art of Painting declined afterward, Epist. 119.
whence Sylvius. I saw pictures of two hundred years standing, polished with no
art. And again, If you look upon carved or painted works of two or three
hundred years standing* you will perceive them not to l^ok like men, but like
monsters, and strange creatures.

But in a few years after it grew up again, and Michael Angelus, and Raphael
U^binas were excellent in Italy, Durerus in Germany, whom Erasmus so highly
extols, that he thinks, that if Apelles had then lived, as he was free and
friendly, he would have yielded the bucklers to Albertus, Carving and Casting,
if they do not exced in our times, yet they are scarce behind the Ancients,
and in this is that Axiom verified, that there is a certain circle in humane
affairs. It is true that in Architecture Vitruvius is commended. But that must
be understood for his Rules in Architecture. Otherwise, Politian writes of Leo
Baptista Alberti a Florentin, that he so searched out the footsteps of the
Ancients, that he both comprehended the ancient manner of Architecture, and
made it Exemplary.

That others have done as much may be seen by magnificent structures, which are
found about Castles, Monasteries, Churches and other buildings, whereof the
Itin^rant and Topographicall descriptions of Countries are full.

The Pyramids and Obelisks were works made only to vaunt by, and not for any
profit. Yet the Obelisk set up by Sixtus V. Anno. 1586, is as good as any of
them. It was 107 foot high, and 956148 pound weight. In the erecting of it from
the beginning of May till the end almost of September, 900 Men, and 70 Horses
were Employed, and the charge came to 37975 Crowns, as says Dominicus
Pontanus. But though there were nothing that could show that the former times
in this point come short of ours; Yet some artificial Works and Inventions can
show this, that not very many years since were brought upon the stage of the
World. The principal whereof, are supposed to be the Art of Printing,
Invention of Guns, the Mariners Compass, and some singular Pieces. concerning
the first Inventor of Printing. Who found out Printing?
Historians strive, yet cannot end this strife. Scriverius seems to demonstrate
by many Arguments, that Laurentius Johannis, surnamed Edituus, was the inventor
of it. And it is true that the Author of the Chronicle of Colen in their Native
Tongue, set forth, Anno, 1499 says that the first Prints were found in
Holland, and that the Inhabitants of Mentzs, Cap. 26. de papyro in Bibliotheca
de communicatione linguar. c. de Typis. in Cosmographia.
from Donatus that was Printed there in the year 1450, framed them to that
form we use them now adays, But the words of Mariangelus Accursius are these
Donatus was first of all Printed here. Anno, 1450: Indeed, Johannes Faust, a
Citizen of Ments, who first invented this art in Copper prints, had his
Instructions from Donatus printed before in Holland, in a print of Wood. But
Palmerius in Chronicis, Guilandinus, Vignerius, Bibliander, L. 2. c. 7.
Munster, contend for Guttenbergius: If this contest can be decided, we may
say, that at Harlem were the first grounds of it laid; and Guttenbergius, whom
Polidor Virgil makes the Author of it, did bring it to greater perfection. But
Faustus was the first Man, that first used the art as we do now. Petrus Ramus
had Tullies Offices in print, with this Inscription. This present most famous
work of Marcus Tully was happily ended by me, John Faust, a Citizen of Ments,
not with Ink and Pen, or quills or brass, but by a very gallant Art, by the
labor of my servant Peter de Gerneshem. It was finished, Anno. 1466. the
fourth day of February. Yet whatsoever this may be, Germany will never endure
to lose the praise of it. Beroa^dus. O Germany that did find,
And art useful for mankind,
To write in print a Man's mind.


What is spoken of China, if it be true, yet every man must acknowledge, that
all was worse, L. 3. de occult. nature. Miracul. c. 4.
and more rude, not so neat and well trimmed, nor adorned with so comely
variety of Leters, as Lem^ius says. I doubt not but he would have said much
more, had he seen the Prints of the Dutch, Italians and others now adays.
Every man may easily collect the great profit arises by this Invention.
Polydore Virgil annexeth this to his Oration, de Bibliothec. Veterum. That was
a very great blessing given to Mankind, De Invent. Rer. l. 2. c. 7.
but it is no way comparable to that we have obtained now, since we found out a
new way of Writing. For one man will print as much in one day as Many can
hardly write in a whole year. All men know that Books are now made chea^er,
more common and more correct, than they were in former times. For to let go
the price, I spoke of in another place, I will speak this one thing truly and
boldly, (they are Erasmus words,) I suppose that Hierom's Books making, cost
him less, than they do us in restoring them; And in the Preface to Augustines
Works. The rashness of idle people has scarce dealt so ill with any other, as
with the Books of this Sacred Dr.

At length Warlike Guns were invented, Whether Guns were known to the Anti^nts?
An. 1380 as Magius will have it, or An. 1400 as Ramus says, by one Bartholdus
S^wartz a Monk of Colen, or as Salmuth writes, by Constantine Anklitzen of
Friburg. It is collected from Platina in the Life of Urban the fourth, that
they were first used in the wars of the Venetians, against the Genoes* But that
seems to be an untruth, Nova repert. tit. 11.
which some write that the Indians, or Salmoneus, or Archimedes were the
Inventors of them.

Virgil writes of Salmoneus thus. I saw Salmoneus cruelly tormented
Because he ^oves Thundering Flames invented. Aeneid. l. 5.

Through Greece and Elis Sreets, in pomp he rode,
Requiring to be honored as a God.
In his Coach with four Horses be did fly,
Shaking a burning Lamp to mock the Sky.
Mad fool, to think that Clouds and Thunder can,
Be made with Air and Horses by a Man.


But this seems to be nothing, L. 3. de regim. princip. p. 3. c. 18
but to make men afraid with the noise. And either Plutarch or Livie, or
Aegidius Romanus, who in the Reign of Philip the fair writ of Warlike
Instruments, Anno, 1285. would have spoken something of Archimedes. Nor would
Mahomet have omitted this in his siege of Constantinople, who for the managing
of one Instrument to beat down the walls, was constrained to employ fifty yoke
of Oxen, and 2000 men, as Chalcondyla witnesses. Yet we cannot deny but that
in the Reign of Richard the Second King of England, in the battering of the
Castle at Outwitch, the French had great Cannon, whereby the walls and houses
of the Castle were cloven and broken in many places. But whether those engines
were such as we use now, is uncertain.

The Mariners Compass was not known of old time, Whether the Ancients knew
the Mariners Compass.
as Blondus, Bodinus, Cardan, Bellonius, Acosta, Turnebus, Pancirolla testify.
Had it been found in Solmons days, he needed not to have consumed three years
in going and coming, nor was he so wise as to know all things. In mercatore
scena 3.
The Compass, by Plautus called Versovia, alleged by Lemnius, and called the
Compass, is supposed to be the Helm that turns the Ship, or a rope that turns
the Sail, L* 20. Advers. c. 4.
as Turnebus explains it. Flavius Melphitanus is thought to be the first
Inventor of it, though Gilbertus says that Paulus Venetus brought it from
China; Gilbert. de Magnet.
and Osorius says, the Portingalls took it from some Barbarian Pirates near
the Cape of Good hope. Also that secret of the Lodastone, whereby friends may
communicate their secret thoughts one to another at the greatest distance, is
reported to be an Invention of our times. But because Famianus Strada has
described it at large in the style and vein of Lucretius. L. 2. Pr^lus. 6.
I will for the Readers benefit, set it down in his own words.

The Lodestone is a stone in Nature strong,
For many needles touched there with will change,
And turn themselves to that Star full right,
That next the Pole, above us does give light.
Conspiring in their motion, far asunder,
All move one way at once, it is a wonder.
For if at Rome one stir, the rest are guided,
By the same course, nere so far divided.
If then you would unto your friend endite
Your mind, to whom you know not how to write.
Make a plain Circle large enough, and set
On the Circumference the Alphabet.
Then let the needle in the middle play.
Touched with the Lodestone, that it easly may
Point to the Letters; and to this again,
Prepare another for a Counterpain;
The needle must be touched with the same
Stone, as the former was to fit your frame.
Your Friend that Travells must one Compass take,
And you must keep the other for his sake.
But on the day and hour first consent,
Whereon you mean to show your close intent.
This done, observe the time prefixed, and
As one, so will the other move or stand.
Move then your needle at that time when you,
Would have your Friend to know the thing you do.
And let the Needles point mark ea^h Letter
Softly, that he may understand the better.
The words they make, of this you may be sure;
Your Needles motion will the same procure,
In your friends needle: use your Instrument
Thus till you have disclosed your full Intent.
It Is a graeat wonder for your friend to see,
His Needle travers over the A. B. C.
Guided by yours, that so wide does lie
Distant from his, and so to read thereby
Each word you there make, and if then he please,
He may so send to you again with ease.
When you have done, and when your style stands still.
He can by's Needle write back what he will.
I would this writing were once brought in use,
Then should our Letters suffer no abuse,
Thei'd need no Posts, nor need they stop or stay,
They Would safely pass, and swiftly, no delay.
From Thieves, nor Seas, nor Rivers need we fear;
It were all one thing to be far or near.
Then Princes might their own dispatches make,
With their own hands, what ere they undertake,
We Scribes that swim in Inkes black Sea might then,
Offer up to the Lodestone every pen.
Thus for Srtada. Haseatefferus write, De ^utis affect. l. ^. cap. 3.
that the like may be done by blood drawn forth of the veins of two friends. As
for particular Inventions, many might be instanced in, that surpass, Architas
his Pigeon, Archimaedes his Globe of Glass, Homers Iliads writ in parchment
and put into a Nutshell, the Ship and the Chariot of Myrmecidas; that was
covered with the Wings of a little Be, this with the wings of a Fly. Albertus
M. made a Statue that spoke, he was thirty years in making it, and Thomas
Aquinas brake it. Regiomontanus made an Eagle that at Norimberg met Caesar
Maximilian, and hung over his head directly, and bore him company into the
City. He made also a Fly of Steel, that flew out of his hands, and flew back
again into his hands, when it had first flew round about all the guests, at a
banquet, and in a manner saluted them all. A generous Gentleman, Johannes
Christophorus de Berg, affirms that he has an Invention, that with one turn of
a Wheel, made by a boy of 16 years old, he would raise 800. weight 60 foot
high. The Coach that saild with the Wind, that Stevinus invented is well
known, of which Grotius writes thus. Typhis first made a Ship with sails, which
Jove
Did soon translate amongst the Stars above,
But Stevins brought it on the Earth to sail.
Typhis and Joves, may, Stevin's shall not fail.


He affirms elsewhere that he could run-with it seventeen miles in two hours. I
believe also that Cornelius Drebbils wonderful Sphere is not unknown, wherein
he did by virtue of a perpetual Motion, represent the constant and most
apparent Motions and Laws of the Heavens and the Stars, and the Predestinations
of Times, and Motions in them.

But what shall we think of that Instrument, Vranckheimius in Epist. ad
Burggravium.
by means whereof he changes himself into diverse forms of Trees, and living
Creatures, and makes an appearance as if the Earth opened, and Spirits came
forth of it; Hegenitius Iti^. p. 73.
First, in the form of a Cloud, and then changing themselves into another shape
that he commands them, be it of Alexander the great, or of some other King or
Prince. I will say nothing of his Ship that swam under the Waters, and an
Optic Instrument, wherewith in a Starlight night, he could read Letters a
quarter of a mile from him.

Jacobus Metius, brother to Adrian Metius invented a Perspective Glass,
whereby he could take the height of any Tower or body that was distant from
him three Holland Leagues, as exactly as if he stood close by it; and he could
see clearly into England from his own Shore. And he discovered other things
concerning the Globe of the Moon, of the Milkie way, and of Stars, which
Astronomers hitherto called Cloudy Stars, and of other Wandering Stars about
Jupiter, an Invention now adays which the Ancients never knew of. Galilaeus
Galileaei, hearing the fame of this Instrument, says, he came to the Invention
of such an other, by the help whereof he descried those Observations in the
body of the Moon, and innumerable fixed Stars, the Milkie Circle, Clowdy Stars,
and the four Planets, and their periods about Jupiter. The same person
mentioned before, proceeded to search out with geat care and study an Instrument
of the like kind, and he hoped to find it, whereby out of our Horizon in the
Opposite Hemisphere, beyond the bounder of the Hemispheres he might observe all
the Stars there, as if they were apparent in that part of the world we live in.
What shall we say of that Musical Instrument? that by the perpetual, moveable
or moving virtue of the same (as the Artificer reported) in a clear day, the
Sun shining forcibly, only by the Sun beams, that musical Genius being, roused
thereby, without touching the isntrumental parts with your hand; would make
most Heavenly Music. But who is able to recckon up all? If those things be
true, that Mormius has set forth in his Arcanis Rosianis, lately at Leyden in
Holland, (but believe them that will) his example were enough to oppose against
all Antiquity.

As for the art of Navigation, Whether the Ancients were as well skilled in
Navigation as men are N^w.
we need not prove it to be more perfect now, than formerly it was.

I. The Ancients writ on Hercules Pillars, Non ultra. And Lucan writes thus of
the first Ships. First the white Willow whilst the Twigs were green.
Twisted into a Ship, and covered with a Hide,
The bottom was on Waters to be seen,
The Britans over Seas in this would ride*
And the Venetians on the river Po.


II. Fracostorius and Acosta confess that we read no where in Ancient Writers
that men did ever sail into the Main Ocean. But the Phoenicians, Carthagenians,
Tyrians and Sidonians made choice of the shore.

III. Lastly, in the times of our Fathers, the whole world has been compassed
round by Americus, Drake, Candish; and in our times, by Oliver Van Nort,
Schoutenius, Spilbergen L'Heremite, and strange Voiages into the North parts
have been undertaken by the English and Dutch. Moreover the precepts of the Art
of Navigation are written by Petrus Medina, and Baptista Ramusius, and the
public Lectures appointed by Charles the fifth, are yet in use. But it cannot
be granted to be true which Vatablus* Whether Ophir be Peru.
and Arias Montanus say, with whom Als^ed seems to agree, that Ophir, from
whence Solomon fetched Gold and Elephants Teeth should be Peru, by
transmutation of the Letters. For in the West Indies there are no Elephants,
and when under Franciscus Pizarrus, the Countries of Attabaliba were
discovered, and the Spanlards that understand not the language, described with
their hands water or any thing they would have, the Indian answered, Peru, that
is water. So Juca^an, which Montanus thinks had the name from Joktan, is
nothing else, but, What say you? What seek you? To rehearse the Opinion of
Pineda, whereby he applies the name of Tartessi to Tartesso, in Spain, is
enough to answer it. For there are no veins of Gold so plentiful, unless
perhaps they were carried into the New World, and brought back again in their
great Gallions. Since therefore it is so, it is most certain that Arts by Times
succession have suffered no loss, but are come almost to the highest pitch; We
may then say with Lactantius,

God has given every one wisdom in such a measure, L. 2. c. 8.
that they may seek out things unheard of, Divin. Institut.
and consider of things they hear. Nor because they did precede us in time, did
they also precede us in understanding; which if it be given equally to all, it
cannot be engrossed by those that went before us. It is pure as light, and the
Sun beams; for as the Sun is the light of the Eyes, so is wisdom of the mind
of man. Wherefore since it is natural to all men to be wise, that is, to seek
after wisdom, they deprive themselves of wisdom that approve the Inventions of
their Ancestors without using their own judgment and are led by others like
bruit beasts. But this deceives them, that when they hear the name of Antiquity
they think it not possible for them to understand more, because they are called
the younger, or that they could be mistaken who are called their Ancestors.

Part. VII.
Vices were as great formerly, as they are now.
HAving saild over the Straits of the Arts, we are now come into a large Sea of
Manners. Whose chief horrible waves and mighty storms drive forward those that
maintain the contrary opinion. And though all things also at this day are full
of vices, yet since in these last times almost the greatest part of the known
World is converted to the Christian Religion, there is no reason that we should
hold this to be the worst of all, being compared with the Former. Lactantius
himself breaks forth into these words. L. 5. Institut. c. 7.
God as a most careful Parent, when the last times drew on, sent an
Ambassador, that should bring back again the former age, and banished Justice;
lest mankind should always be driven on with the greatest and continual
Errors, wherefore the form of that golden age is returned. Yet it cannot be
said that always and in all places the Honesty of men increases, but we must
grant, that all things run in a kind of Circle; and as times, so do manners
change by course. Tacit. in Annal.
There will be vices so long as there are Men, but these are neither
continual, and amends is made by the interposition of better things. Our
Ancestors, says Seneca, complained so, and we complain as they did, and our
posterity will do the like; saying, that manners are decayed, and wickedness
rules, that humane affairs grow worse, and fall into all mischief; But these
things stand at the same point, and they will stand, only moving a little on
this or that side, as waves that are brought in further by the tide, which
going back leaves more room on the shore. Now Adultery is the chief sin, and
Chastity breaks the bridle; another time men are mad in rioting, and the
kitchen proves the fatal ruin of Patrimonies; sometime Men take care for
nothing but gay apparel, and to trim themselves fine, which shows their mind
to be ugly enough, etc. Vices do not wait all in one place, but they are
moveable, and at ods one with another, they jar together, and are driven away
one by another. But because the contrary part has taken strong arguments from
this matter, we shall handle this question something more strictly and
accurately. But since some vices are committed in Religion, others in Policy,
and others in the common society of men, and, to compare all these severally
with all Nations, would be too tedious for us to undertake; We shall therefore
make our comparison with the Romans, whom Historians and other writers report
to have been the most virtuous and prudent people of all Nations. Under this
branch therefore these points are contained.

I. That the Religion of the Ancients was too sottish. II. That many of their
Laws in Policy were wicked. III. That the people of the Romans were extremely
cruel. IV. That their covetousness was incredible. V. That their
Luxuriousness in venery and drinking was none the like ever heard of. VI. In
Meats. VII. In Buildings. VIII. In costly clothes. IX. That the Justice of the
Roman people, prudence, and valor was not any thing. X. It is probable that
the Church shall be in greater glory than ever it was before.
The I. Point.
The Religion of the Ancients was too sottish.
IT may be easily understood that the Religion of the Ancients, was vain,
foolish, wicked, by their Images, the number condition and adoration of their
Gods. That is first clearly demonstrated out of that place of Isaiah, Isay 44.
verse. 8.
to say nothing of Jeremiah, and the Wisdom of Solomon. For in the framing of
an Idol the folly of man proceeds even so. The carpenter stretches forth his
Line, Jer. 9. 3.
and mark's it out with his square, Sapient. 11. v. 13.
he fits the corners of it, or he describes it with his Compass; at length he
makes it of the fashion of a man, and decks it in man's raiment, that it may be
in the house. He heweth down Cedars, and takes the Cypress and the Oak, which
he strengthens for himself, among the Trees of the Forest; He planteth an Ash
and the rain does nourish it, then shall it be for a man, to be burnt, for he
will take thereof and warm himself, yea he kindles it, and baketh bread, yea,
he makes a god and worshippeth it; He makes it a graven Image and falls
down thereto; He burns part thereof in the fire, with part thereof he rosteth
flesh, he eats thereof and is satisfied, yea he warmeth himself and says,
ah, ah, I am warm, I have seen the fire; and the residue thereof he makes a
God, even his Graven Image; he falls down unto it, and worshippeth it, and
prays unto it, and says, Deliver me for thou art my God, etc. But what
madness think you is this, or to make such things that they should afterward
be afraid of, or to fear what they themselves made. If Images could feel or
move, men would voluntarily adore those they made. Therefore Seneca a heathen,
speaks it, though it be in a scoffing way. They worship the Idols of the Gods,
they kneel down and pray to them, they adore them; and when they stand in awe
of these, they despise the Workmaster that made them. The number of the gods
was so numberless amongst the Heathen, that there were almost more gods than
men. In Boccace they are almost without number. Crinitus has numbered 30000 of
them. Boccac. in geneal. Deorum.
Varro reckons Jupiters only, to have been 300. For there were gods of the
upper house, Tutelary gods, Crinitus de honest. disc. l. 3. c. 14.
Village gods, Household and Closet Gods so many, that Pliny breaks into these
words. The company of gods is thought to be more than there are men, when as
every man makes what gods he pleases, Plin. l. 2. c. 7.
and makes Junos, and good angels which they adopt for them selves. Of corn
only, at diverse times differing in the manner of it, there were Goddesses made,
called, Segetia, Tutelina, Proserpina, Nodotus, Volutina, Patilena, Hostelina,
Flora, Lacturtia, Maluta, Ruricina, I do not name them all, for it troubles me
for that they were not ashamed of them. The condition of their Gods, may make
every man laugh. Flora, when she had been a Whore a long time, and by
prost^tuting her body, had gained wealth, by making the Common Wealth of Rome
her heir by her Testament, she gave the name to their Feasts called Floralia.
Juno was both sister and wife of Jupiter. Fortune, Fornax, Muta, Fear,
Palenesse, Fevers, Priapus and Cupid, are not names of things to be adored,
but of the crimes of such as adored them. But what shall I say of the crackings
of the belly, of the privy gods, dunghill gods? What of the Trojans that adored
a Mouse? of the Egyptians that worshipped Onions and Garlic? Mephitis was in
great honor amongst the Heathens. Tacit. 3.
For in the plundering of Cremona, Hist. c. 6.
all the Temples of the gods and goddesses were rifled, but the Soldiers out
of their superstition spared this only. But this was the goddess of stinks.
The manner of Worshipping in many was very cruel, in others very beastly. They
offered men in sacrifices to the dead, and they fed the fire with man's blood as
with oil. That was a custom amongst the Trojans and Grecians, Aenead 11. and
2. Silic. l. 4.
as Virgil says; amongst the Carthagenians as Silicus; amongst the French as
Lucan; amongst the Moabites, and Canaanites as the Scripture writes; amongst
the Romans, though when Cornelius Lentulus, and Lucinus Crassus were Consuls,
they abrogated this wicked custom.

Lastly, amongst the Jews, as we read in the books of Kings, 2 Reg. c. 16.
it was a custom. Lactantius reports from Pescenius Festus, That the
Carthagenians being overcome by Agathocles King of Sicily, L. 1. c. 21.
fearing left the cause was because they had intermitted to adore Saturn, they
offered unto him two hundred Noble children for one Offering. Moloch's Statue
amongst the Jews was in the Valley of Gehennon, or Tophet: Children that were
Sacrificed were shut within the Idol, and the fire was kindled; and that they
might not be heard to cry, they beat Drums, and Cymbals. Their beastliness
Priapus and Berecinthia may show. The Image of the first, was stark naked.

Of their beastly Priests, it is said thus. Nos pudore pulso stamus sub Jove
Coleis apertis.


When the Sacrifice was ended they that were present fell to promiscuous
venery. In brief; August. de civ. dei. l. 6 c. 8.
This disease, that Crime, this disgrace was professed in their adoration, that
will hardly be confessed by torments in the vicious lives of men. Before the
Horselitter of Berecinthia, August. de civ. D. l. 2. c. 4.
on a Solemn day, there were washings, and such songs were sung by the most
wicked Players, that I do not say the mother of the Gods, but the mother of any
Noble persons, L. 1. c. 21.
or any honest men, nay the mothers of the very comedians ought to be ashamed
to hear.

But the Men of Lyndus held those solemnities to be violated, if by chance at
their times of performing these rites, any good word had dropped from any of
their mouths. I will say nothing of their South-sayings, looking into Entralls
and other kinds of Divinations, as also of the fooleries of the Thalmudists,
and Cabalists. Cato and Cicero that were Heathens laughed at them themselves:
Cicero de divin. l. 3.
Petrus Galatinus de Arcanis Catholicae veritatis, Buxtorfius in Synagoga
Judaica, have described these. Since therefore the Sacred worship of the
Ancients was so simple, In fragment.
cruel, and obscene; It is no wonder that Seneca writ, If a man had leisure to
see what they do and suffer superstitiously, he shall find them so unseemly
for honest persons, so unworthy of free Men, so unfit for discreet men, that no
man would doubt but they were mad, if they were mad in fewer numbers, but now
they are so many that they are defended by their numbers from being thought to
be mad. He that would read more of their gods, let him read Gyraldus in
Syntagmate, Dempster in Antiquitat. Roman. and Seldom de Diis Syris.

Part. II.
There were many wicked laws among the Ancients.
AS we have showed the Religion of the Ancients to be daubed with many vices:
so, since a Law is a sacred Decree, commanding things honest, and forbidding
the contrary, It will be very easy to show the same things concerning their
Laws. And because Solon and Lycurgus are said to have founded most famous
Commonwealths; And Plato and Aristotle to have written the best platforms of
them, if we can convince them of wickedness and injustice, I think I shall
give satisfaction in this point.

In Solons Commonwealth, two things are chiefly observed.

First, Wherefore, for ease of the poor, he abolished all former contracts for
debts?

Secondly, By what Law he would make them infamous, that, when there was
sedition in the Commonwealth, held with neither side.

The first was unjust, because he did not enjoyne his friends to restore the
great sums of money they had taken up before, upon trust, being forewarned by
him what design he had in hand; and without Examining the reasons of
particular debts, he at once abolished them all. The other was so, because it
takes away the means of repressing sedition in the Commonwealth. For it must
needs be that reconciliation be made by those that are mediators between them
both. Lycurgus directed all his Laws to Valor, and to erect a Warlike
Government. He published that it was lawful for Men to rob for victuals, and
he would not have them punished though they were taken in the act. He decreed
that Boys and Girls should wrestle naked, in public; and that it should be
lawful for old men's young wives, to make choice of what young man they
pleased, and to lie with them for to have children by them; and as peace is not
ordained for war, but the contrary way; so the Commonwealth should be
instructed for Peace, rather than for War. They that in their childhood are
addicted to ill things, in their youth, having gained a custom, they will
forbear none how great soever. That Law that draws men on to deceive in some
things, does invite men to deceive in all, and as often as we can: Nor can
robberies be better put in practice than under the protection of a Law, that
does not punish a Man for theeving, but for not doing it with dexterity.
Lastly, to prompt men to Lust, and to permit Adulteries, what an impiety this
is? Plato has deserved the same reward that Lycurgus did, by the Law he made
for breeding up young men and Maids in Schools. And by that law he made, To
have all things common, He decreed that form of Government that was contrary
to nature. If marriages were taken away, and men might indifferently use what
women they pleased, all natural love between parents and children would be
lost; and upon quarrels, very brothers would murder one the other; and those
things should be honest and lawful, that are wont to be adjudged heinous and
filthy. The propriety of things contains matter both of virtues and vices, but
the community of them contains nothing but a liberty of vices.

Aristotle seems the most absurd of them all.

For I. He bade to cast forth deformed chilren; But Nature cannot desire the
production of any thing, and not love that it produces. Can any man expect
that they should spare the blood of other men, Lactan. l. ^. c. 23.
that do not spare their own? They cannot be thought innocent who cast their
own bowels to the Dogs for a prey, and as much as lies in them, they kill them
more cruelly than if they had strangled them.

II. He enjoined Abortion. But, for that, at Malta a woman was condemned to
die. For she was thought to have taken away a Citizen designed for the
Commonwealth. Lastly, he commanded those pictures of the Gods to be kept, in
which custom allowed laciviousnesse, otherwise they were to be rejected. But
men sin more by imitation of the Gods. Lucian confesses plainly, that when he
heard of the rapes and adulteries of the Gods, he fell in love with the same.
And Cherea in Terence says, that when he saw the Picture of Jupiter descending
into the Lap of Danae, in a Golden Shower, he was provoked thereby to do the
like. But what God? says he, He that shakes the Heavens with a Noise, and
should not I a contemptible man do the like? Yea, I did that, and willingly;
For men mark more what Jupiter did, than what Plato taught, or Cato decreed. To
this purpose are the Saxon Laws, that are altogether as absurd. For in
doubtful causes, when there wanted manifest proofs to confirm the truth,
sometimes they used Duels, sometimes to make men touch burning iron, or
scalding water, sometimes they cast them into the bottom of a deep river, or
Keel-Haled them. They that were killed in duels were guilty; the conqueror was
disgraced, if he did not kill him that was worsted: they that escaped in the
other punishments were acquitted; they that were carried to the bottom, were
held to be innocent, they that swam on the top were guilty, as if the water
rejected them.

Part. III.
The cruelty of the Roman people was extreme.
BUt let us proceed to the wickedness of the Romans, and let us observe
whether they did not equal, or exceed the wickednesses of our times, or of
those that went but little before us. But whether this or that do appear to be
manifest, it will be false to conjecture from thence, that there is a general
decay of manners.

First, therefore I shall speak of their cruelty, which I shall show by the
Jews, Christians, and other Nations, and from the Romans themselves, amongst
themselves, as being invincible Arguments. Lipsuis de Constant.
They killed of the Jews in the siege of one only City, Jerusalem 1000000. and
they took captives 97000. In the time of Trajan innumerable companies of them
were slain, says Eusebius, Julius Severus, being sent by Adrian the Emperor
into Judaea, did almost depopulate the whole Country. For he beat down fifty
most strong Castles, burnt nine hundred eighty five Cities and Towns, and slew
50000 Jews. As for the Christians, it was their name only that was condemned,
and not any fault they committed. Whence at Lions there was a Table carried
before Attalus, The Martyr, This is Attalus the Christian. In Asia they cried
out against Polycarpus; Polycarpus has confessed himself to be a Christian: De
civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 52.
And so great were the Persecutions, that Augustine compares them to the
plagues of Egypt. Under Nero, they were burnt for lights in the night.
Lactantius writes of Dioclesian; No man can write the cruelty of this Savage
Beast, Tacit in Annal. l. 5. c. 11.
so much as it deserves, which lying but in one place, yet did rage with Iron
teeth, all the world over; and did not only dissipate the limbs of men, but
brake their bones, and was mad against their ashes, that there might be no
place for their burial. Hierom says, In Epist. ad Chrom. and Heliod.
that there was no day wherein there were not 5000 men slain, thirty Roman
Bishops were put to death from Peter to Sylvester, who dyed Martyrs. And to
speak all, I will, in three words, The whole world almost was polluted with the
Sacred blood of the Martyrs, Sulpit. l. 2. Sacra. Histor.
and it was never spilt more in any wars. And if we should reckon up the
kinds of torments we might boldly use these verses in Virgil. Had I a hundred
Tongues, Aeneid. l. 6.
and mouths likewise,
A voice of Iron, I could never comprise
Their forms of pains, or names of Torments show.


They were burnt in Furnaces, they were cast into hot Oil, they had their eyes
pulled out, their tongues cut out, they were cast to Beasts, they were wrapped in
husks and given to the Hogs, they were roasted at an easy Fire, and they were
basted with Salt, and Vinegar, they were cast headlong from Rocks, they were
torn by Trees bound down, and presently let loose, etc.

To touch upon other Nations. Lips. l. 2. de constable. c. 22.
Only the second Carthagenian war.

In Italy Spain and Sicily alone, it consumed above 1500000 in less than
seventeen years. And what speak I of wars that were either waged or led on
with the good success of Many? Only one Caius Caesar (Oh plague and ruin of
mankinde^) confesses, and boasts of it, that he had slain in Battails, 1192000
men. To him we may join Q. Fabius, who slew 1000000 French men; and C. Marius
who destroyed 200000 Danes; and in this latter Age Aetius who in that notable
sight in Catalaunia, slew 160000 Hungarians. What shall I now say of Octavianus
Augustus, who at Perusia, sacrificed on Julius his Altar 300 Citizens? What of
Caracalla, who at once almost destroyed all Alexandria a most populous City?
What of Volesus Messala, who when he had beheaded 300 in one day, Seneca l. 2.
de Ira. c. 5.
he passed amongst the dead bodies, looking proudly, as if he had done some
brave action to be noted, he spoke aloud in Greek, O Kingly action? You shall
find in Lipsius, Admir. l. 4. c. 6.
the cruel fact of Sulpitius Galba. By a most damned treachery, he destroyed
almost all Portugal in a certain Valley, by sending out his Soldiers three
ways. Nor were the bruit beasts free from the cruelty of the Romans. For
Polybius writes; It is frequently seen, that when the Romans take Cities, they
do not only kill men, but dogs also, and mangle other creatures.

I will show the cruelty they used against themselves, only in their Civil
Wars, the Reigns of their Emperors, and in their playings at sharps on the
Stage. For should I mention what is sufficient, my Enchiridion would become a
tedious Volume. For Seneca writes, De iral. 2. c. 8.
That wickedness was grown so common, and was so prevalent in every man's
breast, that innocence was not to be thought, to be rare but not to be all. And
Tacitus speaks of those times only. We read that when Petus Thrasca was
commended by Arulenus Rusticus, and Priscus Helvidius by Herennius Senecio,
that it was a capital crime, and rage was not only exercised upon the
Authors, but also upon their books, the Office being committed to the
Triumviri, that the Monuments of the most famous wits should be burnt in
public Assemblies and Market place. For by that fire they hoped to abolish
the voice of the Roman people, the Liberty of the Senate, and the conscience of
Man kind; In the mean time, they expelled all learned Professors, and
banished every laudable art, that nothing that was honest might remain. We
showed indeed a great proof of our patience: And, as the old Commonwealth saw
what was the height of Liberty; So we see what is the extremity of slavery, the
very liberty of speaking and hearing, being taken from us by their
Inquisitions, that we had lost our very Memories with our Voice, if we had as
much power to forget, as we have to hold our peace. Valor. l. 9. c. 2.
What concerns Civil Wars, Sylla most cruelly made the whole City, and all the
parts of Italy to overflow with rivers of Men's blood in Civil-wars. He recorded
in the public Tables, four thousand 700 that had their throats cut by an Edict
of a cruel Proscription, that the Memory of so famous a business might not be
forgotten. He would have the heads of miserable men that were cut off, brought
before him, whilst their countenance was yet fresh with spirits, that he might
feed on them with his eyes because he might not eat them without great
wickedness. He would not kill M. Marius the Praetor, (who was drawn to the
Sepulcher of the Family of Lutatia by the cry of the Common people) before he
had miserably plucked out his eyes, and broken all the parts of his body. Also
he presently butchered M. Plaetorius, because he swounded at the punishment of
Marius; A new Tormenter of Mercy, for with him it was held wickedness, to be
unwilling to behold wickedness. Moreover he commanded four Legions of the
contrary part, that kept their trust, to be slain in a public place that was
in Campus Martius, and they did not at all ask for mercy from his deceitful
hand. Those whose lamentable cries were heard in the City, their bodies were
cut with the sword and cast into Tyber, which was overburdned with the
multitudes of them, and the waters ran like blood. And when the Senate was
amazed at that cry; He added, Senatou^s, let us do this? A few seditious
fellows are punished by command. This man was formerly a great Officer under C.
Marius, though afterward he proved to be his enemy, and caused Marius his
ashes to be dug up, and scattered into the River Anio. The Triumviri did not
leave to follow his example, for they exposed to the like Proscription 300
Senators and 2000 Gentlemen. It is no wonder therefore that Saint Augustine
writes. That in that War between Marius and Sylla, De C. D l. 3 c. 27.
besides those that fell in Asia abroad, that in the very City the Streets,
Market places, Theaters, Temples were full of dead bodies; that it was hard to
say, when the Conquerors killed most, either before to get the victory, or
afterward, because they had obtained it. And Lipsius uses these words: Oh the
Wickedness! Than which the Sun nor did, De Constable. l. 2. c. 24.
nor can can see any greater from East to West; Let me perish, if you will not
say that manity it self was perished in that cruel and savage Age. It shall
suffice for the Emperors to mention Caligula only. For all the common shores
of cruelty seem to have met in this Man. Sucton. in Calig.
He condemned many of good rank, first being deformed and stigmatized, to the
Mines, or to the keeping of High Ways, or to wild beasts, or else he shut
them up like four footed beasts in dens, or caused them to be sawn in sunder.
Nor were all used thus for great offenses, but such as thought amiss of his
Government, or because they had never sworn by his G^nius; He compelled Parents
to be present at the punishment of their Children, and one of them excusing
himself, because he was sick, he sent him a Horsel^tter. Another, so soon as he
had seen the execution, he presently set to a banquet, and used all ways
possible, to provoke him to rejoice and be merry. He would not kill him that
had the charge of his business, and hunting sports, till for some days
together, he made him be beaten in his sight, as he was bound in chains, and
that his brains being corrupted offended him with the stink of them. When he
would have a Senator to be to^n in pieces, he suborned some that should run
upon him suddenly, when he came into the Court, and call him Traitor, and
should wound him with pen knives, and deliver him over to others to rend him ^n
pieces; and he would never be satisfied till he saw his limbs and bowels and
joints drawn through the streets, and then piled up upon heaps. He seldom
suffered any man to be punished, but with frequent and small wounds, giving
always this common precept, That he should be so wounded that he might feel
his death. Being offended with the people that favored not his actions, he
cried out; Oh that all the Roman people had but one neck! Often times when he eat
or drank, he would cause men to be tormented before him, to make them confess.
A Soldier that was the Heads-man, cut off all men's heads that he pleased, that
were imprisoned. At Puteoli, when the bridge was consecrated, after he had
called many men to him from the shore, he suddenly caused them all to be cast
down headlong. At a great Banquet he suddenly fell into a great laughter, the
Consuls that sat near him, did ask him pleasantly what he laughed at; At what
else, says be, but that I can with one Nod cause you both to be strangled. As
often as he kissed his Wives or concubines neck, he added. So fair a neck shall
be taken off, if I say the word; And he also boasted withal, That he would
search out by wracking from his Caesonia, wherefore he loved her so much.
Wherefore Seneca speaks rightly of him, I knew long since, that under him
Humane affairs would come to that condition, Praefat. ad 4. Nature. quaest.
that to be killed would be an act of mercy. L. 1. c. 26.


Concerning C. Piso: see the same Author, de Ira. Sword plays on the Theater,
were ordained to purge the spirits of great men, in which sports men fought
naked, nor was their fighting so delightful, as the various wounds they made.
This kind of celebration passed afterward from the honoring of dead men, to
honor living men with; and at length, they used these sacrifices in memory of
private men, that left Legacies for that end. At last they ascended to
multitudes. For Caesar when he was Aedilis, showed 320 Duels. Gordianus
sometimes 500. Trajan, in space of 123 days without Intermission, had 2000.
Nero caused 400 Senators, and 600 Roman Gentlemen, to fight it out with the
sword. Commodus himself was amongst these Sword players. But at first only
Slaves were put to it. Sermon. Saturn 1. 12.
Yet that is most true that Lipsius writes. That matter began not unfitly, from
funerals, which indeed was the funeral, and plague of the whole World. I
believe, nay I know, that no War ever brought so great misery and desolation to
mankind, as these plays for pleasure did: think with your selves, of the
number of the days, and the men I spoke of: I am a Liar, if one Month did not
cost Europe 2000 or 3000 men's lives. Orat. pro Sextio.
Yet Cicero testifies, that that kind of show was made and celebrated with
great multitudes, and all sorts of men, and in that spectacle the multitude
deligh^d most, They were often angry with the Fencers unless one of the two
were suddenly slain, Lactant. l. 6. c. 20.
and as if they thirsted after man's blood, they hated delays. This must not be
understood only of the people, but this cruelty was observed even in their
Vestall Nuns.

(...) (...), Decisions, and by the great troubles they put them to, that were
admitted by them. In the Mines of Gold at Ictimulum, there were 50000 to dig;
L. 2. N. H. c. 63. L. 33. c. 4.
and in those that were by new Carthage in Spa^n there were 40000. How they
were used, Pliny describes at large. Moreover it is known what Verres did in
Sicilie, what C. Graccus coming Victor from Sardinia, said. Sylla out of the
lesser Asia every year had 20000 Talents; Brutus, and Cassius within two years
exacted the Tribute for ten years, and Antonius did extort it in one years
time. The sum amounts to 200000 Talents, Pleminius that was Scipio his Tribunus
plundered the treasuryes of Proserpina, that were untouched in any age before.
Sueton. in Galba. c. 12
Sulpitius Galba, when he had melted a Crown of Gold, taken out of the old
Temple of Jupiter, and was given to him by the Tarraconenses, whose weight was
fifteen pounds, because there wanted three ounces in the weight, he compelled
them to make it good. Julius Caesar when he was first made Consul, robbed the
Capital of 3000 pounds weight of Gold, and he laid up so much gilded brass in
the Treasury. He took from Ptolemy alone, Sueton. in Julio c. 54.
in his own name, and Pompeys, 6000 Talents. Nor did Tiberius want this vice;
Sueton. in Tiberio c. 49.
For it is clear enough that C. Lentulus the Augur, who was very rich, for fear
and grief was made weary of his life by him, and that he must make no heir when
he died, but him: But, what was the basest act, he compelled one by threats
that when he was sick he should name him for his Heir, Fulgosus.
and when he recovered afterward he killed him with poison.

Lastly, he went sometimes by heaps of Gold and Silver, and sometimes he would
tumble naked in them. But it may be objected that it is no wonder that Monsters
had such vices. It Is true, Yet Vespasian who was counted a good Emperor, was
sick of the same disease. For he openly did exercise negotiations that a
privtae man would be ashamed of; by buying only somethings, that he might sell
them afterward for more. Also it is believed that he was wont of purpose to
promote the most greedy Officers, that when they were grown rich he might
condemn them; and he was said commonly to use those for Sponges, that when they
were dry he might wet them, and when they were well wet, he might crush them
out. I will Speak nothing of his Custom upon urine, which when his son Titus
accused him for it as disgraceful, he put to his nose a piece of silver
collected from thence, and asked whether it stank of Piss at all: and he added
moreover. That the smell of gain, was good from any thing. But it should seem
that they were all subject to that vice. Sueton in Vespas. c. 16.
For when the Aricini and the Ardeates, had yielded to make the Romans umpires
in a controversy concerning Land, they decreed the fields to be their own.
Also they receiving moneys from some Cities to enjoy their Liberties, they gave
them not their moneys back again, yet they exacted tribute from them Cicero
thought that so foul a fault in Government, that he says, It were better to
trust Pirates than the Senate. Wherefore Salvian seems to speak trne. The
unhumanenesse of Covetousness was the proper vice of the Romans: and well may
that of Claudian to Ruffinus be applied to them. A cruel man whose mind does
burn for Gain, L. 7. de Providentia.

Nor all the Golden sands of Tagus can suffice,
Pactolus wealth, and Hemus in his eyes
Are small; this drunk, he thirsts with greater pain.


Part. V.
Infinite was the Luxury of the Romans for Venery and Drinking.
I Pass from their covetousness to their Incontinence, which I suppose I shall
show sufficiently in their Venery, Drinking, Eating, Buildings, and Apparel.
That manifold and horrid Venery they used, I will not speak of, that I may not
offend chaste ears. Saint Paul has plainly noted that in his Epistle to the
Romans. Their Feasts alone called Floralia, may well show that, wherein Whores
Prostitutes under some ceremonies and Rites, ran naked through the streets,
using obscene words and gestures, and exposed themselves for all men to look
upon them.

Ovid speaks thus, Young Maids and Men and boys are they that do
Gaze on them, and great part of the Senate too.
It Is not nough to hear them speak what is naught,
But we must see what is worse, as we are taught.


Their drunkenness is evidently detected by their long continued drinking,
their great draughts, the multitudes of Bibbers, and the love of them, and also
by the measure of their Cups.

For continued drinking, they imitated the Laws of the Greeks in drinking:
whereof one was, to drink till the Morning star rose. Another, to drink so many
healths as the maids Names had Letters in it, hence Martial. Let Navia six,
Justina seven bc,
Lycas five, Lyda four, and Ida three.


The greatness of their draughts. Nivellius Torquatus, before Tiberius drank
three Gallons at one draught, and thence he deserved to be called, Three
Gallons. M. Cicero the younger, drank two Gallons at one tug. Philip 1.
M. Antonius writ of his own drunkenness, and Cicero writ of him. Thou with
those ^awes, those sides, that strong Fencer-like force of thy body, drankst so
much wine at the Marriage of Hippia, that thou were forced in the sight of the
Roman people to vomit the next day. Sermon. 2.
What shall I say of Cleopatra who at one draught drankup 3124 crowns? What of
Clodius the son of Aesop the Tragedian? Horace speaks thus of him. The son of
Aesop from Metella's ear
Took out a Pearl that she was wont to wear,
Was worth ten Solids, and the same he drinks
Dissolve'd in Vinegar, what ere he thinks.
To cast it down the River were less fault,
Or to have thrown it in a stinking vault.


Also Firmus drank two Buckets full of wine. Adrian the Emperor speaks thus of
B^nosus: He was not born to live, but to drink, and it was a common jear upon
him when he was hanged, That a great vessel hangs there, and not a man.
Maximinus as Capitolinus writes, drank often in one day, a vessel of wine of
the Capitol measure, which containd eight Gallons. Phagon drank more than an
Orca, that is, a vessel for wine greater than the Amphora was.

Lastly there is an Epitaph made of one thus. Drunken Offellius Buraetius is
this; Camer. cent. 1. c. 34

Who ever whilst he lived did either drink or piss.


As for the number of drunkards, and their love; It is well known that Tiberius
gave to Piso the Praetorship, for drinking three nights continually together:
and to Pomponius Flaccus the Province of Syria, and in his Letters he called
them the most pleasant friends he had for all times. He also did prefer a man
that was unknown and sought for the Quaestors Office, before the most Noble
Men, for pledging at a Banquet, an Amp hora of wine, that he drank to him. And
at that time when the Lex Fannia was published, the matter was come so far,
that many of the people of Rome would come drunk into the Senate house and so
consult of the affairs of the Commonwealth. Also Seneca writes thus of women.
They do not watch less, Natural quaest. 4. c. 13.
they do not drink less, and with oil and wine they entise men, and they cast
it up again by their mouths, what they have taken in their entrals, refusing
it; and by Vomit they measure the wine they drank, and they eat snow as well as
men do, to cool their hot stomachs. As for their Utensils, they used not only
great Cups, but, as Ammianus says, very heavy handles, and they were adorned
with most precious Emblems. two Cups of this kind made by Mentor a^are
workmen, cost 100000 Sesterii. Also there were some made of perfect Jewels. L.
22. Plin. l. 33.
Hence Pacatus in Latin, unless that Riot had ^banged the year, unless that
winter Roses swam upon the cups, unless Muscadels had Broken the Summer Ice in
their capacious Jewels. And Cicero, ^ in Verrem. De benef. l. c. 9.
Also there was a wine vessel made of one Jewel made hollow like a great Mazer
with a handle of gold. Also Seneca, I saw their Crystal vessels, whose
Brittlenesse increased their price; For the pleasure of all things, amongst
ignorant people proceeds from that danger should make a man avoid them. I have
seen Murrine cups: for Luxury were small, L. 37. c. 2.
should not men vomit, and drink to one the other in capacious Jewels. Lastly,
Pliny, The Luxury of that matter increases daily: a Murrine stone that cost 80
Sestertii, was made a cup holding about three Sextary. C. Petronius is said to
have broken one of this kind that cost 300000 Sestertii, that he might
difinherit Neros Table. A Matron not very rich is reported to have bought
another for 150000 Sestertii. What if I should say more?

Juvenal writes.

He drinks in a Priapus made of glass. And Pliny.

They delight to engrave their lust upon their cups, and to drink by obscene
ways.

Point. VI.
The Gluttony of the Romans in meats was extraordinary.
I Show the Roman Luxury in their meats, by four Arguments chiefly, drawn from
their Vessels, Servants, Meats, and the quantities they eat. Their vessels were
of two sorts, their Tables and their Dishes. They had Silver Tables, and some
of Gold, and yellow ones that were made of Earth dug out Africa. Plin. l. 13.
c. 15.
Tully had one cost 10000 Sestertii Asinius Gallus had one cost 11000. Also
that wood was thought worth a Senators Estate, Sutton.
which was 12000 Sestertii; the dearer, Octav. 42.
the more knots it had by the unhappynesse of the Tree. Seneca dele benefic. l.
7. c. 9.
And Seneca had 300 such, as Dion reports. The feet they stood upon, were of
Ivory; and that was held so necessary as Juvenal writes. A Turbet or a Do, is
nothing worth,
And Oils and Roses stink that are set forth.
Unless the Table stand on Ivory feet,
And a tall Libard Yawning make them sweet.


To pass to their dishes, Plin. l. 33. c. 11.
Drusillanus Rotundus had one, (he was Free Man of Claudius the Emperor, it
was of Silver, and weighed 500 pound weight, he had 8 more that weighed fifteen
pound weight. Whilst Vitellius was Emperor, he had one, that according to
Budaeus account, cost ten times H. S. and Hottoman says, 200 Sestertii. It was
so great that Vitellius called it Minerva's Buckler. Mucianus called Vitellius,
The More of Dishes. As for the multitude of their servants, Epist. 93.
Seneca cries out, Good God, how many men does one belly employ! For there were
whole troops of unhappy boys, that after their banquets were ended, were for
other disgraceful uses in their chambers. There were whole herds of those
that were out of use, described by their Nations and Colors; so that they
might be all of the same age, and the first down of their chins alike, the same
kind of hair of their heads, that none that had smooth hayr, should be set
amongst curled locks: and that I may speak fully to the point, they did
carefully ordain silver, Seneca de vitae brevitat. c. 12.
and they diligently girded the Coats of their exolete boys, that they should
be very careful, to see how the Boar died when the cook killed him, how nimbly
the smooth faced boys, when the sign was given, ran after their business,
with what Art the Sheep were cut into small pieces, how curiously the unhappy
boys did wipe away the spittle off those that were drunk. But that which is
most wicked; Tiberius Caesar promised to sup with Sestius Gallus, a (voluptuous
old man, full of Lechery and prodigality, whom Augustus formerly had marked
with ignominy, and not many days before, Tiberius had checked him before the
Senate^ upon condition that he should not change or abate any thing of his
common custom, And that they might have naked wenches to attend upon them at
supper. Sueton. in Tiber. c. 42.
To this, belongs their Multitude of Cooks, who first of all were hired at the
rate of a Horse, but at length they grew to that height, that hardly any
Mortal man was of more value, Seneca ad Helvid. c. 10.
than he that best knew how to drowned his I. s. Estate. But Apicius was the
most famous of all those who professed to know Kitchen affairs, Who when he had
spent a thousand Sestertii in his Kitchen, and had wasted so many Princes
donations, and a vast tribute of the Capitol, at several banquets, when he
was deep in debt, and oppressed by his crediditours, then he was first forced
to look into his estate. And he found he should have, when he had paid his
debts, a hundred thousand Sestertii remaining for himself, and fearing that he
must suffer great hunger if he should live with a hundred thousand Sestertii,
he poisoned himself and died.

As for their meats they had variety, and very costly. For our world would be
two narrow for their Throats. For they valued their dainty meats not by the
taste, but by the cost. They were content with no meats but those were brought
from the farthest East, Petat in pa^eg.
or from Colchis, that was out of the bounds of the Roman Empire, or came from
those Seas that were noted for Shipwracks; and the greater price was, the more
they were pleased with them. The common number of their Messes of meat was
seven. Lampridius
But Heliogabalus, made such a Feast, that had 22 Courses of huge dainties.
Also it is reported that at a supper of his Brother Vitellius, made to
entertain him, there were 2000 of the choycest fishes, and 7000 birds set upon
the Table. And he also exceeded this at the dedication of his great Dish.
Sueton. in vitel. c. 12.
For in this, there were the Livers of Giltheads, the brains of Pheasants and
Peacocks, the tongues of crimson winged birds, the small guts of Lampries,
brought as far as from Carpasium and the Spanish Seas, by Mariners and
Galleys, and these he mingled together. I might add to these one Clodius the
son of Aesop the Tragaedian, a young man was mightily Luxurious; Valor. l. 9.
c. 1.
For it is certain, that he bought at vast rates, the best singing birds, and
served them up at supper for Gnatsappers: and he was wont to dissolve pearls of
great value in vinegar, and drink them, desiring by this means, as fast as he
could, to cast away a large patrimony as a sore burden. What shall I say now of
Caligula, who in riotous expenses exceeded the wits of all the prodigal
persons that were, inventing most hideous kinds of meats and suppers, for he
would sup up the dearest pearls dissolved in vinegar, and would set bread and
meats of gold before his Guests, saying, that a man ought to be either very
thrifty, or an Emperor. What shall I write of Asinius Celer, who bought one
Barbel for 6000 Sestertii? of Lucullus, who at one sudden supper, that he
entertained Tully and Pompey at, who thrust themselves in to see what feasts he
made, expended 50000 Drachmes, that is 5000 Crowns as Budeus makes the
reckoning? Lastly, Seneca Epist. 95.
what shall I say of Octavius who bought a very great Barbel for 5000 H. S.
(wherefore should I not set down the weight of it, Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 26.
and provoke the gluttonous throats of others? They say it was four pound
weight and a half.) And by a new example, he bred Guiltheads in the sea, like
corn upon the ground. In a word. These things are incredible if we compare them
with our age. Yet the Roman Luxury was most wanton about Fishes and birds. For
as for them, to say nothing of that of Juvenal.

Whether that Oysters were near Sandwitch bred.
In Campania, or Apulia fed,
They knew by tasting once, and more,
They Would tell by sight which was Echinus shore.
I will speak nothing also of that in Ammianus Marcellius. Lib. 28.
At their banquets they often called for scales to weigh the Fish and Birds
were brought to the table, and Dormice, who were sometimes very great, which
was tedious to those that were present, and formerly not used; but now it is
continually commended, especially when as there were near thirty Sc^iveners
with their boxes and writing tables that assisted them. A Barbel seemd not
fresh enough, unless he died in the hands of one of the guests. Wherefore the
fishes swam in the Chamber, and were ca^e^ed under the Table, and are presently
set upon the Table. An Elops in the banquets of Severus, Seneca Nature. qu^st.
l. 3. c. 17.
was brought in by Servitors with Crowns on their heads, and a Trumpetter with
them, as if it had not been a seast for delight but some triumph of the Gods.
Macrob. Satur. 3. 16.
Also so great was their curiosity about their Fish Ponds, that it is hard to
set it forth. In their Fish Ponds they had some Fish would come when Caesar was
but named. Hi^tius sold his Manor house, that had many fishponds for 40000
S^stertia. Varro de re rustica c. 17.
Cato the Tuto. of Lucullus sold the fish came out of his Fish ponds, for as
many. And if that price of the Fish ponds Columella mentions, Lib. 8. c. 16.
be to be granted, it was for 400000. though they were something less curious
about birds; G^ll. l. 13. c. 8.
yet they were riotous enough. In the time of Favourinus the Governor.
Victuall^ng houses and Luxury, held no supper to be costly, but where men eat
freely; then that should be taken off, and better and more costly meat should
be set on. Then that was accounted to be the principal part of the supper,
amongst them, that made cost and loathing of meats to serve for sports. Who
denied that men ought to eat any bird except Gnatsappe^s: as for other birds,
and crambd fowls, they thought the banquet fordid and deficient, unless so
much was set upon the Table that they might fill their bellies with the hanches
of them on the lower parts; but those that eat the upper part of birds or
crambd fouls, they thought they had no palate. They were most delighted with
Crimson colored birds called Phaenicopteri, Peacocks, Thrushes and Pigeons.
Hence it was that they sed whole companies of these, and they set a vast price
upon them. L. 3. c. 6.
For Peacocks, as Varro reports, Aufidius made above 60000 pieces of Money in a
year. 5000 Thrushes were sold at three denarii, and that part of his far^m
yielded 60000. As for Pigeons, each pa^^ of them in Varroes days was wont to
be sold for a thousand sestertii, and in Columell^ his days there were some
that sold two birds for 4000 pieces of Money. L. 3. c. 8.
As for the quantities they did eat, Maximinus sometimes eat forty pounds of
flesh in a day: Capitolinus
Cordus says, sixty pounds. Claudius Albinus. eat so much as it is incredible.
For he eat 500 d^i^d Figs, which the Greeks call Callistruthi^; and 100 Peaches
of Campania, and ten Melons of Os^ia, and 20 pounds of Grapes of Le^ce, and a
100 Gnatsappers, and forty Oysters. Lastly, Vop^sc^^ in Aureli. no.
Phago, of whom I spoke before, eat at one dinner, a whole Boar, a hundred
loases, a Wether and little a Hog. I will say no more. Though I might speak of
their bread and their sauces, but I should be too tedious. For a conclusion, it
may be observed that this force of Luxury grew strong as the Empire did. For in
the time of the second Panick war, Cato complained, that a City could not
stand, in which a fish was sold for more then Bes: Sueton in Tiber. c. 34.
and Tiberius complained that in his days three Barbels, were sold for 3000
pieces of money.

Point. VII.
The Luxury of the Romans in their Buildings was extreme.
THeir riotousnes in their buildings is seen partly in their public, and
partly in their private houses. Amongst the Transient public houses, that
offer themselves, in the first place, the excess whereof would astonish us,
are the Theater of Marcus Scaurus, and the bridge of Caligula. That was a
temparary work, and the use thereof was to be, scarce f^r one month, yet it
had three Floors, Plin. l. 36. c. 15.
in which there were 360 Marble pillars. The Lowest part of the Theater was all
of Marble, the middle was of glass, and the uppermost was gilded: The
inferior pillars were forty foot long, and between them there were 3000
brazen Statues. The whole theater was so capacious, that it would contain 80000
Men. Caligula built a Bridge, Sueton. in in Caligula c. 19.
all the space through between the hot Bathes, and the City Puteoli almost 3600
paces, procuring from all places, Merchants Ships, and fastening them with
Ancres in a double row, and casting earth upon them, and making the form of it
like to Via Appia. He went upon this Bridge forward and backward, for two days
together. The first day he rid upon a Horse with trappings, and Crowned with a
Crown of Oak, and with an Ax, and a Target, and a sword, and with a horsemans
coat, very richly made. The next day following, he rode in the habit of a
Coachman, in a Coach with two gallant Horses, representing Darius, a Boy one of
the hostages of the Parthians, the Praetorian Troop, accompanying him, and in
Chariots were some bands of his friends. Wherefore that work seems to have been
made for that end, that it might be destroyed.

Caracalla also, wheresoever he did or purposed to stay in Winter, caused
Amphitheaters, and playhowses to be builded, and suddenly they were to be
demolished: amongst those that lasted, it shall suffice me to make mention
only of the Theater of Titus. Ammian.
A man could hardly see to the top of it, and a whole river of wealth was spent
in the building of it, wherefore Martial writes. Caesar's Amphitheater has the
Name.
Let all give place, this does deserve the fame.


And though such stately structures consumed infinite wealth, yet if we regard
the furniture, and such things as were employed besides, we shall find that
the cost they were at, would have served for great Cities. And that the
Magistrate did prodigally wast in Theaters, Plays, Wrestlers, Fencers, and
such kinds of men all their patrimony, that they might win the peoples liking
for an hours time. In a word; The workmanship was more than the matter. Nero,
to show his wealth to Thiridates King of Armenia, covered all the Theater with
gold. and the very hangings that hung up, were of purple, and bossed with
golden Stars, whence that was called a Golden day, and Lucretius all udes unto
it.

Yellow and Golden Hangings commonly,
And murry colored in the Theaters
Hung, twinkling like to stars within the sky.
Also Caligula when he set forth some principal Sports, Sueton. in Calig. c.
18 Vopiscus. in Probo.
He commanded that the floor round about, should be made with Minium and
Chrysocolla; Probus commanded to let loose at once 1000 Ostriches, 1000 Stags,
as many Bears, 1000 Dogs, with wild Goats and many other beasts, and at these
sports he gave them to the people by way of Magnificence* and it was free for
every one to kill as many as he could: And to add to this; The next day he
caused to be showed openly a 100 he Lions, a 100 Leopards of Africa, as Many of
Syria, a 100 she Lions, and 300 Bears. And Titus, who though he were called the
delights of mankind, did the like. All kinds of beasts, Martial.
that on the Mountains be,
Caesar, thy Theater affords to thee:
The Rocks did creep, the woods did run, Men guess,
Such was the Wood of the Hesperides.


But Heliogabalus was the maddest man of them all: Lampridius
For it is reported of him that he made at these sports, his Ships store in
Channels that ran with Wine. And Carinus was not far short of him. For
Calphurnius writes thus of his plays. Not only monsters that in woods are fed
But also such as in the seas are bred.
I saw sea Calves and Bears, and Horses fight,
Ill shapen creatures, yet their names were right.


I will say nothing of those La^geries that were cast amongst the people of all
kinds of things, Sueton in Neron. c. 11.
when Nero reigned, and this was done daily with some thousands of each.
Multitudes of all kinds of birds, Tickets for Corn, Garments, Gold, Silver,
Jewels, Pearls, Painted Tables, Slaves, Cattle, and wild Beasts made tame,
and lastly Ships, Islands, Fields. And if I shall add that private men did such
things, Vopiscus in Carino.
that Milo spent three patrimonies, in these vanities. Junius Messala gave his
estate to stage plays, and not to his posterity; will not all men think that
they were mad? Vopiscus speaks thus, I therefore writ this that those who
should set forth stage plays, and sports hereafter, might be ashamed, and that
they should not defraud their Heirs, and spend their estates on Players and
vaia fellows. What I said of Theaters, I may say the same of their Baths and
Temples. For though they in Artimedorus his days, were nothing else but
passages to their feasts, and so they were in other ages too; Yet was there an
infinite number of them, and the ornaments were too superfluous. Agrippa when
he was Aedilis, built a 170 of them. Lib. 36.
Pliny writes, that in his days they were infinite. Cassiodorus says, they
were wonderful great. L. 16. Olimpiad in Excerptis.
Ammianus says they were built in a Provincial way. Dioclesian's contained
1600 seats, all made of polished Marble. It appears by Seneca his Epistle, that
their ornaments were superfluous. Epist. 86.
For when he had described the bath of Scipio Africanus, he breaks out into
these words. But now who is there, that would be at the charge to be so washed;
He seems to himself to be poor and base, unless the walls shine with great and
precious circles; unless Marbles of Alexandria be rough cast with Pargeting of
Africa, unless it be painted over with a great deal of labor, and varied
picture-like, unless the roof be covered with glass; unless the Thasian
stone, that was formerly a rare fight in any Church, be laid round our
fishponds; unless the water run forth by Silver Cocks; and yet I speak of
only common Conduit pipes. What shall I say when I come to the Baths of the
Libertines? What multitudes of Statues were there? How many pillars that
supported nothing, only they were set for ornament, and for greater cause of
expense? We are grown so dainty, that we scorn to tread on any thing but
jewels. In Antiq* Romans
Rosinus adds further that their walls were anointed with the most fragrant
Balsoms, and sprinkled with the sweetest Oils. There were at Rome 421 Temples.
And they were all almost built of huge marble, shining with gilded roofs,
wherein Jewels shined forth, and appeared like stars, set at several
distances. Augustus bestowed 16000 pounds weight of Gold upon the seat of
Jupiter alone, set in the Capitol, and 500000 Sestertii, Dio 55.
in Jewels. And Domitian adorned the Capitol it self so richly that Martial
thought, If that the Heavens were for to be sold.
And that the Gods should morgage all they hold.
Yet could they not equal this largess.
He add's, Augusta thou art forced to stay.
For Joves Cantore has not wherewith to pay.


And indeed in gilding thereof he spent above 12000 Talents; and the Gate was
covered over with plates of Gold, until the Reign of Honorius. Nor did the
Temple of Peace, erected by Vespasian come short much of this. For Herodian
writes, that it was not only the largest and the most beautiful of all works
in the City, but it was the richest, adorned with ornaments of Gold and silver.
L. 7. excidii.
But Josephus says, All things were conferred and disposed upon this Temple,
to find which, Men went before over all the world. L. 34. c. 8.
Lastly, Pliny sait, Of all things, I have spoken of, the most famous of all in
the City, are now dedicated by the Emperor Vespasian in the Temple of of
Peace. And because they thought that Statues of brass would make them continue
for ever, they much affected them also, yet so that in them they discovered
their Luxuriousness. For at last they exceeded so much in them, that there
were almost as many of these statues in the City, as there were living men.
Cassiod l. 7.
They were not only laid over with plates of Gold, but some were made of
Silver, and some of pure Gold. Domitian would let none be placed in the Capitol
for him, unless they were of Gold or of silver and they must be of such a
weight. And Commodus had his Image of a 1000 pounds weight. ^e.
Statius seems to intimate that weight, when he writes. Give to the Capitol of
lasting Gold,
Faces of Hundred weights, we may behold.


Thus much for public prodigality. Seneca de benef. 7. 10.
Two things principally show their Luxuriousness in private matters. Their
houses, and housholdstuffe. These were larger than some Cities. They supposed
their howses to be narrow, Valor. l. 4. c. 6.
that were not larger than Cincinatus his fields. Some had Orchards on the tops
of their houses, and others had woods that grew upon their roofs; from thence
their roots sprung up, Seneca Epist 122.
whence their aspiring tops would have but reached from the ground. Vast
naturally varied pillars brought out from Egyptian sands, or from the deserts
of Africa, supported the galleries or large Parlours of some of the common
people. Seneca Epist. 115.
If you ask the number of them, Martial speaks boldly, Houses by hundred
pillars are supported.


If the price, Crassus durst write, that ten pillars cost 100000 pieces of
money. Valerius^
The house that Gordianus built had 200 pillars for one walking place. Capitol
in Gordiano.
The beams were gilded, and the roofs laid over with plates of Gold, also
their Chambers and Vessels were gilded. The vaults of their parlours were made
to turn at pleasure, Seneca Epist. 50.
that one might succeed another, and so they changed their rooms so often as
they changed their messes. I speak not of their Groves which in their chambers
spring;
Wherein with war^ling notes in's time each bird does sing.


Heliogabalus in his feasting-rooms, Lampridius
loaded his Parasites with Violets and other Hours, so that some of them died
by it, when as they could not be drawn forth presently. But above all the rest,
Domitian, Nero, and Caligula were mad in their buildings. Plutarch writes of
him thus; If any man admire this magnificent furniture of the Capitol, how,
should he but behold one gallery of Domitian, or a Palace, or a bath, or his
room to sup in of so many inches, would he cry out with Epicarmus! He was not
bountiful or liberal,
But rather to be called prodigal.


Suetonius, thus sets forth, Nero his Golden house. C. 31.
The entrance of it was, where a Colossus stood with his Image, a hundred and
twenty foot high. It was so large that the gallery was three miles, and there
was a Pool like to a Sea, set about with buildings like Cities. Also there was
the Country diversfyed with Fields, Vineyards, Pasture grounds and Woods, with
multitudes of all kinds of cattle and wild beasts, in the other parts all
things were daubed over with gold, adorned with Jewels, and with Cases of
pearls. The vaulted Parlours were set with Ivory Tables, that were made to
turn, that Flowrs might be scattered; and they were made hollow that Unguents
might be sprinkled upon them. The chief of their dining rooms were made round,
and they were carried about day and night as the world is. When he had ended
such a house, and consecrated it, he commended it thus by saying, that now he
began to dwell like a Man. The same speaks thus of Caligula, that he made
Foists of Cedar, Chap. 37
and their Castles were of Jewels, their Sails of diverse colors, with large
Baths, Galleries, and Parlours, and with great variety of Vines, and apple
Trees, and in these he would sit at meat, and pass over the shores of Campania
in the day time, with dancings and Music. In the buildings of his Country
Palaces, and Manors, he set all reason aside, striving most to do that which
men though impossible to be done, and therefore buildings were made in
troublesome and deep Seas, Rocks of the hardest flint were cut up, and plain
fields were raised as high Mountains, Plin. l. 33. c. 11.
and tops of Mountains were levelled like plain fields, all done with
wonderful expedition, For if they delayed, it cost them their lives. As for
housholdstuff, Lampridius
it shall suffice to say that Caesar lay in a Bedsted of Gold. And that
Heliogabalus had not only a golden plough set with Jewels, Plin. l. 33. c. 3.
but he made water in vessels of Myrrha Stones and of Onyx stones. Antonius, in
despite of Nature vilified Gold, a work he deserved to be condemned for, by
proscription; and Bassa did his excrements in Gold. Moreover it is true, that
candlesticks have been sold for 400000 pieces of money. And there is no doubt
but that Horatius had his Whores in a Chamber made of transparent Glass. C. 43.
Of Tiberius, Suetonius speaks thus. He adorned his chambers with Tables and
Prints of lascivions Pictures and Images placed here and there.

Point VIII.
The Luxury of the Romans in their garments was extreme.
I Shall show their Luxury in Clothing, by two Arguments, namely, the trimming
of their bodies, and the clothing of them. Nature. quest. 7. c. 31.
The former was so curious, that Seneca writes, All that is left of good
manners we deface by our Levitie, and trimming of our bodies; we exceed Women
in curiosity, we that are Men put on Whorish colors that civil Matrons ought
not to wear, we stop as we go, by a tender, and soft manner of going, and we
do not so much go as creep. And Julius Caesar was not only diligently shaved
and barbed, but he was plucked also as some upbraded him; Sueton. c. 45.
Nero was so shameless in his decking, and trimming of himself, that his locks
were always laid in order: and in his voyage into Greece, he let them hang
down behind the crown of his head. Sueton c. 51.
Otto was wont to shave his face every day, and to smere it with wet bread, as
the same Author reports, and that he used from the first putting forth of his
downy hairs, that so he might never have a beard.

What concerns their garments, Hortensius thought it a capital crime, because a
plait was changed upon his should er, from the place it should be. Lucullus
affirmed that he had 5000 short cloaks at home. Horat.
It was their common custom to shift their clothes oftentimes in a day, Ep. 9.
and Nero was never seen twice in one garment. A cloak called Lacerna cost
10000 Sestertii. Nonnius had one Ring, Plin. l. 37. 16.
Valued at 20000 Sestertii. The custom was for all of them to adorn their
fingers with rings, and to have a Jewel on every joint. Charinus wore six upon
every finger, and he did not lay them by in the night. And Probus says, that
Luxury had found out Summer Rings, and winter rings. And this was used
promiscuously amongst all. Seneca de Benef. 7. c. 9.
Women had silk Garments, if they may be called Garments, that could neither
defend their bodies or their chastiry. When they had put on these, a woman
almost naked would swear she was not naked. The trimming and Garments of Lollia
Paulina, the Wife of Caligula, and that at ordinary banquets sometimes, was
valued at 400000 Sestertii. Hierome writes that one string of Pearls was worth
many Mannours. In vita Pauli Eremit. de habitu muliebri. c. 9.
Tertullian says, that upon one Necklace 10000 Sestertii were strung, and that
her tender neck wore upon it, whole Groves and Islands. Julius Caesar bought one
Pearl, for 60000 Sestertil, that was bought for Servilia Brutus his Mother.
Suoton. c. 59.
And if you respect the Multitude; I see, says Seneca, Pearls, De benef. 7. c.
9.
not in every ear one (for now their ears are used to carry burdens) they are
coupled together, and others are placed over them, Women's madness cannot
subdue their husbands sufficiently, unless they hang two or three Patrimonies
at their ears on both sides. L. 2. c. 35.
If you seek for the place. Tertullian says, They wear them upon their feet
also, and that not only on the Latchets of their Pantofles, but all over their
Startups. For it is not now sufficient to wear Pearls, unless they may tread
upon them, and walk upon them as they go.

Lastly, if we regard their Looking-Glasses, one cost sometimes more than the
dowry of the Ancients was, Seneca. Nature. quest. l. 1. c. 17.
that was publicly paid for the daughters of the poorer Emperors. Nor was
that dowry sufficient for Free-mens daughters, to buy them a Glass, which the
people of Rome gave to Scipio his daughter. And that was 11000 pieces of Money.

And further, the glasses of Servants cost sometimes 10, sometimes 20000 pieces
of money. Not to make profit by, as Nicias the richest of the Graecians was wont
to do, but only to keep company with, Athen. 6.
when they went abroad. And thus much for the Luxury of the Romans, which C L.
Meursius, and the Noble Kobicrzycus have sufficiently described. As much might
be spoken of their Pride, Boasting, Flattery, Ingratitude. For they called the
City Rome, a Goddess, and they placed their Emperors amongst the Gods; and
they expelled those that deserved excellently well of the Commonwealth,
Camillus and Scipio. The five Cornelii are so many noted Examples of an
unthankful Country. But because Authors are full of examples of these vices,
and our age wants not the like to oppose against them, I pass them over.

Point. IX.
The Justice, Fortitude, and Prudence of the Romans was nothing.
MAny suppose that the Romans went before other nations for their Justice,
Prudence and Valor; but they are deceived. For if we regard these jointly, all
virtues are linked together, by a certain band, so that he that has one cannot
want the rest.

But we have already showed the many vices of the Romans, and if we take them
severally, neither of them can truly be attributed to the Romans; Lactant
Instit. l. c. 10
Not Justice. For how should they abstain from blood, who adored bloody Gods,
as Mars and B^llona? How shall they spare their own Parents that adore Jupiter
that expelled his Father? or their own children, who worship Saturn, that
devoured his own? How shall they keep chastity that adore a naked and an
adulterous Goddess, and one that was a prostitute almost amongst the Gods? How
should they abstain from rapine and deceit, who were acquainted with Mercury
his theeving qualities, who taught them, It was no Deceit to deceive any man,
but it was Wit? How should they refrain lust, who adored Jupiter, Hercules,
Bacchus, Apollo, and the rest, whose Whoredoms and Adulteries, and Villainies
toward Males and Females, are not only known to Scholars, but are also acted
upon the Stages, and are sung up and down, that all men may be well acquainted
with them? Can there be any just men amongst these things? Who though they
should be naturally good, yet their Gods would teach them injustice? For to
please that God you adore, you must use those things you know that he is
pleased with, and so it falls out, that their Gods frame the minds of those
that adore them, to be as they are themselves: For the most religious worship
is to imitate. As for their Prudence, I dare say openly with the most Generous
Gentleman Andreas de Rey. De consil. and Consultatione.
If the Counsels of the Romans, as they are in part described by Livy, and
partly by Dion, and other very grave writers, should be compared with those,
which since a hundred years have been invented and undertaken in Spain, Italy,
and Venice, in part since it was a Commonwealth; France, Germany, England,
Poland, whether they concerned peace or war, and are noted by Commineus,
Guicciardine, Sleiden, and also by some new writers of the French History,
M^taranus, and others in some parts we must confess that this age for
readiness and Acuteness of Invention, and exact dexterity of judgment, does
not only equal but exceed Antiquity. And indeed I cannot conceive how they
were wise men, who destroyed the Common Wealth of their choicest men, in sword
plays upon the Stage, that powered forth vast treasures upon things of no
value, and exercised all manner of cruelty both upon their own people and
strangers.

As for their Valor; As it is not the punishment that makes a Martyr; So, not
fighting, but the cause makes a valiant man. If Justice be set aside, Kingdoms
are nothing but great Thefts. Wherefore Pirates being asked by Alexander, By
what law they did it, they answered, By the same that he did.

And the Poet calls him, Earths fatal mischief, for that he did strike,
Like unto Thunder all the world alike, Unluckie to the Nations --


The same may be applied to the Romans. For to pass over Mithridates and
Galgacus, Enemies to the Romans, of whom he speaks in his Epistle to Arsaces.
Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
The Romans wage war with all, but they are more fierce against those where
they hope to get the greatest booties, when they have conquered them. And
Galgacus says to his confederates, These Plunderers of the World, when they
have plundered all they can on land, they Rove the S^as; if their Enemy be
rich, they are covetous; if he be poor, they are ambitious; for neither East
nor West can satisfy them. The war they first made against the Carthagenians
was by reason of the Mamertini; it is certain almost that it was unjust. Nor
can a heap of cutthroats, win the name of a civil Society, by their good
success, though they make a Covenant.

The same was don afterward in Sardinia, when the Carthagenians had been
compelled to pay 1200 Talents. Moreover if if we be not called the less
valiant because we manfully endure troubles and sharp miseries, our Martyrs may
be preferred before the Romans. For (to let men pass) children and maids have
silently conquered their Tormentors, and the fire it self could not make them
groan. And Eusebius speaks of Dorotheus, L. 8. c. 6.
Of all those that ever were amongst the Greeks, or Barbarians, famous for the
greatness of their Minds, and that are renowned in the mouths of Men, none
can be compared with the divine and notable Martyrs of our age, Dorotheus and
his fellows that were servants to the Emperors. If they object their
defending of their Country, we shall presently answer them with the examples
of the men of Callis under Philip Valesius: and with the examples of the Dutch
and others; who devoted themselves for their Countries good. Again if we shall
recollect the Acts of the Britains, French, L. 5. P. l. c. 5. 1.
Germans, of Pyrrhus, and of the Carthagenians, against them, we shall find
these inferior to them in very few things. He that desires to see an exact
comparison between the Britains and the Romans, let him read Rawleghs History
of the World. Moreover if unity be respected amongst virtues. It is most
certain that there was no example of Amity amongst the Greeks or Romans that
may be compared with the examples of Marcus Tarvisanus, and Nicolaus
Barbadicus, Senators of Venice. Alexander de Galtis, has described it,
prefixing before it an Historical Argument.

Point. X.
And the last, It is probable as some think that the Church shall be in greater
glory upon the earth yet, than ever it was before.
THough the matter be as I have showed, yet many places of Scripture are
objected, which seem clearly to speak the contrary of the last times. Matthew.
24. 12.
And indeed it is express in Saint Matthew, Because iniquity shall abound, the
charity of many shall wax cold. When the Son of Man comes shall he find faith
in the Earth? Luc. 18. 8.
In Saint Paul, The spirit speaks expressly that in the latter times some shall
fall from the faith. 1 Timothy 4. v. 1. verse. 17.
Wicked men shall grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. In Saint
Peter, 2 Peter. 3.
There shall come Scoffers in the last days, walking after their own lusts, etc.

But all this cannot evince so much as to subvert our Opinion. And I may answer
to those places, both in general and in special.

Generally, I. For though it were true that about the end of the world, Men's
manners should grow worse, yet it follows not, that therefore, there was an
universal perpetual decay.

II. It cannot be understood how we shall expect a conversion of Jews and
Gentiles, and yet men's manners should grow worse.

III. The last days seem not to mean those that are nearest to Christ's coming,
but for all that time that is between his first and second ^^mming. Isa. 2. 2.
So in Isaiah. And it shall be in the last days, when the Mountain of the
House of the Lord shall be set in the top of the Mountains and lifted above the
hills; that all Nations shall come unto it. Man is a little World, and as his
age is divided into many parts, so is the age of the World divided into many
periods. Therefore as old age only may equal all the other periods past; so
may the last times also. Job 42. v. 12. 16.
Nor may that seem strange, For the time from Jobs restitution until his
death, is called his last age, though it comprehends a 140 years.

IV. The last days may be taken for the latest, C. 2. v. 28.
whence as Joel speaks of Prophesies, C. 2. v. 17.
And it shall be after that, says he. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles
pronounces the same by saying, that shall be in the last times. And that
appears most clearly in the Prophecy of Jacob preceding his death. For he
promises to certify unto his sons, what should happen in the last days. Yet
he sets, between those times, the taking away of the Scepter from Judah, and
the coming of Shiloh; Wherefore the last times seem not here only to be
meant, but also as a learned man explains it in his Comment upon the Epistle of
Jude, the Kingdom of Christ; And thus much for the general.

In special,

I. The Praediction of S. Paul, concerning forbidding to marry, is fulfilled in
Eustatius, the Tatiani, Marcionists, Manichees Catharists, and Montanists.

The same reason serves for the other. For he does not compare his age with
ours, but rather teaches us what shall be the condition of the kindgom of
Christ. Nor is that increase of wickedness joined with the succession of time,
any thing to a universal and perpetual ruin of nature. For as some fall off
to wickedness, others hold the faster to what is good. And S. Paul himself
says, But they shall proceed no further, but their folly shall be made
manifest unto all.

II. The Prophecy of Peter came to pass then in Judes times: verse. 9.
for Jude uses almost the very same words, and the difference is no more but
this, that one foretells it, and the other shows it fulfilled.

III. The predictions of Christ are to understood, concerning the Persecutions
of the Christian Religion, and the subversion of the City of Jerusalem, and in
this sense, Maldonat and Aretius allege Saint Paul's words, 2 Timothy 4. v. 6.

Those words in Saint Luke signify nothing else, than that from the time that
Christ asscended into Heaven, until his coming again, Men will be always
incredulous. Divines interpret them, and Jansenius says, They do not only
signify Paucity, and want of faith in men, who shall be found alive in the
last day, but also in men of all times. Some things also are alleged for the
coming of Antichrist: but of this subject you may read Whitaker, Downam, and
others.

The most certain Argument; is the removing of that which hinders, or the
overthrow of the Roman Empire, which the popish party, In Memor.
as Thomas, Lyra, Ribera, and Salmeron confess to be done already. Fran. l. 2.
Histor.
Who succeeded into his place, Pasquier, Matchiavel and Sigonius show. Flor. l.
3. de regno.
But the clearest of them all is Lipsius, whose most memorable words are these.
Ital. l. 4.


Wonderful is Gods goodness to this City: When he took away the force of
arms, he gave force to the Laws: When he would not let the sword rule, he
granted power to the Church; and so also he made it to be the honor, the
defense and the support of things. But they say that old Senate is not! Not
that, but an other, and behold in that Purple, select Judges, out of all our
World, who are to be regarded for their Manners, Prudence, and Arms. Should the
old Cynick live again, and should see this Assembly, he would make no question,
to compare it with Kings or Noblemen. What are the Tributes? Not so great but
they are more innocent also, and more willingly paid. What are the Embassies,
of Nations? Nor are they wanting, but they come from the known and unknown
world, so wide does this Majesty spread it self and hence they fetch Rights and
Laws of Sacred things. Kings and Princes come and how themselves, and submit
their obedient heads to this one head. But as it is no doubt but that
Antichrist is come, and is also revealed to the world; so, many places of
Scripture, according to some pious Interpreters, seem to intimate the neernesse
of his Ruin, upon which they say, will follow such a peace of the Church, as
the like was never before. To this peace some adjoyne, a more full conversion
of Jews and Gentiles, to which the noble D. Makovius, the Light of his
Country amongst strangers, adds their return into the land of Canaan; The
restitution of all things by Elias, the ceasing of all Heresies, Foreign
persecutions, and of all Impiety. Some add further to this, the Resurrection
of the Martyrs, and a Reign with Christ upon the Earth for a thousand years. Of
that opinion are, Carolus Gallus Professor formerly of the University at
Leyden, in his Clavis Prophetica nova Apocalypseos. In which work he confesses
that he labored twenty five years, in reading, meditating, searching, writing,
and debating; And also George Hawkwell in his Apologia Providentiae Divinae,
out of which we have taken a great part of this small Tract: as also Mathias
Martinus, My Master, in his Epistle by way of answer to my letters, whererein I
desired his opinion of this matter, Anno, a thousand six hundred twenty eight.
Alsted and Piscator are of this mind. But this man makes that kingdom to be in
the Heavens; the other says, it is not only upon the Earth, but makes the
thousand years to begin about the year, a thousand six hundred ninety four.
Carolus Gallus seems to join with them. In Diatriba and Chr^nol.
For in his eighth Observation, on the 20 Chapter of the Revelations, he writes
thus.

The Prophetical Spirit briefly does prophecy in this Revelation of S. John,
of a singular, and wonderful Resurrection of the Church, Renovation and
restitution thereof, Namely, that in this last age it shall be conspicuous,
consisting of Jews and Gentiles, quick and dead, and it shall after a
wonderful manner Revive, be Renewed, Restored, and Flowrish again more
Gloriously than ever it did formerly, and that from those that were dead the
very first death.

If you enquire of their Arguments, they are partly taken from the certainty of
the conversion of Jews and Gentiles, partly out of some places in the Scripture
expressly promising peace, partly out of the prophecy of a thousand years,
described in the twentieth Chapter of the Revelations, not yet fulfilled. And
though that matter, as Enigmaticall, cannot be decided before the event; and if
it might, it is beyond my abilityes, nor does it concern this place:

Yet, In stella Serpent. delegat. Evangel ad Indos.
I. It seems to be most true, that there shall be a more full conversion of
Jews and Gentiles, as Keckerman and Justus Heurnius, have demonstrated out of
the Scripture. But after the Ruin of Antichrist, not only that which shall
oppose Idolatry, but the matter it self does show it; to say nothing of the
shutting up of the Devil, which is written of, after the casting of the false
Prophet and the Beast into the Lake.

II. No Article of the Faith should be violated, though we should maintain the
coming again of Elias, and the returning of the Jews again into the Land of
Canaan. For that which is spoken of Elias by the Evangelist, to come again and
restore all things, Christ did not ascribe to John the Baptist. Nor is that in
Micha spoken of him, ascribed to this man. To say nothing that the first coming
of Christ was not terrible, but joyful. The promise made to the Israelites,
Deuteronomie 30 is too glorious; and that it is not yet fulfilled, is apparent
by the dispersion of the Jews nor yet restored.

III. It is very probable that the notable ruin of Antichrist is hard at hand.
For since it is evident that the History of the Revelations describes unto us
three periods of the Church, and each of them is bounded with seventy seven
years, and from thence it certainly follows that the Denunciation of the Ruin
of Babylon fell about the Reign of Charles the Fifth, and there is nothing more
written of the restitution thereof, but that those late tumults in that
battle, described in the nineteenth of the Revelations, seem to be prefigured,
and the success on that side, shows nothing else, than what appeared in
Carthage half destroyed. Namely, that the bitings of beasts when they are ready
to die are most violent; It can hardly be thought that it can last long. Nor are
all those Prodigies; What is to be thought of the modern Presages.
Presages, and Predictions to be neglected, which are written to have fallen
out both in former times, and in these last ten years.

Indeed they are more obscure than that they may be easily looked into, and too
serious to be rejected with scoffing prejudice. And though I find that
ambitious and ignorant men challenge this to themselves; Yet Men of better
minds hold it better to wait on the event with hope and patience, than by rash
Judgment to accuse the Scriptures of falsehood, and to make things false to be
true, or to ascribe Divinity to Humane actions; or supernatural Power to
natural things. I, though I had rather be silent, both concerning Divinity and
the Truth, yet I profess that I have hardly found any thing in Histories, I
have read, that is not foretold either by Divine or Diabolick, or Humane, or
Natural predictions, or by them altogether. All the order of the four
Monarchies lies couched in Daniels Images, the brief of all the Ecclesiastical
History is contained in the Apocalyptick writings. And out of these the Devil
has taken some things.

The birth of Christ was fore showed by the Sybils, Oracles, and Stars, besides
the writings of the Holy Prophets. What Figures of men's Nativities, and what
all the rest can do is taught by a work of Julius Caesar, Bullinger de
Divinatione, and by the History of the Duke of Biron. Yet there is a mean to be
used in these things; they must be made use of occasionally, and not
fundamentally.

IV. It is probable that the thousand years in the Revelations are not yet
fu^fill^d. For were they fulfilled, that must be, either in the first, second
or third period.

Not in the first.

For then the seven Seals had their event, nor did then any thing fall out
besides, but what is written of the Woman's driving away, and the battle with
the Dragon: also then there was an Infinite number of Heretics, and a mighty
flood of persecution.

Not in the second.

For under that both Anti-Christianisme sprang up, and Mahumetisme.

Not in the third.

For then they say he was let loose. But then began the Church to rise again,
with the two Witnesses that were slain in the former period; and Babylon began
to decline. Of the same opinion is Dr. Mede, a Divine of Cambridge my
Honorable friend, In libro de succesione.
who is the Author of the Clavis Apoca^yptica, fetched out of the innate and
imbred characters of the visions, and demonstrated from them. The most reverend
Doctor usher Primate of Ireland says that there is a two fold Millenary. But
Martinius takes it for a long time by Synccdoche, and more rightly. But I will
say no more of this matter than I have said; for I would show only what may be
said thereof, and not what may be certainly said; if you except the first and
second.

In the mean while I desire to be instructed of two things. Namely, Whether the
Ruin of Antichrist shall be total? And whether after that Satan is bound up
so, there must needs follow a cessation of all Heres^es, Dionis. Alexand.
of all Impiety, and of all Persecutions in the visible Church? Far be it from
me any farther to favor the Millenaries, that were defended by Papia, Ireneus,
Apollinarius, Tertullian and Lactantius, who dreamt of a glorious Jerusalem
upon the earth for a thousand years, after the Resurrection, The blood of
Sacrifices, Rest of the Sabbath, Circumcision, Marriages, Children, Education,
Delightful Banquets, the obedience to them of all Nations, the Moon to shine
as bright as the Sun, and that the Sun should shine seven fold cleerer than it
does. Let us rather pray that God would be pleased to look upon his afflicted
Church with a Gracious Eye, and grant unto it what is for the good thereof.
This is sufficient, if it be not too much. But, Whether it be so or so, Thanks
be given uuto thee, O Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Streater, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of
London.
THe Vale-Royall of England; or, The County Palatine of Chester, Illustrated.
Wherein is contained a Geographical and Historical Description of that Famous
County, with all its Hundreds, and Seats of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Freeholders; Its Rivers, Towns, Castles, Buildings Ancient and Modern: Adorned
with Maps and Prospects, and the Coats of Arms belonging to every individual
Family of the whole County. Unto which is added, An excellent Discourse of the
Island of Man.

The Refinement of Zion: Or, The old Orthodox Protestant Doctrine justified,
and defended against several Exceptions of the Antinomians: methodically
digested into Questions, wherein many weighty and important cases of conscience
are handled, concerning the nature of Faith and Repentance, or Conversion to
God. By Anthony Warton.

De Morbis Foemineis: The Woman's Counselor; or, The Feminine Physiian:
Modestly treating of such occult* Accidents, and secret Diseases, as are
incident to that Sex.

Pharmacopaea: Or, Rhaenodaeus his Dispensatory. Treating of the whole Body of
Physic: Performing the Office of an Herball, as well as an Apothecarie's Shop.

An History of the Wonderful things of Nature: set forth in ten several
Classes. Wherein are contained, 1. The Wonders of the Heavens. 2. Of the
Elements. 3. Of Meteors. 4. Of Mineralls. 5. Of Plants. 6. Of Birds. 7. Of
four-footed Beasts. 8. Of Insects, and things wanting blood. 9. Of Fishes. 10.
Of Man.


