LONDON'S Joyful Gratulation, and thankful Remembrance for their safeties.
Presented to the Right Honorable their Excellencies, the most Noble Earl of
Essex, and the most Noble Robert, Earl of Warwick. Both Generals of the
present Forces raised for the defense of this Kingdom, with the general joy
for their safe coming hither.

Arma virosque Cano.

LONDON, Printed by John Johnson. 1642.

LONDONS Joyful Gratulation, for their safeties.
WIth as much zeal as to the lusty Spring,
The little Birds their jocund Orgies bring,
Permit men sanctimonious reverence pay,
To ought beneath the Deity: with a true
Unfeigned intention offer we to you
Our grateful hearts: which if you will not despise,
Shall burn our gratitudes ample sacrifice
To you, brave pair of Earls, who have been the health,
The very life and soul of the Commonwealth.
The frozen Russian, so who half the year
Has been locked up in night, when day does clear
That cloudy darkness, joyfully do run,
To pay his homage to the all quickening Sun,
As we to gloirous Essex do impart
The best devotions of a thankful heart;
Who without fear, being justified by th'lawes,
Did put himself into his Countries cause,
And like great Mars, wherever he did come,
The foe did shake at terror of his Drum.
And as the timorous foul; the ^^ab^on fly,
So did they him; when he did dim the sky
With groves of Pikes the splendour of whose heads
Seemed to obscure the Sun beams: when the beds
Of honor in the tombed field were made,
The waving ensigns gloriously displaid;
And to the valiant Soldiers full delight,
The Trumpets sung tantarah to the fight.
When after this brave Earl had led his men,
Through most oth' fertile provinces, and again
reduced them toward this City, in the way,
He made triumphant and victoriour stay,
When near to Keinton the malignants came,
Dress't in the prodigies of smoke and flame;
Such fury in their faces, that from far
Each of their looks appears a civil war,
Teeming with death and horror, as indeed
They Would come to make the Countries Genins bleed,
To show themselves true urpers, that without,
Least Scruple eat their Mothers intrails out.
Then this great Earl his Countries general stood
Resolved to offer in its cause his blood;
And with undaunted Courage his Command,
Brought safety to the much afflicted land.
Under which fighting the bold army went
To death to serve the King and Parliament,
And giving the fierce enemy the defeat,
Who fearfully disordred did retreat,
They brought home conquest: to adorn the breast
O'th Commonwealth, and deck the generals crest.
Illustrious Essex, who is so truly good,
His virtue dignifies his name and stood:
Which being deduced from ancient steeres stem,
With chartlyes barronie even had on him.
To whom by right inheritance did arive
The style of Earl of Essex, and of Eve,
Whose father, that same darling and delight
Of manhood vanquished in victorious fight.
The Spanish powers when with propitious sails,
He with his Army landed at that Cales;
Where Hercules of old upon the shore,
His Pillars fixed, which non plus ultra wore,
Engraven in theie Marble sides, to stand
As 'twere the last marks of the then-known land.
Now to this City in whose just defense,
(And to secure the Laws from violence)
He Is been abroad, with everlasting fame
The General Essex is returned: A flame
Of joy and gladness breaking from each heart,
The City multiplied through every part
With, he expressions of their thanks: the Bells
With their loud voyes ringing welcome knels
To his approach, with whom conjoynd must be,
Warwick that is now our other General: He
That has our Fleet commanded, that same walls
Oth' Island, been its glorious Admiral
And this passed Summer, when our British Seas,
Swarmed with Malignants practices did appease.
All troubles were emergent on the Maine,
That could approach us, or from France or Spain,
Or Holland, where the bold Malginants lay,
To purchase Ammunition to betray
Their Countries safety, and impugn it is peace,
He did by's diligence those fears release.
Which did like tempests threaten to ore-whelme
The State, and those that plied were at the helm;
To ruin that great Chartre which was made
Unto our Ancestors, by whom was sai'd
The Basis of our Liberties. Even then
Did this same second Neptune among men,
Boldly the Azur'd Oceans curled face greet,
With a well-ordered and unconquered Fleet.
So that no Bark could furrow up the Maine,
But by his industry was surprised and taken.
That he in glory with brave Essez, even
Might seem the other Atlas of our heaven.
Upon whose shoulders, from assured decay,
The reeling pillars of this Realm might stay,
That glorious Warwick might his name advance
As high as his, who through the heart of France
Led his great Masters warlike squadrons on,
Warwick, third Edwards marshall that upon
A pile of wounds, did to true honor build
Eternal trophies. Such renown shall guild
Our Warwicks Crest, who with his Essex bands
Another Champion of his Countries stands,
As well as noble Essex self, and is
A worthy patriot in this extasis
Of the sick State: which gladly did him call
From Sea, to take the style of General
Which now he wears, resolved to spend his blood
In our defense, and for the Kingdoms good,
Which needs such worthies, firmly to support
Its frame against those Catalines at Court,
Those strange perverse malignants that instill
Into King Charles his sacred Ears an ill
Opinion of his Parliament, that strive
The Subject of its property to deprive:
And for their own sinister lude intents,
Would quell the essence of our Parliaments,
Who as a constant axiom told this true,
The safest way to old ils is by new.
And against such monsters, whose each acts a crime,
Each thought destruction, was it not high time
To call these Heroes to our aid, to stand
Up for the Liberty and peace of the land,
That their endeavors suddenly might bring
Tranquillity to the Subject and the King.
That this brave City, Britains royal Seat,
Might still continue happy as it is great,
Blessed with imperial presence, which of old,
It as the Chamber of our Kings, did hold
That true Religion might its wings display
Over the vast face of fair Britannia,
Which these brave Earls, by their industrious course,
And by the assistance of the Almighties force,
We hope will see effected; that the tears
May from our eyes be wiped, and all our fears
Banished; and new and glorious Sunshine smile
Through the mourning compass of this Isle.
Then our bright Virgins shall themselves adorn
With beauties ornaments, as if the morn
Broke from their eyes, and gladly flock to see
These men of fame, whom their felicity
Has been derived from: then our wives shall run
With joyful Ios to salute the Sun,
Brought by these Earls upon them, when they may
Safely enjoy the glories of the day.
When every one may under his own vine,
Eat his bread freely, and carouze his wine:
Our Matrons then shall from their couches rise,
And tears of joy shed from their orient eyes,
To see this peace, and happy plenty brought
Into the City, where there shall be naught
Of noise or tumult heard: the old men then
Shall be as jocund, as their youths again
Were growing on them: children shall rejoice
In their first language, and the common voice
Shall be to chaunt soft Hymns and pleasant lays,
To noble Essex and brave Warwicks praise.
To whom this Kingdom and this City shall
(When all their names are held Apochryphall
That do detract their worths: not to be hid)
Erect to each a lofty Pyramid,
To which the Memhpian ones so famed of old,
Shall yield priority: while this Isle does hold
Their memory's sacred; and (...) Annals tells
The History of these two paralels
In the big art of war, who swift as time
Does follow motion, shall while this same clime
Beneath the Pole rests in the book of fame,
Together bear sufficiently a name;
For worth and love unto their Country, which
Shall still to noble Deverux and Rich
Still pay their gratitude: and to begin
The Islands wishes free from that base sin
Of flattery to them. May the joys of health,
Strength, happiness and unexhausted wealth
Surround their ages; May they never meet
The cross of sickness to impair the sweet
Harmony of their frames; may they enjoy
Bliss which no time nor fortune can destroy
In heaven; and while they sojourne here on earth,
May all their actions give a daily birth
To deeds of honor; may a fair success
Crown their attemps; may victory still dress
At the reflection of their glittering swords
It Is beauteous looks, that when their heads are whit
Beneath their helmes they may overcome in fight:
These are our wishes to them, the same fate
Wait upon all those worthies of the state
That do defend their Country; may there fall
Heavens precious bounties plenteously on all
That love the peace of Sion: may the King
Increase in grace and virtue quickly bring
Joy and tranquillity to the Realm; and may
Divisions cease among us, so does pray
All who affect this kingdom, which heavens bless,
With all the fruits of peace and happiness.
FINIS.

