London in Luster: PROJECTING Many bright Beams of TRIUMPH: DISPOSED INTO
Several Representations of Scenes and Pageants.

Performed with great Splendour ON WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER XXIX. 1679.

At the Initiation and Instalment of the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON,
Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.

DIGNIFIED With diverse delightful Varieties of Presentors, with Speeches,
Songs, and Actions, properly and punctually described.

All set forth at the proper Cost and Charges of the Worshipful Company of
DRAPERS.

Devised and Composed by THO. JORDAN, Gent.

-- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
Hor. de Art Poet. London, Printed for John Playford at the Temple-Church,
1679.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of
LONDON.
MY LORD,
THE most Generous Ingenious Persons do never think themselves more affronted,
than when most flattered; because Imperfections commonly are the Objects of
such Varnish, but good Complexions defy Painting: I shall therefore avoid all
florulent Expressions, and make my Addresses to your deserving Person, with
such Encomiums, as are only delivered to me by the Dictates of Verity, which
are these:

By Divine Manuduction, Ability, Opportunity, Legal Election, and Regal
Authority, you are invested and confirmed a Vicegerent over the most Celebrious
City of all Europe, LONDON; yet at such a Season, when the Trouble of the Times
will prove the Trial of the Magistrate; in which, an even Carriage may render
you a good Governor, of great Circumspection, and an Example for Succession,
betwixt this and the Period of Time. In order thereunto, your Company have
dignified your Day with much Cost, disburs'd in delightful Devices of
Triumphant Scenes, and Significant Representations, to illustrate your
Lordships Inauguration, and conduct you with splendor to your Center of
Honor, the Chair of Government: Which, that it may prove a Seat of Safety to
your self, and Security to the City, shall be the daily devout Wishes of,

My Lord, Your really obliged humble Servant, THO. JORDAN.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF DRAPERS.
GENTLEMEN,
HAving Invented, Composed, Reviewed, Corrected, and Transcribed this Copy of
Structures, Figures, Habits, Gestures, Postures, Speeches and Songs, contained
in this Day's Triumph (wherein, I hope, I have Copiously accomplished your
Commands) I present them to your Judicial Examination, and favorable
Approbation, with presumption that I have not at all prevaricated from the
Substance of your Subject Matter, or deviated from the Circumstance of your
Instructions, alluding to the Honor of my LORD, the Glory of the CITY, and
deserved Dignity of this Worshipful SOCIETY: And although our Triumphs are
clouded with Troubles, and the whole Kingdom is terrified with dismal
Expectations; yet the Magnificence and full Grandeur of the Magistrate ought to
flourish, and bid defiance to Treachery, as the true Method to encourage our
Friends and disanimate our Enemies: Which I hope will be confirmed by
Providence, who is the Author of peace, Lover of Concord, and Confounder of
Cruelty, who will I hope Conserve this City and Company from Desolation and
Destruction, according to the assidual Wishes and daily Deprecations of,

GENTLEMEN, Your humble and faithful Servant, THO. JORDAN.

In proper Habits orderly Arrayed,
The Movements of the Morning are displayed.

SElected Citizens in the Morning all
At Sev'n a Clock, do meet at Drapers-Hall.
The Master, Wardens, and Assistants, Joins
For the first Rank, in their Gowns faced with Foyns.
The second Order do, in merry moods,
March in Gowns faced with Budge and Livery Hoods.
In Gowns and Scarlet Hoods Thirdly appears
A youthful number of Foyns Batchellors.
Forty Budge Batchellors the Triumph Crowns,
Gravely attired in Scarlet Hoods and Gowns.
Gentlemen-Ushers which white Staves do hold
Sixty; in Velvet Coats and Chains of Gold.
Next, Thirty more in Plush and Buff there are,
That several Colors wave, and Banners bear.
The Sergeant Trumpet Thirty six more brings,
Twenty the Duke of York's, Sixteen the Kings.
The Sergeant wears Two Scarfs, whose Colors be,
One the Lord Mayors, to other's the Company.
The King's Drum-Major followed by Four more
Of the Kings Drums and Fifes, make LONDON roar.
Seven Drums and Two Fifes more in Vests of Buff
March with Waste-Scarfs, and Breeches of Black Stuff.
Two City Marshals mounted and attended,
Are by the Company with Scarfs befriended.
And (next to the Drums) do Troop it in the Rear.
But the Foot Marshal does the next appear;
Who puts them all in Rank and File, and wears
A Shoulder Scarf as broad and rich as theirs.
Attended by six persons that dare do
What e're their Marshal may Command them to.
Next the Fence-Master troops, and (to defend him)
Diverse with drawn broad bright Swords do attend him.
Many poor Pensioners that march in the Rear,
With Gowns and Caps, Standards and Banners bear;
A numerous Troop of Persons that are poor,
In Azure Gowns and Caps, one hundred more,
With Javelins and with Targets are all Actors,
And bear the Arms of their good Benefactors.
Being thus prepared:

By the Foot-Marshals Judgment they are guided,
And into six Divisions are divided:
Ranked out by two and two. The first that stirs
Are the poor Company of Pensioners;
But in the front of them orderly be
Placed the Ensigns of the Company.
In The Rear of them four Drums and one Fife more,
Then Pensioners in Coats described before.
Persons of worth who do in Martial manner,
Bear each of them a Standard or a Banner.
Four Trumpets more to them, and in their Rear
Two of the Drapers Ensigns march, which bear
(As by the Herald Painter in expressed)
The Draught of their Supporters, and their Crest:
Six Gentlemen-Ushers in order trudge,
And after them the Batchelors in budge:
Marching in measured distance, and endu'd
With Order, This Division does conclude.
In The Rear of them six Trumpets do appear,
And after them two Gentlemen, that bear
Two Coats of Arms, which appertaining be
To the City and the Drapers Company.
Then do march up Eight Gentlemen that wears
The Golden Chains, then the Foins Batchelors,
In amicable measure, move like Friends
Filled with one Joy: So this Division ends.
Two Gentlemen in velvet Coats arrayed,
March after them with two Banners displayed;
Then succeed them Ten Gentlemen-Ushers more,
In Coats and Chains of Gold described before;
And gradually after them you will see
A very worthy large Society;
With each of them a Gown and Livery Hood,
And all LORD MAYORS in the Potential Mood.
In The Rear of these (with silver sounds to fit ye)
Do fall in diverse Trumpets of the City;
And after them two Gentlemen accord,
To bear the Arms of the City and my Lord:
And then the Gentlemen with equal distance
That usher in the grave Court of Assistants.
In The Rear of them, four Drums, six Trumpets, be
Ordered to bring up the Catastrophe.
Three Gallants gradually follow them,
Bearing the Banners of the Diadem.
Kings, Queens, and Cities Ensigns, which engages
Six Gentlemen to wait on them as Pages;
The Masters and the Wardens bring up all.
And thus equipped, they march from Drapers-Hall
To my Lords House, where the Aldermen and He
Take Horse, and rank according to Degree:
Which being done, the whole Body in State
Does move toward Guild Hall, but at the Gate
The new Lord with the old Lord Mayor unites,
Guarded by Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights.
Then thus attired, with Gown, Fur, Hood, and Scarf,
March all through Kings-Street down to Three-Crane-Wharf;
Where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen discharge
A few Gentlemen Waiters, and take Barge
At the West end of the Wharf; and at the East
The Court Assistant, Livery, and the best
Gentlemen-Ushers: Such as stay on shore
Are Ushers, Foins, and the Budge Bachelor:
Who for a time repose themselves and Men,
Until his Lordship shall return again:
Who now with several Companies make have
To Westminster, but in the way is placed
A Pleasure-Boat that has great Guns aboard,
And with Two Broad-sides does salute my Lord.
They Row in Triumph all along by the Strand,
But when my Lord and Companies do Land
At the New Palace-Stairs, orderly all
Do make a Lane to pass him to the Hall;
Where having took an Oath that He will be
Loyal and faithful to His MAJESTY,
His Government, His Crown and Dignity,
With other Ceremonials said and done,
In Order to his Confirmation;
Sealing of Writs in Courts, and suchlike things,
As show his power abstracted from the King's,
He takes his leave of the Lords and Barons, then
With his Retinue he retreats again
To the Waterside, and (having given at large
To the Poor of Westminster) does Re-imbarge,
And scud along the River 'till he comes
To Blackfriars Stairs, where Guns and thundering Drums
Proclaim his Landing; when he is set ashore,
He is saluted by three Vollies more
By (the Military Glory of this Nation) the Company of Artillerymen, they being
all in their Martial Ornaments of Gallantry, some in Buff with Head-pieces,
many of them Massy Silver.

From Black-Fryers-Stairs, they march before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
through Cheapside to Guild Hall. Those that went not to Westminster, viz. the
Pensioners and Banners, being set in order, ready to march, the Foot-Marshal in
the Rere of the Artillery-Company leads the way along by the Channel up
Ludgate Hill, through Ludgate into St. Paul's Churchyard, and so into
Cheapside, where his Lordship is entertained by the first Scene or Pageant.

A Description of the First Pageant
WHich by a double Denomination is called The Fountain of Felicity, and Triumph
of Time. A famous Fabric, erected and designed according to the delightful
Dimensions of the Dorick Order of Architecture, situate in the Medium of a
pleasant Garden, adorned with the beautiful bravery of divers-colour'd Flowers,
suitable to all the Seasons of the year, and on the extreme top of this
Fountain is artfully elevated the Figure of Time, properly accomodate with all
the Emblematical signalities, which are pertinent to his Representation, as
Shape, Fore-lock, Wings, Hourglass, Sith, etc. Round about beneath him on
several Descents, gradually distinguished, sit the Twelve Months of the year;
but in the front of this Fountain on a Pedestal, is perspicuously placed, a
Person representing the judicial, critical, and punctual faculty of that
minutary Minion, Opportunity, which is the Speaker, whose Habits with all
other, pertinent accomplishments, I shall orderly describe in this method.

1. OPPORTUNITY, In a Robe of Watchet-colour'd Satin, richly Embroidered, and
all over laced with Silver, a silver Scarf fringed with Gold, a long lovely
bright flaxen Hair, a golden Coronet about his Head, on the front of which is a
very large Oval Clock-Dial-Plate, the ground of which is Azure, with the Hand
and literal Figures OR, the Finger pointing at xii. On his Shoulders a pair of
golden and purple Wings; on his Feet a pair of carnation Buskins, laced and
surfled with gold and silver Ribon. In his left hand he bears on a large
Shield, Vert, an Angler fishing in a River proper, drawing up a large Fish, the
Motto, In tempore veni quod omnium rerum est primum.

The Twelve Months described.
1. MARCH, A young man with a swarthy Complexion and fierce Aspect, in a tawny
velvet Coat, buttoned and loop'd with Gold, a large shoulder Belt embroidered
with Gold, in which hangs a Sword with a gold Hilt, a black short curled
Hair, on which is a golden Helmet, with a plume of red, white, green, and blew
Feathers, a Chain of Gold about his Neck, at which is hung a large Medal before
his breast, charged with the first Sign of the Zodiac, called Aries, the Ram,
golden Buskins laced and surfled with scarlet-colour'd Satin Ribon. In his left
hand he bears a large Target, on which is painted the Arms of the first in
order of the Twelve Companies, viz. the Mercers: In the other hand, a Banner of
the King's.

2. APRIL, A handsome young Lady, in a long grass-green silk prunello Robe, a
blossom-colour'd Mantle, a bright brown Hair, on which is a Garland of Myrtle
and Hawthorn Buds, Primroses, Violets, Crocus's, and Emonies; and on an oval
Plate springing up from the Garland above his Forehead, the Sign Taurus, with
green and silver Wings upon his shoulders; holding in her left hand a Shield,
bearing the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Grocers; in her right hand, a
Banner of the Companies.

3. MAY, A lovely young Boy, clad in a florid Robe, with a Mantle of
poppinjay-green silk and silver, winged with purple and gold, flaxen Hair
curled; on his Head a Garland of Damask, white and red Roses, Blew-bottles and
Scarlet Poppies, and (on the like oval as the former) above his Forehead the
Sign Gemini: In one hand a Target, with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of
Drapers; in the other hand a Banner of the City.

4. JUNE, A Lady of well-grown stature, in a Robe of French green Silk
thick-laced with Gold, a pink-colour'd silk Mantle mixed with silver, winged
with silver and gold; a long brown curled Hair, on which is a Garland of
Honey-suckles, Strawberries, Bugloss, and Columbines of all colors, with an
erected sprig and oval in front, on which is the Sign Cancer; Buskins of
silver, laced and surfled with grass-green silk and silver Ribon. On her left
Arm a Buckler, on which are the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Fishmongers:
In her right hand a Banner of the Lord Mayor's.

5. JULY, A proper Lady, in a Robe of light yellow-colour'd Satin, a Mantle of
silver and carnation Silk, a dark-brown Hair, curled, on which is a Garland of
Gilliflowers, Musk-Roses, French Mary-golds, and blew Mary-golds with
Africana's, winged with crimson and silver, and on the oval in the front,
formed like the rest, the Sign Leo. On her right Arm hangs a Shield, charged
with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths. In her right hand a
Banner of the King's.

6. AUGUST, A young Man, of a fierce and choleric Aspect, in a flame-colour'd
Garment of silk, a black and Gold Scarf, a sunburned Hair, a Garland of Wheat
and Rye, bearing the Sign Virgo; lemon-colour and silver Wings. In one hand a
Target, with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Merchant-Taylors: In the
other hand a Banner of the City.

7. SEPTEMBER, A Lady of merry cheerful countenance, in a purple Robe, a French
green and gold silk Scarf, a brown flaxen Hair, a wreath of white and purple
Grapes, Apples, Plumbs, Pears, green Walnuts mixed with their leaves; on her
Forehead the Sign Libra, with Wings of diverse colors. In one hand she bears a
Shield, charged with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Skinners: In the
other, a Banner of the Companies. Her purple Robes shows how she reigns
like a Queen above other Months, abounding with plenty of things pleasant and
necessary for Man's life.

The Sign Libra is now an indifferent Arbiter between day and night, poizing
equal hours according to Virgil: Libra dies, somnique pares ubi fecerit horas.


This has its name, as being the seventh Month from March.

8. OCTOBER, A young Man, in a Garment of yellow and carnation silk, a farsnet
scarf of Foli-mort color, a bright brown Hair, on which is a Garland of Oaken
leaves, Acrons, and Apples, wearing yellow Wings, and on his front the zodiacal
Sign Scorpio; yellow Buskins laced with purple Ribon. In one hand he bears
the Shield, adorned with the Worshipful Company of Haberdashers: In the other,
a Banner of my Lord Mayor's.

9. NOVEMBER, A swarthy complexion'd Lady, in a Robe of changeable green silk,
a black silk and gold Mantle, with orange and purple Wings, on her head a dark
brown Hair, about which is a Garland of Olives, (fruit and leaves) and fronted
with the Sign Sagittarius. In one hand she bears a Target, dignified with the
Arms of the Worshipful Company of Salters: In the other, a Banner of the City.

10. DECEMBER, An old Man of a crabbed visage, his Nose red, he is wrapped in an
Irish Rug, girt about him, an old white Peruke, on which is no Garland, but
three or four Night-caps, and over them a Turkish Turbant, stuck with Holy,
Ivy, and Misletow, with black Wings; and on his Forehead the Sign Capricornus.
On his hands are furred Mittens, in one of which he holds a Buckler,
illustrated with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Ironmongers: In the
other hand a Banner of the King's.

11. JANUARY, An old Woman clad all in white Flannel, with a white shag'd Irish
Mantle, (like the color of the Earth at this time when apparel'd in Snow) a
gray long Hair, with a wreath of Parsnips, Cabbage, Turnips, and Carrots, with
milk-white Wings, bearing the Sign Aquarius. In one hand she bears a Target,
beautified with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Vintners: In the other a
Banner of the City.

12. FEBRUARY, An ancient Person in a Robe of dark sky-colour, edged with light
sky and silver Fringe, semined all over with bright-shining and sparkling
golden Stars, which commonly glare and glister in freezing nights, a Mantle of
silver, embroidered with frost-work, a Coronet of Ew, Cypress, Juniper,
Pine-leaves, and their Apples, tipp'd all of them with snow-drops; black, blew,
white, and yellow Wings; on her Forehead the pedal Sign of Pisces. In one hand
a Target, enriched with the Arms of the Worshipful Company of Cloth-workers: In
the other hand a Banner of the Lord Mayor's.

OPPORTUNITY, perceiving my Lord Mayor well fixed and settled in the posture of
Attention, endeavors to answer his expectaion by rising up, bowing his Body,
and delivering with audible Elocution this following Speech.

The FIRST SPEECH Spoken by OPPORTUNITY.
TIME, the Twelve Months, with Opportunity,
In this fair Fountain are all come to be
Actors and Speaker in your Jubilee:
For Love and Honor, now in Triumph ride,
A Day, your own Deserts have dignified:
(I speak the sense of all the City, which
Are Old and Young, Wise, Generous, and Rich)
A Season that is Influenced by me
Without whom nothing is done seasonably.
My Lord! My Name is OPPORTUNITY.
The Twelve Months, which these Persons represent,
Contain the Limits of your Government:
Who, on their Garland Foreheads, undertake
To wear the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac.
The Shields (on which their Honor much relies)
Contain the Arms of the Twelve Companies.
Plenty has sent her Fountain too, by me,
That you may take your Oppurtunity:
Without which, Princes, Politicians, States,
Soldiers and Seamen, Merchants, Magistrates,
Lovers and Laborers, in each degree,
Shall simply Center in Uncertainty;
And lose the prosperous event of Fate,
By setting forth too Early or too Late.
In The restless Wheel of Time, there is a Nick,
Which who so hits, is Fortune's Politic;
But you, my Lord, know well, (by reading Men)
Both what, and where, and how, and why, and when
To apt your Power, though in this very point
Of Time, I doubt, all things are out of joint.
But when Extremes on either hand do sway,
It Is safest sure to choose the Middle-way.
Extremes are dangerous, and apt to hurt us,
We read, in medio consistit Virtus.
Virtue and Providence has made you rise,
To serve the State in Two Capacities,
Which grow as near as Brother is to Brother,
Head of the One, and Member of the Other.
If therefore you will gain good Esteem on Earth,
And dignifie your Name, your Place, and Birth,
If you will raise a future Fame, and be
A Precedent to all Posterity,
Let Equity with even hand, my Lord,
Advance your Balance, and direct your Sword.
Nothing can make a Nation so well live
As Justice, when it is distributive,
And equally dispensed. Consider, that
This Demi-Godlike Power of Magistrate,
Is given to try what Spirit you will be,
Then do not lose your Opportunity.
Advance true Virtue, punish every Crime,
Y' have but a Year to Rule, This is the time.
At the last period of this Oration, we had just cause to presume (by many
significant Expressions, in motion, looks, and gesture) that his Lordship was
well pleased; who separating from his Station, advances, with his worthy
Senators, the Aldermen, through an unruly throng of admiring Spectators, 'till
coming to Milk-street end, he is intercepted, and civilly importuned to apply
his Observation to a Second Scene, which is rendered more manifest by this
following Explanation.

The Second Pageant,
IS the Shepherd's Sanctuary, or Bower of Beatitude: A very proper and pleasant
Scene, of quadrangular Form, situate on a delightful Mount, adorned with all
the delectable Varieties that Art can present, or Nature produce; whose Center
is circled with a fragrant boundary of beautiful Borders, containing as much
Diversity of Flowers and Fruits, in as pleasurable a Plantation, as Poetry has
pictured Paradise: In the front of which sits the Royal-Shepherd, attended
by a double Pairroyal of Shepherds, and Shepherdesses, whose noble Names, well
adapted to their Virtuous Natures, are these, 1. Vigilius and Precaria; 2.
Canonicus and Evangelia, 3. Orthodoxus and Protestantia, 4. Fidelius and
Bonopera; which are the Pious Pastoral Courtiers that wait on the wise Commands
of the Royal Shepherd; who, according to his Dignity, is thus Attired.

A Close-bodied Coat of Scarlet-colour'd Satin, richly beautified with Silver
lace, and over that a Purple-colour'd Velvet loose Robe, richly laced with
Gold; a Dark Brown Curled Hair; on his Head, a Ducal Crown; on his Left Arm
hangs a Shield Argent, Charged with a Giants Head Coupee; in his Right hand,
a Golden Crook, on which hangs down a Golden Sling with Silver strings. Green
Silk Hose, with Sandals of Gold. The Habits of Shepherds and Shepherdesses, are
as follows, figured by Pairs.

1. VIGILIUS, in a Grass-green-silk Robe fringed with Silver, seeded with
waking Eyes; a Siver Mantle edged with Gold, a brown Peruque, on which is a
Chaplet of Bays and their Berries all tip'd with Gold, with gray-silk Hose,
silver Buskins laced and surfled with green and silver Ribon, a grey-silk Scrip
laced with Gold by his side, a silver and green Sheephook in one Hand, with a
Banner of the Kings in the other.

PRECARIA, in a Robe of Ash-colored silk and Gold, a Seagreen and silver
Mantle, a curled flaxen Hair, a Chaplet of Flowers, Pearl-silk Hose, and gilt
shoos tied with green and silver Ribon. By her side hangs down a silver
Scrip, a golden Sheephook in one hand, and a Banner of the Cities in the other.

2. CANONICUS, in a silk Robe of dark russet color, edged with broad gold
Fringe, a Cloth of gold Mantle, a fair curled Hair, a Coronet of golden Stars,
Green-silk Hose, Russet Buskins laced with gold and green Ribon, a green Scrip,
imbroidered with silver by his side; holding in one hand, a Silver staff with a
golden Sheephook at the end on it; In the other, a Banner of my Lord Mayors.

EVANGELIA, a Beautiful Lady in a silver Robe, an Olive-colour and gold Mantle,
a long bright brown curled Hair, a Chaplet of white Roses, with an Olive Branch
in front, upon her head, white silk Hose, and green shoos, tied with gold
Ribon: In one hand a silver Sheephook, and in the other a Banner of the Virgin,
the Patroness of the Worshipful Company of Drapers.

3. ORTHODOXUS, in a Robe of dark-green silk and silver, a willow-green silk
and gold Mantle, a long curled black Hair, on which is a Chaplet of Laurel,
tip'd with gold, french-green-silk Hose and silver Buskins, laced and surfled
with gold and scarlet Ribon; a gray silk and gold Scrip by his side: In one
hand a silver Sheephook; in the other hand, a Banner Charged with the Ensign of
St. John the Evangelist, which is a Golden Eagle, holding a Pen and Inkhorn
with the string in his Beak; the Arms of his Lordships primary Society, the
Scriveners Company.

PROTESTANTIA, a prudent Virgin, of gracious Aspect, in a Cypress-colour'd silk
Robe, fringed with Gold, a Gold and Jay-green Mantle, a long bright flaxen
Hair, on which is a Coronet of white Lilleis intermixed with Thorns, to signify
her Innocence and persecution. By her side a Silver Scrip; In one hand, She
holds a golden Crook; and in the other, a Banner of the Company.

4. FIDELIUS, in a Sage-green Robe, laced and fringed with Seagreen silk and
gold, a Mantle of Dove-colour'd silk and silver, on his Head a dark brown
Peruque, crowned with a Chaplet of Holly, the Leaves tipped with silver, and
golden Berries, Ivy-green silk Hose, laced and surfled with grass-green and
gold Ribon. A greet and silver Scrip; in one hand, a silver Sheephook; in the
other, a Banner of the Kings.

BONOPERA, a Princely Shepherdess of a lovely look, in a Robe of gray-green
silk and silver, on which is a Mantle of Brimstone-green silk and gold; with
the like Fringe, a bright brown Hair, on which is a Chaplet, containing variety
of Fruits to signify Good Works, according to her Name, Willow-green silk
Hose; white shoos tied with yellow and green and gold Ribon; a golden Scrip by
her side; in one hand, a golden Crook; and in the other a Banner of the City.

In the Front of this Scene, on the Stage is conveniently first placed a Golden
Ram, backed by a pretty Rider, which is a very beautiful Boy, with such
features of Face, curiosity of Complexion, and Symmetry of Limbs, that he would
have been an excellent Original to draw an Angel by; and have prevailed with
Medea as far as Jason did when he obtained the Golden Flecce at Colchos. He is
Arrayed in a bright silk Seagreen Robe, largely Fringed with Gold, a poppinjay
green and gold Mantle; bright, long curled flaxen Hair; a Chaplet of Roses,
Lemon-colour'd silk Hose, and silver Buskins, laced and surfled with
grass-green and silver Ribon; a Bridle of Purple and gold Ribon in his left
hand, and a silver Sheephook in the other on which hangs a Banner of the
Company.

His Lordship being in a propense posture of Expectation, the Royal Shepherd,
with reverend Eyes, beholds the Venerable Object, and makes his civil Adress to
his Lordship, in these Expressions following.

The ROYAL SHEPHERD'S Speech.
I Represent that Shepherd whose abode
Was Palestine, One who Divinely trod,
And said, My Shepherd is the Living God:
One that could use the Sheephook, Harp and Sling,
A Shepherd, Soldier, Psalmist, and a King.
That much condemned the vile Wits of his Age
And ours, when wisely, in a Sacred Rage
He did in this line Atheism explode,
The Fool has said in's heart, There is no God.
A Royal Shepherd, One that gave Content
To his Creator with good Government.
Four Shepherds and their Shepherdesses do
Attend on Me, and com to wait on You,
Divinely Qualified, Celestial Swains,
'Bove all that keep upon Arcadian plains.
This Golden Ram with Antlers of defense [Points to the Ram*]
Does show the Drapers, Strength, Wealth, Innocence.
And as to Trade, the Sheep may serve ye both,
In that it does produce Parchment and Cloth.
This little Scene, and I, do represent
A Model of Your greater Government.
For you present a Shepherd, This great Town
Infolds your Flock, (a Plain of great renown)
You do present a Soudier, when, by Law,
You sit and Act in the Militia.
In your distinct Capacities, Men know
You are tam Marti quam Mercurio.
You do present a Judge, when you dispense
Guerdon to Guilt, Succor to Innocence.
You Are a Musician too, in the Consent
And Harmony of well-tuned Government.
You do present a King, in this degree,
For you present His Sacred MAJESTY.
I hope you will present them all so well,
You Will be a Pattern, no Time shall excel.
So shall you please King, Citizens, and Peasants,
And be well known to all Men By these Presents.
His Lordship having exposed his patience, and dignified the ceremony and
circumstance of the whole Design with his acceptance and approbation:
According to regularity and custom, he continues his March farther, 'till the
approach of another Scene prepares to receive a third Salutation, which is,

The Third Pageant.
A Delicate stately rich Royal Chariot, according to the exact and most curious
Roman Order of building, rarely dignified and wrought upon, by the ingenious
and artful hands of able Painters, Gilders, and Carvers, in accurate painting,
as well statuary as perspective, by which the admiring beholders are honestly,
though wittily, deceived into a great deal of fantastic Felicity, which is
drawn by two golden pellited Lions, that are Supporters to the Arms of the
Worshipful Company of Drapers, and are backed by two Negro's, richly and
properly habited. And on several parts of this celebrious Chariot, are properly
placed in elegant Order, certain eminent Figures, whose pertinent Dresses,
significant Emblems, and majestic Motion, add Life and Soul to the body of the
building, which are in number Eight, viz.

1. LOYALTY, A young Man of Heroic Aspect, thus accomplished; On a close Coat
with silver sleves, a suit of golden Armor, viz. Back, Breast, and Corslet,
with a gilt Elbow-Gauntlet, a pair of Roman Bases, with several Labels, or
Panes of purple, gold, scarlet, and silver, hanging down from his waste to his
knees, a long bright flaxen curled Hair, on which is a golden Helmet, with a
red and white large Plume of Feathers, scarlet silk Hose, and gold Buskins,
laced and surfled with silver and purple Ribon. On his left Arm is braced a
large Target, where, on a Field Gules is born the Rose and Crown OR, with this
Motto, Pro Rege, Lege and Grege: In the other he advances a golden Truncheon,
who sits eminently on the supreme seat of the Chariot. 2. PIETY, In a black
silk Robe, a silver Mantle, a fair Hair, on which is a Coronet of golden Stars;
white Hose, silver Buskins laced with black and gold Ribon, bearing a Buckler
in one hand, whereon a Mount Vert, is the Figure of Devotion, kneeling in the
posture of praying: In the other hand, a Banner on an Angelical-staff, bearing
a cross Gules in a Field Argent. 3. EQUITY, In a crimson scarlet Robe, and on
it a gold Mantle, fringed with silver, on her Head a long disheveled Hair of
flaxen color, curiously curled, a wreath of white and red Roses; sky-colour'd
silk Hose, white Shoos. In her right hand she holds a golden Balance
equiponderant, to weigh equally and impartially: In her other hand she bears
a Banner of the King's. 4. VERITY, A very beautiful Virgin, in a white sarsnet
Robe, a Cloth of silver Mantle, a fair bright crispy curled Hair of pure
flaxen, a Garland of white Lillies and white Roses, white silk Hose, white
Buskins laced with silver Ribon. In one hand a large Fan of Stars (with which
she chaseth away the mists of Error:) In the other hand, a Banner of the
Cities. 5. UNITY, In a Robe of green Sarsnet, sprinkled with diverse Annulets of
gold, a Chain of Gold thrice double about her Neck, an orange-colour'd Mantle
deeply fringed with gold, her Legs and Feet beautified with Buskins of gold,
surfled with watchet silk and silver Ribon, a wreath of green Laurel (about a
long Peruke of brown Hair) on her Head. Bearing in one hand an Escutcheon Vert,
charged with a Triangle within a Circle OR: In the other hand a Banner of the
Companies. 6. FIDELITY, A lovely Lady, adorned with a Robe of purple silk,
trimmed with silver and gold Network, a rich Cloth of gold Scarf, a bright
brown Hair, curiously curled on her Head, about which is a Coronet of Hands and
Hearts, scarlet-colour silk Hose, silver Buskins laced with purple and gold
Ribon, surfled. In one hand a Target sable, with two hands conjoined in Fess
OR: In the other hand a Banner of the Cities. 7. MAGNANIMITY, A Masculine
Virgin inrobed with Cloth of silver, a sky-colour and gold Scarf, in which
hangs a short Sword, with a gold Hilt, a long curled Peruke of Raven-black
Hair on her Head, about which is a wreath of Oaken Leaves and Acrons tip'd with
gold, sky-colour'd silk Hose, with yellow Buskins laced and surfled with
silver. In one hand she bears a Shield Azure, charged with a golden Heart: In
the other, a Banner of the Lord Mayor's. 8. STABILITY, In a scarlet-colour'd
silk Robe fringed with silver, an orange-colour and silver Scarf, a long dark
brown Hair curled on her Head, about which is a wreath of Bays tip'd with gold,
pearl-colourd silk Hose, with gilt Buskins laced and surfled with carnation
Ribon. In one hand she bears a Shield Vert, charged with a Fess Wavey betwixt
the two Pole Stars, Artic and Antartic, OR: In the other hand a Banner of the
King's.
LOYALTY, seeing my Lord in a fit posture of Attention, rises up, and
ceremonially addresseth to his Honor in these words: The SPEECH of LOYALTY.
THat I appear thus Armed with Shield and Sword
Is proper, my Name's LOYALTY, my Lord.
True Loyalty, without Schism or Rent,
For the King, my Country, and The Government,
Against all those that hatched the late damned Plot
As black as Hell, and would have been as hot,
If Providence and Loyalty had not
Discovered it; who will as long as able
Persist with Spirits indefatigable.
Except true Concord be amongst us bred,
We shall be ruined, as your Lordship said.
I do, my Lord, the more insist upon it,
'Cause y' have declared for a True Protestant;
For so am I, a Vessel of such Rate
As ventured against Spain in Eighty Eight:
According to that Church, in the Life and Death
Of peaceful, blessed, Queen Elizabeth. -- [A good Pause.]
Y' have gained the Love of LONDON, over which, Fate,
Merit, and Choice, have made you Magistrate,
The great and good Lord Mayor, in such a Season
As will require your most refined Reason,
Authority, and Judgment, (all the Town
Is big with Expectation) and to Crown
With happy Omen, your deserved Honors,
Your Company have displayed all their Banners.
Opened their Treasuries, willing to pay
Their Tributary Triumphs on your Day:
They Have sent their Lions too, that they and I
May defend you from all Conspiracy.
This Rich and Royal Piece of Art you see [Points to the Chariot.]
Is called The Chariot of Loyalty,
Furnished with all those useful Graces, that
Exalt the Seat of a just Magistrate,
Which I Will not nominate, lest with pretense
Of pleasing, I oppress your Patience;
Although not many, their intrinsic Virtue
Shall fortify you so, no ill can hurt you,
Your Prudence will direct you how to choose 'em,
And when, and where, and in what case to use 'em,
Vice to suppress, and virtuous Souls to nourish,
So, the whole City, and your Fame shall flourish.


The Speech being ended, his Lordship giving sufficient demonstration of being
well contented, proceeds through a tumultuous Torrent of crouding People,
which to describe is so numerous and various, that it would exceed the full
length of a Show in the Description.

But in brief they were Shows to one another, the disordered People below in
the Street was an excellent Scene of confusion to the Spectators above in the
Belconies, who like waves of the Sea, did in continual agitation, roll over one
another necks like Billows in the Ocean, and the Gallantry above were as
pleasurable a sight to the Spectators below, where hundreds of various
defensive postures were screwed, for prevention of the fiery Serpents and
Crackers that instantly assaulted the Perukes of the Gallants, and the Merkins
of the Madams. In that Scene below, I saw a fellow carried in a throng of
Squeezers, upon Men's backs like a Pageant for the space of thirty Yards; in
all which time, being somewhat over-sensible of his Elevation, strutted, cocked
his Beaver, and rid in Triumph, 'till at last a new provocation of diversion
separating the shoulders of his Supporters, dropped him in a dismal dirty
kennel, whilst a race of fresh Gamesters ran over him. Like a popular
Favorite, who when the Faction dissipates, is left to himself, and laid liable
to all misfortunes. But (in this time) my Lord is come to St. Laurence-Lane
end, where he is jovially saluted with a Scene of Drolls, being all pertinent
persons in merry conformity to the Drapers Company.

The Fourth Pagent.
THis Scene is a Landscape of Salisbury Plain, where Rustic Shepherds and Rural
Shepherdesses are feeding and folding their Flocks, and for the future
Exaltation of the Drapers delight, here are several Trades met together all
pertinent for making of Cloth; as Carders, Spinners, Dyers, Wool-combers,
Sheerers, Dressers, Fullers, Weavers which are set w^^hout Order, because the
Excellency of this Scene does consist in confusion, although their Number and
weight are too cumbersom and ponderous for all of them to work, according to
their distinct Arts and Mysteries, yet they are here met in their Persons to
rejoice and express their Frolicks, in Dancing, Tumbling, Jumping, Pipeing and
Singing; and all such jovial Actions and Movements of Agility, as may express
their Joy and Exultation in their Complement to the New Lord Mayor, and their
Service to the Drapers Company. When they had done over their Tricks of
Activity; as much silence (as could be in that place at that time) was
Commanded, whilst a Jolly Shepherd and his Bonny Shepherdess advance their
Voices in in this following Ditty, in praise of a Shepherds Life, sung by
Opilio and Pastora.

A SONG.
Opi. OF all the blessed Lives in the World that are famed,
The Shepherd's condition ought first to be named,
Which may be defended from every Degree,

Past. For Piety, Honor, and Antiquity.
Just Abel it is said,
A Shepherd by Trade,
Did dye the first Martyr that ever was made.

Opi. And by his own Brother received his Doom,
Although their Formation were both in a Womb.

Past. This Example may teach us, if well understood,
That there is no Infallible friendship in Blood.

Opi. When David did follow the Ewes great with young,
He lived like a Shepherd, he pip'd and he sung;

Past. But when he was cramped with the cares of a Crown,
His own complaints tell us, his comforts fell down.

Opi. His days of delight
Were trouble and fright,
His hands were taught War, and his fingers to fight:

Past. But though he was blessed with the Death of Goliath,
His crosses increased with the fall of Uriah;
He had a fair Fortune, and stoutly he kept her,
Turned Hook, Scrip, and Bottle, to Ball, Crown, and Scepter.

Opi. Thus far Divine History dignifies Shepherds,
Preserving their Flocks from Wolves, Lions, and Leopards:
Apollo (adored as a God yet) did keep
On Thessalian Mountains King Admetus's Sheep;

Past. And Pan must not be
Forgotten by me,
Whom Shepherds did Worship as their Deity.

Opi. In Arcadian plains he Dominion did bear,
When Argalus and his Parthenia were there,

Past. These Presidents ev'ery Objection convinces;
Shepherds have been Martyrs, Gods, Prophets, and Princes,

Opi. One other (to amplify all) I shall name,
Of Courage and Conduct, good Fortune and Fame,

Past. A Shepherd by Trade, and a Scythian by Birth,
As you will confess when you hear of his worth,
Tamberlain did make
The Turk's Empire to shake,
When he in a Battle did Bajazet take.

Opi. Though five hundred Thousand men there did engage,
He took him, and put him into an Iron Cage;

Past. In one little Cabin his Empire and Throne is,
Who with his one Tongue declared Lex talionis.

Opi. But we simple Shepherds on Salsbury plain,
Live in more content than some Princes that Reign*

Past. In Valleys and Mountains we pipe and we sing,
Love God and our Neighbors, the Church and the King:

Opi. We are not such Sots
To harbor black Plots,
To call in the Frenchmen or draw in the Scots.
And in civil War every Honest-man loses:
They that love it I wish they may hav't in their Houses:

Chor. No Kingdom, nor Dukedom, nor Popedom can be
With all their Dominions, so happy as we.

Opi. We are not for Pistols, Guns, Backsword, nor Rapiers,
But pray for good Tradeing amongst LONDON Drapers,
Of whose Corporation and Society
Sir Henry Fitz-Alwin first Lord Mayor was Free.
Who, as it appears
By our Overseers,
Did Rule as Lord May'r above Twenty four years.
And it is presumed (he so justly did do)
If he had not died then, might have sat there till now.
Then let us sing and Dance up, Curvet, and cut Capers,
We Will pray for the King, the Lord Mayor and the Drapers.

The Song being ended the Foot-Marshal, having placed the Assistants, Livery
and the Companies on both sides of King Street, and their Pensioners with their
Targets hung on-the Tops of the Javelins: In the Rear of them the
Ensign-bearers; Dums and Fifes in the Front, and hasten the Foins and
Budg-Batchelors, together with the Gentlemen-Ushers to Guild Hall, where his
Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-men with Three Vollies more, which
Concludes their Duty; His Land Attendants pass through the Gallery or Lane, so
made into Guild Hall, after which the Company repairs to Dinner in the Hall,
and the several Silk-works, and Triumphs are likewise conveyed into
Blackwell-Hall, and the Officers aforesaid, and the Children that sit in the
Pageants there refresh themselves until his Lordship has Dined at Guild Hall.

But I must attend my Lord in the Hall at Dinner, and give an account of the
delightful Diligence, with the Jocal Accomplishments and performances of the
Musical Movements.

His Lordship and the Guests being all seated, the City Music begin to touch
their Instruments, with very Artful Fingers, and after a Consort Lesson or two
being played, and their Ears as well feasted as their Pallats, an Accute Person
with good Voice, brisk humor and Audible utterance (the better to provoke
Digestion,) sings this pertinent Frolic, called, The CORONATION of CANARY.
DRink your Wine away,
It Is my Lord Mayor's day;
Let our Cups and Caesh be free:
Beer and Ale are both
But the Sons of froth,
Let us then in Wine agree
To taste a Quart
Of every Sort,
The thinner and the thicker;
That spite of Chance
We may advance
The Nobler and the Quicker,
Who shall by Vote
Of every Throat
Be Crowned the King of Liquor.
II.
Muscadel Avaunt,
Bloody Alligant,
Shall have no free vote of mine;
Claret is a Prince,
And he did long since
In the Royal Order shine.
His Face is spread
With sprightly red,
And so he loves to see Men;
If he bears sway,
His Subjects they
Shall be as good as Freemen.
But here is the blot
Almost forgot,
He Is too much burnt by Women.
III.
By the River Rhine
Is a valiant Vine,
That can all our Veins replenish;
Let us then consent
To the Government,
And the Royal Rule of Rhenish.
The German Wine
Will warm the Chine,
And frisk in every Vein;
'Twill make the Bride
Forbear to chide,
And call him to it again.
But that is not all,
He Is much too small
To be our Sovereign.
IV.
We shall never think
Of a nobler Drink;
Then with votes advanced high,
Let us all proclaim
Good Canary's Name,
Heaven bless His MAJESTY.
He is a King
In every thing,
Whose Nature does renounce ill;
He Will make us skip,
And nimbly trip,
To the Ceiling from the Ground-cill,
Especially
When Poets be
Lords of the Privy Council.
V.
But a Vintner he
Will his Taster be,
There is no Man that can him let;
And a Drawer that
Has a good Pallat,
Shall be made Squire of the Gimlet.
The Bar-boys shall
Be Pages all,
A Tavern well prepared;
In jovial sort
Shall be his Court,
Where nothing may be spared,
Wine-Porters shall
With shoulders tall,
Be Yeomen of the Guard.
VI.
If a Cooper we
With a Red-Nose see,
But in any part of the Town;
That same Cooper shall
With his Adds Royal
Be the keeper of the Crown.
Young Wits that wash
Away their Cash
In Wine and Recreation,
That hate dull Beer
Are welcome here
To give their Approbation:
So shall all you
That will allow
Canary's Coronation.


Dinner being ended, and Night approaching, his Lordship being attended by a
private Retinue of his own Company, takes Coach, and is conducted to his
Mansion House, without the troublesome Night-Ceremony which has been formerly,
when St. Paul's was standing. When his Lordship is housed, those that attend on
him depart with order and convenience; and the Triumphs and Silk-works are by
the care of the Master-Artificers, lodged for that Night in Blackwell-Hall
'till the next day following, and then are to be conveyed to Drapers-Hall. To
close up all, the Artists and Artificers (each of them deserving Commendations)
bid you Good Night.

FINIS.

