PSEYDO-ASTPOLTHGOS. OR, THE SPURIOUS PROGNOSTICATOR UNMASKED.

BEING A short EXAMEN of the manifold Errors and Fallacies, Falsehoods and
Flatteries, Published by Mr. W. LILLY, In his MERLIN 1659.

Wherein his Ignorance in Astrology is explained and exploded; His scandalous
girdings at the King of Denmark, Duke of Brandenburgh, and the States of
Holland, Noted; his Nefarious dealing with the late Lord Protector of England,
and the King of Sweden, discovered; His Impudent, Arrogant and Artless
Assertions, Retorted and Refuted.

By G. J. a Lover of Art and Honesty.

Humanum est errare: Jacere belluinum: perseverare diabolicum.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

PSEYDASTPO'GOS. OR, The Spurious Prognosticator, etc.
MAster William Lilly being a person (by the vulgar sort) believed to be the
most famous Astrologer that ever yet appeared on the English Stage: In his
Merlin, 1656. he witnesses the same of himself, thus -- We (says he) have
been a servant to the unthankful; we have shared in honor and dishonor:
Notwithstanding all which -- we have had all along since 1644. as general and
full a Practice in all the known parts of Astrology, as ever any man of this
Nation.

I shall not Comment upon this his Notorious Boast, nor Question whether his
deserts have been as worthy, as his Practice large. Neither shall I trouble my
self with noting any of his former failings (unless Collaterally) which may (I
question not, upon a strict examen) equal the hairs of his head for number;
though I presume it would be not an affront, but favor unto Astrology so to
do. Yet, Notwithstanding his great fame and [supposed] great skill, I may (I
hope) be bold to retort the Errors of his this years Merlin upon him, because
he has therein so notoriously deviated from Art, and so prodigiously
escandalized the same.

If that Great Artists for to Sin be bold,
I see no reason but they should be told.
Now that I may proceed Methodically, I shall consider, (1.) This (supposed)
Great Artist's Epistle. (2.) His General Judgments. (3.) His Monthly Fictions.

Sect. 1. I shall begin with his Epistle. And would gladly be informed by what
Authority, Astrological, or otherwise, he is so bold, as to Question or
bespatter the Duke of Brandenburgh's Title? (2.) Out of what Record (setting
aside Mother Shipton, and such like Authorities, he can prove the King of Swede
not only a Northern Lion, but a Northern Lion Rampant? (3.) What Astrological
Text favors him to predict -- That Carolus Gustavus the great [if the God of
Battles honor him with the Royalty of Denmark, and good footing in Elector
William his Dominions] shall prove a sure sanctuary to the Protestants? And why
either of the other (if the God of Battles prove adjuvant to them) shall not
prove a Sanctuary as sure, and as great unto the Protestants, as Carolus
Gustavus the great? they all being of one Faith or Religion. (4.) Whether there
be a text in Christian Astrology to encourage Mr. L. to say so confidently --
It is as true as truth it self -- when the League betwixt England and Sweden is
dissolved, then farewell the prosperity of the English Nation? (5.) Whether such
Astrology (if Mr. L. will have it so baptized) be not more likely to sow the
seeds of division among Princes and Nations, and set them sooner and surer
together by the ears, then any way uphold the honor of that Art Mr. L.
pretends to be so great a Proficient in?

Had such Errors and Ignorances (for such they must be, since the Art they are
fathered on disclaims them) been Published by some Novice in Art, that had not
been much known in the world, they had done the less mischief. But for one that
looks upon himself as a famed Artist, and is commonly (though how much
undeservedly, you plainly see) believed to be so; Nay, one that writes himself
(though as fondly as falsely,) -- Christianae Astrologiae propagator fidissimus!
for such a one, to be guilty of such gross juggling, and most apparent
flatteries, it does not only intolerably blemish the Art, but prejudices many
honest Professors thereof, -- as Mr. Booker, Wharton, Wing, Tanner, etc. who
when they but hear those pitiful stories of their (pretended) foreman
mentioned, it cannot but strike them into the thoughts of a just indignation
against him.

Omne Animi vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto major qui peccat habetur.
The Eminenter he that does amiss,
So much his sin, the more notorious is.
But cui fini? to what end do I turn Questionist to Mr. L. when all that know
him, know it is not his guise to satisfy any? Let their demands be what they
will, he is not concerned, though his reputation lie at the stake never so much
-- Tell not me (says he) of every Dogs barking at me; I have a salve to cure
all again. Let Mr. L. go on, and tell the world that he has begun a new manner
of Astrology amongst us, and that he walks in those uncouth ways that no former
Author found; And crack with lying Lucretius at large, viz.

A via Signorum peragro loca nullius ante See his Merlins, 1648. 1649. 1650.
1651.

Trita Solo; --
In the amidst of Heavens Signs, I trace a way,
That no man found before me to this day.
Nay, if he invade the World with a Million more of such like hyperbolical
fictions and fooleries, ought he not to be believed? When Delphos was in
fashion, were any so bold, or foolhardy as to urge a reason from their Oracle?
And must it not (in Mr. L's thoughts) be unjust for any to urge him to a reason
of what he writes or obtrudes upon the World? In his thoughts, did I say? Nay,
in his Merlin, 1655. he plainly tells his Readers -- That he will from
thenceforth give no Astrological Reasons [when, or where, I pray Sir, did you
ever give any?] he having been too Copious unto an unthankful Generation of
men; who might have been everlastingly in their A. B. C. without his
assistance. ( -- Proprio laus sordet in ore.) Certainly such boasts could not
but much persuade with many people, that Mr. L. is every whit as able as he
proclaims himself, did they not surely know it to be the property of empty
Hogsheads to sound the loudest. I see not in reason how he can be said to bring
others out of their A. B. C. whose only skill is not removed a hairs breadth
beyond great F. viz. Flatteries. And so I pass from his Epistle to his Book.

Sect. 2. In his General Judgments, page 2. he acquaints us -- That now the
effects of the Comet 1572. draw near to a manifestation upon what Kingdom or
Country of Europe they will pour down their Influence -- The consideration of
which, has occasioned him to wander more then he intended concerning the
Swedish King and his Atchievments, etc. -- I shall not much Question the sense
of the former part of these words, although they sound very Anti-Grammatically,
Yet methinks if Comets have effects (which some very learned deny, and Mr. L.
cannot prove, unless we will be contented with his Assertives for Probatives,)
they should not continue 87. years; but like those of Eclipses or great
Conjunctions, only remain until another of the same kind come, and put a period
unto its threatened Effects.

According to which Doctrine, this Comet (which has caused Mr. L. to wander so
much from the Art he pretends to) should have ended its Effects in 1618. for
then there appeared another. But to make sense of Mr. L's words, he took not
the Comet, but K. of Sweden, etc. to be the cause of his wandering. And then the
Antecedent to the Relative [wandring] stands in the place of the Consequent;
and so he becomes (nevertheless) Guilty, of an Irrhetorical (...). but it
matters not much for sense, Art, or Scholarship; so we find but feignings and
flatteries good store in Mr. L. his learned works, we have what we can thence
rationally expect.

But he goes on and predicts further -- That the work designed by that Comet,
he finds is great, and such, that neither one man or age, shall scarcely afford
matter plentiful to begin its operation. -- A second John Baptist is required.
He finds the work, etc. is great. He can find any thing to be small or great
at his pleasure; he can make a Mountain of a Molehil, and a Molehil of a
Mountain again; he can Magnify, and diminish, without the assistance of the
Optiques, ad libitum; so excellent a workman is learned Mr. Lilly! But does Mr.
L. hope to gain Credit among Ingenious men for such Astrology as this? A Comet
(by his own confession) that stirred up the K. of Swede against the Dane, etc.
And yet now he finds (after a second staring, it seems,) that neither a Man or
Age, shall afford plentiful matter to begin its operation! Risum teneatis
amici? Nay, does not Mr. L. like a sullen Cow kick down (with his disdainful
heel) all the good Meal of Milk, that before he produced for the K. of Swede? I
hope Mr. L. when he complains of a paucity of plentiful Matter, does not mean,
but that the K. of Swede had reason in abundance to Invade the Polander and
Dane! And being stirred up against them by the influence of this Comet twatled
of, I see no reason Mr. L. has to complain for want of plentiful matter to
begin its operations. And if they be already begun, I would demand of Mr. L.
what need we have of a second John Baptist to expound the Riddle? I have heard
a story of a Soldier with a wooden-leg? who being supposed to have a good one
shot off, his friends seeing him fall, called out presently for a Chyrurgeon.
Oh! quoth the Soldier (being better acquainted with his want) it is no matter
for a Chyrurgeon, a Carpenter may serve the turn. All the use that I shall make
of it here, is this, -- that to expound those forged effects of Comets, and
their tedious duration, requires not a second John Baptist, -- A Lilly or
Mother Shipton may do it. And so I proceed to his next contradiction. -- We
cannot or dare we (still you see, he has Pigs in his belly) positively
determine this present Magnanimous K. of Sweden, to be that very Person, or
that so great Northern Lion, who shall do such wonders as have been of old
Prophesied. And why not Sir? as well, as to maintain him to be, A Northern Lion
Rampant? But Mr. L. since the relieving Copenhagen has changed his Opinion;
for in his Merlin, 1657. he positively affirmed this K. of Sweden was the man
Prophesied of, by (those Divinely illuminated Cheatees,) the Sybils. Yet here
he dares not do it. Thus you see Mr. L. may affirm, and not affirm, or dare so
to do, etc. he may indeed do any thing, by Privilege. But yet it is a very raw
and silly conceit of Mr. L. to think to write such notorious contradictions,
and not to be noted and esteemed for them, as he deserves. Shall we believe him
to be an Artist, that changes his humor just as the Times turn? or shall we not
rather take him for an Arch-Temporizer? and one that makes use of an Art to
cover and cloak his ignorance and flatteries? Had Mr. L. believed his Art to be
indubitably real, we should have found him certain somewhere; but he poor man!
Lysps and Jabbers, Shuffles and Cuts, after so ridiculous a manner, as if he
were as little acquainted with Art as honesty.

But it is not against Reason (sure) for a man to demand of Mr. L. his reason
for not positively affirming here, the same thing, that (with as great
confidence as ignorance) he did two years since. Does the M. C. ad * in the K.
of Swede's Nativity deter him? Or has he all the reward he expects? If the
first, it is but finding a transit (in his Astrology) to rancounter that, as in
1658. he did, in these words -- Live most valiant Swedish King, thy Generals,
etc. and be as successful as Anglicus desires; And then you are promised two
several Victories near this Month. -- Non obstante Medium (Medio, it should
rather have been, but that his Astrology and Latin are both of a stamp) Coeli
ad Corpus Saturni, etc. If the later, cannot you send to him for the other Gold
Chain, and acquaint his Majesty, -- That it is beneath the dignity of your
high-fam'd Pen, to spend its precious Ink Sine pretio, or for a mean reward;
and one Gold Chain is too little for a Person of your fame to be guilty of so
great Imposturism, as to forfeit (as much as in you lies) the honor and future
glory of so splendid an Art, that you by profession pretend unto?

Well, to pass this, -- Let us trace Mr. L. a little further, and we shall
find, -- Though he dare not positively affirm this K. of Sweden to be the man
or Conqueror, etc. yet, that his own Motto -- Sero sapit ingratus, may not
bite too hard upon his reputation, and he be noted to do nothing for so worthy
a present, as the Gold Chain he received; In his confident ignorant Dialect, he
runs on, -- Thus much we affirmatively say -- That the present Carolus Gustavus
shall prepare much matter toward the advancement of his Successors, for so
great Atchievments in all parts of Europe, And that the name of this Conqueror
shall be, Charles, and of the Swedish Nation, and offspring of this Carolus
Gustavus, etc.

Mira canunt, sed non credenda Poetae.
Things wonderful to sing is Lilly 's Guise;
But Credit none of them, if you be wise.
In his Merlin 1657. he affirmed Carolus Gustavus now Reigning, to be the
Northern Lion or Conqueror, etc. And yet here he affirms, That not this, but
another of his race, shall be the man. Let him but reconcile these dislocated
Predictions, and I shall believe him able also, to make good this Position.

Nilintra est oleam; nihil extra est in nuce duri.
Within the Olive ['tis beyond all doubt,]
There Is nothing hard, Nor of the Nut without.
The most Chimerical Fancy or Fiction in the World, is every whit worthy as
much Credit, as so notorious and broad-fac'd a Contradiction. If Mr. L. from
his great Patronesses the Sybils, in 1657. spoke truth, -- Then this present
Charles, and not another, must be the man. If Mr. L. speak truth now, then the
Sybils and he were besides the truth in 1657. And is not this most excellent
Christian Astrology! The K. of Swede, shall be, and yet he shall not be the
Conqueror!

Dic quibus in terris, and eris mihi magnus Apollo.
Great Sir! but tell me, how both may be true,
And take Apollo's Bays to be your due.
When Mr. L. can make the two Members of a contradiction accord, he may (I
suppose) make good these his wild and extravagant Assertions. Howbeit Mr. L.
deems it but Reasonable, that he be believed in what he says, let it be never
so contrary to truth, or contradictious in it self; he being (as he supposes)
Princeps Astrologorum. And what is he that shall dare to do the contrary?
however, I shall run the hazard of Mr. L's Censure in this kind for once; and
demand by what Authority Sybillical, Cabalistcal or other, he is warranted to
design the name of this great Conqueror to be Charles, etc.

The Stars name none, and surely Mr. Lilly,
In saying they do, proclaims himself most Silly.
The Names of Persons are such contingent things, that it were (considering
their dependence upon the humors of conceited Gossips, whose wills and fancies
are the sole and alone disposers thereof) a reasonless thing to force Astrology
to father them. But I the less wonder at his refusing to render Reasons of what
he Annually obtrudes upon the understandings of men; because he cannot but be
sensible that his Merlins or Almanacks, are only as Shops or Warehouses
furnished with the worser sort of Drugs, and Rif-raff; himself standing in the
midst of them, just as Horace describes his Petty-Chapman.

Vilia vendentem tunicato Serula popello.
Active in selling, to the vulgar man,
His trash [for truth,] at small Price (if he can.)
The learned I am out of doubt know Mr. L's shifts, and pityful effeminate
evasions; the Ignorant in time may discover them.

In page 8. Mr. L. tells us, -- This vernal Figure of Heaven promises the Lord
Protector of England very fair, from his Allies beyond Sea. But how dares Mr.
L. (unless he dare do any thing) raise a judgment either upon the Lord P. or
any else, from a Scheme so notoriously untrue? Nothing less then 41^. of time
distant from the truth; as is demonstrated by Mr. Wing in his (...) for the
same year; with whom agree most others. And is it not a pretty Riddle, that Mr.
L. which fails thus in the ordinary Principles of the Art [viz. 41 min. of time
in such a Figure wherein an Artist cannot be too precise] should be accounted
the only Father and Restorer of Astrology? But the Aenigma is explained; did
not Mr. L. every year Claw the great Ones by the shoulders, his cunning would
not by many degrees be so much in request above the ordinary Almanack-makers,
as his skill is below them.

But he, at his high-rated confidence goes on, predicting that -- The Princes
of the Earth are very fierce one against the other; Nothing but War,
Destruction, Death, utter Ruin of one another, will give them satisfaction.
And yet he Pipes out nothing but Honor, Renown, Conquest and Victory, to the
L. P. of England, and K. of Sweden; as if they were quite out of the Number of
the Princes of the Earth! And on the contrary, by the Princes of the Earth, he
intends only the Kings of Denmark, and Poland, etc. Anglice, such as engage
against the greatness of Sweden. But surely had any other Astrologer predicted
prejudice, or ought else at so wild a rate, (as Mr. L. here does) concerning
Princes; Mr. L. would have been the first man that should have saluted him
with, --

(...).
Ah! Flattering Knave! Clad with high Impudence.
But I spare Mr. L. although his Presages hang together, velut aegri somnia, --
like sick men's dreams, and are not by the wisest head to be reconciled.

Now Mr. L. having spent his pains (to as little purpose as you have heard) in
predicting things to depend on the Figure of the Suns Ingress; is come to the
Moons Eclipse in April. -- And tells us -- That it begins at 6 h. 22 min. P. M.
and ends at 9 h. 20m. whence (says he) the duration thereof, is 3 h. 15 min.
But had Mr. L. been pleased to have proved his operations, he might have found,
that from such a beginning and end as he assigns, such a duration could not
possibly Emerge; But on the contrary, 2 h. 58 min. Which gross Ignorance in so
ordinary and common a piece of Art, proclaims his whole skill to be but weak
and worthless, and his Judgment insipid and unsavory. Thus you see, that he
who boasts that all others might have been in their A. B. C. without his
assistance, is himself ignorant of the first Principles of the Science he
pretends to. And without doubt had Mr. L. but presented us with the Figure of
this Eclipse, we should have found it as true, as the other but lately noted.

But be his Figures right or wrong, Mr. L proceeds to judgment (his name I
think should properly have been (...)) according to his preceding Method (and
he propounded none at all) and rufflingly acquaints us -- That this Eclipse
will cause a great ruffling both of the Dane and Dutch to regain the Sound; but
they will sooner overthrow the great Mogul, or Grand Signior, then reconquer
the Sound, out of his possession that now has it in keeping, viz. Charles
Gustavus K. of Sweden, etc. I would gladly demand, how it is possible for such
particular Actions and Accidents of Princes to be spelt, or smelt out of
Eclipses of the Moon; since the Effects thereof are not by many able Artists
received for certain, but remain disputable? Is it not therefore, Interest
rather then Art, that causes him thus to write? certain it is, Astrologers
agree -- An Artist may be enabled to Predict much good, or prejudice, to happen
to Persons from their Nativities truly known: But they conclude it altogether
impossible for the best of Artists to point at the particular Persons, or
Places, by whom, or where, they shall receive the same. And that is the meaning
of Ptol. Cent. Aphor. 1. How then dares Mr. L. (without all Authority or
Reason) prate in so high a strain, that is (questionless) incompetent to any,
except God himself? But to follow Mr. L. a little further; if we shall consider
the force of the M. C. ad *. in the K. of Swedes Nativity, there was a great
deal more Reason for Mr. L. to have judged, that he should rather lose the
Sound, then keep it. And had not Mr. L. endeavored to appear Anti-Astrological
in his writings, he could not but know, that that had been (by far) the more
Art-like Prediction. Albeit, Mr. L. goes on, and says -- For whom Heavens have
ordained Rampant and Victorious, In vain it is for man, or men, to withstand
his rising. But (says he) since we may seem to speak in clouds, we intend in
this discourse only the Victorious Armies of his Majesty of Sweden to be the
Person so powerful, etc. If Mr. L. in all Farnabee's Rhetorique, can but find a
figure that does in the least favor so strange a passage as this before us, I
shall acknowledge him better read therein then I am. He intends only the
Victorious Armies of his Majesty of Sweden, to be the Person, etc. May not a
man (that is not encompassed with Mr. L's Clouds) as reasonably, and with as
good sense, and propriety of speech, in commendation of Mr. L. say -- By such a
Discourse, we only intend the many unparalled Proselytes of Mr. L. to be the
Person so learned in Astrology among us? I appeal to the Judgments of all
understanding men, whether Mr. L. be guilty of more sense in the passage urged
before, then this amounts to. If Mr. L. ever went to School, he cannot but
remember that Boys have been whipped for far smaller faults. But these are
only slight dashes of his He-Sparrow's quill, as one of his Antagonists, once
(in vain) minded him of. But,

-- Plus foetent Stercora mota. (i.)
Dunghils the more you stir, the more they stink.
Mr. L. after long flattering the K. of Swede, and sore threatening the Dane,
Hollander, etc. if they engage against that Victorious Prince whom the Heavens
(in his flattering Dialect) have ordained Rampant, betakes himself to a very
convenient startinghole, If in case it should so fall out, that the K. of Swede
do not prosper so well, as he Prophecies, etc. And (like a good Christian
Astrologer, maintains) The best Army, or longest sword, has tho best Cause. By
which it appears, that Mr. L's Religion is as rotten and corrupted, as his
Astrology and Theurgy unsound.

But to follow Mr. L. a little further yet. -- (though not (...)) does he not
insinuate the Hollander, and Dane, to have the best cause, in case the God of
Battles give them the Victory over the K. of Sweden? Nay, may we not estimate
Mr. L's Conscience to be of so large a size, that if the Dane or Hollander
would but Grease him, as the K. of Swede has done, or but a little more, Mr.
L. as the Proverb is, would Claw them again; and in his next Merlin would
appear as confident on the side of the Magnanimous K. of Denmark, and the High
and Mighty States of Holland, as now he has for the Victorious and Rampant K.
of Sweden.

But surely Mr. L. cannot be of so unstable a judgment, nor does he mean, or
insinuate any such thing, as that the Hollander or Dane, can be thought to have
the best cause, although they should fortune to have the longest Sword, or best
Army. And that you may know him to be of a quite contrary Opinion, to what his
now cited words import, he bursts into a flattery of the first Magnitude for
the Swede, to the absolute ruin of the Hollander, etc. in these words. --
Beware Hollanders of affronting his Majesty of Swedens Navy, or Sea-Forces, or
his most certain Friend the present English L. P. any of his Navy, or
particular Ships: His Majesty of Swede, and our Protector have the most
masculine spirited Seamen of the whole World, and a gracious Guardian Angel
(therein is Mr. Lillies greatest skill) for to protect both their persons and
forces, etc. -- This Eclipse threatens breach of Peace between England and
Holland [how know you that Sir? and * are therein in D; and can Ds in your
Astrology produce Breaches?] and from thence a War, and that so great, as the
former may be thought a trifle. Our Noble Seamen are promised Victory, [what,
before they have an Enemy to engage against?] for in Waters upon the waters,
upon people who live like Fishes, wholly upon the waters, and subsist by Seas
and waters [Tautology is no sin with Mr. L.] will the Influence of this Eclipse
take place; therefore our Swedish Sea-Forces, shall transmit thousands of the
Dutch Seamen unto the Fishes for their better Nutriment.

Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
Would you the truth of such great Victory?
It Is Lilly 's Guise to promise his Friends high.
I might demand of Mr. L. (in relation to this his Notorious Non-sequitur,
wherefore he brings his strange therefore? And whether the consequence would
not as roundly have followed, had the premises been turned the contrary way?
But let Mr. L. go on, and chaunt forth (yet further) his Siren Songs of
flattery to the K. of Sweden, and tell him -- That he shall be as great as
Charles the great, etc. the M. C. to the body of Saturn, will prove him to be a
person that keeps Mendacium as a Page to his Pen and Tongue.

But notwithstanding this so insolent threat of his to the poor Hollander, If
he have but the good hap to get the longest Sword, and the best Army, (they are
Mr. L's own words) he has the best Cause; And then (if Mr. L. say sooth) he
may by this Eclipse be empowered to transmit thousands of the Swedes Seamen to
feed the Fishes; as likely as the Swedes theirs. But I hope both those Nations
will be more prudent, then adhere to any such reasonless Flatteries and
Threats, as Mr. L's Silly Pamphlets are constantly stuffed with. So I proceed
from his Annual Judgments, to his Mensurnal Fopperies.

Sest. 3. In January he Prophesies -- That some peremptory Spirits divulge
frivolous Tenants, and their Crabby opinions, to the disturbance of the
Magistrate in several places. But there has as little success answered this
whimsical Presage, as he had ground in Art to Predict it, the first part only
excepted, which he (it may be) foresaw his own ridiculous scribbling to make
good. He proceeds, and tattles of An eminent person to suffer disgrace. Which
he may possibly interpret to some one of the Ladies (for the Sex he mentions
not) who were carried to Bridewell upon suspicion of dishonesty about the
beginning of February; for you must know his Predictions emit Rays.

In February, he talks of a Storm to happen to those persons near the
Seashore, that are Enemies to the greatness of Sweden. But were there any
truth in Monthly Predictions (a work at which Mr. L. is old excellent!) how
came he to Miss so grossly in this? There was a storm it is true, but the heat
thereof fell upon the Swedes; which Mr. L. no more foresaw, then the creeping
of the Scotch K. into England. But that you may know him to be the
all-sufficient Astrologer of England, he goes on -- Some Plot once more in
contrivance, to make division, etc. But, -- There was no Plot, save that which
keeps us poor; as Mr. Wharton wittily Noted in his Call. Eccl. 1659. Unless to
that we add Mr. L 's design to disgrace Astrology.

In March Mr. L. Cants after his wonted rate, of Englands Guardian Angel. In
such whimsies he should have the right hand of Jo. Blagrave; yet they are
confidents of a stamp; And God knows, a Guardian Angel may be somewhat to Eat,
for any knowledge either of them have thereof. But to keep in with the K. of
Swede, Mr. L. tells the World, That he is, and will be sole Master of the
Sound. But (a little after says he) we arrive not yet with our pen to the
Baltique Sea, etc. As if the Sound were at some considerable distance from the
Baltique Sea. I see by this, his good Genius does now and then deceive him.
Toward the Months end, he writes -- Some now flatter our Nation. Which is
admirably well verified by his own clawing the late Protector. And is not that
a rare Artist, that can so order his matter, let things fall out which way they
will, his Predictions (like a Cat) shall still happen right upon their Legs?

In April (as if he were ashamed of his former clawing humor) he tells us --
That there are several confederacies made against the Swede. But how should we
credit Mr. L. in this? who are they that dare Confederate against him, whom
heavens have ordained Rampant and Victorious? Or what success in such
undertaking can they hope for? When they, not only fight against heaven, but
must grapple also with the dire Amulet of a Guardian Angel, and Mr. L 's sour
Predictions. But he goes on -- A Plague or new Disease, and Pyracy from the
Western parts, division, uncertain Rumors and fears, threaten us. -- And yet
(says he) The Month in general promises fair to City and Country. I confess
my self ignorant in the Cabal of such a Canting strain. It Is just like that of
the Satyrists Tyresias -- Quicquid dicam, aut erit, aut non. Whatsoever he
says, shall either be, or not be.

In May his Ignorance and slattery is so obvious, that each boy in the street
is able to lend him a squib for it. Hear him a little: The English L. P. now
enters upon action, and manifests himself to the whole World, that he has
great abilities to govern, etc. And a little after, R. L. P. stoops not, is not
terrified with words, provides for all occasions -- is made happy with several
most welcome News unto him. And behold! The very same time that he had
Calculated this auspicious Prediction for, the Protector mildly made a
resignation of his Power, Protectorship and all! which Mr. L. being twitted
with, in a scurrile base manner called him fool! But it is one of the least of
his Insolences; for so he abused the present Parliament when turned out by the
Protector Oliver; though to the skies he had magnified them before. As I may
hereafter more largely inform the World of.

In June he says -- Some dangerous design is now prepared against his
Highness. But here he is proved a lying Prophet; for his Highness was laid by
the last month. In July, he Temporizes, but not fitly, that -- the wisdom of
our Protector and Council, gives the whole world occasion to know, that the
present affairs of England are in a good posture. But had we had then a
Protector, his Prediction nevertheless had proved a lie. For at the same time,
our affairs were like to have been blown up by the Enemies then among us;
witness the Cheshire Insurrection. But Mr. L. will say perhaps that he was to
be understood by an (...). His Readers ought to be so understood indeed, when
they report him an Astrologer.

In August he feigns -- That some Churchmen, etc. obtain more then vulgar
preferment (that they must do sure, if they obtain any at all) yet toward the
end he Predicts -- That Friars and Monks suffer every where. Now let them
either obtain preferment or suffer, you see Mr. L. has hit it to a hair; and
will speak truth still (in despite of the father of Lies) though at a most
horrible lying rate.

In September, he acquaints the world -- That the death of many Commanders may
be feared. But this Prediction (if Mr. L. could have hit so right) might better
have fitted February, at what time so many were slain at the Storming
Copenhagen. He goes on -- A sad doom is preparing and ready to fall upon some
Northern people; a judgment it is like to be of continuance ('it is no matter,
so it never come to execution!) not easily removable; it smells of servitude
and bondage. Now let the K of Swede be routed, or Rout the Dane, etc. here is a
Presage to fit the foot of either, and Mr. L's credit secure. If Captivity
overtake him whom Heaven fights for, it is no fault of Mr. L's; for he has
discharged the part of a good Astrologer in this very Prediction. In October,
he twattles at the same rate. And should it so happen that Mr. L's; Lion
Rampant be overcome, he is not the first (may Mr. L say) that has been so: did
not Sampson slay a Lion?

In November Mr. L. talks as confidently, as vainly -- The Swedes are not
retired to their Winter Quarters, having some honorable work to perform. He
had done the K. of Swede more service (and the Art he professes more honor,)
to have acquainted him, that then the Sun will be Eclipsed in Scorpio, near his
Radical place in that K's Nativity. But Merlinus Verax has done that for him.

To end his Notorious piece of Flattery -- In December he concludes
Hypothetically -- If Carolus Gustave the Great K. of Swede, write himself Rex
Danae, possessor of Copenhagen, make W. of Brandenburgh repent in Sackcloth and
Ashes, Kick and Cuff the Hogens of Holland out of the Baltique Sea, and
Petition his Majesty (I spare the Nonsense hereof) in Quality of distressed
States; Let them hereafter beware of fighting against Providence. Thus ends
this Metropolitan Artist! and to make an end of following him, I will only
demand of him what reason be has (besides the Gold Chain) to insiauate the
loss of the K. of Denmark's Crown? did ever any man that had any thing of Art
in him, before, conclude it possible for that K to loose his Kingdom, that had
the Sun in Aries in the mid-heaven, in Trine to the Ascendent of which he is
Lord? Let Mr. L produce but one Astrological reason or experiment, and -- Erit
mihi Magnus Apollo. Nay, he shall be (by me) honored as the second John
Baptist, which he says is required. But if he cannot, Let him blush at his
ill-tempered confidence, for broaching such broad-fac'd Barbarisms for Art. By
which Penitency, he may obtain a better Opinion of all those, whose
understandings he has for many years together most grossly deluded.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF Mr. L. this next year, write his recantation-Almanack, Let him for his
Credit's sake acquit himself (if so be he be able) of the several Errors and
Ignorances charged upon him in this Discourse: If he refuse this advice, and
publish another Mess of Flatteries, Falsities, and Nonsense, in the form of an
Almanac; he will then only put me to the trouble of another Examen; and suffer
his Reputation to run into the Quicksands of a far greater hazard and Danger.

FINIS.
Hereunto is annexed, The NATIVITY of the King of SWEDEN.


