THE MUSES MELODY IN A CONSORT OF Poetry. WITH Diverse occasional and
Compendious EPISTLES.

Composed by the Author Tho. Jordan.

-- Cum desertis Aganippes
^allibus, esuriens migraret in Atria Clio.
LONDON, Printed by I. C.

POEMS.
On a Citizen that was so unreasonably jealous of his wife, that he durst not
trust her with the nearest in blood of her own kindred.
WHy how now Jack? are you the only man
Whose forehead we must hang our hats upon?
Shall the luxurious folly of your youth
Araign all women at the Bar for truth?
Can no man now be sociable and good,
'Cause you have had a wildfire in your blood?
Because your wife resolves to remain true
Must your in imagination Cuckold you?
"In what a Sea of sadness does he swim
"Whose own strong fantsie does make horns at him?
May we not look on her? can we devise
New ways of copulation by the eyes?
Can smiles get children? Or if we should leave
Some words behind us, can her ears conceive?
Why do thou search thy trunks and chests? as if
It should be possible the Placket-theif
Could get in there: is no place free from harms?
"So soldiers (when the war; began) sought Arms
"In silver Saltcellars, and springes set
"To catch a Canon in a Cabinet:
Go search her pocket too (to quit all fears)
And pluck out little Ieffery by the ears.
There are most sly conveyances in Love,
'T may be Tom Thum is got into her Glove;
Search every corner of the house, and then
Sit down and coin new faces and new men.
Thou sot in jealouzie, whose fantsie vents
Impossibilities for Arguments:
Quick-sighted Quixot, thou that art inclined
To look about for what thou dare not find:
For (I protest) were I the man whom she
Would choose to act his just revenge on thee,
Thou should discover me with greater fear
Then men would pick sparks out of gunpowder.
I Would make thee be (my rigor should be such)
A Pillow to the thing thou fear so much:
Tempt me with hat in hand, and cast about
To keep that in which thou would now bring out.
Conduct her to my very Arms, and grow
Highly contented thou could please me so:
The Law can not relieve in this distress
Because thy own eyes are no witnesses:
Which would exalt thy torture; thus would we
Pay thy old private scores of Luxury:
And thy mechanic spirit, without doubt,
Will bear all this when thou art beaten to it.
For shame reform thy folly, let her heart
Be no more measured out by thy desert:
Let not the ills which thou have done, proclaim
Suggested falsehood in another Fame:
He that thinks every man is his wife's suitor,
Defiles his Bed, and proves his own Cornutor.
Peccavi, to a virtuous Lady, who was vitiously solicited by a Gentleman whilst
she was in her mourning.
AS guilty men unto the Altar fly
There to appease the incensed Deity,
After the sin of Blasphemy, or blood
Took from the breasts of Innocents, whose flood
Cries up to heaven for vengeance; so come I
To beg a pardon for this heresy
Against your honor: Truth her self can tell
No unbeseeming action, such as sell
The looser wantons of our times, made me
Attempt to break your crystal chastity:
I saw no gesture in you that could say
I might have hopes to win the fatal day
Of your undoing; but you did appear
Stainless, and more immortal then you are
Or can be, till the hand of heaven shall
Transform your ashes to a funeral:
Some men desire to speckle whitest paper.
Venus will light her torch at Vesta's taper:
It is a truth divided from all doubt,
That never a Nun'ry can keep Cupid out:
I know your melting eyes, and mourning dress
Might mortify another wantonness,
But it exalted mine, as if my flame
Could feed upon no fuel but your Fame.
This crime relates to that in Paradise,
Your virtue was the Author of my vice.
Your frowns advanced my blood, and made it boil,
Your Prayers were Bonfires, and your tears were oil*
(To contract all) what ever I could see
Like frost in you, was a fierce flame in me.
"So cowards when made Conqueror, do boast,
"And are more cruel when their slaves beg most.
I feign would plead excuses, if I could
Allege the frailty of our flesh and blood,
Your feature and my love; your youth and tongue,
That so I might extenuate the wrong.
But my Religion says, To do one sin
And then excuse it, brings another in:
No, I Will submit to pardon: you that have
Ability to judge, have power to save
Your penitent offender: I confess
My fault so criminal, I must address
My self unto your mercy, and I spy
Her silver wing spread in your either eye
To entertain my suit; remove the Bar,
The witnesses and Executioner.
You shall for this no Judge, or Jury call,
At your own pleasure, I will stand or fall.
On handsome women that will marry fools.
SHe that will (...) with a Fool it is plain
Is either cra^k'd in Cr^i, or in Brain.
An Apology to a coy Lady for a passionate Letter which a Gent. writ to her
when she returned back to him a Diamond which he before had presented.
MAdam! In such a calm of peaceful air
As the self-sentenc'd sinner sighs in Prayer,
I do salute your Candor; and desire
Your mercy may with pardon, quench the fire
Of my late Passions, for I must confess (dress:
Though they were truths, they wore too wild a
I quite forgot the boundless distance that
Is set betwixt my lowness and your state:
And should (but that I see you disapprove)
In time have been a Leveler in Love:
You have reformed my error, and (with high
Distaste) dismounted my soft heresy;
I am your Proselyte, and shall declare
To Lovers (such as I am) that they are
In desperate error if they dare to prove
Man's merit can deserve a Lady's love:
There Is no such thing in nature; he that can
But scent the air that issues from her fan,
Has happiness enough; and he that wears
Her scorns, is paid for all his vows and tears.
His rings and ribbons are oblations that
Defile the shrine which they are offered at:
Else (honored Lady) sure that trifle which
Your Ivory finger lately did enrich,
Had not been with such detestation sent
To him that loves you like his nourishment:
What is the motive (Madam) I am more
Tortured to know the cause, then feel the soar:
Pray speak it plainly, for the noblest dress
Of Truth is her own native nakedness:
I never yet committed an offense
That was too horrid for my Audience.
I will attend you with undaunted ear,
Although you utter all that I can fear:
My constitution boldly shall endure
To lose that limb which will admit no cure:
I wish you all the happiness that can
(With wisest search) be found in the best man:
May him whom you shall please to favor be
Sincere in all his services for she
That leaves a true heart for a fained one,
Does give a Di'mond for a Bristow Stone.
On a cruel Creditor.
I Will make Dice on's Bones, so does he cry
Who has the debtor in Captivity:
Take heed, there is none will pity thy disaster
When Lucifer (at last) cries Come the Caster.
On Rebellion.
REbellion is a Paradox, for they
Are only put in trust that do betray.
UILLAINIE. Anagram, I LIVE IN ALL.
I Live in all; show me that Name
That has a larger Anagram:
But lest some should think that I
Do assume ubiquity,
Let them know I want the Art
To be All in every part:
But yet I live in all; I know
All Languages, and Nations too:
It Is not France with all her Apes
Can outvye me in my shapes;
I wear a Cope, I wear a Crown,
A Soldiers sword, a Lawyers gown,
And (with reverence be it spoke)
The Surplice and extempore cloak:
I wear a chain, sometimes a ruff,
A purple Robe, a suit of Buff:
A livery-hood, a Country coat,
A seaman's cap (whose subtle boat
Sails with all winds, and, as I can
Change shapes, I li^e in every Man,
And every Place; I live at Court,
And where an Army does resort
(By which so many men are undon.)
I live at sea, I live in London:
In all parts of it I range,
And I always keep the change;
I live in Courts of peace and war,
On the Bench, and at the Bar:
Sometimes like to love and fury,
I have been in Judge and Jury:
In Physicians I live close,
But am used in every dose:
In my coat of Arms I bear
A Roundhead and a Cavalier.
I wear all Passions; but I move
Surest in the shape of Love:
Or in Religion, there I fly (why?
At God knows who, and who knows
In a Shopkeeper you will guess
What I am when I profess:
In a Politic I cry,
Law, Religion, Liberty.
In a Justice I lie hid,
Yet in's Clerk I Am quickly spid:
But my subtleties grow evener
In a Broker and a Scrivener.
In a Sectarist I flame
Like the Air of Amsterdam:
Covenants and Protestations
Are my yearly Recreations.
But I am (such is my fate)
Never from the Counter-gate,
And a house in Broadstreet, where
I am in my proper sphere.
But (to cut off prolixity) you shall
Find (by my Anagram) I Live in all.
Defense composed for his friend Mr. Th. Ea. who ignorantly had persuaded some
Gentlemen his friends to wash their faces with Mercury, one of them being an
elect Bridegroom, the night immediately before the Nuptials, who the next day
were much blistered with the venom, and he much accused by the Ladies, as if
it had been done on purpose.
THE winged feet of fame that always brings
On swiftest pinnion^, most unwelcome things,
Informed the Sentinel that waits upon
My late araigned Reputation,
That I have done an Act which much offends
Men whom I balance with the best of friends:
That I with venom should deform those faces
Wherein fair Ladies found so many graces,
At such a season when bright Hymen's taper
Inflamed the Bride, and made the Bridegroom caper,
When all prepared themsel^es in the best dress
Of civil Art, and (...) coml^ness:
When active youth, and Beaut^ did put on
Their smoothest brows, and best complexion;
That I against this Time, without incitement,
Should perpetrate this fact, so runs the indictment:
To which I plead Not guilty, cause the event
Does make men Criminal, or innocent:
That I was instrumental in it, I grant,
But of the vile event as ignorant
As cradled infants; it is an Act below
My name, my spirit, and my Nature too:
Did my Accusers know how much I prize
My friends, they would with more indulgent eyes
Look on this chance; the Ladies (as I hear)
For it esteem me much their injurer,
Which is (indeed) the greatest cause that I
Make this Confession, and Apology:
I am so much a servant to that Sex
Whose ruby lips, bright brows, and Ivory necks
Surprise all eyes, that their alone commands
Have power enough to stay my active hands
From my worst Enemy, if he be one
That wears the badge of their Affection:
How then should I accomplish a design
Of such dishonor to their friends and mine?
Salute the Ladies from me; let them see
My Penitence and my integrity:
Assure them that the sacred Nuptials which
Their precious presence lately did enrich,
Is of so much esteem with me, that I
Disclaim all thoughts or Acts of injury.
Tell them I am divided from all rest,
Till they have signed me a Quietus est.
A Letter to the Gentlemen, in which this Poem was enclosed.
To his honored friends, etc. Gentlemen,
I Am so sensible of the Ladies sorrows for your disasters and my own
sufferings for their displeasures, that I have penned this Poetical Apology to
soften their ^ensures: which being assisted with your manuduction, may be the
more conducible to their satisfaction.

The result of it, will (I hope) beget such a fair understanding, that the
mistaken difference shall be reconci^ed, and his repute restored, who is theirs
and

Your faithful servant The. Ea.

An Ode composed for three voices, at a celebration of the Birthday of the
much honored G. D. Gent. on November. 29.
I. Voc.
^Oy in the Gates of him whose bi^h
Gives generation to our Mirth,
Whose Fame and meritorious days,
^clipse the luster of all praise.
Chorus.
Then let our invention
Exceed Apprehension
Let liberty dance a Lavalto,
Till Ceres and Bacchus
With jollity rack us.
And every man's brains are in Alto.
II. Voc.
Let none appear under this roof,
Whose spirits are not sorrow-proof.
All constellations we defy
That frown at this Nativitie.
Chorus.
We laugh at the silly
Presages of Lilly.
We fear not the force of Invasion:
The Schoolmen are dullmen:
They fool men and gull men;
It Is Love is the Art of persuasion.
III. Voc.
Let no man in this Circle move
Whose soul is crossed with Law or Love
We likewise do exclude his Pate
That deals in stratagem, and State.
Chorus.
The sum of our treasure
Is freedom in pleasure.
Nor will we forget to remember
The motive that raises
Our voices with Praises
The 20 day of November.
Vote to the much honored THOMAS BRIDGES, Merchant in Alderman-bury London, and
to his most virtuous wife.
IF Health and Treasure, Love and Mirth
Be all the happiness on earth,
(...) wish that every thing you touch,
Or can but think on, may be such.
May all the Pleasures, that we see
under bright heaven's Canopie,
Wait upon you, and may old Fame
Receive advantage from your Name.
Let your quick understanding be
Clear and serene as Purity.
May all your Excellencies prove
The powerful Adamants of Love:
And may that luster of your life)
Your fertile, chaste, ingenious wife
Continue in her loyal flames,
And be the guide to virtuous dames,
May your Childrens childrens merits
Be the pictures of your spirits;
Then may you draw an equal breath,
With long sweet life, and easy death.
May Cities, Towns, Ships, fields, and bowers
Talk of no other worth but yours:
And may no company (one minute)
Be sorrowful when you are in it.
An Epitaph on a scold.
HEre lies, in dust, a married man's great woe,
A nimble Linguist, or a quick-tongu'd shrew.
Now she is dead, and dust to dust is flung;
The earth holds her that never could hold her tongue.
On Jack Summer, who with two shillings, won twenty pounds of Captain Swallow.
WHen poor Jack Summer was an overcomer
Of Swallows purse, one Swallow made a Summer.
On Scorta.
SCorta (the whore) says she will pay all her owings
In the next Term, if God send good her doings.
An Epitaph on Mr. Will. Laws Bachelor in Music, who was mortally shot at
the siege of Westchester.
COncord is conquered: In this Urne there lies
The Master of great Musick's mysteries,
And in it is a riddle like the cause:
Will. Laws was slain by such whose wills were laws.
A Defense for Music in its Practique and Theorick, Dedicated to all Lovers of
Harmony, but more especially to the much honored Mr. JOHN ROGERS.
EMpress of Order, whose eternal Arms
Put Chaos into Concord; by whose Charms
The Cherubims in Anthems clear and even
Create a Consort for the King of Heaven:
Inspire me with thy Magic, that my Numbers
May rock the never-sleeping Soul in slumbers:
Tune up my Lyre, that when I sing thy merits
My subdivided Notes may sprinkle Spirits,
Into mine Auditory, whilst their fears
Suggest their souls are sallying through their ears.
What Tropes or Figures can thy glories reach,
That art thy self the splendour of all Speech?
Mysterious Music! He that does thee right,
Must show thy Excellence by thy own Light:
Thy Purity must teach us how to Praise,
As men seek out the Sun, with his own rays.
What Creature, that has Being, Life, or Sense,
But wears the badges of thy Influence?
Music is Harmony, whose copious bounds
Is nor confined only unto Sounds,
It Is the Eyes object (for without Extortion)
It comprehends all things that have Proportion.
Music is Concord, and does hold allusion
With every thing that does oppose Confusion.
In comely Architecture it may be
Known by the Name of Uniformity,
Where Pyramids to Pyramids relate,
And the whole Fabric does configurate:
In perfectly proportioned Creatures we
Accept it by the title Symmetry,
When many Men for some design convent,
And all concentre, it is called consent:
Where mutual hearts in sympathy do move,
Some few embrace it by the name of Love:
But where the Soul and Body do agree
To serve their God, it is Divinity:
In all melodious Compositions we
Declare and know it to be Symphonie;
Where all the Parts in Complication roll,
And every one contributes to the whole.
He that can set, and humor Notes aright,
Will move the Soul to Sorrow, to Delight,
To Courage, Courtesy, to Consolation,
To Love, to Gravity, to Contemplation.
It has been known (by its Magnetique Mo^
To raise Repentance, and advance Devotion*
It works on all the Faculties, and why?
The very Soul it self is Harmony.
Music! it is the breath of Second Birth;
The Saints employment, and the Angels Mirth.
The Rhetoric of Seraphims, a Gem
In the Kings Crown of New Jerusalem
They sing continually; the Exposition
Must needs infer there is no intermission
I hear some men hate Music: let them show
In holy writ, what else the Angels do:
Then those that do despise such sacred Mirth
Are neither fit for Heaven, nor for Earth.
A Banquet of Discord, dish'd up and dedicated to all lovers of Confusion, and
contemners of Concord.
1.
COme hither you to whom the breath
Of Music is a second Death:
Whose untuned ears are neither (...)
For Concord, Poesy, nor wit.
That chatter in unpointed Prose,
And use no Organ but the Nose:
Who Fantsie nothing but the rents
Of Families and Governments;
Whose spirits are as rude as Rocks,
And Blasphemies are Orthodox.
My Fantsie has a mess of Ministr^s which
Shall please you all, and make your long ears itch,
2.
The first soft Music I can find,
Are herds of Hogs perplexed with wind,
And taught by Dogs of Farmers house
The tearing Sol-fa of the Souse.
And next, to please your approbation,
A Quire of Cats in Copulation.
Where you will hear exceeding skill,
If treble Pu^s but hit the ^rill.
But to provoke your active heels,
Fifty new Carts with ungreas'd Wheels. (sound,
Then, when Hogs, Cats, and Wheels in Chorus
Who will not say you are with Discord crowned?
3.
The next (in stead of Drums, and Tabors)
Twelve Strumpets in abo^tive Labors
To mix with these, a shrill Grand Jury
Of Fi^-wives filled with Ale and fury,
Whose every close does sweetly roar
With Witch, and Bitch, and Bawd, and Whore;
Ten Pewterers, with Platters empty,
Tinkers and Kettles four and twenty,
Thirty Lock-smiths, forty fellows:
Blowing of as many Bellows;
And whilst all these in Parts together chime,
I will have sixteen rag-mills to beat time.
4.
Then for the melody of Fowls,
Thirteen Peacocks, nineteen Owls,
Fifteen Ravens, eighteen Dawes,
Naked Rooks with empty Crawes:
And instead of Lutes and Citterns
Chatt'ring Magpies, Crows, and Bitterns:
With a set of Trencher-scrapers
That will make your teeth cut Capers:
And (to fill ye with amazements)
Northern winds, and open Casements.
If these will not content, (to help the Quire)
The Bells shall ring as when a Town's on fire.
5
Dying men when they are Racked,
Women's cries when Towns are sacked,
Irish mourners when they howl
Over some departed soul:
Wracks at Sea where few are savers,
Whirlwinds cut in Semi-quavers:
For I know (without misprision)
You are Lovers of Division:
This is Music fit for them
Who do Harmony contemn.
When this grows stale, and that you wish for new,
The other world may better furnish you.
An Epigram on a Madman.
A Friend desired me once, as I passed by
Bedlam (the Dippers University)
To walk in there with him, where when I came,
I did behold one as much out of frame
As was the Chaos in continual Night,
Before Jehovah said, Let there be Light;
Madness and Drunkenness conjoined in one,
Would sure have made a less confusion
Then that within his Brayn: some people by
Observing so supreme an Ecstasy,
Asked if he were married that had this strange fit:
No (quoth the madman) I Am not so mad yet.
A mere Soldiers Resolution, written by his own a^rection in the year 1642.
PReach not to me the justice of your Cause,
Your Privileges, or the Kingdoms Laws,
Nor called Religion to oppose your King;
Such stale pretenses framed for quarrelling
I Will neither hear, nor aid; I come to be
A sacrifice for my Necessity.
Give me the Coin, show me the golden showrs,
That only is my Cause, and why not yours?
But (late) I heard a winged Herald sing,
The Cause has left us, and is gone to the King.
Why then beat up your Drums, leavy your Men
We all go for the Cause, to fetched again;
Yet stir not till the Troopers have their pay,
The price of blood, just thirty pence a day:
This makes me mount my Jennet; do not tell
What else we fight for, and the Fiends of hell,
Circled with unextinguishable fires
Shall never daunt: But when your Cause requires,
There I am lost again, foiled with a fright:
Your Cause is the only cause I cannot fight.
An Elegy and Epitaph, in two Acrosticks, composed on the pious memory of
Mistress Grace Dray^on, late wife to William Dray^on (...), (...) whom she was
married the 20 of Ja^y 16^2. and (...) the 20 of June 1653.
^onder of women, give us leave to (...)
(...) (...) on thy sacred UrneWord;
^et our (...) tears ^ll (...) thy Hearse*
^ke th^se (...) drops that pierce
(...) hard Ma^ble. She is gone in whom
All female excell^ (...) has found a Tomb
Modesty, Prudence, Temperance, and Wit,
Devotion, Love and Loyalty do yet
^enown her Name; she was as true a wise,
As was her husbands blood unto his Life:
Young wives, king but her, might learn from thence
The A^ to twist Love and Obedience:
One in whose ever active soul did move
Nothing but ^ial fear, and Nuptial Love.
The Epitaph.
(...), or go by, (...) that true grief forbea^*
(...) that in triumph which we writ in tears.
All ^ys we banish^; they are as contrary,
Compared with as, as June and January:
Every Mourner that does not present
Distilling eyes, destroys ou^ (...).
Reader! within this Cabinet there (...)
A Jewel bright, as So^s meridian Eyes:
Touth mi^'d with mental beauty, (...) was (...)
That made all Virtues her Complexion.
(...)! l^ (...) tears flow freely, for we shall
Never find more cause to wash a Funeral.
To his disdainful Mistress, from whom he received a Repulse at the presentment
of his service to lead her by the Arm in the street.
I Shall give truth the lie, and must engage
In your defense the Pens of this whole Age,
Not to acknowledge that your form and features
Make you shine brightest amongst the best of Crea-
He that surveys your Person with my Sense (tures.
Shall meet (at once) Light, Heat, and Influence;
Yet where you scorn, Experience bids me say,
You raise December in the midst of May. (Crowns
The Chairs of State, the Scepters, Thrones, and
Of Life and Death are in your smiles and frowns,
This truth I freely vent, although you crack
The sinews of my soul upon the rack
Of undeserved displeasure, I must needs
Confess, all Virtue in your bosom breeds;
You are the mirror of all worth: Yet why
(If I may so capitulate) must I
For some offense unacted, or unknown,
Be tortured thus under the frigid Zone
Of your contempt? What have I done that can
Divest me of that Privilege which Man
And manners justly claim? What is in me
So opposite unto civility,
That you should scatter your disdains upon
The soft Address of my Devotion?
W^y should the bared Head, and bended Knee
Of faithful service meet such nicety?
You make me doubt my self, and wonder what
Great Error (like an Attom or a Gnat)
I am accused of; whether I did stand
Right with my Legs, or gave you the wrong Hand:
Whether my Gloves were on, or I did err
In wearing some unbutton'd Handkercher:
Which of these heinous sins it is, I can
No more conceive then a deceased man.
Pray manifest the Cause, and let me know
What is the cruel Author of my woe,
That I may curb the Love which did intrude,
And (for the future) cease to be so rude
With such Perfection; I will let the world
(To my own scorn) know why my hopes are hurled
From your bright Mercy: they shall understand
It is like Sacrilege to kiss your hand,
And that to Arm you brings as bad a fate,
As to be found in Arms against the State.
On Mrs. Howlet, and Mrs. Boon.
FIckle (they say) loves Howlets daughter, she
That is his eldest, Mistress Margery:
And some suppose the wddow Boon will draw
All his Affection, (Mistress Barbara)
But will not he appear a gross Buffoon
To marry with Madg Howlet, or Bab Boon?
To a Bla^-moor that had married a deformed Spanishwoman, and was jealous of an
English Gentleman.
BLack Don de Negro fears that I will be
A sharer in his ^ty Venery
He does believe that in his absence I
Invoke his devil to Adultery,
When (Heaven knows) it is such a Creature, no^
But one that doubts the Resurrection
Would meddle with, a face Men fly in drink,
Whose eyes are Torches, and whose veins ^un (...)
A thing that sure some Succubus has nursed,
And only waits the hour of Go ye cursed.
Yet this strange muddy medly of things horrid,
Makes Don doubt horns upon his woollen forhead
And I must be the object of his doubt,
I tell thee Don, and all thy sable rout,
Thou fear'it in vain; I would not (I protest)
Add one pin feather to thy Magpies nest
For both the Indies: many (by this light)
Have been undone only with black and white
Besides, he is betrayed by self-deceivings,
That takes an armful of the devils leavings.
Do think I Will deal in Charcole? smack a smother*
And dig in one hell to deserve another?
Or will I leave my lovely Pol^ie
With all her Virgin sweets, to sweep thy Chymnie?
Do think I Will ^ine thy Buck^m with my Tissue?
And contribute unto thy checkered Issue?
To fright the Midwife with a womb that swells
With a stripped stripling armed in Tortoise shells?
And in a time where Reformation has
Made Venery as venial as the Bath?
Do think I Will have my (...) look like a Leper?
Like Snow and Gunpowder? or Salt and Pepper?
I hate that hand of Cards, where he that rubbs
Has nothing dealt him but the ten of Clubbs.
Shall I pollute my Limbs with an embrace
For a py'd Ki^ling with a dappled face?
A Cradle full of twylight? prirt and Margent?
A Coat parte-per-fess, sable and argent?
A speckled spawn? joy twisted with disaster?
Or je^ concorporate with Alabaster?
Forbear thy frantic follies, thou may be
^ooner persuaded I could bed with thee.
Can thy ambitious fears think any one
Would taste of that which thou have blown upon?
Decline these doubts: when (...)
With a conjuncti^e generating postu^, ((...),
The pregnan^ womb of Wolves shall bring forth
The robbing (...)
Of rocking Bears shall (against (...))
Embrace the (...).
When we do mix in a ^real (...).
The late dead ^ng and (...)
In Westminster Religion shall (...)
The lofry longings of a States-mans Soul.
An Epitaph on a Prisoner for Debt, who dyed of Fever in the Counter.
HEre falls the trophie of a rich man's pride,
Who by a Creditor was crucified:
The Goal became his Cross, a Fevers flashes
Designed his Death, his Altar, and his Ashes:
Therefore a Gamester lies under this Tyle,
To whom the Counter proved both Cross and Pyle
A Bull made Sense.
AS Three were walking by a Hedge, one cries
I spy a cluster of red Black-berries.
The second laughed, the third (in his defense)
Said he would justify it to be Sense,
And with this Question gravely steps between
Are not Black-berries red when they are green?
On Cavaliers wearing of much Ribbon.
WOuld you know why sequestered Cavaliers
(Like Haberdashers shops that vent small wares)
Wear so much Ribbon? Who before were forced
To fly from Naseby ragged and unhors'd?
The State took care for them that since their fall,
They should be dressed in Haberdashers-hall.
A Congratulatory to the bountiful Lover of the Liberal Sciences, Sir THOMAS
PRESTWICH Baronet.
BRight Beam of honor, in whose worth and w^
The ravished ruins of the Muses sit;
If wishes winged with the felicious flight
Of nimble numbers may create delight,
Or if this composition may set forth
The zeal of one that has more will then worth,
^uspend your approbation, and you will see
How much my Love exceeds my Poetry.
Heroic thoughts inflame your soul; may no
Affronts afflict you wheresoe'er you go:
All that is mixed in Consolations dish,
What studious man can think, or we can wish,
Crown all your Contemplations; may the sky
With fattest favors fill your Treasury:
Honor embalm your Name, and may your fall
Make you rebound to joys Ethereal.
May all the happiness that can be due
To a redeemed Spirit wait on you.
Love be your Manuductor; may the tears
Of Penitence free you from future fears.
Divinity direct your wary ways,
And guard you from the forth of bad men's praise.
These wishes issue from the soul of one
Who means you more then he can think upon.
To Coll. Washington, on his word Away with it, etc* Composed in 1643.
COme Gentlemen Away with it, stand t'your Arms
In wa^ the valiant prove most free from harms
The Rear's not more secure then is the Van;
Death does not always meet the foremost Man:
What would become of me then, who did never
Bring up the Front to fall into the Rear,
Like some wise Leader; who can well endure
The Guns to quarrel whilst they stand secure?
Who fain would purchase honor if they durst.
He that Commands in chief should be served first,
And so will I be, though the field be set
With Henbane, Wormwood, deadly Acconi^,
Or what soever comes terrible to fright
The Feeling, Hearing, Tasting, Sent, or Sight.
My word's Away with it: if you will know the Cause.
It Is this, it comprehends my Martial Laws:
Let not a Soldier dare (that bears a Gun)
Having received his weekly pay, to run
Away with it, lest the Marshal (armed with death)
Stop (both at once) his running and his Breath
Let (...) a soldier from a Townsmans grass
Drive forth a Lamb, or Sheep; he shall not pass
Away with it, lest he suffer that, and more
(If more can be) then his Camrade before:
Let not a Soldier in his Quarters break
A Trunk or Chest for gold; he shall not sneak
Away with it; it is his Majesty's intent
(...) should command an honest Regiment.
But (hear me soldiers) if you sack a Town
That is in opposition to the Crown,
And in their bags or Cabinets do know
Where Plate and Jewels are, I Will bid ye go
Away-with't: it is no more the su^um (...)
To pillage them that come to Plunder us:
If you find Linen, Woollen, Swords and Knives,
Or any thing, but their unuseful wives,
Away with it: but you sots that do encl^e
To pillage Cellars of their Beer and Wine,
Take heed of Rats-bane, such fair bayts are se^
To tempt your Palates, and you will hardly ge^
Away with it: if ye find Powder and Match,
^ikes, Musquers, Bullets, with all quick dispatch
Away with it, load the Cart, when all is done,
(...) march Away with it, quoth Washington,
On (...) ^-Precher.
Went the other day to see a Layman
Ascend the Pulpit (some say 'twas a Dray-ma^*
(...) in his Prayers he made (as ^me believed)
(...) hundred sev^ral faces: (...) (...)
^o see him so, for (i^ he w^ (...) (...))
^ey were no (...)* (...) (...) (...).
To the great lover and protector of Honor and Sciences Sir Henry Newton
Knight, etc.
SIR, I salute your Candor, and commit
These courser Compositions to your Wit:
All that I can commend unto your youth
And abler skill, is this, That they are truth:
Much Learning and Humanity we see
Does issue from your ingenuity.
Vice is your Enemy, and there does flow
Nothing but worth from your Seraglio;
Excellent Sir, I know you use to sip
Much of the Muses fair goodfellowship,
Leander and loved Hero's Life and Death,
With all the Verse since Queen Elizabeth,
Lifts not the front of Fantsie up so high
As you can when your Genius will comply.
All that is Excellently, Good, and New,
Pious and profitable, chaste, and true,
You have an interest in, you are one of those
That love all worth which men ever spoke in Prose.
Reason and all the rules of Art have taught
You to excel in things above my thought.
The figure of your fame deserves to grow
Green in the leaves of Michael Angele,
Xeuxes, or great Apelles. I shall then
Conclude, and leave you to a nobler Pen.
EPISTLES Queint, And COMPENDIOUS.
To a Lady of most Excellent Perfections.
Honored Madam,
PErmit the humblest of your faithful servants, to invade your sacred
retirements with a few expressions proceeding from the white verity of a
Genius, made eloquent only by your Excellence: I will not enter into a
commendation of your Beauty, because it is so high a degree above my Rhetoric,
that to attempt it, were as vain as to wash white the snow-crown'd hills of
Italy; or cast Vermilion upon Roses. To give a character of your swift wit,
sober judgment, curious fantsie, and capacious intellect, with a rough draught
from my rude Pencil, were as impertinent and impossible, as to discover the Sun
in his Meridian with the bashful rays of a wax candle: I shall therefore (in
glories of this kind) convert all expression to admiration.

But if you will believe that your Excellencies have wrought in me delights of
such a ravishing nature, that they exceed all temporal felicity, and that you
dare extend your favors to one who loves you next to his Relion, that would
esteem it greater honor to serve you, then to command both the Indies, and all
things else in the world which that treasure can purchase, vouchsafe the
cordial encouragements of your literal returns, and felicious presence, to

(Madam) The humblest of your Admirers.

To a young Lady from a Gent. whose Parents commanded him to desist from loving.
Madam,
THat I was once your Servant, and that your virtue was the object of my
sincere devotion, is so fair a verity, that I shall never blush to acknowledge
it; nor is there any intervenient evil on yours or my part, that can claim the
cruel privilege to mortify your merit or myaffection: but since we all live
within the circumscription of God and Nature, I must take leave (sadly) to tell
you that I am constrained to let obediential fear, nullify nuptial love; and
that no less a power then what does solely sway divine and humane actions,
could have put so unwelcome a period to our little less then perfect unity; my
parent and my natural aliance being the only hinderance, which I beseech you
(in your native clemency so to consider) that if ever you untye your tongue to
tell the story of our succesless Loves, you may not prove too rigorous in the
mention of him, who (at a sacred distance) shall ever remain,

(Madam) Your penitent servant.

To a virtuous Gentlewoman immediately after the first sight.
Worthy Lady,
ALthough I am a stranger to your person, and may justly allow you liberty, to
wonder at my present confidence, yet I have some assurance that when time and
truth shall permit me, to manifest the motive which has induced me to this
amorous incivility, you will (...) my aims and ends are noble, as this
Gentleman (^yed Friend) is further able to inform you; to (...) ^ndoubted
fidelity, if you dare communicate the m^ns when, where, and how I shall wait on
you, that we may a little entertain the interchange of chaste discourse, I do
not doubt but that I shall give you such a testimony of a fair union begun
betwixt your immaculate merit, and my clear affection, that (in the lowest
sense) you cannot confess me less then

(Madam) The devoutest Honourer of your virtue.

To a Lady that had heard an evil rumor of her servants Fame.
Dearest,
ENvy and detraction are so much devoted enemies to Love and Virtue, that the
pious practices of Princes, nor the most religious leagues of Lovers, could be
ever constantly free from their contagion; but where an holy unity is cordially
contracted with a righteous interchange of faith, and loyal promises, their
mischeif^ are as ineffectual as arrows against Adamant. It is in you (my Dear)
to apply this: and to consider the violent indignities of my accusers, whose
slye slanders (though causeless) aim at the utter dissolution of your Love and
my Lovalty, which I would preserve inviolate with all my faculties of Soul and
Body: for (without any ostentation) I dare assure you, that the Pelican loves
her young (whose heart-blood is their aliment) with less affection then I do
you: nor can the indulgent Loadstone prefer it is cold devotion to the North
beyond my constancy to you; which is so truly fervent, that when the whole
world is consumed to cyndars, the divinity of my Affection will still be
burning; and confess me then, what I am now,.

(Lady) The faithfullest of your humble servants.

To a Lady after her father had banished him from her presence.
Much honored Madam,
ALthough the prudent curiosity of your Parent has (at the present for a
season) set a period to my personal solic tations, I hope (without the breach
of obedience in you, or violation of civil manners in me) I may visit your
virtuous solitude with some pertinent repetitions of my devoted service. To say
I love you, or how much I love you, were a tautology injurious to your
fidelity: I have already insisted upon that, as much as I can speak, though
less then I can act, I must confess your perfections are so magnetical, that I
can compare this instant banishment to nothing less violent then the pains of
hell to purchase heaven: yet if the severity of this trial may add one Cubit to
your faith, and intimate to your intellect what I have (with so much
reiteration) vowed, I shall grow proud of that Laurel that so crowns my
sufferings. In a word, although I assume not that serenity of judgment,
perfection of person, activity of wit, dignity of Birth, multiplicity of
Riches, as many which make your vertute the object of their devotion, yet I
dare measure Love with the largest pretender; but I see what I intended only
for a breviate, is almost swelled to a large Epistle. I shall therefore
conclude, desiring (if your love and leisure will permit) that (at this
distance) I may kiss your fair hand in some few lines of pardon. It will very
much relieve the imprisoned spirits of him who would willingly relinquish all
styles of honor for the beloved title of

(Madam) Your sincere servant.

To a Noble Lady.
Honored Madam,
SUffer the sworn servant to your virtue, to return this mean manifestation of
his gratitude, in answer to those noble favors which he received in the honor
of your late visit, when a companied with your virtuous kinswoman, whose
perfections cannot fully be expressed in one Language. I must confess Mada^
that the hours which then I spent in your sweet society, were attended with so
much innocent felicity that I cannot but suppose them effectual enough to
redeem all the misspent minutes I have cast away since my creation; and that him
whom you shall make happy in a nuptial obligation, has found a sufficient
Antidote against all Adversities.

I am truly sorry to discover, by sad experience, that duty and affection flow
in several channels, and that love and obedience (two such supreme virtues)
should move in opposition to each other; although I must acknowledge your free
and favorable expressions relish of a clear spirit accomplished with much love
and honor, and one whom the rigor of my destiny has thought I fear too mighty
for me. But since the fury of misfortune has sentenced my affection to flame
at the stake of such merciless Allegiance, let me but remain a martyr in your
memory, and I shall kiss the cruelty. These are the solitary contemplations of

(Madam) Your faithful suffering servant,

A return of thanks to a Virtuous Lady.
Dear Lady,
I Am so sensible of those numerous civilities which the freedom of your noble
nature so liberally extended in the gracious entertainment of my friends and my
self so unprovoked by any merit in us, that I should have thought it an
ingratitude out of the l^st of pardon, not to have returned our acknowledgment,
acceptance, and thanks. I should be very frequent in my personal visits, did
not something (though of a lower Nature, which cannot be neglected, as I have
already informed you) prove an impediment, at the present, but shall stand upon
the arrear of satisfaction, when opportunity and I are grown better acquainted.
The liberty you allow me to exercise my Pen in the Expression of an Affection,
that deserves larger Language, does somewhat mitigate the severity of this
ungentle separation, and gives me the much desired advantage of kissing your
f^r hand at a distance. I do very much congratula^e the Compliance of our
affections, and cherish my self with hope that they will walk hand in hand to
eternity, not doub^ing of God's benediction, because you are guided by the
sober rules of your parents counsels: I beseech you pardon the absurdities of
this hasty letter, and measure not the length of my Love by the lownes of my
langu^ge, but consider that there is least art where there is most ^ffection.
Such are the humble concept^ons of him whom nothing can make so pardonably
proud, as the pr^viledge of being

(Madam) Your sole devoted servant.

To the worthiest of Ladies.
Virtuous Madam,
YOu will find by this enclosed Poem, what are the hourly objects of my
contemplation. I cannot call my best thought good, when you are not concerned
in it. Your are so truly virtuous, that I mix you with my prayer, and find it
an excellent means to exalt my devotion.

All joys attend you; May your virtues be
Beatifi'd with true felicit:
Nothing surprise your spirits, but the bright
Eternal tapers of Lo^'s sacred Light.
No ill approach your presence: May your Name
Live in the royal register of ^ame,
Excuse these Ryhmes, and credit him that can
Love you in Prose better then any man.
You will fear I flatter, because your m^desty will not let you own such truths
as proclaim your perfections. If you dare meet mi^flame with equal ^dency, and
lay by the old man's musty a (...), you shall s^n find (by my actions) the
clarity of my intentions. I pray forget not (that which is every m^e in my
memory) our next meeting in the Park, where (if you please) we will conclude
such a conjunction, that silver shall not separate: till there, I remain.

(Madam) Your Loyal Honourer.

To a beautiful Lady for a second sight.
Noble Lady,
THe luster of your late presence does yet remain so bright in my happy
memory, and your incomparable wit has left so harmonious a relish in the ear
of my intellect, that (if it may consort with civility) I should desire to be
honored with the felicity of a second interview, especially at such a season
when your will and leisure may hold correspondency.

I must confess my rudeness may be the object of your reproof, but the serenity
of my intentions must needs be the subje^t of your pardon: If you will honor me
so far as to kiss your fair hand in a few lines (thus remote) I shall put it in
the list of my greatest engagements, and extract esp^cial motives to hope that
I cannot miscal my affection, when I do honor my self with the subscription of

(Fair Lady) Your humblest servant.

To a witty Gentlewoman who commanded him to provide her an Astrologer.
Madam,
SInce I received the honor of your commands, and (...) (...) (...) by so much
interest into your privacies, I have bin very industrious to accomplish your
wishes. I have sought that man out to whom the book of destiny is never shut,
One that has made discovery of all things since the Chaos, and can musier up
each public and private transaction that shall re^te to Religion, State, Love,
or Trade, every minute betwixt this and the worlds inflammation.

He does not only know all the Houses, but (by a late purchase) has made
himself Lord of the Manor. He has as much familiarit^ with the Stars as you
have with your Jewels, and (without doubt) will very readily resolve the pretty
mystery which you intend to propound, provided that your Ladyship will be
pleased to send me a convenient warning of your approach, that so nothing may
be wanting or unready in him that shall curse the Conjurer and all his
constellations, if he do not demonstrate to you that I am

(Lady) The best of your servants.

To a Lady upon separation.
Virtuous Madam,
TO tell you how greatly I am grieve^ for our late unlooked for separation, is
much too large for your says and my expression. I should declare more of truth
then fancy, to let you know that nothing else can equal it, but the divorce of
soul and body.

This unkind disunion has (at one stroke) not only set you at a distance from
me, but my sleep and quiet: There now remains nothing, but that I clear
myself in point of reputation, and manifest, that what is done (as relating to
this unwelcome period) is as utterly opposite to my expectation and affection,
as Love and Usury.

I must confess I am sincerely sorry that we had no milder arbitrators in the
business of our fortunes, and am troubled that your Fathers curiosity was
answered with so much nicety. I have assumed the forbidden privilege to tell
you this, that hereafter my reputation may stand upright in your opinion, when
time and your better proposals shall lessen the value of my love in your
affection. And since I am (like the ^ble of Tantalus) cast away in the very
harb^ of gl^mmering happiness, I will never again make my way through Dust and
Ashes to Love and Beauty. If you please to honor me with some small Scripture
(in answer of this disordered composition) you will somewhat alleviate the
misery of him, who is hardly restrained from cursing those causes that will
Eclipse the title of

(Madam) Your sorrowful servant.

Ad Amicum suum Tho. Jordan. Datae vigessimo primo die Octobris.
MIror equidem nec immerito (poetarum praestantissimum) front, nec lingua, nec
calamo, huc usque tibi notum ut mihi offer as, tanta tua opera tam insignia
melio^i omnino Patrocinatori digna, de quibus verior ne olim dicunt, indigne
dedicasti sed quid retribuere nescio, vel qua oratione ea perstringere, quod
non sum cogitando: eloquium vile existimo, ubi beneficium excepi; Et tibi
praecipue, nunc dideci, idque nuperrime tuis carminibus praecipue, sed etiam
and ab amicis t^i nominis famaeque splendorem, tam late ubique disseminari ut
ignavissimum quemquam in tantam tuae e^cellentiae admirationem inducat: vel
invite literas congratulatorias extorquere possit, teque hisce literis
admirationis meae t^em facerem non possum fateor egregias tuas dotes, tam
graphice depingere concessit vero deus nobis praecordia retribuendi, quod
aliquatinus meritis tuis respondeat, sed facultas deest. Vero dico, and iterum
atque iterum dico Musas tuas amo etiam and veneror; Nam profecto me judice,
nihil tantum voluptatis hominibus administrare possit, quantum mentis (...)
quae dominum suum vere divitem reddunt, and foelicem, sed de his satis, cetera
reffero, donec me foelicem optata tua societate reddas. Vale. Deus Opt. Max.
tibi and this Musis been dicat.

A^us ^uus fidelis, Henricus Stonestreet.

To his Learned and ingenious friend Mr. Hen. Stonestreet.
I Have perused (with a grateful exultation, best of patrons) your elegant
Epistle, and most incomparable Encomium, wherein you have with so sublime a
sense, excelled the subject, and (with such ^nsuperable expressions) made the
paraphrase exceed the Text, that the luster of your language) I behold the
enormities of my own well-intended) intrusions, with an imperfect piece so much
beneath your capacity, Et veniam pro laud peto laudatus abunde
Non fastiditus, si tibi Lector ero.
I must confess some of those Poems which you have wronged your patience to
read, want much of their native Majesty, their easy excellence consisting in
the aptitude of Musical compositions, a relish of which I prepresent to your
pregnant apprehension in three Parts, to a Poem entitled, An Elegy on a good
man: if it find the same effect I wish, I shall be ready (in answer of your
least commands) to provide the residue, desiring (if it may not much conduce to
your dishonor) we may communicate at a more favorable distance.

I beseech you pardon the prolixity of my uncivil silence, for the
interveniency of some occurrent casualties since my thankeful reception of your
Letters (contrary to my desires) have obstructed the celerity of my returns. I
am very much pleased with the artful composition of your genuine Panegyric, so
much, that if my book take its flight from the Press, I should gladly (with
your allowance) wear the undeserved honor of it in the front of my whole
im^ression, but (since I cannot) I will transcribe it in my memory with
indelible Characters; nor shall the least of your favors be obliterated whilst
my hand is able to subscribe,

SIR, Your humble servant THO. JORDAN.


