JEWELS OF INGENVITY, Set in a CORONET OF POETRY.

By the Industry of T. I.

Cormina qui facimus, mittamus Carmina tantum.
Nam Chorus ante alios aptus Amore sumus,
Ovid. de Art. Amand, lib. 1. LONDON, Printed by I. M.

To the most absolute Lover of Arts and Ingenuity, The worthily honored,
Matrhew Gilley Esquire
Most honored Sir,
WHen you shall make a review of your own Merits, and peruse with pausing
Curiosity these Poetical imperfections, my fears are that you will condemn my
confidence, but my hopes are as great that you will commend my prudence from
whence I extract this presumption, that though all Critticks should comply to
cry down my wit in Composing my Poems, they shall applaud my judgment in the
choiee of my Patron.

Sir, Your own deservings declare you to be no less then a Palace of Honor, if
these Poems, like a Vine or Woodbine may support themselves upon Your Edifice,
they may by this fortunate transplantation grow more fragrant, and gratify
Your Indulgence. Sir, in one Word, Your Candor has compeld me to make these
Poetical Adresses, if any thing in them may either provoke Your praise or
pardon, I shall congratulate that happy means which (through this martial mist
of violence and ignorance) has safely conducted me to so splendid a Sphere of
Love and Ingenuity, and be always studious to deserve (what I have been ever
ambitious to desire) a seat in Your memory, and liberty to subscribe

Sir, the humblest of all Your Servants, and the devoutest of Your honourers T.
I.

An Acrostical Encomium, Composed on the Noble Name, and Heroic Nature of Sir
FRANCIS ENGLEFIELD, Baronet.
Fame (in the noblest sense) whose wandering wings
Renown the Actions of Triumphant Kings:
All this year is at leisure to set forth,
No other Excellency, but your worth
Could I court every Muse, and should I be
Inspired with all Poetic Mystery;
Should I rich Jems from every Science pick
Englefield's name would teach new Rhetoric,
Nothing can be said, read, or understood,
Great Sir, but what your merits can make good,
Love is your constitution, and you fit,
Every action to the rules of Wit:
Fidelity and Honor both comply,
In consort, to complete your gallantry;
Every favor in your Gifts or Letters,
Leaves the Receiver bound in Golden Fetters:
Don, Johnson, Fletcher, and (your namesake) Francis
Beaumont in you might find new Theams for Fancies
Arts are your Privy Council: He does know
Reason enough, that has but studied you:
One of your lowest, single virtues, would
Nobilitate a Clown, and change his blood:
Englefield's honor shall nere leave his name,
Till England and the World meet in one flame.
An Acrostick, Consecrated to the renowned name of the most Youthful,
Beautiful, Virtuous, and truly Honorable, The Lady CECILIA ARUNDELL, Daughter
to the Right Honorable, the Lord Arundell of Warder.
Could I contain all Languages, and be
A Prelate in the Art of Poetry:
Eminent Lady! I should scarce inherit
Rhetoric enough to write your meanest merit:
Cherubims tongues, are fittest to relate,
Virtues (like yours) which none can imitate:
If I should call you beautiful, and wise,
Noble, chaste, merciful, and say your Eyes
Lend luster to the day, they would think I do
Dissemble though all these come short of you:
If I should say but what your virtues be,
Every Truth would look like Flattery;
As men that round about the World have been,
Live mute, and dare not tell what they have seen.
Lady you are a Jewel to be set
In a true Heart, the noblest Coronet.
MUSIC Anagram.
CUM KIS.
There Is harmony in Love, I know by this,
The Anagram of Musiok, is CUM KIS.
POEMS.
Three Marriage Songs.
The first at their going to the Temple.
I.
Now our bright joy'gins to appear,
And the white Boy Cupid comes near:
Unto Juno's Altar we run,
Where you know what is to be done
Bright Hymen in glory before them does go,
In season with reason to make one of two.
II.
May you never meet with those woes
Which may sever your hands when they close;
May blisses fall from above,
And kisses keep you in love:
May all you can wish, or good Heaven can give,
Present ye with Plenty so long as you live.
Second Song at Dinner.
I.
Now the Board is filled with Plenty,
And the Wine runs round the room,
Eat and drink what Jove has sent ye,
Joy like this does seldom come.
II.
Fill us off the sprightly Claret,
And let every one beside
Drink it free, and roundly share it
To the Bridegroom and the Bride.
III.
Now me thinks the roof is reeling,
And the very sky looks blew,
Every Virgin has a feeling,
What the Bride must undergo,
Every Lady would be willing,
But to do as she must do.
The third Song at their preparation to Bed.
Welcome gentle night
Thou bring'st all delight,
When thy sable Curtain spreads
Upon the melting mirth of marriage Beds.
Here those joys are free,
Which no eye may see
But the Bridegroom and the Bride,
Between the twilight and the morning-tide.
In Cupids Bushes.
They hide their Blushes.
This Battle breeds no scar,
Such sights as these
Did sweetly please,
The Queen of Pleasure, and the God of War.
When this is doing,
There ends the Wooing,
I will no further pry
What more I know,
I dare not show,
Each Lover here can tell as well as I.
On three Gentlemen that did accidentally meet in a Tavern, all black men, and
every man's name John Crow.
Three (birds by accident) all met together
That never met before, Birds of a feather:
All of a Name too, if you did but call
Gently upon John Crow; ye named them all.
A Trinity of Crows, a very riddle,
John Crow is sirst, and last and in the middle:
John Crow does wear six legs, six hands, three faces,
And (at one time) is in three several places:
Yet in the royal and more noble part,
They were but one (videlicet) one heart;
Such as did all rebellious birds detest,
And paid true homage to the Eagles nest.
These Crows do roost in Churches, and could nere
Eudure the Rooks that built at Westminster.
No City Ravens, nor old country Dawes,
That flutterd and cried out the Cause, the Cause;
But in a word, to have the the truth expressed,
They are three birds, that scorn to foul their nest,
Nor need they fear cold in the sharpest weather,
If every late plucked bird, own had his feather.
Orthography.
HOw can such men be innocent that spell
Reason with T and write God with an L.
An Acrostick on the Names of Mr. TIMOTHY STEEVENSON, and Mr. FRANCIS JORDAN.
True hearts united under-neath one roof,
Excludes all ill, and makes them mischief-prooF
In union, all sorts of Virtues are:
Love is the bond of Peace, and strength of WaR
Mars must use Love, as well as Martial Law,
If ever England gain AmericA
Order, guide all your consultations, then
Zealous affection makes ye happy meN
The World is false, the Bonds of friendship crack,
And Amity her self is on the RaC
How happy then, are those few friends that be
Bound to each other in FidelitI
You two are such, may all that Love profess
Express their hearts toward you to be no lesS
Sincerity and Secrecy comply,
To keep your firm and lasting AmitI
The greatest strength, division has brought low
Heaven were not for Union would be sO
Emperors, Kings, Princes, all Powers that are,
Totter to pieces in a Civil WaR
Envy does then grow fat, when she can tread
Upon the Limbs of a divided heaD
Use but these Contemplations, and you may
Count your selves richer then all Africa
Excuse my rugged Counsel, you are Men
Know better guides to lead you, then my PeN
Nothing that may disturb your Peace appear,
Suspicion-like, to put your thoughts in fear:
One bond contain ye, and may false misprision
Never have any power to work division:
Hearts (like the Flint and Steel) each other strike,
And Need Not Err, But Each Does Each Love Like:
They Love for Love, that is a true Lovers action,
Such as the Cause is, such the Satisfaction.
A Panigerick Composed on the meritorious Name of the most accomplished Mr.
GEORGE SLAUGHTER.
Greatness and goodness that but seldom do
Enter into one man, are both in you;
One single heart, at one time does inherit
(Rightfully to) one great, and one good spirit:
Graceful in all your actions, you are what
Every gallant man should imitate.
Slaughter and Mercy in one Man agree,
Love mixed with strength, valor with courtesy:
And may you nere be thought a Ladies friend
Unless you use them to a noble end:
Go forth and prosper, may you always be
Happy in Love; and in Hostility.
Truth guide your will, Reality your thought,
Errors in Love and Loyalty are naught:
Return victorious, and may nothing prove
Repugnant to your Valor and your Love
On Love.
HHe that endures the rack of Loves desire
Does fry in frost, and he does freeze in fire.
On Women's Love.
IN these extremities most Women move,
Rack where they hate, and cloy men where they love
On a little Gentleman and one Mr. Story that quarreld in the street.
THe little man, by the other man's vainglory,
It seems was roughly used, so says the Story.
But being a little heated, and high blown
In anger, flies on Story, plucks him down:
And when they rise, I know not how it fated,
One got the worst, the Story was translated
From white to red, but ere the fight was ended
It seems a Gentleman that one befriended
Came in and parted them. The little blade
There Is no man could desire or yet persuade
But he would fight still, till another came
And with persuasions counsel'd'gninst the same.
'Twas in this manner, friend you shall not fight
With one that is so unequal to your height,
Story is tall, the the other made reply,
I Would pluck him down were he three stories high.
On Ben Johnson and a Country man.
BEn. Johnson in a Tavern once began
Rudely to talk to a plain Country man.
And thus it was, Thou dull laborious Moyle
That I believe were made for naught but toil;
For every Acre of thy Land I have
Twenty of wit: Such Acres Sir, are brave,
Replied the Country man: What great Mistakers,
Have we been of your wealth, Mr. Wise Acres.
A POEM COMMENDATORY, To the incomparable Pattern of inimitable Perfection,
Mrs. ELIANOR ENGLEFIELD Sister unto the justly honored, Sir Francis
Englefield, Baronet.
Madam,
YOur Merit at this minute raises
My Pen to paint the Picture of your Praises;
And it is most fit some good hand should hold forth,
Their virtues who are modest in their worth;
For he whose wary eyes shall look upon
Your features with examination,
May easily discern as many charms
As theirs that are locked in great Princes Arms:
I do not say your Eyes are Stars, or that
Your Lip and Cheek are to be wondered at;
Nor that your Alablaster Brow and Breast,
Outshine the Snow, out-scent the Phoenix nest:
But that in every part of you does move,
Something for every one to fall in Love:
That man which would all female feature view,
Has lost his eyes that finds it not in you:
Love leads you by the hand, and your fair yonth,
Knows nothing but what is relative to truth:
Imperial innocence in either eye,
Declares whole volumes of divinity:
Such looks as yours would make a Poet grow
Fluent and chaste but love in Folio:
Arts are your honourers, the Wise do sip
Sententious sweetness from your sacred Lip:
Beauty and Grace, the only perfect path
Of Love and Honor your perfection has:
Excuse my language, Madam, for your high
Deservings are above all flattery:
Truth fills me with these praises, you excel
In merit more then I can write or tell:
Heaven inspire you, may the crowned crew
Of Cherubims for ever wait on you;
Faith fills your frame it shows where ere you pass
Transparent as a Lilly closed in Glass:
Opinions not your rule, what ere you see,
Is through the Optics of pure Piety:
Wisdom with true Religion is your Law,
And kept like the Decrees in Persia,
Knowing no alteration: May the bright
Beams of eternal glory be your light;
Eternal joys dwell with you: May you do
Nothing but what your Maker prompts you to:
Noble intentions, guide your thoughts, and may
No evil meet you till your Funeral day:
As you are blessed with Beauty, so may you
Be faithful where you find a Servant true:
Love is a Princely Passion, if it be
Accommodated with Fidelity:
Constancy Crowns all Union, if that Virtue
Knit a firm knot, falsehood can never hurt you.
Excuse these rude expressions, what I do
Madam! your fair deserts invite me to.
An Elegy and Epitaph, Sacred to the immortal memory of that deplored, and
unparalled Lady, The Lady MARY ROPER. Lately a Loyal Wife to the Right
Honorable CHRISTOPHER Lord ROPER, Baron of Tenham, and Sister to the
Worshipful, Sir FRANCIS ENGLEFIELD, Baronet. Who in her prime of Youth,
Beauty, and Virtue, Canceled the Bonds of her Creation, by exchanging this
Temporal Life, for Eternal Felicity.
The Elegy.
TAke heed good Reader, for unless thy eyes
Are fitted to become a Sacrifice,
This is no Object for thy sight: We have
Emptied a Sea of Sorrow in one Grave:
She is deceased in whose bright Soul did move,
All that good men admire and Angels love;
To whose bright eyes more luster did resort,
Then would illuminate a Princes Court:
Whose Beauty, though in yon Celestial Sphere,
Cannot, be sure, much brighter then 'twas here:
Fair as unshaded light, or as the day
In its first birth, when all the year was May;
Sweet as the Altars smoke when as it flies,
In zeal from an accepted Sacrifice;
Fragrant as Beds of Roses, or the blew
Violet whose veins swel with the morning dew.
Kind as the willing Saints and chaster far
Then in their Prayers forgiven Hermits are:
In brief, she had whatever was called good
That wore the interest of flesh and blood;
You Would say (had you this beauty looked upon)
The Soul had then her best apparel on.
Reader, I see thy Tears begin to fall,
Therefore this brevity shall shut up all;
For fear thou flow from hence (in a Springtide)
To Heaven to be further satisfi^de:
Yet ere thou dri'st thy eyes, prithee vouchsafe
With reverend care to read her Epitaph.
The Epitaph.
HEre grows a Plant, whose fertile root does even
Extend its branches to the height of Heaven:
So sweet a flower it bears for sight and touch;
That God's own Garden, is composed of such:
Eden was beautiful, but this bright Stem
Reaches the Walls of new Jerusalem;
Chaplets of such sweet Flowers transplanted there
Redeemed Saints, and mighty Martyrs were:
Archangels sing to see her second birth,
Yield such occasion to advance their mirth:
Farewell fair innocent, may every Reader
Only desire to follow such a Leader:
Rest in thy joy, whilst we with many a tear,
Do grieve cause thou art gone, and we are here.
FINIS.

