THE DEVIL IS AN ASS.

A COMEDY ACTED IN THE YEAR, 1616. BY HIS MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

The Author BEN: JOHNSON.

HOR. de ART. POET. Fucta voluptatis Causa, sint proxima veris.
Imprinted at London, 1641.

THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY.
SATAN. The great devil. PVG. The less devil. INIQVITY. The vice.
FITZ-DOTTREL. A Squire of Norfolk. Mistress FRANCES. His wife. MEERE-CRAFT.
The Projector. EVERILL. His Champion. WITTIPOL. A young Gallant. MANLY. His
friend. INGINE. A Broaker. TRAINS. The Projectors man. GVILT-HEAD. A
Goldsmiths. PLVTARCHUS. His son. Sir POVLE EITHER-SIDE. A Lawyer, and
Justice. Lady EITHER-SIDE. His wife. Lady TAILE-BUSH. The Lady Projectresse.
PIT-FALL. Her Woman. AMBLER. Her Gentleman usher. SLEDGE. A Smith, the
Constable. SHACKLES. Keeper of Newgate. SERIEANTS.
The Scene, LONDON.

The Prologue.
THe DEVIL is an ASS. That is, to day,
The name of what you are met for, a new Play,
Yet Grandee's, would you were not come to grace
Our matter, with allowing us no place.
Though you presume SATAN a subtle thing,
And may have heard he is worn in a thumb-ring;
Do not on these presumptions, force us act,
In compass of a cheese-trencher. This tract
Will never admit our vice, because of yours.
Anon, who, worse then you, the fault endures
That your selves make? when you will thrust and spurn,
And knock us of the ^lbowes and bid, turn;
As if, when we had spoke, we must be gone,
Or, till we speak, must all run in, to one;
Like the young adders, at the old ones mouth?
Would we could stand due North; or had no South,
If that offend: or were Muscovy glass,
That you might look our Scenes through as they pass.
We know not how to affect you. If you will come
To see new Plays, pray you afford us room,
And show this, but the same face you have done
Your dear delight the Devil of Edmunton.
Or, if, for want of room, it must mis-carry,
'Twill be but Justice, that your censure tarry,
Till you give some. And when six times you ha'seen't,
If this Play do not like, the Devil is in it.
THE DEVIL IS AN ASS.
Act. I. Scene. I.
Devil. Pug. Iniquity. HOh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, etc.
To earth? and why to earth, thou foolish Spirit?
What wold'st thou do on earth?
Pug. For that, great Chiefe^
As time shall work, I do but ask my mon'th.
Which every petty pui'nee Devil has;
Within that term, the Court of Hell will hear
Something may gain a longer grant, perhaps.

Sat. For what? the laming a poor Cow, or two?
Entering a Sow, to make her cast her farrow?
Or crossing of a Market-womans Mare,
'Twixt this and Tot^am? these were wont to be
Your maine achievements, Pug, you have some plot, now,
Upon a tonning of Ale, to stale the yest,
Or keep the churne so, that the butter come not;
Spite of the houswives cord, or her hot spit?
Or some good Ribibe, about Kentish Town,
Or Hogsden, you would hang now, for a witch,
Because she will not let you play round Robbin:
And you will go sour the Cittisens Cream against Sunday?
That she may be accused fort, and condemned
By a Middlesex Jury; to the satisfaction
Of their offended friends, the Londoners wives
Whose teeth were set on edge with it? Foolish fiend,
Stay in your place, know your own strengths, and put not
Beyond the sphere of your activity.
You are too dull a Devil to be trusted
Forth into those parts, Pug, upon any affair
That may concern our name, on earth. It is not
Every ones work. The state of Hell must care
Whom it imployes, in point of reputation,
Here about London. You would make, I think
An Agent, to be sent, for Lancashire,
Proper enough; or some parts of Northumberland,
So yo'had good instructions, Pug.

Pug. O Chief!
You do not know, dear Chief, what there is in me.
Prove me but for a fortnight, for a week,
And lend me but a Vice, to carry with me,
To practice therewith any play-fellow,
And, you will see, there will come more upon it,
Then you will imagine, precious Chief.

Sat. What Vice?
What kind would they have it of?

Pug. Why, any Fraud;
(...) Covetousness; or Lady Vanity;
(...) Iniquity: I Will call him hither.

(...) What is he, calls upon me, and would seem to lack a Vice?
(...) words be half spoken, I am with him in a trice;
(...) there, and every where, as the Cat is with the mice:
True vetus iniquitas. Lack'st thou Cards, friend, or Dice?
I will teach thee cheat, Child, to cog, lie, and swagger,
And ever and anon, to be drawing forth thy dagger:
To swear by Gogs-nownes, like a lusty Iuventus,
In a cloak to thy heel, and a hat like a pent-house.
(...) breeches of three fingers, and thy doublet all belly,
With a Wench that shall feed thee, with cock-stones and gelly.

Pug. Is it not excellent, Chief? how nimble he is!

Ini. Child of hell, this is nothing! I will fetch thee a leap
From the top of Pauls-steeple, to the Standard in Cheap:
And lead thee a dance, through the streets without fail,
Like a needle of Spain, with a thread at my tail.
We will survay the Suburbs, and make forth our sallyes,
Down Petticoate-lane, and up the Smock-allies,
To Shoreditch, Whitechappell, and so to Saint Kathernes.
To drink with the Dutch there, and take forth their patterns:
From thence, we will put in at Custom House key there,
And see, how the Factors, and Prentizes play there,
False with their Masters; and gueld many a full pack,
To spend it in pies, at the Dagger, and the Wool sack.

Pug. Brave, brave, Iniquity! will not this do, Chief?

Ini. Nay, boy, I will bring thee to the Bawds, and the Roysters,
At Belins-gate, feasting with claret wine, and oysters,
From thence shoot the Bridge, child, to the Cranes in the Vintry,
And see, there the gimblets, how they make their entry!
Or, if thou had rather, to the Strand down to fall,
Against the Lawyers come dabled from Westminster Hall
And mark how they cling, with their clients together,
Like Ivy to Oak; so Velvet to Leather:
Ha, boy, I would show thee.

Pug. Rare, rare!

Div. Peace, dotard,
And thou more ignorant thing, that so admir'st.
Art thou the spirit thou seem? so poor? to choose
This, for a Vice, to advance the cause of Hell,
Now? as Vice stands this present year? Remember,
What number it is. Six hundred and sixteen.
Had it but been five hundred, though some sixty
Above; that is fifty years agone, and six.
(When every great man had his Vice stand by him,
In his long coat, shaking his wooden dagger)
I could consent, that, then this your grave choice
Might have done that, with his Lord Chief, the which
Most of his chamber can do now. But Pug,
As the times are, who is it, will receive you?
What company will you go to? or whom mix with?
Where can thou carry him? except to Tavernes?
To mount up on a joynt-stoole, with a Iewes-trumpe,
To put down Cokeley, and that must be to Citizens?
He never will be admitted, there, where Vennor comes.
He may perchance, in tail of a Sheriffs dinner,
Skip with a rhyme of the Table, from New-nothing,
And take his Almaine-leape into a custard,
Shall make my Lad Majoresse, and her sisters,
Laugh all their hoods over their shoulders. But,
This is not that will do, they are other things
That are received now upon earth, for Vices;
Stranger, and newer: and changed every hour.
They ride 'hem like their horses off their legs,
And here they come to Hell, whole legions of'hem,
Every week tired. We, still strive to breed,
And rear 'hem up new ones; but they do not stand,
When they come there: they turne'hem on our hands.
And it is feared they have a stud o'their own
Will put down ours. Both our breed, and trade
Will suddenly decay, if we prevent not.
Unless it be a Vice of quality,
Or fashion, now, they take none from us. Car-men
Are got into the yellow starch, and Chimney-sweepers
To their tobacco, and strong water, Him,
Mead, and Obarni. We must therefore aim
At extraordinary subtle ones, now,
When we do send to keep us up in credit.
Not old Iniquities. Get you e'ne back, Sir,
To making of your rope of sand again.
You are not for the manners, nor the times:
They have their Vices, there, most like to Virtues;
You cannot know 'hem, apart, by any difference:
They wear the same clothes, eat the same meat,
Sleep in the selfsame beds, ride i'those coaches.
Or very like, four horses in a coach,
As the best men and women. Tissue gowns,
Garters and roses, fourscore pound a pair;
Embrothered stockins, cut-worke smocks, and shirts,
More certain marks of lechery, now, and pride,
Then ere they were of true nobility!
But Pug, since you do burn with such desire
To do the Commonwealth of Hell some service;
I am content, assuming of a body,
You go to earth, and visit men, a day.
But you must take a body ready made, Pug,
I can create you none, nor shall you form
Your self an aerie one, but become subject
To all impression of the flesh, you take,
So far as humane frailty. So, this morning,
There is a handsome Cutpurse hanged at Tiborne,
Whose spirit departed, you may enter his body:
(...) clothes employ your credit, with the Hangman,
(...) let our tribe of Brokers furnish you.
(...) look, how far your subtilty can work
Though those organs, with that body, spy
Amongst mankind, (you cannot there want vices,
And therefore the less need to carry 'hem wi'you)
But as you make your soon at nights relation,
And we shall find, it merits from the State,
You shall have both trust from us, and imploiment.

Pug. Most gracious Chief!

Div. Only, thus more I bind you,
To serve the first man that you meet; and him
He shows Fitz-dottrel to him, coming forth.
I Will show you, now: Observe him. Yon' is he,
You shall see, first after your clothing. Follow him:
But once engaged, there you must stay and fix;
Not shift, until the midnights cock do crow.

Pug. Any conditions to be gone.

Div. Away, then.

Act. I. Scene II.
Fitz-dottrell. I, they do, now, name Bretnor, as before;
They talked of Gresham, and of Doctor Foreman,
Franklin, and Fiske, and Savory (he was in too)
But there is not one of these, that ever could
Yet show a man the Devil, in true sort.
They have their christalls, I do know, and rings,
And virgin parchment, and their dead-mens sculls
Their ravens wings, their lights, and pentacles,
With characters; I have seen all these. But --
Would I might see the Devil. I would give
A hundred o'these picture,, to see him
Once out of picture. May I prove a cuckold,
(And that is the one maine mortal thing I fear)
If I begin not, now, to think, the Painters
Have only made him. 'Slight, he would be seen.
One time or other else. He would not let
An ancient gentleman, of a good house,
As most are now in England, the Fitz-dottrel's,
Run wild, and call upon him thus in vain,
As I ha'done this twelve mone'th. If he be not,
At all, why, are there Conjurers? If they be not,
Why, are there laws against 'hem? The best artists
Of Cambridge, Oxford, Middlesex, and London,
Essex, and Kent, I have had in pay to raise him;
These fifty weeks, and yet h'appeares not. 'Sdeath,
I shall suspect, they, can make circle only,
Shortly, and know but his hard names. They do say,
H'will meet a man (of himself) that has a mind to him.
If he would so, I have a mind and a half for him:
He should not be long absent. He expresses a longing to see the Devil.
Pray thee, come
I long for thee. An' I were with child by him,
And my wife, too; I could not more. Come, yet,
Good Beelezebub. Were he a kind devil,
And had humanity in him, he would come, but
To save ones longing. I should use him well,
I swear, and with respect (would he would try me)
Not, as the Conjurers do, when they have raised him.
Get him in bonds, and send him post, on errands.
A thousand miles, it is preposterous, that:
And I believe, is the true cause he comes not.
And he has reason. Who would be engaged,
That might live freely, as he may do? I swear,
They are wrong all. The burned child dreads the fire.
They do not know to entertain the Devil.
I would so welcome him, observe his diet,
Get him his chamber hung with arras, two of'hem,
IN my own house; lend him my wives wrought pillowes:
And as I am an honest man, I think,
If he had a mind to her, too; I should grant him,
To make our friend-ship perfect. So I would not
To every man. If he but hear me, now?
And should come to me in a brave young shape,
And take me at my word? ha! Who is this?
Act. I. Scene. III.
Pug. Fitz-dottrell. SIr, your good pardon, that I thus presume
Upon your privacy. I am borne a Gentleman,
A younger brother; but in some disgrace,
Now, with my friends: and want some little means,
To keep me upright, while things be reconciled.
Please you, to let my service be of use to you, Sir.
Fit. Service? H^^ looks and sur^^^'s his feet; over and over.
before hell, my heart was at my mouth,
Till I had viewed his shoes well: for, those roses
Were big enough to hide a cloven foot.
No, friend, my number's full. I have one servant,
Who is my all, indeed; and, from the broom
Unto the brush: for, just so far, I trust him.
He is my Wardrobe man, my Cater, Cook,
Butler, and Steward; looks unto my horse:
And helps to watch my wife. H'has all the places,
That I can think on, from the garret downward,
Even to the manger, and the curry-combe.

Pug. Sir, I shall put your worship to no charge,
More then my meat, and that but very little,
I Will serve you for your love.

Fit. Ha? without wages?
I Will harken o'that ear, were I at leisure.
But now, I Am busy. 'Pr'ythe, friend forbear me,
And'thou had been a Devil, I should say
Somewhat more to thee. Thou do hinder, now,
My meditations.

Pug. Sir, I am a Devil.

Fit. How!

Pug. A true Devil, Sir.

Fit. Nay, now, you ly:
Under your favor, friend, for, I Will not quarrel.
I looked o'your feet, before, you cannot coozen me,
He viewes his feet again.
Your shoo's not cloven, Sir, you are whole hoof'd.

Pug. Sir that is a popular error deceives many:
But I am that, I tell you.

Fit. What Is your name?

Pug. My name is Devil, Sir.

Fit. Sai'st thou true.

Pug. Indeed, Sir.

Fit. 'Slid! there is some omen i'this! what countryman?

Pug. Of Derby-shire, Sir, about the Peake.

Fit. That Hole
Belonged to your Ancestors?

Pug. Yes, Devils arse, Sir.

Fit. I Will entertain him for the name sake. Ha?
And turn away my the other man? and save
Four pound a year by that? there is luck and thrift too!
The very Devil may come hereafter, as well.
Friend, I receive you: but (withal) I acquaint you,
Aforehand, if yo'offend me, I must beat you.
It is a kind of exercise, I use.
And cannot be without.

Pug. Yes, if I do not
Offend, you can, sure.

Fit. Faith, Devil, very hardly:
I Will call you by your surname, 'cause I love it.

Act. I. Scene. IIII.
Ingine. Wittipol. Manly. Fitzdottrell. Pug. YOnder he walks, Sir, I Will go
lift him for you.
Wit. To him, good Ingine, raise him up by degrees,
Gently, and hold him there too, you can do it.
Show your self now, a Mathematical broker.

Ing. I Will warrant you for half a piece.

Wit. It Is done, Sir.

Man. Is It possible there should be such a man?

Wit. You shall be your own witness, I Will not labor
To tempt you past your faith.

Man. And is his wife
So very handsome, say you?

Wit. I have not seen her,
Since I came home from travel: and they say,
She is not altered. Then before I went,
I saw her once; but so, as she has stuck
Still i'my view, no object has removed her.

Man. It Is a fair guest, Friend, beauty: and once lodged
Deep in the eyes, she hardly leaves the Inn.
How does he keep her?

Wit. Very brave. However,
Himself be sordide, he is sensual that way.
In every dressing, he does study her.

Man. And furnish forth himself so from the Brokers?

Wit. Yes, that is a hyr'd suite, he now has on,
To see the Devil is an Ass, to day, in
(This Ingine gets three or four pound a week by him)
He dares not miss a new Play, or a Feast,
What rate soever clothes be at; and thinks
Himself still new in other men's old.

Man. But stay,
Does he love meat so?

Wit. Faith he does not hate it.
But that is not it. His belly and his palate
Would be compounded with for reason. Mary,
A wit he has, of that strange credit with him,
Against all mankind; as it does make him do
Just what it list: it ravishes him forth,
Whither it please, to any assembly or place,
And would conclude him ruined, should he escape
One public meeting, out of the belief
He has of his own great, Ingine has won Fitz-dottrel, to say on the cloak^.
and Catholic strengths,
In arguing, and discourse. It takes, I see:
H'has got the cloak upon him.

Fit. A fair garment,
By my faith, Ingine!

Ing. It was never made, Sir,
For threescore pound, I assure you: 'Twill yield thirty.
The plush, Sir, cost three pound, ten shillings a yard!
And then the lace, and velvet.

Fit. I shall, Ingine,
Be looked at, prettily, in it! Art thou sure
The Play is played to day?

Ing. o here is the bill, Sir.
I, He giv^ him the Play- bill.
had forgot to gi't you.

Fit. Ha? the Devil!
I will not loose you, Sirah! But, Ingine, think you,
The Gallant is so furious in his folly?
So mad upon the matter, that he will part
With His cloak upo'those terms?

Ing. Trust not your Ingine,
Break me to pieces else, as you would do
A rotten Crane, or an old rusty Jack,
That has not one true wheel in him. Do but talk with him.

Fit. I shall do that, to satisfy you, Ingine,
And my self too. He turns to Wittipol.
With your leave, Gentlemen.
Which of you is it, is so mere Idolater
To my wives beauty, and so very prodigal
Unto my patience, that, for the short parlee?
Of one swift hours quarter, with my wife,
He will depart with (let me see) this cloak here
The price of folly? Sir, are you the man?

Wit. I am that vent'rer, Sir.

Fit. Good time! your name
Is Witty-pol?

Wit. The same, Sir.

Fit. And'tis told me,
Yo'have traveled lately?

Wit. That I have, Sir.

Fit. Truly,
Your travells have altered your complexion;
But sure your wit stood still.

Wit. It may well be, Sir.
All heads have not like growth.

Fit. The good man's gravity,
That left you land, your father, never taught you
These pleasant matches?

Wit. No, nor can his mirth,
With whom I make'hem, put me off.

Fit. You are
Resolved then?

Wit. Yes, Sir.

Fit. Beauty is the Saint,
You Will sacrifice your self, into the shirt too?

Wit. So I may still cloth, and keep warm your wisdom?

Fit. You lade me Sir!

Wit. I know what you will bear, Sir,

Fit. Well, to the point. It Is only, Sir, you say,
To speak unto my wife?

Wit. Only, to speak to her.

Fit. And in my presence?

Wit. In your very presence.

Fit. And in my hearing?

Wit. In your hearing: so,
You interrupt us not.

Fit. For the short space
You do demand, the fourth part of an hour,
He shrugs himself up in the cloak.
I think I shall, with some convenien^ study,
And this good help to boot, bring my self to it.

Wit. I ask no more.

Fit. Please you, walk to'ard my house,
Speak what you list; that times yours: My right
I have departed with. But, not beyond,
A minute, or a second, look for. Length,
And drawing out, ma'advance much, to these matches.
And I except all kissing. Kisses are
Silent petitions still with willing Lovers.

Wit. Lovers? How falls that o'your phantsie?

Fit. Sir.
I do know somewhat, I forbid all lip-worke.

Wit. I am not eager at forbidden dainties.
Who covets unfit thinks, denies him self.

Fit. You say well, Sir, 'Twas prettily said, that same,
He does, indeed. I Will have no touches, therefore,
Nor takings by the arms, nor tender circles
Cast'bout the wast, but all be done at distance.
Love is brought up with those soft migniard handlings;
His pulse lies in his palm: and I defend
All melting joints, and fingers, (that is my bargain)
I do defend 'hem any thing like action.
But talk, Sir, what you will. Use all the Tropes
And Schemes, that Prince Quintilian can afford you:
And much good do your Rhetoriques heart. You are welcome, Sir.
Ingine, God b'w'you.

Wit. Sir, I must condition
To have this Gentleman by, a witness.

Fit. Well,
I am content so he be silent.

Man. Yes, Sir.

Fit. Come Devil, I Will make you room, straight. But I Will show you
First, to your Mistress, who is no common one,
You must conceive, that brings gain to see her.
I hope thou'st brought me good luck.

Pug. I shall do it. Sir.

Act. I. Scene. V.
Wittipol. Manly. INgine, Wittipol knocks his friend of the breast.
you hope o'your half piece? It Is there, Sir.
Be gone. Friend Manly, who is within here? fixed?
Man. I am directly in a fit of wonder
What'll be the issue of this conference!

Wit. For that, never ve^ your self, till the event.
How like yo'him?

Man. I would feign see more of him.

Wit. What think you of this?

Man. I am past degrees of thinking.
Old Africa, and the ^ew America,
With all their fruit of Monsters cannot show
So just a prodigy.

Wit. Could you have believed,
Without your sight, a mind so sordide inward,
Should be so specious, and laid forth abroad,
To all the show, that ever shop, or ware was?

Man. I believe any thing now, though I confess
His Vices are the most extremities
I ever knew in nature. But, why loves he
The Devil so?

Wit. O Sir! for hidden treasure,
He hopes to find: and has proposed himself
So infinite a Mass as to recover,
He cares not what he parts with, of the present,
To his men of Art, who are the race, may coin him.
Promise gold-mountaines, and the covetous
Are still most prodigal.

Man. But have you faith,
That he will hold his bargain?

Wit. O dear, Sir!
He will not off on it. Fear him not. I know him.
One baseness still accompanies another.
See! he is here already, and his wife too.

Man. A wondrous handsome creature, as I live!

Act. I. Scene. VI.
Fitz-dottrell. Mistress Fitz-dottrell. Wittipol. Manly. COme wife, this is
the Gentleman. Nay, blush not.
Mrs. Fit. Why what do you mean Sir? have you your reason?

Fit. Wife,
I do not know, that I have lent it forth
To any one at least without a pawn, wife:
Or that I'have eat or drunk the thing, of late,
That should corrupt it. Wherefore gentle wife,
Obey, it is thy virtue: hold no acts
Of disputation.

Mrs. Fit. Are you not enough
The talk, of feasts, and meetings, but you will still
Make argument for fresh?

Fit. Why, careful wedlock,
If I have a longing to have one tale more
Go of me, what is that to thee, dear heart?
Why should thou envy my delight? or cross it?
By being solicitous, when it not concerns thee?

Mis. Fit. Yes I have share in this. The scorn will fall
As bitterly on me, where both are laughed at.

Fit. Laughed at, sweet bird? is that the scruple? Come, come,
A Niaise is a young Hawke, ^an^ crying out of the nest.
Thou art a Niaise. Which of your great houses,
(I will not mean at home, here, but abroad)
Your families in France, wife, send not forth
Something, within the seven year, may be laughed at?
I do not say seven months, nor seven weeks,
Nor seven days, nor hours: but seven year wife.
I give 'hem time. Once within seven year,
I think they may do something may be laughed at.
In France, I keep me there, still. Wherefore, wife,
Let them that list, laugh still, rather then weep
For me; Here is a cloak cost fifty pound, wife,
Which I can fell for thirty, when I have seen
All London in it, and London has seen me.
To day, I go to the Blackfriars Playhouse,
Sit in the view, salute all my acquaintance,
Rise up between the Acts, let fall my cloak,
Publish a handsome man, and a rich suite
(As that's a special end, why we go thither,
All that pretend, to stand for it of the Stage)
The Ladies ask who is that? (For, they do come
To see us, Love, as we do to see them)
Now, I shall lose all this, for the false fear
Of being laughed at? Yes, wusse. Let'hem laugh, wife,
Let me have such another cloak to morrow.
And let 'hem laugh again, wife, and again,
And then grow fat with laughing and then fatter,
All my young Gallants, let 'hem bring their friends too:
Shall I forbid 'hem? No let heaven forbid 'hem:
Or wit, if it have any charge on 'hem. Come, thy ear, wife,
Is all I Will borrow of thee. Set your watch, Sir,
Thou, only art to hear, not speak a word, Dove,
To ought he says. That I do gi'you in precept,
No less then council, on your wive-hood, wife,
Not though he flatter you, or make court, or Love,
(As you must look for these) or say, he rail;
What ere his arts be, wife, I will have thee
Delude 'hem with a trick, thy obstinate silence;
I know advantages; and I love to hit
He disposes his wife to his place, and sets his watch.
These pragmaticke young men, at their own weapons.
Is your watch ready? Here my sail bears, for you:
Tack toward him, sweet Pinnace, where is your watch?

Wit. I Will set it, Sir, with yours.

Mis. Fit. I must obey.

Man. Her modesty seems to suffer with her beauty,
And so, as if his folly were away,
It were worth pity.

Fit. Now, thou art right, begin, Sir.
But first, let me repeat the contract, briefly.
I am, Sir, to enjoy this cloak, I stand in,
Freely, and as your gift; upon condition
You may as freely, He repeats his contract again.
speak here to my spouse,
Your quarter of an hour always keeping
The measured distance of your yard, or more,
From my said Spouse: and in my sight and hearing.
This is your covenant?

Wit. Yes, but you will allow
For this time spent, now?

Fit. Set 'hem so much back.

Wit. I think, I shall not need it.

Fit. Well, begin, Sir,
There is your bound, Sir. Not beyond that rush.

Wit. If you interrupt me, Wittipol begins.
Sir, I shall discloake you.
The time I have purchased, Lady, is but short;
And, therefore, if I employ it thriftily,
I hope I stand the nearer to my pardon.
I am not here, to tell you, you are fair,
Or lovely, or how well you dress you, Lady,
I Will save my self that eloquence of your glass,
Which can speak these things better to you then I,
And it is a knowledge, wherein fools may be
As wise as a Court Parliament. Nor come I,
With any prejudice, or doubt, that you
Should, to the notice of your own worth, need
Least revelation. She Is a simple woman,
Know's not her good: (who ever knows her ill)
And at all caracts. That you are the wife,
To so much blasted flesh, as scarce has soul,
In stead of salt, to keep it sweet; I think,
Will ask no witnesses, to prove. The cold
Sheets that you lie in, with the watching candle,
That sees, how dull to any thaw of beauty,
Pieces, and quarters, half, and whole nights, sometimes,
The Divell-given Elfine Squire, your husband,
Does leave you, quitting here his proper circle,
For a much-worse in the walks of Lincolnes Inn,
Under the Elmes, t'expect the feind in vane, there
Will confess for you.

Fit. I did look for this geere.

Wit. And what a daughter of darkness, he does make you,
Locked up from all society, or object;
Your eye not let to look upon a face,
Under a Conjurers (or some mould for one,
Hollow, and lean like his) but, by great means,
As I now make; your own too sensible sufferings,
Without the extraordinary aids,
Of spells, or spirits, may assure you, Lady.
For my part, I protest against all such practice,
I work by no false arts, medicines, or charms
To be said forward and backward.

Fit. No, I except:

Wit. He offers to discloake him.
Sir, I shall ease you.

Fit. Mum.

Wit. Nor have I ends, Lady,
Upon you, more then this: to tell you how Love
Beauties good Angel, he that waits upon her
At all occasions, and no less then Fortune,
Helps th'adventurous, in me makes that proffer,
Which never fair one was so fond, to lose;
Who could but reach a hand out to her freedom.
On the first sight I loved you: since which time,
Though I have traveled, I have been in travel
More for this second blessing of your eyes
Which now I'have purchased, then for all aims else.
Think of it, Lady, be your mind as active,
As is your beauty: view your object well.
Examine both my fashion, and my years
Things, that are like, are soon familiar:
And Nature joys, still in equality.
Let not the sign of the husband fright you, Lady.
But ere your spring be gone, enjoy it. Flowers,
Though fair, are often but of one morning. Think,
All beauty does not last until the Autumn.
You grow old, while I tell you this. And such,
As cannot use the present, are not wise,
If Love and Fortune will take care of us,
Why should our will be wanting? This is all.
Wha do you answer, Lady?

Fit. Now, the sport comes.
She stands mute.
Let him still wait, wait, wait: while the watch goes,
And the time runs. Wife!

Wit. How! not any word?
Nay, then, I taste a trick in it. Worthy Lady,
I cannot be so false to mine own thoughts
Of your presumed goodness, to conceive
This as your rudeness, which I see's imposed.
Yet, since your cautelous Iaylor, here stands by you,
And yo'are denied the liberty of the house;
Let me take warrant, Lady, from your silence,
(Which ever is interpreted consent)
To make your answer for you: which shall be
To as good purpose, as I can imagine,
And what I think you would speak.

Fit. No, no, no, no.

Wit. He sets Mr. Manly his friend in her place.
I shall resume, Sir.

Man. Sir, what do you mean?

Wit. One interruption more, Sir, and you go
Into your hose and doublet, nothing saves you.
And therefore harken. This is for your wife.

Man. You must play fair, Sir.

Wit. Stand for me, good friend.
Troth, Sir, it is more then true, that you have uttred
And speaks for her.
Of my unequal, and so sordide match here,
With all the circumstances of my bondage.
I have a husband, and a two-legg'd one,
But such a moon-ling, as no wit of man
Or roses can redeem from being an Ass.
H'is grown too much, the story of men's mouths
To escape his lading: should I mak't my study,
And lay all ways, yea, call mankind to help,
To take his burden off, why, this one act
Of his, to let his wife out to be courted,
And, at a price, proclaims his asinine nature
So loud, as I am weary of my title to him.
But Sir, you seem a Gentleman of virtue,
No less then blood; and one that every way
Looks as he were of too good quality,
To entrap a credulous woman, or betray her
Since you have paid thus dear, Sir, for a visit,
And made such venture, on your wit, and charge
Merely to see me, or at most to speak to me,
I were too stupid; or (what is worse) ingrate
Not to return your venture. Think, but how,
I may with safety do it; I shall trust
My love and honor to you, and presume,
You Will ever husband both, against this husband;
Who, if we chance to change his liberal ears,
To other ensigns, and with labor make
A new beast of him, as he shall deserve,
Cannot complain, he is unkindly dealth with.
This day he is to go to a new play, Sir,
From whence no fear, no, nor authority,
Scarsely the Kings command, Sir, will restrain him,
Now you have fitted him with a Stage-garment,
For the mere names sake, were there nothing else,
And many more such journeies, he will make.
Which, if they now, or, any time hereafter,
Offer us opportunity, you hear, Sir,
Who Will be as glad, and forward to embrace,
Meet, and enjoy it chearefully as you.
I humbly thank you, Lady.

Fit. Keep your ground Sir.

Wit. Will you be lightened?

Fit. Mum.

Wit. And but I am,
By the sad contract, thus to take my leave of you
At this so envious distance, I had taught
Our lips ere this, to seal the happy mixture
Made of our souls. But we must both, now, yield
To the necessity. Do not think yet, Lady,
But I can kiss, and touch, and laugh, and whisper,
And do those crowning court-ships too, for which
Day, and the public have allowed no name
But, now, my bargain binds me. 'Twere rude injury,
T'importune more, or urge a noble nature,
To what of it is own bounty it is prone to:
Else, I should speak -- But, Lady, I love so well,
As I will hope, you will do so to. I have done, Sir.

Fit. Well, then, I ha'won?

Wit. Sir, And I may win, too.

Fit. O yes! no doubt on it. I Will take careful order,
That she shall hang forth ensigns at the window,
To tell you when I am absent. Or I Will keep
Three or four foote-men, ready still of purpose,
To run and fetch you at her longings, Sir.
I Will go bespeake me straight a guilt caroch,
For her and you to take the air in: yes,
Into Hide-parke, and thence into Blackfriars,
Visit the painters, where you may see pictures,
And note the properest limbs, and how to make 'hem.
Or what do you say unto a middling Gossip?
To bring you aye together, at her lodging?
Under pretext of teaching of my wife
Some rare receipt of drawing almond milk? ha?
It shall be a part of my care. Good Sir, God b'w'you.
I have kept the contract, and the cloak is mine own.

Wit. Why, much good do it you Sir; it may fall out,
That you ha'bought it dear, though I have not sold it.

Fit. A pretty riddle! Fare you well, good Sir.
He turns his wife about.
Wife, your face this way, look on me: and think
Yo'have had a wicked dream, wife, and forget it.

Man. This is the strangest motion I ere saw.

Fit. Now, wife, sits this fair cloak the worse upon me,
For my great sufferings, or your little patience? ha?
They laugh, you think?

Mis. Fit. Why Sir, and you might see it.
What thought, they have of you, may be soon collected
By the young Gentlmans speech.

Fit. Young Gentleman?
Death! you are in love with him, are you? could he not
Be named the Gentleman, without the young?
Up to your Cabin again.

Mis. Fit. My cage, yo'were best
To call it?

Fit. Yes, sing there. You Would feign be making
Blanck Manger with it at your mothers! I know you.
Go get you up. How now! what say you, Devil?

Act. I. Scene. VII.
Pug. Fitz. dottrell. Ingine. Here is one Ingine, Sir, desires to speak with
you.
Fit. I thought he brought some news, of a broker! well,
Let him come in, good Devil: fetch him else
O, my fine Ingine! what is th'affaire? more cheats?

Ing. No Sir, the Wit, the Brain, the great Projector,
I told you of, is newly come to town.

Fit. Where, Ingine?

Ing. I ha'brought him* (H'is without)
Ere he pulled off his boots, Sir, but so followed,
For business:

Fit. But what is a Projector?
I would conceive.

Ing. Why, one Sir, that projects
Ways to enrich men, or to make 'hem great,
But suites, by marriages, by undertaking:
According as he sees they humor it.

Fit. Can he not conjure at all?

Ing. I think he can, Sir.
(To tell you true) but, you do know, of late,
The State has taken such note of'hem, and compelled 'hem,
To enter such great bonds, they dare not practice.

Fit. It Is true, and I lie fallow for it, the while!

Ing. O, Sir! you will grow the richer for the rest.

Fit. I hope I shall: but Ingine, you do talk
Somewhat too much, of my courses. My Cloake-customer
Could tell me strange particulars.

Ing. By my means?

Fit. How should he have 'hem else?

Ing. You do not know, Sir,
What he has: and by what arts! A monied man, Sir,
And is as great with your Almanack-Men, as you are!

Fit. That Gallant?

Ing. You make the other wait too long, here:
And he is extreme punctual.

Fit. Is he a gallant?

Ing. Sir you shall see: He'is in his riding suit,
As he comes now from Court. But here him speak:
Minister matter to him, and then tell me.

Act. II. Scene. I.
Meer-craft. Fitz-dottrell. Ingine. Trains. Pug. SIr, money's a whore, a bawd,
a drudge;
Fit to run out on errands: Let her go.
Via pecunia! when she is run and gone,
And fled and dead; then will I fetch her, again,
With Aqua-vitae, out of an old Hogs-head!
While there are lees of wine, or dregs of beer,
I Will never want her! Coin her out of cobwebs,
Dust, but I Will have her! Raise wool upon egge-shells,
Sir, and make grass grow out o'marro-bones.
To make her come. To a waiter.
(Commend me to your Mistress,
Say, let the thousand pound but be had ready,
And it is done) I would but see the creature
(Of flesh, and blood) the man, the Prince, indeed,
That could employ so many millions
As I would help him to.
Fit. How, talks he? millions?

Mer. (I Will give you an account of this to morrow.)
Yes, To another.
I will take no less, and do it too;
If they were Myriades: and without the Devil,
By direct means, it shall be good in law.

Ing. Sir.

Mer. Tell Mr. Wood-cock, I Will not fail to meet him
Upon the Exchange at night. Pray him to have
The writings there, and we will dispatch it: Sir,
You are a Gentleman of a good presence,
A handsome man (I have considered you)
As a fit stock to graft honors upon:
I have a Project to make you a Duke, now.
That you must be one, within so many months,
And I set down, out of true reason of state,
You sha' not avoid it. But you must harken, then.

Ing. Harken? why Sir, do you doubt his ears? Alas!
You do not know Master Fitz-dottrel.

Fit. He does not know me indeed. I thank you, Ingine,
For rectifying him.

Mer. Good! Why, Ingine, then
I Will tell you. (I see you have credit, here,
And, that you can keep counsel, I Will not question.)
He shall but be an undertaker with me,
In a most feasible business. It shall cost him
Nothing.

Ing. Good, Sir.

Mer. Except he please, but's countenance;
(That I will have) t'appeare in it, to great men,
For which I Will make him one. He shall not draw
A string of's purse. I Will drive his pattent for him.
We'll take in Cit'zens, Commoners, and Aldermen,
To bear the charge, and blow 'hem off again,
Like so many dead flies, when it is carried.
The thing is for recovery of drowned Land,
Whereof the Crown's to have a moiety,
If it be owner; Else, the Crown and Owners
To share that moiety: and the recoverers
To Enjoy the the other moiety, for their charge.

Ing. Throughout England?

Mer. Yes, which will arise
To eighteen millions, seven the first year:
I have computed all, and made my survay
Unto an acre, I Will begin at the Pan,
Not, at the skirts: as some have done, and lost,
All that they wrought, their timber-worke, their trench,
Their banks all borne away, or else filled up
By the next winter. Tut, they never went
The way. I Will have it all.

Ing. A Gallant tract
Of land it is!

Mer. 'Twill yield a pound an acre.
We must let cheap, ever, at first. But Sir,
This looks too large for you, I see. Come hither,
We'll have a less. Here Is a plain fellow, you see him,
Has his black bag of papers, there, in Buckram,
Wi'not be sold for th'Earldome of Pancridge: Draw,
Gi'me out one, by chance* Project; four dogs skins?
Twelve thousand pound! the very worst, at first.

Fit. Pray you let us see it Sir.

Mer. It Is a toy, a trifle!

Fit. Trifle! 12. thousand pound for dogs-skins?

Mer. Yes,
But, by way of dressing, you must know, Sir,
And med'cining the leather, to a height
Of improved ware, like your Borachio
Of Spain, Sir. I can fetch nine thousand for it --

Ing. Of the Kings glover?

Mer. Yes, how heard you that?

Ing. Sir, I do know you can.

Mer. Within this hour
And reserve half my secret. He pluckes out the 2. Bottle-ale.
Pluck another;
See if thou have a happier hand: I thought so.
The very next worse to it! Bottle-ale.
Yet, this is two and twenty thousand! Pr'y thee
Pull out another, two or three.

Fit. Good, stay, friend,
By bottle-ale, two and twenty thousand pound?

Mer. Yes, Sir, it is cast to penny-hal'penny-farthing,
Of The backside, there you may see it, read,
I will not bate a Harrington of the sum.
I Will win it i'my water, and my malt,
My furnaces, and hanging of my coppers,
The tonning, and subtilty of my yest;
And, then the earth of my bottles, which I dig,
Turn up, and steep, and work, and neale, my self,
To a degree of Proc'lane. You will wonder,
At my proportions, what I will put up
In seven years! for so long time, I ask
For my invention. I will save in cork,
In my mere stop'ling, 'bove three thousand pound,
Within that term: by googing of 'hem out
Just to the size of my bottles, and not flieing.
There Is infinite loss i'that. What have thou there?
O'making wine of raisins: He draws out an other Raisines.
this is in hand, now,

Ing. Is not that strange, Sir, to make wine of raisins?

Mer. Yes, and as true wine, as th'wines of France,
Or Spain, or Italy, Look of what grape
My raisin is, that wine I Will render perfect,
As of the muscatell grape, I Will render muscatell;
Of Canary, his; the Claret, his;
So of all kinds: and bate you of the prices,
Of wine, throughout the kingdom, half in half.

Ing. But, how, Sir, if you raise the other commodity,
Raisins?

Mer. Why, then I Will make it out of black-berries:
And it shall do the same. It Is but more art,
And the charge less. Take out another.

Fit. No, good Sir.
Save you the trouble, I Will not look, nor hear
Of any, but your first, there; the Drown'd-land:
If It will do, as you say.

Mer. Sir, there is not place,
To gi'you demonstration of these things.
They are a little to subtle. But, I could show you
Such a necessity in it, as you must be
But what you please: against the received heresy,
That England bears no Dukes. Keep you the land, Sir,
The greatness of the estate shall throw't upon you.
If you like better turning it to money,
What may not you, Sir, purchase with that wealth?
Say, you should part with two o'your millions,
To be the thing you would, who would not do it?
As I protest, I will, out of my divident,
Lay, for some pretty principality,
In Italy, from the Church: Now, you perhaps,
Fancy the smoke of England, rather? But --
Ha'you no private room, Sir, to draw to,
T'enlarge our selves more upon.

Fit. O yes, Devil!

Mer. These, Sir, are bus'nesses, ask to be carried
With caution* and in cloud.

Fit. I apprehend,
They do so, Sir, Devil, which way is your Mistress?

Pug. Above, Sir, in her chamber.

Fit. O that is well.
Then this way good, Sir.

Mer. I shall follow you; Trains,
Gi'me the bag, and go you presently,
Commend my service to my Lady Tail-bush.
Tell her I am come from Court this morning; say,
I'have got our business moved, and well: Entreat her,
That she give you the foure-score Angels, and see 'hem
Disposed of to my Council, Sir Poul Eitherside.
Sometime, to day, I Will wait upon her Ladyship,
With the relation.

Ing. Sir, of what dispatch,
He is! Do you mark?

Mer. Ingine, when did you see
My cousin Ever-ill? keeps he still your quarter?
In The Bermudas?

Ing. Yes, Sir, he was writing
This morning, very hard.

Mer. Be not you known to him,
That I am come to Town: I have effected
A business for him, but I would have it take him,
Before he thinks for it.

Ing. It is past?

Mer. Not yet.
It Is well of the way.

Ing. O Sir! your worship takes
Infinite pains.

Mer. I love Friends, to be active:
A sluggish nature puts off man, and kind.

Ing. And such a blessing follows it.

Mer. I thank
My fate. Pray you let us be private, Sir?

Fit. In, here.

Mer. Where none may interrupt us.

Fit. You hear, Devil,
Lock the street-doores fast, and let no one in
(Except they be this Gentleman's followers)
To trouble me. Do you mark? Yo'have hard and seen
Something, to day; and, by it, you may gather
Your Mistress is a fruit, that is worth the stealing
And therefore worth the watching. Be you sure, now,
Yo'have all your eyes about you; and let in
No lace-woman; nor bawd, that brings French-masques,
And cut-works. See you? Nor old croanes, with wafers,
To convey letters. Nor no youths, disguised
Like country-wives, with cream, and marrow-puddings.
Much knavery may be vented in a pudding,
Much baudy intelligence: They'are shrewd ciphers.
Nor turn the key to any neighbors need;
Be It but to kindle fire, or beg a little,
Put it out, rather: all out, to an ash,
That they may see no smoke. Or water, spill it:
Knock of the empty tubs, that by the sound,
They may be forbid entry. Say, we are robbed,
If any come to borrow a spoone, or so.
I wi'not have good fortune, or gods blessing
Let in, while I am busy.

Pug. I Will take care, Sir,
They shall not trouble you, if they would.

Fit. Well do so.

Act. II. Scene. II.
Pug. Mistress Fitz-dottrell. I Have no singular service of this, now?
Nor no superlative Master? I shall wi^h
To be in hell again, at leisure? Bring,
A Vice from thence? That had bin such a subtilty,
As to bring broad-clothes hither: or transport
Fresh Oranges into Spain. I find it, now;
My Chief was in the right. Can any fiend
Boast of a better Vice, then here by nature,
And art, they are owners of? Hell never own me,
But I am taken! the fine tract of it
Pulls me along! To hear men such professors
Grown in our subtlest Sciences! My first Act, now,
Shall be, to make this Master of mine cuckold:
The primitive work of darkness, I will practice!
I will deserve so well of my fair Mistress,
By my discoveries, first; my counsels after;
And keeping counsel, after that: as who,
So ever, is one, I Will be another, sure,
I Will ha'my share. Most delicate damned flesh!
She will be! O! that I could stay time, now,
Midnight will come too fast upon me, I fear,
To cut my pleasure --
Mis. Fit. Look at the back-doore, She sends Devil out*

One knocks, see who it is.

Pug. Dainty she Devil!

Mis. Fit. I cannot get this venture of the cloak,
Out of my fancy; nor the Gentleman's way,
He took, which though 'twere strange, yet 'twas handsome,
And had a grace withal, beyond the newness.
Sure he will think me that dull stupid creature,
He said, and may conclude it; if I find not
Some thought to thank the attempt. He did presume,
By all the carriage of it, on my brain,
For answer; and will swear it is very barren,
If it can yield him no return. Devil returns.
Who is it?

Pug. Mistress, it is, but first, let me assure
The excellence, of Mistresses, I am,
Although my Masters man, My Mistress slave,
The servant of her secrets, and sweet turns,
And know, what fitly will conduce to either.

Mis. Fit. What Is this? I pray you come to your self and think
What your part is: to make an answer. Tell,
Who is it at the door?

Pug. The Gentleman, Mistress,
Who was at the cloake-charge to speak with you,
This morning, who expects only to take
Some small command'ments from you, what you please,
Worthy your form, he says, and gentlest manners.

Mis. Fit. O! you will anon prove his hired man, I fear,
What has he given you, for this message? Sir,
Bid him put off his hopes of straw, and leave
To spread his nets, in view, thus. Though they take
Master Fitz-dottrel, I am no such foul,
Nor fair one, tell him, will be had with stalking.
And wish him to for-beare his acting to me,
At the Gentleman's chamber-window in Lincolnes-Inne there,
That opens to my gallery: else, I swear
T'acquaint my husband with his folly, and leave him
To the just rage of his offended jealousy.
Or if your Masters sense be not so quick
To right me, tell him, I shall find a friend
That will repair me. Say, I will be quiet
In mine own house? Pray you, in those words give it him.

Pug. This is some fool turned!

Mis. Fit. If he be the Master,
He goes out.
Now, of that state and wit, which I allow him;
Sure, he will understand me: I durst not
Be more direct. For this officious fellow,
My husbands new groom, is a spy upon me,
I find already. Yet, if he but tell him
This in my words, he cannot but conceive
Himself both apprehended, and requited.
I would not have him think he met a statue:
Or spoke to one, not there, though I were silent.
How now? ha'you told him?

Pug. Yes.

Mis. Fit. And what says he?

Pug. Says he? That which my self would say to you, if I durst.
That you are proud, sweet Mistress! and with-all,
A little ignorant, to entertain
The good that is proffered; and (by your beauties leave)
Not all so wise, as some true politic wife
Would be: who having matched with such a Nupson
(I speak it with my Masters peace) whose face
Has left t'accuse him, now, for it does confess him,
What you can make him; will yet (out of scruple,
And a spic'd conscience) defraud the poor Gentleman,
At least delay him in the thing he longs for,
And makes it his whole study, how to compass,
Only a title. Could but he write Cuckold,
He had his ends. For, look you --

Mis. Fit. This can be
None but my husbands wit.

Pug. My precious Mistress.

Mis. Fit. It creaks his Ingine: The groom never durst
Be, else, so saucy --

Pug. If it were not clearly,
His worshipful ambition; and the top of it;
The very forked top too: why should he
Keep you, thus mur'd up in a back-roome, Mistress,
Allow you never a casement to the street,
Fear of engendring by the eyes, with gallants,
Forbid you paper, pen and ink, like Rats-bane.
Search your half pint of muscatell, lest a letter
Be suncke in the pot: and hold your new-laid egg
Against the fire* least any charm be writ there?
Will you make benefit of truth, dear Mistress,
If I do tell it you: I do it not often?
I am set over you, employed, indeed,
To watch your steps, your looks, your very breathings,
And to report them to him. Now, if you
Will be a true, right, delicate sweet Mistress,
Why, we will make a Cokes of this Wise Master,
We will, my Mistress, an absolute fine Cokes,
And mock, to air, all the deep diligences
Of such a solemn, and effectual Ass,
An Ass to so good purpose, as we'll use him.
I will contrive it so, that you shall go
To Plays, to Masks, to Meetings, and to Feasts.
For, why is all this Rigging, and fine Tackle, Mistress,
If you neat handsome vessels, of good sail,
Put not forth ever, and anon, with your nets
Abroad into the world. It is your fishing.
There you shall choose your friends, your servants, Lady,
Your squires of honor; I Will convey your letters,
Fetch answers, do you all the offices,
That can belong to your blood, and beauty. And,
For the variety, at my times, although
I am not in due symmetrie, the man
Of that proportion; or in rule
Of physic, of the just complexion;
Or of that truth of Piccardell, in clothes,
To boast a sovereignty over Ladies: yet
I know, to do my turns, sweet Mistress. Come, kiss --

Mis. Fit. How now!

Pug. Dear delicate Mistress, I am your slave,
Your little worm, that loves you: your fine Monkie;
Your Dog, your Jack, your Pug, that longs to be
Styled, o'your pleasures.

Mis. Fit. Hear you all this? She thinke^* her husband watches.
Sir, Pray you,
Come from your standing, do, a little, spare
Your self, Sir, from your watch, t'applaud your Squire,
That so well follows your instructions!

Act. II. Scene. III.
Fitz-dottrell. Mis. Fitz-dottrell. Pug. HOw now, sweetheart? what is the matter?
Mis. Fit. Good!
You are a stranger to the plot! you set not
Your saucy Devil, here, to tempt your wife,
With all the insolent uncivil language,
Or action, he could vent?

Fit. Did you so, Devil?

Mis. Fit. Not you? you were not planted in your hole to hear him,
Upo'the stayres? or here, behind the hangings?
I do not know your qualities? he durst do it,
Her husband goes out, and enters presently with a cudgel upon him.
And you not give directions?

Fit. You shall see, wife,
Whether he durst, or no: and what it was
I did direct.

Pug. Sweet Mistress, are you mad?

Fit. You most mere Rogue! you open manifest Villain!
You Fiend apparent you! you declared Hel-hound!

Pug. Good Sir.

Fit. Good Knave, good Rascal, and good Traitor.
Now, I do find you parcel- Devil, indeed.
Upo' the point of trust? In Your first charge?
The very day o'your probation?
To tempt your Mistress? You do see, good wedlock,
How I directed him,

Mis. Fit. Why, where Sir, were you?

Fit. After a pause.
Nay, there is one blow more, for exercise:
I told you, I should do it.

Pug. Would you had done, Sir.

Fit. He strikes him again*
O wife, the rarest man! yet there is another
To put you in mind of the last. Such a brave man, wife!
Within, he has his projects, and does vent 'hem,
and again.
The gallantest! where you tentiginous? ha?
Would you be acting of the Incubus?
Did her silks rustling move you?

Pug. Gentle Sir.

Fit. Out of my sight. If thy name were not Devil,
Thou should not stay a minute with me. In,
Go, yet stay: yet go too. I am resolved,
What I will do: and you shall know it aforehand.
Devil goes out.
Soon as the Gentleman is gone, do you hear?
I Will help your lisping. Wife, such a man, wife!
He has such plots! He will make me a Duke!
No less, by heaven! six Mares, to your coach, wife!
That Is your proportion! And your coachman bald!
Because he shall be bare, enough, Do not you laugh,
We are looking for a place, and all, in the map
What to be of. Have faith, be not an Infidel.
You know I am not easy to be gulled.
I swear, when I have my millions, else, I Will make
Another Duchess; if you have not faith.

Mis. Fit. You Will have too much, I fear, in these false spirits,

Fit. Spirits? O, no such thing! wife! wit, mere wit!
This man defies the Devil, and all his works!
He dos't by Ingine, and devises, he!
He has his winged ploughes, that go with sails,
Will plough you forty acres, at once! and ^ills,
Will spout you water, ten miles off! All Crowland
Is ours, wife; and the fens, from us, in Norfolk,
To the utmost bound of Lincolnshire! we have viewed it.
And measured it within all; by the scale!
The richest tract of land, Love, in the kingdom*
There will be made seventeene, or eighteen millions;
Or more, as't may be handled! wherefore, think,
Sweet heart, if thou have a fancy to one place,
More then another, to be Duchess of;
Now, name it: I will have it, what ere it cost,
(If It will be had for money) either here,
Or'n France, or Italy.

Mis. Fit. You ha'strange fantasies!

Act. II. Scene. IV.
Meer-craft. Fitz-dottrell. Ingine. WHere are you, Sir?
Fit. I see thou have no talent
This way, wife. Up to thy gallery; do, Chuck,
Leave us to talk of it, who understand it.

Mer. I think we have found a place to fit you, now, Sir.
Gloc'ster.

Fit. O, no, I Will none!

Mer. Why, Sir?

Fit. It Is fatal.

Mer. That you say right in. Spenser, I think, the younger,
Had his last honor thence. But, he was but Earl.

Fit. I know not that, Sir. But Thomas of Woodstocke,
I Am sure, was Duke, and he was made away,
At Calice; as Duke Humphrey was at Bury:
And Richard the third, you know what end he came too.

Mer. By m'faith you are cunning in the Chronicle, Sir.

Fit. No, I confess I have it from the Play-bookes,
And think they'are more authentic.

Ing. That Is sure, Sir.

Mer. What say you (to this then)

Fit. No a noble house. He whispers him of a place.

Pretends to that. I will do no man wrong.

Mer. Then take one proposition more, and here it
As past exception.

Fit. What Is that?

Mer. To be
Duke of those lands, you shall recover: take
Your title, thence, Sir, Duke of the Drown'd-lands,
Or Drown'd-land.

Fit. Ha? that last has a good sound!
I like it well. The Duke of Dround-'land?

Ing. Yes;
It goes like Gr^en-land, Sir, if you mark it.

Mer. I,
And drawing thus your honor from the work,
You make the reputation of that, greater;
And stay't the longer in your name.

Fit. It Is true.
Droun'd-lands will live in Droun'd-land!

Mer. Yes, when you
Have no foot left; as that must be, Sir, one day.
And, though it tarry in your heirs, some forty,
Fifty descents, the longer liver, at last, yet,
Must thrust 'hem out on it: if no quirk in law,
Or odd Vice o'ther own not do it first.
We see those changes, daily: the fair lands,
That were the Clyents, are the Lawyers, now:
And those rich Manors, there, of good man Tailors,
Had once more wood upon 'hem then the yard,
By which they were measured out for the last purchase.
Nature has these vicissitudes. She makes
No man a state of perpetuity, Sir.

Fit. He spies Devil.
Yo'are in the right. Let Us in then, and conclude.
I my sight, again? I Will talk with you, anon.

Act. II. Scene. V.
Pug. SUre he will geld me, if I stay: or worse,
Pluck out my tongue, one of the two. This Fool,
There is no trusting of him: and to quit him,
Were a contempt against my Chief, past pardon.
It was a shrewd disheartning this at first!
Who would ha'thought a woman so well harnessed,
Or rather well-caparison'd, indeed,
That wears such petticoates, and lace to her smoks,
Broad seaming laces (as I see 'hem hang there)
And garters which are lost, if she can show 'hem,
Could ha'done this? Hell! why is she so brave?
It cannot be to please Duke Dottrel, sure,
Nor the dull pictures, in her gallery,
Nor her own dear reflection, in her glass;
Yet that may be: I have known many of'hem,
Begin their pleasure, but none end it, there:
(That I consider, as I go a long with it)
They may, for want of better company,
Or that they think the better, spend an hour;
Two, three, or four, discoursing with their shadow:
But sure they have a farther speculation.
No woman dressed with so much care, and study,
Does dress her self in vain. I Will vex this problem,
A little more, before I leave it, sure.

Act. II. Scene. VI.
Wittipol. Manly. Mistress Fitz-dottrell. Pug. THis was a fortune,, happy
above thought,
That this should prove thy chamber; which I feared
Would be my greatest trouble! this must be
The very window, and that the room.
Man. It is.
I now remember, I have often seen there
A woman but I never marked her much.

Wit. Where was your soul, friend?

Man. Faith, but now, and then,
Awake unto those objects.

Wit. You pretend so.
Let me not live, if I am not in love
More with her wit, for this direction, now,
Then with her form, though I have praised that prettily,
Since I saw her, He gives him a paper, wherein is the copy of a Song.
and you, to day. Read those.
They Will go unto the air you love so well.
Try 'hem unto the note, may be the music
Will call her sooner; light, she is here! Sing quickly.

Mis. Fit. Either he understood him not: or else,
The fellow was not faithful in delivery,
Of what I bad. And, I am justly paid,
That might have made my profit of his service,
But, by mis-taking, have drawn on his envy,
And done the worse defeat upon my self.
How! Manly sings, Pug enters perceives it.
Music? then he may be there: and is sure.

Pug. O! Is it so? Is there the enter-view?
Have I drawn to you, at last, my cunning Lady?
The Devil is an Ass! fooled off! and beaten!
Nay, made an instrument! and could not sent it!
Well, since yo'have shown the malice of a woman,
No less then her true wit, and learning, Mistress,
I Will try, if little Pug have the malignity
To recompense it, and so save his danger.
It Is not the pain, but the discredit of it,
The Devil should not keep a body entire.

Wit. Away, fall back, she comes.

Man. I Will leave you, Sir,
The Master of my chamber. I have business.

Wit. Mis.!

Mis. Fit. You make me paint, Sir.

Wit. The'are fair colors,
Lady, and natural! I did receive
Some commands from you lately, This Scene is acted at two windo's, as out of
two contiguous buildings.
gentle Lady,
But so perplexed, and wrapped in the delivery,
As I may fear to have mis-interpreted:
But must make suit still, to be near your grace.

Mis. Fit. Who is there with you, Sir?

Wit. None, but my self.
It falls out, Lady, to be a dear friends lodging.
Wherein there is some conspiracy of fortune
With your poor servants blessed affections.

Mis. Fit. Who was it sung?

Wi. He, Lady, but he is gone,
Upon my entreaty of him, seeing you
Approach the window. Neither need you doubt him,
If he were here. He is too much a gentleman.

Mis. Fit. Sir if you judge me by this simple action
And by the outward habit, and complexion
Of easiness, it has, to your design;
You may with Justice, say, I am a woman:
And a strange woman. But when you shall please,
To bring but that concurrence of my fortune,
To memory, which to day your self did urge:
It may beget some favor like excuse,
Though none like reason.

Wit. No, my tune-full Mistress?
Then, surely, Love has none; nor Beauty any;
Nor Nature violenced, in both these:
With all whose gentle tongues you speak, at once.
I thought I had enough removed, already,
That scruple from your breast, and left yo'all reason;
When, through my mornings perspective I showed you
A man so above excuse, as he is the cause,
Why any thing is to be done upon him:
And nothing called an injury, mis-plac'd.
I'rather now had hope, to show you how Love
By his accesses, grows more natural:
And, what was done, this morning, with such force
Was but devised to serve the present, then.
He grows more familiar in his Court-ship.
That since love has the honor to approach
These sister-swelling breasts; and touch this soft,
And rosy hand; he has the skill to draw
Their Nectar forth, with kissing; and could make
More wanton salts, from this brave promontory,
Plays with her paps, kisseth her hands, etc.
Down to this valley, then the nimble Roe;
Could play the hopping Sparrow, 'bout these nets;
And sporting Squirell in these crisped groves;
Bury himself in every Silke-wormes kell,
Is here unravel'd; run into the snare,
Which every hair is, is cast into a curle,
To catch a Cupid flying: Bath himself
In milk, and roses, here, and dry him, there;
Warm his cold hands, to play with this smooth, round,
And well torn'd chin, as with the Billyard ball;
Roll on these lips, the banks of love, and there
At once both plant, and gather kisses. Lady,
Shall I, with what I have made to day here, call
All sense to wonder, and all faith to sign
The mysteries revealed in your form?
And will Love pardon me the blasphemy
I uttered, when I said, a glass could speak
This beauty, or that fools had power to judge it?
Do but look, on her eyes! They do light --
All that Love's world comprizeth!
Do but look on her hair! it is bright,
As Love's star, when it rises!
Do but mark, her forehead smoother,
Then words that sooth her!
And from her arched brows, such grace
Sheds it self through the face;
As alone, there triumphs to the life,
All the gain, all the good, of the elements strife!
Have you seen but a bright Lilly grow,
Before rude hands have touched it?
Have you marked but the fall of Snow,
Before the soil has smutch'd it?
Have you felt the wool of the Bever?
Or Swans down, ever?
Or, have smelt of the bud of the Brier?
Or the Nard in the fire?
Or, have tasted the bag of the Be?
O, so white! O, so soft! O, so sweet is she.

Act. II. Scene. VII.
Fitz-dottrell. Wittipol. Pug. IS she so, Her husband appears at her back.
Sir? and, I will keep her so.
If I know how, or can: that wit of man
Will do it, I Will go no farther. At this window'
She shall no more be buz'd at. Take your leave on it.
If you be sweet meats, He speaks out of his wives window.
wedlock, or sweet flesh,
Alls one: I do not love this hum about you.
A fly-blowne wife is not so proper, In:
For you, Sir, look to hear from me..
Wit. So, I do, Sir.

Fit. No, but in other terms. There Is no man offers
This to my wife, but paies for it,

Wit. That have I, Sir.

Fit. Nay, then, I tell you, you are.

Wit. What am I, Sir?

Fit. Why, that I Will think on, when I ha'cut your throat.

Wit. Go, you are an Ass.

Fit. I am resolved on it, Sir.

Wit. I think you are.

Fit. To call you to a reckoning.

Wit. Away, you brokers block, you property.

Fit. S'light, if you strike me, I Will strike your Mistress,

Wit. O! He strikes his wife.
I could shoot my eyes at him, for that, now;
Or leave my teeth in him, were they cuckolds bane,
Enough to kill him. What prodigious,
Blind, and most wicked change of fortune's this?
I ha'no air of patience: all my veins
Swell, and my sinews start at iniquity of it.
I shall break, break.

Pug. This for the malice of it, The Devil speaks below.

And my revenge may pass! But, now, my conscience
Tells me, I have profited the cause of Hell
But little, in the breaking-off their loves.
Which, if some other act of mine repair not,
I shall hear ill of my account.

Fit. O, Bird!
Could you do this? Fitz-dottr^^^ enters with his wife as come down.
against me? and at this time, now?
When I was so employed, wholly for you,
Drowned i'my care (more, then the land, I swear,
I'have hope to win) to make you peere-lesse? studying,
For footmen for you, fine paced huishers, pages,
To serve you of the knee; with what Knights wife,
To bear your train, and sit with your four women
In council, and receive intelligences,
From foreign parts, to dress you at all pieces!
You Have (a'most) turned my good affection, to you;
Sowr'd my sweet thoughts; all my pure purposes:
I could now find (i'my very heart) to make
Another, Lady Duchess; and depose you.
Well, go your ways in. Devil, you have redeemed all.
I do forgive you. And I Will do you good.

Act. III. Scene. VIII.
Meer-craft. Fitz-dottrell. Ingine. Trains. WHy ha'you these excursions? where
ha'you been, Sir?
Fit. Where I ha'beene vexed a little, with a toy!

Mer. O Sir! no toies must trouble your grave head,
Now it is growing to be great. You must
Be above all those things.

Fit. Nay, nay, so I will.

Mer. Now you are to'ard the Lord, you must put off
The man, Sir.

Ing. He says true.

Mer. You must do nothing
As you ha'done it heretofore; not know,
Or salute any man.

Ing. That was your bedfellow,
The other month.

Mer. The other month? the week.
Thou do not know the privileges, Ingine,
Follow that Title; nor how swift: To day,
When he has put on his Lords face once, then --

Fit. Sir, for these things I shall do well enough,
There is no fear of me. But then, my wife is
Such an untoward thing! she will never learn
How to comport with it! I am out of all
Conceit, on her behalf.

Mer. Best have her taught, Sir.

Fit. Where? Are there any Schools for Ladies? Is there
An Academy for women? I do know,
For men there was: I learned in it, my self,
Ingine whispers Merecraft, Merecraft turns to Fitz-dottrel.
To make my legs, and do my postures.

Ing. Sir.
Do you remember the conceit you had --
Of The Spanish gown, at home?

Mer. Ha! I do thank thee,
With all my heart, dear Ingine. Sir, there is
A certain Lady, here about the Town,
An English widow, who has lately traveled,
But she is called the Spaniard; cause she came
Latest from thence: keeps the Spanish habit.
Such a rare woman! all our women here,
That are of spirit, and fashion flock, unto her,
As to their President; their Law; their Canon;
More then they ever did, to Oracle-Foreman.
Such rare receipts she has, Sir, for the face;
Such oils; such tinctures; such pomatumn's;
Such perfumes; medicines; quintessences, etc.
And such a mistress of behavior;
She knows, from the Dukes daughter, to the Doxey,
What is their due just: and no more!

Fit. O, Sir!
You please me i'this, more then mine own greatness.
Where is she? Let us have her.

Mer. by your patience,
We must use means; cast how to be acquainted --

Fit. Good Sir, about it.

Mer. We must think how, first,

Fit. O!
I do not love to tarry for a thing,
When I have a mind to it. You do not know me.
If you do offer it.

Mer. Your wife must send
Some pretty token to her, with a complement,
And pray to be received in her graces,
All the great Ladies do it,

Fit. She shall, she shall,
What were it best to be?

Mer. Some little toy,
I would not have it any great matter, Sir:
A Diamant ring, of forty or fifty pound,
Would do it handsomely: and be a gift
Fit for your wife to send, and her to take.

Fit. I Will go, Fitz-dottrel goes out.
and tell my wife on it, straight.

Mer. Why this
Is well! the clothes we'have now: But where is this Lady?
If we could get a witty boy, now, Ingine;
That were an excellent crack. I could instruct him,
To the true height. For any thing takes this dottrel.

Ing. Why, Sir your best will be one of the players!

Mer. No, there is no trusting them. They Will talk on it,
And tell their Poets.

Ing. What if they do? the jest
Will brook the Stage. But there be some of'hem
Are very honest Lads. There Is Dicke Robinson
A very pretty fellow, and comes often
To a Gentleman's chamber, a friends of mine. We had
The merriest supper of it there, one night,
The Gentleman's Land-lady invited him
To'a Gossips feast, Now, he Sir brought Dick Robinson,
Dressed like a Lawyers wife, amongst'hem all;
(I lent him clothes) but, to see him behave it;
And lay the law; and carve; and drink unto'hem;
And then talk baudy: and send frolicks! o!
It would have burst your bottons, or not left you
A seame.

Mer. They say he is an ingenious youth!

Ing. O Sir! and dresses himself, the best! beyond
Forty o'your very Ladies! did you never see him?

Mer. No, I do seldom see those toys. But think you,
That we may have him?

Ing. Sir, the young Gentleman
I tell you of, can command him. Shall I attempt it?

Mer. Yes do it.

Fit. S'light, Enters again.
I cannot get my wife
To part with a ring, on any terms: and yet,
The sollen Monkey has two.

Mer. It were'gainst reason,
That you should urge it; Sir, send to a Goldsmiths,
Let not her lose by it.

Fit. How does she lose by it?
Is It not for her?

Mer. Make it your own bounty,
It will ha'the better success; what is a matter
Of fifty pound to you, Sir.

Fit. I have but a hundred
Pieces, to show here; that I would not break --

Mer. You shall ha'credit, Sir. I Will send a ticket
Unto my Goldsmiths. Here, my man comes too,
Trains enters.
To carry it fitly. How, now, Trains? What birds?

Tra. Your Cousin Ever-ill met me, and has beat me,
Because I would not tell him where you were:
I think he has dogd me to the house too.

Fit. Well --
You shall go out at the back-doore, then, Trains.
You must get Guilt-head hither, by some means:

Tra. It Is impossible!

Fit. Tell him we have venison,
I Will g'him a piece, and send his wife a Phesant.

Tra. A Forest moves not till that forty pound,
Yo'had of him, last, be pai'd. He keeps more stir,
For that same petty some, then for your bond
Of six; and Statute of eight hundred!

Fit. Tell him
We Will hedge in that. Cry up Fitz-dottrell to him,
Double his price: Make him a man of metal.

Tra. That will not need, his bond is current enough.

Act. III. Scene. I.
Guilt-head. Plutarchus. ALl this is to make you a Gentleman:
I Will have you learn, Son. Wherefore have I placed you
With Sir. Pould Either-side, but to have so much Law
To keep your own? Besides, he is a Justice,
Here in the Town; and dwelling, Son, with him,
You shall learn that in a year, shall be worth twenty
Of having stayed you at Oxford, or at Cambridge,
Or sending you to the Innes of Court, or France.
I am called for now in haste, by Master Meere-craft
To trust Master Fitz-dottrell, a good man:
I'have inquired him, eighteen hundred a year,
(His name is current) for a diamant ring
Of forty, shall not be worth thirty (that's gained)
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
Plu. O, but good father, you trust too much!

Gui. Boy, boy,
We live, by finding fools out, to be trusted.
Our shop-bookes are our pastures, our corn-grounds,
We lay'hem open, for them to come into:
And when we have 'hem there, we drive 'hem up
In the one of our two Pounds, the Compters, straight,
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
We Citizens never trust, but we do coozen:
For, if our debtors pay, we coozen them;
And if they do not, then we coozen our selves.
But that is a hazard every one must run,
That hopes to make his Son a Gentleman!

Plu. I do not wish to be one, truly, Father.
In a descent, or two, we come to be
Just 'itheir state, fit to be coozend, like 'hem.
And I had rather ha'tarried in your trade:
For, since the Gentry scorn the City so much,
Me thinks we should in time, holding together,
And matching in our own tribes, as they say,
Have got an Act of Common Council, for it,
That we might coozen them out of rerum natura.

Gui. I, if we had an Act first to forbid
The marrying of our wealthy heirs unto 'hem:
And daughters, with such lavish portions,
That confounds all.

Plu. And makes a Mungril breed, Father.
And when they have your money then they laugh at you:
Or kick you down the stairs. I cannot abide 'hem.
I would feign have 'hem coozen'd, but not trusted.

Act. III. Scene. II.
Meere-craft. Guilt-head. Fitz-dottrell. Plutarchus. O, Is he come! I knew he
would not fail me.
Welcome, good Guilt-head, I must ha'you do
A noble Gentleman, a courtesy, here:
In a mere toy (some pretty Ring, or Jewel)
Of fifty, or threescore pound (Make it a hundred,
And hedge in the last forty, that I owe you,
And your own price for the Ring) He Is a good man, Sir,
And you may hap' see him a great one! He,
Is likely to bestow hundreds, and thousands,
Wi'you; if you can humor him. A great Prince
He will be shortly. What do you say?
Gui. In truth, Sir
I cannot. 'T has been a long vacation with us.

Fit. Of what, I pray thee? of wit? or honesty?
Those are your Citizens long vacations.

Plu. Good Father do not trust 'hem.

Mer. Nay, Thom. Guilt-head.
He will not buy a courtesy and beg it:
He Will rather pay, then pray. If you do for him,
You must do cheerfully. His credit, Sir,
Is not yet prostitute! Who Is this? thy son?
A pretty youth, what is his name?

Plu. Plutarchus, Sir.

Mer. Plutarchus! How came that about?

Gui. That year Sir,
That I begot him, I bought Plutarch's lives,
And fell s' in love with the book, as I called my son
By'his name; In hope he should be like him:
And write the lives of our great men!

Mer. In The City?
And you do breed him, there?

Gui. His mind, Sir, lies
Much to that way.

Mer. Why, then, he is in the right way.

Gui. But, now, I had rather get him him a good wife,
And plant him in the country; there to use
The blessing I shall leave him.

Mer. Out upont't!
And lose the laudable means, thou have at home, here,
To Advance, and make him a young Alderman?
Buy him a Captains place, for shame; and let him
Into the world, early, and with his plume,
And Scarfes, march through Cheapside, or along Cornehill,
And by the vertue' of those, draw down a wife
There from a windo', worth ten thousand pound!
Get him the posture book, and's leaden men,
To set upon a table, against his Mistress
Chance to come by, that he may draw her in,
And show her Finsbury battles.

Gui. I have placed him
With Justice Etherside, to get so much law --

Mer. As thou have conscience! Come, come, thou do wrong
Pretty Plutarchus, who had not his name,
For nothing: but was borne to train the youth
Of London, in the millitary truth --
That way his Genius lies. My Cousin Ev^rill!

Act. III. Scene. III.
Ever-ill. Plutarchus. Guilt-head. Meer-craft. Fitz-dottrell. O, Are you here,
Sir? 'pray you let us whisper.
Plu. Father, dear Father, trust him if you love me.

Guil. Why, I do mean it, boy; but, what I do,
Must not come easily from me: We must deal
With Courtiers, boy, as Courtiers deal with us.
If I have a Business there, with any of them,
Why, I must wait, I Am sure on it, Son* and though
My Lord dispatch me, yet his worshipful man --
Will keep me for his sport, a month, or two,
To show me with my fellow Citizens.
I must make his train long, and full, one quarter;
And help the spectacle of his greatness. There,
Nothing is done at once, but injuries, boy:
And they come headlong! all their good turns move not,
Or very slowly.

Plu. Yet sweet father, trust him.

Gui. Well, I will think..

Ev. Come, you must do it, Sir.
I Am undone else, and your Lady Tail-bush
Has sent for me to dinner, and my clothes
Are all at pawn. I had sent out this morning,
Before I heard you were come to town, some twenty
Of my Epistles, and no one return --

Mer. Why, I have told you of this. This comes of wearing
Mere-craft ^ells him of his faults.
Scarlet, gold lace, and cut-works! your fine gartring!
With your blown roses, Cousin! and your eating
Phesant, and Godwit. here in London! haunting
The Globes, and Mermaides! and wedging in with Lords,
Still at the table! and affecting lechery,
In velvet! where could you ha'contented your self
With cheese, salt-butter, and a pickled hering,
In The Low Countries; there worn cloth, and fustian!
Been satisfied with a leap o'your Host's daughter,
In garrison, a wench of a stoter! or,
Your Sulters wife, in the leaguer, of two blanks!
You never, then, had run upon this flat,
To write your letters missive, and send out
Your privy seals, that thus have frighted off
All your acquaintance; that they shun you at distance,
Worse, then you do the Bailies!

Eve. Pox upon you.
I come not to you for counsel, He repines,
I lack money.

Mer. You do not think, what you owe me already?

Eve. I?
They owe you that mean to pay you. I Will besworne,
I never meant it. Come, you will project, (...)
I shall undo your practice, and threatens him.
for this month (...)
You know me.

Mer. I yo'are a right sweet nature!

Eve. Well, that is all one!

Mer. You Will leave this Empire, one day?
You will not ever have this tribute paid,
Your scepter of the sword?

Eve. Tie up your wit,
Do, and provoke me not --

Mer. Will you, Sir, help,
To what I shall provoke another for you?

Eve. I cannot tell; try me: I think I am not
So utterly, of an ore un-to-be-melted,
But I can do my self good, on occasions.

Mer. Strike in then, They joyne^
for your part. Mr. Fitz-dottrel
If I transgress in point of manners, afford me
Your best construction; I must beg my freedom
From your affairs, this day.

Fit. How, Sir.

Mer. It is
In succor of this Gentleman's occasions, Meere-craft pretends business.

My kins-man --

Fit. You Will not do me that affront, Sir.

Mer. I am sorry you should so interpret it,
But, Sir, it stands upon his being invested,
In a new, office, he has stood for, long:
Master of the Dependances! Meere-craft describes the office of Dependancy.
A place
Of my projection too, Sir, and has met
Much opposition; but the State, now see's
That great necessity of it, as after all
Their writing, and their speaking, against Devils,
They have erected it. His book is drawn --
For, since, there will be differences, daily,
'Twixt Gentlemen; and that the roaring manner
Is grown offensive; that those few, we call
The civil men of the sword, abhor the vapors;
They shall refer now, hither, for their process;
And such as trespass against the rule of Court,
Are to be fined --

Fit. In troth, a pretty place!

Mer. A kind of arbitrary Court 'twill be, Sir.

Fit. I shall have matter for it, I believe,
Ere it be long: I had a distaste.

Mer. But now, Sir,
My learned council, they must have a feeling,
They Will part, Sir, with no books, without the hand gout
Be oyld, and I must furnish. If 't be money,
To me straight. I am Mine, Mint and Exchequer,
To supply all. What is it? a hundred pound?

Eve. No the Harpey, now stands on a hundred pieces.

Mer. Why, he must have 'hem, if he will. To morrow, Sir,
Will equally serve your occasion's, --
And therefore, let me obtain, that you will yield
To timing a poor Gentleman's distresses,
In terms of hazard. --

Fit. By no means!

Mer. I must
Get him him this money, and will. --

Fit. Sir, I protest,
I Would rather stand engaged for it my self:
Then you should leave me.

Mer. O good Sir, do you think
So coursely of our manners, that we would,
For any need of ours, be pressed to take it:
Though you be pleased to offer it.

Fit. Why by heaven,
I mean it!

Mer. I can never believe less.
He offers to be gone.
But we, Sir, must preserve our dignity,
As you do publish yours. By your fair leave, Sir.

Fit. As I am a Gentleman, if you do offer
To leave me now, or if you do refuse me,
I will not think you love me.

Mer. Sir, I honor you.
And with just reason, for these noble notes,
Of the nobility, you pretend too! But, Sir --
I would know, why? a motive (he a stranger)
You should do this?

( Eve. You Will mar all with your finenesse)

Fit. Why, that is all one, if 'twere, Sir, but my fancy.
But I have a Business, that perhaps I Would have
Brought to his office.

Mer. O, Sir! I have done, then;
If he can be made profitable, to you.

Fit. Yes, and it shall be one of my ambitions
To (...) it the first Business? May I not?

Eve. So you do mean to make it, a perfect Business.

Fit. Nay I Will do that assure you: show me once.

(...) Sir^ (...) concerns, the first be a perfect Business,
(...) his ow^ honor!

Eve. I, and th'reputation
To (...) my place.

Fit. Why, why, do I take this course, else?
(...) not altogether, an Ass, good Gentlemen,
Wherefore should I consult you? do you think?
To make a song on it? How Is your manner? tell us.

Mer. Do, satisfy him: give him the whole course.

Eve. First, by request, or otherwise you offer
Your Business to the Court: wherein you crave:
The judgment of the Master and the Assistants.

Fit. Well, that is done, now, what do you upon it*

Eve. We straight Sir, have recourse to the springhead;
Visit the ground; and so disclose the nature:
If it will carry, or no. If we do find,
By your proportions it is like to prove
A sullen, and black Business That it be
Incorrigible; and out of, treaty; then,
We file it, a Dependence!

Fit. So it is filled.
What follows? I do love the order of these things.

Eve. We then advise the party, if he be
A man of means and havings* that forthwith,
He settle his estate: if not, at least
That he pretend it. For, by that, the world
Takes notice, thatt inow is a Dependence.
And this we call, Sir, Publication.

Fit. Very sufficient! After Publication, now?

Eve Then we grant out our Process, which is diverse*
Either by Chartell, Sir, or ore-tenus,
Wherein the Challenger, and Challengee
Or (with your Spaniard) your Provocador,
And Provocado, have their several courses --

Fit. I have enough on it! for an hundred pieces?
Yes, for two hundred, under-write me do.
Your man will take my bond?

Mer. That he will, sure,
But, these same Citizens, they are such sharks!
There Is an old debt of forty, He whispers Fitz-dottrel aside.
I ga'my word
For one is run away, into the Bermudas,
And he will hook in that, or he wi'not do.

Fit. Why let him. That and the ring, and a hundred pieces,
Will all but make two hundred?

Mer. No, And then Guilt-head.
no more, Sir.
What ready Arithmetique you have? do you hear?
A pretty mornings work for you, this? Do it,
You shall have twenty pound on it.

Gui. Twenty pieces?

( Plu. Good Father, do it)

Mer. You will hook still? well*
Show us your ring. You could not ha'done this, now
With gentleness, at first, we might ha'thank'd you*
But groan, and ha'your courtesies come from you
Like a hard stool, and stink? A man may draw
Your teeth out easier, then your money? Come,
Were little Guilt-head here, no better a nature,
I should never love him, He pulls Plutarchus by the lips.
that could pull his lips off, now*
Was not thy mother a Gentlewoman?

Plu. Yes, Sir.

Mer. And went to the Court at Christmas, and St. Georges-tide?
And lent the Lords-men, chains?

Plu. Of gold, and pearl, Sir.

Mer. I knew, thou must take, after some body!
Thou could not be else. This was no shop-looke
I Will ha'thee Captain Guilt-head, and march up,
And take in Pimlico, and kill the bush,
At every tavern! Thou shall have a wife,
If smocks will mount, He tu^ns to old Guilt-head.
boy. How now? you ha'there now
Some Bristo-stone, or Cornish counterfeit
You Would put upon us.

Guil. No, Sir, I assure you:
Look on his luster! he will speak himself!
I Will gi'you leave to put him in the Mill,
H'is no great, large stone, but a true Paragon,
H'has all his corners, view him well.

Mer. H'is yellow.

Gui. Vpo'my faith, Sir, of the right black-water,
And very deep! H'is set without a foil, too.
Here Is one of the yellow water, I Will sell cheap.

Mer. And what do you value this at? thirty pound?

Gui. No, Sir, he cost me forty, ere he was set.

Mer. Turnings, you mean? I know your Equivocks*
You'are grown the better Fathers of'hem o'late,
Well, where't must go, twill be judged, and therefore,
Look you't be right. You shall have fity pound for it.
Now to Fitz-dottrel.
Not a dencer more! And because you would
Have things dispatched, Sir, I Will go presently,
Inquire out this Lady, If you think good Sir.
Having an hundred pieces ready, you may
Part with those, now, to serve my kinsmans turns,
That he may wait upon you, anon, the freer;
And take 'hem when you have sealed, again, of Guilt-head.

Fit. I care not if I do!

Mer. And dispatch all,
Together,

Fit. They Are just: a hundred pieces!
IN have told 'hem over, twice a day, these two months.

Mer. He turns 'hem out together. And Everill and he fall to share.
Well, go and seal then, Sir, make your return
As speedy as you can.

Eve. Come gi' me.

Mer. Soft Sir.

Eve. Marry, and fair too, then. I Will no delaying, Sir.

Mer. But you will hear?

Eve. Yes, when I have my divident.

Mer. There Is forty pieces for you.

Eve. What is this for?

Mer. Your half. You know that Guilt-head must ha'twenty.

Eve. And what is your ring there? shall I have none o'that?

Mer. O, that is to be given to a Lady!

Eve. Is It so?

Mer. By that good light, it is.

Eve. Come, gi'me
Ten pieces more then.

Mer. Why?

Eve. For Guilt, head? Sir,
Do you think, I Will ^low him any such share.

Mer. You must.

Eve. Must I? Do you your musts, Sir, I Will do mine,
You wi'not part with the whole, Sir? Will you? Go too.
Gi' me ten pieces!

Mer. By what law do you this?

Eve. E'n Lyon-law, Sir, I must roar else.

Mer. Good!

Eve. Yo'have heard, how the Ass made his divisions wisely?

Mer. And I am he, I thank you.

Eve. Much good do you, Sir.

Mer. I shall be rid of this tyranny, one day?

Eve. Not,
While you do eat, and lie about the town here;
And coozen in your bullions and I stand
Your name of credit, and compound your business;
Adjourne beatings every term; and make
New parties for your projects. I have now
A pretty tasque of it, to hold you in
Wi'your Lady Taile-bush: but the toy will be,
How we shall both come off?

Mer. Leave your doubting,
And do your portion, what is assigned you: I
Never failed yet.

Eve. With reference to your aides?
You Will still be unthankful. Where shall I meet you anon?
You have some feate to be done alone, now, I see;
You wish me gone, well, I will find you out,
And bring you after to the audit.

Mer. S'light!
There Is Ingines share too* I had forgot! This reign
Is too-too unsuportable! I must
Quit my self of this vassalege! Ingine! welcome.

Act. III. Scene. IV.
Meer-craft. Wittipol. Ingine. HOw goes the cry?
Ing Excellent well!

Mer. Will It do?
Where Is Robinson?

Ing. Here is the Gentleman, Sir.
Will undertake t'himselfe. I have acquainted him.

Mer. Why did you so?

Ing. Why, Robinson would ha'told him,
You know. And he is a pleasant wit! will hurt
Nothing you purpose. Then, he'is of opinion,
That Robinson might have audacity,
She being such a gallant. Now, he has been,
In Spain, and knows the fashions there, and can
Discourse; and being but mirth (he says) leave much,
To his care:

Mer. But he is too tall!

Ing. For that,
He has the bravest device! He excepts at his stature.
(you will love him for it)
To say, he wears Cioppin^s: and they do so
In Spain. And Robinson's as tall, as he.

Mer. Is he so?

Ing. Every jot.

Mer. Nay, I had rather
To trust a Gentleman with it, of the two.

Ing. Pray you go to him, then, Sir, and salute him.

Mer. Sir, my friend Ingine has acquainted you
With a strange business, here.

Wit. A merry one, Sir.
The Duke of Droun'd land, and his Duchess?

Mer. Yes, Sir.
Now, that the Conjurers ha'laid him by,
I ha'made bold to borrow him a while;

Wit. With purpose, yet, to put him out I hope
To his best use?

Mer. Yes, Sir.

Wit. For that small part,
That I am trusted with, put off your care:
I would not lose to do it, for the mirth,
Will follow of it; and well I have a fancy.

Mer. Sir, that will make it well.

Wit. You will report it so.
Where must I have my dressing?

Ing. At my house, Sir.

Mer. You shall have caution, Sir, for what he yields,
To six pence.

Wit. You shall pardon me. I will share, Sir,
IN your sports, only: nothing in your purchase.
But you must furnish me with complements,
To th'manner of Spain; my coach, my guarda duenn'as;

Mer. Ingine's your Pro'vedor. But, Sir, I must
(Now I'have entered trust wi'you, thus far)
Secure still in your quality, acquaint you
With somewhat, beyond this. The place designed
To be the Scene, for this our merry matter,
Because it must have countenance of women,
To draw discourse, and offer it, is hereby,
At the Lady Taile-bushes.

Wit. I know her, Sir*
And her Gentleman huisher.

Mer. Mr. Ambler?

Wit. Yes, Sir.

Mer. Sir, it shall be no shame to me, to confess
To you that we poor Gentlemen, that want acres,
Must for our needs, turn fools up, and plough Ladies
Sometimes, to try what glebe they are: and this
Is no unfruitful piece. She and I now,
Are on a project for the fact, and venting
Of a new kind of fucus (paint for Ladies)
To serve the kingdom: wherein she her self
Has traveled, specially by way of service
Unto her sex, and hopes to get the Monopoly,
As the reward of her invention.

Wit. What is her end, in this*

(...). Merely ambition,
Sir, to grow great, and court it with the secret:
Though she pretend some other. For she is dealing,
Already, upon caution for the shares,
And Mr. Ambler, is he named Examiner
For the ingredients; and the Register
Of what is vented; and shall keep the Office.
Now, if she break with you, of this (as I
Must make the leading thread to your acquaintance,
That how experience gotten in your being
Abroad, will help our business) think of some
Pretty additions, but to keep her floting:
It may be, she will offer you a part,
Any strange names of --

Wit. Sir, I have my instructions.
Is it not high time to be making ready?

Mer. Yes, Sir,

Ing. The foole's in sight, D^ttrel.

Mer. Away then.

Act. III. Scene. V.
Mere-craft, Fitz-dottrell, Pug. Returned so soon?
Fit. Yes, here is the ring: I have sealed.
But there is not so much gold in all the row, he says --
Till't come fro' the Mint. It Is taken up for the gamsters.

Mer. There Is a shop-shift! plague on'hem.

Fit. He does swear it.

Mer. He Will swear, and forswear too, it is his trade,
You should not have left him.

Fit. S'lid, I can go back,
And beat him, yet.

Mer. No, now let him alone.

Fit. I was so earnest, after the maine Business,
To have this ring, gone.

Mer. True, and it is time.
I have learned, Sir, sin'you went, her Ladyship eats
With the Lady Tail-bush, here, hard by.

Fit. In The lane here?

Mer. Yes, if yo'had a servant, now of presence,
Well clothed, and of an aerie voluble tongue,
Neither too big, or little for his mouth,
That could deliver your wives complement;
To send along withal.

Fit. I have one Sir,
A very handsome, gentleman-like-fellow,
That I do mean to make my Duchess Usher --
I entertained him, but this morning, too:
I Will call him to you. The worst of him, is his name!

Mer. She Will take no note of that, but of his message.

Fit. Devil! He shows him his Pug.
How like you him, Sir. Pace, go a little.
Let Us see you move.

Mer. He Will serve, Sir, give it him:
And let him go along with me, I Will help
To present him, and it.

Fit. Look, you do sirah,
Discharge this well, as you expect your place.
Do'you hear, Gives him instructions.
go on, come off with all your honors.
I would feign see him, do it.

Mer. Trust him, with it;

Fit. Remember kissing of your hand, and answering
With the French-time, in flexure of your body.
I could not so instruct him -- and for his words --

Mer I Will put them in his mouth.

Fit. O, but I have 'hem
Of The very Academies!

Mer. Sir, you will have use for'hem,
Anon, He longs to see the play.
your self, I warrant you: after dinner,
When you are called.

Fit. S'light, that'll be just play-time.
It cannot be, I must not lose the play!

Mer. Sir, Because it is the Devil.
but you must, if she appoint to sit.
And, she is president.

Fit. S'lid, it is the Devil!

Mer. And 'twere his Damme too, you must now apply
Your self, Sir, to this, wholly; or lose all.

Fit. If I could but see a piece --

Mer. Sir. Never think on it.

Fit. Come but to one act, and I did not care --
But to be seen to rise, and go away,
To vex the Players, and to punish their Poet --
Keep him in awe!

Mer. But say, that he be ont,
Wi'not be awed ^ but laugh at you. How then?

Fit. Then he shall pay for'his dinner himself.

Mer. Perhaps,
He would do that twice, rather then thank you.
Come, get the Di^ell out of your head, my Lord,
(I Will call you so in private still) and take
Your Lord-ship in your mind. He puts him in mind of his quarrel.
You were, sweet Lord,
In talk to bring a Business to the Office.

Fit. Yes.

Mer. Why should not you, Sir, carry it o'your self,
Before the Office be up? and show the world,
You had no need of any man's direction;
In point, Sir, of sufficiency. I speak
Against a kinsman, but as one that ^enders
Your graces good.

Fit. I thank you; to proceed --

Mer. To Publications: ha'your Deed drawn presently.
And leave a blancke to put in your Fe^ffees
One, two, or more, as you see cause --

Fit. I thank you
Heartily, I do thank you. Not a word more,
I pray you, as you love me. Let me alone.
He is angry with himself.
That I could not think of this, as well as he?
O, I could beat my infinite blocke-head --!

Mer. Come, we must this way.

Pug. How far is it.

Mer. Hard by here
Over the way. Now, to atchieve this ring,
He thinks how to coozen the bearer of the ring.
From this same fellow, that is to assure it;
Before he give it. Though my Spanish Lady,
Be a young Gentleman of means, and scorn
To share as he does say, I do not know
How such a toy may tempt his Ladyship:
And therefore, I think best, it be assured.

Pug. Sir, be the Ladies brave, we go unto?

Mer. O, yes.

Pug. And shall I see 'hem, and speak to 'hem?

Mer. Questions his man.
What else? ha'you your false beard about you? Trains.

Tra. Yes.

Mer. And is this one of your double Cloakes?

Tra. The best of 'hem.

Mer. Be ready then. Sweet Pitfall!

Act. III. Scene. VI.
Mere-craft, Pitfall, Pug, Trains. COme, I must busse --
Pit. Away.

Mer. I Will set thee up again;
Offers to kiss.
Never fear that: can thou get never a bird?
No Thrushes hungry? Stay till cold weather come,
I Will help thee to an Ousell, or a Field-fare.
She runs in, in haste: he follows.
Who Is within with Madame?

Pit. I Will tell you straight.

Mer. Please you stay here a while Sir, I Will go in.

Pug. I do so long to have a little venery,
Pug leaps at Pitfall's coming in.
While I am in this body! I would taste
Of every sin, a little, if it might be
After the manner of man! Sweet heart!

Pit. What would you, Sir?

Pug. Nothing but fall in, to you, be your Blacke-bird,
My pretty pit (as the Gentleman said) your Throstle:
Lie tame, and taken with you; here'is gold!
To buy you so much new stuffes from the shop,
Traine's in his false cloak brings a false message, and gets the ring.
As I may take the old up --

Tra. You must send, Sir,
The Gentleman the ring.

Pug. There it is. Nay look,
Will you be foolish, Pit.

Pit. This is strange rudeness.

Pug Dear Pit.

Pit. I Will call, I swear.

Mer. Where are you, Sir?
Is your ring ready? Go with me.

Pug. I sent it you.

Mer. Mere craft follows presently, and asks for it.
Me? When? by whom?

Pug. A fellow here, even now,
Came for it in your name.

Mer. I sent none, sure.
My meaning ever was, you should deliver it,
Your self: So was your Masters charge, you know.
Ent. Train's as himself again.
What fellow was it, do you know him?

Pug. Here,
But now, he had it.

Mer. Saw you any? Trains?

Tra. Not I.

Pug. The gentleman saw him.

Mer. Enquire.

Pug. I was so earnest upon her, I marked not! The Devil confesses himself
coozen'd.

My divellish Chief has put me here in flesh,
To shame me! This dull body I am in,
I perceive nothing with! I offer at nothing,
That will succeed!

Tra. Sir, she saw none, she says.

Pug. Satan himself, has taken a shape to abuse me.
It could not be else! Meere-craft accuses him of negligence.


Mer. This is above strange?
That you should be so retchlesse. What'll you do Sir?
How will you answer this, when you are questioned?

Pug. Run from my flesh, if I could: put off mankind!
This's such a scorn! and will be a new exercise,
For my Archduke! Woe to the several cudgells,
Must suffer, He asks aid.
on this back! Can you no suckers? Sir?

Mer. Alas! use of it is so present.

Pug. I ask,
Sir, credit for another, but till to morrow?

Mer. There is not so much time, Sir. But how ever,
The Lady is a noble Lady, and will
(To save a Gentleman from check) be entreated Merecraft promises faintly, yet
comfor^^ him.

To say, she has received it.

Pug. Do you think so?
Will she be won?

Mer. No doubt, to such an office,
It will be a Lady's bravery, and her pride.

Pug. And not be known on it after, unto him?

Mer. That were a treachery! Upon my word.
Be confident. Return unto your master,
My Lady President sits this afternoon,
Has taken the ring, commends her services
Unto your Lady-Dutchesse. You may say
She Is a civell Lady, and does give her
All her respects, already: Bad you tell her
She lives, but to receive her wished commandments,
And have the honor here to kiss her hands:
For which she will stay this hour yet. Hasten you
Your Prince, away.

Pug. And Sir, you will take care
Th'excuse be perfect? The Devil is doubtful.


Mer. You confess your fears.
Too much.

Pug. The shame is more, I Will quit you of either.

Act. VI. Scene. I.
Tail* bush. Mere-craft, Manly. APox upo' referring to Commissioners,
I'had rather hear that it were past the seals:
Your Courtiers move so Snaile-like in your Business.
Would I had not begun wi'you.
Mer. We must move,
Madame, in order, by degrees ^ not jump.

Tai. Why, there was Sr. John M^mis-man could jump
A Business quickly.

Mer. True he had great friends,
But because some, sweet Madame, can leap ditches,
We must not all shun to go over bridges,
The harder parts, I make account are done:
He flatters her.
Now it is referred. You are infinitely bound
Unto the Ladies, they have so cried it up!

Tay. Do they like it then?

Mer. They have sent the Spanish Lady
To gratulate with you --

Tay. I must send 'hem thanks
And some remembrances.

Mer. That you must, and visit 'hem.
Where Is Ambler?

Tay. Lost to day, we cannot hear of him.

Mer. Not madame?

Tay. No in good faith. They say he lay not
At home to night, And here has fallen a Business
Between your Cousin and Master Manly, has
Unquieted us all.

Mer. So I hear, madame.
Pray you how was it?

Tay. Troth, it but appears
Ill o'your Kinsmans part. You may have heard,
That Manly is a su^or to me, I doubt not:

Mer. I guessed it, madame.

Tay. And it seems he trusted
Your Cousin to let fall some fair reports
Of him unto me.

Mer. Which he did!

Tay. So far
From it, as he came in and took him railing
Against him.

Mer. How! And what said Manly to him?

Tay. Enough, I do assure you: and with that scorn
Of him, and the injury, as I do wonder
How Everill bore it! But that guilt undoe's
Many men's valors.

Mer. Here comes Manly. Man. madame,
Manly offers to be gone.
I Will take my leave --

Tay. You shall not go, ^'faith.
I Will have you stay and see this Spanish miracle,
Of our English Lady.

Man. Let me pray your Ladyship,
Lay your commands on me some other time.

Tay. Now, I protest: and I will have all piec'd,
And friends again.

Man. It will be but ill ^older'd!

Tay. You are too much affected with it.

Man. I cannot
Madame, but think on it for th'injustice.

Tay. Sir,
Meer-craft denies him.
His Kinsman here is sorry. Not I Madame,
I am no kin to him, we but call Cousins,
And if we were, I have no relation
Unto his crimes.

Man. You are not urged with 'hem.
I can accuse Sir, none but mine own judgment,
For though it were his crime so to betray me:
I am sure 'twas more mine own, at all to trust him.
But he therein did use but his old manners,
And ^avor strongly what he was before.

Tay. Come, he will change!

Man. Faith, I must never think i^.
Nor were it reason in me to expect
That for my sake, he should put off a nature
He sucked in with his milk. It may be Madame,
Deceiving trust is all he has to trust to:
If so, I shall be loath that any hope
Of mine should bate him of his means.

Tay. Yo'are sharp Sir.
This act may make him honest!

Man. If he were
To be made honest, by an act of Parliament,
I should not alter, She spies the Lady Either-side.
i'my faith of him.

Tay. Either-side!
Welcome, dear Either-side! how have thou done, good wench?
Thou have been a stranger^ I have not seen thee, this week.

Act. IIII. Scene. II.
Either-side. To them EVer your servant, madame.
Tay. Where hast'hou been?
I did so long to see thee.

Eit. Visiting, and so tired!
I protest, madame, it is a monstrous trouble!

Tay. And so it is. I swear I must to morrow,
Begin my visits (would they were over) at Court.
It tortures me, to think on'hem.

Eit. I do hear
You ha'cause, madame, your suit goes on.

Tay. Who told thee?

Eit. One, that can tell: Mr. Either-side.

Tay. O, t^y husband!
Yes faith, their's life in it, now: It is referred.
If we once see it under the seals, wench, then,
Have with 'hem for the great Carroch, six horses,
And the two Coach-men, with my Ambl^r, bare,
And my three women: we will live, in faith,
The examples of the town, and govern it.
I Will lead the fashion still.

Eit. You do that, now,
Sweet madame.

Tay. O, but then, I Will every day
Bring up some new device. Thou and I, Either-side,
Will first be in it, I will give it thee;
And they shall follow us. Thou shall, I swear,
Wear every month a new gown, out of it.

Eit. Thank you good madame.

Tay. Pray thee call me Taile-bush
As I thee, Either-side; I not love this, madame.

Eit. Then I protest to you Tail bush, I am glad
Your Business so succeeds.

Tay. Thank thee, good Either-side.

Eit. But Mr. Either-side tells me, that he likes
Your other Business better.

Tay. Which?

Eit. O, the Toothpicks.

Tay. I never heard on it.

Eit. Ask Mr. Mere-craft.

Mer. Madame? H'is one, in a word, I Will trust his malice,
With any man's credit, Meere-craft has whispered with the while.
I would have abused!

Man. Sir, if you think you do please me, in this,
You are deceived!

Mer. No, but because my Lady,
Named him my kinsman, I would satisfy you,
What I think of him: and pray you, upon it
To judge me!

Man. So I do: that ill men's friendship,
Is as unfaithful, as themselves.

Tay. Do you hear?
Ha'you a Business about Tooth-picks?

Mer. Yes, madame.
Did I never tellt you? I meant to have offered it
Your Lady-ship, on the perfecting the pattent.

Tay. How is it!

Mer. For serving the whole state with Tooth picks;
(Somewhat in intricate Business to discourse) but --
The Project for Toothpicks.
I show, how much the Subject is abused,
First in that one commodity? then what diseases,
And putrefactions in the gummes are bred,
By those are made' of' adultrate, and false wood?
My plot, for reformation of these, follows.
To have all Tooth-picks, brought unto an office,
There sealed; and such as counterfeit 'hem, mulcted.
And last, for venting 'hem to have a book
Printed, to teach their use, which every child
Shall have throughout the kingdom, that can read,
And learn to pick his teeth by. Which beginning
Early to practice, with some other rules,
Of never sleeping with the mouth open, chawing
Some grains of mastick, will preserve the breath
Trains his man whispers him.
Pure, and so free from taint -- ha'what is it? sai'st thou?

Tay. Good faith, it sounds a very pretty Business!

Eit. So Mr. Either-side says, madame.

Mer. The Lady is come.

Tay. Is she? Good, wait upon her in. My Ambler
Was never so ill absent. Either-side,
How do I look to day? Am I not dressed,
She looks in her glass.
Spruntly?

Fit. Yes, verily, madame.

Tay. Pox of madame,
Will you not leave that?

Eit. Yes good Tail-bush.

Tay. So?
Sounds not that better? What vile Fucus is this,
Thou have got on?

Eit. It Is Pearl.

Tay. Pearl? oister-shells:
As I breath, Either-side, I know it. Here comes
(They say) a wonder, sirrah, has been in Spain!
Will teach us all! she is sent to me, from Court.
To gratulate with me! Pr'y thee, let us observe her,
What faults she has, that we may laugh at 'hem,
When she is gone.

Eit. That we will heartily, Tail bush.

Tay. Wittipol enters.
O, me! the very Infanta of the Giants!

Act. IV. Scene. III.
Mere-craft. Wittipol. to them MER. Here is a noble Lady, madame, come,
Wittipol is dressed like a Spanish Lady.
From your great friends, at Court, to see your Ladi-ship:
And have the honor of your acquaintance.

Tay. Sir.
She does us honor.

Wit. Pray you, say to her Ladyship,
It is the manner of Spain, to embrace only,
Excuses him self for not kissing.
Never to kiss. She will excuse the custom!

Tay. Your use of it is law. Please you, sweet madame,
To take a seat.

Wit. Yes, madame, I'have had
The favor, through a world of fair report
To know your virtues, madame,; and in that
Name have deserved the happiness of presenting
My service to your Ladyship!

Tay. Your love, madame,
I must not own it else.

Wit. Both are due madame,
To your great undertakings.

Tay. Great? In troth, madame,
They are my friends, that think 'hem any thing:
If I can do my sex (by 'hem) any service,
I'have my ends, madame.

Wit. And they are noble ones,
That make a multitude beholden, madame:
The commonwealth of Ladies, must acknowledge from you.

Eit. Except some envious, madame.

Wit. Yo'are right in that, madame,
Of which race, I encountered some but lately.
Who ('t seems) have studied reasons to discredit
Your business.

Tay. How sweet madames?

Wit. Nay, the parties
W^'not be worth your p^use -- Most ruinous things, madame,
That have put off all hope of being recovered*
To a degree of handsomeness.

Tay. But their reasons, madame?
I would feign hear.

Wit. Some madame, I remember.
They say, that painting quite destroys the face --

Eit. O, that is an old one, madame.

Wit. There are new ones, too.
Corrupts the breath; has left so little sweetness
In kissing, as it is now used, but for fashion:
And shortly will be taken for a punishment.
Decaies the fore-teeth, that should guard the tongue;
And suffers that run riot everlasting!
And (which is worse) some Ladies when they meet
Cannot be merry, Manly begins to know him.
and laugh, but they do spit
In one another faces!

Man. I should know
This voice, and face too:

Wit. Then they say, it is dangerous
To all the fallen, yet well disposed Mad-dames,
That are industrious, and desire to earne
Their living with their sweat! For any distemper
Of heat, and motion, may displace the colors;
And if the paint once run about their faces,
Twenty to one, they will appear so ill-favored,
Their servants run away, too, and leave the pleasure
Imperfect, and the reckoning als'unpay'd.

Eit. Pox, these are Poets reasons.

Tay. Some old Lady
That keeps a Poet, has devised these scandals.

Eit. Faith we must have the Poets banished, madame,
As Master Either-side says.

Mer. Master Fitz-dottrell?
And his wife: where? madame, the Duke of Droun'd-land,
That will be shortly.

Wit. Is this my Lord?

Mer. The same.

Act. IV. Scene. IV.
Fitz-dottrell. Mistress Fitz-dottrell. Pug. to them. YOur servant, Wittipol
whispers with Man^ly.
madame!
Wit. How now? Friend? offended,
That I have found your haunt here?

Man. No but wondering
At your strange fashioned venture, hither.

Wit. It is
To show you what they are, you so pursue.

Man. I think 'twill prove a medicine against marriage;
To know their manners.

Wit. Stay, and profit then.

Mer. The Lady, madame, whose Prince has brought her here,
He presents Mistress Fitz-dottrell.
To be instructed.

Wit. Please you sit with us Lady.

Mer. That Is Lady-President.

Fit. A goodly woman!
I cannot see the ring, though.

Mer. Sir, she has it.

Tay. But madame, these are very feeble reasons!

Wit. So I urged madame, that the new complexion,
Now to come forth, in name o'your Ladishipes fucus,
Had no ingredient --

Tay. But I durst eat, I assure you.

Wit. So do they in Spain.

Tay. Sweet madame be so liberal,
To give us some o'your Spanish Fucuses!

Wit. They are infinite madame.

Tay. So I hear they have
Water of Gourdes, of Radish, the white Beans,
Flowers of Glass, of Thistles, Rose-marine.
Raw Honey, Mustard Seed, and bread dough-bak'd,
The crumbs o'bread, Goats milk, and whites of Eggs,
Campheere and Lilly-rootes, the fat of Swannes,
Marrow of Veale, white Pigeons, and pine- kernells,
The seed of Nettles, perse'line, and hares gall.
Limons, thine skind --

Eit. How, her Ladyship has studied
All excellent things!

Wit. But ordinary madame,
No, the true rarities are the Alvagada,
And Argentata of Queen Isabella!

Tay. I, what are their ingredients, gentle madame?

Wit. Your Alum Scagliola, or Pol^dipedra;
And Zuccarino; Turpentine of Abezzo,
Washed in nine waters: Soda di gotta;
Grosia di serpe; Porcelleto marin^;
Oils of Lentisco; Zucchi Mugia; make
The admirable Vernish for the face,
Gives the right luster; but two drops rubbed on
With a piece of scarlet, makes a Lady of sixty
Look at sixteen. But above all, the water
Of the white Hen, of the Lady Estifanias!

Tay. O I, that same good madame, I have heard of:
How is it done?

Wit. madame, you take your Hen,
Plume it, and skin it, cleanse it of the inwards:
Then chop it, bones and all: add to four ounces
Of Carrnuacins, Pipitas, Soap of Cyprus,
Make the decoction, strain it. Then distill it,
And keep it in your galley-pot well glidder'd:
Three drops preserves from wrinkles, warts, spots, moles,
^lemish, or Sun-burnings, and keeps the skin
In decimo sexto, ever bright, and smooth,
As any looking-glass; and indeed is called
The Virgins milk for the face, Ogl^oreale;
A Ceruse, neither cold or heat will hurt;
And mixed with oil of myrrh, and the red Gilli-flower
Called Cataputia; and flowers of Rovistico;
Makes the best muta* or die of the whole world.

Tay. Dear madame, will you let us be familiar?

Wit. Your Ladyships servant.

Mer. How do you like her.

Fit. Admirable!
But, He is jealous about his ring, and Mere-craft delivers it.
yet, I cannot see the ring.

Pug. Sir.

Mer. I must
Deliver it, or mar all. This fool^'s so jealous.
Madame -- Sir, wear this ring, and pray you take knowledge,
'Twas sent you by his wife. And give her thanks,
Do not you dwindle, Sir, bear up.

Pug. I thank you, Sir.

Tay. But for the manner of Spain! Sweet, madame, let us
Be bold, now we are in: Are all Ladies,
There, in the fashion?

Wit. None but Grandee's, madame.
Of The clasped train, which may be worn at length, too,
Or thus, upon my arm.

Tay. And do they wear
Cioppino's all?

Wit. If they be dressed in punto, madame.

Eit. Guilt as those are? madame?

Wit. Of Goldsmiths work, madame;
And set with diamants: and their Spanish pumps
Of perfumed leather.

Tay. I should think it hard
To go in 'hem, madame.

Wit. At the first, it is, madame.

Tai. Do you never fall in 'hem?

Wit. Never.

Eit. I swear, I should
Six times an hour.

Wit. But you have men at hand, still,
To help you, if you fall?

Eit. Only one, madame,
The Guardo duennas, such alittle old man,
As this.

Eit. Alas! he can do nothing! this!

Wit. I Will tell you, madame, I saw in the Court of Spain once,
A Lady fall in the Kings sight, along.
And there she lay, flat spread, as an Vmbrella,
Her hoope here cracked; no man durst reach a hand
To help her, till the Guarda duenn as came,
Who is the person one l'allowed to touch
A Lady there: and he but by this finger.

Eit. Ha'they no servants, madame, there* nor friends?

Wit. An Escudero, or so madame, that waits
Upon 'hem in another Coach, at distance,
And when they walk, or dance, holds by a hand-kercher,
Never presumes to touch 'hem.

Eit. This's scurvy!
And a forced gravity! I do not like it.
I like our own much better.

Tay. It Is more French,
And Courtly ours.

Eit. And tastes more liberty.
We may have our doozen of visiters, at once,
Make love t'us.

Tay. And before our husbands?

Eit. Husband?
As I am honest, Tayle-bush I do think
If no body should love me, but my poor husband,
I should e'n hang my self.

Tay. Fortune forbid, wench:
So fair a neck should have so foul a neck-lace,

Eit. It Is true, as I am handsome!

Wit. I received, Lady,
A token from you, which I would not be
Rude to refuse, being your first remembrance.

( Fit. O, I am satisfied now!

Mer. Do you see it, Sir.)

Wit. But since you come, to know me, nearer, Lady,
I Will beg the honor, you will wear it for me,
It must be so.

Mist. Fit. Surely I have heard this tongue.

Mer. What do you mean Sir?

Wit. Would you ha'me mercenary?
Wittipol gives it Mistress Fitzdottrell. Mere-craft murmures. He is
satisfied, now he sees it.
We'll recompense it anon, in somewhat else.

Fit. I do not love to be gulled, though in a toy.
Wife, do you hear? yo'are come in the school, wife,
Where you may learn, I do perceive it, any thing!
How to be fine, or fair, or great, or proud,
Or what you will, indeed, wife; here it is taught.
And I am glad on it, that you may not say,
Another day, when honors come upon you,
You wanted means. I ha'done my parts: been,
He upbraids her with his Bill of costs.
To day at fifty pound charge, first, for a ring,
To get you entered. Then let my new Play*
To wait upon you, here, to see it confirmed.
That I may say, both to mine own eyes, and ears,
Senses, you are my witness, sha'hath enjoyed
All helps that could be had for love or money --

Mrs. Fit. To make a fool of her.

Fit. Wife, that is your malice,
The wickedness o'your nature to interpret
Your husbands kindness thus. But I Will not leave;
Still to do good for your depraved affections:
Intend it. Bend this stubborn will; be great.

Tay. Good Madame, whom do they use in messages?

Wit. They commonly use their slaves Madam.

Tai. And does your Ladyship.
Think that so good, Madame?

Wit. No indeed Madame; I,
Therein prefer the fashion of England far,
Of your young delicate Page, or discreet Usher.

Fit. And I go with your Ladyship in opinion,
Directly for your Gentleman Usher,
There Is not a finer Officer goes on ground.

Wit. If he be made and broken to his place once.

Fit. Nay so I presuppose him.

Wit. And they are fitter
Managers too Sir, but I would have 'hem called
Our Escudero's.

Fit. Good.

Wit. Say I should send
To your Ladyship, who (I presume) has gathered
All the dear secrets to know how to make
Pastillos of the Duchess of Braganza,
Coquettas, Almoiavana's, Mantecada's,
Alcoreas, Mustaccioli; or say it were
The Peladore of Isabella, or balls
Against the itch, or aqua nanfa, or oil
Of Iessamine for gloves, of the Marquess Muja;
Or for the head and hair: why, these are offices.

Fit. Fit for a gentleman, not a slave. They only
Might ask for your pivety, Spanish-cole,
To burn and sweeten a room: but the Arcana
He enters himself with the Ladies.
Of Ladies Cabinets --

Fit. Should be elsewhere trusted.
Yo'are much about the truth. Sweet honored Ladies,
Let me fall in wi'you. I have my female wit,
As well as my male. And I do know what suits
A Lady of spirit, or a woman of fashion!

Wit. And you would have your wife such.

Fit. Yes, madame, aerie,
Light; not to plain dishonesty, I mean:
But, somewhat of this side.

Wit. I take you, Sir.
H'has reason Ladies. I Will not give this rush
For any Lady, that cannot be honest
Within a thread.

Tay. Yes, madame, and yet venture
As far for the other, in her Fame --

Wit. As can be;
Coach it to Pimlico; dance the Saraband,
Hear, and talk baudy; laugh as loud, as a larum;
Squeake, spring, do any thing.

Eit. In young company, madame.

Tay. Or before gallants. If they be brave, or Lords,
A woman is engaged.

Eit. I say so, Ladies,
It is civility to deny us nothing.

Pug. You talk of a University! why, Hell is
A Grammer-schoole to this!

Eit. But then, The Devil admires him.

She must not lose a look on stuffes, or cloth, madame.

Tay. Nor no course fellow.

Wit. She must be guided, madame
By the clothes he wears, and company he is in;
Whom to salute, how far --

Fit. I ha'told her this.
And how that baudery too, upo'the point,
Is (in it self) as civell a discourse --

Wit. As any other affair of flesh, what ever.

Fit. But she will never be capable, she is not
So much as coming, madame; I know not how
She loses all her opportunities
With hoping to be forced. He shows his Pug.
I'have entertained
A gentleman, a younger brother, here,
Whom I would feign breed up, her Escudero,
Against some expectation's that I have,
And she will not countenance him.

Wit. What Is his name?

Fit. Devil, of Darby-shire.

Eit. Bless us from him!

Tay. Devil?
Call him De-vile, sweet madame.

Mis Fit. What you please, Ladies.

Tay. De-vile's a prettier name!

Eit. And sounds, me thinks,
As it came in with the Conqueronr --

Man. Over smocks!
What things they are? That nature should be at leisure
Ever to make 'hem! Manly goes out with indignation.
my woing is at an end.

Wit. What can he do?

Eit. Lets hear him.

Tay. Can he manage?

Fit. Please you to try him, Ladies. Stand forth, Devil.

Pug. Was all this but the preface to my torment?

Fit. Come, let their Ladyship see your honors.

Eit. O,
He makes a wicked leg.

Tay. As ever I saw!

Wit. Fit for a Devil.

Tay. Good madame, call him De-vile.

Wit. De-vile, what property is there most required
In Your conceit, now, in the Escudero?

Fit. Why do you not speak?

Pug. A settled discreet pause, They begin their Catechism.
madame.

Wit. I think, a barren head, Sir, Mountaine-like,
To be exposed to the cruelty of weathers --

Fit. I, for his Valley is beneath the waste, madame,
And to be fruitful there, it is sufficient.
Dullness upon you! Could not you hit this?

Pug. Good Sir --

Wit. He then had had no barren head.
He strikes him.
You daw him too much, in troth, Sir.

Fit. I must walk
With the French stick, like an old vierger, for you.

Pug. The Devil prays.
O, Chief, call me to Hell again, and free me.

Fit. Do you murmur now?

Pug. Not I, Sir.

Wit. What do you take
Mr. Divele, the height of your employment,
In the true perfect Escudero?

Fit. When?
What do you answer?

Pug. To be able, madame,
First to enquire, then report the working,
Of any Ladies physic, in sweet phrase,

Wit. Yes, that is an act of elegance, and importance.
But what above?

Fit. O, that I had a goad for him.

Pug. To find out a good Corne-cutter.

Tay. Out on him!

Eit. Most barbarous!

Fit. Why did you do this, now?
Of purpose to discredit me? you damned Devil.

Pug. Sure, if I be not yet, I shall be. All
My days in Hell, were holy days to this!

Tay. It Is labor lost, madame?

Eit. H'is a dull fellow
Of no capacity!

Tay. Of no discourse!
O, if my Ambler had been here!

Eit. I, madame;
You talk of a man, where is there such another?

Wit. Mr. Devile, put case, one of my Ladies, here,
Had a fine brach: and would employ you forth
To treat 'bout a convenient match for her.
What would you observe?

Pug. The color, and the size, madame.

Wit. And nothing else?

Fit. The Moon, you calfe, the Moon!

Wit. I, and the Sign.

Tay. Yes, and receipts for pronenesse.

Wit. Then when the Puppies came, what would you do?

Pug. Get their nativities cast!

Wit. This's well. What more?

Pug. Consult the Almanack-man which would be least?
Which cleaneliest?

Wit. And which silentest? This's well, madame?

Wit. And while she were with puppy?

Pug. Walk her out,
And air her every morning!

Wit. Very good!
And be industrious to kill her fleas?

Pug. Yes!

Wit. He will make a pretty proficient.

Pug. Who,
Coming from Hell, could look for such Catechizing?
The Devil is an Ass. I do acknowledge it.

Fit. Fitz-dottrel amires Wittipol.
The top of woman! All her sex in abstract!
I love her, to each syllable, falls from her.

Tay. Good madame give me leave to go aside with him!
And try him a little!

Wit. Do, and I Will withdraw, madame,
The Devil prays again.
With this fair Lady: read to her the while.

Tay. Come, Sir.

Pug. Dear Chief, relieve me, or I perish.

Wit. Lady, we'll follow. You are not jealous Sir?

Fit. O, madame! you shall see. Stay wife, behold,
He gives his wife to him, taking him to be a Lady.
I give her up here, absolvtely, to you,
She is your own. Do with her what yo will!
Melt, cast, and form her as you shall think good!
Set any sttamp on! I Will receive her from you
As a new thing, by your own standard!

Wit. Well, Sir!

Act. IV. Scene. III.
Mere-craft. Fitz-dottrell. Pit-fall Ever-ill. Plutarchus. BUt what ha'you done
in your Dependence, since?
Fit. O, it goes on, I met your Cousin, the Master --

Mer. You did not acquaint him, Sir?

Fit. Faith, but I did, Sir.
And upon better thought, not without reason!
He being chief Officer, might ha'taine it ill, else,
As a Contempt against his Place, and that
In time Sir, ha'drawne on another Dependence.
No, I did find him in good terms, and ready
To do me any service.

Mer. So he said to you?
But Sir, you do not know him.

Fit. Why, I presumed
Because this business of my wives, required me,
I could not ha'done better: And he told
Me, that he would go presently to your Council,
A Knight, here, in the Lane --

Mer. Yes, Justice Either-side.

Fit. And get the Feoffment drawn, with a letter of Attorney.
For livery and seisen!

Mer. That I knowe's the course.
But, Sir, you mean not to make him Feoffee?

Fit. Nay, that I Will pause on!

Mer. How now little Pit-fall?

Pit. Your Cousin Mr. Ever-ill, would come in --
But he would know if Master Manly were here.

Mer. No, Mere-craft whispers against him.
tell him, if he were, I ha'made his peace!
He Is one, Sir, has no state, and a man knows not,
How such a trust may tempt him.

Fit: I conceive you.

Eve. Sir, this same deed is done here.

Mer. Pretty Plutarchus?
Art thou come with it? and has Sir Paul viewed it?

Plu. His hand is to the draught.

Mer. Will you step in, Sir,
And read it?

Fit. Yes.

Eve. I pray you a word wi'you, Everil whispers against Mere-craft.

Sir Paul Either-side willed me give you caution
Whom you did make Feoffee: for it is the trust
O'your whole State: and though my Cousin here
Be a worthy Gentleman, yet his valor has
At the tall board bin questioned; and we hold
Any man so impeached of doubtful honesty!
I will not justify this; but give it you
To make your profit of it: if you utter it,
I can forswere it!

Fit. I believe you, and thank you, Sir.

Act. IV. Scene. VI.
Wittipol. Mistress Fitz-dottrel. Manly. Mere-craft. BE not afraid, sweet
Lady: yo'are trusted
To love, not violence here; I am no ravisher,
But one, whom you, by your fair trust again,
May of a servant make a most true friend.
Mis. Fit. And such a one I need, but not this way:
Sir, I confess me to you, the mere manner
Of your attempting me, this morning took me,
And I did hold m'invention, and my manners,
Were both engaged, to give it a requital;
But not unto your ends: my hope was then,
(Though interrupted, ere it could be uttered)
That whom I found the Master of such language,
That brain and spirit, for such an enterprise,
Could not but if those succors were demanded
To a right use, employ them virtuously!
And make that profit of his noble parts,
Which they would yield. Sir, you have now the ground,
To exercise them in: I am a woman,
That cannot speak more wretchedness of my self,
Then you can read; marched to a mass of folly;
That every day makes haste to his own ruin;
The wealthy portion, that I brought him, spent;
And (through my friends neglect) no jointure made me.
My fortunes standing in this precipice,
It Is Counsel that I want, and honest aides:
And in this name, I need you, for a friend!
Never in any other; for his ill,
Must not make me, Sir, worse.

Man. O friend! forsake not
Manly, concealed this while, shows himself.
The brave occasion, virtue offers you,
To keep you innocent: I have feared for both;
And watched you to prevent the ill I feared.
But since the weaker side has so assured me,
Let not the stronger fall by his own vice,
Or be the less a friend, cause virtue needs him.

Wit. Virtue shall never ask my succors twice;
Most friend, most man; your Counsels are commands:
Lady, I can love goodness in you, more
Then I did Beauty; and do here entitle
Your virtue to the power, upon a life
Meere^craft taks Wittipol aside, and meves a project for himself.
You shall engage in any faithful service,
Even to forfeit.

Mer. Madame: Do you hear, Sir,
We have another leg-strain'd, for this Dottrel.
He'ha's a quarrel to carry, and has caused
A deed of Feoffment, of his whole estate
To be drawn yonder; ^a'st within: And you,
Only, he means to make Feoffee. H'is fallen
So desperately enamored on you, and talks
Most like a madman: you did never hear
A Phrentick, so in love with his own favor!
Now, you do know, it is of no validity
In your name, as you stand; Therefore advise him
To put in me. (h'is come here:) You shall share Sir.

Act. IV. Scene. VII.
Wittipoll. Mistress Fitz-doftrell. Manly. Meere-craft. Fitz-dottrell.
Ever-ill. Plutarchus. FIT. Madame, I have a suit to you; and a fore-hand,
I do bespeake you; you must not deny me,
I will be granted.

Wit. Sir, I must know it, though.

Fit. No Lady; you must not know it: yet, you must too.
For the trust of it, and the fame indeed,
Which else were lost me. I would use your name,
But in a Feoffment: make my whole estate
Over unto you: a trifle a thing of nothing,
Some eighteen hundred.

Wit. Alas! I understand not
Those things Sir. I am a woman, and most loath,
To embarque my self --

Fit. You will not slight me, madame?

Wit. Nor you will not quarrel me?

Fit. No, sweet madame, I have
Already a dependence; for which cause
I do this: let me put you in, dear madame,
I may be fairly killed. He hopes to be the man.


Wit. You have your friends, Sir,
About you here, for choice.

Eve. She tells you right, Sir.

Fit. Death, if she do, what do I care for that?
Say, I would have her tell me wrong.

Wit. Why, Sir,
If for the trust, you will let me have the honor
To name you one.

Fit. Nay, you do me honor, madame:
Who is it?

Wit. This Gentleman.

Fit. O, no, sweet madame,
H'is friend to him, with whom I ha'the dependence. She design* Manly.


Wit. O, might he be?

Fit. One Wittipol: do you know him?

Wit. Alas Sir, he, a toy: This Gentleman
A friend to him, no more then I am Sir!

Fit. But will your Ladyship undertake that, madame?

Wit. Yes, and what else, for him, you will engage me.

Fit. What is his name?

Wit. His name is Eustace Manly.

Fit. Whence does he write himself?

Wit. Of Middle-sex,
Esquire.

Fit. Say nothing, madame. Clerk, come hither,
Write Eustace Manly, Squire of Middle-sex.

Mer. What ha'you done, Sir?

Wit. Named a gentleman,
That I Will be answerable for, to you, Sir.
Had I named you, it might ha'beene suspected:
This way, it is safe.

Fit. Come Gentlemen, your hands,
Everil applaudes it.
For witness.

Man. What is this?

Eve. You ha'made Election
Of a most worthy Gentleman!

Man. Would one of worth
Had spoke it: whence it comes, it is
Rather a shame to me, then a praise.

Eve. Sir, I will give you any Satisfaction.

Man. Be silent then: "falsehood commends not truth.

Plu. You do deliver this, Sir, as your deed,
To the use of Mr. Manly?

Fit. Yes: and Sir --
When did you see young Wittipol? I am ready,
For process now; Sir, this is Publication.
He shall hear from me, he would needs be courting
Ny Wife, S^r.

Man. Yes: So witnesses his Cloak there.

Fit. Fitz-dottrel is suspicious of Manly still.
Nay good Sir, -- Madame, you did undertake --

What. What?

Fit. That he was not Wittipols friend.

Wit. I hear
Sir, no confession of it.

Fit. O she knows not;
Now I remember, madame! This young Wittipol,
Would have debauched my wife, and made me Cuckold,
Through a casement; he did fly her home
To mine own window: but I think I sou't him,
And ravished her away, out of his pownces.
I have sworn to have him by the ears: I fear
The toy, wi' not do me right.

Wit. No? that were pity!
What right do you ask, Sir? Here he is will do it you?

Fit. Wittipol discovers himself.
Ha? Wittipol?

Wit. I Sir, no more Lady now,
Nor Spaniard!

Man. No indeed, it is Wittipol.

Fit. Am I the thing I feard'd?

Wit. A Cuckold? No Sir,
But you were late in possibility,
I Will tell you so much.

Man. But your wife's too virtuous!

Wit. We Will see her Sir, at home, and leave you here,
To be made Duke o'Shore-ditch with a project.

Fit. Thieves, ravishers.

Wit. Cry but another note, Sir,
He would have his deed again.
I Will mar the tune, o'your pipe!

Fit. Gi'me my deed, then.

Wit. Neither: that shall be kept for your wives goood,
Who will know, better how to use it.

Fit. Have
To feast with my land?

Wit. Sir, be you quiet,
Or I shall gag you, ere I go, consult
You Master of dependances; how to make this
A second business, you have time Sir.

Fit. Oh!
What will the ghost of my wise Grandfather,
Wittipol baffles him, and goes out.
My learned Father, with my worshipful Mother
Think of me now, that left me in this world
In state to be their Heir? that am become
A Cuckold, and an Ass, and my wives Ward;
Likely to lose my land; ha'my throat cut:
All, by her practice!

Mer. Sir, we are all abused!

Fit. And be so still! Who hinders you, I pray you,
Let me alone, I would enjoy my self,
And be the Duke o'Dround'd-Land, you have made me.

Mer. Sir, we must play an after-game of this

Fit. But I am not in case to be a Gam-ster:
I tell you once again --

Mer. You must be ruled
And take some counsel.

Fit. Sir, I do hate counsel,
As I do hate my wife, my wicked wife!

Mer. But we may think how to recover all:
If you will act.

Fit. I will not think; nor act;
Nor yet recover; do not talk to me?
I Will run out of my wits, rather then hear;
I will be what I am, Fabian Fitz dottrel,
Though all the world say nay to it.

Mer. Let Us follow him.

Act. V. Scene. I.
Ambler. Pitfall, Mere-craft, BUt has my Lady mist me?
Pit. Beyond tell^ng!
Here has been that infinity of strangers!
And then she would ha'had you, to ha'sampled you
With, one within, that they are now a teaching;
And does pretend to your rank.

Amb. Good fellow Pit-fall
Tell Mr. Meer-craft, I entreat a word with him.
This most unlucky accident will go near Pitfall goes out.

To be the loss of my place; I am indoubt!

Mer. With me? what say you Mr. Ambler?

Amb. Sir,
I would beseech your worship stand between
Me, and my Ladies displeasure, for my absence.

Mer. O, is this all? I warrant you.

Amb. I would tell you Sir
But how it happnened.

Mer. Brief, good Mr. Ambler,
Put your self to your rack: Meere-cr^^^ seems fu^^^ of busine^^
for I have a tasque
Of more importance.

Amb. Sir you will laugh at me!
But (so is Truth) a very friend of mine,
Finding by conference with me, that I lived
Too chaste for my complexion (and indeed
Too honest for my place, Sir) did advise me
If I did love my self (as that I do,
I must confess)

Mer. Spare your Parenthesis,

Amb. To gi' my body a little evacuation --

Mer. Well, and you went to a whore?

Amb. No, Sir. I durst not
(For fear it might arive at some body's ear,
It should not) trust my self to a common house; Ambler^ this wit^
extraor^^nary spe^^

But got the Gentlewoman to go with me,
And carry her bedding to a Conduit-head,
Hard by the place toward Tiburne, which they call
My L. Majors Banqueting House. Now, Sir, This morning
Was Execution; and I ne'e dreamed on it,
Till I heard the noise of the people, and the horses;
And neither I, nor the poor Gentlewoman
Durst stir, till all was done and past: so that
H^ stags
In The Interim, we fell a sleep again.

Mer. Nay, if you fall, from your gallop, I am gone Sir.

Amb. But when I waked, to put on my clothes, a suit,
I made new for the action, it was gone,
And all my money, with my purse, and seals,
My hard-wax, and my table-books, my studies,
And a fine new devise, I had to carry
My pen, and ink, my civet, and my tooth-picks,
All under one. But, that which greiv'd me, was
The Gentlewomans shoes (with a pair of roses,
And garters, I had given her for the business)
So as that made us stay, till it was dark.
For I was feign to lend her mine, and walk
In a rug, by her, bare foot, to Saint Giles'es.

Mer. A kind of Irish penance! Is this all, Sir?

Amb. To satisfy my Lady.

Mer. I will promise you, Sir.

Amb. I ha'told the true Disaster.

Mer. I cannot stay wi'you
Sir, to condole; but gratulate your return.

Amb. An honest gentleman, but he is never at leisure
To be himself: He has such tides of business.

Act. V. Scene. II.
Pug. Ambler. O, Call me home again, dear Chief, and put me
To yoaking foxes, milking of Hee-goates,
Pounding of water in a mortar, laving
The sea dry with a nut-shell, gathering all
The leaves are fallen this Autumn, drawing farts
Out of dead bodies, making ropes of sand,
Catching the winds together in a net,
Mustring of ants, and numbering atoms; all
That hell, and you thought exquisite torments, rather
Then stay me here, a thought more: I would sooner
Keep fleas within a circle, and be accomptant
A thousand year, which of'hem and how far
Out leaped the other, then endure a minute
Such as I have within. There is no hell
To a Lady of fashion. All your tortures there
Are pastimes to it. 'Twould be a refreshing
^mbler ^omes in, and ^^^vaies (...).
For me, to be in the fire again, from hence.
Amb. This is my suite, and those the shoes and roses!

Pug. They Have such impertinent vexations,
A general Council of devils could not hit --
Ha! This is he I took a sleep with his Wench,
And borrowed his clothes. What might I do to balke him?

Amb. Do you hear, Sir?

Pug. Answer but not to th'purpose.

Amb. What is your name, He answers quite from the purpose.
I pray you Sir.

Pug. Is It so late Sir?

Amb. I ask not of the time, but of your name, Sir.

Pug. I thank you, Sir. Yes it dos hold Sir, certain.

Amb. Hold, Sir? What holds? I must both hold, and talk to you
About these clothes.

Pug. A very pretty lace!
But the Tailor cossend me.

Amb. No, I am cossend
By you! robbed.

Pug. Why, when you please Sir, I am
For three penny Gleeke, your man.

Amb. Pox of your gleeke,
And three pence. Give me an answer.

Pug. Sir,
My master is the best at it.

Amb. Your master!
Who is your Master.

Pug. Let it be friday night.

Amb. What should be then?

Pug. Your best songs Tom of Bet'lem

Amb. I think, you are he. Does he mock me trow, from purpose?
Or do not I speak to him, what I mean?
Good Sir your name.

Pug. Only a couple a' Cocks Sir,
If we can get a Widgin, it is in season.

Amb. He hopes to make one o'these Scipticks of me For Scepticks.

(I think I name'him right) and does not fly me.
I wonder at that! it is a strange confidence!
I Will prove another way, to draw his answer.

Act. V. Scene. III.
Mere-craft. Fitz-dottrell. Everill. Pug. IT is the easiest thing Sir, to be
done.
As plain, as fizzling: roll but wi'your eyes,
And foame at th'mouth. A little castle-soape
Will do it, to rub your lips: And then a nutshell,
With toe, and touch-wood in it to spit fire,
Did you never read, Sir, little Darrels tricks,
With the boy of Burton, and the 7 in Lancashire,
Summers at Nottingham? All these do teach it.
And we will give out, They repai^ their old plot.
Sir, that your wife has bewitched you:
Eve. And practiced with those two, as Sorcerers.

Mer. And ga'you potions, by which means you were
Not Compos mentis, when you made your feoffment.
There Is no recovery o'your estate, but this:
This, Sir, will sting.

Eve. And move in a court of equity.

Mer. For it is more then manifest, that this was
A plot o'your wives, to get your land.

Fit. I think it.

Eve. Sir it appears.

Mer. Nay and my cossen has known
These gallants in these shapes.

Eve. To Have done strange things, Sir.
One as the Lady, the other as the Squire.

Mer. How, a man's honesty may be fooled! I thought him
A very Lady.

Fit. So dd I: renounce me else.

Mer. But this way, Sir you will be revenged at height.

Eve. Upon 'hem all.

Mer. Yes faith, and since your Wife
Has run the way of woman thus, even give her --

Fit. Lost by this hand, to me; dead to all joys
Of her dear Dottrell, I shall never pity her:
That could, pity her self.

Mer. Princly resolved Sir,
And like your self still, in Potentia.

Act. V. Scene. IV.
Mere-craft, etc. to them. Gvilt-head. Sledge. Plutarchus. Serjants. Fitz
dottrel asks for his money.
GVilt-head what news?
Fit. O Sir, my hundred pieces:
Let me ha'them yet.

Gui. Yes Sir, officers
Arrest him.

Fit. Me?

Ser. I arrest you.

Sle. Keep the peace,
I charge you gentlemen.

Fit. Arrest me? Why?

Gui. For better security, Sir. My son Plutarchus
Assures me, you are not worth a groat.

Plu. Pardon me, Father,
I said his worship had no foot of Land left:
And that I Will justify, for I writ the deed.

Fit. Ha'you these tricks in the city?

Gui. Yes, and more.
Meaning Mere-raft.
Arrest this gallant too, here, at my suit.

Sle. I, and at mine. He owes me for his lodging
Two year and a quarter.

Mer. Why M. ^uilt-head, Landlord,
Thou art not mad, though thou art Constable
Puffed up with the pride of the place? Do you hear, Sirs.
Have I deserved this from you two? for all
My pains at Court, to get you each a patent.

Gui. The Project of ^orks.
For what?

Mer. Upo' my project of the forkes.

Sle. Forkes? what be they?

Mer. The laudable use of forkes,
Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
To th'sparing of Napkins. That, that should have made
Your bellows go at the forge, as his at the furnace.
I ha'procured it, ha'the Signet for it,
Dealt with the Linnen-drapers, on my private,
By cause, I feared, they were the likeliest ever
To stir against, to cross it: for 'twill be
A mighty saver of Linen through the Kingdom
(As that is one of my grounds, and so spare washing)
Now, on you two, had I laid all the profits.
Guilt-head to have the making of all those
Of gould and silver, for the better personages;
And you of those of Steel for the common sort.
And both by Pattent, I had brought you your seals in.
Sledge is brought about.
But now you have prevented me, and I thank you.

Sle. Sir, I will bail you, at my own ap-perill.

Mer. And Guilt-head comes.
Nay choose.

Plu. Do you so too, good Father.

Gui. I like the fashin of the project, well,
The forkes! It may be a lucky one! and is not
Intricate, as one would say, but fit for
Plain heads, as ours, to deal in. Do you hear.
Officers, we discharge you.

Mer. Why this shows
A little good nature in you, I confess,
But do not tempt your friends thus. Little Guilt-head,
Advise your fire, great Guilt-head from these courses:
And, here, to trouble a great man in reversion,
For a matter o'fifty on a false Alarm,
Away, it shows not well. Let him get the pieces
And bring 'hem. Yo'll hear more else.

Plu. Father.

Act. V. Scene. V.
Ambler. To them. O Master Sledge, are you here? I ha'been to seek you.
You are the Constable, they say. Here Is one
That I do charge with Felony, for the suite
He wears, Sir.

Mer. Who? M. Fitz-dottrels man?
Ware what you do, M. Ambler.

Amb. Sir, these clothes
I Will swear, are mine: and the shoes the gentlewomans
I told you of: and ha'him before a Justice,
I will.

Pug. My master, Sir, will pass his word for me.

Amb. O, Fitz-dottrel disclaimes him.
can you speak to purpose now?

Fit. Not I,
If you be such a one Sir, I will leave you
To your Godfathers in Law. Let twelve men work.

Pug. Do you hear Sir, pray, in private.

Fit. Well, what say you?
Brief, for I have no time to loose.

Pug. Truth is, Sir,
I am the very Devil, and had leave
To take this body, I am in, to serve you:
Which was a Cutpurses, and hanged this Morning.
And it is likewise true, I stole this suite
To cloth me with. But Sir let me not go
To prison for it. I have hitherto
Lost time, done nothing; shown, indeed, no part.
Of My Devils nature. Now, I will so help
Your malice, against these parties: so advance
The business, that you have in hand of witchcraft,
And your possession, as my self were in you.
Teach you such tricks, to make your belly swell,
And your eyes turn, to foame, to stare, to gnash
Your teeth together, and to beat your self,
Laugh loud, and feign six voices --

Fit. Out you Rogue!
You most infernal counterfeit wretch! Avaunt!
Do you think to gull me with your AEsops Fables?
Here take him to you, I ha'no part in him.

Pug. Sir.

Fit. Away, And sends him away.
I do disclaim, I will not hear you.

Mer. What said he to you, Sir?

Fit. Like a lying rascal
Told me he was the Devil.

Mer. How! a good jest!

Fit. And that he would teach me, such fine devils tricks
For our new resolution.

Eve. O'pox on him,
'Twas excellent wisely done, Sir, not to trust him.

Mer. Mere-craft gives the instructions to him and the rest.
Why, if he were the Devil, we shall not need him,
If you will be ruled. Go throw your self on a bed, Sir,
And feign you ill. We^'ll not be seen wi'you,
Till after, that you have a fit: and all
Confirmed within. Keep you with the two Ladies
And persuade them. I Will to Justice Either-side,
And possess him with all. Trains shall seek out Ingine,
And they to fill the town with'^, every cable
It is to be veer'd. We must employ out all
Our emissaries now; Sir, I will send you
Bladders and Bellows. Sir, be confident,
It Is no hard thing t'out do the Devil in:
A Boy o'thirteen year old made him an Ass
But t'toher day.

Fit. Well, I Will begin to practice,
And escape the imputation of being Cuckold,
By mine own act.

Mer. Yo'are right.

Eve. Come, you ha'put
Your self to a simpe coile here, and your friends,
By dealing with new Agents, in new plots.

Mer. No more o'that, sweet cousin.

Eve. What had you
To do with this same Wittipol, for a Lady?

Mer. Question not that: it is done.

Eve. You had some strain
'Bove E-la?

Mer. I had indeed.

Eve. And, now, you crack fort.

Mer. Do not upbraid me.

Eve. Come, you must be told on it;
You are so covetous, still, to embrace
More then you can, that you loose all.

Mer. It Is right.
What would you more, then Guilty? Now, your succors.

Act. V. Scene. VI.
Shakles. Pug. Iniquity. Devil. HEre you are lodged, Sir, you must send your
garnish,
If you will be private.
Pug. There it is, Sir, leave me.
Pug is brought to Newgate.
To Newgate, brought? How is the name of Devil
Discredited in me! What a lost fiend
Shall I be, on return? My Chief will roar
In triumph, now, that I have been on earth,
A day, and done no noted thing, but brought
That body back here, was hanged out this morning.
Enter Iniquity the Vice.
Well! would it once were midnight, that I knew
My utmost. I think Time be drunk, and sleeps:
He is so still, and moves not! I do glory
Now i'my torment. Neither can I expect it,
I have it with my fact.

Ini. Child of hell, be thou merry*
Put a look on, as round, boy, and red as a cherry.
Cast care at thy posternes; and firke in thy fetters,
They are ornaments, Baby, have graced thy betters*
Look upon me, and hearken. Our Chief does salute thee,
And least the could iron should chance to confu^e thee,
H'hath sent thee, grant-paroll by me to stay longer
A month here on earth, against cold Child, or honger

Pug. How? longer here a month?

Ini. Yes, boy, till the Session,
That so thou may have a triumphall egression.

Pug. In a cart, to be hanged.

Ini. No, Child, in a Ca^te,
The chariot of Triumph, which most of them are.
And in the mean time, to be greazy, and bouzy,
And nasty, and filthy, and ragged and louzy,
With dam'n me, renounce me, and all the fine phrases;
That bring, unto Tiborne, the plentiful gazes.

Pug. He is a Devil! and may be our Chief!
The great superior Devil! for his malice:
Arch-divel! I acknowledge him. He knew
What I would suffer, when he tie'd me up thus
In a rogues body: and he has (I thank him)
His tirannous pleasure on me, to confine me
To the unlucky carcass of a Cutpurse
Wherein I could do nothing.

Div. Impudent fiend,
Stop thy lewd mouth. The great Devil enters, and upbraids him with all his
days work.
Do thou not shame and tremble
To lay thine own dull damned defects upon
An innocent case, there? Why thou heavy slave!
The spirit, that did possess that flesh before
Put more true life, in a finger, and a thumb.
Then thou in the whole Mass. Yet thou rebell'st
And murmurst? What one proffer have thou made,
Wicked enough, this day, that might be called
Worthy thine own, much less the name that sent thee?
First, thou did help thy self into a beating
Promptly, and with it endangerdd'st too thy tongue:
A Devil, and could not keep a body entire
One day! That, for our credit. And to vindicate it,
H^nderd'st (for ought thou know) a deed of darkness:
Which was an act of that egregious folly,
As no one, to'ard the Devil, could ha'thought on.
This for your acting! but for suffering! why
Thou have been cheated on, with a false beard,
And a turned cloak. Faith would your predecessor
The Cutpurse, think you, have been so? Out upon thee,
The hurt thou have don, to let men know their strength,
And that they are able to out-doe a devil
Put in a body, will for ever be
A scarre upon our Name! whom have thou dealt with,
Woman or man, this day, but have out-gone thee
Some way, and most have proved the better fiends?
Yet, you would be employed* Yes, hell shall make you
Provincial of the heaters! or Baud-ledger,
For this side of the town! No doubt you will render
A rare account of things. Bane o'your itch,
And scratching for imployme^t. I Will ha'brimstone
To allay it sure, and fire to singe your nails off,
But, that I would not such a damned dishonor
Stick on our state, as that the devil were hanged;
And could not save a body, that he took
Iniquity takes him on his back.
From Tiborne, but it must come thither again:
You should even ride. But up away with him --

Ini. Mount, dearling of darkness, my shoulders are broad:
He that caries the fiend, is sure of his load.
The Devil was wont to carry away the evil;
But, now, the Evil out-carries the Devil.

Act. V. Scene. VII.
Shackles. Keepers. A great noise is heard in Newgate, and the Keepers come out
affrighted.
O me!
Kee. 1. What Is this?

2. A piece of Justice Hall
Is broken down.

3. Fough! what a steeme of brimstone
Is here?

4. The prisoner's dead, came in but now!

Sha. Ha? where?

4. Look here.

Kee. S'lid I should know his countenance!
It is Gil-Cut-purse, was hanged out, this morning!

Sha. It Is he!

2. The Devil, sure, has a hand in this!

3. What shall we do?

Sha. Carry the news of it
Unto the Sherifes.

1. And to the Justices.

4. This strange!

3. And savours of the Devil, strongly!

2. IN have the sulphur of Hell-coale i'my nose.

1. Fough.

Sha. Carry him in.

1. Away.

2. How rank it is!

Act. V. Scene. VIII.
Sir Poule. Meere-craft. Ever-ill. Trains. Pitfall. Fitz-dottrell. to them.
Wittipoll. Manly. Mistress Fitz-dottrell. Ingine. to them Guilt-head. Sledge.
to them. Shackles. The Justice comes out wondering and the rest informing him.
THis was the notablest Conspiracy,
That ere I heard of.
Mer. Sir, they had given him potions,
That did enamour him on the counterfeit Lady --

Eve.. Just to the time o'delivery of the deed --

Mer. And then the witchcraft 'gan't'appeare, for straight
He fell into his fit.

Eve. Of rage at first, Sir,
Which since has so increased.

Tay. Good Sir Poule, see him,
And punish the impostors.

Pou. Therefore I come, madame.

Eit. Let M. Eitherside alone, madame.

Pou. Do you hear?
Call in the Constable, I will have him by:
H'is the Kings Officer! and some Citizens,
Of creadit! I Will discharge my conscience clearly.

Mer. Yes, Sir, and send for his wife.

Eve. And the two Sorcerers,
By any means!

Tay. I thought one a true Lady,
I should be sworn. So did you, Either-side?

Eit. Yes, by that light, would I might never stir else, Tailbush.

Tay. And the other a civil Gentleman.

Eve. But, madam,
You know what I told your Ladyship.

Tay. I now see it:
I was providing of a banquet for 'hem
After I had done instructing of the fellow
De-vile, the Gentleman's man.

Mer. Who Is found a thief, madam.
And to have robbed your Usher, Master Ambler
This morning.

Tay. How?

Mer. I Will tell you more, anon.

Fit. Gi'me some garlic, garlic, garlic, garlic.

Mer. Hark the poor Gentleman, He begins his fit.
how he is tormented!

Fit. My wife is a whore, I Will kiss her no more: and why?
Ma'st not thou be a Cuckold as well as I?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.

Pou. That is the Devil speaks, and laughes in him.

Mer. Do you think so Sir.

Pou. I discharge my conscience. The Iustic^ interpret all


Fit. And is not the Devil good company? Yes, wis.

Eve. How he changes, Sir, his voice!

Fit. And a Cuckold is
Where ere he put his head, with a Wanion,
If his horns be forth, the Devils companion!
Look, look, look, else.

Mer. How he fomes!

Eve. And swells!

Tay. O, me! what is that there, rises in his belly!

Eit. A strange thing! hold it down:

Tra. Pit. We cannot, madame.

Pou. It Is too apparent this!

Fit. Wittipol, Wittipol, and Manly and Mistr-Fitz-dottre enter.
Wittipol.

Wit. How now, what play ha'we here.

Man. What fine new, matters?

Wit. The Cockscombe, and the Coverlet.

Mer. O strange impudence!
That these should come to face their sin!

Eve. And ou^-face
Justice, they are the parties, Sir.

Pou. Say nothing.

Mer. Did you mark, Sir, upon their coming in,
How he called Wittipol.

Eve. And never saw 'hem.

Pou. I warrant you did I, let 'hem play a while.

Fit. Buz, buz, buz, buz.

Tay Less poor Gentleman!
How he is tortured! Mis. Fit F^e, Master Fitz-dottrel!
What do yo mean to counterfeit thus?

Fit. O, His wife goes to hi^
o,
She comes with a needle, and thrusts it in,
She pulls out that, and she puts in a pin,
And now, and now, I do not know how, nor where,
But she pricks me here, and she pricks me there: oh, oh,

Pou. Woman forbear.

Wit. What, Sir?

Pou. A practice foul
For one so fair:

Wit. Has this, then, credit with you?

Man. Do you bel^eve in it?

Pou. Gentlemen, I Will discharge
My conscience: It Is a clear conspiracy*
A dark and divellish practice! I detest it!

Wit. The Justice sure will prove to be the merrier!

Man. This is most strange, Sir.

Pou. Come not to confront
Authority with insolence: I tell you,
I do detest it. Here comes the Kings Constable,
And with him a right worshipful Commoner;
My good friend, Master Guilt-head! I am glad
I can before such witnesses, profess
My conscience, and my detestation of it.
Horrible! most unaturall! Abominable!

Eve. They whisper him.
You do not ^umble enough.

Mer. Wallow, gnash:

Tay. O, how he is vexed!

Pou. It Is too manifest.

Eve. And give soap to act with.
Give him more soap to foame with, now lie still.

Mer. And act a little.

Tay. What does he now, Sir.

Pou. Show
The taking of Tobacco, with which the Devil
Is so delighted.

Fit. Hum!

Pov. And calls for Hum.
You takers of Waters and Tobacco,
Mark this.

Fit. Yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, etc.

Pou. That Is Starch! the Devils Idol of that color.
He ratifies it, clapping of his hands.
The proofs are pregnant.

Gui. How the Devil can act!

Pou. He is the Master of Players? Master Guilt-head,
And Poets, too! you heard him talk in rhyme!
Sir Poule interprets Figgum a Iuglers game.
I had forgot to observe it to you, ere while!

Tay. See, he spits fire.

Pou. O no, he plays at Figgum,
The Devil is the Author of wicked Figgum --

Man. Why speak you not unto him?

Wit. If I had
All innocence of man to be endangered
And he could save, or ruin it: I Would not breath
A syllable in request, to such a fellow,
I Would rather fall.

Fit. o they whisper, they whisper, whisper, etc.
We shall have more, of Devils a score,
To come to dinner, in me the sinner.

Eyt. Alas, poor Gentleman!

Pou. Put'hem asunder.
Keep 'hem one from the other.

Man. Are you phrenticke, Sir,
Or what grave dotage moves you, to take part
With so much villainy? we are not afraid
Either of law, or trial; let us be
Examined what our ends were, what the means,
To work by; and possibility of those means.
Do not conclude against us, ere you hear us.

Pou. I will not hear you, yet I will conclude
Out of the circumstances.

Man. Will you so, Sir?

Pou. Yes they are palpable:

Man. Not as your folly:

Pou. I will discharge my conscience, and do all
To the Merid^an of Justice.

Gui. You do well, Sir:

Fit. Provide me to eat, three or four dishes o'good meat,
I Will feast them, and their trains, a Justice head and brains
Shall be the first.

Pou. The Devil loves not Justice,
There you may see.

Fit. A spare-rib of my wife,
And a whores purt'nance! a Guilt-head whole.

Pou. Be not you troubled, Sir, the Devil speaks it.

Fit. Yes, wis, Knight, shite, Poule, Ioule, owl, foul, troule, boule.

Pou. Crambe, another of the Divell's games!

Mer. Speak, Sir, some Greek, if you can. Is not the Justice
A solemn gamester?

Eve. Peace.

Fit. (...),
(...),
(...).

Pou. He curses
In Greek, I think.

Eve. Your Spanish, that I taught you.

Fit. Qu bremosel ojo de burlas.

Eve. How? your rest --
Let Us break his neck in jest, the Devil says,

Fit. Di gratia, Signor mio se bauete denari fatamene part.

Mer. What, would the Devil borrow money?

Fit. Ouy,
Ouy, Monsiur, un pauure Diable! Diablet in!

Pou. It is the Devil, by his several languages.

Sha. Where Is Sir Paul Either-side?

Pou. Here, Enter the Keeper of Newgate
what is the matter?

Sha. O! such an accident fallen out at Newgate, Sir:
A great piece of the prison is rent down!
The Devil has been there, Sir, in the body --
Of the young Cutpurse, was hanged out this morning,
But in new clothes, Sir, every one of us know him.
These things were found in his pocket.

Amb. Those are mine, Sir.

Sha. I think he was committed on your charge, Sir.
For a new felony

Amb. Yes.

Sha. He Is gone, Sir, now,
And left us the dead body. But with all, Sir,
Such an infernal stink, and steeme behind,
You cannot see St. Pulchars Steeple, yet.
They smell't as far as Ware, as the wind lies,
By this time, sure.

Fit. Is this upon your credit, friend?

Sha. Sir, Fitx. dottrel leaves counterfaiting.
you may see, and satisfy your self.

Fit. Nay, then, it is time to leave off counterfeiting.
Sir I am not bewitched, nor have a Devil*
No more then you. I do defy him, I,
And did abuse you. These two Gentlemen
Put me upon it. (I have faith against him)
They taught me all my tricks. I will tell truth,
And shame the Fiend. See, here, Sir are my bellows,
And my fall belly, and my Mouse, and all
That should ha'come forth?

Man. Sir, are not you ashamed
Now of your solemn, serious vanity?

Pou. I will make honorable amends to truth.

Fit. And so will I. But these are Coozners, still;
And ha'my land, as plotters, with my wife:
Who, though she be not a witch, is worse, a whore.

Man. Sir, you belie her. She is chaste, and virtuous,
and we are honest. I do know no glory
^ man should hope, by venting his own follies,
^ut you will still be an Ass, in spite of providence.
^^ase you go in, Sir, and here truths, then judge 'hem:
and make amends for your late rashness; when,
^o^ shall but here the pains and care was taken,
^o save this fool from ruin (his Grace of Droun'd land)

Fit. My land is droun'd indeed --

Pou. Peace.

Man. And how much
^s modest and too worthy wife has suffered
^ misconstruction, from him, you will blush,
^^st for your own belief, more for his actions!
(...) land is his: and never, by my friend,
(...) by my self, meant to another use,
(...) for her succors, who has equal right.
If any other had worse counsels in it,
(I know I speak to those can apprehend me)
L^t'hem repent 'hem, and be not detected.
It is not manly to take joy, or pride
In humane errors (we do all ill things,
They do 'hem worst that love 'hem, and dwell there,
Till the plague comes) The few that have the seeds
Of goodness left, will sooner make their way
To a true life, by shame, then punishment.

The End.
The Epilogue.
THus, the Projector, here, is over-throwne.
But I have now a Project of mine own,
If it may pass: that no man would invite
The Poet from us, to sup forth to night,
If the play please. If it displeasant be,
We do presume, that no man will: nor we:

