The Continuation of the LAWS OF JAMAICA, Passed by the Assembly, And Confirmed
by His MAJESTY IN COUNCIL, December 26th 1695. Being the Second Volume of the
said LAWS.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-Luce over against St.
Dunstan's-Church in Fleet Street, and Samuel Crouch at the Corner of
Pope's-Head-Alley over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. MDCXCVIII.

INDEX.
AN Act for Establishing a perpetual Anniversary Fast on the Seventh of June,
Page 3 An Act for Raising Money, for, and toward the Defense of this Island,
Page 5 An Act to Encourage Seafaring Men, and other Their Majesty's Subjects,
Page 20 An Act for making Kingston a Parish, Page 26 An Act for the better
Securing of Port Royal, Page 29 An Act for Making and Clearing a Public Road
from St. Mary's and St. George's into the Parish of St. Andrew's, Page 35 An
Act appointing the Prices of Meats, and Regulating Markets, Page 36 An Act for
Reimbursing Their Majesty's Treasury, Page 40 An Act to Reimburse Their
Majesty's Treasury, and Encourage Their Subjects to come and Settle in this
Island, Page 42 An Act for Raising Money to Solicit in England, the Affairs of
this Their Majesty's Island, Page 52 An Act for Guarding the Sea Coasts, Page
59 An Act for Raising Money as a farther Aid to Their Majesty's, for, and
toward the Defense of this Their Island of Jamaica, Page 63 An Act
appropriating several Sums of Money heretofore Raised, to the immediate Service
of this Island, Page 79 An Act for Appropriating several Sums of Money for the
speedy Relief of the Wounded, and Distressed Inhabitants of this Island, who
have suffered by the late Invasion of the French, Page 84 An Act for the
Encouragement, and Freedom of Servants, and Slaves which have done, or shall do
any remarkable Service against the French during this present War, Page 88 An
Act for Prevention of Indebted Persons from Departing this Island in the Time
of Martial-Law, Page 93 An Act to Enable George Ivey Esquire, to Sell his
Estate for the Payment of the Debts of his Father William Ivey Esquire,
Deceased, Page 98
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Laws of JAMAICA, passed by the Assembly, and confirmed by His Majesty in
Council, April 17. 1684. To which is added, the State of JAMAICA, as it was
under the Government of Sir Thomas Lynch. With a Large Map of the Island.

Printed for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-luce over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street; and are to be had of Capt. Thomas Hudson and Mr. Robert
Cotes, Merchants, at Port Royal.

AT THE COURT AT KENSINGTON, The 26th Day of December, 1695.
PRESENT The King's Most Excellent MAJESTY, In COUNCIL.
Lord Keeper. Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Norfolk. Duke of Schonberge. Duke of
Shrewsbury. Marq. of Winchester. Lord Great Chamberlain. Earl of Bridgwater.
Earl of Stamford. Earl of Scarborough. Earl of Romney. Lord Godolphin. Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secret. Trumbull. Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer. L.
Chief Justice Holt. Mr. Russell. Mr. Boscawen. Mr. Smith.
WHEREAS by Commission under the Great Seal of England, to Sir William Beeston,
Knight, His MAJESTY 's Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief of the
Island of JAMAICA, bearing Dated the Twentieth Day of September, One Thousand
Six Hundrerd Ninety Two, in the Fourth Year of His MAJESTY 's Reign; His
MAJESTY has been Graciously pleased to Authorize and Empower the Governor,
Council and Assembly of the said Island, to Constitute and Ordain Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, which are to Continue and be in Force till His MAJESTY
's Pleasure he signified to the contrary. And forasmuch as certain Laws have in
pursuance of the said Commission been transmitted to His MAJESTY, with the
Humble Desire of the Governor, Council and Assembly, that His MAJESTY would be
Pleased to pass the same in the Words following.

An ACT For Establishing a perpetual Anniversary Fast on the Seventh of June.
FORASMUCH as it has pleased Almighty GOD, Preamble.
the Great Creator and Judge of Heaven and Earth, on the Seventh Day of June,
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Two, justly to punish the Inhabitants of this
Island, for their manifold Sins and Wickednesses committed against his Divine
Majesty, by a most terrible and dreadful Earthquake, The Occasion of the Act;
the Earthquake.
which not only laid waste our Estates and Places of Habitations in general,
but also destroyed many Hundreds of People; which tremendous Judgment was
succeeded by a raging Sickness and Mortality, that few or no Families Escaped.
Now, that so signal a Visitation may be had in perpetual Remembrance, and we
and our Posterity may by humbling ourselves, endeavor to appease God's
imminent Wrath, and prevent heavier Judgments: We Your Majesty's most Dutiful
and Loyal Subjects, Your Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council, and Assembly
of this Your Island of Jamaica, do most humbly beseech Your Most Sacred
Majesty's, That it may be Enacted by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour,
Council and Assembly; and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of
the same, that every Seventh Day of June, (unless it falls out to be on the
Lord's Day, and then the Day following) shall be for ever hereafter set apart,
to be kept and observed by all the Inhabitants of this Island, as an
Anniversary Day of Fasting and Humiliation; A Yearly Fast.
and that all and every the Inhabitants aforesaid, shall upon the said Day,
Annually resort to some usual Place where Prayers and Preaching are used to be
Ministered, and there orderly and devoutly abide during the Celebration of
Divine Service, by Prayers, Preaching, Singing of Psalms, etc.

And to the end that all Persons may be put in Mind of their Duty therein, and
be the better prepared to discharge the same with that Piety and Devotion as
becomes them: Be it further Enacted, That every Minister shall give Notice to
his Parishioners, Notice to be given hereof by the Minister.
in the Church, or other Public Place of Divine Worship, at Morning Prayer,
the Sunday next before every such Seventh Day of June, for the Observation of
the said Day, and that he provide a Sermon suitable to that Occasion; and that
in such Parishes where there is no Minister, this Act shall be published
Annually in the Sessions next before the Seventh of June, as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no
Person or Persons whatsoever, neither by themselves, Servants or Slaves, shall
do, or cause to be done, any manner of Work in his or their Trade, Calling or
Plantation: And that no Shop, Tavern, Coffee or Punch-House be kept open on the
said Day, on Penalty of forfeiting Forty Shillings for every Person, Penalty
for Offenders.
by himself, Servant or Slave so Offending, as aforesaid, to be Recovered
before any of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, who are hereby Required
and Empowered to award the same; one Half of which Forfeiture shall be to the
Churchwardens for the use of the Parish, and the other Half to the Informer,
or him that shall Sue for the same.

W. Bridgeman.

An ACT For Raising Money, for, and toward the Defense of this Island.
WHEREAS it has been found by Sad and Lamentable Experience, Preamble.
that Their Majesty's Ships of War hitherto ordered to attend this Government,
have not been so Serviceable to this Their Majesty's Island, in Cruising about
the Coasts thereof, as the Exigences of Their Subjects have from time to time
required: The Enemies small Crafts, Barque-Luengoes and nimble Vessels, having
from time to time Infested the remote Parts thereof, and Landed their Men, and
made great Incursions into the Country, and taken off, and carried away a very
considerable Number of Slaves, and other Goods and Chattels of great Value, at
several times, from many of Their Majesty's good Subjects Inhabiting
thereabout; and may, if not timely prevented, destroy and unsettle all the
Plantations settled on, or near the Seacoasts, round this Island, to the great
Dishonor of Their Majesty's, and utter Ruin of Their Subjects here:

WE therefore, Their Majesty's Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Assembly of this
Their Majesty's Island of Jamaica, having taken into our Serious
Considerations, how Injurious the Ruin and Destruction of Their Majesty's
Plantations may in time prove to Their Imperial Crown, and being ready and
willing to the utmost of our Abilities, under the present Calamities of War,
and the great Destruction and Ruin of Their Majesty's Fortifications, and of
our own Habitations and Works by the late more dreadful Earthquake, to provide
for Their Majesty's Island aforesaid, and the Resistance of Their Enemies, Have
unanimously given and granted, and do hereby give and grant unto Their
Majesty's, for, and toward the Buying or Hiring, The Design.
Providing, Victualling, and Manning Two good Sloops of War, each with Fifty
Effective Officers, Seamen and Soldiers, inclusively, to be Employed for Six
Months, toward the Guarding of the Seacoasts of this Their Majesty's Island,
and in Cruising with Their Majesty's Friggats about the same, for the necessary
Defense of it, and Common Safety of Their Subjects. And when on Emergent
Occasions the Governor or Commander in Chief, shall by his Orders and
Instructions send over the Friggats to the Coasts of Hispaniola, or South of
Cuba, to commit Acts of Hostility, that then the said Sloop or Sloops shall
attend the Friggat or Friggats, so ordered, the Term of Twenty Days and no
longer, and upon no other Occasion or Pretense whatsoever, the full and entire
Sum of Three Thousand Nine Hundred Seventy Seven Pounds Seventeen Shillings and
Six Pence, current Money of this Island; and also for and toward the Raising of
Two Parties, each of Ten Soldiers and Two Officers, for the Reducing Rebellious
Negroes, for the like time of Six Months, the full and entire Sum of Three
Hundred Twenty Five Pounds Six Shillings and Three Pence, like current Money of
this Island; in all Four Thousand Three Hundred Three Pounds Three Shillings
and Nine Pence; The total Sum.
which we do most Humbly beseech Their Majesty's to Accept: And that it may be
Enacted;

AND be it Enacted by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council and
Assembly of this Island, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
of the same, that the said Sum of Four Thousand Three Hundred Three Pounds
Three Shillings and Nine Pence, current Money of this Island, Who to be
Assessors.
be Assessed, Taxed and Laid on by the several and respective Justices and
Vestries, within their several and respective Parishes and Precincts, or within
the Commission of the Peace for the same within this Island, where there is any
lawful Vestries; and where they have no lawful Vestries, by the Justices of
that Parish or Precinct, or within the Commission of the Peace for the same, or
Major part of the Vestry, in all and every the Parishes of this Island, on all
and every Person within their several and Respective Parish or Precinct, by an
Equal and Just Tax to be paid (within Three Months after the Tenth day of June,
Time of Payment.
which shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three)
by the respective Parishes of this Their Majesty's Island of JAMAICA, into the
Hands of the Receiver or Receivers hereafter Named, according to the several
Rates and Proportions hereafter mentioned, in such Sort and Manner as by this
present Act shall be Limited and Appointed, and in no other Way or Manner
whatsoever: that is to say, for every Negro, Slaves rated.
Indian or Muletta Slave within this Island, of what Age, Condition or Quality
soever, or to whomsoever belonging, shall be Paid for by the Masters,
Proprietors, Owners, Possessors, Guardians or Persons Entrusted in the several
Plantations, Pens, Crawls or Settlements within this Island, the Sum of
Eighteen Pence for each Negro, Indian or Muletta Slave aforesaid, and also for
all Horses, Mares, and Cattle.
Colts, Mules, Asses and Neat Cattle, the Sum of Seven Pence Halfpeny for each
Beast, and for all Sheep, Lambs, Goats and Kids, the Sum of Two Shillings and
Six Pence per Score.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that it
shall and may be Lawful for the Justices and Vestry, in the several Parishes or
Precincts, or within the Commission of the Peace for the same, to Assess, Tax
and Levy on all Overseers and Hired Servants the Sum of Six Pence in the Pound
upon the Wages they receive per Annum. Hired Servants Taxed.
And that all Handicrafts and Tradesmen, be Rated and Taxed according to the
Direction of the Justices and Vestry in the several Parishes where they reside,
any Law, Custom or Usage to the Contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND for the Parish of Port Royal, Port Royal.
it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the
Justices and Vestry shall Lay, Assess, Levy and cause to be Levied Twelve Pence
in the Pound, on all Rents, to be Paid by all Tenants and Allowed by their
Landlords and Proprietors, and on all Leases, to be Paid, by the Lessee, and be
Allowed by the Lessor. And also on the several Inhabitants for their several
Trades, Occupations and Callings, according as they were Rated, Assessed and
Taxed by the Justices and Vestry in the Parish-Roll on Port Royal aforesaid,
for this present Year, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three. And also on all
Persons so Residing at the Town of St. Jago de la Vega, S. Jago de la Vega.
Twelve Pence in the Pound on all Rents, to be Paid by all Tenants, and allowed
by the Landlords and Proprietors. And all Leases to be Paid by the Lessee, and
Allowed by the Lessor, and also according to the Rate, Tax and Sum Assessed by
the Justices and Vestry of St. Katharines, for this present Year One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Three. Kingston.
And for the Persons Residing on Kingston, Twelve Pence in the Pound on all
Rents, to be Paid by all Tenants and Allowed by the Landlords and Proprietors,
and on all Leases to be paid by the Lessee, and allowed by the Lessor; and for
their several Trades, Occupations and Callings, to be Rated and Taxed by the
Justices of the Parish of Sr. Andrews, any thing in this Act to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the
Nation and People of the Jews Residing within this Island, The Jews.
Pay or cause to be Paid, toward the Raising of the said Sum of Money before
mentioned, and expressed to be Raised on the Inhabitants of this Island, over
and above and besides the Tax as aforesaid Assessed, the full Sum of Seven
Hundred and Fifty Pounds, Current Money of this Island, to be rated, Assessed,
Taxed, Collected and Paid in by Solomon Ararij, Jacob de Leon, Moses Toiro,
Jacob Mendez Guteres, Jacob Henriques, Jacob Rodrigues de Leon, Moses Jesurum
Cardoso, Samuel Gabay, Jacob Lopes Torres, Isaac Coutinho, Isaac Nunes Gonsales
and Abraham Nunes, or any Five of them, into the Hands of the Receiver or
Receivers hereafter mentioned, Empowered and Appointed to Receive the same, at,
or within One Month after the Tenth day of June, which will be in the Year of
our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, any thing herein to the
Contrary notwithstanding. Case of Failure.
And in Case of failure in the Compliance of the said Payment,

BE it furt^^r Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Sum of Two Hundred
and Fifty Pounds more, besides the said Seven Hundred and Fifty Pounds above
appointed to be Assessed on the Nation and People of the Jews abovesaid: That
then it shall and may be Lawful for the Treasurer or Treasurers hereafter to be
appointed, by Warrant of Distress, under his or their Hands and Seals, Directed
to the Constable or Constables for the respective Parishes where such Jew or
Jews reside, to Levy or singly cause to be Levied at Discretion upon the
several Jews, Inhabitants of this Island, such proportional Sum or Sums as
shall make up the Sum of One Thousand Pound as aforesaid. And also if any of
the Jews Rated or Assessed by the Persons abovenamed, shall refuse to Pay the
said Sum by them so Assessed; That then it shall and may be Lawful for the
respective Justices in their respective Parishes, or within the Commission of
the Peace for the same, where the said Jews reside, for so much as any of the
said Jews are Assessed and Rated by the Persons abovesaid, who are hereby
Empowered to Issue out their Warrant or Warrants to the respective Constables,
to Distrain any of the Goods and Chattels of any of the said Jews that shall
refuse or delay to pay the same: any Law, Custom or Usage to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, that if the several Persons, or any of them of the
Jewish Nation beforementioned, Empowered and Appointed to assess, levy, collect
and pay in the aforesaid Sum, assessed upon the Nation of the Jews, shall
neglect his or their Duty therein; that then it shall and may be Lawful for the
Governor or Commander in Chief by Warrant under his Hand and Seal, Directed to
the Provost-Marshal or his Lawful Deputy, to Levy or cause to be Levied on all
and every Person or Persons so Offending, 100 l. forfeit.
One Hundred Pound current Money of this Island, or the value thereof upon his
or their Moneys, Slaves, Goods or Chattels, and sell the same by Public
Outcry, returning the Overplus, if any be, to the Owner; and in Case no Money,
Slaves or Goods are to be found, as aforesaid, that then he take into Custody
the Body of the Person or Persons so offending, and him or them in safe Custody
keep, until he or they Pay the said Sum of One Hundred Pound for the said
Offense; any Law, Custom or Usage, or any thing in this Act seeming to the
Contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the
respective Justices of the respective Parishes and Precincts, or within the
Commission of the Peace for the same, or any two of them, deliver into the
Hands of their respective Constables within their respective Parishes and
Precinct, a Roll of such Tax or Assessment as aforesaid, Time for Collection.
so that the Collection be made within Two Months after the Tenth day of June,
which shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three,
with a Warrant under the same, Signed and Sealed by the said Justices, or any
two of them, Impowring and Requiring the said Constables to Levy the said Tax
or Assessment, and Pay the same into the hands of the Churchwardens for the
time being, in the Parish where the same is Taxed or Assessed as aforesaid. And
where it shall happen there are no Churchwardens, That then the Constables are
hereby required to Pay the same into the Hands of the Justices of the said
Parish, Deducting Four Pence in the Pound for Collecting the same in all the
Parishes of this Island, ( Port Royal and Kingston only Excepted) where it
shall be done gratis: who are hereby Required to Receive and Pay the same into
the Hands of the Receiver or Receivers hereafter named, within one Month after
the Collecting thereof. And lest any Person or Persons so as aforesaid Taxed or
Assessed, shall refuse or delay to pay his or their Tat or Assessment, the said
Justices or any two of them, are hereby required in the Warrant aforesaid to
Empower and Command the Constables aforesaid, by Virtue thereof, to Distrain
the Slaves, Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Distress to be made.
Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, or any other Personal Estate
whatsoever of Him, Her or Them so refusing or delaying, and sell the same
forthwith at Public Outcry, retaining to themselves Twelve Pence in the Pound
for every such Distress on Slaves, Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat
Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, or any other Personal Estate whatsoever
Distrained on, or Sold as aforesaid; returning the Overplus, if any be, to the
Owner.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that for
the better Assessing, Collecting, Levying and Paying in the Sums of Money, so as
aforesaid Limited and Appointed to be Raised and Paid as aforesaid; and for the
more Effectual putting this Act in Execution, Justices and Vestries Duty.
the Justices and Vestries within their several Parishes and Precincts, or
within the Commission of the Peace for the same, are hereby Required and
Empowered immediately on the passing this Act, with all possible Speed to
proceed to the Discharge of their said Duties, in Manner and Form as is before
Directed and Appointed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if the Justices,
Vestry-men, Constables or Churchwardens, or any of them, shall neglect or
wilfully fail in his or their Duty in Assessing, Penalty of Neglect.
Collecting or Paying the same as aforesaid; That then and in such Case every
Justice so Neglecting or wilfully failing in his or their Duty in this Act
Prescribed, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, shall Forfeit
Fifty Pound; and all and every Vestry-man, Churchwarden or Constable, the sum
of Twenty Pound, for every such Offense as aforesaid.

AND be it Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that all Owners of
Slaves, Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Goats, Lambs,
Kids, Tradesmen and Hired-men whatsoever as aforesaid, shall and are hereby by
Themselves, Guardians, Overseers, Trustees or Pen-keepers within the several
Parishes aforesaid, required and obliged to give a just and true Account on
Oath to the best of their Knowledge, Account on Oath.
at such Time or Times as the Justices of each Parish or Precinct, or within
the Commission of the Peace for the same, shall Direct, of all Slaves, Horses,
Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, Rents,
Trades and Callings whatsoever as aforesaid belonging to such Owner, Guardian,
Overseer, Trustees or Pen-keepers within their respective Parish or Precinct,
or within the Commission of the Peace for the same (the Nation of the Jews only
Excepted) to the Justices of the Peace, or any of them in the said Parishes or
Precincts, or within the Commission of the Peace for the same, who are hereby
Required and Empowered to Administer the same, and to ask all such further
Questions as to them or any of them shall seem Meet and Necessary, relating to
this present Act. The Tenor of which Oath shall be as follows. Oath.
I A. B. do Swear, that I have within the Parish of C -- Slaves, Young and Old,
and also -- Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs,
Goats, Kids, and no more: So help me God. And if it be to an Overseer, I D. E.
Overseer of the Plantation of F. G. do Swear that the said F. G. has within
the Parish of H -- Slaves, Young and Old, and also -- Horses, Mares, Colts,
Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, etc. and no more, to the
best of my knowledge. And so to Penkeepers or any other Person for Cattle,
Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids,
Rents, Trades, Taverns and Callings whatsoever, Mutatis Mutandis; and if any
Person or Persons shall refuse either by Themselves, Case of Refusal.
Overseers or Penkeepers, to give an Account upon Oath as aforesaid, of their
Slaves, Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats,
Kids, Rents, Trades and Callings in manner aforesaid; That then it shall be
Lawful for the Justices and Vestry, or the Justices where there is no Vestry,
to Tax the Person or Persons so refusing according to their Discretion.

AND forasmuch as the present Necessity will require the Advancing of Money for
and toward the Buying or Hiring and Equipping the said Two Sloops and Men to
Sea, with all possible Expedition:

BE it enacted by Authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful to and
for any Person or Persons to advance and lend to Their Majesty's, for and
toward the furtherance of this present occasion, such Sum or Sums of Money as
may be needful; and that whosoever shall advance and lend any such Sum or Sums
of Money upon the security of this Act, Interect on Money advanced.
shall receive for the Loan of the Sum they shall so lend after the rate of
Twelve Pound Ten Shillings, per Cent. per Ann. for the time he or they shall be
in disburse of the said Sum, on the Credit of this said Act as aforesaid, any
thing beforementioned to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

AND to the end that all Moneys that shall be lent unto Their Majesty's upon
the Credit hereof may be well and sufficiently secured:

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every Person
and Persons who shall Advance and Lend any Sum or Sums of Money to Their
Majesty's, on the Credit of this Act, and actually Pay the same into the Hands
of the Receiver or Receivers hereafter Named and Appointed, shall by the
Receiver or Receivers on the first Payment of Money that shall be Paid into the
Receivers Hands, by virtue of this Act, be forthwith Paid into the Person or
Persons, their Executors or Administrators, so lending the said Sum Advanced,
with the Interest of the same, for the discharge of the Money so Lent and
Advanced. And that all and every other Sum or Sums of Money that shall be laid
out, or be Paid by the Receiver or Receivers, for and toward the Buying,
Equipping, Victualling and fitting to Sea; as also for Paying the Officers and
Seamen on Board the said Sloops: and also for Paying the Officers and Soldiers
of the Two Parties beforementioned, for Reducing the Rebellious Negroes, shall
as they become due, be Paid by the Receiver or Receivers that are hereafter
mentioned and Appointed, without Fee or Charge.

Receivers Names.
AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Honorable
Colonel Charles Knights, one of Their Majesty's Council of this Island, and
also Colonel Thomas Clarke, Captain Lancelot Talbott, Captain Robert Wardlow,
William Hutchinson Esquire Captain Josiah Heathcote and Captain Thomas Clarke, be
and are hereby Required and Empowered and Warranted to be Receiver or Receivers,
of all and singular the several Sums aforesaid, mentioned and intended to be
raised on the several Parishes or People aforesaid, and shall and may Lawfully
by Advice and Consent of the Lieutenant Governor or Commander in Chief,
forthwith Buy or Hire Two good and substantial Sloops fit for War, and Provide,
Equip, Fit ready for the Sea, and Victual the same for Fifty Effective
Officers, Seamen and Soldiers Inclusively, for each Sloop for the said Six
Months, or for such shorter time as to to them shall appear most convenient;
and that the said Two Sloops being thus Fitted and Victualled, it is hereby
Required that the Right Honorable Sir William Beeston Knight, Captains
appointed by whom.
Their Majesty's Lieutenant Governor aforesaid, by Commission under his Hand
and Seal, do Constitute and Appoint on Board each of the said Sloops, such
Discreet and Able Captains for this present Service, as his Honor shall in his
Prudence think fit, and can Confide in; and that each of the said Captains
receive for their Pay after the rate of Six Pounds per Month: And other
Officers.
And likewise appoint by his Warrant for each Sloop one Master at Four Pounds
per Month; one Boatswain, one Gunner at Three Pounds per Month each; one
Surgeon, and one Carpenter at Four Pounds per Month each, on Board each
Sloop. And Command and Require them in Their Majesty's name to Raise and Enlist
on Board the said Two Sloops, by Impressing or otherwise, to make and fill up
the full number of Fifty Effective Officers, Seamen and Soldiers in each Sloop,
who shall also receive after the rate of Forty Shillings each Man per Month.
And that their monthly Pay, arising from this present Service, shall be paid
out of the Money raised by this present Act, Commanding and Requiring the
respective Captains of each Sloop aforesaid, by his Commission and Instructions
therewith to be given, that they take care from time to time, to their utmost
Abilities, to Guard and Defend the Coasts of this Island by constant Cruising,
and looking out both Windward and Leward, North and South sides of this Island,
as his Honor in his great Wisdom shall from time to time Direct and Command.

BE it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Colonel Charles
Knights, and Josiah Heathcote, Esquire be and are hereby appointed, empowered, and
warranted to be Treasurers to Receive and Pay all Sum and Sums of Money as shall
from time to time come to their Hands, Treasurers.
for the more easy and ready dispatch of such Persons as they may have
occasion to Deal with; or pay all such Wages unto the Officers, Seamen and
Soldiers, as the Occasion and Intent of this Act may require. And as soon as
the Receiver or Receivers, before appointed and empowered, have Bought or
Hired, and Equipped the said Sloops, and Victualled them with sufficient
Victuals for their respective Complements of Men aforesaid, for the time they
shall find convenient; That the said Sloops be forthwith dispatched out to Sea
by Command and Direction of the Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief, to
Cruise about the Coasts of this Island, as aforesaid. And that the Receiver, or
Receivers, keep a distinct Account of the Money raised by this present Act. And
for all Payments made for the Uses and Purposes by this Act required, and
render a just and true Account thereof, Account to be given.
when demanded, unto Their Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in
Chief, and Council, of all Sum and Sums of Money by them, and every of them
received by Virtue of this present Act, and how laid out, and for what, and to
whom, and for what Uses. And shall in like manner give an Account to the
Assembly of this Island when Sitting and Assembled, when thereunto required, of
so much of the said Money as shall be by them, and every of them respectively
received, and to whom the same are issued and paid by them respectively, and to
what Uses, and if the said Receiver, or Receivers, or any of them, after the
Receipt of any of the said Moneys, shall divert or misapply the same, or any
part thereof by any pretense whatsoever, otherwise than before intended and
directed, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act; he or they so
Offending shall forfeit to Their Majesty's, Forfeit.
for, and toward the support of the Government of this Island, and contingent
Charges thereof, double the Sum so diverted or misapplyed.

AND for the better Order and Government of the said Sloops of War, wherein the
Honor of Their Majesty's, and the Interest of this Island are so much
concerned: Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Articles and
Orders.
That all and every the Articles and Orders mentioned in certain Acts of
Parliament, made in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of His Majesty Charles the
Second, of blessed Memory, for the Establishing Articles and Orders for the
Regulating and better Governing of his Majesty's Navies, and Ships of War, and
Forces by Sea, shall be duly and respectively put in Execution, Observed, and
Obeyed on Board the said Sloops of War: And are hereby declared to be the Law
of this Island against all such Person or Persons aboard the said Sloops, as
shall Offend therein. And for further Encouragement of the Officers, Seamen,
and Soldiers aboard the said Sloops, Encouragement of Officers, etc.
All Ships, Sloops, or Vessels by them taken from the Enemy, and not belonging
to this Island, are hereby likewise given them for their said Encouragement.
Provided always, that all Slaves, Vessels, or Goods belonging to Their
Majesty's Subjects of this Island, which the said Sloops of War shall happen to
retake before they shall have arrived at the Enemies Port, during the time that
they, or either of them are employed in this present Service, on the Countries
Charge as aforesaid, shall be returned to the respective Owners or Proprietors,
their Agents or Attorneys, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Parties
hereby raised, or to be raised for the subduing the Rebellious Negroes
aforesaid, in case of Misdemeanour or Neglect of their Duty in that behalf,
shall be liable to the Pains and Punishments prescribed in the Articles of War,
as when Martial Law is in force in this Island, and that the Captain of each
Party receive for his Service in this Act intended and appointed, the Sum of
Four Pounds per Month, Pay for the Landforces.
and that each Sergeant also receive Fifty Shillings per Month, and each
Soldier Forty Shillings per Month, to be paid by the Receiver or Receivers,
without any Fee or Charge to either Officer or Soldier.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for
the better Encouraging of the Persons Employed on Board the said Sloops for the
Service of Their Majesty's, and this Island, that they shall receive as Salvage
for all Vessels, Slaves, Prizes retaken.
and other Goods taken of this Island, and by-them retaken before they are
landed in any of the Enemies Commission-Ports, One sixth part of the Vessels,
Slaves or Goods so retaken, or the value thereof, the said Vessels, Slaves or
Goods having been first Appraised by two Persons indifferently Chosen, one by
the Commander or Commanders of the said Sloop or Sloops, and the other by the
respective Owner or Owners; which shall be divided among the Officers, Seamen
and Soldiers of the said Vessels, proportionably to the Pay each Person
receives of the Country for that Service.

AND that all such Persons as shall go out in the Parties to reduce the Negroes
in Rebellion, may be induced to proceed with the more Resolution and Vigor; it
is hereby Enacted that they shall Receive from the Treasurers, Negro killed, or
retaken.
for each Negro Killed that was Actually in Rebellion, which shall be Evidenced
by bringing in his Head to any Justice, the Sum of Forty Shillings: And for
each Negro in Rebellion taken and brought in alive, not Maimed or Mortally
Wounded, the Sum of Ten Pounds, to be paid by the Owner or Proprietor of such
Slave or Slaves, who is hereby obliged under the Penalty of Fifty Pounds to
Transport the Slave or Slaves so Reduced from Actual Rebellion: And in case
that no Owner can be found; That then the Treasurer or Treasurers, by this Act
appointed, or either of them, shall be by this Act Obliged and Empowered to pay
the said Ten Pounds our of the Treasury, and Receive the said Slave or Slaves,
and him or them Sell and Transport as aforesaid: And the Produce retain in his
or their Hands to be employed in the said Service, and for defraying the
Contingent Charges thereof. And to the end that it may be the better known who
is a Negro in Rebellion, It is hereby declared that all Negroes that have been
absent from their Owner or Plantation, the Term of Six Months, be and are
accounted as in actual Rebellion, any thing to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that in Case any of the
Officers, Seamen or Soldiers on Board the said Sloops, or in the said Parties,
shall, in actual Service, lose either Leg or Arm, or be otherwise Disabled:
That then and in all such Cases, Case of Maim.
all and every of the said Disabled Men shall receive Ten Pound per Annum
without Charge, during his or their Natural Lives: And also their Cures to be
Paid for out of the Public Revenue of this Island, by order of the
Lieutenant-Governour and Council, or of the Government of this Island, out of
the first Payment.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Moneys which
shall Remain over and above, Surplus not expended.
or be not Expended of the said Sum of Four Thousand Three Hundred Three Pounds
Three Shillings and Nine Pence, arising by virtue of this Act, and not hereby
applied toward the defraying the Charges of the Sloops and Parties aforesaid,
shall be and remain in the hands of the said Treasurers or either of them, by
this Act appointed to be applied and disposed of, for and toward such other
use or uses as the Assembly of this Island shall appoint by a Law: And that the
said Receiver or Receivers, Treasurer or Treasurers be allowed all his or
their, or either of their reasonable Charges, in and about the discharging the
Trust hereby reposed in them, Commission or pretenses to Commission hereby
excepted.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Fines and
Forfeitures mentioned in this Act and not declared where they shall be
Recovered, Fines, etc. how disposed.
or how Disposed of, be one half to Their Majesty's, for and toward the
Support of the Government of this Island, and the contingent Charges thereof;
the other half to the Informer, who shall Sue for the same in any Court of
Record within this Island, and where no Essoyne, Protection, Injunction, Wager
of Law or nonvult ulterius prosequi shall be allowed.

An ACT To Encourage Seafaring Men, and other Their MAJESTY'S Subjects.
Preamble.
WHEREAS great Numbers of Persons, as well Seafaring Men as others, by the ill
Usage and Discouragement they have formerly met with, have been driven from
this Island, and for Common Subsistence, many of them have fallen under the
Necessity of taking unlawful Courses, and been forced ever since the present
War with France, to seek for Shelter in the Ports and Settlements belonging to
the French King in the West Indies, and elsewhere, and afterward Compelled to
enter into his Service.

AND whereas diverse other Persons being Disabled by their Losses in the late
Dreadful Earthquake, and other Misfortunes, to Pay their Debts to avoid the
Suits and, Prosecutions of their Creditors, have been likewise obliged to go
off this Island; And by reason of the Offenses and Debts aforesaid, cannot
safely return again. And forasmuch as nothing can more conduce to the Strength,
Security, and Flourishing Condition of this Country, than Multitudes of People;
and that it is become absolutely necessary in Order thereunto, for putting the
Island in this time of War, into a Posture of Defense against the Enemy, to
Invite and Encourage as much as possible, Their Majesty's Subjects to come to
this Island, by Delivering them from the Penalties and Forfeitures they have
already incurred, and by preventing all Vexation and Trouble they may be put to
hereafter, by any Prosecution in Their Majesty's Name for the said Offenses, or
by means of the Suit or Suits of any other Persons to whom they stand indebted:

THE Lieutenant-Governour, Council, and Assembly, most humbly beseech Their
Majesty's to be Graciously pleased to extend to all Persons so Offending, as
aforesaid, Their Majesty's Free and General Pardon, Free and General Pardon.
and for the Ease and Quiet of them and the rest, to give convenient Time to
Pay their Debts.

AND that therefore it may be Enacted by the Lieutenant-Governour, Council and
Assembly, and be it Enacted by the Authority of the same in Manner and Form
following, that is to say, That all and every Person and Persons whosoever,
shall be, and are hereby Acquitted, Pardoned, Released, and Discharged against
Their Majesty's, Their Heirs and Successors, and all others whomsoever, of, and
from all manner of Penalties incurred by Serving under the French King or his
Subjects as aforesaid; and all Crimes and Offenses, Acts of Hostility, or
Violence whatsoever (Treason and Murder excepted) and of, and from all manner
of Depredations by Sea or by Land, and all other Crimes, Offenses and
Misdemeanors whatsoever, already done and committed before the First Day of
this Session, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three,
and not otherwise or afterward; And of and from all manner of Forfeitures,
Penalties, Pains Corporal, and Pains Pecuniary, and all Suits, Judgments and
Executions, for, or by reason of the same, or any of them.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Person or Persons that have committed Piracy or Robbery by Sea, and not Murder
or Treason, that shall come hither, Time of Surrender.
and Surrender and Submit themselves within Ten Days after their Arrival in
this Island, unto the Commander in Chief for the time being, and give in
moderate Security for their future Good Behavior, that then, and in such Case,
the said Commander in Chief shall be by Virtue of this Act obliged to extend to
such Person or Persons so Submitting and Surrendering as aforesaid, Their
Majesty's Gracious Pardon under the Great Seal of this Island, for the Crime or
Crimes aforementioned, without Let, Hindrance, or Molestation from Their
Majesty's Attorney General, or any other Person or Persons whatsoever; for
which Pardon, the Parties to whom Their Majesty's Mercy is so extended, Fee for
Pardon.
shall pay the Sum of Forty Shillings, and no more, to be paid as a full Fee
unto such Officer or Officers as the Commander in Chief shall Direct and
Appoint to receive the same.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Attorney General, or any other Officer or
Officers whatsoever, that shall presume by any way or means, directly or
indirectly, to Exact any Sum or Sums of Money of any Person or Persons
whatsoever, to whom such Act of Mercy is extended, Case of Exaction.
or intended to be extended, shall forfeit the Sum of One Hundred Pound,
current Money, one Half to Their Majesty's, for, and toward the Support of the
Government of this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof; and the other
Half to the Patty injured, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or
Information in any Court of Record within this Island, where no Essoyne,
Protection, Injunction, Wager of Law, or Nonvult ulterius prosequi, shall be
allowed; any Law, Custom or Usage, or any Thing in this Act seeming to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Their
Majesty's Free-Pardon as aforesaid, shall be as good and effectual in the Law
to every of the said Persons beforementioned, as the same Pardon should have
been, if all and every the Persons, and all and singular the Offenses
aforesaid, had been particularly, singularly, especially, and plainly Named,
Rehearsed, and Specified, and also Pardoned by proper and express Words and
Names, and be as fully, largely, This Pardon to be taken in the largest Sense.
amply and beneficially Understood, Interpreted and Expounded to all Intents
and Purposes, against Their Majesty's, Their Heirs and Successors, and all
others, to, and for the Benefit, Advantage, and Favor of the Persons before
intended to be Pardoned, as the same can, or may be Understood, Interpreted and
Expounded; any Statutes, Acts, Laws, Customs, or Usages heretofore had, made or
used to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Lieutenant-Governour, Council and Assembly,
and by the Authority of the same, That all and every Person or Persons
whomsoever, that shall come and Reside here, and Claim the Benefit of this Act,
and be employed in the Service of the Country in Privateering Trade, or
otherwise, shall by Virtue hereof be Protected, Excepted, and Excused from the
Payment of their said Debts, contracted before their coming hither, or their
going off from hence, for the space of Five Years, to be computed from the
First Day of this present Session, and during the said Time, that all real,
personal, Time for Debtors.
or mixed Actions, and all Arrests, Process, Suits, Informations, Judgments,
Executions, and all other Prosecutions whatsoever, to be had, commenced, sued
or prosecuted for, or by reason of their said Debts, or any Sum or Sums of
Money by them as aforesaid, Due or Owing to any Person or Persons whomsoever,
be, and are hereby Suspended, Respited and Discharged, and made Void, for and
during the said Term of Five Years and no longer.

PROVIDED always, and it is the true Intent and Meaning of this present Act,
That no Person or Persons claiming the Benefit of the same, shall plead the
Statute of Limitation in their Favor or behalf, as if the said Intermission
had not been after the Expiration of the said Five Years, but that the same
shall be accounted as if this Law had not been made, any Thing in this Act
seeming to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND if any Action or Suit hereby Suspended, Respited and Discharged, shall be
Commenced or Prosecuted, every Person so Sued may plead the General Issue, and
give this Act and the Special Matter in Evidence; and if the Plaintiff shall
become Nonsuit, Suit commenced contrary to this Act.
or forbear further Prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or if a Verdict
shall pass against him, the said Plaintiff shall for ever absolutely Forfeit
and Lose his Original Debt so Sued for, and besides, Pay to the Defendant his
Double Costs and Charges out of Purse; to be Assessed by the Jury, or the
Judges of the Court, where such Action or Suit shall be Commenced, and Levied
by Rule of Court, of the said Plaintiff's Goods and Chattels, or the said
Plaintiff to stand committed till Payment thereof, at the Discretion of the
said Court.

PROVIDED always, nevertheless, That no Person shall take, or have any Benefit
or Advantage by this Act, or any thing therein contained, who shall not within
Twenty Days after his Arrival, Names to be enrolled.
cause his Name to be Entered into the Office of Inrolments for this Island, in
a Book to be kept there for that particular Purpose, and Claim, and Demand the
Benefit of the same; which said Claim, and Demand, and Entry of his Name as
aforesaid, shall be to all Intents and Purposes; as effectual and available in
the Law, as if the said Person had been herein particularly named and
expressed, and an attested Copy of the said Entry and Claim as aforesaid, shall
be pleaded in any Court, and of as much Authority, Force and Validity in the
Law, as this present Act, or Special Pardon under the Broad Seal as aforesaid;
any Statutes, Acts, Laws, Usages or Customs to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Secretary, or
Clerk of the Enrolments for the time being, Fee for Enrolment.
shall not refuse to make Entry of such Claim and Demand as aforesaid, and give
an attested Copy thereof; or take more than Fifteen Pence for such Entry, and
the Copy thereof, under the Penalty of Ten Pounds for every such Offense, to be
paid to him, who by Bill, Plaint, Information, or Action of Debt, shall Sue for
the same.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whereas by an Act
of this Country, Entitled, An Act for Restraining and Punishing Privateers and
Pirates; in which Act, among other Things, Relation to a former Act.
there is contained one Clause, Branch and Article, whereby it was thus
Enacted: Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Person and Persons that shall any way knowingly, Entertain, Harbor, Conceal,
Trade, or Hold any Correspondence by Letter, or otherwise, with any Person or
Persons that shall be deemed, or adjudged to be Privateers, Pirates, or other
Offenders within the Construction of this Act; and that shall not readily
endeavor to the best of his or their Power, to apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended, such Offender or Offenders, shall be liable to be Prosecuted as
Accessaries and Confederates, and to suffer such Pains and Penalties as in such
Case by Law is provided.

WHICH said Clause, Branch, or Article contained in the said Act, and every
Word, Matter, and Thing contained in that Clause, Branch or Article, shall from
henceforth be repealed, annulled, revoked, annihilated, Cause repealed.
and utterly made void for ever, any Thing in the said Act to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

An ACT For making Kingston a Parish.
Preamble.
WHEREAS it has pleased Almighty God by his late Dreadful Judgment, to lay
Waste, and Destroy the Habitations and Dwelling-Places of many of the People,
late of Port Royal, whereby they were necessitated to resort to some more
convenient Place, wherein to Unite and Settle for the Advantage of Trade, and
better Convenience of Living, and did by the Encouragement of the then
Government, Repair to, and Settle upon a certain Place now called and known by
the Name of Kingston, in the Parish of St. Andrews, on the Harbor of
Port Royal aforesaid; and have with great Trouble and Charge made a
Considerable Progress in Building and Settling there, and being willing and
desirous there to Continue by reason of the Convenient Situation of the Place,
and Commodiousness of the Channel and Harbor:

BE it therefore Enacted and Ordained by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour,
Council and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of
the same, Bounds thereof.
That the aforesaid Place commonly called and known by the Name of Kingston,
lying in the Parish of St. Andrews, on the Harbor of Port Royal, bounded
Southerly by the Harbor, Westerly and Northerly by the Line of the Land of Sir
William Beeston Knight, and to continue from a Callabash his North-Easterly
Corner Tree, by a strait Line to the Foot of the Long Mountain, Eighty Chain
distant from the Sea, and from thence toward Three Rivers at the same Distance
from the Sea, until it meets with the Bounds of the Parish of Port Royal; And
also all that Part of the Harbor which lies to the North-Easterly and Easterly
Part of the Middle Ground, shall be and for ever hereafter be taken and
esteemed to all Intents and Purposes, an entire and distinct Parish, separate
from the said Parish of Sr. Andrews, and be called and known by the Name of the
Town and Parish of Kingston, and Have, Use, Exercise, and Enjoy all and every
the Powers, Authorities, Benefits, Privileges, Rights, Immunities and Customs,
that all or any of the Parishes or Precincts within this Island, have, or ought
to Have, Use, Exercise, or Enjoy of Common Right, or by Virtue of any General
Act or Act of this Country, as fully, amply and effectually, as if the same had
then been a distinct and separate Parish or Precinct, and therein by Name
expressly mentioned and specified: And particularly, that there shall be chosen
Three Representatives to Serve in every Assembly hereafter, or after the first
Prorogation of this present Assembly for the said Town and Parish of Kingston,
any Law, Custom or Usage to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for
the Ease of the Merchants and Trading People of the said Town of Kingston, that
there be Erected, Established and Held in the said Town, a Quarter Sessions for
the Conservation of the Peace, and a Court of Common Pleas, Courts of Justice.
with the same Power and Authority, that is, or has been lately Held or
Exercised at Port Royal, which said Court shall be held the first time on the
Second Thursday in October, in this present Year One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Three, and afterward Once every Two Months, and the Sessions every
Three Months, any Thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the
Receiver-General, Secretary of this Island, and Naval Officer for the time
being, do by Themselves or Deputies within One Month after the passing this
Act, keep, or cause to be kept in the Town of Kingston aforesaid, their several
and respective Offices, Public Offices.
as they now do, or heretofore have or ought to have done on Port Royal, on
Penalty of Fifty Pounds each for every Month, they or any of them shall Neglect
or Refuse to do the same, to be Recovered against them, or any of them, by
Bill, Plaint, Information, or otherwise, in the Supreme Court of this Island;
the One Half to Their Majesty's, for, and toward the Support of the Government
of this Island, and the contingent Charges thereof, and the other Half to the
Informer, or him that shall Sue for the same, wherein no Essoyn, Injunction,
Protection, Wager of Law, or Nonvult ulterius prosequi shall be Allowed.

An ACT For the better Securing of Port Royal.
Preamble.
WHEREAS the Town of Port Royal is a Town of a very Considerable Trade, and of
great Strength to resist the Enemy in time of War, by reason of Their Majesty's
Fortifications, and a great number of Houses through the Mercy of God left
standing thereon.

AND whereas by the late Dreadful Earthquake the Land on the Back-Sea-side is
settled lower than it was, by reason whereof the Sea has more power to gain
upon it, and if not timely prevented by Wharfing to resist the Violence
thereof, may endanger the Houses that are standing on that Seaside, for
prevention whereof

BE it Enacted and Ordained by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council
and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the
same, That it shall and may be lawful, from, and after the Twenty Fifth day of
July, in the Year of our Lord 1693. for the Justices and Vestry of the Parish
of Port Royal, or the Major part of them, to Assess, Tax, Money for the Work.
and Levy such Sum, or Sums of Money, upon all and every the Freeholders of the
said Parish of Port Royal, as to them shall seem Meet and Convenient, for, and
toward the Wharfing, or otherwise Securing the Town of Port Royal toward the
Great-Sea-side abovementioned.

AND whereas after the Wharfs are made they may from time to time want
Repairing, Be it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it
is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same; that it shall and
may be lawful for the Justices and Vestry of Port Royal aforesaid, or the Major
part of them, to Assess, Tax, For the Repairs.
and Levy yearly, and every Year, such Sum or Sums of Money upon the Freeholders
of the said Parish of Port Royal, at such times as to them shall seem requisite
or necessary, for Repairing and Maintaining the said Wharfs; and that the
Constable or Constables of the said Parish of Port Royal shall gather in the
abovesaid Moneys so to be Levied, Assessed and Taxed, as before mentioned and
appointed by this present Act; and pay the same into the Hands of the
Churchwardens of the said Parish of Port Royal for the time being, Deducting
to him or themselves Four Pence in the Pound for Collecting the same. And in
Case any Constable or Constables shall neglect his or their Duty in Collecting,
Gathering, or Paying in the Money so Collected by Virtue of this Act, he or they
so neglecting his or their Duty therein, shall Forfeit for every such Offense
the Sum of Twenty Pounds.

AND in Case any Person or Persons shall refuse or delay to pay his or their
Tax so to be Assessed, Taxed, and Levied, Case of Refusal.
as in this present Act is prescribed, Be it further Enacted and Ordained by
the Authority aforesaid, that it shall and may be lawful to, and for any two of
Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the Parish of Port Royal aforesaid, to
Issue out their Warrant of Distress, directed to any Constable of the said
Parish, to Levy the same upon the Goods or Chattels of him, her, or them so
refusing or delaying to pay the same, and Sell the same at Public Outcry,
returning the Overplus, if any be, to the Owner.

AND to the Intent that the Money which shall be Collected and Raised by virtue
of this Act, may be applied to the use and purpose by this Act mentioned and
directed, Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that
the Churchwarden or Churchwardens of the said Parish of Port Royal for the
time being, shall, and are hereby required from time to time to pay the Money
arising by virtue of this Act to such Person or Persons, and to such Uses as
the Justices and Vestry, Payment to whom.
or major part of them shall direct and appoint, and that the Churchwardens of
the said Parish for the time being shall keep a distinct Account of the Money by
them, and each of them received by virtue of this Act, and likewise render a
true and just Account thereof to the Justices, and Vestry of the said Parish of
Port Royal, when thereunto required, and also pay the full Balance of the same
unto the succeeding Churchwardens, or to whomsoever the said Justices and
Vestry, or major part of them shall direct and appoint, under the Penalty of
Fifty Pounds for every Offense committed contrary to their Duty in this Act
enjoined.

AND whereas several of the Freeholders of Port Royal may be, or are not
Resident or Inhabitants on the said Place, for the better Recovery of the said
Tax to be Assessed as aforesaid, Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, that in such Cases, from, Absent Freeholders.
and after the Twenty Fifth Day of July, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three,
an Action of Debt shall Lie in any Court of Record, or before any Justice of
the Peace, as in other Debts, for the Churchwardens of the respective Parish
of Port Royal, and their Successors to Recover against any of the said Persons
Rated, or Assessed by virtue of this Act, or any of them, or their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, Assigns, Agents or Attorneys here, all such Sum and
Sums of Money as are, or shall be Rated or Assessed upon them as aforesaid. And
that the same Rate or Assessment produced in such Court of Record, or before
such Justice of the Peace as aforesaid, shall be sufficient Evidence and Proof
for the Recovery of all such Sum or Sums Money so Rated or Assessed as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons being Seized, Possessed, or Interested of, or in any Ground which was
formerly builded upon, and the Houses thereupon being now Destroyed, Neglect of
Rebuilding.
or pulled Down at the times, or by the means of the late Dreadful Earthquake,
shall not within Three Years next Ensuing Build on the same, that then the
Judges of the Court of Common Pleas of the said Parish for the time being, or
any one of them, shall forthwith cause public Proclamation to be made, as well
at, or upon the said Ground, as also in the Courthouse of the said Parish,
thereby to give notice to all Persons that shall, or may be therein Concerned,
to cause the same to be rebuilded within the space of Nine Months then next
following, and in Case the Owners thereof, or other Person or Persons having
Interest therein, shall refuse or neglect to Rebuild the same within such time
as aforesaid, that then, and in such Case the said Judges of the said Court, or
any one of them, are hereby Authorized to Issue out their Warrants to the
Provost Marshal for the time being, requiring him to Impannel, and return
before them, or any one of them, a Jury of good and lawful Men of the said
Parish, which the said Provost Marshal is hereby Authorized and Required to do
accordingly, which Jury so Returned shall upon their Oaths to be Administered to
them by the said Judges, or one of them, who are likewise hereby Authorized to
Administer the same, Enquire, Estimate, and Assess the true and just Value of
such void Ground, according to their Judgments; and that from, and after such
Enquiry and Valuation thereof made as aforesaid, by Inquest of the said Jury,
it shall, and may be Lawful to, and for the said Judge or Judges to make Sale
of the Fee and Inheritance thereof, by Conveyance under his or their Hands and
Seals, to any Person or Persons that will Purchase the same at such Price, at
which the same shall have been so as aforesaid Estimated and Valued by the said
Jury, and the Moneys thereupon to be received of the Purchasers thereof, shall
forthwith be paid into the Hands of the Churchwardens of the said Parish for
the time being, and from thence to be issued out, and Paid by the said
Churchwardens for the time being, unto such Person or Persons, who shall have
any Estate or Interest in, to, or out of the same, according to his or their
respective Estate or Estates, Title or Interest, which Sale so made and
Enrolled in the Office of Enrolments of this Island, Sale to be Enrolled.
shall be Final and Conclusive to all other Persons whatsoever, and shall Bar
them, their Heirs and Assigns, to Claim any Estate, Right, Title, or Interest
of, in, or out of the Grounds so Sold, Precedent to the said Sale; and the
Purchaser or Purchasers thereof, his, and their Heirs and Assigns, shall, and
may by virtue of this Act, have, hold, and enjoy the same against all Persons
Claiming any Estate, Right, Title, or Interest in, to, or out of the same, his,
her, and their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, freed and
discharged of, and from Encumbrances in Estate, Title, Charge, or otherwise,
Precedent to the said Sale: Their Majesty's Quit-Rents only excepted.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, and it is
hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same, That the Receiver
General, and Naval Officer of this Island, shall by themselves, or lawful
Deputy, Offices to be kept on Port Royal.
keep their Offices on Port Royal, as at any time heretofore they have, or
ought to have done: and that the Secretary of this Island, shall from time to
time by his lawful. Deputy keep his Office at Port Royal, as at any time
heretofore has, now does, or ought to have done, under the Penalty of Fifty
Pounds for every Month the Receiver General, Naval Officer, or Secretary of
this Island, or any of them, shall neglect or refuse to do the same.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all,
and every the Fines and Forfeitures in this Act mentioned and contained, Fines,
etc. how disposed.
shall be one half to Their Majesty's, Their Heirs and Successors, for and
toward the Support of the Government of this Island, and the contingent
Charges thereof, and the other half to the Parish of Port Royal, for, and
toward the Wharfing, Repairing, and Maintaining the Wharfs so to be Made,
Repaired, and Maintained, as in this Act mentioned, and to, and for no other
Use, Intent, or Purpose whatsoever; to be recovered in any Court of Record
within this Island, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no
Essoin, Injunction, Protection, Wager of Law, or Nonvult ulterius prosequi,
shall be allowed, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

An ACT For Making and Clearing a Public Road from St. Mary's and St. George's
into the Parish of St. Andrew's.
Preamble.
WHEREAS by reason of the uncertainty of the Bounds of the Parishes of St.
Mary's, St. George's, and St. Andrew's, the Paths leading from St. Mary's and
St. George's, have not yet been Laid out and Cleared, to the great Hindrance
and Damage of the Inhabitants thereof; and it being requisite, as well for
Their Majesty's Service in Transporting speedy Succors to each Place, as for
the necessary use of Their Majesty's Liege People; that a Public Road be laid
out from the said Parishes of St. Mary's and St. George's, into the Parish of
St. Andrew's:

BE it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant-Governour, Council and
Assembly, And it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same:
That the Path or Road, as it is now used, The Cause of the Road.
from the Orange River Plantation, in the Parish or St. Mary's, over Little
Tom's River, and from thence over Viney Ridge, leaving the Plantation belonging
to Colonel Thomas Clarke to the Eastward, unto the Plantation late of Andrew
Holloway, deceased, at Wagwater, and so into the Parish of St. Andrew's, be a
Public Road, or King's Highway, between the said two Parishes of St. Mary's
and St. Andrew's; and that the Path or Road from Annotta River Bay in the
Parish of St. George's, leading toward St. Andrew's aforesaid, shall by its
nearest and most convenient Course fall into the Path coming from the said
Orange River in St. Mary's, upon a Ridge or Mountain, commonly called or known
by the Name of Mammee Ridge, and from thence forward along the said Path to
Little Tom's River, etc. And that the same be a Public Road, or King's
Highway, between the said two Parishes of St. George's and St. Andrew's as
aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Surveyors of the Highways for the Parish of St. Mary's, do yearly, and as
often as need shall require, clear and amend the said Road, Surveyors limited.
or Highway, from the Orange River aforesaid, over the said Mammee Ridge, unto
the Ford at the Foot of the said Hill at Little Tom's River aforesaid: and that
the Parish of St. George's also clear their Road or Highway from Annotta Bay
as aforesaid, unto the said Place, as it shall fall into the Path on Mammee
Ridge as aforesaid, coming from the said Orange River Plantation; and that the
Parish of St. Andrew's clear the said Ford and Road, or King's Highway,
leading from thence over Viney Ridge aforesaid, leaving the Plantation of the
said Colonel Thomas Clarke to the Eastward as aforesaid, unto the Plantation of
the said Andrew Holloway and Wagwater, and so forward into the Parish of St.
Andrew's.

AND it is hereby further Enacted, That the respective Surveyors of the
Highways, and Inhabitants of the Parishes of St. Mary's, St. George's, and St.
Andrew's, shall be severally subject to the like Pains and Penalties, Penalty
on neglect of Duty.
for their, or any of their neglect of their Duty therein, and be in the same
way and manner Recovered, and in the like manner applied, as is provided for
and appointed in the Act for the Highways, for the neglect of their several
Duties in the like kind.

Proviso.
PROVIDED always, That if at any time hereafter it shall be found necessary that
the said Path or Paths, or any part of them should be turned or altered: That
it shall, and may be done in such manner as in the said Act for the Highways
is provided and appointed in the said Act for turning, or altering Old-ways to
more Conveniences, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the Contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

An ACT Appointing the Prices of Meats, and Regulating Markets.
Preamble.
FOR Prevention of the many Hardships and Abuses that may be put upon the
Inhabitants of this Island, by those that Sell in Public Markets the several
sorts of Meats hereafter mentioned, and demand Extravagant Prices for the same;

BE it Enacted by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council, and Assembly
of this Island, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the
same, that no Person or Persons upon any pretense whatsoever, Selling in any
Public Market within this Island, any of the several Kinds of Meat hereafter
named, presume to Ask, Demand, or Receive for Fresh Beef, Beef, Goat, Mutton,
Veal, Hog.
or Goat, any more, higher, or greater Price, than Four Pence per Pound; Mutton
Six Pence; Veal, the Breast and Loin Nine Pence, and any other part thereof
Seven Pence Halfpenny the Pound; Hog, that weighs Twelve Pounds the Quarter,
or under, Seven Pence Halfpenny; and all weighing above, Six Pence the Pound;
Lamb or Kid, Seven Pence Half Penny the Pound: all which said Meat shall be
weighed without the Head, Entrails, or Feet, and no Suet to be sold at higher
Rates than the Meats aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Meat brought
into the Market, and offered after Cut up to be Sold for Veal, Beef for Veal.
weighing above Twenty Five Pounds the Quarter, shall be adjudged Beef, and for
Lamb weighing above Eight Pounds the Quarter, shall be deemed Mutton, and each
Sold by the Quarter or Joint, at the respective Prices in this Act
beforementioned.

AND to prevent Selling and putting off Old and small Mutton for Lamb, Mutton
for Lamb.
be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Lamb shall be
brought into the open Market with the Heads on, and shown before Cut up to the
Clerk thereof with the usual Signs and Marks of Distinction, that he upon
Scruple may Determine the Matter between Buyer and Seller.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Common Seller,
Butcher, Cutter up of Tortle, Tortle.
or any other Person whatsoever, Sell Tortle, or any of the Meats
beforementioned by Retail, but in open Market, where they shall not refuse to
Sell the same to any Person, bringing Ready Money, by the Quarter, Joint, or
Piece by weight, not less than the Value of Seven Pence Halfpenny at the Prices
aforesaid, without Conditionally imposing upon the Buyer the Head, Feet,
Inwards, or any part thereof, or Meat of any other Kind whatsoever; which Meat
so Bought, and Paid for, shall immediately be, or caused to be removed out of
the said Market by the Person Buying the same.

AND to the end that it may be understood what within this Act shall be
accounted the Public and Open Market, Be it Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, that the Place appointed by the Justices in Sessions for the Selling
there the several Sorts of Meat in this Act mentioned, shall be deemed the
Public Marketplace, Public Market, Place and Time.
and the Markets opening by the Ringing of the Bell by the Clerk thereof, or
his order; which on Saturdays shall be at three of the Clock after noon, and on
that, and all other days, Sundays excepted, at Five of the Clock in the
Morning, and not sooner; in which place, and after which time, the Market shall
be adjudged Open and Public, within this Act as aforesaid.

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from, and after the
Tenth Day of August, of this present Year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety
Three, that this Act, and every Clause thereof, is, and shall be of Force to
all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all, and every
Person whatsoever, Seller, Buyer, or Officer, that shall Offend against any
Particular in this Act mentioned, or contained, Forfeiture on Offending.
or any Branch thereof, he, she, or they so Offending, shall Forfeit Forty
Shillings for every such Offense, one half to the Churchwardens of the Parish
where such Offense shall be Committed, for the Use of the said Parish, the
other half to the Clerk of the Market, Informer, or who shall Sue for the same,
to be Recovered before any Justice of the Peace, any Law, Custom, or Usage to
the Contrary notwithstanding.

An ACT For Reimbursing Their Majesty's Treasury.
Preamble.
WHEREAS Their Majesty's Revenue is considerably Anticipated, the Principal
Branch of which is the Customs of Wines, and that great Quantities were lost at
Port Royal, in the late dreadful Earthquake.

WE, therefore, your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Assembly of
this your Island, do most humbly beseech your Majesty that it may be Enacted,
and be it Enacted by your Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council, and
Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same,
that from, and after the Seventeenth Day of this Instant August, One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Three, there shall be Raised, Levied, and Paid unto your
Majesty's for the Term, and time of Three Months, from, and after the said
Seventeenth Day of August, Impost on Wines.
and no longer, as an Additional Duty and Impost upon Madera Wines Imported,
over and above what is already payable for the same, viz. the Sum of Forty
Shillings for every Tun.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for every Slave
Exported by way of Merchandise, from, and after the said Seventeenth Day of
August, for the Term aforesaid, and no longer, the Exporter or Owner shall pay
the Sum of Twenty Shillings per Head, Negroes.
as an Impost to Their Majesty's, all which Negroes so Exported shall be Entered
in the Receiver-Generals Office, and immediately Bond given by the Owner or
Exporter to Their Majesty's, for the Payment of the Money into the Hand of the
Receiver-General, or his Lawful Deputy, within One Month after the Entry so
made as aforesaid.

AND whosoever shall persume after the said Seventeenth Day of August, to
Export any Slave or Slaves, and not make such Entry, and give Bond, and Pay as
before in this Act is Directed, Forfeiture upon Non-Entry of Slaves.
shall Forfeit for every such Slave so Exported, the Sum of Fifty Pounds, to
be Recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court of
Record within this Island, One Half to Their Majesty's, for and toward the
Support of the Government of this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof;
and the other Half to the Informer, or he or they that shall Sue for the same,
wherein no Essoyn, Injunction, Protection, Wager of Law, or Nonvult ulterius
prosequi shall be allowed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Merchant, or
other Person Importing any Madera Wines into this Island, Of Wines.
from and after the said Seventeenth Day of August, for and during the said
Term of Three Months, and no longer; do, and shall make Entry, make up
Accounts, and give Bonds to Pay the said Sums arising by Virtue of this Act,
according to the Way and Method, and under the same Penalty for not doing the
same, and to be Recovered in the same Manner as is Directed by an Act of this
Island, Entitled, An Act for Raising a Public Revenue for the Support of the
Government of this His MAJESTY's Island.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Money arising
by Virtue of this Act, shall be to the Use of Their Majesty's for the Support
of the Government of this Island, and the Contingent Charges thereof, and
toward the Repairing the Losses the Revenue has sustained by the Wines and
other Merchandises lost in the Earthquake.

An ACT To Reimburse Their MAJESTY'S Treasury, and Encourage Their Subjects to
come and Settle in this Island.
Preamble.
WHEREAS Their Majesty's Revenue is considerably Anticipated, the Principal
Branch of which, is the Customs of Wines, great Quantities whereof were lost at
Port Royal, in the late Dreadful Earthquake.

WE therefore Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Assembly of
this Your Island of Jamaica, do most humbly beseech Your Majesty's, That it may
be Enacted, and be it Enacted by Your Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council
and Assembly; and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, that from,
and after the Seventeenth Day of November, in this present Year One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Three, shall be Raised, Levied, and Paid unto Your
Majesty's, Your Heirs and Successors, for the Term and Time of Five Years, from
the said Seventeenth Day of November, and no longer, as an Additional Duty and
Impost, on the several Liquors hereafter mentioned, over and above what is
already payable for the same, Additional Duty on Wines.
viz. for every Tun of Spanish and Madera Wine imported into this Island, the
Sum of Forty Shillings; all Wines of the Growth of the Western Islands, or
Mixture of Madera Wines, with those of the Western Islands, the Sum of Five
Pound per Tun; for every Tun of French or Rhenish Wines, Thirty Shillings; for
every Tun of Beer or Syder, Four Shillings; for every Tun of Mumm or Metheglin,
Twenty Shillings; for every Gallon of Brandy, Six Pence; for every Gallon of
English Spirits, Three Pence, and so proportionably for a Greater or Lesser
Quantity. All which said Liquors shall be duly Entered, and under the same
Penalties and Regulations as in a former Act of this Country, Entitled, An Act
for Raising a Public Revenue for the Support of the Government of this His
Majesty's Island.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for
every Slave exported from this Island by way of Merchandise, the Exporter or
Owner shall Pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings, On Slaves.
as an Impost to Their Majesty's, for and during the Term and Time of Five
Years aforesaid, excepting only such Slaves, who by Misdemeanor shall by the
Judgment of Two Justices of the Peace and Three Freeholders, be ordered to be
Transported off this Island, by the Master or Owner of such Slave or Slaves.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That out of
the several Sum or Sums of Money arising by Virtue of this Act, and one other
Act, Entitled, An Act to Reimburse Their Majesty's Treasury, made this present
Session; there shall be first Deducted and Paid unto Their Majesty's, Deduction
to Their Majesty's.
to and for the Use of Their Majesty's, the Sum of One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Seventy Four Pounds Sixteen Shillings, as a Sum equivalent to Their
Majesty's, for the Customs of Wines lost in the Earthquake.

AND be it further Enacted, That upon due Proof made in the Supreme Court of
Judicature, an Action of Debt shall lie for Their Majesty's against any Person
whatsoever, Bond not produced.
their Executors, Administrators, or Attorneys that stand Indebted to Their
Majesty's for Customs, whether Bond be given or not, without being obliged to
produce it; the giving of which shall not be pleaded in Bar, except by the
Persons named, and for the Sums in this Act mentioned. Provided also, that if
the Bond for the said Debt, supposed to be lost, shall afterward be found and
put in Suit, that then the said Judgment shall be, and be pleaded in Bar to the
same, and that the said Actions be brought within Two Courts after this Act
becomes in Force.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That after
the Deduction and Payment of the said Sum of One Thousand Seven Hundred
Seventy Four Pounds Sixteen Shillings unto Their Majesty's, Remainder after
Deduction.
the remainder of the Moneys arising by Virtue of this Act, and the Act
beforementioned, shall be and remain as a Fund to Encourage such of Their
Majesty's Subjects, or others as are willing to Transport themselves hither,
and be applied to no other Use, Intent, or Purpose whatsoever.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whereas Benjamin
Way, Joseph Seargeant, William Hutchinson, Case of some Private Persons.
Francis Hall and Edmond Edlyn, stand indebted to Their Majesty's in the
several Sums following, viz. Benjamin Way, in the Sum of Nine Hundred Twenty
One Pounds Twelve Shillings; Joseph Seargeant, in the Sum of One Hundred
Eighty Seven Pounds Four Shillings; William Hutchinson, in the Sum of One
Hundred and Four Pounds; Francis Hall, in the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds, and
Edmond Edlyn in the Sum of One Hundred and Sixty Two Pounds, which said Sums
were due to Their Majesty's for the Customs of Wines which were lost in the
Earthquake: The said Benjamin Way, Joseph Seargeant, William Hutchinson,
Francis Hall and Edmond Edlyn, and every of them, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators shall be, and are hereby for ever indemnified and saved Harmless
against Their Majesty's, Their Heirs and Successors, from Payment of the said
several Sums due from the said several Persons, or any Part thereof, as also
from all manner of Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, against them, or any of
them, their, or any of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns for the same,
already commenced, or to be commenced; and if all, or any of the Persons
aforesaid, be Sued or Impleaded, they may Plead the General Issue, and give
this Act in Evidence; any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Encouragement for Settlers.
AND to the end it may be understood what sort of People are by this Act
intended to be Encouraged, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Tradesmen, and other Persons of what Calling or Condition soever, not able to
Pay their Passages, excepting Jews, Cripples and Children under Eleven Years of
Age, who upon Encouragement of this Act, are willing to Transport themselves to
this Island, shall upon Repairing to any Master or Commander of any Ship or
Vessel Bound for this Island, Passage paid, and Person free.
be received on Board his Ship or Vessel, and after his or their Arrival in
this Island, be Free from all manner of Servitude whatsoever, and have Liberty
to Hire, and Employ him, her, or themselves here, how they think fit, in any
Honest Trade, Service or Calling; and the Captain, Master, or Commander of such
Ship or Vessel shall receive of the Treasurers named and appointed by this Act,
for the Passage of every Person so Transporting him or themselves from England
or Scotland, the Sum of Seven Pounds Ten Shillings, and for every Person from
Ireland, the Sum of Six Pounds current Money of this Island, without Fraud or
Delay.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for each Person so
brought hither from Europe, the Captain, Captains, etc. Encouraged.
Master, or Commander of each Ship or Vessel, shall for his Encouragement, and
to his own Use receive of the said Treasurer or Treasurers, the Sum of Twenty
Shillings per Head, over and above the said Sums.

AND whereas several of their Majesty's Subjects under the qualifications
aforesaid, Residing at New England, New York, Carolina, or other Parts of
America, the Windward Islands, and Providence, may upon the Encouragement of
this Act be willing to Transport themselves to this Island:

BE it therefore Enacted, that all Masters or Commanders, of any Vessel or
Vessels, that shall Import any such Persons before mentioned, shall for every
Person so brought from New England, Persons from other Plantations.
New York, Carolina, or other parts of America, receive the Sum of Three Pounds
Ten Shillings; and for every Person brought from Providence and the Windward
Islands, the Sum of Forty Shillings current Money of this Island, without Fraud
or Delay; and that the Master, or Commander of every Vessel, who shall Import
any Persons by Encouragement of this Act from New England, New York, Carolina,
or other parts of America, the Windward Islands and Providence, shall receive
the Sum of Ten Shillings per Head, to, and for his Own proper Use and Benefit,
over and above the Sums aforesaid, for the Passage of each Person.

AND be it likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Master or Masters of any Vessel or Vessels, who shall Import any Passenger upon
the Credit of this Act, shall within Forty Eight Hours after his, or their
Arrival, Deliver to the Secretary of this Island, or his Lawful Deputy upon
Oath, which said Oath the Secretary is hereby Empowered to Administer, a fair
written List of all such Persons as he, A List to be given.
or they shall have brought to this Island: in which List shall be contained
the Names, Surnames, Age, Trade, and Country of all, and every the said Person
and Persons, as also if Single or Married, which said List the Secretary, or
his Lawful Deputy, is forthwith to enter in a Book to be kept for that purpose,
and then to Transmit the same, with his Certificate Indorsed, to the Treasurer
or Treasurers, receiving for the same the Sum of Two Shillings and Sixpence
from the said Treasurer or Treasurers, who are hereby Ordered and Required upon
receipt thereof to pay the said Master or Masters, the several Sums for the
respective Passages, as is above Directed.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for
the well, and truly Assessing, Collecting, Levying, and paying in all, and
every the Sum and Sums of Money arising by virtue of this Act, all Merchants,
and others Importing any of the Wines and Liquors aforesaid, do, Entry to be
made, and Bond given:
and shall make Entry in the Office of the Receiver-General for the time being,
after the same manner and methods as is prescribed in an Act of this Country,
Entitled, An Act for Raising a Public Revenue, for the Support of the
Government of this His Majesty's Island: all which said Entries of this
Additional Duty, and Impost on Negroes, by virtue of this Act laid on, shall be
kept in a Book apart, and distinct from the other Branches of Their Majesty's
Revenue; and all Bonds for their Additional Impost shall be taken in Their
Majesty's Names, and the Money arising thereon, as it shall become Due, shall be
paid into the Hands of the Receiver-General, and be by him Paid over to the
Treasurer or Treasurers, by virtue of this Act appointed, within Twenty Days
after the Receipt thereof: For the taking the said Bonds, and making the said
Entries, Receiving and Paying the said Moneys, the Receiver-General, or his
Lawful Deputy, shall retain to himself Two and a Half per Cent. and no more,
any Law, Custom, or Usage to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for
all such quantities of any of the Liquors beforementioned, as the Customs Due
for the same, Custom under 5 l.
shall amount to but Five Pounds or under, no Bonds shall be taken, or Credit
given after the Entry thereof; but the Customs for the same shall be
immediately Paid to the Receiver-General, or his lawful Deputy, and by him Paid
over into the Hands of the Treasurer or Treasurers, as is before Directed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Negroes to be
Exported, shall be Entered in the Receiver-Generals Office, Negro's Exported.
and immediately Bond given by the Owner or Exporter, to Their Majesty's, for
the payment of the Money into the Hands of the Receiver-General, or his lawful
Deputy, within one Month after the Entry so made as aforesaid, and whosoever
shall presume after the said Seventeenth Day of November, in this present Year,
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, to Export any Slave or Slaves, and not
make such Entry, and give Bond, and Pay as before in this Act is Directed,
shall Forfeit for every such Slave so Exported, the Sum of Fifty Pounds.

AND forasmuch as the present Necessity many require the Advancement of Money
upon the Credit of this Act, Money advanced.
Be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall,
and may be lawful for any Person or Persons whatsoever, to Advance and Lend
unto Their Majesty's upon the Credit of this Act any Sum, or Sums of Money, not
exceeding One Thousand Pounds in the whole, and to have, and receive for the
Loan of the said Money so Lent and Advanced, after the rate of Twelve Pounds Ten
Shillings per Cent. per Annum.

AND to the End that the said Money that shall be Lent unto Their Majesty's upon
the Credit hereof, may be well and sufficiently secured, Be it further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, that all, and every Person and Persons, who shall
Advance and Lend unto Their Majesty's any Sum or Sums of Money, not exceeding
One Thousand Pounds in the whole, as aforesaid, upon the Credit of this Act,
and actually Pay the same into the Hands of the Treasurer, or Treasurers for
the time being, shall be by the Treasurer or Treasurers, How to be repaid.
upon the first Payment of Moneys that shall be Paid into his, or their Hands
by virtue of this Act, after Deduction, and Payment of the said Sum of One
Thousand Seven Hundred Seventy Four Pounds Sixteen Shillings to Their Majesty's
as aforesaid, be forthwith Paid unto the Person or Persons so lending the said
Sums, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns successively, as they shall
become Due, with the Interest aforesaid, for discharge of the Money so Lent and
Advanced, without Fee or Change.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Honorable Samuel Bernard, and Nicholas
Law, Esquires, and James Bradshaw, William Hutchinson, Thomas Clarke, Modyford
Freeman, and James Banister, Esquires, be, and are hereby Required and
Empowered to nominate and appoint from time to time, Managers appointed.
such fit Person or Persons in England, Scotland, Ireland, New England, New
York, or any other Parts of America, or elsewhere, as they, or the Major part
of them, shall think fit, to make known the purport of this Act as aforesaid,
for the giving Notice to such Persons as are willing to Transport themselves
hither upon the Encouragement thereof.

AND in Case of the Death, Absence, or Refusal of any of the Persons
aforementioned, That then it shall, and may be lawful for the Persons
Remaining, or Surviving, or the Major part of them, to choose to themselves
such other Person or Persons, as they shall think fit, to act in the room or
stead of him, or them that shall Remove, In case of Death and how to be
supplied.
Decease, or Refuse, and that the Person or Persons so Chosen shall be, and are
Empowered to act as fully, and freely, to all Intents and Purposes, as if he,
or they had been mentioned and appointed by Name in this Act: and the Persons
therein nominated and appointed as aforesaid, shall from time to time continue
to act, and do all, and every such thing and things as by this Act they are
Empowered and Required to perform.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Commissioners appointed by virtue of this Act, or the Major part of them, from
time to time are hereby Required and Empowered as often as they shall think
convenient, to choose one, or more of themselves to Receive, Receivers how
chosen.
and Pay the Money arising by virtue of this Act, for the Uses and Purposes
herein mentioned; of the Receipt of all which the Treasurer or Treasurers for
the time being, shall keep an exact and distinct Account, as also of all
Payments made for the Uses and Purposes by this Act required, and render a Just
and True Account thereof, when thereunto demanded, unto the rest of the Persons
in this Act nominated and appointed, or the Major part of them, or unto the
Assembly of this Island when Sitting and Assembled; and if the said Treasurer
or Treasurers for the Time being, after the Receipt of any of the said Moneys,
shall divert or misapply the same, or any part thereof by any pretense
whatsoever, otherwise than before intended and directed, contrary to the true
intent and meaning of this Act; the Person or Persons so Offending shall
Forfeit to Their Majesty's, Forfeiture for Misapplication.
for, and toward the Support, of the Government of this Island, and the
contingent Charges thereof, double the Sum so diverted and misapplied; and the
said Treasurer or Treasurers for the time being shall be allowed Two and a Half
per Cent. for defraying his, or their Charges, in, or about the discharge of
the Trust hereby in him, or them reposed.

AND whereas after the Expiration of this Act, some of the Moneys arising by
virtue hereof, may remain in the Hands of the Treasurer or Treasurers for the
time being, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that such Sum
or Sums of Money, if any be, Surplus of Money.
in the Hands of the said Treasurer or Treasurers, shall, notwithstanding the
Expiration of this Act, be there, and still in his or their Hands remain, and
be Employed to the Uses and Intents in this Act appointed.

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Secretary of this
Island shall from time to time, upon demand, Copies of this Act to be delivered.
give Copy or Copies of this Act to any Person without delay or excuse, for
every of which he shall receive the Fee or Sum of Ten Shillings, and in Case he
shall delay, or refuse to give such Copy or Copies as aforesaid, to any Person
or Persons demanding the same, he shall for every Copy so demanded, and not
given, Forfeit the Sum of Forty Shillings, to be recovered before any Justice
of the Peace.

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
Receiver-General, or his lawful Deputy, shall refuse to make Entry, and do, and
perform all, and every such thing or things as by this Act, or any Branch
thereof is enjoined him; Forfeiture of the Receiver-General on Refusal of Entry.
he shall Forfeit for every such Offense the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds Current
Money of this Island, and all other Person or Persons Offending contrary to the
true Intent and Meaning of this Act, shall Forfeit for every such Offense,
wherein Penalties are not already laid, the Sum of One Hundred Pounds: the
Moiety of all the Forfeitures within this Act mentioned, shall be to Their
Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, for, and toward the Support of the
Government of this Island, and the contingent Charges thereof, and the other
Moiety to the Informer, or he that shall Sue for the same, to be Recovered by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record, within this
Island, where no Essoin, Protection, Wager of Law, or Nonvult ulterius prosequi
shall be allowed, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

An ACT For Raising Money to Solicit in England, the Affairs of this Their
Majesty's Island.
Preamble.
WHEREAS Their Majesty's Island of Jamaica, has diverse times lain under great
Disadvantages, through the Misrepresentation of the Proceedings and Interests
thereof, which has chiefly happened for want of some fit Persons fully
Instructed to appear in England, and there truly Represent and Solicit the
same: And inasmuch as Their Majesty's have been Graciously pleased to permit
the raising Three Hundred Pounds Sterling, per Annum, to be Employed to the
Use, and to prevent the Disadvantage above expressed, and that by a modest
Calculation of the said Sum, it appears that Four Hundred and Fifty Pounds,
current Money of this Island of Jamaica, the Charges of Collecting, and
Receivers Charges for the Receipt, and the Exchange in remitting the same being
included, will not amount or produce more than the said Sum of Three Hundred
Pounds Sterling Money of England:

THE Assembly do therefore most humbly beseech Your most Excellent Majesty's,
That it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted, by the Lieutenant-Governour, Council
and Assembly; and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, Four
Hundred and Fifty Pounds to be raised.
That the said Sum of Four Hundred and Fifty Pounds, current Money of this
Island, for the making Good the said Sum of Three Hundred Pounds Sterling
Money of England, and defraying the Charges of collecting, receiving, and
remitting the same, be raised, levied, and paid within Three Months after the
Tenth Day of August, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, and so the said
Sum to be raised, levied, and paid yearly, and every Year, for and during the
full Time and Term of Eleven Years, Time limited.
to and for the Uses abovementioned, to be paid by the Inhabitants of the
several Parishes within this Island, into the Hands of such Person or Persons
who shall from time to time be appointed by the Commissioners hereafter named,
or the major Part of them, to be Receiver or Receivers of the same, according
to the several Rates and Proportions hereafter following: That is to say, Rates
of the several Parishes.
for the Parish and Town of Port Royal, Forty Nine, Pounds Ten Shillings and
Ten Pence; for the Parish of St. Andrews, Fifty Two Pounds Seventeen Shillings
and Five Pence; for the Parish of St. Katherines, Fifty Six Pounds Sixteen
Shillings and Three Pence; for the Parish of Sr. Dorothy, Twenty Five Pounds
Three Shillings and One Penny; for the Parish of Vere, Forty Seven Pounds One
Shilling and Eight Pence; for the Parish of Clarendon, Forty Two Pounds One
Shilling and Eight Pence; for the Parish of Sr. Elizabeth, Fifty One Pound Six
Shillings and Eight Pence; for the Parish of St. Thomas, to Windward, Twenty
Seven Pounds Ten Shillings; for the Parish of Sr. David's, Sixteen Pounds and
Eleven Pence; for the Parish of Sr. Thomas in the Vale, Twenty One Pound Nine
Shillings; for the Parish of Sr. John's, Fifteen Pounds Eight Shillings and
Three Pence; for the Parish of St. George's, Three Pounds Thirteen Shillings
and-Six Pence; for the Parish of St. Mary's, Eleven Pounds Five Shillings and
Seven Pence; for the Parish of St. Ann's, Seven Pounds Thirteen Shillings and
Six Pence; for the Parish of St. James, Two Pounds Sixteen Shillings and Eight
Pence; for the Town and Parish of Kingston, Nineteen Pounds and Five Shillings.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Justices and Vestry-men for the time being, in their respective Parishes
aforesaid; and where no Vestry is, the Justices by themselves within the Limits
of their several Commissions, are hereby Empowered and Required at the usual
times of Assessing their Parish-Tax, Assessors.
to Assess, Tax and Levy, for the said Term of Eleven Years, the several Sums
over and above the usual Taxes assessed and raised on the several Parishes by
Virtue of an Act of this Island, Entitled, An Act for the Maintenance of
Ministers and the Poor, and Erecting and Repairing of Churches.

AND whereas in some Parishes there may not be Money in the Churchwardens
Hands for the paying of the Tax above assessed for this present Year, it is
therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That then the Churchwardens of
such Parish or Parishes, Money to be advanced.
and where no Churchwardens are, the Justices themselves within the Limits of
their Commissions, do Pay the said Sum or Sums as is above Assessed for this
present Year in such manner as is hereafter Directed, under the Penalty of Ten
Pounds each, for refusing to Pay the same.

AND for the Reimbursing the said Churchwardens or Justices, who do by Virtue
of this Act, Advance and Pay the said Parish-Tax for this present Year, it
shall and may be Lawful for the said Justices and Vestry, and where no Vestry
is, the Justices themselves, within the Limits of their respective Commissions,
are hereby Required and Empowered, That at the next usual time of Assessing
their Parish-Tax, that they Assess such Sum or Sums of Money as shall have
been Lent and Advanced by the Churchwardens or Justices, as is above Required;
which Money so Assessed and Levied, shall be by the Churchwardens, and where
no Churchwardens are, How to be reimbursed.
by the Justices within the Limits of their respective Commissions, paid unto
the Hands of the Persons so Lending the Money for this present Year, with
Lawful Interest for the same; which said Sum, with the said Interest, shall be
Paid by the Churchwardens or Justices, or where no Churchwardens are, by the
Justices within the Limits of their respective Commissions, on Demand, under
Penalty of double the Sum so Lent, and Demanded as aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Sums
yearly to be Collected as aforesaid, shall for this present Year, and the Years
ensuing, during the time mentioned in this Act, be Paid by the Churchwardens
or Justices of each respective Parish, within Twenty One Days after their
Receipt thereof, Time of Payment.
into the Hands of the Receiver, or Receivers, Empowered to Receive the same;
and if any of the Justices, Churchwardens, Vestry-men, or Constables shall
neglect his or their Duty in Assessing, Levying, or Paying the said Sums which
are above required to be Assessed, Levied and Paid, he or they so neglecting or
failing of his or their Duty therein, shall respectively Forfeit for every such
Offense, the Sum of Fifty Pounds.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Money so
Raised and Paid as aforesaid, into the Hands of the said Receiver or Receivers
for the time being, shall by them be yearly remitted on the Countries Risque,
in such manner as they shall think fit, into the Hands of Gilbert Heathcote, To
whom remitted.
Bartholomew Gracedieu, and John Tutt, of London Merchants, or any One of them,
or such other Person or Persons as shall from time to time be appointed to
Solicit in England, the Public Affairs of this Island as Occasion shall
require, and as to them shall seem most to the Interest and Advantage thereof.

AND in Case of the Death, Absence, or Refusal of any of the Solicitors
beforementioned, or the Commissioners hereafter mentioned in this Act, that
then the Persons remaining, or surviving, or the major Part of them, do choose
to themselves such other Person or Persons as they shall think fit, in the room
or stead of him or them that shall Remove, Decease, or Refuse; and that the
Person or Persons so chosen, shall here and in England, each for themselves, be
Empowered to Act as fully to all Intents and Purposes in each Place, as if he
or they had been mentioned and appointed by Name in this Act.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable
Samuel Bernard, and Nicholas Law Esquires, and James Bradshaw, William
Hutchinson, Thomas Clarke, James Banister, and Modyford Freeman Esquires,
Commissioners and Receivers.
shall be, and are hereby Empowered and Appointed to be Commissioners; and
they, or the major Part of them, from time to time, to appoint one or more of
themselves to be Receiver or Receivers of the Money by this Act to be raised.

AND whereas at this present Sessions there are General Instructions drawn up
by the Council and Assembly, for Direction to the Solicitors in England, the
Commissioners named in this Act, Instructions to be observed.
are at no time to Order any thing contrary to any Particulars contained
therein, but fully to observe and be directed thereby, any thing in this Act
seeming to the contrary notwithstanding; which said Instructions are to be
Signed by the Clerk of the Council, and the Speaker of the Assembly, and be
Entered in the Minutes of both Houses.

PROVIDED nevertheless, That the Commissioners beforementioned, Farther
Instructions.
may from time to time upon any sudden or emergent Occasions, give to the
Solicitors in England such further Instructions as they shall think fit for the
Public Service of this Island.

AND in case it shall be thought fit at any time hereafter to turn out or alter
any of the Solicitors in England, that then the said Commissioners, or major
Part of them, are hereby empowered from time to time to turn out, Solicitors
changed.
or alter as aforesaid, all or any of the Solicitors in this Act mentioned.

AND be it further Enacted, That the Person or Persons so named to be Receiver
or Receivers shall receive and pay all such Sum or Sums of Money as shall
come to his or their Hands, arising by Virtue of this Act: Of all which the
Receiver or Receivers for the time being, shall keep an Exact and Distinct
Account of all Payments, and Remittances made for the Uses and Purposes by this
Act required, Account to be given:
and render a Just and True Account thereof when demanded, unto the rest of the
Commissioners in this Act nominated, or the major Part of them, when thereunto
required, or to the Assembly of this Island, when sitting and assembled, of all
the Sum and Sums of Money by him or them received, by Virtue of this Act, and
how laid out or remitted; and if the said Receiver or Receivers for the time
being, after the Receipt of any of the said Money, shall divert or misapply the
same, or any Part thereof, by any Pretense whatsoever, otherwise than before
intended and directed, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, the
Person or Persons so Offending, shall Forfeit to Their Majesty's, for and
toward the Support of the Government of this Island, and the contingent
Charges thereof, double the Sum so diverted or misapplied; and the said
Receiver or Receivers for the time being, shall be allowed all his or their
reasonable Expenses, in or about the Discharge of the Trust hereby reposed in
him or them, Expenses allowed.
Commission or pretense of Commission hereby excepted; and in case the Receiver
or Receivers for the time being, shall Neglect or Refuse to remit the aforesaid
Sum or Sums of Money when received yearly, and every Year during the
continuance of the Act, to the Solicitors in England, shall Forfeit for every
such Offense, the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That one
Half of the Forfeiture contained in this Act, Forfeitures applied.
and not herein applied, shall be to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and
Queen, Their Heirs and Successors, for and toward the Support of the
Government of this Island, and the contingent Charges thereof, the other Half
to him or them that shall Sue for the same, which said Forfeitures shall be
recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information, in any of Their
Majesty's Courts of Record within this Island, wherein no Essoyn, Injunction,
Protection, Wager of Law, or Nonvult ulterius prosequi shall be allowed; any
Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An ACT For Guarding the Seacoasts.
WHEREAS since this present War with the French King, Their Majesty's
Subjects, Preamble.
Inhabiting the Seacoasts of this Island, have been, and still are frequently
alarmed, and for their own Safety and Security of the Island in general, are
obliged to keep constant Guards, and Look-outs, which by reason of the Scarcity
of White Men, is found to fall very severely upon the poorer sort of People, to
their great Disencouragement, and even Chasing them away from their Habitations
and Settlements:

WE therefore Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Assembly of
this Your Majesty's Island; do humbly beseech Your Majesty's, That it may be
Enacted, and be it Enacted by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council and
Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same,
That the Justices and Vestry, or the major Part of them, or the Justices within
the Commissions of the Peace, where they have no Vestries, in all and every the
Parishes of this Island adjacent to the Sea, and exposed to the immediate
Incursions of an Enemy, shall, and are hereby Empowered, and Required to raise,
Money how to be raised.
or cause to be levied, such Sum and Sums of Money, as to them by the Advice
of the Chief Military Officer of that Place shall seem necessary for the
Maintaining and Keeping Night-Watches, Guards, or Look-outs, in such Place and
Places as to them shall seem most proper and convenient for the Securing of the
Inhabitants, and Discovering and Preventing the Approach of the Enemy; and all
and every such Sum or Sums of Money as shall be thought needful as aforesaid,
to pay the said Guards, Night-Watches, or Look-outs, shall be by them the said
Justices and Vestry, and in case of no Vestry, by the Justices within the
Commission of the Peace for the said Parish, laid or assessed, levied or taxed
upon the several Inhabitants, with and in such method, manner, time and form,
as the Parish-Taxes in their several and respective Parishes are, or ought to
be raised, levied and taxed; and the said Sum or Sums of Money so raised or
levied, shall be Collected with the Parish-Tax, that is, and shall be yearly
raised by an Act of this Island, Entitled, An Act for the Maintenance of
Ministers and the Poor, and Erecting and Repairing of Churches, by the
Constable or Constables of the several Parishes or Precincts, and by them
forthwith paid into the Hands of the Churchwarden or Churchwardens for the
time being, who shall, and are hereby required to Issue forth and Pay the same
to such Person or Persons employed in Guarding, Watching, or on Look-outs as
aforesaid, by Warrant from the Chief Officer of that Place: And that all and
every Person or Persons so employed and entrusted in Guarding, Watching,
Failure in Duty.
and for Look-outs that shall fail or neglect his or their Duty, according to
the Charge and Trust given them, shall be liable to such Pains and Punishments,
as if the Articles of War were now at such time in Force in this Island to be
inflicted on them for such their Neglect.

AND that for this present Year, the said Justices with in their said several
Parishes, or within the Commission of the Peace for the same, shall within Ten
Days after the Fifteenth Day of September, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety
Three, call and warn the Vestry-men to appear at a certain Day, Time and Place,
as to them shall seem convenient, Justices, etc. empowered.
who are hereby, then and there, Empowered to make, and lay such Tax as to
them, by the Advice of the Military Officer of that Place, shall be thought
needful for the Maintaining and Keeping such Guards, Watches and Look-outs, as
shall be thought requisite for the Security of the Inhabitants, and preventing
Incursions of the Enemy, and that in such Parishes where there is no Vestry,
the Justices within the Commission of the Peace, shall lay such Tax as shall be
thought requisite; and cause the same to be levied and employed as aforesaid;
and for the Receiving and Collecting of the said Tax, the Constable shall
retain to himself Twelve Pence in the Pound for the Levying and Collecting the
same, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

Parish of Vere considered.
AND whereas several of the Inhabitants of the Parish of Vere, have for the
general Good, and particularly for the Safeguard of their Parish, subscribed to
a Paper in the whole Sum of their Parish Tax, they were asses'd at the last
Year, and paid the same by way of Loan unto Their Majesty's, for keeping such
Guards, and Night-Watches as aforesaid, until they could be otherwise provided
for by an Act of the Assembly; nevertheless, many of the Inhabitants of the
said Parish have neglected and refused to Pay the same;

BE it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Justices and Vestry of they said Parish are hereby Required and Empowered at
their first Meeting, in Order to the Maintaining Guards, and Lookouts, as
aforesaid, to Tax, Raise, and cause to be Levied such Sum or Sums of Money as
shall be made appear to them necessary to reimburse such Persons as have paid
and expended their Money for the Watches and Safeguard of the said Parish,
according to the Subscriptions as aforesaid, over and above what it shall be
thought necessary by the Justices and Vestry, with the Advice of the Chief
Military Officer, to Raise and Assess on the several Inhabitants for
Maintaining their Guards and Look-outs as aforesaid; which said Sum and Sums
of Money so Levied as aforesaid, shall be by the Churchwardens forthwith paid
unto such Person or Persons that have deposited and disburs'd their Money for
Guarding and Look-outs according to the Subscriptions aforesaid.

AND whereas in some Parishes by reason of their long Tracts of Land on the Sea
Coasts, it will prove impossible to keep sufficient Look-outs to give Warning
of the Enemies approach, without the help of Beacons: Be it therefore Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices and Vestry, Beacons to be erected.
or the Justices within the Commission of the Peace where there is no Vestry,
shall Assess and Levy at the usual time and times in manner aforesaid, such
Sum and Sums of Money to erect and keep such and so many Beacons, and in such
convenient Place and Places, as a Regimental Court Martial shall think fit.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Justice or Justices of the Peace, Churchwarden or Churchwardens that shall
neglect or fail in the Execution of his or their Duty as aforesaid, shall
Forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds, for such his Neglect or Default, Forfeiture
upon Default.
and for every Vestry-man or Constable, the Sum of Forty Shillings, to be
recovered by Action of Debt, if not above Forty Shillings, before any Justice
of the Peace, and if above-Forty Shillings, in any Court of Record within this
Island, wherein no Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed, the
one Half of which Forfeiture as aforesaid, shall be for and toward the
maintaining Guards and Look-outs, within the Parish where the Fault was
committed, and the other Half to the Informer, or him that shall Sue for the
same; any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided
always, that this Act, and all and every thing and things therein contained,
shall be and continue in Force during the War with France, and no longer.

An ACT For Raising Money as a farther Aid to Their MAJESTY'S, for and toward
the Defense of this Their Island of Jamaica.
WHEREAS the Provision heretofore made for the Security and Defense of this
Their Majesty's Island, Preamble.
has been found Insufficient, and the French continue still to make daily
Depredations and Descents upon the Parts adjacent to the Sea, and take off, and
carry away great Numbers of Slaves, and other Goods of considerable Value, to
the Ruin of several of Their Majesty's good Subjects, and Impoverishing the
whole Island; for prevention of which, and disabling the Enemy, a greater Force
is absolutely necessary;

WE therefore Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Assembly of
this Their Island of Jamaica, having taken into our serious Consideration, how
injurious the Ruin and Destruction of this their Plantation, may in time prove
to Their Imperial Crown, and being ready and willing to provide further Aid for
Their Majesty's Island aforesaid, and Resistance of Their Enemy; have
unanimously given and granted, and do hereby give and grant unto Their
Majesty's, for and toward the continuance of the Two Sloops of War, already in
Their Majesty's Service, with an Addition of Twenty Men more to each Sloop, and
also toward the Buying, or Hiring, Providing, Victualling, or Manning of Two
more Sloops of War, each consisting of Sixty effective Officers, Seamen, and
Soldiers inclusively, all which said Four Sloops of War to be employed for Six
Months toward the Defense of this Island, Force to be augmented.
and guarding the Seacoasts thereof, and in Cruising with Their Majesty's
Frigates, or such other Vessel or Vessels as shall be Impressed into their
Service about the same, and Attacking, and Destroying the Enemy, and also for
continuing of Two Parties for the like time of Six Months, consisting each of
Two Officers, and Ten Soldiers, for Reducing of Rebellious Negroes, the full
entire Sum of Seven Thousand Five Hundred Pound, current Money of this Island;
and also the Sum of One Thousand Nine Hundred Seventy Three Pound Fourteen
Shillings and Four Pence, formerly Raised, and not yet applied, by an Act made
this last Session of this present Assembly, Entitled, An Act for Raising Money,
for, and toward the Defense of this Island: The whole amounting to Nine
Thousand Four Hundred Seventy Three Pound Fourteen Shillings and Four Pence,
and do most humbly beseech Their Majesty's to accept the same, and that it may
be Enacted:

AND be it therefore Enacted by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council,
and Assembly of this Island, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the
Authority of the same, Sum to be raised.
that the said Sum of Seven Thousand Five Hundred Pound current Money of this
Island, be Assessed, Taxed, and laid on by the several and respective Parishes,
or Precincts, or within the Commission of the Peace for the same, within this
Island where they have any lawful Vestries, and where they have no lawful
Vestries by the Justices of that Parish or Precinct, or within the Commission
of the Peace for the same, or major part of the Vestry, in all, and every the
said Parish or Parishes in this Island, on all, and every Person within their
several and respective Parish or Precinct, by an equal and just Tax, to be paid
within Three Months after the Tenth Day of November, which shall be in the Year
of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, by the respective Parishes
of this Their Majesty's Island of Jamaica, into the Hands of the Receiver or
Receivers hereafter named, according to the several Rates, and Proportions
hereafter mentioned, in such sort and manner as by this present Act shall be
limited and appointed, and in no other way or manner whatsoever, that is to
say: for every Negroe, Mulatto, or Indian Slave within this Island, of what
Age, Condition, or Quality soever, or to whom soever belonging, shall be paid
for by their Masters, Proprietors, Owners, Possessors, Guardians, or Persons
Entrusted in the several Plantations, Pens, Crawles or Settlements within this
Island, the Sum of Two Shillings for each Negro, Indian, Slaves and Cattle
taxed.
or Mulatto Slave as aforesaid, and also for all Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules,
Asses, and Neat Cattle, the Sum of Nine Pence for each Beast, and for all
Sheep, Lambs, Goats, and Kids, the Sum of Two Shillings Six Pence per Score,
and so in proportion for a greater or lesser Quantity.

AND for the Parish of Port Royal, it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Justices and Vestry shall Lay, Assess, Levy, and
cause to be Levied Sixteen Pence in the Pound on all Rents, Rents and Trades.
to be paid by all Tenants, and allowed by their Landlords, and Proprietors,
and on all Leases, to be paid by the Lessee, and allowed by the Lessor out of
their Rents, and also on the several Inhabitants for their several Trades,
Occupations, and Callings as much, and one third more in proportion, than they
were Rated, Assessed, and Taxed by the Justices and Vestry, in the Parish-Roll,
on Port Royal aforesaid, for this present Year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety
Three, and also on all Persons Residing at the Towns of St. Jago de la Vega,
Sixteen Pence in the Pound on all Rents to be Paid by all Tenants, and allowed
by their Landlords and Proprietors, and on all Leases to be Paid by the Lessee,
and allowed by the Lessor, out of all their Rents, and also according to the
Rate, Tax, and Sum Assessed by the Justices and Vestry of St. Katharines for
this present Year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, and for the Persons
Residing in the Town and Parish of Kingston, Sixteen Pence in the Pound on all
Rents, to be Paid by all Tenants, and allowed by their Landlords and
Proprietors, and on all Leases, to be paid by the Lessee, and allowed by the
Lessor out of their Rents, and for their several Trades, Occupations, and
Callings, to be Rated, Assessed, and Taxed by the Justices of the said Town and
Parish, any thing in this Act to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Nation and People of the Jews, The Jews rated.
Residing within this Island, Pay, or Cause to be Paid toward the Raising of
the said Sum of Money beforementioned and expressed, to be Raised on the
Inhabitants of this Island, over and above, and besides the Tax as aforesaid
Assessed, the full Sum of One Thousand Pound current Money of this Island, to be
rated Assessed, Taxed, Collected, and Paid in by Solomon Ararii, Jacob de Leon,
Moles Toiro, Jacob Mendez, Guteres, Jacob Henriques, Jacob Rodrigues de Leon,
Moses Jesurum Cordoso, Samuel Gabay, Jacob Lopes Torres, Isaac Cotileo, Isaac
Nunes Gonsales and Abraham Nunes, or any Five of them, into the Hands of the
Receiver or Receivers hereafter mentioned, Empowered and Appointed to Receive
the same, at, or within One Month after the Tenth Day of December, which shall
be in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, any thing
herein contained to the Contrary notwithstanding: and in Case of Failure and
Non-payment,

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Case of Failure.
That the Sum of Two Hundred and Fifty Pound more, besides the said Sum of One
Thousand Pound above appointed, be Assessed on the Nation and People of the
Jews aforesaid, and that then it shall, and may be lawful for the Treasurer or
Treasurers hereafter appointed by Warrant of Distress under his, or their Hands
and Seals directed to the Constable or Constables for the respective Parishes
where such Jew or Jews Reside, to Levy, or singly cause to be Levied at
Discretion upon the several Jews Inhabitants of this Island, such
proportionable Sum or Sums as shall make up the Sum of One Thousand Two Hundred
Fifty Pound, as aforesaid, and also if any of the Jews Rated, or Assessed by
the Persons abovenamed, shall refuse to Pay the said Sum by them so Assessed:
that then it shall, and may be lawful for the respective Justices in the
respective Parishes where the said Jews Reside, for so much as any of the said
Jews are Assessed, and Rated by the Persons abovesaid, who are hereby Empowered
to Issue out their Warrant or Warrants to the respective Constables to Distrain
any of the Goods and Chattels of any of the said Jews that shall refuse, or
delay to Pay the same, any Law, Custom, or Usage to the Contrary
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, That if the several Persons, or any of them of the
Jewish Nation aforementioned, Empowered and Appointed to Assess, Levy, Collect,
and Pay in the aforesaid Sum Assessed upon the Nation of the Jews, shall
neglect his, or their Duty therein, Neglect of Jewish Assessors.
that then it shall, and may be lawful for the Governor or Commander in Chief,
by Warrant under his Hand and Seal directed to the Provost-Marshal, or his
lawful Deputy to Levy, or Cause to be Levied, on all, and every Person, and
Persons to Offending One Hundred and Fifty Pound current Money of this Island,
or the value thereof, upon his, or their Moneys, Slaves, Goods, or Chattels,
and sell the same by public Outcry, returning the Overplus, if any be, to the
Owner; and in Case no Moneys, Slaves, or Goods are to be found as aforesaid,
that then he take into Custody the Body of the Person or Persons so Offending,
and him, or them in safe Custody keep, until he, or they Pay the said Sum of
One Hundred and Fifty Pound for the said Offense, any Law, Custom, or Usage, or
any thing in this Act seeming to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
respective Justices of the respective Parishes, or Precincts, or within the
Commission of the Peace for the same, or any Two of them Deliver into the Hands
of their respective Constables within their respective Parishes and Precincts,
Time of Collection.
a Roll of such Tax, or Assessment as aforesaid, so that the Collection be made
within Three Months after the Tenth Day of November, which shall be in the Year
of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, with a Warrant under the
same, Signed and Sealed by the said Justices, or any two of them, Impowring and
Requiring the said Constables to Levy the said Tax or Assessment; and Pay the
same into the Hands of the Churchwardens for the time being in the Parish
where the same is Taxed or Assessed as aforesaid: and where it shall happen
there are no Churchwardens, that then the Constables are hereby required to
Pay the same into the Hands of the Justices of the said Parish, Deducting Four
Pence in the Pound for Colleting the same in all the Parishes of this Island, (
Port Royal and Kingston, only excepted) where it shall be done Gratis; who are
hereby required to Receive, and Pay the same into the Hands of the Receiver or
Receivers hereafter named, within one Month after the Collecting thereof: and
lest any Person or Persons, so as aforesaid Taxed or Assessed, shall refuse, or
delay to Pay his, her, or their Tax, or Assessment, the said Justices, or any
Two of them, are hereby required in the Warrant aforesaid, to Empower and
Command the Constable as aforesaid, by virtue thereof to Distrain the Slaves,
Distress upon Non-payment.
Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, or
any other Personal Estate whatsoever, of him, her, or them, so refusing or
delaying, and Sell the same forthwith at Public Outcry, retaining to
themselves Twelve Pence in the Pound for every such Distress on Slaves, Horses,
Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, or any
other Personal Estate whatsoever Distrained on, or Sold as aforesaid, returning
the Overplus, if any be, to the Owner.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for
the better Assessing, Collecting, Levying, and Paying in the Sums of Money so
as aforesaid limited and appointed to be Raised, and Paid as aforesaid, and for
the more effectual putting this Act in Execution, the Justices and Vestries
within their several Parishes and Precincts, are hereby required and empowered,
immediately on Passing this Act, with all possible speed to proceed to the
Discharge of their said Duties, in manner and form as is before Directed and
Appointed.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
Governor or Commander in Chief for the time being, shall before the Levying
and Paying the Tax and Assessment by virtue of this Act laid on, and Assessed,
Case of Law-Martial.
put Martial-Law in force in this Island, and for that Reason if any Person
refuse to Pay his, her, or their Tax as aforesaid, all, and every Person or
Persons so refusing, shall after the expiration of the Law-Martial, Pay double
the Sum so laid on, and Assessed, to be Recovered by Warrant from any of Their
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said Precinct, directed to any
Constable to Levy the same upon the Moneys, Goods, or Chattels of the Person or
Persons so Offending, and the said Goods, or Chattels so Distrained, to Sell at
public Outcry, returning the Overplus, if any be, to the Owner, retaining to
himself Twelve Pence in the Pound for every such Distress: all which said
Forfeitures of the Persons so Offending shall be Paid as the other Moneys by
this Act arising, into the Hands of the Receivers in this Act nominated and
appointed, and Employed to the same Uses, Intents and Purposes, as the Moneys
already by this Act Raised and Appropriated, and to no other Use, Intent, and
Purpose whatsoever; any Law, Custom, or Usage, or any Thing in this Act to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the Justices,
Vestry-men, Constables, or Churchwardens, or any of them, shall neglect, or
wilfully fail in his or their Duty, in Assessing, Collecting, or Paying the
same as aforesaid, that then, and in such case, Neglect of Assessors.
every Justice so neglecting, or wilfully failing in his or their Duty in this
Act prescribed, contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof, shall Forfeit
Fifty Pounds for every such Offense; and all and every Vestry-man,
Churchwarden or Constable, the Sum of Twenty Pounds for every such Offense as
aforesaid.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Owners of
Slaves, Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Goats, Lambs,
and Kids whatsoever, as aforesaid, shall, and are hereby by themselves,
Guardians, Overseers, Trustees, or Penkeepers within the several Parishes
aforesaid, required and obliged to give a True and Just Account, Account on
Oath.
on Oath, to the best of their Knowledge, at such time or times as the Justices
in each Parish or Precinct shall Direct, of all Slaves, Horses, Mares, Colts,
Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, and Rents whatsoever as
aforesaid, belonging to such Owner, Guardian, Overseer, Trustees, or
Pen-keepers within their respective Parish, or Precinct aforesaid, to the
Justices of the Peace, or any of them, in the said Parishes or Precincts, who
are hereby required and empowered to Administer the same, and to ask all
further Questions, as to them, or any of them shall seem meet and necessary,
relating to this present Act; the Tenor of which Oaths shall be as follows.

I A. B. do Swear, that I have within the Parish of C -- Slaves Young and Old,
also -- Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Goats, Lambs,
Kids, and no more, So help me God.

And if it be to an Overseer,

I D. E. Overseer of the Plantation of G. H. do Swear, that the said G. H. has
within the Parish of I -- Slaves Young and Old, and also -- Horses, Mares,
Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, etc. and no more,
to the best of my Knowledge. And so to Pen-keepers, or any other Persons, for
Cattle, Horses, Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats,
Kids, and Rents whatsoever, mutatis mutandis. And if any Person or Persons
whatsoever, shall refuse either by themselves, Overseers, Case of Refusal.
or Pen-keepers, to give an Account upon Oath as aforesaid, of their Horses,
Mares, Colts, Mules, Asses, Neat Cattle, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Kids, or Rents in
manner aforesaid, that then it shall be lawful for the Justices and Vestry, or
the Justices where there is no Vestry, to Tax the Person or Persons so
refusing, according to their Discretion.

AND forasmuch as the present Necessity will require the Advancement of Money,
for and toward the Buying, or Hiring, and Equipping the said Two Sloops and
Men, and Victualling those Two already in, and such other Vessel or Vessels as
shall be Impressed into the Service:

BE it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be lawful to,
and for any Person or Persons to Advance and Lend to Their Majesty's, Money
advanced.
for and toward the furtherance of this present Occasion, such Sum or Sums
of Money as may be needful; and that whosoever shall Advance and Lend any such
Sum or Sums of Money upon the Security of this Act, shall receive for the
Loan of the Sum they shall so Lend, after the Rate of Twelve Pound and a Half
per Cent. per Annum, for the time he or they shall be indisburst of the said
Money, on the Credit of this Act as aforesaid; any thing beforementioned to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

AND to the End that all Moneys that shall be Lent unto Their Majesty's, upon
the Credit hereof may be well and sufficiently secured; Security for the same.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Person
and Persons, who shall Advance and Lend any Sum or Sums of Money to Their
Majesty's on the Credit of this Act, and actually Pay the same into the Hands
of the Receiver or Receivers herein after named and appointed, shall by the
Receiver or Receivers on the first Payment of Money that shall be paid into the
Receivers Hands, by Virtue of this Act, be forthwith paid unto the Person or
Persons, their Executors, or Administrators so Lending the said Sum advanced,
with the Interest of the same, for the Discharge of the Money so lent and
advanced; and that all and every other Sum and Sums of Money that shall be
laid out, or paid by the Receiver or Receivers, for, and toward the Buying,
Equipping, Victualling, and Fitting to Sea; as also for Paying the Officers and
Seamen on Board the said Four Sloops, and Victualling such other Vessel or
Vessels as shall be Impressed; as also for Paying the Officers and Soldiers of
the Two Parties beforementioned, for reducing the Rebellious Negroes, shall, as
they become Due, be paid by the Receiver or Receivers that are hereafter
mentioned and appointed, without Fee or Charge.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable
Colonel Charles Knights, Names of the Receivers.
one of Their Majesty's Council of this Island, and also Colonel Thomas Clarke,
Captain Lancelot Talbot, Captain Robert Wardlow, William Hutchinson Esquire,
Captain Josiah Heathcote, and Captain Thomas Clarke, be, and are hereby
Required, Empowered, and Warranted to be Receiver or Receivers of all and
singular the several Sums aforesaid, mentioned and intended to be raised on
the several Parishes or People aforesaid, and shall, and may lawfully by Advice
and Consent of the Lieutenant-Governour, or Commander in Chief, forthwith Buy
or Hire Two more Good and Substantial Sloops fit for War, and Provide, Equip,
Fit ready for the Sea, and Victual the same for Sixty effective Officers,
Seamen and Soldiers, inclusively, for each Sloop, for the said Six Months, or
for such shorter time as to them shall appear most Convenient; and that the
said Two Sloops being thus Fitted and Victualled, it is hereby Requested, That
the Right Honorable Sir William Beeston, Knight, Captain to be Commissioned.
Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour aforesaid, by Commission under his Hand
and Seal, do Constitute, and Appoint on Board of each of the said Sloops, such
Discreet and Able Captains for this present Service, as his Honor shall in his
Prudence think Fit, and can Confide in; and that each of the said Captains
receive for their Pay, after the Rate of Six Pounds per Month, Payments settled.
and likewise appoint by his Warrant for each Sloop, one Master, at Four Pounds
per Month, one Boatswain, one Gunner, at Three Pounds per Month each, and one
Surgeon, and one Carpenter, at Four Pounds per Month each, Two
Quarter Masters at Fifty Shillings per Month each, on Board each Sloop, and
command and require them in Their Majesty's Name, to Raise and Enlist on Board
the said Two Sloops, by Impressing or otherwise, to make and fit up the full
Number of Sixty Effective Officers, Seamen, and Soldiers in each Sloop, who
shall also receive after the Rate of Forty Shillings each Man per Month, and
that their Monthly Pay arising for this present Service, shall be paid out of
the Money raised by this present Act, Commanding and Requiring the respective
Captains of each Sloop aforesaid, by his Commission and Instructions therewith
to be given, that they take Care from time to time, to their utmost Ability, to
Guard and Defend the Coasts of this Island, by constant Cruising, and looking
out both Windward and Leeward, North and South side of this Island, as his
Honor shall in his great Wisdom from time to time Direct and Command.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the more speedy
Supplying with Necessaries, Victualling, Fitting out, and Dispatching to Sea
the Vessels of War aforesaid, the Commissioners in this Act nominated and
appointed, are hereby Empowered to Employ Captain William Dodington, Commissary
appointed.
or any other fit Person, in case of his Death, Removal, or Misbehaviour, to
buy and provide Victuals, Arms and Ammunition, and all other Necessaries
whatsoever, convenient for the said Vessels, and draw Bills upon the Treasurer
or Treasurers for the Value; for which Service they shall allow and pay unto
the said William Dodington, or other Person so Employed, after the Rate of Five
Pound for every Hundred Pounds worth of Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other
Things needful by the said Person so bought.

BE it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Colonel Charles Knights,
and Josiah Heathcote Esquires, be, and are hereby appointed, empowered, and
warranted to be Treasurers to Receive and Pay all such Sum and Sums of Money
as shall from time to time come to their Hands, Treasurers.
for the more easy and ready Dispatch of such Persons as they may have
occasion to Deal with; or Pay all such Wages unto the Officers, Seamen and
Soldiers, as the Occasion and Intent of this Act may require; and as soon as
the Receiver or Receivers before appointed and empowered, have Bought, Hired,
and Equipped the said Sloops, and Victualled them with sufficient Victuals for
their respective Complements of Men aforesaid, for the time they shall find
convenient, that the said Sloops be forthwith dispatched out to Sea, by the
Command and Direction of the Lieutenant-Governour or Commander in Chief, to
Cruise about the Coasts of this Island as aforesaid: and that the Receiver or
Receivers keep a distinct Account of the Money raised and appropriated by this
present Act, and for all Payments made for the Uses and Purposes in this Act
required, and render a Just and True Account thereof, Account to be given.
when demanded, unto Their Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in
Chief, and Council, of all such Sum and Sums of Money, by them, and every of
them, received by Virtue of this present Act, and how laid out, and for what,
and to whom, and for what Uses; and shall in like manner give an Account to the
Assembly of this Island when sitting and assembled, when thereunto required, of
so much of the said Money, as shall be by them, and every of them respectively
received, and to whom the same are issued and paid by them respectively, and to
what Uses; and if the said Receiver or Receivers, or any of them, after the
Receipt of any the said Money, shall divert or misapply the same, or any Part
thereof, by any Pretense whatsoever, otherwise than before intended and
directed, contrary to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, he or they so
Offending, shall Forfeit to Their Majesty's, for, and toward the Support of
the Government of this Island, and contingent Charges thereof, double the Sum
so diverted or misapplied.

AND for the better Order and Government of the said Sloops, or other Vessel or
Vessels of War, wherein the Honor of Their Majesty's, and Interest of this
Island are so much concerned; Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every the Articles and Orders mentioned in a certain Act of
Parliament made in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of His Majesty King Charles
the Second of Blessed Memory, Articles and Orders.
for the Establishing Articles and Orders for the Regulating, and better
Governing of his Majesty's Navy, and Ships of War, and Forces by Sea, shall be
duly and respetively put in Execution, observed and obeyed on Board the said
Sloops and other Vessels of War, and are hereby declared to be the Laws of this
Island, against all such Person or Persons on Board the said Sloops or Vessels
as shall offend therein; and for further Encouragement of the Officers,
Seamen, and Soldiers on Board the said Sloops or Vessels, all Ships, Sloops,
or Vessels by them taken from the Enemy, and belonging to this Island, are
likewise hereby given them for the said Encouragement: Provided always that all
Slaves, Vessels, or Goods belonging to Their Majesty's Subjects of this Island,
which the said Sloops or Vessels of War shall happen to re-take before they
shall have arrived at the Enemies Ports, during the time that they or any of
them are Employed in this present Service on the Countries Charge as aforesaid,
shall be returned to the respective Owners or Proprietors, their Agents or
Attorneys; any Law, Custom, or Usage to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Parties
hereby raised, or to be raised for the subduing the Rebellious Negroes
aforesaid, in case of Misdemeanor, or neglect of their Duty in that behalf,
shall be liable to the Pains and Punishments prescribed in the Articles of War,
Pay for the Soldiers.
as when Martial-Law is in Force in this Island, and that the Captains of each
Party receive for his Service, in this Act intended and appointed, the Sum of
Four Pounds per Month, and that each Sergeant receive also Fifty Shillings per
Month, and each Soldier, Forty Shillongs per Month, to be paid by the Receiver
or Receivers, without any Fee or Charge to either Officer or Soldier.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for
the better Encouraging the Persons Employed on Board the said Sloops or other
Vessels for the Service of Their Majesty's and this Island, that they shall
receive as Salvage for all Vessels, Slaves, and other Goods taken of this
Island, and by them retaken before they are Landed in any of the Enemies
Commission-Ports, one sixth Part of the Vessels, Slaves, Salvage allowed.
or Goods so re-taken, or the Value thereof, the said Vessel, Slave, or Goods
having been first appraised by Two Persons indifferently Chosen, one by the
Commander or Commanders of the said Sloops or Vessels, and the other by the
respective Owner or Owners; which shall be divided among the Officers, Seamen,
and Soldiers of the said Vessels, proportionably to the Pay each Person
receives of his Country for that Service.

AND that all such Persons as shall go out in the Parties to reduce the Negroes
in Rebellion, may be induced to proceed with the more Resolution and Vigor; It
is hereby Enacted, that they shall receive from the Treasurers, for each Negro
killed that was actually in Rebellion, which shall be evidenced by bringing in
his Head to any Justice, the Sum of Forty Shillings; Rewards for Negroes slain
or taken.
and for each Negroe in Rebellion taken, and brought in alive, not maimed or
mortally wounded, the Sum of Ten Pounds, to be paid by the Owner or Proprietor
of such Slave or Slaves, who is hereby obliged under the Penalty of Fifty
Pounds, to Transport the Slave or Slaves so reduced from actual Rebellion; and
in case that no Owner can be found, that then the Treasurer or Treasurers by
this Act appointed, or either of them, shall be by Virtue of this Act, obliged
and empowered to Pay the said Ten Pound out of the Treasury, and receive the
said Slave or Slaves, and him, and them, Sell and Transport as aforesaid, and
the Produce retain in his Hands, to be Employed in the said Service, and for
defraying the contingent Charges thereof; and to the end it may be better known
what Negro shall be accounted Rebellious, it is hereby declared, That all
Negroes absenting themselves from their Owners Plantation the Term of Six
Months, be, and are accounted as in actual Rebellion, any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in case any of the
Officers, or Seamen on Board the said Sloops or Vessels, or in the said
Parties shall in actual Service, Seaman or Soldier disabled.
lose either Leg or Arm, or be otherwise Disabled, that then, and in all such
Cases, all and every of the disabled Men, shall receive Ten Pounds per Annum
without Charge, during his or their natural Life, and also their Cures to be
paid for out of the Public Revenue of this Island, by Order of the
Lieutenant-Governour and Council, or of the Government of this Island, out of
the first Payment.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when there shall be
no necessity for the said Sloops or Vessels of War, that it shall, and may be
lawful for the Commissioners, or the major Part of them, to Sell the same, with
all the Apparel and Furniture, and of the Money arising therefrom, with all
other Sums of Money which shall remain over and above, Remainder how applied.
or be not expended, of the Money arising, and appropriated by Virtue of this
Act, and not hereby applied, shall be and remain in the Hands of the said
Treasurers, or either of them, by this Act appointed, to be applied and
disposed of, for and toward such other Use or Uses as the Assembly of this
Island shall appoint by a Law; and that the said Receiver or Receivers,
Treasurer or Treasurers, shall be allowed all his, or their, or either of
their, reasonable Charges, in and about the Discharging the Trust hereby
reposed in them, Commission or Pretenses to Commission, hereby excepted.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fines and
Forfeitures mentioned in this Act, and not declared where they shall be
Recovered, Forfeitures, etc. disposed of.
or how Disposed of, be One Half to Their Majesty's, for and toward the
Support of the Government of this Island, and the contingent Charges thereof;
the other Half to the Informer, who shall Sue for the same in any Court of
Record within this Island, wherein no Essoin, Protection, Injunction, Wager of
Law, or Nonvult ulterius prosequi shall be allowed.

An ACT Appropriating several Sums of Money heretofore Raised, to the
immediate Service of this Island.
WHEREAS there have been several Sums of Money raised by Virtue of one Act,
Preamble.
Entitled, An Act for Raising Money, for, and toward the Defense of this
Island; and also by one other Act, Entitled, An Act for Raising Moneys, as a
further Aid to Their Majesty's, for, and toward the Defense of this Island:
And whereas it is provided in the said Acts, That such Part of the Moneys so
raised, and not laid out to the Uses therein directed, should be appropriated
to such Use or Service as the Governor, Council, and Assembly shall seem meet:
We do therefore most humbly beseech Your Majesty's, that it may be Enacted:

AND be it Enacted by your Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council, and
Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted, and Ordained by the Authority of the same,
That of the Moneys arising by virtue of the Acts abovementioned, and not
hitherto applied, or made use of, One Thousand and Three Hundred Pound current
Money of this Island, Money appropriated.
be applied for the Payment of One Thousand Pound Sterling in England, to
Colonel Peter Beckford, to be by him made use of for the Service of this
Island, in such manner as he shall think fit, toward the effecting such things
as he shall be directed by the Governor there to Solicit.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That of the Moneys
arising by virtue of the Acts abovementioned, and not hitherto applied, or made
use of, so much thereof as shall be necessary for the Victualling and Manning
of a Sloop to Transport Colonel Peter Beckford, who is now going for England
for the Service of this Island, shall be Paid as the Governor shall Direct.

AND be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Money as shall
arise from the Freight of Goods, Shipped on Board the said Sloop, either to, or
from England, be by Colonel Peter Beckford applied to the Defraying the Charges
of the said Vessel, and that the Commander of the said Sloop do from time to
time observe all such Orders and Instructions as he shall receive from the said
Colonel Beckford.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That of the Moneys
arising by virtue of the Acts aforesaid, the Sum of One Thousand Pound shall be
Paid into the Hands of the Treasurer or Treasurers, Appointed by an Act
Entitled, An Act to Reimburse Their Majesty's Treasury, and Encourage Their
Subjects to come and Settle in this Island, to be by them Employed, and used
for the paying the Passages of such Persons as shall Transport themselves
hither upon the Encouragement of the said Act, and to no other Uses, Intents,
or Purposes whatsoever, upon the Penalties in the said Act mentioned.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That of the Money
arising by virtue of the Acts aforesaid, and not hitherto applied, or made use
of, that Seventy Pounds, or such part thereof as shall be Expended, be applied
and made use of for the defraying the Charge of a Sloop already sent to
Windward, to Cruise there, to give notice to the English Fleet, daily expected
here, of the Additional Force the French have, or may suddenly receive.

AND be it further Enacted, that of the Money arising by virtue of the Acts
aforesaid, and not hitherto applied, or made use of, the Sum of One Hundred
Sixty Two Pounds, be Paid into the Hands of Colonel Edward Stanton, for
defraying the Charge of Twelve Men for Six Months, to be constantly kept at
Fort-William at Port-Morant for their Defense thereof, and the Security of the
Adjacent Parts.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Remainder of
the said Moneys arising by virtue of the beforementioned Acts, and not by this
present Act applied, shall be by the Governor, by, and with the Advice and
Consent of the Council, applied, and made use of for the immediate Defense of
this Island, and to no other Uses, Intents, or Purposes whatsoever, and the
Receiver or Receivers, Treasurer or Treasurers, in the said Act appointed, are
hereby Required and Empowered to Pay the same accordingly, under the Penalties
in this Act hereaftermentioned, any thing in this, or any other Act seeming to
the Contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, that the Receivers and Treasurers in the said Acts
appointed, are hereby Required and Empowered to Pay the several Sums by this Act
appropriated, into the Hands of such Person or Persons as shall be Empowered to
receive the same, by virtue of a Warrant to them, or any of them, under the
Hand of the Governor (by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Council of
this Island) and if the said Receiver, Forfeit of the Receiver or Treasurer
refusing to pay.
or Receivers, Treasurer, or Treasurers, or any of them, shall refuse to Pay
the aforesaid Sums, or any part thereof, having the same in their, or any of
their Hands, the Receiver, or Treasurer so refusing, shall respectively Forfeit
to Their Majesty's, for, and toward the Support of this Government, and the
Charges thereof, double the Sum he shall so refuse to Pay, to be Recovered by
Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any Court of Record, where no
Essoin, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

AND whereas with part of the Moneys by the said Acts arising, there were
purchased for the Service of the Country Two Sloops, Two Sloops to be disposed
of.
be it Enacted that the Governor, sell, or make use of the said Sloops for the
Countries Service at his Discretion, and if sold, the Governor apply the
Moneys, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Council as before directed.

AND whereas several Sums of Money ordered to be Assessed, and Levied by the
abovementioned Acts, either not having been Assessed, nor Levied within the
time in the said Acts limited and appointed in some of the Parishes within this
Island;

BE it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That where any Tax mentioned
to be Raised by either of the above-recited Acts, Re-Assessment to be made.
and omitted to be either Assessed or Levied by the Justices and Vestry, or the
Justices, where the Vestries neglect their Duty, or where no Vestry is, are
Empowered at any other Day, or Place, within Three Months after the Passing
this Act, as to the said Justices shall seem meet to Appoint, to Assess, and
Levy, as well during Martial Law, as while the Common Law is in force, upon the
several Inhabitants of the said Parishes, the said Taxes: and issue out their
Warrants accordingly to the respective Constables for the Collecting, Levying,
and Distraining for the same, and Payment thereof, as is directed in the said
Acts; which said Constables are hereby Empowered to Collect, and in Case of
refusal to Levy, and Distrain for the same accordingly, notwithstanding the
time then limited in the said Acts be Elapsed, by reason of Martial-Law, or any
other Cause, Protection, or Privilege whatsoever; and whatsoever Justices, or
Vestry, or Constables, shall omit to do their Duty therein, shall Forfeit as is
directed by the said Acts, and to be Recovered and applied accordingly.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Pains and
Penalties, Penalties remitted.
by the abovementioned Acts, by any the Justices, or Vestry of the
respespective Parishes incurred, are hereby absolutely remitted and discharged,
and the Parties Offending fully indemnified for the same, any Law, or Statute
to the Contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An ACT For Appropriating several Sums of Money for the speedy Relief of the
Wounded, and Distressed Inhabitants of this Island, who have suffered by the
late Invasion of the French.
WHEREAS there have been several Sums of Money Raised by virtue of one Act,
Preamble.
Entitled, An Act for Raising Money, for, and toward the Defense of this
Island; And also by One other Act, Entitled, An Act for Raising Money as a
further Aid to their Majesty's, for, and toward the Defense of this Island;
and whereas it is Provided in the said Acts, that such part of the Money so
Raised, and not laid out to the Uses therein Directed, should be appropriated
to such other Use and Service as to the Governor, Council, and Assembly shall
seem meet.

AND whereas by a Subsequent Act of Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour,
Council, and Assembly of this Their Majesty's Island of Jamaica, made this
present Sessions of this Assembly; 'twas Enacted among other things, that of
the Money arising by virtue of the Acts abovementioned, and not therein applied
or made use of, the Sum of One Thousand and Three Hundred Pound current Money
of this Island, Recourse to former Acts.
should be applied for the Payment of One Thousand Pound Sterling in England,
to Colonel Peter Beckford, to be by him made use of for the Service of this
Island, in such manner as he should think fit, toward the Effecting such
things as he should be directed there to Solicit by the Governor.

AND whereas by the said Act it was further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
that out of the Moneys arising by virtue of the said Acts abovementioned, and
not applied or made use of, as much thereof as should be necessary for the
Victualling and Manning a Sloop to Transport Colonel Peter Beckford, who was
then going for England for the Service of this Island, should be Paid as the
Governor should Direct.

AND whereas it was further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That of the
Moneys arising by virtue of the Acts abovementioned, and not hitherto applied
or made use of, the Sum of One Hundred Sixty and Two Pounds, should be Paid
into the Hands of Colonel Edward Stanton, for defraying the Charge of Twelve
Men for Six Months, to be constantly kept at Fort-William. at Port-Morant for
the Defense thereof, and Security of the adjacent Parts.

AND whereas the Receivers and Treasurers in the said Act first abovementioned
and appointed, are Required and Empowered by the said appropriating Act, to Pay
the several Sums by the said Acts appropriated under certain Penalties therein
contained, into the Hands of such Person or Persons as shall be empowered to
receive the same, by virtue of a Warrant, to them, or any of them, under the
Hand of the Governor, by, and with the Advice, and Consent of the Council;
since the Passing of which Act, Entitled, An Act for Appropriating several Sums
of Money heretofore Raised to the immediate Service of this Island; this Your
Majesty's Island has been most miserably harrassed by Your Majesty's Enemies,
Subjects to the Crown of France, who with inhuman barbarity, with Fire and
Sword, have laid Wast Four Parishes of this Island, and infested and destroyed
several Plantations in the other Parishes, to the utter ruin and destruction of
most of the Inhabitants thereof, whereby without some speedy Relief, several
Hundreds of this Your Majesty's Island must perish through Extreme Want,
General Calamity.
and the said Parishes, and most part of the Seacoasts be wholly Deserted,
being destitute of Habitations, and having no Means to Rebuild them, except
some speedy Succor from the Public.

WE therefore Your Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council, and Assembly, do
humbly pray Your Majesty, that for the immediate Relief and Support of the said
poor distressed Inhabitants of this Island, who have suffered in the late
Invasion; it may be Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the
same, that the aforesaid Sum of One Thousand and Three Hundred Pounds above
recited, by the Appropriating Act ordered to be applied for the Payment of One
Thousand Pound Sterling in England to Colonel Peter Beckford, to be by him made
use of as by the said Act is directed, as also the said Sum of One Hundred,
Sixty and Two Pound, by the said Act appointed to be Paid into the Hands of
Colonel Edward Stanton, for the defraying the Charge of Twelve Men for Six
Months, to be constantly kept at Fort-William at Port-Morant for the Defense
thereof, and the Security of the Parts adjacent, which said Sums are not yet
made use of, be forth with applied for, Appropriations taken off.
and toward the Relief of the said distressed Inhabitants of this Your
Majesty's Island of Jamaica, who have suffered by the barbarous Cruelties of
Your Majesty's Enemies, in the late Invasion of this Island by the French, as
also for the Relief of the Sick and Wounded Persons in the late Expedition to
Whily-Wood against the Enemy, and to no other use whatsoever; to be distributed
in such manner, and to such Persons as shall seem meet to the Commissioners to
be appointed by Your Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and Council of this Your
Island for that purpose.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the abovementioned
Act, Past this present Sessions Entitled, An Act appropriating several Sums of
Money heretofore Raised, to the immediate Service of this Island, as to so much
of the said Act only as concerns the applying the One Thousand and Three
Hundred Pound, for the Payment of One Thousand Pound Sterling in England to
Colonel Peter Beckford, to be by him made use of for the Service of this
Island; as also for the applying any Sums of Moneys other than what are already
Expended for the Victualling and Manning a Sloop to Transport the said Colonel
Peter Beckford for England, or whereby the Receivers or Treasurers, who by the
Two Acts first abovementioned, are Appointed, Required, and Empowered to Pay
the several Sums, by the said Appropriating Act applied, into the Hands of such
Person or Persons as shall be Empowered to receive the same by virtue of a
Warrant to them, or any of them, under the Hand of the Governor, by, and with
the Advice and Consent of the Council, as also for the applying One Hundred
Sixty and Two Pounds to be Paid into the Hands of Colonel Edward Stanton, for
the defraying the Charge of Twelve Men for Six Months, to be constantly kept at
Fort-William at Port-Morant, shall be, Repeal of Clauses.
and are hereby Repealed to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever, any thing in
the said recited Act to the Contrary notwithstanding.

AN ACT For the Encouragement, and Freedom of Servants, and Slaves which have
done, or shall do any remarkable Service against the French during this present
War.
WHEREAS upon Advice of the late Invasion made by the French upon this Island,
Preamble.
there was set forth an Order of Council of War for the Encouragement of
Negroes, that All Negroes, or Slaves that should do any Eminent Service against
the Enemy should be forthwith set Free, and that it is also thought reasonable
for the Reward of Servants that have behaved themselves well in the late
Service, that they be freed of the time they have yet to Serve:

BE it therefore Enacted and Ordained by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour,
Council, and Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority
of the same, that all Servants who receive no Salary, which have, or shall do
any good Service against the Enemy, the French, Servants signalizing themselves
against the Enemy.
and can prove the same before the Commissioners hereafter named, shall
forthwith be freed; and that the said Commissioners upon Enquiry made of what
time any such Servant or Servants had to Serve, and his, and their Occupation,
shall Value and Appraise the said time, he, or they had to Serve, and give him,
or them, a Certificate mentioning, his, or their Name or Names, and the Party,
or Parties, to whom he, or they belonged, and the Sum or Sums the Owner, or
Owners ought to receive for him or them, which being Entered into the
Secretary's Office, shall be a sufficient Testimony of his or their Freedom, as
also a good Proof for the Owner or Owners to Recover the Sum or Sums he or
they were appraised at.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Slaves that
have, or shall during this War with France, do any Remarkable good Service
against the Enemy, Slaves freed.
and make Proofs thereof before the said Commissioners hereafter named, shall
be Freed; and the said Commissioners shall give the said Slave a Certificate,
mentioning his Name, the Person to whom he belonged, and the Price he was
appraised and valued at, which is not to exceed the Sum of Fifty Pounds, which
said Certificate being entered into the Secretary's Office, shall be sufficient
to Discharge him of his Slavery, and a Proof for the Owner to Recover what he
was appraised at, which Sum for either Servant or Slave so set Free and
appraised, is to be paid out of Money to be raised for that purpose.

AND whereas diverse Persons have for the Defense of this Island, Armed, and
sent out several of their Negroes or Slaves, who have been killed in Service:

BE it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon Proof
made before the said Commissioners, Slave killed.
of any such Negro or Slave so killed in Service, or that shall be during the
War, the Owner or Owners thereof, shall receive such Sum or Sums of Money as
the Commissioners shall think fit, not exceeding the Sum of Fifty Pounds, to
be paid to the Owner or Owners, in the same manner, as is before expressed for
Servants, Negroes, or Slaves so Freed.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any Owner or
Overseer, that shall hinder any Servant or Slave from Repairing to the
Commissioners hereafter in this Act mentioned, Owner detaining a Slave.
to make their Pretensions, and Claim their Freedom, such Owner or Overseer,
shall Forfeit such Servant or Slave, and they be made Free, and no Satisfaction
to be made to the Owner for such Servant or Slave.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable
Richard Lloyd Esquire, Francis Rose, James Banister, Thomas Bindlos, and John
Walters Esquires, Commissioners for Claims.
or any Three of them, be, and are hereby Authorized and Appointed to be
Commissioners for the Hearing and Determining all Claims that shall be made by
Virtue of this Act, by any Servant or Slave, and that the said Commissioners,
or any Three of them, are hereby fully Empowered to Administer Oaths to any
Person or Persons that can give Evidence therein, and Issue out their Warrants
for all Persons to attend and come before them, who can give Evidence relating
to the Matters, to be by them Determined, by Virtue of this Act, and to
Imprison for Three Months without Bail or Mainprize, all such Persons as shall
refuse Obedience to such their Warrants issued out, and the Determination
concerning the Freedom of any Servant or Slave made by the Commissioners
aforesaid, or any Three of them, pursuant to this Act, being signified under
their Hands and Seals, shall be the final Determination of all Claims and
Disputes that shall or may arise by Virtue of this Act without any further
Appeal; any Thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Honorable
Nicholas Laws Esquire, Edward Stanton, Modyford Freeman, Josiah Heathcote, and
James Bradshaw Esquires, or any Three of them, be, and are hereby Appointed and
Authorized to be Commissioners to Hear and Determine all Claims that shall or
may be made by Virtue of this Act, Other Commissioners.
by any Servant or Slave who shall belong to the Parishes of Kingston, St.
Andrews, St. David's, and St. Thomas to Windward, in the same manner, and have
and full like Power and Authority as is given to the Commissioners first
abovementioned.

AND be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That he Honorable
Richard Lloyd Esquire, Francis Rose, James Banister, Thomas Bindlos, and John
Walters Esquires, or any Three of them, do meet on Thursday the Nineth Day of
August, in this present Year, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Four, and St.
Jago de la Vega, and so every Thursday in the next Six Weeks following, Time of
Meeting.
and then to adjourn themselves from time to time as they shall think fit.

AND the Honorable Nicholas Laws, Edward Stanton, Modyford Freeman, Josiah
Heathcote, and James Bradshaw Esquires, or any Three of them, are hereby
required to meet at Kingston, on Thursday the Nineth of August, in this present
Year, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Four, and every Thursday in the next Six
Weeks following, and then to adjourn themselves from time to time as they shall
think fit; and all Marshals and Constables, Officers to attend.
are hereby required to give their Attendance, and Execute their Order as
required by the said Commissioners; and the Secretary keep a Book, wherein
shall be Entered the Certificates of all such Servants or Slaves who shall be
Freed by Virtue of this Act as aforesaid, and that he take Fifteen Pence for
his Fee, and no more.

AND be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Accounts for Provisions furnished to Their Majesty's for Man and Horse, for
Public Work done, and Materials found for the Fortifications, and all others
Things and Matters relating any wise to the Preparations that were made for
Defense for this Island, be stated and adjusted by Samuel Lewis and John
Walters Esquires, Auditors of Accounts.
at St. Jago de la Vega; Charles Whittle and Charles Saddler Esquires, of
Port Royal; Edmond Edlin and Samuel Foxley Esquires, at Kingston, who are
hereby Appointed, Authorized, and Empowered to audit the same; and that a
Certificate of the State thereof, under the Hands and Seals of the said
Commissioners, or any one of them, shall be sufficient to Entitle the several
Parties concerned to demand and receive out of the Money to be raised for that
purpose, the Sum due to them, without any further Proof.

AND the said Commissioners are hereby Required and Empowered to Hear and
Determine the several Causes in this Act mentioned Material or any other Law to
the contrary notwithstanding: Provided this Act continue in Force during this
present War with France, and no longer.

An ACT For Prevention of Indebted Persons from Departing this Island in the
Time of Martial-Law.
WHEREAS by an Act of this Island now in Force, Entitled, Preamble.
An Act for Settling the Militia; the Martial-Law may on some Emergent
Occasions be declared to be in Force, on the ceasing of which, the Common Law
revives and takes Place, whereby in the said Times, several Ill-disposed
Persons, and indebted, take Advantage and go off the Island, to the manifest
Loss of their Creditors, and general Discouragement to Trade: Be it therefore
Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant-Governour, Council and Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful
for any Creditor or Creditors, to Stop, Arrest, and Detain in Prison by due
Process of Law, and Debtor or Debtors that shall attempt, or go about to depart
this Island, Debtors detained.
until he or they shall Pay and Satisfy their Debt or Debts; or in case of such
going off, or departure, a Foreign Attachment may Issue against his or their
Goods or Chattels, as in time of the Common Law, Attachment.
notwithstanding the said afore-recited Act, or any Clause therein, being, or
seeming to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND whereas several Disputes have heretofore arisen about the Proceedings of
the Surveyors of Highways, Surveyors of Highways.
and of the Justices, Vestries, and Churchwardens within the several Parishes
and Precincts in this Island, for keeping in Repair the High ways, Raising and
Laying on the Parish Taxes, and Collecting, Levying, and Applying the same by
the Constable, or any other Officer or Officers thereto appointed, in the time
when Martial-Law is in Force in this Island, for the prevention of which, and
avoiding the like Inconvenience occasioned by Evil disposed Persons, to the
Prejudice of Their Majesty's Service, and Injury to the Public:

BE it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Churchwardens, and
Surveyors of the Highways, shall proceed to the Discharge of their several
Duties; and the Justices, and the Vestries in the several and respective
Parishes and Precincts within this Island, as well when Martial-Law is in
Force, as at any other time, are hereby Required and Empowered to Meet, and
Raise such Parochial Tax or Taxes, as by the several Acts is Directed and
Appointed; and the several Constables Collect, Levy, and Distrain for the same
accordingly; and any Justice, Churchwarden, Vestry-man, Surveyor or Constable,
neglecting his or their Duty, he or they so Offending, shall incur the Penalty
in the Acts mentioned; any Act, Usage, or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND be it further Enacted, That this Act shall continue in Force during this
present War with France, and no longer.

WHICH Laws having upon the Perusal of the Right Honorable, the Lords of the
Committee of Trade, and Foreign Plantations, been Presented to His Majesty at
this Board, His Majesty was Graciously Pleased, with the Advice of His
Privy Council, to Approve and Confirm the same; and pursuant to His Royal
Pleasure thereupon, Signified and Expressed, all the said Laws, as
aforementioned, are hereby Approved and Confirmed accordingly.

Will. Bridgeman.

AT THE COURT AT KENSINGTON, The 26th Day of December, 1695.
PRESENT The King's Most Excellent MAJESTY, In COUNCIL.
Lord Keeper. Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Norfolk. Duke of Schonberge. Duke of
Shrewsbury. Marq. of Winchester. Lord Great Chamberlain. Earl of Bridgwater.
Earl of Stamford. Earl of Scarborough. Earl of Romney. Lord Godolphin. Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secret. Trumbull. Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer. L.
Chief Justice Holt. Mr. Russell. Mr. Boscawen. Mr. Smith.
WHEREAS by Commission under the Great Seal of England, to Sir William Beeston,
Knight, His MAJESTY 's Lieutenant-Governour, and Commander in Chief of the
Island of JAMAICA, bearing Date the Twentieth Day of September, One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Two, in the Fourth Year of His MAJESTY 's Reign; His MAJESTY
has been Graciously pleased to Authorize and Empower the Governor, Council,
and Assembly of the said Island, to Constitute, and Ordain Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, which are to Continue and be in Force, till His MAJESTY 's Pleasure
be signified to the contrary: And forasmuch as a certain Law, has in pursuance
of the said Commission, been transmitted to His MAJESTY, with the Humble Desire
of the Governor, Council and Assembly, That His MAJESTY would be Pleased to
Pass the same in the Words following, viz.

An ACT To Enable George Ivey Esquire, to Sell his Estate for the Payment of
the Debts of his Father William Ivey Esquire, Deceased.
WHEREAS William Ivey Esquire, Preamble.
lately Deceased, was Seized in his Demesnes as of Fee, of, and in several
Plantations, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, in the
Parishes of Clarendon, Vere, and S. Katherines, and elsewhere within this
Island, and of several Negroes, and Stock thereunto belonging and appertaining:
All which said Plantations, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, together with
all and every the Negroes thereon being, or thereunto belonging, by his Last
Will and Testament, bearing Date the One and Twentieth Day of September, One
Thousand Six Hundred Eighty Nine; he devised to George Ivey Esquire, his Eldest
Son and his Heirs, and for want of Issue of him the said George, to William
Ivey, Second Son of the said William the Testator, and the Heirs of his Body,
with diverse Remainders over; and of his said Will, made the said George his
Eldest Son sole Executor, who since, has duly proved his said Father's said
Will.

AND whereas the said William the Testator, was at the time of his Decease
indebted to the Royal African Company of England, and to diverse other Persons,
by Judgment, Bonds and otherwise, in the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds and
upwards; and forasmuch as the Personal Estate of the said William the Testator,
not including the said Negroes and Stock, was so very inconsiderable, that the
said George Ivey by Reason of the Intail aforesaid, without the Assistance of
an Act of the Assembly, has no way left of Paying his Fathers said Debts,
unless by the Sale of all the said Negroes, and Stock left upon, and belonging
to the Lands and Plantations so Intailed, which must inevitably Ruin and
Destroy the said Plantations, etc.

AND forasmuch as it is highly just and reasonable, that no Act of the said
William Ivey, the Testator, should prevent, or hinder all, or any part of his
said Estate, from being liable, and subject to the payment of his just Debts,
or debar the said George, his eldest Son, from disposing of, and applying the
same for the payment and discharge of the same; and forasmuch as William Ivey,
Consent of the Second Son.
the second Son of William the Testator, to whom the next remainder in Tail
after the Death of George, the Tenant now in Possession, without Issue of his
Body is limited, has, upon Consideration of the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds,
testified, and declared his Consent to the Passing of this present Act:

BE it therefore Enacted by Their Majesty's Lieutenant-Governour, Council, and
Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, that for the
Payment of the Debts aforesaid, it shall, and may be lawful to, and for the
said George Ivey, and he is hereby fully Authorized, Empowered, and Enabled to
Sell, Dispose of, or Convey, or by his last Will and Testament to Devise all,
or any part or parcel of the said Plantations, Lands, Tenements, and other
Hereditaments abovementioned, together with all, and every the Negroes
thereunto belonging, or appertaining, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, in
such manner and form, and as amply, and effectually, to all Intents,
Constructions, and Purposes, as if the same had Descended to him the said
George Ivey, and he were thereof Seized and Possessed in Fee-Simple, and no
such Intail and Remainder, or Remainders as aforesaid had ever been made,
limited, or created; and the Purchaser, or Purchasers, Devisee, or Devisees of
the same, or any part or parcel thereof, shall be deemed, adjudged, and taken
to be Seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to them, and their
Heirs for ever, as if the said George had suffered a Common Recovery in Their
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, at Westminster, of all, or any part or parcel
of the said Premises, Purchaser, etc. secured.
to the Use, or Uses of the Purchaser, or Purchasers, Devisee or Devisees, and
of their Heirs for ever; and the said Purchaser, or Purchasers, Devisee or
Devisees, their Heirs or Assigns, shall, and may hold, occupy, and enjoy the
same free from any Estates, Uses, Limitations, Remainders, Charges, and
Provisoes, had, made, or created, in, and by the said last Will and Testament
of the abovementioned William Ivey, the Testator, any Law, Custom, or Usage to
the Contrary notwithstanding.

WHICH Law having upon the Perusal of the Right Honorable, the Lords of the
Committee of Trade, and Foreign Plantations, been Presented to His Majesty at
this Board, His Majesty was Graciously Pleased, with the Advice of His
Privy Council, to Approve and Confirm the same; and pursuant to His Royal
Pleasure thereupon, Signified and Expressed, the said Law as aforementioned,
is hereby Approved and Confirmed accordingly.

Will. Bridgeman.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Charles Harper at the Flower-de-luce,
over against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem:
Dedicated to Her most Sacred Majesty, in Ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley,
M. A. each Book Illustrated by necessary Notes, Explaining all the more
Difficult Matters in the whole History: Also a Prefaratory Discourse concerning
Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition Revised by the Author, and Improved with the
Addition of a Large Map of the Holy Land; and a Table of the Principal Matters;
with Sixty Copper Plates, by the celebrated Hand of W. Faithorne. Fol.

The Second and Third Parts of the Works of Mr. Abraham Cowley. The Second
containing what was written and published by himself in his younger Years,
Reprinted together. The Sixth Edit. The Third Part containing his Six Books of
Plants, viz. the First and Second of Herbs, the Third and Fourth of Flowers,
the Fifth and Sixth of Trees: Now made English by several Hands, with necessary
Tables to both Parts, and diverse Poems in praise of the Author. Fol.

Resoves: Divine, Moral, Political. With several New Additions in Prose and
Verse. In this Eleveth Edition, References are made to the Poetical Citations
heretofore much wanted. By Owen Felltham Esquire Fol. Price 12 s.

The Works of the Famous Nicholas Machival, Citizen and Secretary of Florence.
Newly and faithfully Translated into English. Fol. Price 15 s.

The Whole Duty of Man, according to the Law of Nature, by that Famous Civilian
Samuel Puffendorf; Now made English. Octavo. Price 3 s. 6 d.

Dr. Willis's Practice of Physic, being the whole Works of that Famous
Physician; rendered into English. Second Edit. with Forty Copper Plates. Fol.

The Historical and Miscellaneous Tracts of the Reverend and Learned Peter
Heylin, D. D. Now Collected into one Vol. And an Account of the Life of the
Author, never before published. Fol.

The Religion of Protestants, a safe way to Salvation; with a Discourse of the
Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy. By W. Chillingworth, M. A. To which in
this Edit. is added his Letter, showing the Reason why he left Popery. Fol.

The History of Q. Elizabeth: By W. Cambden K. at Arms. Fourth Edit. Fol.

An Impartial Collection of the great Affairs of State, from the beginning of
the Scotch Rebellion in the Year 1639. to the Murder of King Charles the First.
Fol. in Two Vol. By Dr. Nalson.

Dugdale's Monasticon Anglicanum. Fol. in Three Vol.

The History of K. Edward II. King of England, and Lord of Ireland. Fol.

Dr. Willis's Practic. of Physic. Octav. With his Treatise of the Plague.
Price 7 s.

Bishop Usher's Power of the Prince, and the Obedience required of the Subject,
with a large Preface, by Bishop Sanderson. Octav.

Animadvers. on a Book Entit. The Theory of the Earth: By Herbert L. B. of
Hereford.

A Treatise of Moral and Intellectual Virtues, wherein their Nature is fully
explained, and their Usefulness proved: By J. Hartcliff, B. D. Pride 4 s.

Contemplations Moral and Divine, in Two Parts, by Sir Matthew. Hale, Knight. late
Chief Justice of the King's Bench. Octav. Price 5 s.

A Voyage to Suratt, in the Year 1689. Giving a large Account of that City, and
its Inhabitants, and of the English Factory there. Likewise a Description of
Madera, St. Jago, Annobon, Cabenda, and Malemba (or the Coast of Africa) St.
Helena, Johanna, Bombay, the City of Muscatt, and its Inhabitants in Arabia
Felix, Mocha, and other Maritim Towns on the Red Sea, the Cape of good Hope,
and the Island of Ascension. By J. Ovington, M. A. Chaplain to His Majesty.
Octav. Price 6 s.

A plain Method of Christian Devotion: Laid down in Discourses, Meditations,
and Prayers, fitted to the various Occasion of a Religious Life: Translated and
Revised from the French of Monsieur Jurieu, the Two and Twentieth Edition; with
a Preface: By W. Fleetwood, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. Price 2 s. 6 d.

LAW BOOKS.
THE Reports of Sir Peyton Ventris, Knight, late one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas, in Two Parts. The first containing select Cases adjudged in the
King's Bench, in the Reign of K. Charles II. The Second Part, containing Choice
Cases, adjudged in the Common Pleas, in the Reign of K. Charles II. and K.
James II. and in the three first Years of his now Majesty K. William and the
late Q. Mary, while he was a Judge in the said Court, with the Pleadings to the
same; with the Allowance and Approbation of the Lord Keeper and all the Judges.
2 Vol. in Fol. Price 1 l. 10 s.

The Lord Coke's Reports in English. Folio.

Judge Crook's Reports in 3 Vol. the Third Edition, with References to all the
late Reports. Folio.

The Lord Coke's Commentary on Littleton. Folio.

-- His Commentary on Magna Charta. Folio.

-- His Pleas of the Crown, or the Third Part of the Institutes. Folio.

-- His Jurisdiction of Courts, or Fourth Part of the Institutes.

-- His Eleven Reports in French. Folio.

Bulstrode's Reports, with New References. Folio.

Leonard's Reports in Four Parts, with New References. Folio.

The Year-Books in 10 Vol. the last Edit. with New Not. and Tables to them.
all. Fol.

The Reports of the Lord Keeper Littleton, in the time of King Charles I. Folio.

The Reports of the Learned Judge, Sir Henry Hobart, the Fourth Edition
corrected and amended. Folio.

Reports in the Court of King's Bench at Westminster, from the 12th. to the
30th Year of King Charles II. by Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire in Three Vol.
Folio.

Kelway's Reports with new References to all the late Reports. Fol.

Reports of several especial Cases in the Court of Common Pleas, by S. Carter
of the Inner Temple, Esquire Fol.

An Assistance to Justices of the Peace, for the easier Performance of their
Duty, the First Part containing the particular Clauses of all such Statutes
from Magna Charta, until the first of King James II. that do any ways concern a
Justice of Peace; in the other Part, the whole Office of a Justice of Peace is
methodically digested, with the most approved Presidents under proper Heads, to
which is now added a Table for the ready finding out the Presidents, with a
large Table of the matters never before Printed: By Jos. Keble of Gray's Inn, Esquire

An exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of London, being of great Use
for all that are concerned in Parliamentary Affairs, and Professors of the Laws
of this Realm, Collected by Sir Rob. Cotton, Knight and Baronet. Fol.

An exact Abridgment of the Statutes of King William and Queen Mary, and of
King William III. in Force and Use. Begun by Jo. Washington of the Middle
Temple Esquire, and since his Death Revised and continued to the End of the
last Session of Parliament, April 27. 1696. Octavo. Price 4 s.

The Scrivener's Guide: Being choice and approved Forms of Precedents, of all
sorts of Business now in Use and Practice, in a much better method than any yet
printed; being useful for all Gentlemen, but chiefly for those who practice the
Law. Octavo. Price 5 s.

Styles's Practical Register, begun in the Reign of King Charles I. consisting
of Rules, Orders, and principal Observations concerning the Practice of the
Common Law in the Courts of Westminster; particularly the Kings Bench, as well
in matters Criminal as Civil; carefully continued down to this time. The Third
Edition. Octavo. Price 6 s.

An exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Form and Use from the beginning of
Magna Charta; begun by Edm. Wingate, and since continued by J. Washington to
the Year 1689. In this Impression many hundred of false References are
corrected. Price 7. s.

Two Dialogues in English between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student of the
Laws of England, of the Grounds of the said Laws, etc. Price 2 s 6 d.

The new Natura Brevium of the most Reverend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitz. Herbert,
Corrected and Revised. Price 6 s.

Some Books Printed and Sold by Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of
Popes-Head-Alley next Cornhil. FOLIO.
THE History, Life, Reign and Death of Edward II. King of England, and Lord of
Ireland; with the Rise and Fall of his great Favorites, Gaveston and the
Spencers: By E.F. in the Year 1627; and Printed Verbatim from the Original.
Historical Collections of Private Matters of State, of Weighty Matters in Law,
of Remarkable Proceedings in Parliaments; beginning the Sixteenth Year of King
James, Anno 1618, and ending the Fifth Year of King Charles, 1629. Digested
into order of Time, and now Published by John Rushworth, Esquire of Lincoln's Inn.

Cambridge Concordance. QUARTO.

THE Rape: or the Innocent Imposters; a Tragedy acted at the Theater Royal.

The New Alamode Secretary: or Practical Penman.

Youths Introduction to Trade: an Exercise-Book, chiefly designed for the Use
of the Writing-School, to Employ Youth at Night and other vacant Times while
they learn to Write; by which the Young Apprentice may be able to Apply his
Writing and Arithmetic to Business; as, a Merchant, Shopkeeper, or other
inferior Trades: First Methodized for the Benefit of the Author's Scholars: and
Published for the Use of such as Tech Writing and Arithmetic: by John Airs.
The Second Edition, Corrected, and very much Enlarged.

Tables for the Forbearance and Discompt of Money; whereby by Interest from
10000 l. to One Shilling, from One Day to 365, is exactly Calculated to the
Thousandth Part of a Penny; with the Rebate of all Sums: Likewise Tables for the
Forbearance, Discompts, and the Purchase of Annuities for 31 Years, at the Rate
of 6 per Cent per Annum. With an exact Table for the ready Summing up of
Commodities: All performed by Addition only, for the Help of the Meanest
Capacity. The Third Edition: by Roger Clavel, Gent. Student in the Mathematics.

The Present State of Europe Examined, and found Languishing: Occasioned by the
Greatness of the French Monarchy. For the Cure thereof, a Remedy is most humbly
proposed by Tho. Manly, Esquire

Large and Small Octavo's:
DE Jure Maritimo and Navali: or a Treatise of Affairs Maritime, and of
Commerce in Three Books: The Fourth Edition: by Charles Molloy.

A Rational Practice of Chyrurgery: or Chyrurgical Observations Resolved
according to the Solid Fundaments of true Philosophy: by John Muys, Doctor of
Physic in Arnheim. In Five Decades.

Dr. Thompson's Method of Curing Chymically.

Observations upon the United Provinces of the Netherlands: by Sir William
Temple, The Fifth Edition. Corrected and Augmented.

The Ingenious and Diverting Letters of the Lady -- Travels into Spain.
Describing the Devotions, Nunneries, Humors, Customs, Laws, Militia, Trade,
Diet, and Recreations of that People. Intermixed with great Variety of Modern
Adventures, and Surprising Accidents: being the Truest and Best Remarks Extant
on that Court and Country. The Fourth Edition Corrected. In Three Parts
Complete.

The Physical Dictionary. Wherein the Terms of Anatomy, the Names and Causes of
Diseases, Chyrurgical Instruments and their Use; are accurately Described. Also
the Names and Virtues of Medicinal Plants, Minerals, Stones, Gums, Salts,
Earths, etc. And the Method of choosing the best Drugs: The Terms of Chemistry,
and of the Apothecaries Art; and the various Forms of Medicines, and the ways
of Compounding them. By Stephen Blancard, M. D. Physick-Professor at Middleburg
in Zealand. The Third Edition, with the Addition of above a Thousand Terms of
Art, and their Explanation.

Carden's Three Books of Consolation, Englished, of great Use in these Times.

The Art of Painting of Oil. Wherein is included each particular Circumstance
relating to that Art and Mystery. Containing the best and most approved Rules
for preparing, mixing, and working of Oyl-Colours The whole Treatise being so
full Complete, and so exactly fitted to the meanest Capacity, that all Persons
whatsoever, may be able by these Directions, to Paint in Oyl-Colours. By J.
Smith, C.M.


