JUDGMENT OF THE Reformed Churches, That a man may lawfully not only put away
his Wife for her Adultery, but also marry another.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

OF THE LAWFVLNES OF MARRIAGE UPON A LAVVFVL DIVORCE.
THE FIRST CHAPTER.
The state of the Question being first declared the truth is proved by
schriptuere: that a man having put away his wife for her adultery may lawfully
marry another.

THe duty of man and woman joined in marriage, requires that Gene. 2. (...).
Mat. 19. 5.
they two should be as one person, and cleave each to other with mutual love
and liking in society of life, until it please God, who has coupeled them
together in this bond, to set them free from it, and to dissociate and sever
them by death. But the inordinat fancies and desires of our corrupt nature have
so inveigeled Adams seed in many places, that men have accostomed to put
away their wives upon every trifling mislike and discontentement: yea Ieuwes
supposed themselves to be warranted by Gods Deu 24. 1 Mat. 5. 31.
law to do it, so that whosoever put away his wife gave her a bill of
divorcement. This perverse opinion and error of theirs our Savior Christ
reproved teaching that divorcements may not be made for any cause save
whoredom only. For whosoever (says he) shall put away his wife except it be
for whoredom and shall marry another does commit adultery and who so marries
her which is put away, does commit adultery. Now about the meaning of these
words of Christ expressed more fully by by on of the M^th. 10. 9
Eua^gelists, by M^^^ 1. Luke 6. 18.
others more sparingly, there has a doubt arisen: and diverse men even from
the primative churches time have been of diverse minds.

For many of the Fathers have gathered thereupon, that if a man's wife committed
whoredom and fornication, he might not only put her a way, but marry another.
Some others, and among them namely S. Austine, have thought that the man might
put away his wife but marry another he might not,

^he Scholedevins of later years, and the Canonists, as for most part they
were al adicted to S. Austins judgment, did likewise follow him herein and the
Popes mainteining their doctrine for Catholic, have possessed the Church of
Rome with this opinion. But since in our days the light of good learning both
for arts and tongues has shyned more brightly by Gods most gracious goodness
then in the former ages, and the holly scriptures by the help thereof have
been the better understood: the Pastors and Doctors of the reformed churches
have percieved and showed, that if a man's wife defile her self with
fornication, he may nor only put her away by Christ's doctrine but also marry
another. Wherein that they teach agreeably to the truth, and not erroneously,
as Jesuits and Papists do falsely charge them. I will make manifest and prove
(through Gods assistance) by express words of Christ, the truth it self. And
because our adversaries do ween that the contrary hereof is strongly proved
by sundry arguements and objections, which two of their newest writers Bell.
the Jesuit and a namelesse author of an English panphlet, have dilligenely
laid together; For the farther clearing therefore of the matter, and taking
away of doubts and scruples, I will set down al there obiectio^s in order,
first out of the scriptures, then of fathers, last of reasons and answer every
one of them particularly. So shall it appeaae to suh as are not blinded with a
fore conceived opinion and prejudice, that whatsoever show of prbabilities are
brought to the contrary, yet the truth deliverd by our Savior Christ
allowetls him whose wife commits sornication, to put her away, and to marry
another

The proof hoereof is evidnnt if the words of Christ be waied in the nienteuth
Chapter af S, Mat. gospel For when the Pharisees asking him a question, whether
it were lawful for a man to put away his wife for every catse, received answer
that it was not, and thereupon said unto him, Why did Moses command to give a
bill of divorcement and to put her a way: Our Saviouer said unto them; Moses
suffered you because of the hardness of your heart to put away Mat. 19. 1.
your wifes: But from the beginning it was not so. And I say unto you, that,
whosoever, shall put away his wife, except it be for whoredom, and shall marry
another, does commit adultery: and who so marries her that is put away, does
commit adultery.

Now this in sentence, the clause of exception [except it be for whoredom] does
argue that he committeh not adultery, who, having put away his wife for
whoredom marries another.

But he must needs commit it in doing so unless the band of marriage be
loosed and dissolved. For who so marries another as long as he is Romans 7. 2
bound to the former verse. 3.
is an adulterer. The band then of marriage is loosed and dissolved between
that man and wife who are put assunder and divorced for whoredom.

And if the band beloosed, the man may marry another: seeing it is written (...)
Art thou loosed from a wife? If thou marry thou sinnest not. Therefore it is
lawful for him who has put away his wife for whoredom to marry another,
verse. 28.


This argument does firmly and necessarily conclude the point in question, if
the first part and proposition of it be proved to be true. For there is no
controversy of any of the rest: being all grounded on such undoubted
principles of scripture and reason, that our adversaries themselves admit and
grant them all.

The first Bel^armin Tom 2 (...) 4 lib^. de ma^r^mon (...)* cap 15. (...). The
Pamp^^etter in his tef^^tation of the discourse to^ening the lawfulness of
marriadgge after divorc^ for whoredone.
they deny to weete that the clause of exception in Christ's speech [except it
before whordome] does argue that the man commiteth not adultery, who, having
put away his wife for whoredom, marries another, And to overthrowe this
proposition, they do bring soudry answers and evasions, The best of all which
as Bellarmin avoucheth, is, that those words [except it be for whoredome] are
not an exception, For Christ (says he) meant those words Ni fiob (...) cattonem.
[except for whoredome] not as an exception, but as a negation. So that the
sense is whosoever shall put away his wife, except for whoredom, that is to
say Extra co^^ ^ornicatinis.
without the cause of whoredom, and shall marry another does commit
adultery. Whereby it is affirmed that he is an adulterer who having put away
his wife without the cause of whoredom, marries another: but nothing is said
touching him who marries another, having put away his former wife for
whoredom. In deed this evasion might have some color for it if these words
of Christ [except it be for Whoredome] were not an exception. But neither has
Bellarmin ought that may suffice for the proof here of and the very text of
the scripture it self is so clear against him, that he must of necessity
give over his houlde. For the principal pillar wherewith he vnderproppeth it,
is De adulteri^ conj^g lib. 1 cap 9.
S. Austins judgment who has so expounded it in his first book touching
adulterous marriages: Now of that treatise S. Retractat lib. ^. cap. 57.
Austin says himself in his retractatio^s I have written two books touching
adulterous marriages, as near as I could according to the scriptuers being
desirous to open and loose the knotts of a most difficult quests on. Which
whether I have done so that no knott is left therein, I know not; nay rather I
perceave that I have not done it perfectly; and thoroughly, al though I have
opened many creeckes thereof, as whosoever reads with judgment may discern.
S. Augustine then acknowledges that there are some wants and imperfections in
that work which they may see who read with judgment. And whether this that
Bellarmin does allege out of it, deserve not to fall within the compass of
that censure I appeal to their judgment who have eyes to see: For S. Augustine
thought that the word in th original of S. Math gospel, had, by the proper
signification of it, imported a negation rather then an exception. And (...)
adulter. co^^ng. lib. 1. cap 11.
he shows by saying that where the Latin translation has Nisi ob
Fornicationem.
[ except for whoredom] in the Grieke text it is rather read Praeter causa
Fornicationis
without the cause of whoredo^:

Supposing belike (whether by slipp of memory or rather oversight) Parectos
Logon por neias.
that the same words, which were used before in the fifth Chapter of S. Math.
Gospel to the same purpose, were used also in this place: where as here they ei^
my epi potneia.
differ, and are well expressed by that in the latin by which S. Austin thought
they were not so well. Houbeit, if they had been the same with the former: yet
neither so might Bell. allow his opinion; considering that the common latin
translation (which Papists by their Council of Trent are bound to stand to
under pain of curse, expresses Except^ causa fornicetionis.
those likewise as a plain exception.

Which in de^de agrees to the right and natural meaning of the Parectos.
particle, as (...) in the Septuagint Sam. 21. 9 ^ Regum. 3. 18
the like writers use it in like construction: Co^ ^5. 27. (...)
even then to, when it has as it were a link less to tie it unto that
meaning. Wherefore S. Austins mistaking of the word and signification thereof
is noe sufficient warrant for Bell. to ground on, that they must betaken so. As
for that he adds, that, albeit (...) ^ei mi. Apoc. 9. 4. et. 21. 27.
both these particles be taken exc^ptively often times, yet may they also be
taken otherwise, since on of them is used in the Revelatio^ as an adversative
not an exceptive^ this makes much less for proof of his as^ertion. For what
if it be used there as an adversative where the matter treated of, and the
tenor of the sentence do manifestly argue that it must be taken so? Must it
therefore be taken so in this place, whereof our question is? or does Bellar.
prove by any circumstance of the text, that here it may be taken so? No,
Neither says he a word to this purpose. Why, men ioneth he then that it may
be taken otherwise, and is in the Revelaton, for an adversative particle? Truly
I know not unless it be to show that he can wrangl^, and play the cavelling
sophister in seeming to gainsay and disprove his adversary, when in truth he
does not. Or perhaps, though he durst not say for the particular, that it is
taken here as an adversative, which he could not but most absurdly. Yet he
thou^ht it policy to breed a surmise there of for the general, that shallower
conceits might imagine another sense therein, they knew not what, and they whose
brazen faces should serve them, thereto, might impudently brable, that our
sense is not certain because another is possible, eve^ as a Jew being pressed
by a Christian with the place of ^sa ^. 4. 2. Gualma.
Esaias, Behoulde a v^gin shall conceive, and bring forth a Son should answer
that the H^brue word translated Virgin, Prove. 30. 19
may be taken othrwise since that in the Proverbs it signifies a married woman:
at least one that is not a Virgin in deed though she would seem to be But as
the Jew cannot conclude hereof with any reason, that the word signifies a
married woman in Esaias; because the thing spoken of is a strange sign and it
is not strange for a married wommen to coceave and bring forth a Son: so
neither can the Jesuit conclude of the former, that the particle in Math. is
mea^t adversatively; because the words then do bear noe sense at all; in
which sort to think that any wiseman spoke, were folly; that Christ the word
and wisdom of God were impiety. Nay if some of Bell. scholars should say
that words must be supplied to make it perfect sense, rather than their
Maiester be cast of as a wrangeler: they would be quickly enforced to pluck
in this horn, or else they might chance to leap (which is worse out of the
frying pan into the fire. For adversative particles import an opposition and
contrariety unto the sentence against which they are brought in. Now, the
sentence is, that who so puts away his wife and marries another, does
commit adultery.

Wherefore he by consequent, commits not adultery who does so for
whor^dome: If the particle be adversative, and must have words accordingly
supplied; and understood to make the sense perfect. Thus the shift and cavil
which Bell. has drawn out of the double meaning of the Greike word, is
either idle and beats the aier; or if it strike any, it strikes himself,
and gives his cause a deadly wound. Yea that which he sought to confute, he
has confirmed thereby. For since the word has only two significations
exceptive, and adversative, neither durst he say that it is used here as an
adversative, it follows he must grant it to be an exceptive: so the place
rightly translated in our Enhelish (agree able to the other in the 5. of Math.)
exoept it be for whoredom, which as in their authentical latin text also does
out of conitoversie betoken an exception. Having all passages therefore shutt
against him for scaping this way, he flees to annother starting hole: to weet,
that if the word betaken exceptively yet may it be an exception negative.

And this (he says) suffices for the maintnance of S. Aust. answer. For when
it is said, whosoever shall put away his wife excepting the cause of whoredo^
and shall marry another does commit adultery: the cause of whoredom may be
excepted, either because in that case it is not adultery to marry another;
and this is an exception affirmative: or because nothing is presently
determined touching that cause, whether it be sufficient to excuse adultery or not; and this is an exception negative, which in that S. Aust. embraced he did
well. I would toe God Bell. had S. Aust. modesty. Then would he be ashamed to
chargs such a man wiith embracing such whorish filth of his own facsing, ar in
distinction of negative and affirmrtive exception he does. For h^e handeleth it
so lewdely and perv^rsely, by calling that affirmative which in deed is
negative, and by a^ouching that to be negative, which is not: as if he had
made a covenant with his lips to lie, treading in the steps of those wicked
wretches of whom it is written (...). 5. 20.
woe unto them* that say that good is evil, and evil good. For the proof where
of it is to be noted that an exception is a particular proposition
co^tradictorie to a geneaall: So that if the general proposition be
affirmative, the exception is negative, and if the proposition be negative
contrariewise the exception is affirmative.

As for exsamples sake Exodus 22. 20.
He that sacrifices to any Gods save to the Lord shall be destroyed says
Moses in the law. The proposition is affirmative, He that sacrifices to any
Gods shall be destroyed. The exception negative.

He that sacrifices to the Lord shall not be destroyed Mat. 10. 18.
There is none good, but one, even God says Christ in the Gospel. The
proposition is ngative, There is none good. The exception affirmative. One is
good even God (...), 2^. 29.
I would to God that all (says Paul to Agrippa) which hear me this day, were
altogether such as I am, except these bonds. The proposition affirmative. I
with that all that hear me were such as I am altogether. The exception
negative. I wish not in bonds they were such as I am. Phil. 4. (...)
No Church did communicate with me in the account of giving and receiving,
saving you only says the same paul to the Phillippians. The Proposition
negative, No Church did communicate with me in the account of giving and
receiving. The exception affirmative You of Phillipp^ did.

Likewise all the rest of expositions adjoined to general propositions, though
the marks and tokens of generallity sometimes lie hidden in the Proposition,
so of denying or affirming do in the exception: Yet it is plain and certain
that in the proposition and exception matched with it, are still of contrary
quallity, the one affirmative, if the other negative, and negative if the other
affirmative. Which being so: see now the Jesuits dealing, how falsely and
absurdly he speaks against truth and reason.

For since in Christ's speech to^hing Diuorcement for whoredom; the proposition
is affirmative^ Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry an other, does
commit adultery: it follows that the exception which denies him to commit
adultery who putting away his wife for whordome, marieth another, is an
exception negative, but Bellarmin says that this were an exception
affirmative. Yea which is more strange in a man learned and knowing rules of
logique (But what can arts help when men are given over by Gods just iudgemnt
to their own lusts and errors?) he entiteleth it an exception affirmative,
even then and in the same place when and where himself having set it down in
the words goeing immediatlye next before, had given it the mark of a
negative, thus, It is not Adultery to marry annother. And as no absurdity
does lightly come alone, he adds fault to fault, saying that this is an
exception negative, When no thing is presently determined touching the cause,
whether it be sufficent to excuse adultery or no. So first to deny with him
was to affirm: and next, to say nothing, now is to deny, Yet there is a rule
in L. Qui't (...) D. de regul^^ juris.
Law that he who faith nothing, dieneth not, Belike, as they coined us neuw
Diviniti at Rome: so they will new Law and new Lodgique too. Houbeit, if these
principles be allowed therein by the Jesuits authority, that negative is
affirmative and to say naught is negative: I see not but al heretics and
ungodly persons, may as well as Jesuits, mainteyne what they list, and
impudently face it out with like distinctions. For if an adversary of the H.
Ghost should be controuled by that wy read to the Corinthians Cor. 2. 11.
The things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God: His answer (after
Bellarmins pattern) were ready, that this proves not the spirit of God to
knouw those things, because it might be a negative exception^ importing that S.
Paul wolude determine nothing presently thereof. If one who dispaired of the
mercy of God through concience of his sine, and trespasses should be put in
mind of Christ's speech to sinners Luc. 1^. 3.
Ye shall all perish except ye repent: He migt reply thereto that the
exception is negative; and this though not in the former point, yet here were
true; but to make it serve his humor. He must expound it with Bellarmin, that
Christ does not determine what shall become of the repentat. If a usurer should
be toulde that he Levi^. ^4. 37.
is for bidden to Give forth upon Usury, ^ze. 18. 13.
or to take increase: and a thief that he is Epes. 28.
commanded To labor and work, and The. ^, 12.
so to eat his own bread; they might (if they had learned to imitate
Bellarmin) de^end their trades both, the one by affirming, that to forbidd a
thing is to say nothing of it, the other, that to command betokens to
forbid. In a word, Whatsoever opinion were reproved as false, or action as
wicked, out of the scriptures denouncing death eternal and pains of hell
thereto* the seduced and disobedient might shift the scriptures of, by glosing
thus upon them, that false is true and wicked holy: life meant by death, and
heaven, by hell. Or if the Papists them-selves would condemned this kind of
distinguishing and expounding places, as senseless and shameless: then let
them give the same sentence of Bellarmins that neg^tive is afirmative, and to
say nothing is to deny; Which whether they do, or not I will, with the consent
and liking (I doubt not) of all indifferent judges, and Godly minded m^n who
love the truth and not contencion, conclude, that these lying gloses of the
^esuits do not become a Christian. And seeing it is proved that an exception
negative is not a preterition or passing over a thing in silence (which if
Christ had meant, he could have done with fit words, as wise men are wont) but
a flat denying of that in on case, which the proposition affirms in all
others it remayn^th that Christ having excepted out of his general speech the^
who for whoredom put away their wives, denies that in them, which in all
others he affirms; and thereby teaches us that the man who putting away his
wife for that cause, marries another, does not commit adultery.

The next trick of Sophistry, whereto as to a shelter our adversaries betake
them, is that the exception ought to be restreined to the former branche of
putting away the wife only. To the which intent, they say that there are some
words wanting in the text which must be supplied and perfected thus; Whosoever
shall put away his wife (which is not lawful except it be for whoredom) and
marries another, does commit adultery. This devise does Bell. allow of as
probable, though not like the foresaid two of negation and negative exception.
But our English Pamphletter prefers it before all. And surely if it were
lawful to foist in these words which is not lawful: the Pamphletter might
seem to have showed greater skill herein then Bellarmin. But men of
understanding and judgment do know that this were a ready way to make the
scripture a nose of wax and leaden rule (as Hierat. lib. 3. Cap. 3.
Pighuis does blasphemously term it) if every one may add not what the
circumstances and matter of the text shows to be wanting, but what himself
lists to frame such sense there of as pleases his conceit and fancy. The
sundry interlasings of words by sundry authors into this very place and the
wrestings of it thereby to sundry senses may (to go noe further) sufficiently
discover the fault and inconvenience of that kind of dealing.

For Quaest 76. ^ Mat. 19.
the Bishop of Auila supplieth it in this manner who so puts away his wifs,
except it be for whordome, though he marry not another, commits adultery,
and whosoever puts her away in whatsoever sort* if he marry another, does
commit adultery. Frei^r Alphonsus Alphonsia Castro advers her lib 11. tit
Nuptiae.
checketh and controlleth this interpretation, partly as too violent, for
thrusting in so many words; partly as untrue, for the former braun, h^of it:
since he who puts away his wife, not for whoredom, although he cause her to
commit adultery, yet does not himself commit it, unless he marry another.
Whereupon the Friar would have it thus supplied rather. Whosoever puts away his
wife, not for other cause but for whoredom, and marries another, does commit
adultery. But this though it have not so many words added, as the Bishop of
Auilas, yet in truth it is more violently forced against the natural meaning
and drift of the text. For by adding these words Not for other cause, his
purpose is to say, that whosoever puts away his wife for noe cause bu^ for
whoredom yet commits adultery, if he marry another; much more if he
marry having put away his wife for any other cause. And so is Christ's speech
in effect made clean contrary to that which his own words do give: he
saying Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it before whoredom: and the
Friar ^orceing him to say Whosoe ver shall put a away his wife although it be
for whoredom, and shall marry another, does commit adultery. In Matt. 19.
Nicolas of Lira being as in time more ancient then the friar, so more
sincere and single in handeling the scripture, says that other words must be
interposed to the supplying of it thus. Whosever puts away his wife except
it be for^whordom, sins, and does agaiast the law of marriage; and whosoever
marries another does commit adultery. Wherein though he deal less vyolently
with the text, then do the friar and the Bishop: yet he offends also in
their licentious humor of adding to the scripture, where nothing was wanting,
and making it there by to speak that which he thinks, whereas he should have
learned to think that which it speaks. Yea Bell, himself acknowledges that
they all were overseene herein, albeeit censuring them with gentler words, as
he is wont his favorits and friends For the explications (says he) which the
Bishop of Auila, Alphonsus a Castro and others have devised, are not so
probable.

But why should these be noted by him as improbable, yea denied unworthy the
rehearsal, and that of his own, though adding in the like sort, which is not
lawful, be allowed as probable, yea magnified as most true by the pamphletter?
The reason which they both, or rather which Bell.. for the pamphletter does no
more here but English him, as neither else where for the most part, though he
bragg not thereof: the reasons then which Bell. does press out of the text to
breed a persuasion in his credulous scholars that this interposition is
probable and likely, are pressed indeed according to the proverb The wringing
of the nose causes blood to com out. For he says that Christ did not place
the exception after those words And shall marry another, but straight after
those whosoever shall put away and likewise when he added, p^o. 30. 3
and whos^ marries her that is put away commits a^^lterie he did not join
thereto, Except it be for whoredom: to the intent that be might show that the
cause of whoredom does only make the putting away to be lawful, and not the
celebrating of a new marriage too. And how does he prove that Christ did so
place the exception in the former clause to this intent? or to this intent did
omit it in the latter? Nay he proves it not; it is but his conjecture, like a
sick man's dream. Unless this go for a proof, that Christ did not so place
it before without cause, nor omit it afterward without cause. Which if he
meant it should, it was for want of a better. For Christ did not these things
without cause I grant Therefore he did them for this cause; it follows not.
S. Paul, having occasion to cite a place of scriptuere does set it down thus
Com ye out from among the^, 2 cor. 6. 17.
and separate your selves says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing. Herein
he has placed the words says the Lord, not after touch noe unclean thing,
but after separate your selves. This did he not without cause, What? for this
cause therefore that he might restrain the words, says the Lord, to the
former branch as not pertaining to the latter also? No for it appears by the
Esaias. 52. 13
prophet Esaias that they belong to both. It is to be thought then, that the
spirit of God who does nothing without cause, did move Paul for some cause to
place them so. Perhaps for perspicuitye and comodiousnesse of giving other men
thereby to understaude the rather that both the words goeing before, and
coming after were quallified with says the Lord* which is to be likewise
thought of the exception placed by our Savior betwee^ the two branches of his
speech. And that with so much greater reason in my judgment because if he had
placed it after the later And shall marry another, the words Ep^^ornela
except for whoredom might have seemed to signifiie that it were lawful for a
man having put away his wife for any cause to marry another ^ if he could not
contain; as it is written Diatis porne (...) 7. 2
Because of whoredom let every man have his wife where now, the exception
being set before (the pharisees whose question Christ therein did answer) could
gather no such poyso^ out of his words: to feed their error: but they must
needs accknowledg this to be his doctrine, that a man may not put away his wife
for every cause, and marry another, but for whoredom only. As for Christ's
omitting of the exception afterwrd Bell, himself will quickly see there might
be another cause thereof, if he considder how S. Paul repeating this doctrine
of Christ does wholly omit the exception, which nevertheless must needs be
supplied and understoode. For why does S. Paul say that to married persons, 1
Co^. 7. 10
the Lord gave commandment; Let not the wife depart from her husband, and
let not the husband put away his wife, without adding to either part, except
it be for woredom which the Lord did add? Bell. greatest Tho Aquin ^ ^eo^. 7.
Lect. 2.
Doctor says he omitted it Because it was very well known most notorius. If
then Paul had reason to omit it wholly because it was so well known: Hoe much
more justly might Christ in part omit it for the same cause, having mentioned
it imediatly before, and made it known thereby? Chiefly seeing that as he
framed his speech to men's undesta^ding, so did he follow the common use of men
therein. And if I should say upon the like occasion whosoever draws his
sword, except he be a magistrate, and kills a man commiteteth murder; and
whosoever abbetth him that kills a man commits murder: what man offense
and reason would not think I meant the exception set down in the former
sentence touching ma^qellers pertains to the later of there abbetters also,
and uttered once must serve for both? yea even in the former too, who would not
think that my meaning were the exception should reach, unto both the branches
of drawing the sword, and killing a man; not to be abridged and tied up unto
the first, as if I had said, whosoever draws his sword (Which none may do
except he be a magistrate) and kills a man, comitteth murder? yet one who
were disposed to play the Jesuits part, Matt. 26. 12.
might thus expound my speech, and say I taught thereby that Peter in deed was
justly reproved for drawing his sword though, he killed not: But magistrates
are authorized to draw it, and noe more, not to put men, to death, and Romans 13.
4.
to take vengeannce on him that does evil. Neither should he do me greater
wrong* there in by making me to speak contrary to scripture, then Bellarmin
does Christ by the like depraving of the like sentence. But if all these
reasons will not persuade his scholars, that in Christ's speech the exception of
whoredom is to be extended to both the points jointly of putting away and
marrying: and that Bell. adding these words, which is not lawful, did
unlawfully sow a patch of human rags to the whole garment of Gods most
precio^s word: behold their own doctrine allowed and established by the
Council of Trent, shall force them, will they, nill they to see it and
acknowledge it. For if the exception be so tied only to the former point: Then
a man may not putt away his wife for any cause save for whoredom, no not from
bed and board, as they term it, that is, from mutual company and society of
life, self. 24. ^. ^
although he marry not another. But the Council of Trent pronounces and
defines, that there are many causes, for the which a man may put away his wife
from bed and board, wherefore the Papists (no remedy) must grant that the
exception cannot so be tied unto the former point only. And therefore whereas
Bell. says further that he thinks it is ^n ^ did. 35. quaest an act 5
adult.
S. Thomas of Aquines opinion that Christ's words should be expounded so: and
in Mat. 19.
Ierom seems some what to be of the same mind: the Papists peradventure will
be feign to say that Bellarmin was deceived herein. For else not only Ierom
of whom they reckon less but Kin. 3. 18
Thomas of Aquine the saint of Saints and chiefest light of the Church of
Rome shall be convinced of error, even by the Council of Trents verdict.

And these consideracions do likewise stopp the passage of another shift,
which is coosin german to the last entreated of, and Bell. prayseth it alike.
To weete that the words commits adultery, must be supplied and understood
in the former part of Christ's sentence thus: Whosoever puts away his wife,
except it be for whoredom, commits adultery, and whosoever marries another
commits adultery. Kin. 3. 18.
Solomon did wisely judge that she was not the mother of the child who would
have it divided; but she who desired it might be saved entier.

Surely the Jesuit has not those bowels of kind and loving affection to
wards Christ's sentence that a Christian should. who can find in his heart to
have it divided; and of one living body, namely, Whoesoever puts away his
wife, except it be for whoredom and, marries another, commiteth adultery,
made as it were two pieces of a dead carkas, the first, whosoever puts away
his wife except it be for woredome, commiteth adultery, the second whosoever
maraieth another co^miteth adultery. Which dealing, beside the inco^venience
of making the s^rpitn ere a nose of wax and leaden rule, if men may add what
pleases them, specially if they may mangle senteces, and chop them in sundry
parts: but beside this mischief here it has a greater, that Christ most true
and holly, is made thereby to speak an untrueth. For a man may put away his
wife for other cause, then for whoredom, and yet not commit adulerie himself.
Yes he commits it (says Bell in his wifes adultery, whereof he was the
cause by putting her uniustly away. But I reply that it is one thing to cause
his wife to commit it, another to commit it him self. And Christ when he was
minded to note these several faults, did it with several words Poiei autin
moichastai and moicharai.
expressing them accordingly. Moreover, undrstanding the term, to put away,
not as Apolve in Lelusai. 1 cor. 7 27.
the force thereof does yield, and Christ took it for the loosing of the band
of marriage, but for a separation from bed and board only, as Bell.
understands it: He cannot allow the sentence which he fathereth on Christ,
though so expounded, without either condemning of the Trent Council, er being
himself condemned by it.

For if whosoever seperateth his wife from him, but for whoredom, does commit
adultery in causing her to commit it: Then is it a sin to separate her for
any cause save for whoredom. Extra tit. de divoti^s.
If it be a sin the Church of Rome erreth in houlding and decreeing that she
may be separated for sundry other causes. But whosoever says that the Church
erreth herein, is accursed by the Council of Sess. 24. can. 28.
Trent. The Council of Trent therefore does consequently curse Bellarm. if he
say that Christ spoke his words in that sense, in which he construeth them. And
does it not curse Lib. c^ntra Adimant^, ca. 3 in Mat. 19. ^
Austin also and c Theophilact, whom Bell. alleges as saying the same? at
least it declares that in the Councels judgment, the fathers missexpounded the
Scriptures sometimes, even those verrye places on which the Papists cite them
as sound interpreters of the Scripture. Now the speech of Christ being cleared
and saved entier from all cauils, the meaning thereof is plain, as I have
showed; that he who having put away his wife for whoredo^ marries anothetr
commits not adultery. For so much imports the excepto^ negative of the
cause of whoredo^, opposed to the general affirmative proposition, wherewith our
Savior answered the question of the pharisees touching divocreme^ts used by
the Jews, who putting away there wives for any cause did marry others.

The only reason of adversaries remaining to be answered, stood upon, and
urged by them as most effectual, and forcible to the contrary, is an example
of like sentences: from which, since the like conclusion (say they) cannot be
inferred, as we in far of this, the inferrence of this is faultye. And
faulty (I grant) they might esteem it justly if the like co^clusions could
not be drawn from the like sentences.

But let the examples, which they bring for poofe here of be troughly sifted*
and it will appear that either the sentences are unlike, or the like
conclusions may be inferred of them. For of three sentences proposed to this
end, the first is out of Scripture in S, James Epistle James. 4. 7
To him that knows how to do well, and does it not, to him there is sin. A
sentence though in show unlike to that of Christ's, for the proposition and
exception both* yet having in deed the force of the like, if it be thus
resolved, To him that does not well, except he know not how to do well there
is sin. And why may it not be concluded here of, that there is no sin to him,
who knows not how to do well, and does it not? because there are sins of
ignorance (says Bellarmin) and he who knows not how to do well, and does
it not, sins, though less then he that offends wittingly. I kouw not
whether this be a sin of ignorance in Bellarmin, or not, that when he should
say (if he will check the conclusion) there is sin to ignorant he says (as
if that were all one) the ignorant sins, Between which two things there is
a great difference in S. James his meauing. For S. James in the se words A
marry au to estin.
there is sin to him, does speak emphatically, and notes in that man the
same that our savior did in the Pharisees, when (because they boasted of their
sight and knowledge) Ioh. 9. 21 Ei^hete a m^^tiau.
he told the^ that they 8 had sin: meaning by this Pharse, as himself
expounds it, that their sin remained, that is to say, continued and stoodt
firm and settled. The custom of the Greek tougue wherein S. James wrote does
geve this Phrase that sense, as also the Syriaque (the lauguage used by Christ)
tra^slating Christ's words after the same manner: and the matter treated of does
argue that he meant not generally of sinue, Luc 12. 4^
but of sin being and cleaving to a man in special and pecular sort. For as
f the servant that knew his Masters will, and did not according to it, shall be
beaten with many strips: but he that knew it not, and yet did commit things
worthy of strips, shall be beaten with few. Likewise in transgressio^ whereu^to
the punishment answers, he that knows how to do well, and does it not,
sin is to him, he has it, he offends notably: But he that knows not how
to do well, and does evil has not sin sticking to him, his sin remains
not, he sins not so greatly and greevously.

Wherefore when Bell draws out of that sentence such a co^clusio^ as if S,
James in saying there is sin to him, had simply meant, he sins; Bellarmin
mistaketh the meaning of the sentence; which if the text it self cannot in
form him, T^o Aquin Hugh Card et. Guillia^d in Jacob. 4.
his doctors well considered may. But take the right meaning and the conclusion
will be sound. Whoesoever does not good and honest things, except it be of
ignorance, he sins desperately and mainely. Therefore whosoever of ignorance
ommitteth to do them, he sins not desperately. And thus our conclusion
drawn from Christ's sentence is rather confirmed the^ prejudiced by this
example, Yea let eve^ S. De adult. coujug lib. 1. cap. 9.
Austin, whose authority Bellarmin does ground on here in, be diligently
marked: and himself in matching these sentences together bewrays an
oversight, which being corrected will help the truth with light and strength,
For to make the one of the^ like the other, he is feign to fashion Christ's
speech in this sort: To him who puts away his wife without the cause of
whoredom and marries another Moehat^o est i^li
to him there is the cry me of committing adultery.

Now Christ has not Moi^ he (...) a^ to (...).
these words of emphaticall property, and strong signification, whereby he
might teach, as S, Augustine, gathers, that whosoever puts away his wife
for any cause, save for whoredom, and marries another, commits adultery
in an high degree: and so imply by consequence, (...)
that who so marries another, though having put away his former wife for
whoredom, yet commits adultery too, a less adultery.

But that which Christ says is simple flatt, absolute; he commits
adultery. And therefore as it may be inferred out of S. James, that he who
ommitteth the doing of good through ignorance, sins not with a lofty hand
in resolute stifnes of an hardened heart: So conclude we rightly out of
Christ's words that he who having put away his wife for whoredom, marries
another, commits not adultery in any degree at all.

The first sentence then alleged by S. Austin and after him pressed by our
adversaries out of the scripturs, is so far from disprooving, that it
proves rather the like conclusions from the like sentences. The second and
third are out of their own brains: The one of Bell. forging, the other of
the Pamphletters; Bellarmins, He that steals, except it be for need,
siuneth. The Phampletters. He that makes a lie, except it be for a Vauntage
does wilfully sin. Where of they say it were a wrong and badd inferrence, That
he sins not, who steals for need: and he wh^ lies for a Vauntage,
sins not wilfully. A badd inferrence indeed. But the fault there of is, in
that these sentences are not like to Christ's, For Christ's is from Heaven, full
of truth and wisdom: These ofmen, fond, and imply untruth, They might have
disputed as fitly to their purpose, and prooved it as forcibly, if they had
used this example: All foure-footed beasts except Apes and Monkeis are d^voyd
of reason. or this All longeared Creatures except asses are beasts. For hereof
it could not be concluded justly that Asses are not beasts, and Apes are not
devoyd of reason. No* But this perhaps might be concluded justly, that he had
not much reason, nor was far from a beast that would make such sentences.
Considering that all men who write or speak with reason, mean that to be
denied in the particular which they do except from a general affirmed And
therefore since he sins who steals pro. (...)
though for need, as the wise man shows, and he that lies for a vauntage
does wilfully sin, yea the more wilfully somtymes, because for a vauntage,
as when the scribs belyed Christ: It were a very fond and witless speech to
say, that Whosoever steals, except it be for need, sins: And whosoever
lies except it be for a vauntage does wilfully sin. Wherefore these
sentences are no more like to Christ's, them copper is to gould, or wormwood to
the bread of Heaven.

Neither shall they ever find any sentence like to his indeed, of which the
like conclusion may not be inferred, as we infer of that. And so the maine
ground of my principal reason proposed in the beginning, remains sure and
clearly prooved; that he by Christ's sentence commits not adultery, who
having put away his wife for whoredo^e marries another. Whereof seei^g it
follows necessarely, that he who has put away his wife for whoredom, may
lawfully marry another, as I there declared: it follows by the like
necessity, of consequence, that the popish doctrine maintained by our
adversaries denying the same, i^ contrary to the schriptuere and does gainsay
the truth delivered by the Son of God.

THE SCCOND CHAPTER.
The places of Scripture aleadged by our adversaries to disproove the Lawful
liberty of Marriage after Divorcement for Adultery, are Proposed, Examined,
and prooved not to make against it.

Saint Austin in his learned books of Christian Doctrine, wherein he geves
rules how to find the right and true sense of Scriptures, does well De doctr.
Christ li^b. 2. cap. 9.
advise the faithful, First to search and mark those things which are set
down in the Scriptures plainly, and then to go in hand with sifting and
discussing of the dark places: that the darker speeches may be^ made evident
by Patterns and examples of the more plain and manifest, and the records of
certain and undoubted sentences may take away doubt of the uncertain.

This wholesome and judicious Counsel of S, Austin if our adversaries had bin
as careful to follow, as they are willing to show the follow him in these
things which he has written less advisedly: they would not have alleged and
urged the places of Scripture, which they doc against the point of doctrine
hitherto prooved out of the 19. of S. Matthew. For Christ in that place does
open the matter and decide the question most plainly and fully: of purpose
answering the Pharisees. In others, either it is not handled of of purpose, but
incidetly touched, or in generallity set down more briefly, and so more
darkely and obscurely.

Wherefore if any of the other places had seemed unto the^ to raise a scruple,
and show of some repugnacie: they should have taken pains to explain and
level it by that in S. Math. the darker by the clearer, the brieffer by the
larger, the uncertein and ambigguous by the undoubted and certain. But seeing
they have chosen to follow S. Austins oversights rather then his best advises
in like sort as Furrius, an orator of Rome did imitate Fimbria whose force of
speech and arguements he attained not to, but pronounced broadlye and set his
mouth awry like him: we must say of them as Christ of the Phareses ^ Let them
alone, thy are blind leaders of the blind: and our selves endeavor to follow S.
Austin in that he followed Christ, who cleared the Cicero lib. 2 deorat.
darker place of Moses by mat 15. 14.
the plainer word and ordinance of God, Matt 19 7
The which if we do, we shall (by Gods grace) easily percieve, verse. 4. et 8.
that none of all the places aleadged by our adversaris, does make against the
doctrine already proved and concluded.

For the first of them is in the 5. of Math. Whosoever shall put away his wife,
except it he for whoredom, does cause her to commit adultery, And whosoever
marries her that input away does commit adultery, These words (says Bell. and
look what Bell. says the, the pamphletter says with him, so that one of
their names may serve for both (and reason Bellarmin have the honor) These
words. And whose marries her that is put away does commit adtltery, must be
either generally taken without exception, or with the exception, Except it be
for whoredom. If generally, then he who marries her that is put away, even for
whoredom too does commit adultery, The hand then marriage is not dissolved and
loosed by her putting away: but company debarred only, For he that marries
her should not commit adultery unless she were bound yet to her former
husband. And thus far Bellarmin says well: but superfluously. For the words
may not be generaly taken, since they have relation to the former senten^e,
whereto they are coupelld; and that sentence speaks of her which is pnt away
except for whordom, Their meaniug then must needs be that he who marries her
which is so put away does commit adultery. Neither could Bell. be ignorant
hereof, or doubt with any likelyhoode, but that this is our judgment, and would
be our answ^r. Wherefore his two forked dispute about the words, was aflourish
only to make us afraid: as if he fought with a two hand sword, which would
kill all that came in his way But now he goes fore ward upon his enemies pike,
an says about him on the other side. If the words must be taken with the
exception: then he that marries a whore put away from her husband, commits
not adultery, and consequently the whore is in better case then the innocent
and chaste, For the whore is free and may be married, whereas the innocent that
is uniustly put away, can neither have her former husband, nor marry another,
But this most absurd, that the law of Christ being most just, would have her
to be in better case and state, that is justly put away, then her that is
uniustly. For answer unto which reason of Bell. I would spurr him a question,
whether by the Popes law, which forbids a man that Extra de bigan^s cap.
(...).
has been twice married, or ^ de big^u^is.
has married a widow, to take holly orders and admits on thereto that has
kept or happily keeps many concubines, a whormo^ger be in better case the^ an
honest man: and if a whoremoger be so by the Popes law, whether we ought to c
Qui^ ^irc^ ^
iugde that this is most absurd or not. Here if he should answer that the Popes
law is not most just and therefore noe marvel if it have some such things as
were most absurd to be imagined by Christ's law: I must ackowledge he spoke
reason. Well, I would spurr him the^ another question, whether he think that I am in better case the^ any Jesuit, yea, then the best of them all. Phy he will
answer, there is noe comparison. The best? nay the worst of them is in better
case then I am: Ext^^ c. (...) in imu^, Qui cler^ci vel. vo^en^e^
Yet I may marry if I list: and none of them may because of their vow (Belike
this Vow-Doctrine was not establishede by the law of Christ, Which is most
just, but by the popes law rather. Or it is most absurd that a poor
Christian should he in better case, Corn Taci^us Annal lip 4 Dio. ib. 7
then the provdest Jesuit. But here peradventure the man will say rather that
we are H^retiqu^s, and they Catholics, and the meanest Catholic is in
better case, even for his faiths sake, then any Heretic watsoever: which if
he do as it is likely, neither can he say ought with probability but to this
effect, then has he confuted and overthrowen his argument, For by this
answer he cannot choose but grant that the simplest woman being put away
unjustly from her husband is in better case for her chastities sake. though
she may not marry, theu watsoever whore that may. And I hope he will not say
that the stews and cuttizans at Rome are in better case then honest matrons
there divorced from their husbands. Yet may none of these, while their husbans
live be joined to others, whereas the curtizaus are free to marry whom they
will, if any will marry them who are so free. Howbeit, least any place af
cavelling be left him, and of pretending a differente between those, who
having had the use of marriage lose the benefit of it, and those who lose it
not having never had it: I will set before him a plain demonstratipn thereof in
married persons. Sianus (as the Roman History records) did put away his
wife Aipicata uiustly: thereby to win the rather the favor of Livia, which
was the wife of Drusus. Livia being carried a way with the wicked intiseme^ts
of Sianus was not only naught of her body with him, but co^se^ted also to make
away her husband Drusus with poison. Now let Bell. tell us whether of these two
were in bettir case Apicata or Livia; Lovia the adulteress and murderesse of
her husband, being free to marry, or chaft Apicata being bound to live
solitary. If he say Livia should have been put to death by the Lege Pompeia de
par^icidis
Roman law because of her murdnr and the^ had she not be^ in better case
the^ Apecata for liberty to marry: I reply that likewise by the law of Moses
the woman who^ Christ speaks of, should have bee^ put to death, because of
her adultery, and so the doubt here ceased Iev^^ 20. 10.
too. But the law of Moses being left vnexe^uted on the adulterous woman, as the
Romain was for the time of Livia; let Bellarmin answer to the point, not as of
Livia only, but of any whor that has wrought her husbands death, and for want
of proof, or through the Magistrates fault is suffered to live, whether she
be in better case then an honest chaste, religious matron, that is put away
from her husband unjustly.

Which if he dare not say, Dent. 28. 15
considderinge one the one side^ the plagues that in this life, and Revel, 21. 8
in the life to come are laid up for such miscreants, on the other the blessed
^ Tim. 4. 8
promises of them both assured to the Godly: then he has noe refuge, but he
must needs confess that his argument was fond. For the murdering whore is not
an aduteresse by the law of Christ, though she take another man her husband
being dead: and yet the chaste Matrone were an adulteress if she married while
her husband lives, ^Nam Per, mearia libeia ester nube^e Potest innocens autem
in inste ^^missa, ne^ p^i ^^mvirium habere Potest, hec alteri ^^^ubere
who has uniustly put her away. Wherein this notwithstanding is to be weighed
that a chaste woman's case is not so hard in comparson of the whores.

No, Not for marriage neither, as Bellarmin by cunning of speech would make
it seem to countenauce therewith his reason, For he srameth his words so, as
if the chaste had no possibility of remedy at all, neither by having her former
husband, nor by marrying another: and the refore were in worse case the^ the
whore who is free to marry, whereas the truth is, that by Christ's law she not
Cor. ^. ver 11
only may but verse, 4
ought to have her former husband.

And why should not she be as likely to recover her husbands good will, to
whom she hadd been faithful: as a faythlesse whore and infamous strumpett to
get a new husband?

Chiefly seeing that it is to be presumed they loved each other when they
married: Teren^. Andt.
and experience shows that Failing out of Lovers is a renewing of love. But
if trough the frowardnes of men on the one side, and foolishnes on the other,
the chaste wife could hardly reconcile her husda^d, the whore get easily a
match it fuffi^eth that the law of Christ cannot be justly char^d with
absurdity, though it do enlarg the unchaste and lewd in some outward thing, in
which it enlarges not the chaste, Ier. 1^ 1.
No more then the providence of God may be controlled and noted of iniquity
though psalm 73 5.
the evil and wi^ked enjoy certain earthly blessings in this life, which are
not granted the upright and godly. Wherefore the first place of Scripture out
of S. Matthew and forced by Bell. with his Di^emmal (...) logismus.
horned argument (as the Logitions term it) does serve him as much to annoy
our cause; as the Iron horns made in A^habs favor by Zedechiah the falce
prophet did stand him in stead to push and consume the host of the Aramiters.

The second place is written in the tenth of Mark. Mark 10. 1^.
Who so puts away his wife and marries another commits adultery against
her: and if a woman put away her husband, and be married to another she
commits adultery. The like whereof is also in the sixtenth of Luke Luk 16.
18
whosoever putte^th away his wife and marries another commits adultery: and
whoesoever marries her that is put away from her husband, commiteth adultery.
These words (says Bellarmin) do teach generally that marriage contracted and
perfected between the faithful, is never so dissolved that they may
lawfully ioynin other wedlock. And whereas we answer that these general
sentences are to be expounded with a saving of the exception mentioned in
Matthew, because one Evanghelist does add oftentimes that another ommitteth;
Mat. 19 9.
and Matthew else where contrary unto Mark and Luke, which (since they al wrote
as they were moved by the holy-spirit of truth) is impossibel: Bell: replieth
that the Evangelists in deed omit or add somewhat now and than, which other
Evangelists have not omitted or added; but they do never omit in such sort
that the sentence is made false. A strange kind of speech, As if all general
sentences were false from the which some speciality, though not expressed in
the same place, yet by conference with others, is understood to be expressed.
Sure the Civil Law which in learned men's opinons has much truth, will then
bestained fowlly with untruths and lies. For how many sentences and rules set
down in it with full and general terms, whereof not withstanding there is
none Lomm^t definitio D. de regul juris
lightly but suffers an exception. The Canon law also (whose credit and
authority. Bellarmin must tender, hewsoever he do the Civil* has store of
such axioms, and Eodtitin Sext ^ General pe^ Speciem derogatur ^ Dig ^ in tot^
jure.
teaches accordingly That a perticulaer does derogate from the general. But
what speak I of men's laws? In the scripture it self Job says that Job. 20 7.
the hypocrite shall perish for ever, like the dung and David, that the psalm. 9
17
wicked shall turn into hell, all nations that forget God, and Solomon that
Prove. 1^. 5
Every proud hearted man is an abomination to the Lord, though hand join in
hand he shall not be unpunished. Luke 13. 3.
These sentences of Job and David and Solomon, Esaias. 1 et 55. 7. Luke 3, 8 Act.
^, 18.
are true in the belief of Christians; yet forasmuch as they must be
understood with an exception, according to the Doctrine of Christ and his
servants, saing unto sinners Except ye repent Ye shall al perish: in the Jesuits
judgment they are made false. And Jonas semblably, when he preached to the
Ninivits Jonas. 3. 4
yet forty days, and Ninive shall be overthrowen, acused them with an untruth:
though learned men do find a truth in his speech, as to be thus taken that
Niniveh should be overthrowen except it repented. Aben Ezra^^ Ier. 1^. 7 Mic
Ly^anus. 10. Ferus. ^tem, et ^n. ^ ^onam.
Or if Bellarmin also acknowledge the same, which he may not choose, unless of
a Jesuit he will become a Julian, and quite renounce the Christian faith: hen
acknowledges he that he plaieth the part of a gui^ful Sophister or a
malicious Rethorician, in signifinge that the sentence of Christ is made false,
if it be expounded and understoode with an exception other where expressed. And
with all by consequence he acknowledges farther, that it is an idle and
brainsick amplification which hereuppo^ he lavisheth out Jesuit like and
vainly mispendeth pains and times about it, by saying that else (if the
sentence forsooth were false) the Evangelists had dece^ved men to whom they
delivered their Gospells making no mentnon of other Evangelists and that when
Mark wrote his Gospel at Rome receved by the preaching of Peter, he did not
send the Romans back to Mathews gospel, as to a commentary: Nay if Mathews
gospel hadd been then at Rome: in the hand of the faytfuull, it may be well
thought that Mark whould not have written, and that Mark wrote not to add
ought to Matthew, as John did afterward, but only that the Romans might the
better remember that which Peter taught: For lib. cap^
Irenaee lib. 2. hist. cap. 15.
Eusebius and ^lib, de viris^ Iustribus in Marco.
Ierom geve this cause; and that Luke wrote his Gospel for those nations to
whom Paul had preached, and unto whom the book of Matthew and Mark were not
yet come, but certayue false writtings of False Evangelists only: as Luc. 1. 1
himself shows briefly, and it is more clearly gathered out of Commen in Luc
cap. 1.
Ambrose, lib^. hist cap. 24.
Eusebius and lib. de viri^ illustribus i^ Luca.
Ierom.

And in conclusion, that the things therefore which Mark and Luke say, must
be ahsolutely true, and not depend of Mathews words, unless our meaning be
that they were deceived, who did read Mark or Luk without Matthew For by this
reason of Bellarmin the words of Job, David, Solomon and Jonas, must be
absolutely true, and not depend of Christ's words in Luke or by Esaias: unless our
meaning be, that they were deceived, who read the Psalms of David or Salomons
proverbs, or heard Job or Jonas speak without Christ, which likewise might
receive a gay show by saying that else (if these sentences were false) these
holy m^n had deceived them to who they spoke or wrote, making noe mention of
other holy teachers: and that when Job, and David, and Solomon, and Jonas did
either write or speak, they did not put men over unto Luke or Esaias as to a
comentarie; Nay Jobs words were uttered, before either of them, or any of
Christ's p^n-me^ of the whole Scripture wrote, as Origin in Job lib 5. Athanas
in ^y nops sacr. script. August. de civitat. Dei lib 18 cap, 47, Theodorer in
Ier. Quaest. 92 Chrysostom poly chron.
sundry of the Fathers do probably teach: and Jonas. 4. 5.
Jonas did look that Niniveh should be overthrowen according to his absolute
speech, so far was he of from sending the Ninivites to such as specify the
exception, besides that, had he sent them, whither should they have gone, who
neither knew the Scriptures, and 2 King 14. 25
lived before the time of Luke and Esaias both? David too, and Solomon, were
their ancients far and each did fett forth the one his Psalms, the other his
Proverbs (even those which they did writ) not all at once but by parts; and
partly Psa. 9. 18. 30. 51. et. Prove. 10 1. et. 2^. ^et. 31 1.
their own titles, and 2 Chronicles. ^6. 17. 1 K^n 4. 31
other Scriptures argue, partly Synops. Sacr Script.
Athanasius Argum in psalm David
Theodoret, and comment, in psalm praefat
Bid signify: neither did Luke or Esaias write to ad ought to the Psalms or
Proverbs, or to the words of Job or Jonas, as In the books of Chronicles.
Ezra did to the book of Kings; But Esaias to publish only his own Prophecy.
and the story touching it, Luke the Gospel of Christ, and Acts of the
Apostles. Here were a trim tale, which might be very forcible with a man
forlorn, like Judas Isoariot, to persuade him, that the sentences of Job of
David, of Solomon, of Jonas concerning the destruction of hypocrites and all the
wicked, are not to be expounded out of Luke or Esaias, with an exception of
Repentance. Yea, this should of reason heve greater force and weight then
Bellarmins of the same spinning. For he says that Mark did not write his
Gospel to add ought to Matthew. Which thing being granted, yet Mark not
withstanding might be expounded by Matthew, and so much the rather, Matthew
having specified an exception, that Mark omitteth: as ^. Regula est D. be reg.
^^rip. ^
the Lawiers teach that the it General rules were not written to add ought
unto the former, yet must be expounded with the exceptions touched in the
former Laws. But in the spiederwebb that I have woven after Bellarmins
pattern, it is contrary wise; that Esaias and Luke did not write to add ought
to the Psalms or Proverbs; or to the words of Ioh or Jonas; which has greater
color to prove that their sayings should not be absolutely true, and not
depend of exceptions mentioned so long after, neither mean to be joined to
them: Chiefly for alianes from the Commonwealth of Israel, such as they that
heard Job and Jonas were, who lived not to read the Doctrine of Christ in his
Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore seeing Bellarm. is forced to acknowledge it
were a lewd part to reason and conclude this on general sentences of Job,
David, Solomon, that an hypocrite, a wicked, and proud-harted man, shall not
be forgiven and saved though he repent: much more must he acknowledge a
fault, in his disputinge gathering out of Mark and Luke that a man having put
away his wife may not marrye another, though he have put her away for
whoredom. And hereby we may see what honor they both, himself and the
pamphletter, who in this whole discourse goes with him soote, by foot, save
that by enterlacing more fond unsavory words, he overrunneth him sometimes: a
cover weel beseeming and worthy such a cup, only somewhat broader; but
hereby we may see what honor they have done De abulteria conj^g. li, 1. cad 9.
S. Austin in knitting up their tale with his words, Who are we, that we
should say, Some putting away their wives, and marrying other, commit
adultery: and some doing so commit it not, whereas the Gospel says, that
every one commits adultery, who does so? Even as much honor as themselves
should gain, if in the forlorn man's case, which I spoke of they were his
ghostly Fathers, and put him in this comfort Who are we that we should say,
some wicked men shall go to hell, (namely the unrepentant) some (the
repentant) shall not go, whereas the Scripture says that every wicked man
shall go to Hell. Let this kind of dealling in refuting matters be once
allowed for current: and every Priest and Jesuit as well as the Pope will have
more Royal power, even over Princes: what should I say over common Christians?
For whereas it is written in the Epistle to the Collosians Col. 3. 20,
Children obey your Parents in all things: and Prophets were honored with the
name of Fathers, not only by their 2 Ring. 2. 12
scholars, the children of the Prophets, bnt also by the 2 R in. 6. 21, et ^ 1.
Kings of Israel: the 9 Bell ^om 1. cont 3 lib, 2 cad. 31.
title of Father geven to all priests though not in such degree as to pape
pa^et datrum to. And^ in ^le mentinar, Pro cem.
the Pope, yet to all priests and to Jesuits especialy, in so much that a Allen
in ^s Apology of ^he Englishi seminaries. chap, 6.
great person of Rome does term them not Fathers only with the people, but
the Reverend Fathers, the Catholic Fathers, the good Fathers of the snciety
of the holy name of Jesus: this title then applied and geven to them all will
quickly win their scholars to think that the Heb. 15. 17, Al^en Apology
chap 4.
obedience commanded to wards them is obedience in all things. Now we
protestants teach that nevertheless supposing they were in deed Fathers not
caterpillars of the Church, yet if Priest or Jesuit or the pope himself should
command a man to commit murder or whoredom, or theft, he might not be
obeyed, because it is written in the Epistle to the Ephesia^s Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children obey your Parents in the Lord, whence that to the Collosians ought to
be expounded, that Parents must be so far forth obeyed, in all things as
stands with the dewty which children owe to God, and in piety they may. But
if some Catholic Father should deny this, and say (like Father Robert) that
S. Paul in deed ommitteth or adds some what in one Epistle, which he has
not omitted or added in another, but he does never omit in such sort that the
sentence is made faulse: for else S. Paul hadd deceived the Colossians to whom
he sent these Epistle, making no mention of that other to the Ephesians: And
surely when he wrote to the Collosians from Rome, he did not sent them back to
his Ephesian Epistle as to a commentury; nay if that Epistle had been in their
hands, it may be well thought, that he would not have w^itten to them. For he
did not write the Epistle to the Collossians thereby to add ought to that which
he had written unto the Ephessians, as he did the later to the Corinthians, or
Thessalonians, after the former, but only to reclayme the Collosians from
their error, that man is reconciled, and has access to God by Angels, and to
corect their Jewish and Heathenish observations; for Hom. 1 in epist ad co^oss
Chrysostom Argument. epist,
Theophylact, and Argum. 2 (...) Theodoreco.
Oecumenius geve this cause. That which Paul therefore says to the
Collossians must be absolutely true, and not depend of that he says to the
Ephesiaus, unless onr meaning be that they were deceived, who read the
Epistle to the Collossians without the other. If some Catholic Father (I say)
should speak thus, against our interpreting of Scripture by Scripture, would
not his children (trow ye) think it strongly and invincibly proved, that they
must obey him absolutely in all things? Chiefly, if as Father Robert brings
Austin, so he brought Monast in st^ut lib. 4. cap 27. For so the Syrique word
Abba^^ hence Ab^ (a^ comes) does signify Ko^. 1. 15
Cassianus S. Chrisostoms scholar in, who prayseth one Mutius (a novice of an
Abbey in Egypt) as a most worthy pattern of obedience to his abbat (...)
Father, as you would say for that he was ready to cast his own natural son a
little child, into the River at his commandment and so as much as lay in hi^
did murder his son, but that some by the Abbats appoynteme^t did r^caive him
being cast out of his Fathers hands toward the River, and saved him from
drowning. For he cassian (...) cap. 28.
who extolleth this Novices faith and devotio^ to Heaven, affirming that the
Abbat was by revelation straightway advertised, that Mutius hadd performed Gen
es. 2. 10.
Abraham the Patriarks wotke by the obedience, as if there were noe difference
between the Gen es. 22. 2.
Lords commandment, and ^n Abbats might have formed a sentence like Austins in
defense thereof: Who are we that we should say, Children in some things must
obey their Parents, and in some they must not, whereas the Scripture says.
Children, obey your Parents in all things. By the which construction whatsoever
a man's mother should command him, must be obeyed too, she being comprehended in
the name of Parents: and what soever a man's 2 ki^ 5. 13.
Master should command, he being also a Father, and whatsoever genesis 45. 8.
Job. 29. 16. 1 Timothy 5. 1. Act. 7. 2. et 22. 1.
any Governor should command, or friend that has done good, or an old
Gray Headed man they being Fathers all, though not by nature, yet by office,
benefit, or age. And then had King 2. chro^ 15. 16.
Asa done evil in putting down his mother Maachah from her state because she
hadd made an Idol in a grove; and in breaking down her Idol; and stamping
it, and buruing it. And 1, Sam. 22. 17
Doeg the Edomite had deserved greater praise then Saul's servants, since they
Would not move their hands to fall upon the Lords Priests, when their Master
bidd them; which Doeg did and executed his wrath to the utter most. And the
Act, 4. 5 et. 5. 29.
Apostles hadd overseene themselves, when they disobeyed the high Priest, and
rulers and Elders of Israel; and gave this reason of it We ought rather to
obey God then men. Yea that wretched impious and execrable friar, who did more
then barbarously murder his Sovereign Lord the HENRY the third. 1589 Augu. 2.
French King the anointed of the HIGHEST, may then be excused, excused! nay
commended and praised by traiterous papists, as having done that which he
ought: seeing it is likely that either Pope or Priest, or Jesuit or Abbat, or
some of his superiors commanded him to do it. Such absurd consequents of
Bellarmins affirming that Marks and Lukes words must be absolutely true, and
not depend of Matthew, do show what great reason he had so to speak. For it
is written of the City of Jerusalem, compared with the Canaanites, Amorites,
and Hittites Ezekiel. 16. 44
Such mother, Such daughter: in like sort may it be said of this construction
of the holy Scripture compared with Bellar. Such consequence, such antecedent.
And this far of his second place.

The third is in the Epistle to the Romans the seve^th chap. Romans 7. 1
Know ye not brethren (for I speak to them that know the law) that the law
has Dominion over a man as long as he lives? For the woman, which is in
subjection to a man, is bound by the law to the man while he lives: but if
the man be dead, she is delivered from the law of the man. So then if while
the man lives, she take another man, she shall be called an adulteress: but
if the man be dead she is free from the law, so that she is not an
adulteress: though she take another man. Out of which place and 1. cor. 7. 39
the like in the seventh of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, We gather
(says Bellarmin) that the band of marriage is never loosed but by death: and
that seeing it is not loosed, it remains after divorcement too, for whatsoever
cause the divorce be made. This does Bellarmin gather: but gathering so, he
reapeth that which the holy Ghost sowed not. For S. Paul's meaning in those
words to the Romans and Corinthians was, that the band of marriage is not
loosed commonly and ordinarily* while both the parties live; not that
absolutely, it is never loosed till one of the^ die. As in the like case (to
open the matter by his own examples) he 1 cor. 9. 7
says Who goes to Warrfare any time at his own cost? Now some have served at
their own charges without pay sometimes. For so did the Dionys, Halycaru ant
Roman l^ 9.
Roman stock of the Fabij against the Vientians and Hered li. 8
Clinias an Athenian Citizen against the Persians. But men for the most part
are waged publicly thereunto. And that is the point which S. Paul respected.
Again, 1 cor 9, 7
Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Ancaeus or Aga
Penc^, L^uc Tzetz in Lycophr.
He on whom they father the first occasion of that proverb Many things do
happen between the cupp and the lipp; is said not to have drunk of the fruit
of the Vineyard which himself had planted, not to have eaten thereof belyke.
At least seeing cic. de senectute.
old men plant trees for their posterity, neither might Levit 19. 23
the Jews eat of their fruit in certain years: It is more then likely that
many of them did not. Some did not questionless: they namely, who sustanied
the curse which God denounced unto them by Moses. Deur 28. ^0
Thou shall plant a Vineyard, and shall not use the finite thereof. Yet S.
Paul said well, because such as plant vines do eni^ye the^ commonly. Again
who 1. cor 9. 7
feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? They eat not of the
milk, who do not milk there sheep at al: and there be who do not for,
fear of impairing therbye the lambs and woole. But it is sufficient for S.
Paul's purpose, and the truth of his speech, that men in most Varr lib ^. c. 2
de re Kust colume^l l, 7. c 4.
contreis are wont to have them milked: Deuteronomy 32 14 Hom odys^ li. Arist dehist
animalium lid. cato be ^etuil. cap 13. virg. l. Elag. 3.
and they who under take the pains of feeding flocks, are accostomed to eat
of the milkes of their flocks. Again Ephesians 5. 9. ^ plutar^ coro
No man ever hated bis own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it. Cato the
younger, who slew himself at Vtica, was so far from nourishing and
cherishing his body, that when his bowels being gushed out thereof, he was not
yet dead, he tore the^ in pieces with his own hands as machab, 14. 16.
Rasias also did. Neither would S. Paul have denied this: who knew that many
l, Sam. 31. 4 2 Sam^. 13. mat 27, 5.
hadd killed themselves, and taken away al joys of life from their flesh.
Only he meant that noe man has ever lightly hated it, but every one does
nourish and cherish it rather. 2 Timothy 2. 4
Noe man that warreth entangleth himself with the affaiers of life, because he
would please him that has chosen him to be a soldier.

What? is this false, because dlutare.
rich Crassus being chosen by the Romans to be their General in Sirria, did
without all care of pleasinge them, who had chosen him, play the marchand man
and occupiede himself in councels and money matters? Cra^^.
Or because a band of Cam-Panian soldiers, polyb lib 1
who served the King of Sicilie gave themselves to citeze^s trades and
occupations, having by treachery seized on Mesana, dispossessed the townsmen,
divided their wives, goods and lands among them, and a band of Romans did
the like at Rhegiu^, to the coffeehouse of such as chose them to be
soldiers, No. for the APostle who exhorted Tymothy to behave himself as good
and honest soldier of Christ, Tim c^ 2. 3
was not to learn that there are some unhonest soldiers and retch less of
their duty. But his meaning was, that soldiers usualy do employ themselves on
warrlike exercises, not on civil affaiers, or domestical business, when they are
chosen once to serve, and in the same sense did he likewise say, that a married
woman is bound by the law unto her husband while he lives: because the band
o^f marriage is not usuallye and ordinarely loosed but by death though it may
be loosed, 1 Cor. 7, 15 6 Lu dedoule tas Eleutera estia 6, ver 3.
and is sometimes otherwise, on rare onwonted cause. Which is apparent to have
been his meaning by that he teaches that if an unbeliving man, who has a
Christian wife, do forsake her then she is not in bondage. For if she be not
in bondage, she is free to marry: as the words of Scripture imply by the
contrary, and the innocent, ra^t, c quanto extra de div^t. is
Pope declares. If the be free to marry the band of the former marriage is
loosed, else were she bound and not free. Where fore since the Popes authentical
record does prove out of S. Paul, that a wife in some case is free to marry
another while her husband lives, the Papists must acknowledge that S. Paul
meant, the band is nor commonly loosed but by death, not that it is never at al
loosed otherwise absolutely and simply. Bell. to frustrate and avoyde this
answer, says that it may be proved by four reasons: which he brings forth
poor unarmed, weak ons of his own mustering, and with a strong hand puteth
them to flight that so men imagining that these are all that cann be alleged
on our side for the proof thereof, might think that out whole force is quite
discomfited and Bell. has wone the field. I have hard say that there is
cunning in daubing. Surely there is cunninge in this kind of dealing. Neither
is it for nothing that one Birstow. M^tive. 3.
of our Glorious Champions does vaunte that the coo^mon sort of Catholics
are able to say more for us, then we can for our selves. In deed they would
bear the common sort in hand, that their learned men in handling of questions
and controversies of religion do set down all objections that can be made of
our part. And I grant, they set down more the^ oftentimes themselves can
sou^dly answer. Yet they use discretion therein by there leave ^and may a strong
reason which would troble the^ fowlly if it came in place, they are co^te^t to
wink at and say nothing of it whereto their ioyn this policy now and the^ also,
that they take upon the^ to be as it were our proctors* and attorneys, in
showing what may be said for us. under which pretense they bring in such
things as having already solution with the objection, and prooving unsound, may
turn to our causes discredit and to ours. So the Jesuit here his arguement
beeinge groundede on two places, the one to the Romans, the other to the
Corinthians, we countermyning the whole with one answer: he says that our
answer may be proved by four reasons, which he gathers out of circumstances
of the former place, al such as the later has neither any kindred with, and
discovers them to be of no vallw. But of the reasons, which I have brought to
prove our answer fitting both the places, and partly confirming that S. Paul
might well mean the same in these, which in the like he meant; partly
demonstrating that certainly he did so, becase it were not true else that he
teaches of the liberty of Christians forsaken of the unbelevers: Ezra 4. 2.
these reasons Bellarmin, does not touch.

No marveil for they are to hot. And it is likelye that he studied not what
might be most strongly said in our defense, but rather what most weakly:
Ezra. 4. 9.
that so he might seem to join bataile with us, and yet might be sure to do
him self noe harm. Letting pass therefore the help which he, offers in
like sort to us as the Samaritans did unto the Jews: I come unto the iniust
and false accusation, wherewith they sought to hinder the buylding of the
Temple, I mean the reasons which he untruly says, do witness our answer and
exposition to be false. Romans ^. 3
Those he draws to there heads, whereof the first has two branches: one that
S. Paul's words are plain; the other that they are often repeated. For what is
more plain (says he) then that if while the man lives, the woman take
another man, she is called an adulteress? and that 1 cor. 7. 39.
the Woman is bouud by the law as long as her husband lives Plain I deny
not. 1 cor. 9. 7


But this proof how pithy and strong soever he thought to set it in his
forefront; Ephesians 5. 29.
is already showed to be no proof at all: ^ Tim 2. ^.
since there are plain words in like sentences, mark^. 2^, luck. 3. 24 Iohu 2.
10 Gal ^. 15.
which nevertheless must be expounded as these are by us. For what more plain
then that Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? and
that Who feadeth a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? and that No
man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it? and that Noe
Warfarring man entangleth himself with the affaiers of life? and many other
such, that might be alleged if in a thing so clear it wear not superfluous?
Nay in these sentences the words are more plain, then in those we speak
of, because those have noe shuche mark of generality expressed in them, as
these have. Wherefore if so great playnnesse of words signede with general
tokens as it were importing that they are true in all yet co^vinceth nor that
they are meant of all without any exception, fully and universally: how can a
lesser playnnesse wanting such efficacy, convince the same of those in
question? Or if it should elsewhere by reason of some difference which might
supply, by other weight that this wa^teth: Yet here it cannot possibly,
because S. 1. cor 7. 15
Paul himself as I have declared shows that in one case the sayings could
not so be true Mor^over the cap vetum. Extra. de con. verse conjugo^ comm^ssum
de spo^salibus. Council. ^ u^be^t Sess 24 can 6. Bell. too^^. 1. cont: lib. 8.
cap. 38.
Papists hold that if a married man become a moncke before he know his wife
carnally, she may lawfully take anot her husband, while he lives. Perphaps
further, also that the Pope for any very weighty cause, may upon the same
circumstance dispense, and loose the band of Marriage. At least covartu. eper
in 4, decre tal Parz cap. 7. 9 4. catharin. de matrimon quart, utrum matrimo^
ante cob fit Sacramentum et al^^quz in architypo
themselves tell us that sundry Popes have done so: and Hesticus. panormi^a et
alij cano^nst in. c expublico de co^vers. con^ugator. cardeaie^. opusculo de
mattim Mac. Madium de Sacro^ hom. contin lib. ^. Martin Navar, confilict lib.
3. de convers. infid. cous 1.
their great Doctors hold we may. Yet is the woman his wife who has wedded
her, or espoused her only, though she has not entered into his bed hamber.
For she that is betrothed, is accounted a wise by the law Deuteronomy. 22. 24. Matt 1.
20.
of God: and consent, not carnal company makes Marriage as the civil L
cuifucait D de condits (...) domo^stra^. L NuPriarum. D de reg far*
Lawiers, Ambrosin, stitur. virg cab ^Augde nupt et con cud lib. 1. cap. 1^
^hr^souo^. Isobeo Cregor comnuis e consuge ^c. qui desponfatam. ^7. 14 (...) si
inteo Exlta despensa^
Fathers, and, Popes do reach. The Papists then of all man may worst on force
the playnesse of S. Panls words against our exposition the^-selves
condescending in cases more then we do, that a woman may take another man
while her husband lives, and be noe adulteress. Where by again appears
how wisely and discreetly the Jesuit Triumphs with beliere, c. ua^ du^um
despons. duorum
Austins words. These words of the Apostle so oftentimes repeated, so
ofte^tymes inculcated, are true are quick, are sound, are plain. The woman
begins not to be the wife of any later husband, unless she have ceased to
be of the former and she shall cease to be of the former, if her husband
die, not if he play the whoremonger. The wife then is lawfully putt away for
whordom, but the band of the former lasts: in so much that he becomes guilty
of adultery, who marries her that is put away even for whoredom.

For if these words of Austin be quick and sound against us, then touch they
popery at the quick: since it may be said by the same reason The woman
begins not to be the wife of any later husband, unless she: have ceased to
be of the former: and she shall cease to be of the former if her husband die
not if he wax a Monk.

Admit then that the wife be put away for monkery, De adulee^. coning lib. 2.
cap. 4.
yet the band of the former lasts: in sommuch that he becomes gulty of
adultery, who marries her thatis put away even for monkery, And likewise
whatsoever those weighty causes were, for which so matrin the ^. Eugenius the
4. Alexander the 6 Iullus the third paul the 4. and p^us the 4. as covattu.
catharin^ caje^an, an^ Navar do testify.
many Popes have loosed the band of Marriage, thy are all controlled by the
saw censure, The woman beg^nneth not to be the wife of any later husband
unless she have ceased th be of the former and she shall cease to be of the
former if her husband die, not if a better match be offered, or some mislyke be
conceived, or the Pope dispense and be well freed from it. Nay S. Paul himself
must fall within the compass of Aestins reproof, by construi^ng his words so
without exception, because they are true, and quick, and found, and plain.
For against his doctrine touching a Susters liberty to marry if she h^
forsaken of her unbelieving husband, the force of S. Austins consequence would
infer in like sort: The woman begineth not to be the wife of any later
husband, unless she have ceased to be of the former, if her husband die, not
if he forsake her* The Ie^uit, who uses so often to repeat, so often to in
culcate the testimonies of the Fathers, should dealeper adventure more
considerately, more charitably out of doubt, if before he cite them, he weighed
their words better, whether they may stand with the truth of Scripture, and
with his own doctrine, For Genesis 9. 22.
Cham discovered the nakedness of Noah, so does he their blemishes: he who
alleges them; not we, whom he enforces to show why w^ee dissent to^ the^*
least our Savious sentence be expounded against us math. 10. 37
He that leveth Father or Mother better then me, is not worthy of me. But the
Jesuits meaning (you will say) was not to discredit them by laying a necessity
on us to refute them, what? was his meaning then by their credit to discredit
the Scripturs, with the truth whereof their sayings do not stand? For (I trust)
he meant not to overthrowe the points of his own doctrine, which their sayings
cross, unless he be of that mind which Tully condemns as barbarous and
savage, expressed in an heathnish verse LET OUR FRIENDS FALL, SO OUR FOES DIE
WITHAL. Howsoever it be it is plain that the plains of S. Paul's words
neither does prove the sense thereof to be simply and absolutely general, Pro.
Deiora tro
the Scripture noteing an exception, neither cann be said by Papists to prove
it whose doctrine both allows that exception of Scripture, and adds more
thereto, Thus one branch of Bell, first and principal reason being cut off:
the other and the rest of his reasons also are cut off with the same labor
and instrument. For whereas he says Certes it were maavell that the Apostel
should never add the exceptin of wheredom, if it Were to be added, Romans 7.
verse. 2.
seeing he repeated and inculcated these things so often. Certes we may say as
well of those exceptions which himself approves that it were marvel the Apostel
should never add them, verse, ^.
if they were to be added. co^, 7. veas. 39
Though what marvel is it, S. Paul. omitted the exception of whoredom in all
those two places, which he Has repated and inculcated these things so often,
as Bellarmin so often tells us: when the thing is mentioned in the former of
them by way of a similitude, wherein it has been found and beside the purpose
to speak of any exception: and, for the later S. Paul has omitted the same
exception verse, 10 et.
twice, where the Scripture shows plainly and Bell. confesses, it should
have been added, math 5. 23. e^ 19 9.
or (tospeake more properly) where al though it needed not to be added, yet
must it needs be understoode; Now to that Bellarmin does next alledg the
Fathers In uteu^ que Iocum pauli
. Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Primasius; Anselmus
and others over and besides Loco ^itat^
Austin, In math 19.
Origin, and In epist ed Ama^d.
Ierom, all as bearing witness that we expound the places falsely: I could
reply that some of these whatsoever they witness have small credit with
Bellarmin as Ambrose, specially: some, namely Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Primasius do not witness that no more then Paul
himself does: Nay they all save one are contrary minded rather as shall appear
in In the third Chapter.
due place: But that which I have said already touching Austin, may serve for
answer to the rest: chiefly since the Papists in whose behalf they are aleaged,
will rather yeald that all the Fathers might err then any of their Popes.
Alexander the third Pius the fourth and ^in the canons above cited out of the
de cre^als and the council of Trent
who yet must have erred in more, then one Canon, if this were true which Bell,
fathereth on the Fathers; Finally, concerning that for the vpshoote he urges
Paul's similytude as if it he 1 Romans 74
drift of it did absoiutely require that the man and wife can not be made free
from the band of Marriage by any seperatio^ but by death only, because while
the law had life as it were and stood in force till Christ the Jews could
never shake off the Yoke thereof from the^, although they endeavored to separate
them-selves from it by committing whoredo^ with sundry laws of salfe Gods: the
rest of S. Paul's similytudes which I me^cioned; do bewary the lamenesse and
halting of this inference: seeing that the drift of them requires absolutely by
the same reason that no man went to warfare at his own cost, or planted Vynes,
or fedd sheep without relief thereby, because 1. Cor. 9. verse 6.
all they verse 14
Who preach the Gospel are allowed to live of the Gospel. And likewise that no
man did ever hurt his own body, because Ephesians 5. 33.
Every husband ought to love his own wife Ephesians. 5, 25
as Christ loved the Church and likewise that no soldier has ever entangled
him-self with the affairs of life because Timothee should be still about those
actions, 2 Timothy 4^.
whereto the Lord ^2. Tim. 2. 3.
who choose him to be a soldier, did call him, Nay to go no farther then the
drift it self or the similytude, which Bellarmin does urge, if it requier
absolutely that the band of Marriage may be no way loosed but only by the
husbands or the wives death: then neither is it loosed if the vnbele ever do
for sake the Christian: neither if the husband become a Monk or the wife a
Nun: neither if the Pope see cause to dispense with either of them. And will
not this fancy of his about that drift drive him in to greater inconvenieence
yet: to weet, that every woman, whose husband is dead ought to marry another,
because the Jews were bound to become Christians after the death of the Law?
or of the other, side that the Jews are not bound under pain of damnation to
become Christians, because no widow is bound under pain of death to take
another husband? or (if these absurdities be not great enough) that dead men
ought to marry, because Romans 7. 4
The Jews by duty should be unto Christ, when they were dead to the Law? or
that the men of Rome to whom S. Paul wrote, should rather not believe in
Christ, because 1. Cor. 7. 8.
he wished widows rather not to marry? Of the which consequences if some be
esteemed erroneous by Papists, some not esteemed only, but are so in deed,
the most have impious folly joined with vnttuth: Let Bellarmin acknowledge that
similitndes must not be set upon the rack, nor the drift thereof be
stretched and pressed in such sort, as if they ought just in length breadth and
depth to match and fit that where to they are resembled. It suffices if in a
general analogy and proportion of the principal point wherein things matched,
and compared together; they be each like to other, and both agree in one
quality. Which here is observed in S. Paul's comparison of the state of
Marriage, with the state of man before and after regeneration: because Romans 7.
verse. 2. 3
as a wife her husband and being dead does lawfully take another, and is not an
adulteress in having his company to bring forth fruit of her body, to him:
so verse. 4. and 5.
regenerate persons, their natural corruption (provoked by the law to sin)
and flesh being mortified are joined to the Spirit (the force of Christ working
in them) as it were to a second husband that they should bring forth fruit
(the fruits of the Spirit) unto God. And thus seeing neither the drift of the
similytude, nor the judgment of the Fathers, nor the playnesse of the words
so oftentimes repeated, do disprove our answer and exposition of the place:
our answer proved by Scripture stands firm and sure and therefore the third
place by our adversaries, is suitable to the former,

So is the fourth and last; taken out of the first to the Corinthians the
seventh Chapter a To them who are Married, it is not I that givs commaudement,
but the Lord: Let not the wife depart from her husband: but if she depart too,
let her remain unmarried, or be recconciled unto her husband. Who rein (as
Bellarmin reasons) the words of S. Paul, If she depart, and so forth are
meant of a woman which parts from her husband upon a cause of just
divorcement, as namely for whoredom, haeresie, and the rest whatsoever they
be, and not of her which parts without any such cause. But concerning her of
whom the word are meant, S. Paul. says most plain ly she may not marry
another, Therefore even a cause of just divorcement loses not the band of
Marriage neither is it lawful for married folckes to marry others, al though
they be severed and put a sunder by just divorcement.

And of this argument Bellarmin does say that it is altogether insolnble. In
saying whereof he seems to confess that none of the former arguments were
so, but might be answered and confuted. His confession touching them has
reason with it: I must needs approve it. But his vaunt of this is like that of
1. King. 20 10.
^enhadads that the dust of Samaria would not be enough to all the people that
followed him for every man an handful, To whom the King of Israel said, Let
not him that girdeth his harms, boast him self as be that puts it off.
Bellamin has skar^ly girt his harneis yet, and that which he has girt, is
vnservisable ^ad harneis too.

For the foremost part there of, his proposition a vouching that the words If
she depart, and so forth, are meant of her only which parts from her
husband upon a just cause of divorcement, ^ namely for whordom heresy, and
such like, is faulty sundry ways: seeing they are neither meant of her only
which parts for a just cause; and though they be also meant of her which
parts for any other just cause, yet not of her which for whoredom.

Moreover the conclusion knitting up his argument with Therefore even a just
cause of divorcement loaseth not the band of Marriage, is guilfully set down:
being uttered in the form of a particular, and true so, taking divorcement as
he does; but intended to carry the ^orce of a general, so by fraud and
faulshood to bear away the point in question. Of both the which to treat in
order, his proposition he presumes of as most certain, because in (his
judgment) Paul would not have said of her who departed without some such
cause, Let her ramayne unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband; but he
would have said, Let her remain unmarried till she be reconciled unto her
husband, and let her come again unto her husband in any case. And why does
Bellarmin think so? His reasons follow. For Paul could not permit an unjust
divorcement against the express commandment of the Lord.

And, if in the same Chapter Paul permits not the man and wife to refrain
from carnal company for prayers sake, and for a time, except it be with
consent: How should he permit the wife to remain separated from her husband
against his will, 1 C^r. 1. verse. ^. and ^0.
without any case of just divorcement, In deed if it had ^yen in S. Paul's
power to stay and refrain the wife from remaining so: no doubt he neither
would not might have permitted, which himself sufficiently showed in forbidding
her to depart at all, much more to continue parted from her husband. But verse.
11.
if not withstanding this charge and prohibition she did leave her husband upon
some lighter cause; or perhaps weightyer though weighty enough for a just
divorceme^t: the^ Paul in duty ought and might (I hope) with reason requier and
exhort her to remain unmarried, and not to join her self in wedlok with
another, a thing that Dicdor. Siculilib. 12.
Greeks and Iuvena^l. Satyr. 6. Sic (...) octo mariti Quinque per au^um. nor
Romans (whose offspring the Strabe Geograph^ ^. 8. pausenas corinth.
Corinthia^s were) used to do. As (to make it plain by the like examples (S.
Pau neither might neither would have allowed a man to be rashly angry with his
brother: for Ma^h. 5. 2^
Christ forbids it. But if one were suddenly surprised with rash anger S.
Paul would advise him (...)
not to let the sun go down upon his angry wrath: neithe might he
thereupon be justly charged with permitting wrath until the sun set
against Christ's commandment.

No more might he with granting liberty to lust, because he (...) 7. 15
wills men not to fulfill the lusts of the flesh; whereas Ma^^. 5. 18
Christ commands the^ not to lust at al^, For S. Paul ^ Romans ^8.
condemns all lusting of the flesh as sin. Call. 6. 17.
But seeing that the flesh will lust against the Spirit, as long as we are in
this mortality: he stirs up the faithful that they R^m. 6. (...).
(...) not sin reign in their mortal bodies, nor do fulfill the lust of
the flesh. In the same sort therefore he gives charge with Christ that the
wife depart not from her husband, Yet in considration of hum aine infirmity he
adds But if she depart too, let her be unmarried, And to meet with a
doubt which hereupon might rise since in the next words before he had affirmed
that they who have not the gift of coutinence should marry and what if she have
it not? he adioyneth farther. 1. Cor. 7. 9.
or let her be reconciled unto her husband. So that although the words may
seem to be uttered in the same sort, as if they did imply and import a
permission, yet are they not permissive, but imperative in truth, and an
express precept, that the wife having forsaken her husband and there in down
evil sor bear to marry another, Mon^^ agamo^
for that were far worse yea though she can not contain; in respect whereof
or of any thing else if she mislike to liv^^ unmarried, she may not use the
liberty that single folk may, who reather ought to marry then burn, but she
^ must reconcile her self unto her husband, whose wife she is by duty still.
And I may say likewise doubtless unto Bellarmin that he and his pamphletter
should not have maynt^yned their error in writting: but since they have done it
let the^ write no more in defense of it, or let them a^knowledg that in this
point they were deceived. For whereas Which ^ollarml^ does not only in this
quae^ion cap (...) bu^ also in the ne^. before c. P. 14.
they gather of the disjuctive particle Let her remain unmarried, or be
reconciled, that S. Paul has put it in the woman's choice and l^ft her at
lib^aty, either to live separated still from her husband, or to be reconcil^d
unto him; they might as well ground upon Christ's words to the angel of the
church of the La^dia^s I would thou werest cold or that that he has put it in
our choice and left us at liberty either to be cold in faith and love, Rev*
el. 3. 15.
as flesh is, Zestos.
or to be fervent in the spirit. Zeontes. Romans 2. 11. (...) ^ev. 3 (...).
Yet Christ had no such meaning. For he commands us to be ferve^t and in
that very angel he says to everi faithful man, Be hot and, Zealo^s. Mat^.
^3. 2^.
But because the party was luke warm, a wordling who had recyved the (...) of
the word but bare not fruit, who Luk 12. (...).
knew his masters will, but did it not and there by sinned most grievously;
Christ wishes that he were cold and sinned less; since he did sin, or
that he were hot and free from both these faults, the later wish made simply
the former in comparison. After the which manner seeing Paul might well, and did
by all likelihood of circumstances of the text, wi^hee simply and chiefly that
the wife estranged were reconciled to her husband, next that she continued
rather parted from him, then married to another as a less evil in comparison*
the uttering of his s^ntence with a disjunctive particle Let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled, does not prove he put it in the woman's choice
and left her at liberty to do wether she listed. And thus it appears how
certain and undoubted that principle is, which Loquitur er. (...) vllo dubio
etc.
upon this proof Bellarmin avoucheth to be most certain and undoubted that
S. Paul's words touching the wise If she depart, are meant of her only which
parts from her husband upon a just cause of divorcement. How be it if they
had been meant of her only: yet must they have touched such wives as leave
their husbands for any other just cause, and not for whoredom, An other and
greater oversight of Bellarmin, that in exemplifing the causes of divorcement
to which in his opinion the words should be restrained, he names whoredom
first, as principally comprised in S. Paul's precept; where as S. Paul meant
that it and it alone, should be excluded and excepted.

For these are his words. ^. Cor. 7. 10
To them who are married, it is not I that give commandment but the Lord, Let
not the wife depart from her husband but if she depart too, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband and let not the husband put away
his wife,

Where in the last branch Let not the husband put away his wife, must needs
be understood except it be for whoredom because S. Paul says it is the
Lords commandment, and Mat. 5. 32. and 19. 9.
the Lord gave it with that express exception. This Bellarmyn does grant.
Well, Then as the last branch so the first too let not the wife depart from
her husband; 1. Cor. 7. 4.
For the analogy is all one: and Mat. 5. 32. and 19. 9.
etche having interest in the others body, she may as lawfully depart from an
adulterer, as he from an adulteress. And this does Beelarmin grant also. But
the middle branch is to be understood of the same depar^ing, and likewise
qualified as the first, Therefore, If she depart too, is meant, except it be
for whoredom. Nay, not so quoth Bellarmin: for the same departing is not
meant, in both, but a far different, in the first an unjust departinge, in
the next a just, and this must be the sense of the Apostles words, Not I, but
the Lord g^ve commandment let not the wife depart from her husband, to wee^
without a ^ist cause: but if she go away, to weet having a just cause, let
her remain unmarried, and so forth. In the refutation of which wrong and
violence done unto the sacred text what should I stand? when the only reason,
whereby out of s^ripture he assayeth to prove it, is the disiunctive particle,
which as I have showed already, has no joint or sinew of proof to that
effect. And August. l^^ de (...) conjug cap 1. 2. 3 et (...).
the only father, whose testimony, he cites, for it, does ground it on that
disiunctive particle of Scripture: So that his reason being overthrowen, his
creditt and authority, by August ^pi.
his own (...)
approved rule may bear no sway. And on the contrary part, chry^ostom Amb^ose
primas us Theod^ter Throphylact and O^cumenius
many other fathers do expound the second branches as having reference to the
same departing that is for bidden in the first. And (which is the chief point)
the natural drift and meaning of S. Paul's words does enforce the same. For
the terms; 7 But, if, too, importe that doing also of that which in the
sentence before he had affirmed ought not to be done: As ^ cor 7 ve^ 9 (...)
the like examples in the same discourse (to go no farther) show; yea some
having one Namely. K^^
par^icle less then this has to press it thereunto. It is good for the
unmarried and widows, if they abide even as I do: Eide
But if they do not contain, let them marry. The woman which has an
unbelieving husband, and he consents to dwell with her, let her not put him
away: Eide.
but if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. Art thou ^oused from a wife?
seek not a wife: Ean de kai.
Bot then marry also, thou sinnest not. This I speak for your profitt, that
you may do that which is comely? But if a^ie man think it uncomely for his
virgin if she pass the time of Marriage, Eide.
let him do what he will. The wi^e is bound by the law as long as her husband
lives: Ean de
but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty and so forth. In all the
which sentences since the clauses brought in with those conjunctions have
manifest relation to the things spoken of before, and touch them in the same
sense, the branch that is inquestion having like dependence, must in all
reason be conserved of same the departing that the former. Thus it being proved
that S. Paul commanding the wife to remain unmarried if she be parted from
her husband, did mean, Except it were for whoredom; it follows that
Bellarmins proposition is faulty even in this also that he names whoredom
among the just causes of the wives departing here meant by S. Paul. Now in this
con^lusion inferring hereupon that even a just cause of divorcement loses not
the band of marriage, he is deceitful, as he was false in his proposition. For
the word Divorcement, being understood, as it is by him, for any separation
and parting of the man and wife, though from b^dd only, and for a certain
time: There may be sundry causes why, such a separation should be allowed or
toll^rated, when as the band of marriage shall nevertheless endure still, And
so the simple reader were likely to imagine that Bellarmin had concluded a
truth and to purpose.

But the point where with he should have knit up his dispute, and which he
would have men conceyve and bear away as if these words employed it, is that no
just cause at al of any div^rceme^t does loose the ba^d of marriage, and
therefore neither whoredom. The falsehood whereoe^ would have be as clear as
the sunshine at noonday, the prpositio^ being so evidently false whereon it
is in ferred. And this is the arguement that Bell. set his rest on Argume^tu^
plane insolub^le
the insoluble argument, even altogether insoluble, the ground whereof he
terms Invictissima de monstrat^^
a demonstration a most invincible demonstration: against the which nothing
(says he) can be objected, but an insufficient reply, made by Erasmns to weet,
that Paul speaks of an adulterous wif^, Vnum et ta^tum quodo^i^et posset.
who therefore being cast out by her husband is charged to stay unmarried, the
innocent party not so charged, Which speeches of the Jesuit come from the like
vein of a vauntinge spirit as those did of his co^plices, who boasted that In
the year of Christ. 58.
the Spainyards Armadoes and navy should find but weak and silly resistans in
England; and callede their armay sent to conquer us, an invicible armey, For as
they diminished by untru^ reports the for^es prepared: To meet and en countere
with the spanish power: so Bell. by saying that naught can be objected beside
that he specifieth; yea fard^r by belying and falsefing of Erasmus, A^uot in 1
Cor. ^
who contrariewise replieth that Paul does seem to speak De levio^lbus
offensis. non deg^avi^us (...)
of lighter displeasiurs for which divorcement then were usual, not of such
cryms as adultery. Moreover by the substance and weight of my replye to his
insoluble argeument, the Godly wise indifferent eye will see (I trust) that the
knotts and strings thereof are loosed and broken: even as the invi^cible armey
of the Spainyards was by Gods providence showed to be Vin^ible without great
en^ou^tering; the carkeses and spoils of their ships and men upon the English,
Scottish, and Irish coasts did witness it. So let allthyn enemies perish, O
Lord, and let them who love him be as the sun when he goes forth in his
strength.

The third Chapter.
The consent of Fathers, the second pretended proof for the Paaists doctrine
in this point, is pretended falsely: and if all be weighed in an even balance,
the Fathers check it rather.

AFter the foresaid testemonies of Scriptur urged by our adversaries in the
first place for the commending of their error: Secondly, the same truth (says
the Jesuit) may be prooved by tradition. By which his own speech, if we
should take advantage of it, he grants all that I have said ^gainste his
arguments drawen-out of the Scripture, and so far forth agrees with us. For
what understands he by the word tradition^? ^ Doctrine not written, as (...)
4 cap 2
him self professes in his first controversy. Where having noted that al
though the word tradition be general and signifies any doctrine written or
unwritten, which one imparreth to another, yet divines, and almost all the
ancient fathers, apply it to signify unwritten doctrine only. And so will
we hereafter use this word says he. If the point in quistion then may be
proved (as Bellarmin affirms it may) by tradition: We might con^lude it is
not written in the scriptures by his own verdict, and therefore all the
scriptures alleged by him for, it are alleged falsely. But he seems to use
the name of tradition in like sort, as cont hero^f: cap. l et 4^.
Vincentius Lirmensis does, calling the doctrine de livered by the church the
Churches tradition. This to be his meaning I gath^r by the reason that he
adds saying for there are extant the testimonies of the fathers in all ages
for it. The Pamphle^ter in other words, but more peremptorily to avouch the
proof thereof by the opi^ion and censure of all ages, affirms, he will show
that it was never thought lawful since Christ, for Christiaas divorced for
^ornication to mrrry any other while both man and wife lived. That it was
never thought lawful since Christ, is a boulder speech them Bellarmin does
use: though to hitt the mark as it were with his shaft, he must and does
imply as much in that he says it may be proved by tradition. For tradition
has not for^e enough to prove a thing to be true, not in the Papists own
judgment, unless it have been always approved and agreed on by the general
consent of Fathers, (as we term them) Pastors and Doctors of the Church.
Which I affirne not upon the general rule of cap. ^ et 4^
Vincentius only so greatly, and so often praised by them as golden: But upon
the Canon of the Trent Counsel and pillars of the popish Church subscribing to
it. For Session. 3
the Council of Trent commanding that noe man shall expound the Scripture
against the sense that the Church houldeth or against the Fathers consenting al
in one, does covertly grannt, that if the Fathers consent not all in one, their
opinion may be false, and consequently, no sure proof of a pyont inquestion.
Andradius Desen ^ide Tride^ lib 2.
does open and avouch the same in his defense of the Council: a work very
highly commended by Epist ad vn^ versam Christianam (...) profixa Andr.
Oserius, And Canus s^tteth down for a conclusion, that many of them
consenting in on can yield noe firm proof, Loco^ Theolog l^b. 7. ca 3.
if the rest though fewer in number do dissent, Yea Tim ^ con 3 lib. 4. cap. 0
Bellarmin himself says that there can no certainty be gathered out of their
sayings, when they agrie not among themselves. It is a thing granted the^ by
our adversaries that the Fathers have not strength enough to prove ought
unless they al consent in one. But the Fathers do not censent in one about
the point we treat of, as it shall be showed, Our adveriaries therefore must grant
that the opinion which they hold in this point, cannot be proovede by Fathars.
Nay they are in danger of beeinge enforcede to grant a farther matter,
Septimi de c^etalium lib ^tit 5 c^ p ^ ^ Nilo juxta v^amimem consensum Patrum.
and more importing them by the conseqe^t hereof. For through a decree of Pope
Pius the fourth, the professors of all faculties, and all that take degrees in
any popish schole are bound by solemn oath that they shall never expound and
take the Scripture but according to the Fathers cousenting all in on. Wherefore
how will Bell. perhaps the pamphletter also if he have been amongst them and
taken any degree, As Patsont by name Edi tom con part (...), con ^. quest 4 and
can^sius cat^chism de matrimon. sactam quest. 3 and Navartus In eap divort de
pe int did. 18 theirseminatio sehollais.
but what shift will Bell. and his Puefellows find to save themselves from
perjury, when it shall be showed that many of the Fathers gaiusay that opinion,
which himself and his expound the Scriptue for? And what if it appear, that
the greater number of Fathers do so? not the greater only: but the better
also, and those whose grounds are sure Then all the probability, which Fathers
can yealde will turn against the papists: and that which our adversaries
would prove by Tradition, and the consent of all ages will rather be disproved
thereby. But howsoever men be diversely persuaded touching the number and
qualety of the Fathers enclining this: or that way, by means of sundry
circumstance which may bread doup^ both perticularly; of certain, and of the
whole sum in general: the maine and principal^ point remaining to be showed,
namelly that the Fathers consent not allin one for the papists doctrine, is
most clear and evident out of all controversy. In so much that many even of
them also whom Bell. aleageth, and the pamphletter after him, as making for it,
make indeed against it: and those of the chiefest and formast ranckes
especially, in the first, the second the third, the fourth hundred years after
Cheist. All the which agree and teach with one consent that the man forsaking
his wife for her adultery, is free to marry again: save such of them only, as
in this verry point of doctrine touching marriage, are tainted with error by
the judgment and censure of Papists themselves. A token of the vanetie and
folly of our adversaries Bellarmin and the Pamphletter: who by naming one at
least in every age, would needs make a show of having the cousent of all ages
with them, whereas it will be seen hereby that in many we have the most and
best; and they, either none at all, or none sound. For in the first hundred
years after Christ all that Bellarmin says they have, is the testimony of
Clemens in the Canons of the Apostles Canon 48
where the man is willed without any exception to be excommunicated, who
having put away his wife does marry another. Nou beside that Clemens upon whom
Bellarmin fathrreth, those canons, is inriured therein. As for the later part
of them (...) cont ^ 7. ca 20
himself shows (...) Lo^^en ^is) otherwise called Turria^ a lo^uit li^ de
(...) Synod.
his friend for the former, neither are they of Apostelique antiquity and
authority notwithstanding their title, as Po^e Gelasius the first. sh^ds
assembled in accou^e^ll^ Scra Romans dict. 15.
many Fathers estifie, and Papists will acknowledge when they are touched by
them: The author of the Canon had respect therein (by all probability) to the
Apostolic doctrine receyved from Christ, and therefore though he made not an
express exception of divorce for whoredom, might as well imply it, Caeser
Baronius Annalus Eecle tom. 1. ad annur^ Christi 58.
as I have declared that some of the Evangelists, and S. Paul did. Which the
interpreters also of those Canons Comme^ in Conou. Adost.
Zonarus and Balsamon, thought to be so likely and more then a conjecture,
that they expound it so without any s^mple. Balsamon in saying that he who
puts away his wife without cause may not marry another; and Zonaras that
he who marries a woman put away without cause by her husband does commit
adultery. Or if these writters mistook the a^thours meaning, and in his
opinion no man, howsoever his wife were put away, with out or with cause, might
lawfully marry another: the^ take this with all, that Apost constable lib. 3. cap.
2
he skarse allowed any second marriage, but controuled the third as a sign of
intemperance, and condemned flatly the fourth as manifest whoredom. Which
although Fr. Turrsan. onner in Apo constable. clement
a Jesuit go about to cover and salve with gentle gloses like Exck 13. 10.
the false prophets, Who when one had built up a mudden wall did parged it with
vnsavoru pla^ster: yet since that counter^^it Clemens work did flow out of
the fountanies of the Gretians, as a Barenius Annal ecele. tom. (...) annu^
Christi 57
great historian of Rome has truly noted, and among the Gretians many, held
that error, as it is likewise showed by a Espencaeus li.^ dec^nti ne^tla 9. ct
16.
great Sorbonist; the likelihood of the matter, and spring whence it proceeds
agreeing so fitly with the natural and proper signification of the words, will
not per mitt their blacknes to take any other hew, nor suffer that profane
speech of I know not what Clement, to be cleared from plain contradiction to
the word of God. Wherefore the only witness that Bellermin produces out of
the first hundred years, does not help him. Out of the second hundred he
produces three; Justinius, Athenagoras and Clemens Alexandrinus. 1. (...). 7. 9.
The first of whom Justinius praising the compendious briefnes of Christ's
speeches rehearses this amongst them: Apo^og ad Anto impera
Whosoever marries her that is divorced from her husband, does commit adultery.
Meaning not as Bellar, but as Christ did: who excepting whoredom in the math.
5. 32. et 10. 0
former branch of that sentence, understood it likewise in this, as I have
showed. And how may we know that Justinius meant so? By his own words, in
thet Apolog^d sen^^^ R^ma^ ^o leg. meno^ parkumin te^podion
he commends a godly Christian woman, who gave to her adulterous husband L^
di^timitu^ devout^^ D. de divottijs et repudijs.
a bill of divor cement ^^ de tautes p^^eaner Eusebius eccl hist lib 4. cap 17
such as did loose that band of matrimony, and says concerning him that, he
was not her husband afterward. The next Apolog. pro christia^is.
Athenagoras, affirms (I grant) that if any man being parted from his former
wife do marry another he is an adulterer. But Bellarm^n must grant with all
that Athenagoras affirms it untruly: considering that he speaks of parting
even by death too, as well as by divorcement, and teaches with the Tertuli de
monegam Ep. Pha. haere 48. August de haerescap 26
Montanists that whatsoerer second marriage is unlawful, Wherevpo^ a famous
Parisian Divine De contine^t lib 3 cap. 17^
Claudius Espenseus says of this same sentence of his which Bellarmin cites;
that it favors rather of a Philosopher then a Christian: and may well be
thought to have been inserted into his work by Eucratites. A censure, for the
ground thereof very true that the said opinion is a Philosophical fancy, yea
an heresy; Though the words seem rather to be Athenagoras his own, as Noted
in part by Espencaeus himself ibid ca 9. 0
sundry farhers speak dangerously, that way the^ thrust in by Encratites,
Eplpha. here 46 et 47. August de here is cap. 6.
who generally riected all marriage, not second marriage only. Athenagoras
therefore works small credit to the Jesuits cause, As much does the last of
his witnesses Strom li 2
Clemens Alexandrinus For both in this point about second marriage he marches
Athenagoras and otherwise his writings are tainted with unsoundness, Strom. lib.
3
and stained with spott of error. Which judgment not only Hist Eccle. ^^n
agdeburg eent. 2 cap 10
Protestants of German have in our remembrance lately, geven of him, though a
Egm came Piam rar.
Iesuitical spirit do tradn^e the^ insolently, for it: But cap Sancta Romans
did 15.
an ancient Pope of Rome with seaventie bishops assembled in a Council above
a thousand years since, and a Bishop of Spain a man of no small reputation
with Papists for skill^ both in divinity and in the Canon law Vat^at (...) Ib,
9. cap. 17
Didacus Covarr^vias does approve the same, Now in the third hundred years (to
go forward) Tertullian and Oregen are brought forth to aver Bellarmins
opinion, of whom one question less co^trolleth, perhaps both. For Advers
marcion lip 4.
Tertullia^ disputing against the heretic Marcion, who falfely objected that
Christ is contrary to Moses, because Moses granted divorcement, Christ
forbids it, answers that Christ saying, whoesoever sholl put away his wife
and marry another commits adultery, means ex eadem vtique causa qua non
licet dimitti ut all aducatur.
undoubtedly of pu^^ing away for that cause, for which is not lawful for a man
to putt away his wife that he may marry another. And likewise for the wife,
that he is an adulterer, who marries her being put away, Illiate dimissain
mane^^ri matrimoni quod non ^ite dire^, ptium est.
if she be put away unlawfully: considering that the marriage, which is not
rightly broken off, continues; end while the marriage does continue, it is
adultarie to marry. Which words of Tertullians manyfestly declaring that a man
divorced from his wife lawfully, for the cause excepted by Christ, may marry
another, Bellarmin does very cunningly and finely, cut of with an et cetera,
and says that there he reaches that Christ did not forbid divorcement, if
there be aiust cause, but forb^d to marrya gnine after divorcement. So directly
against the most evident light of the words and tenor of the whole
discourse: that learned men of their own side, though houlding his opinyon yet
could not for shame but grant that Tertullian makes against them in it. For
Epit in 4 lib decretal Part. ^ cap 7. D. 6.
bishop Covarruvias mentioning the Fathers who maintein that men may lawfully
marry again after diuorcement for adultery, names Tertullian. (quoting this
place) among them. Bibleath. (...) l. b. 6. (...) 8.
Siictus Senensis a man not in f^riour in learning to Bellarmin in sencere
dealing for this point superior, confesses on the same place, and on those
same words but recited wholly, not clipped with an et cetera) that Tertullian
makes a certain and undoubted assertion thereof. Anu^ris Ib advers m^tclon
cap. 3. et P^rad (...) Tertul. ^
Pamelius indeed through a desire of propping up his chruches doctrine with
Tertullians credit, says that though h^e seem hereto allow divorcement for
adultery in such sort, as that the husband may marry another wife; yet he
opens himself, and holds it to unlawful in his book de Mouc^^mia
of single marriage, Wherein he says some what, but little to his advauntage.
For Tertullian wrote this book of single marriage when he was fallen away from
the Catholic, faith unto the heresy of Montanus: and so does hold therein
agreably to that heresy, that is unlawful to marry a second wife howsoever a
man be parted from the former by divorcement or by death. But in that he
wrote, while he was a Catholic against the heretic Marcion, he teaches
contrariwise the same that we do, as Sixtus Senensis and Cova^ruvias truly
grant, Yea Pamelius himself if he look better to his own notes, does grant
as much. For Hierom in ca^^ l^go script eccles (...) lib de mono^am et. cap. 9.
he says that Tertullian uses the word divorcement in his proper
signification, Aunotat in lib. 4. (...) marcion cap. 34.
for such a divorcement hy which one puts away his wife and marries
another, But Tertullian says: that Christ does avouche the righteousness of
divorcement. Habet Christem (...)
Christ therefore avoucheth that for adultery a man may put away his wife and
marry another by Tertullians judgment. Which also may be probably thought
concerning Orige: Although it be true Tract (...) m^th cap 9.
he says (as Bellermin. cites him) that certain bishops did permit a woman
to marry while her former husband lived, and adds, they did it against the
scriptu^re. For he seems to speak of a woman divor^ed from her husband, not
for adultery, but for some other cause, such as the Jews used to put away
their wives for, by giving them a bill of divorcement, The matter that he
handles, and cause that he geveth thereof do lead us to his meaning. Approved
by the opinion of certain learned me^ to. For after he had said (according to
math. 19. 8.
the words of Christ which he expounds) that Moses in permitting a bill of
divorceme^t did yield unto the wakenes of the^ to whom the law was geve^; he
says that, the Christian bishops who permits a woman to marry while her
former husband lives, did it perhaps for such weakness. wherefore since in saying
that, this which they did, they did perhaps for such weakness, he has relation
unto that of Moses, and Moses, as he adds) didnot grant the bill of
divorceme^t for adultery, for that was punished by death it follows that the
Bishop whom Orige^ charge, with doing against the scriptuere did permit the
woman, to marry upon divorceme^t for some other cause, not for adultery and
so his reproving of the^ does not touch us, who grant for adultery only:
Thus does Annot in 1 Go^^
Erasmus think that Orige^ meant: co^cluding it farther, as clear, by
similitude which Orige^ tract Zin ma^k.
he had used before of Christ who put away the Synagoge (his former wife as it
were, because of her adultery and married the church. Yea Expsicar at tic^l^r
Lovan art. 1.
Tapper likewise a great divine of Lova^, and of better credit with Papists
the^ Erasmus says that the divorceme^t permitted by those Bishops, who^ Orige^
controuleth was a Jewish divorcement. Wherein though he aimed at another mark,
to prove an untruth: yet unawares he hit a truth more the^ he thought of, and
strengthened that by Orige^ which he thought to overthrowe. Howbeit if Bell, or
Bell Inther preter can persuade by other likelyhoods out of Orige^ (as he is
somewhat dark, and I know not whether irresolute in the point) that the thing
reproved by him in those Bishops was the permitting of one to marry again
after divorceme^t for adultery: our cause shall be more advantaged by those
sundry Bishops who approved it, the^ disadva^taged by on Orige^, who reproved
for it. Chiefly seeing Orige^ impaired much his credit both by other heresies in
diverse points of faith, for which a Synod. 5 co^^intinob. col. lat. 8. cap II.
Nicephot lib. 1^ cap. 38.
general Council with Tim 1 co^t 6. lib, 2 cad 8.
Bell. allowa^ce count him damned heretic a and in this matter by Hom 17 in
Lucam.
excluding al such as are twice married out of the Kingdom of heaven, which
Cenebrad. annot marg. in cum loca. Espenceus de continent lib 3 ^^d 9.
divines of Paris observe and check him for. Whereas those Bishops of who^ he
makes me^tio^, were neither stained otherwise for ought that may begathred,
nor herein did they more the^ the right believing and Catholic church all
that time thought lawful to be don, as appears by Tertullia^ and Iustine the
Martyr. In the which respect Tractat de insti^us Sa cerde. de ma ^^imon. lect 13
Peter Soto (a freir of great accout in the Trent Council) having said that it
is plain by many arguments that the case which we treat of was doubtful in
the ancient church alleges this for proof thereof out of Origin, that many
Bishops permits married men to marr^ again after divorcement. Thus if the
two fathers whom Bellar. out of the third hundred years as making for him do
not make against him, which perhaps they do both: yet one of the^ does not out
of all controversy, and bishops, more in number, in credit greater then the
other agree with him therein. Out of the fowrth hundred, the show which Bell,
makes, is a great deal fayrer the^ out of the third; and a number of Fathers,
the counsel of Eliberis^^ Am, S. Iero^, a Roman Bishop, and S. Chriso are
affirmed the^^e to join themselves with him. But they are affirmed in the like
manner as the former were: skarse one of them avouching the same that he does,
the rest in part seeming to be of other opinion, in part most clearly showing
it, and such as show not so much, yet showing their own weakness, and that in
this matter their opinion and judgment is of small value.

For the foremost of them conon. 9.
the Council of Eliberis, ordained that a woman which for sooke her husband
because of his adulter ie and would marie another, should beforbidden to
marry, and if she married, she should not receave the communion til he were
dead who^ she forsook, unless necessity of sickness co^stryned to g^ve it
her. Wheerein it is to be noted, first that the coucell says not. Si quis L.
ver (...) de ver (...)
If any man, so to comprehend and touch generally all both men and women:
but they speak peculiarly of the woman alone, and so do not forbid the man
te leave his adulterous wife and marry another. Secondly, that the woman is
excommunicated, if when she is forbidden by the church to marry, she marry
nevertheless, not if before she be ^orbidde^: As it were to punish her
disobedience rather then the fact it self. Thirdly, that she is not debarred
all her life time from the communion, but for a season only, and in time of
need, in dangerous sickness does receive it: yea, even while the party, who^
she forsook lives, Of the which circumstances the first though it might
argue the Councels oversight who made the womans case herein worse then the
man's, both being free alike by Gods law: yet for the man it shows that they
allowed him to marry again after divorcement according to the doctrine of
Christ which we maintain. The next yeildeth likeliehood that the Council did
forbid the woman this not for that they thought it unlawful, but unseemly
perhaps or inexpedient, as co^ncil. 1 lerd. c Non^ porter a se^tu agesima 33 q.
4.
another Council is read to have forbidden the celebrating and solemnizing of
marriages at certain times. But the last puts the matter out of doubt, that
they were persuaded of the woman also marryi^g in such sort that her fact was
warra^table by the word of God. For else had they, not judged her marriage with
this latter man to be lawful, they must needs have judged her to live with him
in perpetual adultery. Which if they had thought, it is most improbable they
would have admitted her to the communion in case of dangerous sickness: seeing
at the point of death can. 64.
they deny it to women so continuing, yea ^ah. 3. 7 17 18 47. 65. ^o (...) and
^5.
to me^ offend^ng less heynoufly then so. With such extremity of rigor
therein that Annal Eccles tom. ^ adanu^ christ 5^.
Bar^nius notes their decrees as favoring of the Novation heresy; and Tim.
1. contr. 7 lib 1 cad 6.
Bell. lays it almost as deeply to their charge. So far from all
likeliehood is it that they would admit her in necessity of sickness to the
communion had they been persuaded she lived in adultery still. Therefore it
was not without cause that Bell, did suppress this circumstance to gether with
the former, in citing the decre of the Elibernie Council: least his false
illation, to weete that they accounted such marriage unlawful even for the
innocent party, and in the cause of adultery, should be descovered and
controlled thereby. Next is Ambrose brought in whom upon the 16 chap. of Luke,
writes much against them that putting away their wife do marry another, and
he calls that marriage adultery in sundry places: neither does he ever
except the cause of whordo^ in that whole discourse as Bellarmin says. But
what if Bellarmin here be like himself too? Certainly S. Ambrose speaks
Dimi^t (...) ^xocem qua^^lu^a sin^ crimine
of such wive^s as lived without crime, and Putas id ti b^ licere quia lex
h^mana non prohibet sed div^na prohib. l. 1.
whom their husbands were (as he adds) forbidden by the law of God to put
away. So that he reproving men for marrying others after they had put away
their chaste wives, does evidently show he meant not of marriage after
divorcement for whoerdom, And if it be sufficient proof that he supposed they,
Noli ergo vxotem (...) tere. Quidi mittit uxote^ facit eam more cham.
might not marry again after they had put away a whorish wife because he
never excepteth who^ do^ in that wholediscourse of marrying again, the^ by as
sufficient a reason he supposed that ^2 they, might not put away their wives
at all, no not for whordom, because he never excepteth it in that whole
discourse of putting away the wife. But that Papists will gr^unt that a man may
lawfully put away his wife, if she committ whordom. As Bellar. then will
construe S. Ambrose in this branch, so let him in the former. And if he say,
that S. Ambrose thinking upon Luke alone whom he expounded, or trusting his
memory forgot the exception added by Christ ^ Matthew, for Math. c. 32.
putting away the wife* the same slipp of memory might loose the same
exception for math. 19. 9.
marrying another. If he think that Ambrose did not forget himself, but
understood the exception in the former point, as the 1 cor. ^, 11
Apostle did, though neither mention it expressly: what reason why, it might
not as well be understood in the later also? As for S. Ierom no marve^l if he
wrote against second marriage after divorcement for whordo^ Epist ^ ad Salvinam
et n, ad Age^u chia^ et adversus ^ovinian.
who wrote against all second marriages in such sort, that De contine^t lib 3^
ap. ^
Espenceus asks what could have been said more greivously against them by the
impure Who condemn of cond marriges Epiph^^s. haeres 59 August de hae (...) ib
cap, 8
Catharists, them is said by him? And In August de civit, de lib (...) The
divines of Lo^anin in their edition of Au^en. printed at Ant (...) sentence out
beyond the prescript of index expurgatorius
Vives pronounces, that he did not only detest second marriages, but also had
small liking of the first, nor did much favor matrimony; Beside that himself
to, as far as (...) exceded the bounds of Godly modesty and truth her in,
even by thes^mens judgments whom Papists do repute learned and Catholic
allayeth and correct^th in one of the places, which Bell* alleges, his
peromptorie consure given in the other. For whereas he says in his Epistle to
Amandus, that the wife who divorced herself from her husband because of his
adultery and married another ^it on vult adui^ers redu^ari
was an adulteress for so marrying, and Non A Peila ^ur vir fed a dul^et
her new husband an adulterer: In his epitaph of (...) (a noble godly^g
gentlewoman of Rome, who did the like and was poenite^t for it after her second
husbands death he says, that she lamented and bewaryled if so, as if she had
committed adultery. By which kind of speech and others suitable to it, as that
he terms her state after divorcement from her first husband. Widdowhood,
and adds, that she lost Vidu^latem suam servare non pote^at 8 Sub, glo^^a
vni ver
the honor of having h^^d but on husband, Post (...) see nodi viri ^ Opera
exercete (...)
by mar^ying the second, and says, she though^^^ better to undergo a
certain, shadow of pitiful wedlock, then to play the whore, because it is
better (says Paul) to marry the^ to burn: S. Ieron declares that although
it were a fault in his opinion to do as she did: yet not such a fault, a
crime, a public crime, as Bell. doctrine makes it. No more may it be justly
thought in the opinion of that Roman Bishop, of whom, because he put Fabiola to
public penance after her second husbands death, Bell, concludes that it was
accounted a public crime in the Catholic Church at that time, if any man
whilst his wife yet lived, married another yea, albeit for whordo^. For me^ at
that time were put to some penance in the Catholic Church, for marrying
again after their first wives death, as Bell. observes out of the Catholic
Nec eaesas can. 7 et lao dicen cap. 1 proved (...) have tha. meaning by Espeu
ceu^ lib, 2. de continent cap I aS Zonaras too and Ba samo^ interpret them
b^th, hongth the glossoon Graaian (...) one of them otherwise cap de his (...)
D Qu^d. (...) D' de xdili^. edict l non emnia D, de publici iudi^.
Councels: adding therewith al, that al though they knew second marriage to be
lawful, yet because it is a token of incontine^cie they chastised it with
somepena^ce. Wherefor since it might easily be that they who laid some penan^e
upon no fault, would lay public penance upon a small fault, specially in
women, to who^ in such cases they were more severe and rigorous them to me^:
the penance which the Bishop did put Fabiola to for her second marriage does
not prove sufficiently that it was accounted then a public crime in the
Catholic church. Howbeit if the t^arm of public crime be used in a ge^tler
se^s the^ commonly it is, or the Bishop of Rome did never put aney but grivous
offe^ders and sinners to public penance: yet perhaps even so to will
Bellarmin come short of this conclusion (...)* For thereby (says he) we do
not understand that ^i q^i vive^te conjuge
if any man while his wife yet lived, marry another, yea albeit for whoredo^,
it was accounted a public crime in the Catholic church at that time, if any
man did it. As who say the Bishop of Rome must need should that, if women were
not lisenced to marry after divorcement for whordom, men could not be neither,
Whereas he might be of the same opinion, that an auncien, ^onc l. Ell ber^ cap.
9
Council seems (as I showed) to have been before him; and an ancient
Ambros. in. 1. ad c. ^ cap. 7
Father (living and writing as censuratheol gerum lova^ in August lib quaest
veret nov restain Tom. 4.
some think, in Rome about the same time) was: I mean, that this liberty and
freedo^ should be granted to men but not to women. Moreover the delay of
Faviolas penance, in that she was not put thereto until Hi^rom epist. o ad
(...).
after her second husbands death, yeledeth very strong and probable co^ecture,
that it had not been before the^ accounted any crime at all in the Catholic
church, not for a woman neither to put away her husband because of his
adultery, and to marry another. Melius arbitra^ae (...).
For that which Fabiola did, she did openly. Her self was religious, godly, well
instructed; and thought it to be lawful. Her husband by all lykelyhood of like
mind and judgment: the church of Rome called not their marriage in to
question. The Bishop did not execute any Church ce^sure on the^, Nay, since she
was Adolescentu^^ten.
yeat young, when they married, and never hard of any fault therein committed as
long as her husband lived: it may be Rome had many bishops in that time, none
of whom saw cause why they should bla^e her for it. The example of Fabiola
therefore, and the Roma^bs. deling in it, makes more a great deal with us then
against us, if it be thoroughly waighed. Now S. Chrisostom makes absolutely with
us: howsoeoer Bell, affirms that he teaches the same with S. Ierom yea with
Epist. 145
S. Ierom* simply comending all such marriage. Amanqum^
For what does S. Chrisostom teach in the sermon that Bell, quotetth upon Math?
Hom. 17. in Math. cadt.
Forsooth; that by Moses law it was permitted, that whosoever hated his wife
for any cause might put her away and marry another in her Room: But Christ
left the husband one cause alone to put away his wife for namely whoredom.
What? and does it follow hereof that Chrisost. meant that the husband putting
her away for whoredo^, might not marry another? Rather the clean contrary.
Seeing he speaks of such a putting away, as Moses did permit and makes this
the difference between Christ's ordinance, and the law of Moses, that Moses
did permit it for any cause, Christ but for one, Which to be his meaning he
shows more plainly upon the first to the Corinthia^s, saying that the
marriage is dissolved by whordom, Hom. 19 int 1. eor. 7.
neither is the husband, a husband any longer. For hence it appears that he
thought the band of marriage to be loosed when they are severed for woredo^:
and therefore consequently the parties are free to marry according to the
Apostles rule. 1. cor 7. 28


And other where also, Homil de ^^bell requdii
though somewhat more obscurely, yet co^ferrence with this place will show him
to have taught. But what should I stand on farther proof thereof, it being so
undoubted, Epitom in 4. lib dectetal part. 2. cap. 7 D. 6.
that bishope Covaruvias an ernest adversary of marriage after divorcement, and
bringing all the Fathers that he can against it, confesses S. Chrisost. to
stand on the other side against him for it. And this in four hundred years
after Christ, Bell. ca^ot find on of the Fathers, that he may justly say is
his excepting them which make as much for the Encratites, Montanistes, and
Catharists, as they do for Papists. In the ages followi^g he finds better
store: now one now more in the hundred. Yet among the^ also, look how many he
names of the Eastern bishops, whether expressedly, or implyedly: he plays
the Ies^it with him. For the first of them Theophylact he alleges with the
same faith and truth, that he did Chrisost, Tom. 7. contr. 7. lib. 1 cap. 4.
whose scholar Theophylact being (after Bellarmins own note) did follow his
master.

And this the two places themselves that Bellarmin quoteth; do insinuate
clearelye: Theophy ^uct iae Math. cap. 19.
The former by oppening how Christ permits not the putting away which Moses
did, without just cause, nor allows any cause as just but whordom In. 1.
Cor. 7
the (...) by omitting mention of whordom, in spesifying the causes for which
if a woman depart from her husband she must remain unmarried. Whereto (if
Bell. need more light to see it by) we may add a third place: in which In.
Luc. cap. 16.
Theophylact saying that Luke rehersing Christ's words against men putting away
their wives and marrying other must be understood with the exception out of
Matthew, Patectos logou porneias delade. obseured by the Latin tra^slator
omitting delade.
Unless it be for whordom, does show howfarre he differs herein from Bell.
who denies flatly that Christ's words in Luke must be supplied with that
exception. The rest of the Eastern Fathers whose testimony is alleged by
Bellarmin though their names not mentioned: are such as were assembled in the
Council of Florence. For there came thither to confer with the Pope and the
western by shops, albeit many of these houlding a general Council at Basil
the same time, refused to change the place for the Popes pleasure, who sought
his own advantage therein, not the Churches, and undermined the actions of the
Council of Basil Council Bas^lien^sese 33. et 34 Enias Syl^iusde ge^l. council.
which condemned him of heresy, and deposed him; but there came thither
Synodus Floaentine, proce et subscript in ilterlavuioni^
the Patriarchs of Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioche, and Jerusalem, either
themselves in person, or by their deputies, with many Metropolitanes and
Bishops of Greece of Asia, of Iberia, and other countries of the East. Whose
creditt and consent how vutruely Bellar. pretends, for the proof of his
false assertion, it is plain by that he says the Coun^al of Florens did
decree the same in the instruction of the Armenians. A chapter which is
fathered indeed upon the Counsel by the schismatical pope Eugenius the fourth,
the deviser of it: but fathered uniustly and calumniously as the time agrees,
wherein it was begotten. For it is accorded in the same decree, that it was
made the Decimo calendas D^ce^ b^tis
two and twentieth of November in theyeare of Christ a thousand four hundred,
thirty and nine. Now the Council ended in July the same year four months
before: As both Synod Fl^ ^ent. sess. ult.
it self witness^th, and O^npht. in Pontil. max ^t card Cene card. Chronog^adh.
lib 4
Popish stories note. Wherefore the Council could not be the farther of that
decree and chapter: noe more then a man can be of that child which is borne
fourete^ months after his death. And the pope whose bastard in truth the brat
is, by the acknowlegment and record of Papists them selves in the Decretum
Eugeui^ paper quat^i
Tomes of Concells, was so much the more to blame to father it upon the Council
of Florence Psaesens. ^ane at atque magna et Vulversa li^ Synodus
the great and general council, and Florentiaeia Publica seffio ne Synoda^i
(...) brata.
date it in a public solemn session thereof; because neither was it debated
in the Council whether marriage after divorcement for adultery were lawful or
no; and the Synod Flo ^eur (...). ult.
Eastern bishops mainteyned it to be lawful, when the pope after the end of
the council did reprove the^ fore its neither is it likely the contrary was
decreed by all there present of the west, Chiefly seeing that more the^half of
the^ were, gone when both parts the East and West, In proamio
subscribed to the decrees of the Council in the leters of agreement: as
appears by conferring their number with Sess. ult.
their names, and the note thereof, There are about ^o by shops seas in Italy.
Leand Albett in descript. talie I Eneas Sylvius degestis Basillensi^ council lib
1. cla^dius Espe^ce us in epist ad ritum cap l.
Yea the Council being ended the sixth of July, had their superscriptious
added unto it the one and twentieth. Then if of 7, score and perhaps upward,
scarce 3. score were remaining at Florence. 14. days after the Counsel ended:
What may we think there were above 4. moniths after? But how many soever were
present of the West, as the Pope can quickly must^r up an 100; bishops or
more, if need be out of Italy alone, to carry awy things in Co. by multitud of
voices, such policy has he used for that; but how many soever Italia^s he
ba^ded to countenance his decree, the bishops of the East agreed not thereto,
neither was it the councels act. Thus all the Fathers of the Eastern churches,
whom Bell alleges, and may urge with credit their doctrine toward marriage,
do not only not say with him, but gainsay him. Wherein there have so many
others followede them from age to age till our time, that it is apparent they
allow with greater consent a man's marriage after divorcement for adultery
the^* Fathers of the Western churches dissalow it, For Eusebius treatinge of
Justin the Martyr sets forth with the same praise that he had done the story
of the Christian woman, who divorced her self from her adulterous husband. And
S. Hist eccl sib 4 cap^ 17
Basils cannons approved by Synod sext. in Trull can. 2 ^ Quoniam (...) 6
Synod. sept can. 1.
general cou^cells; do not only authorieze the man to marry another, whose
wif^ is an adulteress, but also check the custom which yielded not like favor
in like case to the woman. And Epipha^ius Here Is. 59.
says (his words are read corruptly, but the sense thereof is Plain of our
side, as Epis^a 4 lib docreta part. 2 cap. 7. 6.
Covarievs as grau^teth, Epiphanius says therefore that Sepration being made
for whordom a man may take a second wife, or a woman a second husband and the
same in effect avoucheth De eur gr^^ affect lib. ^
Theodoret affirming that Christ has set down one cause: whereby the hand of
Marriage should be dissolved, and only rent asunder, in that he did except
whoredom. And a general Sext Sxnod Constautmot Iin T^u^^ ca^ot Nomon syna^
thisan translated otherwise by some but me^^ thus by the council as mentoi
with the antithesis going before it shaweth and thi^ use of the word Synap
testas can 13 did 3 e Quon^am
Counsel, wherein there were above 220. bishops of the East gathered together,
does implye as much in saying that. He, who his ^ wife having keept the law of
wedlock and being faithful to him, yet forsakes her and marries another is
by Christ's sentene guilty of adultery. So does ^n prior ad cor cap. 7
Oecumenius in applying the precept of abiding unmarried to (...) has should
not have departed, and in abridging Chrisostoms words after his manner, whose
scholar Tom 1 cont 7 cap l^b
Bell. therefore terms him. So does In math. ca 5
Euthymimius Choysostoms. scholar too, in charging the man with adultery,
Hist ecel lib 3 cap. ^3
who marries a woman divorced for any cause but whordom from her husband. So
does Nicephoras, in copyinge and co^meding that out of Eusebius, which he had
out of Justin the Martyr. To be short, the Grecians, Decretum. Eugenli pupae
which name compriseth many nations the East all whom the h Florentine Council
calls the Eastern Church do put the same doctrine receyved from their
aunstours in practice even at this day, allowing married folk not only, to
sper^te and divorce themselves in case of adultery but also to marry others,
as Bellarman confesses. Wherefore his opinion has not the consent of the
Eastern bishops: neither has had it any age since Christ, Much less can he
show the consent of the South paulus lovint (...) lib. (...) Francis Alvat
descript (...) cap. 21
the Aethiopians, an Abessines, or of the A^ex. (...)
Moscovites and Russes in the North: both which as they receyved their faith
from the East, so use they like freedom and liberty for this matter. No, not
in the west it self, though he have many then agreeing with him, yet has he
the general consent of all the Fathers perhaps not of half, if an exact count
might betaken of them, ^or besides Tertullian, the Council of Eliberis etc. to
let pass Ambrose on* Bishop of Rome, or more already showed to have thought
that ^ a man being divorced from his wife for her adultery, is free to marry
again: th^re are of the same mind (...)
Lactantius, In mat ca 5
Chromatius, (...)
Hilarie, Augustine de aduliet co^jug, ad pollent lib. 2 cap. ^ et lib cap. ^.
Polle^tius, ^u Epist (...) cap 7.
the auther of the Commentaries in Ambrose his name upon S. Paul's epistles,
can. 10.
the first Council of Arles, can. 2.
the counsel of Vannes, they who either were at or agreed to the Co^stantinop
in Trullo cap. 88 gr. 87 ^at
sixth general counsel the second time assembled Epist 4 ad (...)
Pope Gregory the third ^ Pope Zachary, the council of cap 3. et 10
Burchard. de cre^or I c. 4 et l. 1^ cap. 17^ et^^
Worms of ^2 (...) cum nova^ca Burchar. iib. 17. c. 17. et 18
Tribur, of ca. 5 Burchar ^ b. 17. c. 5.
Mascon, a council alleged by, 52 q. ^ quaedam
Gratian without name, and other learned me^ alleged likewise by Sed illud ead
cause. et quest ^e Vemeus (...) da eo qui a^gn con sang vxoris suae.
him Qua^to. extra. de divortys
Pope Alexander the third, Qua^to. extra. de divortys
Celestin the 3, de concord Euang cap (...)
Zachary and Addit. 2. ad Lyran in mat. 19
Paul bishop, the one of Chrisopolis, the other of Burgose Christ marrimon
instit et au not. in ^cor. cap ^
Erasmus, Tract de mat^^ quest an propror c^im edult couj. l. b. a vinculo
Cardinal Cajetan: Archbishop Catharinus Enar ratim epist ad (...)
Naclantus bishop of Clugia, finalli the teachers of the reformed churches in
Tindal ou mat, 5 Bucer. de regno christ lib. 2. ca. 43 pmarry^ in ^ cor ^ Bea^
(...) the confession of their faith pie^ in Luther ^uacrat in mat 5. et. cor.
^con ^ Saxon in Harmon con^. sect. 18. art de com w^ite^ ibid hist. magdeburch,
(...) l. ca. Ke^nic. exam, (...). Trident part
Eng. m Scot., n Ger. calvin lust^ (...) lib 4. 19. ult gal. in Ha^mon conf.
Be^g in Harm. con muscul in mat. 5. bull. decad. 2. se^m. 10. ^ zege
France and i^ Iacorcom, de div^r, tub. l.
other countris, for why should not I name these of our profession and faith
among the Fathers as well as Bell. names the popish council of Trent on the
contrary side? But the Papists (will some man peradventure say do not grant
that all whom you have rehearsed, were of this opinion. But the Papists I
answer) do grant that sundry of them were? and such as they grant not, the
light of truth and reason will either make them grant, or ^hame them for
denying it. As Biblioth Sanct
Sixtus Senensis, namely does deny that Hilarie and Chromantius allow a man to
marry another wife after divorcement: or teach that he is loosed from the
band of matrimony, while his former wife though an adultesse lives. Now weigh
their own words, and it will appear that Sixtus iniurieth them therein. For
^n math. cap 5.
Chromatius says that they who having put away their wives for any cause save
for whoredom, 4 A^sq fornicationis causa
presume to marry others, do against the will of God, and are condemned,
Wherein, with what sense could he except whoredom, unless he thought them
guiltless, who having put away their wives for it do marry others? And can
4. in Math ^D. sinendla con^ugio.
Hilarie affirming Christ to have prescribed no other cause^ of ceasing from
matrimony, but that; shows that the baud of matrimony is loosed thereby in
his judgment. Chiefly since he knew that they might cease from the use thereof,
for other causes: and the occasion and tenor of the speech do argue that he
mea^t such a seperatio^ as yeel death liberty of new marriag, In like sort, or
rather more plainly and expressly did Pollentius hold and maintain the same:
As Austin (who^ in this point he dissented from) does repote and testify. Yet
Bellarmin (a strange^thing in a case so clear, but nothing strange to Jesuits)
says that Pollentius Non ^contra dix^t. Angu^ti. no sed eum consuluit.
did not gainsaie Austin, but asked his judgment of the matter: and for proof
here of refers us to the beginnings of both the books of Austin. Even Dead
(...) co^iug ad polle^t, lib 1 cap 1.
to those beginnings in which it is declared how Austin having labored too
prove that a woman parted from her husband for his fornication might not marry
another, Tanquam consulende sh^th Austin In steedewherof, Bellarmin ^a h co^su^
e^do and drowneth. sanqnam.
Pollentius wrote unto him as it were by way of asking his judgment and showed
he thought the contrary: yet showed it in such sort, that Austin setting
down both their opinions, does specify then as flatly crossing one the other:
You are of this mind, I of that: and says of Pollentius again and again
that 8 he was of this mind, which Bellarmin denies he was of, wherein the
Jesuits dealing is more shameful, for that beside the evidence of the thing it
self so often repeated in the very same places that he cites Id enim sen it is
and videtut ^ibset existi mas and putas. et ef^s^o nes tibivibet ut ^t
existimas*
Sixtus Senenses a man as unwilling as Bellarmin to weaken any of their Trent
points with granting more then he must needs confesses that Poeleutius
thought hereof as we do. Biblior^ sac ^ae lib. 2. verb Bepud^j humanilibellus
Belike because Sixtus Seuensis honors: him with the praise and title of a
polia^sium religiosish mum virum.
most godie man, Bell. thought it better to lie, then to grant that they have
such an adversary. He would feign avoid too another a^ncient father bearing
the name of Ambrose, and I^ epi t. l ad ct ^ cap 7
Ambrose might his name be, though he were not famous Ambrose Bishop of Milan.
But whether he were named so, or otherwise (which As it is probably gathered
out of Au^^in cont duase of t^las pelagian lib ^, cap.
perhaps is truer unto his testimony pronouncing it lawful by S, Paul's
doctrine for a man justly divorced to marry (again though not for a woman as
he^ by missetaking S. Paul thro^gh error 20 (...) seb ^llnd
though Bellarmin replieth with a threefold answer. First Gratian (says he)
and Peeter lib* sent. did 35.
Lambard do affirm that those word ^swere thrust into this authors
Commentary by some corrupters of writtings. In deed the one of them
affirms: dicitur.
it is said so the other, credituo.
it is thought so. But if it be sufficient to affirm barely without any
ground of proof or probability, that it is said or thought so: what error
so absurd that may not be desended by perverse wranglers? what cause so
oniust, that unrighteous judges may not geve sentence with? For whatsoever
words be enforced against them out of the law of God or man, our of any
evidence or record of writers and witnesses worthy credit: they may with Peter
Lo^bard and Gratian reply that the place alleged is said or thought to have
been thrust into those monuments by some corrupters of writings. And in
replying thus they should speak trueli, though it were said or thought by nome
beside themselves: but how reasonably they should speak therein, let men of
sense and reason judge. Surely though Peter Lo^bard rest upon that answer,
for want of a better, yet Gratian (whether ^^aring the si^klie state thereof,
does leave it, and seeks himself a new patron saying that Ambroses, words are
thus meant, that a man may lawfully marry another wife after the death of the
adulteress, but not while she lives, which answer is mote absurd the^ the
former. In so much that Epis in 4. lib decreta ^ pat 2 caP. 7. 5. ^
Covarruvias speaking of th. former only as verdict, as any, said that this
repugneth manifestly to Ambrose. A very true verdict, as any man not blind
may see by Ambrose words: And Bellarmin couf^ss^th the same in effect, by
passing it over in sil^nee as ashamed of it, But others (says he secondly)
do answer that this author speaks of the Civil law, the law of Emperous: To
weet, that by the Emperors Laws it is lawful for men, but not for women,
having put away their mate, to marry another: and that Paul therefore least he
should offend the Emperor 1. cor. 7. 1
would not say expressly. If a man put away his wife, let him a bide so or
bereconciled to his wife. Now Gratians second answer was no less worthy to
have been mentioned, then this of panop* Evang lib. 3. cad, ^. 5.
William Lindam, patched up by Bell. For the li. D de divo ^et ^epud, (...)
lege ad le, ^e lubdeadu ^t ^ co^nfensu list constan ^ee de^epu di^s.
civil law prononceth the band of marriage to be loosed as well by divorcement
as death: and allows women to take other hushands, their former being put
away, as it allows men to take others wives, So that is a fond and unlearned
conceit to imagine that Paul would not say of husbands as he did of wives,
least he should offend the Emperor by speaking expresselie against that which
his law allowed, For l. cor. 7. 11.
he did expressly control the Emperors law in saying of the wife. If she
dedart from her husband, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her
husband. And the authors words do show that he meant to speak, not of
human laws, but of divine: of the sacred scripture where upon he wrote, and
what was thereby lawful, Which seemed so evident unto, Instit sacerd ca de
Matr^m Lect 13.
Peter Soto, gstiblioth sa^e lib. 9. annor. ^
and Sixtus Senesis, and Annot in cap v^or avi* 10. 32. 97.
the Roman Censors, who oversaw Pope Gregory the thirtenths tenths new edition
of the Cannon law, that they confess that Ambrose (meaning this author) does
a prove plainly, certainly, vndoubtely, men's liberty of marrying again after
divorcement. Bellarmin therefore coming in with his third answer. Yet says he
if these be not so well liked, it may be answered easily: that the author of
those Commentaries is not Ambrose, nor any of the renowned Fathers, Qu^q
erud^^^ (...) ignorant.
as learned men know. Thus at length this author, if men will not believe that
his words are corrupted, or that he spoke of the Civil law, shall be
granted us with Bellarmins good leave; But then we shall be told* that he
is not Ambrose, nor any of the renowned Fathers as learned men know. And why
could not Bellarmin answer this at first? Why was he so loath to grant
that such an author, base, obscure of sclend^r cr^ditt, makes with us? H^rein
th^re (...) a mystery. There is in epist 1 ad ^im cap. 2.
in this authors Commentaries a place, a cujus h^die Iactov est Damaus.
piece of a senten^e, which seems to speak for he Popes Supremacy: Though
perhaps never written by this author, or not with that meaning, as I have he
wed else where. To. 2. e ntr^ 3 lib cap 6
Bellarmin had cited that place for that in Beatus Am brosius where by he
meneth simons Am. b^^se. bishop of Mila as the quotatio^s so^ lowing she^
S. Ambrose. his na me: and The English college of Rheimes, Annot. On ^ tim 3.
15
many make a feast thereof, as being fare S. Ambroses. Now if he should say,
that the author of those Commentaries was neither Ambrose nor Saint: he should
gainsaie himself. And since he was learned, when he did cite it so, and
therefore knew (by his own words) that it was not Ambrose not any of the
renowned fathers who writ it: men would see thereby, that he had for the Pop^s
sake against his own knowledge, fathered on S. Ambrose that which is not his.
No marveil then if Bellarmin came to his answer as a bear to the stake. At
the which though he seem to cast us of, by saying that the author was no
renowed Father, and erred in mistaking S. Paul, as having geven more liberty
to men then women, whereof in due place afterward: yet in the mean season he
is forced to grant that this ancient Father took it to be lawful for men
to marry again after divorcement for adultery. The sundry evasions and
shifts whereby the Papists have labored to wrest the credit of this one Father
out of our hands, do geve me occasion to suspect that they will wrangel much
more to withdraw from us the first Council of Arles' being more ancient in
time, in credit greater, and (as Heldin constan^ins time about they ^at ol
christ (...)
^art caranza in somon ^ eo^ciliocum.
one of themselves does probably conjecture) confirmed by the Pope also.
Herevente the Councele wishing of certain persons not to marry in the case
we treat of might serve them for a color in as much as can. ^o
it says concerning them whose wives are taken in adultery, that if they be
young men and forbidden to marry, ^^ns llum. eis deur,
advise should be given the, as much as may be not to take other wi^es while
the former live, though adulteresses. But this giving of advise is in truth an
argument that the council judged a man no adulteter, if he took another
wife. Else would they have given not advise and counsel, but charge and
commandment to refrain from it; and (as it is likely) restrained men's
transgression therein with sharp discipline, specially considering ^an 3. 4.
5. 7. 11. 12. et 14 e In quantum pciest Adolescens^s exprohibe^^es nub^^e.
they punish lesser faults with excommunication. Neither is it nothing that they
temper also this counsel and advise to be geven such, with 9 as much as may
be. And a farther circumstance yet of more importance, they make not this
restraint for all men, but for ^ young men nor ^or all young men, but such as
are forbidden to marry: meaning (as it seems) thoose who being under the
care of their parents were by them forbidden, and could not honestilie disobey.
For had not this respect or the like moved the Fathers of the Council, why
should they have restrained such young men and not other? Nay, why only young
men, not rather men, not aged men, or the^ also? Since in p Tim. 5. 9
S. hripture elder women are chosen to be widows, and younger willed to marry.
Our adversaries therefore must yield that the counsel of Arles is of our side
for the point in question, Whereto they shall have greater reason to induce
them, if they note with all that the Council Va narie in Gallia cund 2.
Council of Vames in the same contrie, Ab^ut the year of christ 400.
a the age following made this canon. pecca^a
We appoint and ordeine, that they who having left their wives, except for
whoredom (as it is said in the Gospel) or upon proof mad of adultery, marry
others, shall be excommunicated: Least, finnes being suffered by o^r too much
gentleness do provoke other men to loosenes of transgressing. And this decree I
find not any of the Papists that goes about to shift of: Neither ca^ I see
how they may possibly: The Con^cell expou^ding so plainly Christ's words of
marriage forbidden after divorcement unless it be for whoredom, and
accompting marriage after such divorcement not a lesser sin, but no sin, at
all, as the reason added for strength of their decree shows, Now for the next
the general Council assembled in the Emperors palace of Constantinople which
made the like decree and taught the same doctrine, as I have declared:
Bellarmin would persuade us (upon other occasions touching Popery nearer the
quick, the^ this does) that the western Bishops neither gave countenance
thereto with their presence, nor approved the Canons there of with their
consent. To this end he denies that the said Council was a general Council,
and striveth in his De To pont lib. 2. cap 27
third controversy to answer some of our reasons which confirm it. But he
eases us of pains to fist his aunsweres by means that himself in the Dr
ecc'es m^ te lib 1 cap 7 vi s^8 D, de con^ititu^ pri^ eip^m.
fourth controversy, discoursing of general councels purposelie, does recke^
it amongst the^. For as in v men's laws when they are repugnant on unto
another, the later derogateth from the former: lib led magini^ad eao 35 Post
Nicaen synod 2. ^cius synodi e^ct ^. a Nicae u^sy. 6.
so (I trow) when Bellarmin does contradict himself, his last word must hold.
And the more reason it should so in this, because both Pope Adrian the first of
ancient time, did call it the sixth Council, declaring thereby he took it to
be of the General Councels whereof he termed it the sixth, and in the
seventh General Council sundry Fathers alleged it by the name of the sixth
General, and avouched it to be justly called so. Which sentence of theirs
being uncontroled by any of that Council, Nicaen-sy
and the Council it self afterward approoving the decrees and canons of the
six general Councels, Zonaras et o orientatis a orienta is ec^ls. c. ult.
it is very probable that the Western churches yealding their consent to the
seventh council, and taking it for found accounted (as the Eastern have done
and do) that which they entiteled the sixth to be general, Specially seeing
that in the West, men of great credit Ivo and Gratian and Pope Ionoceutius the
third and their disciples the whole schole of ca^onists have on those autorities
of the seaveth counsel made like reckouing of it. Decretie pari 4. c 12. et
^equ nt
And although our younger Papists for the most part and some of the elder,
perceiving what advantage may be taken thence against many grounds of popery,
Oist 16 c. Hobe^ libru^ ^c A mustis
do cross th^er predecessors herein with seely reasons, such as whereof the
best would infer more forcibly that their council of Trent was noe General
co^cell: yet among the^ also there are who allow the ancient opinion as Caranza
namely, and Genebrard and Surrius, with whose preface tending to the proof
thereof it is reco^mended and published by papists in the two perfectest and
last editions of the councels. Virged by of Canus etc. lib. 2. de Rom pont cap.
27.
Wherefore whether auy of the West were present in person, orby deputys, and
subscribed to it which Belsamon and Nilus, learned Greek Fathers avouch by
oulde records; or whether it were celebrated by Estern bishops only, as the
second General Council also was in the same city of Constantinople the
consent of the West approving it for Geuerall averreth my saiings by a cloud of
witnesses of the Western Churches, su^ ma co^ciIotu^, chtono gra Ph. lib 3.
sta^tino lolitanum sinit it sub^ ustinian^ Rhimotmet oeolctis. 237
pope Gregory the third follows, He grants that if a woman by reason of
siicnesse wherewith she were taken could not perform the duty of a wif to her
husdand, her h^sband might put her away and marry another. More then by the
doctrine of Christ he had learned to grant for sickness, but so much the
likelyer that he thought it should be granted for whoredom expressly mentioned
by Christ. Whereupon Ioverius a sorbonist in a work approved by Sorbonists,
Pres^t sy^n 6
matcheth this Cannon with the like of Councels, who gave the innocent party
leave to marey again after divorcement, while the other lived. an^t eccles
clsi. 2. sect. 2.
Neither does Bellarmin deny the illation but the proposition, which the point
inferrede is grounded upon. For the Doctores (says he meaning the Canonists)
expound the Canon of such sickness as makes a woman unfit for Marriage: and
foe is an impediment disolving matrymonye contracted, by showing it was no true
matrimonye, But the Doctor of Doctors sed illud. Quanvis 3. ^7
Gratian himself understood it otherwise; of sickness befalling to her, who
was an able wife. And those his gloss writers use most that exposition which
Bellarmin would have us receive for authentic as the fittest salve; yet rest
nba^. u vel intellige ve dic In c squo^ P^opo ulsti verbo
they not upon it. And Hist part 2. tit. 4 capl. quamvis. where he names
Englismen in sied of Gerina nes and Gergotye the ^ susteed of Greg orie the 3
(...) tooeke it.
Antouius a great Canonist: Archbishop of Florence correcting Explicat arti
cul. lovan. art. 19
Gratians slipp of memory for the persons, concludes with him for the matter.
And the slower of Lovan q Tapper, the Chauncelour of their viniversity,
approves this of Antonius. And co^cilior Ton 3 annotat mat ad hu^c loenm.
the learned men who were overseers of the last edition of the Councels do
witness^ by controlling it as a thing which now the Church observes not Istuc
hodie ecclofix non ^ervat.
that Gregory meant of sickness happening unto lawful wives in their
judgment. And the Pope himself (as Tom 1 cont 3 lib. 4. cap. 2 32 (...)
concubuisti.
Bellarmin notes elsewhere) declares that he took it to be true matrymonie,
by saying that the man ought not to bereave the former wife of aid, that is,
ought to maynteine, and find her as his wife still. Wherefore if no Catholic
bishop would imagine that a man may lawfully put away his sick wife, and marry
another, unless he thought the same much more to be lawful in an adulterous
wife, as we are to presume: then must the Papists by consequent acknowledge,
that the point in Question is proved and allowed by Gregory the third. A
playner and directer allowance thereof, appears in a Canon of his successor ^
Zachary, who when a certain man had d^fi^ed himself incestiously with his
wives sister, granted that his wife should be divorced from him: and unless
she were privy to that wicked act by cousayling or pro^uting it* might marry
in the Lord if she could not contain. This so clear a testimony of an About
the year of christ 740
ancient Pope authorizing the divorced woman to marry, Bellarmin would elude,
by saying that he meant she might marry another, after the form^r husbands
death. As who say, the Pope inioyning the Since spe con jugii Ierma^^ atis.
man and the whore for a punishment to stay and abide without hope of marriage,
were likelye to mean by liberty of marrying granted the guyltlesse for a
benefit, that while the guilty lived, who might overlive her, she should not
marrye no more then he. Or as though there had been need for the Pope then to
grant it with ex^eptio^, Si se continere no^ vul^.
If she will not contain Let her marry in the Lord. Whereby it seems that
he rather wished her to refrain from marriage, if she might be induced
thereto, which he had no cause too wish on this occasion after the man's death,
she being ^ cor. 7. 39
then simply fre, and willed to marry (...) 5. 4
such might her age be. But what do I reason out of the circumstances in a
thing so certain and clear of it self, that although the great masters whom
Bell. alleged before and solloed here, have assaied to darken the light
thereof by this mist: yet Sixtus Senefis confesses that Pope Zachary decreed
that the woman if she would not contain, peter Lomand Gracian.
should marry another husband while the formrr lived. It is true that Sixtus
seeks to help the matter another way somewhat, by yoking the Pope with
provincial Councels: Biblioth fact lib. 6 Anno ^at. 8.
who (says he) allowed and decreed it, not by a general and pereptual
ordinance, but for a time and to certain nations, and that in such heinous
cryms as incest only, But will the Papists stand to this doctrine, that the
popes decres bind not al nations generally, nor are perpetual to last? Then
must they acknowledge (which would touch papcie and popery very nerely) that
the Popes supremacy is faulsly pretended, he has his certain limits as
Metroplitanes have: and some will reason also that the laws of Popes were to
last for a time untl Luther rose, but for a time only, there date is out now.
As for the time of incest, whereupon the Pope allowed the innocent party to put
away her husband and to marry another, that confirms rather the point in
question the^ disproveth it.

For he had noe warrant to allow this by, but our Saviors doctrine forbidding
such divorceme^t, Matthew. 9.
except it were for whoredo^: so that h^e might not have granted for incest,
Exodus 20. 14 Math. 5. 28
unless he had thought it lawefull for adultery, Neither did he consider the
crime but as comprised under adultery too: adul^tera.
Whereof (in a general sense meant by the law) incest is a kind. And
therefore in speaking of her with whom the detestable act was committed, cap.
3. Bntch and decte^or. lib. 9. cap 41.
he termed her the Adulteress nor the incestious person. Thus it is apparent,
that in this manner Pope Zachary was noe papist, No more was the Council of
Worms which showed their judgment to the like effect to weet, of livla Drusiin
cornelius Tacitus N^res Aiden mres Sanders In our Eagl^sh chroniclaes
that a man who could prove his wife to have been of counsel with such as
sought his death, might put her away and marry another if he would. Presu^ing
that belike, which they might justly, as examples teach us* that she was uought
of her body with some of the conspiracy. math. 19. 9
Forels had the Council expess^ly authorized the same which Christ condemns,
Epit in 4. lib. decrtial, part 2 cap. 6. D. 6.
if for any other cause the^ for adultery they had allowed the man to marry,
Therefore Covau^vias reckons up this Council among them who held that a man
having lawfully put away his wife for her whoredom might take another while
she lived. Eilbetrnuomh^e call thit trough an ertoucot lonie dit ^o^ of
Cratian.
Yet a certain spanish Friar named Raymund, one of Pope Gregory the ninths
special State-men, the compiller of his Decretals ca^ Si quamuliet extra de
div^rtijs.
would avoyde it also after Gratanus manner, by false exposition as if the
council had meant, a man might take another wife afte the death of the former.
To the more effectu II devswad^ng whereof, that questionless they meant so:
He uses a special trick of Popish cunning. For, making show of registering
the Counsels own decree, in steed of those words pote^ (...)
He may put away his wife and marry another, if he will, the Friar sets
down theses He may after his wives death marry another, if he will. And
where as the Counsel had said, (...) ipse porell (...)
as we think; which words had beue absurdely pnt in, if they hadd meant after
his wives death he might marry another, a thing agreed on and undoubted: The
Friar (as thieves are wont to deface and suppress the marks of things which
they have stolen, least they betaken thereby) leaves that clear out. But by
the mouth of two witnesses Detetor. lib ^ cap. 41.
Burchardus Bishop of worms, and li q^a muliet 31. d, 1 of sundry lawiers that
it was prae^olium
Gratian or Palea, both elder the^ the Friar, and from whom of likelyhoode he
received this Canon of the Council of Whormes his false and irreligious
dealing is bewrayed. Whereto may the confession of the third be added, though
in years younger, yet greater in credit for things against Papists, himself a
Popish Doctor and burning light of Paris, ^ Ioverius I mean: who says of that
Council, that it allowed the innocent party to marry again after
divorceme^t, the other being yet alive. And the Council it self makes farther
proof that they are not on justly charged by Ioverius and Covariuvias with
this judgment.

For if any man had committed wickedness with his dangter in law, the
daughter of his wife by her former husband, h they agreed that he should keep
neither of them: but his wife might marry an other if she would, if she
could not conteyne and if she had not carnal company with him, after that she
knew of his adultery with her daughter. The last clause whereof shows that
they me^t of liberty granted her to take another husband while the former
lived: since it cannot be thought with reason, but they judged she might take
another the former being dead: though she had continued with him as his wife,
after she knew of his adultery. The l Conncell of Tribur did maynteyne the
same: ordeyning that if any committed vilany with his mother in law, her
husband may take another wife if he will, if he cannot contain and the like
order is to be observed; if with his daughter in law or his ^ives sister.
(...) Potest ingium pervenite
Bellarmin like the Horat do art. Poet,
paynter, who being good at purtraof a Cypress tree, when one gave him money
to draw and represent a shipwreck in a table asked if he would have a Cypress
in, dispaiting to do ought worth perhaps, unless that helped: says that all
such Canons (all not only this of the Triburian Council) are understood of
marriage granted to the innocent party after the death of the former wife or
husband. An answer no fitter for this and all such Canons then a Cypress tree
is for a shipwrackin those of Pope Zachary and the Council of worms the
former whereof he granisheth also with this Cypress tree do argue. For the
same reasons which prooved* Zachries cannon to be meant of the woman's marriage
while the man lived, prove the Council of Tribur to be likewise meant of the
man's in the woman's life time. The punishment inflicted therein on the offenders
do equally enlarge the benefit to the innocent. The exception added to the
enlargeme^t, fi^fo^n^teyne e^non potest
is stronger: implying they would have him stay unmarried rather, if he can
contain, The testemony of Sixtus is all one for both: neither does the
quallity of the crime of incest more inferring the argument here then it did
there. And this extenuation that the Council being a provincial Council
ordainede it for men of their of their own province, and for that time only,
increases the autothorety thereof, if the precious be severed from the vile,
the truth from the falsehood. For why affirms he that they did ordein it for
that time only? The form of their decree touching al generaly that should
offend so, not some p^rticular person, who presently had; they speaking of the
thing as lawful in it self, P^oncil. Tribur can. 4.
and to be observed alike in all cases, their making of other connons to that
effect: yea another Council also^o peradventure, and no limitation of time in
any of them; do pesuade the contrary. Now whereas they ordained it for men of
their own province, their modesty was the greater: who did not take upon the^
as Popes to make lawrs for men of al nations, but looked as bishops to their
own Diocaes. And the greater modesty the liker to Christ, and the batter to be
l^ked of Christians, the more reverence to be haerd with, and their judgment to
be had in greater estimation. Beside that this self-same decree of theirs was
establishede also by the Council of Worms.

And at that time Pipinus King of (France, and of a great part of Germamy)
was present. Who as he did keep a general asse^bly of his Poeple there: (...)
Wo^mati^ civitare Aimein de (...) Francor. lib. 4 cap. 66.
so by all likelihood caled Bishops thither out of his whole realm to make
decrees for the whole. A province of such largnes, that councils consisti^g of
pishops assembled, out of no greater, have been termed general: and worthily
as (Bell. confesses) in co^patiso^ of provincial councils commonly so caled,
wherein there were not bishops of a whole nation, or Realm. Thus Sixtus by
striving to lesse^ and diminish the credit of the ca^non of the counsel o^
Tribur, has give^ us occasion to make the more of it ^o^sidering on the on
side the modesty of the Bs. who were assembled there, and made decres for their
provin^e; on the other the province for which that decree was made for, so
large that all the prove. of Italy ca^ot match^it, though they were linked in one.

Had it not ben beter for him, Sanction ^cle. clasi. 2.
without this retori^ue to say derectly and flatly as Iover. does that the Co.
of Trib. made the like decre to the C. cell of worms, which now the Church (he
means the Popish church receyveth not: werher any papist will take exception
against the Council of Mason, (...). Bur^^nad. lib, 17.
which allowed likewise a certain man, whose wife had been de floured by his
brother before he wedded her to put her away and marry another it may be we
shall know here after. But unto a Council that made another such decree, as
Queda^.
Gratian shows all aging it without name, Bellarmin takes two exceptions:
one, that it is lost: the other of the Cypress tree. Touchching the former, not
as much as the name thereof (says he) is extant: therefore it might be easily
contemned and set at naught. Why? Is it therefore worse then all that have names,
because it is namelesse? Then have Cardinal P^le Sadose^con^taren er cons^
delect card.
many Cardinals with other learned reverent men been much to blame, for writing
so of Rome as if it had a nnmber of wicked lewd propane inhabitants. For by
there report the Romans having everye one a name or two, should be worse for
the most part, then were the Atlantes, a people of Afric, whom Diodorus
Seculus commends very heighly for Godlynes and Humauity, yet non of them had
any name, Horodotus says. Or if this be a fable as f Pliny s^emeth rather to
think, and well it may be; yet is it most certain that Plutarch records as
grave and wise sayings of Lacedaemonians without names, as of any whoses names
are known. And Bellarmin (I trust) will grant that in the scriptures there is
no less account to be made of the book of Joshua, the^ of Nehemias, of Job,
then of the Proverbs: though their name who wrote the one be not set down, as
theirs who wrote the other. But he will say perhaps that of this council not
only the name is unknown, ^dom iniett^
but also the work it self lost; And what if it be? were not F^^ccus Flor^
tinus ^set ^ore^ under the na^ of L Fe^este^^a.
those of Varroes works, which we have not as learned as the work ^ The
writers of the Notes on Gregory's edition.
of Floccus which we have? Of Tullie, of Polibius, of Livie, Deo, Tacitus* of
infinite writers more, are there not as good books lost, as there are extra^t
The same has fallen out in Eclesiastical authors specially in councels whereof
a great meany are not to befound: as they who by occasion of Canons cited
thence in the Decrees and Decretals, have dilligently searched through the
chiefest liberaries of Europe, do note. And a certain famous and ancient
Council of Ments being commended and praised above the other, by Tretenius and
Surius, who wishes he might have gotten it to be publyshed; shows that soome
extant, are not too be compared with some that are lost, wherefore Bellarmins
former exception to the Council that it is not extant, no nor the name of it,
was not worth the nameing. The latter that the Counsels* Canons meant of
Marriage after the former wives death: is like too prove as false as the proof
thereof is frivolous and fond. For quedam. 32
these are the wotds of the Canon: A certain woman lay with her husbands
brother: it is decreed the adulterers shall never be Married: but lawful
Marriage shall be granted unto him, whose wife the vilenie was wrought with.
Which words are we^ll expounded (says Bellarmin) by the Doctors, and their
meaning gathered (...) ^adem quaect
out of the like Canon ^ollowing a little after: wherein it is ordained, that
When the adulterous wife is deceassed, her man may marry whom he will; but
her self the aldulteresse may not marry at all, no not her husband being
dead. Gratian in deed, and the Glosse-writers on him (the Doctores meant by
Bellarmin) does them wrong in saying they expound it rightly. For this Canon
following, out of which they gather that to be the meaning, being a Canon of I
know not what Gregory, at least Fathered on him, does no more prove it the^
quod proposuisti, cap. ^
the above alleged Canon of Gregory the third permitting marriage to the
innocent party while the other lived, does infer the contrary. And the
Counsels words mentioning expressly the Innocent parties freedom and liberty
to marry, which had been superfluous if they mea^t of marriage aftet the others
death: make it most probable that the Council uttered them with the same
meaning, wherewith others uttered the like, as has been showed. Hereunto the
judgment of Bebl, Sanct lib. ^ a^not 81 under the name of Syuadns
Sixtus Senensis does add no small weight, since he albeit striving to weaken
the strength and cut the sinews of it, acknowledges not withstanding that it
was of one mind with the council of Tribur. So was Pope Alexander the third
too some time, though Bell. allege ^ebl, sanct lib. 6 auno^ 8^ under the^n^^e
of syu^d^s
him as of another mind. Ex^arte extra de spo^se^ matrim.
But let Bellarmin say whether he had two minds and erred in on of them:
seeing it is certain he ^ ^e Venie^ ^ de eo qui
was of this mind once, unless he wrote against his mind. For whereas a man
that had wedded a wife, did, before he entered the marriagebed with her, enter
her mothers bed: Pope Alexander said, that he doing some penance might be
dispensed with to marry another wife. Here the Popes favor toward the
offender; does savor of that which ^ ^ran^. Victoria relect ^ ^e^ lib. 1. et. 2
has been missliked in papal dispensations. But he that granted thus much
to the incestuous husband; would (I trust) have granted it to the guiltless
wife: as ^ Epist Alex and tor^ addict. eise Append. (...). lateram
he did also to her that had this injury. The only evasion whereto a
Bellarminian might by his Masters example have recourse, is that the Canonists
expound the Popes words not of a wife but of a spouse, and her espoused also by
words of the time to come, not of the time present.

Which exposition may seem the more probable, because the Popes words set
down in the D^cretalls geve her the name of spouse without sinification that
the man had wedded her. But hereof Friar Raymund who compiled and clipped the
Dec^lls must (...) the blame, as Annor 8 de vari^s decretal et in diaesat Grego
t^j u^nl.
Antonius Contiu^ a learned Lawier of their own has well observed. For the
Popes Epistle which is extant whole in the Appe^d Come
Tomes* of Councels, declares that the woman was the man's wedded wife, though
he did forbear her company a while. No remedy there-fore but it must be
granted, that in this matter pope Alexander the third subscribed to the former
Councels. Now by all the rest whom I aleaged there is none excepted against by
a ^nye Papist, for ought that I know, or as I think will be. For Diomor.
institu^ lib 6. cap ^3.
Lactantius first avoucheth, so the lawfulnes of putting away a man's wife for
adultery even with intent to marry another that both Epit in lib 4 Decretal.
part 2. cap. 7 D 6.
Covaruvias and In 4 sent. (...) ^6 ac^ 6
Dominicus Soto grant him to be clear from it. Next ci Quadam sen^e^tiam ^2 9
^ Sed ^ lud.
toyching the authors mentioned by Grat^an as holding the same for one kind
of adultery: who doubted but there were ceertaine so persuaded, when such an
adversary con^^sseth it, Then for Pope Celestin the third, since ^un^centi
a Pope says he thought that a man or wife might lawfully forsake their
parteners in wedlock for haerisie* and marry others: I see not how the Papists
may deny^ h^e thought it lawful for adultery, more then I showed they might of
Gregory the third. And albeit ^ De concord Eva^g cad 102.
Zachary Bishop of Chrysopolis, may seem to show rather what other m^ns
opinion was then what his own; yet it is apparent by this manner of handeling
that he joined with iu epist. ad (...) cap. 7.
Ambrose therein, whos^ words he eiteth, and fenseth them against autorities,
that might be opposed, As for the Bishop of Burgos, Paul commended heighly by
Aust S^ene. ^ec^gn^ ver Teb^ in Gen 3^ ^ixt sene^ l^b. 4.
learned me^ for learning, Addit. 2 ad lyt in Ma 19
he says that it is manifest by Christ's doctrine, that whoesoever puts away
his wife for whoredom, commiteth not adulterye though he marry another.
Naclantus who was present at the coun^ell of Trent, a Bishop of principal name
and price among them, affirms as directly that a wife being loosed from her
husband by death or by divorcement, is not an adult^resse if she marry
another. Too conclude Bellarmin confesses that Erasmus, En^tar in epist (...)
cap. 7.
Caietan, Catharinus, Lnther. Melancton, Bucer Calvin, Br^utius, Kemnitius,
Peeter Martyr, and in a word all Lutherans and Calv^nists (as it pleases this
Roman Tertullus to name us poor ^^cti 24. 5
Nazarens) agree that our Savior does allow marriage after divorcement for
adultery. Howbeit fearing much what a deadly wounnde he might geve his cause
by granting that Erasmus, Te^ton Na^ora^en air seus Prote^^^tis*
Caut^m, Catharinus three so learned man, and two of them such pillars of the
Romish Church a Carpinall and an Arch bishop agree in this point with Lutherens
and Caliunic^: ^ reliquo (...)
he adds that those three differ much from these hertiques (mea^ing By
hertiques the Nazare^s I speak of, 7. whose ringleader was Prul) in as much
as they submitt themselves expressly to the churches judgment* ^bldue test
(...)
And because the church (says he) has now opened her mind most evidently,
as appears by the Council of Trent the 24 session the 7 Canon, where all who
think the band of marriage may be loosed for any cause are a cursed: therefore
it seems that those three also, and chiefly the two later, must be thought no
other wise minded in this matter, the^ 8 all the rest of the Catho. Divines are
and have been with great agreemet and consent, which dispute of Bell. if it
have sufficie^ ground and strength of reason Eras. must be counted a catholic
in all things For ^ in al^ his writting he submits himself to the churches
judgment. The^ why does k Bell. call him al demie Christian, and enrol his name
among sectaries and hertiques? what are the Fathers of the Counsel of Tre^t
Demie-christia^s, ^biden in. 1. or. ad hunc Ipsum locum emper inquit
illabefacto eccle. catholic^ ^iditio.
s^ctaries, heretics; they are (by Bell. logique) of one mind with Erasmus.
Moreover S. Austin the ciefest man of Bell. side in this question must be
counted ours by the same logique. For m he taught expressly that himself; yea
any bishop eve^ S. Cipria^, yea provincial Cou^c. to, should yield to the
authority of a general Coun. and the 6 general Cou^. granted liberty of
marriage after divorceme^t, as has been declared: wherefore if Caieta^ must be
thought no other wise minded the^ Papists are, because that church who^e
judgment he did submitt himself to, defi^ed so at Tre^t a good while after his
death: S. Astin must be thought no otherwise minded the^ we are, because our
assertion was confirmed likewise by a General Counc. whereto he would hay
yielded. Chiefly since of liklyhood he would have more easily ye^lded thereunto,
the^ Caietan to his churches because Cou^cil milevit cum ^7. carthag. sent.
Prefat. 7.
Caieta^ shows he was stiff in holding fast his own opinion, ^ whe^for
fear of churchme^ he durst not say all that he thought; and in this very
point, though ^ submitting himself to the Sea of Ro^e as well as to the church,
p he eludeth decrees of q popes that make against him, so resolut he was in it,
S. Austin contrariwise used very modestly and willingly to retract things that
he had written, eve^ when he lighted on ought in an heretic that seemed better
and truer, and this point he thought t so dark in the Scripturs, and hard to
be discerned, that his opinion was not hard to be removed; if he had see^
stronger reason brought against it, or greater authority. Now if S Austin come
over to our side by that quirck of Bell. a band of Bellar. witnesses is like
to come with him namly the council of Melevis and Affrique, ^ which he was
present at, and swaied much with: perhaps Primasius also (were he Austins
f^ho^lar) and Bid with a number of Canonists, and s^hool men, who followed most
S. Austin. But Bella. will never resign all these unto us, to gain the other
three from us. For (as our Bee-hive says) Men live not by losses. He must
suffer therefore Erasmus, and Caietan, and Catharinus specially, who (beside
the Annot in coment cajetan. lib. 5.
place that Bellarmin has quoted) does avouch the matter in a treatise written
purposely there of, more thoroughly and exactly then Erasmus or Caietan;
Bellarmin I say must suffer them to be counted of that mind which they were
of, while themselves lived; not cavil as if they were of that which
peradventure they would have been 4 had they not died before the Council of
Trent taught so, Unless he think (which he may by as good reason that whreas
they were deceased above x. years yer the Cou. of Trent made that new canon,
we ought to count them alive all that while, because they did submitt
themselves to Physicians and would have lieved perhaps till then, had art been
able to cure disseases. How much more agreablye to si^gelnes and truth do
Sixtus, Couarruvias, and Domeni^us Soto acknowledge (the two former touching
Catharinus the last for Erasmus, all con^erning Caiet an) that in this question
of marriag: again after divorc^m^ur for adultery, E^itaph. Fabi. er. Adman.
their doctrine is the same with those ancient Fathers whom our younger
^eachers of the reformed churches follow. And thus if I should enter into the
comparison of Divines on both sides: first, or the number it is more the^
likely, that we prevay^e much, For all whom Bellarmin and the Pamphletter
after him do muster out of the west, I mea^e whom they claim justly, not who
either say against them as Tertulli^n, or not with them as Scotus, all
theresore whom they master fo o^t of the West, are Ierom the Conncels of Melvis
and A^frique In^ocentius the first Austin, Paimasius, Isiodore, Bid, the
Co^ncell of Friouli and Nantes, Auselmus, Pope Alexander and Innocentius the
third, Thomas Bonaventure, Durand; and other S^holemen, Pope Eugenius with his
florentines and the Council of Trnt

Which though Gratian, Lombard and whomsoever he might byll, were added to
them yet ours out of the West alone perhaps would match them? What if the
North, the South, whence Bellar. has none? what if the East, when^e he has
two or three at the most for hund^reds of ours be joined thereto? ^ean
ga^demus de divortijs.
Then for Quallity came the word of God out from you? says Paul to
Corinthiaus, or Came to you only? Meaning that they ought to reverence the
judgment of other christian Churches being more the^ they were: but of those
cheeflly and first (as he places them) from whom the Gospel came first. Now
the Go^pel came first out of the East: whose consent we have in a manner
generally, Sent. lib. 4. d^t. 35.
and as we have the first in Country so in time the auncientest and eldest: our
two first Councels in Spain, and in France elder an hundr^d years th^n their
two in Affrique, our next far elder yet then their next; and so unto the
last: yet, for several Fathers, ancient on both sides, there are more with us
in the four or five or six formoste ages then th^re are with them.

Of sou^dnes in Doctrine, of learning, of virtue, of co^sta^cie, of co^se^t, it
is hard to speak by way of comparison whether excels other. 1. Tim 3. 3
Tim. 2. 24


Saving that for gentleness and meekenes, a special ornament of bishops, weigh
both parties to gether, 6. wga^^ ^ut Savior also who says it
and ours surpass our adversarics.

Amongst whom the Council of Trent accurseth all such as say that they do
err in this point, into which outrage no^ of ours has broken against the
contrary minded. As for other graces of the holy Ghost, though Bellarmin have
noted sundry spotts and blemishes whereby some of ours are touched in credit,
Bell. tom cont 3. lib. 4 Cap. 12.
and their authority is impeached let him cast his eyes upon his own
witnesses without pertirlity, l^id. Ca 14 (...) the Place.
and he shall find that we have a Rowland for his Oliver. For where he tells
us that Ambrose did err in yealding greater freedom to men the^ to women;
Luther and Bucer in granting second marriage after divorcement for more causes
then whordo^, ^u Marc. C. 10.
pope Gregory the same for sicknes^ Celestine the same for haersie: Did. cov^t
we tell him again that Clemens Alexandrinus Athenagoras, Origin (if he be out
of theirs) Ierom and Bid did errelikwise in speaking against al second
marriages, and Clemens with Origin in sundry wighty points of faith. Where he
tells us that Lactantius fell into a number of errors, as being more skilful
in Tully then in the scriptures, we tell him again that some of the scholemen
were, though not more skillful in Tully, the^ in the scriptures yet as
vnfkilfull in the scriptures, as in Tully; and their graund^ Master the
Master of the sentences is charged by themselves with above a score of errors.

Where he tells us that Luther varieth from him self Melancton agrees not
with him, and lib. 6. An^not. 11^.
nor K^mnitius with either of them, because Luther allawed divorement for more
causes afterward then at the first, and Melancton thinks that both the
divorced parties are free to mary Kemnitius that the innocent only, Sixth
sene^s cad, v^t.
we tell him again that niether does Pope Innocentius the third agree with
Pope Alexander, nor Alexander with him self nor neither of them with
Athenagoras, Tom ^cont^
seeinge Athenagoras condemns second marriage which the Popes allow, Meleh
ca^us
though Alexander punished one that blessed it; Articuli^ in quibus
Innocentius checketh a decree of Alex. cum sec^^d u^capella^u^ extca de
that deprived the Innocent party of his right because the offendour had sinned
thus, or thus: Alex. whether in this deree I know not (for it is razed out of
the Decretals) but in other exta^t overthwarteth himself, as his words
alleged on both parties, for Bellarmin and for us do testesie. Closs in d^^
So Bellarmins objections of human infirmetyes and wantes notwithstanding,
they which are of our fide excel in estemation those which are of his, Tertul
chro^^t Hilax p^^lem cone Ven (...) etc
for diverse circumstaunces and respects.

And (the most important respect of all others) the ground whereupon ours
do buyld- their Doctrine, is the plain evidence and express testemonye af
our Savioure Christ, (...). 19. 7
excepting whordo^ namely out of the cruses for which he denies a man may put
away his wi^e and marry another. Contrary wise the ground that our
adversaries buyld on is their own conceit, not able to stand without violent
wresting, suppressing, or corrupting of Christ's exception the proof where of
is seen in three the most peremtorie me^ for his matter, and best accounted of
among the^, Innocentius the first. the 3. and Thom. of Aquin. Thom. in that he
answers that Christ's exception pertains to the putting away of the wife,
and not to the marring of another, also Inuoc. the first, in that he omitt^th
the exception quite, and cites Christ's words thus whosoever puts away his wise
for whordom, and marries another does commit adultery Innoc. ^ Que^^que
dimisserit us o^^^ suam obsorni cationem.
the third, in that he depraveth and alters the exception, affirming that
Christ says whoso^ver puts away his wife for whordom, and marries another,
does commit adultery: whosoever puts away his wif^ for whordom. A notable
corruption by s^raping out of the sentence Nisi el m^ or me.
the exceptive particle having the force af a negative, to change for this
point into an affirmative: and so ea^ily to be corrupted by the text of the
Scriptur it self, that I doubted whether it were not the Pri^ters or
bookewriters error, until I perceived that all the printed copies, which I
could get the sight of, did agree there in; even the new one to Gre. the
thirtenth conferred with all the written copies in the Popes liberarie, beside
many other, and corected by the^. But of such buyldings such must be the ground
wrokes; or equal unto such in force; An untruth will never cleav unto the
truth by other kind of mortar* in probabillity therefore it is to be presumed
that not only the greater part of the fathers but the better also, and they
whose grounds are surer do maintain our doctrine. So the weapon which Bell.
draws out of their sheath against us, does be^d back and turn the point
against himself: and the wound it may geve, it can not pearce so deep as that
which is sharper then any two edged sword, but the wound it may geve, it
geveth to his own cause. Howbeit if any shall concive otherwise hereof for the
number and quality of the witnesses, as some peradventure will and may by
reason of broken conjectures, which the variety of circumstances yields, yet
no man will (I trust) sure no man of modestye and sense can deny, but the mayn
and principal point I hadd to show, namly that the Fathers co^se^t not all in
one for the Papists doctrine, is showed to their sha^e, whose face and
conscience served them to avouch the contrary. Wherefore since our adversaries
do grant that the Fathers have not strength enough to prove a point in
qustio^ unless they all consent about it: Bell. with his Pamphletter must
consequently grant, that their cursing Tre^t assertion in this point cannot be
proved by Fathers and so the second staff which they have framed themselves to
lea^e upon, is like to that broken staff of reed, Egypt, whereupon (says the
scriptur) if a man lean, it will go into his hand and pearce it.

The Fourth Chapter.
The Conceits of reason, urged last against us, are ouersights pr^oceeding from
darkness not from light, and Reason it self, dispelling the Mist of Popish
probabiliaies, geveth clear Testimony with the truth of Christ,

The third and last objection, whereupon the Jesuit and his scholar stand, is
conceit of reason: divided into five branches as it were, or Rivers issuing
from on spring. The water whereof how unlike it is to the water of Siloah, and
savoring of that puddle of which the Roman deputy Gallo did draw when having
undertake^ to do according to reason he spoke profanely of Religion, and
suffered one to be wrongfully vexed for regarding it, as if to do justice in
that case were agai^ste reason, 1. Argumentu^ agatione p^^^m.
I leave it to be judged and considered by them who say that our reason is
naturally dark, and leads her wisemen into sottish follies, neither can
discern the things which are of God til it be lighte^ed with his spirit. For
although the Papists have some glimse of light and see more then the Heathe^s,
as the phare^ies did whose words (I am afride) they will use likewise: are we
also blind? yet as the phare^ies were over seen fowly in may arguments
grounded upon reason, so the papists may be. And that they not only may be
overseene, but are in the reasones which their puddle-water has yealded to
Bell. ceasterns in this point the be^ames of reason lightened from above shall
open and discrie; let such as love not darkness more thin light be judges.
For he reasons first thus: The Marriage of the faithful is a sign of Christ's
coniuncttion with the Church, as S. Paul teach^th. But that Conjunction is
indissolluble, and cannot be loosed, The band of Marriage is therefore
indissoluble too.

As if a rebel should say, The joining of the head with the body in man
resembles the conjunction of Christ with the Church as S. Paul teachth. But
Christ and the Church can never be parted; therefore the head may never be cut
from the body. A happy conclu^ion for traitors; if it were true. But if it be
false where then is Bellarmin reason? which will take the greater overthrow by
this because look how Cbrist is the head of the Church, semblably the husband
is the wives head. So that notwithstanding the similtud of Christ's headship,
the joint whereby a traitors head is knit to his body may feel the axe of
justice, as Bell. will grant: the marriage band that coupleth a man to an
adulterous wife may be loosed by the like reason, notwithstanding marriage is a
sign of Christ's coniuction with the Church. And if this fuffice not to make
him acknowledge the loosnes and fondnes of his Sophistical sylogisme, let him
observe farther that the separation which them selves allow in case of adultery
is condemned by it. Bellar de ma^ium ser. ^acre Cap. 14. eiur
For Christ does continue with his church always, and cherishes her ^or ever
with his spirit of comfort, and is so far from dispoylinge her o^ her own,
wealth, if she had any, that of his gifts and graces still he leaves with
her. Now the papists teach that a man may lawu^uly with draw himself from ever
dwellinge with his wi^e, and from yealding husband-like love and duty to her,
yea may still wit^ould her own dowery from her if she be an adulteress. Which
doctrine how could Bell. cleanse from stain of error, i^ some whore of Rome
should touch it with this reason. The marriage of the faithful is asigne ^f
Christ's conjunction with the Church, C. ^rmatrin, ^ac ram. ca. 4^
as Paul teaches but Christ does still assist relive, and enrich the Church
with his graces: thrrefore must the husband dwell still with his wife and find
her maintenance and wealth. Would he say the Council of Trent accus^th al who
make such Iesuitical silogismes and sophismes against their sa^red ca^non.
Certainly the harlots reason must be good unless the Jesuits be naught. But
he goes onwaard and adds that albeit some parts of the church, te weet the
faithful folk do commit spiritual whoredom now and then and make a
divorcement yet is not lawful for them to change their God. What a speech is
this? As who would say* our Savior could deserv^ at our hands that we should
forsake him, and get our selves a new bridgrom. Neither does God cast them
so away (says Bellarmin) that he will not be reconciled, nay he does exhort to
reconcilement still still? To whom then swear he, they should not enter into his
rest? What were they whose carkeises sell in the wilderness? whence come the man
of God who wil^d the^ that co^n^it Idolatrey to be slain? wh^re lived the
prophet who says Thou destroy^s^al them that go a whoring from thee: The
Israelits whom God did shut out of the promisede laud, of whom he took many
thousands away by sundry plagues, to who^ the law speak has being under the
law, did they not profess that faith and use those Sacraments which all that
do are faithful folk and parts of the Church in Bell. phrase and meaning? I
grant that God offers to be reconciled some times to such offenders, and
waits in mercy long for their ame^dement. Which i^ it be a pattern for us to
follow herin, I say, if it be, for God gave time of repe^ta^ce to Ioab a wil^ul
murderer, who the magistrate should have put to death presently: God gave time of
repenta^^e to Idolatrous wives of the Jews, who^ their husbands ought not to
have spared so: if therefore Gods actio^ herein be set dou^e for our imitatio^,
the man that can co^teine, and be without a wife, as God without our servi^e,
may like wise in m^rcie wait for her repentance and when he perceives it to
be be unfeigned, take her again to be his wife. But h^ who can not or will not
render such kindness for such unkindnes and wickedness, may in justice also put
her so away that noe place or hope of reconcilement be left her, as Bellarmin
own reason in this similitude teaches. For God is not bound to give unto
profane dispisers of his grace and breakers of his covenant place of
repentance and reconciliation: Nay he may in justice absolutely deny it them,
and oftentyms does as the examples of Cain of Esau, of Corah, Dathau and
Abiram, of Zimri, of Acan, of Auanias and Saphira, of infinite other, that have
either presently dyed in their sins, or had sentence of death pronounced
irrevocably against the^* do argue. wherefore when Bell. concludes this reso^
with sayin that S. Austin urges it greatly in his book of the Good of marriag;
De bone conjug cap. 7 15
^e deals as Cooks do in larding lean meat to give that a relish which of
it self woul be unsavory, Though eve^ for the lard to perhaps it agrees not
half so well herwith, as this Italia^ cook would have us think it does, De
adulter. co^^g. ad Pollenium.
For why did not S. Austin urge the same likewise in his books of adulterous
marriages written afterward and purposely maintaining this Point against
Pol^tius who gainfaied him in it? Retractat. ib 2. cap. 22.
was it because he saw that he had urged it more then it would bear well? or
that he perceived it would not hold against an adversarye: though without an
adversary it were a pretty allusio^? At least whatsoever me^ deem of the lard,
the meat is naught questio^les: and such that the cook be co^te^t to eat the
driest morsel of it, yet must he needs grant that it has not taste, not as
much as th white of an egg has. For himself says that marriag betokens and
signifies Christ's coniu^ction with the faithful soul, as Thomas and the Pope
reach. But Christ's coniunctio^ with the faithful soul is not ind^ssoluble, ^
Innocentiv^ the third c. debitum extra de digam is. 4 Injuri^ affice (...)
Prolee. ^
as him felf also says: the band of marriage therefore (by his own consequence)
may be dissolved and loosed. And thus far of his first sophisme.

The next is that if other marriage were lawful, the offspring should be
iniuried: for the children borne already (says he) should ^e evilll provided
for, who should begin to have a stepfather in steed of a father, a stepmother
in steed of a mother. Where hence the conclusion secretly inferred, to weet that
other marriage therefore is not lawful, would very well follow if his foremost
ground and proposition werr true, that the children should be injured thereby.
For it is not lawful to deal injuriously with any he that does wrong shall
receive for it, But how proves Bell. that they should be iniuried? his reason
ensues* for they should be evil provided for, what? therefore? Is God unjust
the^, who by taking me^ out of this present life, does leave their wives
widows; and their children fatherless: both often destitute of help? God
forbid (says the Apostle) else how shall God judge the world? But the childeren
should be endamaged thereby, and that perhaps will Bell, say was his mea^ing, well,
they should be endamaged and evil provided for. Why? Because they shol^ have a
step father instead of a father or stepmother in steed of a mother. Then
belike the brau^he^ cut of the Olivtre which was wild by nature and graffed
co^trari to nature in aright olive tree; are evil provided for and enda^aged by
it, For as when a gardenar asked why the herbs which he set or sowed do grow
and shoot up so slowly, where weeds which the earth brought forth of her own
accord increased a pace, Aesop said that it was because the earth is the weeds
mother, and the herbs steepe-mother: so the wild Olive tree was the mother
that brought forth such brauches: the right Olive tree whereinto they were
graffed, is their stestmother. S, Paul, who thought it better for us of the
Gentiles to be graffed so, the^ to continue as we were the children of wrath by
nature: declares that a Christian whose wife being an infidel, an nnbelever,
forsakes him, is free to marry anoth^r. Which considering that he had an eye
to the holly seed, their offspring also) what lets him to have done with
this persuasion, that the children should receive more good and benefit by a
believing stepmother then by an u^beleeving mother. Doubtless his care of
having the^ brought up in godliness, a thing that godly mothers do further very
much, and ungodely hinder, is argueat agnement that he was of this mind* And
the soune of Catelyne, whom that adulterous wretch his father murdered to
compass the more easily the liking of a woman whom he lusted after, has left
snfficient proofs that some having fathers are no better looked to for things
of this life neither, the^ they should of liklyhood, if in steed thereof they
had stepfathers. Wherefore since experience varifieth the same in me^ which in
woeme^, that when they have made shipwreck of their chastity, they will not
stick at any wickedness: the argument that children should be endamaged and evil
provided for, because in steed of adulterours fathers or mothers, they should
have stepfathers, stepmothers, chaste, and honest, is worse provided for by
Bell. the^ he thought. But suppose it were good, and proved that the children
should be endamaged how follows the conclusion? The children should be
endamaged by marriag another eitherefore the marriage is not lawful? ^or by
this reason a believing husband forsaken by his wife being an vnbelever, may
not take another if he had children by the former. Nay no wife or husband
having any children may lawfully ever marry again either of them after the
others death. 6 Adulte^^tu^ virgo de servi domu^ Sen Agamemnon
And in deed by a law that Charondas made for his Thurian Cityzens, the men
who did so were punished. And Mar. Antonius, an Emperor of Rome, because he
was loath to wedd a stepmother to his children his wife being dead, kept a
concubine. And S. Ierom speaking as the Catharists did, against second marriage,
does by detestation of a stepfarther d^ssuad a widow from it. But the Papists
hold agreeably to Scripture that the man is at liberty to marry in the Lord
after the woman's death, the woman after the man's: yea in life time also, if
either of them being an infidel and unbeliever forsake the other being a
Christiam, And Bell. acknowledges that they hold both these points, and ought
to hold them Bell. shall therefore do well to acknowledge that his step-reas^n,
which oppugneth both these points of sound doctrine, savoureth of haeresie,
neither makes more for him against us, then ^or the Catharists against the
Catholic Fathers. Wherewith he may confess to that he has abused Ambrose in
affirming this to be his reason: and avouching him to say, that the Father
ought to pardon the Mothers fault for the childrens sake. For S, Amb. blaming
the man, 7 Dim it is uxore^ quasi ju^esine crimi^e.
who puteth away his wife without crime, and marries another, an adulteress
by so marrying; mislyketh that the children should have such a stepmother
having such a mother under who^ they might be. And if the mother, being put
away so, took another husband, who in this case were an adulterer: S. Ambr
wishes the children to be under their father, not under such a step-father,
And if the Father casting out his wife so, cast out his children with her: S.
Amb. says the children should rather purchase pardom for their mothers fault
at their fathers hands, then be cast out for her sake. Wherein he does no more
say that the father ought to pardon the mothers adultery for the childrens
sake; then Abraham said that God ought to forgive the Sodomites abomination
for Lots sake, when he said that the wicked should rather be spared for the
righteous, them the righteous should be destroyed with the wicked. But here
peradventure the Pamphletter will reply that although Bell. author and argument
(as himself observed, who there upon cut Bell. shorter) prove not his intent to
weete that another marriage is unlawful: yet they prove such marriage to be
inconvenieur in respect of the childeren, to whom there rises hurt and
discomodity by it, For answer whereunto and to the like reasons drawn by him
and Bell. from other inconveniences, 7 things are to be noted: al such as our
adversaries themselves must n^eds yield to, ^ De Ma^ri^m. Sacram lid 14 ^
gandem^s. ext^^ de co^^ers co^iugat
and yielding thereunto shall set on fire their own chafe. The first that the
man whose wife is an adulteress: may put her absolutely away, for all his
liftyme: nor is ever bound to let her dwelwith him again, no not though she
repent. Which point being plainly implied in our saviors answer to the
Pharisees, Bell. avoucheth and maintains thence: agreably to the doctrine of his
chiefest guids the Pop^s and Thom. of Aquine. The second that if the woman
continue in her wickedness, without repentance and amendment, the man is by
duty bound to put her away. S. Mat. reports, of the blessed virgin, that when
she was found to be with child of the holy Ghost, before her husband Joseph and
she came together, Joseph being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away secretly. Of which words impotting
that justice moved him to put her away, goodwill to do it secretly, it seems
to follow, that such a woman as Joseph misdeemed her to be, to weet an
adulreresse, cannot be kept without sin, whether she repent or no. And
Cornelius Iansenius a learned bushop of the Papists grants herevpo^, that it
was so in the old Testament. But in the new Testament, he says, if she repent
she may be kept with out sin: acknowledging that she may not in the new
Test* neither unless she repent. Whereunto the Canonists and Schoolmen do
accord; Innocen^ (...) lib ^ de comtempt.
expounding a sentence cited by many Fathers our of the Prove. of Salo. He that
keeps an adulteress, is a f^nle and a wicked man; a sentence ^ound in the
Greek text of the Prove. albeit not expressed out of the Hebrew Fountain, but
add^d by the Seventie Interpreters, or other, perhaps to show that Salo.
commending a wife, did mean a chaste wife in their Judgment, but added in the
Greek, and thence translated also into the common Latin edition called, S.
Ieroms. so that it goet for Scripture with Papists by their Trent Canon; this
sentence I say, and the Canons of the Fathers that urge it vndi Sinctly against
whosoever keeps an adulteress, whether repentant or unrepentant, in like
sort as the Civil Law condemned all such, the Canonists and Schoolme^
distinguish and expound of such as keep adulteresses, which do nor repent and
amend their lives. Now granting that a man may keep an adulteress in
matrimony if she repent, or being divorced from her, may take her again: yet
(which is the third point) he may not do it often least impunitie increase
inequitie. And this is agred on by the same pillars of the Church of Rome, the
Cano^ists and Schoolmen. Hermes out of whom the Master of the sentences
aleageth and avoucheth it, meant (as his reason brought to prove it argues)
that the man may take her so again but once. Which doctrine the Papists ca^
make Canonical if they list, 9 in libre S. (...)
unless Stapleton lie, who says their Catholic Church at this present may
add to the Catalogue of Canonical Scriptures that book of Hermes, written in
the Apostles time by S. Paul's scholar, not only cited much but commended to by
many and most ancient Fathers, Clemens, Ireneus, Origin, Athanasius, Eusebius,
and Ierom. At least the chiefest part of the Canon Law compiled by the
direction and ratified by the authority of Pope Gregory the ninth, setting
down the very same out of a Council that Peter Lombard out of Hermes: ^ L^be^
q^li appe^etur Pa^^bris, (...) p^us d^st. 15
the Papists though they will not (I trow) be of Stapletons mind for Hermes
book, yet may think it likly that the Counsel and Pope approved his meaning in
this point. Chiefly since Panormitan, the flouer of the Canontsts having noted
on it that one offending often must not be pardoned, because sins unpunished
do beco^ examples, cites an excele^t proof and light thereof a law of worthy
Emperors, Valentinianus, Theodosius, and Arcadius: who grau^ting a general
pardon for smaler trespasses extended it to no^ committed oftener the^ once;
accou^ti^g such unworthy of their Princilie favor, as grew by their former
forgiveness to a custom of sinning rather the^ to amendeme^t. But whether the
Papists will judge those Christian Emperors to have been to strickt, and say
that adultery deserpardon oftener then lesses faults with them, or whether
they think it sufficient to pardon on so great a crime, which the Emperors
except-by name out of their pardon, Authens u^ll^cat m^tret ^vl^ Qu^a ve^o
plur^m coll^t, ^
and willed it to be punished even the first time: The papists do agree that a
husband must not forgeve it to his wife often. The fourth thing to be noted is,
that a woman being put a way so, does loose her dowry too by law. Which
punishment as God has threatened by his law to men that go awhoreing from him,
though they have not any dowry of their own neither, but of his gift: so the
Civil law has inflicted it on adulterous wives, and the Ca^non law in looser
times also. The fifth, that many persons mistake the help prepared of God, and
marry or do worse: considering that some ca^ot co^teine, as Pope Gregory
notes touching men S, Ambrose touching women, the scripture touching both;
some, though they could perhaps, yet should h^ut their bodies with sickues, and
if they did, as phisique and phylosophie teach; some though neither chastity
nor health enforce them to marry, yet need it for their state of living, as
Dominicus Soto does prove by certain poor husbandmen and laborers. The
sixth, that if a man die and have no son; his inherata^ce ought to come to
his daughter by the law of Moses and if he have no daughter, it ought to come
to his brethere^, and so fourth to the next kinsma^ of his famely. Unto which
ordinance: the laws of al well ordered stats and common weals are though in
certain circu^sta^ces deffere^t, yet in supsta^ce suitable. The seventh, that
it is sundry ways inco^modius for a child to be u^lawfuly be gotten (as we
term it) base-borne because both the igno^eny thereof is a blemish and that
blemish breeds basnes of courge; and bastards are not brought up so well by
their Parents as lawful children use to be: neither are they priveleged alike;
Chrisosto. in epi ad Hebre. Romans 29*
and peferred to place of public government, or Benefit of inheritance by
laws divine or human. And these things being weighed well show that Bll.
reason corected by the pa^phletter needs a new core^ctio^: and if
inco^uenie^ces might decide our question which they cannot do for many things
are lawful that are not expedient but if they mihht decid it, they would swaie
with us rather the^ against us. For in case the man, burning with ielosie and
rage which is unlawefull in this kind of injury or the woman being (as
adulteresses como^ly are) wicked, impius, once nanght and always naught, he
will not or may not keep or take her again, the children missing her, are
destitute of a mother to look to their education. L. Ceneral^ter Spatios D.
de^ D^entionibus


And then it were better for them that their Father took a second wife to
breng the^ up, as Plato thought, Wherein another man might have the like
success that Poris (a gentleman of Macedo^ia) had whose former wi^es children
were brought up as carfuly by their stepmother own children were. But if it
fall not out with many as with him, and the children find more sharp and hard
usage at theit step-mothers hands, who knows whether it may not turn to their
more good. Chiefly ^ith the tender indulgence^ of Parents does nourish wanto^
wiked nesse, in the sons of Eli, ambition in Adonia, transgressions in whom
not? and moderat severytle would restrain the same as one who said he had a
cruel stepmother and a father, another who found like fault with his father and
mother, both for fear restraing hemselves from tricks of unthrifts did show by
their examples. Here is a farther help to for the childrens benefit, that their
father having their mothers whole dowry beside whatsoever the second wife
brings is able to do more for them Whereas contrariwise: if by means he
cannot live single and unmarried he be constrained to keep the adulteress
still or after separation too receive her again: (...)
she is likely to geve her own and her husbands gods to her lover, as
Messalliua did to Silvis or though she take gifts and rewards of him, to wast
al in riot, as the whores of Cattilinis conf^dracie did. Moreover a woman that
can have no sons, but dau^ghters only by her husband, may have sons by
another man, as Hippocrates shows, Which if the adulteress have by her lover
the daughters to who^ the in heritance should come are defrauded of it, And if
she have but daughters or younger sons by him the bastards; presu^ed to be
lawful children, defraud the lawful children of so much as the^ selves get. The
(...) hatcheth her eggs in other birds nests, and the eggs she finds of
theirs, she devowreth, as Arist. writes: or, as Pline says the birds that
sits abroad upon her own eggs and the Cuckows when both their young are
bred up, likes the Cuckows bird better then there own, and suffers them to
be devoured of him in her own sight. A term in reproach drawn in many
languages from the Cuckows name to note their calamity, or (if they suffer it
willingly) dishouesty who receive other men into their bedds and foster up
their children, Vestigia ^iralien i Collatine in lecto sunt (...) Live lib. 2
may be a sufficient leson for a father what confort and benefit his children
are to look for by having such a mother to feed and oversee them. Beside to
omit suspicion of bastardy, where by his children also may be discouraged and
stained) himself shall be counted a bawd unto his wife, and must (by a Canon of
the C. of Nantes) do seven years dublique penance, and be shut out all that
while from the communion, yea want the consort thereof even at his death too,
(by another Co.) if he be of the C^^argi^, And how can he choose but live
still in fear and anguish of mind, least he add drunckennesse to thirst, and
murder to adultery: I mean least she serve him as Clytem^estra did Agamemnon,
as Li^^ia did Drusus as Mr. Arden did her hushand? or if to avoid these grifes
of shame and dau^nger he put her quite away and resolve never too come again
in house with her ^he may incur as great danger or shame, or both nay
greater, on the other side, by lack of anecessary help for his living, or by
state of body subject to certain sicknesses or by incontine^ci, wether
consuming burnig him without remedy, or forcing him to dannable remedies of
whors or worse, Further more his wife, the adulterous mother, may be the
boulder to sin, and to return as the dog to his vomitt, and the sow washed
to wallowing in the myer, if she know her husband cannot want a wife, and must
have her or none, which pethaps moved that Gentle woman of Rome to be the more
licentious, Quam^e nunquam repuhiaru^um ante iu^eva
whom her husband found plaing the incestuous whore with their son in law:
after that she had her husband bound by oath that he would never separate and
divorce her from hi^, for to be free to marry another, And why may not she live
too in pertuall heaviness and fear, least her husband being chayned with such
necessity should seek to get himself libetty of marrying by making her away:
There was a certain Spa^^jard, whose wife drive^ out by him for her adultery
and estsons reconciled, was when she offended again, divorced from him by an
Ecclesiastical Judge, at his suite, and shutt into a monastery. The husband
saying after ward that he loved her, and that he a greed for fear to the
divorceme^t, desired that he might be reconciled to her, and she restored to
him, according to the Civil Law Navarus (as famous a man forskil in canon law,
among the Papists, as Bell. for Divinity (being asked his indgme^t what should
be done herin made answer, Ex a more cotra^endi cum a^ ^ Postlius morte^.
that the wife divorced in such sort, is not bonnd to return again unto her
husband, and that the husbands speech of his affection must not be easily
believed, because he may feign it to theintent to allure her thereby to dwell
with him, that he may slay or poysen her, through desire of marrying another
wife, after her death. Of which thing (says Navarus) there may suspicion and
conicture rise of the circumstances of her offense; and his suite: chiefly in a
man of the Spanish nation, which is more inclined to bear small love to their
wivs yea being chaste then to be reconciled to then being adulteresses,
specially after the first time. Now though Spanjards chiefly be prone to work
such feats of slaying or poisoning, as this man who knew the^ (himself a
Spanjard) witnesses? yet an Italian Marquis who put to death his wife taken in
adultery and married another declares that not only Spanjards will adventure to
make their wives away, if finding then unchaste, they must have some and would
have beter. Finally if the wife not able to have any children by her husband,
have some by an adulterer (for this may come to pass also) the brethren, or
the next of kin to the husband, shall loose his inheritance: and that which
they ought to enjoy by right the adulterous feed will intercept and purloine,
I let pass the public harms and discommoditis which by such iniquities of
private persons were likely to a crrew to the common weal.

These that I have touched suffice to overweigh our adversaries reason drawn
from inconveniences. For if I should stand on the cildren alone, even those
already borne whom Bell. expressly mentions and names: the hardness of a
stepfather or stepmother lighting on the^ by the second marriage, cannot
counterpeise the loss in educatio^, wealth, inheritance, honor, which an
adulterous parent brings, Beside that the children to be borne afterward (as
Bell. by naming those already borne seems to confess) should be evil
provided for: whose baseness of birth and discommodities following it Proceeded
from restraint of maring again after divorceme^t for adultery. Wherefore if we
put with all in our balance the detriments and harms, that grow to the
father, the mother, the brethren and kinsmen of the father I might say to the
common weal too: the balance of our adversaries will be tilted up so high by
the weight of ours, as if it were lighter then vanity it self.

And thus by the way of weakness of Bell. third and fourth reasons is des^ryed
and daunted. The third that if the marriage we treat of were lawful, a gapp
would be opened to infinite divorceme^ts, yea wrongful and vi^^st. The fourth
that if the i^nocent party may marry, the nocent also may, who then should
gain by his sin, platin a de v^^x pont i^ cum, in P^o. 2.
and many would sin of purpose that they might marry others. For as one of
the wisest, and best learned Popes Pius the ^ said, that marriage was taken
away from Priests for great cause, but ought to be restored to them for
greater: so may a iuditious and discrete Papist supposing these reasons of
Bell. to be sound, say that marriage after devorceme^t for adultery was taken
away from men upon many and good confiderations: but ought to be restored unto
them again upon more and better. Howbeit I must add thereunto that al though his
reasons be confuted sufficiently with this supposall, let them be tried also
by the rules of reason, and it will appear they are a great deal sounder in
show then in decde. For the divorcement of an adulteress from her husband is
punishment of her sin: as hanging with us is a punishment of thieves, of
cutpurses, and burning through the ear of rogues. So that Bell. reason
concluding the marriage in question to be unlawful, beca^se a gap would be
opened to infinite divorceme^ts, is likeas if a libertine or vagabond should
say, that it is unlawful for Judges to do justice on rogues, thieves, and
cutpurses, Innocent quart in c. si se d^xerit. exrta de adule Hostiens sum de
adult. 5.
because there would be opened a gap to infinity hangings, and burnings through
theeares, But some me^ (says Bell.) would sow debates, pick quarrels, devise
faulse accusations against their wives being innocent: and so a gap would be
opened to wrongful divorceme^ts, not to divorcements only. What? must no
offender, no traitor, no blasphemer then be put to death because many
thousands of innocent persons, yea innoce^cie it self, have been accused
falsely, and putt to death wrongfullie? Or if Bellar. grant, that al though
some sitting to judge according to the law, do manifest wrong to guiltless
men against law, yet must wicked miscreants be exequted by the Magistrate who
bears not the sword in vain: he grants it is cavilling captiousnes and
sophistry to co^clud that me^ divorced lawfulle may not marry because some
would therefore de divorced unlawfully: the greater was his fault to say that
this reason is touched by, S. Ierom: whose oversight he should have done better
to acknowledge and freindly to excuse it by his haste in writing; for haste is
unadvised and blind (as on said well) the^ by his name to couutenance so weak
a reason in itself, so dangerous in consequence, which overtroveth all
administering of Iuctice and judgment. And since himself teaches aginst S.
Ieroms judgment that a man whose wise entiseth him to heresy, or to wicked
deeds, may be divorced from her, because although the wemans chastity should
come thereby into hazard, yet less is the peril and hurt of her adultery
then of his wickedness or here^sie, and the church provideth rather for the
innocent party, then for the nocent: he might with a little indifferency and
equity of an impartial eye have seen that the church should by the same
reason allow the innoeent to marry: at least that S. Ieroms creditt cannot
prejudice us more in the one point the^ him in the other. True is that (I
cannot deny) which he adds true, most true and certain, that the8
offenders should gain by their sin, if they might also marry, as well as
the innocent. Commodum ex peeca^osuo adulter reportaret dan 4. 16
They should gain in deed. But as Dan. said unto Nabuch. the dream be to
them that hate the and the iuterpretation thereof to thine enemies: In like sort
may I say, this gain be to the enemies of God and of his Church. For
adul^^rers and aldulteresses do gain, first, dishonesty, defiling their
bodies and souls with an heinous and detestable crime. Then hardely escape
they, but they gain beggary to the man if he be a whormo^ger, wasting all
commonly as the prodigal child did; the woman losing her dowry. Beside they
gain infamy; a gain of greater value them beggarry by much: for a good name
is to be chosen above great riches. Last of al they gain the heavi^ wrath of
God, and his just vengenance: they lose the inherta^ce of the kingdom of
Heaven, and purchase to themselves the chains of darkness for ever Lucretia a
matrone of Rome in time of paganism, having suffered violence of Sixeus
Tarquinius, when her husband being sent for to come unto her 9 did ask her Is
all well? No quoth the; for what is well with awaman, her chastity being lost?
yet she if better judgment might have prevailed with her, had not lost her
chastity: her body being only defiled by force, her mind undefiled. But now a
Christian man, if yet a Christian; sure a Jesuit, the chiefest instructor of
the youth of Rome and of the Romanists through al Christendo^, ^ Lucret^a no
(...).
does mainteyn in print that Lucretia, not she I spoke of but such a Lucretia
as the popes daughter was having lost not only chastety but also wealth, good
name Gods favor* the promise both of this life and the life to come, yet if
being put away from her husband she may take another, has gained by her
losses, because she may be married to her Tarquinuus, and match a graceless
whore witha a shamlesse beast.

As for the last of Bell. points of inconvenience that many would commit
adultery of purpose to the intent of being set free from their former wives,
they might marie others: it may be some would, and I have read of a woman that
had a desire to be beaten of her husband: which she found means also (as she
was witty) to obtein, in so much that she, put it often in practice, til having
cruely beaten her at length he killed her The man who of purpose to get anew
wife would cowmit adultery, should dessire more strips then that woman meant,
and die a death infinitely more grevous then she did. Sigis mund commeutar
rerum, Mus^^ covitat.
But if as wise almost as she was should long after scourges: must they who
deserv by law to be whipped be denied it, because a fool desired it without
desert? The Romaius had an ancient law that whosoever did a man injury, should
by way of punishment pay about shilling. There was a lewd losel, a yo^thly
harebrined Ruffian, who having wealth enough at will and taking a desire in
giving honest men boxes on the ears, would walk up and down with a purse full
of shillings, which his slave atte^ding an him did carry and giving on a box
would bid his slave geve him a shillinge, another box and a shilling, What was
in this case to be done for remedy? If Bell. had lived there and been of the
counsel to the state, we see the advice he would geve: namly that the
amercime^t should be taken away because some would do men injury of pupose to
fulfill their lusts with paing of a shilling or two. But the Roman governor
stoke contrary order, to increase the amercement, according to the discretion
and arbitrament of Judges: that evel desposed persons might be deterred from
trespassing by sharpnes of the punishment to be inflicted on them for it, Whose
wisdom therein it is to be wished that Princes and Rulers reme^bering them
selves to be ordained as David betymes to destroy all the wicked of the Land.
would follow by increasing the punishment of adultery: ^ Apolog^t cap 6^
Weleriue, Max lib. 2.
And then should Bell. mouth be the sooner stopped for his fourth reason. Which
yet in the mean while does no better prove that fafthfull husbands separated
from adulterous wives may not marry again, then userers and extorcionars
procuring wealth by wicked and ungodly means do prove that honest men may not
enjoy the goods which by lawful trades and virtuous industry they get.

The fifth and last is, that even among the Heathen too, where good orders
flourished, no divorces were made. For no bill of divorcement was written at
Rome, sor the space almost of six hundred years after the City was buylt: but
afterward, good orders being overthrowen, divorces also were brought in with
other vices. And this reason Bellarmim does lard after his manner with
Tertullians name, to season it thereby and give it some verdure. But it is such
caraine that the lard is lost, and all the cookery cast away. For the first
divorce which was made at Ro^e, was of a chaste wife put away by her husband
because she was barin, and did not bear him children. (...) sisieprehe^disses
^heiudicio raimme ne^a 119.
Now to separate husbands and wives for such causes (we grant) it is u^lawful:
our Savior allowing it for whordo^ only; The example therefore of the well
ordared Romans is in vain aleaged out of Tertul. against us. But neither was
there any divorce for adultery made above 500 years among the^, will Bell.
perhaps say, I grant. And I will help with a stronger argument: that among the
Cains (a state well ordered too) 700 years did pass before any divorceme^t was
made for adultery. For (as Plutarch writes) there was no adultry co^mited by
the space of so many years among the^. But among the Ro^ans (will Bell.
perhaps reply) it is likely that some was committed within 500 years. True. But
the husband then might put his wife to death (being convicted first of
adultery) without al public judgment, So that if Bell. words have any force,
this is their effect, Among the heathen Romans while good orders flourished,
the woman that committed adultery suffered death: afterward good orders being
overthrowe^, she was divorced only. But whether she were put away by death or
by divorceme^t, the man might marry again. Wherfoore the example of the heathen
Romans, both well and evel ordered, fight against the popish Romans, and their
Cha^pion, Hereto the example of all other heathens, whose orders were but so
good that they allowed second marriage, may be adjoined, Which I do not so much
affirm on mine own knowledge (though for ought that I have read and remember
it is true (as on Bell. ^ God desecu^ dis, nuptys de repudy. 1. Cen. 43 20.
secret co^fefsio^ and silence a man of greater reading and having used many
men's pains in search of these things. Beside, when christian faith came among
the heathens the Emperors did punish adultery first by death: afterward
Justinian mittigating that law did pu^ish it by divorcement. But in both these
cases the man being severed from his adulterous wife is free to marry again.
Bellarmins speech therefore touching well ordered heathens came in evil season,
to raise both them and others yea Christians too, against him. So his last
reason, nay his reasons all are grown to worse plight, then were the seven
later kyne in Pharaos dream, the seven poor, evil favored and lean fleshede
kyne, that devowred the the seave^ former fatt well favored and thereby saved
their life. For the thin carkeiss dreamed of by Bellarmin have no^ strength
enough to overmaister and eat up the sound bodies of reasons standing there
against, but gasping after them in vain they dye with famine. And thus having
proved that neither light of reason, nor consent of Fathers, nor authority of
Scripture disproveth our assertion I conclude that the point demo^strated at
first by the word of truth the doctrine of Christ, That a man having put away
his wife for her adultery may lawfully marry another.


