New-Englands RARITIES Discovered: IN Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Serpents, and
Plants of that Country.

Together with The Physical and Chyrurgical REMEDIES wherewith the Natives
constantly use to Cure their DISTEMPERS, WOUNDS, and SORES.

ALSO A perfect Description of an Indian SQUA, in all her Bravery; with a POEM
not improperly conferred upon her.

LASTLY A CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE of the most remarkable Passages in that Country
amongst the ENGLISH.

Illustrated with CUTS.

By JOHN IOSSELYN, Gent.

London, Printed for G. Widows at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's Church yard,
1672.

To the highly obliging, His honored Friend and Kinsman, SAMUEL FORTREY Esquire
SIR,
IT was by your assistance (enabling me) that I commenced a Voyage into those
remote parts of the World (known to us by the painful Discovery of that
memorable Gentleman Sir Fran. Drake.) Your bounty then and formerly has
engaged a retribution of my Gratitude, and not knowing how to testify the same
unto you otherwise, I have (although with some reluctance) adventured to
obtrude upon you these rude and indigested Eight Tears Observations, wherein
whether I shall more shame my self or injure your accurate Judgment and better
Employment in the perusal, is a question.

We read of Kings and Gods that kindly took
A Pitcher filled with Water from the Brook.
The Contemplation whereof (wellknowing your noble and generous Disposition)
has confirmed in me the hope that you will pardon my presumption, and accept
the tender of the fruits of my Travel after this homely manner, and my self as,

Sir, Your highly obliged, and most humble Servant, John Josselyn.

New-Englands RARITIES Discovered.
IN the year of our Lord 1663. May 28. upon an Invitation from my only Brother,
I departed from London, and arrived at Boston, the chief Town in the
Massachusetts, a Colony of Englishmen in New England, the 2^ th of July
following.

Boston (whose longitude is 315 degrees. and 42 degrees. 30 min. of North Latitude) is
built on the South-west side of a Bay large enough for the Anchorage of 500
Sail of Ships, the Buildings are handsome, joining one to the other as in
London, with many large streets, most of them paved with pebble stone, in the
high street toward the Common there are fair Buildings some of stone, and at
the East End of the Town one amongst the rest, built by the Shore by Mr. Gibs a
Merchant, being a stately Edifice, which it is thought will stand him in little
less than 3000 l. before it be fully finished. The Town is not divided into
Parishes, yet they have three fair Meeting*houses or Churches, which hardly
suffice to receive the Inhabitants and Strangers that come in from all parts.

Having refreshed my self here for some time, and opportunely lighting upon a
passage in a Bark belonging to a Friend of my Brothers, and bound to the
Eastward, I put to sea again, and on the Fifteenth of August I arrived at
Black-point, otherwise called Scarborow, the habitation of my beloved Brother,
being about an hundred leagues to the Eastward of Boston; here I resided eight
years, and made it my business to discover all along the Natural, Physical, and
Chyrurgical Rarities of this Newfound World.

New England is said to begin at 40 and to end at 46 of Northerly Latitude,
that is from de la Ware Bay to New Foundland.

The Sea Coasts are accounted wholsomest, the East and South Winds coming from
Sea produces warm weather, the Northwest coming over land causes extremity of
Cold, and many times strikes the Inhabitants both English and Indian with that
sad Disease called there the Plague of the Back, but with us Em^iema.

The Country generally is Rocky and Mountanous, and extremely overgrown with
wood, yet here and there beautified with large rich Valleys, wherein are Lakes
ten, twenty, yea sixty miles in compass, out of which our great Rivers have
their Beginnings.

Fourscore miles (upon a direct line) to the Northwest of Scarborow, a Ridge of
Mountains run Northwest and Northeast an hundred Leagues, known by the name of
the White Mountains, upon which lies Snow all the year, and is a Landmark
twenty miles off at Sea. It is rising ground from the Sea shore to these Hills,
and they are inaccessible but by the Gullies which the dissolved Snow has
made; in these Gullies grow Saven Bushes, which being taken hold of are a good
help to the climbing Discoverer; upon the top of the highest of these Mountains
is a large Level or Plain of a days journey over, whereon nothing grows but
Moss; at the farther end of this Plain is another Hill called the Sugar Loaf,
to outward appearance a rude heap of massy stones piled one upon another, and
you may as you ascend step from one stone to another, as if you were going up a
pair of stairs, but winding still about the Hill till you come to the top,
which will require half a days time, and yet it is not above a Mile, where
there is also a Level of about an Acre of ground, with a pond of clear water in
the midst of it; which you may hear run down, but how it ascends is a mystery.
From this rocky Hill you may see the whole Country round about; it is far above
the lower Clouds, and from hence we beheld a Vapor (like a great Pillar) drawn
up by the Sun Beams out of a great Lake or Pond into the Air, where it was
formed into a Cloud. The Country beyond these Hills Northward is daunting
terrible, being full of rocky Hills, as thick as Mole-hills in a Meadow, and
clothed with infinite thick Woods.

New England is by some affirmed to be an Island, bounded on the North with the
River Canada (so called from Monsieur Cane) on the South with the River Mohegan
or Hudsons River, so called because he was the first that discovered it. Some
will have America to be an Island, which out of question must needs be, if
there be a Northeast passage found out into the South Sea; it contains
1152400000 Acres. The discovery of the Northwest passage (which lies within the
River of Canada) was undertaken with the help of some Protestant Frenchmen,
which left Canada and retired to Boston about the year 1669. The Northeast
people of America, i. e. New England, etc. are judged to be Tartars called
Samoades, being alike in complexion, shape, habit and manners, (see the Globe:)
Their Language is very significant, using but few words, every word having a
diverse signification, which is expressed by their gesture; as when they hold
their head of one side the word signifies one thing, holding their hand up
when they pronounce it signifies another thing. Their Speeches in their
Assemblies are very gravely delivered, commonly in perfect Hexamiter Verse,
with great silence and attention, and answered again ex tempore after the same
manner.

Having given you some short Notes concerning the Country in general, I shall
now enter upon the proposed Discovery of the Natural, Physical, and Chyrurgical
Rarities; and that I may methodically deliver them unto you, I shall cast them
into this form: 1. Birds. 2. Beasts. 3. Fishes. 4. Serpents and Insects. 5.
Plants, of these 1. such Plants as are common with us, 2. of such Plants as are
proper to the Country, 3. of such Plants as are proper to the Country and have
no name known to us, 4. of such Plants as have sprung up since the English
Planted and kept Cattle there, 5. of such Garden Herbs (amongst us) as do
thrive there and of such as do not. 6. Of Stones, Minerals, Metals* and Earths.

First, Of Birds.
The Humming Bird.
THe Humming Bird, the least of all Birds, little bigger than a Dor, of
variable glittering Colors, they feed upon Honey, which they suck out of
Blossoms and Flowers with their long Needle-like Bills; they sleep all Winter,
and are not to be seen till the Spring, at which time they breed in little
Nests made up like a bottom of soft Silk-like matter, their Eggs no bigger than
a white Pease, they hatch three or four at a time, and are proper to this
Country.

The Troculus.
The Troculus, a small Bird, black and white, no bigger than a Swallow, the
points of whose Feathers are sharp, which they stick into the sides of the
Chymney (to rest themselves, their Legs being exceeding short) where they breed
in Nests made like a Swallows Nest, but of a glewy substance, and which is not
fastened to the Chymney as a Swallows Nest, but hangs down the Chymney by a
clew-like string a yard long. They commonly have four or five young ones, and
when they go away, which is much about the time that Swallows use to depart,
they never fail to throw down one of their young Birds into the room by way of
Gratitude. I have more than once observed, that against the ruin of the Family
these Birds will suddenly forsake the house and come no more.

The Pilhannaw.
The Pilhannaw or Mechquan, much like the description of the Indian Ruck, a
monstrous great Bird, a kind of Hawk, some say an Eagle, four times as big as a
Goshawk, white Mail'd, having two or three purple Feathers in her head as long
as Geeses Feathers they make Pens of, the Quills of these Feathers are purple,
as big as Swans Quills and transparent; her Head is as big as a Child's of a
year old, a very Princely Bird; when she soars abroad, all sort of feathered
Creatures hide themselves, yet she never preys upon any of them, but upon Fawns
and Iaccals: She Ayries in the Woods upon the high Hills of Ossapy, and is very
rarely or seldom seen.

The Turkey.
The Turkey, who is blacker than ours; I have heard several credible persons
affirm, they have seen Turkey Cocks that have weighed forty, yea sixty pound;
but out of my personal experimental knowledge I can assure you, that I have
eaten my share of a Turkey Cock, that when he was pulled and garbidg'd, weighed
thirty pound; and I have also seen threescore broods of young Turkies on the
side of a Marsh, sunning of themselves in a morning betimes, but this was
thirty years since, the English and the Indian having now destroyed the breed,
so that it is very rare to meet with a wild Turkey in the Woods; but some of the
English bring up great store of the wild kind, which remain about their Houses
as tame as ours in England.

The Goose.
The Goose, of which there are three kinds; the Gray Goose, the White Goose,
and the Brant: The Goose will live a long time; I once found in a White Goose
three Hearts, she was a very old one, and so tuff, that we gladly gave her over
although exceeding well roasted.

The Bloody Flux Cured.
A Friend of mine of good Quality living sometime in Virginia was sore troubled
for a long time with the Bloody Flux, having tried several Remedies by the
advice of his Friends without any good effect, at last was induced with a
longing desire to drink the Fat Dripping of a Goose newly taken from the Fire,
which absolutely cured him, who was in despair of ever recovering his health
again.

The Gripe and Vulture.
The Gripe, which is of two kinds, the one with a white Head, the other with a
black Head, this we take for the Vulture: They are both cowardly Kites, preying
upon Fish cast up on the shore. In the year 1668. there was a great mortallity
of Eels in Casco Bay, thither resorted at the same time an infinite number of
Gripes, insomuch that being shot by the Inhabitants, they fed their Hogs with
them for some weeks; at other times you shall seldom see above two or three in
a dozen miles traveling. The Quill Feathers in their Wings make excellent Text
Pens, and the Feathers of their Tail are highly esteemed by the Indians for
their Arrows, they will not sing in flying; a Gripes Tail is worth a Beavers
Skin up in the Country.

A Remedy for the Coldness and pain of the Stomach.
The Skin of a Gripe dressed with the down on, is good to wear upon the Stomach
for the Pain and Coldness of it.

The Osprey.
The Osprey, which in this Country is white mail'd.

A Remedy for the Toothache.
Their Beaks excel for the Toothache, picking the Gums therewith till they
bleed.

The Wobble.
The Wobble, an ill shaped Fowl, having no long Feathers in their Pinions,
which is the reason they cannot fly, not much unlike the Pengwin; they are in
the Spring very fat, or rather oily, but pulled and garbidg'd, and laid to the
Fire to roast, they yield not one* drop.

For Aches.
Our way (for they are very sovereign for Aches) is to make Mummy of them, that
is, to salt them well, and dry them in an earthen pot well glazed in an Oven;
or else (which is the better way) to bury them under ground for a day or two,
then quarter them and stew them in a Tin Stew^an with a very little water.

The Love.
The Love is a Water Fowl, alike in shape to the Wobble, and as virtual for
Aches, which we order after the same manner.

The Owl.
The Owl, Avis devia, which are of three kinds; the great Gray Owl with Ears,
the little Gray Owl, and the White Owl which is no bigger than a Thrush.

The Turkey Buzzard.
The Turkey Buzzard, a kind of Kite, but as big as a Turkey, brown of color,
and very good meat.

What Birds are not to be found in New England.
Now by what the Country has not, you may ghess at what it has* it has no
Nightingals, nor Larks, nor Bulfinches, nor Sparrows, nor Blackbirds, nor
Magpies, nor Iackdawes, nor Popinjays, nor Rooks, nor Pheasants, nor Woodcocks,
nor Quails, nor Robins, nor Cuckoes, etc.

Secondly, Of Beasts.
The Bear, which are generally black.
THe Bear, they live four months in Caves, that is all Winter; in the Spring
they bring forth their young ones, they seldom have above three Cubbs in a
litter, are very fat in the Fall of the Leaf with feeding upon Acorns, at which
time they are excellent Venison; their Brains are venomous; they feed much upon
water Plantane in the Spring and Summer, and Berries, and also upon a
shellfish called a Horse-foot, and are never mankind, i. e. fierce, but in
rutting time, and then they walk the Country twenty, thirty, forty in a
company, making a hideous noise with ^oaring, which you may hear a mile or ^wo
before they come so near to endanger ^he Traveller. About four years since,
^corns being very scarce up in the Coun^ry, some numbers of them came down
amongst the English Plantations, which generally are by the Sea side; at one
Town called Gorgiana in the Province of Meyn (called also New-Sommerset-shire)
they killed fourscore.

For Aches and Cold Swellings.
Their Grease is very good for Aches and Cold Swellings, the Indians anoint
themselves therewith from top to toe, which hardens them against the cold
weather. A black Bears Skin heretofore was worth forty shillings, now you may
have one for ten, much used by the English for Beds and Coverlets, and by the
Indians for Coats.

For pain and lameness upon Cold.
One Edw. Andrews being foxt, and falling backward cross a Thought in a Shallop
or Fisher-boat, and taking cold upon it, grew crooked, lame, and full of pain,
was cured, lying one Winter upon Bears Skins newly flead off, with some upon
him, so that he sweat every night.

The Wolf.
The Wolf, of which there are two kinds; one with a round ball'd Foot, and are
in shape like mungrel Mastiffs; the other with a flat Foot, these are liker
Greyhounds, and are called Deer Wolfs, because they are accustomed to prey upon
Deer. A Wolf will eat a Wolf new dead, and so do Bears as I suppose, for their
dead Carkases are never found, neither by the Indian nor English. They go a
clicketing twelve days, and have as many Whelps at a Litter as a Bitch. The
Indian Dog is a Creature begotten 'twixt a Wolf and a Fox, which the Indians
lighting upon* bring up to hunt the Deer with. The Wolf is very numerous, and
go in companies, sometimes ten, twenty, more or fewer, and so cunning, that
seldom any are killed with Guns or Traps; but of late they have invented a way
to destroy them, by binding four Maycril Hooks a cross with a brown thread, and
then wrapping some Wool about them, they dip them in melted Tallow till it be
as round and as big as an Egg; these (when any Beast has been killed by the
Wolves) they scatter by the dead Carkase, after they have beaten off the
Wolves; about Midnight the Wolves are sure to return again to the place where
they left the slaughtered Beast, and the first thing they venture upon will be
these balls of fat.

For old Aches.
A black Wolfs Skin is worth a Beaver Skin among the Indians, being highly
esteemed for helping old Aches in old people, worn as a Coat; they are not
mankind, as in Ireland and other Countries, but do much harm by destroying of
our English Cattle.

The Ounce.
The Ounce or Wild Cat, is about the bigness of two lusty Ram Cats, preys upon
Deer and our English Poultrey: I once found six whole Ducks in the belly of one
I killed by a Pond side: Their Flesh roasted is as good as Lamb, and as white.

For Aches and shrunk Sinews.
Their Grease is sovereign for all manner of Aches and shrunk Sinews: Their
Skins are accounted good Fur, but somewhat course.

The Raccoon.
The Raccoon lives in hollow trees, and is about the size of a Gib Cat; they
feed upon Moss, and do infest our Indian Corn very much; they will be exceeding
fat in Autumn; their flesh is somewhat dark, but good food roasted.

For Bruises and Aches.
Their Fat is excellent for Bruises and Aches. Their Skins are esteemed a good
deep Fur, but yet as the Wild Cats somewhat coarse.

The Porcupine.
The Porcupine in some parts of the Country Eastward, toward the French, are
as big as an ordinary Mungrel Cur; a very angry Creature and dangerous,
shooting a whole shower of Quills with a rowse at their enemies, which are of
that nature, that wherever they stick in the flesh, they will work through in a
short time if not prevented by pulling of them out. The Indians make use of
their Quills, which are hardly a handful long, to adorn the edges of their
birchen dishes, and weave (dying some of them red, others yellow and blew)
curious bags or pouches, in works like Turkie-work.

The Beaver, Canis Ponticus, Amphybious.
The Beaver, whose old ones are as big as an Otter, or rather bigger, a
Creature of a rare instinct, as may apparently be seen in their artificial
Dam-heads to raise the water in the Ponds where they keep, and their houses
having three stories, which would be too large to discourse: They have all of
them four Cods hanging outwardly between their hinder legs, two of them are
soft or oily, and two solid or hard* the Indians say they are Hermaphrodites.

For Wind in the Stomach.
Their solid Cods are much used in Physic: Our Englishwomen in this Country
use the powder grated, as much as will lie upon a shilling in a draught of Fiol
Wine, for Wind in the Stomach and Belly, and venture many times in such cases
to give it to Women with Child: Their Tails are flat, and covered with Scales
without hair, which being flead off, and the Tail boiled, proves exceeding good
meat, being all Fat, and as sweet as Marrow.

The Moose Deer.
The Moose Deer, which is a very goodly Creature, some of them twelve foot
high, with exceeding fair Horns with broad Palms, some of them two fathom from
the tip of one Horn to the other; they commonly have three Fawns at a time;
their flesh is not dry like Deers flesh, but moist and lushious somewhat like
Horse flesh (as they judge that have tasted of both) but very wholesome. The
flesh of their Fawns is an incomparable dish, beyond the flesh of an Asses Foal
so highly esteemed by the Romans, or that of young Spaniel Puppies so much
cried up in our days in France and England.

Moose Horns better for Physic use than Hearts Horns.
Their Horns are far better (in my opinion) for Physic than the Horns of other
Deer, as being of a stronger nature: As for their Claws, which both Englishmen
and French make use of for Elk, I cannot approve so to be from the Effects,
having had some trial of it; besides, all that write of the Elk, describe him
with a tuft of hair on the left Leg behind, a little above the pastern joint on
the outside of the Leg, not unlike the tuft (as I conceive) that grows upon
the Breast of a Turkey Cock, which I could never yet see upon the Leg of a
Moose, and I have seen some number of them.

For Children breeding Teeth.
The Indian Webbes make use of the broad Teeth of the Fawns to hang about their
Childrens Neck when they are breeding of their Teeth. The Tongue of a grown
Moose, dried in the smoke after the Indian manner, is a dish for a Sagamor.

The Maccarib.
The Maccarib, Caribo, or Pohano, a kind of Deer, as big as a Stag, round
hooved, smooth hair'd and soft as silk; their Horns grow backwards a long their
backs to their rumps, and turn again a handful beyond their Nose, having
another Horn in the middle of their Forehead, about half a yard long, very
straight, but wreathed like an Unicorns Horn, of a brown jettie color, and
very smooth: The Creature is no where to be found, but upon Cape Sable in the
French Quarters, and there too very rarely, they being not humerous; some few
of their Skins and their straight Horns are (but very sparingly) brought to the
English.

The Fox.
The Fox, which differs not much from ours, but are somewhat less; a black
Fox Skin heretofore was wont to be valued at fifty and sixty pound, but now you
may have them for twenty shillings; indeed there is not any in New England that
are perfectly black, but silver hair'd, that is sprinkled with gray hairs.

The Iaccal.
The Iaccal, is a Creature that hunts the Lions prey, a shrewd sign that there
are Lions upon the Continent; there are those that are yet living in the
Country, that do constantly affirm, that about six or seven and thirty years
since an Indian shot a young Lion, sleeping upon the body of an Oak blown up by
the roots, with an Arrow, not far from Cape Anne, and sold the Skin to the
English. But to say something of the Iaccal, they are ordinarily less than
Foxes, of the color of a gray Rabbet, and do not scent nothing near so strong
as a Fox; some of the Indians will eat of them: Their Grease is good for all
that Fox Grease is good for, but weaker; they are very numerous.

The Hare.
The Hare in New England is no bigger than our English Rabbets, of the same
color, but withal having yellow and black strokes down the ribs; in Winter
they are milk white, and as the Spring approaches they come to their color;
when the Snow lies upon the ground they are very bitter with feeding upon the
bark of Spruce, and the like.

Thirdly, Of Fishes.
PLiny and Isadore write there are not above 144 Kinds of Fishes, but to my
knowledge there are nearer 300: I suppose America was not known to Pliny and
Isadore.

A Catalogue of Fish, that is, of those that are to be seen between the English
Coast and America, and those proper to the Country.
Alderling. Alize, Alewife, because great bellied; Olafle, Oldwife, Allow.
Anchova or Sea Minnow. Aleport. Albicore. Barble. Barracha. Barracoutha, a Fish
peculiar to the West Indies. Barsticle. Basse. Sea Bishop, proper to the Norway
Seas. River Bleak or Bley, a River Swallow. Sea Bleak or Bley, or Sea Camelion.
Blew Fish or Hound Fish, two kinds, speckled Hound Fish, and blew Hound Fish
called Horse Fish. Bonito or Dozado, or Spanish Dolphin. River Bream. Sea
Bream. Cud Bream. Bullhead or Indian Muscle. River Bulls. Burfish. Burret.
Cackarel or Laxe. Calemarie or Sea Clerk. Catfish. Carp. Chare, a Fish proper
to the River Wimander in Lancashire. Sea Chough. Chub or Chevin. Cony Fish.
Clam or Clamp. Sea Cob. Cocks, or Coccles, or Coquil. Cook Fish. Rock Cod. Sea
Cod or Sea Whiting. Crab, diverse kinds, as the Sea Crab, Boatfish, River Crab,
Sea Lion, etc. Sea Cucumber. Cunger or Sea Eel. Cunner or Sea Roach. Cur.
Currier, Post, or Lacquey of the Sea. Crampfish or Torpedo. Cuttle, or Sleeves,
or Sea Angler. Clupea, the Tunnies enemy. Sea Cornet. Cornuta or Horned Fish.
Dace, Dare, or Dart. Sea Dart, Iavelins. Dogfish or Tubarone. Dolphin. Dorce.
Dorrie, Goldfish. Golden-eye, Gilt*pole, or Godline, Yellowheads. Sea Dragon or
Sea Spider, Quaviner. Drum, a Fish frequent in the West Indies. Sea Emperor or
Sword Fish. Eel, of which diverse kinds. Sea Elephant, the Leather of this Fish
will never rot, excellent for Thongs. Ears of the Sea. Flayl Fish. Flownder or
Flook, the young ones are called Dabs. Sea Flownder or Flower. Sea Fox.
Frogfish. Frostfish. Frutola, a broad plain Fish with a Tail like a half Moon.
Sea Flea. Gallyfish. Grandpiss or Herring Hog, this, as all Fish of
extraordinary size, are accounted Regal Fishes. Grayling. Greedigut.
Groundling. Gudgin. Gulf. Sea Grape. Gull. Gurnard. Hake. Haccle or
Sti^klebacks. Haddock. Horse Foot or Asses Hoof. Herring. H^llibut or Sea
Pheasant. Some will have the Turbut all one, others distinguish them, calling
the young Fish of the first Buttis, and of the other Birt. There is no question
to be made of it but that they are distinct kinds of Fish. Sea Hare. Sea Hawk.
Hartfish. Sea Hermit. Henfish. Sea Hind. Hornbeak, Sea Ruff and Reeves. Sea
Horseman. Hog or Flying Fish. Sea Kite or Flying Swallow. Lampret or Lamprel.
Lampreys or Lamprones. Limpin. Ling, Sea Beef; the smaller sort is called Cusk.
Sea Lanthorn. Sea Liver. Lobster. Sea Lizard. Sea Locusts. Lump, Poddle, or Sea
Owl. Lanter. Lux, peculiar to the River Rhyne. Sea Lights. Luna, a very small
Fish, but exceeding beautiful, broad bodied and bluish of color; when it
swims, the Fins make a Circle like the Moon. Maycril. Maid. Manatee. M^la, a
Fish like a lump of Flesh, taken in the Venetian Sea. Millers Thumb, Mulcet or
Pollard. Molefish. Minnow, called likewise a Pink; the same name is given to
young Salmon; it is called also a Witlin. Monkefish. Morse, River or Sea Horse,
fresh water Mullet. Sea Mullet, Botargo or Petargo is made of their Spawn.
Muscle, diverse kinds. Navelfish. Nunfish. Needlefish. Sea Nettle. Oyster.
Occulata. Perch or River Partridge. Pollack. Piper or Gavefish. Periwig.
Periwincle or Sea Snail or Whelk. Pike, or Fresh Water Wolf, or River Wolf,
Luce and Lucerne, which is an overgrown Pike* Pilchard, when they are dried as
Red Herrings they are called Fumadoes. Pilot Fish. Plaice or Sea Sparrow.
Polipe or Pour-Contrel. Porpuise or Porpiss, Molebut, Sea Hog, Sus Marinus,
Tursion. Priest Fish or Sea Priest. Prawn or Crangone. Punger. Patella. Powt,
the Feathered Fish, or Fork Fish. River Powt. Pursefish or Indian Reversus,
like an Eel, having a Skin on the hinder part of her Head, like a Purse, with
strings, which will open and shut. Parratfish. Purplefish. Porgee. Remora, or
Suck Stone, or Stop Ship. Sea Raven. Roch or Roach. Rochet or Rouget. Ruff or
Pope. Sea Ram. Salmon. Sailfish. Scallope or Venus Coccle. Scate, or Ray, or
Gristlefish; of which diverse kinds, as sharp snowted Ray, Rock Ray, etc. Shad.
Shallow. Sharpling. Spurling. Sculpin. Sheepshead. Soles, or Tonguefish, or Sea
Capon, or Sea Partridge. Seal, or Soil, or Zeal. Sea Calf, and (as some will
have it) Molebut. Sheathfish. Sea Scales. Sturgeon, of the Roe of this Fish
they make Caviar^ or Cavialtie. Shark or Bunch, several kinds. Smelt. Snaccot.
Shrimp. Spyfish. Spitefish. Sprat. Spungefish. Squill. Squid. Sunfish. Starfish
Swordfish. Tench. Thornback or Neptunes Beard. Thunnie, they cut the Fish in
pieces like shingles and powder it, and this they call Melandria. Sea Toad.
Tortoise, Torteise, Tortuga, Tortisse, Turcle or Turtle, of diverse kinds.
Trout. Turbut. Sea Tun. Sea Tree. Uraniscopus. Ulatife or Sawfish, having a Saw
in his Forehead three foot long, and very sharp. Umber. Sea Urchin. Sea Unicorn
or Sea Mononeros. Whale, many kinds. Whiting or Merling, the young ones are
called Weerlings and M^ps. Whore. Yardfish, Asses Prick or Shamefish.
The Sturgeon.
The Sturgeon, of whose Sounds is made I^inglass, a kind of Glue much used in
Physic: This Fish is here in great plenty, and in some Rivers so numerous,
that it is hazardo^s for Canoes and the like small Vessels to pass to and
again, as in Pechipscut River to the Eastward.

The Cod.
The Cod, which is a staple Commodity in the Country.

To stop Fluxes of Blood.
In the Head of this Fish is found a Stone, or rather a Bone, which being
pulverized and drank in any convenient liquor, will stop Women's overflowing
Courses notably: Likewise,

For the Stone.
There is a Stone found in their Bellies, in a Bladder against their Navel,
which being pulverized and drank in White Wind Posset or Ale, is present Remedy
for the Stone.

To heal a green Cut.
About their Fins you may find a kind of Lowse, which heals a green Cut in
short time.

To restore them that have melted their Grease.
Their Livers and Sounds eaten, is a good Medicine for to restore them that
have melted their Grease.

The Dogfish.
The Dogfish, a ravenous Fish.

For the Toothach.
Upon whose Back grows a Thorn two or three Inches long, that helps the
Toothach, scarifying the Gums therewith.

Their Skins are good to cover Boxes and Instrument Cases.

The Stingray.
The Stingray, a large Fish, of a rough Skin, good to cover Boxes and Hafts of
Knives, and Rapier sticks.

The Tortous.
The Turtle or Tortous, of which there are three kinds: 1. The Land Turtle;
they are found in dry sandy Banks, under old Houses, and never go into the
water.

For the Ptisick, Consumption, and Morbus Gallicus.
They are good for the Ptisick and Consumptions, and some say the Morbus
Gallicus.

2. The River Turtle, which are venomous and stink.

3. The Turtle that lives in Lakes and is called in Virginia a Terrapine.

The Soil.
The Soil or Sea Calf, a Creature that brings forth her young ones upon dry
land, but at other times keeps in the Sea preying upon Fish.

For Scalds and Burns, and for the Mother.
The Oil of it is much used by the ^ndians, who eat of it with their Fish, and
anoint their limbs therewith, and their Wounds and Sores: It is very good ^or
Scalds and Burns; and the fume of it, ^eing cast upon Coals, will bring Women
^ut of the Mother Fits. The Hair upon ^he young ones is white, and as soft as
^ilk; their Skins, with the Hair on, are good to make Gloves for the Winter.

The Sperma Ceti Whale.
The Sperma Ceti Whale differs from ^he Whales that yield us Whale-bones, ^or
the first has great and long Teeth, the other is nothing but Bones with
Tassels hanging from their Jaws, with which they suck in their prey.

What Sperma Ceti is.
It is not long since a Sperma Ceti Whale or two were cast upon the shore, not
far from Boston in the Massachusetts Bay, which being cut into small pieces and
boiled in Cauldrons, yielded plenty of Oil; the Oil put up into Hogsheads, and
stowed into Cellars for some time, Candies at the bottom, it may be one
quarter; then the Oil is drawn off, and the Candied Stuff put up into
convenient Vessels is sold for Sperma Ceti, and is right Sperma Ceti.

For Bruises and Aches.
The Oil that was drawn off Candies again and again, if well ordered; and is
admirable for Bruises and Aches.

What Ambergreece is.
Now you must understand this Whale feeds upon Ambergreece, as is apparent,
finding it in the Whales Maw in great quantity, but altered and
excrementitious: I conceive that Ambergreece is no other than a kind of
Mushroom growing at the bottom of some Seas; I was once showed (by a Mariner) a
piece of Ambergreece having a root to it like that of the land Mushroom, which
the Whale breaking up, some escape his devouring Paunch, and is afterward cast
upon shore.

The Coccle.
A kind of Coccle, of whose Shell the Indians make their Beads called
Wompampe^g and Mohaicks, the first are white* the other blew, both Orient, and
beautified with a purple Vein. The white ^eads are very good to stanch Blood.

The Scarlet Muscle.
The Scarlet Muscle, at Paschatawey a ^lantation about fifty leagues by Sea
East^ard from Boston, in a small Cove called ^akers Cove there is found this
kind of Muscle which has a purple Vein, which ^eing pricked with a Needle
yields a per^ect purple or scarlet juice, dying Linen (...) that no washing
will wear it out, but ^eeps its luster many years: We mark ^ur Handkerchiefs
and Shirts with it.

Fish of greatest Esteem in the West Indies.
The Indians of Peru esteem of three ^ishes more than any other, viz. the Sea
^orteise, the Tubaron, and the Manate ^r Sea Cow; but in New England the
In^ians have in greatest request, the Bass, ^he Sturgeon, the Salmon, the
Lamprey, the ^el, the Frost-fish, the Lobster and the ^lam.

Fourthly, Of Serpents, and Insects.
The Pond Frog.
THe Pond Frog, which chirp in the Spring like Sparows, and croke lik^ Toads in
Autumn: Some of these when they set upon their breech are a Foot high the
Indians will tell you, that up in the Country there are Pond Frogs as big as
(...) Child of a year old.

For Burns, Scalds, and Inflammations.
They are of a glistering brass color, and very fat* which is excellent for
Burns and Scaldings, to take out the Fire, and hea^ them, leaving no Scar; and
is also very good to take away any Inflammation.

The Rattle Snake.
The Rattle Snake, who poisons with a Vapor that comes thorough two crooked
Fangs in their Mouth; the hollow of these Fangs are as black as Ink: The
Indians, when weary with traveling, will ^ake them up with their bare hands,
laying ^old with one hand behind their Head, with ^he other taking hold of
their Tail, and ^ith their teeth tear off the Skin of their Backs, and feed
upon them alive; which ^hey say refreshes them.

For frozen Limbs, Aches, and Bruises.
They have Leafs of Fat in their Bellies, which is excellent to anoint frozen
Limbs, and for Aches and Bruises wondrous sovereign. Their Hearts swallowed
fresh is a good Antidote against their Venom, and their Liver (the Gall taken
out) bruised and applied to their Bitings is a present Remedy.

Of Insects.
A Bug.
THere is a certain kind of Bug like a Beetle, but of a glistering brass
color, with four strong Tinsel Wings; their Bodies are full of Corruption or
white Matter like a Maggot; being dead, and kept a while, they will stench
odiously; they beat the Humming Birds from the Flowers.

The Wasp.
The Wasps in this Country are pie^ black and white, breed in Hives made lik^
a great Pine Apple, their entrance is a^ the lower end, the whole Hive is of a^
Ash Color, but of what matter its mad^ no man knows; Wax it is not, neithe^
will it melt nor fry, but will take fire suddenly like Tinder: This they fasten
to a Bow, or build it round about a low Bush, a Foot from the ground.

The flying Gloworm.
The flying Gloworm, flying in dark Summer Nights like sparks of Fire in great
number; they are common liewise in Palestina.

Fifthly, Of Plants. AND
1. Of such Plants as are common with us in ENGLAND.
HEdghog-grass.

Mattweed.

Cats-tail.

Stichwort, commonly taken here by ignorant People for Eyebright; it blows in
June.

Blew Flower-de-luce; the roots are not knobby, but long and straight, and very
white, with a multitude of strings.

To provoke Vomit and for Bruises.
It is excellent for to provoke Vomiting, and for Bruises on the Feet or Face.
They Flower in June, and grow upon dry sandy Hills as well as in low wet
Grounds.

Yellow bastard Daffodill; it flowereth in May, the green leaves are spotted
with black spots.

Dogstones, a kind of Satyrion, whereof there are several kinds grows in our
Salt Marshes.

To procure Love.
I once took notice of a wanton Woman's compounding the solid Roots of this
Plant with Wine, for an Amorous Cup; which wrought the desired effect.

Watercresses.

Red Lillies grow all over the Country innumerably amongst the small Bushes,
and flower in June.

Wild Sorrel.

Alders Tongue comes not up till June; I have found it upon dry hilly grounds,
in places where the water has stood all Winter, in August, and did then make
Ointment of the Herb new gathered; the fairest Leaves grow amongst short
Hawthorn Bushes, that are plentifully growing in such hollow places.

One Blade.

Lilly Convallie, with the yellow Flowers* grows upon rocky banks by the Sea.

Water Plantane, here called Watersuck-leaves.

For Burns and Scalds, and to draw Ater out of swelled Legs.
It is much used for Burns and Scalds, and to draw water out of swelled Legs.
Bears feed much upon this Plant, so do the Moose Deer.

Sea Plantane, three kinds.

Small-water Archer.

Autumn Bell Flower.

White Hellibore, which is the first Plant that springs up in this Country, and
the first that withers; it grows in deep black Mould and Wet, in such
abundance, that you may in a small compass gather whole Cart-loads of it.

Wounds and Aches Cured by the Indians. For the Toothache. For Herpes milliares.
The Indians Cure their Wounds with it, anointing the Wound first with
Raccoons greese, or Wild-Cats greese, and strewing upon it the powder of the
Roots; and for Aches they scarifie the grieved part, and anoint it with one of
the foresaid Oils, then strew upon it the powder: The powder of the Root put
into a hollow Tooth, is good for the Toothache: The Root sliced thin and boiled
in Vineager, is very good against Herpes Milliaris.

Arsmart, both kinds.

Spurge Time, it grows upon dry sandy Sea Banks, and is very like to
Rupterwort, it is full of Milk.

Rupter-wort, with the white flower.

Jagged Rose-penny-wort.

Soda bariglia, or massacote, the Ashes of Soda, of which they make Glasses.

Glass-wort, here called Berrelia, it grows abundantly in Salt Marshes.

St. John' s-Wort.

St. Peter' s*Wort.

Speed-well Chick-weed.

Male fluellin, or Speed-well.

Upright Peniroyal.

Wild-Mint.

Cat-Mint.

Egrimony.

The lesser Clot-Bur.

Water Lilly, with yellow Flowers, the Indians Eat the Roots, which are long a
boiling, they taste like the Liver of a Sheep, the Moose Deer feed much upon
them, at which time the Indians kill them, when their heads are under water.

Dragons, their leaves differ from all the kinds with us, they come up in June.

Violets of three kinds, the White Violet which is sweet, but not so strong as
our Blew Violets; Blew Violets without sent, and a Reddish Violet without sent;
they do not blow till I^ne.

For swelled Legs.
Wood-bine, good for hot swellings of the Legs, fomenting with the decoction,
and applying the Feces in the form of a Cataplasme.

Salomons-Seal, of which there is three kinds; the first common in England, the
second, Virginia Salomons-Seal, and the third, differing from both, is called
Treacle Berries, having the perfect ^ast of Treacle when they are ripe; and
will keep good along while; certainly a very wholesome Berry, and medicinable.

Doves-Foot.

Herb Robert.

Knobby Cranes Bill.

For Agues.
Ravens-Claw, which flowers in May, and is admirable for Agues.

Cinkfoil.

Tormentile.

Avens, with the leaf of Mounta^e-Avens, the flower and root of English Avens.

Strawberries.

Wild Angelica, majoris and minoris.

Alexanders, which grow upon Rocks by the Sea shore.

Yarrow, with the white Flower.

Columbines, of a flesh color, growing upon Rocks.

Oak of Jerusalem.

Achariston is an excellent Medicine for stopping of the Lungs upon Cold,
Ptisick etc.
Oak of Cappadocia, both much of a nature,- but Oak of Jerusalem is stronger
in operation; excellent for stuffing of the Lungs upon Colds, shortness of
Wind, and the Ptisick; maladies that the Natives are often troubled with: I
helped several of the Indians with a Drink made of two Gallons of Molosses
wort, (for in that part of the Country where I abode, we made our Beer of
Molosses, Water, Bran, chips of Sassafras Root, and a little Wormwood, well
boiled,) into which I put of Oak of Jerusalem, Cat mint, Sowthistle, of each
one handful, of Enula Campana Root one Ounce, Liquorice scraped bruised and cut
in pieces, one Ounce, Sassafras Root cut into thin chips, one Ounce, Anny-seed
and sweet Fennel-seed, of each one Spoonful bruised; boil these in a close Pot,
upon a soft Fire to the consumption of one Gallon, then take it off, and strein
it gently; you may if you will boil the streined liquor with Sugar to a Syrup,
then when it is Cold, put it up into Glass Bottles, and take thereof three or
four spoonfuls at a time, letting it run down your throat as leasurely as
possibly you can; do thus in the morning, in the Afternoon, and at Night going
to bed.

Goose-Grass, or Clivers.

Fearn.

Brakes.

Wood sorrel, with the yellow flower.

Elm.

Line Tree, both kinds.

A way to draw out Oil of Akrons, or the like, etc.
Maple; of the Ashes of this Tree the Indians make a lie, with which they force
out Oil from Oak Akorns that is highly esteemed by the Indians.

Dew-Grass.

Earth-Nut, which are of diverse kinds, one bearing very beautiful Flowers.

Fuss-Balls, very large.

Mushrooms, some long and no bigger than ones finger, others jagged flat,
round, none like our great Mushrooms in England, of these some are of a Scarlet
color, others a deep Yellow, etc.

Blew flowered Pimpernel.

Noble Liver-wort, one sort with white flowers, the other with blew.

Black-Berry.

Dew-Berry.

Rasp-Berry, here called Mul-berry.

Goose-Berries, of a deep red Color.

H^ ho^n, the Haws being as big as Services, and very good to eat, and not so
astringent as the Haws in England.

^oad flax.

Pellamount, or Mountain time.

Mouse-(...) Minor.

The making of Oil of Akrons. To strengthen weak Members* ^or Scall'd-heads.
There is Oak of three kinds, white, red and black, the white is excellent to
make Canoes of, Shallopes, Ships, and other Vessels for the Sea, and for
Claw-board, and Pipe-staves, the black is good to make Waynscot of; and out of
the white Oak Acorns, (which is the Acorn Bears delight to ^eed upon): The
Natives draw an Oil, taking the rottenest Maple Wood, which being burnt to
ashes, they make a strong Lie therewith, wherein they boil their white
Oak-Acorns until the Oil swim on the top in great quantity; this they fleet
off, and put into bladders to anoint their naked Limbs, which corrobarates
them exceedingly; they eat it likewise with their Meat, it is an excellent
clear and sweet Oil: Of the Moss that grows at the roots of the white Oak the
Indesses make a strong decoction, with which they help their Papouses or young
Childrens scall'd Heads.

Juniper, which Cardanus says is Cedar in hot Countries, and Juniper in cold
Countries* it is hear very dwarfish and shrubby, growing for the most part by
the Sea side.

W^llow.

Spurge Laurel, called here Poison berry, it kills the English Cattle if they
chance to feed upon it, especially Calves.

Gaul, or noble Myrtle.

Elder.

Dwarf Elder.

For a Cut with a Bruise.
Alder; An Indian Bruising and Cutting of his Knee with a fall, used no other
remedy, than Alder Bark chewed fasting, and laid to it, which did soon heal it.

To take Fire out of a Burn.
The decoction is also excellent to take the Fire out of a Burn or Scalld.

For Wounds and Cuts.
For Wounds and Cuts make a strong decoction of Bark of Alder, pour of it into
the Wound, and drink thereof.

Hasel.

For sore Mouths, falling of the Pallat.
Filberd, both with hairy husks upon the Nuts, and setting hollow from the Nut,
and filled with a kind of water of an astringent taste; it is very good for
sore Mouths, and falling of the Pallat, as is the whole green Nut before it
comes to Kernel, burnt and pulverized. The Kernels are seldom without maggots
in them.

The Figure of the Walnut.


Walnut; the Nuts differ much from ours in Europe, they being smooth, much like
a Nutmeg in shape, and not much bigger; some three cornered, all of them but
thinly replenished with Kernels.

Chestnuts; very sweet in taste, and may be (as they usually are) eaten raw;
the Indians sell them to the English for twelve Pence the bushel.

Beech.

Ash.

Quick-beam, or Wild-Ash.

Coals of Birch pulverized and wrought with the white of an Egg to a Salve, is
a gallant Remedy for dry scurfy Sores upon the Shins; and for Bruised Wounds
and Cuts.
Birch, white and black; the bark of Birch is used by the Indians for bruised
Wounds and Cuts, boiled very tender, and stamped betwixt two stones to a
Plaster, and the decoction thereof poured into the Wound; And also to fetch
the Fire out of Burns and Scalds.

Poplar, but differing in leaf.

Plumb Tree, several kinds, bearing some long, round, white, yellow, red, and
black Plums; all differing in their Fruit from those in England.

Wild Purcelan^.

Wood-wax, wherewith they dye many pretty Colors.

Red and Black Currants.

For the Gout, or any Ach.
Spunck, an excrescence growing out of black Birch, the Indians use it for
Touchwood; and therewith they help the Sciatica, or Gout of the Hip, or any
great Ach, burning the Patient with it in two or three places upon the Thigh,
and upon certain Veins.

2. Of such Plants as are proper to the Country.
Toripen any Impostume or Swelling. For sore Mouths. The New-Englands standing
Dish.
INdian Wheat, of which there is three sorts, yellow, red, and blew; the blew
is commonly Ripe before the other a Month: Five or Six Grains of Indian Wheat
has produced in one year 600. It is hotter than our Wheat and clammy;
excellent in Cataplasms to ripen any Swelling or impostume. The decoction of
the blew Corn, is good to wash sore Mouths with: It is light of digestion, and
the English make a kind of Loblolly of it, to eat with Milk, which they call
Sampe; they beat it in a Mortar, and sift the flower out of it; the remainer
they call Homminey, which they put into a Pot of two or three Gallons, with
Water, and boil it upon a gentle Fire till it be like a Hasty Pudden; they put
of this into Milk, and so eat it. Their Bread also they make of the Homminey so
boiled, and mix their Flower with it, cast it into a deep Basin in which they
form the Loaf, and then turn it out upon the Peel, and presently put it into
the Oven before it spreads abroad; the Flower makes excellent Puddens.

Bastard Calamus Aromaticus, agrees with the description, but is not barren;
they flower in July, and grow in wet places, as about the brinks of Ponds.

To keep the Feet warm.
The English make use of the Leaves to to keep their Feet warm. There is a
little Beast called a Muskquash, that lives in small Houses in the Ponds, like
Mole Hills, that feed upon these Plants; their Cods sent as sweet and as strong
as Musk, and will last along time handsomely wrapped up in Cotton wool; they are
very good to lay amongst Clothes. May is the best time to kill them, for then
their Cods sent strongest

Wild-L^kes, which the Indians use much to eat with their fish.

A Plant like Knavers-Mustard, called New England Mustard.

Mountain-Lillies, bearing many yellow Flowers, turning up their Leaves like
the Martigon, or Turks Cap, spotted with small spots as deep as Safforn; they
Flower in July.

One Berry, or Herb True Love. See the Figure.

Tobacco, there is not much of it Planted in New England; the Indians make use
of a small kind with short round leaves called Pooke.

For Burns and Scalds.
With a strong decoction of Tobacco they Cure Burns and Scalds, boiling it in
Water from a Quart to a Pint, then wash the Sore therewith, and strew on the
powder of dried* Tobacco.

Hollow Leaved Lavender, is a Plant that grows in salt Marshes overgrown with
Moss, with one straight stalk about the bigness of an Oat straw, better than a
Cubit high; upon the top-standeth one fantastical Flower, the Leaves grow close
from the root, in shape like a Tankard, hollow, tough, and always full of
Water, the Root is made up of many small strings, growing only in the Moss, and
not in the Earth, the whole Plant comes to its perfection in August, and then
it has Leaves, Stalks, and Flowers as red as blood, excepting the Flower which
has some yellow admixt. I wonder where the knowledge of this Plant has slept
all this while, i. e. above Forty Years.

For all manner of Fluxes.
It is excellent for all manner of Fluxes.

Live for ever, a kind of Cad weed.

Tree Primerose, taken by the Ignorant for Scabious.

A Solar Plant, as some will have it.
Maiden Hair, or Cappellus veneris verus, which ordinarily is half a Yard in
height. The Apothecaries for shame now will substitute Wall-R^e no more for
Maiden Hair, since it grows in abundance in New England, from whence they may
have good store.

Pirola, Two kinds. See the Figures, both of them excellent Wound Herbs.

Homer's Moll^y.

Lysimachus, or Loose Strife, it grows in dry grounds in the open Sun four foot
high, Flowers from the middle of the Plant to the top, the Flowers purple,
standing upon a small sheath or cod, which when it is ripe breaks and puts
forth a white silken down, the stalk is red, and as big as ones Finger.

Marygold of Peru, of which there are two kinds, one bearing black seeds, the
other black and white streaked, this bears the fairest flowers, commonly but
one upon the very top of the stalk.

Treacle-Berries. See before Salomons Seal.

Oak of Jerusalem. See before.

Oak of Cappadocea. See before.

Earth-Nuts, differing much from those in England, one sort of them bears a
most beautiful Flower.

For the Scurvy and Dropsy.
Sea-Tears, they grow upon the Sea banks in abundance, they are good for the
Scurvy and Dropsy, boiled and eaten as a Sallade, and the broth drunk with it.

Indian Beans, better for Physic use than other Beans.
Indian Beans, falsely called French beans, are better for Physic and
Chyrurgery than our Garden Beans. Probatum est:

Squashes, but more truly Squonte^ squashes, a kind of Mellon, or rather Gourd,
for they oftentimes degenerate into Gourds; some of these are green, some
yellow, some longish like a Gourd, others round like an Apple, all of them
pleasant food boiled and buttered, and seasoned with Spice; but the yellow
Squash called an Apple Squash, because like an Apple, and about the bigness of
a Pome-water, is the best kind; they are much eaten by the Indians and the
English, yet they breed the small white Worms (which Physicians call
Ascarides,) in the long ^ut that vex the Fundament with a perpetual itching,
and a desire to go to stool.

Water-Mellon, it is a large Fruit, but nothing near so big as a Pompion,
color, smoother, and of a sad Grass green rounder, or more rightly Sap-green;
with some yellowness admixt when ripe; the seeds are black, the flesh or pulpe
exceeding juicy.

For heat and thirst in Fevers.
It is often given to those sick of Fevers, and other hot Diseases with good
success.

New England Daysie, or Primrose, is the second kind of Navel Wort in Johnson
upon Gerard; it flowers in May, and grows amongst Moss upon hilly Grounds and
Rocks that are shady.

For Burns and Scalds.
It is very good for Burns and Scalds.

An Achariston, or Medicine deserving thanks.
An Indian whose Thumb was swelled, and very much inflamed, and full of pain,
increasing and creeping along to the wrist, with little black spots under the
Thumb against the Nail; I Cured it with this Umbellicus veneris Root and all,
the Yolk of an Egg, and Wheat flower, f. Cataplasme.

Briony of Peru, (we call it though it grown hear) or rather Scamnony; some
take it for Mech^acan: The green Juice is absolutely Poison; yet the Root when
dry may safely be given to strong Bodies.

Red and Black Currence. See before.

Wild Damask Roses, single, but very large and sweet, but stiptick.

Sweet ^ern, the Roots run one within another like a Net, being very long and
spreading abroad under the upper crust of the Earth, sweet in taste, but withal
astringent, much hunted after by our Swine: The Scotch-men that are in
New England have told me that it grows in Scotland.

For Fluxes.
The People boil the tender tops in Molosses Beer, and in Possets for Fluxes,
for which it is excellent.

Sarsaparilia, a Plant not yet sufficiently known by the English: Some say it
is a kind of Bind Weed; we have in New England two Plants, that go under the
name of Sarsaparilia; the one not above a foot in height without Thorns, the
other having the same Leaf, but is a shrub as high as a Goose Berry Bush, and
full of sharp Thorns; this I esteem as the right, by the shape and savor of
the Roots, but rather by the effects answerable to that we have from other
parts of the World; It grows upon dry Sandy banks by the Sea side, and upon
the banks of Rivers, so far as the Salt water flows; and within Land up in the
Country, as some have reported.

Bill Berries, two kinds, Black and Sky Colored, which is more frequent.

To cool the heat of Fevers, and quench Thirst.
They are very good to allay the burning heat of Fevers, and hot Agues, either
in Syrup or Conserve.

A most excellent Summer Dish.
They usually eat of them put into a Basin, with Milk, and sweetened a little
more with Sugar and Spice, or for cold Stomachs, in Sack. The Indians dry them
in the Sun, and sell them to the English by the Bushel, who make use of them
instead of Currence, putting of them into Puddens, both boiled and baked, and
into Water Gr^el.

Knot Berry, or Cloud Berry, seldom ripe.

Sumach, differing from all that* I did ever see in the Herbalists; our English
Cattle devour it most abominably, leaving neither Leaf nor Branch, yet it
sprou^s again next Spring.

For Colds.
The English use to boil it in Beer, and drink it for Colds; and so do the
Indians, from whom the English had the Medicine.

Wild Cherry, they grow in clusters like Grapes, of the same bigness, blackish,
red when ripe, and of a harsh taste.

For Fluxes.
They are also good for Fluxes.

Transplanted and manured, they grow exceeding fair.

Board Pine, is a very large Tree two or three Fadom about.

For Wounds.
It yields a very sovereign Turpentine for the Curing of desperate Wounds.

For Stabbs.
The Indians make use of the Moss boiled in Spring Water, for Stabbs, pouring
in the Liquor, and applying the boiled Moss well stamped or beaten betwixt two
stones.

For Burning and Scalding.
And for Burning and Scalding, they first take out the fire with a strong
decoction of Alder Bark, then they lay upon it a Plaster of the Bark of Board
Pine first boiled tender, and beat to a Plaster betwixt two stones.

To take Fire out of a Burn.
One Christopher Luxe, a Fisherman* having burnt his Knee Pan, was healed
again by an Indian Webb, or Wife, (for so they call those Women that have
Husbands;) She first made a strong decoction of Alder bark, with which she took
out the Fire by Imbrocation, or letting of it drop upon the Sore, which would
smoke notably with it; then she Playstered it with the Bark of Board Pine, or
Hemlock Tree, boiled soft and stamped betwixt two stones, till is was as thin as
brown Paper, and of the same Color, she anointed the Plaster with Soyles
Oil, and the Sore likewise, then she laid it on warm, and sometimes she made
use of the bark of the Larch Tree.

To eat out proud Flesh in a Sore.
And to eat out the proud Flesh, they take a kind of Earth Nut boiled and
stamped, and last of all, they apply t^ the Sore the Roots of Water Lillies
boiled and stamped betwixt two stones, to a Plaster.

For Stitches.
The Firr Tree, or Pitch Tree, the Tar that is made of all sorts of Pitch Wood
is an excellent thing to take away those desperate Stitches of the Sides, which
perpetually afflicts those poor People that are stricken with the Plague of
the Back.

Note, You must make a large Toast, or Cake slit and dip it in the Tar, and
bind it warm to the Side.

The most common Diseases in New England.
The Black Pox, the Spotted Fever, the Griping of the Guts, the Dropsy, and
the Sciatica, are the killing Deseases in New England.

The Larch Tree, which is the only Tree of all the Pines, that sheds his Leaves
before Winter; The other remaining Green all the Year: This is the Tree from
which we gather that useful purging excrense Agarick.

For Wounds and Cuts.
The Leaves and Gum are both very good to heal Wounds and Cuts.

For Wounds with Bruises.
I Cured once a desperate Bruise with a Cut upon the Knee Pan, with an Ungent
made with the Leaves of the Larch Tree, and Hogs Grease, but the Gum is best.

Spruce is a goodly Tree, of which they make Masts for Ships, and Sail Yards:
It is generally conceived by those that have skill in Building of Ships, that
here is absolutely the best Trees in the World, many of them being three Fathom
about, and of great length.

An Achariston for the Scurvy.
The tops of Green Spruce Boughs boiled in Bear, and drunk, is assuredly one of
the best Remedies for the Scurvy, restoring the Infected party in a short time;
they also make a Lotion of some of the decoction, adding Honey and Alum.

Hemlock Tree, a kind of Spruce, the bark of this Tree serves to dye Tawny; the
Fishers Tan their Sails and Nets with it.

To break Sore or Swelling.
The Indians break and heal their Swellings and Sores with it, boiling the
inner Bark of young Hemlock very well, then knocking of it betwixt two stones
to a Plaster, and anointing or soaking it in Soyls Oil, they apply it to the
Sore: it will break a Sore Swelling speedily.

One Berry, Herba Paris, or True Love.

Sassafras, or Ague Tr^e.

For heat in Fevers.
The Chips of the Root boiled in Beer is excellent to allay the hot rage of
Fevers, being drunk.

For Bruises and dry Blows.
The Leaves of the same Tree are very good made into an Ointment, for Bruises
and dry Blows. The Bark of the Root we use instead of Cinnamon; and it is ^old
at the Barbados for two Shillings the Pound.

And why may not this be the Bark the Jesuits Powder was made of, that was so
Famous not long since in England, for Agues?

Cran Berry, or Bear Berry, because Bears use much to feed upon them, is a
small trayling Plant that grows in Salt Marshes that are overgrown with Moss;
the tender Branches (which are reddish) run out in great length, lying flat on
the ground, where at distances, they take Root, over-spreading sometimes half a
score Acres, sometimes in small patches of about a Rood or the like; the Leaves
are like Box, but greener, thick and glisteri^g* the Blossoms are very like the
Flowers o^ our English Night Shade, after which succeed the Berries, hanging by
long small foot stalks, no bigger than a hair; at first they are of a pale
yellow Color, afterward red, and as big as a Cherry; some perfectly round,
others Oval, all of them hollow, of a sower astringent taste; they are ripe in
August and September.

For the Scurvy.
They are excellent against the Scurvy.

For the heat in Fevers.
They are also good to allay the fervor of hot Diseases.

The Indians and English use them much, boiling them with Sugar for Sauce to
eat with their Meat; and it is a delicate Sauce, especially for roasted Mutton:
Some make Tarts with them as with Goose Berries.

Vine, much differing in the Fruit, all of them very fleshy, some reasonably
pleasant; others have a taste of Gun Powder, and these grow in Swamps, and low
wet Grounds.

3. Of such Plants as are proper to the Country, and have no Name.
(1.)
PIrola, or Winter Green, that kind which grows with us in England is common in
New England, but there is another plant which I judge to be a kind of Pirola,
and proper to this Country, a very beautiful Plant* The shape of the Leaf and
the just bigness of it you may see in the Figure.

The Leaf of the Plant judged to be a kind of Pirola.


The Ground whereof is a Sap Green, embroydered (as it were) with many pale
yellow Ribs, the whole Plant in shape is like Semper vivum, but far less, being
not above a handful high, with one slender stalk, adorned with small pale
yellow Flowers like the other Pirola. It grows not every where, but in some
certain small spots overgrown with Moss, close by swamps and shady; they are
green both Summer and Winter.

For wounds.
They are excellent Wound Herbs, but this I judge to be the better by far.
Probatum est.

a type of plant

2.
This Plant was brought to me by a neighbor, who (wandering in the Woods to
find out his strayed Cattle,) lost himself for two Days, being as he ghessed
eight or ten Miles from the Seaside. The Root was pretty thick and black,
having a number of small black strings growing from ^t, the stalks of the Lea^
about a handful long, the Leaves were round and as big as a Silver five
Shilling piece, of a s^p or dark green Color, with a line or (...) as black as
Jeat round the Circumference, from whence came black lines or ribs at equal
distance, all of them meeting in a black spot in the Center. If I had staid
longer in the Country, I should have purposely made a Journey into those Parts
where it was gathered, to discover if possible, the Stalk and Flower; but now I
shall refer it to those that are younger, and better able to undergo the pains
and trouble of finding it out; for I (...) by the Natives, that it is not
common, that is, every where to be found, no more th^n the embroydered Pirola,
which al^ i^ ^ most elegant Plant, and which ^ ^id endeavor to bring over, but
it (...) a^ (...).

For (...).
(...) all ^eal, O. (...), (...) another (...) ^rb (...) ours, but rather
beyond it: Some of ou^ English practitioners take it for Vervene and use it for
the same, wherein they are grossly mistaken.

The Leaf is like a Nettle Leaf, but narrower and longer; the stalk about the
bigness of a Nettle stalk, Champhered and hollow, and of a dusky red Color;
the Flowers are blew, small, and many, growing in spoky tufts at the top, and
are not hooded, but having only four round Leaves, after which follows an
infinite of small longish light brown Seed; the Roots are knotty and matted
together with an infinite number of small white strings; the whole Plant is
commonly two Cubits high, bitter in taste, with a Rosenie savor.

(3.)
This Plant is one of the first that springs up after White Hellibore, in the
like wet and black grounds, commonly by Hellibore, with a sheath or Hood like
Dragons, but the pestle is of another shape, that is, having a round Purple
Ball on the top of it, beset (as it were) with Burs; the hood shoots forth
immediately from the Root, before any Leaf appears, having a Green Hollow
Leaved Lavender. Page 54.
sprig growing fast by it, like the smaller Horse Tail, about the latter end of
April the Hood and Sprig wither away, and there comes forth in the room a Bud,
like the Bud of the Walnut Tree, but bigger; the top of it is of a pale Green
Color, covered with brown skins like an Onion, white underneath the Leaves,
which spread in time out of the Bud, grow from the root with a stalk a Foot
long, and are as big as the great Bur Dock Leaves, and of the color; the Roots
are many, and of the bigness of the steel of a Tobacco Pipe, and very white;
the whole Plant sents as strong as a Fox; it continues till August.

A Branch of the Humming-Bird Tree.


(4.)
This Plant the Humming Bird feeds upon, it grows likewise in wet grounds,
and is not at its full growth till July, and then it is two Cubits high and
better, the Leaves are thin, and of a pale green Color, some of them as big as
a Nettle Leaf, it spreads into many Branches, knotty at the setting on, and of
a purple Color, and garnished on the top with many hollow dangling Flowers of
a bright yellow Color, speckled with a deeper yellow as it were shadowed, the
Stalks are as hollow as a Kix, and so are the Roots, which are transparent,
very tender, and and full of a yellowish juice.

For Bruises and Aches upon strokes.
The Indians make use of (...) for Aches, being bruised between two stones, and
laid tocold but made (after the English manner) into an unguent with Hog^
Grease, there is not a more sovereign remedy for bruises of what kind soever;
and for Aches upon Strokes.

In August, 1670* in a Swamp amongst Alders, I found a sort of Tree Sow
Thistle, the Stalks of some two or three Inches, about, as hollow as a Kix and
very brittle, the Leaves were smooth, and in shape like Souchus laevis, i. e.
Hares Lettice, but longer, some about a Foot, these grow at a distance one from
another, almost to the top, where it begins to put forth Flowers between the
Leaves and the Stalk, the top of the stalk runs out into a spike, beset about
with Flowers like Sow Thistle, of a blew or azure color: I brought home one of
the Plants which was between twelve and thirteen Foot in length, I wondered at
it the more for that so large and tall a Plant should grow from so small a
Root, consisting of slender white strings little bigger than Bents, and not
many of them, and none above a Finger long, spreading under the upper crust of
the Earth; the whole Plant is full of Milk, and of a strong savor.

(5.)
This Plant I found in a gloomy dry Wood under an Oak, 1670. the 18th of
August, afterward I found it in open Champain grounds, but yet somewhat
scarce: The Root is about the bigness of a French Walnut, the Bark thereof is
The Plant when it springs up first.
brown, and rugged, within of a yellowish Color, from whence arises a slender
stalk, no bigger than an Oat straw, about two Cubits in height, somewhat better
then a handful above the Root shoots out one Leaf of a Grass Green color,
and an Inch or two above that, another Leaf, and so four or five at a greater
distance one from another, till they come within a handful of the top, where
upon slender foot stalks grow the Flowers four or five, more or fewer,
clustering together in pale long green husks milk white, consisting of ten
small Leaves, snipt a little on the edges The Figure of the Plant when it is at
full growth.
with purple hair threads in the midst; the whole Plant is of a brakish taste:
When it is at its full growth the stalks are as red as Blood.



(6.)
This Plant Flowers in August, and grows in wet Ground; it is about three or
four foot in height, having a square slender stalk chamfered, hollow and tuff,
the Leaves grow at certain distances one against another, of the color of
Egrimony Leaves sharp pointed, broadest in the midst about an Inch and half,
and three or four Inches in length, snipt about the edges like a Nettle Leaf,
at the top of the Stalk for four or five Inches thick, set with pale green
husks, out of which the Flowers grow, consisting of one Leaf, shaped like the
head of a Serpent, opening at the top like a mouth, and hollow throughout,
containing four crooked pointels, and on the top of every pointel a small
glistering green button, covered with a little white woolly matter, by which
they are with the pointels fastened close together and shore up the tip of the
upper chap, the crooked pointels are very stiff and hard, from the bottom of
the husks, wherein the Flower stands, from the top of the Seed Vessel, shoots
out a white thread which runs in at the bottom of the Flower, and so out at the
mouth: the whole Flower is milk white, the inside of the chaps reddish, the
Root I did not observe.

a type of plant

(7.)
This Plant I take for a varigated Herb Paris, True Love or One Berry, or
rather One Flower, which is milk white, and made up with four Leaves, with many
black threads in the middle, upon every thread grows a Berry (when the Leaves
of of the Flower are fallen) as big as a white pease, of a light red color
when they are ripe, and clustering together in a round form as big as a Pullets
Egg, which at distance shows but as one Berry, very pleasant in taste, and not
unwholesome; the Root, Leaf, and Flower differ not from our English kind, and
their time of blooming and ripening agree, and therefore doubtless a kind of
Herba Paris.

The small Sun Flower, or Marygold of America.




(8.)
This Plant is taken by our Simplists to be a kind of Golden Rod, by others for
Sarazens Consound, I judge it to be a kind of small Sun Flower, or Marygold of
the West Indies; the Root is brown and slender, a foot and half in length,
running a slope under the upper face of the Earth, with some strings here and
there, the stalk as big as the steal of a Tobacco pipe, full of pith, commonly
brownish, sometimes purple, three or four foot high, the Leaves grow at a
distance one against another, rough, hard, green above, and gray underneath,
slightly snipt and the ribs appear most on the back side of the Leaf, the
Flower is of a bright yellow, with little yellow cups in the midst, as in the
Mary gold of Peru, with black threads in them with yellow pointels, the Flower
spreads it self abroad out of a cup made up of many green beards, not unlike a
Thistle; Within a handful of the top of the stalk (when the Flower is fallen,
grows an excrense or knob as big as a Walnut, which being broken yields a
kind of Turpentine or rather Rosen.

What Cutchenele is.
The stalk beneath and above the knob, covered with a multitude of small Bugs,
about the bigness of a great flea, which I presume will make good Cutchenele,
ordered as they should be before they come to have Wings: They make a perfect
Scarlet Color to Paint with, and durable.

4. Of such Plants as have sprung up since the English Planted and kept Cattle
in New England.
COuch Grass. Shepherds Purse. Dandelion. Groundsel. Sow Thistle. Wild Arrach.
Night Shade, with the white Flower. Nettlesstinging, which was the first Plant
taken notice of. Mallows. Plantain, which the Indians call English-Mans Foot,
as though produced by their treading. Black Henbane. Wormwood. Sharp pointed
Dock. Patience. Bloodwort. And I suspect Adders Tongue. Knot Grass. Cheek weed.
Compherie, with the white Flower. May weed, excellent for the Mother; some of
our English Houswives call it Iron Wort, and make a good Unguent for old Sores.
The great C^ot Bur. Mullin, with the white Flower.
Q. What became of the influence of those Planets that produce and govern these
Planets before this time!

I have now done with such Plants as grow wild in the Country in great plenty,
(although I have not mentioned all) I shall now in the Fifth place give you to
understand what English Herbs we have growing in our Gardens that prosper there
as well as in their proper Soil, and of such as do not, and also of such as
will not grow there at all.

5. Of such Garden Herbs (amongst us) as do thrive there, and of such as do not.
CAbbidge grows there exceeding well. Lettice. Sorrel. Parsley. Marygold.
French Mallows Chervel. Burnet. Winter Savory. Summer Savory. Time. Sage.
Carrats. Parsnips of a prodigious size. Red Beetes. Radishes. Turnips.
Purslain. Wheat. Rye. Barley, which commonly degenerates into Oats.
Oats.
Pease of all sorts, and the best in the World; I never heard of, nor did see
in eight Years time, one Worm eaten Pea.

Garden Beans.
Naked Oats, there called Silpee, an excellent grain used instead of Oat Meal,
they dry it in an Oven, or in a Pan upon the fire, then beat it small in a
Mortar.

Another standing Dish in New England.
And when the Milk is ready to boil, they put into a pottle of Milk about ten
or twelve spoonfuls of this Meal, so boil it leasurely, stirring of it every
foot, least it burn too; when it is almost boiled enough, they hang the Kettle
up higher, and let it stew only, in short ^ime it will thicken like a Custard;
they season it with a little Sugar and Spice, and so serve it to the Table in
deep Basins, and it is altogether as good as a White-pot.

For People weakened with long Sickness.
It exceedingly nourishes and strengthens people weakened with long Sickness.

Sometimes they make Water Gruel with it, and sometimes thicken their Flesh
Broth either with this or Homminey, if it be for Servants.

Spear Mint. Rue, will hardly grow. Fetherfew prospers exceedingly. Southern
Wood, is no Plant for this Country. Nor, Rosemary. Nor Bays. White Satin
grows pretty well, so does Lavender Cotton. But Lavender is not for the
climate. Penny Royal. Smalledge. Ground ^vy, or Ale Hoof. Gilly Flowers will
continue two Years. Fennel must be taken up, and kept in a warm Cellar all
Winter. Housleek prospers notably. Holly hocks. Enula C* panae, in two Years
time the Roots rot. Comferie, with white Flowers. Coriander, and Dill. and
Annis thrive exceedingly, but Annis Seed, as also the Seed of Fennel seldom
come to maturity; the Seed of Annis is commonly eaten with a fly. Clary never
lasts but one Summer, the Roots rot with the Frost. Sparagus thrives
exceedingly, so does Garden Sorrel, and Sweet Bryer, or Eglantine. Bloodwort
but sorrily, but Patience, and English Roses, very pleasantly. Celandine, by
the West Country men called Kenning Wort, grows but slowly. Muschata, as well
as in England. Dittander, or Pepper Wort, flourishes notably, and so does.
Tansie. Musk Mellons are better then our English, and.
Cucumbers.
Pompions, there be of several kinds, some proper to the Country, ^y are dryer
then our English Pompions, and better tasted; you may eat them green.

The ancient New England standing Dish.
But the Houswives manner is to slice them when ripe, and cut them into dice,
and so fill a pot with them of two or three Gallons, and stew them upon a
gentle fire a whole day, and as they sink, they fill again with fresh Pompions,
not putting any liquor to them; and when it is stewed enough, it will look like
baked Apples; this they Dish, putting Butter to it, and a little Vinegar, (with
some Spice, as Ginger, etc.) which makes it tart like an Apple, and so serve it
up to be eaten with Fish or Flesh: It provokes Urin extremely and is very windy.

Sixthly and lastly,
Of Stones, Minerals, Metals and Earths.
AS first, the Emrald which grows in flat Rocks, and is very good.

Rubies, which here are very watery. I have heard a story of an Indian, that
found a stone, up in the Country, by a great Pond as big as an Egg, that in a
dark Night would give a light to read by; but I take it to be but a story.

Diamond, which are very brittle, and therefore of little worth.

Crystal, called by our West Country Men the Kenning Stone; by Sebegug Pond is
found in considerable quantity, not far from thence is a Rock of Crystal called
the Moose Rock, because in shape like a Moose, and

Muscovy Glass, both white and purple of reasonable content.

Black Lead.

Bole Armoniack.

Red and Yellow Oker.

Terra Sigilla.

Vitriol.

Antimony.

Arsnick, too much.

Lead.

Tin.

Tin Glass.

Silver.

Iron, in abundance, and as good bog Iron as any in the World.

Copper. It is reported that the French have a Copper Mine at Port Royal, that
yields them twelve Ounces of pure Copper out of a Pound of Oar.

I shall conclude this Section with a strange Cure effected upon a Drummers
Wife, much afflicted with a Wolf in her Breast; the poor Woman lived with her
Husband at a Town called by the Indians, Casco, but by the English, Famouth;
where for some time she swaged the Pain of her Sore, by bathing it with strong
Malt Beer, which it would suck in greedily, as if some living Creature: When
she could come by no more Beer, (for it was brought from Boston, along the
Coasts by Merchants,) she made use of Rhum, a strong Water drawn from Sugar
Canes, with which it was lulled a sleep; at last, (to be rid of it altogether)
she put a quantity of Arsnick to the Rhum, and bathing of it as formerly, she
utterly destroyed it, and Cured her self; but her kind Husband, who sucked out
the Poison as the Sore was healing, lost all his Teeth, but without further
danger or inconvenience.

An ADDITION of some RARITIES overslipt.
THe Star Fish, having fine points like a Star, the whole Fish no bigger then
the Palm of a Man's hand, of a tough substance like leather, and about an Inch
in thickness, whitish underneath, and of the Color of a Cucumber above, and
somewhat ruff: When it is warm in ones hand, you may perceive a stiff motion,
turning down one point, and thrusting up another: It is taken to be poisonous;
they are very common, and found thrown up on the Rocks by the Sea side.

Sea Bream, which are plentifully taken upon the Sea Coasts, their Eyes are
accounted rare Meat, whereupon the proverbial comparison, It is worth a Sea
Breams Eye.

Blew Fish, or Horse, I did never see any of them in England; they are as big
usually as the Salmon, and better Meat by far: It is common in New England and
esteemed the best sort of Fish next to Rock Cod.

Cat Fish, having a round Head, and great glaring Eyes like a Cat: They lie for
the most part in holes of Rocks, and are discovered by their Eyes: It is an
excelling Fish.

Munk Fish, a flat Fish like scate, having a hood like a Friars Cowl.

Clam, or Clamp, a kind of Shell Fish, a white Muscle.

An Acharistor, For Pin and Web.]

Sheath Fish, which are there very plentiful, a delicate Fish, as good as a
Pr^wa, covered with a thin Shell like the sheath of a Knife, and of the color
of a Muscle.

Which shell Calcined and Pulverized, is excellent to take off a Pin and Web,
or any kind of Filme growing over the Eye.

Morse, or Sea Horse, having a great Head, wide Jaws, armed with Tushes as
white as Ivory, of body as big as a Cow, proportioned like a Hog, of brownish
bay, smooth skinned and impenetrable* they are frequent at the Isle of Sables,
their Teeth are worth eight Groats the Pound; the best Ivory being Sold but for
half the Money.

For Poison.
It is very good against Poison.

For the Cramp.
As also for the Cramp, made into Rings.

For the Piles.
And a secret for the Piles, if a wise Man have the ordering of it.

The Manaty, a Fish as big as a Wine pipe, most excellent Meat; bred in the
Rivers of Hispaniola in the West Indies; it has Teats, and nourishes its
young ones with Milk; it is of a green Color, and tastes like Veal.

For the Stone Colic.
There is a Stone taken out of the Head that is rare for the Stone and Collect.

To provoke Urine.
Their Bones beat to a Powder and drank with convenient Liquors, is a gallant
Urin provoking Medicine.

For Wound and Bruise.
An Indian, whose Knee was bruised with a fall, and the Skin and Flesh stripped
down to the middle of the Calf of his Leg; Cured himself with Water Lilly Roots
boiled and stamped.

For Swellings of the Foot.
An Indian Webb, her Foot being very much swelled and inflamed, assuaged the
swelling, and took away the inflammation with our Garden or English Patience,
the Roots roasted. f. Cataplas. Anno 1670. June 28.

To dissolve a Scirrhous Tumor.
An Indian dissolved a Scirrhous Tumor in the Arm and Hip, with a fomentation
of Tobacco, applying afterward the Herb stamped betwixt two stones.

A DESCRIPTION OF AN INDIAN SQUA.
NOw (gentle Reader) having trespassed upon your patience a long while in the
perusing of these rude Observations, I shall, to make you amends, present you
by way of Divertisement, or Recreation, with a Copy of Verses made sometime
since upon the Picture of a young and handsome Gypsy, not improperly
transferred upon the Indian SQUA, or Female Indian, tricked up in all her
bravery.

The Men are somewhat Horse Faced, and generally Faucious, i. e. without
Beards; but the Women many of them have very good Features; seldom without a
Come to me, or Cos Amoris, in their Countenance; all of them black Eyed, having
even short Teeth, and very white; their Hair black, thick and long, broad
Breasted; handsome straight Bodies, and slender, considering their constant
loose habit: Their limbs cleanly, straight, and of a convenient stature,
generally, as plump as Partridges, and saving here and there one, of a modest
deportment.

Their Garments are a pair of Sleeves of Deer, or Moose skin dressed, and drawn
with lines of several Colors into Asiatick Works, with Buskins of the same, a
short Mantle of Trading Cloth, either Blew or Red, fastened with a knot under
the Chin, and girt about the middle with a Zone, wrought with white and blew
Beads into pretty Works; of these Beads they have Bracelets for their Neck and
Arms, and Links to hang in their Ears, and a fair Table curiously made up with
Beads likewise, to wear before their Breast; their Hair they Comb backward,
and tie it up short with a Border, about two handfulls broad, wrought in Works
as the other with their Beads: But enough of this.

The POEM.
WHether White or Black be best
Call your Senses to the quest;
And your touch shall quickly tell
The Black in softness does excel,
And in smoothness; but the Ear,
What, can that a Color hear?
No, but it is your Black ones Wit
That does catch, and captive it.
And if Slut and Fair be one,
Sweet and Fair, there can be none:
Nor can ought so please the taste
As what is brown and lovely dressed:
And who will say, that that is best
To please ones Sense, displease the rest?
Maugre then all that can be sed
In flattery of White and Red:
Those flatterers themselves must say
That darkness was before the Day:
And such perfection here appears
It neither Wind nor Sunshine fears.
A Chronological TABLE Of the most remarkable passages in that part of America,
known to us by the name of NEW ENGLAND.
ANno Dom. 1492. Christ. Columbus discovered America. ANno Dom. 1516. The
Voyage of Sir Thomas Pert, Vice Admiral of England, and Sir Sebastian Cabota to
Brazile, etc. ANno Dom. 1527. New Foundland, discovered by the English. ANno
Dom. 1577. Sir Francis Drake began his Voyage about the World. Anno Dom. 1585.
Nova Albion discovered by Sir Francis Drake, and by him so Named. Anno Dom.
1585. April 9. Sir Richards Greenevile was sent by Sir Water Rawleigh with a
Fleet of Seven Sail to Virginia, and was styled the General of Virginia. Anno
Dom. 1586. Captain Thomas Candish, a Suffolk Gentleman, began his Voyage round
about the World, with three Ships past the Streights of Magellan, burned and
ransacked in the entry of Chile, Peru, and New-Spain, near the great Island
Callifornia in the South Sea; and returned to Plymouth with a precious Booty
Anno Dom. 1588. September the 8th; being the third since Magellan that
circuited the Earth. Anno Dom. 1588. Sir Walter Rawleigh first discovered
Virginia, by him so Named, in honor of our Virgin Queen. Anno Dom. 1595. Sir
Walter Rawleigh discovered Guiana. Anno Dom. 1606. A Collony sent to Virginia.
Anno Dom. 1614. Bermudas Planted. Anno Dom. 1618. The blazing Star; then
Plymouth Plantation began in New England. Anno Dom. 1628. The Massachusetts
Colony Planted, and Salem the first Town therein Built. Anno Dom. 1629. The
first Church gathered in this Colony was at Salem; from which Year to this
present Year, is 43 Years.

In the compass of these Years, in this Colony, there has been gathered Forty
Churches, and 120 Towns built in all the Colonies of New England.

The Church of Christ at Plymouth, was Planted in New England Eight Years
before others.

Anno Dom. 1630. The Governor and Assistants arrived with their Pattent for
the Massachusetts. Anno Dom. 1630. The Lady Arabella in New England. Anno Dom.
1630. When the Government was established, they Planted on Noddles Island. Anno
Dom. 1631. Captain John Smith Governor of Virginia, and Admiral of
New England, Dyed. Anno Dom. 1631. Mr. Mavericke Minister at Dorchester in
New England. Anno Dom. 1631. John Winthorpe Esquire chosen the first time
Governor, he was eleven times Governor; some say Nineteen times; eleven Years
together; the other Years by intermission. Anno Dom. 1631. John Wilson Pastor
of Charles Town. Anno Dom. 1631. Sir R. Saltingstall at Water Town came into
New England. Anno Dom. 1631. Mr. Rog. Harlackinden was a Majestrate, and a
Leader of their Military Forces.

Dr. Wilson gave 1000 l. to New England, with which they stored themselves with
great Guns.

Anno Dom. 1633. Mr. Thomas Hooker, Mr. Haynes, and Mr. John Cotton, came over
together in one Ship. Anno Dom. 1634. The Country was really placed in a
posture of War, to be in readiness at all times. Anno Dom. 1635. Hugh Peter's
went over for New England. Anno Dom. 1636. Connecticat Colony Planted. Anno
Dom. 1637. The Pequites Wars, in which were Slain Five or Six Hundred Indians.

Ministers that have come from England, chiefly in the Ten first Years, Ninety
Four: Of which returned Twenty Seven: Dyed in the Country Thirty Six: Yet alive
in the Country Thirty One.

The Number of Ships that transported Passengers to New England in these times,
was 298. supposed: Men, Women, and Children, as near as can be ghessed 21200.

Anno Dom. 1637. The first Synod at Cambridge in New England, where the
Antinomian and Famalistical Errors were confuted; 80 Errors now amongst the
Massachusetts. Anno Dom. 1638. New Haven Colony began.

Mrs. Hutchinson and her erroneous companions banished the Massachusetts Colony.

A terrible Earth quake throughout the Country.

Mr. John Harvard, the Founder of Harvard College (at Cambridge in New England)
Deceased, gave 700 l. to the Erecting of it.

Anno Dom. 1639. First Printing at Cambridge in New England. Anno Dom. 1639. A
very sharp Winter in New England. Anno Dom. 1642. Harvard College Founded with
a public Library.

Ministers bred in New England, and (excepting about 10,) in Harvard College
132; of which dyed in the Country 10; now living 81; removed to England 41.

Anno Dom. 1643. The first combination of the Four United Colonies, viz.
Plymouth, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New Haven. Anno Dom. 1646. The second
Synod at Cambridge touching the duty and power of Majestrates in matters of
Religion: Secondly, the nature and power of Synods.

Mr. Eliot first Preached to the Indians in their Native Language.

Anno Dom. 1647. Mr. Thomas Hooker Died. Anno Dom. 1648. The third Synod at
Cambridge, publishing the Platform of Discipline. Anno Dom. 1649. Mr. John
Winthorpe Governor, now Died.

This Year a strange multitude of Caterpillars in New England.

Thrice seven Years after the Planting of the English in New England, the
Indians of Massachusetts being 30000 able Men were brought to 300.

Anno Dom. 1651. Hugh Peter's, and Mr. Wells came for England. Anno Dom. 1652.
Mr. John Cotton Dyed. Anno Dom. 1653. The great Fire in Boston in New England.

Mr. Thomas Dudley, Governor of the Massachusetts, Dyed this Year.

Anno Dom. 1654. Major Gibbons Died in New England. Anno Dom. 1655. Iamaica
Taken by the English. Anno Dom. 1657. The Quakers arrived in New England, at
Plymouth. Anno Dom. 1659. Mr. Henry Dunster the first President of Harvard
College now Dyed. Anno Dom. 1661. Major Atherton Dyed in New England. Anno Dom.
1663. Mr. John Norton Pastor of Boston in New England, Dyed suddenly.

Mr. Samuel Sto^e, Teacher of Hartford Church, Dyed this Year.

Anno Dom. 1664. The whole Bible Printed in the Indian Language finished.

The Manadaes, called New Amsterdam, now called New York; surrendered up to His
Majesty's Commissioners (for the settling of the respective Colonies in
New England, viz. Sir Robert Carr, Colonel Nicols, Colonel Cartwright, and
Mr. Samuel Mavericke,) in September, after thirteen Days the Fort of Arania,
now Albania; twelve Days after that, the Fort Aw^apha; then de la Ware Castle
Manned with Dutch and Sweeds; the Three first Forts and Towns being Built upon
the great River Mohegan, otherwise called ^udsons River.

In September appeared a great Comet for the space of three Months.

Anno Dom. 1665. Mr. John Indicot, Governor of the Massachusetts Dyed.

A thousand Foot sent this Year by the French King to Canada.

Captain Davenport killed with Lightning at the Castle by Boston in
New England, and several Wounded.

Anno Dom. 1666. The Small Pox at Boston. Seven slain by Lightning, and diverse
burnt: This Year also New England* had cast away, and taken 31 Vessels, and
some in 1667. Anno Dom. 1667. Mr. John Wilson Pastor of Boston Dyed, aged 79
Years. Anno Dom. 1670. At a place called Kenibunck, which is in the Province of
Meyne, a Colony belonging to the Heir of that Honorable Knight Sir Ferdinando
Gorges; not far from the River side, a piece of Clay Ground was thrown up by a
Mineral vapor (as we supposed) over the tops of high Oaks that grew between it
and the River, into the River, stopping the course thereof, and leaving a hole
two Yards square, wherein were thousands of Clay Bullets as big as Musket
Bullets, and pieces of Clay in shape like the Barrel of a Musket. Anno Dom.
1671. Elder Peun dyed at Boston. Anno Dom. 1672. Mr. Richard Bellingham,
Governor of the Massachusetts in New England.
FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by Giles Widows at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's
Church Yard.
Folio.
DOctor Nath. Homes's Works.

Mr. Davies's Rights belonging to Uniformity in Churches.

A Book of the five Senses, in Copper Plates.

Quarto.
Mr. Caryl's Exposition on the 32, 33, and 34 Chapters of the Book of Job.

Dr. Sibbs's Light from Heaven, discovering the Fountain opened, the Angels
acclamatio^s, the Churches Riches, the Riches Poverty, in four Treatises.

Mr. Barto^s Remedy for Londons languishing Trade.

The younger Brothers Apology, or a Fathers free power, etc.

Marcelia, or the Treacherous Friend, a Tragy-Comedy. Written by Madam Boothby.

Large Octavo.
Mr. Stucklyes Gospel Glass, representing the miscarriages of English
professors.

Mr. Gales Theophily.

His Anatomy of Insidelity.

His Idea of Iansenism both Historick and D^gmatick, in small Octavo.

Pufendorfs Elementorum Iuris prudentia Universalis.

Walker's Grammar.

His Art of Teaching.

12. and 24.
Frommoni^ Synopsis Metaphysica.

Hoole's Greek Testament.

History of the Bible.

Batavia, or the Hollander Displayed in brief Charectars, etc.

Dr. Collet's daily Devotions, or the Christians Morning and Evening Sacrafice;
digested into Prayers and Meditations, with some short directions for a Godly
life; and a brief account of the Authors Li^e, by Doctor Fuller.

Those Famous Lozenges for the Cure of Consumptions, Coughs new and old, and
all other Diseases incident to the Lungs, are made by Edmund Buckworth,
Physician to the Queens most Excellent Majesty, and are Sold at the Green
Dragon in St. Paul's Church Yard, where you may also have his Famous Homogenial
Pill.

GW
printer's or publisher's device


