THE JUDGMENT and DOCTRINE Of the Clergy of the Church of England, CONCERNING
One special Branch of the King's Prerogative, Viz. In dispencing with the
Penal Laws, Asserted by The most Reverend Fathers in God, The Lords
Archbishops Bancroft, Laud and Usher.

The Right Reverend Fathers in God, The Lords Bishops Sanderson and Cartwright.

The Reverend Doctors, Sir Thomas Ridley L. L. D. Dr Heylin, Dr Barrow, Dr
Sherlock Master of the Temple, Dr Hicks, Dr Nalson and Dr Puller.

And by the ANONYMVS, Author of the Harmony of Divinity and Law.

Together with the Concurring Resolutions of our Reverend Judges, as most
Consonant and Agreeable thereunto.

In a Letter from a Gentleman of Oxford, to his Friend at London.

Licenced the 2d. of May 1687.

Upon whomsoever God is understood to bestow the Sovereign Authority, he must
also be understood to bestow upon him all the Jura Majestatis; or Essential
Rights of Sovereignty, according to that Maxim, Qui dat esse, dat and omnia
pertinentia ad esse; He that gives the Essence, gives also the Properties
belonging to the Essence. Jovian, or an Answer to Julian the Apostate, chap.
11. London, Printed for J. H. and T. S. and are to be had at most Booksellers,
in London and Westminster.

SIR,
IN one of the late Conferences you were pleased to have with me, you seemed to
be somewhat disatisfied upon the subject we were discoursing of, which was,
whither the King had by Law such a Supreme Power inherent in, and inseparably
annexed to his Crown, as to Dispense with Penal Laws.

I remember I then told you, we could not resolve our selves of this Great
Point, but by these two ways.

1. To see, how far the Judgment of our Churchmen, appearing in their
Doctrines (which are for our Edification) does Warrant this Prerogative to be
in the King.

II. To see how far the Judges Resolutions (in declaring their sense of the Law
of the Land in this doubtful Question,) do agree with such their Judgments and
Doctrines.

And as for the First, Sir, I doubt not but to make it clear, past all
peradventure, that our Reverend Clergy of the Church of England have
unanimously concurred in this Point of Doctrine, that it does inseparably
belong to the Kingly office to dispense with Penal Laws, when ever such a
Supremacy of Power shall be thought necessary to be exerted for the safety of
the King, and the Good and Ease of his People in general. And if I can prove
this undeniably to You; I hope then that this nice Scruple of yours (which by
the way, I suppose, you will allow me to call your tender Conscience) will
easily be removed; and consequently then it may be presumed, I shall have less
difficulty to Satisfy You in the other Point, that this sense of the Law of
the Land in the point in Question, is no other, than what is exactly
Correspondent with the Judgment and Doctrine of the Clergy of the Church of
England.

To begin then,

The Reverend Dean of Worcester, in his so deservedly applauded Answer to Dr
Hick's Jovian. chap. 10.
Julian the Apostate, declares, that the English Realm is a perfect
sovereignty, or Empire, and that the King of England by the Imperial Laws of
it, is a Complete, Imperial, and Independent Sovereign. And he quotes Coke in
Cawdrye's Case, who says, that by the ancient Laws of this Realm, England is
an absolute Empire, and Monarchy; and that the King is furnished with plenary
and Entire Power, Prerogative, and Jurisdiction, and is supreme Governor over
all persons within this Realm.

Now it would be a contradiction to call this an Imperial Crown; to acknowledge
the King for supreme over all Persons, -- and that he is furnished with Plenary
and entire Power, unless He have all Those Rights, which are involved in the
very Notion of his Imperial Sovereignty.

By the Rights of Sovereign, says He, I understand Those Prerogatives, and
Preeminences of Power and Greatness, which are involved in the Formal
Conception of Sovereignty, and are inseparably annexed to the Sovereign. -- He
has no sharers or Copartners in the Sovereignty; None Coordinate with him in
Government; no Equal, nor Superior, but only God, to whom Alone He is subject,
-- All Power and Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived and deducted
from Him, as supreme Head of These Churches, and Realms.

There are some Essential Rights of the Sir Robert Pointz Knight of the Bath,
his vindication of Monarchy. chap. 8.
Crown, which the Subjects cannot obtain from their Sovereign by any Grant or
prescription, without destroying the essential and individual Rights of
Monarchy. These Rights, called the Flowers of the Crown, are Regalia Suprema,
or Summa Jura Imperij, regno tuendo servientia, inherent to his Royal Function,
and politic Capacity, and serve for the strength and support thereof -- such
are the Rights of making War and Peace, of having the last Appeal unto him, or
his Great Council and supreme Court; and of making Leagues, and of Dispensing
with Penal Laws, granting pardons, and such like.

Now if the King has a perfection and fullness of Imperial Power in him, as Dr
Dr. Hicks ut. Sup.
Hicks has clearly made out, and This Power of dispensing with Penal Laws be
(as it must be, or nothing) one of those Prerogatives and Pre-eminencies of
power and Greatness, which are involved in the Formal Conception of
Sovereignty; Then certainly it is very plain, that This is an Essential Right
inseparably annexed to our Imperial Sovereign: and to go about to deprive him
of such an inherent Right, it would tend to the disinherison of the 4. Inst. p
14. Suprema Jurisdictio and potestas Regia, et si Princeps velit, se seperari
non possunt, sunt enim ipsa forma, et Substantialis Essentia Majestatis, ergo
manente Rege ab eo abdicari non possunt. Cavedo, Pract. observe. p. 2. decis.
40. n. 8.
King and his Crown. This Phrase, he says, of the disinherison of the King and
the Crown in other Stat. of Praemunire, 16. R. 2. cap. 5.
Acts of Parliament is called, The Destruction of the King's Sovereignty, his
Crown, his Regality, and things that tend thereunto, things that are openly
against the King's Crown in Derogation of this Regality.

And, Sir to convince You, that the King has this Perfection and fullness of
Power, more especially in matters of Religion, in his sacred Person, you may
please to be informed, that that Great Metropolitan of All England, Archbishop
Bancroft, when Question was made of Dr. Richard Bancroft made Lord Archbishop
of Cant. 1604.
what matters the Ecclesiastical judges have cognizance, either upon the
exposition 12. Co. fo. 64. 5. Jac.
of the Statutes concerning Tithes, or any other thing Ecclesiastical, or upon
the Statute 1 Eliz. concerning the High Commission, or in any other case in
which there is not express Authority in Law, declared, That the King himself
may decide it in his Royal Person; and that the Judges are but the Delegates of
the King, and that the King may take what causes he shall please to determine,
from the Determination of the Judges, and may determine them himself. And the
Archbishop said, that this was clear in Divinity, that such Authority belongs
to the King by the word of God in the Scripture. So that Eminent Prelate.

For, as it is well observed by that Learned Knight, and Doctor in the Civil
Law, Sir Thomas Ridley. His Majesty, by Ridley's View of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law, dedicated to King James 1. 3d Edition, part 4. chap. 1.
Sect. 1.
communicating his Authority to the Judges to expound his Laws, does not
thereby abdicate the same from himself, but that he may assume it again to him,
when, and as often as he pleases, whose Interpretation in that is to be
preferred before Theirs. For, as he says in another place, He is both by the
Ordinance of God and Man, (...), (as the Id. part 2. chapter 1. sect. 7.
Apostle terms him) among them, that is, One who is Supreme Sovereign above the
1 Pet. 2. 13.
Rest, and whom they ought in all things to obey, so it be not against the Law
of God, and Common Justice; for himself is instead of the whole Law, Yea, he is
the Law it self, and the only INTERPRETER thereof, as in whose Breast is the
whole Knowledge of the same.

Now, Sir, what Answer can you give to all This? if it be clear in Divinity,
that such Authority belongs to the King by the word of God in the Scripture,
with what Color of Reason can you deny the King's Imperial Sovereignty in
dispensing with Penal Laws?

But to proceed more clearly to the Point in Question, The most Reverend,
Renowned and Religious Prelate and Patriot, Dr W. Laud, Archbishop of
Canterbury, A man of such Eminent virtue, (as the Author Cyprianus Anglicus, by
Dr Heylin, D. D. and Chaplain to Charles the 1st and Charles the 2d, 2 part.
of his life writes of him) Such an Exemplary Piety toward God, such an
unwearied fidelity to his Gracious Sovereign, and of such a Public Soul
toward Church and State, that he lived the Honor, and dyed a Martyr of both.
I say, Epist. Dedicat.
this Great, but at last unfortunate Prelate, thus delivers his Considerate
Opinion, Archbishop Laud against Fisher, Printed 1673.
that the Supreme Magistrate in the Estate Civil, may not abrogate the Laws
made in Parliament, though he may dispense with the Sanction or Penalty of the
Law, quoad hic and nunc, as the Lawyers speak.

The next I shall give You, is, that Learned and moderate Primate and
Metropolitan of all Ireland, Dr. James Usher, late Lord Archbishop of Armagh,
who in his Book entitled, The Power communicated by God to the Prince, and the
obedience required of the Subject, composed purposely for the Rights both of
Princes and Subjects, Vid Epis. dedicat. to King Charles 2. by James Tyrr^^l Esquire
and for the comfirmation of staggering Loyalty, assures us, that POSITIVE
LAWS, being (as other works of men are) IMPERFECT and not free from many
discommodities, if the STRICT OBSERVATION thereof should be pursued in EVERY
PARTICULAR; it is fit the SUPREME Governor should not himself only be EXEMPTED
from SUBJECTION thereunto, but also be so far LORD OVER THEM, that where he
feeth cause he may ABATE, or TOTALLY REMIT the PENALTY incurred by the Breach
of them, DISPENSE with others for the NOT OBSERVING of them at all; yea, and
generally SUSPEND the EXECUTION of them, when by experience he shall find the
Inconveniences to be greater then the profit that was expected should redound
thereby unto the Commonwealth. PLUTARCH sets Plutarch, in Comparat.
Flaminij et Philopoemen.
this down as a chief point of that natural skill which PHILOPOEMEN had in
Government, that he did not only rule according to the Laws, but overruled the
Laws themselves, when he found it conducing to the weal-publick.

And he says a little before, by the LAW OF THE KING, I understand such
ordinances as are MERELY CIVIL and POSITIVE; the COACTIVE POWER whereof being
DERIVED from him who is the SUPREME LAWGIVER UNDER GOD ON EARTH, He himself
cannot properly be said to be tied thereby. For as with the Grammarians, the
Imperative mood has no first Person, so with the Civilians, Marcian in l. si
de re sua, de recept, arbit, vid. et Vlpian in l. ille a quo, Sect.
Tempestivum, D. ad Senate. Trebel. et in l. Quod autem, Sec. Vxori quis D. de
donat inter, viz.
no man can command or forbid himself; at least wise, no Hermog, in l. si quis
Sect. 1. D. deleg 3.
man can impose such a Law upon himself, but that he may recede from it when he
pleases. And with the Schoolmen* a Law has power to direct such Acts as
belong to those who are subject to the Government of Thom. 112. quest. 93.
artic. 5.
another; whereupon no man, if we speak properly, does impose a Law upon his
own Acts. As no man therefore is superior to himself, so no man has
Jurisdiction over himself; because none can oblige a man against his will, but
only his Superior, and the Jurisdiction over a man's self may be dissolved at
Pleasure.

KINGS therefore, as he affirms in another place, are said to be ABOVE THE LAWS
whereby they govern their People, partly in respect of Themselves, partly in
respect of Others: Of OTHERS, in as much as they have POWER to JUDGE Cynus in l.
rescript, Cod. de precib. Imper. offerend.
according to their own CONSCIENCE, and not according to the Letter of the Law;
as also to DISPENSE in some Cases with Thom. in 1. 2. quest. 96. artic. 5. ad 3.
the very OBEDIENCE, in some with the PUNISHMENT required by the LAW.

For, he quotes Aeneas Silvius a little after saying, Equity is that which is
just beyond the written Law: Now if the Law does command one thing, and Equity
persuade another, it is fit the Emperor should temper the Rigor of the Law
with the Bridle of Equity, as He who alone may and ought to look unto that
interpretation which lies interposed between Law and Equity. Especially seeing
no Decree of the Law, although weighed with never so considerate Council, can
sufficiently answer the varieties and unthought on plottings of Man's Nature.
And seeing the Condition of human Law is such, that it runs always without
stint, and there is nothing in it which can be at a perpetual stand; it is
manifest, that in tract of time the Laws which before were just, prove
afterward to be unjust, and become now unprofitable, now harsh, now
unrighteous: for the moderating whereof there is need of the Prince, who is
Lord of the LAWS. For if it fall out, that any thing has been more obscurely
delivered therein, it is fit the Emperor should clear it, and amend that
harshness of the Laws, which he shall find to be contrary and disagreeable to
his humanity. For where it is said, that a Law, although it be hard, should yet
be observed; that respects the inferior Judges, and not the Emperor; in
whom is that Power of moderating the Laws which they call (...), or Equity,
which is so annexed to the Supremacy of the Prince, that by Aeneas Silvius de
Ortu and Authoribus Imperii, cap. 20. 21.
no Decrees of man it can be pulled from it. Thus far Aeneas Silvius out of him.

In regard of Themselves Kings are said to be exempted from Subjection to the
Laws, both because they are not tied (otherwise than for convenience and good
Example's sake) to the observance of such as are mere positive and temporary
Laws; and because they are not liable to the Civil Punishments set down for the
breach of any Law, as having no superior upon earth that may exercise any such
Power over them.

And again, says this Great Prelate, while the Laws do stand in force, Justin
Junior, Imp. in praefatione conseit 3.
it is fit that sometimes the King's Clemency should be mingled with the
severity of them; especially when by that means the subjects may be freed from
much detriment and damage: Symmach, l. 10. Ep. ult.
The Condition of the Magistrates, whose Sentence is held corrupt, if it be
milder than the Laws, being one thing; the Power of Princes, whom it becomes
to qualify the sharpness of them, a far different matter.

To this Eminently Reverend and Judicious Primate, I shall next subjoyn the In
his Preface and Life by Dr Isaac Walton.
humble, patient and learned Dr Robert Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln,
that you may see what his Opinion is in this matter. But before I give you his
Words, let me beg your favor to hear what the Modest and Holy Writer of his
Life, Dr Isaac Walton says of that Book from whence I produce them. How much
the Learned World stands obliged to Him for his Lectures de Conscientia, I
shall not attempt to declare, as being very sensible, that the Best Pens must
needs fall short in the commendation of them: So that I shall only add, that
they continue unto this day, and will do for ever, as a Complete Standard for
the Resolution of the most material doubts in Casuistical Divinity. And now
Sir, pray observe what the Bishop says.

Upon a Doubt, how may that be understood which so commonly is spoken, Salus
Populi Bishop Sanderson's Cases of Conscience, translated by Robert Codrington,
Master of Arts, Printed 1660. ninth Lecture.
est Suprema Lex, the safety of the People is the Supreme Law; he, among other
things, thus declares, There is no sober man will deny, that the Safety of the
People, that is, of the whole Commonalty, as that word comprehends the King,
together with the Subjects, is the Supreme Law; but that the Safety of the
People, that is, of the Subjects, the King being excluded, is the Supreme Law,
there is no man will affirm it, unless he be a Fool, or an Imposter; a Fool, if
he does believe what he himself says, and an Imposter, if he does not believe
it. But if any man will seriously look into the Original of this Aphorism, I do
believe he will more easily grant, that it ought more precisely to be
understood of the Safety of the Prince, than of the Safety of the Subjects.
This Saying, so tossed up and down in the Mouths of all Men, came to us from
the Romans, and was then used by them when their Republic did flourish most of
all under a Popular State: And there is no great Reason that any man should
wonder, that the People's Safety was the Supreme Law with them, with whom the
People themselves were the Supreme Power; In the Judgment therefore of those
wise Ancients, who were the first Authors of this Aphorism, the Safety of the
Supreme Power was the Supreme Law, of the People indeed in a Democracy, but of
a King in Monarchy.

But I say, it being admitted, but not granted, that this Aphorism is properly
understood of the Safety of the People, that is, of the Subjects, it is
nevertheless perversely wrested to the Prejudice of Regal Dignity, which even so
does render its Power more Ample and Illustrious in this sense. A King that
gives Laws and Statutes to his People will not be so bound up by his Laws, that
it shall not be lawful for him, the safety of the Commonwealth being in an
apparent danger, to provide for the safety of Kingdom and People committed to
him by God, even against the words of the Law; not that it is lawful for
Subjects under the pretense of the defense of their Liberty to break all the
bonds of Laws and Fidelity, and by an intolerable presumption to trample on
the Authority of their King, but that it is lawful for the Prince, in the
Preservation of his own and his Subjects Safety, to lay aside for a while all
strict observance of the Laws, and to make use a little of an Arbitrary Right,
least by too unseasonable and superstitious Reverence of the Laws, he may
suffer both his own Person, and his People that are subject to him, and even
the Laws themselves, to fall into the Power of his Enemies.

I will close up this Christian Doctrine of our Bishops with one Authority
more, and that is of our Present Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas Lord
Bishop of Sermon preached upon the aniversary solemnity of the happy
Inauguration of our dread Sovereign Lord King James 2. by Thomas Cartwright, D.
D. Dean of Rippon, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.
Chester, in his Sermon on the 6th of Feb. 1685/6;. in the Collegiate Church of
Rippon, where you will find him thus to inform you, and all other good
Subjects; So that the King may, it seems, make use of his Prerogative, as God
does of his Omnipotence, upon some extraordinary occasions: For as my Lord
Hobart well observes, The Statute Laws are made to ease him of his Labor, not
to deprive him of his Power, and that he may make a Grant Colt and Glover
against the Bishop of Litchfield.
with a Non-obstante to them: And indeed the Power of dispensing with
particular Laws, in some Emergencies, is such a Lex Coronae, such a
Prerogative, without which no Kingdom can be well governed, but Justice will be
turned into Wormwood. For there never was yet, nor ever will be, any human Law,
framed with such exact Skill and Policy, that it might not, on some occasion or
other, be burdensome to the Subject, and obstructive to the public good of
the Commonwealth: There being particular Cases and Exigencies, so infinitely
various, that it is impossible for the wit of man to foresee or prevent them.
And therefore in all Government there must be a Power Paramount to the written
Law; and we have good reason to bless God, that this is lodged but in One, and
in him whom he has set over us, to be his Vicegerent; by whose Authority,
they who break the Letter of the Law, in pure Zeal and Loyalty, to serve the
ends of Government, and to uphold the Crown on the Right Head, that does and
ought to wear it, may be relieved, and pardoned, and rewarded too.

Thus Sir, have I given you in short the Sense and Judgment of our Spiritual
Guides, the Great Fathers of the Church of England in the Point in Question
between us; I will now descend to men of less degree in the Church, but they
shall be men of great and eminent Learning, sober Understandings, and of
examplary Piety and Gravity, and you shall hear how they All concur in the same
Judgment as concerning this Point of Regal Sovereignty.

The First shall be the Reverend Dr Peter Heylin. whose knowledge was extensive
as the Earth, and who had a parfect familiarity with the present State In the
Account of Dr Heylin's Life.
of all the Countries in the World, (as the Ingenious Author of his Life
informs us) and one who is honored by all true Sons of the Church of England,
with a due veneration for his Learned and Elabourate Works. And He speaks thus.

He (viz. the King) has Authority by his Prerogative Royal to dispense with
the Rigor of the Laws, and sometimes to pass by a Statute with a Non-obstante.

The Learned and Judicious Dr Isaac Barrow, late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, in his Treatise concerning the Popes Supremacy affirms thus -- It is
indeed a proper Indowment of an absolute Sovereignty, immediately and immutably
constituted by God, with no Terms or Rules limitting it, that its will declared
in way of Precept, Proclamations concerning the Sanction of Laws, the
Abrogation of them, the Dispensation with them, should be observed.

And says he a few Leaves futher, The Power of enacting and dispencing with
Ecclesiastical Laws touching exterior Discipline did of old belong to the
Emperor. And it was reasonable that it should; because old Lawss might not
conveniently suit with the Present State of things, and the public welfare;
because new Laws might conduce to the good of Church and State, the care of
which is incombent on him; because the Prince is bound to use his Power and
Authority to promote Gods Service, the best way of doing which may be by
framing Orders conducible thereunto.

And in another place he declares that it is a Privilege of Sovereigns to
grant Privileges, Exemptions, Dispensations.

Thus says the Reverend Dr Sherlock, Master of the Temple, in a positive
manner, it does not become any man, who can think three Consequences off, to Dr
Sherelock's Case of Resistance, chap. 6.
talk of the Authority of Laws, in derogation to that Authority of the
Sovereign Power. The Sovereign Power made the Laws, and can repeal them, and
dispense with them, and make new Laws: the only Power and Authority of the Laws
is in the Power which can make and execute Laws. Sovereign Power is inseparable
from the Person of a Sovereign Prince.

I shall in the next place give you the words of the Ingenious, and most
painful Searcher into Truths, John Nalson, Dr. of Laws, whose indefatigable
Industry has sufficiently appeared in those Volumes of Historical Collections
he lived Dr Nalson's Common Interest of King and People, chap. 6.
to see published to the World, his words are These.

In the Kings Power it is to remit the Severities of the Penal Laws, whereby he
may manifest his Goodness and Clemency as well as his Greatness and Justice, by
graciously pardoning the Smaller Breaches of his Laws, and the more Capital
Offenses which he might most justly punnish.

And who in the World can dispute this? When, as Dr. Hick's in his Jovian tells
us for certain, that upon whomsoever God is understood to bestow the Sovereign
Authority, he must also be understood to bestow upon him all the Jura
Majestatis, or essential Rights of Sovereignty, according to that Maxim, Qui
dat esse, dat et omnia pertinentia ad esse; He that gives the Essence, gives
also the Properties belonging to the Essence. And does not all mankind consent
in this, that the King is the fountain of mercy as well as of Justice? Surely
then the Penal Laws, especially those made merely for diversity of Opinions in
Religion, which (not to call them unchristian; since our Savior never offered
any external force and Compulsion to make Case of Resistance.
men obey his Laws, as the Learned master of the Temple assures us, but
however) are in themselves by experience proved very unreasonable, ought at
least to be Subject to the Goodness and Mercy of the Prince, to dispense with
them, when He in his Wisdom shall judge it most necessary for the Good of his
People in general. For as the Egyptian Hieroglyphick for Government was an
Eye in a Scepter: So the chief Magistrate is like a watchman De jure
Uniformitatis Ecclesiasticae: by Hugh Davis, L. L. B. lib. 3. chap. 15.
upon a Tower, who is to look down and view the general state of his People,
and to conduct himself accordingly.

The Reverend Dr Puller, in his most extraordinary Book concerning the
Moderation os the Church of England, says, that (...), Moderation, as it is
now generally used, is a word borrowed from the Law, and is used by the Masters
Chap. 1.
thereof, to denote such a gentle and benign temper, as disposes those who
have the Administration of the Laws (which, You see, is the Imperial Sovereign,
who has the Supreme Jurisdiction over all others, Davia's ut sup. lib. 2.
chap. 6.
and Jurisdiction is defined by the Civilians to be, Potestatem Juris dicendi,
a Power of giving Laws to others) to remit of their Rigor, where either
(first) they press too hard upon particular persons; or else (secondly) to
supply the defects of the said Laws, where they provide not sufficiently for
particular cases; in order thereunto, squaring their Determination by the
natural rules of Justice and goodness, rather than by the Letter of the Law.

And a little further, the same Doctor Dr Puller's Moderation of the Church of
England, chap. 1.
goes on, saying, moderation, in the Forensick sense wherein we take it, is
defined by Aristotle to be the Correction of (...). Arist. Eth. l. 5. chap. 14.
the Laws wherein because of their Universality they are deficient. From
whence, as it must be supposed, to be confined to those to whom the
Administration of the Laws is committed, who Alone can have the Power of
correcting them: So nothing therefore will be further requisite to show, than
that it disposes them; where the Laws press too hard upon particular persons,
to relax the Rigor of them; as on the other side, where they do not
sufficiently provide for them, to supply their defect.

All Laws, we know, are for the punishment of Evil Doers, or for the praise of
them that do well: but it being impossible so to provide for the punishment of
evil doers, as not sometimes to bring even the Innocent within the compass of
it; because what, generally considered, ought to be looked upon and censured as
evil, may yet upon sundry considerations and circumstances have nothing of evil
in it, or at least be worthy of pardon; either the Innocent must suffer
together with the nocent, (which so benign a virtue as that we treat of cannot
allow) or it must dispose those to whom the Administration of the Laws is
committed to remit of their rigor in such particulars, and exempt them from
the undergoing of it: it being in like manner impossible for Laws so to provide
for the encouragement of those who deserve well, as that sometime such may not
be past over or neglected; partly because all cases cannot be foreseen by the
Lawgiver; and partly by reason of the shortness of his expressions; either
some who may deserve encouragement may be excluded from partaking of it, (which
so benign a virtue Est Scriptum Legis angustum inter pretatio diffusa. Senec.
l. 4. controv. 27.
as we speak of cannot casily permit) or it must dispose those to whom the
Administration of the Laws is committed to ampliate their favors; and to take
such within the compass of them.

Once again, Equity and moderation, says He in the next page, is the public
honesty of the Laws; without which, Justice often would be turned into
Wormwood: it contains the excellent Spirit ((...)) the mind and reason of the
Law, and is the most Sacred and venerable part of it: As it is the honor and
perfection of the Laws, so it is the Sanctuary of such as happen to be
oppressed by the Rigor of the Letter.

I will now, Sir, trouble you with but one instance more upon this Subject,
(though I could multiply, I am confident, Authorities of this kind even beyond
your patience) and that is of One, that will needs be Anonymus, and therefore
so he shall pass for me, but his words are These.

It is the Prerogative of the King, to The Harmony of Divinity and Law, in a
discourse about not resisting of Sovereign Princes.
dispense with many Acts of Parliament by a * Non-obstante, or clause of
notwithstanding, especially such, as bind him from any Prerogative, that is
solely, and inseparably annexed to his Sacred Person, and Royal Power.

And even to the Asterick *There is this marginal Note, viz. 44. Eliz. in the
house of Commons Sir George Moor said; We know the Power of her Majesty cannot
be restrained by any Act. Why therefore should we thus talk? admit we should
make the statute with a Non-obstante, yet the Queen may grant a Townsend's
Collect. page 234.
Patent with a Non-obstante to cross this Non-obstante.

I have done, Sir, now with our Reverend Prelates and Doctors of the Church of
England as to this Particular, and hope, I have sufficiently proved to you,
that their Judgment and Doctrine does clearly warrant this Great Prerogative of
dispencing with Penal Laws, to be in the King.

Let us see in the next place what were the Reasons that induced the Reverend
Judges in Westminster Hall, (who (the Law says) are the Expositors of Acts of
Parliament, and are likewise Custodes jurati ss. Praerogativae Regiae,) so
openly and solemnly, after mature deliberation, to declare their Resolutions in
this Point for the King.

The Reasons that persuaded them were These that follow, viz.

I. That the Kings of England are Sovereign Princes. II. That the Laws of
England are the King's Laws. III. That therefore it is an Incident Inseparable
Prerogative in the Kings of England; as in all other Sovereign Princes to
dispense with Penal Laws in particular cases, and upon particular necessary
Reasons. IV. That of these Reasons, and these Necessities, the King himself is
the sole Judge. And then which is Consequent upon all. V. That this is not a
Trust invested in, or granted to the King by the People, but is the ancient
Remain of the Sovereign Power, and Prerogative of the Kings of England, which
never yet was taken from them, nor can be.
Now, Sir, if such has been the Doctrine of our most Eminent Clergy of the
Church of England, (and in it they have delivered to us nothing but the words
of Truth in Righteousness) that the King by his Imperial Sovereignty, when he
shall see the Necessity of the State to require it, (of which he is the only
Judge,) may dispense with Penal Laws; How can you, or any man, who is a sincere
lover of the Church of England, be dissatisfied with the Resolution of our
Reverend Judges in this matter, seeing the Reasons they went upon were only
such as were exactly correspondent with the avowed Doctrines before recited;
and that by this Declaration of theirs, the Law of the Kingdom of England
concerning this sovereign Power in the Crown, is no more, than what was before
publicly asserted to be the Divinity of the Kingdom.

Besides, Lex vigilat pro Rege, says the Law, and the Judges are sworn to
maintain all the Kings Prerogatives; which are part of the Law of England, and
comprehended within the same; therefore it Co. 2 Inst. f. 496.
is said, that Imperij Majestas est Tutelae Salus, the Dignity of the Prince is
the Peoples 1. Inst. 64. b.
Security. The Kings Prerogative and Privileges, are incident to his Crown,
and He need not prescribe in any Prerogative, for it is as ancient as his Lane.
26.
Crown is, and is not only the Law of the Exchequer, but the Law of the Land,
as that which is his by the ancient Laws of the Land. Wherefore the Judges of
the N. Bendl. 117.
Courts of Westminster are to judge in matters of Prerogative by this Rule,
that whatsoever may be for the Benefit and Profit Sheph. tit. Prerog.
of the King, shall be taken most largely for him, and whatever may be against
him, and for his disprofit shall be taken strictly: and it is the Duty of every
Judge of all Courts, High and Low, to take great care to preserve the Kings
Right, and for that purpose to take every thing at the 2 To. rep. 508.
best for him.

And, Sir, unto the Judges the People are bound lastly and finally to submit
themselves for matter of Law, according to the Royallists defense chap. 5. page
49.
opinion of the Learned Author of the Royallists Defense.

But I remember likewise you seemed to startle at the thoughts of this Power;
and were afraid, if at any time the King should think it necessary and
convenient to exert it, and to grant a general Liberty of Conscience, that the
Church of England would be extremely shaken in her security. What strange
Jealousies and Suspicions some weak men may have, I suppose it will not be here
worth while to consider; but certainly our Great Supporters of the Ark of God
can never allow themselves in so feminine a passion. They know they have an
infinitely wise God, and a most Gracious King to trust to: this has been their
Doctrine, and ought we not to practice it? They say,

1. They have the Care and Providence of God for their Security, who is King
Jovian chap. 12.
of Kings, Lord of Lords, and the only Ruler of Princes; and that the Hearts of
Kings are in his Rule and Governance, and He does dispose and turn them as
seems best to his godly Wisdom: according to what Solomon said, and perhaps
upon his own experience, That the Kings Heart is in the hand of the Lord, as
the Rivers of Water, he turns it whithersoever he will. SO THAT THEY HAVE ALL
THE SECURITY THAT ANY PEOPLE IN THE WORLD EVER HAD, HAVE, OR OUGHT TO HAVE.
Besides,

2. They have a most Gracious King to trust to. For,

1. They have his Royal Word, that he His Majesty's most Gracious Declaration,
etc.
will protect and maintain the Church of England, in the free exercise of her
Religion, as by Law established; and can she ever be trusted in safer Hands
than his? Bishop of Chesters Sermon ut sup.
He has done more than ever any of us durst ever venture to look for, to give
us Confidence in him; enough to puzzle our Understandings, as well as our
Gratitude: And how can he give us better security than he has done? Shall we
suspect him without cause? or remain dissatisfied when he has given us the
best security that our Cause admits of? To suspect our Prince, where we cannot
help our selves, is of all fears the most unreasonable.

2. Again, We have the Conscience of the Prince for our security, who has
Jovian ut sup.
all the moral Obligations, and the fear of God, to keep him from oppressing
us, so long as we keep our selves within the Conscience of the Duty which we
owe unto him.

The Common Principles of Humanity, Justice and Equity, are engraven by the
Finger of God upon the Minds of Kings, as well as upon other Men's; and they
cannot do wrong upon any particular Person, much less to great numbers of their
Subjects, without undergoing the same uneasy remorse that other men do, when
they injure one another. This has been found by sad experience in Pagan
Princes. -- And if Conscience be a restraining Principle in Heathen Princes, if
they cannot without such Soul torments pervert Justice, and violate their
Oaths, and the Laws, it must needs much more be a powerful Principle of
Restraint to Christian Kings, who are taught to know that they are Gods
Ministers, and that he will call them to a severe Account for oppressing his
People over whom he set them: And shall not the fear of God's Anger and
Judgments keep the Sovereign from injuring of them?

3. But further still, As the Church of England has the Prince's Conscience,
for her Security, so she has his honor too. For Princes (like other men) are
tender of their Honor, and good Name, and are powerfully restrained by shame
from doing Evil to their Subjects. -- Though they may be desirous for their
honor to have the Times computed from their Conquests, yet the same Principle
of Honor will ordinarily make them ashamed to have them computed from their
Massacres, and Persecutions, which will but get them the Surname of the Bloody,
or the Tyrant, unto the end of the World. Honor, as Moralists observe, is a
Secondary, or Civil Conscience.

And as for our Prince, who was ever so exceeding tender of his Honor as He?
so just to all, and has He not Bishop. of Chesters Sermon. ut sup.
promised to uphold and maintain this Church, and her Legitimate Children? --
He knows, that ours is a Religion that has always asserted the Rights of the
Crown, with life and fortune: and how cheerfully the Members of it have spent
their Blood and Treasure in his Own, his late Majesty's, and his Father's
Service, and how they stand affected to his Prerogative.

And He is very well content, we should be as faithful to God, as we are to
him; as true to our Religion, as to our King: God preserve and prosper him for
it.

Now since our own Religion (as to the free exercise of it) is thus Secured to
us, and seeing that by his Majesty's Gracious Declaration he is willing that no
man should be forced to his Religion, or drove against his Conscience from the
Religion he professes; and seeing it is manifestly necessary, that, as Sails,
so Laws, are to be turned, and as Occasion, time and circumstance, and reason
of state shall direct, either to be altered, or revoked: And if Acts of
Parliament formerly made to try what good effects they could work in the state,
do apparently prove mischievous and ineffectual by their too great rigor and
violence, and by the Great Numbers of those that are of dissenting Judgments?

What dishonor can it be for the King to lay them asleep for a while to stay
those passionate heats, and fierce oppositions of such as seem adversaries to
his Grace, or for any Parliament to repeal them, for the same Reasons, non
coercet sed provocat violentia, For too heavy a hand upon those whom the Law
casts down, shows the will rather to oppress the Offender, then to cure the
offense? It Is the greatest honor to Kings, that their mercy, like that of the
Almighty, is more eminent than their Justice, and that their Benches, and
Courts, can witness more compassion than severity; for He that sets open the
Prison doors in so wise and gracious a manner, means not to conquer the
Hearts and Consciences of his People by Torment, but to winn them by mercy and
sweetness. Clemency is a virtue sometimes of as great policy as Piety, because
it begets Love, and Love breeds Loyalty, commands the very Soul, and lays the
Body at the Feet of the obliger: Mercy kindles Fire and Zeal in the Hearts of
Subjects.

Liberty of Conscience is a Natural Right, and therefore our Savior compelled
none to receive his Doctrine, but est Dominus non Cogens, he is not a
constraining Lord, but committing his Liberty Grotius.
to the will, said publicly to all, if any man will come after me; and to his
Apostles, Will ye also go away? and his Disciples were not Commanders, but
Instructors and Teachers, which was their Commission. Compulsion and terrene
Penalties are out of his Jurisdiction, whose Kingdom was not of this World,
which he acknowledges not only in speech, but in practice: For when the
Disciples would have commanded Fire from Heaven to have consumed the Luke 9. 54.
Samaritans, he rebuked them; and when he was apprehended by the Chief Priests
and Elders, he could have commanded Math. 26. 53.
Legions of Angels, but would not. It is Irreligion to take away the Liberty of
Religion; so Tertullian, ad Irreligiosiatis Elogium Chap. de Act. Imp. f. 139.
concurrit, this concurreth to the commendation of Irreligion, to take away the
liberty of Religion, etc. and therefore, says the Apostle, we have not
Dominion over Your Faith. 2 Cor. 1. 24.


Sir, I cannot tell how well to shut up this Discourse without the words of
that Learned and most Reverend Dr. Gerard Langbaine, who was Provost of Queen's
College in Oxford, so well known to all, not only at home, but abroad, that
the Famous Rhetorician, Longinus, could scarce speak any thing beyond the merit
of so excellent a Person: This Doctor in his Judicious Refutation of the
Damnable League and Covenant, (which was then so furiously contended for) to be
imposed upon the Consciences of those who expressed their Zeal to his Majesty's
righteous cause, in which, without all peradventure, he spoke the inward
Sentiments of all the Loyal Suffering Clergy of England, does there most
admirably instruct us, what a sandy Foundation that is, which supports
Persecution for Conscience sake. His words follow.

Persecution in matters of mere Religion is a Course against the Nature of
Langbain's Review of the Covenant, Printed 1661.
Religion it self, for Faith, the Soul of Religion, is an inward Act of the
Soul, which all the Tyranny in the World, that the malice of the Devil can
invent, or the wit of man can exercise, can neither plant where it is not, nor
extirpate where it is. It is the gift of God, freely begotten in the Hearts of
Men, not by threats and Terrors, not by Tortures and Massacres, but by the
quiet still voice of the word preached, Suadenda, non cogenda. And therefore
St. Paul, though a Lawful Governor in the Church, flatly disclaims any
domineering Power over the Conscience. As for the outward profession of
Religion, neither is that Subject to force and violence: A man may confefs
Christ, and his Faith in him, as freely in bonds, as at Liberty; as gloriously
upon the Cross, as upon the Throne. Fear indeed may incline a weak Conscience
to dissemble his Opinion, but cannot constrain him to alter it: Fire and Faggot
are strong Arguments of a weak Cause, undeniable Evidences of Cruelty in Those
that use them, but slender, motives of Credibility to beget faith in those that
suffer by them. Lastly, for the external, free, and public practice of
Religious Duties, that I grant may be restrained by the outward violence of
man, but when it is so, it is not required by God, who never expects to reap
what he did not fow.

In another place, he says, the most Ancient Apologists for the Christian
Faith, use this as an Argument to prove the Religion of their Persecutors to be
false, and their own true, That stood in need of humane force to maintain it,
but theirs stood by the sole Power of God.

It is against (says he a little further) the Innate Principle of the Law of
Nature, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. Those, who plead most for
extirpation of Heretics, when it comes to be their own Turn to be under the
Cross, stand for Liberty of Conscience, and declaim against Persecution for
Religion, as a thing utterly unlawful; and surely if we will not suffer it from
others, we may not use it our selves.

Therefore, as Dr Puller rightly says, if ever the Practice of Moderation, as
Puller's Moderation. To the Reader.
well as any Discourse thereof, were seasonable; it may be supposed now, when,
for ought we know, the lasting happiness of the Kingdom and Church, may depend
immediately upon this rare and desirable Temper, acknowledged of all most
excellent.

I will conclude all with that Admirable Sentence of Dr Barrow in his
forementioned Treatise, that Relief of the Oppressed, or Clemency to the
distressed, are noble Flowers in every Sovereign Crown.

Thus, Sir, You see how ready I am, as far as my Abilities will extend, to
contribute to the Satisfaction of Your Judgment. I shall be as zealous still to
go on in so pious a Duty, if there be any remaining doubts and Scruples you
will make known to,

SIR, Your humble Servant, etc.

FINIS.

