ISA. 66.21. I will also take of them for Priests and for Levites, says the
Lord. EPHESIANS. 4.8, 11, 12, 13. When he ascended up on high he gave gifts unto
men. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. HEB. 5.4, 5. And no
man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron.
So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest; but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. 1 TIMOTHY 4.14.
Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. LUTH. Tom. 4. Lat. Ien. fol. 19. Non
fortunat Deus labores eorum qui non sunt vocati, and quanquam salutaria quaedam
afferant tamen non aedificant. Ius Divinum Ministerii Evangelici. OR THE DIVINE
RIGHT OF THE Gospel Ministry: Divided into two Parts.

The first Part containing A Justification of The Gospel Ministry in general.
The Necessity of Ordination thereunto by Imposition of hands. The Unlawfulness
of private men's ^ssuming to themselves either the Office or Work of the
Ministry without a lawful Call and Ordination.


The second Part containing A Justification of the present Ministers of
England, both such as were Ordained during the prevalency of Episcopacy from
the ^oul aspe^sion of Antichristianism: And those who have been Ordained since
its abolition, from the unjust imputation of Novelty: Proving that a Bishop and
Presbyter are all one in Scripture; and that Ordination by Presbyters is most
agreeable to the Scripture-Patern.

Together with an Appendix, wherein the Judgment and Practice of Antiquity
about the whole matter of Episcopacy, and especially about the Ordination of
Ministers* is briefly discussed.

Published by the Provincial Assembly of London.

LONDON, Printed by John Legate and Abraham Miller, 1654.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT is reported of Bucer, that he was so eager of Peace with Luth^r, that he
was like to a man Qui prae nimia aviditate etiam foeces haurire^, who by an
overmuch greediness after Unity, was ready to swallow down many of Luthers
errors. For our parts, Though we should be loath to buy Peace with the loss of
Truth, yet such have been the unexpressible mischiefs that the divisions of
Brethren have brought upon this Nation, and such is our earnest desire after an
happy Accommodation, that we hope we can truly close, though not with the
former, yet with another saying of Bucers, In a Letter of his unto a godly
Minister named Ambro^i^a Bla^r^rus.
That we would willingly purchase with the loss of our lives, the removing of
the infinite scandals that have been given to the Churches of Christ by the
divisions of Christians.

Eusebius reports of Constantine (though a great Emperor) That he was more
troubled with the dissentions of the Church, Eusebius. lib. 3, de vita Constant.
then with all the wars in his Dominions: That he took them so to heart that
he could not sleep quietly for them; yea, although he had a spiritfull of
heroic val^ur, yet the dissentions of the Church were such evils to him as to
cause him to shed many a tear, etc. Our prayer to God is, that the same
affection toward the Churches of Christ in these three Nations may be kindled
in all our breasts. And We doubt not but through the grace of God We are able in
Sincerity to profess with Luther, Vobis or^ persuadeatis, tam cupide me
amplecti concordiam, quam cupide velim mihi Dominum Iesum propitium semper fore.

Luth. Eccl. Argentinensis Pastoribus.


That we are as desirous to embrace Peace and Concord, as We are desirous to
have the Lord Jesus to be propitious to us.

And therefore foreseeing that this ensuing Treatise will meet with many
Adversaries of different Persuasions, and with much opposition, We thought fit
to give the Reader notice of our intentions here, lest We should be thought to
be enemies to Peace, and hinderers of that long desired and often prayed for
Union between dissenting Brethren.

There are six sorts and ranks of men whom We have occasion to deal with in
this Book.

1. Such as are against the very Office of the Ministry, and that affirm, That
there is no such Office instituted by Christ to be perpetual in his Church. We
look upon this Assertion as destructive unto Christian Religion, and to the
souls of Christians.

2. Such as say, That it is lawful for any men that suppose themselves gifted
(though neither Ordained, nor approved by able men) to assume unto themselves a
power to preach the Word, and Administer the Sacraments. This Opinion We judge
to be the highway to all Disorder and Confusion, an inlet to Errors and
Heresies, and a Door opened for Priests and Jesuits to broach their Popish and
Antichristian Doctrine.

3. Such as hold, That the Ministry of England is Antichristian, That our
Churches are no true Churches, but Synagogues of Satan, and that there is no
Communion to be held with us. This Opinion We conceive to be not only false and
uncharitable, but contradictory to Peace and Unity.

4. Such as say, That Episcopacy is an higher Order of Ministry above
Presbytery by Divine Right, That Christ has given the sole Power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction unto Bishops; And that Ordination of Ministers is so
appropriated to them by the Gospel, that all Ordinations by single Presbyters
are null and void, and that Sacraments by them administered are no Sacraments.
These Assertions We look upon not only ^s groundless and unscriptural, but as
cruel, and utterly overthrowing all the Protestant Reformed Churches and
Ministers.

Now though We hope We can truly say, that We have with all Meekness and
Christian Moderation managed the Debate with these four sorts of Adversaries,
and shall be ready to exercise all Offices of Christian Love and Affection
toward them, and by requiting good for evil, labor to heap coals of fire upon
their heads; yet notwithstanding such is the great Distance between Them and Us
in Judgment and Practice, and such is the bitterness of their Spirits in
their Opposition against Us, that We have little hope for the present (till the
Lord be pleased to work a happy change of Judgment in them) of any real and
hearty Accord and Agreement with them.

5. A fifth sort are our Reverend Brethren of New and Old-England of the
Congregational way, who hold Our Churches to be true Churches, and Our
Ministers true Ministers, though they differ from Us in some lesser things. We
have been necessitated to fall upon some things, wherein they and We disagree,
and have represented the Reasons of Our Dissent. But yet We here profess,

That this Disagreement shall not hinder Us from any Christian Accord with them
in Affection. That We can willingly write upon Our Study-doors that Motto which
Mr Jeremiah Burroughes (who a little before his Death did ambitiously endeavor
after Union amongst Brethren as some of Us can testify) persuades all Scholars
unto, Opinionum varietas, and opi^antium unitas non sunt (...). Heart-divisions.


And that We shall be willing to entertain any sincere Motion (as We have also
formerly Declared in Our Printed Vindication) that shall further a happy
Accommodation between Us.

6. The last sort are the Moderate, Godly Episcopal men, that hold Ordination
by Presbyters to be lawful and valid; That a Bishop and a Presbyter are one
and the same Order of Ministry, that are Orthodox in Doctrinal Truths, and yet
hold, That the Government of the Church by a perpetual Moderatour is most
agreeable to Scripture-patern.

Though herein We differ from them, yet We are far from thinking that this
difference should hinder a happy Union between them and Us. Nay, We crave leave
to profess to the world, That it will never (as We humbly conceive) be well
with England till there be an Union endeavored and effected between all those
that are Orthodox in Doctrine, though differing among themselves in some
Circumstances about Church Government.

And the Lord has strangely made way for this long-desired Union, by the
bitter, woeful and unutterable fruits of Our Divisions, which have almost
destroyed not only the Ministry, but even the very heart and life of Religion
and Godliness.

Memorable is the Story of Bishop Ridley and Bishop Hooper, two famous Martyrs,
who when they were out of Prison, disagreed about certain Ceremonial Garments,
but when they were put into Prison they quickly and easily agreed together.
Adversity united them whom Prosperity divided. The time is now come wherein the
ruin of all the Godly, Orthodox and Ordained Ministry, is by some men designed
and endeavored: And therefore though hitherto We have continued sinfully
divided, yet now the Consideration of our Common Danger, and the Preservation
of the Ministry, and therein the Preservation of the Glorious Ordinances,
Churches and precious Truths of Jesus Christ, should marvellously constrain Us
to study to find out, and being found out cordially to embrace all lawful
ways to Unity and Agreement.

Thus much We thought fit to signify, that so Our Endeavors in the ensuing
Discourse may not be mis^interpreted and misrepresented.

There are two other things also which We are necessitated to communicate unto
the Christian Reader.

First, That this Book should have come out two Years ago, but was hindered by
multitude of necessary and indispensable Businesses intervening. And that since
our first undertaking of it, there have been many Treatises written of most of
these Subjects (of which We speak) to very good purpose, which had prevailed
with Us to have spared Our Pains, had We not been encouraged by a saying of
Austines, That it is good and profitable to the Church of Christ, that the same
things be written of by diverse Men in diverse Books, because those Books which
come to the view of some, will not come to the sight of others, and by this
means the Truths of Christ will be the sooner and easier spread and propagated.

We confess that We have been necessitated in the Point of Episcopacy, to
borrow some things out of Smectymnuus, and Our Reverend Presbyterian Divines,
in their Conference at the Isle of Wight, and in Our Discourse about Election
out of Mr Hudson, and some others: Which We have done, because being to handle
the same Subjects, We thought it needless to add any thing to what they have
said; and also, That by this means We might revive the Memory of those Books
which We believe are quite forgotten by most, and are assured were never
sufficiently answered by any.

Secondly, The other thing which We would make known is, That in this Our large
Treatise We have purposedly declined all affectation of Language, We have not
labored (...) to feast the ear with curious phrases. Our endeavor is to speak
non diserta sed fortia. We have always disliked those Books which have in them
(...), a Sea of words, and but a drop of sound Reason. Our Care has been more
after Matter then Words. And We hope the unbiassed and judicious Reader will
find that though the Garment with which We clothe Our Matter, be rough and
hairy like Esau, yet the Voice is always the Voice of Jacob. For We have
studiously avoided all Bitterness of Speech, even against those that make it a
great part oftheirReligion to rail and reproach Us, and who account Us the
filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things. We have learned of Our
blessed Savior, To bless those that curse Us, Matthew. 5.
to do good to them that hate Us, and to pray for them which despitefully use
Us and persecute Us. And of the blessed Apostle, To instruct them in meekness
that oppose Us, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
if God peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledgement of the
Truth.

It is a great Comfort to Us, that the Government of the Church is upon Christ's
shoulders, and he that could bear the wrath of God, no doubt will uphold his
own Government, maugre all opposition. And it is no less Joy unto Us, that the
Ministers of Christ are Stars in his right hand, and therefore safe and secure
from the hurt of unreasonable men. We read in the Revelation of a Woman
clothed with the Sun and the Moon under her feet, and a Crown of twelve
Stars upon her head. This Woman represents the true Church; Every true
Christian is clothed with Christ's Righteousness as with the Sun, and has
the world as the Moon under his feet, and wears the Ministers and their
Gospel-Doctrine as a Crown upon his head. He that treads this Crown under his
feet has little of true Christianity in him. But howsoever, though We be
trodden under feet, and reproachfully used for what We have written, yet it is
no little Satisfaction to Us that We have discharged Our Consciences both to
God and men. And if some people will not wear Us as Crowns upon their heads, We
shall wear their Reproaches as Our Crown; and shall pray unto the Lord (who
only teaches to profit) that he would give a good Success to this Undertaking
of Ours for the Glory of his Name, the Benefit of his Church; and more
especially for the Establishing of our respective Congregations, That he would
direct, protect, providefor, support, sanctify and comfort the Godly Ministry
against all the sad Discouragements they meet with, That he would keep out
Popery, root out Error, Her^sie, Atheism and all Profaneness, and make Peace
and Truth, Holiness and Righteousness to kiss one another in these three
Nations.

The PREFACE.
THe Necessity and Excellency of the Gospel Ministry is so transcendently
great, as that it cannot but be accounted a very glorious Service, in all those
that shall undertake to represent it in its Beauty to the Sons of men, and to
vindicate it from all that seek to asperse, undermine and destroy it. Our
Savior Christ when he Ascended up into Heaven, left the Ministry as his
choicest Legacy next to the Gift of his holy Spirit; he gave unto his Ministers
(which he gave to no earthly Monarch) the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
16.19. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 Cor. 4.1. Heb. 13.17.
he committed to them the Word of Reconciliation, he made them Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, and Watchmen ^ver the precious Souls of his people. There is
hardly any thing necessary for man in his Natural or Civil Relation, but the
Ministry is compared to it. Are Light and Stars necessary? Is Sa^^ necessary?
Are Rulers, Shepherds, Mat. 5.13, 14. Rev. 1.20. Chap. 2.1. Heb. 13.17. 1 Cor.
4.1. 1 Cor. 3.9. Chap. 4.15. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 3.10, 12 Isa. 52.8. Ezekiel.
3.17. 2 King. 13.14.
Stewards, Ambassadors, Husbandmen, Builders, Angels, Chariots and Horsemen
necessary? Ministers are called, The Light of the world, The Salt of the earth,
Stars in Christ's right hand, They are Angels, Rulers, Ambassadors, Stewards,
Husbandmen, Fathers, Shepherds, Builders, Watchmen, The Chariots and Horsemen of
Israel. The people of Constantinople professed they could sooner want the Sun
then Chrysostom's Ministry. And Chrysostom tells us, That Herod might very well
have saved John Baptist notwithstanding his Oath, for his Oath was to give the
daughter of Herodias what she should ask, though it were to half his Kingdom,
but John Baptist's head was more worth then all his Kingdom.

Hence it is, That the Devil in all Ages has labored by his wicked
Instruments to discountenance, disparage and overthrow the Ministry, as knowing
that it is a spiritual Engine in the hand of the Lord of Hoasts to batter down
his Strong holds, and designed for this very purpose to bring people from the
power of Satan unto the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

In the Old Testament, though the Ministry that then was, was acknowledged to
be of Divine Institution, yet even then it was by a carnal part of the World
opposed, as a superfluous humane Invention, and the Persons to whom that
Ministry was committed were in their several Generations vilified and traduced
as a Society of men which rather sought some worldly, carnal, personal
interest, then the sacred things of Gods Kingdom. Thus Enoch who had this
Testimony that he pleased God, ^ndured hard speeches which ungodly sinners
spoke against him. Noah a Preacher of Righteousness was not believed in his
Generation, they did not, they would not know any thing till the Flood came and
swept them all away. Moses a Prophet mighty in word and deed had Jannes and
Jambres to resist him in Egypt, and Corah and his company to withstand him in
the Wilderness. Elijah that man of God, whom one calls an Earthly Angel, and
an heavenly Mortal, who whilst he lived on Earth below, commanded the Heavens
and Clouds that are above, yet was he persecuted by Jezebel, and accounted by
Ahab both an Enemy to him and to the State, and accused to his face as the
Troubler of Israel. Thus Jeremiah, sanctified from the Womb, was smitten and
imprisoned, Michaiah imprisoned, Urijah slain with the Sword, Zechariah stoned
to death.

In the New Testament John Baptist who was filled with the holy Ghost from his
Mothers womb, was beheaded. And Christ Jesus himself, who was not ashamed to be
styled the Minister of the Circumcision, The Bishop of our souls, The Apostle
and High Priest of our profession, was crucified between two thieves. The holy
Apostles of whom the world was not worthy, were not worthy to live in the
world, but were despised and rejected of men, and accounted the scum and
offscouring of the world.

In the ten first Persec^tions, The Devil especially endeavored the ruin of
the Godly and Learned Ministry: It is said expressly of the sixth Persecution,
That the Emperor Maximinus raised it against the Teachers and Leaders of the
Church, thinking that if these Captains were removed out of the way, he should
the easilier prevail against the rest. The greatest Design th^^ Julian the
Apostate had for the overthrowing the Christian Religion, was by destroying of
Learning, and taking away the means of subsis^ence from the Ministry.

The Scripture tells us, that for the space of 1260 days (that is, all the time
of Antichrists reign) the two Witnesses should prophestein sackcloth, and this
sackcloth is not yet put off, nor as yet likely to be.

For there are a Generation of men risen up amongst us, that say, That it is
the greatest cheat that ever was put upon Christians, to make them believe that
there is a distinct Office of the Ministry p^culiar to some men and not to
others. This they call a Monopolizing of the Ministry, and the worst of all
Monopolies. And they say, just as Corah and his Company, You take too much upon
you, ye sons of Levi* Are not all the people of God holy? And may not any man
that is gifted preach, though he be not Ordained? But in the mean time they
forget, that this Speech of Corahs was accounted Rebellion, and that the earth
was not able to bear it, but opened her mouth and swallowed him up, and the
rest of his companions. It was heretofore accounted a great fault for a
Minister to be a Justice of Peace, and t^ought incompatible with his Calling,
and impossible for one man to wait upon both. But there are many in our days,
that continuing in their Civil Callings, think themselves able to discharge the
Ministerial. And although the Apostle out of the sense of the weightiness of
it, cried out, Who is sufficient for these things? Yet there are very many that
think every man almost sufficient. And as Jeroboam made Priests of the lowest
of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi, and it was reckoned as his
great sin. So it is with us, The lowest of the people and such as are not
called to the Ministry, nor trained up in the Schools of the Prophets, are
become Preachers, and cried up as the Nonesuch of our times.

There are diverse ways by which some men endeavor to destroy the Ministry.

1. By railing upon and reviling their persons, and raising all manner of
reproaches against them, as if they were the only Incendiaries of Church and
State, pestilent fellows, the causers of all the disturbance in the
Commonwealth.

2. By crying down the present Ministry as Antichristian, because made (as they
say) by Antichristian Bishops.

3. By taking away their Maintenance.

4. By setting up the basest and meanest of the people, and such as have no
Arts nor Knowledge in the Tongues, to be Preachers, that thereby they might
make the world believe, That the Ministerial Office is of all other the lowest
and the easiest.

5. By d^crying the very Office it self.

These with others of the like Nature, are the ways and means by which men
seek to ruin the Ministry, and thereby Religion, and to open a wide gap to all
Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Profaneness and Atheism. Herein dealing with
us as Alexander did with the Athenians, who desired to make Peace with them
upon condition that they would deliver eight of their chief men into his hands.
Demosthenes to dissuade the Athenians from delivering them up, tells them a
Fable of the Wolves and the Sheep: The Wolves desired to make Peace with the
Sheep, upon condition they would deliver up their Dogs to be destroyed, which
they had no sooner done, but the Wolves presently devoured the Sheep: Even so
when once not only the Persons of Ministers are disgraced, and their
Maintenance taken away, but when the very Calling and Office of the Ministry is
denied, and liberty given to every man that will to preach, then will the
Wolves devour the Sheep of Christ, then will Errors, Heresies, Blasphemy,
Atheism and Popery, come in like a mighty flood, then will ruin and
desolation come like an armed man upon that Nation where this is practiced,
without remedy.

And therefore to testify our Love unto the Truth, that the Sun of
Righteousness may not go down in our days, that the Truth of the Gospel may
live when we are dead, and the Word of Christ may run and be glorified; And to
prevent the growth of Atheism which every where abounds, and threatens the
overthrow and ruin of the way that God has called holy, and to reduce poor
misled souls, which ignorantly conceive they sin not in traducing the
Ministers of the Gospel, as if they were men only seeking their own things,
and not t he things of the Lord Jesus, and contemning the Ministry as if it
were not Gods Institution, but an humane in vention introduced to uphold some
carnal interest.

We the Members of the Provincial Assembly convened by Authority of Parliament,
conceive it our Duty to clear unto our respective Congregations, the Ministry
and Ministers, such as serve the Lord in uprightness, from these unkind and
ungrounded aspersions. Beseeching the Lord, the Father of Spirits, to convince
and settle the Judgments of them that through misguidance may doubt, and to
give Repentance unto such as carnally oppose themselves, that they may come to
the acknowledgement of the Truth, and so recover themselves out of the snare of
Satan, wherein they suffer themselves to be taken captive at his pleasure.

The Sum of all we shall say about the Gospel Ministry, we shall comprehend
in this following Scheme.

The Divine Right of the Gospel Ministry, containing 1. The Justification of
the Ministry; wherein are handled these particulars, 1. That the Office of the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments is necessary in the Church of God by Divine
Institution. 2. That this Office is perpetually necessary in the Church of God.
3. That no man ought to take upon him the Office, or do the work of the
Ministry, except he be lawfully called and ordained thereunto. 4. The several
ways of calling men to the Ministry, where is spoken of, 1. An immediate call,
and therein laid down, 1. The characters of an immediate call. 2. A resolution
whether we are now to expect an immediate call. 3. Whether the call of the
first Reformers of Religion from Popery, was an immediate call.
2. A mediate call, consisting in, Election, concerning which are handled two
things, 1. That the Election of a Minister does not by Divine Right, belong
wholly and solely to the major part of every Congregation. 2. That the whole
Essence of the Ministerial call, does not consist in Election without
Ordination.
Ordination, concering which are made good these four Assertions. 1. That
Ordination of Ministers is an Ordinance of Christ. 2. That the Essence of the
Ministerial call, consists in Ordination. 3. That Ordination ought to be with
prayer, fasting and Imposition of hands. 4. That Ordination ought to be by the
Presbytery.



2. The Justification, etc. B B. 2. The Justification of our Ministry which is
comprised under two Propositions. 1. That the Call to the Office of the
Ministry which some of our present Ministers did receive, during the prevalency
of Episcopacy, was lawful and valid; which is proved, 1. By Arguments drawn
from the principles of our Adversaries, wherein by the way is proved 1. That
the Chu^ches of England are true Churches. 2. And the two great Objections
against them, taken from their Parochial and National constitution, are
sufficiently answered.
2. By Arguments taken from our own Principles, and the nature of the thing;
And here our Ministry is largely vindicated from the foul aspersion of
Antichristianism, which is cast upon it, because conveyed unto us (as is said)
by Popish and Antichristian Bishops.
2. That the Call to the Office of the Ministry which our present Ministers do
receive, since the abolition of Episcopacy is lawful and valid, in which is
showed, 1. That a Bishop and Presbyter are all one in Scripture. 2. That the
instances of Timothy, and Titus, and the Asian Angels do not prove the
contrary. And because Ordination by Presbyters without Bishops is highly
accused of Novelty, as having not the least shadow of Antiquity, and thereby
many Candidates of the Ministry are discouraged from this way of entering into
the Ministry, and Ordination so received is accounted null: We have therefore
added an Appendix wherein is briefly held forth the Judgment and Practice of
Antiquity both in reference to Ordination, and the whole matter of Episcopacy.




Ius Divinum Ministerij Evangelici. OR THE DIVINE RIGHT OF THE Gospel Ministry:
The First Part.

CONTAINING A Justification of The Gospel Ministry in general. The necessity
of Ordination thereunto by Imposition of Hands. The Unlawfulness of private
men's assuming to themselves either the Office or Work of the Ministry without a
lawful Call and Ordination.


LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller. 1654.

Ius Divinum Ministerij Evangelici. OR THE DIVINE RIGHT OF THE Gospel Ministry.
CHAPTER I. Containing the first Proposition.
PROP. I. That the Office of the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments is
necessary in the Church by Divine Institution.
FOr the understanding of this Proposition we shall briefly show, 1. What is
meant by Ministry. 2. What by Office.


1. What is meant by Ministry; Romans 13.4. Ioh. 12.26. Act. 6.
The word Ministry is a term of large comprehension: Sometimes it is taken for
a Civil Service in the Commonwealth; Sometimes for a spiritual worship of
Jesus Christ; Sometimes for the Office of a Deacon: But in this Proposition it
is taken for an Ecclesiastical Function appointed by Christ in his Church for
the Preaching of the Word and Administration of the Sacraments. This is called
a Ministry in opposition to Lordly Domination and Principality; For Ministers
are not appointed to be Lords over Gods Heritage, but to be examples to the
flock: 1 Pet. 5.3.
The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are
great exercise authority upon them: But it shall not be so among you, but
whosoever will be great among you let him be your Minister, and whosoever will
be chief among you let him be your Servant: Mat. 20.25, 26.
The Office of the Ministry is not a Dominion but a Service, and a labourious
Service, and therefore called (...), a word taken from those that labor at the
oar, and (...), a word taken from those that do in pulvere desudare: But yet it
is a most glorious and honorable Service, because a Service to God his Church,
and the Souls of People, and therefore called The Ministry of Christ, The
Stewardship of the Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Heb. 13.17.
and a spiritual Rule over the Household of God.

Q. 2. What is meant by the word Office?

Ans. For this you must know, That there is a great deal of difference between
the Office and the work of the Ministry; Indeed in Scripture they are sometimes
held forth by one Name because they are near akin, Act. 6.4. We will give our
selves to the Ministry of the Word; And Romans 11.13. I magnify my Office; Both
in the Original called (...), yet are they really distinct in nature as
Relation and Action, and separable either by Divine Providence in case of
sickness, or by humane pravity in case of Imprisonment, Banishment, or
Rejection of the People, or Supine negligence, sloth, ambition, or
covetousness in the Officer.

Impossible it is to dispute about the Office without mention of the work, they
being Relatives, and therefore cannot be understood the one without the other:
But yet because there are a double sort of dissenters, some that deny the very
Office of the Ministry; Others that grant the Office, but yet think it no sin
for a man gifted (though uncalled) to assume the public work of the Ministry:
Our purpose is to speak distinctly to both. But in this Proposition only to the
first.

The Office of the Ministry is a spiritual Relation to the whole employment of
the Ministry in a person qualified, founded upon a special and regular call.

For its general nature, It is a Relation as is evident by removing all other
kinds, In particular it cannot be Action, For this is transient, but an Office
is permanent.

For its property, It is a spiritual Relation to distinguish it from natural
and civil Relations.

Its Subject is a person qualified, Namely, 1. Able. 2. Willing. 3. Pious in
the judgment of Charity.

Its Object or ^erm is the Ministerial employment, amplified by its extent in
order to the work: A gifted Brother may upon just occasion materially exercise
some parts of the Ministry, as Prayer, opening and applying of the Scripture,
but not all parts, as Administration of the Sacraments, nor the former in
public, unless lawfully called thereunto.

Its Foundation is Vocation, or a Call limited; 1. By its Specialty: A general
Call enables to Prayer and Teaching as a Christian, but only a special and
particular Call enables to these duties ex officio and authoritative; A private
person may bring news of a Treaty to be had, but only an Ambassador or Herald
comes enabled by Authority to treat.

2. It is limited by its Regularity to distinguish it from the bare Call of the
People: The Peoples Call may determine a Persons Ministry in an especial
manner to themselves, but cannot invest a person into the Office of the
Ministry, who was not a Minister before; Nor can their deserting of him put him
out of Office, though happily it may out of employment: Action is transient, but
Relation is permanent; Therefore the Office is better defined by relation to
the work then by relation to a particular people, who may easily out him of his
work but not of his Office: This Regular Call then consists not in bare
instinct, whereby men run before they be sent, nor barely in the suffrages of
the people, which make a Person their Minister not a Minister: But in mission
either immediate by God and Christ, witness the Prophets and Apostles; or
mediate by some delegated and authorized by God for that purpose, Nihil dat
quod non habet: Nor can he who is not either a Minister or the Lord of
Ministers regularly make a Minister: 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. Act. 14.22* Tit.
1.5. 1 Timothy 5.22.
Paul was called by Christ, Timothy by Paul and the Presbytery; Nor do we read
of any called ordinarily to the Ministry without Ministers: And here by the way
take notice, That the very nature of the Office of the Ministry argues
strongly, that none can take upon them that sacred Office without a lawful
Call and Ordination, since the very Foundation of this Relation is a lawful
Call, and without a Foundation no Relation can either exist or persist; But
more of this hereafter.

For the present, That which we have now to prove is, That the Office of the
Ministry, that is, That a spiritual Relation to the whole employment of the
Ministry in a person qualified, founded in a special and regular Call, is of
Divine Institution: Or more plainly, That the Eccles^asticall Ministry is an
Order, Function, or Office, that has its Original from Heaven; Not from an
Ordinance of Parliament, but of the Lord Jesus Christ, which we shall prove by
these Arguments.

From the peculiar designation of some Persons to the work of the Ministry;
Argum. 1.
Whence thus we argue,

If God has peculiarly designed some Persons to this work of the Ministry,
then the Office of the Ministry is by Divine Institution: But God has
peculiarly designed some Persons to the Work of the Ministry: The Consequence
is clear. If God appointed some Persons to the Work of judging Israel, then the
Office of Judges was by Divine Institution; If God appointed some Persons to
carry the Utensils of the Tabernacle or Temple, and to keep the doors, then the
Office of the Porters and Door-Keepers was of Divine Institution: So here if
God designed some Persons to the Work of the Ministry, then there is such an
Office. And it will be further strengthened by this consideration; That where
there was no distinct Office God did not design peculiar Persons for the Work,
but left it in common to all, and where he left it in common to all there was
no distinct Office. Thus the daty of Almes-giving in general, because it is a
duty common to all, and no peculiar Persons are designed to it, but it is
equally required of all according to their ability, therefore there is no such
Office of Almes-giving* But now to distribute the Alms of the Church in a work
peculiarly determined to some particular Persons which are called Deacons (and
is not common to all) and therefore the Office of the Deacon is by divine
Institution. Add further that to design particular persons to any work, to
which all have a like Call, Power, and Authority, is needless and ridiculous.
So much for the proof of the consequence: The Antecedent will easily be made
out.

1. That this was so under the Law, is evident beyond all dispute, to all who
read and believe the Old Testament: Though all Israel was Holiness to the
Lord, a Kingdom of Priests, and a Holy Nation, Exo. 19.6. 1 Pet. 2.9 Rev. 1.6.
1 Pet. 2.5. Exo. 28.1. Mumb. 1.50. Deuteronomy. 10.8. and 33.8.
as all Christians are now in their private duties and domestic Relations to
offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; Yet there was
then a distinct peculiar Ministry in the Levit^s the Sons of Aaron by divine
appointment; And no man might take that honor upon him, but only he that was
called thereunto, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. Nor might any enter within the
Tabernacle but the Priest accomplishing the Service of God. Heb. 9.6.


2. As it was thus in the Jewish Church before Christ's Incarnation, so it was
foretold that it should be also in the Christian Church consisting of Jew and
Gentile; It was Gods great Promise to be fullfilled in Gospel Times, that he
would take of the Children of them that should be brought into the Church for
Priests and Levites, Isa. 66.21.
alluding to the Officers that then were in being; which cannot be understood
of spiritual Priests, such as all Saints are in some sense styled; Isa. 61.6.
1 Pet. 2.9.
for these are said to be singled out from the rest for such a special Office.
And that in the times of the Gospel, according to the Promise, such an Office
was appointed by our Lord Jesus, is beyond all question to all who read and
believe the New Testament; Mat. 10.1, 7. Mar. 3.14. Luke 9.1, 2. and 10.1, 2.
Christ before his death appointed the Apostles to go and preach; He ordained
twelve that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to
preach: And after this the Lord appointed other seventy also; and because the
Harvest was great and the Laborers were but few, therefore they are bid to
pray the Lord of the Harvest that h^ would send firth Laborers into hi^
Harv^st: To his Apostles he revealed himself especially after his resurrection,
Mat. 28.19. Act. 10.41, 42
and gave them commission and command to preach the Gospel to all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghos^:
And when Judas being numbered with them had obtained part of this Ministry, from
which by transgression he fell; Act. 1.17, 24, 25.
the rest of the Disciples did not magnify themselves to be Apostles, but
sought to the Lord, that God himself would show whom he had chosen to take part
of that Ministry and Apostleship, and the Lo^ falling upon Mathias he was
numbered with the eleven.

3. The Ministry in the days of the Apostles was not only dispensed by the
Apostles, the seventy Disciples, and other Prophets and Evangelists, whose
Call, Gifts, and Works were extraordinary, but by other ordinary Pastors, whose
spirits were not insallible, and whose commission was not extraordinary. 2 Timothy
2.2.
The extraordinary Officers were commanded to commit the word to faithful men
who shall be able to reach others also. And this Ministry dispensed by ordinary
Pastors; was by the Apostles themselves and the several Churches of the New
Testament esteemed as a Ministry by Divine Institution: Col. 1.7.
Paul styles Ep^phras a dear Fellow Servants, who is for you a faithful
Minister of Christ: Tychicus he calls a beloved Brother and a faithful
Minister in the Lord. And these ordinary Pastors (distinguished from those
extraordinary Officers) the Scriptures do affirm to be as truly by divine
appointment as the former, though not so immediately and eminently.

1. The same God that set in the Church first Apostles, 1 Cor. 12.2^.
then Prophets, the same God set in the Church some to be Teachers. Some (by
way of distinction from others,) and not all; For the holy Ghost argues as if
it were equally absurd to have all to be Teacher^, as all to be Apostles, and
appeals to their natural conscience about it; Are all Apostles? Ver. 29.
Are all Prophets? Are all Teachers? And if God himself the Father of all
mercies has placed these Teachers in his Church, what is man who is but ^ worm
that he should attempt to displace them?

2. The same Redeemer the Lord Jesus who gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11.
the same Christ gave also some to b^ Pastor^ and to be Teachers.

3. The some holy Spirit which said, Separat^ me Barnabas and Saul for the work
of the Ministry, Act. 13.2. Gal. 2.7.
and who committed to Paul the Gosp^l of Uncircumcision as he did the Gospel of
Circumcision to Peter* The same blessed Spirit gave charge to the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus to take heed to the Flock of Christ; And though they were no
where recorded to have received a Commission extraordinary, and a spirit
infallible, (Nay, so far were they from being infallible* that the Apostle
foretel^ that some of them would speak perverse things to draw away Disciples
after them, v. 30.) Yet is it said expressly, that the holy Ghost h^d made them
Overseer^ over the Flock: As the Saints converted to the Faith of the Gospel by
the Ministry of Tychichus, Epaphras, Act. 20.2^.
and Onesimus, and the Saints that in those days were really added to the
Church, were no less^ truly Saints then those which were converted immediately
by Paul, and Peter, and the rest of the Apostles; So these ordinary Pastors and
Teachers aforementioned did no l^sse truly receive their Ministry from the Lord
for their ordinary employment, then the Apostles did (though they more
eminently for their employment extraordinary*)* As he committed to them the
Word and Ministry of Reconc^liation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19
and gave to them both Commission and Command to dispense his Ordinances, so
that to them it was not only lawful or arbitrary, but necessity was laid upon
them, and a Woe denounced if they preached not the Gospel: 1 Cor. 9* 16,
So was it also to the ordinary Teachers, and therefore Archippus (no where
mentioned to be an Officer extraordinary) is commanded to fulfill his
Ministry, which he also received from the Lord. Col. 4.17.


Now if the Father, the God of Truth; the Son, the Way, the Truth, and the
Life; and the holy Ghost the Spirit of Truth has designed peculiar persons to
this Office, then the Ministry by way of Office, is necessary by Divine
Institution.

The Second Argument is drawn from the peculiar Names or Titles, Argum. 2.
whereby the Persons thus designed and distinguished from other Saints: If God
has given peculiar Names and Titles, whereby the Persons designed to this
Office are distinguished from other Saints, then this Office is by Divine
Institution. For as the judgment of God is, so are the denominations which God
gives to things, Romans 2.2.
according to truth: If Adam gave distinguishing Names to all creatures,
suitable to their beings; Surely our only wise God will not distinguish where he
himself has made no difference. But God has given to the persons designed to
this Office peculiar Names and Titles.

Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Pet. 5.2. Act. 20.28.
1. These are called Pastors, and the other Saints respectively are called the
Flock. Now is there not a real distinction (as well as nominall) betwixt the
Flock and Pastor, the Sheep and the Shepherd?

1 Cor. 12.28. Gal. 6.6.
2. They are called Teachers, and does not the holy Ghost evidently distinguish
betwixt them that do instruct and those that are instructed?

1 Timothy 5.17.
3. They are called such as Rule well, not in any civil way as State-Officers,
but such as labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Heb. 13.17. Heb. 13.24.
4. They are such as are Over the Saints in the Lord, and the holy Ghost does
expressly distinguish betwixt the Officers in the Church, which have rule and
inspection over the Saints, and all the rest of the Saints under that
Inspection.

5. They are called Stewards of the Mysteries of God; 1 Cor. 4.1. Tit. 1.7.
Gal. 6.10. Luke 12.42.
all the rest of the Saints are of the Household of Faith; and who may appoint
Stewards in the House but the Master of the Household? And if the Master call
them Stewards, let all Saints do so who are of his Household. 1 Pet. 4.10. Luke
16.2.
Though all other Saints may be called Stewards of the manifold grace of God,
according to the proportion of the gifts and talents which they have received
for their Lords use, and so every man must give an account of his Stewardship
even for civil gifts and common graces, yet neither are all men nor all Saints,
as such, 1 Cor. 4.1.
any where styled by the holy Ghost to be Stewards of the Mysteries of God, as
the Ministers of Christ are; And it is one peculiar Argument which the holy
Ghost uses, why the Bishop must be eminently blameless above other Saints,
because he is so to carry himself in Gods House as one who in a special way is
the Steward of God.

6. They are called Preachers by way of Office, Tit. 1.17. Romans 10.14.
or Gods Heralds, (though others may know and speak the same things, viz^)
These authoritatively are sent forth to proclaim the mind of the Lord.

7. They are called Ambassadors for Christ: God has given to them the Ministry
of Reconciliation, 2 Co. 5.19, 20.
and has committed to them the Word of Reconciliation.

8. They are Super-intendents and Overseers of the Flock; Act. 20.18. 1 Pet.
4.15. 1 Pet. ^2.
and if they had no such Office, then in the discharge of this work they might
be charged to be Busybodies; And so we shall call this a sin which God
Almighty has charged upon them as their duty.

9. They are called Stars in Christ's right hand.

10. The Angels of the Churches, Rev. 1.20. R^v. 2.1. v. ^.12.18. Rev. 3.1, 7,
14.
and our Lord himself does clearly distinguish betwixt the seven Stars in the
Church, and the seven golden Candlesticks which are seven Churches; he
evidently puts a difference betwixt the Churches and the Angels set in them and
over them in the Lord.

A^gum. 3.
The third Argument is drawn from the Lords special care in requiring peculiar
gifts and qualifications in Persons so distinguished and designed for this work
as formerly.

If the Lord out of his special care to the good of the souls of People, has
appointed peculiar gifts and qualifications (above what is required in all
Saints as such) in all who enter into the work of the Ministry, then the Office
of the Ministry is by Divine Insti^ution. For why should God require such
qualifications for an Office, if he first had not appointed such an Office;
Suppose a Parliament should lay down several qualifications for every man that
is to be made a Justice of Peace, Does not this clearly infer, that there is
such an Office as of a Justice of the Peace; 1 Timothy ^.^.
But our Lord does require peculiar gifts and qualifications, etc. Not only
those Moral Theological Christian gifts and graces which are required in all
Saints at such, as to be blameless, vigilant, sober, etc. But such
qualifications as are peculiar, Though gifts as gifts do not alone invest into
an Office, yet where these are so strictly and peculiarly required, they argue
that there is an Office. God requires

1. That they be apt to teach: Saints may be Saints though they be not fitted
to teach others: 1 Timothy 3.2. I^m. 1.19.
It is ^ good degree of Saintship when they are swift to hear, slow to speak,
and apt to learn, (and we could wish the Saints in our times could learn and
practice that Lesson) but those faithful men to whom the Ministry is to be
committed, must be apt to teach.

2 Timothy 2.2.
2. That they be not only apt but able to teach others also.

Tit. 1.9.
3. That they be such as holding fast the Word may be able by sound Doctrine to
exhort and convince Gainsayers.

2 Timothy 2.15. Not only (...) but (...). Luke 12.4^.
4. That they be such as st^dy to show themselves approved unto God, Workmen
that need not be ashamed* Rightly dividing the Word of Truth; And who then is a
faithful and wise Steward whom the Lord may make Ruler ^ver hi^ Household t^
give them their portion of meat in due season.

5. That these gifts be tried and approved by others (for no man can be a
competent Judge of his own gifts) The Deacons must first be proved, 2 Timothy 3.10.
and if the Deacons the lowest Officer of the Church must by Divine appointment
be first proved before he be admitted to use the Office of a Deacon, how much
more is this required in the Office of the Ministry, which is far higher?

6. That those that are to prove and approve observe these things without
carnal preferring one before another; 1 Timothy 9.21* 22.
that they do nothing by partiality, that they lay hands suddenly upon no
man,, and this the Apostle charge them with before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ and his Elect Angels? Now why are all these qualifications required?
Would not all these injunctions about such an Office be superfluous, if such an
Office were not by Divine Institution?

7. The qualifications are so many, the work so eminent, the success so
various, the Ministry of the Word being to some the savor of life unto life,
and to others the savor of death unto death, that the Apostle in admiration of
the difficulty and dignity of this employment, cries out, Who is suffici^nt
for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. Mal. 1.13.
But they who are alienated in their minds as they snuff at the service of
God, and bring the torn, and the lame, and the sick (as if any thing though
never so bad were good enough) for an Offering to the Lord, so they account the
work of the Ministry so mean, and the Office so contemptible, that they say in
opposition to the holy Apostle, For these things who is not sufficient? boldly
intr^ding themselves into this work, without any gifts or qualifications
suitable and approved thereunto, presuming to be Teachers of the Law and of the
Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.7.
yet not unde^standing what they say or whereof they do affirm.

The fourth Argument From peculiar duties; If God require peculiar duties of
Ministers which he does not require of Bele^vers as Believers, Argum. 4.
then there is such a distinct Office by Divine Institution. But God does
require peculiar distinct duties of Ministers.

1. They are commanded to take special care of the Church of God to take the
oversight of the Flock of God, ^ Tim. 3.5. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
yet not as Lords over Gods Heritage; but being examples to the Flock.

2. When they have undertaken this work they are charged not to neglect the
gift that is in them, 1 Timothy 4.14.
which was given by the laying on the hands of the Presbytery.

3. Wholly to mind this Work and the Office; Meditate on these things, ^ Tim.
4.15. Act. 6.2, 4.
give themselves wholly to them, that their profiting may appear to all: It is
not reason that they should leave the Word and serve Tables, but they must
continually give themselves to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word. It is
true, that the work of the Apostles was exceeding great, yet it is as true,
that their gifts were extraordinary, and the assistance they had was above
measure, God testifying to the word of his grace by many signs and wonders: Now
if the Apostles endued with those transcendent abilities, would not suffer
themselves to be diverted, how much more does the work of the Ministry
challenge the whole man, of them whose parts and assistances are so far
inferior that they may attend the special service of God without distraction?
Have not the Ministers now as much need as Timothy then to give attendance to
reading, 1 Timothy 4.13.15.
as well as unto exhortation and doctrine, to meditate upon these things, and
give themselves wholly to them, that their profiting may appear to all, that so
they may save themselves and them that hear them?

4. Not only wholly to mind this work in private, but in public to Preach the
Word; ^ Tim. 4.2.
to be instant in season and out of season; Rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine: 2 Timothy 2.25.
With meekness they must instruct those that oppose themselves; They must
labor even to weariness in the Word and Doctrine: They must be willing to
spend and to be spent upon the Service of the faith of the people: A necessity
is laid upon them to preach the Gospel, 2 Cor. 12.15. 1 Cor. 9.16, 17
the neglect whereof involves them in a Woe; If they do it willingly they have
a reward, and if not yet a Dispensation is committed to them.

5. Not only to preach the Word, Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Cor. 10.^6. 1 Cor.
11.24. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 5.22. Heb. 13.17.
but also to administer the Sacraments.

6. And also to ordain others into the work of the Ministry: Of which more
hereafter.

In all these works not to feed themselves but to feed the Flock, to look not
only to their lives but to their doctrine, to watch not only for their own
souls but for the souls of others.

7. They are commanded so to watch over the Flock as those that must give an
account. Heb. 13.17.


8. They are commanded to take heed to themselves and to their doctrine, not
only how they live but how they teach, 1 Timothy 4.16.
that they may edify both by living and teaching, and though they meet with
many discouragements, unfruitfulnesse in some, and unkind oppositions from
others, yet they must continue in these things, and persist in their work, when
they have laid their hands to this Plough they must not look back, Tit. 2.1. 2 Timothy 4.2.
but must persevere to speak the things which become sound Doctrine, to preach
the Word, to be instant in season and out of season, to reprove, rebuke and
exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine.

The fifth Argument is drawn From the peculiar distinct duties enjoined the
people in reference to their Teachers. Argum. 5.


If the Lord requires peculiar distinct duties from the people in reference to
their Teachers, then this Office is by Divine Institution.

But the Lord requires peculiar distinct duties in the People in reference to
their Minister, etc.

1. To know and acknowledge them such as are over them in the Lord. 1 These.
5.12.


2. To remember their guides who have spoken unto them the Word of God; Heb.
13.7.
We are prone to forget our duty toward them* God is sensible of this sin, and
gives out these commands to cure this forgetfulness.

3. Highly to esteem them, and that in love, and this also for their works
sake. 1 The. 5.13.
Though the Saints are not to esteem or think of them above what is meet, yet
this esteem must not be vulgar as that which is only common to ordinary men and
believers: ^ Tim. 5.17.
When the ^nthankful world despise the Ministers, the Saints are obliged to
account them worthy of double honor, and to esteem them highly, (...) 1 The.
5.13.
very highly and abundantly; This high degree of esteem must be in love, for if
we love the Embassage, and the Lord who sends the glad tidings of Salvation,
Romans 10.15.
How beautiful then are the feet of his Ambassadors! This esteem of them in
love must be for t^eir works sake: Now if this work was not of God, he would
never give so many injunctions to honor these workmen: But this work of the
Ministry in reconciling sinners to God, 1 Pet. 1.12.
is so stupendous, that the Angels with admiration desire to look into these
things: And in the dispensation of this mystery which from the beginning of the
world has been hid in God, is made known by the Church not only to men bu^ to
Cherubins and Seraphims Principalities and powers in Heavenly places the
manifold wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3.9, 10.


Heb. 13.17.
4. To obey them that have the rule over you and submit your selves unto them.

Heb. 13.17.
5. To encourage them, that they may do their work with joy and not with grief,
for that is unprofitable to the Flock, as uncomfortable to the Pastor.

6, To maintain them; He that is taught in the Word must communicate to him
that teaches in all good things: Gal. 6.6. 1 Cor. 9.7. to 19.
Why does the holy Ghost spend almost a whole Chapter upon this Subject? and
after many arguments, why does the Apostle make that appeal? Do ye not know
that they which minister about holy things live of the things of the Temple; V.
13.
and they that wait a^ the Altar are partakers with the Al^ar? And whereas some
might say, This practice is Mosaicall, and fit for the Jewish Priesthood, V. 14.
but not for Gospel Times, He prevents this Objection, and asserts as a Divine
Institution, that God has thus ordained, that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel: But this doctrine of the maintenance of Ministers
has been of late so largely and sol^dly asserted by several able pens, that we
shall not need to s^y any more about it. But no wonder that those which would
take away and detain the maintenance should also be willing to deny the Office:
They that take away the Oil would break the Lamp in sunder as a thing useless
and unnecessary.

Object. But some may say, the Apostles did work with labor and travel, night
and day, 2 These. 3.8, 9. Act. 20.34.
that they might not be chargeable: Does not Paul himself appeal to the Elders
of the Church of Ephesus, Yea, you your selves know, that these have ministered
to my necessities, and if the Apostles labored and had no maintenance, though
they were extraordinary, why should not other ordinary Ministers labor, and
why is their maintenance a duty necessary?

We answer, 1. This travel with their own hands for a subsistence was a
peculiar case of P^ul and Barnabas, and was not the practice of the other
Apostle^; for Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.6. comp. ver. 5.
I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working as the other
Apostles and Brethren of the Lord and Cephas?

2. When they refused to receive maintenance, this refusal was upon especial
occasion: As 1. Either the Churches extreme necessities, the days of danger
and exigencies of the Saints: In such case, though marriage was lawful; I
suppose it is good for the present distress, I say it is good for a man to
forbear marriage; 1 Cor. 7.26. com. with 37.
and so Paul did both forbear marr^age and also refused maintenance, but none
can conclude from hence the marriage of Ministers is unlawful, or their
maintenance unneedfull. Or 2. This refusal of maintenance was in case of
scandal, when false Teachers had crept into the Church of Corinth, who boasted
of themselves and their own doctrine, and that they would Preach the Gospel
freely, and so cried down Paul and his Ministry, therefore in this case Paul
preached the Gospel freely, I was chargeable (says he) to no man, 2 Cor. 11.^.
to 9.
and in all things I have kept my self from being burdensome to you, and so
will I keep my self, and what I do in this kind that I will do; and the ground
of this practice he declares to avoid scandal, that I may cut off occasion
from them which desire occasion; v. 12, 13.
and that he might stop the boastings of those false Apostles, dececeifull
workers transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, that wherein they
gloried they may be found even as we.

3. When Paul was neeessitated to labor with his hands, he numbers it in the
Catalogue of his sorrows as part of his sufferings, 1 Cor. 4.11, 12
To this hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked and buffeted, and have
no certain ^welling-place, and labor working with our own hands.

4. Though Paul refused maintenance, yet he still taught Believers that it was
a Gospel-Ordinance to maintain their Ministers; 1 Cor. 9.7, 14. v. 8. to 15.
for Who goes to warfare at his own charges? Shall Soldiers have no pay
because when they are lawfully called forth they offer themselves freely to
serve the public? Who planteth a Vineyard and does not eat thereof?

5. When Paul in the cases and for the persons abovementioned refused
maintenance, 2 Cor. 11.8.
yet he tells the Corinthians, that he received much from others, I robbed
other Churchss, taking wages of them to serve you; for that which was lacking
to me, they which came from Macedonia supplied: and he abundantly commends
the Philippians, who were careful for his outward subsistence; And their supply
sent unto him he calls an Odor of sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable,
well-pleasing to God, Phi. 4.10, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and that hereby fruit did abound to their account.

The sixth Argument is drawn from the Promises; If God has made particular
Promises to them that work in this Ministry, Argum. 6.
then this Office is by Divine Institution; For God did never promise to keep
up that Office in the Church which he has not set up; but has said the
contrary, that every Plant which our Heavenly Father has not planted shall be
plucked up. Mat. 15.13.


But God has made peculiar Promises to them that work in the Ministry.

1. That his special presence shall be with them; Lo, I am with you in this
work of Teaching and baptizing, Mat. 28.20.
though many or most may be against you.

2. His special assistance; God alone is alsufficient to make them who are
insufficient of themselves to think one good thought, able Ministers of the New
Testament, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
not only of the Letter but of the Spirit; God alone continues these abilities
from the perpetual supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.19. 2 Cor.
4.1.
From this special assistance it is that they which have this Ministry faint
not under all affronts and discouragements, totally and universally, because
they receive new supplies of Mercy from the Lord.

3. His special protection of them in all assaults: He is present with all his
Saints to protect and preserve them; He is in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks, and he walks in the midst of them; These seven Golden
Candlasticks are declared to be the seven Churches of Asia; Rev. 1.1.
But God does more then so to the Ministers of those Churches, He is not only
in them, and walks in the midst of them, but he holds the Stars in his right
hand.

4. Unto them he promises the power of the Keys, and engages himself, Mat.
16.19.
that whatsoever they ministerially bind on earth shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever they loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven; And this promise
first made to P^ter was not limited to Peter's person alone, for Christ after
his Resurrection makes good the same promise to all the other Apostles; Whose
sins soever ye remit are remitted, and whose sins soever ye retain are
retained; Ioh. 20.23.
And that this promise was not liimted to the Apostles as Apostles, but was
given to the Apostles as Ministers of the Gospel, is evident from Mat. 18.17,
18. where the same power is given to the ordinary Church Officers that was
given to the Apostles, and the same encouragement given to them to exercise
that censure.

5. Christ Jesus promises special sympathy with them, whatsoever
entertainment they meet withal in the discharge of this Office* He that
receives you receives me, and he that receives me receives him that sent
me: Mat. 10.40.
And when the Ministers are despised, hated, and contemned, Christ tells us he
takes it is to himself, as if these contempts were done to himself in his own
person: He that hates them (in reference to the r work) hates me; He that
despises them despises me, Luke 10.16.
and he that despises me despises him that sent m^; which great promises
though eminently given to the Apostles, yet are not limited to the Apostles as
Apostles, but extended to all the Ministers sent to preach the Gospel, for so
Christ himself expounds these Promises; Ioh. 13.20.
Verily, Verily, I say unto you, He that receives whomsoever I shall send,
receives me: Now if the promise be to all whomsoever Christ sends, then not
only to the Apostles; for besides them Christ sent other Pastors who were not
immediately called and sent, as the 12. and the 70. yet they were proved before
to have been sent and set in the Church by Christ.

6. Christ is so tender of the good or bad usage of his Ministers, that he has
undertaken to recompense all that good done to them; He that receives a
Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; And though
this be true also of every righteous man and Disciple in his proportion, V.
41.42.
yet our Lord does evidently there distinguish betwixt the Prophet by Office
and the righteous man or disciple, as he does also betwixt a Prophets reward
and a righteous man's reward: And so in all ages God has taken it kindly when
his faithful Ministers have been protected and countenanced: It stands upon
record as a token of the sincerity of Obadiah, that in that general persecution
by Iezabel, he had a hundred of the Lords Prophets, 1 Kin. 18.13.
and hid them fifty in a Cave, and fed them with bread and water: And of
Hezekiah that good King who walked before the Lord with a perfect heart, there
is this testimony recorded, that he spoke comfortably unto all the Levites
which taught the good knowledge of the Lord: But those Kings and Rulers that
abused the Ministers are noted as enemies to God himself, 2 Chr. 30.12.
Ahab and Amazia, etc. And contempt of Ordinances and Ministers sent from God,
is made the saddest forerunner of ruin and desolation; When they mocked the
Messengers of God, 2 Chro. 36.16.
despised his Word, and misused his Prophets; Then the wrath of the Lord rose
up against his people, till there was no remedy: The Lord was tender of the
Ministry of the Law because glorious. Now does not the holy Ghost tell us, 2
Cor. 3.9.
that the Ministry of the Gospel does exceed in Glory; That among them that are
born of women there has not risen a greater then John Baptist;
Notwithstanding, he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then he,
not that their Persons are better, but that their Ministry is higher.

Therefore let us all take heed of despising the Ministry, Mal. 4.6. 1 These.
4.8.
lest the Lord smite the Earth with a Curse; For he that despises, despises
not man but God. So much shall suffice for the First Proposition.

CHAP. II. Containing the Second Proposition.
PROVING, That the Office of the Ministry is perpetually necessary.
THat it is so will appear by these ensuing Arguments.

If all the former Arguments which evince the necessity of this Office by
divine Institution be of a moral nature, then are they of perpetual Obligation
by Divine appointment; For the Commands of the Moral Law given to the Jews
oblige all, and Precepts of the Gospel given both to Jews and Gentiles in the
Apostles times, do equally oblige all believers in these days as they did
believers in the days of the Apostles, to whom they were at first immediately
prescribed; because those precepts are of a moral nature; Whatsoever duties God
r^quired in the Churches of Galatia, Romans 15.4. Rom* ^.16.
Philippi, C^losse, etc. all these Scriptures do as really bind now a^ they
did then bind them, for Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written
for our Learning; The same evils which were sins then are sins now, the
duties enjoined then are duties now, and shall bind all ages until the
appearance of Christ; This Rule is so exact and perpetual, that they and they
alone which walk according to this Rule, Peace shall be on them and upon the
Israel of God.

But all the former Arguments which prove the Office of the Ministry to be
necessary, are of a moral nature; Not given to Apostles as Apostles, but to
them as Stewards and Ministers of God, and so appertain to all Ministers of
Christ. And in every Argument there are those proofs produced out of Scripture,
which were not given only to Apostles but to ordinary Pastors, as may appear by
a particular review of all the foregoing Arguments.

Aryum. 2.
If the Ordinances be perpetually necessary in the Church by Divine Institution
till the day of Jesus Christ, then the Office of the Ministry to dispense those
Ordinances is perpetually necessary in the Church by Divine Institution; The
reason of this consequence appears thus.

If the Lord had only appointed Ordinances to continue, and had appointed none
to administer them, then the Ordinanres would fail, because that which is every
man's work is usually and effectually no man's work, and though God has
immediately appointed these Ordinances, yet now he does not immediately
administer them, but the administration of these Ordinances he has committed
unto others; Iud. 13.22. Dan. 10.15, 17
not to Angels, for their glory is so great, and our infirmities so many, that
we could not endure their visible ministration; but this Ministry he has
committed unto men, to some and not to all, as has been proved in the former
Proposition; and these are called the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. 2 Cor.
^.1. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Stewards or dispensers of the Mysteries of God, and are workers together with
God, and such have this Treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power might be of God; The Ministry of the Word and the dispensing of the
Sacraments we find conjoined in the Institution of Christ, to whom Christ gave
Commission to preach, to them he also gave Commission and Command to Baptize,
and he promises to concur with them in their administration: But that any
others have any such Command to enjoin them, or Commission to enable them, or
any such promise of Gods concurrence with them, if they undertake these
Administrations; or that any su^^ practice was in the days of the Apostles, we
read not in the New Testament, and because the whole nature and virtue of the
Sacraments of the New Testament, depends solely and wholly upon the Authority
of God being the Institutour of them, therefore we may neither add to nor
detract from his Institution, lest the Lord add to the Plagues written in this
Book, and take away our part out of the Book of Life: Rev. 22.16, 19
So much for the consequence of the Major; Now to the Minor, which is this.

The Ordinances be perpetually necessary in the Church by Divine Institution;
which will be evident if we consider the public Ordinances of the Word, of
Baptism, and of the Supper of the Lord.

1. For the Word; It is evident that the Word preached shall continue in all
ages from Mat. 28.20. where Jesus Christ commands his Apostles and Ministers to
teach all Nations, and promises to be with them in that work to the end of the
world; as also from Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Christ gave Pastors and Teachers, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of
the body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the Faith.

2. For Baptism, we desire these particulars to be considered.

1. That Baptism is an Ordinance of the New Testament appointed by God himself,
John was sent to baptize, Ioh. 1.33.
he did not go about this work till he was sent, and because Baptism was first
adminis^red by him, therefore he is so frequently called John the Baptist, not
that Baptism was his invention, but that the Administration thereof was first
committed unto him* Mat. 3.1, 11, 12
the Institution it self was of God; God was the Author, John only the
Minister, therefore the Baptism of John is denied to be of men, and affirmed to
be of Heaven: Mat. 21.24. Luke 7.30.
And when the Pharisees rejected his Baptism, it is asserted they rejected the
counsel of God against themselves, Matthew. 3.13. with 15.
being not baptized of him: And the Lord Jesus Christ to declare the Baptism of
John to be of God, even he that came to fulfill all righteousness, came from
Galilee to Jordan to be baptized of John.

2. It is evident, that Baptism was appointed not only to the Jew but to the
Gentile, it was indeed first administered to the Jew by John and by the
Disciples of our Lord, and after Christ's Resurrection by the Apostles to those
primitive Converts: Mat. 3.6. Ioh. 4.1.
but when the partition Wall was broken down, Baptism of Repentance was
preached unto the Gentiles, Act. 2.38, 41.
not only in Judea but in Samaria also they that believed were baptized both
men and women, Act. 8.10. Act. 10.48. Act. 16.33. 1 Co. 1.14, 16
and so Cornelius the Roman Centurion, and so the Jailer and all his at
Philippi and Corinth, Paul baptized Crispus and Gaius, and the Household of
Stephanus.

3. This Ordinance of Baptism instituted both for Jew and Gentile, was not to
continue only in the Infancy of the Church, as the Photinians and Socinians
affirm, but is perpetual, as may appear by these Arguments.

1. The promise and precept of Christ wherein the Lord commands the Word to be
preached unto all, Mat. 20.20.
and all Nations to be baptized; and Christ promises that he will be with his
Officers in the Administration of his Ordinances to the end of the world; If to
the end of the world there shall be Disciples, and if all Disciples must be
baptized, then Baptism must continue to the end of the world.

2. The ends for which Baptism was ordained, are not temporary, but moral, and
so perpetual; All the Disciples of Christ now need the same means as the
Christians, during the Age of the Apostles, that we also might be baptized into
Christ, Gal. 3.27. Romans 6.3, 4*
to be baptized into his death, buried with Christ by Baptism, that like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, 1 Co^. 12.13.
even so we also should walk in newness of life; Neither does the Baptism of
the Spirit disanull the Baptism of water, but rather confirm it; For by one
Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond
or free.

3. If we consider the nature, use, or efficacy of Baptism, it is called by the
holy Ghost a saving Ordinance, and is unto believers and their seed in the New
Testament, as the Ark was to Noah and his ^amily in the Old world* who being in
the Ark was saved from perishing in the waters, when the rest were drowned; so
Baptism that does now save us not only or mainly the outward part of it, the
putting away the filth of the flesh (which yet is an Ordinance to further our
salvation) but when the Spirit of Regeneration effectually concurs, so that we
find that there is a renewing of the holy Ghost, and thereby the answer of a
good Conscience toward God. 1 Pet. 3.21.


Thirdly, For the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it is evident,

1. That it is an Ordinance of God appointed by Jesus Christ, for he alone who
gives grace has power to appoint the means whereby he will convey grace: as no
man can create new Articles of Faith to be b^^eeved, so no man can appoint new
Sacraments to be received; Only Jesus Christ the Prince and Mediator of the
New Covenant, the High Priest of our profession, who has all power in Heaven
and Earth, and who alone is able to fill all his own Ordinances (which in
external appearance seem but mean) with inward efficacy and sprituall
fulness; Matthew. 26.26, 27, 28. 1 Co. 11.23.
He has first instituted this Sacrament and also administered it even the same
night in which he was betrayed.

2. This Ordinance was not only appointed to and for the Apostles, to whom it
was first administered, but unto all believers both Jews and Gentiles, by whom
it is to be received, not only once as Baptism (for we read no Institution to
baptize the same person more then once) But our Lord has prescribed the frequ
ent reiterated use of this Sacrament, 1 Co. 11.26.
that we should often ^at this Bread and drink this Cup, Act. 2.42, 46.10.7.
and accordingly the Apostles and the primitive Christians did frequently
celebrate thiS Ordinance.

3. It is evident that this Sacrament was appointed not only for that age, but
for all succeeding generations, therefore Believers are commanded to frequent
this Ordinance, and in eating this Bread and drinking this Cup, 1 Cor. 11.26.
to show forth the Lords Death till he come; for our Lord that will have his
Church to continue in all successions, till the day of his appearance, has
both enjoined all Believers as their duty to perpetuate the use of this
Sacrament in their several generations, and has also foretold for their
comfort, that this Ordinance shall continue till the day of his last coming: 2
Th. 1.7, 8.
So then these Ordinances being appointed by God to continue to the end, hereby
it appears that the Lord has designed the Office of the Ministry to hold up
and hold forth his Ordinances to the end of the world.

Argum. 3.
If the Promises which Christ has made to uphold the Ministry be perpetual,
then the Office is perpetually necessary. But these Promises are perpetual.
That Christ has made promises to uphold the Ministry, has been proved in the
former Proposition out of Mat. 28.20. etc. The only doubt which can remain, is,
Whether these Promises were limited to that age wherein the Apostles lived, or
whether they do reach all succeeding ages to the end of the world; Wherein who
can better resolve us then Christ himself in the words of the promise, Go teach
and baptize, and lo I am with you always to the end of the world.

1. This Promise (we grant) was made first and immediately to the Apostles; but
the Query is, Whether solely and only unto them as they were Apostles; It
cannot be denied but many precepts and promises given to them were of a
different nature, 1. Some to the Apostles as Apostles, and 2. Some to Apostles
as Ministers, and 3. Some to Apostles as Believers. If any demand, how shall we
know when Christ spoke to them as Apostles? when to them as Ministers? and when
to them as Christians? We answer, That the best way to discern this, is to
consider the nature of these precepts and promises: if they be of an
extraordinary nature ^^ove what God has commanded or promised to all
beleever^, o^ to all ordinary Ministry; Then these commands or promises are
peculiar to Apostles as Apostles, as extraordinary Officers; For instance, When
Christ had called the twelve, He gave them power against unclean spirits, to
cast them out, and to heal all manner of sicknesses, and all manner of
diseases: And these being extraordinary promises, it appears they were made to
the Apostles as Apostles, and not to them either as Believers or as Ministers.

If they be of a common nature wherein all Saints and Disciples of Jesus Christ
are equally concerned, then though they were given to the Apostles, yet not
only to them as Apostles, but to them as Believers, 2 Pet. 1.1. Matthew. 24.42.
compared with v. 2, 3.
who also partake of like precious faith with them, through the righteousness
of God and our Savior Jesus Christ; When Christ commanded them to watch, for
ye know not what hour the Lord will come; this duty was laid upon them
immediately and apart from others as appears; His Disciples came to him
privately, saying, When shall these things be? Yet this duty is of such a
nature as is common to all believers; Mar. 13.37. Mat. 6.9. to 14
and so elsewhere Christ expounds it, What I say unto you I say unto all,
Watch: When Christ taught his Disciples to pray, in them he taught the same
duty to all believers: And all these commands, to deny our selves, take up the
Cross, and follow him, are so given to the Apostles as they also oblige all
believers: Ioh. 17.20.
So when Christ prayed for the Apostles, that God would sanctify them with all
truth; he prayed not for them alone, but for all that were given to him of the
Father, which should also believe in him through their Word: So all those great
and precious promises which pertain to life and godliness, whereby all
believers partake of the divine nature, having escaped the pollutions which are
in the world through lust, 2 Pet. 2.3, 4.
were given not only to the Apostles but to all Believers. The ignorance or
non-observance of this distinction has led the Papists into many absurdities,
as when Christ gave the Cup to the Apostles, because they all were Ministers,
therefore they do not conceive themselves obliged by that example to give the
Cup to the Laity; whereas Christ gave the Cup to the Apostles not as Apostles
but only as Believers, and so ordained it for all Believers, who did not only
Eat the Bread, but Drink the Cup of the Lord. 1 Cor. 7.26.


The Precepts and Promises which are of a middle nature betwixt the two former,
not so general as to concern all believers, nor yet so strait and peculiar as
to be limited to the Apostles, as Go, Teach and Baptize, etc. These Precepts
and Promises thereunto annexed, were given to Apostles, not as Apostles, nor to
them as believers, but given to them as Ministers and Stewards of the mysteries
of God; For the Apostles did not administer the Sacraments as Apostles, 1 Cor.
1.17.
for to baptize was no peculiar work of the Apostles, as such. Now Christ's
promise in Matthew. 28.20. is to Apostles teaching and baptizing. But these are
acts ministerial, which therefore appertain to all Ministers called of God in
his Name to perform these duties.

If any shall object and say, This promise was not to their persons, but to
their doctrine, which shall continue to the end of the world.

Answ. It is true, the doctrine of the Apostles shall continue to the end of
the world; it is such a light as all the breath of men, or rage of hell can
never blow out, and one jot or tittle of this word shall not fail; Matthew. 5.18.
But this promise is not only to their doctrine, but to their persons,
invested in such an Office, not only to their (...), but to them (...), not
only to their doctrine taught, but to their teaching and baptizing.

This promise cannot be confined to the persons of Apostles; for where are the
Prophets and Evangelists? And do the Apostles live for ever? But this promise
reaches all ages; I am with you always to the end of the world, which
strongly argues, That the Office of the Ministry shall continue till the
second coming of Christ; and though many have endeavored to suppress both
Ministry and Magistracy, yet they shall continue till Christ deliver up the
Kingdom to God even the Father. Rev. 21.22, 23
Then, and not till then, will he put down all Rule, and all Authority and
Power. Then there shall be no Temple, there shall be no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine therein, for the glory of the Lord shall lighten
it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

When Christ sends forth his Apostles about a ministerial imploiment, he
promises to be with them unto the worlds end, which does not, cannot intimate,
either that the Apostles themselves should live so long, or that this his
promise should be made good no longer then they lived. But that as the
imploiment it self then given them in charge (for the main substance and
subject matter of it) so that promise of his gracious presence and efficacious
assistance, should be continued, as to them in particular for their times, so
to others that should in those administrations succeed them from time to time
in the several ages ensuing to the worlds end.

Obj. But may not these words, I will be always with you unto the worlds end,
be limited to the particular age or dispensation during the lives of the
Apostles?

Sol. To prevent this Objection, the holy Ghost uses three expressions to
declare the perpetuity of this promise: 1. (...), that this promise shall
continue so long as the world continues. 2. (...), this promise shall have no
end till the worlds end. 3. (...) all days and successions of times, not only
(...), not only with you during your days, but all the days of the Gospel,
till time shall be no more; All which words clearly hold out a continuance of
the power and function of the Ministry, and Christ's special spiritual presence
with the persons assigned to this Office in the exercise thereof, not for some
particular age, as the lives of the Apostles, but in all successive times to
the end of the world, which is evident from the terms in this promise used,
being duly considered with collation of other places of Scripture, in the New
Testament especially wherein elsewhere they are found.

And first, the word (...), answering to the Hebrew word (...) is taken
sometime in the notion of an adjunct, and sometime of a subject. Sometime in
the notion of an adjunct of time or continuance; and here most properly, and in
its native sense, according to its original, (...) (as Grammarians generally
agree) it is used for Eternity, either for the continuance of eternity before
time, which is commonly called aeternitas a part ante, and so it may well be
taken, Joh. 4.14. and 6.51, 58. Joh. 8.51, 52. Matthew. 25.46. Luke 18.18.
Acts 15.18. where it is said, That Gods works were known to him, (...), from
eternity; or for the continuance of eternity, when time shall be no more,
commonly called aeternitas a part post; as it is manifestly taken where the
Messiah is said to abide, (...) unto eternity, or for ever; whence (...) for
ever, and (...) for never, as also (...) for life eternal that shall never have
an end. this is correspondent to that Psalm. 60.2. (...) from eternity unto
eternity, thou art God, that is, without either beginning or ending. But from
hence with some restriction it is used for some long continuance of time, as
the word (...) also in Hebrew is. And more peculiarly applied to the world, it
imports the perpetual continuance of the thing spoken of, until the world
have a period of its present being. Thus it seems to be taken where (...) and
(...) are both joined together; for as one of the Jewish Doctors well observes
(...) The rock of flint, Deuteronomy. 8.15. and (...) The flint of Rock, Deuteronomy. 32.13.
are in effect the same: So (...), the perpetual continuance of this world,
Ephesians. 2.2. and (...), the world of this present perpetual continuance, are in
effect and substance one and the same. Yea where the word (...) is not
expressed, as ((...)) Luke 1.70. Acts 3.21. and (...), John 9.32. is from the
worlds beginning: So (...) or (...), Luke 1.33. compared with 1 Cor. 15.24, 25.
and Luke 1.55. is, unto the worlds end. Hence also that distinction of (...)
this world, Mark 4.19. Luke 16.8. and 20.34. or (...), The world that now is, 2 Timothy 4.10. Tit. 2.12. and as some copies also have it, Matthew. 12.32. or (...),
The present world, Gal. 1.4. and (...), The world that shall be, Matthew. 12.32.
Heb. 6.5. or (...), that is coming, or that is to come, Mark 10.30. Luke 18.30.
precisely answering that so common with the Jewish masters of (...) and (...)
this world and that to come? Nor is it found where the penmen of the Books of
the New Testament use the word (...) of a particular present age, or such a
short stint of time as some would here restrain it to: They have another word,
to wit, (...) answering the Hebrew word (...) which in such cases they use, as
where it is said of David, Act. 13.36. that he served (...), his peculiar age,
that is, the age wherein he lived, and those forms are common, (...) this age
or race Mat. 11.16, and 12.41, 42. where what is said (...) with this age, is
by Luke 11.31. rendered (...) with the men of this age. Now where the holy Ghost
uses diversity of terms so distinguished, we ought not to confound them.

Again, Sometime the word (...) is used in the notion of a Subject, for the
Frame or Fabric of the Creation of the world, as we commonly use that word,
yet for the most part in ^ figurative sense, as hereafter shall be shown. Thus
when the devil is by the Apostle styled (...) the God of this world, 2 Cor.
4.4. he is by our Savior to the same purpose termed, (...) the prince or ruler
of this World, Joh. 12.21. and 14.30. where yet in a Metaleptical manner of
speaking, this world, that is, the world here below is put by a Metonymy first
for men the Inhabitants thereof, as also Romans 3.16.19. then by a Synecdoche, or
a (...) rather for the most and worst sort of them, 1 Ioh. 5.19. When also that
distinction (...) those in the world, Joh. 13.1. and (...) those of the world,
Joh. 8.23. and 15.19, (...) Psa. 17.14. so termed because they have their share
and their lot, their part and their-portion, their hopes and happiness in the
things of this world, and the present life alone, as the Psalmist there
expounds himself. But thus most expressly is the word used in the plural form,
where it is said of Christ, that God by him (...) made the worlds, Heb. 1.2,
and by faith we understand (...) that the worlds were framed that is as the
Jewish Masters use to speak (...) the upper world, (...) the nether world, the
whole frame of Heaven and Earth; Of which our Savior, Until Heaven and Earth
pass away, Mat. 5.18. Whether way then we take the word (...) here, in the
notion of an adjunct or of a subject, according to the holy Ghosts manner of
speech, is, so long as the world stands, or for as long time as it lasts,
for to one and the same stint it amounts either way. That which in the other
term of (...) is so evidently and perspicuously expressed as that nothing can
be more pregnant, nor need the words any further gloss or Comment, being of
themselves so clear: Howbeit if any shall be either so dim-sighted or
self-wil'd, as to require some further Comment upon them, or explication of
them, to whom should repair be made for further information in such a case
rather then the Penman hereof himself? take we then the Evangelist what by this
form of speech (...) he intends, and he will evidently inform us, Chapter 13.39,
40, 49. and 24.3. (where four several times he uses the very self same form)
that there is no other thing intended then the end of the world; what time that
general Harvest shall be of all sorts of men, good and bad, wherein the Angels
shall be as Gods Harvestmen to dispose according to his appointment of either,
that which is joined also with Christ's second coming, when coming in the Clouds
in most Majesticall manner with fulness of power and glory, he shall send
forth his Angels to gather together his Elect, out of all parts of the world,
Mat. 24.3.30, 31. which compared with 1 These. 4.16, 17. cannot be any other
coming of Christ then that which shall be at the last day, and the worlds end,
until which coming of his it is also by the Apostle averred that these
administrations of Christ's own appointment in the Word and Sacraments are to be
continued, 1 Cor. 11.26. unto the worlds end, here, and until he come, there;
both intimating one and the self same period or stint of time, wherein the
Evangelist having so clearly expressed and expounded himself, it is not
frivolous only but presumptuous for any man to attempt to fasten any other
forced notionor strange sense upon his words.

The fourth Argument From the necessity of the Elect.

If there be 1. a perpetual need of the Ministry in these days, as in former
times; and 2. God has provided for the necessities of his people in the latter
times, as well as in former ages; and if there be no other ordinary means and
remedy provided to supply their necessities but the Ministry of the Word, then
this Office of the Ministry is perpetually necessary in the Church by Divine
Institution; But

First, There is a perpetual need in these days as well as in former times;
because

1. Our natures (though we be born of Christian Parents) are as bad as Jews and
Pagans, for there is no difference. Romans 13.22.10.21, Ephesians. 2.3.
The Elest by nature till regenerated are Children of wrath even as others,
dead in trespasses and sins.

1. Our Judgments so dark, that whilst we continue in our natural condition,
we do not, 1 Cor. 2.12. Romans 8.7. Col. 1.21.
cannot discern the things of the Spirit; The wisdom of our flesh is enmity
against God. 2. Our wills so alienated that we rebel against the light. 3. Our
natures so universally depraved, that whilst we are in the flesh unconverted,
we cannot please God; Romans 8.0. Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impossible that we should please God, or that God should
please us.
2. The mysteries of the Gospel are so high, so transcendant above nature, that
till the faculties of the soul be elevated there is a vail upon these Mysteries
without, 2 Cor. 3.14. 1* Tim. 3. last.
and upon our hearts within; So that if the same Question was demanded of us
that was of the Eunuch, Act. 8.30.
Understand thou what thou read? Had we that same ingenuity we should
return the same answer in the sense of our spiritual disability; How can we
except some man guide us?

3. The delusions of Satan are so strong, that he prevails over all men
naturally, and over most both totally and finally, to keep them under the power
of darkness, and so fit them for chains of darkness; He blindes the eyes of
them that believe not.

4. The multitude of false Teachers is so numerous, 2 Co. 4.3.
as there did arise in former times many false Prophets, saying, Let us go
after other gods; Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2.
So in the Apostles times, there rose up many false Teachers, who desired to be
Teachers of the Law, 1 Timothy 1.7. 2 Timothy 3.6.
understanding not what they say, nor whereof they do affirm; Who crept into
Houses, and did lead captive silly Women, laden with sin, and led away with
diverse lusts; which false Teachers could countenance, or at least connive at
any error, though never so absurd and destructive to the tenants which
themselves professed, yet they did ever join in resisting the Truth, men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith: v. 8.
It was the danger of the Christian Churches planted by the Apostles to be
assaulted and deluded by false Teachers, Romans 16.17, i8
among the believing Romans there were some to be marked and to be avoided,
which did cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which they had
learned; and those Seducers did not serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellies, and by their good words and fair speeches deceived the hearts of the
simple.

2 Cor. 11.13. v. 14.
Among the Corinthians there were False Apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan
though he never change his nature and malice, yet he often alters his habit and
pretenses, and when he cannot prevail as an opposer, he turns professor, and
preaches, v. 15.
and so transformeth himself into an Angel of Light, and therefore it is no
great thing if his Ministers be transformed as the Ministers of righteousness.
These cried down the Ministry and Apostleship of Paul, to set up themselves and
their own errors, which forced that holy Apostle to insist so largely in
defending his Ministry, in the 12. Chapter of that Epistle.

Among the Galatians there were some that troubled them, whom Paul wishes were
cut off, and these perverted the Gospel of Christ, and by whom the Galatians
were soon removed from him that called them into the grace of Christ unto
another Gospel. Gal. 1.7. with 5.12.
For even Satan and his messengers when they cannot prevail by their cunningly
devised fables, Then (as Luther observes) the Devil has his Gospel, and his
agents will broach new truths, such as Paul and the rest of the Apostles knew
not.

Among the Ephesians Paul foretold that after his departure grievous wolves
should enter in among them not sparing the flock: also of your selves shall men
arise speaking perverse things, Act. 20.29, 30
to draw disciples after them. And the Apostles have foretold us That in the
last times errors shall abound, and men shall not only privily (as then) but
even boldly and arrogantly (as it is now) bring in damnable heresies, 2 Pet.
2.1.
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

And the most groundless errors because more suitable to our depraved natures,
draw more in a day then the most solid truths can obtain in many years.

Luther thus complains, It is a grief and lamentation that Satan more hinders
and wounds the Gospel by his ministers and phanatical spirits, then all the
Kings, Nos hodie conquerimur and deploram^s quod Satan plus nocuerit Evangelio
nostro, per suos n inistros, spiritus illos phanaticos, quam per omnes reges
principes and episcopos qui illud vi persecuti sunt, and adhuc persequuntur.
Luther. in Galat. c. 1. v. 1.
Princes and Prelates which with their open force have persecuted it, or yet
continue in the persecution of it.

How hard a thing is it to prepare a people for the Lord! And after page 14.

Quanta difficultate paratur domino plebs perfecta! december annos laboratur
antequam Ecclesia rect and pie instituta paratur, and u^i parata est irrepit
aliquis fanaticus, and quidem idiota, qui nihil novit, quam contumeliose loqui
contra synceros verbi doctores, is in uno momento evertit omnia: quem non
vehementer movet ista indignita^?


Ten years are spent before the foundation of a Church is well laid, and when
it is laid, there creeps in some simple and ignorant fanatic, that can say and
do nothing, but rail at Gods faithful Ministers, and this silly idiot in one
moment overthrows a work of so many years? Whose heart does not bleed at the
thoughts of such a sad disaster!

And therefore the hearers and followers of Seducers shall multiply, many shall
follow their pernicious ways, V. 2.
by whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

In the Church of Pergamus, Revel. 3.14, 15
There were some who held the doctrine of Balaam, and also some that held the
doctrine of the Nicholaitans, which thing (says God) I hate.

In Thiatyra there was the woman Iezabel (though never Revel. 3.20.
called of God to any office) yet she called her self a Prophetess, 1 Timothy 4.1.
and who taught and reduced many of Gods servants to commit fornication.

And in the last days the holy Ghost fore-tels expressly, That men shall depart
from the faith giving heed to seducing spirits. And therefore the Ministry is
and shall be perpetually necessary in the present and future ages. And hence it
is that Satan and his messengers do so extremely traduce and vilify the
Ministers of God who withstand their errors; and multitudes of men who drive
on various interests, and scarcely agree in any one thing, yet they can all
unanimously agree in this to Oppose, and so much as in them lies to Extinguish
the Ministers, and will entertain no thoughts of peace, but upon this condition
that the Ministers be abolished, and then they seem to promise to themselves
and others rest, as if they would proceed no further, Perperam foedus inire cum
grege hac condition si gregis custodes fuerint sublati. Sad. de vocatio^e
pastorum. p. 541.
which is much like that wherewith Demosthenes refuted Alexander, that that
league must needs be destructive to the flock, wherein the Keepers and
Shepherds of the flock must be abandoned. And if this be once obtained the
people shall soon find, That when the Shepherd is smitten the flock will be
scattered, Mat. 26.31.

Secondly, As the need is perpetual and as great in these times as in former,
so God is careful to provide for the necessities of his Saints, as well in the
later times as in the former days. This needs no proof, because many rather
now think that God neglected all former Saints in comparison to us, and so
magnify the Saints of this present age, that they either condemn or lightly
esteem the generation of righteous men that lived before us. But however, sure
it is that God is tender of his youngest children, and that the Primogeniture
shall not carry all away: If our elder Brethren had a double portion, Heb.
11.40. Heb. 8.6. Heb. 13.8. Matthew. 16.18.
yet God has provided some better thing for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect. However, we are sure that the Covenant is the same to us
that it was to them. Christ the Mediator of the Covenant is the same yesterday
and to day, and the same for ever. The relation of the Church to hi m is
tender, Acts 9.5. and Christ undertaking is as full a ever, so to preserve the
Church, Acts 26.18.
That the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Thirdly, As our need and Gods care are perpetual, so the great and sole
ordinary means which our Lord in his tender regard to the souls of his has
appointed to heal our nature so corrupt, to clear his mysteries which are so
high, to detect the frauds of Satan which are so prevalent, and to counter-work
seducers which are so many and so active, is the Ministry of the Word. For God
has not revealed any other way in Scripture whereby he has promised to call
home his elect effectually, to separate them from an evil world, to be a
peculiar people to himself, then by the preaching of the Word. Romans 10.14.
Therefore the Ministry is perpetually necessary to bring in and build up those
that belong to the election of grace, to perfect the Saints, and to edify the
body of Christ. Which Ordinance of Preaching though it be vilified, 2 Cor.
2.16. 1 Pet. 2.8. Romans 1.16.
and prove the savor of death unto death to them that perish, who stumble at
the Word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed: Yet to them
which believe it is the power of God unto salvation. As Christ and his
Ordinances are a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense to the unbelievers: 1
Pet. 2.7.
So to them which believe, Christ in his Ordinances is very precious, and the
dispensers of his Ordinances very acceptable: Romans 10.15.
For unto them, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of
peace! Thus Christ in his Ordinances and messengers, when he is disallowed of
men, is made the head-stone of the corner, and when the world by wisdom knew
not God, it pleased God by the Ordinance of preaching, which a carnal world
calls foolishness, to save them which do believe.

Some object against this Argument, 1 Cor. 1.21.
That though the Ministry was needful in former times, yet there is no need in
times of the Gospel, The Saints shall be taught of God. And God promises in the
new Covenant, saying, Esaias 54.13.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lood, Ier. 31.34. Heb. 8.10, 11.
for they shall all know me from the lest of them unto the greatest. Now if all
the Saints shall be so taught of God that they shall not need to teach one
another, Then teaching by way of Office is not perpetually needful in times of
the Gospel. And another parallel place there is 1 John 2.27. The anointing
which ye have received abides in you: and ye need not that any man teach you.
But as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth and is no
lie, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. To which we answer,

1. Though the light in times of the Gospel be far clearer then under the
Law, yet it remains a perpetual truth even in Gospel Times, That without all
controversy great is the mystery of Godliness. And this mystery is so great,
that flesh and blood do not reveal it to us. 1 Timothy 3. ult. Mat. 16.17. 2 Cor.
3.14.
That there is a vail upon our eyes in reading the Scriptures, which vail is
only done away by Christ.

^ Though Christ alone does away this Vail, and all the Sa^nts be taught of
God, yet is neither the Vail removed, nor the Saints instructed ordinarily
without the Ministry of the Word: when God undertakes to teach his Elect
effectually, and to take them one of a City, and two of a Family, and to bring
them to Sion, then God promises, saying, I Will give you Pastors after mine own
heart, Ier. 3.14, 15.
which shall feed you with understanding and knowledge: So the Saints are truly
taught of God in the Ministry of the Word, because it is God alone that gives
Ministers, and alone also teaches his People to profit under this Ministry, 1
Cor. 15.38.
for it is God that gives to every seed his own Body: Paul may plant, and
Apollo water, but it is God alone that gives the increase: Paul's planting and
Apollo's watering did not cease to be the Ordinances of God, though in
reference to the success of their Ministry, neither was he that planted any
thing, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.
nor he that watered, but God alone that gives the increase.

3. When God says, They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man
his brother; This word [ not] a note of negation, is not absolute but
comparative; as where Christ says, Heb. 8.7. Joh. 7.16.
My doctrine is not mine but his that sent me. The world cannot hate you, but
me it hates, Joh. 16.7. Hos. 6.6. Mat. 12.7. 1 C6r. 7.17. 1 These. 4.7. v. 10.
because I testify that the works thereof are evil. When God says, I will
have Mercy and not Sacrifice. When Paul says, God sent me not to Baptize; And
when to the Churches he says, As touching Brotherly Love ye need not that I
write unto you, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another. Yet
in the very next verse he exhorts them unto brotherly Love, beseeching them
that they would increase more and more: And as touching the ministering of the
Saints he says, It is superfluous for me to write to you; yet in that very
Chapter he uses many arguments, and professes that he thought it necessary to
prepare their bounty, and to stir up their pure minds to a liberal
contribution to the Saints, and unto all men: All which speeches are
comparative expressions, whereby not the thing it self, but such a measure and
degree is denied; and so it must be here.

1. Because when these promises That they should not teach every man his
brother were fullfilled, and all the Saints were taught of God; yet even then
were they taught by an outward Ministry: Christ himself taught daily in the
Temple, He even taught in the Synagogues; Luke 19.47. Joh. 18.20. Joh. 10.7.
He sent also out his Dis^ples to teach: And the Apostles themselves gave
themselves continually to the Ministry of the Word: So that in those primitive
times the inward spiritual teaching of God did not take away that teaching
which he himself has ordained to be external and ministerial.

2. This negation in this promise must be only comparative and not universal
and absolute, because then it would not only destroy the Ministry as
unnecessary in public, but also evacuate and disannull all brotherly
admonitions in private, and then all godly conference and fraternall reproofs
should be prohibited as sins, which none can deny to be commanded as duties,
and such duties as are perpetual in Gospel Times; for all Saints at all times
are commanded to consider one another to provoke unto holiness and good works;
And they should be teaching and admonishing one another to warn them that are
unruly, to comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, Heb. 10.24.25 Col.
3.16. 1 The. 5.14. Gal. 6.1, 2.
To restore a brother that is fallen with the spirit of meekness, and to bear
one another burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

3. The Internal teaching of the Spirit does not take away the need of an
external teaching by the Ministry, because by the same Argument there should
be no need of Scripture, because the Scripture it self also is external: And
this is not a malicious supposition, but de facto there are many men in our
times that do so far rely upon this inward teaching as to lay aside the
Scriptures: And if so, there is no rule left to try the spirits, which is ever
needful, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Then there
is no way left to recover them that are fallen, 1 Jhoh. 4.1.
or preserve them that stand, for every one then will wander after his own
heart without conviction, and the delusions of Satan may prevail undiscovered,
as if they were the Oracles of God; Then a blind world and a blind heart will
lead one another till they both fall into the ditch: Mat. 15.14.
To prevent these dangers at all times, God has appointed the Ministry as
perpetually necessary, and has enjoined his Saints to repair unto the Law and
to the testimonies, and if any walking in a spirit of error under specious
pretenses of new light speak not according to this word, Isa. 8.20.
it is because there is no light in them.

If the ends for which Christ first appointed the Ministry, be perpetually
necessary, Argum. 5.
then the Office of the Ministry appointed by Christ for those ends is
perpetually necessary in the Church of God by divine Institution; but those
ends for which Christ appointed the Ministry are perpetually necessary, as will
appear by a serious consideration of these particulars.

1. One end for which the Ministry was ordained of God was, that the Elect
might be called and gathered, and there shall be some still in every age to be
added to the Church of them that shall be saved, and when the number of the
Elect is fully complete, then shall Christ come in his glory and all his Angels
with him to be glorified in his Saints, in the mean time there are many Sheep
which are not yet of the Fold, many who belong to the election who are not yet
effectually called, them also will Christ bring in both Jew and Gen^ile, Joh.
10.16.
that there may be one fold as there is on^ Shepherd: Now God has revealed no
other ordinary way to convert and bring these into his fold, but the Ministry
of his Word, for How can they believe without a Preach^r? Romans 10.14.
therefore if there be some Elect continually to be brought into fellowship
with Christ, and this end be not fully attained till the end of the world, then
the Ministry assigned to thi^ end must be perpetually necessary.

And therefore the Apostle Paul acquaints us that Christ gave the Ministers for
this among other ends, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. In which place, because i^ is
the great Charter of the Gospel Ministry, we shall crave leave a little to
exspatiate: we have,

1. The fruits or effects of Christ's Ascension, He gave some Apostles and some
Prophets, etc. verse. 11.

2. The ends for which these gifts were given, verse. 12. For the perfecting of
the Saints, etc. and verse. 14. That we be not children tossed to and fro, etc.

3, The duration or continuance of these gifts, which is expressly asserted to
be verse. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, etc. Now from this
place we argue;

1. Either Apostles, or Prophets, or Evangelists, or Pastors and Teachers, are
to continue till we all come into the unity of the faith. But Apostles,
Evangelists and Prophets were not to continue, which we prove thus, That which
is here given to continue, and promised that it shall continue, that certainly
did and does continue, otherwise Christ should break his promise. But de facto
Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists did not continue, as is confessed. Therefore
Pastors and Teachers are to continue.

2. Ordinary Officers in the Church are as truly the institutions of Christ,
and the fruits of his Ascension, as extraordinary, and therefore where God
gives ordinary Officers, they are to be received as sent by God, as well as
extraordinary, both are said to weave one web, to carry on one (...), one work
of the Ministry.

3. Whatever God gives to the Church, man neither can nor must take it away,
except God reverse it. But Christ gave this gift to the Church, and gave it as
appears with intention never to recall it. And therefore woe be to that man
that offers to take away this gift, let him take heed lest God take away his
part out of the book of life.

4. Though Paul was an extraordinary Minister, yet he does both here and
elswher^ maintain the honor, and assert the necessity of ordinary Pastors,
quite contrary to the men of our times who pretend to extraordinary
inspirations, and thence take occasion to pour contempt upon the ordinary
Ministry.

5. It was the intention of Jesus Christ when he gave this Ministry, that it
should continue till we all come into the unity of the faith. And if the
Ministry should not continue, it must be either because he is not careful to
make good his intention, or not able, or not willing to do it. But all these
are absurd. Indeed if this were a conditional promise, depending upon some
thing in us, the nonperformance of the condition on our parts might excuse the
not accomplishment of the promise on Gods part, but it is most evident that the
promise here is absolute and independent upon us, and therefore certainly it
has not been, shall not be broken.

If it be said, If this Argument hold, it will prove, that the Apostles shall
continue till we all come to the Unity of the Faith, etc. for they also are
mentioned in this Chapter.

We Answer. The words are to be understood not conjunctim but divisim, not
conjoynedly that all those should continue, but severally, that some one of
these (at least) should continue till that time, otherwise this great absurdity
would follow, that Christ should fail in the fullfilling of his Word.

6, When Christ promises a Ministry until we come to the Unity, he is thereby
obliged not only to keep his Ministry from a final abolition, but also from a
total interruption. As when God says to Christ, Sit thou at my right hand*
until I make thine enemies thy footstool, Mat. 22.44. it is therein implied,
that Christ shall not cease sitting at the right hand of the Father till all
his enemies be subdued. So here when Christ says, the Ministers shall continue
till we all come, etc. it follows undeniably that they must not cease till that
date be expired. And least of all should the Word of Christ stand, if God had
only set Ministers in his Church for a hundred or two or three hundred years,
and suffered his Church to lose the Ministry in the Apostasy of Antichrist, and
to be without it for so many hundred years together, as the Seekers are not
ashamed to affirm.

2. When the Saints are converted, Gods end in the Word and Sacraments is to
confirm them in a state of grace, Act. 14.22. Phil. 3.12.
to edify them and to nourish them up in the words of faith, for the best of
Saints are not here perfect, but must go from strength to strength, pressing
forward toward perfection; therefore during this life they shall ever need the
Ministry, ordained of Christ for the perfecting of the Saints; and they are
bound as new born babes to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may
grow thereby. 1 Pet. 2.
And it is the character of true Converts, that they love the gates of Sion,
Psalm. 133.3.
for there the Lord commands his blessing, even life for ever more.

3. The Saints are to be united (and what tears are sufficient to lament our
present Divisions?) God has promised there shall be an happy Union, as of the
Members to the Head, so of the Members mutually one to another, that there
shall be no Schism in his Body; 1 Cor. 12.25.
and he has Ordained the Ministry for this end, Till we all come in the unity
of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, Ephesians. 5.13.
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

4. The Saints are to be established in the truth of the Gospel, and for this
end was the Ministry Ordained, That from henceforth we be no more children
tossed to and fro, Ephesians, 5.15.
and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men and
cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

5. Besides all these, there will always be gainsayers, Who subvert whole
houses, Tit. 1.11.
teaching things which they ought not for filthy lucres sake; and their mouths
must be stopped, therefore the Ministry will be perpetually necessary for the
attaining of these ends.

Obj. If the Ministry of Pastors and Teachers be perpetually necessary for
these ends, Why then is not the Ministry of the Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists perpetuated, for all these are one breeding and feeding Ministry,
which Christ ascending on high, set in his Church?

Ans. Those extraordinary Offices were necessary to plant the Churches, to lay
the foundation as wise master builders, that all the Saints might be built upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ himself being the
cornerstone; but after the foundation was laid, it pleased the Father to leave
the Ministry in the hands of ordinary Pastors and Teachers, that they might
build upon the Foundation, even as God raised up Moses an extraordinary Prophet
to give the Law, and then left it to ordinary Teachers, both to read the Law
and give the sense thereof; for even Moses of old time had in every City them
that preached him, being read in the Synagogue every Sabbath day; so has the
Lord appointed ordinary Teachers and Pastors, and has committed to them the
Ministry, and has commanded them to wait on their Ministry, and when they
Prophecy to Prophecy according to the proportion of faith: Romans 12.6, 7.
And as he has commanded them to fulfill their Ministry which they have
received of the Lord, so has he also enjoined the people to be swift to hear,
and to esteem them that are over them highly for their works sake.

If the removal of the Ministry from place to place be threatened by God as one
of the saddest curses which can befall a people, Arg. 6.
and the removing or sleighting of it by men be charged upon them as a grievous
sin; Then the Ministry is perpetually necessary by Divine Institution, and to
be esteemed a very great blessing, but the removal of the Ministry is
threatened as one of the saddest curses, etc. For where there is no vision the
people perish; Pro. 29.18. 2 Chro. 15.3.
they are destroyed for lack of knowledge. It was the darkness of those woeful
times before King Asa, that Israel had been a long season without a teaching
Priest, and so without the true God and without the Law. The famine of hearing
the Word of God is threatened as the worst of famines, worse then that of bread
and water. Amos 8.11, 12
When God delivered up the Ark into captivity, then every one had cause as well
as Eli's daughter in Law to cry out Ichabod, the glory is departed from Israel.
As it was thus in the Old Testament, so in the New* When Christ was greatly
provoked by the Jews for their rejecting of him, one of the greatest judgments
that Christ threatens against them is, that the Kingdom of Heaven should be
taken from them and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. Mat.
21.43.
When people set themselves to discountenance, disobey and destroy the
Ministry, Rev. 2.5.
God may justly remove the Candlestick out of his place. How are those famous
Asian Churches laid desolate! Isa. 13.21.
The wild beasts of the desert lie down there, their, not only houses, but
Temples are full of doleful creatures, the Owls dwell there, and the Satyrs
dance th^re, and Mahumetanism has covered the face of the Eastern parts of the
world, as Antichrist has done in the West. The Ministry is the hedge of Gods
Vineyard, which if it be broken down, Psalm. 80.13.
all that pass by the way pluck it, the Boar out of the Wood does wast it, and
the wild beasts of the field devour it.

The Ministers God in mercy has set as watchmen upon the walls of Jerusalem,
which shall never hold their peace day or might. If they be discountenanced,
and through carnal fears so dispirited, that they are like unto dumb dogs that
cannot bark, it is a forerunner that the Flock will be devoured by the Wolves,
and that such a people is near to ruin. 1 King. 12.32.
It was the sin of Jeroboam, and though he intended it for establishment, yet
it became a ruin both to him and to his house, that he contemned the Ministry,
and made Priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of
Levi.

Ahab and Iezabel persecuted the Prophets of the Lord with the sword, and how
doleful was their end, 1 King. 19.10.
when the dogs licked up his blood, and eat her flesh. 1 King. 22.38. 2 King.
10.33* 2 Chr. 16.10.
It is noted that the contempt of the Ministry and the oppression of the people
do frequently go together. Asa a good King, yet being in rage against the Seer,
put him in prison; and the holy Ghost observes, that at the same time he
oppressed some of the people. It is noted of Amaziah that God had determined to
destroy him, 2 Chr. 25.16.
because he did evil, and would not hearken to the Counsel of the Prophet: And
that great sin for which God abhorred the excellency of Jacob, and sent his own
people into captivity, is expressed to be this, that when the Lord had sent to
them his Messengers rising up betimes and sending, because he had compassion on
his people and his dwelling place, that then they mocked the Messengers of God,
2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16.
and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people, till there was no remedy.

And in these days the way of truth is evil spoken of, and there are risen up
even among Professors, those who are Retainers of a form of godliness, and yet
are despisers of them that are godly, Jude ver. 19. 1 Thessalonians. 15.19, 20.
who separate themselves, being sensual, having not the Spirit, who despise
prophesying, and quench the Spirit. And one reason why preaching is not so
effectual to the bringing in of souls to Christ, is, because of the many
multitudes that frequent Sermons, there are but few that come to the Word as to
an Ordinance of God, or that seek God in his own Ordinance; there are very few,
which when they receive the Word of God which they hear of Ministers, Receive
it not as the word of men, 1 Thessalonians. 1.13.
but as indeed it is the Word of God which effectually works in them that do
believe. Now this evil is not only a sin against Gods free mercy, but is also
a sin against the sweetest of remedies: How will our sore prove uncurable, and
our disease continue without healing, if we despise the balm of Gilead and
reject all healing medicines? It is in the number of those sins which go before
us unto judgment, when people put away the Ministry of the Word from them,
they are said by the holy Ghost before the day of Judgment come, to judge
themselves unworthy of eternal Life. And thus we have done with the Arguments
proving the perpetuity of the Ministry, there remains one great Objection to be
Answered.

CHAP. III. Wherein the grand Objection Asserting the Loss of the Ministry
under Antichrist, is Answered.
WE confess that there was a Ministry Ordained of Christ, and continued all
the days of the Apostles, Objection.
and some Centuries after, yet the Mystery and Ministry of the Man of Sin was
then working, which at length so far prevailed, that all the world wondered
after the Beast, and power was given him over all Kindreds and Tongues and
Nations; Rev. 13. v. 3.
so that be caus^d all, both great and small, rich and poor, Ver. 16.
bond and free to receive his M^rk in their Right hand, or in their Foreheads.
In this Apostasy the Church which had been a chaste Virgin, became the Mother
of Harlots and Abominations, and not only the Kings and the inhabitants of the
earth were made drunk with the Wine of her Fornications, but especially the
Priests in all Nations were the abominable Pandors to promote the filthiness
of her Whoredoms, they were the Merchants made rich by her Fornications. Rev.
17.2. Rev. 18.15.
Now under this Reign of Antichrist, Bethel was turned into Bethav^n, the
Ministry was wholly lost, being only in pretense for Christ, but in reality for
Antichrist: And therefore we look upon all Ministers now as Members of that
notorious Strumpet, as Locusts from the bottomless Pit, as Priests of Baal,
and Limbs of Antichrist, and so account it not a sin, but a duty to contemn
their persons, and abhor their Ministry.

We acknowledge first that the Apostasy under Antichrist was exceeding
dreadful. Secondly, Soluti^n.
That not only the people and the Princes, but the Priests also had a great
hand, and were chief agents in this defection. Thirdly, That its the duty of
Gods people to come out of Babylon, that they partake not of their sins, nor
receive of their plagues. Rev. 18.4.
But yet we need the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in Christ, that we may
know the things that differ, that we may not call good evil, and evil good, but
according to the Word of truth, judge righteous judgment: And therefore we
entreat the Reader or this Objector, conscientiously to ponder these
Considerations.

1. Consider, as there have been many false Christ's, so there are and have been
many mistaken Antichrists; and the holy Ghost bids us, not to believe every
Spirit, but to try the spirits; Mat. 24. v. 23, 24, 25.
when many shall say, Lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ: And its as
true of Antichrist, some say, Lo here is Antichrist: Some, Lo there; yet the
Lord commands us saying, believe them not. The Truths, Ordinances, Servants and
Ministers of Christ, do not therefore cease to be of Christ, because some,
either by mistake, or by design shall say they are of Antichrist. The Doctrine
of the Deity of Christ* who is God blessed for ever, will not cease to be a
most precious Truth, because Michael Servetus, Georgius Blandatra, Franciscus
David, Laelius Socinus and his adherents condemn it as an Antichristian Error.

Was Valentinus Gentilis therefore a friend and Martyr to God the Father,
because he died as an enemy to God the Son? Stapleton Orat. Academ. 28. Jacob
Usher de Statu and Success. Ecclessiae cap. 3. p. 64.
Were the Valdenses who appeared against the Romish errors, the limbs of
Satan, because some of the Romanist affirm that Satan was let loose in
Berengarius and his Disciples? How luxuriant and confident are the fancies of
many concerning the things contained in the Revelations, wherein modest
Christians would choose rather to be humbly inquisitive, then Dogmatically
positive? Was Innocent the third the less nocent, Nicola Lyran. in Apocalypse.
cap. 20. Jacob. Usher ibid. page 297.
or was Pope Calixtus the more holy, because some of their followers make them
to be the Angel coming down from heaven, having the Key of the bottoml^sse pit
to bind Satan, as if the binding of Satan were nothing else, but to
Excommunicate Emperors, and to depresse the Imperial power under the Papal?

Bonaventure in Vit* Francis. cap* 3.
Shall Dominicus or Franciscus, those two great Founders of the Orders of the
Friars Dominican and Franciscan, the great upholders of Papacy, shall they be
less suspected, Jaco. Usher. ib. page 265.
because some of their disciples admired them, and confidently averred them to
be that Angel ascending from the East, having the Seal of the living God? Rev.
7.2. Men have no power to make Christian, Unchristian or Antichristian, either
persons or things, according to their pleasure: The Word of God is established
in the heavens, and his Truths do not vary after the variety of men's mistaking
fancies: Therefore we have great need to be sober and humble, and to beg of the
Lord the spirit of love and of a sound mind, that we may neither justify the
wicked nor condemn the Righteous.

2. Consider, concerning Antichrist, Though we grant it that Antichrist is not
an individual person, as Bellarmine and the Papists generally affirm: But the
state and succession of men which with one and the self same spirit oppose
Christ. 2. That the seat of this great Whore, is not, Heylin in his late
Geograph. p. 251, 252. H. Grotius in 2. these. 2.4. and Tractat. de Antichristo.
Bellarmin. de Antichristo, cap. 13.
as some intimate, Constantinople; nor Jerusalem, as others affirm; but Rome
that great City, that then reigned over the Kings of the earth, spiritually
called Sodom and Egypt. And 3. that the Antichrist is not the Turk and
Mahumetanism in the East, But the Pope and Papism in the West; yet there is no
ground to condemn every thing in that Antichristian Synagogue for
Antichristian; for without all question the Books of the Old and New Testament
were wonderfully preserved even in mystical Babylon. As formerly when the
Oracles of God were committed to Israel, the Lord continued the holy Scripture
in the Jewish Church, notwithstanding their spiritual Apostasy and Babylonish
Captivity. The good Word of the Lord is no less the Word of Truth, because the
false Antichristian Synagogue, do acknowledge it; no more then the Scripture
cease to be the Scripture, because Satan the father of lies did allege it.
Gold is gold wherever you find it; Truth is truth, however men either accept
it or contradict it. It Is a vast comprehensive Error to reject all Tenants,
though never so true for errors, because an erroneous Society does confess
them: For all is not false which the false Church asserteth; Every error is
founded upon the mistake of some truth; Malum in aliquo bono fundatur, Aquin.
contra Gentil. lib* 3. cap. 11.
as every evil does usually arise from the abuse of some good: In this mixture
of good and evil, light and darkness, where there are many precious truths,
yet many abominable falsehoods; it is our duty to sever between the righteous and
the vile, that we neither swallow down all for truth because there is a mixture
of truth, nor reject all for false because there is superadded a redundancy of
falsehood; Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, and his coming is with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, therefore we must Watch and Pray for the
spirit of discerning, that we may distinguish between things that differ.

3. Consider as the Lord had his truths so he had his Church in Babylon during
the rise, and growth, and reign, and continuance of Antichrist. The Apostasy
though general over all tongues, and kindreds, and Nations, yet it was not so
universal in all individual persons, but that there were a remnant according
to the Election of grace: Romans 11.4.
As in the Baalitish Apostasy the Lord reserved seven thousand who had not
bowed their knees to Baal; So in this Antichristian defection, the Lamb upon
Mount Sion had 1^. times 12. thousand that adhered to the doctrine of the 12.
Apostles, and these 144000 had their Fathers name written in their Forehead,
Rev. 14.1, 4, 5.
redeemed from among men, b^ing the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb, and
in their mouth was found no guile, and they were not defiled with those
Antichristian whoredoms; For they are Virgins, they were the true seed of the
woman which keep the Commandments of God, Rev. 12.17. Si Dominus temporalis
terram suam neglexeri^ purgare ab h^retica praevitate excommunicationis vinculo
innodetur, and summus pontifex vasallos ab ejus fedelita^e demintiet absolut^s
and terram exponat alijs occupandam. Con Lateran. sub Innoc. 3.

Vid. Alphons. D^cr^tum in Jacob. Usher page 253.


and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, against whom the Dragon raged: And
therefore when the Romanists ask, where was the Church before Luthers time? We
answer it was in and among them, though it was not of them. The Waldenses,
Albingenses, Berengarians, Pauperes de Lugduno or Lionists, Lollards, in
several places having many other several names and these in the several ages
of the Reign of Antichrist held the truth of Jesus, and opposed the errors of
the man of sin: which several Popes endeavored to destroy but could never
effect: All the Kings and Potentates of the earth were stirred up against them,
and a Decree made that if any temporal Lord did neglect to expel them out of
his Dominions, that he should be excommunicated, his subjects absolved from
allegiance, and all their Lands confiscate and given to others; Hence some of
the Princes of the earth made it Treason for any of their Subjects either to
hear or harbor them, or any ways to releeve them.

And the armies raised against the Saracens and Mahometans were converted
against these poor Christians and plenary indulgence, M. Mede in Apocalypse. c.
13.7. Huc and illuc dipersi ubique cum exegitarentur, tamen extitere semper per
intervalla qui little doctrinam intermortuam renovarunt. Thuan. l 5. ad an. 1550.
pardon of all sin promised to all that would fight against them: And if in
France alone as its reported in the History of that War, there were slain ten
hundred thousand, what shall we think the number of them to be who were slain
in all other Nations; Yet under all these pressures and persecutions, though
they were often dispersed, yet they could not be extinguished but these
afflicted people of the Lord, being scattered fled into Provence and the Alps,
some into Calabria, Bohemia, Polonia, and into Britain, as Thuanus in his
Preface.

And though many Opinions were imputed to them to make them odious, Ja. Usher.
ibid. p. 159. ad 173. Thuan. ibid.
yet their accusers do woefully and wonderfully contradict themselves, as some
of our Learned men do prove: and some of them ingenuously confess: yet their
main tenants were that they renounced the Church of Rome as the mystical
Babylon, contemned the Pope as the man of sin, and rejected their several
Popish opinions as Antichristian; They held the same truths for substance that
the Protestants now profess, Insomuch as some of the adversaries confess,
that they who are now Calvinists were anciently called Berengarians, and the
New Protestants are the Old Waldenses; Qui hodie sunt Calvinist ae olim dicti
fuerunt Berengariani. Serar.
This Sect some of the Papists complain to be of all most pernicious to the
Church of Rome.

1. Because it is most ancient and durable, having continued from the time of
Pope Sylvester: Who was created Pope An. 315. ut Onuph.
Others say from the time of the Apostles.

2. Because most general, no part of the earth scarce free from it.

Inter omnes fectas quae sunt vel fuerunt non est periculosior Ecclesiae D^i
quam Pauperum de Lugduno, tribus de causis. 1. Quia Diuturnior quidam dicunt
quod duraverit a tempore Sylvestri, alij dicunt quod a tempore Apostolorum. 2.
Quia Generalior fere enim nulla terra est, qua haec secta non serpit. 3. Quia
magnam habet Speciem Pietatis, eo quod coram hominibus just vivunt and been de
Deo omnia credunt, solum Romanam Ecclesiam blasphemant and oderunt, cui
multitudo facilis est ad credendum. Rainerius contra hereticos. cap. 4. page: 54.
3. Because it has the greatest appearance of godliness, for they live justly
toward men, and believe all things well concerning God, only they blaspheme
and hate the Church of Rome.

Consider. 4.
As the Lord had his Saints during all the Reign of Antichrist, so he raised up
his Ministers who in their several successive ages in several places,
testified against the spiritual whoredoms, idolatrous worships, and deceiving
frauds of Antichrist; it is true, as the generality of the people, so the
generality of the Priests in those times did worship the Beast, even all that
dwelt upon earth, whose names were not written in the Lambs Book of Life; Rev.
13.8. Romana Ecclesia ad hunc statum venit, ut non esset digna regi nisi per
reprobos. Petr. Aliac. de informatione.

D. Usher ibid. page 179. ^ These. 2.10, 11, 13.


and some observe, that it was the righteous judgment of the Lord upon the
Church at that time, that such an Apostate people should have such apostaticall
Priests, and the holy Ghost makes this one express ground, because men did
not receive the love of the truth that they might be saved, therefore God shall
send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, that they all might
be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness: But
in this general defection both of people and of their Teachers; The Lamb had a
remnant with him who were called, and chosen, and faithful, even an afflicted
poor remnant of Pastors as well as of people, Rev. 17.4.
reserved in the midst of Babyltn, who did trust in the Name of the Lord, and
those godly pious Priests were both obedient unto and bold in the faith of
Jesus.

Now if there were such Ministers during the reign of Antichrist, that followed
the Lamb, did not defile their garments, but preached and prayed, and lived,
and died in their constant and conscientious oppositions of the man of sin,
then surely the Ministry was not totally lost under the reign of Antichrist.
But that there were such, appears both by Holy Scripture-prophesie which
foretells it, and unquestionable History of the Church that confirms it: In the
one, men may learn what God spoke with his mouth; In the other, what the Lord
fullfilled with his own hand: The holy Ghost expresses, that there should be
some to prophecy in Sackcloth one thousand two hundred and sixty days: Now
not to dispute, but taking that for granted which the best Interpreters assert,
and by Arguments out of the Revelations prove,

1. That those One thousand two hundred and sixty days are not natural days
but prophetical, Brightman, Mede, Iunius, Paraeus in Apocalypse.

Bellarm. de Antichristo. c. 2.


every day taken for a Year, as Ezekiel. 4.6. Number. 14.14.

2. That those two Witnesses prophesying were not two individual persons, as
Enoch and Elias, as Bellarmine and other Papists affirm; but a succession of
Holy men stirred up all that time to testify the truth of Christ against
Antichrist, as our learned men prove.

3. That the Reign of the Beast continuing for 42 months, Paraeus in
Apocalypse. c. 11.3.
which months taken prophetically as before, every day for a year, and
reckoning for every mon^th 30 days, now multiply the 42 by the 30. and the
reign of the Beast is 1260 years, and though there be great difficulty when to
begin the rise and reign, and most Expositors herein much vary, yet in the
continuance there is a general accord, and none can rationally make any
question about it.

4. That these Sackcloth-prophecies though but very few comparatively to the
Locusts out of the Bottomless pit, which were innumerable, called two like
their types Moses and Aaron, who brought Israel out of Egypt, or as Elias and
Elisha which reduced Israel out of Baalism, yet these Witnesses, though in
number few, continue in their successions all the reign of the Beast, for the
days of their prophesying in Sackcloth are One thousand two hundred and sixty
years, and so expire not till the 42 months of the Beasts Reign be expired.

Now fifthly we add, that these Sackcloth Prophesiers were not only Saints who
mournfully bewailed the abominations of those times, that the holy City should
be trampled under foot; but also that they were holy pious Ministers distinct
from the Saints in Office, and in the act of their Prophetical function, which
is intimated to us,

1. From the power bestowed upon them* the Lord gives to them not only to pray
and to mourn, but to Prophecy, Rev. 11.3. Not so much by prediction of things
future, as by Preaching the everlasting Gospel. It was a mighty power from on
high that a few contemned, persecuted Ministers should have gifts to be able,
and power to be courageous to preach against the son of perdition, when all the
world wondered after the Beast.

2. From their effectual exercise of that power and that in their public
detecting those Antichristian abominations, and denouncing the wrath of God
against them. It is said in the days of their Prophecy, though they were poor
men and had no carnal weapons to defend themselves or offend their enemies, yet
in a spiritual sense fire proceeds out of their mouths and devoureth their
enemies, Revel. 11.5. For the Lord did make his words in their mouth to be
fire, and the people wood, and it devoured them, Ier. 5.14. and the holy Ghost
adds further that these Prophets tormented them that dwell upon the earth, v. 10.

3. The Spirit of truth does not only call these two by the name of Prophets,
but elsewhere distinguishes the Prophets and Righteous men, He that receives
a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; and he
that receives a Righteous man in the name of a Righteous man, shall receive a
Righteous man's reward. Where Christ encouraging poor Preachers of the Gospel
against all the hard and harsh usage of the world, intimates to us, 1. That
there are some who by way of Office and distinction from others, are Prophets
and Preachers. 2. That there is some eminent reward due to Prophets. 3. That
they who do any good to Prophets, even because of that Office, shall receive a
Prophets reward.


And in this very Prophecy concerning Antichrist, the Spirit makes these two
distinct, the Prophets and the Saints: Babylon is therefore ruined, because in
her is found the blood of the Prophets and of the Saints, Rev. 17.24. Now if we
descend from the words of this Prophecy, and come to observe the answerable
event in History, we shall find that in every age there were Ministers
opposing the tenants of Antichrist. Their particular names, times, places, and
their manner of resisting the man of sin, it will be too large to insist upon,
yet a brief Catalogue of Ministers is here inserted.

From the time of Christ and his Apostles, for 600 years, our famous Jewel
against the Romanists, has abundantly proved that the truths professed in the
reformed Churches were maintained by the Ancients. And in the succeeding
Centuries, when the Man of Sin began to prevail, there were in their several
Ages, Godly and Learned Ministers who opposed the Popish Errors, defending the
sufficiency of Scripture, Communion in both kinds, Justification by free
Grace; disclaiming the defilements of worship in adoring Images, Invocation of
Saints, praying for the Dead, worshipping Relics; and openly testifying
against the rising and swelling power of the Pope, declaiming against his
Supremacy and title of Universal Bishop as Antichristian.

From the 600 year of Christ, to the 700, besides Isidore, 7. Century.
Hesychius and others; there were in this Island these two famous Preachers,
Aidan, who converted from Paganism the Kingdom of Northumberland, which then
contained not only the Country now so called, but also Cumberland, Bed^ histor.
l. 3.
Westmoreland, Lancashire, Yorkshire, the Bishopric of Durham, and some part
of Scotland. Also Finan, by whose Ministry the Lord turned to the Christian
faith, the Kingdom of the East Saxons, and of Mercia, as our own Countryman
does testify.

Besides our famous Countrymen, Bid, 8. Century.
Al^vinus and many others; there were Adlebertus and Clemens and Sampson,
Albertus, and Clemens, and Sa^pson, and complures ali^ a Bonifacio
dissen^^r^^t, ^ist^r. Magdeburg. Cent. 8. Albertus Gallus and ejusdem secta
s^^erdot^s P. Bonifacio adversari vehem^ntissime caep^ru^t. Aven^. Anal. l. 3.
with many other Priests, who did mightily withstand Pope Boniface.

Besides Taurinensis, Agobardu^, Rabanus Maurus, there was Scotus accused by
the Pope for an Heretic, 9. Century.
Baronius tom. 9 Balae. Possevi^. Acts Monum. page 130.
and murdered (as is conceived) by his own Scholars for his opposing the carnal
presence. And Bertram a Priest in France, was so clear a Protestant in the
point of the Sacrament, in a Book that he set forth, that some Romanists say it
was writ by Oecolampadius under the name of Bertram. Vid. Sim. Birckbeck, page
220.
And the most learned of the Papists confess that Walafridus Strabo, Jonas
Bishop of Orleans, and Hin^marus Archbishop of Rhemes departed from the
received opinion of the Church Catholic. Baron. t^m. 9.


In this Age (the most unlearned and unhappy) are recounted Radulphus
Flavia^ensis, 10. Century.
Stephanus Eduensis, Smaragdus, and our English Alfricke whose Saxon Homily was
appointed to be read publicly to the people against the carnal presence*

In this Age more light began to appear, even in the heat and height of
Antichristianism, 11. Century.
not only by the Ministry of Fulbert Bishop of Chartres, Anselme of Laon Author
of the Interlineal Gloss, Oecumenius, Theophylact and others, but especially by
Berengarius and his disciples.

Besides Arnulphus the Martyr, Hugo de Sancto Victore, Robertus Tuitiensis, 12.
Century.
Gulielmus de sancto amore, Io^chim Abbas, Niceas, Mr. Fox 1. part page 180.
were Peter Bruis and his Scholar Henry of Tholous^, two famous Preachers
against Popish errors, insomuch as Peter was apprehended and burnt. In this
Age the Waldenses appeared, who were the famous opposers of Antichrist.

In this Age are recorded Al^^ssiodore, Peter de Vin^is, Arnoldus de nova
villa, 13. Century.
and those two famous Preachers Gerardus and Dulcinus, Robertus Grostedus
Romanorum malleus. Mr. Fox 1. part page 292.
who preached that the Pope was Antichrist, and Rome Babylon. Besides our
famous Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, the great hammer of the Romanists,
who wrote to the Pope that he was Antichrist.

In this Age appeared for Christ Thomas Bradwardin, 14. Century.
Richard Armachanus, Taulerus a famous Preacher in Germany; and that glorious
instrument of the Lord, John Wickliff.

In this Century, besides Peter de Alliaco, Nichol. Clemangis and many others,
we need name no other, 15. Century.
but those great Worthies and Martyrs Savanorola a famous Preacher in Florence,
with John Huss and Hierom of Prague, whose memories are precious throughout all
the Reformed Churches.

In this Age the Father of mercies raised up Martin Luther, and so many others,
16. Century.
and from that time the defection from Rome was so eminent, that it has
visibly continued to this day; and concerning the following times there is no
question.

And for the more clear understanding of all the persons aforementioned the
Ministers of the Lord, we refer the Learned Readers to the Histories
Magdeburgens. to Illyricus his Catalog. testium veritatis, to Jacob. Usher, de
Eccles. succes. and statu. and amongst our English Writers, to Mr Fox his Acts
and Monuments, and to Mr Sim. Birckbeck his Treatise called The Protestants
Evidence.

And if any further demand saying, Though many particular men did appear
against Antichrist, yet how does it appear, concerning those multitudes of
Professors called the Berengarians and the Waldenses, that their Churches had
Ministers?

We Answer, That Berengarius is reported to have been so great a friend to
Learning and Learned Preachers, Berengarius egenos scholares praesertim
theologiae studios^s, quotidiana stipe (cum opulentu^ esset) ita sollicitavit,
ut eorum opera omnis p^n^ Gallia and vicinae gentes eo malo quam citissime
laborarent. Alan. de Euchar. Per eg^^^s scholares quos quotidia^^^ stipendiis
sustentabat, etc. Mat. Paris. Jacob. Usher. page 199.
that at his own proper cost and charge, he brought up many Scholars, specially
such as were Students of Divinity, by whose help his Doctrine was spread almost
through all France, and the Countries adjoining, which is a great complaint
that the Popish Authors had against him.

And when it was objected against the Waldenses, that they said, Minis^ris
quid^m nostris optaremus came faelicitatem, ut se su^sque absque illis
adminiculis operar^m honestarum alere possent, ita enim plus temporis saltem ad
studia sua ipsis suppeteret, and occasio major esset instituendi nostros
doctrina and eruditione necessaria. N^n enim superstitiose, vel dem^nter
potius, manibus opus facere mandamus nostros, quod nisi hoc saciunt peccare eos
judicamus. Sicut de quodam memorari audimus, qui ex sacerdote agricola factus
fuerit, quod scriptum esse diceret, In sudore vultus comedes panem tuum. Ad eum
modum (Christo gratia) non est passus nostros labi Dominus: Sed plerique ex
nostris necessitate eo adiguntur ut opus faciant, etc. In scripto edito Anno
1572. Jac. Usher* p. 168.
Ministers should live upon Alms or work for their living,

They answer, that they wished that happiness to their Ministers that they
might be free from servile labors, for so they should have more time for their
studies, and more fitness to instruct us. For we are not grown to that
superstition or rather madness, as to think our Ministers do sin unless
they labor with their hands. As it is reported of one who of a Priest turned
Husbandman, because it is written In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy
bread. Our Lord has not suffered us to fall in this manner. Yet many of our
Ministers are brought to that necessity, that they must either work or starve.

But this these holy Saints did not account in those times to be the Ministers
duty, but lamented it as the Churches misery. By all which it appears that the
Berengarians and the Waldenses had their Ministers, even under the reign of
Antichrist.

5. Consider.
As there were Saints and Ordinances, and Ministers under the reign of
Antichrist: so many of these godly Ministers suffered Martyrdom during the
tyranny of the Beast, for their appearing against Antichrist. And if these
Ministers and Priests died for the Name of Christ against Antichrist: then
surely the Ministry was not lost, nor is it Antichristian. But that there were
such Ministers and Martyrs for the Name of Christ in every Country, is apparent
by the C^talogue of Martyrs which you may see more at large in Mr Fox. M^. Fox
Acts and Monum. part. 2d.


In Germany, Nicholas of Antwerp, Johannes Pistorius of Holland, George
Sekerter at Rustat, Mr Bersival at Lovain, Page 116.
P^ter Bruly at Dornick in Flanders, with many others.

In France, Laurentius Cruceus at Paris, Page 128. Cae^eri qui errorem
^uebantur, ignibus ^xusti sunt, in quibus pleriqu^ sacerdotes. Thuan. l. 5.

Act. and M^n. par. 2. p. 14^.


John du-Beck in Champaign, Aimond at Bordeaux, Geffery Varagle at Thuren. What
need we relate Peter Bruis, and other godly Ministers, when Thuanus records,
that all those who would not recant, were burnt alive; among whom (he says)
were many Priests.

In Spain, Dr Cacalla called the Standard Bearer to the Gospellers. Francis de
Bivero Priest of Valladolid, Alfonso Perez Priest of Valence.

It would be too long to speak of Savanarola in Florence, of John Hu^, Hierom
of Prague in Bohemia, and many other godly Ministers burnt alive for the
testimony of Jesus.

But we need go no farther then to England for examples: and here not to insist
on the troubles of John Wickliff, Nicholas Herford, Philip Repington, with
other pious Ministers in the time of Richard the 2d, nor the cruel burnings of
William Tailor and William White under Henry the 4th, and many others in the
succeeding times. Only peruse the History of Henry the 8th and Q. Mary.

Under Henry the 8th Mr Fox records these famous Ministers suffering Martyrdom.
Act and Mon. part. 2.


Mr Thomas Bilney.

Mr* Burfield, both burnt anno 1531. Page 277.293.309.361.


John Fryth, burnt anno 1532.

William Tyndal, called the Apostle of England, burnt anno. 1536.

John Lambert, burnt anno 1538.

Robert Barns, Tho* Garret, 397.528.
William Hierom Divines, burnt together in Smithfield anno 1541.

We instance in these among others, and have named the time of their
sufferings, and the pages of the Book where their sufferings are recorded: that
when you have considered their holy lives and godly death, how they embraced
the flames of fire as beds of Roses for the name of Christ, you may for ever
abhor the thought of accounting such worthy Ministers of Christ as
Antichristian.

And if you descend to the bloody days of Qu. Mary, you may find all the Land
over, Ministers of Christ burning for the name of Christ.

Take but the first year of that fiery trial Anno Dom. 1555. and see how these
Antichristian flames kindled upon the godly Preachers.

Mr John Rogers Vicar of Sepulchers Protomartyr, burnt in Smithfield, Feb. 8.

Mr Lawrence, burnt at Coventry about the same time.

Mr John Hooper burnt at Gloucester, Feb. 9.

Dr Rowland Tailor, burnt at Hadly, Feb. 9.

Mr John Lawrence, burnt at Colchester, Feb. 29.

Mr Robert Farran, burnt at Carmarthen in Wales, March 30.

Mr George Marsh, burnt at Westchester, April 24.

Mr William Flower, burnt at Westminster, April 24.

Mr John Cardmaker, burnt at London, May 30.

Mr John Bradford, burnt in Smithfield, July.

Mr John Bland, burnt at Canterbury, July 12.

Mr Robert Samuel, burnt at Ipswich, Aug. 31.

Dr Nicholas Ridley, and Mr Hugh Latimer at Oxford, October. 26.

Mr John Philpot, burnt in Smithfield, December. 18.

Not to name the year following. In this one year you may read of these holy
Ministers with others, counting not their lives dear unto themselves, so they
might finish their course with joy, and fulfill the Ministry which they
received of the Lord: and dare you call these blessed Martyrs the limbs of
Antichrist, who had all their limbs torn in pieces and consumed by Antichrist?
If you profess your selves Protestants, be not like the Papists in their
brutish rage who dug up the bones of Bucer and Paulus Fagius. It was the
praise of Boaz, that he left not off his kindness, Ruth 2.20.
but it will be your reproach, that you have not left off your unkindness
neither to the living nor to the dead.

The Turks so far honored S^^nderberg, that when he was buried at Lyssa,
they with great devotion dug up his bones, counting it some happiness if
they might but see or touch them, and they that could get any part of them,
caused them to be set in silver or in gold, and so to hang about their necks as
ornaments of greatest worth. If the Turks did this to him that was an enemy,
and they Mahumetans to him a Christian, how may they rise up in judgment to
condemn many in this generation, who profess themselves Christians, yet
condemn the most eminent soldiers and Martyrs of Jesus? Cursed be this anger
for it is cruel, and this rage for it is fierce. If you be real Protestants,
for shame bridle your fury, which in some regards is worse then Popish. Do you
cry out Antichrist, Antichrist, and yet crucify Christ again in his members?
Is not this to partake of Antichrists sin? Howsoever, when you have done your
worst, these holy Ministers and Martyrs are happy in heaven, and their memorial
shall be in all ages blessed upon earth, when their enemies shall perish and
leave their names for a curse unto Gods chosen. Isa. 65.15.


If the Lord had his holy Ministers not only in suffering times to be Martyrs,
but also in times of Reformation; 6. Consider.
if the Lord stirred up his Ministers as his chiefest instruments to bring his
people from the power of Antichrist, as of old he led his people out of Egypt
by the hands of Moses and Aaron, then surely the Ministers are not
Antichristian. But the Lord did stir up his Ministers in several places to
detect the frauds of Antichrist, and by their Ministry he did reduce his people
from that Antichristian tyranny. Before you heard of many Worthies, as
Wickliff, Hus, Hierom Prague, etc. But in the 16. Century, how wonderfully did
the Lord raise up for the rescue of his people the Ministry of Luther, and with
him what a troop of expert valiant Champions, Philip Melancthon, Conradus
Pelican, Fabricius, Capito, Osiander, Bucer, and many others in Germany,
Zui^glius in Helvetia, Indefessus Christi miles. Calv. opusc.
John Calvin and Farellus that unwearied soldier of Christ, as he is called.

These with multitudes of others in England, France, and other Countries, held
their life in their hands, hazarded all for the Gospel of Christ, these smit
spiritual Egypt in her firstborn. These, even these bare the heat of the day,
and we are entered upon their labors; And is this all the thank that ye render
to God or them, that when they delivered you from Antichristianisme, you
condemn them as Antichristian?

If ever since the beginnings of Reformation, the pious, painful Ministers in
the Reformed Churches have stood in the breach, 7. Consider.
have prevented our spiritual relapsing into Egypt, if they have spent their
time, parts and studies night and day to fight the battles of Christ against
Antichrist; then it is not only a groundless mistake, but an ungodly, sinful
scandal to censure them as Antichristian. How is it that ye are not afraid to
speak evil of the servants of the Lord, set up by his Spirit for the defense of
the Gospel? Will any rational man versed in the writings of those Worthies,
believe that Zanchius, Bullinger, Beza, Brentius, Iunius, Pareus, Piscator,
Musculus, Scultetus, Chamier, or of our Countrymen Jewel, Reignold, Whitaker,
Perkins, with multitudes of others, who were willing to spend and be spent in
defending the truths professed in the Reformed Churches against the Romanists?
Will any sober Christian believe that these were members of the Roman Harlot?
The Popish party cannot so belly them, but have found them to be their greatest
adversaries.

Will any man be so senseless and stupid as to account David who slew Goliath, 1 Samuel* 17. 2 Samuel 23.
or Eleazar the son of Odo, who slew the Philistims till his hand was weary, or
Shammah, who (when all Israel fled from the Philistims) he stood in the midst
of a ground full of Lentiles and defended it, and slew the Philistims, and the
Lord wrought a great victory? Will any man be so mad as to say that David and
his worthies were the only friends of the Philistims, and so bury them, and
cause them to go down to the grave among the uncircumcised?

Forget not the great appearances of Christ which have been gloriously seen and
felt in the faithful Ministers of this Land. 8. Consider.
Have not they preached and pressed to the conscience the practical points of
Christianity? and has not the Lord set a visible seal to their Ministry in the
souls of thousands? Dare you say that these practical Ministers Greenham, Dod,
Dent, Dyke, Bains, Rogers, Hildersham, with a world more, of whom the world is
not worthy, that they were Antichristian? Who art thou that give thy mouth to
evil, and thy tongue frames deceit? Thou sit and speak against thy
brother, Psalm. 51.19, 20
and slanderest thine own mothers son. Have thou considered their work of
faith, labor of love, patience of hope? If thou have not, why will thou speak
evil of things and persons thou know not? And if thou have read and
considered, confess and give glory to God, and say, God was in these Ministers
of a truth. Be not like those seduced Professors, Who measuring themselves by
themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves were not wise. 2 Cor.
10.12.
These silly or rather proud Christians, and their false teachers traduced the
great Apostle, as if he had not Christ, to whom Paul answers, and we with him,
If any man trust to himself, that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this
again, that as he is Christ's, 2 Cor. 10.7.
even so are we Christ's.

These holy Ministers were the precious members of Christ, and will you make
them as much as is in you the members of an harlot? God forbid. 1 Cor. 6.15.


The 9thConsideration is drawn from the sad consequences of this censorious,
groundles opinion. For as touching our selves, 9. Consider.
and the Ministers of this present Age, We say nothing, but We resolve in the
strength of Christ to be faithful to the death, and not to fear the revilings
of men, and in the midst of all your undeserved reproaches, to persist in the
work of the Lord, and to commit our selves to him that judges righteously.

Concerning these sad consequences we appeal to your serious and sober thoughts
in these few Queries,

Q. 1. Does not this Opinion (in rejecting all the godly Ministers of the
Reformed Churches as Antichristian) much promote the Cause of Antichrist which
you seem vehemently to oppose. Now if any build that which he has destroyed,
he makes himself a transgressor: For

1. Is it not the great work of Antichrist to destroy our Ministers, to smite
the Shepherd that the Flock may be scattered? Peruse what a subtle Jesuit and
Politician ( Adam Co^tzen by name) has written in his Politics, lib. 2. c.
18. 6. where among diverse other means prescribed for the reducing of people to
Pope^y, this is one, Haer^siarchae and doctores ^rrorum Republica pellendi
sunt. Vna quidem vice, si commode fieri queat, sin minus, se^sim and paulatim:
Non opus est hac quid^m in re probatione, nam turbulentis and vertiginosis
Aeolis abactis, mare, quod imo fundo exciverunt, sponte conquiescet: Et error,
cui patro^imum deerit, sine pugna concidet, etc. that is, Heretical Teachers
and Masters of Errors (So he calls the Ministers of the Gospel) are to be
banished out of the Commonwealth, and that at once, if it can conveniently be,
if not, insensibly and by degrees* That this is a sure way to reduce a nation
to the true Religion (So he miscals Popery) needs not much proof; For when the
turbulent winds are diverted or driven away, the waves of the Sea will be
quiet and the tempest will cease* And Error (so he nicknames the Truth) when
it wants Patrons, will fall without striking a stroke. Thus far Coutzen. So
that in the judgment of this crafty Jesuit there is no way more likely to
introduce Popery, then to throw down Protestant Ministers, whether by blasting
their reputation, or taking away their subsistence, or persecuting their
persons, (all comes to one thing;) And therefore you poor souls that are
seduced into this Anti-ministeriall design by Jesuitical craft, consider what
you are doing, whose projects you are carrying on; Look to your selves, Smite
your hand upon your thighs, and say, What have we done?
Certainly if the Lord in his wrath should suffer you so far to prevail as to
suppress Learning, trample upon the Universities, and ruin the Ministers;
That there should be no Learned men to detect Popish Impostures, and refell
their errors; That neither shield nor spear should be left among thousands in
Israel; you would in this more advance Antichrist, then if you were his sworn
Vassals, even an Army of Friars and Jesuits deceiving and being deceived.

2. Do not most of your Arguments symbolize with the Romanists as if they were
arrows shot out of their quiver? They renounce us upon this ground, That we are
no true Church, have no true Ministry, and do not you agree with them in this
unchristian principle: and are not we forced to prove the being of our Church
and Ministry in all ages against you, with the same Arguments we use against
them? and herein do not you gratify the common Adversary, and strengthen their
hands?

3, Have you not cause to enquire whether you be not acted by the same Spirit?
For you know the Spirit of Christ is a Spirit of meekness, and that wisdom
which comes from above is first pure, and then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated: But the Spirit of Antichrist is high, and hot, and furious, usurping
an infallibility of judgment, and unchurching all that differ from him; and do
not you unsaint all persons, and unchurch all Societies dissenting from you?
and may not this rise from the spirit of delusion which works strongly in the
Children of disobedience?

4. It is the Opinion of many, that the slaying of the Witnesses is not past,
but that the time thereof is very near, when Popery shall once again prevail;
And the Reformed Churches shall be punished by taking away these Witnesses for
a time, M^de in Rev. 11.12.
because they received them not according to the dignity of their Embassage.
And are not you preparing your selves and others to help on this slaughter? why
do so many pray in blood, and offer strange fire upon Gods Altar, as if nothing
could give content till the Ministry be ruined, and does not this Tenent, That
the Ministers are the Limbs of Antichrist, bind you to shed their blood, and
to account it good service to God, not only to unsynagogue them (which you have
done already) but to kill them; That so among you also may be found the blood
of the Prophets and of the Saints.

Q. 2. Do you not hereby wound all the Reformed Churches, darkning the beauty,
and obstructing the progress of Reformation? When the Lord stirred up Luther
in Germany, Zuinglius at Zurich, Calvin at Geneva, to set upon this great work,
multitudes in all Nations begun to embrace the truth, and to fly from the rents
of Babel: Duo Prophetae injusti, Pontisex and Lutherus, and hic quidem illo
deterior.

Sleidan. l. 10. ad Ann. 1535. Calv. adversus Libertin. ad Ann. 1547.


Antichrist was made so naked and bare in all the filthiness of his
whoredoms, that the whole world was ready to forsake her: Had not Satan
stirred up this cursed Tenent wherewith many were levened, Rotmannus,
Cnipperdoling, John Leyden, and others opposed Luther as a false Prophet, as
bad as the Pope, and of the two they said Luther was the worst. Antonius
Pockquius under pretense of spiritual liberty, seduced many into the reality
of carnal security, and how furious the Antinomians and Anabaptists were in
Germany, we had rather lament then express; And did not Satan by these Agents
prevail to weaken the hands of those Heroic Worthies, and so caused the work
to cease, and many to relapse? How little has been the Progress of the
Protestant Religion ever since? And now of late when the Lord stirred up many
in this Island, to seek to serve the Lord with a pure worship, the work went
forward with great felicity till this conceited opinion obtained, since which
time the spirits of professors have been so alienated and embittered, that the
way of truth is every where evil spoken of.

Q. 3. Has not the Lord greatly testified from Heaven against this Tenent in
his spiritual Judgments upon many the great promoters of it? Since they
despised the Ministry, deserted the Ordlnance; how are they fallen from heaven,
some turning Scepticks and Seekers, others Ranters and Quakers, and what not?
falling and falling, till at last they grow openly profane and profligate
Atheists.

Q. 4. Does not this opinion greatly endanger the souls of others? Are not all
sinful enough, naturally hating Teachers, and scorning to be reproved, being
enemies to light and truth? Why should you strengthen the hands of sinners?
that whereas formerly they could not sin against light, but they had many
checks of conscience, now they despise instruction and hate to be reformed, and
when they sin most fully and foully, yet they sin without reluctance, and glory
in their own shame; so that if these men perish in their gain-sayings, yet may
not their blood be required at your hands, who have not only misled them into
error, but have killed them with prejudice against the remedy which should
reclaim them?

Q. 5. Is not this opinion the sad abuse of the great liberty now enjoyed? In
times of former trouble, How did Professors live sincerely, love fervently,
pray, and fast, and mourn together? But by these Tenants the Staff of Bands and
Beauty is broken, and dashed in pieces one upon another, which may justly
provoke the Lord to cut short the day of liberty, that men may learn by the
want of liberty how to prise and sadly bewail their woeful abuse of it.

Q. 6. If your principles about an universal liberty be true, why are you so
untrue to your own principles? you can well endure men that deny the
Immortality of the soul, the verity of Scriptures, the Deity of Christ, the
Godhead of the holy Ghost, and those that defend any thing, whatsoever is
contrary to sound doctrine; These you can tolerate, defend, hug in your bosom;
and if any one speak against any the broachers of those errors: You cry out,
Persecution, Persecution, yet at the self same time you persecute (to your
uttermost) all Ministers, who take themselves bound in conscience to defend the
Ministry, You do and can tolerate the most profane and heretical, but these
Ministers Consciences you cannot tolerate: Are you not partial in your selves,
and become Judges of evil thoughts, whilst you justify that in your selves as
a duty which you condemn in others as an abominable iniquity? Why are your
professed principles so uneven, and you so contradictory to your own
principles? Be not like the Jews who please not God and are contrary to all men.

Q. 7. Have you not cause to fear, that the Lord may leave you as he did your
Predecessors in Germany, who held the same Tenants with you, gloried (as much
as you) in their own confidences, and condemned (as you do) all others; Railed
first against the Ministry, then raged aginst the Magistracy, brought both
Church and State into confusion, put the Country into burning Flames, wherein
at length themselves were consumed to ashes; Do not therefore persist in
kindling these false fires; Walk no longer in the light of the sparks that you
have kindled, lest you have this at the hand of the Lord, to lie down in sorrow.

CHAP. IV. Containing part of the Third Proposition.
SHOWING, That none ought to take upon him the Office of the Ministry without a
Call.
IT is manifest by the Word of God, That no man ought to take upon him the
Office or work of a Minister, Propos. 3.
till he be lawfully called and ordained thereunto.

As the Church and State are distinct Polities, so have they Subjects Laws and
Officers, distinct always in the formal conception, though materially in
diverse things they may agree, Mat. 12.21. Render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods; The things of God and
Caesar are distinct. Thus Luke 2.11. Man, who made me a Judge or divider over
you? a Preacher and a Judge are two distinct callings.

These Officers for their Institution, Vocation, Encouragement, depend not
solely, nor principally upon man, but are given and confirmed to theChurch by
Christ the King of Saints, and great Shepherd of Souls, for ends and purposes
most honorable and necessary in all ages of the world, Mat. 28.29, 28. Ephesians.
4.11, 12.

Supposing therefore at present what has been already proved, that there is
such an Office in the Church to last by Divine Institution to the end of the
world: The present Discourse enquires about the Subjectum recipiens of this
high and weighty Office, and the work of it, whether it lie in common, or be
appropriated by Divine Ordinance to some peculiar and special persons, who are
not only favored to be Christ's Sheep, but honored also to be Shepherds under
him? This Question is not de lana caprina, nor needless; For

1. It is manifest, that there be some who constantly supply the room of
Preachers, and arrogate to themselves the reverence and maintenance due to none
but Ministers, and yet they themselves were never ordained to this Office. By
this means many Congregations are deprived of Government, and of the
Sacraments, and such as would willingly take care of their souls in a regular
and ordinary way are excluded by such intruders, as will neither be solemnly
set apart for the, Ministry by imposition of hands, with fasting and prayer,
nor give way to them that would.

2. Others there be that plead for a liberty of preaching, or (as they phrase
it) for the exercise of gifts in public, even in these Congregations where
there are ordained Ministers, and this to be by those who pretend not to be
Preachers and Ministers, strictly and properly so called, when, and as often as
such persons please, and that this liberty ought to be given to every Christian
who desires it, and may probably be presumed to be fitted for it.

We therefore that we may as much as in us lies take away the stumbling block
which by these practices is laid before blind Papists, and remove the scandal
given to Reformed Churches, and hinder the progress of this sin in our own,
shall 1. Bear witness to these truths: 1. That none may assume the Office of
the Ministry, unless he be solemnly set apart thereunto, i n this Chapter. 2.
That none may undertake the work of the Ministry, except he be a Minister, in
the next Chapter.
2. Answer all the considerable Arguments we could meet with used in defense of
the forenamed errors, in the Chapter following: and this we shall do with
clearness and brevity, as the matter shall permit, and in sincerity, and with
a spirit of meekness, as becomes the Ministers of the Gospel.


These. 1. That none may assume the Office of the Ministry, unless less he be
solemnly set apart thereunto, appears by these Arguments.

First, We argue from that known Text Romans 10.15. And how shall they preach
except they be sent? Argum. 1.
This is set down by way of Interrogation, Vt oration sit penetrantior, says
Pareu^. The Prohibition is made more emphatical by the interrogation, and the
form of expression makes it morally impossible to preach without mission. The
Apostle uses a fourfold gradation, How shall they call upon him in whom they
have not believed? How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
How shall they hear without a preacher? How shall they preach except they be
sent? The last link of the chain is of equal truth with the former. As no man
can call rightly on him in whom he believes not, and no man can believe in him
of whom he never heard, and no man can hear without a Preacher; so also no man
can preach except he be sent; and therefore he that breaks this last link
breaks this golden chain of the Apostle, and sins against God. Besides this
last link is an eternal truth. As no man to the end of the world can call upon
him in whom he believes not, or believe in him of whom he hears not, or hear
without a Preacher; so it is, and will be true to the end of the world, that no
man can preach except he be sent. The Apostle scrueth up the necessity of
mission as high as the necessity of preaching, and if one be perpetual, the
other must be so also. Now from all this we gather,

1. That mission is essential to the constitution of a Minister. The Apostle
does not say, How shall they preach except they be gifted (though this be true)
but how shall they preach except they be sent? Implying, that gifting without
sending does not constitute a Minister.

2. That this mission is not only of extraordinary, but of ordinary teachers,
because faith is as much annexed to their teaching, as teaching to their
mission, and faith is not the fruit of humane invention (such is preaching
without mission) but of Divine Ordinance And therefore since we have no
extraordinary Preachers, we must either conclude there is no faith in the
world, or that there is an ordinary way of sending Ministers, by whom as Gods
instruments faith is wrought, and if so, their persons must enter that way, and
not run before they be sent.

3. That there is a necessity of a constant and perpetual, as well as of an
ordinary mission. If faith depends upon hearing, hearing upon preaching,
preaching upon mission, then if faith be necessary in all ages of the world,
mission is also necessary, yea ordinary mission, because extraordinary is
ceased. A person may be praedo, but he cannot be praco without mission, and
whatsoever may be done in some few extraordinary cases where regular mission
cannot be had, yet to run without sending, and to leap over the wall where God
has opened a door, is as high presumption in Divinity, as it is in the civil
state, to break open an house without humane authority. To all this it is
replied,

1. Some say, That this sending is meant of sending by the election of the
people, but not by the Ordination of Ministers. Answ. This cannot be, for the
people are the parties to whom the Preachers are sent: Ministers are sent to
the people, not by the people. The same party cannot be the person sending, and
the persons sent unto. An Ambassador is not sent by the State to whom he
brings his Embassy, but by the States which gave him his Commission.

2. Others say, That this sending is to be understood of a providential, not of
an ecclesiastical and ministerial sending. Answ. This is confuted by the next
words in the Text, How shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written,
How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things. These words are taken out of Isa. 52. and must
needs be understood of a ministerial sending. The Ministers he speaks of are
called Watchmen, Isa. 52.8. and the Prophet himself is mentioned as one of
them, Romans 10.10. They are a Prophecy of the acceptance that the Ministers
sent by God, should have amongst the people of God in the times of the Gospel;
And that this Text is to be understood of more then a bare providential
sending, appears further. Because

2. If providential sending were sufficient, then women-Preachers are as much
sent of God, and may promise themselves as good success as the best Minister.
Yea a tyrant, robber or murderer, may justify himself in his wickedness, as
being sent by God providentially; Then Zimri had as just a warrant to destroy
the house of Baasha, as Iehu had to destroy the house of Ahab, and Joseph's
brethren did well in selling him, since they did it by special providence, Genesis
45. and 50.7.

3. The Apostle speaks of such a sending as must be acknowledged by all to be
of God, an authoritative mission, such as Ambassadors have, who are sent with
public Letters of Credence, to negotiate the Affairs of those that employ
them. For

1. They are called Preachers or Heralds, the participle in the original, Romans
10.14. noting the Office, as Romans 12.7, 8. and 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Heb. 13.17. so in
the parallel place, Isa. 52.8. they are called Watchmen, both which terms
connote Authority.

2. People are blamed for not hearing them, Romans 10.16, 21. but the not hearing
of such as are not sent, Otherwise then providentially.
is no fault but a virtue, John 10.5, 8. Indeed divine truth is ever obligatory
who ever brings it, but a double tie lies upon people when truth is conveyed
by a divine messenger: Otherwise any private person had as much power of
binding and losing as a Minister. There is a wide difference between an arrest
or pardon reported by a private person, and the same applied under the
Broad-Seal by a person delegated from the Supreme Magistrate.

3. The Socinians reply to the Text, and say, That a special Call was
necessary in the Apostles days, because the doctrine by them delivered was new
and unheard of, but this mission is not necessary in our days, because we
preach no new Doctrine, but only that which the Apostles have formerly taught
and written.

Answ. But the Answer is easy. For* 1. We have already proved, That there is a
necessity in the Church of Christ of a constant, perpetual and ordinary mission.

2. It is false that the Apostles and Prophets taught any new Doctrine, Act.
24.14. and 26.22. and 28.23. they believed and taught nothing but old truths,
formerly delivered by Moses and the Prophets, 1 John 1.7. New indeed they might
be in respect of the manner of proposing, Joh. 13.34. or the singular
ratification thereof by miracles, Mark 1.27. or the apprehension of the
Auditors, Acts 17.19. but not as to the substance of the Doctrine. Compare John
13.34. with 2 Epist. of John verse. 5. 1 Ioh. 2.7.

3. As to the first and third Consideration, the Gospel is always new to
children, ignorant persons or Heathen, etc. And therefore if Socinians will be
true to their own principles, they cannot plead against a called Ministry.

4. In the days of the Apostles the truths of the Gospel were owned by all the
Churches, and so not new as to their apprehensions, yet then came none to the
Ministry without a Call. Witness the Epistles to Timothy and Titus. Thus at
last we have vindicated this Text from all those mists that are cast upon it to
darken it, and made it to appear, That none ought to take upon them the Office
of a Minister, unless they be lawfully Called and Ordained thereunto.

Our second Argument is taken from Heb. 5.4, 5. And no man takes this honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God, Argum. 2.
as Aaron; so also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but
he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. No man
takes, (i. e.) ought to take. Verbs active, as our English Annotators upon the
place observe in the phrase of Scripture sometime import not the act it self,
but only an Office, as Genesis 20.9. Levit. 4.12, 13. Psa. 32.8. This honour] the
Priestly Office is not only a b^rthen but an honor, what ever the carnal world
esteem of it. The Apostle here makes a general Proposition, No man ought to
take the ministerial honor upon him unless called by God. This Proposition is
not limited but illustrated,

First, By Aaron, who undertook not this Office till called thereunto, Exodus
28.1. no more did any other of the Priests in the Old Testament, 2 Chronicles.
29.11. and 16.16. It cost C^rah and his Company dear for doing otherwise. The
Prophets also make mention of their Commissions in the beginning of their
Prophecies. The word of the Lord came to Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, etc. And when
Amaziah objected against Amos, Amos did not plead any general liberty the
Israelites had of prophesying, but tells Amaziah, I was no Prophet, I was an
Herdsman, and a gatherer of Sycamore fruit, and the Lord took me as I followed
the flock, etc. If then the Priests and Prophets of the Old Testament could not
take this honor upon them, till called and appointed, who can show any just
reason, why any under the New Testament should do otherwise, especially if we
consider, That the Gospel Ministry is more weighty and glorious then the Legal
was.

Secondly, By Christ, who though he be God blessed for ever, the true God,
coequal and coeternal with the Father, yet he glorified not himself; to be made
an High Priest, but was sealed and inaugurated by his Father into this great
Office. And therefore he says expressly John 8.54. If I honor my self, my
honor is nothing, it is my Father that honors me, of whom you say that he
is your God. Now we desire all Christians in the fear of God to consider, That
if the Lord Jesus would not honor himself to become our Mediator till he was
anointed by his Father, and designed to this Office, it cannot but be great
presumption for any man to glorify himself, and make himself a Minister before
he be lawfully ordained thereunto, we may truly say to such, as Christ does,
You that thus honor your selves, your honor is nothing.

Argum. 3.
Thirdly, We argue from the Titles that are g^ven to the Ministers of the
Gospel: They are called Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. Stewards, Tit. 1.7. Me^ of
God, Tim. 6* 11. compared with 2. King. 5.8. Watchmen, Ezekiel. 3.7. Angels,
Revel, 2.1. which are all names of Office, and require a special designation
from God. Stewards do not use to officiate without warrant, Luke 12.42.
Ambassadors do not go forth to treat with forain States without public
Commission. As they must have Instructions for the matter of their Message, so
they must be enabled with public Authority for the managing of their Work.
Add further, that Ministers are called Gods Mouth, and how shall a man take
upon him to be Gods mouth who is not sent from God? They are called the Good
soldiers of Jesus Christ, soldiers in an eminent degree, to fight against
iniquity and heresy, and therefore must be listed by Christ into that number,
and must have his warrant for the discharge of their duty. They are Gods
Servants and Ministers, and therefore must be sent by him, or else they are
their own masters, not Gods servants. And that all these things concern our
Ministry as well as theirs in the Primitive times, is evident, because these
Titles are applied not only to extraordinary, but to ordinary Ministers. The
Ministers of the seven Churches of Asia are called Angels; the Ministers
ordained by Titus; Stewards, the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Overseers or
Bishops; now a Ruler is a name of Office, and implies a Commission to
constitute him in that capacity.

Fourthly, We argue From the constant distinction that is made in Scripture
between gifts and calling; Argum. 4.
We read Ioh. 20.21, 22. First Christ gives his Apostles their Commission; As
my Father has sent me even so send I you: Then he gives them their gifts,
Receive the Holy Ghost: Thus also Isa. 6.6, 7, 9. God touched his lips with a
coal from the Altar, and gifted him; Afterward he gives him his Commission:
Thus also it was with the Prophet Jeremy 1.5, 9. God sends him, and then puts
forth his hand, touches his mouth, and fi^s him: Even as it is in all civil
Governments: Gifts make not any man a Judge, or a Lord-Maior, Sheriff, or
Common-Counsell man, though he be never so richly qualified for these Offices,
unless he be lawfully appointed thereunto; So is it in Church Affairs, it is
not gifts but calling that constitutes a Minister; therefore that distinction
of a Minister by gifts and a Minister by calling has no footing in the Word of
Truth: If gifts were sufficient to make a Minister, then women might preach as
well as men, for they may have as eminent gifts. Indeed gifts are a necessary
qualification of the person to be called, but make him not a lawful Minister
till called and ordained: And if he take the Office upon him unsent, he is an
Usurper, and may fear to perish in the gainsaying of Corah, notwithstanding
his gifts.

Argum. 5.
Fifthly, We argue from the Rules laid down in Scripture for the calling of men
to the Office of the Ministry: The Word of God does exactly tell us the
qualifications of the person, that is to be called 1 Timothy 3.2, 3. etc. The
Scripture also directs for the manner of his calling to the work, who are to
Ordain, How he is to be Ordained, 1 Timothy 4.14. etc. Now either these directions
are superfluous and unnecessary, or else it is a truth that no man ought to
take this Office upon him without such a call; Nor were these directions given
for that age only, but for all the ages of the Church to the end of the world,
as appears evidently from 1 Timothy 6.18. compared with 1 Timothy 5.7.21. In the
first place he is charged to keep those commands without spot to the appearance
of Jesus Christ; And in the second place there is as solemn a charge
particularly applied to quicken his diligence and faithfulness about matters
of the Church, and especially the ordination, honor and maintenance of the
Ministry, in ordinary, as appears by the context before, and after from ver.
17. to ver. 23. The same charge is laid down also by way of direction, Chap. 3.
and particularly committed to Timethy's care, ver. 14. And one main ground why
Paul charge Timothy to be so careful about these particulars especially at
Ephesus, was, That thereby false doctrine might be prevented, 1 Timothy 1.3, 4.
for which there is scarce a more effectual means in the world, then a public
and regular care of calling persons duly qualified to the Ministry: And we
cannot but look with sad hearts upon the spreading of errors in these days of
general Apostasy, as the righteous judgment of God upon the supine
negligence of men in this particular among others; The same charge upon the
same ground is laid upon Titus, Cha. 1.5, 9, 10. where also the Apostle gives
singular directions for the qualification of the person to be ordained, both in
point of gifts and grace, which are all vain and unusefull, if any may enter
upon the Ministry without Ordination.

Sixthly, We argue from that confusion which would come into the Church, Argum.
6.
if every man that presumes himself gifted should intrude himself into the
Office of the Ministry, without a regular call: Saint Jerome held it an
infallible sign of a Church falling into ruin, Vbi nulla Ministrorum est
electio manifestum cognosce collab^nt is Christianismi judicium; where there is
no choice of Ministers, acknowledge this a manifest evidence of Christianity
decaying: The reason is apparent; The prostituting of this sacred and weighty
Office to the wills of men, opens a door to all disorders, and the introducing
of all heresies and errors; How much did the Church of Antioch suffer from such
as came from the Apostles, and had no Commission, Act. 15. Gal. 2.5. besides
that contempt and scorn which it exposes the Ministry unto; Admit the same in
the Commonwealth or in an Army: Might he that would make himself a Mayor,
Judge, Constable, a Colonel, Captain, etc. what an Iliad of miseries would
thence ^nsue is easier to be imagined then expressed.

CHAP. V. Containing part of the Third Proposition.
PROVING, That none may do the Work of the Ministry without Ordination.
NO man may perform the work of the Ministry but he that is solemnly set apart
and ordained to be a Minister.

Having in the precedent Chapter asserted the necessity of Ordination to the
work of the Ministry against the presumptuous usurpation of such as run and are
not sent; We shall by the grace of God in this Chapter vindicate the work of
the Ministry unto those whom God has set as Officers in his Church.

That there is a work belonging to the Ministry is out of question, and what
that work is, is confessed by all; It belongs to them to dispense the mysteries
of God, the keys of the Kingdom of God are in their hands; It is their work to
watch for souls as they that must give an account of them at that great day; To
preach the Word, and by sound doctrine to convince gainsayers, to administer
the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, to pray for and bless the
people in the Name of God, to rule and govern the Church, having a care of
discipline, and all these as in the place and person of Christ.

Of how great necessity these works are unto the Church, is evident unto
understanding Christians, and has been demonstrated already: It now remains to
be enquired, whether all or any of these works may be performed by men
uncalled, though gifted, or whether they be peculiar unto Ministers.

Those with whom we have to do, yielding all the rest to the Ministry,
challenge in their writings a liberty to preach the Word, and in their
practices (some of them) a power of praying for and blessing the people, how
justly we shall show when we have first stated the Question, which we shall do
briefly and plainly, that we may not seem to disallow what we ought to
countenance, commend, nay to command in the Name of the Lord, and that we may
prevent and anticipate the cavils of some gainsayers.

For the right stating of the Question, we shall declare what we mean by
preaching of the Word, and from thence premise some few distinctions, which
well considered of, might put an end to this whole controversy.

By the Preaching of the Word we understand an authoritative explication and
application of Scripture, for exhortation, edification, and comfort, to a
Congregation met together for the solemn worship of God, in the stead and place
of Christ; and we desire that every branch of this description may be well
weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary.

The Subject of Preaching is the Word of God, Mat. 28.19. Let him that has my
word speak my word faithfully, Jer. 23.28. This is that sound doctrine, and
form of sound words which the Apostle enjoins Timothy and Titus to hold fast.
And themselves and Christ himself taught no other things then were written in
Moses and the Prophets, etc.

This work is the explication and application of this word: As Ezra read in the
Book of the Law, and gave the sense, and caused all Israel to understand, Neh.
8.8. And it is to this which Paul presses Timothy when he exhorts him to show
himself a workman that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth,
2 Timothy 2.15.

The end of this work is the exhortation, edification, and comfort of the
Church, 1 Cor. 14.2. which is the profitable use of all Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.16.

The object of this work is a Congregation met together for the Solemn worship
of God, 1 Cor. 14.23. when you are come together into one place; It is true,
that the word ought to be preached to Infidels, Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Go into all
the world; but the principal object of this work is the Church; Prophecy is
not (i. not so much) for them that believe not, but for them that believe, 1
Cor. 14.22. Hence it is, that God has s^t his Officers in the Church, 1 Cor.
12.28. For the Church, Ephesians. 4.12.

The manner of the doing of this work, is, 1 Authoritatively, not (...)
magisterially as Lords of Faith, but (...) ministerially, as being over the
Church in the Lord, 1 These. 5.12. Thus is Titus enjoined Tit. 2.15. These
things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority, (...), with all
command. Secondly, In the stead and place of Christ; Thus the Apostle 2 Cor. 5.
We beseech you, as if God did beseech you, we pray you in Christ's stead, be
reconciled to God; and hence it is that Christ says to his Disciples, Luke
10.16. He that hears you hears me, etc.

From hence,

First, We distinguish between a private brotherly teaching, admonition,
exhortation of one another* and an authoritative public teaching; The first
grounded on charity is the common duty of all Christians, by the royal Law of
love, and prescribed to all, even to women, by the Law of God under pain of
sin, and this especially in evil times. This practice we are far from
disallowing or discouraging; we call God to witness it would be the joy of our
hearts to see our people full of knowledge, and full of goodness, able and
willing to admonish one another with prudence, love, zeal, and a spirit of
meekness; and this we exhort and charge in the name of Christ that they
neglect not: It is authoritative teaching only which we deny.

Secondly, We distinguish between the teaching of parents and Masters in their
Families (to which also the teaching of Schoolmasters may be reduced) and
Ministerial preaching: We call upon Parents, Masters, Schoolmasters, not only
to bring their Families, and Scholars to public Ordinances, but to make their
Houses the Churches of Christ; To read the Scriptures in them* to catechize
them, to train them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, to teach them
in their youth, in the trade of their way, as they will answer it at that great
day: And unto this duty we exhort even mothers; but we deny unto them
Ministerial Preaching,

Thirdly, We distinguish between the exhortation of a General in the head of an
Army, and of a Judge in his charge upon the Bench, and preaching the Word of
God: Though we deny not the lawfulness of the one or the other of the two
former, because we have the approved examples of Ioab, 2 Samuel 10. Of Abijah, 2
Chro. 13. Of Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 19.20. Joshua Cha. 23.24. yet we say, First,
That properly thus to do was the Ministers work; for thus the Lord prescribes
Deuteronomy. 20.2. And it shall be when ye are come nigh unto the battle, that the
Pri^st shall approach and speak to the people, and shall say unto them, Hear O
Israel, as it follows, ver. 3. And thus Iehosapha^ practices, 2 Chronicles. 19.
where he joins Priests and Levites to the Judges whom he sends abroad in all
the Cities of Judah. Secondly, We say that there is a vast difference between
this action and the work of the Ministry for neither is the object of it a
Congregation sacred, but merely civil* neither is the authority
Ecclesiastical and from Christ, but merely political. These Officers perform
this work as Custodes utriusque ^ab^lae, and their work is rather reducible to
a charitative admonition then a ministerial dispensation; Should it not be
done by them, their sin was rather against charity then justice; and ceased not
to discharge the duty of a General, or a Judge, though they ceased to do the
duty of a Christian General, or a Christian Judge.

Fourthly, We distinguish between Divinity-exercises in the Schools, and
University, and the Preaching of the Word. For though these Lectures are
performed either only by such as have received Ordination, and ar^ Ministers of
the Gospel, or such a^ are Candidates of the Ministry; either Prophets, or the
Sons of the Prophets, and so not wholly without Commission, ye^ are they not
performed to a Congregation met together for the solemn worship of God; They
are rather reducible to the work of School-ma^^ers instructing their Scholars,
and Scholars rendering account to their Masters, then ministerial preaching.

Fifthly, We distinguish between the act of members in any sacred or civil
Assembly, debating, counselling, and admonishing one another out of the Word of
God, and the preaching of the Word; Because this action of theirs toward one
another is not authoritative, but merely brotherly, is rather (...), a
Christian conference, then preaching, and no other then private Christians met
together by mutual consent may perform; neither is their meeting such a one as
is the Object of preaching of which we speak.

Sixthly, Before we proceed to argument, we desire it may be observed that we
dispute not what may be done in extraordinary cases, either in regard of times
or places where Ordination may not possibly be had; whether in such a case
private gifted men may not preach, we do not dispute: David's necessity made it
lawful for him and his men to eat the shewbread, which it was not lawful for
any but only the Priests to eat; but our Question is, What may be done in an
ordinary way, in Churches where Ordained Ministers either are or may be had;
Though we will not prescribe against necessity, yet we would not have necessity
pretended where none is: For we read that the Indians were converted to the
Christian Faith by the means of Aedesius and Frumentius two private men, but we
read not that either of them took upon them the Office or work of the
Ministry; Frumentius was ordained Bishop of the Indians by Athanasius. Theod.
Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 22. And it is observable how great a journey he undertook
rather then to run or officiate without a Call. The Iberians were converted (as
the same Author relates) by the means of a Captive Maid, but they sent to
Constantine for ordained Ministers by whom they might be further instructed and
guided in the ways of God, which probably our gifted men would never have done.

These things thus premised, we come now to prove our Proposition, That None
may undertake the work of the Ministry but he that is solemnly set apart
thereunto, not respecting so much the number as weight of Arguments.

First, We argue thus, Argum. 1.
That work for the doing of which God has designed special Officers of his
own, neither ought, nor may be performed by any that are not designed unto that
Office.

But God has designed special Officers of his own for the preaching of the
Word; Therefore,

None ought or may preach the Word, but such as are designed unto this Office.

The major of this Argument is confirmed by these Reasons.

First, Because God has severely punished such as have done the work appointed
by him to special Officers, though they had no intent to invade the Office
unto which that work was by God designed: This appears manifestly; first in the
case of Saul, 1 Samuel 13.8, 9. etc. He lost his kingdom for offering sacrifice,
though but once, and that in a great straight. The Philistims were ready to
assault him, he had not made his peace with God, Samuel delaied his coming, the
people began to scatter from him, whereupon he constrained himself, and offered
a Sacrifice, yet for this one presumptuous (though as it might seem)
necessitated act, he hears from Samuel that he had done foolishly, i. wickedly,
and from God, that his Kingdom was irrevocably rent from him. Secondly, In the
case of Vzzah, 1 Chro. 13.9, 10. who put his hand to the Ark, and that out of a
good intention to keep it from falling, when the Oxen shook it, and yet the
anger of the Lord was kindled against him, and he smote him that he died:
Better it had been for Vzzah to have kept his hands farther off, then to have
touched the Ark without warrant, and better for the people of God that he had
so done, for for his rashness God made a breach upon them, and smote him, and
this act of his did not help but hinder the bringing of the Ark up into the
place prepared for it. Thirdly, In the case of Vzziah, 2 Chro. 16.16, 17, 18.
etc. who when he was strong, had his heart lifted up to his destruction, for he
transgressed against the Lord his God, and went into the Temple of the Lord to
burn incense upon the Altar of Incense, but the Priests of God withstood him,
and said, It appertains not to thee Uzziah to burn Incense to the Lord, but
to the Priests the Sons of Aaron that are consecrated to burn Incense; Go out
of the Sanctuary, for thou have transgressed, neither shall it be for thine
honor from the Lord God, and though he was a King, yet the Lord smote him
immediately with the plague of Leprosy, of which he was not healed till his
death. This famous History holds forth these great Truths. 1. That it is a
transgression against God in any to enter upon the work designed by God to
another calling. 2. That the Original of this transgression is pride of heart.
3. That it is the Ministers duty to testify and bear witness against such
transgressions. 4. That it is dishonorable in the sight of God (whatever
foolish people may imagine) thus to transgress. 5. That God will not be
always silent to suffer such transgression unpunished in the greatest, when
his Ministers warnings are rejected; Vzziah would enter into the Sanctuary, and
is separated from the Congregation: Now though God be not so immediate in the
severe punishing of such presumption in our days, yet these things are written
for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are come, that we should
not be presumptuous, as some of them were, lest we also perish as these did.

Secondly, Because this practice does make void, or at least unnecessary or
insufficient those Officers which God has appointed. This is in it self a
truth of clearest evidence: What needs a peculiar Officer to be set apart to a
common work? As in the natural body there is no peculiar member set apart as
the Organ of feeling, because this sense is common to every member; so in the
body of Christ there need not any special Officer be designed for such a work
as is common to, and may be performed by every Christian.

Thirdly, Because this practice does confound and disturb that order which God
has set in his Church; therefore it must needs be sinful. God is the God of
order, and not of confusion, 1 Cor. 14. and has commanded that every one
should do his own work, 1 Thessalonians. 4. Romans 12. And abide in his own calling, 1
Cor. 7. He has condemned those that walk disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3. and are busy
bodies; he has placed in his Church different orders, some Shepherds, some
Sheep, some Teachers of the Word, some to be taught, as their places, so their
works are distinct, as the different members of the body have different
offices; but now as in the body there would be confusion if any member should
do the work of another member; so is it in the Church, if any member shall
invade the duty of another. This takes away distinction between Shepherds and
Flock, Pastor and People, Rulers and Ruled, and with the new Astronomers casts
down Stars toward the Center, and advances and wheels the dull earth to, and
in an heavenly orb. No marvel such Phaetons burn up the spiritual world by
presuming to govern the chariot of the Sun.

Thus the major being cleared we come to the minor or Assumption; That God has
set peculiar Officers apart for the Preaching of the Word. For the proof of
this, these two things are to be done, First, We must prove, that Ministers are
Officers, the Ministry an Office set up by God in his Church; For this we
refer to the foregoing Propositions, in which this Point has been largely
discussed. And indeed who can in reason deny that those that are set by God in
his Church, as Stewards, Heralds, Watchmen, etc. are set by God as Officers in
his Church; The Apostle himself reckon^ them up as special members in the body
of the Church, having (...) a proper Office, Romans 12. Secondly, That the
preaching of the Word (amongst diverse others) is one work assigned to these
Officers; which is manifest both in the Old and New Testament. The Priests work
was not only to bring Sacrifices and burn Incense, but also to teach Jacob,
Deuteronomy 33. Ever were the Priests Lips to preserve knowledge, and the people to
enquire the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2. And the greatest complain^ of God against
those Officers, was the neglect of tha^ ^uty, that they were dumb dogs, Isa.
56, I^le Idol Shepher^s, Ezekiel. ^4. Our blessed Savior when he had ordained 12.
sent them out to preach, and afterward sent out the 70 to preach* The Apostle
says of himself, that he was (...), that was his work, Romans 1.1. that he was
entrusted with the Gospel, Tit. 1.3. according to the Commandment of God, that
he and other Ministers were allowed of God to be entrusted with the Gospel, 1
These. 2.4. Thus the same Apostle gives direction to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.2. To
commit the things which he had heard of him to faithful men, who shall be able
to teach others: which must of necessity be understood of some special trust,
because of the special qualifications required in the persons that might be
trusted; they must be faithful and able to teach: if the Apostle had understood
by this word commit, only the making known of these things, this was to be done
to all, in which respect Paul professes himself a debtor both to the Greeks,
and to the Barbarians, to the wise and to the unwise, Romans 1.14. but inasmuch
as he requires that the parties should be (...) and (...), the two special
qualifications of such a one as might be ordained a Bishop, it is plain, that
by this word commit he understands the giving of the work in especial charge.
Indeed the Preaching of the Word is not only a work assigned to the Ministry,
which they may not omit without incurring the woe, 1 Cor. 9* because a
dispensation is committed to them; but the greatest, weightiest work they are
entrusted with, 1 Cor. 1.17. I was not sent (i. so much sent) to baptize but to
preach the Gospel; A work it is, which the people can least want, because it is
the power of God to salvation, and requires the greatest learning, prudence,
meekness, faithfulness in the dispensers of it, that they may show themselves
workmen that need not be ashamed, 1 Timothy 2. and fulfill their Ministry. It is
not for nothing that the Apostle tells us, that ordinary Teachers were set in
the Church, that we might not be children in knowledge, Ephesians. 4.14. Seeing
therefore that God has provided Officers of his own, to whose trust he has
committed the Preaching of the Word, and no man can without blasphemy aver,
that this provision of God is either unnecessary or insufficient, it evidently
follows, that the practice of men howsoever gifted, that preach without a
solemn setting apart to the Office of the Ministry, is both unnecessary and
unlawful. And thus much of our first Argument against the preaching of
un-ordained men.

Our second Argument shall be this; No religious service may be performed unto
God by any other sort of persons then such as are appointed or otherwise
warranted thereunto. Argum. 2.


The preaching of the Word is a religious service unto which persons gifted,
not ordained, are neither appointed nor warranted: Therefore,

The Preaching of the Word may not be performed by gifted persons un-ordained.

The major Proposition is clear from this principle: Every positive act of
Religion must have an affirmative warrant, and the service which we tender must
be obedience, or righteousness, obedience it cannot be unless it be commended,
nor righteousness unless it be at the least indulged. If it be either commanded
or indulged, we have warrant sufficient, but if the thing we do be neither
required nor allowed, we sin presumptuously, though what we do be to a good
intent, and very plausible to humane wisdom.

As to the minor or Assumption,

First, It will not be denied that the Preaching of the Word is a Religious
Service.

Secondly, That all gifted persons are not appointed to preach, nor otherwise
warranted thereunto, It appears in the parts.

First, They are not appointed, For then,

1. Every gifted man that preaches not is guilty of the sin of Omission.

2. Preaching must be looked upon as a common duty enjoined unto all Believers
as such, and every one should study Divinity in order to Preaching, and woe to
him that preaches not, though he could preach but one Sermon only, and do not;
The judgment of the unprofitable Servant shall be upon him.

Secondly, They are not otherwise warranted, for the Ministry of the Word is
only cultus institutus, founded in Institution, and therefore must be regulated
according to it; For the Preaching of public Officers we find the
Institution to be clear, but of another Institution for the public exercise
of gifts by those who are no Ministers, we find nothing; That which is
pretended concerning prophesying, or the like, we shall answer when we come
professedly to deal with Objections.

Argum. 3.
Thirdly, We argue thus, If no man may do the work of a Magistrate in the civil,
or of a Deacon in the Ecclesiastical State, but he that is called to the
Office of a Magistrate, or of a Deacon, then much less may any man preach the
Word (which is the work of a Minister) but he that is called to the Office of
the Ministry.

But no man may do the work of a Magistrate in the civil, or of a Deacon in the
Ecclesiastical estate, but he that is called to the Office of a Magistrate or
of a Deacon: Therefore,

The minor is evident,

1. That no man may do the work of a Magistrate unless he be a Magistrate,
from Luke 12.14. where our Savior Christ refuses to meddle with dividing
Inheritances, because he was no Judge; Man, who made me a Judge?

2. That no man may do the work of a Deacon in the Ecclesiastical state,
unless called to the Office, is evident from Act. 6. where men full of the
holy Ghost, and faith, chosen by the people to that work, yet might not
minister till they were appointed by the Apostles; and that general rule laid
down, 1 Timothy 3.10. Let him be first proved, so let him minister.

Now the reason of the connection is evident, for by how much the work of the
Ministry is of greater consequence, difficulty and danger, then either of
these; by so much greater care and circumspection is to be taken, that it be
not performed promiscuously to Quicunque vult, but performed by such men as are
triedly sound in the faith, and able to teach others also: Galen stomachs
Empericks and Mountebanks in Physic, for (says he) if a Stone-cutter miscarry
he loses but a stone, If a Shoemaker he spoils but a piece of Lether, but if
a Physician miscarry, he destroys a man; what may we say of those that intrude
upon the work of the Ministry, if they miscarry they destroy souls, and this is
indeed to destroy the man; Si navem poscat sibi peronatus arator, non merito
exclamet frontem melicerta perisse de rebus? In brief, shall an exact scrutiny
pass upon such as are to feed the bodies of poor men, and not upon such as
feed the souls? Act. 20.28. The work of the Ministry, the preaching of the Word
is a work of the highest consequence and importance that ever God committed to
the sons of men; The reconciling of men to God, 2 Cor. 5.19. Even an heavenly
Embassy of infinite and eternal consequence: Now if God allow not these works
which are of an inferior nature to be done by men untried and unappointed to
the Office, how shall he approve of such as adventure upon this work of
preaching the Word, which is negotium negotiorum the work of works, without any
trial or commission.

If none may administer the Sacrament but he that is lawfully called and
ordained thereunto, Argum. 4.
then neither may any preach but he that is lawfully called and ordained. But
none may administer the Sacraments but he that is lawfully called and ordained
thereunto. Therefore,

The minor is easily granted and proved from the nature of the Sacraments: They
are Seals of the righteousness by faith. If it be an intolerable usurpation
amongst men for a private man to take the broad seal of the Kingdom, and put it
to what instruments he pleases, much more intolerable is it for a private man
to usurp the dispensation of the broad Seal of the Kingdom of heaven: As in all
States there are Keepers of the Seals appointed, whose office it is to dispose
them according to Law: Even so it is in the Church of God, Jesus Christ has
appointed Keepers of his Seals, those whom he calls Stewards of the mysteries of
God, to whom he has committed the word of Reconciliation, and to whom he has
given power to baptize, and to administer the Lords Supper.

The connection is clear, because that these two works are jointly in the same
Commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. and of the two the preaching of the Word is the
greater work. This the Apostle intimates, 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to
baptize but to preach the Gospel: The negative particle is here (as in many
other places) taken for the comparative, he was sent rather to preach then to
baptize, and by this manner of expression it appears, that to preach was his
more proper and especial work: This account all the rest of the Apostles had
of it, therefore they did put off ministering to Tables, that they might give
themselves to the Word and Prayer. In the consideration of the greatness of
this work, the Prophet Isaiah being sent about it cries out, Woe is me, I am
undone; the Prophet Jeremiah, Ah Lord God, behold, I cannot speak, for I am a
child, and Paul also, Who is sufficient for these things? Of this account it
has been always had in the Church of God ancient and modern till these
unhappy times of licentiousness. And therefore we humbly entreat all those
that do conscienciously (and as we believe justly) scruple to have their
Children baptized by, or receive the Lords Supper from the hands of any
un-ordained person, that they would seriously consider upon what warrant they
hear un-ordained men preach: Seeing there is the same Commission for preaching,
and for baptizing; and that preaching is the great, if not the greatest work of
a Minister.

Argum. 5.
To usurp authority over the Church is a sin. But to preac^ without calling and
Ordination to the work, is to usurp authority over the Church. Therefore,

The first Proposition is clear by its own light, the other is easily proved,
by asserting Preaching to be an act of authority, which is evident both in that
the Apostle, 1 These. 5.12. gives this charge, Know them that are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you, where to admonish is to be over, Heb. 7. without
controversy the lesser is blessed of the greater, and this is further
evi^enced in that the Apostle suffers not women to preach, because they may not
usurp authority over the man, 1 Timothy 2. but is commanded to be in subjection,
upon which place Oecumenius (...). The very act of teaching is to usurp
authority over the man. Besides them the public work of the Ministry of the
Word is an authoritative administration, like unto that of Criers, Heralds, and
Ambassadors, to be performed in the name of the Lord Jesus, and therefore may
not be performed by any but such as are authorized, and immediately or mediatly
deputed by him, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. appears, because in preaching, the key of the
Kingdom of Heaven is used, to take men in or shut men out, and this key is in
the hand of ordinary Teachers as well as extraordinary, yea, the power of
binding and loosing is exercised, For though to preach be no act of
jurisdiction strictly so called, yet it is an act not only of order but of
power, not such as is common to every member of the Church, but peculiar to
such as are in public Office. Now to perform any authoritative act without
authority, what is it other then to usurp authority? Gifts confer the faculty
of administration but not the power: The Question which the Pharisees put to
our Savior being propounded to these men, By what authority do thou these
things, and who gave thee this authority? Could they answer as Christ? Ioh.
7.28. I am not come of my self.

That which the Scripture reproves may no man practice, but the Scripture
reproves uncalled men for preaching: Argum. 6.
Therefore. The major will not be denied: The minor appears, in that the false
Prophets are reproved, Ier. 23.21, 32. not only for their false doctrine,
telling their own dreams, and stealing the Word of God from his people, but
also for running when they were not sent. I am against them says the Lord: a
fearful commination; If God be against them who shall be with them? if they
find not acceptance with God, all that approbati^n and applause which they
find from men, what will it profit? He is not approved whom man approves, but
he whom God approves. The false Prophets themselves accuse Jeremiah, Jer.
29.27. for making himself a Prophet, which though it was a most unjust and
false imputation, yet it holds forth this truth, That no man ought to make
himself a Prophet, the false Prophets themselves being witnesses. It is very
observable, that Shemaiah the Nehelamite, a false Prophet and a dreamer, writes
to Zephaniah the son of Maasiah the Priest, and to all the Priests, and
accuses Jeremiah for a mad man in making himself a Prophet, and tells them,
that upon this account they ought to put him in prison, and in the stocks. It
seems by this that it was no little sin, and deserves no little punishment
(even in the judgment of false Prophets) to preach without a lawful call. The
Apostles in the Synod of Jerusalem, speak of certain men that went out from
them, and troubled the Gentiles with words subverting their souls. They went
out, They were not sent out, but they went out of their own accord; this is
spoken of them by way of reproof. And then it follows, they troubled you with
words, subverting your souls. He that preaches unsent, is not a comforter, but
a troubler of the people of God, not a builder but a subverter of souls. There
be many in our days like Ahimaaz, they will be running without either call or
message, and happily they may outrun Gods Cushi's, we wish they meet with no
worse success then he (in a spiritual sense) to prove useless Messengers.

Argum. 7.
We argue from the practice of the Ministers of Christ, If they have been as
careful to make proof of their mission as of their doctrine, then is mission
required in him that will Preach the Word; But they have been thus careful,
Therefore: If any gifted man may preach without a Call, why does the Apostle so
often make mention of his Call, Romans 1.1. Gal. 1.15, 16. 1 Cor. 1.1. when the
Disciples of John murmured against Christ for baptizing, Ioh. 3.27, 28. John
answers, A man can receive nothing unless it be given him from heaven, ye your
selves bear witness of me that I said I am not the Christ, but that I am sent
before him. Here Christ's undertaking to baptize, is justified by his Mission.
When the chief Priests and the Scribes with the Elders asked Christ, Luke 20.2.
Tell us by what authority do thou these things, or who gave thee this
authority? Christ makes answer by demanding another question, The Baptism of
John, was it from heaven or of men? Which teaches us these two truths: First,
That none ought to preach without being authorized and sent. Secondly, That
this Call and Sending is not only from men, but from heaven. True it is, such
as is the Ministry, such ought the Call to be; if the Ministry extraordinary,
the Call extraordinary; if the Ministry ordinary, the Call must be ordinary;
but we read of no Ministry allowed in Scripture without a Divine Call: There
is a threefold Call to the Ministry mentioned, Gal. 1.1. The first is of or
from man only, when any is designed to this work errante clave, that has no
inward qualification or Call from God. This though it authorizeth to outward
administrations in the Church, yet will not satisfy the conscience of him that
so administers. The second is by man, as the instrument, when any is designed
to the Ministry by those whom God has entrusted with the work of Ordination
according to the rule of the Word; these God calls by man, Act. 20. This is the
Call of ordinary Pastors. The third by Jesus Christ immediately, and by this it
is that Paul proves himself an Apostle, an extraordinary Minister.

Lastly, we argue thus: Argum. 8.
That work may not be performed by any, which cannot by him be performed in
faith; But preaching by a Brother Gifted, but not Called nor Ordained, cannot
be done in faith: Therefore A Gifted unordained brother may not Preach.

Concerning the major we shall say little; the Apostles general Canon, Romans 14.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, does evidently demonstrate it. The truth of
the minor appears in that there is no warrant in Scripture (which is the ground
of faith) for such a practice.

For first there is no

1. Precept that such should preach; if there were a precept, it was then a
necessary duty that every gifted person ought to perform, it was a sin if any
gifted person should not preach, though he could preach but one Sermon only in
all his life. Where is the necessity laid upon them (as the Apostle speaks of
himself) that they preach the Gospel?

2. There is no Precept that any should hear them, or obey them in the Lord, or
maintain them; these duties of the people areappropriated to those that are
Preachers by Office, Mal. 2. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and
the people should enquire the Law at their lips. Luke 10.16. The hearing of
them is the hearing of Christ, and the refusing of them is the refusing of
Christ: It is not so said of any that preach without mission; but contrarily
there is a strict charge not to hearken to such, Ier. 17.14. and a complaint of
them that heap to themselves teachers, 2 Timothy 4. Thus the Apostle, Heb. 13* 7,
17. Remember them, obey them, submit your selves to them that have the rule
over you, and have spoken to you the Word of God. So 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the
Elders that rule well be accounted worthy of double honor, etc. Nothing of
this is spoken of gifted Brethren, yet if they may lawfully preach, all this
may they challenge, and all that hear and plead for them are bound in
conscience to yield, because all this is due for the works sake, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.

Secondly, There is no promise in Scripture made unto any that Preach and are
not thereunto lawfully Ordained: We say no promise, either of

1. Assistance: A Minister must depend upon God for his inabling unto the great
work which he undertakes, for all our sufficiency is of God, and we have no
sufficiency of our selves so much as to think any thing, 2 Cor. 3.5. and God
has promised this assistance only to those whom himself sends. Thus Exo. 4.10.
Go, says the Lord to Moses, and I will be with thy mouth. Isa. 6.7, 8* God
touches the mouth of Isaiah and sends him. Ioh. 20.21, 22. Christ sends and
gives the holy Ghost to the Apostles, and to them is the promise. Ioh. 13. The
Spirit of truth shall lead you into all truth. Does God do thus to those that
run and are not sent? O let the great errors broached of old by Origin, and
others that presumed the the undertaking of this work without a Call; and in
our days by Anabaptists, Socinians, and others that despise a regular lawful
Call, bear witness. Surely we may say that if any amongst us Preach without a
Call* and yet Preach the truth, they have not their assistance by virtue of any
promise from the hand of God.

2. Protection: Thus God has promised to those whom he sends on his message.
Thus the Lord encourages Jeremiah, chapter 1.18, 19. I have made thee this day a
defenced City, and an iron pillar, and a brazen wall against this whole Land;
and they shall fight against thee, but shall not prevail against thee, for I am
with thee, says the Lord, to deliver thee. Thus also Act. 18.9. the Lord
incourageth Paul, Be not afraid, but speak and hold not thy peace, for I am
with thee* and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee. So also Act. 23.11. Be of
good cheer Paul, etc. And as we find that God has promised protection to
those he sends, so also the Ministers of God have encouraged themselves to a
faithful discharge of their duty against all opposition, especially upon this
ground that they had their commission from God, and his immutable promise for
protection: Isa. 49.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Isa. 51.16. Ier. 26.14, 15. But no where
has God made any such promise to those that intrude themselves into this work,
but threatens to be against them as has been declared; The Angels of God have
a charge to keep us in our ways, Psalm. 91. but they that go out of them may
fear the portion ^f the sons of Sceva the Jew, Act. 19.15. that they be
beaten by the evil spirit they undertake to cast out.

3. Success, in respect of the weighty ends of the Ministry, the principal the
glory of God, the secondary the conversion and salvation of souls; How is it
possible that he who intrudes himself into the work of the Ministry should
glorify God in the work, since God is honored only in his own ways and
means, and therefore cannot be glorified when his ways are not observed. To
obey is better then sacrifice, says the Prophet, and to hearken then the fat
of Rams. Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest; such therefore
as assume the Ministry, glorify themselves and not God. Neither is there any
promise made, neither is it to be expected, that he who assumes this work of
the Ministry without a Call, should ever become the instrument of the
conversion and edification of souls, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
preaching of such as are sent, Romans 10.14, 17. but unsent Preachers have the
curse of God upon their labors, that they shall not profit the people at all,
Ier. 23.32. Luther has a good saying to this purpose, Deus non fortunat
labores little qui non sunt vocati, and quamvis salutaria quaedam afferant tamen
non aedificant: that is, God does not prosper their labors, who are not
called, and though they preach some profitable truths, yet do they not profit
the people. Hence it comes to pass that they that hear uncalled Preachers, fall
i nto so many errors, as a just punishment of God upon them; according to that
the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. For the time will come that they will not
endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves
Teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the
truth, and shall be turned unto fables* Gods blessing of conversion is promised
only to his own Ordinance, which they cannot expect* who either by preaching
without a Call, or hearing such as so preach, do overthrow.

Thirdly, There is no one approved example recorded in Scripture of any one not
being Sent and Called, either immediately or mediatly by God, especially in a
constituted Church, that undertook this work of preaching, or any other work
appropriated by God to the Ministry.

And thus we have also finished this second Chapter, and sufficiently and
clearly proved, as we suppose, That it is unlawful for any man not lawfully
called and set apart to the Office of a Minister to undertake and intrude upon
the work of Preaching appropriated by God to that Office. CHAP. VI. Answering
the Arguments brought for the Preaching of men out of Office.
IN this Chapter we shall give Answers to the chief and main Arguments produced
by such as maintain this unwarrantable practice of Preaching by men out of
Office; for though a Christian ought not to depart from the plain rule of the
Word of God, though he be not able to satisfy all the Sophistical cavils of
gainsaying adversaries, yet that we may remove all stumbling blocks, and
occasions to fall out of the way, that if it be possible some may be reclaimed
from their ^rrour, others may be more firmly established in the truth, when
they see discovered the vanity and invalidity of pretenders Arguments for the
preaching of gifted men out of Office, we shall likewise undertake this task.

The first and principal Argument is drawn from 1 Cor. 14.31. Ye may all
prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted: Whence is
thus inferred; That the Apostle giving liberty to the gifted Brethren of the
Church of Corinth out of Office to Prophecy (you may All Prophecy) warrants
this practice of Preaching in all men that have gifts, though they be not set
apart to this Office.

In Answer to this Argument we first lay down this Rule, which is also of
excellent use for the understanding of many other places of Scripture, viz.
That this universal All is to be restrained and limited according to the
subject or matter treated of. As when the Apostle says, All things are lawful
for me, he means not simply All things, but restrainedly All indifferent things
of which he was there treating, 1. Cor* 6.12. and 10.23. In like manner when
the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.17. says, All things are made new. This Proposition
is to be restrained from the subject and matter of which he was speaking, unto
Believers. The like may be observed in many other places, Luke 13.15. 1 Cor.
12.7. Isa. 9.17, etc. These things thus premised, We say

First, In this place of the Apostle, Ye may all prophecy, the word All is to
be restrained according to the subject of which the Apostle speaks: He says
not of the Body or People of the Church of Corinth, that they might All
Prophecy, but of the Prophets in that Church, that they might All Prophecy.
This is evident both from the antecedent and subsequent words. In the 29th
verse the Apostle says, Let the Prophets speak two or three, etc. then he
subjoyns, For ye may All prophecy: and then it follows immediately, And the
spirit of the Prophets shall be subject to the Prophets. By this discourse of
the Apostle it evidently appears that the liberty of prophesying was not given
to every member of the Church of Corinth, but only to the Prophets that were in
that Church: Now it is clear they were not all Prophets ( c. 12.29. Are all
Prophets? i. All are not Prophets:) and therefore all had not granted them this
liberty of prophesying: And thus far we have the consent not only of Beza and
others upon the place, but even of the most sober of our adversaries, who will
not assert a promiscuous liberty of prophesying to every member of the Church,
but only to such as are gifted and qualified for the work, and desired by the
Church to exercise that Gift.

Secondly, The Prophets both in this place, and where ever else in the
Scriptures mentioned, were an order of Ministry, not only gifted Brethren, but
constituted Officers in the Church. Thus 1 Cor. 12.28. God has set in his
Church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. As the
Apostles and Teachers were Officers set by God in his Church, so also were the
Prophets. Read also Ephesians. 4.11, 12. When Christ gave (...) gifts, Officers for
the good of the Church, he gave amongst these Officers Prophets. And we do not
believe, that there can an instance be given of any Text either in the Old or
New Testament, in which the word Prophet does not signify one in Office
peculiarly called and sent. Now if this be an irrefragable truth (as indeed it
is) then the Apostles permitting all Prophets ( i. men in Office) to prophecy,
is no warrant for gifted brethren (if out of Office) to do that work.

Thirdly, Though what has been already said be sufficient to infringe the
Argument drawn from this place to warrant the preaching of men out of Office,
yet we add for the more full Vindication of this Scripture, that the Prophets
here mentioned, yea, and throughout the New Testament, seem not to be only
Officers in the Church, but extraordinary Officers immediately inspired and sent
by the holy Ghost, which appears in that

First, They are not only mentioned and preferred before Pastors and Teachers,
the ordinary Officers of the Church, Act. 13.1. 1 Cor. 12.28. but also before
the Evangelists themselves, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. who are acknowledged by all to have
been Officers extraordinarily sent.

Secondly, The gift of prophecy is reckoned amongst the extraordinary gifts of
the Spirit, and put in the midst of them, 1 Cor. 12.9, 10, 11. and
contra-distinguished from ordinary gifts, verse. 7, 8. the word of wisdom, the
word of knowledge; The word of wisdom denotes the Pastors work, the word of
knowledge the Teachers work; but prophesying is different from both these,
c^^sisting partly in the foretelling of future events, as Act. 11.27, 28. In
those days came Prophets from Jerusalem unto Anti^^h, and there stood up one
of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be a great
dearth throughout the w^rld. 2. Partly in an infallible explication and
application of (the m^st difficult places of) Scripture, not by industry, and
labor, but by the immediate illumination, and teaching of the holy Ghost by
whom the Scriptures were inspired.

Thirdly, It is evident by the series of this Chapter, that the Prophets herein
spoken of, and their prophesying was extraordinary, ver. 26. When you are come
together every one of you has a Psalm, has a Tongue, has a Revelation, has
an Interpretation; Tongues, Interpretation, Revelation, are joined together,
ver. 30. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first
hold his peace, by which it appears that the Prophets here spoken of were
inspired by the holy Ghost; and that this gift of prophecy was an extraordinary
dispensation of God given to the Primitive Church, but now ceased; and
therefore this Text cannot justify our Lay-Preachers, who cannot without
impudency pretend to such extraordinary Revelations as these had.

We might fill many Pages with Quotations of Authors that consent with us in
this last, Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 3. sec. 10. etc. Pet. Mart. loc. com. clas. 4.
c. 1. p. 558. Aret. prob. lo. 61. de Prophetia. Gerh. com. loc. tom. 6. de
Minist. Ecc.. Diodat. in 1 Cor. 14. 1, 6, 23. Gomarus on Romans 12.6. Synops.
purioris Theolog. disp. 42. these. 22. Our English Annotat. in 1 Cor. 14.

Against this third Position asserting the Prophesying in this Chapter,
mentioned to be extraordinary, there be many things objected which we shall
answer for the further manifestation of the truth.

Object. 1. The Apostle exhorts the faithful to desire this gift, verse. 1.
and to seek to excel therein, and therefore it is not likely that it was a
miraculous and extraordinary gift.

Answ. It does not follow that because it was to be desired therefore it was
not extraordinary; Other spiritual gifts were extraordinary, yet says the
Apostle Desire spiritual gifts, as much as he says of prophesying; Elysaeus
desires a double measure of Elias spirit, 2 King. 2.9. was not that
extraordinary? The faithful might in those days in which such extraordinary
gifts were usually given in the Church, lawfully seek after them, especially by
praying to God for them, which is the way prescribed, verse. 13. Let him that
speaks in an unknown tongue pray that he may interpret. And it is apparent
that in the Schools of the Prophets many did study and prepare that they might
be fitted for this extraordinary gift of Prophecy, 1 Samuel 19.20. 2 Kin. 2.3, 4.
and 2 Kin. 3.15. and out of them God usually made choice of such as he employed
as his special Ambassadors to his Church.

Object. 2. The Apostle speaks of such prophesying as is to the edification,
exhortation, and comfort of the Church; therefore of ordinary prophesying.

Answ. It follows not, because extraordinary prophesying (as well as ordinary)
was given for the edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. All the
extraordinary as well as ordinary Officers were given by Christ for the
gathering and edification of the Church: And all gifts are to be employed to
this end, 1 Cor. 14.26. Whether you have a Psalm, or Doctrine, or Tongue, or
Revelation, or Interpretation, Let all things be done to edifying.

Object. 3. The Apostle in this Chapter speaks not of any thing extraordinary,
but lays down a general liberty, for all the members of the Church of Corinth
to prophecy. And this appears because he pres^ribes Rules: 1. For men, how
they should order their liberty for edification, and then 2. for Women
forbidding them altogether the liberty of prophesying; Let your women keep
silence in the Churches: Women (say they) are here named in opposition to men,
and they only being prohibited, all men may and ought to be allowed to
prophecy in public.

Answ. 1. It is absolutely false to say, that the Apostle speaks of nothing
extraordinary in this Chapter, for he speaks of the gift of tongues, verse. 6,
14, 2^, 26. and of extraordinary Psalms and Revelations.

Answ. 2. It is also as false to say, that the Apostle gives a general liberty
of prophesying to all, to all the members of the Church of Corinth; It has
been already proved that the liberty was given to such only as were Prophets,
v. 29, 30, 31. and these Prophets were persons in Office, as has been
demonstrated, and that they were ex^raordinary Officers, Superior to
Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers; Now all the members of the Church of
Corinth were not P^ophets, 1 Cor. 12.29. nor had the gift of Prophe^y, as
appears by the Apostles prayer for them, 1 Cor. 14.6. I would that ye all spoke
with tongues, but rather that ye prophesied, etc.

Answ. 3. Women are not mentioned in opposition to the men in Corinth simply,
But in opposition to such as had extraordinary gifts, whether of Tongues, or of
Prophecy, or any such like: And the scope of the Apostle is not to give liberty
to all, but to lay down rules to those that were Prophets and men in Office,
how they should regulate their prophesying, for the edification, exhortation,
and consolation of the people, and then he wholly excludes the women from this
work.

Answ. 4. We may further answer, that by women here are not meant women simply,
but Women-Prophetesses, in opposition to men-Prophets formerly spoken of. This
seems to be intimated in the words of the Text, Let your Women keep silence in
the Church, i. your prophesying women: That there were women that did prophecy
appears from Act. 21.9. Now the Apostle does inhibit all women-Prophetesses
from prophesying in the Church. It is not permitted to them (of what rank
soever) to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience, as also says
the Law. Thus also 1 Timothy 2.12. But I suffer not a woman to teach nor to usurp
authority over the man: These Prophetesses might teach in private, but nature
it self forbids them to usurp authority over the man, by teaching him in
public.

Object. But does not the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 11.5. Every woman that prays or
prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head? It seems by this
Text that the women did pray and prophecy in public.

Answ. Women are said to pray and prophecy, not by doing so actually in their
own persons, but by joining with men in praying and prophesying: And the
meaning of the Text is, Every woman that joyneth in praying or prophesying;
Thus Solomon is said to offer 120000. sheep, not in his own person, but by
joining with the Priests that did it. Thus Pilate is said to scourge Jesus,
which he did not do in his own person, but by his Officers.

Object. 4. These Prophets were to be tried, examined, and judged, ver. 32. And
therefore they were not Officers extraordinarily inspired.

Answ. 1. It follows not, Their doctrine might be tried, therefore they were
not extrordinary Officers or immediately inspired; for the Apostles were
extraordinary Officers (as is confessed) and yet their doctrines were to be
tried; The Bereaus are commended for it, Act. 17.11.

Ans. 2. Those who were extraordinarily inspired, thoug^ they could not err,
so far forth as they were inspired by the holy Ghost, yet might sometimes in
some particular cases give an answer out of their own hearts in which they
might err and be deceived; Such was the case of Samuel when he saw Eliab, 1 Samuel 16. Doubtless the Lords anointed is before me, but it was not so. Thus
Nathan permits and encourages David to build the Temple, 2 Samuel 7. but
herein he was mistaken, Act. 21.4. The foretelling of Paul's danger at Jerusalem
was from God; But the consequence drawn from hence by the prophesying
Disciples, that therefore he should not go up to Jerusalem, was from their own
spirit. Vide Bezam.

Object. 2. A second Objection is taken from 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. As every man has
receivid the gift, even so minister the same one to another as good Stewards of
the manifold grace of God; If any man speak let him speak as the Oracles of
God; if any man minister let him do it as of the ability which God gives, etc.
From hence is inferred, that every man that is gifted may lawfully Preach the
Word, though he be not called and solemnly set apart to this work.

Answ. To this we reply, 1. That we heartily assent to this Truth, That every
man that has received a gift of God, (...). In loc.
ought to improve it to the good of others: And we limit not the word Gift in
the Text (as some do) only to the gift of liberality (though the word (...) be
sometimes put for that gift, as 1 Cor. 16.3.2 Cor. 8.4, 6, 7.) but extend it,
as Oecumenius not only to the possession of riches, but to all endowments of
nature, which whosoever is possessed of is bound to communicate to those that
want them, as having received them of God to be thus distributed, yea, and with
Piscator, Calvin, Bullinger, and others, to all spiritual gifts; as knowing
that the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one for the profit of
the whole, and mindful of the heavy sentence pronounced upon the slothful
servant who hid his Talent in a Napkin. Mat. 25.

2. But we assert, That these spiritual gifts are to be exercised by every one
in his own sphere, by private persons privately, by those that are in Office
publicly, and in the Congregation: It is very observable, that Aquila and
Priscilla, private persons, yet of eminent gifts (insomuch as they knew the way
of Christ more perfectly then Apollos himself, who was an eloquent man and
mighty in the Scriptures) kept their own place, and whereas Apollos being a
Minister in Office (as appears 1 Cor. 3.5.) preached publicly in the
Synagogues, they as gifted Christians did not undertake to preach publicly but
took him to them, and privately expounded to him the way of God more perfectly,
Act. 18. This is a notable pattern for private Christians even of the highest
form to walk by; In this way they may find emploiment for all their gifts, in
this way they may honor God, and be promoters of the Gospel, as were those
women whom the Apostle honors with the Title of Laborers with him in the
Gospel, Phil. 4.3. They labored not by public preaching, for this the Apostle
permits not to women, 1 Timothy 2. but by private advertisements and admonitions,
as opportunities were administered.

3. Therefore it follows not, that because all gifts are to be improved,
therefore a gifted brother may preach; for first, there are other ways of
making use of our most excellent gifts then by preaching only: and secondly, It
is required in him that will preach warrantably, not only that he be fitted for
the work, but that he be appointed to the Office of the Ministry, as has been
before fully demonsttated; and therefore that we do not the same work twice, we
here supersede.

Object. But does not the Apostle in the 11. verse, where he says, If any man
speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, warrant every man that has the
gift of speaking publicly to the edification of the Congregation, to preach
publicly, provided he speak as the Oracles of God.

Answ. We answer negatively, those words permit not every gifted man to be a
Preacher, but direct every Preacher in the right dispensation of that weighty
Office; Calvin excellently upon these words, He that speaks observes, Qui
publica authoritate rite ordinatus est, He that by public authority is rightly
ordained to speak; Let him speak as the Oracles of God: And Estius, Qui ad
hujusmodi munus in Ecclesia vocatur, He that is called in the Church to this
work, let him speak as the Oracles of God, And thus some restrain the word Gift
in the 10th verse, As every man has received a gift, i. an Office, even so
minister, etc. and that not with out probability, for it is evident that the
words (...) and (...) are taken sometimes in Scripture not for gifts simply but
for an Office; as Romans 12.6. (...), having gifts which the Apostle in the
verses following expounds of Offices: So also 1 Timothy 4.14. (...), Neglect not
the gift which was given thee by Prophecy, that is, the Office, if the Apostle
may be his own Interpreter, Cha. 1.18. This charge I cummit to thee my Son
Timothy, according to the Prophecies that went before of thee, etc. where by
the way observe, against those that scornfully ask, What gift the Imposition of
hands by the Presbytery can now confer? that it confers as much as the
Imposition of hands by the Presbytery did to Timothy, viz. the Office of a
Presbyter; If Timothy had any extraordinary gift, that was given by the
Imposition of the Apostles hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift that is in thee
by the laying on of my hands; as it was in those times usual for extraordinary
gifts to be conveyed. So also the word (...) is used in the same sense, Ephesians.
3.8. To me that am less then the least of all Saints is this grace (...)
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles, his being made the Apostle of
the Gentiles is called (...), so also Romans 1.5. By whom we have received grace
and Apostleship, (...), by the Grammatical Figure Hendyadis, for (...) the
grace of Apostleship, as Piscator in his Scholia, and others. Secondly, It is
worth our Observation, to take notice of that order which the Apostle seems to
make between gifts, administrations, and operations, 1 Cor. 12, 4, 5, 6. Gifts
qualify for Ministries, Ministry authoriseth for operation; as no man may
lawfully undertake a Ministry or Office, if not qualified; so may no man do the
work of the Ministry which he has not taken upon him; Abilities do not
authorize to act out of our own Sphere and calling; A Physician might not judge
of Leprosies though he had skill, nor a Butcher kill the Sacrifice though he
knew how; these things belonged to the Priest; Every able Lawyer may not usurp
the office or work of a Judge, nor every gifted brother undertake either the
Office or the work of a Minister.

Object. It is argued for the lawfulness of Preaching by gifted men, not
ordained to the Ministry: That Eldad and Medad prophesied in the Camp without a
calling, and were approved of by Moses in the Prayer, Would God that all the
Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them,
Numb. 11.26, 29.

Answ. 1. To this we reply, that nothing in this Story does in the least
patronize the practices of our preaching un-ordained gifted brethren, because,

1. The prophesying of Eldad and Medad was extraordinary from an immediate and
divine inspiration; for the Spirit of God is said to have rested upon them, as
upon those others that were round about the Tabernacle, as appears ver. 25, 26.
but our gifted men are not thus immediately inspired and taught of God.

Ans. 2. This gift of Prophecy was given them as a Seal of their Commission for
the government of the State, not directly for the edification of the Church: It
was visibile signum, a visible sign (says Calvin) that God had chosen them to
assist Moses in the Government: In loc.
Non enim erant Prophetae, sed voluit Deus hac externa not a testari novos esse
homines, quo majori reverentia eos ex^iperet populus: By this Spirit of
Prophecy they were inaugurated to their civil government. Thus the Spirit of
Prophecy was given to Saul in confirmation of his Election to the Kingdom of
Israel, 1 Samuel 10.6, 11. And therefore many learned men are of opinion, Loring
Tostatus.
that Eldad and Medad did not prophecy praedicendo or praedicando, That their
prophesying was not a Prophetical or Ecclesiastical Preaching, but a political
or prudentiall speaking of things appertaining to the government of the State:
Some others think that Enthusiasmo acti they did lauds Deo can^re, Corn. a
Lapido.
that by divine instinct they did celebrate the praises of God: All agree that
it was extraordinary, and therefore makes nothing for the justification of such
as preach without office. Mr Ainsworth observes excellently, that this
prophesying of Eldad and Medad was only for the day, and therefore whereas it
is said verse. 25. They prophosied and did not cease, Ainsworth reads the
words, They prophesied and did not add; (...)
so it is in the Hebrew Non addiderunt, that is, they prophesied no more but
that day. The same word is used Deuteronomy. 5.22. These words the Lord spoke in all
your assembly, and he added no more, that is, spoke no more, or in such a
manner to the people. (...)
Thus the Septuagint reads the words, and Sol. Iarchi says, They did not
add, i. they prophesied not save that day only. The Chaldee indeed translateth
it, They ceased not; And so also it translateth Deuteronomy. 5.22. The Lord spoke the
ten words, and ceased not, which translation if it be allowed, it will admit
(says Ainsworth) of this favorable Interpretation, The Lord ceased not
speaking, that is, till all his ten words were finished; And the seventy Elders
prophesied, and ceased not, that is, they continued all day prophesying, not
always; (As Saul in Naioth is said to prophecy all that day and all that
night, 1 Samuel 19 24.) For this prophesying of theirs seems (says Ainsworth) to
be a temporary gift and miracle, for the ratification and confirmation of their
office. But howsoever whether this prophesying was for a day or for a longer
time, whether it was Ecclesiastical or only political, certain we are it was
extraordinary, and a visible inauguration of them into their Office.

Answ. 3. Certain we are that these men ha^ a lawful Call to do what they did,
for they were two of the seventy Elders whom the Lord commanded Moses to
choose, and unto whom he promises to give his Spirit, Numb. 11.16, 17. And
therefore this example does not at all prove the lawfullnesse of private men's
preaching: That these two were of the number of the seventy Elders, appears by
three Arguments from the 26. verse.

1. It is said ver. 25. That God took of the Spirit that was upon Moses, and
gave it to the Seventy Elders, and when the Spirit rested on them, they
prophesied, and ceased not, Then follows, But there remained two of the men
in the Camp, that is, two of the Seventy. As if we should say, There were
seventy men chosen to be Common Council men to sit at Guild Hall, but two of
the men did remain in their Houses, and did not go, must we not necessarily
understand that the two remaining were two of the seventy Common Counsel men.

2. The Spirit of God is said to rest upon these two, verse. 26. just as it is
said of the other Elders, ver. 25.

3. It is said expressly, That they were of them that were written, but went not
out into the Tabernacle, That were written, that is, says Deodate, enrolled
and delegated among the seventy Elders, or as Ainsworth says, they were
written by Moses in a Book, and so were appointed among the rest to come to the
Tabernacle, ver. 16.24.

Quest. 1. But why did not they go unto the Tabernacle as the rest did?

Ans. Tostatus says, It was out of a modest bashfullnesse and sense of their
own unworthiness, Ainsworth says, that it is probable, that as Saul when he
was to be made King, withdrew and hid himself among the stuff, 1 Samuel 10.22.
so these two, unwilling to take the charge upon them, withdrew their shoulders,
and came not to the Tabernacle, yet the Lord by his Spirit found them out: For
whether shall men go from his Spirit, or whither shall they go from his
presence, Psa. 139.7. See more for this out of Ainsworth upon the place.

Quest. 2. But if these were two of the seventy Elders, why does Joshua desire
Moses to forbid them?

Ans. 1. Because he might not know that they were set apart to be members of
the Senate as well as the rest.

2. Because they obeyed not Moses, to come out to the Tabernacle as he
commanded, for the Disciples forbad one that cast out devils in Christ's Name,
because he followed not them, Luke 9.49, 50.

3. Especially thus he spoke out of an envious zeal for his Master Moses sake
(as the verse following shows) that he would not have the use of the gift of
prophecy common, and therefore Moses answers, ver. 29. Enviest thou, for my
sake?

But though Joshua would have had them inhibited prophesying, yet Moses did not
forbid them, which is argument sufficient to prove, that they were persons
lawfully chosen to this Office; for if Moses so sharply rebuke Corah and his
company for intruding into the Office of the Priesthood without a call* surely
he would not have approved of Eldads and Medads taking upon them the office of
Prophets without a Call.

Quest. 1. But what then is the meaning of Moses prayer, Would God that all the
Lords People were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them?

Answ. This was an excellent and imitable desire in Moses, for though he knew
that God had decreed not to diffuse this gift of prophecy unto all, yet he here
discovers his humility in wishing that all the Lords people had the gift of
prophecy. And the man is ^ot worthy the name of a Minister, that does not
heartily desire that all Gods people might excel in gifts and graces. Hunc
Spiritum charitatis imitentur omnes concionatores (says Cornelius de Lapide)
qui non suam, sed Dei unius gloriam quaerunt, petuntque quod Martha petiit a
Christo Dic sorori ut adjuvet me. But this does not at all prove, that a
private man without a lawful call may do the work of a public Preacher, for
Eldad and Medad were lawfully called, and though Joshua knew it not, yet it
appears plainly by this very Prayer of Moses, that he knew that they both were
Prophets, and that the Spirit of God did rest upon them even the same that
rested upon the other 68 Elders, and therefore he prays, Would all the Lords
People were as th^se two, and the rest of the Elders. And this is our daily
prayer, That the Lord would multiply his gifts and graces upon his people, and
because the harvest is great and the laborers are few; That the Lord of the
Harvest, would send forth more and more able Laborers into his Harvest.

Object. 4. Another Objection is from the example of Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 17.7,
8, 9. who in the third year of his Reign sent to his Princes even to Benhail,
and to Obadiah, etc. to teach in the Cities of Judah, And with them he sent
Levites, even Shemaiah, etc. And they taught in Judah, and had the Book of the
Law with them, etc. Here the Princes are said to teach as well as the Levites.

Answ. 1. The Princes are thought by some to have been sent to teach not
Ecclesiastically but Politically, viz. by countenancing the Levites, and by
their civil authority, compelling the people to hear them, they taught the
people regaliter not ministerialiter; Thus R. Sol. Iarchi upon the place. It
was proper (says he) to the Priests and Levites to teach, inasmuch as it is
written, Deuteronomy. 24.8. According to all that the Priests and Levites shall teach
you, do ye, but the Princes went with them lest they should have rebelled
against their words, that they might compel them to obey: Great men are said
in Scripture to have done those things which they did not in their own persons,
but were done by their authority and command. Solomon is said to offer a
Sacrifice of 22000 Oxen, and 120000 Sheep, that is, not in his own person (for
he should have sinned Vzziahs sin in so doing) but by the Priests. Pilate is
said to scourge Jesus, that is, by his Officers; And the chief Eunuch Dan 1. to
teach Daniel and the rest of the Israelitish women, that is, by appointing them
Masters to teach them, so also in this place, the Princes may be said to teach,
that is, by the Levites whom they did accompany, countenance, and encourage in
the work.

Answ. 2. Iehosaphat intending a full Reformation, and establishing his Kingdom
in Righteousness and Religion, in matters of God and matters of the King, he
sends out mixed Commissioners, for the civil affairs his Princes, for the
businesses of God the Levites: The Princes taught Ius regium, the Levites Ius
Dei; and so there was no interfering in their employment; Vide Pelican. in loc.
This answer seems the more probable, because in his second visitation of his
Kingdom mentioned chapter 19. Iehosaphat himself making (as here) joint
Commissioners, divides the work into Civil and Ecclesiastical, the matters of
God and the matters of the King, over the former he sets the Priest, over the
latter the prince; as was observed in the stating of the Question.

Object. 5. Some argue from Luke 8.39. The man dispossessed went about
preaching what Christ had done for him; And from Ioh. 4. The woman of Samaria
preached Christ to the Samaritans, and many believed; And the man that had but
one talent, and hid it, was therefore cast into hell; And from the example of
the Saints in evil times, speaking often one to another; Lastly, From the
command of the Apostle to stir up the gift of God that is in us.

Answ. To which we answer shortly; To the first, we answer, that the
dispossessed did no more then he had a Commission from Christ to do, and
therefore is no president for such as preach without a calling; if he did more
he sinned.

To the second, The woman of Samaria did not preach but only charitatively, and
as private persons may, declare what she had seen and heard; and if any thing
can be concluded from hence for Preaching without Ordination, the lawfulness of
women's preaching must be concluded.

To the third, The man was cast into hell for hiding and not employing his
talent, that is in his own calling, as has been often suggested; It is the
duty of every Christian to stir up the gift ofGod that is in him, and for
Christians to speak often one to another in evil times, to teach, admonish,
exhort one another, to pray together and one for another; but all this comes
short o^ the Ministers duty, there being a vast difference between this private
charitative way of exhorting which belongs to all Christians, and the office,
and work of the Ministry, as has been above distinguished.

Object. 6. Private Christians, Act. 8.4. and 11.19. when they were scattered
abroad, went every where preaching the word, Therefore gifted men though not
ordained may also preach the Word.

Answ. This instance which is much insisted upon by many, is not of strength to
conclude the lawfulness of preaching by gifted, un-ordained persons; For,

First, Some allowing these scattered Christians to have been private persons,
yet do rationally distinguish between a Church constituted, and a Church
scattered and dissolved, between what may be done in a Church gathered, and in
an ordinary way, and in the gathering of a Church, and in the ^ase of
necessity: It is not recorded that these did preach while they were at
Jerusalem in a settled Church, but when they were scattered, then they went
every where preaching; what warrant soever this instance may give to persons
uncalled to preach amongst Indians, and in places where no Churches nor
Ministers are, yet can it not warrant them in their preaching in our Churches,
in which Ministers are or may easily be had.

Secondly, It may justly be denied, that the Christians here spoken of were
private Christians, it may be asserted that they were men in Office, and had
commission to do what they did. This appears,

1. From the first verse, where it is said, At that time there was a great
persecution against the Church which was at Jerusalem, and they were all
scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea and Samaria, except the
Apostles; These All that were scattered must be either All the Teachers and
Church Officers, or all the Believers; not all the believers, for it is said in
the 3. verse, That Saul made havoc of the Church, entering into every house,
and haling men and women, committed them to prison. And Act. 11.22. there is
express mention made of the Church at Jerusalem, notwithstanding the
persecution. Had all the Believers been scattered what should the Apostles have
done at Jerusalem, their tarrying would have been dangerous to themselves and
useless to the Church. And therefore we judge that by all is meant all the
Church Officers (of whom there were many at Jerusalem) were scattered except
the Apostles, and when they were scattered they went every where preaching the
Word.

To make the Interpretation clearer observe,

First, That the word All is used here with an exceptive particle, which
necessitates it to be meant not of believers but of men in office; for if all
relate to believers, then it will follow that there was not one Believer left
in Jerusalem except the Apostles. The particle (...) with the Genitive case in
the New Testament, being always exceptive to the utmost, as appears Ioh. 8.10.
Act. 15.28. and 22.22. Mar. 12.32. but this we are sure is false, as has been
already proved.

Secondly, That it is said, That they that were scattered went every where
preaching the Word; It is not said teaching which may be actus charitatis, but
Preaching which is actus officij; How can they preach except they be sent, Romans
10. The Reverend Assembly of Divines in their Answer to the Reasons of the
Dissenting Brethren, observe, that those that were scattered went about (...),
that (...) refers to the act of men in office, and they desire the Brethren to
produce one Scripture where (...) is used concerning any that are not Preachers
by Office, they bring many where it is used concerning those that were in
Office, even by the penman of this history, and conclude, that these (...) had
their Commission to preach before this persecution, though the persecution
occasioned their preaching in Judea and other places.

Thirdly, Act. 8.5. there is but one of this scattered number named, and he was
a person in office, to wit Philip, not the Apostle, but who is numbered among
the Deacons, Act. 6. and called an Evangelist, Act. 21 8. By the singling out
of this one who was in Office, we may judge that the rest were persons in
office as well as he.

Fourthly, It Is probable, that these that were scattered did baptize as well as
preach, which we gather from Act. 11.26. It is said there, There was a Church
settled at Antioch, which could not be unless they were first baptized, but
there were none in Antioch to baptize them, if they of the dispersion did not;
for Barnabas, Agabus, and other Prophets came not to Antioch till the Church
was founded, Act. 11.25, 26, 27. and this Church of Antioch is expressly said to
be founded by the scattered brethren, Act. 21.19. now baptism is to be
performed only by men in office, Mat. 28.19.

Fifthly, These scattered brethren are said to be Prophets and Teacher^, Act.
13.1. where mention is made of Lucius of Cyrene, who in all probability was one
of the scattered Preachers, as appears Act. 11.19, 20. where it is said, That
some of these scattered were men of Cyrene.

If it be said, that there is no where mention made of the Ordination of, or
any commission given to these scattered brethren: It is answered, that it does
not follow that therefore they had none, because none is mentioned. It is
sufficient for us that there are Scripture-Reasons to persuade us that they had
a Commission; They did a work peculiar to Officers of the Church, as has been
proved, which godly men out of Office durst not have done; they had success,
and the blessing of God upon their labors, which he promises not to those
that go in an evil way, as has been demonstrated: But let thus much suffice
for this instance.

Obj. 7. All the People of God are called Priests, Rev. 1.6. why then may they
not preach?

Answ. They are indeed all made Priests unto God, and Kings unto God not unto
men; They are Priests not ministerially but spiritually, not as to the
ministerial function, but as to the offering up of spiritual Sacrifices unto
God. Thus it is expounded 1 Pet. 2.5. Prayer, Thanksgiving, and Almsdeeds
are called Sacrifices in Scripture, and these a Believer offers up to God,
and so he is made a Priest to God.

Secondly, All are made Priests unto God, but are all made Prophets? Are not
all made Kings? And may therefore all exercise regal jurisdiction amongst men?
May all be Magistrates? Away with such fanatic Monasterian conceits; If we be
Priests let us sacrifice our lusts, if Kings let us rule over our passions and
our pride, this would quickly prevent such unwarrantable practices, and put a
happy issue to these Disputes.

Object. 8. But if a Master of a Family may instruct his own Family, why may he
not preach in the public Congregation?

Answ. Because he has a calling to do the one, and no calling to do the other;
You may as well ask, Why may not the Lord-Maior of London exercise his
jurisdiction at York as well as at London? Or why may not a Justice of Peace
send Warrants out of his own County? Or why might not Vzziah as well offer
Incense in the Temple as pray in his own Family? The answer to all these
Questions is easy, for the one they have a lawful calling but not for the
other.

Obj. 9. But why then do you your selves suffer men whom you call Probationers
and Expectants for the Ministry, to preach without Ordination? May not private
men preach as well as they?

Answ. There is a great difference between a private man's preaching that never
intends the Ministry, and a Probationers preaching that intends the Ministry,
and preaches by way of trial, that so the people that are to choose him may
have experience of his gifts. A probationer, and a Minister differ but in
degree, but a private man and a Minister differ toto genere. In the Old
Testament there were Prophets, and sons of the Prophets that were trained up in
the Schools of the Prophets: These Sons of the Prophets did prophecy by way of
trial and exercise, 1 Samuel 19.20. 2 King. 2.3. 1 King. 20.35, 36.

2. That these Sons of the Prophets, or as they are commonly called, these
Expectants, are not allowed in the Presbyteriall government to preach without
approbation and license. The Directory stablished by both Nations, is, That
such as intend the Ministry may occasionally both read the Scriptures, and
exercise gifts in preaching in the Congregation, being allowed thereunto by the
Presbytery. And therefore even Probationers under the Presbyterian Government
are not to preach though but occasionally, and for a little while, without a
License and Authority so to do, from them to whom Christ has given this power
to authorize men for such an employment.

So much in answer to Objections, and so much for the Third Proposition.

The Fourth Proposition.
Concerning the several ways and means of calling men to the Ministry, which
is the Subject of all the following Chapters in the First Part.

CHAP. VII. Wherein are handled three Questions about an imm^diate Call to the
Ministry.
HAving showed, That no man ought to take upon him the Office or the work of
the Ministry, but he that is lawfully called and ordained thereunto; We shall
now proceed (according to our method formerly propounded) to speak something
concerning the diverse ways and means of calling men unto the Ministry. That
which we have to say, we shall comprehend in the ensuing Propositions.

Propos. 1. Ius summum and (...) vocandi Ministros ad Deum solum pertinet.
Gerhard. de Minist. Eccles.
That the Power and Authority of calling men to the Ministry belongs properly
to God only; It is he that is the Lord of the Harvest, and therefore he only it
is that can send forth Laborers into his harvest; Ministers are his
Ambassadors, and therefore to be sent by him: He only can give the Heavenly
Unction and make us able Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. And it is
for the great honor and encouragement of the Gospel Ministry, that all the
three persons are said to call men to this sacred office. Of God the Father it
is said, 1 Cor. 12.28. And God has set, etc. and Mat. 9.38. Pray unto the
Lord, etc. Of God the Son, Ephesians. 4.11. Of God the holy Ghost, Act. 20.28.

That there are two ways by which God does call men to the Office of the
Ministry, the one immediate, Propos. 2.
the other mediate.

The immediate call is when a man is chosen by God without the intervention of
man; Thus were the Prophets and Apostles called: Paul says of himself, That he
was an Apostle not of men nor by men, but by Christ, Gal. 1.1.
etc. where the Apostle tells us of three sorts of Ministers:

1. Such as are called neither of men nor by men, but by Christ and God
immediately, such were the Apostles

2, Such as are called by God, and also by men appointed by God for this work,
such were the Apostles successors.

3. Such as are neither called by God immediately or mediatly, but only of man,
that is, by the mere authority of men; such were the false Apostles. Zanchy
tells us out of Hierom of a fourth sort, and they are such as are neither of
man, Zanch. in 4. Praecep. p. 769.
nor by man, nor by Christ, but by themselves; Qui per seipsos Ministerium sibi
sumunt non vocati, Who take upon themselves the work of the Ministry uncalled;
And these he says are omnium pessimi, the worst of all. Of these the Prophet
Jeremy speaks, I have not sent these Prophets yet they ran, I have not spoken
unto them yet they prophesied. Ier. 23.2.1.


We purpose not to speak much of this immediate Call; Only because there are
some who are ordinarily called Anabaptists or Enthusiasts, or as Chemnitius
calls them fanaticos homines fanatic men, that boast much of Heavenly
Revelations and of divine impulses, and pretend to an immediate Call, we will
for our peoples sake briefly answer these three Questions.

Quest. 1. How may we distinguish between an immediate Call from God; and the
imposture of fanatic men that say they are so called, and are not?

Quest. 2. Whether are we to expect any immediate Call in these days?

Quest. 3. Whether the Call of the first Reformers of Religion from the Errors
of Popery, was an immediate Call or no?

Quest. 1. How may we distinguish between an immediate Call from God, and the
imposture of men that say they are so called when they are not?

Answ. 1. They that are immediately called to the Ministry are endued by God
either with the gift of miracles, or with some other testimony of the Spirit,
by which they are enabled to give proof of their immediate Call. When Christ
called his twelve Apostles, he gave them power against unclean spirits to cast
them out, and to heal all manner of sickness, and all manner of disease. Mat.
10.1.
And the Apostle Paul calls this power of working miracles a sign of his
Apostleship, 2 Cor. 12.12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you
in all patience, in signs and wonders, and mighty deeds. When Christ called his
70 Disciples he adorned them also with power of Miracles, Luke 10.9. Thus when
God called Moses immediately, he enabled him to work miracles, that so the
Israelites might believe that he was not an Impostor, but that the Lord God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had appeared unto him, Exodus 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. After
this manner was the calling of Elias and Elisha confirmed. And yet from hence
we dare not (as some do) gather a general Rule, That an immediate Call is
always joined with the gift of miracles, for it is said expressly of John
Baptist, That he did no miracle, and yet he was immediately called: Ioh. 10.41.
Neither do we read of many of the Prophets of the Old Testament, that they
wrought any miracles; But we say, That an immediate Call is always joined
either with the gift of Miracles, or the gift of Tongues, or some other
extraordinary thing, by which men are enabled undoubtedly to demonstrate to
others their immediate Call. Thus the Prophets were all of them endued with the
gift of foretelling things to come, and John Baptist was enabled to make proof
of his immediate Call by showing the Prophecies both of Isaiah and Malachy that
were concerning him; which prophecies were applied to him by the Angel, Luke
1.15, 16, 17. before he was born; appropriated by himself, Ioh. 1.23. and
confirmed by Christ's testimony of him, Mat. 11.9, 10, 11. And therefore let all
those that boast of their Revelations, and say they are called by God to preach
as the Apostles were, show the signs and tokens of their Apostleship, as the
Apostles did; let them show the gift of miracles, or of Tongues, or of
foretelling things to come, or some supernatural prediction, that such as they
should be sent into the world, or at least some rare and extraordinary work of
God, that so the world may believe, that they are in truth sent by God, and are
not Impostors and Seducers, as the false Prophets were, Ier. 14.14.

Secondly, They that are immediately called by God will preach no other doctrine
but what is agreeable to the Word of God. This is the distinguishing character
brought by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 23.16. Hearken not unto the words of the
Prophets, etc. For they prophecy a lie unto you, for I have not sent them,
says the Lord, yet they prophesi^ a lie in my Name. Thus Ier. 29.8, 9. Let not
your Prophets and your Diviners deceive you, neither hearken to your Dreams,
etc. for they prophecy falsely unto you in my Name; He that boasts of dreams,
vision^, and Revelations, and holds forth any doctrine contrary to the written
Word, he is an Impostor and a Seducer. And this is the chief Note of
difference, without which the former i^ insufficient; Prima ac praecipua
probationis regula (says Gerhard) est harmonia and congruentia doctrinae,
Gerhard. do Minist. Eccl^s. p. 87.
cum doctrina a Deo revelara, The first and chief rule of trial is the harmony
and agreement of the doctri^e they preach with the doctrine of the Script^res.
For our Savior Christ tel^ us, That false Christ^ should arise and false
Prophets, Mat. 24.^4.
and should show great signs and wonders, insomuch (if it were possible) they
should de^eive the very Elect. And the Apostle tells us, that the coming of
Antichrist shall be after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders. 2 These. 2.9.
These wonders are called lying wonders, either because they should be false
and counterfeit, or if ^rue, yet they may be called lying wonders ( miranda not
miracula) because wrought by Satan to confirm erroneous doctrines and lies:
Such are Popish miracles (falsely so called) which are (as our Annotations upon
the place say) either lyi^g prodigies, or prodigious lies. This caution was
given to the Children of Israel by Moses, Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise among you
a Prophet, or a dreamer if dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder, and the
sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee saying, Let us go
after other Gods, etc. Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet,
or that dreamer of dreams, for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether
you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, etc.
From all which we gather, That whosoever groundeth his authority of preaching
upon an immediate call, and braggeth of heavenly visions and divine
revelations, if he preach strange doctrine contrary to the doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, although he should confirm it by signs and wonders, and
although he should undertake to foretell things to come, and these predictions
should come to pass, yet notwithstanding we are not to hearken unto him but to
reject him as a Seducer, and his wonders as lying wonders, Gal. 1.8, 9.
and to say with the Apostle Paul, Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any
other Gospel unto you then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
accursed: Excellently to this purpose does Austin answer to the Donatists,
boasting of their Revelations, but departing from the sincerity of Evangelical
doctrine. Non dican^ ideo verum esse, qui^ illa and illa mirabilia fecit
Donatus vel Pontius, vel quilibet alius, etc. aut quia ille frater noster and
illa soror nostra tal^ visum vigilans vidit, ^el ^ale visum dormiens somniavit.
Removeantur ista v^l figmenta menda^ium bominum, vol portenta fallacium
Spirituum, etc. Remotis ^mnibus istis, Ecclesi^m su^m demon^tron^ non in signis
and prodigi^s fallacibus, (quia etiam contra ista verbo Domini praep^rati and
ca^ti re^ liti sum^s) sed in praescripto Legis* in Prophetarum praedictis, in
Psalmorum cantibus, in ipsi^s P^storis vocibus, in Evangelist^r^m
praedicationibus and laboribus, hoc est, in omnibus Canonicis sanctorum
librorum autoritatibus. August. de Unita^e Eccles. c. 18, 19, in Edi^ione
Lov^niensi. Ann. 1616.
Let them not therefore say it is a truth, because Donatus or Pontius or any
other did such and such miracles, or because this Brother or that Sister saw
such a vision, or dreamed such a dream; Let these fictions of deceitful, men or
wonders of lying spirits be laid aside, etc. And having laid them aside, Let
them demonstrate their Church, not by such lying prodigies, (because against
giving heed to such we are warned in the Word of God) but by the prescript of
the Law, the predictions of the Prophets by the Book of Psalms, by the voice of
the great Shepherd, by the Preachings and Writings of the Evangelists, that is,
by ^the Authority of Canonical Books of Scripture.

So much for the first Question.

Quest. 2, Whether are we to expect any immediate and extraordinary Call to the
Ministry in these days?

Answ. Though we cannot, nor ought not to set bounds to the infinite power of
free will of God, nor will we dispute what God may do out of his free grace in
times of general Apostasy, yet we shall make bold to give in this answer to
this great Question.

That we do not read that we are commanded in Scripture to wait for and expect
such a Call, Nec habemus mandatum ut expect^mus immediatam vocationem, nec
promissionem Deum velle hoc tempore mitt^re operarios in messem suam per
immediatam vocationem. S^d per Apostolos tradidit, and Ecclesiae praescripsit
certam formam qu^modo nunc velit mitt^re and vocare Ministros nimirum p^r
mediatam vocationem. Neque enim opus nunc est immediata vocatione. Deus enim
omnino vult ut ministerium usque ad consummationem seculi alligatum sit ad
vocem doctrinae quae a Filio D^i accepta, and ab Apostolis immedia^e vocatis
Ecclesiae tradita est. Chemnit. loc. commun. de Ecclesia.
neither do we know of any promise that God has made to encourage us to wait,
nor do we conceive that there is any absolute necessity of such an expectation.
For God (as Chemnitius observes) has by his Apostles delivered and prescribed
to his Church a certain form by which he would have men enter into the
Ministry, and that is a mediate Call, neither is there now any need of an
immediate; For it is Gods will, that the Ministry even to the end of the world
should be tied to that doctrine which is delivered to the Church by the
Apostles.

Add to this, That the Apostles, though they themselves were called immediately
by God, yet notwithstanding they did not wait till others that should succeed
them in the work of the Ministry, were chosen also immediately by God; But they
themselves ordained Ministers, and gave order to Timothy and Titus about the
way and method of electing and ordaining Elders, which we are assured they
would never have done if the immediate Call had not ceased, together with their
persons.

When Christ went up to heaven he gave two sorts of Officers to his Church,
some extraordinary as Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, and these were
temporary: some ordinary, as Pastors and Teachers, and these are perpetual. Now
as we are not to expect in our days such extraordinary Officers, as Apostles,
Evangelists, and Prophets, no more are we to expect such an extraordinary way
of calling, as they had; but as our Officers are ordinary, so the calling we
are to expect is ordinary. Add,

That God has promised to preserve an ordinary Ministry in the world till the
coming of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.26. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Mat. 28.20. Isa. 59.21. And
therefore there is no need of waiting for and expecting an extraordinary and
immediate Call. Zanch. in 4. Praecep. p. 719.
As it is necessary (says Learned Zanchy) that there shall be always a Church
upon earth, because Christ has promised, that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it; So also it is every way as necessary that a lawful
Ministry be preserved: Vnum enim ab altero separari non potest, nec Ecclesia a
Ministerio, nec Ministerium ab Ecclesia; For the one cannot be separated from
the other, neither the Church from the Ministry, nor the Ministry from the
Church: And from hence it appears (says the same Author) That even in the
Church of Rome, Idem liquet in Ecclesia Romana, corruptissimus fuit magna
ex^parte cul^us Dei; interim servavit ibi Deus integros fid^i articulos, and
baptismum ad substantiam quod attinet, and quantum erat satis ad salutem
electorum, ita ut sicut non peni^us extincta ibi fuit Ecclesia, sic neque
penitus interierit Ministerium. Zanch. ut supra.
though the worship of God be most corrupt in it, yet God has preserved in it
so much of the substance of Religion as was necessary to salvation; so that as
the Church is not wholly extinct therein, so neither was the Ministry.

We deny not but that there are some Learned Divines that plead much for an
immediate and extraordinary call in times of public and general defection
from the Truth; For our parts we will not espouse this quarrel: We cannot, we
ought not to set bounds to the infinite power and free will of God; We dispute
not what God may do at such times, only we say with Gerhard, Destituimur
promissione quod debeamus hoc tempore post confirmatum Novi Testamenti canonem
immediatam vocationem expectare; Gerhard. de Minist. Eccles. p. 88.
We have no promise that we ought after the confirmation of the Canon of the
New Testament to expect an immediate call. And afterward he says, Nulla
apparet immediatae vocationis necessitas, There appears no necessity of this
immediate Call.

And besides, even those that are for an immediate Call do lay down diverse
limitations which are very worthy to be considered by the people of our age,
lest they should suck poison from such a doctrine. One that pleads much for it
gives these Rules.

1. That this extraordinary and immediate Call then only takes place, when a
mediate and ordinary cannot be had, Bucan. loc. communes de Ministerio. quest.
43.
and that such a Call ought not to be pretended unto in contempt of the
ordinary way.

2. That whosoever shall pretend to this immediate Call ought first to be tried
before he be admitted, That his doctrine ought to be examined by the Word, That
his life and conversation ought to be diligently looked into, lest he prove one
of those concerning whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 16.18.
That serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own belly, and by good words
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple.

After this he puts this Question, Anne cessante ordinaria vocatione? etc.
Whether when the ordinary Call cease, it be then lawful for every private
Christian, verst in the Scriptures, to go up into the Pulpit, and preach
against false Doctrines, and assert the Truth? and answers, God forbid! for
this would open a door euivis ubivis, qui se sapientem existimaret, etc. to
every one every where who thinks himself wise, under a pretense (whether true
or false) of confuting false doctrine, to have clandestine meetings, as the
Anabaptists and Libertines of our days are wont to do, following the evil
example of those that first at Antioch, afterward in Galatia, and elsewhere,
creeping in privately, brought great tumults and confusions into the Church; Of
whom the Apostle speaks: Forasmuch as we have heard that certain which went out
from us have troubled you with words, Act. 15.24.
subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised and keep the Law, to
whom we gave no such commandment. Thus far Bucanus; and much more to this
purpose in the same Chapter. By this it appears, That even they that justify
an immediate Call, in some cases, do notwithstanding flatly condemn the
disorderly practices of our times:

So much in answer to the second Question.

The third Question is, Whether the Call of Luther and the rest of the best
Reformers of Religion from the errors of Popery, was an immediate and
extraordinary Call, or no?

Answ. He that would be satisfied about the Call of Luther to the Ministry, let
him read Gerhard de Ministerio, where he shall find proved, Page 147.148.
That Luther though he did always plead his doctrine to be of God, yet he did
never so much as pretend to an immediate and extraordinary Call, but that he
was called after a mediate and ordinary way; That he was ordained Presbyter in
the Year of our Lord 1507. at 24 years of Age; That when he was ordained
Presbyter he did receive power to preach the Word of God; That the next Year
after he was called by John Staupitius, with the consent of Elector Frederick,
to be Divinity Professor of the Church and University of Wittenberg, By the
Statutes of which University he was bound to this, sc. Vestrum est legem
divinam interpretari and librum vitae docere; It is your Office to interpret
the Divine Law and to teach the Book of Life.

Object. If it be objected, That Luther received his Ordination from the Church
of Rome, and therefore it is null and void.

Answ. To this Gerhard answers, That although the rite of Ordination in the
Church of Rome was corrupted with many Superstitious and Unprofitable
Ceremonies, Quamvis vero ritus ordinationis in Ecclesia Pontificia multis
superstitiosis ac inutilibus Ceremonijs sit vitiatus, ex ^o tamen ipsius
ordinationis essentiae nihil decedit. Distinguenda igitur Episcopi ordinantis
impuritas ab ordinatione, quae sit totius Ecclesiae nomine, and in ipsa
ordinatione distinguendum est divinum ab humano, essentiale ab accidentali,
pium and Christianum ab Antichristiano. Sicut olim in Ecclesia Israelitica
super cathedram Moses sedebant Scribae and Pharisaei, Mat. 23.2. quorum
Ministerio, Sacrificiis, Ordinationibus utendum, interim tamen a sermento
ipsorum cavendum erat, Mat. 16.12. Ita quoque in Ecclesia Romana, illorum qui
erant in ordinaria successione, ministerio, Sacramentis, ordinationibus utendum
erat, interim tamen fermentum admixtum a puritate massae distinguendum.
yet Ordination it self was not nullified; We must distinguish between the
impurity of the Bishop Ordaining, and the Ordination which is done in the Name
of the whole Church: And in the Ordination we must distinguish that which is
divine from that which is humane, that which is essential from that which is
accidental, that which is godly and Christian from that which was
Antichristian. As in the Israelitish Church they were to use the Ministry,
Sacrifices, and Ordination of the Scribes and Pharisees, who sat in Moses
chair, yet the people were warned to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees,
Mat. 16.12. So also is the Church of Rome; We use the Ministry, Sacraments, and
Ordination of those that were in ordinary succession, but we reject the leaven
of their Superstition. But to this Objection we shall speak more fully in our
fifth Proposition.

The like to that, is said of Luther, may be said of Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Bucer, Peter Martyr, etc, Zanchy says, Zanch. in 4. Praecep. p. 774.
That Luther was a lawful Teacher, and a Minister created in the Church of Rome
with Imposition of hands, and with authority to create others. The like he
says of Zuinglius, Bucer, etc. and of himself, Qui in Papatu fuimus creati
Doctores cum authoritate alios creandi; We were made Teachers under the Papacy
with authority to make others. We confess that Zanchy, Bucanus, and diverse
others speak much (if not too much) of an extraordinary Call that these blessed
Reformers had; But yet we desire it may be considered,

That the same Authors make mention also of the ordinary Call which they had.

That none of our first Reformers ever renounced their ordinary Call, but
rather asserted it and pleaded it upon all occasions, as Gerhard shows of
Luther in particular. Bucan tells us, That the Call of our first Reformers was
ordinary and extraordinary. Ordinary, because they were Doctores Pastores and
Presbyteri ex institutione Ecclesiae Romanae, sed abstersis istius sordibus a
Deo; Doctors, Pastors, and Presbyters by the Institution of the Church of Rome,
God having washed away the defilements that cleaved to that Ordination: It was
extraordinary, because they were endued with extraordinary gifts, and (blessed
be God) with incredible success, even to a miracle. And if this be all that is
meant by an immediate and extraordinary Call, in this sense we willingly and
freely own it; and acknowledge, Of the same judgment is Amesius who in his
Medulla Theologiae. l. 1. cap. 33. says thus; Wiclephus, Lutherus Zuinglius,
and similes Evangelij restauratore^ primi non fuerunt proprie loquendo
extraordinarij Ministri: Extraordinarij tamen non male a quibusdam appellantur.
1. Quia aliquid praestiterum simile eorum, quae ab extraordinarijs ministris
praestita fuerunt olim. 2. Quia quoad gradum, singularia quaedam dona
acceperunt a Deo, prout res ipsa postulabat, quod etiam affirmari potest de
multis inter Martyrs illustriores. 3. Quia ordine tunc temporis perturbato and
collapso, necesse habueru^ nonnulla tentare praeter ordinem communem.
That our blessed Reformers were men raised up by God after a wonderful
manner, to do great things for his Church; That they had (...), They were
endued with a singular knowledge of divine mysteries, with a rare and peculiar
gift of utterance, with an heroique spirit and an undaunted courage, and owned
by God with miraculous success, maugre all the opposition of the enemies of
Christ against them: The Papists upbraid the Protestants, and demand What
miracles did your first Reformers work? We answer, That this was a great
miracle, That so few men under such great opposition without working of
miracles, should be able to convert so many thousands to the Protestant
Religion:

So much in answer to the 3. Questions, and also about an immediate Call.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein is handled the mediate Call of men to the Ministry, and
therein one assertion about the peoples Election of their Minister, viz. That
the Election of a Minister does not by Divine Right belong wholly and solely to
the major part of every particular Congregation.
THE mediate Call, is when a man is called to the Ministry by men lawfully
deputed thereunto. Concerning this mediate Call we shall offer these
Propositions.

That the mediate Call though it be by men, yet it is from God and by divine
right as well as the immediate; Propos. 1.
A necessary Proposition for the people of our unhappy age, that vilify the
Gospel Ministry, because they are not called as the Apostles were, nor have the
Apostolical Gifts of Tongus and Miracles. Know therefore that when Christ went
up to heaven, he gave not only Apostles and Prophets to his Church, Ephesians. 4.11.
but also Pastors and Teachers: That the Apostle Paul tells the Elders of
Ephesus, that were ordinary Officers, Act. 20.28.
That the holy Ghost had made them Overseers over the Flock: He calls not only
extraordinary but ordinary Officers Ambassadors of Christ and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God. 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Cor. 4.1.
Our Savior Christ calls the Ministers of the seven Churches of Asia, Angels:
The Apostle commands the Thessalonians, To know them that labor amongst them,
and to have them in high esteem, 1 Th. 5.12, 13
etc. who yet notwithstanding were but ordinary Ministers. And to the Hebrews
he commands, To obey them that had the rule over them, and to submit
themselves, etc. Heb. 13.17.
All which Texts prove, That Ministers made by men after a lawful manner, are
made by God, are Ministers of Christ, are to be obeyed, submitted unto, and had
in high esteem for their works sake; and we may add, That such Ministers may
expect protection from God, direction and success of their labors as well as
if they were immediately called: Those rare promises Isa. 49.2. Isa. 51.16. Ier.
1.8, 10. are their rich portion: The Apostle joins Apollo with himself, not
only in the fellowship of the Ministry, but also in the promise of a blessing
upon it: Who then is Paul, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6.
and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to
every man; I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase.

Propos. 2.
That this mediate Call is either extraordinary or ordinary; The extraordinary
mediate Call is (as Paraeus says) proxima immediatae, near to the immediate,
but yet not the same with it. For though every immediate Call be extraordinary,
yet every extraordinary Call is not immediate. Thus God chose Aaron to be
Priest after an extraordinary manner, yet it was a mediateCall, by Moses his
Internuncius or Messenger. Thus also he chose Elisha by the intervention of
Elias: Thus Matthias his Call to the Apostleship was extraordinary by the use
of a Lot, Paraei Comm^n. in Romanos.
and yet also by the choice of the people. Pareus writes a Story of the Fratres
Bohemici, The Bohemian Brethren, who in the Year of our Lord 1465. when all
their Ministers were driven from them by Persecution, Tres ex novem sort sibi
designarunt non sine miraculo, Chose three out of nine by lot to be their
Ministers not without miracle; But of this immediate extraordinary Call we
spoke sufficiently in the former Questions.

Propos. 3.
The mediate ordinary way by which God would have all men to enter into the
Ministry is by Election and Ordination. They are both of them distinctly set
down in the choice of Deacons, Act. 6.3, 5, 6. Look ye out seven men whom we
may appoint, etc. Now though we do not purpose to speak much concerning popular
Election, yet because there are many that lift it up too high, and make the
whole essence of the Ministerial Call to consist in it, and that look upon
Ordination, if not as Antichristian, yet at best but as a circumstance of the
Ministerial Call which may be as well omitted as used; Therefore we are
necessitated to propound unto our people these ensuing Propositions concerning
popular Election.

That the Election of a Minister does not by divine right belong wholly and
solely to the major part of every particular Congregation. Propos. 1.


This we shall prove, 1. By examining those three Texts that are brought for
the divine right of Popular Election. 2. By showing the mischiefs that will
inevitably follow from this assertion,


1. We will examine the Texts. The first is taken from the choice of Matthias
into the office of an Apostle, Act. 1.23.
which was done (say they) by the 120. Disciples there present; And if the
people have power to choose an Apostle, much more to choose an Ordinary
Minister. But we answer,

1. That those words, And they appoined two, Joseph called Barsabas, and
Matthias, do in all probability relate to the Apostles, and not to the
Disciples: They appointed two, that is, the Apostles appointed two; Thus our
Annotators; They appointed two, that is, the forementioned Apostles put two in
Election. And if the history be well observed, it will appear that the 120.
Disciples are named only in a Parenthesis, and that Peter in his whole
Discourse relates especially if not only to his Fellow-Apostles. It is said
ver. 17. He was numbered with us, that is, with the Apostles not with the
Disciples. And so ver. 21. which have companied with us, that is, with the
Apostles. ver. 22. must one be ordained to be a witness with us, etc. that is,
with us Apostles. And then follows, And they appointed, that is, the Apostles,
and not the 120. Disciples.

But suppose that they had been appointed by the 120. Disciples, yet we answer.

1. That the whole and sole power of choosing was not in the people, for they
were guided and directed in their choice by the eleven Apostles: It was Electio
populi praeeuntibus and dirigentibus Apostolis, By the guidance and direction
of the Apostles; and so it comes not up to the proof of the Proposition: The
Apostle tells them in express terms, ver. 21, 22. of those men which have
companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
beginning from the Baptism of John, etc.

2. That the people cannot (in any good construction) be said to have chosen
Matthias any more then Barsabas: For they appointed two: And when the people
had made their choice, Barsabas was as capable of being an Apostle, as
Matthias. The truth is, Matthias was chosen by God himself, and by God only,
and therefore it is said, verse. 24. Thou Lord which know the hearts of all
men, show whether of these two thou have chosen. It was the divine lot, not the
120. that chose the Apostle.

Object. But it is said ver. 26. He was numbered with the eleven Apostles,
(...), that is, say they, he was together chosen by suffrage of the 120.
Disciples.

Communibus calculis eligere.
Answ, The word (...) primarily and properly signifies to choose by stones or
counters, with which they were wont to give voices in commission or judgment.
But here it must necessarily be taken in a more general sense, for the general
consent and approbation of the whole company: For it is certain, That Matthias
was chosen by lot and not by stones, by God and not by the people; And
therefore when it is said He was numbered, the meaning is, he was acknowledged
to be one of the 12. Apostles, They all rested contented with the lot, as being
confident that God disposed and approved the event thereof, and as our
Annotations say, By a common declaration of their general consent he was
numbered among the eleven Apostles.

The Second Text is, Concerning the choice of Deacons, where the whole and sole
power of choosing is put into the hands of the people: Act. 6.3.
And therefore (say they) the choice of a Minister belongs by divine right
wholly and solely unto the people.

Answ. 1. The people had not the whole and the sole choice of the Deacons, but
were herein guided, directed, and limited by the holy Apostles; They were
limited to the number of seven, and to the company out of which those seven
were to be chosen, and to certain qualifications which must be in these seven:
Look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and
wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business: And we are confident that if
the brethren had failed in any of these particulars, the Apostles would have
refused to have laid their hands upon them. And therefore this Text comes not
up to the proof of the Objection.

But suppose, That the people had had the whole and sole choice of the Deacons,
yet it will not follow that therefore they should have the whole and sole
choice of their Ministers: For it is a certain Rule, Argumentum a minori ad
majus non valet affirmative. It is no good way of arguing to say, That because
a man is able to do the lesser, therefore he is able to do the greater. Now the
Office of a Deacon is inferior to the office of a Presbyter. And besides, it
will no way follow, That because people are able without advice and direction
from others to choose men to gather and distribute money to the poor, that
therefore they are able wholly and solely to choose men that shall divide the
Word of God amongst them, as skillful workmen that need not be ashamed.

The third Text is Act. 14.23. And when they had ordained them Elders in every
Church, and had prayed with fasting, etc. The Greek word is (...), etc. which
signifies a choosing by lifting up or stretching out the hand; And Beza
translates the words, Cumque ipsis per suffragia creassent per singulas
Ecclesias Presbyteros, And when they had created for them by suffrages Elders
in every City. This Text seems to make much for the whole and sole power of the
people in the Election of a Minister.

But we answer.

That though the word (...) signifies primarily and properly to choose by
lifting up of the hands, as (...) signifies to choose by stones or counters,
yet also it oftentimes signifies simply to choose or to appoint, or to ordain
without the use of the ceremony of lifting up of hands; Thus it must
necessarily be taken, Act. 10.41. And thus (...), Act. 1.26. is also to be
understood for a bare numbering and accounting; We could here cite multitude of
Authors where the Greek word (...) is used for decerning, Seldom de Synedrijs.
appointing, constituting, and that without lifting up of hands, but they are
reckoned up to our hands by many Authors, to which we refer those that desire
to be satisfied herein: For our parts, we incline rather to this latter
signification of the word. And to the Text we say,

1. That whatsoever is meant by (...), yet certain we are that the persons that
did (...) were Paul and Barnabas, and not the people; For it is said expressly,
And when they had ordained them Elders, This they must needs be Paul and
Barnabas: It is six times used of them in five verses, ver. 21, 22. When they
had preached, etc. they returned to Lystra confirming the souls of the
Disciples, and ver. 23. when they had ordained, etc. and had prayed, they
commended them to the Lord, and ver. 14. after they had passed throughout
Pisidia, they came, etc. and they preached: By all which it appears, that the
persons that did ordain were Paul and Barnabas, and therefore whether this
(...) were a creating by suffrages (which we think not,) for being but two
there could be no place for suffrages, or a bare ordaining and appointing; sure
we are that in Grammatical construction this ordaining must be the act of the
Apostles, and not of the people, and therefore this Text comes not up to the
proof of the Objection.

Object. It is Objected by a Learned man, That the Syriack version does
insinuate, that the word (...) is to be understood not of the Apostles
Ordination of Elders, but of the Churches Election of Elders, thus, And when
they, that is, the disciples forementioned had by votes made to themselves
Elders in every Church, and had prayed, they commended them (that is, Paul and
Barnabas) to the Lord.

Answ. 1. This interpretation cannot consist with the Antecedents and
Consequents, as we have already showed.

2. If this Interpretation were true, it should be (...) not (...), it is illis
not sibiipsis.

3. Tremellius that translates the Syriack of the New Testament, renders it, Et
constituerunt eis in omni coetu Seniores. And they appointed (that is, Paul and
Barnabas) to them that is, to the people. The Hebrew is (...) illis.

Object. There is another that confesses, that the word (...), can agree with
no other but Paul and Barnabas, and therefore he labors to find the Election
of the people in the word (...), which (says he) does not signify in every
Church, as it is translated, but according to the Church, instancing in the
Orators phrase, faciam secundum te, I will do it according to thy mind: So
they (that is, Paul and Barnabas) ordained them Elders according to the Church,
that is, according to the will and mind of the Church.

Answ. If this were granted, it would not prove the matter in hand, That the
major part of a Congregation by divine right have the whole and the sole power
of Election: it would only conclude an acquiescency in the people, and that
they had satisfaction in the Ordination carried on by Paul and Barnabas. A
phrase to the same purpose is used, Tit. 1.5. where Titus is left in Crete to
appoint Elders, (...), and we may as well say, that the whole City had their
vote in Election in Crete, and that every thing was done according to the mind
of the City, as to say here, that every thing was done according to the mind
of the Church. See more of this in M. Blake his Treatise of the Covenant. So
much for the first Argument.

The Second Argument by which we prove, That the power of Election of Ministers
does not by divine right belong wholly and solely to the major part of every
particular Congregation, is drawn from the mischiefs that will inevitably flow
from this assertion. For,

1. It is certain that every one that is to be made a Minister is first of all
to be tried and proved whether he be fit for so great an Office, 1 Timothy, 3.10.
Let these also be proved, etc. These also, that is, the Deacons as well as the
Bishops; The Bishop therefore is to be tried and examined whether he be apt to
teach, whether he be able to convince gainsayers, whether he be a workman that
needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth. Now there are many
Congregations wherein the major part are very unfit to judge of ministerial
abilities, and if the whole and sole power were in them they would set up
Idol-Shepherds instead of able Shepherds.

2. There are some Congregations wherein the major part are wicked, and if left
to themselves wholly, would choose none but such as are like themselves.

3. There are some wherein possibly the major part may be heretical, and will
never consent to the Election of an Orthodox and sound Minister.

4. Sometimes there have been great dissentions and tumults in popular
Elections, even to the effusion of blood, as we read in Ecclesiastical Story:
Sometimes Congregations are destitute of Ministers for many years by reason of
the divisions and disagreements thereof, as we see by woeful experience in our
days. Now in all these or such like cases if the whole and sole power of
Election were in the major part of every Congregation, how sad and lamentable
would the condition be of many hundred Congregations in this Nation: And
therefore it is, that in all well-governed Churches great care is had for the
avoiding of these Church-undoing inconveniences. In the Church of Scotland the
power of voting in Elections is given to the Presbytery of the Congregation,
with the consent of the major or better part thereof. And therefore M.
Gillespie though a great friend to the due right of particular Congregations,
M. Gillespies Treatise of Miscellany Questions. ^. 2. p. 8, 9.
yet when he comes to state the question about Election of Ministers, he puts
it thus, Whether the Election of Pastors ought not to be by the votes of the
Eldership, and with the consent (tacit or expressed) of the major or better
part of the Congregation, etc. he durst not state it precisely upon the major
part, and afterward he tells us, That the Election of a Minister is not wholly
and solely to be permitted to the multitude or body of the Church, Idem page
30. Page 28. Page 30, 31.
and that an heretical and schismatic Church has not just right to the
liberty and privilege of a sound Church; And that when a Congregation is rent
asunder, and cannot agree among themselves, the highest Consistories,
Presbyteries and Assemblies of the Church are to end the controversy, and
determine the case after hearing of both parties. Bucanus tells us, That the
Election of a Minister for the avoiding of confusion ought not to be by every
member of a Congregation, but by the Presbytery, or by the Pastors and Teachers
of neighboring Congregations directing and guiding the people, Bucani loc.
commun. de Minist. Gerhard. de Minist. p. 95
as being most fit to judge of Ministerial abilities. The Lutheran Churches put
the power of calling of Ministers into the Presbytery, Magistracy, and People.
To the Christian Magistrate they give nomination, presentation, and
confirmation: To the Presbytery, examination, ordination, and inauguration; To
the People, consent and approbation. He that would be further satisfied in this
point, may read the Discourse of our Reverend Brother Dr Seaman about
Ordination, Diatribe.
where he shall find the custom and practice of most of the Reformed Churches
in calling of Ministers, for the avoiding of the forementioned mischief.

So much for the first Proposition.

CHAP. IX. Wherein a second assertion about Election is largely proved, namely,
That the whole essence of the Ministerial Call does not consist in Election
without Ordination.
THat the whole essence of the Ministerial Call does not consist in Election
without Ordination. Propos. 2.
There are many Learned and Godly men whom we much reverence, though we dissent
from them in this particular, that say, Ames. Med* p, 217. M. Hookers Survey of
Church Discipline.
That Ordination is* only Adjunctum consequens and consummans, an adjunct
following and consummating the Ministerial Call, but not at all entering into
the constitution of it: That Ordination is nothing else but the approbation of
the Officer, and a settling and confirming him in his Office, and that Election
is that which gives him the essentials of his Office. Vocatio proprie and
essentialiter consistit in Electione. Ames. Survey of Church Discipline. par.
2. page 67.
Dr Ames says, That the vocation of a Minister does properly and essentially
consist in Election. Mr Hooker says, That the Election of the People rightly
ordered by the rule of Christ, gives the essentials to an Officer, or leaves
the impression of a true outward Call, and so an Office-power upon a Pastor.
Our Brethren in New England in their Platform of Church Discipline say, That
the essence and substance of the outward Calling of an ordinary Officer in the
Church, does not consist in his Ordination, but in his voluntary and free
Election by the Church, and in his accepting of that Election, etc. For our
parts we crave leave to dissent from these worthy men, and that upon these
grounds.

Arg. 1. Because our brethren do not bring any one Text of Scripture to prove
this their assertion (as we can find) nor do we think that any can be brought.

Arg. 2. Because that those very Texts forementioned, which are the chief (if
not the only) Texts that are brought for popular Election, do seem to us to
hold forth the quite contrary to this assertion. When Matthias was made an
Apostle, it was not the Election of the people that did constitute him an
Apostle. The people chose two, (if they chose at all) but that which did
constitute him an Apostle was the determination by lot; As in a Corporation,
when the community chooses two, and the Aldermen one of these two; in
propriety of speech, it is the Aldermen that choose the Mayor, not the
community: All that the 120. did (if they did that) was to set two before the
Lord, but it was God that did constitute and appoint Matthias to be the
Apostle: In the choice of Deacons the people nominated seven Persons to be
Deacons, but it was the Apostles Ordination not the peoples Election, that did
constitute and make them Deacons; Act. 6.3. (...).
So says the Text expressly, Look ye out among you seven men whom we may
appoint or constitute over this business. The essence and substance of the
Deacons Call, is placed not in the peoples nomination but in the Apostles
Ordination.

As for Act. 14.23. we have already showed that they that did (...) were the
Apostles and not the Churches; And that if they did (...) by suffrages, it was
per suffragia propria non aliena by their own suffrage not the Peoples, though
we think (as we have formerly said) that the word is to be taken for a bare
decerning and appointing, without the ceremony of lifting up of hands, as it is
taken Act. 10.41. There is nothing at all in this Text that proves, That the
whole essence of the Ministerial Call is in the peoples Election; but it
rather proves the quite contrary, That the Apostolical Ordination was that
which did constitute Elders in every Church.

Arg. 3. All those Texts that we shall hereafter bring for the asserting of the
divine right of Ordination, do prove that the essence of the Ministerial Call
does consist in Ordination and not in Election: There are more and more clear
Texts for Ordination then for Election, and Texts that make it not to be an
adjunct but an essential constituent of the Ministerial Call, as we shall
hereafter (God willing) prove at large.

Arg. 4. We argue from the nature of popular Election; Election by the people
properly is nothing else but their designation of a person that is to be made
their Minister, or that is already a Minister, to his particular charge: It is
not simply a making of a Minister, but the making of him a Minister of such a
place; As it is one thing (says Mr Rutherford) to make a gold Ring, another
thing to appropriate it to such or such a finger; Election is nothing else but
the appropriation of a Minister for the exercise of his Ministry in such a
place: It does not give him the Office, but the opportunity of exercising his
official authority over those that choose him. This appears in the Election of
Deacons; all that the people did by Election was only to design the persons and
to set them before the Apostles, but it was the Apostles praying and laying on
of their hands that made them Deacons. Act. 6.6.
This likewise appears from Deuteronomy. 1.13. which place though it speaks of the
choice of civil Officers, yet it does very clearly describe unto us the nature
of Election; Take ye wise men and understanding, and known among your tribes,
and I will make them Rulers over you: The peoples taking of men did not give
them the essentials of their office; They nominated the persons, but it was
Moses that made them Rulers. Our brethren of New England in their Platform of
Church Discipline, tell us, That all Office-power is proper to the Eldership,
and that the brotherhood have only a power of privilege. Now then we demand,
If the people have no Office-power belonging to them, how can they by Election
make an Officer? Indeed they may and do design persons unto office by choosing
of them, but that they that have not the power of Office neither formally nor
virtually committed unto them, and that cannot act or exercise an Office-power,
that they by a bare Election should communicate Office-power, and give the
essentials of a Ministerial Call, is to us a riddle we understand not; Nihil
dat quod non habet nec formaliter nec eminenter; The lesser is blessed of the
greater, not the greater of the lesser. Add further, If Election be (as our
Brethren say) the constituting of a Minister, and the giving him the essentials
of his Office, why then did the Apostles take so much pains to return to
Lystra, Act. 14.21, 23.
Iconium, and Antioch, to ordain them Elders in every Church? and why did Paul
leave Titus in Crete to ordain Elders in every City? Tit. 1.5.
Why did they not spare their journey, and send to the people to make their own
Ministers by Election? Can we imagine that they took such pains only to add an
adjunct to the Ministerial Call, an adjunct, which does not give essence, but
follows the essence, supposing the Subject complete in its essence before? For
our parts we are far from so thinking, but rather conceive it much more suitable
to Scripture to say, That Tit^^ was left to make Ministers in Crete, and that
the Apostles went about from Church to Church to give the Essence of the
Ministerial Call, and that all that the people did was to nominate the person
to be ordained, or rather to approve and accept of the Ministers made them by
the Apostles.

Arg. 5. If Election gives the essentials to a Minister, then may a Minister
elected administer the Sacraments without Ordination. For as Mr Hooker well
says in another case, M. Hooker par. 2. cap. 2. page 66.
He that has complete power of an Office and stands an Officer without
exception, he cannot justly be hindered from doing all acts of that Office; For
to be an Officer complete without an Office, or being complete in his Office,
yet according to rule to be hindered from doing any thing belonging to his
Office, implies a contradiction; for it is all one to say a man is bound to a
rule, and yet by a rule he should not do it.

But a person Elected cannot administer the Sacraments without Ordination; he
cannot do it lawfully, it being cross to Scripture-Presidents, nor can he do it
in the opinion of those Reverend men with whom we now dispute: Mr Hooker calls
it an Anabaptisticall frenzy, to say, That an un-ordained person may baptize:
And besides, This is contrary to their own practice in New England, where it is
frequent to have a man Elected, and preach half a year, a whole year, nay (as
Mr Gi. Firmin once a Preacher there says) he knew one elected, M. Firmin
Separation examined. page 56.
and preached two years to his people, and they maintained him all that while,
and yet all that time he never administered a Sacrament, but he and they when
they would partake the Lords Supper, went ten miles to the Church out of which
they issued to receive the Sacrament; which practice without doubt was very
unnecessary, if Election gives the whole essence of the Ministerial Call, and
Ordination be only an adjunct: We say in Logic, Forma dat operari, Effects
depend upon the Form, not upon extrinsecall circumstances: This is Argumentum
ad hominem.

Arg. 6. If the whole essence of the Ministerial Call consists in Election,
then it will follow, That a Minister is only a Minister to that particular
charge to which he is called, and that he cannot act as a Minister in any other
place. This consequence is confessed by Reverend Mr Hooker who says, Survey of
Church Discipline. par. 2. cap. 2. page 61, 62.
That a Minister preaching to another Congregation, though he cease not to be
a Pastor, yet he does not preach as a Pastor, nor can he do any Pastoral acts
but in that place, and to that people to whom he is a Pastor. Thus also it is
said in the answer of the Elders of several Churches in New England unto nine
Positions. Pos. 8. If you mean by Ministerial act, such an act of authority and
power in dispensing of Gods Ordinances as a Minister does perform to the Church
whereunto he is called to be a Minister, then we deny that he can perform any
Ministerial act to any other Church but his own, because his Office extends no
further then his Call: This is also confessed in the New England Platform of
Church Discipline. And therefore we need not say more for the proof of the
consequence.

But as for the minor, That a Minister can perform no Pastoral act out of his
own Congregation, is an assertion

1. Unheard of in the Church of Christ before these late years.

2. Contrary to the practice of the Brethren themselves with whom we dispute;
It is acknowledged by all of them that the administration of the Sacrament is a
Ministerial act, and cannot be done but by a Pastor or Teacher, and yet it is
ordinary both in Old England and in New England for members of one Congregation
to receive in another Congregation. M. Firmin tells us, That M. Phillips Pastor
of the Church in Water-town, Separation examined, page 62.
while M. Wilson Pastor of the Church of Boston was here in England, went to
Boston and administered the Lords Supper to that Church; This surely was a
Pastoral act, and M. Phillips acted herein as a Pastor to those that were out
of his own Congregation. And if we may argue from our Brethrens practice we may
safely conclude, That a Minister may act as a Minister out of his own
Congregation.

Thirdly, Contrary to Scripture; For the Scripture tells us,

1. That there is a Church general visible as well as a particular Church
visible, Act. 8.1. Gal. 1.13. 1 Cor. 10.32. Gal. 4.26. Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Cor. 12.28.
1 Timothy 3*15.

2. That Ministers are primarily seated in the Church general visible, and but
secondarily in this or that particular Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. Teachers are set
by God in the same Church with the Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Pastors and
Teachers are given by Christ for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the
building of the body of Christ in general.

3. That every Minister has a double relation, one to his particular Church,
another to the Church general visible. And though he be actually to exercise
his Ministry, especially over that charge where he is fixed, yet he has a
virtual and habitual power to preach as a Minister in any place where he shall
be lawfully called. Therefore Ministers are spoken of in Scripture under a
general notion, to show the indefinitenesse of their Office. They are called
Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. Ministers of the
New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6. Ministers of the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. and Ministers
in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.21. Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. But never
Ministers of the people. Indeed they are for the people, but not of the people.

That a Minister is a Minister of the Church Catholic visible, appears thus:
He that can ministerially admit or eject a Member into, or out of the
Church-Catholick visible, is a Minister and Officer of the Church-Catholick
visible: But every Minister, by Baptism or Excommunication admits or
ejecteth Members into, or out of the Church-Catholick visible. Therefore, etc.
This Argument is urged by Apollo^i^s, and also by that godly, learned Minister
Mr Hudson* who has largely handled this point, and to whom we must necessarily
refer the Reader that would be further satisfied about it. We shall only
relate a passage out of Mr Ball, in his Trial of the new Church Way, p. 33.
collected by Mr Hudson. M. Hudson of the essence and unity of the
Church-Catholick, and his Vindication. page 140.
A Minister chosen and set over one Society, is to look unto that people
committed to his charge, etc. But he is a Minister in the Church universal. For
as the Church is one, so is the Ministry one, of which every Minister (sound
and orthodox) does hold his part. And though he is a Minister over that flock
which he is to attend, yet he is a Minister in the Church universal. The
function or power of exercising that function in the abstract, must be
distinguished from the power of exercising it concretely, according to the
diverse circumstances of places. The first belongs to a Minister every where
in the Church, the later is proper to the place and people where he does
minister. The lawful use of the power is limited to that Congregation
ordinarily; the power it self is not so bounded. In Ordination Presbyters are
not restrained to one or other certain place, as if they were to be deemed
Ministers there only, though they be set over a certain people. And as the
faithful in respect of their community between them, must and ought to perform
the offices of love one to another, though of different Societies; so the
Ministers in respect of their communion, must and ought upon occasion to
perform ministerial Offices toward the faithful of distinct societies.

And one more passage out of Mr Rutherford in his peaceable plea, page 263.
Ordination (says he) makes a man a Pastor under Christ formally and
essentially, the peoples consent and choice do not make him a Minister, but
their Minister, the Minister of such a Church; he is indefinitely made a Pastor
for the Church.

Fourthly, This Assertion, That a Minister can perform no Pastoral act out of
his own Congregation, as it is contrary to the universal Church, to the
practice of our Brethren themselves, to the holy Scriptures; so also it is
contrary to sound reason. For hence it will follow,

1. That when a Minister preaches in his own Congregation to Members of
another Congregation, he does not preach to them, nor they hear him preach as a
Minister, but as a gifted Brother. And that at the same time he preaches as a
Minister by virtue of his Office to those of his own Congregation, and to
others of another Congregation then present, only as a gifted Brother ex
officio charitatis generali, out of the general office of charity, which to us
is very irrational.

2. Hence it will follow, That when a Minister preaches out of his own
Congregation, he preaches only as a private Christian, and not as an
Ambassador of Christ, and when he acts in a Synod, his actings are the actings
of a private Christian, and when he preaches a Lecture out of his own
Congregation (though it be in a constant way) yet he preaches only as a gifted
Brother. Now what a wide door this will open to private men to preach publicly
and constantly in our Congregations, we leave it to any indifferent man to
judge.

3. Hence it will follow, That when a Minister baptizeth a child, he baptizeth
him only into his own Congregation. For if he be not an Officer of the
Catholick-Church, he cannot baptize into the Catholick-Church, which is
directly contrary to 1 Cor. 12.13.

4. Hence it will follow, That a Christian who by reason of the unfixednesse of
his civil habitation, is not admitted into a particular Congregation, has no
way left him to have his children baptized, but they must all be left without
the Church in Satan's visible Kingdom, because they are no particular Members,
and (according to our Brethrens opinion) there is no extension of the
Ministerial office beyond the particular Congregation.

5. We add, That according to this Assertion, there is no way left us by
Christ for the baptizing of Heathens, when it shall please God to convert them
to the Christian faith. We will suppose an hundred Heathens converted. We
demand, by whom shall these be baptized? Not by a private Christian. This our
Brethren abhor as well as we. To baptize is an act o^ Office, and can be done
only by Officers. Not by a Minister: For a Minister (say they) cannot perform
any Pastoral act (such as this is) out of his own Congregation. Neither can
these hundred converts choose a Minister, and thereby give him power to baptize
them; for they must first be a Church before they have power to choose
Officers, and a Church they cannot be till baptized. Neither can they join as
Members to any other Church, and thereby be made capable of Baptism by that
Minister into whose Church they are admitted. For in the way of Christ a man
must first be baptized before he be capable of being outwardly and solemnly
admitted as a Member of a particular Church. The three thousand were not first
added to the Church, and then baptized, but first baptized, and thereby added
to the Church. Act. 2.41.
We cannot conceive how such Heathen converts should regularly be baptized,
unless it be granted, that every Minister is a Minister of the
Church-Catholick, and that every Minister has an habitual, indefinite power to
act as a Minister in any place of the world where he shall be lawfully called:
That the desire of these hundred converts to be baptized is a sufficient call
to draw forth this habitual power into act, and that he may (being thus
desired) according to the rules of the Gospel regularly and warrantably baptize
them.

6. Hence it will follow, That a Minister preaching out of his own
Congregation, cannot lawfully and warrantably pronounce the blessing after his
Sermon (which yet is practiced by our Brethren.) For to bless the people from
God is an act of Office, and to be done only by an Officer, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25,
26. compared with Revel. 14.5. where the same blessings and persons from whom
they come are expressly mentioned) And so also Isa. 66.21. where under the name
of Priests and Levites to be continued under the Gospel, are meant Evangelical
Pastors, who therefore are by Office to bless the people, and they only,
Deuteronomy. 10.8. 2 Cor. 13.14. Ephesians. 1.2.

7. Hence it will also follow, That when a Minister of a particular
Congregation is sick, or necessitated to be a long while absent upon just
occasion, that all this while (though it should be for many years) the
Congregation must be without the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, without having
their children baptized, and without any Preacher that shall preach amongst
them, as a Minister of Christ, but only in the capacity of a private Christian.

Neither can it be answered by our Brethren (as some of them do) that a
Neighbor Minister (in such cases) may come in at the desire of the
Congregation, and administer the Sacraments amongst them by virtue of Communion
of Churches, unless they will also hold Communion of Offices, which they do
not. For these acts being acts of Office, cannot be done, unless there be an
habitual, indefinite power of the Ministerial Office, which by the desire of
the Congregation is drawn out into act.

There are diverse other absurdities that flow from this Assertion, That a
Minister cannot act as a Minister out of his own Congregation, brought by Mr
Hudson, to whom we refer the Reader. M. Hudsons Vindication, p. 148, 149, 150.

Page 144. M. Balls Trial of the Churchway, p. 80.


Only we shall cra^e leave to cite a passage out of Mr Ball, alleged by the
forenamed Author. That to suppose a Minister to be a Minister to his own
Congregation only, and to none other Society whatsoever, or to what respect
soever, is contrary to the judgment and practice of the Universal Church, and
tends to destroy the Unity of the Church, and that Communion which the Church
of God may and ought to have one with another. For if he be not a Minister in
other Churches, then are not the Churches of God one, nor the flock which they
feed one, nor the Ministry one, nor the Communion one which they had each with
others. Again, page 90. he says, If a Minister may pray, preach, and bless
another Congregation in the name of the Lord, and receive the Sacrament with
them, we doubt not but being thereunto requested by consent of the Pastor and
Congregation, he may lawfully dispense the Seals among them, as need and
occasion require. That disti^ction of preaching by Office, and exercising his
gifts only, when it is done by a Minister, and desired of none but Ministers,
and that in solemn, set, constant Church Assemblies, we cannot find warranted
in the Word of Truth, and therefore we dare not receive it.

Before we part with this Argument we must necessarily answer two Objections.

Obj. If a Minister be a Minister of the Church Universal Visible, and can act
as a Minister out of his particular Congregation, wherein does he differ from
an Apostle? Was it not the peculiar privilege of the Apostles, Evangelists,
etc. to have their Commission extended to all Churches? This Objection is made
by Mr Hooker. Survey of Discipline, part 2, c. 2. p. 61.


Answ. Though we believe that every Minister is a Minister of the Universal
Church, yet we are far from thinking, that he is actually an Universal
Minister. The Apostles had the actual care of the Church Universal committed
unto them, and wheresoever they came had actual power to perform all
Ministerial Offices without the consent or call of particular Churches. And
besides they were not fixed to any particular charge, but were Ministers alike
of all the Churches of Christ. But it is far otherwise with ordinary Ministers:
They are fixed to their particular Congregations, where they are bound by
divine right to reside, and to be diligent in preaching to them in season and
out of season. All that we say concerning their being Ministers of the Church
universal, is, That they have power by their Ordination in actu primo (as M.
Hudson says) to administer the Ordinances of Christ in all the Churches of the
Saints, yet not in actu secundo, without a special Call, which is far
differing from the Apostolical power.

Object. If a Minister may act as a Minister out of his own Congregation, why
do you your selves ordain none but such as have a title to some particular
charge?

Answ. It is true, We say in our Government, That it is agreeable to the Word
of God, and very convenient, That they that are to be ordained be designed to
some particular Church or Ministerial employment, not hereby limiting their
Office, but the ordinary exercise of their Office. We distinguish between a
Minister of Christ and a Minister of Christ in such a place, between the Office
it self and the ordinary ^xercise of it to such or such a people; And yet
notwithstanding we ordain none without a Title, thereby to prevent,

1. A vagrant and ambulatory Ministry; For we conceive it far more edifying for
the people of God to live under a fixed Ministry.

2. A lazy and idle Ministry; For when men shall have an office, and no place
actually to exercise it, this might in a little space fill the Church with
unpreaching Ministers.

3. A begging and so a contemptible Ministry; For when Ministers want places
they are oftentimes wholly destitute of means, and thereby come to great
poverty, even to the very contempt of the office it self.

So much for the sixth Argument.

Arg. 7. If the whole essence of the Ministerial Call consists in Election
without Ordination, then it will necessarily follow, that when a Minister
leaves, or is put from that particular charge to which he is called, that then
he cease to be a Minister, and becomes a private person, and that when he is
elected to another place, he needs a new Ordination, and so toties quoties, as
often as he is elected so often he is to be ordained, which to us seems a very
great absurdity.

That this consequence does necessarily follow, is confessed by the Reverend
Ministers of New England in their Platform of Church Discipline, where they
say, He that is clearly loosed from his Office-relation unto that Church
whereof he was a Minister, cannot be looked upon as an Officer, nor perform any
act of Office in any other Church, unless he be again orderly called unto
Office, which when it shall be, we know nothing to hinder, but Imposicion of
hands also in his Ordination ought to be used toward him again; For so Paul
the Apostle received Imposition of hands twice at least, from Ananias Act.
9.17. and Act. 13.3, 4.

But this seems to us to be a very great absurdity, and contrary to sound
doctrine, which we prove,

1. Because every Minister has a double relation, one to the Church-Catholique
indefinitely, another to that particular Congregation over which he is set. And
when he removes from his particular Congregation, he cease indeed to be a
Minister of that place, but not from being a Minister of the Gospel; And when
called to another he needs no new Ordination, no more (as M. Hudson well says)
then a Physician or Lawyer need a new License or Call to the Bar, Hudson
Vindication. p. 139.
though they remove to other places, and have other Patients and Clients. For
Ordination is to the essence of the Ministerial Office, and not only in
reference to a particular place or charge. The Reverend Assembly of Divines in
their Advice to the Parliament concerning Church Government, say, That there is
one general Church visible held forth in the New Testament, and that the
Ministry was given by Jesus Christ to the general Church-visible, for the
gathering and perfecting of it in this life, until his second coming; which
they prove from 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.4, 5. compared with ver. 10, 11, 12, 13,
15, 16. of the same Chapter. Now if Ministers be seated by Christ in the
Church-Catholique as well as in their particular Churches, then it follows,
That they have a relation as Ministers to the Church-Catholique, and though
their relation to their particular Church cease, yet their Ministerial
relation cease not, because they were Officers of the Church-Catholique, and
there does still remain in them a power in actu primo to dispense all the
Ordinances of Christ, though their Call ad actum secundum, sive exercitum pro
hic and nunc (as M. Hudson phraseth it) cease. Even as every private
Christian has also a double relation, one to the Church general, another to
the particular place whereof he is a member: And when he removes from his
Congregation, he does not cease to be a member of the visible Church (for then
his Baptism should cease, for every baptized person is a member of the Church)
but only of that particular Church. And when he joins with any other
Congregation he needs not to be baptized again, but is received by virtue of
his former Baptism; So it is with a Minister of the Gospel: When he leaves his
particular Congregation, he continues still to be a Minister, though not their
Minister, and needs no more to be ordained anew, then a private Christian to be
baptized anew; because neither Ordination nor Baptism do stand in relation to
the particular Congregation, but to the Church-Catholique.

Secondly, If a Minister when he removes or is removed from his particular
Congregation cease to be a Minister, then it will follow,

1. That if the Church that called him prove heretical, and wickedly separate
from him, that then the sin of the people should nullify the Office of the
Minister; Or.

2. If the Church refuse to give him competent maintenance, and starve him out
from them, or if the major part unjustly combine together to vote him out (for
such power our brethren give to particular Churches) that then the
covetousness and injustice of the people should make void the Function of
their Minister. Nay,

3. By this doctrine there will be a door opened for the people of a City or
Nation to un-minister all their Ministers, which things are very great
absurdities, and contrary to sound doctrine.

Thirdly, Because there is no Scripture to warrant the iteration of Ordination
in case of removal. The Apostles went about Ordaining Elders in every Church;
And Titus was left in Crete to Ordain Elders, etc. But there is no mention made
of any command for reiterated Ordination, neither indeed can it be; For
Ordination being a setting a man apart to the Office of the Ministry (as we
shall hereafter prove) and not only to the exercise of it in such a place,
though the local exercise should cease yet his Office still remains, and
therefore needs not be reiterated; Austin contra Parmenianum lib. 2. c. 13. De
bono conjugali. Contra Iovinian. c. 24.
To this truth we have the consent of the Universal Church, who do not only
not allow but condemn a second Ordination; Neither do we know any of the
Reformed Churches that teach or practice after this manner, but many that teach
and practice the contrary.

Object. What then will you answer to the example of Paul who had hands twice
laid upon him, once by Ananias, Act. 9. and afterward at Antioch, Act, 13?

Answ. 1. It will not easily be proved, Tha^ the Imposition of hands by Ananias
upon Paul was for the consecration of him to the Office of an Apostle, and not
rather for the recovering of his sight, and for that only: The Text seems to
hold out the last; Sure we are that Paul was baptized after this Imposition of
hands; and it is not probable that he was outwardly and visibly ordained to his
Apostolical Office before his Baptism.

As for Act. 13. M. Hooker in his Survey par. 2. page 83. says expressly, That
here is no Ordination to Office at all, for the Apostles had their Office
before, and if so, then it makes nothing for our New England Brethren to prove
an iterated Ordination unto the same Office. Of the like mind with M. Hooker
is Learned Chamier, who says, That before this Ordination Paul and Barnabas
had preached and exercised the Offi^e of their Apostleship; And therefore we
do not think (says he) that this Imposition of hands was an Ordination
properly unto any New Ecclesiastical Function, but only a confirmation of
their sending to the Gentiles, to whom they were not yet professedly sent: For
in that excursion of theirs unto Antioch there is no mention made of the
Gentiles, and that was a kind of Prologue to that great work which now they
were to put in full execution. The Text it self seems to give countenance to
this Interpretation, because it says, Separate me Paul and Barnabas for the
work, etc. not for the office but for the work whereunto I have called them;
Called they were before, and designed by God to be Preachers to the Gentiles,
and now they were publicly inaugurated to that great and eminent service.
Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius (as they are cited by Chamier) say,
That this Imposition of hands was unto the Office of an Apostle: Thus Deodate,
They laid their hands on them, that is, for a sign of Consecration unto the
Office of an Apostle. But how can this be, when the Apostle Paul himself tells
us, that he was an Apostle, not of men, neither by men, but by Jesus Christ
immediately? and also when he was an Apostle (as Calvin says) long before this
time? And therefore we rather think, that this separation was not unto the
Apostolical Office, but unto that great and (as Calvin calls it) now unusual
work of preaching unto the Gentiles.

But howsoever, whether this Imposition of hands were unto the Apostolical
Office, or only unto a peculiar work, it makes nothing for the proof of that
for which it is brought, to wit, That an Officer loosed from his
Office-relation, may be ordained again unto the same Office: For Paul was never
loosed from his Office after he was once called unto it; If the Imposition of
hands by Ananias were unto the Office of an Apostle, as we believe it was not,
yet if it were, we then demand, Either this Ordination was afterward null and
void, or remained firm and valid? If it always remained firm, what need a new
Ordination? If null and void, we desire a proof of it, which we are sure they
cannot produce, and till that be done, this instance makes nothing for the
proof of their assertion.

Besides all this, we add, That this separation and imposition of hands was by
the immediate appointment of the holy Ghost; The holy Ghost said, Separate me,
etc. and ver. 4. They were sent forth by the holy Ghost; This was an
extraordinary thing, and therefore not sufficient to ground an ordinary
practice upon.

Thirdly and lastly, If the whole essence of the Ministerial Call consists in
popular Election, then will two other great absurdities follow.

1. That Ordination can in no case precede such Election. 2. That there must be
Churches before there be Ministers.
First, that Ordination can in no wise precede Election. Now though ordinarily
no man is ordained in the Presbyterian way without a title to some ch^rge, yet
we conceive many cases may be put, in which Ordination may lawfully go before
Election: We shall only give two Instances.

1. When an ordained Minister removes upon warrantable grounds from one charge
to another, the people to whom he removes ^hoose him not as o^e that is to be
made a Minister, but as one already made, and now to be made their Minister,
for his removing from his former place does not nullify his Ministerial
office, as we have sufficiently proved.

2. When there is a necessity of sending men (as there is now in New England
for the conversion of Heathen people) we th^^k it very agreeable unto
Scriptur^-rules, that these men should be first ordained before they be elected
by the Heathen to whom they are sent. And the reason is because that the
conversion of souls is the proper work of the Ministry: When Christ went up
into heaven he left not only Apostles, Prophets, and Evang^lists, but also
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. And the office
of o^dinary Ministers is to be Ambassadors for Christ, and in Christ's Name or
in Christ's stead to beseech people to be reconciled unto God, not only to build
them up in grace when reconciled, but to be instrumental to reconcile them, to
open their eyes and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, etc. We find no place in Scripture to warrant a Church to send
out gifted brethren without Ordination for the work of conversion; What may be
done in extraordinary cases where Ordination cannot be had we dispute not; but
where it may be had, there we conceive it most agreeable to the Word, that men
should be first Ordained before sent: Hereby they shall have a divine stamp
upon them, they shall go with more authority, and shall have power to baptize
those whom they do convert, which otherwise they cannot lawfully do: It is an
unscriptural opinion, and of pernicious consequence that some amongst us have
taken up, That a Minister should preach only for the building up of Saints, and
not for the conversion of sinners, That when a Minister converts any out of his
own Congregation, he does it not as a Minister but as a gifted brother; That
the great work of conversion which is the chief work of a Minister, does
properly belong to gifted Brethren. All this arises from that groundless
conceit, That a Minister is no Minister out of his own Congregation, which we
have abundantly disproved.

Secondly, It will also follow, That there must be Churches before there be
Ministers, which is against Scripture and sound reason: We do not deny but that
there must be a Church before their Minister, but not before a Minister: The
Church-Entitative is before the Church Ministerial, but yet a Minister must
needs be before a Church: For every Church must consist of persons baptized
(Unbaptized persons cannot make a Church:) And therefore there must be a
Minister to baptize them before they can be made capable to enter into
Church Fellowship. Our Savior Christ chose his Apostles for the gathering of
Churches; There were first Apostles before Churches, and afterward^ the
Apostles ordained Elders in these gathered Churches. And one great work of
these Elders was to convert the neighboring Heathen, and when converted to
baptize them, and gather them into Churches; And therefore Elders as well as
Apostles were before Churches: And whosoever with us holds (as our Brethren do)
that none but a Minister in Office can baptize, must needs hold that there must
be ordinary Ministers before Churches, and that therefore the whole essence of
the Ministerial Call, does not consist in the Election of the Church. So much
for the proof of the second Proposition.

It will be expected that we should answer to the Arguments that are brought by
these Reverend men that hold the contrary to this Proposition: M. Hook^^ Survey
of Church Discipline. par. 2. cap. 2. page 67, 68.
As for Texts of Scripture there are none brought nor (as we said before) can
be brought. The great argument used by D. Ames and improved by M. Hooker is
this.

Arg. 1. One Relate gives being and the essential constituting causes to the
other,

But Pastor and People, Shepherd and Flock are relates. Ergo.

He adds further, That they are simul natura, and that the one cannot be
without the other; There cannot be a Pastor before there be a people which
choose him, etc.

Answ. We shall answer to this Argument according to the grounds formerly laid;
That every Minister has a double relation, one to the particular Church of
which he is a Minister, the other to the Church universal: As to his relation
to his particular Church, it is very true, That Pastor and People are relates
and simul natura; He cannot be their Pastor but by their submission to his
Ministry, and when he leaves them he cease to be their Minister. But now
besides this particular relation he has a relation also to the Church
universal, and by his Ordination is invested (as we have said) with habitual
power to act as a Minister beyond his particular Church when he is lawfully
called thereunto; and as long as this correlative (the Church universal)
lasts, so long his ministerial office lasts, though his particular
relation should cease. In a word, The people give being to a Minister as to be
their Minister but not as to be a Minister.

Page 68.
Another Argument brought by M. Hooker is, Arg. 2. It is lawful for a people to
reject a Pastor upon just cause (if he prove pertinaciously scandalous in his
life, or heretical in his doctrine) and put him out of his Office, Ergo, It is
in their power also to call him outwardly, and put him into his Office.

The consequence is proved from the staple rule, Ejusdem est instituere, and
destituere, He that has power to invest has power to divest.

The Antecedent is as certain by warrant from the Word, Mat. 7.15. Mat. 7.15.
Beware of Wolves, Phil. 3.2. Beware of false Prophets.



Answ. If by putting him out of his office be meant only a putting him from
being their Officer, then the argument must be thus framed; They that have
power to put out a Minister from being their Minister, have power to choose him
to be their Minister; and this we deny not.

But if by putting him out of office be meant a putting him absolutely from
being an Officer, we deny, that the people in this sense have power destituere,
to put him out of office, or instituere, to put him into office: And we retort
the Argument.

They that have not power instituere have not power destituere; They that have
not power to put a Minister into office, have not power to put him out of
office: But people (not being Officers) have not power to make an Officer, as
has been showed; Ergo.

But it seems that Mr Hooker by the peoples rejecting their Pastor, and putting
him out of office, does mean their excommunicating of him, for he says
afterward, That this rejection cuts him off from being a member in that
Congregation where he was, etc.

M. Firmin Separation examined. page 63.
For answer to this we refer the Reader to what is said by a Minister, that is
come out of New England, who says, That if Reverend Mr Hooker had been alive,
and had seen what work Church Members make here in England in very many
Churches, it would have caused him to bethink himself again of the Peoples
power. Something we hear of (says he) is done in a Church not far from the
place where he lived, it cannot be kept close, the light of that fire shines
into England. Afterward he brings Mr Cotton to confute Mr Hooker. Mr Cotton
says, That Excommunication is one of the highest acts of rule in the Church,
Key ^, page 16.
and therefore cannot be performed but by some Rulers. Then he cites Mr
Buroughs. If the Church be without Officers, they cannot do that which belongs
to Officers to do, they have no Sacraments amongst them, neither can they have
any spiritual Jurisdiction exercised amongst them, only brotherly admonition,
and withdrawing from such as walk disorderly, for their own preservation.

Much more to this purpose is brought by this Author, to whom we refer the
Reader.

As for those two Texts of Scripture, Matthew. 7.15. Phil. 3.2. by which Mr
Hooker proves his Antecedent, they do not at all come up to the point in hand.
Though people are to beware of wolves and of false prophets, it does not
therefore follow that a people may excommunicate their Minister. Indeed this
will follow, That people are to be careful to preserve themselves from
heretical Ministers, and to withdraw from them, and this withdrawing if it be
upon just grounds, makes him cease to be their Minister, but not from being a
Minister, as we have often said.

We will not trouble the Reader with answering any more Arguments, because they
seem to us to have no weight in them, these two already answered being the
chief that are brought.

Only we shall speak a little to a similitude that is often brought by our
Brethren of the contrary judgment. For it is ordinarily said* That there is the
same relation between a Minister and his particularCongregation, as is between
a man and his wife. And as it is the mutual choice one of another that makes
them man and wife: So it is the peoples choice, and the Ministers accepting
that choice that makes them to be Pastor and flock. Dr Ames says, That
Ordinatio Episcopalis sine titulo est aque ridicula, Ames. Medull. Theol. l. 1.
c. 39.
ac si quis maritus fing^ritur esse absque uxore. And indeed says Mr Hooker,
Survey of Discipline. p. 68. par. 2.

Bellarm. enervatus, Tom. 2. l. 3. cap. 2. Page 88, 89.


It is ridiculous to conceit the contrary.

In another place the same Doctor says, Oves rationales possunt eligere sibi
pastorem, sicut sponsa eligit sibi sponsum, non per jurisdictionem aut
gubernationem, sed potius per subjectionem.

But we answer,

That Symbolical Theology is not argumentative, Similia ad pompam non ad
pugnam, Similitudes do beautify not fortify. There is nothing almost more
dangerous in Divinity, then to overstretch similitudes, of which fault we
believe our Brethren are much guilty. As for the Similitude it self, we
conceive it will not hold. For

1. If Minister and people be as man and wife, then it will follow that they
may not separate till death, unless it be in case of adultery. The Wife is as
much bound to the Husband as the Husband to his Wife. But there are few people
(if any) that think themselves obliged to abide with their Ministers till
death. (It is ordinary even with men professing godliness to forsake their
Minister, and that oftentimes upon worldly interest.) And there are few
Ministers (if any) that think that they may in no case leave their people.
There are three cases in which we conceive all agree, that a Minister may
remove from his people; if he cannot have his health where he is, if he be
denied competent maintenance, and if the glory of God may be in an eminent
manner advanced. But we hope that it will not be said that a Husband may
separate from his Wife in these cases.

2. This Similitude sounds ill. For it makes every Minister to be as a Husband
to his Church, and so by consequence the Head of his Church, which complies too
much with the Antichrist of Rome, who calls himself the Husband and Head of the
Church. The Church has no Husband but Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.

3. This Similitude makes Christ to have as many Wives as there are particular
Churches. Our Brethren hold, That every particular Congregation is the Body of
Christ, and the Spouse of Christ, which if it were true Christ should have as
many Bodies and Spouses as there are particular Churches, which (we conceive)
cannot be right. For it is as absurd to say, That one Head has many Bodies,
and one Husband many Wives, as to say, That one Body has many Heads, and one
Wife many Husbands.

But now we say, That the whole Church of Christ throughout the world is but
one. That Christ properly has but one Body, and one Wife. And that particular
Churches are but members of this one Body, and limbs and members of this one
Spouse, even as every particular Saint also is. And that every Minister has a
relation to this Church-Catholick as a member thereof, and seated therein, and
as one that by his Ordination has power to act as a Minister wheresoever he is
(if called) for the good of the whole. And that he is placed in a particular
Church for the actual and constant exercise of his Ministry, as in a part of
Christ's Body, or a limb or member of his Spouse. And that they by their choice
make him their Minister, their Pastor, their Shepherd; but not a Minister, a
Pastor, a Shepherd.

So much in answer to the Arguments against the second Proposition, and also
concerning Election of Ministers.

CHAP. X. Concerning Ordination of Ministers, wherein the first Assertion about
Ordination is proved: Namely, That Ordination of Ministers, is an Ordinance of
Christ.
THat the method which we propounded in the beginning may not be forgotten, we
crave leave to put the Reader in mind of what we have already said, That the
Call of men to the Ministry, is either immediate or mediate. That the mediate
Call is by Election and Ordination. And having finished what we thought fit to
say about Election, we are now to proceed to speak about Ordination, concerning
which we shall offer this general Proposition.

That the work of Ordination, that is to say, An outward solemn constituting
and setting apart of persons to the Office of the Ministry, by prayer, fasting
and imposition of hands of the Presbytery, is an Ordinance of Christ.

For the more methodical proving of this general Proposition, we shall
undertake to make good these four Assertions.

1. That Ordination of Ministers is an Ordinance of Christ. 2. That the Essence
of the Ministerial Call consists in Ordination. 3. That Ordination ought to
be with prayer, fasting and imposition of hands. 4. That Ordination ought to be
by the Presbytery.
That Ordination of Ministers is an Ordinance of Christ.

Assert. 1.
For the understanding of this Assertion we must distinguish between the
Substance, Essence, and Formal Act of Ordination, and the Rite used in
Ordination. The Essential Act of Ordination, is the constituting or appointing
of a man to be a Minister, or the sending of him with Power and Authority to
preach the Gospel. The Rite is Imposition of hands. In this Assertion we are
not at all to speak of Imposition of hands, but only of Ordination, as it
relates to the setting of a man apart to the Office of the Ministry.

Now that this is an Ordinance of Christ, we shall not need to spend much time
in proving it.

1. Because we have already made this out in our third Proposition, where we
asserted, Chap. 3.
That no man ought to take upon him the Office of a Minister, but he that is
lawfully called and ordained thereunto.

2. Because the proving of the other three will prove this also.

3. Because we have not so many enemies to contest withal in this, as in the
other three Propositions. For though there be many that hold Ordination to be
only an adjunct of the Ministerial Call, and not an Essential ingredient,
which is against the second Proposition. And many that deny Imposition of hands
against the third. And many that say, that a Church without Officers may ordain
against the fourth Proposition. And though there be very many that hold, That
an unordained man may preach as a gifted Brother, yet there are but few (in
comparison) who say, That a man may enter into the Office of the Ministry, and
preach authoritatively as a Pastor, without Ordination.

Our Brethren in New England, in their Platform of Church Government say,
Chap. 9.
That Church Officers are not only to be chosen by the Church, but also to be
ordained by Imposition of hands and prayer, etc. And in their Answer to the
thirty two Questions, they say expressly, That Ordination is necessary by Divine
Institution.

The very Socinians themselves, Socin. Tract. de Eccles.
though great enemies to the Ministerial Calling (and no wonder, when such
great enemies to Christ himself) though they deny the necessity of Ordination,
Nicolaides de Ecclesia and missione Ministerii.
yet they acknowledge that for order and decency it is fit to retain it in the
Church. For our parts we think the Scripture to be so clear for the proof of
this Assertion, that we wonder there should be any found to stand up in
opposition against it. For

Levit. 8. Number. 8.
First, In the Old Testament not only the High Priest, but all the other
Priests and Levites were by divine appointment inaugurated to their Ministerial
Offices, and when any men unconsecrated intruded themselves into the Priestly
or Levitical Office they were remarkably punished by God himself* Witness
Corah and his company, of whom we have formerly made mention.

Now surely this was written for our instruction upon whom the ends of the
world are come, to teach us, that it is the will of Christ that no man should
enter into the Ministerial Office unordained or unconsecrate. To hint this, the
Prophet Isaiah tells us, That in the times of the New Testament the Lord would
take from among Christians some to be Priests, Esa. 66.21.
and some to be Levites, where the New Testament Ministers are clothed with
Old Testament titles, and are called Priests and Levites, not in reference to
any real unbloudy and propitiatory Sacrifice by them to be offered, as the
Papists falsely imagine, but as we conceive to signify unto us, 1. That there
should be an Office of the Ministry distinct from all other Offices under the
New Testament as well as under the Old (and therefore it is said, that God
would take of them for Priests not take all them for Priests.) And, 2. That
these Ministers were to be consecrated to their respective offices, as the
Priests and Levites were.

Secondly, In the New Testament we read,

1. That in the very choice of Deacons, which was but an inferior Office and
serving only for the distribution of the temporal estates of people, the
Apostle requires, that they should not only be elected by the people, but also
ordained to this office. Much more ought this to be done in the choice of
persons who are called to the work of preaching, and dispensing Sacramental
mysteries, a service of all others of greatest weight and worth.

2. That even the very Apostle Paul, though chosen immediately by Christ unto
the great Office of preaching unto the Gentiles, and that in a miraculous way,
Act. 13.1.2, 3, 4.
yet notwithstanding it was the pleasure of the holy Ghost, that he must be
separated and set apart by men for this great work. And if this was thought
necessary for an extraordinary Officer: If Paul that was separated from his
mothers womb to preach Christ to the Heathen, Gal. 1, 15, 16. Act. 9.15* Gal.
1.1.
and was separated by an immediate voice from Heaven to bear Christ's Name
before the Gentiles, must also have an outward solemn separation by the
Prophets at Antioch unto this work, how much more is this necessary in ordinary
Officers?

3. That Paul and Barnabas who were themselves separated to the work of the
Ministry, Act. 13.1. went about, Act. 14.23. ordaining Elders in every Church.
The Greek word (...) signifies (as we have showed) not a choosing by the
suffrages of the people, but a special designing and appointing of Ministers by
the Apostles Paul and Barnabas.

4. That Titus was left at Crete to ordain Elders in every Church, which surely
had been very vain and superfluous if Ordination be not an Institution of
Christ, and necessary in his Church.

5. That Timothy was ordained not only by the laying on of Paul's hands, 1 Timothy
1.6. 1 Timothy 4.14.
but also by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. By laying on of
hands, as by a Synecdoche is meant the whole work of Ordination, and hence we
see that it is the will of the holy Ghost that not only Paul an Apostle, as
formerly, but Timothy an Evangelist must be set apart unto his Office by
Ordination.

6. That Timothy is commanded to lay hands suddenly on no man, neither to be
partakers of other men's sin, 1 Timothy 5.22*
but to keep himself pure. This negative command implies an affirmative, that
it was his Office to lay on hands, that is, to ordain Elders, but his care must
be not to do it rashly and unadvisedly upon men insufficient, lest he should
thereby be made partakers of other men's sins. This Text does necessarily imply
a precept for Ordination.

2 Timothy 2.2.
7. That Timothy is commanded to commit those things which he had heard from
Paul among many witnesses, to faithful men who shall be able to teach others
also. Where we have, 1. A Separation of some men to be teachers in Christ's
Church. 2. The Qualification of these teachers, they must be faithful men, and
such as are able to teach others. 3. We have an injunction laid upon Timothy
that he should commit what he had heard of Paul unto these faithful men. Now
this committing was not only to be by way of instruction, but also by way of
Ordination. Paul's charge committed to Timothy was not so much to make men fit
to teach others, as by Ordination to set men apart for the teaching of others,
that there might be a perpetual Succession of teachers. For the further making
out of this truth, let the Reader consider what is said by Mr Gillespy in his
Miscellany Questions, and what we have before said, page 84.

Heb. 6.1, 2.
8. That laying on of hands is reckoned not only as an institution of Christ,
but as one of the principles of the Doctrines of Christ: but of this Text we
shall speak more in the third Assertion.

By all these places it is evident, That it is the will of Christ that those
that enter into the Ministerial Calling should be consecrated, set apart and
ordained thereunto.

Most of the Objections brought against this Assertion, have been answered at
large in the handling of the third Proposition.

If any shall further object and say,

Obj. 1. That these are but examples, and examples do not amount up to a Rule.

Answ. 1. That Apostolical examples in things necessary for the good of the
Church, and which have a perpetual reason and equity in them, have the force of
a Rule. Of this nature is Ordination.

2. If we should not follow the examples of the Apostles in those things in
which they acted as ordinary Elders, we should be left at uncertainties, and
every man might do what seems good in his own eyes, which would tend to
confusion, and the dissolution of the Church.

3. The Apostles taught the Churches to do nothing but what they had a
commandment from Christ to teach them, Matthew. 28.20. 1 Cor. 11.28. and in all
their Disciplinary Institutions, which were not merely occasional, and had only
a temporary reason of their Institution (of which kind Ordination we are sure
is not) are to be imitated as though they were the immediate Institution^ of
Christ.

4. For Ordination of Ministers we have not only Apostolical example, but
Apostolical pre^^pt, as we have already proved out of 1 Timothy 5.22.

Object. 2. If it be further objected. That the Ordination mentioned in the
Text forenamed, was only for those times, and not to continue to the end of
the world.

Answ. 1. This is not true. Romans 10.
For if the Ministry he to continue to the end of the world, then the way of
entering into the Ministry enjoined by the Apostles, is also to continue. And
there can no reason be brought why the one should be abolished, and not the
other.

2. Timothy is enjoined to keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable,
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Timothy 6.14.
Beza translates (...) haec mandat^, Keep these commandments, that is, (says
he) all the commandments commanded him in the whole Epistle. Thus Deodate, That
thou keep this commandment, that is, Not only that which is contained, verse.
11. and 12. but generally all other commandments which are contained in this
Epistle. Now this commandment of laying hands suddenly on no man, is one of
those commandments which he was to keep without spot until the appearing of
our Lord Jesus Christ; which evidently proves That Ordination is an Ordinance
of Christ, and is to last to the end of the world.

M. Lyford in his Apology for the Ministry.
It is worth observing which is also hinted by a Reverend Minister, that there
are 4. descents of men sent and ordained.

1. Christ himself was sent and had his Commission from his Father, Ioh. 20.22,
23. Jesus Christ did not glorify himself to be made an High Priest, but was
anointed thereunto by God his Father, Act. 10.38.

2. Christ Jesus as he was sent of his Father, so he sent forth his Apostles,
Ioh. 20.23. It is said Mat. 10.1. That Christ called unto him his twelve
Apostles, and sent them forth, and gave them their commission: Nay, it is said
Mar. 3.14. And he ordained twelve; The Greek is, (...), And he made twelve that
they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach; This
making was an authoritative appointing them to their Office. The Apostles would
not have dared to have preached the Gospel, had they not been commissionated by
Christ thereunto.

3. The Apostles went about ordaining Elders in every Church; Paul ordained
Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6.

4. Timothy and Titus did ordain others as they themselves had been ordained,
and that by the Apostles own appointment, Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.22. Nay, we read
of a Presbytery ordaining, 1 Timothy 4.14. And as Timothy was entrusted with the
Word of Christ, so he is commanded to commit the same trust to faithful men
able to teach others also, that so there may be a succession of Teachers: Thus
we have four descents recorded in Scripture.

1. God anoints Jesus Christ and ordains him to his Ministerial office. 2.
Christ ordains his Apostles. 3. The Apostles ordain extraordinary and ordinary
Officers. 4. And these ordain others. And this commandment is given to be
observed till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And thus (as the Author forementioned says) The Apostles admitted men in
their own practice into the Ministry, and thus they appointed for succeeding
times, and can any think that Ordination ended with that age? Is there not the
same cause, necessity, use and reason for it in after ages as in the first
times of the Church, when there were as yet extraordinary gifts stirring in the
Church which are now ceased, and therefore the more need of a standing
Ministry? Sure we are of two things.

1. That there are more, and more clear Texts for Ordination then for popular
Election; Our Brethren in New England and many in Old England are very much for
Election by the people; And so are we if it be rightly ordered and managed; But
we desire them to show us as clear Scriptures for Election, as we have done for
Ordination.

2. That there is as much (if not more) in Scripture for the Justification of
Ordination as for any other part of Church Government, as for the divine right
of Synods, of Excommunication, of Ruling Elders, or any other part of
Discipline, in which we agree together. How then it should come to pass that
many in our days should cry up the divine right of Election by the people, of
Excommunication, and other parts of Church Government, and cry down the divine
right of Ordination, we know not: Indeed we confess, That the Papists do too
much extol it, calling it a Sacrament, and not only a Sacrament in a general
sense, as Calvin seems to do, but a Sacrament in a proper sense, as Baptism
and the Lords Supper are called Sacraments; And also in appropriating it to
Bishops, as distinct from Presbyters: Hence it may be it is, That some in our
age running into the other extreme (as the nature of man always is apt to do)
do too much vilify and undervalue it, and because they like it not, brand it
with the black mark (as they do other of the Ordinances of Christ) of
Antichristian Ordination. But we hope better things of our people, and beseech
them to take heed of those that call good evil and evil good, and that call the
Institutions of Christ the doctrines of Antichrist.

So much for the first Assertion.

CHAP. XI. Proving the Second Assertion about Ordination, to wit, That the
essence of the Ministerial Call does properly consist in Ordination.
THe Second Assertion is,

That the essence of the Ministerial Call does properly consist in Ordination.

The contrary to this Assertion is maintained by many Reverend Divines, who set
up Election in the room of Ordination, and make Ordination ^o be but an adjunct
unto, and a consequent of this Ministerial Call, and a confirmation of a man
into that office which he has bestowed upon him by his election. The essence
and substance of the outward calling of an ordinary Officer in the Church (say
the Ministers of New England in their Platform of Church Government) does not
consist in his Ordination, but in his voluntary and free Election by the
Church, and in his accepting of that Election. In opposition to this we have
already endeavored at large to prove, That the essence of the Ministerial
Call does not consist in popular Election. And therefore we intend to be very
brief in proving the contrary; That it does consist in Ordination: This we make
out by these ensuing arguments.

1. If Election does not give the essentials of the Ministerial Office, then
Ordination does: For the outward Call of a Minister (as it is agreed on all
sides) does consist only in his Election or Ordination.

But Election does not, etc. as we have formerly showed by diverse arguments.
Ergo. Ordination does.

2. If Ordination makes a man a Minister that was not one before, then it gives
the essence of the Ministerial Office.

But Ordination makes a man a Minister that was not one before, Ergo, etc.

That this is so appears,

1. From the Ordination of Deacons, Act. 6.3. Look ye out seven men, etc. whom
we may appoint over this business, (...) is to put a man into an Office which
he had not before. Thus it is said of Joseph, Act. 7.10. and he made him
governor over Egypt, etc. (...). etc. This act of Pharaohs did not confirm him
in that Office which he had before, but conferred upon him an Office he never
had. The like we read Deuteronomy. 1.13. Take ye wise men and understanding, and
known among your tribes, and I will make them Rulers over you. It was not the
peoples taking, but Moses his appointing that did make them Rulers. Thus Exo.
18.21. Thou shall provide able men, and place such over them to be Rulers of
thousands, etc. It was Moses his placing that did give them the formality of
Rulers. The Hebrew word in Exodus and Deuteronomy. is (...) which answers the Greek
word (...) 1 Timothy 1.12. where it is said (...), and it was the Apostles
appointing of Deacons that did make them Deacons: All that the people did was
to set seven men before the Apostles whom they by Ordination made Deacons.

2. This appears also from Tit. 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that
thou should -- ordain Elders in every City, (...), Et constituas; And ordain
o^ appoint: It is evident that there was a great want of Elders in Crete, and
Titus was left to appoint and set Elders over them: Titus was not left only to
add an adjunct (as we have formerly said) to the Ministerial Call, or to
establish and confirm those in their places that had right to them before, but
he was left (...), which is all one as in a civil sense, (...) or (...) as one
says, or (...) constituere and praeficere rectores and judices, to constitute
and make Rulers and Judges: Thus it is said, Luk 12.42. Who then is that
faithful aend wise Steward whom his Lord shall make Ruler, etc. (...). This
act of the Lord of the house is that which gives the formal being of a Ruler
unto this Steward. And it is Ordination that does (...), and is essentiale
constituens of the Ministerial office.

Argum. 3. If Ordination be the sending of a manforth with power and authority
to preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, then it is that which
gives the essence of the Ministerial Office. But Ordination is so, Ergo.

The minor is proved from Romans 10.15. And how shall they preach except they be
sent, (...). This sending it an authoritative mission to preach the Word as
Criers and Heralds (for so the word (...) signifies) and also as Ambassadors
are sent forth by their Prince with their Letters missive and credentials,
which appears by the words immediately following, As it is written, How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things! Hence it is, That some Divines do very well define
Ordination to be missio potestativa, A sending of a man forth with power and
authority to preach and administer the Sacraments. It is not an installing of a
man into an office to which he has right before, but it is a giving of him his
Commission and authority; And of this kind of sending is this Text to be
understood. That it cannot be understood of providential sending we have
formerly proved, nor of a sending by the Election of the people: For the people
cannot be said to be sent to themselves, but Ministers are said to be sent to
them. And we now further add, That it cannot be understood only of an
extraordinary mission by God, such as the Apostles had, which was to cease with
the Apostles, but it must be understood of such an authoritative sending which
was to continue to the end of the world: For the Apostle in that Climax of his
makes it as necessary and perpetual as calling upon the Name of the Lord, as
Believing and Hearing the Word: For this the Apostle affirms, That as calling
upon the Name of the Lord is perpetually necessary to salvation, so is faith to
the calling upon the Name of the Lord, and so is Hearing of the Word necessary
to Believing, so is Preaching of the Word to Hearing, and so is Ordination and
Mission necessary to the orderly Preaching of the Word. And therefore we
conclude, That by sending is meant a sending by Ordination, and that this
sending is a deputation of a man to an Ecclesiastical Function with power and
authority to perform the same, and that it is to last as long as Preaching,
Believing, and Prayer, which is to the end of the world.

Arg. 4. If Ordination be that which gives the Ministerial office, then the
essence of the Ministerial Call consists in Ordination.

But Ordination is that which gives the Ministerial office.

That this it so appears from 2 Timothy 1.6. Wherefore I put th^e in remembrance
that thou stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my
hands: And by 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee which was given
thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. By laying
on of hands is meant (as is aforesaid) the whole work of Ordination; And by
gift is meant docendi officium, Anselme, Lombard, Thomas, Cajetane, Gerson,
Bucerus.
(as most Interpreters say) the office of the Ministry, and the power and
authority conferred thereby upon him. The Greek word (...) is often taken not
only for the grace by which we are fitted for an office, but for an office unto
which men are through grace fitted. Thus it is taken Ephesians. 4.8. Romans 12.6. And
thus it is here to be taken, Paul by Ordination did not only declare Timothy
to be an Officer, and confirm him in that Office which he had before ^ollated
upon him by the choice of the people* But he together with the Presbytery gave
him the gift or office of the Ministry.

Object. The Text says, That this gift was given by prophecy, and therefore
not by the laying on of the hands either of Paul or of the Presbytery.

Answ. These words By Prophecy do signify only the moving cause, and that
encouraged Paul with the Presbytery to lay hands on Timothy, viz. It was
prophesied, That Timothy should be an excellent Minister, 1 Timothy 1.18. This
charge I give unto thee, Son Timothy, according to the Prophecies that went
before of thee: So that the meaning is, Paul by Prophecy, that is, according to
the Prophecies that went before of him, or Paul directed by the Spirit of
Prophecy conferd the gift or office of the Ministry upon Timothy.

But here we must of necessity add one caution left we be mis-understood.

When we say that Ordination gives the Ministerial office, we mean only as to
the essence of the outward Call, For we know, That it is the Prerogative Royal
of the Lord Jesus to appoint Officers and Offices in his Church. It is Christ
only that institutes the office, and that furnishes and fitteth men with
graces and abilities for the discharge of so great an employment, with willing
and ready minds to give up themselves to so holy services: It is Christ only
that sets the Laws and Rules according to which they must act. All that man
does in Ordination is in a subordinate way as an Instrument under Christ to
give the being of an outward Call, and to constitute him an Officer according
to the method prescribed by Christ in his Word. All that we say (that we may be
rightly understood) may be reduced to these three heads.

1. That it is the will of Christ who is King of his Church, that men should be
outwardly called to the Ministry as well as inwardly fitted. And that without
this Call none can warrantably do any act that belongs to an Officer, as not
having the specificall form of an Officer, and (as Mr Hooker says) Whatsoever
is done without this, Part. 2. Page 45.
is void and of none effect.

2. That this outward Call consists in Election and Ordination.

3. That Ordination is that which gives the Being of this outward Call, that
makes a man a Minister, That (in this sense) gives him his Ministerial Office.
Election does only design the person, but it is Ordination that bestows the
Office upon him.

Arg. 5. We might argue in the fifth place from the persons appointed by Christ
to ordain, and from the great solemnity used in Ordination, and from the blame
that is laid upon those that ordain unworthy persons unto the Ministerial
Office.

1. The persons that are said in Scripture to ordain, are (as we shall prove
hereafter) either Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists or Presbyters. And this is a
sufficient Argument to us to prove that it is Ordination that constitutes the
Minister, and not Election. For it is not likely, that Christ would appoint his
Apostles, and his Apostles appoint extraordinary and ordinary Elders to convey
only an adjunct of the Ministerial Call, and leave the great work of conveying
the Office-power unto the common people.

2. The solemnity used in Ordination, is Prayer, Fasting, and Imposition of
hands. We do not read the like solemnity expressed in Scripture in Election,
and therefore it is against reason to think, That Election should constitute
the Minister, and give him all his Essentials, and Ordination only give him a
ceremonial complement.

3. The blame laid upon Timothy if he should lay hands suddenly upon any
Minister, is very great. For hereby he makes himself impure, and becomes
accessory to the sins of those whom he makes Ministers. Now we may thus reason,
Where the greatest blame lies for unworthy men coming into the Ministry, surely
there must lie the greatest power of admitting men into the Ministry, else the
blame is not just. But the greatest blame is laid upon the Ministers. Ergo. If
the constituting cause of the Ministerial Call did lie in Election. The
Minis^ers may well excuse themselves, and say, We do but ordain, we do but give
an adjunct, the people did the main act, they gave the Essence, and therefore
the blame belongs to them, and not to us. See more of this in Separation
examined by Mr Firmin. page 58.

Much more might be added for the proof of this Assertion, but we shall
purposely wave what else might be said, least we should be overtedious.

CHAP. XII. Wherein the third Assertion is proved, viz. That Ordination of
Ministers ought to be by Prayer, Fasting and Imposition of hands.
THE third Assertion is, That Ordination of Ministers ought to be by prayer,
fasting, and Imposition of hands.

Here are two things to be made out,

1. That Ordination ought to be with prayer and fasting. Prayer and fasting,
though they be not necessary to the very being and essence of Ordination, yet
they are very necessary to the better being of it, as divine conduits to convey
the blessing of God upon it.

First, For Prayer. It is observable in the old Testament, that Aaron and his
sons did not enter upon their Ministry, till they had been sanctified by the
holy oil, and sprinkling of blood, and had been seven whole days before the
Lord, abiding at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, Levit. 8.33.

In the New Testament our blessed Savior, when he chose his Apostles is said
to have spent all the night before in prayer, Luke 6.12, 13. (...). And to our
remembrance we do not read that our Savior spent a whole night in prayer, but
upon this occasion, which shows, of how great consequence it is, that those
who preach the Gospel should be sent out with solemn and earnest prayer. And
this is the more observable if we compare the 9th of Matthew. 36, 37, 38. with
Luke 6.12, 13, 14. When Christ saw the misery of the people in the want of
faithful Ministers, that they were as Sheep not having a Shepherd, he directs
them to pray to the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his
harvest, and then as seems by Luke's relation, he put that in practice which
he commended to do for themselves, he spent the whole night in prayer, and then
Mat. 10.1, 2. he chose and sent out his twelve Apostles to preach the Gospel.

Secondly, For joining of Fasting with prayer, we may consider, That it was not
ordinary and common prayer, or some few and occasional Petitions that were put
up, but as in c^ses of greatest concernment, when some great evil was to be
averted, or some singular mercy to be obtained, fasting was joined with prayer.

In the Acts, where you have the records of the Primitive Churches practice, as
the best president for succeeding ages, it is recorded, that persons designed
to the work of the Ministry, were set apart and commended to God for his
assistance, support and success by fasting and prayer.

Acts 13.1, 2, 3. It is said of the Prophets and Teachers of Antioch, As they
ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas
and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And then when by a new
fast, as it may seem purposely called upon that occasion, they had sought God
on that behalf, they fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, and sent
them away to preach.

And as it was thus done to Paul and Barnabas, so when they had traveled far
in preaching the Gospel, and had found that happy success on their Ministry,
that many among the Gentiles were converted, because themselves could not make
their constant abode in anyone place (the greater service of the Church calling
them forth to other places) that there might be a foundation of a fixed
Ministry, for the building up of those that were already converted, and for the
bringing in of others yet uncalled. They ordained them Elders in every Church,
which should stay with them, and watch over them in the Lord, Act. 14.23. And
these they sent out with the like solemnity in seeking God by fasting and
prayer, and then commended them to the Lord in whom they believed.

The Reasons why Ministers should be set a part with prayer and fasting, are
weighty, and still the same.

1. The inidoneousnesse and insufficiency of any mere man (though of the
greatest abilities and indowments, whether for nature, art, or grace) for such
a work wherein we have to do withthe highest mysteries of God and heaven, and
with the most precious things on earth, the truths of God, and souls of men.

2. The discouragements which every where attend this work (when most
faithfully performed) from Satan and wicked men.

3. The success of every ones Ministry depends wholly on Gods blessing. 1.
Cor. 3.7.
For neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but God
that gives the increase. Nor does the faith of believers depend at all on the
wisdom or or power of the Minister, but on the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5. And
therefore it is necessary in the most solemn manner, that is, by prayer and
fasting to implore aid from God whenever we ordain Ministers. But this will
be granted by all sides, and therefore we will add no more about it.

The second thing we are to make out, is

That Ordination of Ministers ought to be with imposition of hands.

That we may more orderly handle this Assertion, which is so much controverted
in our unhappy days, and be rightly understood, we shall crave leave to
premise three things:

1. That Imposition of hands is not a proper Gospel-duty, never used but in the
New Testament, but it is a Rite and Ceremony borrowed from the Old Testament,
and by Christ made a Gospel-institution. Annotat. upon Acts 11.3. Totum regimen
Ecclesiarum Christi consormatum fuit ad Synagogarum exemplar.
That which Grotius says in his Annotations, That the whole Government of the
Churches of Christ, was conformed to the pattern of the Synagogues, is true in
many things, and especially in this of Imposition of hands. We find it was
used in four cases under the Old Testament, 1. In benediction and blessing,
Genesis 48.14, 20. 2. In offering of Sacrifices unto God, Lev. 1.4.3. In bearing
witness, Lev. 24.14.4. In ordaining or appointing unto an Office. Thus Moses
when he ordained Joshua to succeed him, he was commanded by God to lay his
hands upon him, and to give him a charge in the sight of the people, Number.
27.18, 23. Under the New Testament it is used, 1. In benediction, Mark 10.16.2.
In curing of bodily diseases, Luke 13.13. Mark 16.18. Acts 9.17. 3. In
conveying the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, Act. 8.17, 18. Act. 19.6. 4.
In Ordination of Church Officers, and of this last way of Imposition of hands
are we now to speak.

Secondly, That it is not our purpose accurately to enquire whether Imposition
of hands be an Essential part of Ordination, without which it is null and void,
or an integral part, without which it is deficient and imperfect, or only an
inseparable adjunct. It is enough for us to assert, That it is lawful and
warrantable, and not only so, but that it is the duty of all that are to
ordain Ministers to lay hands upon them, and that it is a sin in any that is to
be ordained, to refuse it.

Thirdly, That though we assert the Divine Right of Imposition of hands, yet we
plead for it only in a Scripturesense, but not in a Popish-sense. The Papists
make it to be an outward sign of an inward and spiritual grace. They make
Ordination a Sacrament, and Imposition of hands an operative instrument of
conveying not only grace in general, but even justifying grace. Hence it is
that some few of our Divines speak a little too slightly of it (at which those
that are enemies to it take much advantage) but yet there are no Reformed
Churches (that we know of) but do retain it and plead for it, some as a Rite
and Circumstance, and moral sign; others as an integral part, and others as an
essential part of Ordination.

These things premised, we come now to prove, That it is the will of Christ,
that all that are ordained Ministers should ^lave Imposition of hands. This
appears

1. From the examples of this Ceremony used by the Apostles in Ordination, 1.
We find that the Deacons though inferior Officers must have hands laid on
them. 2. We find that the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, though extraordinary
Officers had hands laid on them. 3. We read that Paul laid hands upon
Timothy, Licet nullum extet certum praeceptum de manuum impositione, quia tamen
suisse in perpetuousu Apostoli^ videmus, illatam accurata c^rum observatio
praecepti vice nobis esse debet. Calv. instit. l. 4. c. 3. Sect. 16.
and also the Presbytery. Hence it is that Calvin says, Though there be no
certain precept extant concerning Imposition of hands, yet because we see it
was in perpetual use by the Apostles, that, their so accurate observation ought
to be in stead of a precept to us. And it is a wonder to us that they that are
so exact in urging every other circumstance in Church Government, and have
suffered much prejudice in their outward estate rather then they would forbear
sitting at the Sacrament (which yet is but an outward gesture) should take such
strange liberty to themselves in dispensing with a duty that has so many
examples for the enforcing of it.

2. From that command of Paul to Timothy, Lay hands suddenly on no man. This is
a divine precept for imposition of hands. For when Timothy is forbidden to lay
hands suddenly, it is implied, that it was his duty to lay on hands. Hence it
is that the New England Ministers do assert, Platform, ^. 9.
That Church Officers ought to be ordained by imposition of hands. And from
this Text Walaeus has a memorable passage, which though it be long, yet we
will not think much to transcribe. I see this (says he, Walaeus de Pastoribus.
p. 472.

Video in omnibus confessionibus nostrarum Ecclesiarum, praeter unam and
alteram, illam requiri: Et san^ cum Apostoli semper eam usurparent, imo
Apostolus praecep^um dat Timotheo, 1 Timothy 5, 22. Ne cito eniquam manus
imponito, nos omittendam non judicamus: quia in negativo illo mandato etiam
affirmativum continetur, ut dignis manus imponat: ubi cum pro tota electi^ne
Pastor^s sumatur per Synecdochen, certe pro ritu aut part essentiali habenda
est, alioquin pro to^o sum^ ^on posset, aut saltem pro adjuncto proprio and
omnibus vocationibus communi.


speaking of Imposition of hands) to be required in almost all confessions. And
truly since that the Apostles have always used it, yea the Apostle gives a
precept to Timothy, to lay hands suddenly on no man; we judge it ought not to
be omitted, because in that negative commandment, an affirmative is included,
that he should lay on hands upon men that are worthy, where because it is taken
by a Synecdoche for the whole calling of a Pastor, certainly it is to be
esteemed either for a rite, or an essential part, otherwise it could not be
taken for the whole, or at least for a proper adjunct, and common to this with
all other callings. So far Walaeus.

Thirdly, Because the whole work of Ordination is comprehended under this
Ceremony of Imposition of hands, 1 Timothy* 4.14. 1 Timothy 5.12. Ordination is called
(...) Imposition of hands, and the gift or office of the Ministry is said to be
given by this as by the sign, 1 Timothy 4.15. Now then, if Imposition of hands, as
a part, be put for the whole work of Ordination, it seems very strange to us
that there should be any amongst us that express a willingness to be
ordained, and yet an unwillingness to have Imposition of hands. We rather
judge, That they that refuse Imposition of hands, which is put for the whole,
will in a little time make no conscience of refusing the whole it self. We
read in Scripture, That prayer and keeping the Sabbath are sometimes put for
the whole worship of God, Ier. 10.25. Isa. 56.4. And as it is a good Argument,
keeping of the Sabbath and prayer are put for the whole worship of God, and
therefore they are parts of it, if not chief parts. So it is a good Argument.
Imposition of hands is put for the whole work of Ordination, and therefore it
is a part of it, if not a chief part. And we desire our people further to
consider, that there is but one Text for (...) or lifting up of hands in the
election of a Minister (and this also but a shadow without a substance, as we
have proved) and yet how zealous are many amongst us for popular Election? And
why should not they be much more zealous for (...), or Imposition of hands,
which has so many substantial Texts for the justification of it, and which is
so often put for the whole work of Ordination?

Fourthly, Because it is placed by the Apostle Heb. 6.1, 2. amongst the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, Therefore leaving the principles of the
doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection, not laying again the
foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, of the
doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the
dead, and of eternal judgment. The great Question is, What is here meant by
laying on of hands. The Papists understand it of the Sacrament of Confirmation:
But it never has nor ever will be sufficiently proved, that either there is
such a Sacrament appointed by Christ, or that it was a custom in the Apostles
days to lay on hands, or (as was formerly phrased) to Bishop baptized
Christians who were grown up to years of discretion; others by laying on of
hands understand the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, which in these
days were given by laying on of hands. But this cannot be the meaning.

1. Because it cannot be proved, that the gift of the holy Ghost was given with
every laying on of hands in those times. For the laying on of hands, 1 Timothy
4.14. 1 Timothy 5.22. was not for giving the holy Ghost, but for Ordination.

2. Because the giving of the holy Ghost by laying on of hands was proper to
the Primitive age, and does not concern after ages; But the Catechetical heads
enumerated by the Apostle concern all ages.

3. Because it would be hard to think, that the knowledge or profession of the
doctrine concerning the giving of the holy Ghost by such laying on of hands,
was such a principle as that none ignorant thereof, though instructed in all
the other Articles of Christian faith, could be received as a Churchmember,
and as one grounded in Catechisticall doctrine.

And therefore by laying on of hands, as by a Synecdoche, we suppose is meant
the whole Ministry. Thus D. Ames in his Confutation of Bellarmine; Bellarminus
enervatus, tom. 2. page 76.
By laying on of hands (says he) is here meant Totum Ministerium, the whole
Ministry. Bullinger on the place, By laying on of hands, understands also the
Ministry and their Vocation, Mission, and Authority given them. Mr. Hooker in
his Survey of Church Discipline, par. 1. page 1. By laying on of hands as by a
Metonymy of the adjunct, understands Ordination, and Ordination as one
particular is put (says he) for the whole of Church Discipline. And from this
very Text he undertakes to prove Church Discipline to be a fundamental point
of Religion: But we may more safely and more rationally assert the same of the
Church-Ministry: For whosoever denies a Ministry overthrows all
Gospel Ordinances and Gospel-Churches. And here we will make bold to put our
people in mind of a passage in M. Cartwrights Confutation of the Rhemists, who
was a man sufficiently opposite to the Bishops and their Ceremonies, yet he is
pleased to use these words upon this Text. By Imposition of hands the Apostle
means no Sacrament, much less Confirmation after Baptism, but by a Trope and
borrowed Speech the Ministry of the Church upon the which hands were laid,
which appears in that whosoever believes, that there ought not to be a
Ministry by order to teach and govern the Church, overthrows Christianity;
whereas if Confirmation of Children were a Sacrament as it is not, yet a man
holding the rest, and denying the use of it, might notwithstanding be saved. So
Cartwright. Now then* If Imposition of hands be taken in Scripture not only for
the whole work of Ordination, but also for the whole Ministry; We may (we hope)
safely and convincingly conclude, That it is the will of Jesus Christ, that
they that enter into the Ministry should have hands laid upon them: And that
they that oppose Imposition of hands may as well oppose the whole
Gospel Ministry, and therein overthrow Christianity it self.

We will not trouble the Reader with answering all the Objections that are
brought against this Thesis, but only such as seem to carry most weight in them.

Object. 1. We do not read that the Apostles were made Ministers with
Imposition of hands.

Answ. 1. No more do we read that they were made Ministers by the Election of
the people; This objection fights as much against Election as against
Imposition of hands.

2. A negative argument from Scripture does not hold in matters of this nature;
It does not follow, because it is not recorded, therefore it was not done. Many
things were done by Christ which are not written; It is said, That Christ
ordained twelve, but after what manner is not set down.

3. The Apostles were extraordinary Officers, and had an extraordinary Call.
Our Thesis is of ordinary Officers; They that oppose this Assertion must prove,
that ordinary Officers were made without Imposition of hands, or else they
prove nothing to the purpose.

Object. 2. When the Apostle left Titus to ordain Elders in Crete, he says not
a word of Imposition of hands.

Answ. 1. Nor a word of Election by the people.

2. The Apostle left him to ordain Elders as he had appointed him. Now it is
irrational to think that he would appoint Titus to do otherwise then according
to what he himself practiced. He ordained Deacons, Elders, and Timothy by
laying on of hands: And therefore it is without dispute to us, That he
appointed Titus to do so also.

3. If we compare Tit. 1.5. with Act. 6.3, 5. it will appear, That by
appointing or ordaining Elders in Crete, is meant, ordaining by Imposition of
hands: For there is the same word in both, (...): Now (...) in Act. 6. was by
laying on of hands, and so was (...) in Tit. 1.5.

Object. 3. Imposition of hands was used by the Apostles only for the present
occasion, as other things were observed, as blood was forbidden, as Paul used
circumcision and shaving, viz. for the Jews sake who had their public
Officers thus set apart.

Answ. 1. No circumstance of any one Text where Imposition of hands is
mentioned to be used, gives ground for stating this to be the reason of its
practice.

2. This was not only practiced at Jerusalem but at Antioch, and not only among
and by the Jews, but elsewhere, and by others. It is said of Paul and Barnabas
that they ordained Elders in every Church.

Object. 4. Imposition of hands was used by the Apostles in a miraculous way,
and it did confer the holy Ghost and gift of Tongues, etc. and therefore as
the miracle is ceased, so ought the ceremony to cease. As in extreme Unction,
etc.

Answ. 1. The giving of the holy Ghost and conferring of extraordinary gifts
was one, but not the only use which the Apostles made of Imposition of hands.
And as prayer is still to be continued in the Church, though it did sometimes
conveigh extraordinary blessings, Act. 8.15, 16, 17. Act. 9.40. Iam. 5.14, 15.
because it had other ordinary ends and uses; So is Imposition of hands to be
continued upon the same account.

Answ. 2. We never read of the holy Ghost given by Imposition of hands in
Ordination: That gift which Timothy received by the laying on of the hands of
the Presbytery, is no other then the gift of Office. Neglect not the gift, i.
e. Neglect not the office. If Timothy had had power by laying on of hands to
have conferred due qualifications for the Ministry; why does Paul require him
to lay hands suddenly on no man? and why must he be so careful to see them
first fit, in case his laying on of hands would fit them? There needed not such
trial of their gifts, in case a touch of his hands could have gifted them.
This proves clearly, That there was no extraordinary gift conferred in
Ordination.

3. There is a double Imposition of hands, The one miraculous and
extraordinary, which consisted in healing the sick, and conveighing the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. And this was temporary and is now ceased as
extreme Unction is; The other is ordinary, Such is the Imposition of hands in
Ordination, and therefore to be perpetually continued in the Church. We read
not only that Paul who was an extraordinary Officer, but that Presbyters who
were ordinary Officers imposed hands upon Timothy. And the example of the
Primitive Churches were intentionally left upon record for this end, that they
might be binding patterns in like cases in after ages. And this seems to be one
singular ground and reason of the Writing of the Acts of the Apostles, That the
Apostles acts in the Primitive Churches might be our Rules in succeeding ages.

Obj. 5. To what purpose then is Imposition of hands used, if the extraordinary
gifts of the holy Ghost be not conveyed thereby?

Answ. 1. We use it, because the Apostles did use it in an ordinary way without
giving the holy Ghost, as well as in an extraordinary way, because there is the
same standing reason, and because the Apostle bids us, 1 Timothy 5.22. Sufficit
pro universis rationibus, Deus vult.

2. We use it not as an operative Ceremony, but as a Moral sign, so declare
publicly who the party is that is solemnly set apart to the work of the
Ministry.

3. We use it as it is a Rite and Ceremony by which the Office is conveyed, 1 Timothy 4.14.

4. We use it as it is a consecrating, dedicating and offering up of the party
unto the Lord and his service, as in the Old Testament hands were laid on for
this end.

5. We use it as it is an Authoritative and Ministerial Benediction of the
party ordained, as it was used by Jacob in his fatherly blessing of Ephraim and
Manasses, and by Christ in his blessing and praying over the little children,
Mat. 19.15. Mark 10.16.

And thus we have made out the Divine Right of Imposition of hands, and our
Exhortation to our people is, That they would not stumble at that way of
Ordination which has so much of God in it, nor be easily led aside into
by-pathes by the seducers of this Age. And that they would not rest contented
with Ministerial Examination (though that ought to be, and that in all
exactness) nor with Ministerial approbation, nor yet with Authoritative
Mission without this Apostolical Ordinance of Imposition of hands.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein the fourth Assertion about Ordination is proved, viz. That
ordination of Ministers ought to be by the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.
OUr last Assertion is concerning the persons who are by Divine Authority
appointed to ordain, Assert. 4.
and it is this.

That Ordin^tion ^f Ministers ought to be by laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.

For this we have an express Text, 1 Timothy 4.14. which that we may the better
understand, we will give a brief Answer to some few Questions.

Qu^st. 1. What is meant by the word Presbytery?

Answ. By Presbytery is not meant the Office of a Presbyter, but Collegium f^o^
confess^^ Presbyter^rum, a College or company of Presbyters. For as Mr
Rutherford well observes, The Office has no hands. And the word is used but in
two other places, Luke 22.66. Acts 22.5. In both which it must necessarily be
taken for the Officers, and not for the Office. For the Office of Elders could
not meet together, as in that plac^ of Luke, nor could the O^^^ce of Elders
bea^ witness to Paul, as in that place of the Acts. Hooker. part. 2. cap. 2.
Besides as Mr Hooker well says, Not only reason does reject, but the very
ear would not relish such an unsuitable sense, Neglect not the gift which is in
thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Office. How harsh and unpleasant is such an expression?

Here Calvin is brought in by some who are in other things his utter enemies,
to countenance this interpretation. And Mr Gillespy reckons it as one of
Calvin's few (for they were but very few) mistakes. But looking upon his
Commentary upon the place, we find these words, Presbyterium qui hic
collectivum nomen esse putant pro collegio Presbyterorum positum, recte
sentiunt meo judicio. They who think Presbytery in this place to be a Noun
collective put for a College of Presbyters, do think rightly in my judgment.
And therefore though he thinks the other interpretation non male quadrare
(which was his error) yet he is not to be reckoned amongst those that deny
that by Presbytery is meant an Assembly of Presbyters.

Quest. 2. Whether this Presbytery was a Presbytery of Bishops, or of single
Presbyters?

Answ. To this we shall give this short reply, That in Scripture a Bishop and a
Presbyter is all one, as we shall have occasion hereafter to prove. And
therefore we answer, That it was an Assembly of Bishops, that is, of Presbyters.

Quest. 3. Whether this Presbytery were Congregational or Classical?

Answ. Mr Hooker of New England confesses, That he never yet heard any
Argument that did evince either, Part. 2. Chap. 2.
by dint of undeniable evidence. And for our parts, we do not conceive it
necessary, as to our purpose, to disquiet the Reader with a debate about it.
For we deny not but that a Congregation sufficiently Presbyterated, that is,
wherein there are many Ministers, may ordain, though we believe that there are
but very few such, if any; and therefore are of the opinion of the Reverend
Assembly, in their Advice to the Parliament concerning Ordination, That it is
very requisite that no single. Congregation that can conveniently associate, do
assume to it self all and sole power in Ordination.

Quest. 4. What part has the Ruling Elder in Ordination?

Answ. Supposing that there is such an Officer in the Church (for the proof of
which we refer the Reader to our Vindication) We answer, That the power of
ordering of the whole work of Ordination belongs to the whole Presbytery, that
is, to the Teaching and Ruling Elders. But Imposition of hands is to be always
by Preaching Presbyters, and the rather, because it is accompanied with Prayer
and Exhortation, both before, in, and after, which is the proper work of the
Teaching Elder.

Quest. 5. Whether may one Preaching Presbyter lay on hands without the
assistance of other Ministers?

Answ. Imposition of hands ought to be performed not by one single Presbyter,
but by a combination of preaching Presbyters. In the Ordination of Deacons, not
one Apostle alone, but a company of them laid on hands, Act. 6.6. When Paul and
Barnabas were separated unto the work whereunto they were called by God, the
Prophets and Teachers joined together in laying on of hands. It is observable
that in all the Texts where mention is made of Imposition of hands, (...) is
joined with (...) in the Plural, not with (...) or (...) in the Singular or
Dual Number, and so there must of necessity be more then one Imposer of hands.
Timothy was ordained by the Imposition not only of Paul's hands, but also of
the Presbytery. And therefore when we read that Timothy is enjoined to lay
hands suddenly on no man, and Titus left in Crete to ordain Elders, we must not
imagine that they were endued thereby with the sole power of Ordination. For
surely the Apostle would not require Timothy or Titus to do that which he
himself would not do. If Paul with the Presbytery laid hands upon Timothy, then
no doubt Timothy was also, together with other Presbyters, to lay hands upon
those whom he should ordain. The naming of one does not exclude others,
especially if we consider that Titus was left to ordain Elders, as Paul had
appointed him. Now it is without all peradventure, that Paul did appoint him to
do according as he himself practiced.

Quest. 6. Whether a company of Believers associated together may ordain
without Ministers?

Answ. The Answer to this Question, is that which we especially aim at in this
our fourth Assertion, and wherein we desire most of all to satisfy the
expectation of the Reader. For this end we shall offer this Proposition in
Answer to the Question.

That Ordination of Ministers does belong to Church Officers, and not to a
Church without Officers. Prop.
And that Ordination by people without Ministers is a perverting of the
Ordinance, and of no more force then Baptism by a Midwife, or consecration of
the Lords Supper by a person out of Office.

For the proof of this we might argue from what is recorded by Jewish Writers,
concerning the custom of creating men members of their great Council or
Sanhedrin. When Moses by Gods appointment assumed the seventy Elders to assist
him in Government, and part of his spirit was by God put upon them, this was
done says Maimonides Sanhedr. cap. 4. by Moses laying hands upon them. And at
length before his departure out of this life, when a successor was to be
provided for him, God commands him to take Joshua, and lay his hand upon him,
etc. and accordingly it was done, Numb. 27.18. And so for those seventy Elders,
it is certain from the Jewish Writers, that the succession of these was
continued through all Ages, by their creating others in the place of those that
died by this Ceremony of Imposition of hands. To this purpose are the clear
words of Maimonides, Moses our Master created the seventy Elders by Imposition
of hands, and the divine Majesty rested on them, and those Elders imposed hands
on others, and others on others. And they were found created until the house
of judgment of Joshua, and unto the house of judgment of Moses: that is, from
time to time ascending to the Sanhedrin in Joshua's and Moses's time. Petrus
Cunaeus de Rep. Hebrae^rum cap. 12. says, This Senatorian dignity, because it
was most honorable, was granted to none without a legitimate act, namely,
Imposition of hands. So Moses laid his hand upon Joshua, and the seventy
Elders, which solemnity being performed, presently a divine Spirit from above
fell down upon them, and filled their breasts. And these being thus initiated
themselves, admitted others after the same way. The same Author tells us also
out of Maimonides of a constitution made, That no man should after such a time
use Imposition of hands, but by grant from Rabbi Hillel that divine old man,
who was Prince of the great Council; and how afterward it came to cease: And
what care was taken by Juda the son of Baba to support and uphold it.

But because these things are not recorded in Scripture, we shall wave all such
way of arguing, and rather dispute,

First, From the constant practice of the Church of Christ, as it is set down
in the Apostolical Writings. We challenge any man to show any one Text in all
the New Testament for the justification of popular Ordination. We read of
Ordination by Apostles, Act. 6. Act. 14. And by Prophets and Teachers, Act. 13.
And by Evangelists, Tit. 1. 1 Timothy 5.22. And by a Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. But
for Ordination by the people we meet not at all with it. And without all
peradventure, If Ordination be an Ordinance of Christ, it is to be managed
according to the will of Christ, and that is by Ministers, and not by the
community of believers. May we not say to such Churches that usurp upon this
work, as it is said, Matthew. 21.23. By what Authority do you these things? And
who gave you this Authority? Show us your warrant out of the Word? We read
indeed of Ordination in Churches, Act. 18.23. and in Cities, Tit. 1.5. but no
where of Ordination by Churches, or by Cities, taking them for believers
without Officers. We add

Secondly, That Ordination by the people is not only not written in Scripture,
but it is against the Scripture. For to what end and purpose should Jesus
Christ appoint Officers extraordinary and ordinary for the doing of that work
which the people themselves may do? To what purpose did Paul and Barnabas go
from place to place to ordain Elders? Why was Titus left in Crete to appoint
Elders in every City? Might not the people say, What need Paul leave Titus to
do that which we can do our selves? Frastra ^it per plura, etc. If this
Doctrine were true, the Apostles needed only to have preached and to have
converted the people to the faith, and when they had done to have said, We have
now done our work, you may now elect and ordain your Officers your selves, the
power to do these things belongs to you. But the Apostles did quite contrary,
and therefore certainly Ordination is not the peoples, but the Ministers Office.

Add thirdly, that which to us seems to be of weight, That all that is written
in the Epistles concerning the Ordainers and the qualification of the ordained,
etc. is all written in the Epistles unto Timothy and Titus who were
Church Officers. In the other Epistles which were written unto the Churches,
there is no mention made of these things, which does abundantly prove unto us,
That the work of Ordination is a work belonging to Ministers, and not to the
people.

Lastly, We might argue from the nature of Ordination. It is a potestative and
authoritative mission. It is an eminent act of Jurisdiction, not only
confirming a Minister in that Office which he had before by Election, but
conveying the very Office-power of preaching and administering the Sacraments.
It is that (as we have said) which gives the essentials of the Ministerial
Call. And therefore by the rule of the Gospel it belongs to Officers, and not
to private persons. The Scripture does accurately distinguish between
Church-Rulers and private believers, Heb. 13.17, 24. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Private
persons can with no more lawfulness convey power to another, to administer the
Sacraments, then they can themselves lawfully administer the Sacraments.
Church Power is first seated in Christ the head, and from him committed to the
Apostles, and from them to Church Officers. And they alone who have received it
from the Apostles can derive and transmit it to other Ministers. And though we
freely confess, That all Church Power is in the people, finaliter and
objective, that is, for their use and benefit, according to that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.22. All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas,
all are yours, i.e. for your service and salvation; yet we are far from
thinking that all things are theirs formally and originally, that is, of their
making and authorizing. Or that they that are not Ministers themselves can
derive the Ministerial Office to others. This we believe to be both against
Scripture and reason.

The serious consideration of these things is of mavelous concernment for the
people of our age upon this one account especially, because there are a
generation of men risen up amongst us, that renounce and disclaim all
Ordination from Ministers, as unwarrantable and Antichristian, and take it up
from the people as the only way of the Gospel, herein committing amongst many
other these three evils.

1. In renouncing the Ordinance of Christ, and calling that which is truly
Christian, Antichristian.

2. In setting up a new way of Ordination, which has not the least footing in
the New Testament, or in all Antiquity.

3. In plunging themselves into this inextricable difficulty; for he that
renounceth Ordination by Ministers as Antichristian, must of necessity renounce
not only our present Ministry, but all the Ministers and Churches in the
Christian world, he must turn Seeker, and forsake all Church Communion, as some
in our unhappy days do. For all Ordination by the people is null and void, as
being not only not grounded upon Scripture, but against Scripture. And to
intrude into the Ministerial Office without Ordination, is as the sin of
Corah and his company, as we have formerly showed. Our desire is that these
particulars may be duly weighed by all sober Christians.

It will not be amiss here to consider what is said against this Thesis by the
Elders of New England. In four things they agree with us, 1. They say,
Church Officers are to be ordained. 2. And to be ordained by Imposition of
hands. Platform of Church-Disc. chap. 9.
3.That where there are Elders Imposition of hands is to be performed by those
Elders. 4.That where there are no Elders, if the Church so desire, Imposition
of hands may be performed by the Elders of other Churches.


But they differ from what we have asserted, when they say,

In such Churches where there are no Elders, Imposition of hands may be
performed by some of the Brethren chosen by the Church thereunto. For the proof
of this they bring a Reason and a Scripture.

The Reason is, If the people may elect Officers, which is the greater, and
wherein the substance of the Office consists, they may much more (occasion, and
need so requiring) impose hands in Ordination, which is the less, and but the
accomplishment of the other.

Answ. 1. If this Argument were valid, it would follow that people might ordain
their own Ministers, not only when they want Elders, but when they have Elders.
For if Election give the essence to a Minister, and Ordination only an adjunct,
we see no reason why they that give the essence, should not also give the
adjunct; And why an adjunct should belong to the Officers in that Church, to
whom the essence does not belong. But

2. We say, That Scripture Light being Judge, Election is not the greater, and
Ordination the less. It is possible that it is upon this ground that some men
have made so slight of Ordination, that so they might entitle the people
thereunto. But we have abundantly showed, 1. That Election does not give the
essence of the Ministerial Call. That Election is only the designation of the
person that is to be made a Minister, not the making of him a Minister. 2. That
Ordination is that which gives the essence. That it is an Authoritative
appointing of a person to the Ministry, and an actual investing him into the
office. That it is held forth in the Scripture as the greater, and therefore
not given to one and the same persons, but this later referred to the more
honorable persons, as appears from Acts 6.3, 5. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy
5.22.

The Text they quote in the Margin for the proof of this, is not out of the
New Testament but the Old, out of Numb. 8.10, 11. And thou shall bring the
Levites before the Lord, and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon
the Levites: And Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord, for an offering
of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the Lord.

Ans. 1. This Text does not prove that for which it is brought, but makes
rather against our Brethren. For they say, That where there are Elders,
Imposition of hands is to be by the Elders, and not by the people, but in case
of want of Elders. But here Aaron and his sons were present. And if it proves
any thing, it proves that the people may ordain where there are Elders, which
our Brethren will in no case consent unto.

2. That the children of Israel were commanded by God immediately to lay on
hands upon the Levites. But in the New Testament, we meet with no such command
laid upon the people. We read that Timothy and Titus, and the Presbytery are
to lay on hands, but not a word of command for the people, but rather against
it, as we have showed.

3. When it is said, That the children of Israel laid on hands, it is not
imaginable that all the Israelites did put on hands, but it was done by some
chief of them in the name of the rest. And as Ainsworth observes, It was done
by the firstborn: For the firstborn was sanctified and consecrated unto the
Lord, Exo. 13.1. Because the Lord when he destroyed the firstborn in Egypt,
spared the firstborn of the Israelites, therefore he challenges a right in
all their firstborn, and they were to be given to him. And now the Levites
were taken by God in stead of the firstborn, as appears Numb. 8.16, 17. And
hence it was that the children of Israel, that is, the firstborn of Israel,
were to lay on hands upon them, for the Levites gave an atonement for them, and
were offered up unto the Lord in their stead, and as the Rabbis say, Every
firstborn laid on hands on the Levite that was for him. Which if it be so,
will afford us two other answers to this text.

4. That the children of Israel had not only a special command, but a special
reason also for what they did. And therefore this example cannot be made a
pattern for New Testament practice.

5. That this laying on of hands upon the Levites, was not for them to set them
apart for the service of the Lord, but rather a setting them apart for a
Sacrifice unto the Lord. It was the command of God that the children of Israel
must put their hands upon the Sacrifices they did offer unto the Lord. The
Levites were now to be waved or offered before the Lord for an offering of the
children of Israel, and to be offered in stead of the firstborn. And therefore
the firstborn did put their hands upon them as their propitiation and
atonement.

It is very observable, That notwithstanding this Imposition of hands, the
Levites were not thereupon invested into their office, and made able immediately
to execute it. But Aaron the Priest was to wave them before the Lord for a
wave-offering, that they might execute the service of the Lord. It was Aarons
waving of the Levites, and separating them from among the children of Israel,
that did constitute and make them Church Officers.

And thus at last we have put an end to our first part concerning the Divine
Right of the Gospel Ministry, and have, as we hope, sufficiently cleared to the
consciences of our people, That there is such an Office as the Office of the
Ministry perpetually to be continued in the Church of Christ. That no man ought
to take upon him either the Office or the Work of the Ministry, unless he be
lawfully ordained thereunto. That Ordination of Ministers is an Ordinance of
Christ, and ought to be by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, etc.

We cannot but expect to meet with many Adversaries that will oppose what we
have here written. Some will deny the very Office of the Ministry. Others will
grant that there was such an Office in the Apostles days, but will say that it
is now quite lost. Some will grant that the Office of the Ministry is
perpetually necessary, but will add, That it is lawful for all men gifted, to
enter upon the public work of the Ministry, though they be not called and
ordained thereunto. Some are for an immediate and extraordinary Call to the
Ministry. Some will deny all Ordination of Ministers. Others will grant
Ordination but deny Imposition of hands. Others will grant Imposition of hands,
but say, That it ought to be done by private Church Members, and not by the
Presbytery.

By this it appears that our Adversaries differ as much one from another, as
they do from us. And therefore we need not be much afraid of their opposition,
for in writing against us they will be necessitated also to write one against
another.

It is, we confess, a great lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation, that
there should be such differences and divisions amongst Christians, and
especially amongst those that profess the Protestant Reformed Religion, and
have made a necessary and just separation from the Idolatry and superstition of
the Church of Rome. Hereby God is greatly dishonored. True Religion hindered
and disgraced. The wicked are hard^ed in their wickedness. The Popish party is
encouraged. The godly party weakened, and great stumbling blocks are laid before
weak Christians to deter them from true conversion. But we hope that this which
we have written will contribute something toward the healing of these
differences, and uniting of all godly and unprejudiced people in peace and
truth. This is our design, this is the success we pray for.

We have been necessitated to make frequent mention of A Platform of
Church Discipline, agreed upon by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches in
New England, and have expressed our dissent from some things therein contained.
But we desire the Reader to take notice,

1. That in the Preface to this Platform they assure us of their hearty consent
to the whole Confession of Faith (for substance of Doctrine) which the Reverend
Assembly presented to the Parliament; and tell us of an unanimous vote of a
Synod at Cambridge, 1648. which passed in these words, This Synod having
perused and considered (with much gladness of heart, and thankefulness to God)
the Confession of Faith published of late by the Reverend Assembly in England,
do judge i^ to be very holy, orthodox and judicious in all matters of Faith,
and do therefore freely and fully consent thereunto, for the substance thereof,
etc. And do therefore think it meet, that this Confession of Faith, should be
commended to the Churches of Christ amongst us, and to the honored Court* as
worthy of their due consideration and acceptance.

2. That as we agree wholly in the same Confession of Faith, so also we agree
in many things of greatest concernment in the matter of Church Discipline.

3. That those things wherein we differ are not of such consequence, as to
cause a schism between us, either in worship, or in love and affection. Our
debates with them are (as it was said of the disputes of the ancient Fathers
one with another about lesser differences) not contentiones, but collationes.
We can truly say (as our Brethren do in the forenamed Preface) That it is far
from us so to attest the Discipline of Christ, as to detest the Disciples of
Christ; so to contend for the seamless coat of Christ, as to crucify the
living members of Christ; So to divide our selves about Church Communion, as
through breaches to open a wide gap for a deluge of Antichristian and profane
malignity to swallow up both Church and Civil State.

The main intendment and chief drift of this our undertaking, has been, to
oppose those that say, That there is no such Office as the Office of the
Ministry; or, That this Office is quite lost; or, That every man that thinks
himself gifted, may intrude into the Ministerial Office. These opinions we
judge destructive to Christian Religion, and an inlet to Popery and all
error, to all disorder and confusion, and at last to all profaneness and
Atheism.

There are four things that justly deserve to be abhorred by all good
Christians.

1. An Universal Toleration of all Religions. 2. An Universal Admittance of all
men to the Lords Supper. 3. Universal Grace, that is, that Christ died equally
for all, and that all men have free will to be saved. 4. Universal Allowance of
all that suppose themselves gifted to preach without Ordination. This last is
that which we have abundantly confuted, and which we conceive to be
unsufferable in a well-ordered Christian Commonwealth. And our prayer to God
is, That our respective Congregations may be established in the truth against
this and all other errors; And that they may take heed least being led away
with the error of the wicked, they should fall from their own stedfastness.
And (for the preventing of this mischief) That they may grow in grace and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to him be glory both now
and for ever. Amen.
The End of the first Part.
The Second Part, CONTAINING A Justification of the present Ministers of
England, Both such who were ordained during the prevalency of Episcopacy, from
the foul aspersion of Antichristianisme, and those who have been ordained since
its abolition, from the unjust imputation of Novelty; That a Bishop, and
Presbyter are all one in Scripture; and that Ordination by Presbyters is most
agreeable to the Scripture pattern.

TOGETHER With an Appendix, wherein the Judgment, and Practice of Antiquity,
about the whole matter of Episcopacy, and especially about the Ordination of
Ministers is briefly discussed.

1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God.

1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them that labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you. [13.] And to esteem
them very highly in love for their work sake.

1 Cor 9.2. If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless I am to you, for
the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord.

Revel. 11.3. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall
prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.

Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over
the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, or Bishops.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. 1654.

The Justification of our Ministry is comprised undertwo Propositions.

1. That, The Call to the Office of the Ministry which some of our present
Ministers did receive during the prevalency of Episcopacy, was lawful, and
valid; which is proved, 1. By Arguments drawn from the principles of our
Adversaries, wherein, by the way, Is proved, 1. That the Churches of England
are true Churches. 2. The two great Objections against them, taken from their
Parochial and National constitution, are sufficiently answered.
2. By Arguments taken from our own Principles, and the nature of the thing.
And here our Ministry is largely vindicated from that foul aspersion of
Antichristianisme which is cast upon it, because conveyed unto us (as is said)
by Popish, and Antichristian Bishops.
2. That, The Call to the Office of the Ministry which our present Ministers do
receive, since the abolition of Episcopacy, is lawful, and valid. In which is
showed, 1. That a Bishop, and Presbyter are all one in Scripture. 2. That the
instances of Timothy and Titus, and the Asian Angels do not prove the contrary.
And because Ordination by Presbyters without Bishops is highly accused of
Novelty, as having not the least shadow of Antiquity, and thereby many
Candidates of the Ministry are discouraged from this way of entering into the
Ministry, and Ordination so received is accounted null, We have therefore added
an Appendix, wherein is briefly held forth the Judgment, and Practice of
Antiquity, both in reference to Ordination, and the whole matter of Episcopacy.

The Preface.
HAving sufficiently proved, That there is such an Office as the Office of a
Minister, and that this Office is perpetual; And that no man ought to assume
this Office unless he be lawfully called thereunto* And that this Call is by
Ordination with the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery. It remains now
that we should speak something concerning the Justification of our own
Ministry. For what are we the better that there is a Ministry by Divine
institution, if our Ministry be of man, and not of God? What are we the better
that there is a Ministry from Christ, if our Ministry be from Antichrist? It
will be said to us as it was to Christ, Physician cure thy self. Trouble not
the world with a general assertion of the necessity of a Ministry unless you
will bring it down to particulars, and make out unto us the divine right of
your Ministry. This then is the work that is now before us, which we shall the
rather undertake*

First, for our peoples sake, that they may with all cheerfulness and
conscienciousnesse submit unto our Ministry, when it shall appear plainly unto
them, that we are Ministers sent by God; Tha^ we are over them in the Lord*
That we are the Lords Stewards, and the Lords Ambassadors. And that they may
with confidence expect a blessing from God upon our Ministry, as not doubting
but that God will make use of his own Instruments, and that a Minister sent by
God, will be blessed by God: wh^reas they that hear men not lawfully called,
have no promise of a blessing, but rather a threatening that they shall not
profit by such Preachers, Jer. 23.32.
as we have formerly proved. Hence it is that such hearers run from one error
to (...) as a just punishment of God upon them, (...) to the saying of the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.3, (...) will come, when they will not endure sound (...)
after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves (...) having itching ears.
They shall make (...) upon Teacher, they shall heap up teachers. And these
teachers shall be sent by themselves, and not by God: and after their own
lusts, not after the Divine rule. For so says the Text, They shall after their
own lusts heap to themselves, etc. And the reason why they do this, is not
because they have more judicious ears, then other people, or because they are
more holy; but because they have ^^ching ears. But mark the curse that attends
all such, verse. 4. They shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall
be turned unto fables.

Secondly, for our Brethren's sake in the Ministry. For there is nothing that
will more enable a Minister to discharg^ his Office with courage,
faithfulness; and cheerfulness, maugre all opposition of unreasonable men,
nothing will more encourage him to persevere in it, and to expect a blessing
from it, than the evidence that he is deputed by God to this Office, That he is
feeding the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made him overs^er. This was
Gods encouragement to Jeremy and Isaiah. Jer. 1.5, 8, 10, 18, 19. Isai. 49.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. Isa. 51.16.
There is required in Ministers a singular confidence in Gods assistance, and a
singular expectation of direction, protection, provision, supportation, and
benediction, which they cannot have, unless they be fully assured, that their
function and Ministry is from heaven heavenly: Hence it is that Paul 1 Cor.
9.1, 2, 3.
labors to make out the authority of his calling to the Corinthians, and
Joh. 1.23, 33.
John unto the Pharisees, and Joh. 5. Joh. 6.
Christ unto the Jews.

Thirdly, For our enemies sake, that cry down the pr^^ent Ministers as ^^als
Priests, as Popish and Antichristian; That Goliah-like defy the Armies of the
living God* That tread under their feet not only the Ministers, but their
Ministry; And say to us, Bow down that we may go over; That make our bodies as
the ground, and ^s the street for them to go in. Isa. 51.23.3
That say of us just as the Jews did of Christ, Crucify them, crucifi^ th^^.
Now that such as these may know, That when they fight against our Ministry,
they fight against God, whose Ministry it (...)* And that when they persecu^e
us, they persecute Christ, whose servants we are. And that it is in vain to
kick against pricks; That we are (...) in Christ's right hand, and that they
shall feel the power of his right hand, that would pluck us out of his right
hand; That even Ieroboam's hand (though a King) shall wither, if he stretch it
out against a true Prophet of the Lord; That we are a plant of Gods planting,
and therefore shall not be rooted up: Therefore it is that we have undertaken
this work.

The Thesis we shall lay down is this, That the Ministers of the Church of
England that now are, and have been since the reformation of Religion, are
lawfully called to their Office, so as they need not renounce their Ordination;
nor have their people any just ground of separation from them in that respect.

The present Ministers of the Church of England are of two sorts, either such
as have been made Ministers since the abolishing of Prelacy by the imposition
of the hands of preaching Presbyters; or such as were ordained heretofore by
the laying on of the hands of the Bishop, together with other Ministers. And
there are two sorts of Dissenters amongst us. There are some that dislike our
present way of Ordination, and say it is invalid, because performed by
Ministers without a Bishop. There are others dislike our former way of
Ordination, and say it is null, and of no validity, because we were made by
Antichristian Bishops. One side deny our Ministry to be of God, because we want
Bshops to Ordain us: The other side deny our Ministry to be of God, because we
had once Bishops to Ordain us. And thus is the present Ministry like Jesus
Christ himself crucified between two opposite parties. But as Christ, though
crucified, yet rose again and is ascended up into heaven: So we doubt not but
the Ministers of Christ, though they prophecy in sackcloth for the present,
and may perhaps ^e slain, and lie in the streets for three days and an half,
yet they shall rise in spite of all their enemies, and be called up into
heaven in the sight of them.

In opposition to these two sorts of Dissenters, we shall lay down these two
Propositions:

That the Cal^ to the Office of the Ministers, Propos. 1.
which some of our present Ministers did receive during the prevalency of
Episcopacy was lawful and valid.

That the Call to the Office of Ministry, Propos. 2.
which our present Ministers do now receive since the abolishing of Episcopacy
is lawful, and valid.

CHAP. I. Containing the first Pr^position, and proving it by Arguments drawn
from the Principles of our Adversaries,
THat the Call to the Office of the Minist^ry, which some of our present
Ministers did receive during the prevalency of Episcopacy was lawful and valid.
Propos. 1.

THere are some amongst us that refuse to hear our Ministers, because they were
Ordained (as they say) by Antichristian Bishops, and think they are bound in
conscience to renounce our Ministry, till we have renounced our Ordination.
And as the Antipaed^-baptist would rebaptize all that are baptized amongst us:
So the Brownist would re-ordain all that are ordained amongst us. For our
parts, we are confident that there is neither warrant out of the Word of God
for rebaptization, nor reordination. That the latter (which is our present
work) may the better appear, we must premise a distinction which we have
formerly made use of in our Vindication, where we have also spoken something
about this subject.

We must distinguish between a defective Ministry, and a false Ministry; as
we do between a man that is lame or blind, and a man that is but the picture of
a man. We do not deny, but that the way of Ministers entering into the Ministry
by Prelates ^ad many de^ects in it, for which they ought to be truly and
greatly humbled; but yet we add, That notwithstanding all accid^nt^l
corr^ptions, it is not substantially and essentially corrupted, so as there
should be need of reordination. The Scribes and Pharisees were not only
wicked in their conversation, but mingled the leaven of false doctrine with
their teachings, and had many defects in their entrance; yet our Savior says,
Matthew. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and P^^risees si^ in Mos^s his seat. All therefore,
etc. If they that sat in Moses his Chair were to be heard in all things that
they taught according to the Word, though they did not live as they taught, and
had many failings in their entrance, much more they that s^t in C^th^dra
Christi, in the ch^i^ of Christ, and teach (...) quae sunt Christi, those
things which Christ would have them teach, and live according to what they
^each, although there were many defects in their entrance into the Ministry: A^
every defect in a Christian, does not make him no Christian, and every defect
in the administration of the Gospel Ordinances, does not make them no
Gospel Ordinances: So ^very defect in the way of entrance into the Ministry,
does not make that Ministry a false Ministry, or no Ministry.

Now that our Ministry during the prevalency of Episcopacy, was lawful and
valid for the substance of it, though mingled with many circumstantiall
d^fect^, appears two manner of ways.

1. We will ar^ue ^ccordi^^ to the judgment of those, who hold, that the whole
essence of the Ministerial call consists in the election of the people, and
that Ordination is nothing else but a solemn installing of a Minister into
that Office, which he had before conveyed unto him by his election: Our
Brethr^n of New ^ngland, though they hold Ordination by imposition of hand^ to
be of divine institution, yet not so necessary, as if a Ministers call were a
nullity without it; for, they say in the same place, Answer to the 32. quest.
page 67.
that the outward Call of a Minister consists properly and essentially in
election by the people, and that this election is so necessary, as that the
Minister^ C^ll without it is ^ nullity; but not so without ordination. The
Brownist^ and Anabaptists do speak f^rre more slightingly, and undervalui^gly
of Ordination; and therefore we ^rave leave to use ^rgumentum ad h^minem An
Argument taken from their own principles.
Thus

They that are lawfully elected by the people, are lawful Ministers.

But suc^ are the Minister^ of Engl^^^, etc. Ergo.

Or thus,

If a Minister rightly chosen by the people be a true Minister, though not at
all ordained, then a Minister rightly chosen by the people is a true Minister,
though ^orruptly ordained.

But (according to these men,) a Mi^ister rightly chosen by the people is a
true Minister, though not at all ordained.

Erg^.

But many Ministers during the prevalency of Episcopacy were not at all el^cted
by the people. Object. 1.


But many were, Answ. 1.
and thi^ argument serves to justify their Ministry.

2. Though there are some, that were at first obtruded unjustly and unduely
upon the people, 2.
yet the p^ople^ aft^r ^cceptance and ^pprob^tio^ (...) supply the want of
el^ction ^t first, (...) after ^onsent and ^^ceptance of Leah, made her to be
his wife, though he chose her not at first: And by thi^ (s^y o^r Brethren in
New England) we hold the calling of many Ministers in England may be excused,
who at first came into their places without the consent of the people.

Object. 2.
But the people that those them were wicked and ungodly, and therefore they were
not rightly chosen.

Answ. 1.
This is not true of many place^ where Ministers, were chosen by Congregations,
wherein there were many godly people.

2. Visible Saints and unblameable livers are sufficient to to make up the
matter of a true Church; and who can deny, but that there are such in many, if
not in most, of the Congregations in England.

Object. 3.
But what though we judge that the whole essence of the Ministerial Call
consists in popular election, yet the Ministers whom we plead against, look
upon their Ordination, as that which give^ them the essence of their Call, and
think they stand Ministers by that.

Answ.
What is that to you what they ^hink their (...) ^hin^ing in your opinion is
their personal error, but it c^nnot nullify their Ministry; for, he that has
the essentials of a true Minister, is a true Minister; but he that is rightly
elected has the essenti^ls of ^ true Minister ^ccord^ng ^o you* and therefore
whatsoever his judgment is about ordination, he must stand a true Minister to
you, unless you will cross your own position.

Suppose (as one says) a Deacon thinks his Ordination gives him the essentials
of his office, the people think their election does; what then ^ will you
separate from him, and not go to him for relief in case of want? he has
election and ordination, so that to be sure a Deacon he is: The case is the
same with the present Ministry. This instance is urged by Mr. Buroughs, of
which we shall have occasion afterward to make further use.

We shall add another Argument of the same nature, to prove that the Ministry
of England, is a true Ministry.

If there were true Churches in England, Argu. 2.
during the prevalency of Episcopacy, then there was a true Ministry: For,
(according to those men) it is the true being of a Church, that gives being to
the truth of Ministry, and Ordinances, and not the Ministry and Ordinances that
give being to a Church.

But there were true Churches in England, during the prevalency of Episcopacy.

Ergo, etc.

That there were true Churches appears,

From what the New England Ministers say in their Answer to the 32. Questions,
page 24.25.26.27. And in their Apology for the Church Covenant, page 36, 37,
38, 39, 40. where they show.

1. That the Gospel was brought into England in the Apostles days or a little
after, and that Churches were by them constituted in England according to the
Evangelicall pattern.

2. That though Popish Apostasy did afterward for many ages overspread all the
Churches of England* (as in other Countries) yet still God reserved a remnant,
according to the election of Grace amongst them, for whose sake he preserved
the holy Scriptures amongst them, and baptism in the name of the Trinity only.

3. That when God of his rich Grace was pleased to stir up the Spirit of King
Edward the ^ixt, and Queen Elizabeth to cast off the Pope and all fundamental
errors in doctrine andworship and a great part of the tyranny of
PopishChurch-government, etc. the people of the Nation generally re^^ived the
Articles of religion, etc. wherein is contained the marrow, and sum of the
Oracles of God, etc.

4. That wheresoever the people do with common and mutual consent, gather into
settled Congregations, ordinarily every Lords day (as in England they do) to
teach and hear this Doctrine, and do profess their subjection thereunto, and
do bind themselves and their Children (as in baptism they do) to continue
therein, that such Congregations are true Churches, notwithstanding sundry
defects and corruptions found in them, wherein (say they) we follow the
judgment of Calvin, Whitakers, and many other Divines of chief note: nor can
we judge or speak harshly of the wombes that bare us, nor of the paps that gave
us suck.

This also appears,

2. From that Mr. Phillips of Watertown in New England says in a Book of his
written for the Justification of Infant Baptism, and also concerning the form
of a Church therein he proves, that there is a true Ministry in England,
because there are true Churches; and that there are true Churches in England
and in other Reformed Churches of the like consideration, he Proves.

1. Because the true visible state of Christ's Church is by Gods promise to
continue unto the end of the World. Luke 1.33. Matthew. 16.16. and 18.18.20. Mat.
28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11, 26. Then he argues.

If the visible Church State be to continue, then either it continued in
England, and other places of like consideration, or in some other places of the
World.

But not in other places of the world, etc. Ergo. Again, If there be no other
Churches in the World, nor have bin for many hundred years, but Popish, or
Reformed. Then (if the visible state of Christ's Church must abide for ever)
either the Popish, or the Reformed Churches must be the true Churches of
Christ.

But not the Popish: Ergo the Reformed.

2. He argues: If Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God, and the Courts of
the Temple be given unto the Antichristian Gentiles for a certain time to tread
under foot, then there was a true Church State where he sat, and whilst he
sat there, and it was the true measured Temple, whose Courts he treads under
foot; nor can there be Antichrist, unless there be the Temple and Courts
thereof where he is. And if Antichrist ^ver sat in England, then there was the
Temple of God there before he sat in it, and whilst he sat in it: as also in
other Reformed Churches. The Temple or Church is the subject wherein; he must
sit, The Antichristian seat is not the subject, nor Constitutes it, but is an
accident vitiating the subject; the removing therefore of Antichristianity does
not destroy the subject, or make it to ^ease to be, but changes it into a
better estate.

He adds,

3. If ever there were true Churches Constituted in England, they remain so
still, or else God has by some manifest act unchurched them. But there were
true Churches in England in the Apostles days or a little after, and God has
by no manifest act UnChurched them.

" Ergo.

Thus far this Reverend Author,

That there are true Churches in England, and so by consequence true Ministers,
appears further.

3. Where there are a company of visible Saints meeting constantly together in
public, to worship God according to his own way prescribed in his Word for the
substance of it, there are (according to these men's opinion) a true Church, and
a true Church State, and a true Ministry.

But during the prevalency of Episcopacy there were in our Congregations
companies of visible Saints meeting together, to worship God according to his
own way, prescribed in the Word for the substance of it;

Ergo.

The Congregations in England are not combined together by a Church Covenant,
Object. 1.
which is the essential form of a particular Church, and therefore are not true
Churches, and so by consequence have no true Ministry,

We acknowledge no such Church Covenant as commanded in Scripture distinct from
the Covenant of grace. Answ. 1.


Supposing, but not granting, that a Church Covenant is necessary to the being
of a Church, yet we desire that our Brethren in New England may be heard
pleading for us.

Hooker's Survey Part 1. cap. 4.
Mr. Hooker says, that this Church Covenant is dispensed after a double manner,
either explicitly, or implicitly. An implicit Covevant is when in their
practice they do that whereby they make themselves engaged to walk in such a
Society, according to such Rules of Government, which are exercised amongst
them, and so submit themselves thereunto, but do not make any verbal profession
thereof.

Thus the people in the Parishes in England, when there is a Minister put upon
them by the Patron or Bishop, they constantly hold them to the fellowship of
the people in such a place, attend all the Ordinances there used, and the
Dispensations of the Minister so imposed upon them, submit thereunto etc. By
such actions and a fixed attendance upon all such services, and duties they
declare that by their practice which others do hold forth by their profession.
And therefore it is a great Scandal for any to say that for want of a
Church Covenant we Nullify all Churches but our own, and that upon our grounds
received there must be no Church in the World but in New England etc.

So likewise in their Apology, for a Church Covenant they say. Page 56.


Though we deny not but the Covenant in many Congregations of England is more
implicit, and not so plain as were to be desired, yet we hope we may say of
them with Mr Parker Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 16. page 167. Non abest realis and
substantialis (quanquam magis quam par erat implicita) Coitio in faedus, eaque
voluntaria professio fid^i substantialis, qua (Deo gratia) essentiam Ecclesiae
idque visibilis hucusque sartam tectam in Anglia conservavit. That is, there
wants not that real and substantial coming together, or agreeing in Covenant
(though more implicit then were meet) and that substantial profession of
Faith, which (thanks be to God) has preserved the Essence of visible Churches
in England unto this day.

Object. 2.
But the Congregations of England are Parochial Churches, and therefore no true
Churches of Christ, and so by consequence have no true Ministry.

There is much opposition in our days against distinguishing of Congregations
by local bounds, Answ.
and much endeavor to break this bond asunder, and to leave people at liberty
to join (notwithstanding their dwellings) with what Church they please, and
with no Churches if they please; and most People speak of Parochial Churches in
a most contemptible way, as of so many cages of unclean Birds, and of
Parochial Ministers, as of so many Parish Priests: But we hope this arises
not so much out of Malice, and from a spirit of opposition, as from a
misunderstanding of our judgment concerning Parochial Congregations. We will
therefore briefly declare what we do not hold, and what we do hold.

1. We do not say That the bare dwelling in a Parish is sufficient to make a
man a member of the Church of Christ within that Parish. A Turk, or Pagan, or
Idolater may be within the bounds of a Parish, and yet we do not hold him a
member of the Church in that Parish.

2. We do not say, That all that dwell in a Parish, and that join constantly in
hearing of the word of God therein Preached, should upon that account be
admitted to the Lords Table. We heartily desire, and sincerely endeavor to
keep all Ignorant and Scandalous People from the Sacrament although they dwell
within the same bounds with those that are admitted.

3. We do not allow, but much dislike the unequal division of Parishes, and we
heartily desire a redress herein.

But we say.

1. That it is most expedient for edification, and most agreeable to the
Evangelical pattern, that Congregations should be distinguished by the
respective bounds of their dwellings. Thus all the Christians in Corinth did
belong to the Church of Corinth, and all the Believers in Eph^sus, to the
Church of Ephesus. The Churches in the New Testament are distinguished one from
another by the places where the believers dwel^. As the Church at Corinth from
the Church at Ephesus. And we do not read of any of one Town member of a Church
in another Town distinct from it.

The Reverend Assembly gave 3. reasons for the proof of this Assertion.

1. Because they who dwell together, being bound to all kind of Moral duties
one to another, Deuteronomy. 15.7.11. Matthew.2^ 39. Matthew. 5.17.
have the better opportunity thereby to discharge them, which Moral tie is
perpetual, for Christ came not to destroy the Law, but to sulful it.

2. The Communion of Saints must be so ordered, as may stand with the most
convenient use of the Ordinances* Exodus 2.4.
and discharge of Moral duties without respect of persons, 1 Cor. 14.26. Let
all things be done unto edifying. Heb. 10.24, 25. Iam 2.1.2.

3. The Pastor and people must so nearly cohabit together, as that they may
mutually perform their duties each to other with most convenience.

2. We say, That all that live within the same Parish being Baptized persons,
and making profession of Christianity may claim admission into the society of
Christians within those bounds, and enjoy the privileges and Ordinances there
dispensed, if by their Scandalous lives they make not themselves unworthy. For
we believe that all Baptized Persons are members of the Church general visible,
and have right unto all the Ordinances of Christ as the circumcised Jew had, 1
Cor. 12.13. Romans 3.1.2.
and wheresoever they come to fix their dwellings may require an orderly
admission unto the Ordinances there dispensed, unless by their sins they have
disinherited themselves.

3. We say, That it is agreeable to the will of Christ and much tending to the
edification of his Church, That all those that live within the same bounds,
should be under the care of the same Minister or Ministers, to be taught by
them and Governed by them, and to have the other Ordinance^ dispensed unto them
suitable to their condition, as they shall manifest their worthiness to part^ke
of them. And that to remove altogeher those Parochial bounds would open a gap
to Thousands of people to live like sheep without a shepherd, and instead of
joining with purer Chur^he^, to join with no Churche^* and in a little time (as
we conceive As our experience abundantly shows.
) it would bring in all manner of profaneness and Athiesme.

Suppose a godly man living under a wicked Minister or ^n Heretical Minister,
Object.
or a Minister that admits all men promiscuously to the Sacrament without any
examination; would you have this man bound to hear him and to receive the
Sacrament from him?

If the Government of the Church were once settled, and countenanced by the
Civil Magistrate, Answ*
care would be taken that there should be no place for such kind of objections.

2. Such a person in such a case ought rather to remove his Habitation (if it
may be done without any great prejudice to his outward estate) then that for
his sake that good and old way of bounding of Parishes rightly understood
should be laid aside.

Suppose he cannot remove without very great prejudice to his outward estate.
Object.


In suc^ a case, Answ.
It is much better as we conceive (till the Church Government be further
settled, and has further countenance from Civil Authority) to relieve such a
one by admitting him into another Congregation for a while, than wholly to
break and dissolve that Laudable and Church edifying way of distinguishing
Congregations by local bounds.

But would you then have every man bound to keep constantly to the Minister
under whom he lives? Quest.


We are not so rigid as to tie people from hearing other Ministers occasionlly
even upon the Lords day, Answ.
But yet we beli^ve that it is most a greeable to Gospel order upon the grounds
for^mentioned* that he that fixet^ his h^bit^tion where there is ^ godly able
Orthodox Minister, should ordinarily wait upon his Ministry, and join to that
Congregation where he dwells rather then to another. In Scripture To appoint
Elders in every Church and in every City is all one. They that were converted
in a City (who were at first but few in number) joined in Church Fellowship
with the Elders and Congregation of that City, and not with any other.

Object.
But the Church of England is a National Church, and therefore cannot be a true
Church, because, the Church of the Jews was the only National Church, and
there are no National Churches now under the New Testament.

Answ.
This objection lies as a great stumbling block to hinder many Christians from
joining with our Churches, and therefore we shall take some pains to remove it.
For the better answering of this objection, we shall premise this distinction
of a national Church.

A Church may be called National in a two fold respect, Either because it has
one national Officer, worship, and place of worship. Thus it was among the
Jews, they had one high Priest over all the Nation; they had one place to
which all the Males were bound thrice in a year to assemble, and one special
part of worship, to wit, Sacrifice which was confined to that public place,
unless in case of extraordinary Dispensation. Such a National Church we are
far from asserting or endeavoring to establish.

Or a Church may be called National, when all the particular Congregations of
one Nation, living under one civil Government, agreeing in doctrine and
worship, are governed by their lesser and greater Assemblies* and in this sense
we assert a national Church.

Object.
But there is no example of any national Church in the New Testament.

Answ. 1.
The reason is, because we have no example there of any Nation converted to the
faith.

2. There are Prophesies, and promises of National Churches, Psalm. 72, 10, 11,
17. Isai. 2.2. Isai. 19.18, In that day shall five Citi^s sp^ak the Languag^ of
Ca^aan, and swear to the Lord of Host^ and^. and v. 19. -- then shall be an
Altar (...) the midst of the Land of Egypt and a pilla^ at the border t^^reof
to the Lord. And so on to verse. 24 25. In that day shall Isr^^l be the third
with Egypt, and with Assy^ia, ^ven a blessing i^ the midst of the Land; Whom
the Lord of Hosts shall bless^ saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria
the work of mine hands, and Isra^l mine inheritance. From this full place we
gather, 1. That in the times of the New Testament there shall be National
Churches. 2. That these Churches shall combine in one way of worship by Oath
and Covenant. 3. That the Lord own's those Churches thus combined, as hi^ own*
and promises to bless them.

3. Even the Jews themselves, when their Nation shall be turned to the Lord,
and return to their own Land, shall become a National Church; (not as having
one High Priest, one place of worship, and one special public worship in that
one place (for these things were Typical, and Ceremonial, and so were to vanish
but as) agreeing together in the same way of doctrine, worship, and covenant as
other Christian Nations do^^. This is evident from Ezekiel. 37.21. to the end of
the Chapter.

But we do not find in the New Testament, that the particular Churches of any
Nation are called a Church in the singular number* But Church^^* Object
And therefore we look upon it as an unscriptural Expression to call the
Congregations of this Nation The Church of England.

We find that several Congregations in the same City are called a Church, Answ.
1.
as in Jerusalem, Act. 8.1. That there were many Congregations in Jerusalem is
evidently proved, both in the Reasons of the Assembly of Divines against the
dissenting Brethren (where they prove it both from the variety of Languages,
and from the multitude of professors, and Ministers) as also in our
Vindication of the Presbyterial Government: And so Act. 12, 1, 5. And Act.
15.4, 22.

Thus it was with the Ephesians; called ^ Church Act. 20.17. and Revel. 2.1.
and yet had many Congregations, as appears from the Booke^ fore-quoted. (And if
five Congregations may be called one Church, why not five hundred?)

2. We might instance, that the Churches in diverse Cities are called A Church:
compare Gal. 1.13.22, 23. with Act. 26.11. where the Churches of diverse Cities
are called expressly (...).

3. Yet further it appears that all the visible Churches in the World are
called A Church, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 3.21. 1 Cor. 10.32. And if all the
Churches in the World are called one Church, let no man be offended if all the
Congregations in England be called the Church of England.

But how does it appear that it is the will of Christ that the Churches of one
Nation should be governed by lesser and greater Assemblies, Object. 3.
and so become a National Church.

Answ.
For this we desire the Reader seriously and impartially to peruse the
Vindication of the Presbyterial Government, wherein this very thing is largely
proved both by the light of Nature, and by the Scripture: See Vindicat. p. 20.
and 26.

And thus we have endeavored by two Arguments to convince those that oppose our
Ministry from their own principles, and to give them to understand that
according to their own Tenants they are bound in conscience to acknowledge many
of our Ministers, at least, to be true Ministers, although it should be granted
them, that our Ordination is unwarrantable and Antichristian. For most of these
men are amongst the number of them that vilify* and disregard Ordination. The
best of them make it but a mere circumstance or adjunct to the call of the
Ministry. And who knows not but circumstances may be wanting or corrupted, and
yet the substance remain entire? If we be true Churches, then (according to
their own positions) we are true Ministers. If rightly Elected, then we have
that which (they say) is essential to the Ministerial call. Suppose Ordination
by Bishops should be an humane addition not agreeable to the Rule, yet
notwithstanding hum^n^ additio^^ do not nullify divine institution*.

Mr. Buroughs in his Heart-divisions has this saying, Page 123.
I confess for my part I never yet doubted of the lawfulness of the call of
many of the Ministers of the Parishional Congregations in England; though they
had something superadded which was sinful yet it did not nullify that call
they had by the Church, that communion of Saints, amongst whom they exercised
their Ministry.

If a man be Baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, though
there should be many Ceremonial additions of S^le, Spi^^l^, (...), the sign of
the Cross, etc. Yet these additions would not nullify the Ordinance of
Baptism^. Now more can the superaddition of Ordination unto our election
(though it be supposed by them to be sinful) nullify our Ministry, which in
their judgments is, for the (...) of it, confer^ed by Election.

CHAP. II. Wherein the same Proposition is proved by Arguments taken from our
own Principles.
BUt omitting this way of Argumentation, we shall now (God assisting) undertake
to prove according to our own Principles (who hold That Ordination is that
which gives the Ess^rice to the Ministerial call.) That the call to the Office
of the Ministry which some of our Ministers did receive during the prevalency
of Episcopacy, was lawful and valid, for the substance of it, though mingled
with many circumstantial defects.

This appears by these ensuing Arguments. Arguments.


They that (for the substance of their call) were called to the Ministry
according to the mind of Christ, are lawful Ministers of Christ.

But the Ministers that were Ordained during the prevalency of Episcopacy were
(for the substance of their call) called according to the mind of Christ, Ergo.

(Here we desire the Reader to take notice, that in this Argument, we shall not
at all speak of the peoples election of their Minister. Not because we are
enemies to popular Election rightly managed and ordered, or because we think
that the Ministerial call does not consist in Election as well as Ordination
(for we have formerly declared the contrary.) But because the great stumbling
stone and Rock of offense against the present Ministry is in reference to to
their Ordination, therefore it is that we insist upon that only.)

The Minor is proved by surveying the Book of Ordination established by Act of
Parliament according to which Ministers were to be Ordained, during the
prevalency of Episcopacy.

Out of which we thus Argue.

They who were sufficiently gifted and qualified for the Ministry, and were
inwardly called by God, and outwardly called by prayer* and fasting, with the
imposition of the hands of Preaching Presbyters, were called to the Office of
the Ministry (for the substance of it) according to the mind of Christ.

But such were they who were Ordained during the prevalency of Episcopacy, Ergo.

That they were such that is* ought to have been such according the Rule
established, and that many were such de facto, and if any were not such, it was
vi^ium personae ordinantis, not vitium regulae, the fault of the person
ordaining, not of the Rule for Ordination, appears by viewing the Book it self
in which we shall find.

1. That the party to be Ordained is to be one that is apt to teach, willing to
take pains in the Ministry, found in the faith, of honest life and
conversation. And sure we are, many were such, and if any were not, it was a
personal, not a Church error.

2. The party to be Ordained is to be examined touching his persuasion of an
inward calling by the Spirit, whether he be inwardly moved by God to the work
of the Ministry, and touching his faith of the sufficiency of the Scriptures,
his purpose to execute his Ministry according to the word of God, to oppose all
erroneous and strange doctrines, to fashion his conversation according to what
may become a Minister of the Gospel, etc.

3. The party thus qualified, after a Sermon Preached and prayer made to God
for a blessing is to be Ordained, and set apart to the work of the Ministry by
the laying on of the hands of the Bishop, together with other Preaching
Presbyters.

This is the substance of the Book as touching the Ordination of Ministers,
from which it appears That Ministers made during the prevalency of Episcopacy,
were (for the substance of their call) called according to the mind of Christ,
and therefore lawful Ministers.

But it will be objected,

That the Ministers we plead for were made by Bishops distinct from Presbyters*
Object.
who had no power nor authority to Ordain them; and not only so, but by
Bishops who held themselves to be a superior Order of Ministry by divine right
above Presbyters, who were not only Bishops but Lord Bishops, who were wicked
and Antichristian, and whom we have renounced and sworn to endeavor to
extirpate in our late solemn League and Covenant.

What our opinio n is concerning the divine right of Episcopacy, Answ.
and what difference there is between a Presbyter Bishop, and a Bishop over
Presbyters, between a Scripture Bishop and the Bishop that obtained in the
Primitiv^ times and the Bishop of our times, we shall have occasion to declare
hereafter. For the present, before we return an answer to this great objection
consisting of many particulars, we must crave leave to premise these few
conclusions, many of which we shall in the next proposition prove at large.

That according to the mind of God a Bishop and a Presbyter are all one:
Conclusion 1.
The Scripture owns no Bishop over Presbyters, but only a Presbyter-Bishop.

Conclu. 2.
That the Laws of the Realm acknowledge nothing by divine right in a Bishop
but his being a Presbyter. Sir Ed. Cook de jure Regis Eccles. fol. 8.
Sir Edward Cook makes it one part of the Kings jurisdiction to grant to
Bishops that Ecclesiastical power they now exercise over us (speaking of his
times) and also to take it from them at pleasure, Printed 1543. and called The
institution of a Christian man.
etc. In Henry the 8the. days there was a Book Printed for all his subjects to
receive, seen and allowed by both Houses of Parliament, wherein is said Of
these two Orders only, that is to say, Priests and Deacons, the Scripture
makes express mention, and how they were conferred by the Apostles by prayer,
and imposition of hands. By which it is evident, That the Laws of the Realm
do not acknowledge the divine right of Prelacy.

That most of our Bishops in King Edwards and Queen Elizabeth's days did freely
confess, Co^c^^. 3.
That Episcopacy as it differed from Presbytery was only of humane right and
not from divine institution. This Bishop Jewel confesses in his answer to
Harding, and brings diverse of the Ancient Fathers of the same judgment, whose
sayings we shall hereafter mention. The same is affirmed by Archbishop Whitgift
against Carewright, and by Bishop Downam in the Preface to his defense of his
Sermon Preached at the consecration of the Bishop of Bath and Wells.

That the best learned* even amongst the Papists themselves* Conclu. 4.
do confess, That a Bishop is not a superior order of Ministry above a
Presbyter, but only a superior dignity* That Sacerdotium, that is, as they
call it, The Priesthood, is the highest order in the Church. That a Bishop is
only (...) Presbyter; The first Presbyter, or, as Bellarmine calls him* major
(...), Episcopacy is not another Order distinct from the Priesthood says
Caepr^^lus.

No Prelate has more concerning Sacramental power, or of Order, then simple
Priests. So Armachanus, Armach. lib. 11. c 2. Bell. de Cleric. lib. 1. cap. 11.
As concerning Sacerdotal order, and things that pertain to Order, they are
equal. Thus Bellarmine himself. Although a Bishop and Presbyter are
distinguished, yet as concerning Sacrifice they exercise the same Ministry, and
therefore they make one Order, and not two. Cusanus goes further; Cusa,
concor. lib. 2. cap. 13.
All Bishops, and happily also Presbyters, are of equal power in respect of
jurisdiction, although not of execution; which executive power is shut up and
restrained by certain positive Laws, The Master of the Sentences says, That
the Canons acknowledge only two sorts of holy orders; Diaconatum, sc. and
Presbyteratum, quia hos solos primitiva Ecclesia legitur habuisse, and de his
solis praeceptum Apostoli ^abamus. That is, The Deacon and the Presbyter.
Lombard lib. 4. did. 24.
Because the Primitive Church had no other, Estius in libr. quart and did. 24.
and the Apostolic precept speaks of no other. Estins tells us, That Aquinas,
Waldensis, Bonaventure, and most of the other Schoolmen are of this opinion:
And Doctor Field in his 5th. Book of the Church has this remarkable passage
Touching the preeminence of Bishops above Presbyters, there is some difference
among the School Divines: For the best Learned amongst them are of opinion that
Bishops are not greater then Presbyters in the power of consecration or order,
but only in the exercise of it and in the power of jurisdiction* seeing
Presbyters may Preach and Minister the greatest of all Sacraments by virtue of
their Consecration and order* as well as Bishops. Touching the power of
consecration or order, says Durandus, Duran. in 4* Sentent. did. 24. qu. 5.
it is much doubted of amongst Divines, whether any be greater then an ordinary
Presbyter: For Hierome seems to have been of opinion, that the highest power
of consecration or order i^ the power of a Priest or Elder, so that every
Priest in respect of his Priestly power, may Minister all Sacraments, confirm
the Baptized, give all orders, all blessings, and consecrations, but that for
the avoiding of the peril of Schism, it was Ordained that one should be
chosen, who should be named a Bishop, whom the rest should obey, and to whom it
was reserved to give orders, and to do some other things which none but Bishops
do. And afterward he says, That Hierome is clearly of this opinion, and much
more to this purpose. Now hence it follows necessarily.

Conclu.
That the power of Ordination of Ministers exercised for these many hundred
years by Bishops, did belong to them as Presbyters and not as Bishops, and that
the act and exercise of it was restrained to them potius ad honorem Sacerdotii
and in remedium schismatis quam ad Legis ^^cessitatem: rather for the honor of
the Priesthood, and (as was then their opinion) for the remedy of Schism, then
for any necessity of Law. For the Scripture warrants no such practice, as we
shall show hereafter.

Now this flows from the former conclusion. For if Episcopacy be the same
Order of Ministers with Presbytery, and the Ecclesiastical power equal in both,
and a Bishop be nothing else in the opinion of Antiquity, but a chief
Presbyter, or the President of the Presbytery, and of the same rank with them,
then all the acts he does, he must do by virtue of his Presbyterial
consecration. This is demonstrable (even our adversaries being Judges) from
this Argument.

Because a Bishop made per saltum, that never had the Ordination of a
Presbyter, can neither consecrate and administer the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, nor Ordain a Presbyter, himself being none, nor do any act peculiarly
appertaining to Presbyters. Ordination therefore (says Mr. Ball) is reserved
to the Bishop, not in respect of superiority in degree of Ministry above his
brethren, Answer to Mr. Can. page 96.
for if he be no Presbyter he cannot make Presbyters, but for order sake, and
to prevent Schism and division, being for substance of the same Order and
consecration with them. Dr. Field manageth the same argument these or words. Of
the Church lib. 3. cap. 39.


A Presbyter (says he) ordained per saltum that never was consecrated or
ordained a Deacon, may notwithstanding do all those Act^ that pertain to the
Deacons Order (because the higher Order does always imply in it the lower and
inferior in an eminent and excellent sort.) But ^ Bishop Ordained per saltum,
that never had the Ordination of a Presbyter, can neither Consecrate and
Administer the Sacrament of the Lords body, nor Ordain a Presbyter, himself
being non^, nor do any act peculiarly, pertaining to Presbyters. Whereby it is
most Evident ( says Dr. Field) That that wherein a Bishop excels a
Presbyter, is not a distinct Power of Order,, but an Eminency and Dignity
only, specially yielded to one above all the rest of the same Rank, for Order
sake, and to preserve the unity and peace of the Church.

What peace and Order was preserved hereby in the Church, we shall show
afterward: For the present it is most clear, even from the testimony of
Episcopal men themselves, That a Bishop is of the same Order and Rank with a
Presbyter, and that his acts of Ordination were exercised by him as a
Presbyter, not as a Bishop.

These things premised, we now come to Answer to the Objection, and to every
branch of it. Object. 1.


The Ministers we plead for were made by Bishops distinct from Presbyters who
had no power nor authority to Ordain them. Answ. 1.


The Bishop though distinct from his Presbyters, yet he did not Ordain them
alone, but together with the laying on of the hands of other Presbyters he
being as the first and chief Presbyter, or is Pr^ses Presby^^rii, The President
of the Presbytery.

The Bishop that ordained them was also himself a Presbyter, Answ. 2.
and had power as a Presbyter to Ordain, and therefore by virtue of his
Presbyterial capacity his Ordination must needs be valid and lawful. Even as
when a Bishop conse^rateth the Bread and Wine at the Lords Supper, he does it
not as a Bishop (though he be one) but as a Presbyter; so also when the
Ordains a Minister (which is an act of a far^ inferior nature) he does it by
virtue of a power belonging to him as a Presbyter, not as a Bishop distinct
from a Presbyter, much less as a Lord-Bishop.

This is that which is said in the Ordinance of Parliament for Ordination.
Whereas the word Presbyter, that is to say Elder, and the word Bishop, do in
the holy Scripture intend and signify one and the same function, although the
Title of Bishop has been by corrupt custom appropriated to one, and that unto
him a^cribed, and by him assumed as in other things* so in that matter of
Ordination that was not meet; which Ordination notwithstanding being performed
by him, a Presbyter joined with other Presbyters, we hold for substance to be
valid, and not to be disclaimed by any that have received it. And that
Presbyters so Ordained, being lawfully thereunto appointed and authorized, may
ordain other Presbyters. In the office and calling of Bishops two things ar^ to
be considered says Mr. Ball.

1. The substance of their office and Ministry whereunto they are separated,
Answer to Can. page 93.
to wit, to Preach the Gospel, dispense the Sacraments, and Administer the
Discipline of Jesus Christ. And this is of God.

2. The superiority they take or challenge over their Brethren whether in
Ordination or Jurisdiction, and this is of man. But they make not a difference
or nullity in the substance of their Ministry. All Ministers of the Gospel are
stewards of Jesus Christ, se^ apart to do his work wherein if any one shall
challenge more th^^ of right appertains to him, or do ought out of pride,
partiality, sinister affection, tyranny, or sedition: or receive such authority
to himself alone, as belongs not to his place and office, or is common to
many; in that he is blame worthy: but thereupon his Ministry or Ministerial
acts done by him are not made void, or of none effect.

But the Bishop that Ordained these Ministers you plead for, Object.
Ordained them as a Bishop by virtue of his Episcopal consecration, and not as
a Presbyter, by virtue of his Presbyterial Order.

This is not true of all Bishops* Answ. 1.
For as Mr. Firmin tells us, he heard a Reverend Minister of a Congregational
Church in Essex, say That when the Bishop Ordained him, he told him: I do
Ordain you as I am a Presbyter.

2. Suppose he did, this wa^ his personal error, but did not ^word; his power
of Ordination as a Presbyter. Suppose a man made a Constable by lawful
authority, should afterward unwarrantably assume the power of a Justice of the
Peace, and should do things which belong to his place as a Constable under the
Title of a Justice of Peace, should not this act of his be valid though he
pretends to do it upon a wrong title.

Mr. Buroughs in his Heart-divisions has this observable passage. Page 184.
If a man does a thing that he may do by virtue of 2 relations, or either of
them, it may be he thinks he stands in one of these relations which indeed he
does not, yet he does the action by virtue of it in his own thoughts, in this
he sins; but there is another relation wherein he stands, that is enough to
warrant the action that he does to be lawful. Now though he does not intend the
acting by this relation, the action may be sin to him, but not at all sin to
those that join with him in it. If he will go upon a false ground, when he may
go upon a true, let him look to it. I will join with him in that action as
warranted for him to do by virtue of his second relation, which it may be he
will not own himself. He gives this instance. Giving alms is a work that a man
may do either by virtue of Church-office, as a Deacon, or as a Christian, whom
God has blessed in his estate, or betrusted with the distribution of what
others betrust him with, Now suppose a man is in the place of a Deacon, he
thinks, himself to be in that office by a right call into it, and he gives out
the alms of his Church by virtue of his call; but I am persuaded his call to
that office is not right, he is not a true Deacon; yet if I be in want, I
knowing that bothhe and those who have given him moneys to dispose, may and
ought to distribute to those that are in need, by virtue of another relation,
as men, as Christians, enabled by God, surely then I may receive alms from him
lawfully, though his principle by which he gives them me is sin to him. I may
communicate with him in this thing, though he acts by virtue of that offece
that he had no true call unto etc. Much more may the like be said of receiving
Ordination from a Bishop, who has power to confer it as a Presbyter, though he
gave it by virtue of his Episcopal consecration.

Object. 3.
But the Ministers whose Ordinations you defend were made by Bishops, who held
themselves to be a superior order of Ministry above Presbyters by divine
Institution. Whether they did so or no, we know not, but sure we are, that the
Bishops of King Edwa^d and Queen Elizabeth's days were not of this opinion,
Answ.
as we have showed. That the laws of the Realm do not countenance it, that the
learnedest of the Papists are against it, and if any of the Bishops of late
years were of this opinion, it was their personal error, and not at all
essential to the Episcopal Office.

Object. 4.
The Ministers we speak against were made not only by Bishops, but Lord Bishops.

Ans.
But not as Lord-Bishops. The Lordly dignities of Bishops were mere civil
additaments annexed to their Bishoprics by Kingly favor, not essential
ingredients into their Office. And therefore when they were taken from them
they continued not only Presbyters, Objct. 5.
but Bishops.

The Bishops from whom these Ministers received their Ordination were wicked
and ungodly, and therefore their Ordination must needs be wicked and ungoldly.

This is not true of all of them. Some of them were godly, and some of them
have shed their bloods for the Gospel sake. And he that shall call such Bishops
wicked and ungodly, is notoriously guilty of the breach of the 9. commandment.
2. Supposing, though not granting, Ans. 2.
that all of them were wicked and ungodly, yet notwithstanding though we are
far from justifying their ungodliness, We answer.

That some evil men may and always have de facto been officers and Ministers
in the Church. In the Church of the Jews Hophni and Phinehas, in the days of
Christ* Scribes and Pharisees.

2. That the wickedness of such men did not null or evacuate their ministerial
acts. The Scribes and Pharisees that sat in Moses his chair were to be heard,
though they said and did not. Christ's commission did as well authorize Judas as
any other to Preach and baptize, etc.

And surely if the Principal acts belongingto the Ministerial function, as
Preaching, Baptizing, adminstring the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, be not
nulled or made void by the personal wickedness of Ministers, then, consequently
not their ordination. So that if Judas had been an Apostle when Christ sent his
Apostles to ordain Elders* his Ordination should have been as valid as his
Preaching, and Baptizing formerly had been. The Leprosy of the hand does not
hinder the growing of the corn which that hand sows.

But these Bishops were Antichristian, Object. 6.
and their office Antichristian, and therefore the Ministers ordained by them
must needs be Antichristian Ministers and not the Ministers of Christ.

For satisfaction to this objection, we shall first propose what the ancient
learned and godly Non-conformists have left in print about it, Ans.
and then we will lay down our own answer. The old Non-conformists by joint
consent have written, That they did not see how our Bishops could be called
Antichrists, or Antichristian. 1. Because the word m^rks out Antichrist by his
false Doctrine: nor do we find in holy Scripture any such accounted Antichrist
or Antichristian, which holding the truth of Doctrine, swerveth, either in
judgment or practice, from Christ's rule for Discipline. Now it is evident that
our Bishops do hold and teach all fundamental doctrines and truths, and some of
them have soundly maintained them against Heretics, converted many to the
truth and have suffered persecution for the Gospel.

2. Their Hierarchy and other corruptions, charged upon the calling of our
Bishops, were rather to be esteemed the stairs and way to Antichristianity,
then Antichristianity ^t self; for they were in the Church, before the Pop^,
who is the Antichrist, and the chief Head link of all Antichristianity, was
revealed.

3. The Antichristian Bishops hold their preeminence as from Gods law, which is
unchangeable; whereas our Bishops since his Majesty's reign to this day (for
the most part) hold superiority by no other right then the positive law, which
is variable; yea it appears by the institution of the Court of Delegates, and
the continuance thereof to this day, that they do and ought by law to hold
their Jurisdiction, not as from God, but is from the Prince. Thus they.

And as to the Ministers Ordained by Bishops, they say.

Bishops are able to judge of such gifts as are required for the sufficiency
of Ministers, that many of them have been such Ministers themselves, as to
whose labors the Lord has set to his Seal. We are persuaded, that though it
were not necessary, yet it cannot be unlawful for him that enters into the
ministry to be approved, and authorized even by them. Andif our Ordination be
in this behalf faulty, how will our Brethren justify the calling of their own
Ministers that have received Ordination ever from the people, who neither by
commandment nor example can be found to have any such authority, nor are in
any degree so capable of it as the Bishops.

Thus much is said by the old Nonconformist.

For our own particulars we shall return an answer to this objection by
distinguishing of the word Bishop and the word Antichristian.

There are three sorts of Bishop, the Scripture-Bishop, the Bishop of the first
Primitive times, and the Bishop of latter times Now we are far from thinking
that the scripture Bishop (that is to say the Presbyter) or the Bishop of the
first Primitive times (who was nothing else but a chief Bresbyter or the
Moderator of the Presbytery and had a Priority, not of power but of order
only, like a Speaker in the Parliament) were Antichristian. The question only
is about the Bishop of latter times.

The word Antichristian may be taken prope^ly or improperly. An Antichristian
Minister prope^ly is one that own's the Pope as a visible Monarchical head over
the Church, and that stands a Minister with subjection and subordination to the
Church of Rome, and that professedly maintains the Popish religion. An
Antichristian Minister improperly is one that in his calling and office has
diverse things that are Antichristian.

In the first sense we believe none will say our Bishops were Antichristians.

But yet we cannot deny, but that those Bishops who did take upon them by
divine right the care of whole Diocesses, and did assume the whole power of
jurisdiction over the people and Ministers therein* and did challenge a
Majority and tantum non a sole power in Ordination* did symbolize herein too
much with Antichrist, and had in this sense much of Antichristianisme in them;
yet notwithstanding this is not sufficient to denominate them Antichristian, no
more then the having of some hypocrisy and covetousness, does denominate a
godly man, an hypocrite, or a covetous person. The denomination is always a
meliore, From the better part.
Our Bishops for the most part were very Orthodox in doctrine and pure in the
substantialls of worship, and have written many learned treatises against
Popery and Antichristianisme. Indeed in matters of Discipline and ceremonies
they were exceeding faulty, and some of them of late years began to Apo^^atize
both in doctrine and worship, for which God has grieviously punished them; yet
all this is not sufficient to make them Antichristian properly so called, much
less to null all their acts of Ordination no more then their acts of
preaching, baptizing, and administering theLords supper specially if we consider
that they had power enabling them to perform all these acts as they were
Presbyters, though they never had been Bishops.

B^t let us suppose (though not grant) the Bishops were Antichristian, and
their office Antichristian yet we answer.

That it will not follow that the Ministers made by them are Antichristian
unless it can also be made out (which never can be done) that they were
Antichristian in the very act of Ordination. Ans.


For as a maimed man may beget a perfect child, because he begets him not as
maimed but as a man. So an Antichristian Bishop may ordain a true Minister,
because he ordaines him; not a^ Antichristian, but as a Presbyter, that by
divine warrant has authority so to do. As Austin against the Donatists proves
the validity of Baptism by Heretics, if they Baptized with water in the name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though in other points they were Heretical.
So certainly a Minister ordained to Preach the Word and administer the
Sacraments according to the mind of Christ is a lawful Minister, though
ordained by a Bishop in other points Antichristian, considering that in that
one act he is not Antichristian, but does that which he has warrant from the
Scripture to do though he were not a Bishop. The word Sacraments, and Ministry
are the institutions of Jesus Christ. And these are not made null and void
though the power to dispense them in foro externo be conveyed to us by
corrupt Instruments, no more then the Scriptures were polluted because offered
by Hophni and Phinehas, or the Chair of Moses defiled, because the Scribes and
Pharisees sat in it. We must carefully distinguish (as a learned Minister well
says) the acts of office (which have their form and being from a root or
fountain without us) from the qualities of the man that performs the office.
The man may be naught, yet his office good; and acts done by virtue of his
Office, Just and allowable, although the man and his religion be naught. As for
instance. A Popish Landlord makes you a l^ase of a Farm, your lease is not
antichristian, but good in Law, though he that demised it, be for his Religion,
a Papist. A Popish Judge does pass a sentence in Court, which stands good in
Judicature, his sentence is not Popish* though he that pronounced it be a
Papist; the reason is, because the legal sentence is not of him, nor from him,
as a Papist, but as a Judge, who does but deliver that which he has received
from an higher root, the Law. So in this case, Ordination is an act of Office
received from Christ and is not Antichristian, though executed by one that is
in other things Antichristian. We do not rebaptize them that were baptized by a
popish Priest, because the power ofGods Ordinance depends not on theperson that
does execute the same, but upon an higher foundation, the institution of
Christ. Ministerial acts are not vitiated or made null, though they p^sse
through the hands of bad men; But stand good to all intents and purposes to
such as receive them aright, by virtue of their Office authoritatively derived
from the first institution. A Bishop in his Presbyterial capacity has divine
right to ordain, and therefore his Ordination is valid, though it be granted
that he is Antichristian in his Episcopal capacity.

If a Minister made by a Bishop be a lawful Minister, Object. 7.
why then did you in your late covenant abjure Episcopacy with all its
dependencies? Ans.


We did not swear in our covenant to endeavor the extirpation of Scripture
Episcopacy which is Presbytery; but of Prelacy, that is, of those Lordly titles
which Bishops were invested withal, and of their unjust usurpation of a sole
power of jurisdiction and of a Majority of power in Ordination together with
their Chancellours and Commissaries and the rest of the Hierarchy* But we never
did and never shall (by God^ Grace) renounce them as Presbyters, which by
consent of all sides are by divine right, nor Ordination by them upon that
account, which we doubt not but is lawful and valid, and will appear so to be
at the great Tribunal.

And thus we have answered this objection with all the branches of it.

There is one objection of great concerment yet behind. But before we mention
it we shall propose three other Arguments for the Justification of the
Ministry, made during the prevalency of Episcopa^y.

Argument 2.
From the glorious success God gave unto it during the reign of Prelacy. For
since our Ordination, God has sealed to the truth of our Ministry, and has
blessed it with the Conversion of many Thousand souls unto God. Now that
Ministry that God does ordinarily bless with bringing forth sons and daughters
unto God, that Ministry must needs be a Ministry sent of God; For God has
threatened (as we have often said) That a false Ministry shall not profit. Jer.
23.32.
And the Apostle proves the lawfulness of his Ministry, by the success it had
upon the hearts of the Corinthians 1. Cor. 9.1, 2. There are many of those that
cry down our Ministry as Antichristian, and separate from us as no Ministers,
that cannot deny but that they had their conversion (if they are at all
converted) from us. And if our Ministry be Antichristian, how is their
conversion Christian?

From the ends and purposes for which we were Ordained. Argu. 3.
They that were Ordained by Bishops, together with other Ministers for no other
end and purpose, but to Preach the Word, and Administer the Sacraments
according to the will of Christ, are lawful Ministers of Christ.

But so were the Ministers Ordained during the prevalency of Episcopacy.

Ergo.

He that shall say, That a Minister that Preaches Christ and his truths, and
administreth ^he Sacraments according to the mind of Christ, is an
Antichristian Minister, because of some defects in his entrance, does more
advance and honor Antichrist, then he does disparage or disgrace us. Mr. Ball
(no friend to Episcopal Government) in his answer to Mr. Can, has these words.
In every true Church where the Word of God is entirely preached and received,
and the Sacraments for substance rightly administered, there is a true Ministry'
and a true calling to the Ministry, though in some things maimed and faulty.

From the destructive mischiefs, Argu. 4.
and Church-ruining consequences that do naturally flow from this assertion.
For he that shall undertake to make good this desperate proposition (as that
learned and godly man so often cited, justly calls it) That a Minister made by
a Bishop, Mr. Ball.
is no Minister of Christ, but of Antichrist, must also be forced to confess
and acknowledge;

1. That Mr. Bradford, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Philpot, Dr. Tayl^r, Mr. Saunders, and
the rest of those blessed Saints and Ministers, who laid down their lives in
defense of the Gospel against Antichrist. were Antichristian Ministers.

2. He nulli^ieth and and makes void all the Ministerial acts performed by the
Ministers of England ever since the Reformation. For if our Ministry be no true
Ministry, then is our Baptism no true Baptism, the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper no true Sacrament, our Church no true Church.

3. He must acknowledge that there was neither Church, Sacraments, nor Ministry
in the whole Christian World for many hundred years past. For it is without
dispute, that there was no other way of entering into the Ministry for many
hundred years in the Church of Christ, but by the Ordination of Bishops.

4. He must be forced (if a Minister) to renounce his Ministry, and take it up
again from the people, who (as the old Non conformists well say) have neither
commandment nor example in all the New Testament, to authorize them to Ordain
him. And by this means he overthrows the whole Ministry a nd Church of Jesus
Christ, and will be necessitated at last to renounce all Churches, and all
Ministry and turn Seekers, as some do in our days, even upon these very gro
unds and Principles.

Now then if the denying of our Ministry during the reign of Episcopacy to be a
lawful^ Ministry be the parental cause of such horrid and desperate
consequences, we doubt not but it will be abhorred and abominated by all sober
and godly Christians. And that our people that read these lines will be rooted
and established in this great Truth.

That the call to the Office of the Ministry which some of our Ministers did
receive during the prevalency of Episcopacy was lawful and valid for the
substance of it, though mingled with many circumstantial defects.

CHAP. III. Wherein the great Objection against our Ministry as being derived
from Rome, is answered.
But the great objection (of which we even now spoke) against this proposition,
is,
Object.
IF we justify the lawfulness of Episcopal Ordination, then it will also
follow that we must justify the Ordination that is in the Church of Rome. For
if Ordination by our Bishops be lawful, then these Bishops themselves must be
be lawful Ministers, and then their Ordination must also be lawful, and so by
consequence it will follow, That those in the Church of Rome, from whom the
Protestant Ministers in the beginning of the Reformation had their Ordination,
were true Ministers of Christ. For if they were not, then were not our
Ministers made by them the Ministers of Christ. And if they were, then may a
Minister of Antichrist be a Minister of Christ, and Ordination received from
the Pope of Rome be a Scripture Ordination.

Answ.
Before we answer to this great Objection we shall premise this one distinction

It is one thing to receive a Ministry from the Apostate Church of Rome as the
author of it, another thing to receive a Ministry from Jesus Christ through,
the Apostate Church of Rome.

Our Antiministerial adversaries, if they would argue aright, their objection
must be thus framed.

The Ministry which has the Pope of Rome, Object.
or (which is all one) That has Antichrist for the author of it, is Popish and
Antichristian. But such is the Ministry of the Church of England.

Ergo.

We deny the Minor: For we say, Answ.
That our ministry is derived to us from Jesus Christ. We are his Ministers and
his Ambassadors. It is he that gave Pastors and Teachers to his Church as well
as Apostles and Evangelists.. We say, That Ordination of Ministers by
Ministers, is no Romish institution but instituted by the Lord Jesus himself
long before Antichrist was. That our Ministry is descended to us from Christ
through the Apostate Church of Rome, but not from the Apostate Church of Rome.
And that this great objection (which some say is unanswerable) must of
necessity be summed up into this argument.

Those Ministers which stand by an institution of Christ descending to them
from the Apostles through the antichristian Church of Rome, Object.
are ministers of Antichrist and not of Christ.

But such are our Ministers, Ergo.

But here we deny the Major as utterly false; we say, Ans.
That the Ministry which is an institution ofChrist, passing to us through
Rome, is not made null and void, no more then the Scriptures, Sacraments, or
any other Gospel-Ordinance which we now enjoy, and which do also descend to us
from the Apostles, through the Romish Church.

Now that this great Truth so necessary to be known in these days, may be
fully made out to our respective Congregations, we shall crave leave a little to
enlarge our selves in the proof of it, and shall for this end offer these
ensuing considerations to be seriously weighed by all that fear God amongst us.

That the Lord Jesus has given the Ministry to the Church to continue till we
all come to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
Ephesians. 4.11.12.13^
unto a perfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
which will never be till the day of judgment. And he has promised to be with
the Apostles teaching and baptizing always even unto the end of the World; which
must needs be understood of them and their successors. Matthew. 28.20 Math. 16.18.
He has promised that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church
(which Mr. Hooker Mr. Cotton and others, expound of the universal visible
Church existing in its particulars) The Apostle Paul also says, Hooker Part.
1. c. 11.
That the Sacrament of the Lords supper is to be observed, and to continue till
the coming of Christ. And that glory is to be given to God by Christ Jesus in
the Church [(...)] throughout all generations and ages. 1. Cor. 11.26.
It is also prophesied concerning the Kingdom and Government of Jesus Christ,
both invisible and visible, that it shall abide to the end of the world. Ephesians.
3.21.
Luc. 1.33. Isaiah 9.6.7. By all these te^ts, it is evident, That there was,
i^, and shall be a true Church, and a true Ministry preserved by Jesus Christ,
even unto the end of the World. How can glory be given to God in the Church
throughout all ages, if there should be an age in which the Church should be
utterly lost? How can the Sacrament be continued in the Church till Christ
come, if there were so many hundred years in which there was no true Ministry?
How can it be said That Christ is with his Ministers always even unto the end of
the World, and that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, and
that there is no end of Christ's Government, if during all the reign of
Antichrist, there was no true Church State in the world, no true Ordinance, as
some say, no true Ministry? And therefore though we should not be able to tell
how the Church and Ministry was preserved in the midst of that great and
general Apostasy that has been in the Christian World; yet notwithstanding we
ought to believe that it is so, because Christ has said it shall be so, and
heaven and earth shall ^asse away, but not one title of Gods word shall pass
away. Mr. Bartlet, in his Model of the Congregational way, spends the most part
of a Chapter to prove That the essentials of a Church State together with the
Officers, Ordinances and administrations thereunto appertaining, has, and
shall abide for ever in the World. This he proves both by Prophesies,
promises, and precepts of Scripture, Mr. Bartlet. chapter 4.

Mr. Philips against Tho. Lambert. P. 144* 145.


and also by diverse reasons. The same task is also undertaken by Mr. Philips of
Watertown in New England; but for brevity we forebear transcribing them.

We read Revel. 12. of a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun
etc. This woman represents the Christian Church, she is persecuted by the
heathen Emperors and overthrows them by the blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of her testimony and by not loving her life unto the death. Afterward she
is persecuted by Antichrist, and then she flies into the wilderness where she
has a place prepared her of God, that they should feed her a thousand two
hundred and threescore days Verse. 6. and she i^ said to be nourished in the
wilderness for a time, times and half a time, from the face of the Serpent,
verse 14. Note here. 1. That by the 1260 days, and a time, times, and half a
time, is meant the whole time of Antichrists reign. 2. That the Church during
the whole reign of Antichrist should be in a sad lamentable and Wilderness
condition. 3. That maugre all the fury of the ten-headed, or two-headed beast,
yet notwithstanding the Church of Christ should be preserved and kept safe. For
there were two wings of a great Eagle given unto her to enable her to fly into
the Wilderness where she is fed and nourished 42. Months. And all this is to
be understood not only of a Church entitative, or a Church without Officers,
but of a Church instituted or Ministerial, a Church administering Ordinances.
For this woman is not only kept alive in the Wilderness all the time of
Antichrists reign, but she is fed and nourished by Gospel-Administra^ions. ^he
is fed by the Two witnesses (for the prophesying of the witnesses is
contemporary with the woman's flight into the Wilderness) Even a^ Elias was
nourished in the Wilderness and kept safe from the fury and rage of Iezebel.
And as God reserved 7000. that had not bowed their knees to Baal etc. and by
good Obadiah preserved an hundred Prophets of the Lord alive all the time of
Ahabs bitter opposition against them* Even so was the Woman, that is, The
Church of Christ, reserved and nourished by the Ordinances, Scriptures, and
Ministry of Christ, (though in a Wildernesse-condition) all the time of
Antichrist's prevalency.

The like to this we read of in the 11. of the Revelation, where we have two
things very observable for our purpose. The one concerning the Temple measured,
and the outward Court unmeasured. The other concerning the two Witnesses.

1. Concerning the Temple measured and the outward Court unmeasured. Romans 11.1,
2.
The outward Court was to be left out or cast out, to wit, as profane, and
that which God will make no account of; It was not to be measured, but to be
given unto the Gentiles (that is the Antichristian party) to be trod under
foot, forty and two Months; that is, all the time of Antichrists reign. The
meaning is, (as Mr. M^de well observes)* That the Antichristian Apostasy
which he calls redivivus Ethnicismus) shall prevail over the Christian Church,
Heathenism revived.
and shall bring in a new kind of Idolatry into the places where the true
Religion was professed.

But now the Temple and the Altar, and they that worship therein are to be
measured with a divine reed. This measuring is an allusion to Ezekiel. 40.1. etc.
where the Temple, with all in it, was to be measured by Gods appointment, to
show, that that building was of God. So must the true Church of Christ under
Antichrist be measured, that is, kept pure from Antichrist's Idolatry, walking
exactly according to the Rule of the Word, and also kept safe from Antichrist's
rage and fury.

1. Note here, That though the outward Court was given to the Gentiles to be
trodden down, yet the Temple with the worshippers therein was not given.

2. That during the prevalency ofAntichrist, the Temple and Altar and
worshippers therein, that is, a true Church, and a true Ministry, and true
Gospel Ordinances, are preserved and kept safe. While the outward Court is
worshipping the Beast, the true Church is serving God according to his Word, as
in the inner Court of the Temple.

Our English Annotations say; That by the measuring of the Temple and altar,
and the worshippers therein, is signified. 1. The fewness ^f the true
Christians under Antichrist, in comparison of the Id^latrous, ones as the
Priests and Levites, that worshipped in the inner Court, were few in comparison
of the people that worshipped in the outward. 2. That Gods people, while
Antichrist raged, should have a place in the Wilderness where they might serve
God according to his will, as the Jews offered sacrifices on the alt^r in the
Temple, and which should be for safety, as a Sanctuary unto them, Isai. 8.14.
Ezekiel* 11.16. Therefore Temple, and altar, and worshippers, and all are
measured. So Jerusalem is measured after the captivity, that it may be
inhabited again. Zech. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. etc.

2. The Second thing observable is concerning the two Witnesses, who are said
to Prophecy in sackcloth 1260. days, that is, all the time of the reign of
Antichrist. By the Two Witnesses in general are meant Omnes Veritatis divinae
interpretes and assertores (says Mr. Mede). All the Interpreters and assertors
of divine truth, qui soedam illam and lachrymabilem Ecclesi ae Christi
contaminationem assiduis querelis deflere^t etc. who should by their daily
complaints bewail the foul and lamentable pollution of Christ's Church. These
Witnesses are said to be two for the fewness of them, and because two
witnesses were sufficient to confirm any truth, and also in al^usion to Mos^s
and A^ron in the Wilderness, To Elijah and Elisha when the Israelites
worshipped the Calves, and Baal; To Zerubbabel and I^hoshua in Babylon, and
after the return of the Israelites from captivity.

For our parts, we conceive that by the Two witnesses in a more especial manner
are meant the True Ministers of Jesus Christ who are called Witnesses of
Christ, Act. 1.8. and whose proper Office it is to bear witness to truth and
holiness, against all the Heresies, Blasphemies, Idolatries, and ungodliness
of Antichrist. Now these two witnesses are said to Prophecy (though clothed
in Sackcloth) all antichrists reign, which is a clear and demonstrative
argument to us, That there has been a true Ministry, preserved by God from the
beginning of the Christian Church even to this very day, Dr. Whites way to the
Church dig^. 52.

Bishop Usher de successione Eccl.

Simon Berkbeck Protestants Evidence.

Catalogus Testium veritatis.


notwithstanding the great and universal Apostasy that has been in it. And our
learned Protestants in diverse Books have given us a Catalogue of the faithful
Ministers of God, and other godly men whom the Lord raised up in all ages of
the Church to bear witness against the growing and spreading abominations of
Antichristianisme in the Christian World.

3. The third thing we offer to consideration is. To beseech our people,
accurately to distinguish between the Church of Rome and the Antichristianisme
of the Church of Rome, as between a man and the Plague Sore that is upon him;
and between a Field that is full of tares, and yet has some Wheat in it. It is
certain that the Church of Rome was a true Church in the Apostles days when
the faith of it was spread throughout the World, and it is as certain that
afterward by little and little it apostatized, till at last Antichrist set up
his throne in that Church. And yet still we must distinguish between the
Church, and the Apostasy of it; between the Corn and the Tares that are in it.
Thus the Apostle seems to do, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. where he puts a difference between
the Temple of God, in which the man of sin shall sit as God, and between the
man of sin sitting in this Temple. The man of sin is no part of this Temple of
God, but as a Plague of Leprosy infecting, defiling, and polluting it. But yet
the Temple of God (which is his visible Church, as appears from 1 Cor. 3.16,
17. Revel. 3.12, Revel. 11.1, 2. 2 Cor. 6.19.) does remain where the man of sin
sits, even as the Church of Pergamus did, where the seat of Satan was. Revel.
2.13.
And though we renounce the Antichristianisme which pollutes the Temple of God,
yet we do not renounce the Temple in self.

This is that which some of our Divines say: That we differ no more from Rome
then Rome differs from it self, and from what it was in the Apostles days,
neither do we refuse any Doctrine that they hold, simply because they hold it,
unless it can appear to us, that that doctrine is part of the
Antichristianisme of that Church. The Religion of the Church of Rome, is like a
piece of bread mingled with a great deal of poison. They hold many truths, but
then they poison them by their Heretial additions. They hold most that we hold,
and their Apostasy consists rather in adding to the truth, then in
detracting from it. They hold the Scriptures we hold, but they add Apocryphal
to the Canonical Scriptures. They hold Christ the Head of the Church, but the
Pope also. They hold Justification by Faith as we do, but they add
Justification by works also; They hold praying to God, but add praying to
Saints; They hold two Sacraments, but add five more etc. Thus their Religion is
bread and poison mingled together, and whosoever living amongst them can
separate the bread from the poison, shall find bread enough to nourish him unto
eternal life.

And the reason why we separated from them, was because they would not suffer
us to eat the bread unless we would eat the poison also. Even as a man that
is drinking a cup of Wine, and another comes and puts a Toade in it, and will
not suffer him to drink the Wine unless he will drink the Toade also. This was
our condition Unless we would swallow down all their Antichristian additions
to Gods Word, they would not suffer us to live amongst them, and hereupon we
separated, and may justly be said to be non fugitivi, sed fugati. Not
withdrawing, but driven away. And which is very observable; When the Protestant
Churches did separate, they did not erect a New Church but reformed a corrupt
Church. And therefore ours is called The Protestant Reformed Religion. Not, A
New Religion. We take away their heretical superstructions, but still keep the
Truths which they hold; We put away the poison, but keep the bread; We take out
the toad, but yet do not fling away the Wine; We remove the rubbish of
Antichristianisme, but yet we do not renounce any thing of God, or of the
Scriptures that is yet remaining sincere in that Church. All this we the rather
observe, that thereby we might heed our people of that great cheat that is now
put upon the Saints of God in this Nation, in crying down all the truths of
Jesus Christ, as Antichristian, and scaring people from the doctrine of Christ
by persuading them to avoid Antichrist. There is hardly any Truth of Christ but
it is charged by some or other in our unhappie days to be Antichristian. Thus.

1. The Doctrine of the souls Immortality was, excogitata ab Antichristo ad
stabiliendam suam culinam per fictum Purgatorium, Theses Cracovia impressae.
et invocationem Sanctorum, Invented by Antichrist to uphold his Kitchen etc.
as is said by the Cracovian-Socinians. And in the Book called Man's Mortality it
is said, That the most grand and blasphemous heresies that are in the World,
the mystery of iniquity, and Kingdom of Antichrist does depend upon this
doctrine of the Souls immortality.

2. The Doctrine of the Trinity is said to be a doctrine that has Antichrist
for the author of it. Zanchius in responsione ad Arianos.

3. That Christ is God coaequal and coaeternal with the Father, this also is
called antichristian doctrine. Sic clamat Antichristus. So cries* Antichrist,
say the Arrians; Zanch. in responsione ad Arianos.

4. The doctrine of the Magistrates power in punishing Anti istian heresies and
blasphemies (which the Scripture says will be the way by which God will at
last destroy Antichrist) is said to be Antichristian. Thus Blackwood in his
storming of Antichrist.

5. The Doctrine of Infant Baptism is also called Antichristian.

6. The Doctrine of humiliation, Repentance, Sanctification, and of good works,
done out of obedience to Gods command, is antichristian, as say the Antinomians.

And who knows not, That the very places where we meet to worship God, and
the worship which we perform in those places, and that our Government of the
Church by lesser and greater Synod^, is called Antichristian? And therefore it
is no wonder if our Ministry be also so called. For we are now come to that
height, That there are some that renounce all Churches as Antichristian, even
those Churches themselves that renounce us as Antichristian. And thus by the
great subtlety of Satan under the notion of avoiding Antichristianisme there
are many people tumbling down apace to direct Athiesme; and are brought to
renounce Christ himself, lest therein they should comply with Antichrist. And
therefore we earnestly beseech and entreat our respective Congregations not to
be affrighted at the bugbear word Antichristian or Popish. But to examine,
Whether the Charge be true, and to renounce whatsoever is truly Antichristian:
But to take heed that they be not frighted from Christ and from his Ordinances,
and Government, and Worship, and Ministry under the notion of renouncing
Antichristianisme. So much for the third consideration; these three first
considerations are more general. We shall now apply our selves more punctually
to the answer of the great Objection, and desire it may be considered.

Consid. 4. In the fourth place. That it has pleased God out of his infinite
Wisdom and providence to continue the two great Ordinances of Baptism and
Ordination found for the substantials of them in the Church of Rome even in
their greatest apostasy. We deny not but they have been exceedingly bemudded
and corrupted, Baptism^ with very many superstitious ceremonies as of Oil,
Spettle, Crossings etc. Ordination with giving power to the party Ordained to
make the body of Christ etc. But yet the Substantials have been preserved.
Children were Baptized with water in the name of the Father, the Son, and Holy
Ghost. And the parties ordained had power given them to Preach the Word of God.
Now the Protestant Religion does not teach us to renounce Baptism received in
the Church of Rome, neither is a Papist, when converted Protestant, rebaptized.
Nor does it teach us simply and absolutely to renounce Ordination; but it deals
with it, as the Jews were to do with a captive maid when they had a mind to
marry her. They must shave her head and pare her nails, and put the raiment
of ^er captivity from off her, and then take her to wife. So does the
Protestant Reformed Religion.

Dout. 21 12.12.^3.
It distinguishes between the Ordinances of God and the corruptions cleaving
unto the Ordinances. It washes away all the defilements and pollution^
contracted in the Church of Rome both from Baptism and Ordination, but it does
not renounce either the one or the other.

1. Because they are none, of Antichrist's posts or Antichrist's inventions,
but are the institutions of Jesus Christ, and were in the Church of Rome long
before Antichrist sat there.

2. Because they have been preserved sound for the substantials and essentials
of them, And the truth is he that renounceth the one must needs renounce the
other; which were well if some of our dissenting Brethren would seriously
consider.

Now that this Position may not seem strange, we will a a little compare the
Apostasy of the 10. Tribes with the Apostasy of the church of Rome. The 10.
Tribes did not only worship God after a false manner by setting up their
golden Calves in Dan and Bethel, but afterward in the reign of Ahab they
directly worshipped false Gods, and set up Baal and Ashtaroth, and fell away
wholly from the true God; and yet notwithstanding all this, when the Prophet
came to ^noint Jehu, he says unto him.

Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee King over the people
of the Lord, ^ve^over Israel Here note, 2. K. 9.6.
That they are called the people of God notwithstanding their Apostasy. And the
Ordinance of Circumcision, which was retained amongst them in this their
Apostasy, was Gods Ordinance and they that were circumcised under that Apostasy
not only did not renounce their circumcision, Exodus 12.43.44.48. 2. Chron. 30
18.19.20*
but had sinned against God if they had done it, and were accordingly admitted
to the passover by H^^^kiah as truly circumcised. For Gods Ordinance^ are not
to be renounced for man's Corruptions cleaving to them, but the corruptions are
to be removed and the Ordinances embraced.

And afterward in Christ^ time it is evident, that the Office of the Priest
and the High Priest was exc^edingly corrupted. They came ordinarily into their
office by bribery, and faction. And as many learned men think there were Two
high Priest^ together ( An^as and Caiaphas) when Christ was crucified. The
Priests and Highpriests had their chief stroke in the Crucifying of Christ.
And yet we read John 11.15 Caiaphas is owned by the Holy Ghost as high Priest
etc. Act. 23. when Paul said to the High Priest, God will s^it^ thee thou
whited wall etc. and they that stood by said, R^vilest thou the High Priest?
Paul answered, I wist not* Brethren, that he was the High Priest. For it is
written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Rul^r of thy People. Here also Paul
as many think, acknowledged him as an High Priest, though the Priesthood at
that time was tyrannical, heretical, and they came by most unjust ways into
their places and offices. From all this it appears; That corruption^ cleaving
to Gods Ordinances do not null Gods Ordinances. That we are not to renounce
divine Ordinances because of circumstantial defilements annexed to them. That
Baptism and Ordination were found for the substance in the Church of Rome, and
therefore to be reformed, but not renounced.

5. The fifth thing we desire may be considered is.

That it is no disparagement to the present Ministry of the Church of England
to say, That we receive our Ministry from Christ and his Apostles, and from the
Pr^mitive Churches, through the impure and corrupt Channel of the Church of
Rome. For,

1. It was no disparagement to Jesus Christ that he received his humane nature
from Adam through many unclean channels, as Thamar, Rahab, Bethshebah, etc.

2. It is no disparagement to the holy Scriptures of the old Testament, that
the Christians received them from the Church of the Jews even after they had
crucified that Christ who was the center of the whole Old Testament. Nor is it
any disparagement to the Old and New Testament, that we receive them as
delivered to us by sucession from the Apostles through the Church of Rome,
although that Church by their corrupt Glosses and Interpretations had much
depraved and corrupted them.

3. It was no disparagement to circumcision that it came from God through the
hands of Idolaters unto Christ and his Apostles: Nor to Baptism, that it comes
to us from Christ through the Antichristian Church of Rome; insomuch as many of
those that renounce Ordination do yet retain their Baptism, though it may be
easily made to appear that it was as much corrupted as Ordination.

4. It is no disparagement to the Ordinance of Marriage, that many have been
married in the Church of Rome, and married with all the Popish Ceremonies; yet
we never heard of any that have renounced their marriage as unlawful, because
solemnized in the Church of Rome, which yet notwithstanding does hold Marriage
to be a Sacrament in a proper sense and have many corruptions in their way of
marriage, and yet it is by the Law of God and man, valid for the sustance of it.

5. It was no disparagement to the Vessels of the Temple that they had been 70.
years in Babylon, Jer. 27.21* 22. ^za. 5.14* 15.
and abused and profaned by Belshazzar, who in contempt of the God of Heaven
drank Wine in those holy, Ezi^ 5.14^
and consecrated Vessels; for afterward the Israelites made no scruple of
receiving them, and restoring them to the Temple. This is the fifth
consideration.

6. The sixth consideration is; That the receiving of our Ordination from Christ
and his Apostles and the Primitive Churches, and so all along through the
Apostate Church of Rome is so far from nullifying our Ministry, or disparaging
of it, that it is a great strengthening of it when it shall appear to all the
World, That our Ministry is derived to us from Christ and his Apostles by
succession of a Ministry continued in the Church for 1600. years. And that we
have 1. a lineal succession from Christ and his Apostles. 2. Not only a lineal
succession but that which is more, and without which the lineal is of no
benefit, we have a Doctrinal succession also.

We succeed them in Preaching the same Doctrine that they did deliver to the
Churches. The Papists boast much of a lineal succession, but they want the
Doctrinal. They succeed the Apostles as darkness succeeds light, and as
Manasseh succeeded Hezekiah. But this is the happiness of the present Ministry,
That we have both a lineal and doctrinal succession from Christ and his
Apostles.

But does not this discourse of ours, (when we say, Object.
That the essentials of a (...) true Ministry, and that Baptism and Ordination
for the Substantials of them were preserved in the Church of Rome during the
prevalency of Antichrist) make Rome to be a true Church of Christ.

There are indeed some learned Orthodox Divines That say, That the Church of
Rome is V^re Ecclesia, Answ.
though not Vera Ecclesia, is Truly a Church, though far from being a true
Orthodox Church. There are others that say, That till the last Council of Trent
the Church of Rome remained a true Church for the essentials and substantials
of it, and then it ceased to be a true Church.

The Scripture says, That Antichrist sits in the Temple of God, though he be
no part of it (as we have formerly said) no more then Satan who had his seat in
Pergamus was part of the Church of Pergamus. But for our parts we conceive we
are not at all forced by any thing that we have said to entermeddle with this
Controversy. For it does not follow, That because Ordination, which is an
Ordinance of Christ for the substance of it, was preserved in the Church of
Rome, that therefore the Church of Rome is a true Church, no more then it
follows That a Thief having the goods of an honest man in his house, which
he has stolen, should thereupon be accounted a True man. Surely The Thief is
still a thief. And so is Rome still the Mother of Harlots, notwithstanding her
possessing the Essentials of Ordination and Baptism. Even as Babylon of old,
(A type of Rome was Babylon still and far from being the Church of God*
although it had the Vessels of the Temple with her: So is the Church of Rome
still an Antichristian Church, The Mother of Harlots and abominations of the
earth, although it has had the Essentials of a true Ministry by Gods
overruling providence continued in her.

7. The Seventh and last consideration does more immediately concern the
Ministry of England, and it consists of three branches.

1. That the first conversion of the English Nation from Heathenisme unto
Christia^ity did not proceed from Rom^, but from Jerusalem. Acts and Mon. lib.
2. page 1. etc.

Whites way to the Church Sect. 49.


Mr. Fox, and Dr. John White have learnedly demonstrated out of Gildas and
sundry other Authors, who affirm that Britain received the Gospel in the time
of Tiberius the Emperor, under whom Christ was crucified, from some of the
Apostles, or some Apostolical men. It is mostly received, that Joseph of
Arimathea was sent by Philip from France to Britain about the year 63. and
laid the first foundation of the Christian faith amongst us. Tert. adv. Iudaeis
cap 7. Britannarum inaccessa Romany loca Christo vero subdita.
To this Tertullian attesteth in his Book against the Jews. And therefore it
is a falsity for Rome to challenge the conversion of the English Nation, and no
less absurdity for us to derive our succession from them.

2. That the Churches of England in their first Plantation were rightly
gathered and constituted, as being planted by the Apostles or men Apostolical.
And that true Christianity after it is first settlement in Britain was never
wholly ex^^nguished, but has continued from the very first Plantation of it, to
this very day. This Dr. White proves against the Papists in his way to the
Church,. 49. Where he shows; That the Faith continued here from King Lucius
to the coming of Austin the Monk, whom Gregory sent hither 600. years after
Christ; who when he came found diverse Britain Bishops and learned men, with a
Monastery at Bangor who did oppose Arrianisme and P^lagianisme, and the pride
of Austin the Popes Ambassador.

3. That during the reign of Antichrist here in England, God reserved unto
himself many Thousands that never bowed their knees to Baal, as appears in the
Book of Martyrs. And amongst other^ he raised up Mr. Wickliffe, and made him a
great and famous instrument of Church-reformation. Our London Divines in their
Appendix to the jus divinum of Church government prove out of good Authors,
that in this Church of England the corruptions which the Church of Rome would
have introduced about Ordinations of Ministers and other Ecclesiastical
affairs, were withstood, and opposed by the Kings of England, etc.

So that if the whole be well considered, it will puzzle our Antiministerial
adversaries to prove that the Church of England was beholding to the Church of
Rome for either the first plantation, after reformation, or continuation of the
Gospel, Church and Ministry therein, from the beginning to this day. We will
conclude this consideration, with the remarkable speeches of two New England
Ministers.

The first is Mr. Philips of Watertown, who having proved. That England was not
beholden to Rome for its first conversion, nor after reformation, at last has
these words When it pleased God more fully to clear up the light of his Gospel
in this Nation, so as many thousands were redeemed from amongst men
Antichristian, and were made the first fruits unto God and the Lamb, The
Church State was not essentially altered all this time nor were these first
fruits unto God, New constituted Churches, but members of some Churches,
clearing themselves from corruption, and by reformation recovering themselves
out of a desperate diseased condition, into a more healthful and sound estate.
In which course the Lord went on mightily in many places, especially after
Luthers time, yea even in England, something by Henry the 8th. more by Edward
the 6th. and Queen Elizabeth, who did not constitute new Churches, but reformed
the Churches deeply degenerated from the first constitution and the pure state
thereof; as they did the like in the state of Judah often, sometimes better and
more fully, and sometimes not so fully in the days of the Judges, David, Asa,
Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra, and Nehemiah.

The other is Mr. Cotton in his way of the Churches of Christ in New England
Chap. 7. Page III. where he says: Four things, we observe in the State of the
Churches in England which make way for Reformation amongst them.

First, the Efficient instruments of their first plantation, which were either
Apostles, or Apostolical men, whether Philip, or Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon
Zelotes, as any of our Countrymen may read in Mr. Foxe's Book of Acts and
Monuments, in the beginning of it next after the story of the ten persecutions,
out of Gildas, Tertullian, Origin, Beda, Nicephorus; which being so, we cannot
but conceive,, the Churches in England were rightly gathered, and planted
according to the Rule of the Gospel; and all the corruptions found in them
since have sprung from Popish Apostasy in succeeding ages* and from want of
through and perfect purging out of that leaven in the late times of reformation
in the days of our F^ther^. So that all the work now i^, not to make them
Churche^, which were non^ before, but to reduce and restore them to their
primitive institution, etc.

And thus we have ^t l^st finished our several consider^tions, in answer to
thi^ great Objection, and shall here put an and to our first Proposition, to
wit* That the Call to the O ffice of the Ministry, which some of our Minister^
did receive, during the prevalency of Episcopacy, was l^wfull and valid, for
the substance of it, though mingled with many circumstantiall d^fects. We have
proved it by arguments drawn from the principles of our adversaries, and also
from our own principl^^. We have endeavored to give full satisfaction to all
the Objection^ that are brought against it: We had thought to have given our
people a summary recapitulation of the chief heads of this large discourse,
but because we have been overlong (we fear) already, we shall forbear it, and
conclude with that saying of the Apostle, Consider what w^ have said, 2 Timothy
2.7.
and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

CHAP. IV. Containing the 2. Proposition, and proving it by clearing from
Scriptures, and other T^stimonies, that a Bishop, and a Presbyter are all one.
THat the call to the Office of the Ministry, which our present Ministers do
now rec^ive sinc^ the abolishing of Episcopacy is lawful and valid. Propos. 2.

FOr this you must know, that this way of making of Minister^ does not
essentially differ from the former, but is the same for substance, only this
i^ more ^urified, and refined and agreeable to Scri^ture-pattern* The forme^
was by Bishops that did claim a greater power in many things th^^ wa^ due u^^o
them by (...) by Bishops also, bu^ they are Scrip^^^e-Bishop^, that (...)
Pre^byters. There are some among us (and these not a few) t^^t do so Idolize a
Bishop over Presbyters, as that they ^ffirm ^ll Ordi^^tions to be null and
void, that are made by the Presbyte^ Bishop, without a Bishop over Pre^by^ers.
For their s^tisfaction (if possibl^) and for our own people^ edification and
instruction, we will bri^fly undertake two things.

1. To prove that a Bishop over Presbyters is an Apocryphal, not a Canonical
Bishop, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are Synonym^'s in Scripture.

2. We will speak something about the A^tiquity of Episcopal Government, and
concerning the judgment of the an^ient Church about it.

1. We shall undertake to prove, That according to the Scripture pattern (which
is a perfect rule both for doctrine and government) a Bishop and a Presbyter
are all one, not only in name, but in office. And that there is no such
Officer in the Church ordained by Christ as a Bishop over Presbyters, This
appears evidently.

1. From Titus 1.5.7. where the Apostle leaves Titus in Creet to ordain Elders
in every City, and then shows how these Elders are to be qualified, and adds
the reason of his advise; For a Bishop must be blam^l^ss. This For is (...) or
causall, and shows clearly not only the Indentity of names, but of office
between an Elder and a Bishop, otherwise his argument had not only been a
false reasoning, and failed in form, having four terms, but in truth had
been no reason at all. If a Chancellor (says Smectymnuus) in one of the
Universities should give order to his Vice Chancellor to admit none to the
degree of Bachelour in Arts, but such a^ were able to p^^^ch or k^ep a Divinity
Act* (For Bachelours in Di^in^^y (...) so;) What reason or equity were in this?
So if (...) so. Had ^ Bishop been an Order or Calling ^istinct from, o^
superior to a Pre^by^er, and not the same, this had been no more rational or
^quall then the former: Therefore under the name of Bishop in the seventh
verse, the Apostle must needs intend the Elder mentioned in the fifth ve^se; To
this purpo^^ spe^keth* G^rrard de Minis^^rio Eccl^stastico, Ex hoc loco
manifestum eosdem dici, and fuiss^ Episcopos qui dicebant^^* and e^ant
Pr^sbyt^ri, ali^^ (...) in textu Apostolic^ connexio, quam tam^n particul^
(...) [(...)] diser^e ponit, Qu^ ^ui^ (...) hac forest Illi consti^u^ndi sum
Pr^sbyt^ri, qui sunt s^ne crimin^, quia Episcopum, cujus Officiu^, potestas,
j^risdictio and gr^d^s diff^rt a Pr^sbyt^ro, (...) esse fine crimine: From this
plac^ it is manif^s^ that the same were called, and were Bishops, who were
called, and were Pr^sbyt^rs, otherwise there would b^ no connection in the Text
of the Apostl^, which yet the ca^sall particle [for] evidently makes out. For
what juncture of r^^son would be in this? They are to be made Presbyters who
are blameless, because a Bishop* whose office, power, jurisdiction, and deg^^^
diff^^^ from a Pr^sbyter, ought to blameless.

2. The same is manifested, Act. 20.17.28. Paul sends from Miletum to Eph^sus,
and calls the Presbyters of the Church, and this he does when he wa^ to leave
them, and never see their faces more, verse* 38. To these Elders he says, Take
he^d th^^^fore unto your selves, and to all the flock, ^ver which the
Holy Ghost has made ^ou over-sears (or as it is in the Greek-Bishops) to feed
the Church of God, which he has purch^s^d with his own blood. From hence we
gather.

1. That Elder^ are called Bishops.

And not only so, But,

2. That the Apostle gives the whole Episcopal power unto them, and charge
them (...) which signifies to feed; by government ^s w^ll as by life and
doctrine: Revel. 2.27. Rev. 19.15.


If it belongs to Bishops to ord^in Elders, and to exercise jurisdiction in
(...), then this also belong^ to Elders; for they are Bishops, and their duty
is, (...) and (...).

From 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. The Elders which are among you I exhort who am also an
Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, etc. Feed the flock of God
which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, (...).
(or (as in the Greek,) performing the Office of a Bishop over the flock of
God) not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.

Here again observe,

1. That the Apostle calls himself a Presbyter, and so does John 2 Epistle, and
3. Epistle, verse. 1. and therefore the Presbyters are the Successors of
theApostles.

2. That Presbyters are called Bishops, and that they have not only the name
but the Office of Bishops given to them; for their work and office is, (...)
The Elders are not only (...), as it is said, Act. 20.28. But here they are
comm anded (...), which is to perform all those Offices to the Church* which
belong to a Bishop, which are to preach, ordain and govern, etc.

4. We argue from 1 Timothy 3. where the Apostle makes but two standing ordinary
Officers, for the service of the Church, Bishops and Deacons: And therefore
after he has set down the qualification of a Bishop, he presently propounds
the qualification of a Deacon, not at all interposing the qualification of a
Presbyter, thereby giving us to understand, That a Bishop and a Presbyter are
all one in Scripture language. And from hence we may safely argue, after this
manner.

Post Episcopum Diaconi Ordinationem subjicit: Quave? nisi quia Episcopi and
Presbyteri unae Ordinatio est? uterque enim sacerdos est, etc. Ambros. in 1 Timothy 3.
They which have the same name, and same qualification to their Office, and the
same Ordination, and the same Work, and duty required of them, are one and the
same Officer.

But a Bishop and a Presbyter have one and the same name, (as we have already
proved from Act. 20. and 1. Pet. 5.) and the same qualification to their Office
(as appears here and Titus 1.5* 7.) and the same ordination (for ought we can
read in Scripture) and the same work and duty, as appears from Act. 20.28, and
1* P^t. 5.2. and shall presently be more fully proved. Therefore a Bishop and a
Presbyter are one and the same Officer.

5. This is further manifested from Phil. 1.1. -- To all the Saints in Christ
Jesus who are at Philippi, with the Bishops and D^acons. Here again note.

1. That a Bishop and a Presbyter are all one. For by Bishops cannot be meant
Bishops over Presbyters; for of such there never was (as our Episcopal men say)
but one in a City.

2. That there are but two Orders of Ministry in the Church of Christ of divine
institution, Bishops and Deacons* And that therefore a Bishop over Presbyters
is not a plant of Gods planting, nor an Officer appointed by Christ in his
Church.

6. We argue, From these very texts in which the holy Ghost does on purpose set
down all the several sorts of Ministry which Christ has Ordained in his
Church, As 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Romans 12.6.7, 8. When Christ went up
to Heaven he left extraordinary, and ordinary Officers, for the perfecting of
the Saints, and for the work of the Ministry, etc. But here is no mention made
of a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter, much less of a Bishop superior to a
Presbyter, in the power of Ordination and Jurisdiction. Here are Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, who were extraordinary Officers, and temporary, and
had no successors (properly) in ^undem gradum; And here is mention of Pastors
and Teachers, who are the only ordinary standing and perpetual Ministers: But
no mention of the Pope (by which argument our learned Protestant Divines prove
him to be none of Christ's Ministers) nor of Patriarchs, nor of Archbishops,
or Bishops distinct from Pastors and Teachers.

7. All distinct Officers must have distinct works and operations ( nam operari
sequitur esse) and they must have distinct Commissions. But Presbyters have the
same commission with Bishops, and the same work and operation, Erg^ they are
the same with Bishops.

That they have the same Commission appears from Ioh. 20.21. As my Father sent
me, so send I you. This was said to all the Apostles equally, and to all their
successors indifferently. And whose sins you forgive are forgiven, etc. This is
common with Bishops to all Presbyters. So Matthew. 28.20. Go Teach all Nations,
Baptising them, etc. and lo I am with you always unto the end of the world. This
is common to all Presbyters; And as for their work and operation, The
Presbyters are called Rulers, Governors and Overseers in Scripture 1 Timothy 3.5.
1 Timothy, 5.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Heb. 13.7.17, 24. And the keys of the Kingdom of
heaven are committed to them Matthew. 16.19. The Scripture puts no distinction
between the Bishop and the Presbyter, nor gives us any the least hint to make
us believe, That the key of doctrine should belong to the Presbyter, and the
key of Discipline to the Bishop. Ordination is performed by the Presbytery 1 Timothy 4.14. Jurisdiction likewise is given to the Presbyters. For they are (...)
and (...) And when the Apostle says to the Church of Corinth, Heb. 13.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12* 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. Matthew. 18.17.
Do not ye Judge them that are within? and put ye away from among your selves
that wicked person; And when Christ says, Tell the Church, These texts cannot
be understood of a Biship distinct from a Presbyter; For one man cannot be
called a Church which signifies a company. And the Apostle speaks to the
Corinthians, not in the singular, but in the plural number; Nor can they be
understood of the whole Congregation promiscuously; For the Apostle says
expressly, That the punishment executed upon the incestuous person, was
inflicted by many, not by all. And by the Church of which Christ speaks, 2 Cor.
2^6.
and to which scandals are to be brought, must of necessity be meant, a Ruling,
and Governing Church. And it is most clear in Scripture, That private members
are not Church-rulers. For the Apostle puts a distinction between Saints and
Rulers Heb. 13.24. Salute all them that have the rule over you, and all the
Saints. If all were the eye, where were the hands and feet? And therefore these
texts must be understood of the Presbytery. From hence then it follows. If
jurdifiction and Ordination O^dination belong to the Presbyter as well as the
Bishop, then a Bishop and a Presbyter, are one and the same office.

8. We might add, That the Scripture acknowledges no superiority or
inferiority, between officers of the same kind. For th^^gh we read that one
order of Ministry is said to be above another; yet we never read that in the
same Order of Officers there was any one superior to others of the same order.,
We believe, That the Apostles were above the Evangelist^ And the Evangelists
above Pastors and Teachers, and Pastors and Teachers above Deacons; But we
likewise believe, That there was no Apostle above ^n Apostle; but that they
were all equal in power and jurisdiction, no Evangelist above an Evangelist, no
Deacon above another, and so by consequence, no Presbyter, by divine right over
other Presbyters.

6. Las^ly, If there be any distinction* between a Bishop and a Presbyter in
Scripture, the greater honor and pre^^inence must of necessity be given to the
Presbyter above the Bishop, which we believe will never be granted. For
according to our Prelatical Divines, the office of a Bishop as distinct from
Presbyters, is to rule and govern; and the office of a Presbyter is to preach
and administer the Sacraments. Now sure we are, That preaching and administering
the Sacraments are far more excellent works then ruling and governing. And the
Apostle says expressly, That they that labor in word and doctrine deserve
more honor then they that Rule well, 1. Tim. 5.17. Hence we argue.

If there be a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter, either he is equal, or
inferior, or superior.

Our Adversaries will answer, That he is superior. But this cannot be. For
superior Orders must have superior acts and honor belonging unto them above
their equals or inferiors. But Bishops have not. For preaching is an act
above Ruling, and most worthy of double honor, and so is administering of the
Holy Sacraments. And therefore the act and honor of a Presbyter is above the
act and honor of a Bishop, and ^rgo, a Bishop is not superior, and ergo, there
is no Bishop at all in Scripture distinct from a Presbyter.

This is all we have to say out of Scripture for the Identity of a Bishop and a
Pre^byter and that this may not seem to be our own private judgment, or that we
do herein hold any thing that is contrary to the doctrine of the Catholic
Church or our own Church of England, we shall crave leave to set down what has
been the opinion of the Church of Christ, and also of our own Church concerning
the divine right of Episcopal government.

First we will begin with St. Jerome, who upon the first of Titus has these
words.

A Presbyter and a Bishop is the same: Idem ergo est Presbyter qui Episcopus
and antequam Diaboli instinctu, studia in religione fierent and diceretur in
populis, ego sum Paul^ ego Apollo, ego ^ephae, communi Presbyterorum* Consilio
Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Postquam vero unusquisque eos quos baptiza Verat, suos
putabat esse, non Christi* in to^o orb decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris
electus super poneretur cae^eris, ad quem omnis Eccl^siae cura pertineret, and
schismatum semina tollerentur* Putat aliquis non Scripturarum sed nostram esse
sententiam, Episcopum and Presbyterum unum esse, and aliud aetatis, aliud esse
nomen officii, relegat Apostoli ad Philippenses verba, dicenti^, Paulus, and
Timotheus servi Jesus Christi qui sunt Philippis, cum Episcopis and Diaconis.
Philippi una est urbs Macedoniae: and certe in una civitate plures, ut
nuncupantur, Episcopi esse non poterant. Sed quia eosdem Episcopos illo tempore
quos and Presbyteros appelabant, propterea indifferenter de Episcopis qu^si de
Presbyteris est locu^us. Adhuc alicui hoc videatur ambiguum* nisi altero
testimonio comprobetur. In Actibus Apostolorum scriptum est, quod cum venisset
Apostolus Miletum, miserit* Ephesum: and vocave^i^ Presbyteros Eccle^^ae
ejusdem: quibus postea inter caterae sit locutus: Attendi^e vobis and omni
gregi: in quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posu^t Episcopos pascere Ecclesiam Domini,
quam acquisivit per sanguinem suum. Et hic diligentius observate, quom^do unius
civitatis Ephesi Presby^eros vocans postea eosdem Episcopos dixe^it. Si quis
^ult recipere eam Epistolam, quae sub nomine Pauli ^d Hebraeos scripta est: and
ibi aequalit^r inter plures Ecclesiae cura dividitur. Siquidem ad plebem
scribit; Parete principibus vestris, and subjecti estote, ipsi enim sunt qui
vigilant pro animabus vestris, quasi rationem reddentes, ne suspirarites hoc
faciant siquidem hoc utile vobis est. Et Petrus qui ex fide^ firmitate nomen
accepit in Epistola suae loquitur dicens: Presbyteros ergo vos obsecro
compresbyter, and teslis Christi passionem: qui and ejus gloriae quae in futuro
rev^lando est socius sum. Pascite eum qui in vobis est gregem Domini: non quas^
cum necessitate, sed voluntario Hac propterea, ut ostenderemus apud veteres
eosdem fuisse Presbyteros quos and Episcopos, pulbatim vero ut dissensionum
plantaria ^oellerentur ad unum omnem solicitudinem esse delatam. Sicut ergo
Presbyteri sci^nt se ex Ecclesiae consuil^dine ei qui sibi prapositus fuerit
esse subjectos; ita Episcopi noverint se magis consu^^^dine quam dispositionis
Dominicae veritate, Presbyteris esse majo^^s: and in communi debere Ecclesiam
regere, imitantes Moysen: quis cum haheret in potestate solus piae esse populo
Israel, septuainta elegit cum quibus populum judicaret.
and before there were, through the Dive^^ instinct, divisions in Religion, and
the people began to say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of C^phas; The
Churches were governed by the common Council of the Presters. But after that
each man begun to account those whom he had baptized, his own, and not Christ's,
it was decreed through the whole world, that one of the Presbyters should be
set over the rest; to whom the care of all the Church should belong, that the
seeds of schism might be taken away. Thinks any that this is my opinion, and
not the opinion of the Scripture* that a Bishop, and an Elder is the same, let
him read* the words of the Apostle to the Philippians, saying, Paul and Timothy
the servants of Jesus Christ to them that are at Philippi with the Bishops and
D^ac^ns. Philippi is one City of Macidonia, and certainly in one City there
could not be many Bishops (as they are now called) But because at that time
they called the same men Bishops, whom they called Presbyters. Therefore he
speaks indifferently of Bishops, as of Presbyters. If thi^ yet seems doubtful
to any unless it be proved by another testimony, let him consider; That in the
Acts of the Apostles it is written, That when Paul came to Miletu^ he sent to
Eph^sus and called the Elders of that Church, and amongst other things says
unto them: Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock over which the holy
Ghost has made you Bishops to feed the Church of God which he has purchased
with his own blood. And here let yet be diligently observed: That calling the
Presbyters of one City of Ephesus he afterward called the same persons
Bishops. If any will receive that Epistle which under the name of Paul is
written to the Hebrews. There are care of the Church is divided amongst many.
For thus he writes to the people: Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give an
account* that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you. And Peter if called from the firmness of his faith says
in his Epistle. The Elders which are among you I exhort also who am an Elder
and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the Glory
that shall be revealed. Feed the flock of God which is among you etc. not by
constraint but willingly. These things I have written to show that amongst the
ancients, Bishops and Presbyters were one and the same, and that by little and
little, that all the seeds of dissension might be plucked up, all the care of
the Church was delegated to one. And therefore as the Elders may know, that
they are to be subject to him that is set over them by the custom of theChurch,
so let the Bishops know, That it is more from custom, then from any true
dispensation from the Lord, that they are above the Presbyters, and that they
ought to rule the Church in common, imitating Moses, who though he had it in
his own power to govern the people of Israel yet notwithstanding chose 70. with
whom he would judge the People.

We have thought fit to transcribe this quotation at large, because it gives
the same interpretation of Scriptures which we do, and makes it the result of
all his discourse. That Bishops over Presbyters are from the Custom of the
Church only, and not from any divine original.

We might here likewise set down the Epistle that St. Hierome writes to
Evagrius, Hi^ronymus Evagrio Tom. 3.
wherein he brings not only the Scripture forementioned, but most of the other
places which we have brought, and gives the same explication of them; but
because it is very long, we think fit to omit it, and desire the diligent
Reader for his own further satisfaction to peruse it.

The next that we shall cite is St. Austin who in his 19th. Epistle writing
unto St. Hierome says, Quamvis secundum honorum vocabula quae Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit Episcopatus Pre sbyterio major est, in multis tamen Augustinus
Hiero^^mo minor est.
That though according to words of honor which the custom of the Church has
brought in, Episcopacy be greater then Presbytery, yet in many things Austin is
Inferior to Hierome.

And in Quaest. veteris et Novi Testamenti Quaest. 101. what is a Bishop but
the first Priest? that is to say, the highest Priest.

In the third place we shall add Dr. Reynolds in his Epistle to Sir Francis
Knowls, who shows out of Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustin^, Theodoret,
Pri masius, Sedulius, Theophylact, That Bishops and Presbyters are all one in
Scripture, and that Aerius co uld no more be justly condemned for heresy, for
holding Bishops and Presbyters to be all one, then all those fathers; with whom
agree (says he) Oecumenius, and Ansolme Archbishop of Canterbury, and another
Anselme and Gregory, and Gratian: and affirms, that it was once enro lled in
the Canon law for sound and Catholic Doctrine, and thereupon taught by
learned men; he adds further, That it is unlikely that Anselm^ should have been
Canonized for a Saint by the Pope of Rome, and the other Anselme and Gregory so
esteemed in the Popes Library, that Gratians works should be allowed so long
time by so many Popes for the golden fountain of the Canon law, if they had
taught that for sound doctrine, which by the whole Church in her most
flourishing condition was condemned for heresy, and concludes th at they who
have labored about the reformation of the Church, these five hundred years
(of whom he names abundance) have taught that all Pastors be they intitulated
Bishops or Priests have equal authority and power by the word of God.

In the fourth place we might urge the saying of Michael Medina lib. 1. de
sacris origin. who affirms, that not only St. Hierome, but also that Ambrose,
Austin, Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact,
were of the same judgment with Aerius, and held that there was no difference
between a Bishop and a Presbyter by Scripture.

The Next we shall instance in is Cassander in his Book of cons^ltation,
article 14, who says, An Ep^scopatus inter Ordines Ecclesiasticos pon^ndus
sit* inter Theologos et Canon^stas non convenit; convenit autem inter omnes in
Apostolorum aetate int^r Episcopos et Pr^sbyteros nullum discrimen ^uisse, sed
post-modum Schismatis ^vitandi causa Episc^pum Presbyterii suisse praepositum,
cui (...), id est, Ordinandi pot^stas concessa est sine qua ordinandi
disti^ctione pax vel politica vel Ecclesiastica retineri vix possit.
whether Episcopacy be to be accounted an order Ecclesiastical distinct from
Presbytery, is a question much debated between the Theologues and the
Canonists. But in this one particular all sides agree, That in the Apostles
days there was no difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, but afterward
for the avoiding of Schism the Bishop was placed before the Presbyter, to whom
the power of ordination was granted, that so peace might be continued in the
Church.

Add further, That in the Ecumenical Councels of Constance and Basil after
long debate it was concluded, That Presbyters should have dicisive suffrages in
Counsels as well as Bishops; because that by the law of God Bishops were no
more then they, and it is expressly given them Act 17.23.

7. Erasmus upon 1. Tim. 4.4. says, that in ancient time there was no
difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, (but afterward for the avoiding
of Schism, a Bishop was chosen by many,) and so many Pres byters, so many
Bishops.

8. Bishop Jewel in the defense of his Apoology part 2. cap 9. divi^. 1.
proves against Harding, that Aerius could not be counted an heretic for
holding that Bishops and Presbyters are all one Iure divino, and citing for it
Hierom, Austin, Cyhrsostome, closes up for answer with these words. All these
and many more holy Fathers together with the Apostle St. Paul for thus saying
must by Hardings advice be held for heretics.

9. Bishop Morton in his Cathol. Apology part 1. cap. 33. affirms that diverse
other Divines besides Hierom were of the same opinion with Aerius, That there
was no difference by divine right between a Bishop and a Presbyter. For which
he also cites Medina, Anselme, Sedulius, Erasmus and Alphonsus a Castro who
says that Hierome was of this opinion, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are
ejusdem ordinis et authoritatis of the same Order and the same Authority.

10. Bishop Bilson (whatsoever he says to the contrary in his book called the
perpetual government of Christ's Church) in his book against Seminaries lib. 1.
page 318. affirms out of Hierome, that the Church at first was governed by
the common Council of Pr^byters; and therefore Bishops must understand that
they be greater then Ministers, rather by custom then the Lords appointment,
and the Bishops came in after the Apostles times.

11. Dr. Whitakers respon ad Campiani rations, ratio, affirms That Iure
divino a Presbyter and a Bishop are all one. And whereas Durans affirms with
many words that Bishops and Presbyters were Iure Divino diverse, he tells him
that if he will retain the estimation of a modest Divine, he must not so
confidently affirm that which all men see to be so evidently false. For, what
is so well known, says he, as this which you acknowledge not. Hierom plainly
writes, that Elders and Bishops are the same, and confirms it by many places
of Scripture.

12. Dr. Holland the Kings Professor in Oxford, at an Act July 9. 1608.
Concluded against Mr, Lanes question; An Episcopatus sit ordo distinctus a
Presbyteratu, ^oque superior jure divino* and said: That the Affirmative was
most false against the Scriptures, Fathers, the Doctrine of the Church of
England, yea, the very Schoolmen themselves, Lombard, Thomas, Bonaventure, etc.

We might cite diverse others, as Archbishop Whitguife against Car^hright, and
Dr. Fulk upon Titus the 1. ver. 5. and Deane Nowell, etc. But we forbear, and
the rather because we shall have occasion hereafter to touch upon the same
Argument.

Now by all this it appears, That by Scripture, and the judgment of the ancient
Church, and our own Church of England, a Bishop and a Presbyter are all one,
and that therefore they that are made Ministers by Presbyters, are made
Ministers by Bishops, and are lawfully ordained because ordained in a way most
agreeable to Scripture pattern.

CHAP. V. Answering Objections taken from the pretended Episcopacy of Timothy
and Titus.
BEfore we leave our Scripture-proofs, it will be expected, that we should
answer to what is brought out of Scripture for for the Ius Divinum of Prelacy,
and also to what is brought in answer unto our Arguments out of Scripture
against it.

For the first, there are two chief and principal arguments, the one from
Timothy and Titus, the other from the 7. Asian Angels.

As for Timothy and Titus, It is said, that they were constituted Bishops of
Ephesus, and Cree^ by the Apostle Paul, and did exercise Episcopal power in
these places both in Ordination and Jurisdiction, and this power was derived by
them unto their successors, as being necessary to continue in the Church, as
well as the power of preaching and administering the Sacraments.

To this we Answer.

That Timothy and Titus were not Bishops in a Prelatical sense. We deny not but
that they did exercise Episcopal power both in Ordination and Jurisdiction, and
that this power is necessary to be continued in the Church. But we say, that
they did this, not as Bishops in a formal sense, but as extraordinary Officers
or Evangelists, which were Officers in the Church distinct from Pastors and
Teachers.

To make this out, we will briefly do two things.

1. We will prove that Timothy and Titus were not Prelaticall Bishops. 2. That
they were Evangelists.
1. That they were not Prelaticall Bishops. This we make out.

1. Because the Scripture no where calls them Bishop^.

But in the Postscripts they are called Bishops.

These Postscripts are no part of Canonical Scripture. Object. Answ.
The Papists themselves ( Baronius, Serarius, and the Rhemists) confess that
there is much falsity in them. Smectimnu^s has everlastingly blasted the
Authority of them. The first Epistle is said to be writ from Laodicea, whereas
B^za in his Annotations proves apparently that it was written from Macedonia,
to which opinion Baronius, and Serarius and Athanasius and Theodoret, in his
Epistle before his Commentary upon Timothy, subscribe. It is also called the
first Epistle. But how was Paul sure that he should live to write a second? And
it is also said to be written from Laodicea, which is the chiefest City of
Phrygia Pa^atiana. But as B^za well observes, there is no mention of Phrygia
Pacatiana in the writers of those ages, sed apud recentiores illos, qui Romani
^mperii jam inclinantis provincias descripserunt.

The second Epistle i^ thus subscribed.

The second Epistle unto Timothy, ordained the first Bishop of the Church of
the Ephesians, was written from Rome when Paul was brought, etc. Now these
words, Ordained the first Bishop, are wanting says B^za, in quibusdam v^t^stis
codicibus, in veteri vulgata editione, and apud Syrum interpretem. The Syriack
Interpreter reads it, Here ends the Second Epistle to Timothy, written from
Rome. If St. Paul had written this Postscript, he would not have said to
Timothy the first Bishop, etc. whereas it was not yet certain whether ever
there should be a second. Neither would it be said, when Paul was brought, etc.
But when I was the second time brought before Nero.

The Epistle to Titus is said to be written from Nicopolis; whereas it is
clear that Paul was not at Nicopolis when he wrote it Titus 3.12. Be diligent
to come to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined there to winter; he does not
say, here to winter, but there; where note for the present he was not there,
and besides it is said, that Titus was ordained the first Bishop, etc. And who
was the second? or was there ever a second? But we forbear transcribing any
more etc. This is abundantly sufficient to invalidate the authority of the
Postscript written ab hominibus v^l indoctis vel certe non s^tis attentis, as
Beza says.

But some of the Fathers call them Bishops.

Object. 1. Answ.
They that call them Bishops borrow their testimonies from Eusebius, of whom
Scaliger says, and Dr. R^yn^lds approves of it: That he read ancient Histories
paru^ attente, which they prove by many instances. And all that Eusebius says,
(...)
is only Sic scribitur, It is so reported. But from whence had he thi^ History?
Even from Clemens Fabuleus and Hegesippus not extant.

2. It is no wonder that Timothy and Titus are called Bishops by E^sebius and
Theodoret, because that the Apostles themselves are called Bishops by the
writers of those times, who spoke of former times according to their own. Thus
Peter is said to be Bishop of Rome, and James of Hi^rusalem. Now it is evident
(as we shall hereafter prove) That the Apostles were not Bishops properly and
formally, but only eminently and vertually.

3. As they are called Bishops, so also they are called Apostles, Theodoret
calls Titus (...) and Timothy (...). And yet we believe that there are few of
our Episcopal Divines will undertake to prove them to be Very Nominis Apostolos.

Some call them Archbishops, Metropolitans, Patriarchs, and yet will not be
easy to persuade a person disengaged from Prelacy that there were Archbishops
and Metropolitans in the Apostles days. The truth is, That which Thucydides
says of the ancient Greek Historians, may as truly be said of Eusebius, Quae a
majoribus acceperunt posteri, ea, (...) securi examinis, suis iter posteris
tradiderunt.
Irenaeus and others, etc. That those things which they received from their
Forefathers they delivered to their posterity without strict examination, and
thereby in many things more deceived themselves, and were the cause of
deceiving others, as we shall have occasion to show afterward.

For our parts we answer clearly; That the Fathers and Councels speak of the
Officers of former times according to the style of their own times. That
Timothy had an Office above a Bishop, (as Wale Messalinus says) though
afterward from the custom of the Church and some acts that Bishops did like
his (but not solely) he was allusively, if not abusively, and (...) called a
Bishop. And as another faith; Timothy and Titus are called Bishops by the
ancients, because they did those acts that by humane custom were afterward
appropriated to Bishops in regard of Presidency, but they did them not as
Bishops (which they are not called in Scripture) hut as Evangelists which they
were, and so one of them is called, 2 Timothy 4.5.

2. The second argument to prove that Timothy and Titus were no Bishops,
relates especially to Timothy, and it is this.

If Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, it must be when the first Epistle was
written. For it is in that Epistle in which he is said to receive his pretended
charge of exercising his Episcopal power in Ordination and Jurisdiction. But
now this first Epistle was written when Paul was at Macedonia* as the learned,
both new and old, Papists and Protestants, agree. And it was after this when
Paul came to Miletum accompanied with Timothy, and sends for the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus unto him, and commends the government of the Church unto
these Elders whom he calls Bishops. Now surely if Timothy had been constituted
their Bishop (in the sense of our Adversaries) the Apostle would not have
called the Elders Bishops before their Bishops face, and in stead of giving a
charge to the Elders to feed the flock of Christ, he would have given that
charge to Timothy, and not to them, And no doubt he would have given some
directions to the Elders how to carry themselves toward their Bishop. And
because none of these things were done; it is a clear demonstration to us, that
Timothy was not at that time Bishop of Ephesus.

To avoid the force of this argument, there are some that say, That Timothy was
not made Bishop of Ephesus till after Paul's first being a prisoner at Rome,
which was after his being at Miletum. But these men while they seek to avoid
the Scylla of one inconvenience, fall into the Carybdis of another as great;
For if Timothy was not made Bishop till Paul's first being at Rome, then he was
not Bishop when the first Epistle was written to him (which all agree to be
written before that time) And then it will also follow, That all that charge
that was laid upon him, both of Ordination and jurisdiction, and that
entreating of him to abide at Ephesus, was given to him not as to the Bishop of
Ephesus (which he was not,) but as to an extraordinary Officer sent thither
upon special occasion, with a purpose of returning when his work imposed was
finished. From both these considerations we may safely conclude.

That if Timothy were neither constituted Bishop of Eph^sus before Paul's first
being prisoner at Rome, nor after; Then he was not constituted Bishop at all:
But he was neither constituted Bishop before nor after etc. Ergo not at all.

3. To prove that Timothy and Titus were not Bishops in a Prelatical sense, we
argue from the matter contained in these Epistles. In the first Epistle
(wherein all that is alleged for Episcopacy is contained, for in the 2 Epistle
there is nothing at all said about it) Chap. 1. Verse. 3. He beseeches Timothy
to abide at Ephesus when he went into Macedonia, which had been a needless
importunity (as Smecttymnuus well observes) if Timothy had had the Episcopal
charge of Ephesus committed to him by the Apostles, for then he might have laid
as dreadful a charge upon him to abide at Ephesus, as he does afterward to
Preach the Gospel 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. And in his Epistle to Titus Chap. 1.5. he
says. For this cause left I thee in Creete, that thou should set in order
the things that are wanting etc. In which words the Apostle specifieth the
occasional employment for which he was desired to stay in that place. Now (as
the Reverend Presbyters in their conference at the Isle of Wight have well
noted.) These expressions -- I besought th^e to abide still at Ephesus, I left
thee in Creete, do not sound like words of instalment of a man into a
Bishopric, but of an intendment to call him away again. And if we consider his
actual revocation of them both (of which we shall afterward speak) and the
intimation in these texts of his intention, that they should not stay there for
continuance; and the reason of his beseeching the one to stay, and of his
leaving the other behind him, which was some present defects and distempers in
those Churches, they will put fair to prove, That the Apostle intended not to
establish them Bishops of those places, and therefore did not. Add to this, That
when Paul undertook in 1 Timothy 3. to set out the Office of a Bishop, he
mentions nothing in that Office which is not competent to a Presbyter, and
therefore omits the Office of a Presbyter (as we have formerly said) including
it in the Office of a Bishop, which certainly he would never have done, if he
had at the same time made Timothy an HierachicalBishop, with a power to do that
formally which was unlawful for a Presbyter to do.

And in his Epistle to Titus, he directly confounds the names and offices of
Presbyters, and Bishops, and makes them one and the same Titus 1.5.6. which he
certainly would not have done, if he had made them at that time distinct order^
with distinct Offices, or if he had made Titus at that time Bishop (or as some
would have it) Archbishop or Primate and Metropolitan of the hundred Cities
that were in Creet. So much for the proof that Timothy and Titus were not
Bishops in a Prelatical sense.

2. The second thing we are to prove is, That Timothy and Titus were
Evangelists, and not only so in a general signification (as all Preachers of
the Gospel may be called Evangelists) but in a special and proper sense. This
will the better appear, if we consider what an Evangelist is, and the
difference between Evangelists and other Officers of the Church.

Evangelists, properly so called, were men extraordinarily employed in
preaching the Gospel without a settled residence upon any one charge; They
were Comites, et Vicarii Apostolo^um, Vice-Apostles who had Curam vicariam
omnium Ecclesiarum, as the Apostles had, Curam principalem; And they did (as
Ambrose speaks) Evang^lizare sine Cathedra.

Bishops or Presbyters were tied to the particular care and tuition of that
flock over which God had made them Overseers, Act. 20.28. But Evangelists were
not tied to reside in one particular place, but did attend upon the Apostles,
by whose appointment they were sent from place to place, as the necessity of
the Churches did require. To this agrees Mr. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical
policy; ^ib. 5.
Evangelists, says he, were Presbyters of principal sufficiency whom the
Apostles sent abroad, and used as agents in Ecclesiastical affairs wheresoever
they found need. They were extraordinary and temporary Officers (as the
Apostles and Prophets were) and Officers of a Rank higher then Pastors and
Teachers, and so they are reckoned Ephesians 4.11.

Now that Timothy and Titus were such Officers is made evident.

Not only because one of them is in direct terms called an Evangelist 2 Timothy
4.5. But also, from the perpetual motion of both of them from place to place,
not only before they were sent to Ephesus and Creet, but as much after, as
before. And that they did so move, appears from diverse Authors who have exactly
set down their several peregrinations both before and after. (...). Capel.
S^^ectymnuus.
We shall not trouble the Reader with their travailes before they were sent to
Ephesus and Creet, but shall only relate what is said by the Reverend Minsters
in their humble answer, at the Isle of Wight of their journeyings after their
going thither. And first of Timothy.

If Timothy say they, was Bishop of Ephesus, he must be so when the first
Epistle was sent to him, in which he is pretended to receive the charge of
exercising his Episcopal power in Ordination, and government; but it is
manifest that after this Epistle sent to him, he was in continual journeyes, or
absent from Ephesus. For Paul left him at Ephesus when he went into Macedonia,
1. Tim. 1.3.
and he left him there to exercise his Office, in regulating and ordering that
Church and in ordaining; but it was after this time that Timothy is found with
Paul at Miletum: For after Paul had been at Miletum, he went to Jerusalem
whence he was sent prisoner to Rome, and never came more into Macedonia, and at
Rome we find Timothy a prisoner with himand those Epistles which Paul wrote
while he was prisoner at Rome namely the Epistle to the Philippians, H^b.
13.23. Phil. 1* 1. Philem. 1. Col. 1.1. Heb. 13.23.
to Phil^mon, to the Colossians, to the Hebrews, do make mention of Timothy as
his companion at these times* nor do we ever find him again at Ephesus, for we
find that after all this, toward the end of Saint Paul^ life, after his first
answering before Nero, and when he said his departing was at hand, he sent for
Timothy to Rome, 2. T^m. 4.6.10.11.12.16.
not from Ephesus; for it seems that Timothy was not there, because Paul giving
Timothy an account of the absence of most of his companions sent into diverse
parts, he says Tychieus have I sent to Ephesus. Now if your Majesty shall be
pleased to cast up into one Total what is said, The several journeys and
stations of Timothy, the Order of them; the time spent in them, the nature of
his employment, to negotiate the affairs of Christ in several Churches and
places, the silence of the Scriptures as touching his being Bishop of any one
Church, you will acknowledge that such a man was not a Bishop fixed to one
Church or precinct, and then by assuming that Timothy was such a man, you will
conclude that he was not Bishop of Ephesus.

The like may be said also concerning Titus after he was left at Creet, he was
sent for by Paul to Nicopolis, and after that he is sent to Corinth, Titus
13.12. 2. Cor. 1.12. 2 Cor. 5.6. 2. Cor. 8.6. 2 Timothy 4.10.
from whence he is expected at Troas, and not with Paul in Macedonia, whence he
is sent again to Corinth, and after all this is near the time of Paul's death
at Rome, from whence he went not into Creet, but unto Dalmatia, and after this
is not heard on in the Scripture.

From all this we gather 3. Conclusions.

That Timothy and Titus were not Bishops in our Brethrens sense, Conclus. 1.
that is, were not fixed Stars in Ephesus or Creet.

And whereas it is answered, that the necessities of those times made even the
most fixed Stars planetary, calling them frequently, from the places of their
abode, to those services that were of most use for the success of that great
work, yet so that after their errands fully done, they returned to their own
charge, and that therefore they might be Bishops notwithstanding their several
journeys.

We challenge any of them to show in all the New Testament, any one that was
appointed Overseer of a particucular Church, whose motion was as Planetary, as
we have showed that of Timothy and Titus to have been, or if that fail, to show
that after Timothy and Titus went abroad upon the service of the Churches, they
did constantly or ordinarily return either to Ephesus or Creet, and not to the
places either of the Apostles present abode, or appointment. But we are fully
assured that they can show neither the one nor the other, and therefore we may
safely conclude, that they were not Bishops in our Brethrens sense.

Conclus. 2.
That Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, and Evangelists in a proper sense, and
Officers distinct from Pastors, and Teachers and Officers of an higher Rank and
Order.

Conclus. 3.
That they were not only Evangelists before they were sent to Ephesus and
Creet, but afterward also, as has been abundantly proved. And the truth is,
If they were Evangelists at any time, we cannot conceive how they can come to
be Bishops in our Brethrens sense. For we thus argue,

They that were made Evangelists in a proper sense by the Apostles, were never
afterward made Bishops in our Brethrens sense by the Apostles.

For this had been to degrade them from a superior Office to an inferior. And
if (according to the Council of Chalcedon) it be not only incongruous, but
sacrilegious to bring back a Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter; If it be an
eternal reproach and shame to a Bishop to be* degraded from a Bishop to a
Presbyter, much more reproach and shame it must needs be, for an Evangelist to
be brought down unto the Office of a Bishop.

But Timothy and Titus were once made Evangelists by the Apostles, when they
were chosen to travel up and down with them as their companions, and before
they were settled (as our Brethren suppose) the one at Ephesus, the other at
Creet. This is confessed by Bishop Hall, Bishop Downham, and all Episcopal
men, that we have read of this subject. And the great debate between them and
us is, not whether they were once Evangelists, and Vice-Apostles or no, but how
long they continued so, and whether ever they were made Bishops in our
Brethrens sense.

And therefore we may undoubtedly conclude, That because they were once
Evangelists, therefore they were never Bishops, neither before they were sent
to Ephesus and Cre^^, nor afterward.

Before we leave our discourse concerning Timothy and Titus, we must of
necessity answer one Objection.

It is said, Object.
that the work imposed upon Timothy and Titus in Ephesus and Creet, both of
Ordination and Jurisdiction is as necessary to be continued in the Church as
the work of preaching and adminstring the Sacrament, and that after their
deaths, those that did succeed them did the same work, and were called Bishops
by the ancient Fathers. And that therefore Timothy himself was a Bishop,
because his Successors in the same place were called so.

Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, Answ. 1.
and therefore temporary and extraordinary Officers, and therefore could not
have any Successors in Office. Indeed the power they did exercise in Ephesus
and Creet, was necessary for the Church of Christ, and there were some that
succeeded them in that work, but none in the Office, the Apostles and
Evangelists had some that came after them and did the same work that they did
in governing ordaining and preaching: but they had no Successors in Office, for
then they had not been extraordinary. And as one well says; when the Apostles
and Evangelists dyed, their Offices ceased, what parts of their Office were of
perpetual use, as praying, preaching, administering Sacraments, and the use of
the Keys, were left to those Ordinary Officers called Pastors and Teachers
Ephesians. 4.11. The distinction made afterward between a Pastor-Bishop, and a
Pastor-Presbyter, was but an humane invention for order, and to avoid
accidental inconveniences, of which we shall speak more hereafter. In a word
the successors of Timothy and Titus were Presbyters, who by common consent
govern the Church, and ordain Elders, and did the same work as ordinary
standing Officers which Timothy and Titus did as extraordinary and temporary
Officers, etc. So it was at first, till afterward, for avoiding ofSchisme, (as
Hierom says) one was chosen from amongst the Presbyters and called a Bishop;
But whether this invention were of God, and whether it were hurtful or
profitable for the Church, we shall, God willing, show at large when we come to
speak of the practice of Antiquity in point of Episcopacy. So much for Timothy
and Titus.

CHAP. VI. Answering Objections from the pretended Episcopacy of the seven
Asian Angels.
THe second Scripture ground brought to prove the Divine right of Prelacy is
from the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia. These Angels (say they) were
seven single persons: And (as one has lately written) not only Bishops, but
Metropolitans and Archbishops. This is said with so much confidence, that all
men are condemned as blind, or wilful that endeavor to oppose it.

And it is reckoned as one of the great prodigies of this unhappy age, that men
should still continue blind, and not see light enough in this Scripture, In
tacta Iuce adhuc caecutire aliquos inter pessima, and in^auspicatissimi, seculi
prodigia numerandum est.
to build the great Fabric of Episcopacy by Divine right upon. It is further
added, That some of the ancient Fathers, mention the very men that were the
Angels of those Churches. Some say Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, when John
writ his Epistle to it: Others say Onesimus: Others say that Polycarp was
Bishop of Smyrna. And from hence they conclude with a great deal of
plausibilitie, that the Angels of the Churches were seven individual Bishops.

For answer to those things, we must of necessity refer the Reader to what is
said in the books quoted in the margent, wherein they are fully, clearly,
Smectimnuus. The vindicati of Sme^tym. The humble answer of the Divines at the
Isle of Wight.
and (as we conceive) satisfactorily handled, we shall crave leave to borrow a
few things out of them, adding something of our own. In answer therefore to
this Scripture, we do desire those things may be considered.

1. That St. John the Penman of the Revelation, does neither in it, nor in any
of his other writings, so much as upon the name Bishop, he names the name
Presbyter frequently, especially in the Revelation; yea, when he would set out
the Office of those that are nearest to the throne of Christ in his Church,
Revel. 4. He calls himself a Presbyter, Epist. 2. And whereas in St. John's
days some new expressions were used in the Christian Church, which were not in
Scripture; As the Christian Sabbath began to be called (...) L ords day,
and Christ himself (...) The Word*
Now both these are found in the writings of St. John. And it is strange to us,
that the Apostle should mention a new phrase, and not mention a new Office
erected by this time (as our Brethren say) in the Church* especially if we
consider that Polycarp (as i^ related) was made Bishop by him; and no doubt if
he had been made Bishop in a Prelaticall sense, we should have found the name
Bishop in some of his writings* who lived so long as to see Episcopacy settled
in the Church, as our Adversaries would make us believe.

Add to thi^,

1. That there is not the least intimation in all St. John's writngs of the
superiority of one Presbyter over another, save only where he names and chides
Diotrephes, as one ambitiously affecting such a Primacy.

Consider, thirdly, That the same Authors, that say that St. John made Polycarp
Bishop of Smyrna, and that St. Peter made Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, do also
say that St. John himself sat many years Bishop of Ephesus, and was the
Metropolitan of all Asia, which is an evident demonstration to us, that these
Authors did not use the word Bishop in a Prelaticall sense. For it is certain
that the Apostles cannot properly be called Bishops: For, though they did
eminently contain the Episcopal office, yet they were not formally Bishops.
For, this were to degrade the Apostles, and to make their Office ordinary and
perpetual, this were to exalt the Bishop above his degree, and make him an
Apostle, and to make the Apostle a Bishop. Hoc enim non multum distat ab
iusania, dicere Petrum fuisse propcie Episcopum, ut reliquos Apostolos.
It does not much differ from madness, to say that Peter or any one of the
Apostles were properly Bishops, as learned Whitaker says, whom we shall have
occasion to cite this purpose hereafter.

4. Consider fourthly, That the word Angel (which is the title given to those
supposed Bishops) does not import any peculiar jurisdiction or pre-eminence,
but is a common name to all Ministers, and is so used in Scripture: For all
Ministers are Gods Messengers, and Ambassadors sent for the good of the Elect,
and therefore the name being common to all Ministers, why should we think that
there should be any thing spoken to one Minister, that does not belong to all?
The same may be said of the word Star (which is also a title given to those
supposed Metropolitans.) It is evident that all faithful Ministers are called
Stars in Scripture, whose duty is to shine as lights unto the Churches in all
purity of doctrine, and holiness of conversation. There is nothing in these
Titles, that argue these Ministers to be Bishops in our Brethrens sense,
insomuch as had they not been called Bishops, by some Authors that succeeded
them (who spoke of former times according to the language of their own times)
this way of arguing would have been counted ridiculous.

5. Add lastly, That these Titles of Stars and Angels are mysterious and
metaphorical. It is said Rev. 1.20 The mystery of the seven Stars, etc. And
certainly it cannot be safe or solid, to build the structure of Episcopacy by
Divine right upon mysterious and metaphorical denominations; Theologia
Symbolica non est argumentativa. Especially if we consider, that there are
abundance of clear Texts, that make Presbyters and Bishops to be one and the
same: and it cannot be praiseworthy for any men (though never so learned in
the esteem of the world,) to oppose certain allegorical, and mysterious
titles, to so many express testimonies of Scripture.

Against all this it will be said, That our Savior Christ in his Epistles to
these seven Churche^, singles out one Angel in every Church from all the other
ministers that were there, and dedicates his Epistle unto these Angels, thereby
giving us to understand, that these Angels were superior to all the other
Ministers, Angels of an higher Orb, Superintendents and not only Bishops
overPresbyters, Archbishops over other Bishops, as a high Prelatist is pleased
to tell us.

Answ.
To this objection there are solid and every way sufficient answers given in the
books forementioned; we shall reduce all to these two head^.

1. That the word Angel is not to be taken (...), but (...), not Individually,
but collectively, for all the Pastors and Ministers of the respective
Ministers; this answer we confess is called a poor shift and vain conceit,
and a manifest wresting of the plain words of our Savior by our Episcopal men;
But we conceive there are such reasons brought for the Justification of it that
cannot be answered. As for example.

It is certain that our Savior Christ speaks to this Angel often in the
plural number, Rev. 2.24. But unto you I say and the rest of Thyatira Rev.
2.10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. B^hold, the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death etc. This see Rev. 2.13. By
which is evident, that by the word Angel is not meant one singular person, but
the collective body of Rulers.

But some copies leave out the Conjunction (...), Object.
and read it, (...).

Answ.
He that shall view the Antecedent, and consequent and consider that verse. 23.
it is said I will give to every one of you etc. And then follows But I say
unto you, and in the conclusion of the verse, I will put upon you no other
burden, will confess that the old copies are better then that which is said to
be Tecla's Manuscript.

2. It is certain that the Church of Ephesus was a collective body, and that
there were many Presbyters to whom St. Paul at his final departure from them
committed the charge of that Church. And these Presbyters are called Bishops,
and were all of them stars of the same magnitude, and Ange^s of the same Order
without a difference and distinction.

3. It is usual with the Holy Ghost, not only in other books of the
Scripture, but in this very book of the Revelation, in Mysterious and
prophetic writings and visional representations (such as this of the stars and
golden Candlestick is) to express a number of things or persons in singulars.
And this in visions is the usual way of representation of things, a thousand
persons making up one Church, is represented by one Candlestick; many Ministers
making up one Presbytery by one Angel. Thus Revel. 8.2. It is said, That John
say seven Angels which stood before God. By these seven Candlesticks Dr.
Reynolds does not understand seven Individual Angels, but all the Angels. For
there are no seven Individual Angels that stand before God, but all do, Dan* 7.
There are many more instances brought in the book^ forementioned.

4. Add lastly, That though but one Angel be mentioned in the fore^front; yet
it is evident, that the Epistles themselves (though we are far from thinking in
that formal Denomination the Angels and Candlesticks are the the same) are
dedicated to all the Angels and Ministers in every Church, and to the Churches
themselves, as appears Rev. 1.11. Rev. 2.7.11.17. And therefore when it is said
in the singular number, I know thy works, This thou have, Repent and do thy
first works etc. All these and the like places are not to be understood as
meant of one Individual person, but of the whole company of Ministers, and
also of the whole Church, because the punishment threatened is to the whole
Church Rev. 2.5.16.2. Now we have no warrant in the word to think that Christ
would remove his Gospel from a Church for the sin of one Bishop, when all the
other Ministers and Churches are far from those sins. These are some of those
reasons that are brought to prove that this our interpretation is no wresting
or offering of violence to the text, but such a one that flows naturally from
it.

We might for the confirmation of it cite Mr. Brightman, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Fox,
(who cites Primasius, Haymo, Beda, Richardus, Thomas etc. of the same
judgment) Dr. Fulk, Mr. Mede, Gregory, and St. Austin, all of them interpreting
this text as we do. But we forbear, because they are quoted by Smectimnuus.

But it will be said that as some Autohors say, That Timothy was Bishop of
Ephesus when our Savior wrote this Epistle to it; Object.) Ribera, tyra,
Pererius.
Others Tertul. Ignatius, Eusebius.
that Onesimus was Bishop, ( c) Others that Polycarp was Bishop of Smyrna at
that very time; And therefore these Angels must needs be taken Individually for
for so many single persons.

They that say that Timothy was then Bishop, offer no little injury to him;
Answ.
for they thereby charge him to be guilty of Apostasy, and of losing his first
love, and so out of a blind zeal to Episcopacy, they make that Glorious Saint
to stand charged as an Apostate. The like injury is offered by Objections to
Onesimus.

2. We have already proved, That Timothy was an Evangelist in a proper sense,
and therefore cannot be called a Bishop of Ephesus in their sense.

It will not follow because Onesimus was bishop of Ephesus in

3. St. John's days, that therefore he was the only person to whom Christ
wrote his Epistle; for St Paul tells us that there were many Bishops at Ephesus
(besides the supposed Onesimus) and Christ may very well write to him and to
all the rest as well as him. The like may be said concerning Polycarpe: For our
Savior speaks to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna in the plural number Rev.
2.10. And therefore he may truly be said to write to all the other Angels that
were at Smyrna as well as to one. So much for the first head of answers.

2. But now in the second place, Let us suppose it (though we will not grant
it) That these Angels were Personae singulares, and that the word Angel is to
be taken Individually; yet, we conceive, That this will not at all advantage
the Episcopal cause. For,

1. First Mr. Beza (no great friend to Episcopacy) acknowledges, That by these
words To the Angel is meant (...) To the President as whom it behoved specially
to be admonished touching those matters, and by him both the rest of his
Colleagues, and the whole Church likewise. But then he adds.

But that Episcopal Degree which was afterward by humane invention brought into
the Church of God, Sed hinc stutui Episcopalis ille gradus postea humanitus in
Eccl^siam Dei invectus certe nec potest nec debet, imo ne perpetuum quidem
istud (...) munus esse necessaria ^portucsse, sicut ^xorta inde Tyrannis
oligarchia (cuus apex ^st Antichr^stian^ bestia cetissima cum totius, non
Ecclesiae modo sed etiam orbis pernicie, nunc andem declar^t.
certainly neither can nor ought to be hence concluded; Nay not so much as the
Office of a perpetual President should be of necessity as the thence arising
Olig^rchical Tyranny (whose head is the Antich^istian Beast) now at length,
with ^he most certain ruin not of the Church only, but of the word also
makes manifest; by which quotation it is evident, that though Beza h^ld the
Angel to be a singular person, yet he held him to be Angelus pres^s not Ang^lus
Princeps. And that he was Praeses pr^ tempore, just as a Moderator in an
Assembly, or as a Speaker in Parliament.

To this effect do the Reverend Divines speak in their humble answer at the
Isle of VVight, where they say, That these writings to the Angels are directed
as Epistolary letters to Collective bodies usually are; That is, To one, but
intended to the body, which your Majesty illustrateth by your sending a
Message to your two Houses, and directing it to the Speaker of the Hou^e of
Peers; which as it does not hinder, we confess, but that the Speaker is one
single Person; so it does not prove at all, that the Speaker is always the
same Person; or if he were, that therefore because your Message is directed to
him, he is the Governor or Ruler of the Two Houses in the least, and so your
Majesty has given clear instance, that though these letters be directed to
the Angels, yet that notwithstanding, they might neither be Bishops, nor yet
perpetual Moderators.

Secondly, Dr, Reynolds (who has written a letter in Print against the j^s
divinum of Episcopacy) acknowledges also, (in his conference with Heart dial
3.) That this Angel was persona singularis. For he says, That Presbyters when
they met together for the carrying on of the affairs of the Church by common
Council and consent, chose one amongst them to be the President of their
company, and Moderator of their actions. As in the Church of Ephesus, though it
had sundry Elders and Pastors to guide it; yet amongst those sundry, was there
one chief, whom our Savior calls The Angel of the Church, and writes that
to him, which by him the rest should know. From which saying we may safely
conclude, That though we should grant (which yet we do not) that this Angel is
a single person, yet it will not at all help the Episcopal Hierarchy. For this
Angel is but a Moderator of the Presbytery, having no superiority of power
either in Ordination, or Jurisdiction, above Presbyters; is himself also a
Presbytery, and (for ought appears to the contrary, from the judgment of Dr.
Reynolds) a Moderator only pro tempore: Which kind of government is purely
Presbyterial, and not at all Episcopal, much less (as some would have it, even
from this text) Archiepiscopal and Metropolitical.

Object.
But it is objected by some learned men, That the Seven Cities in which these
seven Asian Churches had their seat, were all of them Metropolitical, and so
had relation unto the rest of the Towns, and Cities of Asia, as unto daughters
rising under them; And that therefore these Churches were Metropolitical
Churches, and their Angels Metropolitical Bishops.

To this we answer, Answ.
1. That it will hardly be proved that these Seven Cities were all of them
Metropolitical Cities in St. John^ days; And the situation of the most of them
lying near together by the Sea side, makes it very improbable. 2. But suppose
it would, yet we answer.


1. That it is no good argument from the greatness of the Cities, to infer
the greatness of the Churches: For, though the Cities were great, yet the
Churches were but small, and the number of believers very few in comparison of
the rest of the people.

2. We do not believe that ever it can be proved, That the Apostles did model
the government of the Church according to the government of the Roman State.
This was the after-policy of Christian Emperors and Bishops, but no part of
Apostolical policy; And therefore it does not follow, That because there were
diverse Cities under the jurisdiction of these seven Cities, That therefore
there should be diverse Churches subordinate to these seven Asian Churche^.

3. We are fully assured, That it can never be made out, That any of these
Asian Angels were Archbishops, or Bishops over other Bishops; or Bishops over
diverse settled Churches. The seven stars are said in Scripture to be fixed in
their seven Candlesticks or Churches, not one Star over diverse Candlesticks, or
Churches.

If this opinion were true, Then Tertullian did no^ do well in saying, That St.
John made Polycarpe Bishop of Smyrna, but he should rather have said, That he
made him Archbishop. And our Savior Christ had not given unto these seven
Angels their due Titles. For he must have written. To the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, together with all those Churches in the Cities subordinate to
Ephesus.

And so likewise of the other Six: Surely this device was found out for the
honor of Archiepiscopacy by some that did aspire unto that dignity; But we
hope that our more moderate Brethren are far from stamping a divinum jus upon
Archbishops and Prim^tes and Patriarchs, for fear lest by the same proportion
of reason they be forced to put a divine stamp at last upon the Pope himself.
And therefore we forbear to say any more about it.

For the conclusion of this discourse about the Asian Angels, we shall add;

4. That it can never be proved, That these Asian Angels were Bishops in a
Prelatical sense, much less Archbishops and Metropolitans. For it is agreed
upon on al parts, That believers in great Cities were not divided into set and
fixed Congregations or Parishes, till long after the Apostles days. And that
Parishes were not united into Diocesses till 260. years after Christ. And
therefore sure we are, That there could not be Diocesan Churches, and Diocesan
Bishops formally so called in the Apostles days. These Angels were
Congregational, not Diocesan. In the beginning of Christianity the number of
believers, even in the greatest Cities, were so few, as that they might well
meet, (...) in one and the same place. And these were called The Church of the
City, and therefore, to ordain Elders (...), and (...), are all one in
Scripture.

Afterward we conceive, That believers became so numerous in these great
Cities as that they could not conveniently meet in one place. Act. 2* 40. and 4
4. and 5.14.
Thus it was in the Church of Jerusalem: and thus possible, it might be in
most of these Asian Churches in St. John's time. But yet notwithstanding all
this, there are three things diligently to be observed.

1. That these meeting places were frequented promis^uously, and indistinctly,
and that believers were not divided into set and fixed Churches or
congregations in the Apostles days.

2. That notwithstanding these different meeting places, yet the believers of
one City made but one Church in the Apostles days, as is evident in the Church
of Jerusalem, which is called a Church, not Churches, Act. 8.1. and 15.6. and
22.16. And so likewise it is called the Church of Ephesus, and the Church of
Thyatira, etc. not Churches etc.

3. That this Church in the City was governed in the Apostles days by the
common Council of Presbyters, or Bishops. A^t. 14.23.
For the Apostles went about Ordaining Presbyters in every Church; and Act.
20.71. Paul calls for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus (one of these seven
Churches) and calls them Bishops, and commits the whole government of the
Church unto them. The like may be said of the other six Churches. From all this
we gather, That the Asian Angels were not Dioces^n Bishop^, but
CongreCongregational Presbyter^ seated each of them in one Church, not any of
them in more then one.

And though Poly^arpe, by Tertullian and Irenaeus, be called Bishop of Smyrna,
and On^simus by others, Bishop of Ephesus, yet it is confessed by all, That
Bishops and Presbyters had all one name in the Apostles days, and long after,
even in Irenaus his time. And therefore the question still remains, Whether
they were Bishops phrasi Apostolica, that is, Presbyters; or phrasi Pontificia;
whether Bishops Antonomastic^, and (...), so called, or whether, as we believe
(and have proved as we conceive sufficiently) in a general sense, as all
Presbyters are called. This is all we shall say about the Second answer; Though
for our parts, we profess that we adhere unto the first answer, That the word
Angel is to be taken Collectively, not Individually. And so much in answer to
the Scripture-argument drawn from the Asian Angels.

CHAP. VII. Containing our Reply to the Answers given to our
Scripture-arguments.
THe next thing we are to take in hand is to make brief replies unto those
answers that are given to some of our arguments (for to some of them no answer
at all is given) brought against the jus divinum of Prelacy, and for the
Identity of a Bishop and Presbyter in Scripture.

The general answer that is returned unto all our texts of Scripture is; That
these texts do only prove an Identity of names, but not of Offices, and that
it is the great Presbyterian fall^cy. To argue from the Samenesse of names to a
samenesse of function.

But we answer.

1. That it is of no small consequence, that there is a constant Identity of
denomination between a Bishop and ^ Presbyter. For the proper end of names
being (as Smect^ymnuus says) to distinguish things according to the difference
of their nature, and the supreme wisdom of God being the imposer of these
names, who could neither be ignorant of the nature of these offices, nor
mistake the proper end of imposition of names, nor want variety to express
himself, the argument taken from the constant Identity of Denomination is not
so contemptible as some would make it.

2. But we answer further, That our argument is not drawn from the Identity of
denomination only, but also from the Identity of Office, and it is this. They
that have the same name, and the same office, and the same qualifications for
their office, and the same Ordination to their office, they are one and the
same: but so has the Presbyter, and Bishop, Ergo. This we proved from Titus
1.5.6.7. 1. Tim. 3. and other places never yet answered.

More particularly,

To that place Act. 20.17, 28. where the Apostle commits the government of the
Church of Ephesus unto the Presbyters of that Church whom he there calls
Bishops etc. It is answered, That these Elders were not mere Presbyters, but
Bishops properly so called. And though they were sent for from Ephesus, yet
they are not said to be all of Ephesus. But they were all the Bishops of Asia
called from diverse parts, and gathered together at Ephesus, and from thence
sent for by Paul to Mil^tum. To make the new-minted answer seem probable, They
bring the 25. verse, where it is said, And now behold I know that ye all among
whom I have gone Preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. This
must needs relate, say they, to all the Bishops of Asia amongst whom he had
gone preaching the Kingdom of God. And so also they bring the 31. verse.
Therefore watch and remember that ^y the space of three years I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears. Now with whom did Paul spend his
three years? Not with the Elders of one City of Ephesus, but with all the
Bishops of Asia. And therefore they conclude, that this was Paul's Metropolicall
visitation, not of a few Elders of one City, but of all the Asian Prelates.

To all this we reply.

1. That this interpretation is a manifest wresting of the text, contrary to
most of the ancient Fathers, to Hierom, Reply*
Theod^ret, Chrysostom. etc. and contrary to many Counsels, and purposely found out
to avoid the deadly blow that this text give^ to Episcopacy by divine right.

2. There is no sufficient ground to build that conjecture upon, That the
Bishops of all Asia were gathered together at Ephesus when Paul sent from
Miletum to Ephesvs. The text says that Paul from Miletum sent to Ephesus and
called the Elders of the Church. Of what Church? Surely of that Church to which
he sent, and that was Ephesus. He sent not, for ought we read, for any other
Elders, neither is there any mention of any other Elders then present at
Ephesus.

3. The Syriack translation reads it. He sent to Ephesus and called the Elders
of the Church of Ephesus. So Hierom, Presbyteros Ecclesiae Ep^esinae. So
concilium Aquis-granense.

4. If the Apostles by the Elders of the Church had meant the Bishops of all
Asia, he would have said, not the Elders of the Church, but of the Churches. It
is an observation brought by one of those that makes use of this answer we are
now confuting, That when the Scripture speaks of Churches in Cities, it
always uses the singular number, as the Church of Hirusalem, the Church of
Corinth etc. But when it speaks of provinces in which were many Cities, then
it uses the Plural number. As the Churches of Iudaea and the Churches of Asia
Rev. 1.11. According to this observation, If the Apostle had meant of the
Bishops of All Asia, he would have said, The Elders of the Churches. But
because he says the Elders of the Church, it is evident he means only, The
Elders of the Church of Ephesus, and so by consequence it is as evident, That
by Elders* the Apostle understands mere Presbyters, and not Bishops in a
distinct sense, unless our brethren will confess* That there were more
Bishops then one in Ephesus which is wholly to forsake theircause, and to
confess that which we affirm, that the Bishops of Ephesus were true
Presbyters, and the Presbyters true Bishops.

5. Whereas it is said, That Paul sent not only for the Bishops or
superintendents of Ephesus, but of all Asia. We demand, who was the Bishop of
Ephesus that Paul sent for? Surely it was not Timothy. For Timothy was then
present with him, and needed not to have been sent for, and yet Timothy was
(according to our Brethrens judgment) the first Bishop of Ephesus. And if
Timothy was the first Bishop, then surely there was none in Ephesus for Paul to
send for, and if Ephesus at that time had no Bishop which was the Metroplis of
all Asia; How came the Daughter Churches to have Bishops before their Mothe^
Church, as they call it?

6. But, sixthly, We desire it may be proved, That there were any Bishops over
Presbyters in Asia when Paul was at Miletum. This is taken for granted by
Episcopal men, But this is the (...) The very thing which is in question. We
say That the Bishops of Asia were of the same nature with the Bishop of
Ephesus, that is, they were Elders and Presbyters of the Churches to whom the
Holy Ghost had committed the care of teaching and governing etc.

7. As for that which is gathered from the 25. verse, it bears no weight at
all with it; For these words, All ye, relate only to the Elders of the Church
of Ephesus that were then present. Should a man say unto ten Members of the
House of Lords, and ten of the House of commons, and say unto them, All ye are
now dissolved; would it imply a presence of all the Lords and all the Commons,
because the speech concerned them all, and was true of them all? who ^nows not
it would not? So it is here, etc.

As for that which is hinted from the 31 verse. it does not ^t all prove that
which it is brought for. For if we look into Act. 19. we shall find, that Paul
spent most of his three years at Ephesus o^^ly, and not in other parts of Asia.
Ephesus was the chief City of Asia, and greatly given to Idolatry, and there
P^^l fixed his habitation.

It is the observation of Hiro^^, That Paul tarried 3. years at Ephesus in
praedicat^ous Evangelis assiduns and (...) Minister, ^t Id^lolatriae arc^
destructa facile mi^orum, Hierom, in praefatione Epist. ad Ephesios.
urbi^^^ fa^a and superstitio^^s convell^^et. A daily and stro^uous Minister in
the Preaching of the Gospel: That by destroying the chief fort and castl^ of
Idol^try, h^ might the ^asilier demolish the temples and, the s^^^^stitions of
the less^r Cities. The te^t it self ^entioneth two years and three Months. And
therefore this verse does not at all prove that all the Bishops of Asia were
present with Paul at Mi^etum. So much for the Justific^tion of our ^gument
drawn from Act. 20.17.28.

2. Whereas we have proved from Phil. 1.1. That there ^re but two ordinary and
st^nding Officers constituted by Christ in his Church etc. To this diverse
answers are given, and some of them quite contrary one to the other.

1. First it is said by some, That though in the place cited there be but two
Orders of the Ministry mentioned, yet it does not follow, but that there may be
mention in other Scriptures of another standing Officer.

We desire that these Scriptures may be produced: We say* That there is no
mention in any place of any others, and we add, That there is no mention of any
Rules for Ordaining any others, or of any way of Mission for any others, no
Qualifications for any others. And therefore that there is no other standing
Officer in Christ's Church of his appointing.

2. It is confessed by others, That the Bishops in Philippi were mere
Presbyters, and that the Apostles in the Churches which they planted, did not
at first appoint any Bishops, but Presbyters only, to whom they gave the power
of Preaching, but reserved in their own hands the power of Governing, till
toward the latter end of their lives.

Reply.
This conceit, though it be frequently urged, and much insisted on by the
learnedest of our Brethren, yet that it is but a mere conceit, appears.

1. Because that when the Apostles placed Preaching Presbyters over the
Churches, they did not only give unto them the power of Teaching, but also of
governing. They are called Rulers and Governors, and their charge was (...),
and (...), as we have proved at large. Our Savior Christ committed both the
Keys (as they are called) The Key of Doctrine and Discipline, into the hands
of Preaching Presbyters. And whom the Apostles did constitute Teachers, the
same they made also Rulers and Governors.

2. Because that when Paul took his solemn leave of the Elders of Ephesus, and
was never to see their faces more, he did not set a Bishop over them to Rule
and govern them, But he left the power of government in the hands of the
Elders* Charging them to feed the flock (over which the holy Ghost had made
them Bishops) both by Doctrine, and Discipline.

3. This answer does yield thus much; That the Apostles at first did place
Presbyters in the Churches by them planted, and that to these Presbyters, he
gave the power of Teaching, and (as we have proved) the power of governing also.

Now it lies upon our Brethren to prove a Super-institution of a Bishop over
Presbyters by the Apostles, in some after times, which we are sure they cannot
do. It is evident they did the quite contrary at Ephesus: And therefore we may
safely conclude, That there was no such Officer in the Apostles days.

4. As for the Apostles reserving in their own hands the power of governing.

To this it is well answered by the reverend Divines in their humble answer
etc. That the Apostles could no more divest themselves of power of Governing,
then (as Dr. Bilson says) they could lose their Apostleship. Had they set up
Bishops in all Churches, they had no more parted with their power of Governing,
then they did in setting up Presbyters; for we have proved that Presbyters
being called Rulers, Governors, Bishops had the power of Governing in
Ordinary, committed to them as well as the office of teaching etc. Nor do we
see, how the Apostle could reasonably commit^ the Government of the Church to
the Presbyters of Ephesus, and yet reserve the power of Governing (viz. in
ordinary) in his own hands, who took his last farewell of them as never to see
them more. As the reserving of that part of the power of Governme nt called
Legislative, in the Apostles hands hindered not, but that in your Majesty's
judgment Timothy and Titus were Bishops at Ephesus and Creet, to whom the
Apostle gives rules for ordering and governing the Church: So likewise there is
no reason, why the Apostle reserving of that part of the power of Government
called Executive, in such cases and upon such occasions as they thought m eet
should hinder the setting up of Bishops, if they had intended it; and therefore
the reserving of power in their hands can be no greater reason why they did not
set up Bishops at first, then that they never did.

There is a third answer given which is quite contrary to the second, and that
is, that these Bishops of Philippi were Bishops in a proper sense, and that at
that time when the Apostle wrote his Epistle there* were no single Presbyters
at Philippi.

1. This answer is quite contrary to the sense that Hierom, Theodoret, and
Theophylacts, Reply.
and others give of this text.

2. This answer supposes, that there were more Bishops then one planted in one
City by the Apostles, which is quite contrary to the judgment of Episcopal
divines, and quite destructive of the Episcopal Hierarchy. Theodoret says that
the Apostles by Bishops understands single Presbyters (...) Otherwise it had
been impossible for many Bishops to go vern one, City. And so also Theophylact,
The Apostle calls Presbyters, Bishops, (...), For there were not many Bishops
in one City. And the truth is, To affirm* That there were many Bishops in one
City in the Apostles days is in plain English to grant the cause and to say,
That the Apostolical Bishops were mere Presbyters.

3. Another text brought by us to prove the Identity of a Bishop, and Presbyter
was 1. Tim. 3. where the Apostle reckoning up the qualifications of a Bishop
passes from Bishops unto Deacon^, leaving out the qualifications of
Presbyters, there by giving us to understand that Presbyters and Bishops are
all one. To this it is answered, That because Paul wrote to Timothy and Titus
who were Bishops, therefore there was no need to write any thing concerning the
choice or qualification of any other sort of officers, then such as belonged to
their Ordination and inspection, which were Presbyters and Deacons only, and
no Bishops.

Reply.
1. This answer would have some weight in it, if it could be proved, That
Timothy and Titus were Bishops in a for^all sense, or if there could be found
any rule for the Ordination of an Hierarchicall Bishop, or for the
qualification of him in some other place of Scripture; but we are sure that
neither the one, nor the other can be made out.

2. It is reasonable to think (as our Divines at the Isle of Wight say) the
Apostle when he passes immediately from the Bishop to the Deacon (in the place
forementioned) would have distinctly expressed, or at least hinted, what sort of
Bishop he meant whether the Bishop over Presbyters, or the Presbyter Bishop, to
have avoided the confusion of the name, and to have set, as it were, some mark
of difference in the Eschocheon of the Presbyter-Bishop, if there had been some
other Bishop of a higher house.

3. According to the judgment of Episcopal men (as our divines do well
observe) Bishops might then have ordained Bishops like themselves; for there
was then no Canon^ forbidding one single Bishop to Ordain another of his own
rank: and there being many Cities in Creete Titus might have found it
expedient, to have set up Bishops in some of those Cities. So that this answer
fights against the principle of those that hold Timothy and Titus to have been
Bishops.

4. This answer is opposite to all those that hold Timothy and Titus to have
been made by the Apostle Archbishops of Eph^sus and Cr^^t^. If they were
Archbishops, then their Office was to constitute Bishops in a proper sense.
There is one of no little note among our Prelatical Brethren that stoutly
maintains this; and till our Brethren be reconciled among themselves, we need
make no other reply to this answer.

5. Whereas out of 1 Pet. 5. we proved* That the Elder^ are not only called
Bishops, but have the whole Episcopal power committed unto them, being
commanded (...), and (...) To feed and take the Episcopal charge of the flock
of God. To this it is said, That by Elders are meant Bishops in our Brthrens
sense; Because These Elders are required to feed the flock (...) not as being
Lords over Gods heritage; So it is translated. But say some, it must be
translated, Not as being Lords ^ver the Clergy committed to your care, which
hints unto us (say they) That these Elders were Bishops over Presbyters, and
not mere Presbyters.

This Interpretation is Novel, and not to be found for ought we can discern in
all Antiquity, and we believe, Reply.
our more Moderate Brethren are ashamed of it; and therefore we will be very
brief in answer to it. All that we shall say is;

1. That though after the Apostles days there came in this Nominal distinction
between the people and their Ministers, insomuch as the people were called
Laici, and their Ministrs Clerici: yet it is evident, that in the Apostles
days there was no such distinction. The people of God are in this very Epistle
called an holy Priesthood 1 Pet. 2.5. and a royal Priesthood 1 Pet. 2.9. And
Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion, and the lot of his inheri^ance. And if the
Reader will be pleased to view all the translations that have been of this text,
he will never find it translated -- As being Lords of the Clergy but as being
Lords of Gods heritage.

2. We answer, That the Apostle, as if on purpose he had intended to have
fore-armed us against this misunderstanding of the words, in the latter clause
of the verse he shows what he maeneth by (...). -- Not as Lords over Gods
heritage, but as being ensamples to the flock. The latter is the (...) of the
former; By (...) he means (...) And the sense of the whole verse can be no
other but this; That the Elders be careful not to Lord it over Gods heritage,
that is, Gods flock, but to be examples unto them.

We shall not trouble the Reader with any other answers to our arguments. These
that we have mentioned being the most material.

Only for the conclusion of this discourse, we shall crave leave to take
notice, That there is a Doctor, a high Prelatist of great esteem for learning
amongst some men, that in a late Book of his has undertaken to make out these
two great Paradoxes.

1. That wheresover the word Bishop is used in the New Testament, it is to be
taken in a Prelatical sense. For a Bishop is superior to Presbyters in
Ordination and Jurisdiction.

2. That wheresoever the word Presbyter is used in the New Testament, it is to
be understood, not of a mere Pr^sbyter, but of a Bishop properly so called. And
whereas we say, That the Scripture-Bishop is nothing else but a Presbyter, and
that there were no Bishops distinct from Presbyters in the Apostles days: This
Author on the contrary says, That the Scripture-Presbyter, is a true Bishop:
And that there were no single and mere Presbyters in the Apostles days. For
our parts, we do not think it necessary to take a particular survey of all that
is said in Justification of these Paradoxes. Only we desire it may be
considered.

1. That these assertions are contrary unto Antiquity* which yet
notwithstanding our Brethren do so highly magnify, and boast of in this
controversy, and for receding from which (as they s^y we do) they do most
deeply charge us.

2. That they are contrary to all that have ever written in defense of
Episcopacy. And therefore till our Brethren can agree amongst themselves, we
need not spend time to answer the private opinion of one Doctor.

3. That whosoever will defend these Paradoxes, must of necessity be forced to
grant;

1. That there were more Bishops then one in a City in the Apostles days,
which is to betray the cause of Episcopacy, and to bring down a Bishop to the
rank of a Presbyter.

2. That there were no Bishops over Presbyters in the Apostles days. For if
there were no Presbyters, there could be no Bishops over Presbyters.

3. That Ordo Presbyteratus is not jure divino: For if neither Christ, nor his
Apostles Ordained the Office of a Presbyter. Then is the Order of Presbytery a
mere humane invention: Which is an assertion, that even the worst of Papists
will abominate. Bellarmine himself says, That a Bishop that is not first a
Presbyter is a mere figment, and an empty Title.

4. The Author himself in Justification of this his opinion is forced to
confess.

1. That the Ephesius Presbyters whom Paul sent for to Mile^^^, were all the
Prelates of Asia.

2. That the Bishops of Philippi whom Paul salutes Chap. 1. were not the
Bishops of that City only, but of the whole Province, whereas Theophylact
says, That Philippi was (...) A little City subject to the Metropolis of
Thessalonica.

3. That Timothy was Archbishop of Ephesus, and that when Paul sets down the
qualifications of Bishops, though he mentions no qualification, but such
which are common to a Presbyter with a Bishop; yet he is to be understood to
speak of Bishops in a prelatical sense, and not at all of Presbyters. And when
he says, The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor etc. That is
says this Author, the Bishops that rule well etc. Thereby holding out this
great error, that a Bishop that rules well is worthy of double honor though he
never preaches. And when St. Paul bid^ Timothy not neglect the gift that was
given him by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, that i^ (says he)
of Episcopacy. And when the Apostle charge him not to rebuke an Elder etc.
and not receive an accusation against an Elder etc. This is to be understood of
Bishops (says he) and not of mere Presbyters.

4. That Titus also was Archbishop of Creet, and that he received no
commission from St. Paul to ordain single Elders, but only for ordaining of
Bishops in every City. It seems this Author slights the postscript where Titus
is called the first Bishop of Creet, and slights all those ancient Fathers that
are cited by his own party to prove that he was Bishop of Creet. But he must be
an Archbishop, and so must Tymothy be also, or else these assertions of his
will fall to the ground. Now that they were neither Bishops nor Archbishops
has been sufficiently proved (as we conceive) in the former discourse.

5. Fifthly and lastly, those Paradoxes are contrary to the very letter of the
Scripture, as we have made it evident in our arguments against the jus divinum
of Episcopacy, and would further manifest it, if we thought it necessary. For
when the Apostle says James 5.14. Is any sick among you? let him call for the
Elders of the Church etc. who is there that can be persuaded to believe That
all these Elders were Bishops in the sense that Bishops are taken in our days)
is this the proper work of Bishops to visit the sick? and, besides, If the
Apostles by Elders had meant Bishops in that sense, he would have said, let him
call the Elder s of the Churches, not of the Church, unless our Brethren will
say that there were diverse Bishops in every Church in the Apostles days, in
which there were many sick persons.

Besides, when it is said Act. 21.18. Paul went in with us unto James, and all
the Elders were present. It is supposed by our Episcopal men that this James
was at this time Bishop of Jerusalem. Now we demand, who were these Elders?
were these also Bishops of Jerusalem? will this answer consist with our
Brethrens judgment? So likewise when it is said Act. 15.4. And when they were
come to Jerusalem they were received of the Church and of the A^pstles and
Elders. We demand what is meant by the Church? Is it not meant the Church of
Jerusalem, to which place they are said to come? And if so, Then we ask
further what is meant by the Elders? Must it not be answered, That by Elders
are meant the Elders of Jerusalem. And then let any man tell us how these
Elders can be said to be Bishops in a Prelaticall sense, especially according
to the sense of our Brethren who make James to be at this time the only Bishop
of Jerusalem. Add further, It is said Act. 14.23. when Paul and Barnabas had
ordained them Elders in every Church Act. 11.30. They sent relief to the Elders
etc. Can any Imagine that this Relief was sent only to Bishops, and that Paul
and Barnabas ordained no Presbyters in any Church but only Bishops. Is not
this to offer manifest violence to the Scriptures? and instead of upholding of
Episcopacy is not this sufficient to render it odious and contemptible to all
sober and Godly and Moderate Christians? But we forbear.

So much for our Scripture Proof, and for our Justification out of the Word of
God of Ordination by Presbyters without Prelates.

HAving now finished our Vindication of the present Ministers of the Church of
England, both such as were made by Bishops, and such as are now made without
Bishops, before we come to our Appendix; we shall crave leave to show in few
words unto our respective Congregations, not only the lawfulness of the
present Ministry: But the absolute necessity of adhering to it, and the
destructive dangers, and ineffable mischiefs that will follow upon receiving of
it. And this will appear upon a fourfold account.

1. Because a true Ministry is essential to an Organical Church, that is, a
Church administering Ordinances. A true Church says Cyprian is Plebs Episcopo
adunata.

Ecclesia non est (says Jerome) quae non habet sacerdotem. Sure we are; That
there cannot be a true Church Ministerial, without true Ministers.

2. Because the Scripture way and the only Ordinary way by which men are set
apart to the work of the Ministry is by Ordination, as we have abundantly
showed. He that comes any other way is a Thief and a Robber, not a true
Shepherd.

3. Because That this Ordination must be performed either by Ministers, or by
the people.

And if all Ordination by Ministers be to be accounted Antichristian (because
these Ministers were made by other Ministers, and those by others, and those by
such, as before the reformation, were belonging to the Church of Rome) Then it
will follow, That there is no way of Ordination left, but by the people.

4. Because there is neither precept nor president in all the Book of God for
Ordination of Ministers by the people without Ministers. We read of Ordination
by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, but never by the laying on of
the hands of the people. We find the Apostles Ordaining, and Timothy and Titus
Ordaining (as we have formerly said) and the Presbytery ordaining; But no where
of the peoples Ordaining. We find the people contra-distinguished from Rulers
and Governors, but no where called Rulers or Governors. And if there be a
power by Scripture in the people to Ordain Ministers, why was Titus sent to
Creete to Ordain Elders? why did the Apostles visit the Churches they had
planted, to Ordain Elders in every Church? And why is Timothy commanded, To lay
hands suddenly on no man, etc. Some thing possibly may be said out of
Scripture: For (...), But for (...) there is ne (...) quidem in tota Scriptura.
Surely, this way of Ordination by the people is a devise that has neither
ground for it in the Scripture, nor in all Antiquity. And for private
Christians to assume, not only a power to elect their own Ministers, that is,
to nominate Persons to be made their Ministers (which we no ways dislike or
deny, so it be done in an orderly way by the guidance of the Presbytery) but
also to undertake, without Ordination, to become Public Preachers themselves:
and not only so, but to send forth Ministers authoritatively to Preach the
Gospel, and administer the Sacraments. This is a sin like unto the sin of
Vzziah, and of Corah and his company. This is to make themselves Political
Popes, and Antichristian Christians.

And therefore for the conclusion of all, we shall make bold to speak two
things to all those that renounce their former Ordination by Ministers, and
take up a new way of Ordination by the people.

1. We would entreat them that before they find fault with our way of
Ordination by Ministers, they would first of all justify by the Canon of the
Scripture, their new way of Ordination by the people.

2. We would desire them, in the fear of God to consider; That whosoever
renounceth Ordination by Ministers, must of nece ssity not only renounce our
Ministry, but all the Ministers and Churches Reformed in the Christian world,
and as Constantine said to Acesius the Nova^ian; He must erect a Ladder by
himself to go to heaven in a new way: He must turn Seeker, and forsake all
Church Communion, as some do in these our unhappy days upon this very ground,
that we are speaking of. For sure we are, If Ordination by Ministers be
Antichristian; Ordination by the people is much more Antichristian. But we
hope* better things of you, though we thus speak. And our prayer to God is, and
shall be; That the Lord would send down the spirit of Truth into the hearts of
his people to guide them in the truth in these erring days; The Spirit of
holiness, to sanctify them by his truth in these profane days; And the
Spirit of charity, and meekness, and sobriety, to cause them to speak the
truth in love, (...).
Ephesians. 4.15. and to love one another in the truth, (...).
2 John 1. in these sinful and miserable days of uncharitableness and
division.

The Appendix.
HAving sufficiently proved out of the word of God, that a Bishop and Presbyter
are all one; and that Ordination by Presbyters is most agreeable thereunto: We
shall now subjoyn a brief Discourse about the grand Objection, from the
Antiquity of Prelacy, and about the Judgment and Practice of the Ancient
Church, concerning the Ordination of Ministers. And this we shall do the
rather, because our Prelatical Divines do herein most triumph and boast.

For Bishops distinct from Presbyters have been (say they) in the Church of
Christ for 1600. years and up^ward. And there never was any Ordination without
them. And when Coluthus was Ordained by a Presbyter without a Bishop, his
Ordination was pronounced null and void: And Aerius by Austin and Epiphanius
was accounted an Heretic, for holding (an (...) and a (...)) an equality and
Identity between a Bishop and a Presbyter. Nay Ierom himself says, That a
Bishop over Presbyters is an Apostolical Tradition, and that it began when some
said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, which was (say they) in
the Apostles days. And from hence it is peremptorily asserted that Episcopal
government is of Apostolical institution.

For answer to this great and plausible objection, and for the further
declaration of our judgments concerning the Antiquity of Prela^y, we crave
leave to lay down these following Proposit^ons.

Proposition 1.
THat whatsoever may be said for Prelacy out of antiquity, yet sure we are (as
we hope has been sufficiently proved) That it has no foundation in the
Scriptures. And as Christ, in matter of divorce, brought the Jews to the first
institution of marriage: so ought we in the point of Prelacy to reduce men back
to the first Institution of Epis^opacy, and to say as Christ, From the
beginning it was not so. It is a good saying of Tertullian, Id adulterum quod
posterius, id verum quod primum. And it was well observed by Cyprian, That
Christ said, Ego sum via, veritas, vita: not Ego sum consuetudo: and that
consuetudo sine veritate est vet^stas erroris. Christ is truth, and not
custom, and custom without Truth is a moldy error. And as Sir Francis Bacon
says, Antiquity without truth is a Cipher without a figure. And if we should
seem in what we have asserted about the Identity of a Bishop and Presbyter, to
differ from some of the ancient Fathers, yet we have the same plea for our
selves, which Austin had, who being pressed with the authority of Cyprian, Lib.
Con^ra. Crescon. 2. cap. 32.
answers;

His writings I hold not Canonical, but examin^ them by the Canonical writings:
And in them, what agrees with the authority of Divine Scriptures, I accept
with his praise, what agrees not, I refuse with his leave, Sure we are, That
humane authority can but produce an humane faith; and when all is done, it is
the Scripture (a perfect reconditory of all credenda, petenda, faci^nda) to
which we must flee as the only rock, upon which we can rightly build our
faith; according to that excellent saying of Austin. Sunt certe libri Dominici,
quorum auctoritati utrique consentimus, utrique credimus, utrique servimus, ibi
quaramus Ecclesiam, ibi dis^^tiamus causam nostram.

Proposition 2.
THat there were many corruptions which crept into the Church, in the very
Infancy of it, and were generally received as Apostolical traditions, which yet
notwithstanding are not pleaded for by our Episcopal men, but many of them
confessedly acknowledged to be errors and mistakes. Witness first, The
Millenary opinion which Iustine Martyr says, That he, and all, in all parts,
Orthodox Christians held it* and calls them Christians only in name, with many
other circumstances of aggravation, that denied it. Lactantius after a long
discourse about it, concludes, Haec est doctrina sanctorum Prophetarum, quam
Christiani s^quimur, hac est Christiana sapientia. The like is affirmed by
Tertullian, Irenaeus, and diverse others as is well known. Secondly, we will
instance in the necessity of childrens partaking of the Eucharist, which was
taught by Austin and others as an Apostolical tradition. Rightly (says Austin)
do the Punick Christians call Baptism by no other names but health and safety;
nor the Sacraments of Christ's body by no other then life: Vnde nisi ex antiqua,
(ut existimo) and Apostolica tradi^ion^ qua Ecclesiae Christi insitum tenent
praeter Baptismum, and participationem Dominica mensae, Austin lib. 1. de
peccat. merit. and remiss.
non sol^m non ad regnum Dei, sed nec ad salutem, and vitam ae^ernam posse
quenquam hominum pervenire. In which words the absolute necessity of Baptism
and of the Eucharist for all sorts of people is made an Apostolical tradition.
Lastly, to name no more, Basil de Spiritu Sancto cap. 27^
St. Basil in one Chapter names 4. customs as Apostolical Traditions, to wit,
signing men with the sign of the Cross; praying toward the East; anointing
with oil; standing up at prayer from Easter to Whitsuntide; which though some
of our Episcopal Divines may perhaps approve of as lawful customs, yet we
conceive none of them will believe all of them, especially the two last, to be
Apostolical traditions. From hence we gather, That there were many doctrines
and practices pretended to be grounded upon Apostolical institution, which yet
notwithstanding are rather to be accounted Apocryphal, then Apostolical.

Proposition 3.
THat after Christ's ascension into heaven, The Church of God for a certain
space of time, was governed by the common Council of Presbyters without
Bishops: This appears,

1. From the words of Ierom forementioned; Idem Ergo est Presbyter qui
Episcopus, Et antequam Diaboli instinctu studi^ in religione fierent and
diceretur in populis Ego sum Pauli, Ego Apollo, ego Cephae, communi consilio
Pr^sbyterorum Ecclesiae, gubernabantur. Postquam v^ro unusquisque eos etc. And
afterward Paulatim vero ut dissensionum plantaria evellerentur, ad unum omnem
solicitudinem esse delatam etc. Here note, That for a certain time the Church
was governed by the Assembly of Presbyter^ alone, and that Bishops came in
postea and paulatim. It is not said Simula^ Corinthi dictum fuit, Ego sum Pauli
etc. Sed postquam id dictum.

Object. 1.
But Ierom seems to say, That this was done in the Apostles days, because then
people began to say, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas.

Answ.
These words cannot be so understood; For then Ierom should contradict himself;
For the whole design of the place is, to prove Bishops to be of humane
constitution. Besides Ierom does not say, That it was said so among the
Corinthians; But among the people, -- and diceretur i^ populis. He alludes
indeed to the Apostles words, and speaks in the Apostolical phrase; but not at
all of the Apostles times.

The meaning is as David Blondel well observes; Postquam alii passim
Corinthiorum more dementati i^ parts di^cerpti sunt: After that others were
intoxicated after the manner of the Corinthians, and divided into several
factions, then was one set over the rest as their Bishop. And that this must
needs be so, appears demonstratively by this argument; Because that to prove
that a Bishop and Presbyter are all one, Ierom cites places out of the
Philippians, out of Titus, and out of the second and third Epistle of John,
which were all of them written after the Epistles to the Corinthians.

Object. 2.
But St. Ierom in his 85. Epistle ad Evagrium calls the superiority of a Bishop
over Presbyters, an Apostolical tradition.

Answ.
A learned writer for the Prelatical government triumphs over Dr. Blondel, and
Wal^ Messalinus, because they pass over this objection unanswered; and he
seems to say that it never can be answered: But if he had been pleased to have
cast an eye upon the Vindication of the answer to the humble Remonstrance,
written by Smectymnuus, he should have found this answer.

Ierom in that Epistle sharpens his reproof against some Deacons, that would
equalize thewselves to Presbyters, Answ.
etc. To make this repoof the stronger, he says Presbyteris, id est,
Episcopis, and a little after, he does out of the Scripture most manifestly
prove eundem esse Presbyterum atque Episcopum: and carries this proof by Paul,
by Peter, and by John the longest surviver of the Apostles: Then adds Quod
autem postea un^s electus qui caeteris praepon^retur, in s^hismatis remedium
factum. The reason why afterward one was elected, and set over the rest, was
the cure of Schism. It is hard to conceive how this imparity can be properly
called an Apostolical tradition, when Ierom having mentioned John the last of
the Apostles, says, i^ wa^ poste^ that one was set over the rest. Yet should
we grant it an Apostolical tradition in Ieroms sense, it would be no prejudice
to our cause, seeing with him Apostolical tradition, and Ecclesiastical custom^
are the same; witness that instance of the observation of Lent, which he
writing ad Marc^llum says is Apostolica traditio, yet writing adversus
Luciferianos faith, it is Ecclesiae consuetudo: Whereby it fully appears, That
Ierom by Apostolical tradition meant not an Apostolical institution, but an
Ecclesiastical custom: Thus far Smectym^uns.

And thus Ierom is made to agree with himself, whom our Episcopal Doctors would
make to speak contradictions.

But Ierom says, It was toto orb decretum, and how could this be but by
Apostolical appointment? Object. 3.


The same Author also says in the same place, That it came in paulatim. Answ.
It was not decreed in the whole world all at once, but it came in by degrees,
in some places sooner, and in some later. The saying of Ambrose, or whosoever
was the Author of it, upon the 4th. to the Ephesians is very remarkable -- Ideo
non per omnia conveni^nt scripta Apostoli Ord^nationi quae nunc in Ecclesia est
etc. Nam and Timotheum Presbyterum a se creatum Episcopum vocat, quia primum
Presbyteri Episcopi appellabantur: ut recedente uno, sequens ei succederet etc.
Sed quia caeperunt sequentes Presbyteri indigni inveniri ad primatus tenendos,
immutata est ratio, prospiciente Concilio ut non Ordo, sed meritum crearet
Episcopum. This quotation we shall have occasion to mention afterward: We
bring it now only to show; 1. That the Ordination that was in Ambrose his
days (if he be the Author) was not in all things agreeable to the Apostolical
pattern. 2. That the change that was made was prospicie^te concilio, Was by the advice of a Council, and therefore it is not to be wondered, if in time the
Church of Christ came to be governed by the lifting up of one Presbyter above
the rest.


But how long was it that the Church of Christ was governed by the common
Council of Presbyters without a Bishop set over them? Quest.


Dr. Blondel, a man of great Reading and Learning, undertakes in a large
discourse, Answ.
to make out that before the year 140. there was not a Bishop over Presbyters.
To whose elaborate writings we refer the Reader for further satisfaction in
this particular.

Sure we are, that Clemens who lived in the first Century, in his famous
Epistle to the Corinthians (an undoubted piece of Antiquity) makes but two
Orders of Ministry, Bishops and Deacons. The occasion of that Epistle seems to
be a new sedition raised by the Corinthians against their Presbyters, p. 57.58.
(not as B. Hall says, the continuation of the schisms amongst them in the
Apostles days) Clemens to remove their present sedition, tells them how God
has always appointed several Orders in his Church, which must not be
confounded. In the Jewish Church he appointed a high Priest, Priests and
Levites. And then tells them for the time of the Gospel that Christ Jesus sent
his Apostles through Countries, and Cities, (...). Clemens ad. Corinth. p. 54.
in which they preached and constituted the first fruits (approving them by the
spirit) for Bishops and Deacons, to those who should afterward believe. Here
we observe

1. That in the first and purest times, the custom was to choose Bishops in
Villages, as well as in great Cities. Afterward indeed in the year 347. in the
Council of Sardica, it was decreed, That no man should be chosen Bishop in a
Village, or in a little City ne vilescat no^e^ Episcopi: That the name of a
Bishop might not be rendered contemptible. But in the first age of the Church,
they appointed Bishops (...) as well as (...).

2. That Bishops and Deacons were the only Orders of Ministry in the first
Primitive Church: And that the Apostles appointed but two Officers (that is
Bishops and Deacons) to bring men to believe: Because, when he had reckoned up
three Orders appointed by God among the Jews, Highpriest, Priests and Levites,
coming to recite Orders appointed by the Apostles under the Gospel, he does
mention only Bishops and Deacons.

The same Clemens adds page 57. That the Apostles knowing by Jesus Christ,
(...).
that there would a contention arise (...), About the name Bishop, and being
endued with perfect foreknowledge, they appointed the foresaid (that is the
foresaid Orders of Bishops and Deacons) etc.

Here note 1. That by name is not meant the bare name of Bishop, but the honor
and dignity as it is taken Phil. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.21. Heb. 1.4. Revel. 11. So that
(...) is here to be rendered by (...) and (...) is (...). The controversy
amongst the Corinthians, was not about the Name, but dignity of Episcopacy, for
it was about the deposition of their godly Presbyters, page 57.58.

2. That the only remedy appointed by the Apostles for the care of all
contentions arising about Episcopacy, is by committing the care of the Church
unto Bishops and Deacons. Afterward the Church found out another way, by
setting up one Bishop over another: But Clemens tells us, That the Apostles
endued with perfect foreknowledge of things, Ordained only Bishops and Deacons
for a remedy of all Schisms.

It would be too long to recite all that is said in this Epistle, for the
Justification of our proposition. Let the Reader peruse page 57.62.69.72. and
take notice; That those that are called Bishops in one place, are called
Presbyters in another, and that they are (...), throughout the whole Epistle.

(...). Perpetual government of Christ's Church. Distinct. 93. cap. Legimus.
The like record we have of Polycarpe, that famous Disciple of John the Apostle,
who lived also within the first Century, and wrote an Epistle to the
Philippians, in which he makes also but two Orders of Ministry, Bishops and
Deacons and persuades the Philippians to be subject to their Presbyters and
Deacons as to God, and to Christ. Nay, Bishop Bilson himself says, page
158.159. That Elders at first did govern by common advise, is no doubt at all
to us* That which is doubted and denied by us, is, That these Elders were
Laymen.

Gratian in his decrees brings in Ierom word for word affirming, That a Bishop
and a Presbyter are the same; upon which words* the author of the gloss says.
Some say that in the first Primitive Church, the Office of Bishops and
Presbyters was common, but in the second Primitive Church, both names and
Offices began to be distinguished. And again, A third sort say, this advancing
was made in respect of name, and in respect of administration, and in respect
of certain Ministeries which belong only to the Episcopal office.

And the same Author himself is of this opinion, saying; Before this advancing,
these names, Bishops and Presbyters, were altogether of the same signification,
and the administration was common: because Churches were governed by the common
advise of Presbyters. And again, This advancing was made for a remedy against
schism as is here said by St. Ierom. That one should have the pre-eminence in
regard of the name, the administration, and certain Sacraments, which now are
appropriated to Bishops. Here we have a distinction of the first and second
Primitive Church, and that in the first Primitive Church, Bishops and
Presbyters were all one.

To all these Quotations we shall subjoyn a remarkable passage of the L. Digby
recorded in a letter of his, full of excellent learning, written to Sr. Kenelme
Digby. This Gentleman was a great adorer of Monarchical Episcopacy, and yet
observe what he says. He that would reduce the Church now to the form of
government in the most Primitive time^, should not take in my opinion, the best
nor wisest course; I am sure not the safest: for he would be found pecking
toward the Presbytery of Scotland, which for my part I believe, in point of
government, has a greater resemblance, then either yours or ours, to the first
age of Christ's Church, and yet it is never a whit the better for it; since it
was a form not chosen for (...) best, but imposed by adversity under
oppression, which in the beginning forced the Church from what it wished, to
what it might, not suffering that dignity and state Ecclesiastical, which
rightly belonged unto it, to manifest it self to the world: and which soon
afterward upon the least lucida intervalla, shone forth so gloriously in the
happier as well as more Monarchical condition of Episcopacy: of which way of
government, I am so well persuaded, that I think it pity, it was not made
betimes, an Article of the Scottish Catechism; That Bishops are jure Divino.
By this passage it is easy to perceive the indiscreet zeal of this Gentleman
toward Lordly and Monarchical Prelacy, and yet we have here his free clear and
full confession; That in the first, and best, and purest times of the Church,
the Presbyterian government was practiced, and not the Episcopal, which is the
thing which we undertook to make out in this third Proposition.

Against all that has been said in this Proposition, Obje^t.
it is objected; That the Blessed St. Ignatius who lived in the first Century
has in his Epistles clearly and fully asserted Episcopal government, as it is
distinct from Presbyterial. And that therefore there was no space of time
wherein the Church ofChrist was governed by the common Council of Pre^byters
without Bishops properly so called.

In answer to this, we must entreat the Reader to take notice, Answ.
that in the Primitive times there were abundance of spurious and
supposititious works put forth under the names of the Apostles, and blessed
Martyrs, which were none of theirs, but father^d upon them ut ementitis titulis
fidem authoritatemque erroribus suis ^onciliarent: That by their counterfect
titles they might gain belief and authority to their errors. Such were the
Epistle of Paul to Seneca, and Seneca's to Paul; The laws and constitutions
Apostolical, The works of Dionysius Ar^opagita, and diverse others; The like
fraud has been used in Ignatius his works. It is certain, That the Epistle of
the Blessed Virgin Mary to Ignatius, and of Ignatius to the Blessed Vi^gin, and
two other Epistles of Ignatius unto St. John the Apostle, are spurious and
counterfeit. And as for his other twelve Epistles, five of them are by
invincible arguments as we conceive, proved by Vedelius, to be written by a
Pseudo-Ignatius. Eusebius and Ierom make mention but of Seven: And for those
seven, though with Scultetus, Vedelius, and Rivetus, we do not renounce them as
none of hi^, yet sure we are, they are so much adulterated and corrupted; that
no man can ground any solid assertion about Episcopacy from Ignatius his works.
The Reverend Archbishop of Armagh says, That there are but six of these
Epistles that are genuine, and that even these six are miserably depraved and
corrupted. Rivet says very judiciously, Ex quibus constat quaedam esse
resecta. quaedam assuta, quaedam mutata, ac proinde epistolas illas fidem
facere non posse, nisi in iis in quibus cum Apostolorum Scriptis convenient.
Riveti critica sacra.
That in these Epistles some things are defective, some things added, some
things changed; And therefore they cannot merit oisr belief, but only in those
things in which they agree with the Apostolical writings.

Baronius indeed says, that all his Epistles are come to us integrae and
in^orruptae entire and uncorrupted: But yet notwithstanding, it seems
forgetting what he had said, he tells That when there is mention made in the
Epistle to the Philadelphians of the marriages of P^ter and Paul; That the word
Paul i^ foysted in. And he also tells us (as Vedelius observes) That the words
Gratia and Am^^* with which Ignatius was wont to conclude his Epistles were
left out incuria librariorum in all his Epistles except two. And whereas it is
said in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, That not only the bread was given,
but the cup also was distributed to all, Bellarmin^ says; That the Greek
Cop^es are corrupt.

For our parts* we will not trouble the Reader with a large discourse about
this subject. If he please he may read that what the Archbishop of Armagh, what
^ivet, Vedelius and Cook in his Censura Patrum. And what Salmasius and D.
Blondel say about it, who all of them bring diverse arguments to evince the
invalidity of these Epistles. There is a learned Doctor that has undertaken to
answer the objection^ of the two last.

But this Doctor should do well to answer also to what the learned Archbishop
of Armagh h^th written about these Epistles, who proves at large, That six of
them are Nothae, the other six Mixtae, and none of them to be accounted omni ex
part sinc^rae and g^nuinae. Who also tell^ us out of Casaub^n^ That amongst
all the Ecclesi^stical monuments, there are none in which the Papists put more
confidence then in Ignatius his Epistles, That Baronius in his first Tome,
almost in every page, cites Igna^ius to confirm his Popish traditions.

In the Second Tome Anno. 109. he confesses, and disputes it at large. That
these Epistles are the very Tower of the Pontifician doctrine, and that it
stands upheld by them as by a pillar, and he often says, That there was never
any found, who called the truth of these Epistles into question etc. And
therefore this Reverend Doctor ought not to be offended if we advise him to
take heed how he complies with Baronius in justifying of Ignatius from all
depravations and interpolations, left out of overmuch love of Prelacy he be
found an advancer of Popery.

We shall briefly offer three Reasons why we cannot build our judgment
concerning the doctrine of the Primitive Church about Episcopacy upon Ignatius
his Epistles.

Because there are diverse things quoted out of his Epistles by Athanasius
Gelasius and Theo^oret, Reason 1.
which are either not to be found in their Epistles, or to be found altered and
changed, and not according as they are quoted. This is Rivets argument, and
pursued at l^rge by the Archbishop, to whom we refer the Reader.

From his overmuch extolling himself in his Epistle to the Trallians, Reason 2.
where he says: That he had attained such a measure of knowledge, That he
understood heavenly things. (...) and^.
The Orders of Angels: The differences of Archangels, and of the heavenly Host:
The differences between Powers and Dominations: The distances of Thrones and
Powers: The magnificencies, or magnitude^ of Ae^nes or Principalities: The
sublimity of the Spirit: The excellencies of Cherubims and Seraphims: The
Kingdom of the Lord, and the incomparable divinity of the Lord God Almighty.
All these things I know, and yet am not perfect and c. Now who is there that
can believe that such Arrogant boasting can proceed from such a holy man, and
humble Saint as Ignatius was.

The third Reason (which is most for our purpose) is from his over eager*
Reason 3.
and over anxious defense of the Episcopal Hierarchy which he does with such
strange, and hyperbolical expressions (as if all Christianity were lost if
Prelacy were not upheld) and with such multiplied repetitions ad nauseam usque*
Coci censura.
That we may confidently say as one does: Certo certius est has Epistolas vel
supposititias esse, vel foede corruptas. And that they do neither agree with
those times wherein he wrote, nor with such a holy and humble Martyr as he was.
We will instance in some few of them.

In his Epistle to the Trallians he says; (...).
What is a Bishop, but he that is possessed of all Principality and authority
be^ond all as much as is possible, for men to be possessed of, being made an
imitator according to the power of Christ who is God. He that can find in these
words an Apostolical Spirit breathing, has little acquaintance with the
Apostolical writings. How unlike is this to that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 3.5. Who
then is Paul, and who Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believe?

In the same Epistle he says, (...), etc.
Reverence the Bishop as ye^ do Christ, at the holy Apostles have commanded;
But where is this commanded?

In his Epistle to the Magn^sians, (...), etc.
He says: It becomes you to obey the Bishop and in nothing to oppose him* For
it is a terrible thing to contradict him.

And again, (...), etc.
As the Lord Christ does nothing without his Father: So must you do nothing
without your Bishop, neither Presbyter, Deacon, nor L^y man. Let nothing seem
right and equal to you, that is contrary to his judgment. For that that is such
is wicked and ^nmity to God.

In his Epistle to Polycarpe: (...), etc.
It becomes those that marry, and are married, not to marry without the consent
of the Bishop. And again, my soul for theirs that obey the Bishop, Presbyters
and Deacons.

In his Epistle to the Philadelphians: (...), etc.
Let the Princes obey the Emperor, the Soldiers the Princes; The Deacons and
the rest of the Clergy with all the people and the Soldiers, and the Princes,
and the Emperor, let them obey the Bishop.

Observe here how the Princes and Emperors are enjoined to obey the Bishop,
when there were not at this time, nor many years after, any Emperor or Princes
Christian.

In his Epistle to the Smyr^enses he says: (...) etc.
The Scripture says, Honor God and the King: But I say, Honor God as the
Author and Lord of all things, And the Bishop as the Prince of Priests
resembling the image of God. Of God for his Principality; of Christ, for his
Priesthood etc. There is none greater then the Bishop in the Church, who is
consecrated for the salvation of the whole world etc. and afterward. He that
honors the Bishop shall be honored by God, and he that injur's him shall be
punished by God. And if he be justly thought worthy of punishment that rises
up against Kings, and is therein a violator of good Laws; Of how much greater
punishment shall he be thought worthy that will undertake to do any thing
without his Bishop, thereby breaking concord, and overturning good Order etc.
We need not paraphrase upon these passages. Only we desire the Reader in the
fear of God to pass sentence whether these high and supertranscendent
expressions, This prelation of Bishops above Kings, do savor of the first
Primitive times, or can be imagined to proceed from Blessed Ignatius, even then
when he was in bonds, and ready to be Martyred.

In the same Epistle he says (...) etc.
Let all men follow the Bishop as Christ the Father and. Let no man do any
thing that belongs to the Church without the Bishop. Let that Eucharist be
allowed on which is done by the Bishop or by his concession etc. It is not
lawful without the Bishop to Baptize, or offer etc. That which he approves on
is accepted of God, and whatsoever is so done is safe and firm. It is right
that God and the Bishop be known: He that honors the Bishop is honored of
God. He that does any thing without first consulting with the Bishop, (...) is
a Worshipper of the Devil.

If this Doctrine be true, what shall become of all the Reformed Churches,
especially the Church of Scotland, which (as Ioannes Major says lib. 2.
hystoria de g^stis Scotorum cap. 2.) was after its first conversion to the
Christian faith above 230. years without Episcopal government.

We will not cite any more passages of this nature; These are sufficient to
justify that censure which the Reverend Presbyterian Divines in their humble
answer to the second Paper delivered them by his Majesty at the Isle of Wight
do pass upon Ignatius, where they say. That there are great arguments drawn
out of these Epistles themselves, betraying their insincerity, adulterate
mixtures, and interpolations: So that Ignatius cannot be distinctly known in
Ignatius. And if we take him in gross, we make him the Patron (as Baronius,
and the rest of the Popish writers do) of such rights and observations, as the
Church in his time cannot be thought to have owned. He does indeed give
testimony to the Prelacy of a Bishop above a Presbyter; That which may justly
render him suspected, is, that he gives too much Honor, says he, the Bishop
as Gods high Priest, and after him you must honor the King. He was indeed a
holy Martyr, and his writings have suffered Martyrdom as well as he.
Corruptions could not go current, but under the credit of worthy names.

The considerations of these things makes Salmasius to believe that these
Epistles were written by a Pse^do-Ignatius at that very time when Episcopacy
properly so called came into the Church, that so the people who had been
accustomed to the Presbyterian government, might the more willingly and easily
receive this new government, Walo Messalinus. cap. 4.
and not be offended at the novelty of it.

And this he the rather thinks, Because in all his Epistles he speaks highly
in honor of the Presbytery as well as of Episcopacy.

For in the Epistle to the Trallenses; He bids them be subject to the
Presbytery as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ. And a little after, he calle^
the Pre^bytery (...)* And in the some Epistle he says* That the College of
the Presbyters is nothing else but (...). Which passage must needs be
understood of the second Primitive times. For afterward, the Presbytery was
much neglected and laid aside, as Ambrose complains upon 1 Timothy 5. We will
conclude our discourse concerning the The Epistles of Igna^ius with a
remarkable saying of Rive^ in his Critica sacra.

Nos sane genuinis scriptis parati sumus defer quantum jure bono poscere ab
Herone potuit. Custod^, inquit depositum meum quod ego and Christus
concredimus, ubi Christus in verbo suo depositum sacrum concredidit, cui qu^
apud Ignatium* concinnat amplecti^ur; Cae^^ra vero quae nec cum ^hristo, nec
cum vero Ignatio conveniut ut adulterin^ and non ^erenda (...).
We are ready to asc^ibe to the genuine writings of the F^thers, as much as
Ignatius requires of Hero, to whom he says. Keep that depositum which I and
Christ have committed unto you. Christ in his Word has concredited this holy
depositum; And whatsoever is agreeable in Ignatius to this holy word we
embrace: Other things which neither agree with Christ* nor with the true
Ignatius, we reject as adulterin^ and not to be born. So much in answer to this
objection.

Proposition 4.
THat when it is said by Ir^naeus, lib. 3. cap. 3. That the holy Apostles made
Bishops in Churches, and particularly, That Polyca^pe was made Bishop of Smyrna
by the Apostles, and that the Apostles made Linus Bishop of Rome, after whom
succeeded Anacletus, and that Clemens was made the third Bishop by the
Apostles. And when it is said by Tertullian, lib. de praescription. That
Polycarpe was made Bishop of Smyrna by S. John, and Clement Bishop of Rome by
S. Peter. This will nothing at all advance the Episcopal cause, unless it can
be proved, that by the word Bishop, is meant a Bishop as distinct from
Presbyters; a Bishop (as Gerrhard says) p^rasi Pon^ificia not a Bishop phrasi
Apostolica; a Bishop in a Popish, not in an Apostolical sense* which is all one
with a Presbyter. For it is not denied by any that ever wrote of Episcopacy*
That the names of Bishop and Presbyter were used (...), and were (...) in the
Apostles days and many years after. And therefore Iren^us in his Epistle to
Victor cited by Eusebius* lib. 5. cap. 23* calls A^i^etus, Pius, Higinus,
Telesphor^s, Xist^^s, Presbyters of the Church of Rome -- and afterward,
Presbyter^ (...) qui te pracesserunt, The Presbyters that went before thee: And
so also, Nec Polycarpus Aniceto suasit, ut servaret, qui sibi Presbyterorum,
quibus successerat, consu^tudinem servandam (...) diceba^. T^rtullian also in
his Apolog. cap. 39. call^ the Presidents of the Churches, Senior^ or
Presbyte^^, when he says, Praesident probati quique Seniore^, etc. It is not
therefore sufficient for our Episcopal Brethren to say, That Bishops over
Presbyters are of Apostolical institution, because the Apostles made Bishops in
Churches; unless they do also prove, that those holy men who are called
^ishop^* were more then Presbyters. Otherwise we must justly charge them (of
which they unjustly charge us) to be guilty of endeavoring from the name
Bishop, which was common to Presbyters with Bishops, to prove a superiority of
Bishops over Presbyters.

Add to this, That when our Brethren do frequently urge those places of
Irenaeus, where he ^aith, Irenai lib. 3. cap. 3. Lib. 4. cap. 63. Lib. 5. cap.
20.
That he was able to number those that were madeBishops by the Apostles, and
their successors unto his time, and often urges the successions of Bishops,
unto whom the Apostles committed the charge of the Church in every place, This
will nothing at all (as we conceive) advantage the Episcopal Hier^rchy* unless
they do also prove, That those Bishops were Hierarchical Bishops, and not the
very same with Presbyters. For the same Autho^ does speak the very same things
of Presbyters, calling them also Bishops. For he says, lib. 4. cap. 43.
Quapropter ^is (...) in Ecclesia sunt Presbyter^s obaudir^ opor^et, his qui
succession^^ h^be^^ ab Apostol^s sicu^ (...), qui cum Episcopa^us successi^^^
charis^a veritatis cert^m, secundum placitum Patris, acc^perunt. Re^iquos vero
qui absistu^^ a princip^l^ successione, and qu^cunque loco colliguntur,
suspectos habere, vel quasi h^retic^s and mala (...), vel quasi sci^d^ntes and
^latos and sibi place^^^s (...), ^t hypocritas (...) grati^ and (...) gloriae
hoc (...). So also (...). 4* cap. 44 -- Ab omnibus ^a^ibus absist^re oportet
adhaerere vero his qui and Apostolorum, sicut praediximus doctrinam custodiunt,
and cum Presby^^rii ordine s^rmonem sanum, and conversationem sine offensa
praestant ad informationem and corr^ctionem aliorum. Observe here, 1. That
Presbyters are called the Successors of the Apostles. 2. That they are also
called Bishops. 3. That the Apostolical doctrine is derived from the Apostles
by their succession. 4. That there is nothing said in the former places of
Bishops which is not here said of Presbyters. And that therefore those place^
do not prove, That the Apostles constituted Bishops in the Church distinct
from, and superior over Presbyters. As for that which is said about the
succession of Bishops from the Apostles unto Irenaeus his time, we shall h^ve
^ccasion to speak to afterward.

Add also, That when in Antiquity James the Brother of our Lord is said to
have been made Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles, and Peter to be ordained
Bishop of Antioch, or Rome, etc. This does not contribute to the proof of what
it is brought for, to wit* That there were Bishops properly so called in the
Apostles days. For as Dr. Reynolds against Heart, cap. 2. says* When the
Fathers termed any Apostle a Bishop of this or that City, (as namely Saint
Peter of Antioch or Rome) they meant in a general sort and signification,
because they did attend that Church for a time* and supply that room in
preaching the Gospel, which Bishops did after; but as the name of Bishop is
commonly taken for the Overseer of a particular Church, and Pastor of a several
flock, so Peter was not Bishop of any one place: therefore not of Rome.

And Dr. Whitakers, lib. de Pontif. qu. 2. cap. 15. says, Patres cum Iacobum
Episcopum vo^ant au^ etiam P^trum, non proprie sum^nt Episcopi n^men, sed
vocant eos Episcopos illarum Ecclesiarum in quibus aliquandiu commorati sunt.
Et si propri^ de Episcopo loquatur, absurdum est Apostolos fuisse Episcopos.
Nam qui proprie Episcopus ^st, is Apostolus non potest esse, quia Episcopus est
unius tantum Ecclesiae. A^ Apostoli pl^^ium Ecclesiarum fundatores and
inspectores erant. Et postea. H^^ eni^ non multum distat ab insania, dicere
Petrum fuisse proprie Episcopum, aut reliquos Apostolos. That the Fathers when
they call James or Peter Bishops, do not take the name of Bishop properly, but
they call them Bishops of those places where they abode for any long time. And
in the same place, If we speak properly of Bishops, it is absurd, to say, That
the Apostles were Bishops: For he that is properly a Bishop, cannot be an
Apostle. For a Bishop is only of one Church. But the Apostles were the
Founders and Overseers of many Churches. And again, he says, It does not much
differ from a phrenzy, and madness to say, That Peter or any of the Apostles
were properly Bishops. For the truth is, This were to degrade the Apostles, and
to bring them into the Rank and Order of common and ordin^ry Officers of the
Church, which is no little Sacrilege. And therefore such kind of quotations
out of Antiquity do little avail our Brethren. So much for the fourth
Proposition.

Proposi^ion 5.
THat when the distinction between a Bishop and Presbyter first began in the
Church of Christ, it was not grounded upon a Ius Divinum, but upon prudential
reasons and arguments. And the chief of them was (as Hierom and diverse after
him say) in remed^^m Schismatis, and ut dissensionum plantaria evellerentur,
For the remedy of Schism, and that the seeds of error might be rooted out of
the Church.

Now that this prudential way (invented no doubt at first upon a good
intention) was not the way of God, appears (as Smectymnuus has well shown)
thus,

Because we read in the Apostles days there were divisions, Romans 16.17* and
Schisms, 1 Cor. 3.3. and 11.18. yet the Apostle was not directed by the Holy
Ghost to Ordain Bishops for the taking away of those Schisms. Neither in the
Rules he prescribes for healing of those breaches does he mention Bishops for
that end. Neither does he mention this in his directions to Timothy and Titus
for the Ordination of Bishops or Elders, as one end of their Ordination, or one
peculiar duty of their office. And though the Apostle says, Oportet haereses
esse ut qui probati sunt manifesti fi^^t inter vos; yet the Apostle no where
says, Oportet Episcopos esse, ut tollantur haereses quae manifest^ fiunt;
There must be Bishops that those Heresies which are manifest amongst you may be
removed.

2. Because the Holy Ghost, who could foresee what would ensue thereupon, would
never ordain that for a remedy, which would not only be ineffectual to the
cutting off of evil, but become a stirrup for Antichrist to get into the
saddle. For if there be a necessity of setting up one Bishop over many
Presbyters for preventing Schisms, there is as great a necessity of setting up
one Archbishop over many Bishops; and one Patriarch over many Archbishops, and
one Pope over all, unless men will imagine that there is a danger of Schism
only among Presbyters, and not among Bishops and Archbishops, which is contrary
to reason, truth, history and our own experience.

Hence it is that Musculus having proved by Act. 20. Phil. 1.1. Titus 1.5. 1
Pet. 5.1. that in the Apostles times a Bishop and a Presbyter were all one, he
adds, But after the Apostles times when amongst the Elder^ of the Church (as
Hierome says) Schisms arose, and a^ I verily think, they began to strive for
Majority by little and little, they began to choose one among the rest out of
the number of Elders that should be above the rest in a higher degree, and
called Bishop. But whether that device of man profited the Church or no, the
times following could better judge, then when it first began. And further
adds, That if Hierome and others had seen as much as they that came after,
they would have concluded, that it was never brought in by Gods Spirit to take
away Schisms, as was pretended; but brought in by Satan to wast and destroy
the former Ministry that fed the flock* Thus far Musculus.

Sadeel also has this memorable passage; The difference between Bishops and
other Ministers came in for remedy of Schism. But they that devised it little
thought what a gate they opened to the ambition of Bishop^.

Hence also Dr. Whi^akers asking, How came in the inequality between Bishops
and Presbyters, answers out of Hierome, That the Schism and faction of some
occasioned the ancient Government to be changed -- which, says he, how ever
devised at first for a remedy against Schism, yet many holy and wise men have
judged it more pernicious then the disease it self; and although it did not by
and by appear, yet miserable experience afterward showed it. First ambition
crept in, which at length begat Antichrist, set him in his chair, and brought
the yoke of bondage upon the neck of the Church.

The sense of these mischiefs made Nazianz^n wish, not only that there were no
(...). No dignity or tyrannical prerogative of place, but also that there were
no (...), no principal dignity, to wit, in the Church of which he is speaking.
But now (says he) Contentions about the right hand and the left, about the
higher and the lower place, etc. have bred many inconveniences even among
Ministers that should be Teachers in Israel.

Proposition 6.
THat there is a wid^ and vast difference between the Bishops of the Primitive
times, and the Bishops of later times, as much as between ancient Rome, and
Rome at this day.

A Bishop at his first erection was nothing else but Primus Presbyter, or
Episcopus Praeses (as a Moderator in a Church-Assembly, or a Speaker in a
Parliament) that governed communi Concilio Presbyterorum, and had neither power
of Ordination, nor of Jurisdiction, but in common with his Presbyters.

Episcopi and Presbyteri una est Ordinatio; uterque enim Sacerdos est, sed
Episcopus primus.
Ambrose upon the 1 Timothy 3. says, That there is one and the same Ordination of
a Bishop and a Presbyter; for both of them are Priests, but the Bishop is the
first.

In Conference with Heart, in the end of the third, and beginning of the fifth
Division.
Dr. Reynolds says, That when Elders were ordained by the Apostles in every
Church through every City to feed the flock of Christ, whereof the Holy Ghost
had made them Overseers: they to the intent they might the better do it by
common counsel and consent, did use to assemble themselves and meet together.
In the which meetings, for the more orderly handling and concluding of things
pertaining to their charge; they chose one amongst them to be the President of
their company, and Moderator of their actions -- And this is he whom afterward
in the Primitive Church the Fathers called Bishop. For as the name of
Ministers, common to all them who serve Christ in the stewardship of the
mysteries of God, that is, in preaching of the Gospel, is now by the custom of
our English speech restrained to Elders who are under a Bishop; So the name of
Bishop common to all Elders and Pastors of the Church, was then by the usual
language of of the Fathers appropriated to him who had the Presidentship over
Elders. From which quotation it appears, that in the judgment of learned Dr.
Reynold, A Bishop at his first appearing was nothing else but (...). The
President or Moderator of the Presbytery.

D. Blondel, a man of vast Reading, endeavors strenuously to make it out, That
when Episcopacy first came up in the Church, the custom was to choose the
Eldest of the company of the Presbyters (whom he calls (...) that is the first
of those that were ordained) to be their Bishop or Moderator. And after his
decease, the next in age succeeded him, not advanced in degree of Ministry or
power above his Brethren, but only in order and dignity as being the first
Presbyter.

This opinion is agreeable to that passage out of St. Ambrose) if that Book be
his where he says -- Nam and Timotheum Presbyterum a se creatum Episcopum
vocat, quia primum Presbyteri Episcopi appellabantur, ut rec^dente uno, sequen^
ei succederet -- Sed quia ceperunt sequentes Presbyteri indigni inveniri ad
Primatus tenendos immutata est ratio, prospiciente concilio, ut non Ordo, sed
meritum crearet Epis^opum multorum Sacerdotum judicio constitutum, ne indignus
tem^re usurparet and esset multis scandalum. I^ lege nascebantur Sac^rdotes ex
genere Aaron Levi^ae, etc. Whether this conjecture of (...) be true or no, or
whether (as others think) it was true in some Churches and not in others, we,
will not now debate. But sure we are, that in Alexandria, as St. Ierom tells
us, The Bishop was chosen not only out of the Presbytery, but by the
Presbytery, and by them constituted Bishop, and placed in excelsi^ri gradu in
an higher degree of honor, not Office. He was not made by 3. Bishops, Sed
Presbyteri unum ex se electum in excelsiore gr^an collocatu^, Episcopum
nominabant.

Indeed afterward in process of time, This Ep^scopus P^aeses came to be
Episcopus Princeps and usurped sinfully upon the privileges of Ministers and
people, and made way for the coming in of Antichrist. Famous is that (so often
mentined in several writings in this age) saying of Ambrose upon 1 Timothy 5 1
Vnde and Synagoga and post^a Ecclesia Seniores habuit quorum sine consilio
nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia obsolev^rat nescio, nisi forte
Doctorum desidi^ aut magis superbia dum volunt aliguid videri*

From hence came that distinction of Beza's between Episcopus divinus, humanus,
and Diabolicus; By the divine Bishop he means the Presbyter; by the humane
Bishop, he means the Bishop chosen by the Presbyters to be President over them,
and to rule with them by fixed Laws and Canons; By the Diabolical he means a
Bishop with sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, Lording it over Gods
heritage and governing by his own will and authority.

And therefore when men argue from the practice of the Primitive times, and
from the Bishops of those days to the Bishops of our days, they do but (...),
they commit a fallacy, just as if a man should argue, That the Church of Rome
is now a true Church, because it was so in the Apostles days. For the further
handling of this proposition* we refer the Reader to Sm^ctym^^us, where he
shall have many pages spent to prove the imparity between the Bishops of the
Primitive times and our days.

Only we shall crave leave to relate a passage from a Reverend Divine now with
God, Mr. John Gerce his Sisters Sieve broken, cap. 4.
who holds forth this assertion: That the ancient Fathers in the point of
Episcopacy differ more from the high Prelatist then from the Presbyterian* This
he proves. Because The Presbyterians always have ^ President to guide their
actions, which they acknowledge may be perpetual d^rante vita ^^do s^ ben^
g^sseri^: or temporary to avoid inconvenience. Which Bilson in his preface (and
again and again in his Book of the Perp. government) takes hold of, as
advantageous, because so little discrepant (as he says) from what he
maintain^: But now the high Prelatists exclu^e a Presbytery, ^s having nothing
to do with jurisdiction, which they put as far above the sphaere of a
Presbyter, as sacrificing above a Levites, to wit, an act restrained to an
higher Order; whereas the Fathers acknowledge a Presbytery, and in diverse
cases, Councels tie the Bishop to do nothing without them. And so it is clear,
The high Prelatist^ are at a further distance from the Fathers, then the
Prebyterians: Afterward he also adds, If we differ from the Fathers in point
of Prelacy (wherein our opponents are in no better terms with them, then we)
yet I would have them consider in how many things we jumpe with the Fathers,
wherein many of them have been dissenting both in opinion, and practice; as 1.
touching promiscuous dancing, especially upon the Lords day. 2. Touching
residency of Pastors in their Churches, which excludes all Pluralities. 3.
Frequency and diligence in Preaching. 4. Touching the abuse of health-drinking,
or drinking ad aequales calices. 5. Touching Bishops not intanling themselves
with secular affairs, or businesses of state in Princes Courts. 6. Touching
gaming at Cards or Dice, and such like, so that they can with no great
confidence triumph in the Fathers, against us, in this one point (wherein
themselves also are at a distance from them) while we keep closer to the
Fathers* then they do in many others.

Proposition 7.
THat the great argument that is brought for Episcopacy from the lineal
succession of Bishops from the Apostles days to our d^^e^, has not that
validity in it that is imagined. Bishop Bilson and others ^ake a great deal of
pains to give us a Catalogue of the Bishops in Rome, Al^xandria, Jerusalem,
and Antioch, from the Apostles days unto Constantine's time. But we desire the
Reader to consider*

First, That these Catalogues labor much of an Homonymy in the word Bishop.
For the Bishops of later times were Bishops of a f^r different nature from the
Bishops of the first times. Though the same name be common to all in the
Catalogue, yet in the nature of their Office they differed very much. The
later, piece by piece, taking that authority to the^ which the former neither
might nor did ^njoy. The later were Diocesan, the former were Bishop^ only of
one Congregation. At first the Churches were governed by the Common Council of
Presbyters, and the line of succession was drawn (says D. Blo^del) from the
(...), that i^, the first Ordained Minister. Even ^s amongst the Athenian^
there were* 9. Archontes or chief Ruler^ equal in power and authority, and yet
the succession of Governors in Athens was desi^ed from one of them only who
w^^ the first Ar^bon or Ruler, which was not done to diminish the ^^thority of
the ^est, sed ut compendi^sio^^^ minus (...). But that the enumer^^i^n of the
(...) of their successive Governour^ might (...) compendious and expedite. Even
so at first* there were diverse Presbyters in every City which did govern with
equal power and authority, and yet the line and succession was deduced from one
who was the first of those that were ordained, not thereby incroaching upon the
joint authority of the rest: but for the more expedite way of reckoning. And
when afterward one was chosen out of the Presbytery, he was, for a long time*
but as the Moderator of a Synod amongst the Scotch and Dutch, and at most but
as a Superintendent amongst the Germa^s; of whom Zepp. lib. 2. cap. 10. says,
That they are of the same degree with other Ministers, they are only president^
while the Synod lasts, when it is dissolved, their Prerogative cease. They
have no prerogative over their fellow-Ministers* they are subject to their
Presbyteries. The Synod ended, they return to the care of their particular
Churches.

Secondly, That these Catalogues the nearer they come to the Apostles days are
the more ^ncer^in* and indeed contradictory one unto another: Some say, that
Clemens was first Bishop of Rome after Peter: some say, the third* and the
intricacies about the Order of Succession in Linus, Anacletus* Clemens* and
another called Cletus* as some affirm, are inextricable. Some say, That Titus
was Bishop of Cr^te, some say Archbishop; and some, Bishop of Dalmatia. Some
say, That Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus; and some say, That John was Bishop of
Ephesus at the same time. Some say, Polyca^ps was first Bishop of Smyrna;
another says, that he succeeded one Bu^olus: and another, That Arist^ was
first. Some say, That Alexandria had but one Bishop, and other Cities two* and
others, that there was but one Bishop of one City at the same time. And how can
these Catalogues be unquestionable, that must be made up out of Testimonies
that fight one against another.

Iun. con^rv. lib. 2. cap. 5. not. 18.
Learned Iunius speaking of that great controversy about the succession of the
first Bishops or Presbyters of Rome, whether Linus was the first, or Clemens,
or Anacletus, has this remarkable passage; That these or some of these were
Presbyters or Bishops of Rome at the same time, ruling the Church in common.
But the following Writers, fancying to themselves such Bishops as then had
obtained in the Church, fell into these snares of tradition, because they
supposed, according to the custom of their own time^* that the^e could be but
one Bishop in one Church at the same time, which i^ quite cross to the
Apostolic all times.

Thirdly, This is also to be considered, That they that made the Catalogues
spoke according to the language of the times in which they lived, in which
there was a distinction between Bishops and Presby^ers; and therefore call them
who went before them Bishops* whereas indeed they were not so in a proper
sense. Nor can the Bishops of aftertimes be said to succeed them any otherwise
(if so much) then Caesar is said to succeed the Roman Consuls.

Fourthly, These Catalogues do resolve themselves into an Apostle or an
Evangelist* as at Rome into (...); at Alexandria into Mark; at Ephesus into
Timothy; a^ ^ret^ into Titus. Now it is certain, That the Apostles and
Evangelists cannot be said to be Bishops in a formal sense. For they had an
universal Commission, and their Offices were extraordinary, and they had no
successors properly in idem Officium. Indeed Bishops or Presbyte^s did succeed
them in some part of their work, but not in their Office. Ordinary Offices
succeed Extraordinary, not in the same line and degree as one Brother succeeds
another in his inheritance, but as men of another Order, and in a different
line. They are, we confess, called Bishops by Ecclesiastical Writers, but that
was only by way of allusion, and (...), as we have formerly showed.

We will conclude this Proposition with part of a passage out of the conference
of the Reverend Presbyters at the Isle of Wight, where they say;

And left your Majesty might reply, That however the Catalogues and Testimonies
may vary, or be mistaken, in the order, or times, or names of those Persons
that succeeded the Apostles, yet all agree, that there was a Succession of some
Persons; and so though the credit of the Catalogues be infirmed, yet the thing
intended is confirmed thereby: We grant, that a Succession of men to feed and
govern these Churches, while they continued Churches, cannot be denied; and
that the Apostles and Evangelists, that planted and watered those Churches
(though extraordinary and temporary Officers) were by Ecclesiastical Writers in
compliance with the language and usage of their own times, called Bishops; and
so were eminent men, of chief note, presiding in Presbyteries of the Cities or
Churches, called by such Writers as wrote after the division and distinction of
the names of Presbyters and Bishops: But that those first and ancientest
Presbyters were Bishops in proper sense, according to your Majesty's
description, invested with power over Presbyters and people, to whom (as
distinct from Presbyters) did belong the power of Ordination, giving Rules and
Censures; we humbly conceive can never be proved by authentic or competent
Testimonies. And granting, that your Majesty should prove the Succession of
Bishops from the Primitive times seriatim, yet if these from whom you draw, and
through whom you derive it* be found either more then Bishops, as Apostles, and
extraordinary persons, or less then Bishops, a^ merely first Presbyters,
having not one of the three essentials to Episcopal Government (mentioned by
your Majesty) in their own hand; it will follow, that all your Majesty has
proved by this Succession, is the Homonymy and equivocal acceptance of the
word Episcopus.

Proposition 8.
THat whatsoever may be said of Episcopacy out of Antiquity, yet
notwithstanding it is an opinion generally received by the Learned in all ages,
That there are but Two Orders of Ministers in the Church of Christ, Bishops and
Deacons, according to the saying of Paul to the Philippians, where he salutes
the Bishops and Deacon^, that is, the Presbyters and Deacons. Of this opinion
i^ Clement in his Epistle to the Corinthians, and Polycarp^ in his Epistle to
the Phil^delphians, as we have showed. Thi^ also i^ the opinion of most of the
Schoolmen. Lombard says; 4. Sent. distinct. 24.
Whereas all the seven Orders are spiritual and sacred; yet the Canons think
that two only are called Sacred Orders by an excellency, to wit, the order of
Deaconship and Priesthood: because the Primitive Church, so far as we can read,
had only these two; and of these only we have the Apostles precept.
Bonavent^r^ says, That Episcopacy i^ no order, Non est ordo praecise loquendo,
Sed ordinis eminentia vel dignitas. Ponav. in 4. Sent. dist^^ct. 24.
but an eminency and dignity. The like says A^re^lus upon the 4. Sent.
distinct. 24. Nav^rrus says, That it is the common opinion of the Divines,
That Episcopacy is not an Order, but an Office. See more of this in Forbesii
I^^nicu^, lib. 2. cap. 11. And in the Addition of M. Mason to his defense of
the Ministry of the Church of England, where there are very many authors cited
to prove, That Presbytery is the highest Order of Ministry, is not a different
order, but a different degree of the same Order. See also D. Blo^de^, Sect.
3.135. where he shows out of diverse Counsels, that under the name of Priests
and Levites, the whole Gospel Ministry were comprehended.

In our own Nation that blessed man Mr. Wickloffe did judge, Catalogus ^^stium
tom. 2. Tantum Duos ordines Ministrorum esse deb^re judicavit, Presb^t^ros,
viz. and Di^conos.
that there ought only to be two Orders of Ministers in the Church, to wit,
Presbyters and Deacons. And John Lamber^ a Martyr in his answer to Articles
objected against him* says, As touching Priesthood in the Primitive Church,
when virtue bore (as Ancient Doctors do deem, and Scripture in mine opinion
records the same) most room, there were no more Officers in the Church of God
then Bishops and Deacons that is Ministers; as witnesses, besides Scripture,
Hierome in his Commentariesupon the Epistles of Paul.

But we shall give one instance instead of many that might be added. In the
year 1537. there came out a Book called, The Institution of a Christian man,
made by the whole Clergy in their Provincial Synod, set forth by the authority
of the Kings Majesty, and approved by the whole Parliament, and commanded to
be preached to the whole Kingdom, wherein speaking of the Sacrament of Orders,
it is said expressly, That although the Fathers of the succeeding Church after
the Apostles instituted certain inferior degrees of Ministry; yet the truth
is, that in the New Testament there is no mention made of any other degree or
distinction in Orders, but only of Deacons or Ministers; and Presbyters, or
Bishops, and thoroughout the whole discourse makes Presbyters and Bishops one
and the same. But of this Proposition we have had occasion to speak formerly,
to which we refer the diligent Reader.

Now from hence it follows inevitably, That* if according unto the judgments
of our Episcopal Divines, Episcopacy be the same Order of Ministry with
Presbytery, th^^ it has no more intrinsecal power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, then Presbytery has. And that all that distinction that was put
between them by Antiquity, was merely in restraining the use and exercise of
that power which was truly and really inherent in them. The actus primu^ was
common to both, although for order sake the actus secundus was inhibited the
Presbytery. And this leads us to speak something about the practice of
Antiquity in the point of Ordination of Ministers: which is that in which we
believe the Reader does desire especially to be satisfied, and which is that
for which we have undertaken this discourse about Antiquity, and in which our
Adversaries do most triumph. For it is said by all Anti-Presbyterians, That the
way of Ordination now in use is quite contrary to Antiquity, and that
whatsoever is done in this kind without a Bishop over Presbyters, is null and
void. In answer to this we shall crave leave to hold forth these ensuing
Propositions about Ordination, out of Antiquity (for as to what the Scripture
says, of that we have already spoken.)

Several Propositions declaring the Judgment and Practice of the Ancient Church
about Ordination of Ministers.
Proposition 1.
THat in the first and purest times, when the Church of Christ was governed by
the Common Council of Presbyters, There was Ordination of Presbyters without
Bishops over Presbyters. For these Bishops came in postea and paulatim, as
Hierome says. And Panormitanus lib. 1. Decretal. de consuetudine cap. quarto,
says, Olim Presbyteri in communi regebant Ecclesiam, and ordinabant
Sacerdotes, and pa^iter conferebant omnia Sacramenta.

Proposition 2.
THat after that Bishops were admitted into the Church, yet notwithstanding
Ordination by Bishops without the assistance of his Presbyters was always
forbidden and opposed.

Cyprian in his exile writing to his charge, certifies them, that Aurelius was
ordained by him and his Colleagues, Cypr. Ep. 33.
who were present with him. By his Colleagues, he means his Presbyters, as
appears epist. 58. And Firmilianus says of them that rule in the Church, Quod
baptizandi, manum imponendi and ordinandi possident potestatem. Apud Cyprian
epist. 75.
And who those be, he expresses a little before, Seniores and Praepositi; by
whom the Presbyters as well as the Bishops are understood.

In Synodo ad Quercum anno 403. it was brought as an accusation against
Chrysostom, (...), That he had made Ordinations without the company and
sentence of his Clergy.

In the Council of Carth^ge it was decreed, Can. 20. Vt Episcopus sine Consilio
Clericorum suorum Clericos non ordinet. And Can. 2. Cum ^ dinatur Presbyter
Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super caput ejus tenente; etiam omnes
Presbyteri qui praesentes sunt, manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super caput
illius teneant. When a Presbyter is ordained, The Bishop blessing him, and
holding his hand upon his head, all the Presbyters that are present, shall
likewise lay their hands upon his head, with the hands of the Bishop. By this
laying on of the hands of Presbyters, is not only signified the Presbyters
consent to what the Bishop does, but Ordo ipse confertur and gratia ordini
necessa^ia impe^ratur, quemadmodum per impositionem manuum Episcopi; The Order
it self is conferred, and grace necessary is impetrated as it is by the hands
of the Bishop: Lib. 2. cap. 11.
as says Forbefius in his Irenicum. The Presbyters impose hands (says the
same Author) non tanquam duntaxat consentientes (ad consensum enim sufficient
suffragia, and plebs etiam consentit, nec tamen ejus est manus imponere) sed
tanquam Ordinantes, se^ Ordinem conferentes, and ex potestate Ordinandi
Diuinitus accepta, gratiam Ordinato, hoc adhibito ritu, apprecantes; Not only
as Consenting (for to manifest their consent their suffrages had been
sufficient, and the people also gave their consent, and yet they impose not
their hands) but as Ordaining, and conferring Orders, and by the power of
Ordination conferred to them by God, praying for grace upon him that is
Ordained, using the ceremony of laying on of hands.

The same Author brings a famous example of Pelagius Bishop of Rome, Cap. 11*
the first of that name, who was made Bishop of Rome by Two Bishops and one
Presbyter named Andreas. In the Council of Nice it was decreed, That No Bishop
should be made but by Three Bishops at least. And yet this Pelagius being by
Justinian, Anno 555. appointed to be Bishop of Rome, and not being able to
obtain Three Bishops to ordain him, (he being suspected then of a crime from
which he afterward cleared himself) he received Ordination from Two Bishops
and one Presbyter. And this Ordination Canonica habita est in hunc usque diem,
is accounted Canonical even to this day. By which it is evident that Presbyters
lay on hands in Ordination together with the Bishop as partners in the power.
And that Pelagius and his successors would never have owned this way of
Ordination, had they not believed, That a Presbyter had a power derived to him
from Christ to confer Ecclesiastical Orders. And this leads us to a Third
Proposition.

Proposition 3.
THat even according to the Judgment of Antiquity, Presbyters have an
intrinsecal power and authority to ordain Ministers, and when this power was
restrained, and inhibited, it was not propter legis necessitatem, but only
propter honorem Sacerdotii; It was not from the necessity of any Divine law for
bidding it, but only for the Honor of Episcopacy. It was not from the Canon
of the Scriptures, but from some Canons of the Church.

Leo Primus ep. 88. upon complaints of unlawful Ordinations, writing to the
Germane and French Bishops, reckons up what things are reserved to the Bishops.
Among which he sets down Presbyterorum and Diaconorum consecratio; and then
adds, Quae omnia solis deberi summis Pontificibus authoritate Canonum
praecipitur. And Isidore Hispalensis, lib. 2. de Offi^iis Ecclesiasticis, cap.
7. speaking of Presbyters says, His enim sicut Episcopis dispensatio
mysteriorum Dei commissa est. Praesunt enim Ecclesiis Christi; and in
confectione divina corporis and sanguinis consort^s cum Episcop^ sunt;
similiter and in doctrina populorum, and in Officio praedicandi. Sed sola
propter authoritatem summo Sacerdoti Clericorum ordinatio and consecratio
reservata est; ne a multis Ecclesiae disciplina vendicata, concordiam solveret,
scandala generaret: and afterward he proves by Scripture texts, that Bishops
and Presbyters are one and the same. So also Concilium Aquisgran. 1. Canon 8.
Solum propter authoritatem Clericorum Ordinatio and Cons^cratio reservata est
summo Sacerdoti. Dr. Forbes professor at Aberdeen (though a great friend and
pleader for Episcopacy, Cap. 11.
yet, he says, Habent Presbyteri de jure Divino, Ordinandi, sicut praedicandi,
and baptizandi, potestatem: quamvis haec omnia exequi debeant sub regimine and
inspectione Episcopi in locis ubi est Episcopus. And Mr. Mason a known Writer
in defense of Episcopacy says also, The Addition of Francis Mason unto his
defense of the Ministry of the Church of England, wherein the Ord nation of the
Ministers of the Reformed Churches is maintained.
That a Presbyter, as he is a Presbyter, is endued with intrinsecal power and
ability to Ordain, and was restrained from the exercise of it only by the
Church for Disciplines sake, and that when the Power of Ordination was reserved
to the Bishop, the power of the Presbyter was not at that time utterly
extinguished, but only restrained as the faculty of the flying of a bird, when
hi^ wings are tied. What authority the Church had to tie these wings, or
whether the Church did well in tying them when the Scripture had left them
untyed, is not now under debate. All that we produce this Author for, is to
prove, That the wing^ of Presbytery were not cut off, though they were tied up;
and that according to the judgment of Episcopal Writers themselves, Presbyters
have an intrinsecal power of giving Orders. The same Author proves this his
Assertion thus; Because that a Bishop is intrinsecally enabled to give Orders,
not by his power of Jurisdiction, but by his power of Order. And because a
Presbyter has as much of the Sacrament and character of Order (according to
the Papists themselves) as a Bishop, and therefore every Presbyter has an
intrinsecal power of giving Orders. Now that Episcopacy and Presbytery are one
and the same Order of Ministry, and that that which is added in Episcopal
consecration, whereby a Bishop is distinguished from a Presbyter, is only a
degree of dignity and eminency, and is neither the Sacrament of Order, nor
imprinteth a Character, he proves by a world of witnesses, even from Popish
Writers: From Lombard, Aquinas, Durandus, Dominicus Soto, Richardus, Aureolus,
and diverse other^. Tostatus says, It is in the consecration of Bishops, as of
the Pope: in which there is not imprinted a Character, seeing they are not
Orders but dignities or degrees of Ecclesiastical preeminence. Gerson says,
Above Priesthood there is no superior Order; no not the function of a Bishop
or Archbishop. Armachanus says, A Bishop in such things has no more in
respect of his Order, then every single Priest; Although the Church has
appointed that such things should be executed by those men whom we call
Bishops. Aureolus has a notable passage; Every fo^m in as much as it is in
act, Lib. 4* d. 24. artic. 2.
has power to communicate it self in the same kind: therefore every Priest
has power to celebrate Orders. Why then do they not celebrate them? Because
their power is hindered by the decree of the Church. Whereupon when a Bishop is
made, there is not given unto him any new power, but the former power being
hindered is set at liberty: as a man when the act of reason is hindered, and the
impediment is removed, there is not given unto him a new Soul. From all these
things it appears, that Presbyters have an intrinsecal power to Ordain
Presbyters.

Proposition 4.
THat even during the prevalency of Episcopacy it was not held unlawful for a
Presbyter to Ordain without a Bishop. A Presbyter had not only an inherent
power of Ordination, but in some cases he did actually Ordain. S. Ambrose upon
Ephesians. 4. says, Apud Aegyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit
Episcopus. Austine (or whosoever was the author) in quaestionibus ex utroque
Testamento mixtim quast. 101. In Alexandria and per totam Aegyptum, fi desit
Episcopus consecrat Presbyter. Which words cannot be understood (as a learned
defender of Prelacy would have them) of the consecration of the Eucharist. For
this might be done by the Presbyter praesente Episcopo; But it must be
understood either of confirmation, or (which is more likely) of Ordination,
because Ambrose in that place is speaking of Ordination. But howsoever it is
not much material. For Confirmation was restrained to the Bishop as well as
Ordination; and if the Presbyter might confirm si desit Episcopus, then he
might also Ordain.

Hierome says of the Alexandrian Bishops, Presbyteri unum ex se electum, in
excelsiori gradu collocatum, Episcopum nominabant, etc. That the Presbyters for
many years did Ordain their Bishops. And certainly if it were not held
unlawful in Antiquity for Presbyters to ordain Bishops, much less could it be
held unlawful for Presbyters to Ordain Presbyters.

Dr. Forbes says, That in all those Churches which are governed by the Common
Council of Presbyters without Bishops, Valida and efficax est Ordinatio quae
fit per impositionem manuum solius Presbyterii. Quin and ubi est Episcopus,
possunt Presbyteri Ordinare; consentiente, licet non simul manus imponente,
Episcopo.

Dr. Field of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 39. tells us; That Presbyters in some
places, and at some times did impose hands, which when Gregory Bishop of Rome
would wholly have forbidden, there was so great exception taken at him for it,
that he left it free again. And afterward, Not only Armachanus, a very
learned and worthy Bishop, but, as it appears by Alexander of Hales, many
learned men in his time and before, were of opinion, that in some cases, and at
some times Presbyters may give Orders, and that their Ordinations are of force,
etc.

And that Ordination by Presbyters was held lawful and warrantable by the
ancient Church, appears further by these ensuing Arguments.

1. Because the Chorepiscopi, who were but single Presbyters, had liberty by
the Church to Ordain, if they had a license, from the Bishop. That they had
liberty appears from the 13. Canon of the Council at A^^yra. (...).
Chorepiscopis non licere Presbyteros, vel Diaconos ordinare, sed neque urbis
Presbyteris nisi cum literis ab Episcopo permissum fuerit, in aliena parochia.
This Council was held before the Council of Nice in the year 314. And in the
Council of Antiochia, which was Anno 341. Can. 10. It is decreed, That the
Chorepiscopi should not dare to Ordain Presbyters or Deacons, (...). From these
two Canons we may collect these two observations.

1. That before these Councels the Chorepiscopi did Ordain Presbyters without
any license at all from the Bishop of the City. Otherwise to what purpose are
they inhibited?

2. That after these Councels they might Ordain by virtue of a license, which
shows evidently that in the judgment of these Reverend Fathers, the
Chorepiscopi had an intrinsecal power to Ordain derived to them from Christ.
For a license does not confer a power to him that has it not, but only a
faculty to exercise that power he has. And this is the Conclusion that D.
Forbes draws from this practice of these Councels. Surely, says he, The
Church would not have granted this power to the Chorepiscopi. Nisi judicasset
validam esse eam Ordinationem, qua per solos p^ragitur Presbyteros.

It cannot be denied, but that Pope Damasus made a Constitution for the
abolishing of this Office of the Chorepiscopi: But it seems this constitution
was not put in execution in all Churches for above 200. years after. Isidore
Hispalensis who lived Anno. 630. in libro de Officiis Ecclesiasticis cap. 6.
speaks of these Chorepiscopi as yet continuing in the Church, and says,
Chorepiscopi, id est, Vicarii Episcoporum, juxta quod Canones ipsi testantur,
instituti sunt ad exempla 70. Seniorum, tanquam Sacerdotes propter
solicitudinem pauperum. Hi in vicis and vitis constituti, gubernant sibi
commissas Ecclesias, habentes licentiam constituere Lectores, Subdiaconos,
exorcistas: Presbyteros autem and Diaconos Ordinare non audeant praeter
conscientiam Episcopi, in cujus regione praeesse noscuntur. Hi autem a solo
Episcopo civitatis, cui adjacent, ordinantur.

Observe here, That Isidore translates those words of the Canon, (...), not as
Gentianus Hervetus, Absque urbis Episcopo, but Praeter conscientiam Episcopi.
Quae versio optime explicat mentem Concilii, says Forbesius, estque ipso rei
usu and exequutione firmata, ut nimirum, possent Chorepiscopi etiam Presbyteros
and Diaconos ordinare, permittente, licet non simul ordinante Episcopo loci.
But how will it be proved* may some say, That these Chorepiscopi were only
Presbyters and not Bishops? For if this can be clearly made out, it will
undeniably follow, That according to the judgment of Antiquity, Presbyters had
not only the inward power, but also the outward exercise of Ordination for a
long space. Now that these Chorepiscopi were mere Presbyters, appears;

1. Because they were to be ordained but by one Bishop -- a solo Episcopo
civitatis cui adjacent, says the Council of Antiochia. But by the Canons of
the Church, A Bishop properly so called, was to be ordained by three Bishops.

2. Because they were to be subject to the Bishop of the City. So says the
Canon, Ab Episcopo Civitatis cui subjicitur fiat Chorepiscopus. Now we read no
where of the subjection of one Bishop and his charge to another* Cyprian pleads
the freedom of Bishops, telling us, that each of them has a portion of
Christ's flock assigned to him, for which he is to give account to God.

3. Because they could not, nay, they must not dare to exercise the power of
Ordination without the leave of the Bishop. Con^il. Ancyr. says, Non licere,
nisi cum literis ab Episcopo p^rmissum fuerit. Council. Antio^h. says, Non
audeat praeter conscientiam Episcopi. None of this would have been said, if
they had been Bishops in a Prelatical sense.

4: Because they were Bishops in villis and regionibus; and therefore (as some
think) called (...). But according to the Canons of the Church, Bishops in ^
proper sense, were not to be made, unless in great Cities, n^ vil^sca^ nomen
Episcopi, as Damasus argues, when he pleads for the abolition of the
Chorepiscopi.

5. Because thi^ power was afterward taken away from the Chorepiscopi by the
same authority of the Canons and Ecclesiastical constitutions, by which it was
first appropriated to Bishops themselves, as Leo epist. 88. witnesses; which
to us is a firm argument to prove, not only that they once had it, but that
they had it as Presbyters. For if they had it as Bishops, the taking of it away
would have been a degradation of them.

6. We might bring an argument ad homin^m, because they are said Council.
N^ocaesar. Can. 14. to have been appointed in the Church after the manner, or
in imitation of the Seventy* Now* according to the opinion of the Hierarchical
men, Bishops succeed the Apostles, not the Seventy.

7. We might also here urge the authority of Leo, epist. 88. who says, That
the Chorepiscopi, juxta Canones Neocaesarienses, sive secundum aliorum Patrum
decreta, iid^m sunt qui Presbyteri; and of Isidore Hispalensis before
mentioned, and of Damasus, epist. 5. To whose sentence Council. Hispal. Can. 7.
does subscribe; and also of Dr. Field of the Church, lib. 3. cap. 39. who
says, Neither should it seem strange to our adversaries, that the power of
Ordination should at some times be yielded unto Presbyters, seeing their
Chorepiscopi, Suffragans, or Titular Bishops that live in the Diocese and
Churches of other Bishops; and are no Bishops according to the old course of
Discipline, do daily in the Romish Church confirm children and give Orders. And
again -- Seeing that Chorepiscopi, or Suffragans, as they call them, being not
Bishops, but only Presbyters, do daily with good allowance Ordain Presbyters,
and all other Episcopal acts.

But we forbear multiplying of argument^, These are sufficient to prove, That
they were but single Presbyters: And that therefore single Presbyters did
Ordain even during the prevalency of Episcopacy.

To avoid the strength of this argument, Bellarmine invents novum quoddam and
antea inauditum Chorepiscoporum genus. He says, That there were some of them
that were mere Presbyters, and others that were very nominis Episcopi. And that
the Council of Antiochia speaks of the last in the beginning, and of the first
sort in the latter end. But certain it is, that the Canon speaks of
Chorepiscopi in general, without any distinction throughout the whole. And the
scope of Damasus his letter is to prove, that all the Chorepiscopi whatsoever
their Ordination was, were nothing else but Presbyters. We shall not undertake
to answer Bellarmine at large, because it is done to our hands by that learned
man so often mentioned, who though a lover of Episcopacy, Forbes^i Irenicum,
cap. 11.
yet surely he was a very Moderate and meek spirited man, and has fully
answered all that is brought by Bellarmine against what we have asserted. The
Reader may view him if he please for his further satisfaction.

There is another, whom we forbear to name, that says, That the Chorepiscopi
of whom the Canon speaks were Bishops. But he adde^, Though they were Bishops,
yet they were Bishops made but by one Bishop, and Bishops merely Titu^an, and
sine Cathedra* which is all one, as if he should say, They were not properly
Bishops. For according to the Canons then in force, A Bishop properly so called
was to be made by 3. Bishops, and if he were Ordained sine titulo, his
Ordination was null and void.

We will conclude this discourse of the Chorepiscopi with a pass^ge out of
Gabri^l Vasquez, (...) tertiam partem Thomae disp. 238. cap. 7.
Postquam proposuisset istud B^llarmini somnium, ^aec subjungit v^rba. Alii
^amen non minor^s authoritatis existimant Chor^piscopos fuisse tantum
Presbyteros. Ita express sentit Ayala de traditionibus Ecclesiasticis 3. part.
Consideratione 4. ubi ha^c r^m ex pr^f^ss^ disputat; and noster Franciscus
Turrianus in annotationibus ad Consilium Nicaenum Can. 54. ^it Ordin^m
Chorepiscoporum non fuisse nisi Presbyterorum tantum: eandem sententiam
sequuntur docti aliqui rec^ntiores, etc. Porro Damasum duo illa genera
Chorepiscoporum minime distinxisse, sed de omnibus etiam illis, quoru^ m^
minit, Concilium Antiochenum, pronunciasse, veros non esse Episcopos; ita ut si
Presbyteri ess^ nollent; nihil om^ino essent, probat ex instituto Ayala loce
citato; Potestque ex ipso Damaso s^aderi -- Nunquam dicit Damasus hos
Chorepiscopos diversos esse a prioribus, aut vere Episcopos esse; imo vero ex
professo probat, licet a pluribus consecrati, vere tamen Episcopos non esse.
Haec Vasquez. So much of this argument.

A second Argument to prove, That it was not held unlawful in Antiquity for
Presbyters to Ordain, may be drawn from the opinion of the Schoolmen and
Canonists during the prevalency not only of Episcopacy, but even of Papal
Tyranny. For it is a received opinion in the Church of Rome, That the Pope may
by his Commission authorize a single Presbyter to Ordain Presbyters; he cannot,
say they, commissionate a Layman, but he may a Presbyter. Mr. Francis Mason
cite^ many Authors to attest this.

The Author of the Gloss says, Di^o quod Papa potest hoc delegare simpli^i
Sacerdot^, and non Laico (sicut credo) and sic ex tali delegatione, and
adminiculo habiti Sacramenti, potest confer quicquid habet. Imo quilibet
Cl^ricus hoc facere potest; qui ver^ non habet, non potest confer.

Ros^llus also says, V^lunt Doctores, De potestate Imperatoris and Papae,
part. 4. cap. 16.
quod Papa potest committere cuilibet Clerico, ut conferat quae babet ipse, ut
si est Presbyter, possit Ordinare Presbyterum, and Diaconus Diaconum, ex
man^ato Papae. And again, Ego teneo, quod Papa possit demandare Presbyter^,
quod conferat omn^s sacros Ordines, and in hoc (...) cum senten^ia Canonistarum.

Dr. Forbes brings also many quotations to this purpose, some of which we shall
recite as being very observable.

Panormita^^^ says, -- Ego potiu^ p^tarem ut Sacerdoti hoc possit delegare
indistincte, quia (...) de Sacr^^^nto Eucharisti^ sit disposit^m institutione
Domi^ic^, qu^ ha^^ant illud administrare: hoc tamen non est dispositum in
collation^ Ordinum. Nam olim Presbyteri in comm^ni r^geba^ Ecclesiam, and
ordinabant Sacerdotes. Vnd^ quemadmodum olim poterant, ita videtur quod Papa
possit hoc concedere Sacerdoti, maxim delegando, quum nihil exerceat delegatus
nomine proprio.

In decretalibus Gregorii 9. de consuetudine cap. 4. etc. It is said, Dico quod
Papa potest hoc delegare simplici Sacerdoti, et non Laico, sicut credo, et sic
ex tali delegatione, et in adminiculo habiti sacramenti, potest confer
quicquid habet.

Very remarkable is that passage in Petrus Aureolus, in quartum Sent. Distinct.
24. In habente animam rationalem quandoque impeditur ^ctus rationis, et postea
removetur impedimentum; non datur nova anima, vel forma, sed tantum removetur
illud quod impediebat prius animam, n^ exiret in actum rationis. Sed Ordinare
in Sacerdotem est actus conveniens Sacerdoti, in quantum Sacerdos est, and
tantum est actus impeditus in ^o. Probo. Quia nemo dat quod non habet, sicut in
naturalibus, ubi forma transfundit seipsam: Ergo non Sacerdotis non est
ordinare in Sacerdotem: sed hoc pertinet ad Sacerdotem, qui habet formam illam
in actu potentem transfundere seipsam. Vnde Papa non posse^ Ordines committere,
nisi Sacerdoti, ut Diacono, vel Laico; Potest autem committere cuicunque
Sacerdoti: Ergo videtur, quod confer Ordines sit pertinens ad Sacerdotem.
Probo. Quia Pone, quod sit Sacerdos, omni alio circumscripto, potest Papa
committere ^i Ordines: Pone autem alia omnia and circumscribe Sacerdotium, non
poterit Papa committere potestatem Ordinandi; Hoc videtur satis rationale, quia
omnis forma, ex quo est in actu, videtur quod possit se communicare infra
eandem speciem (apud Capreolum est, in eandem speciem) ergo Sacerdos hoc modo,
quantum est ex potestate sibi conveniente absolute, poterit Ordines celebrare:
Ergo si potestas ^lla modo sit impedita, sicut est de facto, and impedimentum
removeatur per hoc, quod fit Episcopus; Non datur ^i Nova potestas, sed
tantummodo pristina potestas prius impedita reducitur ad usum impedimento
remoto, and haec reductio illius potestatis ad usum dicitur ampliatio
potestatis. Hac Aureolus.

From these two arguments, and the quotations alleged, we may safely gather
these conclusions:

1. That there was a time when Presbyters did govern by Common Council, and did
Ordain without Bishops. So says Panormitan, Olim Presbyteri in communi
regebant Ecclesiam, and Ordinabant Sacerdotes.

2. That whole Nations have been converted to the faith and governed for
hundreds of years without Bishops. This Conclusion is abundantly proved by D.
Blondel, Sect. 3. de Ordinationibus, where he tells us, That Ioannes Major de
gestis Scotorum lib. 2. cap. 2. says, Per Sacerdotes and Monachos sine
Episcopis Scoti in fide eruditi, That Ioannes Fordonius says, Ante Palladi^
adventum, hab^bant Scoti fidei Doctoros, ac Sacramentorum Ministratores
Presbyteros solummodo vel Monachos, ritum sequentes Ecclesia Primitivae. The
Scots were Christians 220. years and more without Episcopal Government. The
like he proves of the Goths and French. For brevity sake we refer the Reader
to the Author himself.

3. That in Egypt, when the Bishop was absent, Presbyters did consecrate.

4. That in Alexandria for almost 200. years the Presbyters constituted and
Ordained their Bishop.

5. That though by the Canons of the Church the power of Presbyters in
Ordaining was restrained, yet it was the judgment of Antiquity, That every
Presbyter has actum primum, and an inward power to Ordain, and that though his
power was impedited by the Canons, yet it was not utterly extinguished.

6. That when a Presbyter is made a Bishop, he has no new power conferred upon
him, but only his former restraints and impediments are removed, as says
Aureolus.

7. That the Chor^piscopi for a certain space did Ordain of their own
authority, without receiving authority from the Bishop. Afterward (though they
were mere Presbyters) yet notwithstanding by the leave of Councels had liberty,
with the Bishops license, to Ordain.

8. That to this day it is the opinion of Schoolmen and Canonists, that the
Pope may give liberty to a Presbyter to Ordain. From whence, says Dr. Forbes,
it evidently follows, Ordinationem quae per solos Presbytero^ peragitur non
esse de jur^ divino invalidam, neque Ordination^m esse de jure Divino ita
propriam Episcoporum, ut non possit valide peragi per solos Presbyteros: That
is, That Ordination which is by Presbyters alone, is not by Divine right
invalid, neither is Ordination so proper by Divine right to a Bishop, that it
may not be done (even in the opinion of Papists themselves) by Presbyters
alone. For otherwise the Pope could not commit Ordination unto Presbyters. For
Bell^rmine says expressly, In jure Divino non potest Papa dispensare, Lib. 2.
de Council. cap. 18. Lib. de Matrim. cap. 11.
The Pope cannot dispense in things that are by divine right. And Aureolus
says, Ea quae sunt Ordinum omnes recipient immediate a Christo, ita quod in
potest^te nullius imo nec Papae est ill^ auferre: qua sunt autem
jurisdictionis, potest ea P^pa suspendere. Now then from hence we may argue.

That which by divine authority is to be done only by Bishops, that neither
Bishops nor Councels, nor Pope can commit to Presbyters that are not Bishops.
Nam in jure Divino Papa non potest dispensare.

But (according to the Judgment and practice of Antiquity) The Pope may give
the liberty and power of Ordaining to Presb^ters that are not Bishops. And
Bishops also may do the like. Therefore the liberty and power of Ordaining is
not by divine right belonging to Bishops only, but may be lawfully done by
others, the Papists themselves being Judges. And so much for our fourth
Proposition.

Proposition 5.
THat when Hierome says, Quid facit Episcopus quod non facit Presbyter except^
Ordinatione? This passage cannot be understood as if Hierome had thought, That
Ordination was by Divine right appropriated to Bishops, and not to Presbyters
(as Bishop Bilson says). For in the very same Epistle he tells us, That by
divine right a Bishop and a Presbyter are all one. And that in Alexandria, for
a long time the Presbyters Ordained their Bishop. But he must b^ understood of
the practice of the Church in his days; and his meaning i^, Quid facit
Episcopus secundum Cano^^s Ecclesia quad non facit Presbyte^ excepta
Ordinatione?

Proposition 6.
THat when Ischyras was deposed from being a Presbyter, because mad^ by
Collu^hus, that was but a Presbyter himself, and not a Bishop; This was done,
not because the act of Collu^^us was against the Canon of the Scriptures, but
only because it was against the Canons of some Councel^. Thu^ Dr. Fi^ld
answers, Whereas, says he, The Fathers make all such Ordinations void (...)
are made by Presbyters, Lib. 3. cap. 39.
it is to be understood according to the strictness of the Canon in use in
their time, and not absolutely in the nature of the thing; which appears, in
that they likewise make all Ordinations sine titulo to be void: All Ordination^
of Bishops ordained by fewer then three Bishops with the Metropolitan; All
Ordinations of Presbyter^ by Bishops out of their own Churches without leave.
Whereas I am well assured, The Romanists will not pronounce any of these to be
void, though the parties so doing are not excusable from all fault. Thus far
Dr. Field.

But now whether the Church in th^se days did well or no in restraining that
by their Canons, which the Canons of the Scripture has left free, we leave it
to all sober Christians to judge and determine.

Proposition 7.
THat A^rius was never condemned, by any Council, o^ heresy, for holding the
Identity of a Bishop and a Presbyter. But on the contrary, Council.
Aquisgranens* sub Ludovico Pio Imp. 1^. an. 816. has approved it for true
Divinity out of the Scripture, that Bishops and Presbyters are equal, bringing
the same texts that Aerius does, and which Epiphanius indeed undertakes to
answer; but how slightly, let any indifferent Reader judge. We confess, That
he is called an heretic by Epiphanius and Austin^; but this was especially, if
not only, because he was an Arrian, Epiphanius, says he, did Arrium ipsum
dogmatum novitate superare. Austine says, That he did in Arrianorum haeresin
labi. But as for his opinion, That there ought to be no difference between a
Bishop and a Presbyter, Austine indeed calls it, proprium dogma. And Epiphanius
calls it dogma furiosum and stolidum. But neither of them both call it an
Heresy.

But suppose they did, (for so it is commonly thought) yet that this was the
private opinion of these two Doctors, and not much to be regarded, appears;

1. Because (as Smectym^uus has well observed) the same Authors condemn Aerius
as much for reprehending and censuring praying and offering for the dead, and
the performing of good works for the benefit of the dead. Epiphanius accused
him, because he said, that superstitum preces did not opitulari ^is qui ex h^c
vita discesserunt. And Austine accused Aerius because he said, Non licet orare,
vel offerr^ pro mortuis oblationem. He is further condemned for reprehending
stata jejunia, and the keeping of the week before Easter as a solemn Fast.
Which things if worthy of condemnation, would bring in most of the reformed
Churches into the censure of Heresy, and would make most of our Episcopal men
themselves Heretics.

2. Because not only Saint Hierome, but Austine himself, Sedulius, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Theophylact, were of the same opinion with
Aerius (as Michael Medina observes in the Council of Trent, and has written
lib. 1. de Sacr. hom. origin.) and yet none of these do deserve the name of
fools and mad men, much less to be branded for heretics.

Add to this, That Alphonsus de Castro advers. haeres* Titul. Episcopus,
says, That Hierome was of the same opinion with Aerius.

And our learned Professor Dr. Whitakers resp. ad Campian. rat. 10. has these
words, A^rium Epiphanius and Augustinus in haereticis nume ant, and praeter eos
antiqui pauci. Et si Presbyterum Episcopo aequare sit haereticum, nihil
Catholicum esse potest. Cum Aerio Hieronymus de Presbyteris omnino sensit.
Illos enim jure divino Episcopis aequales esse statuit. This is sufficient to
answer the objection about Aerius.

Proposition 8.
THat even many, if not most* of those that hold Episcopacy, and Episcopal
Ordination to be divini juris, yet (as we in charity believe) they do not hold
it to be so of divine institution, as to be perpetually and immutably necessary
^n the Church of Christ; But they say, That those Church^^ are true Churches
that want Bishops, and those Ministers true Ministers who are Ordained by
Presbyters without Bishops. Thus Bishop Downame in his consecr. Sermon,
professes, page 92. not so to maintain the calling of Bishops to be Divini
juris, as intending thereby a general and perpetual necessity thereof. And
afterward in his defense, Though ordinary right of Ordination belongs to
Bishop^ in the Judgment of the ancient Church; yet it was not to be understood,
as so appropriating it to them, as that extraordinarily* and in case of
necessity, it might not be lawful for Presbyters to Ordain; and much less
teaching absolutely a nullity of the Ordination which is performed without a
Bishop; which answer I confirmed by diverse reasons, (see them) whereunto I now
add, That there seems to be the like reasons for the imposition of hands, in
confirmation of the baptized, in the reconciliation of public penitents, as in
the Ordination of Ministers. But although the two former were reserved as well
as the third, to the Bishop, yet extraordinarily* in the case of necessity, and
in the want and absence of the Bishop, the ancient Church held it lawful for
Ministers to impose hands, either for confirming of parties baptized, or for
reconciliation of the penitents. The former is testified by Ambrose upon Ephesians.
4. and Austin qu. ex Vet. and Nov. Test. mixed. qu. 101. The latter by Cyprian,
lib. 3. Ep. 17. and diverse Councels* Council. Carthag. graec. cap. 43. Carth. 2.
cap. 4. Council. Ara^sic. cap. 2. And the Popish Writ^rs themselves do teach,
that the Pope may give license to him that is not a Bishop, to Ordain, so that
he to whom such license is given, have those Orders himself which he would give
to another, Summa Angel. ordo, etc. If therefore by the Popes license a
Presbyter may Ordain Presbyters, much better may a company of Presbyters, to
whom in the want of a Bishop, the charge of the Church is devolved, be
authorized by necessity, which, as they say, has no law. So far B. Downame.

Thus also Mr. Francis Mason, -- If by jure Divino you mean, That which is
according to Scripture; then the preeminence of Bishops is jure Divino. But if
by jure Divine, you understand a law and commandment of God, binding all
Christian Churches universally, perpetually, unchangeably, and with such
absolute necessity, that no other form of regiment may in any case be admitted:
in this sense neither may we grant it, nor yet can you prove it to be jure
Divino. And no doubt it were a most cruel and unmerciful opinion so to cry up
Episcopacy and Episcopal Ordination, as to condemn all the reformed Churches of
France, Scotland, Holland, Helvetia, etc. as no Churches, and their Ministers
as no Ministers, and their Sacraments as no Sacraments. But we shall say no
more of this Proposition, because there is a Reverend Minister has spoken
largely to it, Mr. Baxter in his Christian Concord and agreem^nt.
and has proved, That it was the opinion of Dr. Field, B. Downame, B. Jewel,
Saravia, B. Alley, B. Pilkinton, B. Bridges, B. Bilson, D. Nowel, and diverse
others, That Ordination by Presbyters in some cases is lawful and valid: and
has also fully and excellently discovered the woeful and unsufferable miseries
and mischiefs that would flow from the contrary assertion. To him we refer the
Reader, that desires to be further satisfied herein.

We shall name but one Proposition more, and then we have done.

Proposition 9.
THat our Episcopal brethren that do so much inveigh against the Presbyterian^
in all their writing^ for walking contrary to Antiquity in the matter of
Ordination, do themselves fall under the same accusation in many particulars
which we could easily name, if we did desire to recriminate. We will instance
only in two. Epist. 6.28.18.


1. The ancient Bishops would do nothing without their Presbyters. Cyprian
professes he would do nothing without the Clergy; he could do nothing without
them, nay he durst not take upon him alone to determine that which of right did
belong to all. The fourth Council of Carthage condem^s the sentence of the
Bishop as irrita nisi Clericorum praesentia confirmetur: The Church had it^
Seniores sine quorum cons^lio nihil ag^batur in Ecclesia. There are a multitude
of quotations of this nature which we might transcribe out of D. Blond^^ and
Smectymnuus, but we forbear. Now how contrary our Episcopal men walk to this
practice, i^ sufficiently manifest to all the Christian world.

2. D. Blondel that great Antiquary undertakes in a very long discourse to make
it out, That for 1200. years the people had free liberty in the choice of
their Bishops; he proves it by undoubted Authors in all the several Countries.
And Cyprian tells us, That this power did descend upon the people de Divina
Authoritate. Epist. 68.
And yet our Brethren in their practice go quite Antipodes to this part of
Antiquity, and would be loath to be charged with the black brand of Innovators
and despisers of all Antiquity for so doing. And therefore let them not accuse
us for walking contrary to Antiquity, (when as we are sure that we walk
agreeably unto the Scriptures, and to the first and purest Antiquity) but
consider how deeply and how justly they themselves may be charged with this
guilt.

ANd thus we have finished all that we thought fit to add concerning the
Judgment and Practice of the Ancient Church in the point of Episcopacy. Not
that we intend to be finally concluded by the determination of Apostolical
Traditions unwritten, or by the Fathers, or Canons of the Church, in this great
Controversy, For, though we are amongst the number of those that do much
reverence Antiquity; yet we do not Idolize it. For we know that the Ancient
Church was much beguiled in receiving many things as Traditions Apostolical,
which are confessed by all to have been Apocryphal. Irenaeus Lib. 2. cap. 39.
tells us, that S. John told those that told him, That Christ lived here upon
earth, and preached ultra quadragesimum, aut etiam quinquagesimum annum, beyond
40. or 50. years; which to be a counterfeit Tradition will be by none denied.
The Bishops of Asia in Victor's time, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 22, 23.
who was Bishop of Rome, celebrated the Christian Passover or the Feast of
Easter, upon the 14th. day of the month, according ^s the Jews were commanded
to eat their Passover; This they did as a received Tradition, not only from
Polycarpe, but from S. John himself: But now, on the contrary, the Bishops of
the Western Churches kept it upon the day of Christ's Resurrection, which they
did from a Tradition received from S. Peter. Now sure we are that both of these
cannot be true.

And as for the Ancient Fathers, though they were famou^ Lights in the Church,
yet they have their Naev^s, and (...), and their writings are much defaced by
the Popish Index Expurgatorius. A learned Gentleman Lord Digby.
undertakes in a short Epistle to make out Their Contradictions one to another.
Their variance from themselves. Their Repugnancies both to Protestants, and
Papists. Their want of ability in many points of our Controversies: in most, of
will to decide them.


And therefore we appeal from men to God; from the Canons of the Father^, to
the Canons of the Holy Scriptures, as the only infallible Judge of this, and
all other Controversies of Religion. We say with the Prophet, Ad Legem, Isa.
8.20.
and Testimonium, To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according
to this Word, it is because there is no light in them.

And yet we have spoken something in brief even to the matter of Antiquity,
which we have done upon a double account: 1. For the Vindication of Presbytery
from the prejudice of Novellisme. 2. For the Satisfaction of young Students,
who scruple the Ordination by Presbyters for this reason only, Because it is,
as they think, a receding from the Judgment and Practice of all Antiquity; The
contrary to which we have clearly manifested.


And now we hope, at last, we may safely conclude from all the Premises, That
the Way of Ordination which is now, for the present, in use in England, by
Scripture-Bishops, that is, Presbyters, is not only lawful, but more desirable
than the former way, because more agreeable to Scripture-patterne. And
therefore they that are so Ordained, their Ordination is valid, and they need
no Reordination.

Subscribed in the Name, and by the Appointment of the Assembly, November. 2.
1653. Roger Drake, Moderator. Samuel Balmford, Assessor. Allen Geer, Assessor.
Matthew Pool, Scriba. John S^abrook, Scriba.


THe ingenuous Reader is earnestly desired to correct with his pen, before he
reads, those errata which he perceives to be most material, either by the
omission, or addition or change of words; and for less mistakes in letters,
pointings, or accents, either to correct them or excuse them, as he passes by
them in reading.

Part. 1. Errata.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, page 2 line 18 read herein. page 6 line 27 r.
purposely. In the book, p. 2 l. 14 r. (...) p. 8 l. 13 for and r. are p. 21*
l^ne 11 r. add to us, ibid. l. ult. r. from Heaven. p. 24 l. ult. r. Ministers.
p. 27 l. 23 r. (...). p. 34. l. 2 for reduced r. seduced. in marg r. iniri. p.
35 l. 1 r. Christ's. p. 48 l. 6 for righteous r. precious. p. 122 l. 12 for best
r. first. p. 123 l. 11. for fifth proposition r. second part. p. 149 l. 9 for
thirdly r. eighthly. p. 171 l. 3. r. commanded them to do for themselves.

In the second part and Appendix Errata.
PAge 1 line 8 read ministry. page. 5. line 3 read these. page 6 l. 8. read
what p. 15. l. 15. for now r. no. p. 20 in marg. r. Concl. 5. and l. 19 r.
Ministry. p. 21. l. 1. r. in these, and dele or, and l. 34. for is r. as p. 22
l. 32. r. this makes. p. 26 l. 20. for is r. as. and l. 31 r. even. p 27. l. 5.
r. Presbyter. p. 28 l. 29 for Scriptures r. Sacrifices. p. 34. in marg. by l.
1. put Consid. 1. and l. 15. r. (...). p. 35. l. 11. in marg. put Consid. 2. p.
36. l. 7 r. preserved. p. 45 l. 25 dele true Church and. p. 46 in marg r.
Tertul. adv. Judaeos cap. 7. Br^tannorum. p. 54 l. 37. r. Jurisdiction. p. 60
l. 9. r. decisive. p. 61 l. 4. r. and that, and l. 6. dele ratio. p. 69 l. 33.
for not r. met. p. 74. l. 21 dele 1. ^p. 77 l. 21 for in that r. that in p. 78
l. 18 r. the Object^r. p. 82 l. 32 for 71 r. 17 p. 83 l. 37 r. samenesse. p.
86. l. 25 r. (...). p. 87 l. 19. r. argument. p. 91 l. 6. r. were p. 93 l. 35
for confess, r. maintain. p. 105 in marg. r. (...), and l. 16 for Officers, r.
Orders, and l. 36 for care, r. cure p. 108 l. 14 for laws r. Canons. p. 109 l,
12 dele that. p. 110 l 9. for their r. his, p. 112* l. 24 and 27 for on r. of.
p. 114 l. 4 dele the p. 122 l. 37 r. intangleth. p. 127 l. 24 after Ministry
put and that Episcopacy.

FINIS.

