A JOURNAL Of all that happened in the MARCH of the VAUDOIS Till their Arrival
in the Valleys of St. Martin and Lusern; Written from Lausanne the 19th. of
September 1689. to an Eminent Merchant in London, with the Number of those that
passed the Lake to join them.
LICENSED September 27th. 1689. J. F.
THE Vaudois to the number which I mentioned in the last that I sent you, set
forward from this City about fifteen days since; with a Resolution to go into
the Valleys of Piemont, distant from hence about five and thirty Leagues. I was
one of those that desired one of the Magistrates of this place, to let them
have the convenience of Boats, for that Monsieur the Bailiff had forbid the
people here to furnish them with any, though under hand he was willing enough
they should have them, as being one that wished well to the common Cause,
however he is forced to observe some little measures and punctillio's by reason
of the Neutrality: But at length I engaged Monsieur le Boursie one of the
Judges to go to the Fort at two of the Clock at Night, whither I accompanied
him, and obtained permission, that the Vaudois might be furnishd with Boats: We
also assisted them with all such other necessaries as lay in our power. They
had an extraordinory good passage over the Lake; and as they marched forward,
they seized upon the Priests and Lords of the Villages through which they
passed. But finding by that time they had gone two days march, that there was a
Bridge broken down to impede their passing farther; they threatened their
Prisoners to put them to death, if they did not take care to have the Bridge
repaired; so that the Country people that lived on the other side were forced
to repair the Bridge, which the Vaudois passed in good Order.

The Duke of Savoy having intelligence of their March, raised the Militia of
his own Country, and sent away a Courier to the Marquess de Larre Colonel of
Dragoons, and Commander of the Forces in the Dauphinate, to stop the farther
progress of the Vaudois, who were then upon the Frontiers. Thither therefore he
hastened with four Troops of Dragoons, whom he caused to break down a Bridge,
and Entrenched the Militia of Savoy in the same place to dispute the passage.
But the Vaudois upon the first discharge which they made, killed the Commander
of the Savoyards, who was a Marquess also, with several others, which put the
rest into such a Terror that they abandoned the Pass. Here the Vaudois lost a
Minister and four Soldiers, whom the Enemy carried bound to Chamberg, and
there hanged them up.

Afterward Monsieur Larre meeting them with four Troops of Dragoons, asked
them whither they were going; they Answered they were going to their own homes;
by whose Order? To whom? Their Minister Mr. Arnauld who has appeared all along
at the Head of them; Replied, by Order of the King of England, William the
Third. Upon which the Commander told 'em, that they were a Company of Vagabond
Rascals, and that he would trample them to death under his Horses Feet, and so
Commanded his Dragoons to ride up to them, which Mr. Arnauld seeing, prepared
his people to receive them accordingly, which they did; and after a Fight that
lasted two Hours, they won the Victory, having killed a hundred and fifty of
the Dragoons, and two Captains, befides sive or six more Inferior Officers
killed and wounded; and Mr. de Larre wounded in the Elbow of which he is since
dead: Of the Vaudois not above fifteen or twenty killed and wounded.

Thus they entered into the Valleys of of Pregolas which are under the Dominion
of France, where about two hundred of the Inhabitants of the said Valleys
joined them. In their March they pillaged the Abbey of Ouls in the French
Territory; where they found 180000 Livres, or 15000 l. English, and twenty four
Monks, whom they carried along with them as Hostages. They also took upon the
Mountains above twenty Thousand Sheep. At the same time they met the Baggage
belonging to the Popes Nuncio, returning from Paris to Rome. They opened the
Packs, and took out all the Plate, but meddl'd with nothing else; but besides
all this Booty, they found the Valleys of St. Martins and Lusern, where they
are now Arrived, well stored with Corn, which makes us believe they will find
it a difficult thing to make them dislodge from thence, having expelled the
Savoyards that lived in the Vale to the very tops of all the Mountains. All
Savoy is in Arms, to prevent those that have taken Sanctuary in Switzerland,
from going to their Assistance, as it is believed they will do; the Switzers
not at all opposing the Levies which they make in those parts.

The Duke of Savoy has Written a very severe Letter to the Switzers upon this
occasion, which they have taken very ill, no less offended that he had broken
his word with them, in not restoring to them the Ministers and Children of the
Vandois. The Canton of Oury, which is a popish Canton, has delivered up a
hundred and five of those poor people to the Ambassador of Savoy, after they
had robbed them of all their Clothes and money, and put four of them to the
Rack, to make them discover the designs of the rest of their Brethren, but they
would not confess any thing. The Ambassador has caused them to be tied two and
two together, and sent them away into Savoy, for fear that the Lords of Zurie
and of Berne should redemand them, which they did; to whom the popish Cantons
returned for Answer, that they had delivered them up already, but with this
condition, that no harm should be done them; which very much displeased the
Lords of Zurie and Berne; insomuch that it proved the occasion of a Rupture
between them.

There are already departed above 1500 Men to join those that are Marched
before; in order to which they have passed the Lake, and two Thousand more are
ready to Embark, with a resolution to follow them. They are all French that
fled for Refuge, except four hundred Vaudois, who came hither as soon as they
understood the departure of the rest, And had not Mounfieur the Bailiff forbid
the Switzers, upon pain of death, not to stir out of the State, there would
have gone above two thousand. However this has not hindered a very considerable
number from going, finding the Vaudois so successful in their Enterprises.

It is hoped, that the King of England will prevail with the King of Spain to
declare war against the Duke of Savoy; to the end the Milainois Governors may
be ordered to furnish them with all such necessaries which they shall stand in
need of. For otherwise, it will be a difficult thing for these poor people to
preserve what they have got. The King of France having ordered the forces of of
the Dauphinate to march, to expel them from those places where a little
Assistance would defend them from all the force of their Enemies. The
Ambassador of France at Geneva makes a great noise and speaks loud upon this
occasion. We expect with impatience the result of the Consultations of the
Assembly at Baden. Savoy is all in Arms, and the people are strangely alarmed,
at so many Commotions. The French Troops are quartered round about Geneva:
However as yet all things are quiet: In expectation of more News I remain,
YOVRS, etc

We thought it not from the purpose to gratify the Curiofity of the Reader to
add this Century of Nostre Damus in regard it agrees so well and falls out so
pat to the Condition of France at this time.

When ere the Crescent shall decrease,
An Eagle shall the mighty Cock deplume,
In Sixteen hundred Eighty Nine
Great Changes then by death shall come.
The same Fate shall two Kings attend,
Good Cheese to Calvin and his Friend.
LONDON, Printed for Ben. Griffin in the Great Old Baily, 1689.


