The Judgment of God showed upon one John Faustus Doctor in Divinity.
Tune Fortune my Foe.




ALL Christian men give ear a while to me;
How I am plunged in pain but cannot dye,
I lived a life the like did none before,
Forsaking Christ, and I am damned therefore.
At Wittenburge a Town in Germany,
There was I born and bred of good degree,
Of honest Stock which afterward I sh^m'd,
Accursed therefore for Faustus was I named.
In learning lo my Uncle brought up me,
And made me Doctor in Divinity:
And when he died he left me all his wealth.
Whose cursed Gold did hinder my Souls health.
Then did I shun the holy Bible book,
Nor on Gods word would ever after look,
But studied accursed Conjuration,
Which was the cause of my utter damnation.
The Devil in Friars weeds appeared to me,
And straight to my request he did agree,
That I might have all things at my desire,
I gave him soul and body for his hire.
Twice did I make my tender flesh to bleed,
Twice with my blood I wrote the Devil a deed,
Twice wretchedly I Soul and Body sold,
To live in peace and do what things I would.
For four and twenty years this Bond was made,
And at the length my soul was truly paid,
Time ran away and yet I never thought,
How dear my soul our Sav^our Christ had bought.
Would I had first been made a beast by kind,
Then had not I so vainly set up mind;
Or would when reason first began to bloom,
Some darksome Den had been my deadly tomb.
Woe to the day of my Nativity,
Give to the time that once did foster me,
And woe unto the hand that seal^d the bill,
Woe to my self the cause of all my ill.


THe time I past away with much delight
Amongst princes, peers, and many a worthy Knight.
I wrought such wonders by my magic skill
That all the world may talk of Faustus still.
The Devil he carried me up into the Sky,
Where I did see how all the world did lie
I went about the world in eight days space,
And then returned unto my Native place.
That pleasure I did with to please my mind,
He did perform as Bond and Seel did bind
The secrets of the stars and planets told,
Of earth and sea, with wonders manifold.
When four and twenty years was almost run,
I thought of all things that was past and done,
How that the Devil would come and claim his right
And carry me to everlasting night.
They all to late I cursed my Wicked Deed.
The Deed whereof does, make my heart to bleed,
All days and hours I mourned wondrous sore,
R^^enting me o^ all things done before,
I then did wish both Sun and Moon to stay
All times and s^^^^^^ ^eve^ to decay
Then had my time never come to dated end,
Nor soul and body down to Hell descend.
At last when I had but one hour to come,
I turned my glass for my last hour to run,
And called in learned men to comfort me,
But faith was gone and none could comfort me
By twelve a Clock my glass was almost out
My grieved conscience then began to doubt,
I wished the Students stay in chamber by,
But as they staid they heard a d^eadful cry.
Then presently they came into the Hall,
Whereas my brains was cast against the wall,
Both arms and legs in pieces torn they see,
My bowels gone ^^is was an end of me.
You Coniurors and damnes Witches all,
Example take by my unhappy fall:
Give not your Souls and Bodies unto Hell,
See that the smallest hair you do not sell.
But hope that Christ his Kingdom you may gain
Where you shall never fear such mortal pain:
Forsake the Devil and all his crafty ways,
Embrace true Faith that never more decays.
Printed for A. M. W. O. and Tho. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-Lane,


