Joyful News FROM HVLL OR, Sr. John Hothams overthrow given to the Cavaleers.

Wherein is showed how Sr. John Hotham having received intelligence of their
coming, displayed his Ordnance against them, whereby was slain threescore
Cavaleers beside others who were wounded and fled.

(...)ikewise, a most Remarkable passage, showing Gods Judgment on diverse
Cavaleers of New Castle-

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

August 2. Printed for Thomas Baley. 1642.

THE IVDGMENT Of GOD on diverse Cavaleers for their damnable Oaths.
IN time of War, that some times happy peacemaker, when unlooked for mischeifs
are either hatching or of ripe age; prevention and policy is the best
antidotes, which the best even our blessed Parliament have used as sovereign
in these worst ages.

And indeed if upon a conceited survey of imminent danger, they had left to be
caustious, they had resigned enjoyed security to hap hazards Cruilty; but that
honorable Assembly having a wellconceated ill conceit of some adverse party,
who deeming Majesty Loyalty, would feign Lord it over them with some upstart
tyranny, have well fortified those places most aimed at, because most dangerous
to their assaults, and turrited and resartiated those timeworne Bulwarks,
which lay as it were gaping for the issue of the enemy. Nay, not only so, but
since that moneys are the finewes of war, victuals and provision the useful
artillery, they they have with as much care as speed, caused to be transported
to Hull, such conveniences which their private necessities cry for: a ship
laden with victuals.

But since that Fortune is commonly adverse to virtuous and good intended
designs, it had not swept the surface of the water, to New Castle, but it had
run on the pikes of danger, by some Cavaliers; if execution had not proved more
unlucky then intention^ for no sooner were their eyes commanders of the
Vessel, but drove with envy rather then hunger, armed with temerity rather
then civil honesty, without sulration, they let fly a Cannon shot at her: but
it came short of their longing, and, as it were approving their innocence, the
hard iron cried in his errand, as loath to do his message, and for grief fell
down dead. Which when these Buffes perceived, presently, not knowing the cause
of the quarrel, they seemed to lay battery against heaven, and with thundering
and selfe-damming word-shot, threatened to imbarke the poor Bark in some
disadvantage. Whereupon they lifted up their voices in a high execrable
strain, others were in a lower Key, all ran division, and no music sounds,
well, unless there be another Base shot, command therefore was given, that
they should glut a piece: and after they had roard it with a Dam Me, they
seconded it with a Ram ye to the top, so that they fed the piece belly full
with the deadly enemies of life, for how they will shoot and indeed in the
upshot they did, for having discharged their Engine: again as if the others
cause was good, it broke its heart, and as enraged sent his intrails into
theirs who kindled his anger, and with his sides thrust them into deaths
doors. Here might you see a Separatist, a leg parted from the body, there an
Athiest, as if he had denied its Essence, many to the number of thirty
massacred, some as Church Papists, share equally of life and death.

Thus did they fall and were entangled in their own yarne: thus they became
their own executioners, who, whilst they intend to build a house on others
ruin, and make others wretchedness their happiness, found no enemies but
themselves, as if they only had been the men who were to be prosecuted with
such vengeance. And now would this accident feign traduce the constancy of my
faith: and I begin to judge of the cause of the injured party, which uses
skill in selfe-defending not man offending guided by nature, which clemency and
patience have named good; whose cause Fortune has Christened just, unless it
be turned a crime to secure ones self; I am therefore struk with dull
amazement at the thought of that tongue destructions that slay our Common
wealth in so many piece, that Mortals should judge occurrents as their fancies
reaches, each man as is inclined to War or Peace embrace either, not
respecting their own persons nor the Cause but the person for whose safeguard
their weapons are suscepted, or if not so, for for what they have not long bin
acquanted with Pillage, who are the more desperat^, c^use they are past hope, I
speak of those only who know it serves, no way to save a Country but to
destroy it, whose headlong actions spe^ke t^em unfortunate even in the least
attempt ^or their hopes were frustrate, and that swimmi^g sto^ehouse like the
Trojan Horse linde wi^^ ammunition safely dancing upon the wave, for joy they
arri(...)in wished for port.

If they would but sit down and recolect what dangers hoper over us and them
how sha^pely they have been intertaind in their adventures; they would I
suppose, take breath and parle before a second one set; for lately they were
stuffed with such ouermeting audacity that taking as they thought time by the
forehead, they in tended to invade Hull, and having a friend of night to
distowne Sr. John Hotham; which under mask of darkness they did, intending
may I say like Cowards which strike winking or blind fold, but he found fortune
as fauarable as the Parliament finds him faithful for first he seeming as it
were carlesse Congested the Waters together and bridled them in which some fresh
Water Soldiers being privy to, Conducted by their ancient Captain, Captain
fancey began to inherit after the Flood, and having won the opportunity
orespred the earth; this Sr. John Hotham gave leave to Rand^uowz in his
thoughts; who presently felt these Flies wagging in his Web; whereupon he
saluteed these Brauadoes with a piece of ordinance welcome sent about
threescore souls to Pluto (...) rest into an Ague H^rd Fate.

Sr. John not only welcomd them but paid the shot, such intertainment were they
never like to rein o^or the rest to be tasters of unless they come with a
powder, thus those daring Grim spirits have bin cur^d of the desease of long
life: for indeed they have bin engines of torment of torment to the Country,
and that Nobleman is crowned with glory; who remembers rather that he is a
Subject then a Knight, whom the Honorable Houses of Parliament, have as a
gurdeon and ^ for his deserts, willingly with (...) ^^^^ions for the security
of his persons as their own, whose happiness consists in theirs: to maintain
which, he^ is as ready as able to put in force any thing by force, from force,
the endeavors of incroaching adversaries; wherefore answerable to their
command, to let in the water, he has opened the floodgates, which measuring
the out-fields, make clothes of Crystal for the neighboring plains: which,
that it may not be disrobed of its pure garment, to the subversion of many. Let
such Merchant adventurers take heed to batter for goods, or thought-good to
King, with life or limbs, lest while they strive for that little Island in a
forced ebb, they be ill willers to the King and Kingdom estate, whose ruin
is smirkt with the name of safety, and gain the Parliaments displeasure to
their own loss.

The Lords and (...), that a Garrison of Soldiers is at New Castle. Likewise
Earl Rivers being put into the Commission of Array, exercises it with much
rigor imprisoning all the that oppose him.

John Brown Cler. Part.

FINIS.

