THE IVDGES JVDGEMENT A SPEECH Penned in the beginning of the Parliament
against the Judges.

Per ignotum quendum. Printed for John Aston; 1641.

A SPEECH Against the Judges per Jgnotum quendam.
Mr. Speaker,
IT was a custom amongst the Romans (who as by their power they once gave
laws, so by the happy success of their long flourishing Government, might
they well give examples to all the world) that in their Senates the youngest
men spoke first: partly that they might not have their weaker notions
anticipated by the more knowing Senators. And partly for that the Senate might
not be diverted from the mature resolutions of the more Ancient by the
interpositions of the younger men; They as all free States ever allowing free
members to express themselves according to their several capacities. And me
thinks it was a happy Method. So your opinions and inclinations of the Assembly
being discovered and ripened to resolution by such gradations, the sentences of
the Sages sounded as Judgments, not orations, their wisdom and gravity put a
seasonable Period to others, perhaps otherwise endless discourses.

Their precedent encourages me, (who worst may) to break the Ice: Children can
lay their fingers on the Sore, point out their pain; and Infant Graduates in
Parliament may groan out the grievances of a diseased Commonwealth, but they
must be Doctors in the Art of government that can apply apt remedies to recover
it.

Mr. Speaker, Ancient and approved has been that Parallel of the body
politic with the body natural: It Is the part of the Patients in either
distempered, to impart freely their griefs to the Physicians of the body or
state, if they expect a cure.

This Commonwealth is (or should be) but one body. This house the great
Physician of all our maladies, and alas Mr. Speaker, of what afflicted part
shall we poor Patients complain first? Or rather of what shall we not
complain?

Are we not heart-sick? Is there in us that which God requires, unity, purity,
and singularity of heart? Nay is not Religion (the soul of this body) so
miserably distracted, that I speak it with terror of heart, it is to be feared
there is more confusion of Religions amongst us, then there was of tongues at
the subversion of Babell: And is it not then high time that we understand one
another, that we were reduced to one Faith, one Government.

Sir, Is the head whole: The seat of Government and Justice, the Fountain
from whose sweet influence all the inferior members of this body should
receive both vigor and motion: Nay, has not rather a general Apoplexy, or
Palsy, taken, or shaken all our members? Are not some dead? Others buried
quick? Some dismembered, all disordered by the diversion of the course of
Justice.

Is the Liver (Natures exchequer) open; from whose free distribution each limb
may receive his proper Nutriment, or rather is it not wholly obstructed? Our
property taken from us? So that it may, Properly be said of us. Sic vos non
vobis fertis aratra, our Ancestors drunk the juice of their own Vines, reaped
and eat the fruit of their own harvest. But now the poor man's Plough goes to
furrow the Seas, to build Ships: we labor not for our selves but to feed
excressions of Nature, things grown up out of the Ruins of the natural
members. Monopolists.

Sir, These are Maxim vitalia; Religion, Justice property; The heart, the
head, the Liver of this great body, and these distempered or obstructed, can
the subordinate parts be free? No Sir, the truth is; all is so far out of
frame, that to lay open every particular grievance were to drive us into
despair of cure: In so great confusion where to begin first, requires not much
less care then what to apply.

Mr. Speaker, I know it is a plausible motion to begin with setting Gods house
in order first: who presses that moves with such advantage, that he is sure no
man will gainsay him. It Is a well becoming zeal to prefer Religion before
our own affairs, and indeed it is a duty not to be omitted; where they are in
equal danger: But in cure of the body politic or natural we must still
prefer the most pressing exigents.

Physicians know that Consumptions, Dropsies, and such like lingering diseases
are more mortal, more difficult to cure the^ slight external wounds: yet if
the least Vein be cut, they must neglect their greater cures to stop that,
which if neglected must needs exhaust the stock of nature, and produce a
dissolution of the whole man.

A Defection from the duties of our Religion is a Consumption to any State, no
foundation is firm that is not laid in Christ.

The Denial of Justice, the abridgment of our liberties, is such an
obstruction as renders the Commonwealth Leaprous; but the wounds in our
property let us out the lifeblood of the people.

The Reformation of Church Government must necessarily be a work of much time,
and God be thanked the disease is not desperate; We serve one God, we believe
in one Christ, and we all acknowledge and profess one Gospel. The difference
is only de modo, we vary but in Ceremonies to reduce, which to the Primitive
practice, must be a work of great debate, is not a work for us alone to
settle.

The stop of Justice, can yet Injure but particulars, It Is true, there may be
many, too many instances of strange oppressions, great oppressors, but 'twill
be hard to judge the Conclusion. Et sic de caeteris

But take from us the propriety of our estates, our subsistence, we are no more
a people. This is that vein which has bin so deep cut, so far exhaust,
that to preserve our being, we must doubtless first stop this current: Then
settle Rules to live by, when we are sure to live.

Mr. Speaker, he that well weighs this little word property, or propriety in
our estates, will find it of a large extent; The Leeches that have sucked this
blood, have bin Excise, Benevolences, Loanes, Impositions, Monopolies, Military
Taxes, Ship Money (cum multis aliis) all which spring from one Root.

And is it not high time to grub up that Root that brings forth such fruit?
Shall we first stand to lop the branches one by one, when we may down with all
at once? He that to correct an evil tree, that brings forth bad fruit shall
begin at the Master bough, and so lop downwards, is in danger to fall himself
before the Tree falls. The safer and speedier way is to begin at the Root, and
there with submission to better judgments would I lay to the Axe.

The Root of most of our present mischiefs, and the ruin of all posterity,
do I hold, to be that extrajudiciall (Judgment I cannot say, but rather) doom
delivered by all the Judges under their hands out of Court yet recorded in all
Courts, to the subversion of all our fundamental Laws, Liberties, and
Annihilation, if not Confiscation of our estates. That in case of danger, the
King may impose upon his Subjects, and that he is the Sole Judge of the
danger, necessity and proportion, which in brief, is to take what, when, and
where he will, which though delivered in the time of a gracious and merciful
Prince, who we hope will not wrest it beyond our abilities, yet left to the
Interpretation of a succeeding Tyrant, if ever this Nation be so unfortunate
to fall into the hands of such; it is a Record wherein every man may read
himself a slave that reads it, having nothing he can call his own, all
prostitute to the will of another.

What to do in such a case we are not to seek for precedents, our Honorable
Ancestors taught us in the just and exemplar punishments of chief Justice,
Tresilian and his Accomplices (for giving their Judgments out of Parliament,
against the established Laws of Parliament) how tender they were of us, how
careful we ought to be to continue those Laws, to preserve the Liberty of
our Posterity.

I am far from maligning the person, not in my heart wish I the Execution of
any man, but certainly it shall be a Justice well becoming this House, to lay
their Heads at his Majesty's mercy, who had laid us under his feet, who had
made us but Tenants at will of our Liberties and Estates.

And though I cannot but approve of Mercy, as a great Virtue in any Prince, yet
I heartily pray it may prove a Precedent as safe and useful to this oppressed
State, as that of Justice.

Mr. Speaker, blasted may that Tongue be that shall in the least degree
derogate from the Glory of those Halcyon days our Fathers enjoyed, during the
Government of that ever blessed, never to be forgot Royal Elizabeth. But
certainly I may safely say (without detraction) it was much advantage to the
peace and prosperity of her Reign, that the great Examples of Empson and
Dudley, were then fresh in Memory: The Civility of our Laws tell us, that
Kings can do no wrong, and then is the State secure, when Judges (their
Ministers) dare do none. Since our times have found the want of such examples,
it is fit we leave some to Posterity. God forbid all should be thought or found
guilty, there are doubtless some Ringleaders, let us sift out them. In
public Government to pass by the Nocent is equal injustice, as to punish
the Innocent. An omission of that duty now, will be a guilt in us, render us
shamed in History, cursed by Posterity, our gracious and (in that act of
voluntary Justice) most glorious King, has given up to the satisfaction of his
afflicted People, the Authors of their Ruins: the power of future preservation
is now in us. Et qui non servat patriam, cum potest, idem facit destruenti
patriam.

What though we cannot restore the damage of the Commonwealth, we may yet
repair the breaches in the bounds of Monarchy. Though it be with our loss and
charge, we shall so leave our childrens children, fenced as with a wall of
safety; by the restoration of our Laws, to their ancient Vigor and Luster.

It Is too true, that it is to be feared, the Revenues of the Crown sold
outright, would scarce remunerat the injuries, repay the losses of this
suffering Nation, since the pronouncing of that fatal Sentence. What
proportionable satisfaction then can this Commonwealth receive, in the
punishment of a few inconsiderable Delinquents? But it is a Rule valid in Law,
approved in equity that Qui non habent in crumen Luant in Corpore. And it is
without all question in policy, exemplar punishments conduce more to the safety
of a state, then pecuniary reparations; Hope of impunity lul's every
bad-great-officer into security for his time, and who would not venture to
raise a Fortune, when the alurements of honor and wealth are so praevalent, if
the worst is can fall be but Restitution.

We see the bad effects of this bold-erroneous opinion; what was at first, but
corrupt Law; by encouragement taken from their impunity, is since become false
Doctrine, the people taught in Pulpits, they have no property, Kings instructed
in that destructive principle, that all is theirs, and is thence deduced into
necessary state policy, whispered in counsel, That he is no Monarch, who is
bounded by any Law.

By which bad consequences, the best of Kings, has bin by the infusion of such
poisonous positions diverted from the sweet inclinations of his own Natural
Equity and Justice, the very essence of a King taken from him, which is
preservation of his people: and whereas Salus populi is, or should be Suprema
Lex, the power of undoing us, is masqu'd under the style of what should be
Sacred Royal Prerogative.

And is it not high time for us to make examples of the first Authors of this,
subverted Law, Bad Counsel, worse Doctrine?

Let no man think to divert us from the pursuit of Justice, by poisoning the
clear streams of our affections, with jealous fears of his Majesty's
Interruption, if we look too high. Shall we therefore doubt of Justice,
because we have need of great Justice? We may be confident the King well
knows, That his Justice is the Band of our allegiance: that it is the staff,
the proof of his Sovereignty.

It Is a happy assurance of his intentions of grace to us, that our Loyalty has
at last won him to tender the safety of his people: and certainly (all our
Pressures well weighed this 12. Years last past) it will be found the passive
Loyalty of this suffering Nation, has outdone the active duty of all Times
and Stories. As the Poet has it, fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest: I
may as properly say, Fideliter fecimus, we have done loyally to suffer so
patiently.

Then since our Royal Lord has in mercy visited us, let not us doubt, but in
his Justice he will redeem his people. Qui timide rogat docet negare. But
when Religion is innovated, our Liberties violated, our Fundamental Laws
abrogated, our modern Laws already obsoleted, the propriety of our Estates
alienated. Nothing left us, we can call our own, but our misery and our
patience: if ever any Nation might justifiably, this certainly may now, now
most properly, most seasonably cry out, and cry aloud, vel Sacra Regnet
Iustitia, vel Ruat Coelum.

Mr. Speaker, the sum of my humble motion is, that a special Committee may
be appointed, to examine the whole carriage of that Extrajudiciall judgment.
Who were the Counselors, Soliciters, and Subscribers to the same: the Reasons
of their Subscription, whether according to their opinions; by importunity or
pressure of others, whether pro forma tantum. And upon report thereof to draw
up a charge against the guilty, and then Currat Lex, Fiat Justitia.

FINIS.

