IOYFVLL TIDINGS To all true Christians, Wherein is expressed his Majesty's
reuniting himself with the Parliament, according with them in whatsoever may
be acceptable for the peace of this kingdom. With diverse particulars inserted,
wherein his Majesty does explain his Royell intent and good meaning to further
Parliamentary proceedings. His desire of the Bishops trial and the punishment
of delinquents. With his intent to go to Woodstocke and the reasons inducing
him to the contrary. Compacted that every true Christian perusing the same,
might rejoice at these so happy beginnings of Reformation.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammond. 1642.

His Majesty's reuniting himself with the Parliament.
THe method of our happiness has of a long time been anticipated and kept
from us by invective and malevolent persons, the Parliaments endeavors been
extenuated by deeracting its power and privileges, the safety and prosperity
of the Commonwealth deferred; and the hope of the loyal subjects dejected by
the many differences falling betwixt the King and Parliament in State affairs,
through the persuasive delusions of such as rather desire to prosecute the
motions of evil, then propogate the truth, and labor the Kingdoms good. How
happy then are we now, and how much are we bound to praise the name of the
Almighty, that has been pleased to remove these lets, and to inspire his
Majesty with a care of his Kingdom, and to join with the Parliament to
confiscate their grievances, as by the sequel will appear.

The one and twentieth of January his Majesty being at Windsor, and being often
moved by some well-minded subjects, to join with the Parliament for the
settling of Religion, peace and tranquillity of his Kingdom, showing the diverse
inconveniences which were like to ensue, in respect of the division and
difference betwixt his Majesty and the Parliament; the matter being debated
before him, and finding the eminent dangers like to follow without a sudden
agreement, was pleased to give this gracious answer: That whatsoever had been
remissely hitherto, and contrary to the will of the Parliament, commanded and
authorized by him, should be called in; and that hereafter he would altogether
join with them for the consummating of his Kingdoms peace and happiness; and
to that intent sent a Message to the Parliament concerning the same. Whereupon
it was resolved by the Parliament and his Majesty, that on the Monday following
the Bishops should be called to the trial; and the Articles exhibited against
them, to be produced: and that they (as it is alleged) being the first
grievance which disturbs the present Parliament, as they should be found
guilty, to receive punishment according to their deserts. And next, that the
innovations concerning superstititious ceremonies, should be made utterly
void: that the tyrannical power of their Court, and exaction by them used,
should be reformed acording to the statute made in Q. Elizabeth's days, to that
effect, Anno 1593. As for other matters concerning the settling of peace in this
his Majesty's Kingdom, he sent his resolution in this manner: That whatsoever
they should find convenient for the procuring of the aforesaid peace, he would
be conformable unto them, as far as it might stand with his Honor and
Maiesticke dignity: against which he was verilily persuaded, there wus none of
them that should degrade or go. As concerning the Parliaments motion to him to
lay open to them who they were that devised those opprobrious Articles against
those worthy Statesmen, the Lord Kimbolton, M. Denfil Hollis, M. Pym, Sir
Arthur Haslerig, M. Hamden and M. Stroud, whereby they are challenged to be
guilty of high treason against the State, being so opprobriously false and
wicked, that we humbly desire your Majesty to manifest the authors of the
said false accusation against so worthy friends: for it cannot be otherwise
conceived, but that they who sought to pick holes in the coats of our best men,
cannot be free themselves from blemish: whereupon his Majesty's answer was,
that he would not produce them; but notwithstanding they should not be
concealed, but manifest themselves as occasion shall serve hereafter. But as
for the Articles they were called in already cleared to their honor and credit.
His Majesty likewise made a motion concerning the danger of Ireland, and
desired assistance by counsel of them for a remedy. Whereunon the Parliament
sits ever since concerning the Irish affairs. The Parliament likewise
entreated his Majesty's favor concerning some course to be taken for disarming
the Papists in England, at least to quell their superbious rising to the great
affright and disaster of the City, mentioning their sudden commotion about the
Parliament house, their joining with Digby and Lunsford in hostile manner, and
their continual ^^estering words and threats by some of their adherents to
the terror of all his Majesty's loyal subjects; his Majesty was pleased to
grant this gracious reply, that seeing they so well apprehended the grievance,
they should proceed to provide a remedy, and as he should find the motion
honorable, he would be ready to sign to it; the Parliament making it so
palpably appear against the Recusants, concerning their sowing sedition in his
Majesty's Realms, by endeavoring to subvert the fundamental laws of this
Kingdom, and have endeavored by many aspersions upon the Parliament, and its
industry, to alienate the affection of his Majesty from Parliaments, and make
it seem odious unto him, and are to be suspected, lest they have invited and
encouraged foreign Nations against us, to invade his Majesty's Kingdom of
England, as well as to detract the Kingdom of Ireland, and endeavor to settle
it upon their own faction, by ploting to subvert the very ends and being of
Parliament. And for completing their traitorous designs, they have endeavored
as much as in them lay, by their traitorous insinuations and persuasions to his
Majesty to compel the Parliament to yield to their untollerably false
accusations, and to join with them in their traitorous designs; and to that
end have actually raised and countenanced tumults against King and Parliament:
for whatsoever is against the State, must needs entirely concern his Majesty.
The King being moved with these real instigations, gave leave and authority to
the Parliament to remove these doubts, as aforesaid. These are the brief
particulars of his Majesty's favor toward us, whose care i beyond expression,
whose indulgent and laborious endeavors for the settling of Religion and piety,
are quotidiall, and whose mercies toward us in permitting us to hnioy such
hopes of ensuing happiness, are exemplary that we should prove ungrateful
unto God, if not to give him the praise of inspiring this influence of grace
into his Majesty; and disloyal to his Majesty, if not to extol his wonderful
bounty; for whose honor, long life, and peace upon earth, and everlasting
glory after death, we daily pray for now and ever.

The 22. of this present month of January, the Kings Majesty was desirous to
go to Wodstocke; and to that intent sent to the Officers of his Carriages to
provide for the same against Monday; who replied, that they durst not without
commission. Whereupon returning to his Maistie, they received commission from
him; which they likewise denied to obey, because it was not likewise authorized
by the Parliament, their answer was, that without further order, they would
stir no further: and that they had rather, and with more alacrity carry him
home then carry him further from home. Whereupon it was left to further
consideration.

FINIS.

