THE JUST MAN IN BONDS. OR Lievt. Col. John Lilburne close Prisoner in Newgate,
by order of the HOUSE of LORDS.
SInce this worthy gentle man's case is mine, and every man's, who though we be
at liberty to day, may be in Newgate to morrow, if the House of Lords so
please, does it not equally and alike concern all the people of England to lay
it to heart, and either fit both our minds and necks to undergo this slavery,
or otherwise think of some speedy and effectual means to free our selves and
our posterity there from.

This noble and resolute Gentleman Mr. Lilburne, then whom his country has not
a truer and more faithful servant, has broke the Ice for us all, who being
sensible that the people are in real bondage to the Lords (and that the Laws
and Statutes providing to the contrary, serving them in no stead) has singly
adventured himself a Champion for his abused country men, nothing doubting but
that he shall thereby open the eyes, and awake the drowsy spirits of his
fellow Commoners, or rather Slaves (as the case now stands) with them; and
likewise animate the representative body of the people, to make use of that
power wherewith they are trusted to free us, themselves, their and our
posterities, from the House of Lords imperious and ambitious usurpation.

Object. Some through ignorance, or poverty of spirit, may (peradventure) judge
Mr. Lilburne a rash young man for his opposing himself against so mighty a
stream or torrent of worldly power, which the Lords now possess. To such I
answer, 1. That the power of the House of Lords, is like a shallow, un-even
water, more in noise then substance; If we could distinguish between what is
theirs of right, and what by incroachment, we should soon find that they have
decked themselves with the Commoners brave feathers, which being reassumed, they
would appear no better arrayed then other men, even equal by Law, inferior in
uprightness, and honesty of conversation: We should then find that they are
but painted properties, Dagons, that our superstition and ignorance, their own
craft and impudence have erected, no natural issues of laws, but the
extuberances and mushromes of Prerogative, the Wens of just government, putting
the body of the People to pain, as well as occasioning deformity, Sons of
conquest they are and usurpation, not of choice and election, intruded upon us
by power, not constituted by consent, not made by the people, from whom all
power, place and office that is just in this kingdom ought only to arise.

2. Mr. Lilburnes opposing himself against this exorbitant and extra-judiciall
power of the Lords, ought rather to be admired by us as a pitch of valor we
are not yet arived too, through the faintness of our spirits, and docage upon
our trades, case, riches, and pleasures, then censured by us as rash or
furious. He that dares scale the walls of an enemy, or venture himself upon
the utmost of danger in the field, is not judged rash but a valiant man,
unless by those low spirits that dares not do as he has done. Let us
therefore rather blame our selves for want of fortitude, then accuse him, as
having too much.

Consider I pray the great danger we are in, if the Lords thus presume to clap
a Commoner of England in close prison, even now when the Commons of England are
sitting in Parliament, who are put in trust, and enabled with power to protect
the people from such bondage (yea and so suddenly after they have in effect
declared, that they will do it, in their Declaration of the 17. of April last)
what injuries will not these Lords do to us, when the Parliament is ended, and
the people have none of their own Commons nor Trustees to protect them, hear
their cries, nor redress their grievances; What prison or dungeon will then be
base enough, what punishment or torture great enough for them, that are not
cowardish enough so to be slaves and bondmen? And so is not the last error,
like to be worse then the first?

Death it self is more tolerable to a generous spirit, then close
imprisonment, besides the continual fears that such an inhumane practice
brings with it, of private murder or poisoning, as there are manifold examples
of such cruelties, of which Overberies was not one of the least who was
poisoned in the Tower, and to salve or color that wickedness, it was strongly
given out and avouched that he murdered himself, though afterward diverse
were hanged for it, and the Earl of Somerset and his Countess hardly escaped.
Sir Richard Wiseman was moped and stupefied with his close imprisonment, and
what mischiefs (of diverse sorts) may be done to honest and faithful Mr.
Lilburne upon this renewed opportunity by the Lords (as he had too much
formerly by the Bishops, though contrary to all equity and justice, yea and
even to the Lords own reparations which lately they voted and allotted to him)
whiles he is now close prisoner in their own hands, who know him to be their
chiefest opposite in all their usurpations and encroachments upon the Commoners
freedoms? does it not concern all the Commons of England to consider and
prevent the same, especially their great and general Counsel in Parliament
assembled.

Lay to heart I beseech you O YE HOUSE of COMMONS, that neither your selves
nor your children can plead any immumitie or security from this cruelty and
bondage of the House of Lords, if now ye be slack or negligent, but ye may
justly expect and feel the smart thereof upon you and your posterity, as well
as we upon us and ours, at least after you are dissolved, and dismissed from
your Authorities. And is not this one of the maine points for which ye have
put your selves, us, and so many of this Nation as stand in your defense, to
the effusion and expense of so much blood and multituds of estates?

If ye did intend to expose this Kingdom to the miseries of war for no
other ends but that one kind of Arbitrary government, Star Chamber, or High
Commission Power, might be abollished, and others of these kinds established
over us, why would ye not tell us in due time, that we might have both spared
our lives and estates, and not made so many soldiers, Widows and fatherless
to mourn at the Parliaments gates, for the manyfold wants occasioned by your
service, and made us sooner l^ke humble vassals, to present our selves like
slaves upon our knees at the House of Lords Bar, and suffer our cares to be
bored through with an aule, in testimony that we are their bondmen for ever.

But if ye would either free your selves of this suspicion, or us of those
just fears, then show your selves to be such worthies as do truly deserve
that title, by using this happy opportunity which God has put into your hands,
and making us freemen; it being the maine cause for which we used and
entrusted you; and as a present sign of your fidelity and magnanimity, let
your real intentions in the general appear by the exactness and speediness
of your delivering of this your own, and his Countries faithful servant Mr.
Lilburn from prison with all due reparations.

Banish all base fears, for there be more with you then against you, and the
justness of your cause will daily increase both your number and power, for
God is always present where Justice is extant, and ye cannot but observe by
manifold experiences that he not only loves and protects just men, but by his
Almighty power so abaseth all their Enemies, that they shall flee before him
and his, like the dust before the wind: If ye will but take example by the
courage and justice of your own Armies, and do as they do, doubtless the
same God who has prospered them will also prosper you, yea and be with you, in
all your proceedings whilst ye are with him, but if ye forsake him, (by
denying, selling, or delaying justice, contrary to your duties, Oaths,
Covenants, Protestaions and declarations) he will also forsake you, as he has
in all ages (even his own People for their injustice, sins, and abominations)
and stirred up both foreign and intestine enemies to revenge his just
quarrel and true cause against them.

For more particular information, these ensuing lines will be a special means.
Upon the 22. of June 1646. the House of Lords sent an Order to the Keeper of
Newgate, to bring Mr. Lilburn before them upon the 23. thereof at ten a clock,
whereof he having notice that morning, wrote a letter to the said Keeper,
declaring his just liberties and the House of Lords usurpation thereof,
contrary to Magna Charta and other fundamental Laws of this, Kingdom and
that he would not go to them willingly, but had appealed and petitioned to the
House of Commons, and therefore he desired the Keeper to take heed what he did,
lest he could not recall any violent action, not grounded upon Law:

And after Mr. Lilburn had sent the said letter by his wife, together with the
printed copy of his protestation against the House of Lords illegal
proceedings against him as a Commoner, and his appeal and Petition to the
House of Commons as his competent Judges, but sh^e not finding the Keeper at
Newgate prison, nor at his own house, and the hour of his appearance before
the House of Lords near aproching, she delivered the same to the Sheriffs of
London, being then in Guild Hall at the Court of Aldermen, where doubtless both
the said letter and book were read, and as Sheriff Foot informed her, that
they sent a messenger to Newgate with their answer, what it was, is not yet
known.

But if it came at all, it was not in due time, for after the deputy Keeper and
his assistants had attended half an hour for Mr. Lilburns coming from his
chamber to go with them before the House of Lords at the time appointed, and
upon his constant refusing to go willingly with them (or so much as to open his
Chamber door, but shut it in token of his constant opposing so unjust a power
over him a free borne Englishman) and before the m^ssenger whom he sent to
Guild Hall with their consent, had returned with an answer (and whose returning
they promised to attend) [they brake open his door, took him away to
Westminster] and no messenger was sent (who yet we have heard off) from the
Court of Aldermen.

When they had brought him to the painted chamber next the House of Lords
door, where he attended with his Keepers almost two hours before he was
called in, (as it seems) the House of Lords servants and attendants, taking
notice of the of the intercourse of Parliament men and others speaking to, him
told their masters thereof^, and left their usurpation of the Commons
liberties, and his just cause should be manifested as well by word, as by
writing, the Lords did call his Keepers and commanded them that they should
speedily charge him to hold his peace, and speak with none at all; but to be
altogether silent until he was called in before them to answer their
interrogatories.

Unto whom he returned this answer, and bad them tell the same to the House of
Lords who sent them, that he would not hold his peace, but speak with any man
who in the way of love spoke to him, so long as he had his tongue, except the
Lords should put a gag into his mouth at their Fellow Lords the Bishops did to
him 8. years ago, on the Pillory at Westminster, after they had caused him to
be whipped from the Fleet prison thither, and after he had told them their
spiritual usurpations, as it does these Lords their temporal encroachments on
free men's liberties.

Then he being called into the House of Lords, was commanded by their keeper of
the Black-Rod to kneel before them, which he absolutely refused to do, and
after their still urging, and his constant refusing, they asked him the reason,
he answered that he had learned both better Religion and manners then to kneel
to any humane or mortal power how great so ever, whom he never offended, and
^^r less to them whom he had defended with the adventure both of his life and
estate, yea and withal the friends he could make: whereupon they not only
returned him to Newgate prison, but commanded him to be kept close-Prisoner, as
appears by these ensuing orders.

Die Lunae 22. Junij 1646.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Liev. Col John Lilburne now
a prisoner in Newgate, shall be brought before their Lordships in the [High
Court of PARLIAMENT] to morrow morning by ten of the clock: And this to be a
sufficient warrant in that behalf.

To the Gent-Usher of this House, or his Deputy, to be delivered to the Keeper
of Newgate or his Deputy.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.


Die Martis 23. Iunij. 1646.
Ordered by the LORDS in PARLIAMENT assembled, that John Lilburn shall stand
committed close prisoner in the Prison of Newgate; and that he be not permitted
to have pen, ink, or paper; and none shall have access unto him in any kind,
but only his Keeper, until this Court does take further order.

To the Keeper of Newgate his deputy or deputies.

Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.
Exam. per. Rec. Bristoe Cleric. de Newgate.


FINIS.

