A just VINDICATION On the behalf of John Eliot Esquire IN ANSWER TO PETITIONS
Preferred against him to His Excellency And to Mr. Speaker Of the Honorable
HOUSE of COMMONS, By some Officers under the Command of Major General
LAUGHORNE.

Imprinted in the Year, 1648.

A just Vindication on the behalf of JOHN ELLIOT Esquire in answer to Petitions
preferred against him to his Excellency and to Mr. Speaker of the honorable
House of Commons, by some Officers under the command of Major General
Laughorne.
THere is nothing more saddens the hearts of honest men, then to be unworthily
traduced with false suggestions presented with a color of truth; and happy is
he who notwithstanding such provocations, will entertain no persecuting
thoughts to stick or lie down with him: And I am confident the Gentleman in
whose vindication I write, if he has not attained to his full wishes therein,
yet he does endeavor to study Christian forbearence and passively look upon
such malicious calumnies as Dav^d did on S^^^'s Cu^ssing, rather than harbor
implacability of reveng^; but in his just vindication as a friend to truth and
to undeceive such who have read a Petition against him, believing it being once
printed it might be stuffed in other weekly Pamphlets and dispersed and the
Reader prejudiced in opinion with the falsities thereof; I shall first therefore
observe the heads of the said Petition suggested against Mr. Eliot the accused,
as I found them in the end of a Trivial Pamphlet of Prince Griffies Histories,
and then in order give you an answer to every particular.

The Petition was directed to his Excellency, entitled, The b^^ble Petition of
the Colonels, Lieutenant Co^lonels, Maj^^^ Captains, and other Officers under
the Command of Major General Laughorne.

1. That their Major Generals honor and his Forces are tainted by false
asperstons, as if they would join with Poyer to maintain the Castle of
Pembroke against the Parliament. 2 That Mr. John Eliot is the professed Author
of Accusation. 3 That Mr. Eliot has executed the Commission of Array in the
County of Pembroke, and that he be enjoined to answer Articles of Delinquency
against him. 4 That he has defrauded the Army of Provisions sent them by the
Parliament. 5 That he endeavors to defame all those that have faithfully
served the Parliament. 6 That Master Eliot may not dispose of your Petitioners
Arms. 7 That he may he made incapable to proceed in his usurped Agency.
These are in brief the particulars charged in the said Petition against Mr.
Eliot, which in the frontice piece carries with it the countenance of Colonels,
Lieutenant Colonels Majors, when it is well known there is but one Colonel,
one Lieutenant Colonel, and one Major in the whole number; here is their first
untruth; And I shall pass by their flourishes and their large demonstration of
their merits and professions to his Excellency in the first part of their
Petition, and only add my wish they may as really perform as they have
professed touching their disbanding, and so answer the rest.

The first is most wrongfully alleged against Mr. Eliot, for what was printed
was to this effect, That Col. Rice Powell being desired by Letter from Col.
Horton to assist the Gentlemen who had besieged Poyer in the Castle of
Pembroke, with the Forces under his Command, did absolutely refuse it: This Mr.
Eliot received from good hands out of the County of Pembroke; and this was
afterward confirmed to Mr Eliot by a Gentleman of that County, who said he saw
Col. Powels Letter to Col. Horton to the effect aforesaid; And on the second
day of March the General received a Letter from Col. Fleming, and amongst
other particulars he gave an account of to the General touching that Castle,
he related these words, viz. I find that some of Major General Laughornes
Forces are of Poyers Council, and great hopes he has of making his Party good
against any Power. This alludes much to make good what was asserted by Mr.
Eliot; and in the end of this sheet the Reader may peruse a Letter from the
Commissioners to Powell, wherein he may see how Powell and the rest of the
Petitioners have performed their professions to the General touching their
disbanding.

To the second, Mr. Eliot is not the professed accuser of any, but does really
wish the Petitioners were as free from malice and animossitie as himself; he
will justify any particular he is Author of* And as for their Charge of
Delinquency, which they threaten him withal, they cannot possibly do him a
greater savor, for in his Answer he doubts not only to clear himself with
good advantage, but shall therein make it advantageous to the State, by
discovering the actions of the accusers so much accomptable.

There is nothing more false and scandalous than the third for no man living
can prove that ever Master Eliot did execute the Commission of Array, and if
such a thing had been, it must have been acted in public; But Mr. Eliot did
never as much as see the Commission of Array, neither was it ever opened or
executed in the County of Pembroke: But this Charge carries with it such a
clouding full mouthed aspersion, that it is enough at first view to blast the
strongest and cleerest reputation, until the mist be dispeld, and their
falsehood appear.

To the fourth; Its well known Mr. Eliot never had the buying of any
Provisions, though within this three years he has sent down to the County of
Pembroke according to several Ordinances of Parliament, in Moneys, Arms,
Ammunition, and Provisions, about the sum of 9000 l. Mr. Arthur Owen being
always joined with Mr. Eliot in all Ordinances for sending Provisions unto the
County of Pembroke, and both of them together have always received the
Provisions ready packed up by the Merchant that bought them, and so conveyed
them from Tower Wharff aboard the Ships, so that if Mr. Eliot had been
deceiptfully bent, he never had the opportunity; but for every penny they can
prove that Mr. Eliot has defrauded the State, he will be bound to give them
100 l. This aspersion being equally scandalous and false with all the rest.

To the fifth, There is no man living can prove that ever Mr. Eliot spoke any
words of derogation of any because they loved the Parliament, for he has been
always a lover of such; he has two Sons that have been always in Arms for
the Parliament under the command of Major General Laughorne since the
beginning of the Wars there, that are known to have been in as much action and
as faithful lovers of the Parliament as any in that Army; therefore any one
may judge, he would be very cautious and chary of laying aspersions on that
Army in general: This allegation being as false as all the rest.

To the sixth, Mr. Eliot does not desire to have the custody of their Arms, or
to dispose of them, neither does he know what ground they have to suggest to
themselves such a thing, if they mean their Arms in the Country, Mr. Eliot
is at a sufficient distance from them; and if they intend to disband, what need
they be troubled who shall have their Arms

To the seventh, concerning Mr. Eliots Agency, I shall desire leave of the
Reader to digress a little, and give him the true ground of Mr. Eliots Agency,
before I answer that point: Mr. Eliot being ever very active for the
Parliament, was himself in person with two of his Sons and Servants, at the
first taking in of Carmarthen to the Parliament in May, 1644. and several
other Castles of that County, commanded there the Trained Band of the hundred
he lived in; he garrisoned his house for the Parliament, and for want of timely
relief from Major General Laughorne, who promised it, he and two of his Sons
were then taken prisoners by Gerhands Forces; Mr. Eliot was afterward exchanged
for Col. Pert, his Sons were prisoners in Carmarthen Castle about four
months, and Mr. Eliot and his two Sons were endicted of high Treason at
Carmarthen before David Jenkins, then Judge for bearing Arms against the King;
and the said Mr. Jenkins gave sentence of death on Mr. Eliots eldest Son; and
in August 1644 the said Forces burned Mr. Eliots said dwelling nouse, and six
of his houses in the Town of Narberth, and plundered him of all his personal
Estate; and in the year following about April, 1645. at Gerhards second
coming down; his Forces plundered Mr. Eliot again of all the stock he had
gotten in that interim, his wife and twelve children and grandchildren left
without habitation or subsistence, and he totally ruined in his fortune. Now I
come to answer his point of Agency; Mr. Eliot being one of the Committee of
that association, and in this sad condition was voted Agent to negotiate the
affairs of the distressed County of Pembroke with the Parliament by the
Committee, not one voice contradicting; which trust Mr. Eliot undertook, and
has effectually performed it for these three years last past, as aforesaid;
And in that interim he was confirmed by two several Orders to continue in his
Agency by the said Committee; and Mr. Eliots great toil, care and diligence,
in the conveying down of moneys and provisions for Major General Laughornes
Army, is well known to several Members of the Honorable House of Commons;
And had not Mr. Eliots affection to the Parliament and his Country obliged him
to it; the sallary he received from the Committee was small encouragement to
him, for he never received above 30 l. from the Committee during the three
years aforesaid. Now let all men judge whether his Agency were usurped or not.
Having answered the falsities of the said Petition, I will let the Reader see
from whom the said Petition took its rise; Let him but enquire who was lately
employed down to the County of Pembroke to disband the supernumeraries, and to
raise the monthly Assessement; and if he does but know that party, and the
malice he bears Mr. Eliot, he must needs know the influence that party has
over the Petitioners, and then cannot but judge the Petition to be the
consequence thereof; the said party and the Petitioners have obstructed the
said Committee from sending Mr. Eliot his annual exhibition due for his
Agency. The said party caused one John Poyer, who now is proclaimed Traitor by
Ordinance of Parliament, for fortifying the Castle of Pembroke against the
Parliament and General, to put in Articles against Mr. Eliot and other
Gentlemen to the Committee of Gloucester about two years since. Secondly, he
caused one John Young, who is likewise in Rebellion with the said Poyer in the
said Castle, to exhibit Articles against the said Mr. Eliot and the said
Gentlemen, at the Head Quarters at Pniney, being the same in substance as the
said scandalous Petition; but as soon as Mr Eliots and the said Gentlemen's
Answers were read in both places they were dismissed, to their great advantage
in their reputations, by the several Committees before whom the business was
heard. And after the Ordinance past for the established Forces of the Kingdom
and for the disbanding of Supernumeraries and there being no appearance of the
Enemy in the said Association, but all reduced into the obedience of the
Parliament, and the Counties of Pembroke, Carmarthe^, and Cardigan, being
extremely ruined in the late War, especially the County of Pembroke, whose
sufferings and miseries are not to be paralleld by any County of: this
Kingdom, fire and sword having its full rage, until it was even glutted in
the bowels thereof Mr. Eliot hereupon endeavored what in him lay to have the
Petitioners and the said Forces disbanded that the poor Counties aforesaid
might have some time to respi^e and breathe after their tedious, long, irksome
burden of free Quarter; but Mr. Arthur Owen aforesaid, being the continued
friend of the Petitioners, and first Cosen to the Commander in chief of those
Forces, did always oppose Mr. Eliot therein, and to keep the said Forces
undisbanded; herein Mr. Eliot acting contrary to the Petitioners interest in
order to the public, drew their malice consequently on him. But truly I
wonder how men so guilty as the Petitioners are, should be so maliciously bold
to traduce Mr, Eliot with such falsities, being a man of approved and known
integrity to the Parliament; for a cleerer demonstration cannot be of his
affection than his activenesse and sufferings for them, which are sufficient
testimonies in his behalf, besides his faithful solicitations here in the
reducing South Wales to the obedience of the Parliament. And as Mr. Eliot has
preferred always to be in love and charity with all men before malice and
revengefulnesse; so he as little values the inveterate and irreconcilable
spleen of his Enemies: And though he has many vigilant and potent adversaries
that drive at his ruin, yet the candidnesse of his actions, and the just
grounds he proceeds on, has so protected him under God hitherto, that they
cannot much boast of their prevailences against him. Mr. Eliot has no ambition
or self seeking ends, only he trusts in the goodness of God and the
Parliament, to enable him to be in the same condition he was in long before the
late War, being then in Commission of the Peace in the County of Pembroke,
and his family as ancient Gentry as any of that County; lived beloved in his
County in a commendable and peaceable condition. To conclude, I wish the
Petitioners would in imitation to Col- Lewis and his Regiment with Captain
Lloyd, Capt. Jones, Capt. Vaughan and Capt Sli^wman, yield their obedience in
disbanding according to the Ordinance of Parliament; but I doubt their own
actions will daily witness to the contrary against them; for why has some of
the prime of the Petitioners drawn down their Foot, their Magazines and Guns
from Carmarthin to Tenby, and fortify the said Town, since they refused to
make their appearance before the Commissioners to be paid off according to the
Ordinance? why do they mutter that they will declare for the King, and
accordingly make preparation under hand? But I still wish their future
obedience to the Ordinance of Parliament may expiate their former disobedience,
and that they may leave their selfeish destructive ends, and become lovers of
their Country.

SIR,
WE received an Ordinance of Parliament, attended with several Instructions
for the disbanding of Major General Laughornes Forces in the associated
Counties of Carmarthen, Cardigan, and Pembroke, in pursuance of which Ordinance
we the Commissioners appointed for that service did address to the most
convenient place we could think upon for the ease of the Gentlemen of all
Quarters to meet us, and to contribute their advice for the well settlement of
the Country, and to answer the expectation of those that put us in trust; so we
sitting at Carmarthen, where your self was then present and did participate
with what was then agreed upon; we in due obedience to the said Ordinance, and
to accomplish the resolutions by us then resolved, appointed several Troops to
be at Lambeder on wednesday the first of March, there to receive their now
present pay allowed them by the Ordinance, and to be disbanded, Colonel Lewis,
Captain Jones, Captain Lloyd, Captain Vaughan, Captain Read, Captain
Sloeman; and several other Officers of Colonel Lewis Regiment, appeared that
day with several Troops, whom we mustred and their number, and by us
registered, of which we shall give an account to the honorable Houses and his
Excellency; yet notwithstanding our trust so well performed, and as we thought
our Country disburdened of Free Quarter, or any other Impositions on the
Inhabitants, by them we are given to understand that a party of Horse, namely
Captain Addis and Captain Morgan, who refused their appearance before us, to
be Mustred and Disbanded and Paid according to the Orders agreed by all the
Commissioners at Carmarthen, have since made their Inrode into the County, and
forced the people to a new obedience of Free Quarter and Taxations settled and
commanded by them, and what other may be within the command of a Soldier,
without our privity or consent, being the appointed Commissioners for that
employment. Sir, we desire to be rightly understood whether this intrusion be
done by your Order, though we have better confidence of your fidelity and
obedience to the Ordinance of both Houses; yet we shall desire you to express
your self, that we may be satisfied, and render a candid construction of your
fidelity to those as we conceive under whom you have hitherto fought: To this
end we desire you will give order for their speedy removal out of this
country, otherwise we hope it will not be ill taken if the country join in a
course to relieve themselves from a burden under which they have so long
groaned. Your speedy answer is desired by your servants,

James Philippes. Thomas Lloyd, et al.


EVen as I had concluded there appears more news in Letters to his
Excellency, which adds much to Mr. Eliots Justication, and to the Petitioners
accusation:

That part of Major General Laughornes Forces seized upon those Pieces of
Battery sent from Gloucester toward Colonel Flemmings and brought them to
Pembroke Castle, that they have jointly with Poyer fallen upon Colonel
Flemmings 100 foot there being then no more come to him, and on those of the
Country that joined with him, and have either slain or taken prisoners
Colonel Flemming, Roger Lort, Esquire, Captain Cuney, Master John Lort, and
many others, and have hereby raised the Siege.

FINIS.

