A Just Vindication OF THE PRINCIPAL OFFICERS OF HIS MAJESTY'S Ordnance From
the false and scandalous Aspersions laid upon them in a Printed Libel,
ENTITLED An Exact Relation of the several Engagements and Actions of His
Majesty's Fleet, under the Command of his Highness Prince Rupert, in the
Summers Expedition, 1673.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Brook (Stationer to His Majesty's Office of the
Ordnance) at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange, 1674.

A VINDICATION OF THE Principal Officers OF HIS MAJESTY'S Ordnance, etc.
THe Principal Officers of His Majesty's Ordnance, having to the utmost of
their Power, in both the Dutch Wars carried themselves with all Care and
Industry in the Execution of their several Places, in furnishing His Majesty's
Fleets, and Men of War with good, sufficient and serviceable Gunners Stores,
and fitted them with early Supplies, at all Times when required; for which they
have had the thanks of his Royal Highness, of his Highness Prince Rupert, and
his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, in the first War; and of his Royal Highness,
and his Highness Prince Rupert in this last War: and although they have met
with several Mistakes of some Persons who have reported the Dutch Guns and
Powder to have been better and stronger than those of His Majesty's, (who yet
have acknowledged their Errors, when by Experience some of them have seen by
Proof that His Majesty's Powder is stronger, and by better than the Dutch) they
looked upon such Reports as the Effects rather of misinformation, than of
malicious scandal slander an exact Relation of the several Engagements, etc.
under the Command of Prince Rupert; and perceiving how that Libel had already
influenced several Persons to their Prejudice; they have thought fit to
manifest to All Persons, Lovers of Honor and of Truth, in Defense of
themselves, and of the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Chicheley Knight, Master
General of His Majesty's Ordnance (by whose Endeavors, Interest, and unspotted
Fidelity, His Majesty's Service in this Office has so well proceeded) That at
no time in any of these late Wars against the Dutch, His Majesty's Fleets were
better provided with Canon, Powder, Shot, and all Ammunition, and Stores of
War, than that set out this last Spring under his Highness Prince Rupert. To
which may be added the other great Stores of War, viz. of Grenades for
Morterpieces and Hand, Fire Arms, Pikes, Powder, Shot, Scaling Ladders,
Turnpikes, and many other chargeable Stores for Land Service, which by his
Highness Particular Order, were provided and laden upon six great Ships under
the Charge of Jonas Moore Esquire, who attended upon the Prince, and was on
Board with him in the two first Engagements. And at the last going out in July
they provided (besides the Supply of Gunners Stores for the whole Navy, with
all its Tenders) all fitting Stores and Equipage for the Land Forces, and Train
of Artillery then designed; that is to say, All manner of Arms, Offensive and
Defensive, Ammunition of all sorts, Horses, Tents for 10000 Men, Habiliments of
War of all kinds, and other Utensils and Instruments, as well for Intrenchments
as Surprises, in case a Descent had been made either upon the Coast of Holland,
or elsewhere. All which to the value of 40000 l. and upward, have been by them
sent out extraordinarily, and upon the Credit of the Office the last Summer,
without one Penny advanced for the same.

This being in general premised; they come now to answer more particularly to
such unjust Accusations, as this false and scandalous Libeller has been
pleased to lay upon them; which are these that follow.

The first, is in Page the Seventh; wherein he declares (to the Scandal and
Infamy of the Stout Brave Seamen and Soldiers of this Nation) How faint the
Hearts of the whole Fleet were (he measured certainly by his own) for want of
Workmen and Tools, Seamen, and Supplies, and this before the Fleet engaged. The
Second is in Page the Twelfth, where, after the Second Engagement in June, he
says, The Commanders exclaimed that they had not sufficient Supplies, but were
in Want of Powder, Shot, etc. The Third is in the last Page of this Libel,
where he enumerates the Difficulties and the Wants the Fleet was in. Of which,
The fayler of Provisions, and Want of Ammunition, and all other Necessaries are
reckoned as Part.
These black and false Aspersions can no way better (in few Lines) be cleared,
than first by declaring, 1. What Ammunition and Stores were provided and sent
on Board the Fleet, from this Office before it went out. 2. What Supplies were
made after the Engagements. 3. And lastly, what Ammunition, Powder, Shot, etc.
were remaining on Board the beginning of September last, when the Fleet
returned, and a General Remain was taken by Order of the Office, as may appear
by the Books and Gunners Accounts remaining in the said Office.


And here they cannot but take Notice and declare that in the first Dutch War,
forty Rounds (that is Powder and Shot to each Gun to be forty Times discharged)
was as great a Proportion as the Ships could stow and take in. Some Ships
indeed might take in more by reason of their Built, but those were but few.

This Rule will best be judged of by the Powder, not naming (for Brevities
sake) the rest of the Stores.

Twelve thousand Barrels of Powder completed the Proportion of 40 Rounds to
those 60 Sail of Ships which were commanded by his Highness Prince Rupert this
last Summer (many other of His Majesty's Ships at the same time being elsewhere
employed:) which Proportion of 12000 Barrels with Shot and all other Stores
answerable, the said Ships carried out with them in May last, and they had
beside six Vessels attending them with much Powder and Shot, sent after as is
before mentioned according to the Princes Order, than which a greater
Proportion, or better, was never before sent. So that as to the first
Accusation, there was no Reason that the Hearts of the whole Fleet should faint
(as doubtless this Cowardly Libellers did.) And if Success had been answerable
to their Supplies, this Apology had not needed.

At the Return of the Fleet to the Buoy of the Nore, which was the Eighth of
June, the Officers by directions of the Master of the Ordnance had provided
five thousand Barrels of Powder, with Shot and Ammunition proportionable, and
the Tenth of June sixteen great Vessels laden with the said Powder and Stores,
were at Anchor near the Fleet under the Charge of Sir Jonas Moore, Master
Surveyor of his Majesty's Ordnance, and Samuel Fortrey Esquire, Clerk of the
Deliveries; where they found those Ships sent along with Stores for Supply of
the Fleet returned into the Swale, without having Delivered any Part or Parcel
of their Provisions.

The Fleet might have been supplied with Gunners Stores in a few Days, but
many Ships were to be repaired, which the Officers and Commissioners of His
Majesty's Navy (whom this Libeller has likewise most unjustly aspersed) with
all possible Industry and Expedition refitted within less than three Weeks
time: So that by the first Week in July, the Fleet was supplied with 4100
Barrels of Powder, Shot, and other Stores answerable, making up with what they
had remaining on Board the entire Complement of forty Rounds: Upon which the
Fleet sailed, and fourteen Store-Ships belonging to this Office attending
thereon.

By this it appears how false his second Scandal is, for that the Fleet had not
spent little above One third of their Stores of War, viz. 4100, of 12000
Barrels. And none of the Commanders, except this Malicious Libeller, could
exclaim for want of Powder and Shot.

At the Return of the Fleet in August; after the third and last Engagement, the
Officers of the Ordnance sent again another Supply of 5000 Barrels of Powder,
and Stores proportionable; but that might have been spared, together with the
great Charge of Freight and Demurrage; for the Fleet had spent little more than
a sixth Part of their Powder and Stores, viz. 2000, of 12000 Barrels, as by the
Remains in the Office appears, there being above 9000 Barrels of Powder brought
back in the Fleet, besides the Stores sent along, which likewise returned
without any Diminution, clearly showing his last Accusation to be as false as
any of the rest; and it is as plain that in all the three Engagements, not much
above half the Stores of War of the first Supply were expended.

To give one further satisfactory Instance touching the Expense of Powder, One
Ship which was confessed by all to have been most engaged, will afford a clear
Demonstration, viz. the Royal Prince. Her first Complement was 430 Barrels, the
Supply she took in 176 Barrels, in all 606 Barrels. The Gunner brought back and
delivered in September last 395 Barrels, with Stores answerable, to this
Office, which makes the Expense something above One third. Nay, the Rupert,
which made most complaint, brought back with her two thirds of her Powder and
Stores.

Ab Vno, disce Omnes -- To conclude; by what has been said, no Person can have
reason to believe this false Libeller, but on the contrary to acquit the
Officers of the Ordnance, as having done their Duties, by timely furnishing
out, and fully resupplying His Majesty's Fleet this last Summer. And they
cannot but with humble Thanks acknowledge the Honor which his Highness Prince
Rupert has done them, by often declaring as much, both publicly and otherwise.

FINIS.

