THE Roman Empress. A TRAGEDY: Acted at the ROYAL THEATER, BY HIS MAJESTY'S
SERVANTS. And written by WILLIAM JOYNER, Gent.

Qui Bavium non odit, amet tua carmina Maevi;
Atque inopeis rerum versus, nugasque canoras.
Virg. Ecl. 3. Horat. In the SAVOY, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, and
are to be sold at the Sign of the Anchor in the lower Walk of the New Exchange,
1671.

TO THE HONORABLE Sr Charles Sidley.
SIR,
THough this Tragedy, in spite of a dead Vacation, and some other impediments,
found the applause and approbation of the Theater as often as it appeared: yet I
esteem it a singular fortune to have had yours in particular: and look upon it
like the great advantage, which a rich jewel gives to a ring of gold. Such
envious spirits, who thought nothing requisite, but audacity, to become Censors
in this Art (which perchance is the subtilest of human invention) and upon this
ground condemned the common suffrage: when they see it confirmed by yours, will
lose the choicest fruits of their malice. In the government of Provinces under
Nero, it is observed, that it was always dangerous to do well; and yet not
still safe to do ill. These persons would bring the Stage to the same
condition: for as they have sought to condemn this Play for the regular
conformity to the rules of art, and reason; so they have not desisted sometimes
to decry others for their unnatural incongruities, when they have been informed
where they are. Sir I could wish that you, so far placed above the reach of
envy, would honor the Theater with some productions of this nature: For there
is nothing more difficult; or which requires a more elevated wit, richer fancy,
or subtiler judgment: Which rare qualities concur in you in so high a
perfection, that there is no free, noble soul which denies you herein the just
tribute of respect and preference. In the happy return, and conduct of our
great Sovereign, we see restored to us the secure felicity of the times of
Augustus. To which you might add the splendor, by affording us the noble
fruits and inventions of your wit. Messala Corvinus, and Pollio, the Ornaments
of that Court, though eminent in War, preferred this way to perpetuate the glory
of their names: A desire which naturally inflames Heroical breasts; and should
do yours: the commendation of the present times being a Patrimony of too
contracted limits for so great a worth: which cannot receive deserved fame and
reputation, but from the bounty of succeeding ages: which I much wish, and at
present, the continuation of a flourishing prosperity. I am,

SIR, Your most humble and obliged Servant, WILLIAM JOYNER.

The Preface.
HAving considered, that of all Tragedies the old Oedipus, in the just
estimation of the Ancients and Moderns carried the Crown: a Story as yet
untoucht by any English Pen; I thought, though defective in my art, I could not
be but very fortunate in this my subject. Which has given me leave not only to
include what is admirable in this Oedipus; but several great advantages above
it for a Tragical Theater. Of which, one is the greatness of this Roman
Emperor above so petty a Prince in Greece. Another is, that it is imagined,
there was never any such person as this Oedipus, and the Story wholly fabulous.
Whereas mine is foundded in truth and reality. For, though by advise of friends
I have disguised the names; yet this Emperor was one of the greatest that ever
Rome boasted. He held his Adversary sometime reduced to that low condition and
posture I describe. And instigated by this malicious calumny of his Empress,
put to death his own Son, after the creating of him Caesar. As it was affirmed
by the glorious Martyr Artemius in the presence of the Emperor Julian
Apostate: Who was the near Kinsman of this Florus; and very inquisitive after
the sad end of so brave and illustrious a Person. Yet some Historians make him
die accused for Treason: and I for both; with the most forcible reasons I could
produce. For intending Valentius for my Protagonist, (...) the most perfect
subject of Tragical compassion in (...) of Aristotle, approved by all
intelligent (...) strangely to circumvent him; and make the most excusable, I
possibly could, that imprudence for which Zosimus maliciously defames him.
Besides this Character of Oedipus, the true occurrents of this admirable Story
afford me two others highly celebrated by all learnned Nations, in the persons
of Fulvia, and Florus, who much represents the old Hippolytus, unless it be in
the horrid rudeness of his carriage; which I have here changed into a gallant
bravery, ending in a dismal Catastrophe, much more agreeable to the compassion
of these Times. The ancient Phoedra is here set off in a real Fulvia; and I am
informed, some exceptions are taken at the wickedness I show in her person: but
sure these people want a subject of discourse, and trouble, who would fain
concern themselves in my not concealing the ill qualities of a Pagan woman: who
for the atrocity of these crimes is known in History to have had a miserable
end. This Character has been ever much extolled: if my art has failed in the
writing of it, it was highly recompensed in the scenical presentation; for it
was incomparably acted. I have for the greater variety of the Stage divided
this Character, conferring some share of it on Aurelia, which, though a great,
various, and difficult part, was excellently performed. In the person of
Honorius, I have nothing of antiquity to plead for me, the Character being
never thought of by any man but by self: neither had I honored him with such
noble company, but by the advice of some friends; who persuaded me, that his
horrid opinions, by reason of the novelty, and the setting off a false Pagan
Gallantry, would excellently suit with this Tragical Subject. At which no just
exceptions can be taken, for none sure come to Plays to learn true history, or
religion; and to make profane persons speak profanely, is practiced in the
Tragedies of Petavius; whom I my self knew as eminent for his piety, as
learning.

If the language please not, I am sorry: the fault proceeds from no want of
respect to the Audience. For I wrote the quantity of three or four Plays upon
this noble Subject; of which I conceive this the best extract. Such who expect
to have their ears tickled with the gingling Antitheses of Love and Honor, and
such like petty wares, will find themselves deceived. For the chief intent of
Tragedy being to raise Terror and Compassion; I thought a more masculine and
vigorous eloquence and graces more natural, and less affected, were requisite
to inspire such impressions. For satisfaction of the English Stage, which
delights in variety, I have sought to entertain the Audience with the
divertisement of new accidents; not only from Act to Act, but Scene to Scene;
where the Contests are lively, the Passions violent, the Designs extreme, and
the Deliberations horrid. My endeavor has been to conform this piece to the
best rules of Art in all the parts: Though my Opposers have presumed to condemn
it clear throughout: but especially in the fifth Act, which they have concluded
senseless, and void of all art and reason; With which (as the head of man is
with intellectual faculties) it should be chiefly enricht. And so the Reader
shall perceive it, if he please rather to direct himself by the rules of solid
Science; then the dreams of these Persons. For here he finds himself arrived at
the end of strangely astonishing disasters; yet confined within the limits of
Probability; without having the least reason to demand how he has been
conducted, or by what means they have been wrought. Though in the passage (as I
may say) they have been wholly surprising, and left him every where at a loss.
This rule I have observed throughout the Play, to please the judicious, who
still watch and expect things unexpected: And I believe will scarce find here
one anticipated action, or event. For the Dream of Valentius, though it seems
to give a manifest overture of the consequence, yet the obscureness is so dark,
that it deceives not only Him, but the very Audience; the fatal thunderbolt
falling, unseen and unheard in the midst of them. And here occurs in the Person
of Valentius, what Aristotle admires in Oedipus, confessing human wit can
invent in this kind nothing beyond it. For he incurs those very misfortunes,
which with all imaginable care he shunned; condemning his Son without knowing
him; and after death knowing him without all benefit: which makes him the best,
and greatest of all Tragical Subjects. The narration I have made clear,
pathetique, and short; including a story curious, and therefore not taedious:
To shun which fault I have also interrupted it with the doleful exclamation of
Valentius in the Agnition of his Error: Which to judicious ears appears the
most melodious part in Tragical composition. In the escape of Fulvia I have
followed the example of Medea, which by the subtle and judicious Castelvetro
is only censured for the want of preparatives: the foregoing parts having
nothing contributed to this strange action. Which is here contrary; and the
conveyance more rational. Which my opposers should have remarkt. And how the
great Catastrophes in this Play proceed from no external helps, or new faces
unseen before; but from the interweaving of the intrinsecal parts of the
Subject; And how I have not defiled the Majestique Grace of a Tragique Theater
with the company of any vile Plebeian Persons, though the Plot has been so
variously intricated. They should lastly have taken notice, that here is
nothing Episodical; which I have not made essential in the construction of the
Story; from whence arises the graceful Union: An observation to be wished more
in fashion. For it is this Union, which like Harmony in Music, gives the last
perfection and beauty to all Subjects moral, as well as natural.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
VAlentius, Roman Emperor. Major Mohun.
Florus, whose other name is Vespasius, General of Valentius; proving at last
to be his Son. Mr. Kynaston.
Honorius, Friend of Florus: Epicurean in his opinions. Mr. Bell.
Statilius, A Military Councellor, and Favorite of Valentius. Mr. Lyddel.
Macrinus, A great Person, vulgarly passing for the Father of Florus. Mr.
Beeston.
Servilius, Great Courtiers, and Commanders of Legions. Mr. Harris.
Carbo, Great Courtiers, and Commanders of Legions. Mr. Littlewood.
Fulvia, Roman Empress, in love with Florus. The young Mrs. Marshall.
Antonia, Lady of Honor to Fulvia, and Wife to Servilius. Mrs. Kneap.
Hostilius, Tyrant of Rome. Mr. Watson.
Arsenius, General of Hostilius, and thinking himself Father of Florus. Mr.
Cartwright.
Aurelia, Daughter of Hostilius, of singular beauty, beloved of Florus. Mrs
Boutell.
Sophonia, Her Governess; who proves to be Palladia, first Wife of Valentius,
supposed long before dead. Mrs Cory.
Courts, Men, Women, Officers, Attendants, etc.
The SCENE of this Drama or Action is about the Banks of Tiber: where Hostilius
and his Party are supposed to be in Rome, or on the Roman side of the River:
And Valentius with his Party encampt on the other side in the nature of
Besiegers.

THE Roman Empress.
ACT. I.
Hostilius, Courtier, and Court-Attendants. The SCENE exposed of a Battle newly
fought. Court. THe Enemy, Sir, is at last retreated
Almost with equal loss, after a cruel
And bloody fight, excepting that young Lucius.
Prince of the Roman Youth, and your brave Son,
As yet appears not: your Camp-master below
Attends to give you an exact relation.

Exeunt. Host. I come: in the mean space see that my Daughter
Enter Aurelia, Sophonia. Attend me here:

Co. I shall -- Madam I was
Just coming to inform your Princely Highness,
How his Imperial Majesty intends
To find you in this place.

Au. Depart. He shall


Sophonia. Aurelia weeping. So. Madam, I should esteem the tears you shed
At a great value, did they ease those griefs
They thus lament: but they rather increase them:
Clear those bright lights then from those misty clouds.

Au. -- My dear Sophonia,
Whose milk first gave me blood, whose bosom, life;
Add this to those thy other benefits,
To let me thus consume my self in tears
Which are so just: thou see
My Fathers power, which lately had no other
Bounds, than the boundless Ocean, and the Heavens
Contracted to the Walls of Rome, confined
Here to the Banks of Tiber; where we suffer
Defeats upon defeats, no funerals see
Of Parents, Friends, Allies; which make not up
Their horrid train with funerals of others.
I fear the issue of this cruel fight,
Wherein my Brother was engaged. New horror,
Besides from ill presages of my mind
Torments my fancy.

Soph. These thoughts and fears unworthy are to enter
The breast of my Aurelia, but are inmates
Fit to be entertained by such are born
To the distaff and obedience: you the Daughter
And Niece of Emperors, marked with the stamp
Of Majesty Imperial, and of Beauty,
Are destined, when that Rome shall choose her Head,
To be Commandress of that great Commander,
Or rather by the honor of your bed
To show who is proper to be Romes great Head.
Compose your self, your tears and grief assuage
By timely marriage, and stop this civil rage.

Au. From funeral, to those of nuptial rites,
The passage will seem strange: the heavens change not
So suddenly, but 'twixt the day and night
They interpose the mornings dusky light.

Soph. The morning's gay and pleasant, dissipates*
Nights horror; so let mirth begin in you
A day of jollity, which may not know
What setting is.

Au. Which to me cannot happen; thou have known
My heart, Sophonia, and what a cruel part
Love there has acted; for I told thee how
When I last passed to the Enemies Camp
In my disguise (as I must now again)
I fell in love with Florus their brave General,
And so became a captive of the greatest
Oppressor of our Cause, and Family.

Soph. Madam, Arsenius has informed you how
He Is more surpised with you; so that two flames
Love never better kindled, to extinguish
This mortal hatred of your Families.

Au. True, if the cruel nature of my Father,
Who thirsts after his blood, would not oppose us.
But here he comes; and as my fears foretell me,
To reprehend me on this very subject.

To them Hostilius and Macrinus. Hos. Macrinus, when the Romans surfeited
With Roman blood, think fit to stop the torrent,
You like a generous adversary will
Advance the public good: Mac. It Is my first wish
Thus to express my gratitude to you.

Hos. Farewell, and, where the laws of arms permit you,
Be civil to my party. Now Sophonia,
Exit Macr. Your obligations to Macrinus are
Cancelled by this his liberty, I give him;
Which though you do not, I count forfeited.

Sop. I must eternally record this favor.


Hos. Aurelia, 'twas you, and your entreaty
Exit Soph. I sought to gratify herein: I hope
When I grant your request, that you will mine,
Which is at present, to cast off thoughts of love,
Especially of Florus; an Usurper,
As in the State, so in thy breast now enterd,
Where love must have no harbor: I shall find
Passions more noble to possess thy mind.

Au. Sir, if external beauty joined with virtue
Force love in woman's heart, it is no wonder.
Florus finds entrance here: Sir, let these tears
Soften that breast, which the age, war, and custom
Seem to have armed so against compassion.
-- When you reflect
On loves predominancy over all things,
Can you imagine that the soft and tender
Breast of a young and inexperienc'd Virgin
Can resist him, who under the white snow
Of reverend gray-heads, kindles his fires,
and with his flames, extinguishes the light
Of the maturest judgments.

Hos. -- Love exercises
His power only where he finds consent.

An. No April tree when her green season's past
Shoots not forth into blossoms; nor no Virgin,
Her Spring time come, feels not the heats of love.
However O my erring soul, and thou
My captived heart, and you my thus misplaced
Affections bear me witness, if I used not
(To comply with my Father) all my forces
To free my mind from these tyrannick passions:
But O alas! the more I sought to break
These fetters, I in them was more entangled.
This love which in my breast insensibly
It self insinuating, there grew up
Without advise of reason, cannot be now
By reason either governed, or extinguished.

Hos. -- Audacious creature, were I not (what thou
Seems't to deny here) an indulgent Father,
Thou from these hands at present should receive
shows her his sword. Chastisement proper to thy insolence,
Which now falls on thee mitigated only
Into admonishment; thy error is
The error of love, which is excusable
In younger age, confined within limits
Excusable; but when a royal Princess
Hurried from love to madness by her passion
Disdains the curbs of reason, and of honor,
And yields her self up to my greatest foe,
This is a crime severely to be punished;
and should be, were I not assured of thy
Future amendment: but in the mean time
Gives her a bloody handkerchif. Wipe off thy tears, for Florus here with this.

Au. What ominous gift is this?

Hos. It is a token
She startles. Dipped in thy Brother Lucius blood, with which
The hands of Florus, as yet hot, and distilling,
Must thee embrace.

Au. Death shall embrace me first
In her cold arms. What mutiny is here?
One of my chiefest vital parts has me
Deprived of the other. Oh, my Brother slain!
And by the hands of Florus, just when he
Has signified his flames reciprocal,
And great as mine. O my accursed fate!
Why, we were twins, bedfollows in the womb,
Companions e're born, together united
Before with life inspired: in his death
I Have lost my better part, and cannot survive
She falls into a swoun. With what is left me.

Hos. Aurelia, nay Aurelia,
Recall thy self, thy Father is yet living
He strives to recover her. Thy loving Father, who to thee shall be
A Brother, Mother, all things; reassume
Thy life and courage.

Au. I do, and find my self
She seems to come to her self. In this short transe so changed, that now I Am
sorry
I have no pentitential moisture left
To expiate those tears, against my duty,
Cast away on the love of Florus: but
You Will pardon this defect; desire of my
Revenge so agitates my heart, and raises
Such violent motions in my troubled fancy
Transporting all my thoughts, and faculties
To her tyrannique will; like some vast flame,
Which all occurring obstacles consuming,
Transformeth them at last into her self.
Rage, choler, fury, ofsprings of hell increase
And multiply here in this breast, which freely
I open to you, casting out all thoughts
Of virgin softness, or remorse; hereafter
These fountains of my eyes be ever dry;
My hands, and tongue audacious to commit
Mischiefs to terrify mankind; my looks
Dissembling, treacherous, and fatal be
To those they please; the powers of my soul
Let my rage rule, and nothing it control.

Hos. Aurelia, now thou show, thou do inherit,
As well as Mothers beauty, Fathers spirit.
Magnanimous revenge, not love's a guest
Fit to be harbor'd in a royal breast.

Exeunt. Sophonia. Macrinus. Soph. O dear Macrinus, hasten thy departure,
Hostilius must not know thy longer stay,
He thinks he gives, what he can take away,
Thy liberty, which I have so endangered.

Mac. I would expose my life, much more what you
Call liberty, to serve your Majesty.

Soph. That word does but revive
The memory of my unhappy fate,
Macr. weeps. Which I would fain forget. I prithee weep not.

Mac. Madam, I must, though I rejoice to see
Your virtue triumph over your misery.

Soph. Thou see Valentius finds his satisfaction
In my supposed death.

Mac. The Gods we see
Intend your happiness, since sure by their
Instinct he destines Florus for the Throne.

Sop. Macrinus, thou would fain revive my false
And treacherous hopes; but oh, I fear the heavens,
Which see me in my miseries grow old,
Will in them let me die: but pray lets see
The way the have found (excuse my vanity)
To save my reputation when I dye.

Mac. Here Is the Inscription which I have made of you.

The most unfortunate of women, the supposed Sophonia, was the true Palladia,
Empress, and Wife of Valentius, condemned by him upon a false suspicion, but
saved by Macrinus conscious of her innocence and virtue, in testimony whereof
he has left these characters ingraved with his own hands. This I have cut in
several plates of brass,
Which fixed in walls, and only incrusted over
With a slight plaster, in short time decaying,
Will clear your story to the abused world.

Soph. Honest Macrinus, how much I fear
I never shall this zeal of thine repay:
Once more farewell, make speedy have away.

Exeunt. Florus. Servilius. Carbo. Carb. -- Though Courts have ever been
The chiefest Theaters where love delights
To represent his cruel, serious follies:
Yet Camps are not exempted.

Serve. Yes, Sir, but
The wonder is to see our noble General
Surpised thus with the picture of a Lady.

Car. Why were you so?


Flo. Yes, when the Roman Eagles
Victoriously under my conduct flew
Through Italy, reducing the Enemies power
To the Precincts of Rome; in the surprisal
Of Sarnium, I saw the picture of a Lady,
Drawn by the pencil of the famous Sanga,
Whose shape the very Goddesses would take,
Were they to make love here on earth again:
Ah how this object in the very moment
Deprived me of my liberty, so that
My entrance there was servile, not triumphal.

Car. To see arise in a great General
Confusion from a Picture, from a shadow,
Is very strange.

Serve. I thought
A painted fire might deceive the sight
But never raise a heat, or kindle flames.

Flor. I grant this; did not fame
Paint out the original substance of this shadow
Above what fancy comprehends; Eumolpus
Has on this subject made a Song, wherein
He'has touched the proper string of my affection,
With commendation of his friend the Painter.
Boy, lets see it, go now, and sing it.
SONG.
That divine form which thus deludes thy sense,
And holds thee gazing in a strange suspense,
The creature only is of Sanga's art;
Yet from these eyes love does his fires dart.
To them a lively speech his favoring hand
(Which to the tongue he never would impart)
Has given like Sirens to betray thy heart.
Ah fly then! it is too late; thou have thy wound,
And there do panting lie upon the ground.
My strange misfortune is, that I,
Or rather my ill fate, have fixed my love
Upon an Enemy of Valentius;
So that if I pursue it, I shall lose
My Princes favor; and if not, I lose
My soul, my self.

Car. Why he is sick of my disease, I love
An Enemy of Valentius; to Thee
Aside. Aurelia I gave my faith before.
Thy Father was declared his enemy.

Ser. I must condem this love.


Car. It Is then with high injustice.


Ser. -- He Is guilty who hates not
His Princes Enemies; can you think him
Then innocent, who thus adores them.

Flor. -- Have patience only, and
Consider if the admirer of this object.
Rather deserves reproach, pity, or envy
shows a picture to them.
Car. -- What Is this I see!
aside startling. I have defended here my Rival; this
Is my Aurelia's picture, which I left her
A pledge of my eternal love at parting.

Ser. This image so confounds my reason, that
The accused may justly absolve himself
aside surpised. By virtue of his Judges crime; I must
Think of my duty to my Wife and Prince.

Flor. -- I perceive strange emotion
In them, but would not from their weakness seek
Protection for my failings. Why thus changed?
Come in, and recollect your selves, I Will see
If you are sick of my infirmity.

Exeunt. Arsenius. Honorius. Ars. disguised in habit of a common soldier. Ars.
-- Behold us here arrived
At the Tents of Valentius; that I,
The General of Hostilius, disguised
In this vile habit of a common Soldier,
Expose my self to him my Enemy,
Are strange effects of love: that liberty
-- Which I give thee,
Thou in requital seems't to take from me.

Hon. Sir, that you have restored me to my self
And liberty, I must confess, but not
That I thus seek to recompense your favor;
Express your meaning: these words offend my honor.

Ars. You have often told me that
Your General Florus was your greatest friend;
On which belief I let you know he was
My only Son; and how capricious fortune
Had separated those minds, and affections
Which nature joined.

Hon. It Is true, and I acquainted
You with his love of your Princess Aurelia;
Well knowing the advantages you would
Take to seduce him from his loyalty,
With so fair a temptation; but know
To this I then consented, fearing, that
To take from noble virtue the occasion
Of victory, was to envy her triumphing.

Ars. I hope his love of her will now extort
That which the duty of a Father could not,
That Is his obedience; since love ever finds
His Empire greatest in the greatest minds:
-- though hitherto
The vain and empty title of being loyal
Prevailed more with him then the entreaties of
A most indulgent and a tender father.

Hon. Sir, you are too indulgent, who would thus
Permit, nay more persuade him to become
A Traitor to his Prince, the common Father
Of us, and of his Country; and in whose
Obedience, though with loss of life, and fortune,
He Is happy in performing thus his duty.

Ars. Of all wild beasts, which entrance find in Courts,
Malicious detractors are the worst:
Of all domestical, these flatterers,
Which into Princes ears gently distill
The poison of these maxims, as if human
Nature could thus comply with servitude,
Not foaming at the Curb; Sir, like sea waves,
Impetuously forced by several winds,
We are by the tempestuous torrents hurried
Of rage, ambition, choler, and revenge:
Of which the latter justly has provokt
My indignation against Valentius.

Hon. Nothing can justify these practices
Against your Prince.

Ars. But to the subject, to return from which
We deviate now; I have of late obtained
Aurelia by the consent of her Father
In marriage for my Son, to whom I lately
Addressed a letter signifying the same,
shows him a letter. Intending you the happy bearer of
This grateful news, of which another Copy
I to Aurelia sent, to show my pen
As forward as my sword in the procuring
Hers, and her Fathers interest; but since
Considering in desperate diseases,
That extreme remedies are best, I Have changed
My thoughts, persuaded that a Fathers presence
Will be more prevalent
Then the mute eloquence of Paper; so
Behold me here arrived, to procure
An end to my calamities; my Sons
Greatest felicity; the ruin of
The persecutor of my life, Valentius.

Hon. Give over this rash discourse; here thou should die
The sacrifice of my just indignation,
draws at him. Were not to envy thy brave Sons secure
Triumphing over thy vain stratagems.
Do hope through my protection to put
Thy treacherous practice into execution
Against my Prince? the sound of this discourse
More odious is to me then the noise
Of chains or fetters, which I Will rather suffer.
These abject thoughts proportionate, and proper
Are to thy doting age; attribute to
Thy fortune of having so brave a Son
puts up his sword. The life, thou receiv'st from these generous hands.

Ar. Is it a generous part thus to reward
My benefit with this ingratitude?

Hon. A benefit conferred in the sense
Of interest, merits no recompense.

Ar. My forward love mistaken was to try
To gain affection from an Enemy.

Hon. Thy hopes are vain, it was thy error here
With courtesy to 'abuse a Gentleman.

Ar. A Gentleman, who such resentment shows
The man, to whom his liberty he owes?

Hon. Can he be author of my liberty,
Who would engage me in this treachery?

Ar. Sir, is it treacherously, or nobly done,
To reconcile a Father to a Son?

Hon. A Father, he who seeks to rob a Son
Of his true honor, and reputation?

Ar. Honor to spend his youth, and time, and die
In service of his Fathers Enemy?

Hon. His respect to his Father must give way
To that of his true Prince, who all must sway.

Ar. Man's first, and greatest duty from the tie
Of nature comes, not human policy.

Hon. Nature must yield to reason, which thinks fit,
Private to public interest should submit.

Ar. Go to thy Son Arsenius, and try,
If he be cruel like thy Enemy.

Hon. Go to thy Son Arsenius; there is his Tent:
A Fathers ignominy there lament;
points to the Tents of the Camp. And a Sons glory, as thy punishment.

ACT. II.
Fulvia, Antonia. Attendants. Full. ALl but Antonia leave the place.
Excessive griefs, Antonia, receive
No mitigation from advice of friends:
And such are mine; so that if I implore
Assistance, I exasperate them more.

Ant. Madam, what causes this strange alteration?
So many nights your eyes have seen no sleep,
Which changed of late, have lost their usual luster.
Your looks and speech are not accompanied
With their accustomed graces; as some sick
Persons, in cold languishing all the night,
With feavors burning at the approach of light;
Just so your Majesty the Sun offends
When he his course begins, or when he ends.
The arrival of the night gives you no ease;
That of the day your torments does increase.
To me your servant why do you thus affect
To hide the cause, who tell you the effect?

Full. What shall I do? confessions of our crimes
In Princes are worse crimes then they themselves;
And which, if I strive longer to conceal,
aside. This forced silence will at last reveal:
-- Let then my will,
Which in an Empress should be sole Commander,
The voluntary first eruption make.
Antonia, thou shall now know my disease,
But let compassion mollify thy heart
Conformable to the grief, which I suffer.
Who the distressed relieve, must first resent,
And feel the torment of the Patient.
Florus, that name so grateful to Antonia,
But more to me.
Florus, I say to thee, so acceptable.

Ant. -- Madam, it is true, 'twas he
Who first to my Servilius me united.

Full. -- And me has disunited from my self,
My Prince, the world, and all things but himself.
Florus more fair, more beautiful than is
Morning or midnight star, more lovely then
The pleasant Sun himself, when he shines through
The golden Fleece of the celestial Ram.
-- O how I am,
With love transported.

Ant. True;
But it is, I hope, of your Valentius.

Full. No; it is not: yes, it is; I mean of him:
Not what he is, but what he was; in Florus
Me thinks I see Valentius revived,
And my old flames: Love has
Retrac'd the same imaginations in
My fancy, which kindled my first desires.
Nature gave the same features to their faces,
And to their minds and bodies the same graces.
Such sprightliness was in Valentius looks,
When first he courted me:
Such was his comely gesture, when on horseback
The stately courser proud was of his burden.
Thus smiled he, thus he frowned, and in his anger
Became more lovely from the change of passions.
Marvel not then, that so great a Commander
So soon has conquered, and inflamed the breast,
Alas! of a poor Lady.

Ant. These heats should be suppressed in their beginning.


Full. And so they might; did they like other fires
Grow by succession; but they masterless
Like lightning, found expansion in an instant
Through all my veins, inflaming all my spirits.

Ant. Cast off these vain surmises, and be sure
the thought you may be cured, is half the cure.
Let not your Majesty herein persever,
We safely sin sometimes, securely never.
Strangle these vile thoughts in their infancy.

Full. This I have often endeavored, but in vain
-- So whilst that I
Am thus consumed by an internal fire,
Scarce daring to let it evaporate
In words, in sighs, in tears like other lovers;
The heat increasing, multiplies within
My breast, and will, I fear, at last for want
Of vent destroy me.

Ant. Madam, these thoughts should have no vent, but find
At once their birth, and burial in your mind.

Full. My vital heat, and this more vital of
My love, are substances inseparable;
Nay, if the nature of my soul shall not prove
Mortal, I fear that will not of my love:
So that to save my honor if I die,
I am not sure to end my misery.
Will thou not then afford me thy compassion?

Ant. To her who voluntary casts her self
In misery, what pity can be due?

Full. O it is against my will; love like a Tyrant has
Reduced my soul, and all her faculties
In vassalage: Virtue lets fall her arms,
As weak, and useless, 'against such powerful charms.

Ant. Think on the violation of your faith.


Full. I have, and find, that constancy is only
A force imaginary in us women:
I find it by my self.

Ant. But not by others.


Full. Can see me perish, and afford no succor?


Ant. Want of assistance in this kind preserves you.
My succor in this case would make you perish.

Full. Thy Empress submissively entreats,
And will thou not obey?

Ant. learn to command,
And first your self, and then I shall obey.
I am your servant, not slave of your vice.

Full. Can thou a Lover be, and yet so cruel?


Ant. My love I keep confined within due limits.


Full. Contrivers of crimes secretly committed
In Courts, securely still advance themselves,
Without the loss of fame, or reputation.

Ant. We doubly err; if erring we procure
The opinion, that we have conserved our honor.

Full. -- If we approve in Princes
Actions unjust for private interest, why not
Those more excusable for private pleasure?
A hidden fault was never entire crime.

Ant. That which is voluntary, is entire.


Full. But not in Princes, who being public persons,
Their vices, if not public, are not vices;
Nor private virtues esteemed Princely virtues.
It Is cruelty not to assist the afflicted.

Ant. Not when contrivers of their own misfortunes.


Full. O thou art obstinat.


Ant. It Is constancy.


Full. It Is cruelty.


Ant. It Is generosity.


Full. Ingratitude in the most high degree.


Ant. Greatest beneficence.


Full. Thy Princes hater.


Ant. A lover of her honor, and my own.


Full. No more Antonia: shall I live, or die?


Ant. Then loss of honor, death's less misery.


Full. What shall I do? my reason having lost,
Whiles fury guides me, I rove strangely tossed,
I know not where, but certainly astray,
Where honor suffers mad love to lead the way.

Exeunt. Arsenius. Honorius. Florus putting up his sword. Flo. No, no; I cannot
believe it; it is almost
Impossible, that he should be my Father,
Who seeks thus to deprive me of my honor,
In forfeiting my duty to my Prince.
-- Acknowledge in pure gift
Thy life from my unlucky ignorance
Of him, who is my Father.

Hon. Brave Florus, this new field maintain,
Which virtue has laid open with intention
To signalize thy valor in all kinds.
Nature her self thou here subduest, not words
Of human art or hand; and which is most,
None in this conquest, but thy self can boast.

Ar. My Son.


Fl. My Enemy.


Ar. My only Son.


Flor. My greatest Enemy.


Ar. Thou know I seek
Thy happiness, and can thou injure me?

Flo. Is this an injury, to defend my self
From th'undermining practice of a Traitor?

Ar. Can thou submit to serve a Prince, who is
An enemy to him, who gave thee being.

Flo. Suppose you did, will you on this account
Rob me of my well-being, fame, and honor?

Ar. Disguised here in these abject weeds, for thee
My grandour, and my dignity, and life
To hazard I expose.

Flo. Return; thou have free leave, and reassume
Thy Generalship under Hostilius:
It is my glory in the head of armies
To meet me as my adversary; but
My shame, disgrace, and ignominy to
Respect thee with the reverence of a Father.

Ar. Cruel Barbarian, if thou dispisest
Thy Father, from whom thou enjoy'st this light;
At least make some account of him, who seeks
To put thee in possession of that
Thou love above this light, thy fair Aurelia.

Flo. When my affection to Aurelia
Shall be offensive to Valentius,
I Will cast it off.

Ar. Art thou resolved to refuse me all pity?


Flo. I shall observe my duty to my Prince.


Ar. Which should give place to thy paternal duty,
And is ingrafted in all breasts but thine;
-- Known long before,
Private ambition, popular faction
Had laid the ruins, or the foundations
Of Principalities, or Commonwealths,
Whence these names sprang of loyalty, and honor.
The cruel Thracian, barbarous Indian
Acknowledging no other law, know this:
So does the inhospitable Scythian,
Who others blood devouring, with his own
His aged fainting Sire will revive.

Flo. -- My cruel fortune!
When thy looks fairest are, how thou confound'st me?
Here filial obligation, which nature
Imprints not only in men's hearts, but beasts,
Challenges my obedience to a Father;
Who not content to give me life, seeks here
With hazard of his own, to make mine happy.
On the other side my Prince, who has prevented
My age, my merit, and my expectation,
With heaping on me honors upon honors,
Exacts more from me then my gratitude
Equaliz'd to my wishes could repay.
O how thus strangely circumvented I
Far greater torment find to live then die!

Hon. Florus, why thus perplexed? what in a dream?
Dispel these cloudy mists, follow the way,
Where honor lights thee with her golden ray.

Flo. Honorius, thou have turned the balance, which
My trembling heart durst neither way incline.

Ar. Unfortunate Arsenius! what new hopes
Can thou retain, when they ungrateful are,
Which have such benefits received from thee;
The one is life, the other liberty.

Hon. T'oblige the innocent, to make him guilty.
Is not a benefit, but treachery.

Ar. Ah Florus, some respect to these gray hairs,
My Son, some duty's due to me, thy Father.
Let these my tears mollify that hard heart,
Which so inflexible seems to my prayers.

Flo. -- Old man give over;
Thy words, and time are lost in this pursuit.

Ar. -- Rash and inhuman creature,
If thou dispisest the entreaties of a Father:
-- I Will make thee fear the courage,
And stratagems of an old General
Grown white under the helmot, and the rage
Of an incensed Enemy: Valentius
Shall know Aurelia's thy intended Spouse,
Hostilius thy private Friend: so shall
This artifice at once deprive thee of
Thy honor, and of that unworthy being,
Which I unworthily have given thee.

Flo. O nature, O my honor, cruel Tyrants
Of my divided soul, how you distract me!
In what inextricable labyrinth
Has my ill fortune cast me? if I conquer,
Or yield subdued in this unhappy conflict
Of my contesting passions, and affections,
I Am sure to lose my life, or reputation;
Or rather both, which my sad thoughts presage.

Hon. Fear nothing; be not thus dejected, whilst
Here Is an Honorius to give so ample
A testimony of your innocence.

Flo. Malicious dotard, do thy worst, my clear
Sincerity of mind, and actions shall
Prove, thou a Traitor can not be my Father.

Ar. Arsenius, thou spend'st thy time, thy words,
And labor here in vain: come then prepare
For thy revenge.
The world shall know what I thought to conceal.

Flo. -- Arsenius hold:
Ah stay, and lets compose this cruel strife;
You pretend only to have given me life,
Which I Will return to you: opening thus my breast,
The passage will make entrance for my rest;
The blood will be the balsom of my honor,
And pay your debt, and save my reputation.

Ar. Arsenius, O thy unhappy fortune!
Which made thee Father, Soldier, or Commander!
Live cruel Parricide, live, and prolong
Thy odious life; I Will find some way to death,
And my repose: my self I cannot show
A cruel Father, or soft-natur'd Foe.

Exit. Hon. Florus, why thus cast down? it is strange to see
A man dejected after victory.
Here nothing was required but a spectator
Of this most glorious passage of thy life,
Which the propitious aspect of the heavens
Has granted thee in an Honorius.
Florus farewell; congratulate thy happy
Fortune to have preserved a Friend, who seeks
The preservation of thy honor; which
Thy Father, thou here losest, sought to ruin.

Exit. Flo. There is no reason nature should unite
By an usurped authority those minds,
Virtue upon just grounds has separated.
But see the Empress comes: I Am sorry she
Should find me in this conflict of my passions.

Fulvia. Florus. Full. Ladies retire within; I will be private.
See here in finding Florus alone, a happy
Occasion is presented by my fortune
aside. For the discovery of my passion (which
As women's wits are best when they have least
Time to consider) I have found already.
I Will tell him that I hear his love aspires
To the possession of a Royal Lady,
Who meets his flames with mutual fire, commending
Herein his choice; so by this artifice
He shall perceive my love in a surprise.
Florus, what is the occasion of this sadness,
When The Emperor so much applauds your conduct?

Flo. Madam, to see the enemy provide
Against us a more vigorous assault.

Full. It Is but a new occasion for your triumph.
I know the real cause of this disturbance.
O Florus you aspire to great matters.

Flo. Servilius or my Father has betrayed me.

aside.
Full. Nay I commend your course, 'twas virtue which
Distinguished, and made Princes-first; besides
Love's a great leveller like death, and where
He finds not an equality, will make it.

Flo. -- I shall be of the Court
Now, and the Camp the laughing stock and sport.
aside.
Full. If you desired such secrecy, you should not
Make one the object of your love, so near
In blood to me allied.

Flor. Aurelia is her Niece; it is very true:
aside. If I persist, this silence will convince me.
Let not your sacred Majesty be thus
Abused by false reports; my Princes favor
And yours (as ever happens in great Courts)
Have raised me private enemies, which seek
My ruin from these false suggestions.

Full. No, no; here is no place for the least suspicion
Against the testimony of this truth,
Which from the Ladies lips proceeds, who loves you;
Which here this Medal better will declare
gives him a Medal. Then words, which through respect of you, and of
My self I cannot utter.
Confront this with the orignal, and see
If she be well expressed, who thus affects you.

Exit. Plo. Let Us see if the Inscription show the same
Person, the picture seems to represent.
turns about the Medal. Fulvia Empress, second Wife of Valentius, etc. Is this
some real passage, or illusion?
Perchance I dream, and now some lively visions
Play the Impostors on my deluded fancy.
I wish it were so; but that scarce can be;
For though in dreams we think our selves awake,
Yet really awake we know we dream not.
No, I am the lost miserable Florus;
And this the cruel Fulvia, who destroys me;
And which is strange, with love; a stronger engine
Erected for my ruin, then her hatred.
Who can esteem me innocent? whilst I
Am flexible thought to so foul a crime.
Blast me ye heavens, or else at least these looks,
Which please the Empress: if my heart be chaste,
They are lascivious, and my honor stain:
And this sufficient is to make me guilty.
Was ever case like mine! If I declare
My self a lover then I lose my friends;
And if I am beloved, my Prince I injure
In highest point of honor, and what is strange,
Th'offendor is in both ways innocent.

Exit. Antonia. It Is strange my Husbands love should fade so soon,
Which I have sought to cultivate with all
Art, duty, offices which can become
A subtle woman, or complacent wife.
Perchance I am deceived, and with some false
Surmise create within my self true torment.
O Gelosie; o thou quicksighted daughter
Of thy blind father Love, of whom at last
Thou prov'st the murderer: thou of all things only
Detested, loathed, hated by thy self;
Ingenious only in the searching after
That, which thou wishest could not be found out;
Or being found, leaves thee in greater torment.
Since in so short a time thy venom has
Spread through my veins, and poisoned all my thoughts;
Return to thy infernal mansion, where
Hatred begot thee, though perchance some share
Love in thy generation might have,
To make thy birth double, and so more monstrous:
There be a torment to thy self, and since
Suspicions are thy choicest nourishment.
Vex thy self with new fears; never secure,
As well with those which doubtful are, as sure.

To her Servilius. Ser. Here comes my poor Antonia, methinks,
The sad reproach of my inconstancy.

Ant. What cause have I given you of late to be
So much disgusted with my company?

Ser. None, but some other flames have in my breast
Extinguished thine, and rob me of my rest.

Ant. What can these strange looks, or this language mean?
I hope Sir, you intend no breach of faith.

Ser. No, I am forced to it against my intention.
Against my former vows, and my own wishes.

Ant. We all confess, Sir, this unquestioned truth,
Man's will cannot be forced, though it rebel,
By any power on earth, in heaven, or hell.

Ser. If here is an error, Florus should be rather
Accused then I: he, who first joined our loves.
Has been the occasion of dissolving them,
In showing me a face of late in beauty
So far transcending thine,
That 'twere impiety not to adore it.

Ant. -- False and disloyal man;
Florus and thou shall sink under the force
Of my revenge, provoked to such a height,
It shall pluck on you both untimely fate.

Ser. Antonia, divert the torrent of
This furious rage some other way; accuse
Nature, who has to my excessive torment
This beauty formed, so far excelling thine,
As the moon does the lesser stars outshine.

Ant. Traitor accuse thy one perfidiousness,
Which makes thee change thy promise, and thy customs.

Ser. I have changed the object only, not my custom.


Ant. The have broke thy faith; this makes thee infamous.
I hope in her thou followst, thou will see
An hatred equal to my love of thee.

Ser. Antonia examining thy glass
Accuse that vulgar beauty, and thy face,
Which on my freeborn soul has had no charms
More powerful, and such early fading colors.

Exit. Ant. -- Go; go;
Go, if my beauty be of untimely fate,
In my revenge so shall not be my hate;
To perfect which, I heaven, and hell will move:
It Is the only recompense, of injured love.
Nature, and Fortune cruel Stepmothers
Are to us women: in our tender years
Our Fathers Palaces to us are Prisons,
Where nor our persons, nor scarce our looks are free:
And afterward, when our maturity
Should change this bondage into liberty;
We only of all creatures are who buy
With a vast dowry our own slavery:
Thus only changing a new Master, whom
We purchase to rule o'r our souls and bodies,
And cast us off thus when he please. Man is
A bold insolent creature; grand usurper
Upon the rights of nature; not by his wit
(For in our age of folly we enslave him)
But by his force, and number. He makes laws
Partial to himself, rigid to us: his vows
He breaks, ours must be kept; his vices
Pass only for his gallantries; ours are
Branded with foul and horrid names to affright us.
Ambition in us, in him is honor;
And our irregular appetites in him
Pass for the noble passions of his love;
Not only to be excused, but commended.
Who made these laws and customs? did our Sex
Ever give up their voice, and suffrages?
No: there is no right, or obligation then
We should obey these orders made by men,
So partial Judges: the Empress and I will see
To vindicate our sexes liberty.

Exit. ACT. III.
Florus. Servilius. Carbo. Car. That which you tell us, is a secret of
Importance, that Arsenius should be
Your Father, and converse here in our Camp.

Flo. It Is True; but I am now relating to you
The occasion which has brought Aurelia hither.
The wild lust of her Father, not content
To violate the chastity of Virgins,
The faith of Matrons, Widows vows; at last
Lasciviously incroached on his Daughter:
The horror of which thought so frighted her
(Such was her virtuous innocence) she sought
Her refuge from her enemies, and fled
From him her Father, as her greatest foe.
So by this means fortune affords my arms
The happy occasion of protecting virtue,
I think her self in a corporeal shape.

Ser. This passion of your love strangely deceives you.
Virtue needs no external form, or beauty
Seldom puts any on; and yet more seldom
It Is that they can agree.
Chiefly in Courts, like jarring Elements,
Where one proves the confusion of the other;
Beauty at least to Virtue ever fatal.

Car. He tells you true, the outward shape of your
Aurelia shows no internal goodness.

Flo. -- Sure correspondent to
The external splendour must be lodged in her
A soul deserving such an habitation;
As greater luster of some sparkling jewels
Denotes in them no less intrinsique virtue.

Car. I can compare Aurelia's eyes to stars
As bright as you, but of ill influence,
And look on her arrival to the Camp,
Like the approach of some ill threatening Comet.
The heavens preserve our General, and us.

Flo. What raises these strange Omens of my love,
Which some will envy, but the most approve.

Ser. Most will condemn, others oppose; think not
Aurelia's beauty will not raise you Rivals,
To bring the Prize in contestation.

Flo. These motives of vain fear I scorn; farewell,
I Will seek some other friends to gratulate
The happiness of my triumphing fate.

Exit. Car. I am amazed to think Arsenius,
Great Captain General of our enemy,
Should be his Father; and here in disguise
Converse within our Camp.

Ser. It Is a strange secret.


Car. To me it seems improbable, that he
Who was surpised with the mere shadow of
His Mistress, should remain inflexible
To the tears and entreaties of a Father:
What Is your opinion?

Ser. That we play the fool
Egregiously; remember we are Soldiers
As well as Courtiers; lets cast off this dissembling.

Car. Since you advance, I Will meet you: Sir I hear
Of your intention of divorce, to make
Room for Aurelia's entrance in your bed;
Whose love I seek with as great fervency
As you; we both forfeit our hopes, if this
Rival be not removed; th'effecting which
His open folly has made easy.

Ser. True;
As Scholars prove ill Soldiers, so these Soldiers
Prove the worst Courtiers; their franc and generous natures
Make them as unfit for the air of Courts,
As birds are for the Element of water.
Who but a General bred up in Camps
Like Florus, such a secret would reveal,
On which divulged, his ruin does depend,
To us, who shall raise our selves from his fall.

Car. In Court it would a Soloecism appear,
So gross an error should unpunisht go:
There is no reason for it, he must give way,
Though both of us cannot have this glorious prey:
And consequently in our Generals fall,
The one of us must find his Funeral.

Exeunt. Valentius, Statilius, Honorius, with Court-Attendants, etc. Val.
Statilius, the Gods are equally
Willing to make us great, as afterward
They are averse long to conserve that greatness.
We often see our fall, or misery
Bring up the rear of our prosperity.

Sta. Your Majesty knows well that our condition
Admits not of a sincere happiness,
Without the mixture of some discontent.

Val. Whilst Italy and the Provinces applaud.
My victories, and happiness, I fear,
And yet perceive no true cause of my fear.

Hon. It Is generously to be rejected then,
As being grounded upon no foundation.

Val. Thence it takes deeper root. Old Mariners
Expect a horrid tempest, when the sea
Rouls boystrous waves, and yet no winds are stirring.
Last night, or rather 'twixt the confines of
The day and night, the lively, but the dismal
Impressions of a dream have so tormented
My spirit, I shall have no quiet till
I see the menacing effects blown over.

Hon. These are deceptions of the fancy, not
Deserving the attention of a Prince.

Val. So often verified in all reports,
Who can assure us these are fallacies?

Hon. The rare, divine, admired Epicurus,
Who with the light of reason has dispel'd
These golden fears, these terrifiers of
The vulgar spirits; did you but imagine
The innumerable multitude of such
Who either will deceive, or be deceived:
Nothing so beneficial you will see
As a judicious incredulity.

Sta. It Is a sign of a poor and mollifi'd
Spirit to fear all events of this nature;
And to fear nothing a stupiditie.

Hon. A virtue Sir, if once opinion can
Remove us from our solid station,
We never after shall firm footing find.
An understanding must be, to see clear,
Purged from all superstition and fear.

Val. It is an happiness to be resolute
In our opinions, though erroneous.
O that I could like thee, Honorius,
Believe these terrors follies: my dream was,
That my dear Wife, and eldest Son; O horror!
Before we see the Sun once more ascend
To his meridian altitude, should fall
At my feet murdered by me in furious rage.

Sta. The vanity herein appears, that in
The short extent of one days compass so
Horrid a fact must be accomplished, which
Requires years for the maturing of it.
The innocence and virtue of the Empress,
And Prince are yet unblemisht, insuspected.

Val. It Is true; but if the fates will make Valentius
Unhappy, they will make him first imprudent.

Hon. The happiness of great Valentius
Depends upon the will of great Valentius:
Not upon, fortune, or destiny.
These are but idle names of idle Writers,
-- Unhappily invented,
To terrify mankind, and sow the seeds
Of error, folly, superstition in us:
Who should rely on our own proper virtues;
For man is only on himself dependant;
Not fate, nor fortune, nor his stars Ascendant.

Val. Think thou not some celestial powers above
Direct the course of our affairs?

Hon. No Sir
They rest secure, happy not thinking on them,
Nor us, such little crawlers here on earth.
Nor is it human wit, but rather human
Folly, which now seems the disposer of them.
Observe but with what vermin the age swarms,
And how the world is strangely people with
Armies of murderers in ambitious wars;
Or else the instruments of our luxury.

Val. I am told by my Philosophers at Court,
Confused, and interrupted dreams are not
To be regarded; but when that order is
In them which was in mine, they are advises
From heaven sent to tell us what shall happen.

Hon. -- In the distracted Chaos
There never was greater confusion,
Then is in them, and in their mad opinions;
Which no more credit should find in us, then
Poetique fancies, or fanatique dreams.

Sta. -- For my part;
Ere since I first opened my eyes to make
Inspection into the darkness of
Human affairs, and nature, I straight saw
Nothing was suited to our capacities;
But ever thought Philosophers, and such
Who give themselves up to their contemplations.
Most ignorant, and useless of all men.

Hon. -- They first corrupt our natural wit,
And judgment with an artificial folly,
And then our genuine customs with learned vices.

Sta. Rome, as she grew more learned, grew less valiant.


Hon. These studies in her Senators destroyed
That bravery in them, which subdued the world.

Sta. Science, and vice like twins at the same time
Found birth in her, and grew up to perfection.

Hon. She owed her ruin to no other cause,
Then when she changed from Martial to be learned.

Sta. O let it not be said that this disease,
In the corrupting of the judgment of
The great Valentius, twice should fatal be
Thus to the Roman Name, and Majesty.

Val. I am of no such accidents afraid,
Where prudence or my will can give me aid.

Hon. We boldly should contemn, not fear those ils,
Which cannot be opposed by our wills.

Val. To foster hopes is a mere vanity
When we foresee certain our misery.

Sta. A Prince who thus thinks that his State impairs
A fruitless subject gives himself of cares.

Val. He rightly thinks of fortune, who suspects
Her various in the persons she affects.

Hon. The change of fortune rather should erect
The spirit of an Emperor, then deject.

Val. Unhappy state of Princes! whom her favors
Sometimes betray, more then her frowns; for they
Corrupt us, and our natures mollify:
We gain our honor in adversity.

Exeunt. Fulvia. What shall I do? sustain the gravitie,
And person of imperial Majesty?
Or lose the hopes else of an ardent lover.
Rebellious passions of my distracted soul,
Fear, love, desire, envy: why do you thus
Torment my mind with separated factions?
Though thou art here a most unjust Usurper,
Love, I Will my self rather submit to thee:
Divided power is greater tyranny.
Speak then, and hope; happy success may make
Our impious actions pass for honorable,
Much more the faults of love, which in all breasts
Find their Apologies; for no man shall,
Seeing Florus, not absolve the Criminal:
And Ladies, which have known him, cannot choose,
But say the cause brings with it the excuse.
To her Florus. -- O here he comes
As I expected! Florus, I hope you have
Confronted the Original with the
Pourtraict I gave you, and are pleased with both.

Flo. Your Majesty was not deceived, I shall
Declare my self an enemy to those,
Who shall their treachery practice on that beauty.

Full. Now I am happy, I perceive he loves me.
aside. Let no suspicious gelosie torment you;
You only then need fear a Rival, when
Another Florus should be like your self.

Flo. In breasts where love has no admission found,
Gelosie can find none; he need not fear
A Rival, who no lover is.

Full. Not you
A lover; can I be so much deceived?

Flo. Yes; when my reason shall direct the passion.


Full. -- Love joined with reason
Is a monster, and not that noble ghest,
Which should command all in a Princes breast;
Fear, counsel, reason either chasing thence,
Or else reducing to his obedience.

Flo. My honor then must regulate my actions.


Full. Which never should inspire a noble heart
With cruelty, but rather with compassion
Of a distressed Lady. Florus, you
Knew that to be Fulvia's Picture, I gave you.

Flo. It Is true, and as I think by some mistake
Unluckily conveyed into these hands.

Full. No Sir, be not deceived, the present was
Made by mature election.

Flo. I reverence it as your gift, and as
The Pourtrait of my Sovereign adore it.

Full. The name of Sovereign is unsuitable
To my affection, or my present state:
Call me your servant; that familiar term.
Becoms him, who predominats over all
The powers of my soul.
Disdain not one, who ever has preserved
Her reputation unstained, her faith
Inviolated, and to you alone
Commits them both; one action of my life
Should not reproach me with inconstancy.
Compassionate an Empress, who entreats
That used to command: O Florus, put
A period to my life, or to my torment.

Flo. -- O ye immortal Gods,
aside. Can you see this offense, and suffer it?
I hope your Majesty will harbor thoughts
Which more become your royal dignity;
And of your own dishonor, and my shame,
In hearing mentioned this licentious flame.

Full. If it be lawless, 'twill the more aspire;
Resistance will prove vain to my desire.

Flo. O Madam, let reason triumph above
This passion, and honor over your love;
Think how I am the Subject of Valentius.

Full. Sufficient curb to this repulse should be
The thought how a great Empress loves you; and
Loves you alone; and the Commandress of
The world submits her self to your commands.

Flo. I cannot conceive your Majesty as Empress,
But at that time Wife also of my Sovereign.

Full. If you desire happiness, think only
Of my Imperial dignity and power.

Flo. Who by their passions thus enslaved have lost
Their liberty, cannot of power boast.

Full. If thou despisest an obsequious lover,
Thou shall the rage fear of an incenst Lady.

Flo. I apprehend more danger from the love,
Then anger of her who despises honor.

Full. If thy audacious insolence contemns
My threatenings, their effects shall make thee tremble.

Flo. No violence, no hidden treachery
Can affright him, who never feared to die.

Full. -- If that which I intend
An ignominious death cannot thee move,
Thou have less sense of honor, then of love.

Flo. Which cannot be, when the occasion only,
Springs from the hatred of an immodest woman.

Full. Thou shall feel misery.


Flo. I can conquer it.


Full. Thou shall repent.


Flo. No, I am ever constant.


Full. I Will be revenged.


Flo. I can defend my self.


Full. To slight a Lady never was unpunisht.


Flo. Offense of honor cannot be tolerated.


Full. My hatred now shall equalize my love.


Flo. And my contempt my former reverence.


Full. O thou unhappy Fulvia! what does it
Avail thee to be Empress of the world,
And can not make thy self beloved or feared.

Flo. O miserable Florus, to what purpose
Can serve thy innocence, if thou becom'st
The odious object of another crime.

Exit. Full. Ah cruel creature! he is gone: if ever
Any had cause to murmur against nature,
It Is I, in giving him, so like Valentius,
A form and shape fatal to my repose.
I cherisht the first heat, entered my breast
Insensibly as an acquainted ghest:
But seeking after how it did aspire,
I found my nuptial torch lighted this fire:
So that I cannot reproach my self with shame,
My first and lawful love kindling this flame:
Then all the fault's in him, who thus rejects me.
O thou disdain, the conqueror of love,
Which conquers all things else, enter my breast;
There, till revenge expel thee, take no rest:
Incenst by thee, let all my spirits aspire,
Mixing in combat with this tyrannique fire
For victory. A Princess thus incenst
With love, and rage thus, more is to be feared,
Then cruel fires, fierce plagues, devouring seas,
Or what most terrifies our human nature.

To her Aurelia. Au. You Majesty is much perplexed, that passion
Is always great, which cannot contain it self.

Full. I must conceal to her the unlucky motive
aside. Of my disturbance. Alas! Aurelia,
My miseries are ever fruitful in
Producing others: scarce my tears are dried
For the late losses of our Family;
But I must new supplies find, to lament
The fresh disgrace now falling on my issue.

Au. Who can be so unjust to injure you?
Or who can be so arrogant to offend
That power, which is so armed for revenge?

Full. Valentius; enemy of his own children,
Because I think they are mine, or else because
They'are Nephews of Hostilius your Father,
Intends that Florus shall be now advanced
To the Imperial dignity, to their
And my perpetual reproach, that Florus,
Th'oppressor of my Father, and who seeks
The ruin now of yours. Au. A happy occasion
Opens a field to the triumphant passage
Of my revenge; I can my self disclose
Now to so great an enemy of Florus.
aside. O let that beauteous serenitie,
Madam, return, which used t'adorn your looks.
-- You Have opened your disease
To the Physician, who alone can cure you.

Full. Who you? become of late an enemy
To your own father, interessed in
The quarrel of Valentius against him.

Au. Your Majesty's deceived, I only act
A counterfeited part; I have defamed
-- My Father as attemptor
Upon my virgin modesty, that I
The better might secure his tottering power.
I fain my self in love with Florus; and
My flight here to Valentius, as my refuge,
That I more safely may procure their ruin.

Full. Aurelia, we are then in the same interest,
Will, and affection more conjoined, then blood.

Au. Arsenius has let me know
Of late a secret, which will raise your wonder;
How Florus is his Son, and how he is
In love with me, seeking a mutual love;
Which understanding, with notice of my Father
I filled the old man's head with hopes, and joy
Of my affection for his Son, to whom he has
shows her a letter. A letter writ here on that very subject,
Apt either to make him desert his Prince,
In hope of gaining me; or else t'accuse him
Of treason in his correspondence with
Arsenius enemy of Valentius;
Who thus abused shall see himself deprived
Of this his General, our great Adversary.

Full. My Brothers present danger, and my Sons
Disgrace, whose fame Florus eclipses, makes
Him subject of my hatred; and the memory
Of my poor Father, murderd by Valentius,
Makes him alike. Au. Madam, then let us strive
To be revenged of both;
And with an emulation, who shall put
Her malice into speediest execution;
Not doubting of success: It Is great assurance
To those, who seek revenge, to have so faithful
Companions in the stratagems, as you have.

Full. It Is true my dear Aurelia, let me embrace thee
For this thy brav'ry; though I envy it,
So far advancing thy unriper years.

Au. This day shall show here what the furious rage
Of an ambitious Lady can produce;
And the interest and gelosie of State,
And emulation, Madam, of your glory.

Full. Expect from me all, that can be expected
From a contriving subtle wit, and cunning
Hypocrisy joined with a perfect malice.

Au. Let Florus, let Valentius perceive
The entrance of Aurelia in their Camp.
Let fear and modesty, companions of
Our sex, so much inclined to virtue, be
Now cast off by the thoughts of our revenge.

Full. My passion shall esteem no sin unlisenc'd.
In me let one crime still beget another;
And let it not be thought a crime, which does
Not multiply it self in many others;
And ever with increase, the latter greatest.

Au. Madam mistake not; and let nothing pass
With us for criminal, but what is virtuous.

Full. It Is the delightful fruit of vice to think,
That no vice, which is caused by interest.

Au. True of our selves, better then that of state;
Which no great Prince values at any rate,

Full. They never else in Court or Camp would find,
With all their pomp, tranquillity of mind.

Au. It Is on this ground that I Will prepare to act
Those things I cannot think, unless enraged.
Posterity shall ever curse, though scarce
Believe that, which I Will put in execution.

Full. Compared with me thou shall as innocent
Appear, and did the state but know how high
The provocation is of my disdain,
It would with trembling fear the consequence.

Au. Who injured me the favor shall not have
To die, unless that I accompany
That death with an eternal infamy.

Full. That merits not the title of revenge,
When we destroy and enemy, and give
Leave to his reputation still to live.

Exeunt. Valentius. Florus. Statilius. Honorus, with Court-Attendants. Val.
Since not as yet possessed of Rome, we cannot
Express our joy with usual festivals,
For this adoption of Florus in the Empire;
Lets see what sports, and what divertisements
Our Camp affords us in our slaves and captives.

Here very conveniently may be brought in some divertisements of the Stage.
Val. I never liked the fancy of Augustus;
Nor of some other Princes, who have from
The vices, imperfections of successors
(Sometimes their Sons, Brothers, nearest Allies)
Sought to illustrate to posterity
Their shameful glory, so injurious to them,
And to the present age: A solid virtue
Needs no such foyl, or shadow to set off
Her beauteous luster; and this is the reason,
Why I omitting my own issue joined
To me in blood, not virtue, Florus, have
Destined thee for my successor; and to morrow
Companion, and Colleague in my great Empire.

Sta. Your Majesty declares in this Election,
No passion has an influence over your judgment.

Val. Since it is not in my power to create him
Heir of my blood, I Will make him of my glory.
But Florus why amazed? thy merit should
Prevent thy marvel at thy high advancement:
Honor should never surprise a noble breast,
But enter as a long expected ghest.

Flo. My silence was the effect of grief, and wonder;
The last occasioned thus to see a Father
Divest himself of natural affections,
To represent a Prince more absolute:
My sorrow from the sense of envy springs,
Which will pursue so great prosperity.

Val. Your grief were juster, if your exploits had not
Deserved envy; and your wonder, if
Your merit had not forced this Election.

Hon. he need not envy fear, who by his actions
Worthy of envy has secured himself
In a safe station, above the reach of envy.

Flo. The title of Caesarean Majesty
Is too illustrious for my extraction,
The charge too weighty for these shoulders; which
I fear will faint under their glorious burden.

Sta. Who first knows how to rule himself, like you,
Seems destined by the providence of heavens
For the command of Scepters, and of Empires.

Val. Fear nothing Florus; cheerfully assume
This greatness, as thy valors recompense;
A purchase, which with loss of blood, life, honor
So often is sought after by ambition:
For the proud man finds that the boistrous flood,
Which rowls him to this Port, still runs in blood.

Exeunt. ACT. IV.
Valentius. Carbo. Antonia. Val. NOw I perceive, as thou have told me, that
This my erroneous pursuing of
The customs of Princes my Ancestors,
(Which makes me as I write and speak with pens,
And Tongues of other men; just so I hear
My informations with the ears of others)
Has led me in a labyrinth of errors,
Where truth could never find me out, had you
Not been her trusty guides. For thou O Carbo
Must be content to have this noble Lady
Companion in thy glory.

Car. I am proud of it.


Val. 'Twas she who first made known to me, from whence
Arose the clouds, which have of late eclipst
The mirth, and beauty of my dearest Consort:
I say 'twas she; prepare thy faith to hear
Far greater wonders, than thou have related.
This Traitor Florus in the presence of
This noble Lady has solicited
My Empress, O horror! to betray
My honor; nay startle not; that is my part,
Whom the world falsely calls the great Valentius.

Car. I was surpised; but thinking how the greatest
Of vices is ingratitude; there is none
Of which I think he cannot be found guilty.

Val. This I confess: but alas! here his utmost
Cruelty should have spared his Prince: I am
The soul diffused through the vast body of
The Empire, thus exposed in all parts to
His wounds, and injuries; at least herein
He should have had compassion of his friend
His Benefactor, Father by adoption;
Which merits more then if I were by nature.

Car. Sir, he has told me, he esteemed all things
Lawful to gain an Empire, or a Mistress:
And in a scorning manner often would say;
In other things let justice be observed.

Val. O ye immortal Gods! why has your care
Given us a touchstone to distinguish our
Adulterate gold, and no mark to discern
The treacherous hearts of false perfidious men.
-- If this be true;
Confound him with your sharpest thunderbolt:
But it is too true; and if I further stay
To question it; I fear I shall become
Procurour of those dire events upon me,
Portended in my last nights dreams to happen
Within so short a time.
Antonia retire: I Will have a care
To vindicate my honor: his proud Laurels,
Which from Joves thunder are secure, I Will blast.
But let this secret make no further progress.

Ant, My prudent care shall not fail to correct
This fault, to which our sex is incident.

Val. A Prince, who tolerates a known disgrace,
Becomes the subject of the vulgar scorn.

Ant. Honor, once sought to be betrayed, is never
Secure, so long as the Offender lives.

Val. Gelosie entered in a Prince, no other
Assistant needs, to hasten his revenge.

Ant. Which, when it is of a slow pace, we find
It Is sign of weakness in a Princes mind.
Let him the effects Sir of your anger prove,
Who thus has undervalued your love;
In prudent Monarques, like your self, t'appear
Not to be feared, should be your only fear.

Exit. Car. You Majesty's perplexed.


Val. But why should I
So low thoughts of my self have; and so high
Of his bold insolent temeritie.
Good Carbo have the patience to repeat
Thy story over; though in it every passage
Creates new wounds, and ulcers in my soul.
Thou said, the Master of my light Cavalrie,
Macrinus, was not Father of this Florus;
But that Arsenius, the sworn enemy of
My person, and my dignity has made
The world the present of this dissembling Monster:
Can this be so?

Car. Your Majesty may rest
Can this be so? Car. Your Majesty may rest
Assured I heard it from his own relation;
And how besides he has in a disguise
Converst here with him in our Camp; where he
Assured him of the consent of Hostilius
For his obtaining of the fair Aurelia,
The Idol of his soul;
With the rich dowry of the Roman Empire.

Val. Which his pernicious hopes securely straight
Devoured, with consentment to my ruin.

Car. Yes; and with invitation to my self,
Joining with him, to take part with Hostilius.
See where the Empress comes: I take my leave.

Exit, Valentius. Fulvia. Antonia. Full. Now if, Antonia, as thy promise was,
aside. Thou have distilled the poison in his ears;
I shall perceive straight by the operation.

Val. My dearest Fulvia, since all griefs and sorrows
Divided are betwixt the Wife and Husband,
The occasions also should be so; if then
Antonia's care without your intimation
Has let me know the cause of your distemper,
I must obtain her pardon; let then thy
Former serenity of looks dispel
Those clouds of sorrow from that brow to mine;
Where they hang thick already; but I Will have
Them washed away in blood of the offenders.

Full. With whose let mine be joined; Sir it is the only
Favor I beg here on my knees; by all
kneels. The former merits, with which the constant duty
Of an obedient Wife has e're been able
T'oblige a Husband; by the rising hopes
Of young Valentius; and the other pledges
And fruits of our so constant loves, till now
By this accursed accident disturbed.

Val. They are not: rise then; O let me not see
takes her up. My idol thus bow, and incline to me.

Full. Sure you look on me with false eyes, or else
You see me changed into a loathsome creature:
Suspicion of guilt in an Empress makes her
Seem foul, and guilty to her felf and others.
So I am in effect: a Viper though
He casts no poison forth; his very touches
Are venomous: th'offring to embrace me
In Florus has methinks with leprosy
Infected all my parts. Good Sir have mercy
kneels again. On your poor Fulvia here; and let me die;
When life is now my greatest misery.

Val. His blood shall rather satisfy the offense,
Who trespast on thy spotless innocence:
And though he seems at too cheap a rate
By single death his crime to expiate;
It Is recompenc't at once to see him die,
And live in a perpetual infamy;
Whilst thou the best of women; glory of
embraces her. The present age, and honor of thy sex,
Shall like a star of the first magnitude,
Shine glorious in the firmament of honor.
However yet, my dearest Fulvia,
The heavens in their happiness delay:
Thy presence, though so much desired there,
T'instruct the age is necessary here.

Full. My noble Lord, my duty,
So hitherto obsequious to your will,
Shall strive then to obey your last commands.

Val. O now thou speakst like Fulvia, and thy self:
Thy passions can never long transform thee:
Come let us go to my Pavilion, and
Consult upon the manner, how to put
In speedy execution our revenge:
The just effects of which shall never cease,
Till in the Traitors blood I find my peace

Exeunt. Florus. Honorius. Flo. It Is strange methinks, Honorius, that you,
An Epicurean by Sect should be
An enemy of love; the greatest pleasure,
When once obtained, in the enjoyment of
What we call perfect beauty; a happiness
So frequently desired, so seldom found.

Hon. The nature of true pleasure cannot consist
In the delights of love, which leave the soul
Not satisfied, when the most satiated;
Whilst in her interchangeably there fight
Restless disgust, and restless appetite.
True pleasures no remorse, but leave behind
Them still a grateful odor in the mind.

Flo. They ill discourse of love, who are no lovers.


Hon. It troubles me to see the royal fort
Of noble Florus heart thus yielded up.

Flo. It Is given up to him, who conquers all things;
And will in time the brave Honorius breast,
Where virtue keeps so strong a garrison.

Hon. It must be weak, if so contemptible
An Adversary can his entrance force.

Flo. Neglect of the Enemy destroys the valiant:


Hon. The fear of him dejecteth noble spirits.


Flo. Who apprehends his Adversary may
Preserve his honor, though he lose the day.

Hon. Esteem of him is distrust in our selves.


Flo. A prudent fear companion is of valor.


Hon. It Is rather of an irresolved mind.


To them Aurelia. Flo. But stay, behold: here breaks the beauteous light,
Which will these difficulties clear.
Honorius stand firm; what means this change?
Honorius surpised at her beauty. Let not thy actions contradict thy words.

Hon. My hearts unmoved: but the external sense
In such surprisals has no sure defense.

exit. Au. Yonder he comes; his eyes are fixed on mine;
Those false lights, which will lead him to his ruin.
Love and Disdain, two raging firebrands,
Are of the mind; their common residence
Is in the heart; but raise a general
Disturbance in the soul, confounding all
Her faculties. They are of equal force,
Contending for the prize with emulation;
But in effect and nature contrary;
The one producing hatred, and the other
Gentle affection: when these fierce Combatants
In duel are; the heart too narrow a field
For two such Foes groans languishing in torment,
Till one the victor shall subdue the other;
As here Disdain has Love in me, by force
Compelling me to act a damned part
Against my nature, conscience, and my heart.
My honor does depend upon his death;
aside. And yet perchance my life depends on his.
But I am now engaged past all retreat.

Flo. O my Aurelia (pardon this presumption)
If I am bold to call you so upon
So new acquaintance; my love's of longer date.

Au. And so is mine; however that love's poor,
Which time requires to grow up to perfection.
Mine of another nature was; at once
Finding conception, and maturity;
Both at first sight of you. Flo. But what was stranger;
I found my heart enflamed from the shadow,
And picture of you only: from dead colors
Love first found life in me: I selt the heat,
Before I saw the light: wonder not then
If I stand trembling in the presence of
My Goddess, when the luster of her only
Image I could not with these eyes sustain;
Which from that time is ever in my thoughts.

Au. It Is long, amongst your very enemies,
That fame has painted your illustrious person,
Heroique actions (though perchance with colors
Defective from the life) and your great merit:
Wonder not then, that I forgetting my
Imperial dignity, and virgin blushes;
And other ceremonious restraints,
So suddenly am thus become your captive.

Flo. Can this be true, Aurelia? can the heavens
So prodigally pour on me their blessings.

Au. To see you; and to fall in love with you,
Sir, things are different; but by those heavens
You mentioned, happened to me in one moment.

Flo. Why should we fear, that time should then destroy,
What time did not produce; that is our affection.

Au. It Is true; but violent flames, like ours, we see
Consume their nourishing fuels, and themselves;
And we think happier those, whom love inspires
With moderate heats, with moderate desires:
Which keep themselves alive like glowing fires.

Flo. My life, my soul, my dear Aurelia,
Make here no mention of sinister surmises.
My breast not comprehending well the greatness
Of my felicity, gives place too fast
Already to my fears. I cannot think
My fortune unforeseen will constant prove.

Au. Sir you may fix her, if you will execute
What the sense of this Letter will persuade you.

Gives him a Letter, which. he reads as follows. Flo. Florus, I have, through
my affection, to you, restored to liberty your friend, and my prisoner of war
Honorius; who has discovered to me your secret love of our Princess Aurelia;
from whom I have obtained a correspondent affection for you, by the consent of
her Father: who much desires to adopt such a Son for his Successor in the
Empire. The affection, and interest you have in the Army, ministers a fair
occasion of revenging your self of a cruel adversary of your Father, by
disarming Valentius of his chiefest forces. I expect your sudden answer, and
concurrence to your own happiness.

Arsenius. What Is this I see? new treacheries against me?
This Letter is writ by Arsenius.
How comes Aurelia to present it, who
aside. Declares her self enemy of Hostilius.
Can she dissemble? a person of such honor?

Au. -- What strange suspension is this which I see,
Sir, in your thoughts, and looks suddenly changed?
Be resolute; the question's only here,
Whether you will concur in the procuring
Your Father's happiness, your own, and mine.

Flo. I can no amorous correspondence purchase
At such a rate, thus forfeiting my honor.

Au. Sir 'twas plebeian folly
Which first raised Idols; and then worshipped them;
And amongst others this of honor; but
I hope your thoughts fly higher, not confind
Within the limits of law, custom, justice;
Shackles for Common people, not for Princes;
Great Ravagers of sea, and land like you.

Flo. Unhappy Florus! what a celestial shape
A Fury here has taken to betray thee.
-- Vile woman take thy Letter;
throws back the Letter. Inveigle some less cautious with these arts.
I loved thee, whilst I thought thee lover of
Thy honor; but do now as much detest thee,
As I do thy most detestable crime.
I could now kill thee; for though little honor
half draws. Would in it appear; the action commendable
Would be to purge the world of so infectious
A Pestilence: yet live; thou will resent
puts up. Thus, I believe, the greater punishment.

Au. Aurelia; now it is time to come to action;
Repentance is too late: crimes of this nature,
If once begun, are never secure till finished.
Friends, Officers, Commanders, hasten
To the defense of a distressed Lady,
cries out near the Tents. An innocent Virgin, an unhappy Princess.

To them Valentius, Statilius, Fulvia, etc. as out of the Praetorian Tents.
Val. VVast you Aurelia, who made this outcry?


Au. Yes, great Valentius, it was I; 'twas I;
The most unfortunate Aurelia,
To whom no place I see will afford refuge:
For what security can I my self
Promise from your protection, when your General,
My Fathers private friend, threatens by force
To bring me back to his Camp, persuaded by
This Letter, which he has cast into my hands,
gives the Letter to Valentius. That I fondly in love must yield my felf
His prey, to satisfy my Fathers pleasure,
My present enemy; who persecutes,
My honor, dearer to me then my life.
His rage has been so violent on my
Refusal, that he drew his sword upon me;
A poor distressed woman!
Deny this Villain if thou can; see there
His sword yet scarcely sheathed.

Flo. Sir hear me speak.


Val. Perfidious Traitor, interrupt her not.


Au. -- Sir I hope
You Will as a Prince your patronage afford
kneels. To the distressed, and as a Judge condemn
So foul a criminal.
Look on me not as Daughter of a Tyrant,
And of your Enemy; but as the Niece
Of Fulvia, your pious virtuous Empress.
rises. If I cannot obtain revenge, I Will rather
Choose gloriously to die by my own hands,
Then afford matter to another crime;
Here, I swear by those Gods, who see me injured.

Flo. Your Majesty will let me speak.


Val. I will not.
O ye coelestinl powers, in what strange darkness
Are our human affairs involved: from you
We know not what to ask, or what to fear.
So off our wishes prove our fatal ruin:
So often by what we feared, we are preserved.
I never sought your favors with such fervent
Prayers for my self, as for this monster; whom
Moved with a false inspired love, I have
From his green years here fostered in my bosom;
Preserved his beauteous youth from all abuse,
And afterward, before his age admitted,
Heap't honors on him to afford him matter,
In all the three parts of the world, of Triumph;
Where I have made his name glorious and feared,
That at the last I might fear him my self.

Full. -- Sir I could wish you would read.
His Fathers private Letter; but alas!
I fear 'twill turn your passion into rage.

Val. I will; to disarm him of all excuse.


He is reading the letter at some distance. Full. Now I triumph to see thy
boasting fate
Bow, and submit it self to Fulvia's hate.

Au, And from this moment I esteem my self To Florus apart.
Happy; now I have made thee miserable.

Flo. O cruel creatures, leave me to my self.


Au. No; I Will torment thee here; when thou art dead,
My Brothers ghost shall act that part; whom thou
Inhumanly did murder in cold blood.

Flo. 'Twas only by the chance of war he fell.


Au. Know once, thou were the only object of
My love, as now of hatred; which when any
Remorse of conscience would extinguish in me,
Plucks forth the bloody handkerchef. See here; thus with that blood I wiped
away.

Full. O my revenge, sweeter then life, or love.


Au. O how my joy increases with his torment.


Val. How much I was deceived; he shall straight die.
In reading the letter Val. often stamps and cries Traitor. Shows the letter.
My dearest Fulvia, what is the matter with him?

Full. He rages only to see himself discovered.


Flo. Sir, will your Majesty be pleased to hear me.


Val. Speak arrogant Traitor then; only in answer
To what I ask: is this the writing of
Arsenius? confess; is he thy Father?

Flo. Should I deny Arsenius, Sir, to be
My Father, I should be ungrateful to him
Who gave me being; which the Gods defend.

Val. It was thy choice then rather to express
Thy gratitude to him, a public Rebel,
And Traitor to his Country, then to me,
The common Father of her; thy peculiar,
And so great benefactor. See, Statilius,
To have Honorius found out; as I
Believe confederate in this treason; and
Macrinus, who, persuading us he was
The Father of him, has concealed his true
Extraction.

Sta. I shall obey.


Exit. Val. Thy crimes so horrid are, that with the greatest
I cannot reproach thee; neither stands it with
The reputation of a man of honor,
Much less a Princes dignity to speak them.
To them Honorius. Arsenius. -- Oh here opportunely comes another
Conspirator: Tell me, vile man, the reason
To Honorius, Of purchasing thy dear-bought liberty
With prostitution of thy honor; 'twas
Thou, who discoverdst to Arsenius, how
Florus was ready to betray me, when
He should obtain Aurelia for his bed.
Therefore thou shall fall with him: it were pity
That cruel death should separate that pair,
Which treacherous friendship has so fast united.

Ar. Unlucky son! thus betrayed by thy self;
aside. And I become a miserable Father,
In only seeking a Sons happiness.

Val. What he is astonished to be thus found out.


Hon. No: it is to have my faith suspected only,
Who with expense of blood so often have purchased
The reputation of my Prince.

Ar. Unfortunate Arsenius! constrained
Here to accuse thy self of guilt and die
aside. Dishonored, to express a loving Father
To him; who scarce vouchsafed to be thy Son.

Val. When once thy actions have deceived me, I
Should too incautious be, to be surpised
With the fair language of discovered traitors.

Ar. Ah, cruel Prince! if there be treachery, it is mine;
It Is mine alone; Florus is guilty of
No other crime, but disobeying of
A Father in obedience to thee;
Which has alike Honorius made ungrateful
To me, the author of his liberty.
I am Arsenius: and though I was
Plucks off his disguise. Injuriously upon a false suspicion
Banished the Empire; I Will confess my self
A criminal, to save the innocent.
O spare a Son; become an enemy
To his own Father, to obey his Prince.
O spare a Friend; whose gallant braverie
So nobly scorned my treacherous courtesy.
Let me fall; with my blood these gray hairs stain,
Who thus alone have my own ruin wrought;
The fittest sacrifice for thy revenge.

Val. Arsenius! Arsenius here! why this clears all my doubts.

Says this in amaze.
Flo. Unhappy Father; this is to reproach
A weakness in me, not to think this heart
Sufficiently courageous to sustain
The injust indignation of one man.
Let not your Majesty deceive your self;
Had I not been incautious in my love,
My Father had not incurred this suspisition
Of treachery; not caused by malice, but
Compassion of rash folly in a Son.

Hon. Florus, this language is offensive to
Thy virtue, and our friendship, in supposing
Your self the least way guilty; in your life
If you to envy subject were, in death
Be not to infamy. Let glory triumph
Over thy nature; let thy Father perish,
Thy Friend, thy self; but let thy honor live.

Ar. My only Son, let me fall by thy hands:
Compassion it is, not cruelty to take
My life in my old age, and save my honor.

Flo. Take rather, Sir, that life, which you have given
To me now for my misery; already
I for my glory have lived long enough.

Ho. Cheer up friends; it is for us, who gloriously
Have known the way to live so many years,
Easy to die like Romans in a moment.

Full. Why thus amused?


Au. What do you ruminate?

To Valentius.
Ant. Sir, as the case stands now, your only counsel
Is to take none.

Au. But think of execution.


Val. As a ship seeming with her ful-blown sails
To make a high and rapid course, sometimes
Is checked, and drawn back by an unknown current:
So I methinks now ardently pursuing
Revenge; thus instigated by my reason,
And passion feel within me secret motives,
Which would retard my will. But I must break
Through these impediments. They all shall die
And from thee, Fulvia, shall receive their sentence.
Thou for thy answering my great benefits
With an unparalled ingratitude.
To Flous. Thou, who preferd'st before thy loyalty
A friendship so dishonorable, shall,
Now see the fruits of thy unlucky choice.
To. Honorius. And thou inured to treason, who at last
Betrayd'st thy self, shall see how the just heavens
Convert thy crimes into thy punishment.
To Arsenius. Thus Treason is discovered in the birth:
The Gods of heaven protect the Gods of earth.

Ex. Val. etc. Florus. Honorius. Arsenius. manent. Ar. Come let our minds be
cheerful: now they shall
No longer prisoners be; we are just sailing
Out of the narrow channel of this life
Into the Port, or rather boundless Ocean
Of everlasting, unrestrained freedom.

Full. It Is true; we are now on the confines of
That vast, immense, inconfin'd liberty,
Which men call Death.

Honorius, if I loved thee
So much here; I shall more hereafter.

Hon. No;
Now comes the period of our friendship; and
Of what concerns, us but our memory.
There Is nothing after death; and death it self is nothing,
At least in all respects to us; for whilst
We are, death is not; and when death is,
We are no more; and therefore nothing more
Can us concern, or humane nature, when
Our gross and airy parts are separated.

Full. -- But the immortal soul
Of the renowned Honorius shall embellish
The heavens; where it shall give, and receive
New light and luster, and the just reward
Of his so gloriously transacted life.

Hon. I never indulged my self the liberty
Of any vice, as odious in its nature.
I ever honored virtue for her self;
And paid the tribute of my worship to
The immortal Gods, as due to those high powers;
Not for reward, or punishment; me thoughts
That was, like Merchants, to conditionate
Irreverently with those celestial powers.
So I preserved my constancy of mind,
Dejected never by superstitious fears,
Nor pust up, and exalted by false hopes;
But still in even balance.

To them Fulvia and Aurelia. Ar. -- How importunly here
These women enter, to disturb us in
Our passage to eternal happiness,
The Inheritance of noble souls. Full. Aurelia,
These men, deserted of their former valor,
Have now recourse to false opinions of
Philosophers, and Pedants; and would fain
Persuade themselves, that death's no misery;
But know it is of all the last, and greatest;
Horrid, and terrible in her own nature;
As contrary to the enjoyment of
This pleasant light; of which He now deprive you.

Hon. -- Impure creatures be gone.
The earth does many monsters generate;
So does the sea; yet nothing can produce
So mischievous in nature, as a woman,
Pursuing her revenge, and scorning honor.
Mankind should have been propagated from
Some other origin, and not from this;
The fatal source, the occasion, and cause
Of all his miseries, and servitude.

Au. Thou base reviler of that sex, which gave
Thee life with hazard of her own, have here
Extinguished quite all sense of that compassion,
Which I, methoughts, felt moving in my breast.

Full. Aurelia, what pleasure it is to see
Them thus tormented in their rage: if there
Were any peace in death, 'twill make their death
Less peaceable; But you great Generals,
Deep Politicians, and prime leaders in
Affairs of War and State; who filled the world
With so much noise, tumult, and blood, with what
Thoughts can you now reflect upon your selves?
Armed yesterday with numerous legions; now
Thus circumvented by the stratagem
Of us poor silly, simple, virtuous women.

Flo. It is my glory, not a reproach to me
To have such impious creatures seek my death.

Full. Which thou will undergo with high regret;
I know thy soul enamored on thy body
(Th 'object once of my love, as now of hatred)
Cannot but with great indignation quit
Her lovely, pleasant, and delightful mansion.

Flo. Not when she sees the neighborhood infested
With such infectious pestilent diseases.

Full. She must when she no benefit can find
In death, accompanied with infamy;
Which if she have a being, will torment her;
If not; then nothing will remain of thee
Hereafter, but an odious memory.

Hon. Let us, as it becomes us, go, and die.


Flo. Death's our admission into liberty.


Full. The entrance into confusion, and darkness,
Out of which no man ever found his way.

Ar. The ease of troubled minds.


Full. Their only horror.


Flo. The safe port of the virtuous.


Full. The only rock,
Which human nature ever apprehends.

Flo. None but such impious creatures, as thou art;
Who nor in life, nor death can have repose.

Hon. Come let us die the examples of true virtue.


Full. The sacrifices of my furious rage.


Ar. We'll freely meet our death.


Full. Your execution,
Where you shall fall the trophies of my triumph.

Flo. The types of honor; how happier it is to die
So, then like you, to live in infamy.

Full. All after death uncertain is: in life
No such felicity as our revenge.

ACT. V.
Aurelia disguised. Aur. O Thou bright glorious morning;
Thou oriental springtime of the day,
Who with thy mixed vermillion colors paintest
The Skies, these Hills, and Plains: thou do return
In thy accustomed manner; but with thee
Shall never return my wonted happiness.
Here thou reducest back with thee, the early
Light, and the golden Planet of the day,
To revive, and illustrate with his presence
The troubled world: thou chasing noisome darkness,
And clouds of discontent, illuminat'st
All hearts with joy and cheerfulness but mine.
From thy approach all things receive below
New face, and restoration: The usurping
Seas, which devour the innocent, become
Calm in their channels; the rebellious winds,
Public disturbers of the peace of nature,
Find and give rest to the other elements.
All beasts of rapin, Lions, Wolves, and Tigers,
Have their repose: Only a guilty mind
No cure, no peace, no rest shall ever find.
Here in my breast, as in her loathed cell,
Eternal horror will for ever dwell.

To her Sophonia disguised like an Eunuch. An. -- O Sophonia,
Since last night parting, we our habits changed
In this disguise, these eyes have known no sleep.

Soph. Nor will not, Madam, if you keep them open
Thus to your tears: mine are long since dried up;
Unless they are such, which have so many years
Continually distilled within my heart.

Au. -- O I shall never sleep more:
The clear sunshine of my serener days,
In a short moment vanishing, is here
Succeeded by a fearful night of horror,
Which will never know a setting, but in death.

Soph. Thy tender years, Aurelia, know not
The nature yet of death; it is so lately
From me thou learnst to live.

Au. And have not the
Cursed fruits of this last passage of my life
Most rarely answered the blossoms of thy hopes
Of me? e're that my virgin honor
Were lost, thus to contaminate my self
With so detestable a parricide.

Soph. Desire of revenge transported you.


Au. -- Which the immortal Gods
Permit us never to execute our selves.
O what infernal torments equal mine!
Hating to live; I am afraid to die;
Yet never can hope ease to my misery.
Now since, I hear, my Brother Lucius fell
Only by the unlucky chance of war.
O the most cruel nature of my Father!
Thus to abuse my credulous ignorance.

Soph. Madam, did he inform you otherwise?


Ar. Yes; and persuaded me that Florus killed him
With his own hands in cold blood after battle;
And thus deluded, gave me the cursed employment
Of cutting of this General in his Camp;
The only person which I loved, of whom
I had the fortune to be loved again.

Soph. It was unjustly done, thus to deceive you.


Au. 'Twas his insatiate thirst of human blood;
Which, since I find increasing with his age,
I have thought of the effusion of some,
Which if not satisfying, will delight
Perchance his strange capricious appetite.

Soph. I scarce know what this language signifies;
I hope you think not by some greater sin
To wash away the lesser; Madam,
Your virgin tears will best perform this office.

Au. No; my offense is of a deeper stain,
And must be washed in blood: I have alreayd
Thought of the way, and fixed my resolution.
In this disguised habit I Will tell my Father,
That I the fatal executioner
Have been of his Aurelia, on pretense
Valentius had discovered my design:
Now straight I know his rage will prompt him to
Kill me with his own hands; so that I shall
Immediately the proper trophy fall
Of the most injured Florus funeral.
And, if the blood of an usurping Tyrant
Be ever the most grateful sacrifice
To the immortal Gods, as certainly
It is, I hope that mine derived from him
Will prove an acceptable offering.
The man whom I loved best, he made me kill.
Her blood whom he loves best, I Will make him spill.
Ye Gods, look down then with propitious eyes
On him the Priest, and me the Sacrifice.

Soph. I am at present in an ill condition
To give, or take advice, having resolved
Not to outlive the setting of this Sun.

Au. Sophonia, it is not fit that you
Perform the penance of another crime.
Is mine so great? or are the Gods so cruel;
That nor my tears, nor blood can washed away.

Soph. No, you more white will after this offense
Rise and appear, then in your innocence.

Au. O my Sophonia; must we now depart?


Soph. Yes never more to meet again.


Au. I am not
So sorry to forsake the light, as thee.

Soph. It Is long since thou the only light have been
Of these mine eyes.

Au. And thou even of my soul:
Which never felt eclipse, but in thy absence.
Farewell.

Soph. Farewell.


Au. Farewell my dear Sophonia:
Shall I once more, and this the last time join
These treacherous and perfidious lips to thine?

Exeunt. Hostilius. I wonder I have no intelligence
From my Aurelia: my too forward fears.
Would fain persuade me that she has miscarri'd
In my last enterprise: I must confess,
The employment was of a strange nature, to
Make her conspire, and act against the person,
Whom above all mankind she loved thee most.

To him a Messenger, and Aurelia disguised. Mess. Sir, here is a person from the
enemy's Camp
Desires speedy admittance.

Hos. Let him enter.
Some happy news, I hope now, from my daughter.
Sir, your business.

Au. It is of such importance,
That 'twill require privacie to hear it.

Hos. Leave us alone; first tell me who you are.


Au. My name is Oppius, and I am the Son
Of a Captain of the Praetorian Cohorts:
My Message to your Majesty is concerning
Aurelia the Princess.

Hos. O let me
Embrace thee; not a messenger from heaven
Could be so welcome.

Au. But I fear my news
Will not be so: In short the horrid plot,
Which you designed against our General
Has been discovered; and Aurelia,
Not like a lawful enemy, but like
A Traitor has received her punishment.

Hos. How! pray tell me then what is become of her.


Au. Sir, I by order of Valentius
Have been her Executioner; and here
Behold the fatal Instrument; as yet
Remaining stained with her most guilty blood.

Hos. Stay, let me see it; take this reward, for thy
So civil message, civilly delivered.

Stabs her Au. Enought; enough Hostilius; I have
What I expected: I am thy Aurelia.

Hos. Aurelia! ah my Aurelia; what has made thee draw
This punishment upon thy self, and me.

Au. Sir, I methoughts had left no other way
To wash away your horrid guilt, and mine
In the effusion of the blood of Florus.
O thou his noble soul, which hover'st here
About me, though invisible, and can not
Repair to thy celestial origin
So soon; not being by thy fate, but my
Perfidious treachery divorced from
Thy lovely body, look down on my complaint;
See how thy injury is vindicated.
Why cannot my soul follow thee? she shall,
And mounted on the wings of love shall fly
To that part of the pure celestial sky,
Where thou shall -- O Florus, Florus, Florus --

dies. Hos. Ah how I have at once wounded two breasts,
And in thy death deprived my self of life.
That blood of thine is mine; the torments which
Afflict thy body, I feel in my soul. Who waits there.
To him some Attendants. Though this young Gentleman I have discovered
My enemy, and as a Spy dispatched him;
Yet since he was of high Patritian blood,
See that his body privately you burn,
And close the ashes in a marble Urn.

Exeunt. Valentius. Statilius. Sta. Sir, the Camp is full of the news already;
Who say their General was sacrificed
To satisfy some factions of the Court.

Val. Were not all testimonies clear against him?


Sta. No Sir, it is thought you were uxoriously
Subject to the ill government of women,
Whose practices should ever be suspected.
Their vows, nor oaths; their frowns, nor pleasant looks;
Their smiles, nor tears should conclude nothing in us.
Man's heart is seldom known; a woman's never.

Val. O good Statilius compassionate
Me, and my years, so far distant from dotage;
Which otherwise might plead in my behalf.

Sta. It neither can become your Majesty,
Nor my condition longer to delude you
With idle entertainments of false hopes.
You are betrayed; Aurelia is retired
Into her Fathers Court; whom Fulvia followed.
Servilius has delivered up the Bridge
Committed to his custody; where he,
And Carbo with their legions have past
To fight under the colors of Hostilius.
Sir, these the fruits are of the intercourse
Betwixt the Empress, and her beauteous Niece.

Val. How long have I this viper in my bosom,
Never suspected for a poisonous creature.
O the vain hopes of my approaching triumph
In the air vanished! O my reputation
Betrayed by those, in whose hands 'twas committed,
As in the safest custody.

Exeunt. Sophonia disguised. Soph. So now methinks the stormy weathers past
Of my tempestuous life; and if a fair
Evening will crown the day, sure I shall set
Now red and gloriously here in my blood,
Which with these daring hands I Will now let forth,
To vindicate my honor and my worth.

To her Valentius, as it were speaking to some in the Tents. Soph. But see;
yonder he comes, the cruel author
Of all thy miseries; the murderer
Of thy fair reputation; and thy Son;
And as he thought of thee. Valentius,
Here thou shall see in this Paper the motives
Gives him a Paper. Of thy repentance; the defense of such
Whom most injustly thou have put to death.
Rash man in thy suspicion; cruel in
Thy execution; from this very moment
Begin to be unhappy: yesterday
Thou lost thy Son; and now thy Wife, the true
Empress here falls before thee.

Stabs her self. Val. Come in, and take this body forth. What strange
Phantasms are these? which scorn my power; and
Torment my sight with dismal objects; and
My soul with these reproaches. O Statilius.
To him Statilius. The friend, and the Companion of thy Prince,
Thou opportunely comst to my assistance;
If there were any: in this memorial,
By her presented, who is now a Carkase,
Included is the full malignity
Of my misfortune. Yesterday, she said,
I lost my Son, and now my Wife; but how
Can that be, if the Empress Palladia,
So many years are past, died without issue.

Sta. This is some person, who at the approach,
And horror of her death, distracted spoke
She knew not what.

Val. Ah how I fear this was the true Palladia.


Sta. How can that be? that from the dead one should
Arise, is more then a Poetique fiction.

Val. If this were false, I could not be so troubled.


Sta. Sir recollect your former mind, too much
Dejected with a falsifi'd appearance.

Val. Sure 'twas the head divided from her body,
Which by Macrinus was exposed before
These eyes: yet I suspect their faith unless
Where they, as here, shall make me miserable.

Sta. Sir, if you doubt your own, trust mine; who saw
And had her head within these hands: you know
To me alone you did impart this secret.

Val. It Is true; but why defer I thus to read
This short memorial, which may pacify
Perchance these thoughts, and troubles in my mind.

Sta. -- Securely read it


Val. My hand shakes, and my heart trembles at
The opening of it; and a sudden horror
Congeals within me all my vital spirits.
What horrid spectacle is this!
My eyes deceive me, when they should preserve
My honor; not when they should make me happy.
These are Palladia's true Characters.

Sta. Sir you will find the conceptions different.


Valentius reads, Val. Valentius, Thy inclination to cruelty has made thee
guilty of two strange errors; the first in the injust condemnation of Palladia,
upon a false suspicion: who yet escaped the execution of thy barbarous design:
the last not only in the mistake of the crime, but the criminal. The true name
of Florus was Vespasius, whose Father was Valentius; and not Arsenius, or
Macrinus. Palladia was his Mother; whose loss not being able to sustain (for he
was falsely accused) she made choice of a violent death. If thou desir'st in
thy self a fruitless remorse; Macrinus will give thee an account of her
inviolate integrity; and of other occurrents sufficient to make thee miserable.


Sta. What can a soul believe? when thus deluded
By senses; which are thought her true informers.

Val. O my suspicions equally fatal to me
When they are just, or false! O my sad visions
So feared and apprehended without profit:
And verified in me with my ruin.
Useless advises of the heavens; that
They only might reproach me with imprudence.
When I securely thought them vain, or past;
I found my ignorance exposer of them.
O thou black dismal day; arising only
To see my honor blasted with thy light,
And confound me in an eternal night.

Sta. Let not your Majesty's misfortunes triumph
In the dejecting your high noble spirit.
Perchance your complaints are not rational.
Why should you credit to your senses give
Only, when they would make you miserable,
Refusing when they satisfy your wishes.
But see here happily Macrinus comes;
To dissipate the clouds, which here involve us.

To them Macrinus. Val. O thou Protector of mine enemies;
And Traitor of the honor of my Empress;
And of my Son; why have thou thus abused me?

Mac. Sir, if it is to be compassionate
An error; I cannot excuse my self.

Val. No Traitor; all circumstances accuse thee.
Thy very silence speaks aloud against thee;
The accursed silence, which has thus ruined me.
If Florus was my Son; or if Palladia
Were innocent; why did thou not tell me? Was I
So great a hater of religious truth.

Mac. In Princes with new Wives, and their Attendants
Surrounded; and with passions prepossest,
Truth finds her entrance doubly barricadoed.
This, rather then to justify with hazard,
Made me choose to secure the innocent.

Val. Tell me how can Palladia be absolved
From her lasciviousness; when I saw my self
Her Lovers Letter, where in amorous language
He promises to temperate those heats*
Which so consumed him, in his absence from her.
Can any thing appear more evident?

Mac. Not in a form so near resembling truth;
Which I unveiled will expose to your view.
Calantha a Pannonian Lady, Cousin
Of th'Empress; loving a Roman Knight,
Called Plancus, then of her domestique Train;
Procured her consent, that in Pages habit
She might repair to Court; and so discover
The ardency of her affection to him.
She changing then her person, and her name
Into Lucrinus, writ that Letter, which so
Subscribed, the occasion was of your mistake,
And gelosie.

Sta. Sir, which was grounded on
Such probabilities; which will exempt you
From being censured rash.

Val. Ah let him proceed
To tell me how he saved Palladia from
My furious rage.

Mac. When that you had enjoined me
The private execution of her, in
My village; where Calantha waited on her;
And where we all lamented our ill fortunes;
Secure of each ones innocence; but
Could find no remedy; at last Calantha
Having some respite with her tears, comes to me,
Affirming that she had found out the way,
To lead us out of this dark labyrinth:
She bid me only find her in her Closet,
Within two hours; where I should in writing
See her design; and, as she knew, approve it.
The time arrived, I went to see her; whom
I newly found expired, with a bloody*
Dagger in her right hand, and in the left
This Paper, which will clear part of the story.

Val. Statilius, read it.


Sta. Macrinus, thy only respect of virtue, and innocence, has made thee inform
us of thy odious commission, to make a present this night of my Cousin
Palladia's head to the Emperor: In whose stead I beseech thee to take mine,
divided from my body. It Is the only, and last request, which I dying, entreat
of thee. Our age, complexions, and features, were so alike, that they will
remain undistinguisht in death. With this happy delusion thou will incur no
suspicion of neglecting the Emperor's severe Commands. And the life of the
Empress will be hereby preserved: Together with my reputation, in thus
declaring I have not betrayed so incomparable a Princess.


Calantha, or the Counterfeit Lucrinus. Sta. O memorable act! where shall we
find
Roman, or Grecian Pens to celebrate
Sufficiently the worth of this brave woman.

Val. How strangely fortune has industrious been
In this my ruin. What became of Palladia?

Mac. Having performed what this Letter desired,
From her with difficulty I obtained
Patience to live, concealed in my Village;
Till she brrought forth a Son unfortunate
No less in birth, then death, named Vespasius;
Who yesterday expired (you know the manner)
Under the name of Florus. After that
I placed her in the family of Hostilius;
Where she was Nurse, and Governess of his
Aurelia; and her great virtues, the
Delight, and admiration of his Court;
Till now impatient for the loss of her
Vespasius, she used violence on her self.
The unhappy Mother of an unhappy Son.

Sta. These are events t'astonish minds at once
With grief, and wonder; horror, and amazement.

Val. O ye Gods! was there so much artifice
Required to make one man miserable?
With what contrivance you have wrought my ruin!
O my Palladia! equally to me
Unfortunate in the suspicion of
Thy loyalty; and clearing of thy fame!
Unhappy Son! discovered now my Son;
When I unworthy am to be thy Father!
Ah Florus! now thy innocence is proved;
When I, thy Father, am guilty of thy murder.

Sta. Great persons, when they are injured in their honor,
Pursue the offense with death; you thought you were so.

Val. O interrupt us not: thou have not yet
Related, how thou did deceive the world,
Making Vespasius appear for thy Son;
Nor by what error, poor Arsenius thought
Him his; which false belief cost him his life.
Every one sought the glory to be his
Father; but I the Monster who begot him.

Mac. Some few days after this your Son saw light,
Arsenius had a Son named Florus; whom
(When he was banished the whole Roman Empire)
He to my care committed; but he proved
Of small survivance; which I concealed from him,
Making Vespasius pass for his Son Florus:
Not willing to add to the affliction of
His exile this new loss. In the mean space
(Whilst Arsenius commanded Persian Armies)
Tespasius growing up in years, and hopes,
I told him he was Son of this great General;
Though the world thought him mine: which troubled him
To think he should his first relation have
Sir, to your greatest enemy; and whom,
Hostilius raising tumults in the Empire,
Restored, and made his General to oppose you.
What for their benefit I contrived, in the end
Has proved the fatal ruin of them both.

Val. O the convulsions of my distracted soul,
Desiring, though not yet deserving death.
O my eyes, given me only for my torment;
What will ye first lament? the desperation
Of a Wife; or the murder of a Son;
Or my lost honor: And I yet alive?
Am I still called a Prince, or Emperor?
Are these my eyes thought worthy of the light?
Yes; and perchance it is to betray me with
More fatal errors, then my former were.
Is there no courteous hand will arm it self
Against me? but with what? with that Poniard,
So cruelly stained in the bowels of
My Son: or else that which is infamous,
And wreaking yet distills with the chaste blood
Of my so injured Empress. Have I left
No friend, nor enemy? But why demand I
Goes to stab himself. That aid, which I can give my self?

Sta. Nay; hold Sir,
You may die with Statilius, not without him.

Here they hold him. Mac. Sir, it is the greatest of miseries, to think
Your heart not capable of enduring greater.

Val. Then let me die, to free me of this torment.


Sta. Sir, a great Prince like you, though life he hate,
Should stand in opposition to his fate.

Mac. And being as fearless to live, as die;
He should at once both life and death defy.

Val. From slaves we life take: not the power of dying:
Must my condition then be worse then theirs?
For heavens sake let me die, Statilius.

Sta. O Sir preserve that life, on which depends
The happiness of all your Friends, and Subjects.

Val. It Is vain to teach him pity, who has been
So cruel to his Son, and Wife, and thee,
The brave Honorius, glory of the age.

Mac. Your Majesty shall live, as long as I
Have force to oppose your death.

Val. Ah Traitor, have thou not
Conferred sufficient miseries upon me,
Unless thou do prolong them? Here this dagger
Shall be the instrument of my revenge on thee.

Sta. I cannot hold him: O Macrinus fly.


Here he gets out of their hands, and pursues Macrinus, who kills himself. Mac.
No: like a Roman, by these hands I Will die.


Val. He has escapt me.
However I will not escape my self.
So; now I shall die. Oh;
But not my name, or lasting memory.
Stabs himself. Of my rash and inhumane cruelty
Statilius, --
Thy Prince bids thee farewell, and goes to know,
Since here is none, if there be rest below.

dies. Sta. Valentius, thy brave soul is fled, that soul
Which did not only animate thy body,
But the whole fabric of the Roman Empire,
Which now lies buried in thy Funeral;
Such is the sequel of so great a fall.

FINIS.

