A SERMON Preached in the year of our Lord 1650. January 9. At the Baptizing of
THEOPHILUS, (Then Lord HASTINGS) Now EARL of Huntingdon.

By John Joins M. A. one of the Prebends of Lincoln, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable FERDINANDO then Earl of HUNTINGDON.

Baptizetur unusquisque vestrum, in Nomine Jesu Christi, in remissionem
peccatorum, and accipietis donum Spiritus Sancti.

Act. 2.38. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Edward Man, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Sign of the Swan near York-House in the Strand. 1668.

To the Right Honorable THEOPHILUS Earl of HUNTINGDON, Lord Hastings,
Hungerford, Botreaulx, Molyns, Moules, Slomet, and Peverell, etc.
MY LORD,
THis Sermon Preached Sixteen years ago and upward, upon your Lordships
Account (though then you was not able to take notice of it) having layne by me
ever since, does now, by your Lordships particular desire, (which I shall ever
interpret as a Command) present it self to your Lordships hands. It was my
desire (being sufficiently conscious to my self of several Reasons for it) that
it might have enjoyed the same security, by enjoying the same obscurity still.
But since your Lordship will have it otherwise, I prefer my obedience to all
other considerations, and wholly surrender my self and it to your Lordships
Disposal, hoping that if you shall think it fit (as I do not) to suffer it to
see any further light, then that of your Lordships Closet; it may appear under
the Patronage of your Honors name, as a small Testimony of the great
obligation I have to your Honor, and Noble Family: For whose health and
happiness daily prays (as in duty he is Bound)

My Lord, Your Honors most obliged and most humble Servant John Joins.

Luke 3. Verse 21, 22. Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass,
that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was opened.

And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, like a Dove upon him, and a
voice came from Heaven which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in Thee I am well
pleased.


SInce it has pleased Almighty God, in his gracious Providence, out of his
infinite mercy and goodness to this illustrious Family, to afford unto them
this new and lively hope, of repairing their late inestimable loss; so as for
one (and that their only) Son, sown in tears, to let them reap another in joy:
And since by the occasion of bringing this Infant to his Holy Baptism, the
opportunity of speaking concerning Baptism is so happily put into our hands; I
conceive I could not make a fitter choice of a Text of Scripture, whereupon to
ground such a discourse, than this, which is in short the History of his
Baptism who instituted ours. The Author of this Sacrament, and the Author of
our Salvation is the same, even our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who
instituted this holy Sacrament by his precept, and sanctified it by his
Example, and has promised to accompany the right use of it, by the internal
efficacy and operation of his holy Spirit unto the end of the world. Mat.
28.19, 20.
Go (says he) and teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. And lo I am with you always even to
the end of the world. Christ assists his own Ordinance, with his own spirit,
and promises here, that he will do so to the end of the world, which promise
he, for his part, will most surely perform, procuring in the Baptism of those
that are rightly Baptized, the same miraculous and supernatural effects, in an
internal and visible manner, that so visibly and openly happened at his own
Baptism; namely, the opening of Heaven; Conferring the Holy Ghost upon the
Baptized, and entering and enrolling of them as the servants and sons of God.
For so when he was baptized, we read, that the Heavens were opened, the Holy
Ghost came down, and a voice from Heaven was heard saying, Thou art my beloved
Son, in Thee I am well pleased.

How this is performed, shall be shown in the latter part of this Discourse,
when we come to a Review of the Text by way of Application. In the mean time we
will consider the words themselves as they are here Historically proposed and
laid down before us.

And so they will engage us to the observation of these three Particulars.

1. The Baptism it self, of our Savior. 2. The miraculous effects that
attended it, viz. the opening of Heaven; the descent of the Holy Ghost in a
visible shape; and lastly, a Voice from Heaven in an audible manner,
proclaiming our Savior to be the Son of God. 3. The Instrument or means
whereby all this was procured, viz. the Prayers of our Savior.
Jesus also being baptized [and praying,] the Heaven was opened, and the Holy
Ghost descended in a bodily shape, like a Dove upon him, and a Voice came from
Heaven which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased.

First, of the Baptism of our Savior. Now when all the people were baptized,
it came to pass that Jesus also being baptized, etc.

This: as all other Actions, is to be considered with those circumstances that
attend it; concerning which, the Story takes notice of three, Time, Company,
and Place.

1. For the time; It is said to have been when Jesus began to be about thirty
years of age, ver. 23. so old was our Savior when he entered upon his
Ministerial charge; not that his Abilities were not grown up till then, for we
read that at the age of twelve, Luke 2.46, 47.
he was able to Dispute with Doctors. To answer, and oppose too, to the
Admiration of the Hearers. But to teach us that the work of the Ministry is
not the work of Infants. The ancient Church (guided, no doubt by this example)
forbad any to enter upon that calling till Thirty. The present canons give a
greater liberty, but yet set a time, before which none shall be capable of holy
orders; which if it were not done; doubtless the general rule, of men's judging
of their readiness for this calling, would be the readiness of their preferment
when they entered upon it. Other things as to the circumstance of Time, with
reference to this Action, being only traditional, it will be enough (if not too
much) only to mention, not to insist upon them.

There is an ancient tradition that this Baptism of our Savior fell out on the
sixth of January, on which we celebrate the Feast of the Epiphany upon which
day likewise (as the same tradition says) the first miracle that our Savior
did of turning Water into Wine, did happen. What certainty there is of these
things, I determine not, any more than of what St. Austin tells us, concerning
the day of the work on which it happened, we (says he in a certain Homily of
his) was on the Lord's Day. Quam sace and venerabilis est hic Dies, etc. How
sacred and venerable (says he) is this Lords day of ours, on which so many
wonderful and remarkable things have fallen out for the universal benefit and
good of Mankind. This was the first day of the Creation, on which the Light was
created, being, as it were struck out of the Chaos by the Fiat, or almighty
Word of God. This the day on which the Children of Israel past on dry ground
through the Red Sea. This the day on which it first rained Manna: The day on
which Christ was baptized in Jordan: The day whereon he turned Water into Wine
in Cana of Galilee: The day on which his sacred Benediction multiplied five
Loaves to the satisfaction of five hundred persons: The day on which himself
rose from Death: The day on which he sent the Holy Ghost; And the day on which
we do expect him (so he) to appear a second time to Judgment.

Several of these things are affirmed to have happened on the day mentioned, by
Scripture it self; as for the rest that rely upon Tradition, I leave every one
at liberty to believe as he sees cause, and so pass to the next and more
material circumstance mentioned in the Text, and that is our Saviors
Associats, his fellow Communicants, or the persons that accompanied him in his
Baptism, and were Baptized with him; which the Evangelist tells us were (...)
All the People. Now when all the people were baptized it came to pass also that
Jesus being baptized, etc.

2. Circumstance company.
It was not a select Congregation, or Company of Saints, that Christ received
his Baptism among but a Rabble or mixed multitude; Pharisees, Saduces, Publicans
and Soldiers; Dregs of men, and according to the Baptists own Character, a
Generation of Vipers. Matthew. 3.7.


Our Savior Christ, without all doubt, was a person so pure that he stood in
no need at all, of any Baptismal Ablation, or Sacramental purification. 'Twas
he that purifyed that Element, and sanctified the waters themselves, to the
mystical washing away of sin. Yet you see, he not only complied with the
accustomed Rites of his Country (though there was no need for it at all) but
he chose to do it, in the company of ordinary and vulgar people, in a mixed
communion, the Rabble indeed, and a Generation of Vipers.

Does not this example of our Savior, sufficiently tax the Insolence and
singularity of those who refuse the Sacrament of the Lords Supper upon no other
account but this, that they must receive it in a mixed multitude? Though perhaps
they may think the company they receive it in, worse then that wherein our
Savior received his Baptism; yet I hope, they have not so high a conceit of
their own purity, as to think it greater than that of the Lamb of God, that was
undefiled and without spot. 1 Pet. 1.19.
And yet this great and real purity of his (transcendent and imparalleld as it
was) made him not disdain to communicate, in his baptism, with a generation of
Vipers. Sacramentorum Efficacia nullo modo pendet vel a dignitate ministrantium
vel a puritate communicantium. The efficacy of either Sacrament does in no sort
depend either upon the dignity of the Minister that gives it, or the purity of
the company that takes it, but upon the power and veracity of him that
instituted them, and promised to accompany the true use of his own ordinances,
by his own spirit to the end of the world.

It Is true, that the unworthy Receiver shall receive Damnation to himself. 1
Cor. 11.21.
But it is not his company but his sins that make him unworthy. And it is as
true, on the other side, that they that come prepared, and rightly disposed for
the Receiving of these holy Seals, neither the meanness or unworthiness of the
Minister, or the unfitness of other communicants, can render them uneffectual
to such, for the reason abovesaid, viz. That the efficacy of the Sacraments
depends not upon the worth or purity of either giver, or Fellow Receiver, but
upon the institution and promise of Christ. This has ever been held Orthodox
Divinity in this point, and Mr. Calvin himself delivers it for such, against
the Anabaptists and other Fanatics of his time, Instit. cap. 17. do Baptismo.
affirming them to be no better than Novations and Donatists, that teach
otherwise.

Thus much of the Company, the second circumstance observable in this Action.

3. Circumstance Place.
The third, (which is the Place) is not so material.

The Evangelists St. Matthew and St. Mark do assure us, it was in the River,
Jordan, of which some are so curious as to assign several Reasons. A^^^^st
others that I shall not now mention, I look up (...) of Thomas Aquinas as most
significant, P. 3. Qu. 1 Art.
viz. That the River Jordan being the water that the Children of Israel past
through into the Land of Promise, was the fittest to be made use of, in the
Justification of that Sacrament, by which we do (and without which we cannot)
enter into the kingdom of heaven; according to that of our Savior, Except a
man be born of water and of the spirit, To. 3.5.
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

And there are those that venture to tell us, That the place, in the River it
self, where our Savior was Baptized, was the very place the Children of Israel
past through, Jos. 4.
and that the Baptist pointed to those Stones, that Joshua caused to be erected
upon the shore, in memory of that miraculous passage, when he told the Jews,
Matthew. 3.9.
That God was able out of those Stones to raise up children unto Abraham. Of
the truth of these things let them that have the curiosity determine: St. John
the Evangelist tells us, that the place where the Baptist did Baptize, was
Aenon near Salim; whether this place was over against Jericho, where the
Israelites past this River, I leave to the Geographers to dispute. Whatsoever
the Reason was that moved our Savior to be Baptized in the River Jordan,
certain it is (as our Church professes in her office of Baptism) that by this
Action he did sanctify both that, and all other waters, to the mystical
washing away of sin.

And so I have done with the first Particular observable in this story, which
is the Baptism of our Savior, with the several circumstances of that Action.

2. Particular observable.
Of which the first is

The opening of Heaven.

The manner how this was performed, as it is not easy, so it is not necessary
to determine. That it was a real Rupture or Discontinuance of the heavenly
frame, is altogether improbable, but only an Appearance of an extraordinary
Light and Brightness in the air: which kind of Phoenomenon or Impression, they
that write of Meteors call Vorago or Hiatus; of which kind (it is to be
believed) was that Apparition that happened to St. Stephen, where he says,
That he saw the Heaven opened, Acts 7.56.
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. It is sufficient to believe, that
the Phoenomenon, or extraordinary Apparition of light, that was then beheld by
the spectators, did appear, or show it self to them, as if the Heavens had
really opened.

But beside this there appeared another wonder, which was,

2. The Holy Ghost like a Dove descending and lighting upon him.

The Heaven was opened and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, like a
Dove upon him. Waving all frivolous Questions about this matter, As, Whether
this was a Dove really, or in appearance only? Whether seen by our Savior and
the Baptist alone, or by the Company also? with some others more bold and
extravagant then these, As, Whether or no this Dove was assumed by the Holy
Ghost into the unity of the same Suppositum (as the Schools use to speak.)

It will be sufficient for us to take notice that God at this time was pleased
to honor the solemnity of his Sons baptism by so glorious and visible a
Miracle; which, though it was a sufficient Attestation that our Savior was a
Divine and extraordinary Person, yet was it not an infallible conviction, or
Demonstration that he was the Son of God. And therefore (as a full testimony of
that) this visible, was succeeded by an audible, but in all respects, as great
a Miracle; and that was

3. Miraculous effect.
3. A voice from Heaven pronouncing him to be the Son of God; And there came a
voice from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased.

Certainly this was the greatest solemnity that ever happened upon Earth; where
the mysterious Cabinet (as a late Author speaks) of the sacred Trinity, was
opened and exposed to the view of Mortals. God the Son in person of a Man; God
the Holy Ghost in the likeness of a Dove: And though no shape of God the Father
was seen, yet was his voice heard audibly, attesting the Divinity of our
Savior, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.



The means whereby these Miracles were procured. And that is here said to be The

Prayer of our Savior.

Now it came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized and praying, the Heaven
was opened, and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon
Him, and a voice came from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son in whom
I am well pleased. Concerning which, it will be as proper to speak in the
Review, or Application of this Text, unto the present occasion; unto which I
shall now address my self.

The Review.
When I consider how our Savior was baptized, not for himself, but for us; and
how he did submit himself to this Rite, that by his Example (as well as Precept
and Institution) he might consigne the use of this holy Sacrament) unto his
Church to the end of the world; I doubt not at all to affirm that one main End
of the happening of these great Miracles and Ostents at this time, was, That
they might serve as so many Predictions and Significations of the spiritual
Effects and Influences, that in all future Ages should accompany the use of
this Sacrament in the Church, especially it being assented to, as an undoubted
verity by all Christians, That there is nothing ritually prescribed, or
supernaturally happenning in Scripture, but relates either to something of
duty, or something of benefit in the Church. Insomuch that St. Paul speaks of
the Baptism of the Israelites under Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor.
10 1.
as referring to Christ: nay, he says that the Rock that followed them was
Christ: v. 4.
An expression to be understood like that of Genesis 41.26. where it is said, The
seven Kine are (i. per figure) seven years, as the Rock being struck yielded
them water; so Christ percussus ad mortem, Spiritum Sanctum suis obtinuit,
being struck to death, purchased the gifts of the Holy Spirit for his Church:
And as the Rock in effect, (that is, the water that came out of the Rock)
followed them in all their Journeys; so Christ by his Spirit accompanies his
Church to the end of the world. That Rock was Christ, (1.) was a lively figure
of Him.

But I return to the matter in hand; this being only a short Digression in
order to my present Design, which is to show, that the same Spirit which did
accompany Christ in his Baptism, does still accompany the Baptism of Christ;
and that in the right use of that Sacrament, Christ is, by his holy Spirit,
according to his promise, still present with his Church, and will be so to the
end of the world: And that the same miraculous effects that were performed when
he was Baptized are still performed in the due Administration of the Sacrament
of Baptism, though not in a visible, yet in a real manner; That therein, or
thereby Heaven is opened; That therein the Holy Ghost is conferred; and lastly,
that as Christ in his, was proclaimed to be the Son; so Christians in their
Baptism are received, admitted, and taken into the number, Roll, or List of the
Children of God.

1. Of the opening of Heaven. Ir


It is a known passage in the Song of St. Ambrose, commonly called the Te Deum,
where, speaking of Christ, he says, When thou had overcome the sharpness of
death, thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

Without looking after Limbus Patrum, which some pretend to find in this
passage, the sense of it is very obvious to any that shall consider it, thus,
That though it was our Saviors business in his life time, to make known the
will of his Father to his Disciples, and to let the whole Nation of the Jews
understand, that the Kingdom of Heaven was come among them, Luke 17.21.
yet the fuller Revelation of the mysteries thereof was reserved till after his
death. Then it was that he did expound the Scriptures unto his Disciples
concerning himself, Luke 24.27.
and opened their understandings so, as sully to make them perceive the drift
and meaning of what was written both in Moses and the Prophets concerning Him;
v. 45.
For forty days together after his Resurrection, Act. 1.3.
speaking unto them of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. Then it was
that he instituted the Sacrament of Baptism as a Door of Admission and Entrance
into that Kingdom, Mat. 28.19, 20.
commanding them to baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, and to teach them to observe all things, whatsoever He had
commanded. Thus when he had overcome the sharpness of death, he did open the
Kingdom of heaven to all believers.

But that you may be more fully satisfied how Baptism is said to open the
Kingdom of heaven, you must understand that the Kingdom of heaven in the New
Testament is taken in two senses. First (and that very frequently) for the
Kingdom of Grace; Into which Kingdom there is no entrance but by the door of
Baptism; And (with submission to the Judgment of the Church) I conceive that
that passage of our Savior to Nicodemus, where he says, Job. 3.5.
Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, ought (primarily at least) to be understood in this sense; so
as that the meaning of the place is this; Except a man be baptized, he cannot
be a Christian, or a Member of my Kingdom.

Secondly, For the Kingdom of Glory. If Baptism be the door of admission into
the Kingdom of Grace, it must be consequently so into the Kingdom of Glory: For
none can be Members of the Kingdom of Glory hereafter that are not Members of
the Kingdom of Grace here.

What then must we conclude (will you say) concerning them that die unbaptized?

And last of all, what must we think of those children, that are born of
Christian Parents, and yet die unbaptized?

in voto, though not de facto. They were baptized in vote and desire: They were
Candidates of Baptism, and fit to wear the Livery of the Lamb, but died before
it was fit for them. In this case we are to believe, that the will is accepted
for the deed; and that where there is faith, repentance; and a desire of
Baptism, the allmerciful God, who ties no body to impossibilities, punishes
none for the want of that, which they desired, but could not have.

2. As for those Martyrs that died before they were initiated by this
Sacrament, it cannot be absolutely said that they died unbaptiz'd; for
baptismus sanguinis is a real Baptism: The want of water, which is the ordinary
and outward Element of Baptism, being supplied by their own blood; and instead
of giving up their Names, (which is the form) in their Martyrdom they gave up
their lives to Christ, and so were safe in that promise of his, that says,
Luke 9.24
Whosoever loses his life for my sake shall save it.

Lastly, For Infants that die unbaptized, supposing that nothing (as is usually
held) of certainty can be affirmed in this point: Yet this we are certain of,
That the denial of salvation to such was the first foundation of the Invention
of Limbus Puerorum, and that St. Austin, who sometime denied salvation in this
case, was therefore styled Durus Pater Infantum. And though nothing can be
pronounced as de side herein, yet charity binds us to believe (that which in it
self is very credible, and has been held by the pious and learned of all sides)
that as in bringing of an Infant to Baptism the Faith of the whole Church, and
of them that present it, is reputed as it is own: so in case it die before it be
baptized, the vote and desire of the whole Church in general (which would have
all her Children partakers of that Sacrament) and that of the faithful Parents
in special, who did desire and design it, will be accepted and reputed for
Baptism before God. Moreover it is no less credibly then piously held in this
case, That what is wanting of the outward ministry of the Church (without the
fault of those that want it) shall be supplied out of the infinite Treasury of
the merits of our faithful and merciful High Priest, 1 Timothy 2.4.
who would not that any should perish, but that all should be saved.

Regeneration as really, as he is said to have done upon those at the Creation.
Genesis 1.2.


For the demonstration of which Truth I shall bring Three proofs beyond all
exception. 1. Our Savior promised it should be so. 2. The Church believes, and
has ever believed that it is so. 3. The unquestionable History of the
Apostolic times has left it upon record, that then de facto, it was so.

John did indeed baptize with water, Acts 3.5.
but I (says our Savior) will baptize you with the Holy Ghost. And herein
consisted the difference betwixt the paptisme of our Savior, and the baptism
of John, by John's own confession; Matthew. 3.11.
I indeed baptize you with water, but he that comes after me shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire: ((I.) According to a usual Hebraism) with
the Fire of the Holy Ghost, or with the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, that are quick
and powerful, active, and operative as Fire. The baptism of John was no more
but a Significative Ceremony, serving to put them in mind, that came to it, of
the necessity of Repenance, and Purity of Life; Verse. 11.
and this was it that John told them, where he says, I indeed baptize you with
water unto Repentance.

Our Saviors baptism is another thing: His baptism is the Laver of
Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
as St. Paul calls it, wherein they that are washed, are Regenerate and born
anew, of Water and of the Holy Ghost; which likewise St. Paul takes notice of
in that place, as the inseparable concomitant of that baptism; Not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done, but by his mercy he saved us by the washing
of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.

Secondly. This Promise of our Saviors (whose Promises are all of them Yea and
Amen) must needs be acknowledged a sufficient ground for the Church to build
her Faith upon in this point; and accordingly our Church does publicly profess
her belief of the same, in express words, to that purpose, in the Collect that
immediately succeeds the Baptism; Seeing now dearly beloved that this Child is
regenerate, and grafted into the Body of Christ's Church, etc. And the ancient
Fathers speaking upon this point, deliver their fence to this purpose; We bring
no Sanctity or holiness with us into the World, nor are we sanctified in the
Womb; But as Christ was sanctified at his Conception, so we at our
Regeneration. He was conceived, not by Man, but by the Holy Ghost; and we are,
not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, John 1.13.
nor of the will of Man, but of God. The same overshadowing power which formed
his Humane nature, reformeth ours; and the same Spirit assures us a remission
of our sins, which caused in him an exemption from all sin. He that was born
for us upon his Incarnation, is born within us upon our Regeneration.

Acts of the Apostles, we are told, that S. Paul coming upon a time to Ephesus,
Act. 19.1, 2, etc.
he found there certain Disciples that having only received the Baptism of
John, had not so much as heard whether there was such a thing as the Holy Ghost
or no. Hereupon Paul takes them and baptizes them in the Name of the Lord
Jesus; Ver. 5.
And immediately the Holy Ghost fell upon them, Ver. 6.
and they spoke with Tongues and Prophesied. It is said indeed that upon the
Imposition of St. Paul's hands they received the Holy Ghost. Now whether this
Imposition of hands was in, or after Baptism, is not certain, nor much
material. However it was; it is most certain, that upon their being baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, they received the Holy Ghost, which before in the
Baptism of John they had not received, nor so much as heard of.

It Is true, those Gifts of the Holy Ghost there mentioned are miraculous and
extraordinary, which are not to be expected, now, because the reason why they
were, then, given, is now ceased. Miracles are Signs, and Signs are for
unbelievers: Those extraordinary dispensations of the Spirit were in order to
the Conversion of Nations. 1 Cor. 14.22
In converted and settled Churches there is no need of Miracles, and therefore
there, the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and dispensations of the Spirit are not
visible and extraordinary, or by way of prodigy or ostent; but the Spirit in a
silent and invisible (yet real and effectual) manner blows where, Joh. 3.8.
and as it pleases. As those Disciples at Ephesus did, upon their being
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, receive the Holy Ghost in Gifts
miraculous and extraordinary, so doubtless they did receive those more ordinary
(but more necessary) gifts and graces which by the Holy Ghost are poured forth
upon all those that really and truly have given up their names to Christ; which
then, as now, and now, as then, are shed forth in Baptism, according to what S.
Peter undertakes to those new Converts of his, Act. 2.38. Repent, and be
baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.

The Gifts of the Holy Ghost at that time poured forth together with the water
of Baptism, (besides those extraordinary, which only fell upon some (such as
Tongues, Miracles, and Prophecy, etc.) were ordinarily these three;
Illumination, Justification and Sanctification.

1. Illumination: Heb. 10.32.
Call to mind (says the Author to the Hebrews) the former days, in which after
ye were illuminated ye suffered a great fight of afflictions. The Ancients
understanding this place of Baptism, do sometimes in their writings call
Baptism it self by the names of (...) or Illumination, and the Font (...) or
the Illuminatory. This no doubt with regard of the Baptized's being then
admitted into the knowledge and participation of those mysteries of God in
Christ, which, as the Apostle speaks, had been hid from Ages and Generations,
but now made manifest unto the Saints. Col 1.26.
The faith and belief of which mysteries, was the gift of God by the operation
of the Holy Ghost, without which, we can neither rightly love God, or know
Christ. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. So the
Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 12.3. And in another place, Romans 5.5.
The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given
unto us.

2. Justification: by which I understand Remission of sins, and Reconciliation
with God. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. Now that Baptism is
an instrument of conferring Remission of sins is an Article of our Creed: Romans
5.1.
I believe one Baptism for the Remission of sins; Nicene Creed.
which (as all other Articles ought to be) is founded upon Divine Revelation,
or express authority of Holy Scripture. Be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ for Remission of sins, (so S. Peter. Act. 2.38.
) And the Counsel that the devout Ananias gave S. Paul, as he relates the story
himself, Act. 22.16. was, That he would make haste to be baptized, and wash
away his sins, calling upon the name of the Lord.

Upon which grounds we may safely conclude, that all those first converts to
Christianity, who upon the preaching of the Apostles renounced their Idolatry
and sinful life, and embraced the faith of Christ, did upon their Baptism
receive a full, free and instantaneous pardon of all their sins, and were saved
by Baptism, as S. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 3.21. or by the washing of Regeneration,
as S. Paul, Tit. 3.5.

3. Sanctification. For which the place now mentioned in Titus is most express;
He saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and renewng of the Holy Ghost,
which he shed on us most abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. And in 1
Cor. 6.11. speaking what kind of persons some of the Corinthians had been
before their Baptism, he tells them there, How by it, they were washed and
sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of
God. And the Chuch in her preface to the office of Baptism does not only
exhort the Congregation to pray that the Child may be baptized with water, and
the Holy Ghost, but prays her self in these words: We beseech thee for thine
infinite mercies, that thou will mercifully look upon this Child, wash him, and
sanctify him with the Holy Ghost, etc. And that (when she prays thus) she
prays in faith; you may be satisfied from her profession afterward: Seeing
now, dearly beloved, that this Child is regenerate, and grafted into the body
of Christ's Church, etc. Which profession she makes not to men only, but to
God, and that in a most solemn and public manner, as appears from those words
in the Thanksgiving immediately following: We yield thee hearty thanks, most
heavenly Father, that it has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant by thy
Holy Spirit, etc.

They then that do not believe that the Holy Ghost does accompany this
Ordinance of Christ, do not believe as the Church believes, nor as the
Scripture teaches. The descent of the Holy Ghost upon our Savior in a visible
shape, was one of those miraculous effects that happened at his baptism; which
miraculous descent at that time, was no less then a pledge and earnest of what
is done in the Sacrament of Baptism, ever since, though not miraculously and
visibly, yet really and effectually; the Gifts of Illumination and
Justification being therein conferred by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost.

And there came a voice from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased.

Here I doubt not to affirm, That as Christ in his baptism was justified in, or
by the Spirit (as the Apostle with reference, 1 Timothy 3.16.
as is thought, to this testimony speaks;) that is, As our Savior at his
baptism was mightily declared by the Holy Ghost to be the true and eternal Son
of God by Generation, so we at our baptism are admitted and received as the
Sons of God by Adoption.

I suppose it altogether needless for me to bring arguments to prove this:
Every one that has but learned the entrance into his Catechism, professes that
in his Baptism he was made a member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor
of the Kingdom of Heaven. And upon this account it is, that the Church, upon
the conferring of baptism, gives public and solemn thanks to God in those
words, (mentioned before) expressing not only the gift of Regeneration, but
that also of Filiation or Adoption. We yield thee hearty thanks most merciful
Father, that it has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant by thy Holy Spirit,
to receive him for thy own Child by Adoption, and to incorporate him into thy
Holy Church. And so having done with those miraculous events that attended our
Saviors Baptism, which were, The opening of Heaven, The descent of the Holy
Ghost, and a voice heard from Heaven, proclaiming Christ to be the Son of God.
And having paralleled these miraculous Events with those real effects that do
still accompany that Sacracrament of Christ's own Institution, and (according to
his promise) shall do so to the end of the world. Mat. 28. ult.
And having showed that therein Heaven is opened, the Holy Ghost conferred, and
the party baptized made the Child of God by Adoption: I come now unto

Particular observable.
and that is the means or instrumental cause that procured the opening of the
Heavens, the descent of the Holy Ghost, and the voice that proclaimed Christ to
be the Son of God; which was (as is here observed) the Prayers of our Savior.
Jesus being baptized and praying, it came to pass that the Heavens were opened,
etc.

That so great things as these were procured by so powerful a means as the
Intercession of the Son of God, we need not wonder. So need we not doubt of the
truth and reality of those graces conferred upon us at our baptism, since they
are procured and obtained by the very same means, viz. by the mediation and
intercession of our faithful and merciful High Priest, Heb. 7.25.
who ever lives to make intercession for us, and who has promised to accompany
the use even of this very Ordinance, by his Holy Spirit, unto the end of the
world. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. And lo I am with you
even to the end of the world. Mat. 28.19, 20.
Hence we learn, moreover, that solemn Prayers and supplications ought always
to be joined with the Administration of the Sacraments. Jesus being baptized
and praying, the heavens were opened, and the Holy Ghost descended, etc. So now
in the use of this Sacrament, the Prayers of the Church, united to the
Intercession of Christ, are a powerful and effectual means of epening Heaven,
and of bringing down the Holy Ghost (in the sense above mentioned) upon the
persons baptized.

Again: From hence it is obvious to observe, how the Ritual part of
Christianity, (1.) The Rites and external Ceremonies enjoined on Gods part, are
always to be accompanied with something moral on ours. The Rite of Baptism is
then effectual when it is rightly performed; that is, when the Administration
of it is accompanied with solemn Prayer and Supplication. Though the grace
conferred in Baptism be the free Gift of God, yet something is required on our
parts for the procuring of it: Not that we should glory or attribute any thing
to the merit of our own works, but that we may value and prize the Grace the
more, being that is not obtained, Ex opere operato, (as some affirm) by the
mere doing of the thing, how carelessly and supinely soever, but by careful and
conscientious using therewithal the means of Gods own appointing and hallowing.
Jesus himself being baptized [and praying] the heavens were opened, etc. So the
Sacraments of the Church, through the Prayers of the faithful, joined with the
Intercession of Christ, become effectual to the very same purposes, as has been
shown in the preceding discourse.

Lastly, We may from hence rest satisfied, that the Sacraments instituted by
Christ, under the New Testament, are not Mera and nuda symbola, Naked symbols,
Signs only, and mere significations of something to be done, without
conferring any thing at all of help or assistance toward the doing of it. Such
indeed we acknowledge the Baptism of John to be; A Rite, or external Ceremony,
serving to put men in mind of the great purity that would be required of them
who was to live under the Laws of the Messia; whose forerunner he was, and
baptized as such, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him who
should come after him; Act. 19.4.
that is, on Christ Jesus. Such we acknowledge Circumcision to have been, viz. A
sign or symbol of cutting off the superfluities, and putting away filthiness of
the flesh, but that, in it self, it contributed nothing either of grace or
strength toward the performance of such a work.

The Sacraments of the New Testament are of another Nature; not bare and naked
signs, only to signify what is to be done, and to mind us of our duty; but,
according to the Doctrine (not only of the Schools, but) of the Fathers, and
Scripture it self, they are the effectual means and instruments of conveying
divine aid, ghostly strength, and Grace, to those Receivers of them, that do
not in themselves, Obicem ponere (as the Schools use to speak) that is, that do
not put in something by way of bar, or impediment to their intended and
designed operation: Particularly the Sacrament of Baptism, (supposing no such
bar, or impediment) does in the right use of it, carry along with it among
others, the Graces now mentioned of Justification, Sanctification, and
Adoption; so that therein, in a spiritual (but real) sense, (as it was at the
baptism of Christ in a literal) The Heaven is opened, the Holy Ghost bestowed,
and the baptized person received for the Child of God by Adoption. And herein,
as is said before, consists the true difference betwixt the baptism of John,
and the baptism of our Savior, (by the confession of John himself:) John did
indeed baptize with water unto repentance, Mat. 3.11.
but our Savior did baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. (i.e.) did,
together with his Baptism, confer the quick, active and operative Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, resembled for that reason to Fire. In short, thus; John's baptism
did signify unto men that Repentance and purity of Life was their duty.
Christ's baptism did really regenerate and purify them.

Thus much of the View and Review of these words.

I should here have put an end to this Discourse, were it not for a certain
Scruple that calls, and an Exception that clamours for satisfaction.

The Scruple, Scruple.
in short, is this; That since it is now the custom of the Church, to baptize
Children in their Infancy, how they can be capable of those Benefits of Baptism
above mentioned, or indeed of any other? Do they then receive Remission of
their Sins, Divine Illumination, etc?



1. Sanctification, in that their persons are then consecrated and dedicated to
God: Their Natures regenerate, they being born anew of water, and the Holy
Ghost.

And secondly, Remission of Sins by spiritual Regeneration; the guilt of
Original sin being so wholly taken away by Baptism, that if they die before
they commit any actual crime, they are undoubtedly saved. This is the avowed
Doctrine of our Church, who therein grounds her self upon the Word of God, as
appears from those words by way of Rubric subjoined to the office of Baptism.
It is certain by Gods Word that Children which are baptized, Rub. in fin^.
Baptismi.
dying before they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved.

Further, they then receive the Gifts of Adoption, as has been said, being
received into the bosom of the Church, as the Children of God, and enrolled
into the number of the faithful. Then do they receive the seeds of those graces
which in a visible manner spring up afterward, provided that they themselves
do not obicem ponere, or put in something in Bar. The baptism of the Spirit
will in due time become as visible as that of water, if they do not do those
things in the mean time that infallibly grieve and quench the Spirit.

To prevent which, the Church takes all possible care, enjoying the use of
Confirmation, which is intended for the corroboration of baptismal Grace, being
(as one calls it) the suppletory of early Baptism, and a Rite certainly of
Apostolical, both Institution and Practice; wherein we give our selves up unto
Christ by our own free and voluntary choice, no less then if we had been
actually baptized at that instant; ratifying in our own persons that vow, and
making good that promise, which in the person of others we engaged to perform
at our Baptism. Thus much in answer to that Scruple.

The Exception which some put in against Infant Baptism Exception.
it self, not only as impenitent and frivolous, but as unlawful and
abominable; is not so easily, at least not so soon answered.

We are fallen into times wherein contentious, spirits have assumed the liberty
not only to oppose the Doctrine, but to disturb the peace of the Church, as
about others, so particularly about this point of baptizing Infants; from the
rebaptizing of which, they themseves (I mean the sect) have received their
name, and are baptized Anabaptists.

Being then that we are met upon such an occasion as this, viz. to dedicate an
Infant to God by Baptism, it may seem not only seasonable, but in some sort
necessary, to say something in justification of the Churches Practice in this
Particular; and to do what we can (as every true Son of the Church, and every
good Christian is bound to do) to put a stop to the careir of that opinion,
which, in a short time, if it should prevail, would put an end to Christianity
in Christendom, by making it consist of no other but unbaptized persons, or (if
I may so speak) of Unchristen'd Christians.

This I shall endeavor to do, in as short, and as satisfying a way as I am
able: First, by answering some of the chief of their Arguments; Secondly, by a
positive Assertion of the point it self. Both these, as briefly, so, as fully,
as the latter end of a Sermon will permit; referring them that have the mind
and the leisure to engage in such a task, to the no few, nor small volumes that
have troubled the world upon this occasion.

The Arguments they bring against paedobaptism, Go and teach all Nations
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, Mat. 28.19.
and of the Holy Ghost -- From whence they argue that none are to be baptized
but such as are first taught, or (as they are pleased to criticize upon the
Greek) first made Disciples. (...).
When men thoroughly understand Christianity, or the way of Christ, and are
willing to own and profess it, then they may be baptized, not before. So they.

To this I Answer, That if this Proposition had been found in Scripture, either
in express words, or by undeniable consequence, they had said something. But to
lay so great a weight, upon so sandy Foundation as that of the casual placing
of these words, shows no more, but that (as sinking men are willing to lay
hold upon any thing, so) they were glad to make use of this Argument for want
of a better.

That the placing of these words is without any such design, as that any such
inference ought or might, be drawn from them, is evident from this, That in the
same period Teaching is put after Baptizing, as well as before it, -- Go and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, V. 20.
etc. So that an Argument drawn from these words, for Baptizing before
Teaching, is as good as for one drawn for Teaching before Baptizing, and
nothing more sure then that these words were not marshalled and placed thus, as
an intended foundation of this Doctrine; for doubtless if so, it would have
been built upon long before these destructive Builders thought of Building
their Hay and Straw and Stubble upon it; Erroneous and groundless Deductions
from Scripture, being at the best, no better.

A second Argument is drawn from Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved. -- Whence they conclude that Baptism is for Believers only.
Before that, none can be capable of it, nor can it benefit any.

himself a Believer. But distinguenda sunt Tempora. At that time there was no
such thing as Children of Believers to baptize, for there were no Believers
except only some few in Judea. The Apostle at the 15. Verse had a Commission
given to go forth into all the world, and to Preach the Gospel to every
creature, and as many as they could convert those they were to baptize, and no
other. Nothing so certain as that they neither would nor ought to baptize any
before they were fully converted and made a profession, not only of their
faith, but of their desire to be baptized, Act. 8.96.
as we find the Eunuch did.

But afterward the case was otherwise, when Nations came to be converted,
Churches settled, and Christianity propagated from the Father to the Son: Then,
Act. 2.39. 1 Cor. 7.14.
the promise being made to them and their Children; And the Children themselves
being holy, as born of believing Parents, and within the Covenant, they are
certainly not less capable of being admitted into the Christian Church, as
Members thereof, by the right of baptism (which St. Paul calls the circumcision
of Christ) then the Israelitish Infants were of being admitted into the Jewish
Church, Col. 2.11.12.
by the right of circumcision.

He then that duly considers this passage, togegether with the circumstances
(that ought to be considered) of the time when, and reason why it was spoke;
will I think, be as inclinable to conclude any thing therefrom, as that it was
intended as a prohibition of Baptism to the Children of believing parents, or
that any such thing can, concludingly, be inferred from it.

A third Argument they bring against Infantbaptism grounded upon this Reason.

To. 4.15.
there is no Transgression.

So then whereas they say, there is no precept nor example for it in Scripture:
Admitting that to be true, it is a sufficient Answer to that Objection to say,
there is neither against it. And if the difference between them and us,
concerning this matter, come to be weighed in this Balance, it would he found
to stand thus. They have the practice of the whole Church against them, and no
Scripture for them: We have the practice of the whole Church for us, and no
Scripture against us. These scales, you see give it for us, against them
clearly. And thus having given a taste of their Objections to let you see they
are answerable, I shall now say something by way of positive Assertion of the
Churches Doctrine and practice in this Particular.

Briefly then I shall endeavor to assert, Assertion.
not only the lawfulness but the necessity of Infant Baptism by Scripture, by
Reason, and by Universal practice, and first

By Scripture.

I do not say that there is any Scripture that does totidem verbis, or in
express words say, That Infants are to be baptized, but there is a Text that
not only justifies the lawfulness of doing it, but by consequence proves the
unlawfulness of leaving it undone, and that is Io. 3. at the 5. verse. Except a
man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God. Whence it follows, that if the want of Baptism endanger the salvation of
any, it must be the fault of them that deny or or keep them from it.

I am not the first that has urged this Text for the necessity of
Infant Baptism, See Land against Fisher Object. 1.
but to evade the force of this Argument they give two Answers. First, that the
Text it self is to be understood of persons of mature age. and therefore it is
said Except a man, not except a child be born again, etc. To this I answer, that

Except a man (as we Translate it) but (...), It is an Indefinite, equivalent
to an Universal, so that the sense is (without exception of Man, Woman, or
Child) Except a person, or except one be born again of water, etc.

A second exception to the Argument drawn from this Text is this, That
according to the Rule of this exposition there is a necessity of communicating
Children as well as of baptizing them, of giving them the Sacrament of the
Eucharist as well as that of Baptism, for it is said Io. 6.53. Except ye eat
the flesh of the son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no life in you.

To this I answer that one Scripture is to be expounded, so as not to
contradict another, and places that are obscure, must receive light from those
that are plain. Now the places that speak of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
do plainly show that it is to be received only by such as have the use of
reason and have understanding. As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup,
ye do show forth (or show ye forth) the Lords death till he come. And in the
next verse, Let a man examine himself, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27.
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, etc. Selfexamination,
and commemoration of Christ's death are the essential and indispensible duties
of those that come to that Sacrament, neither of which children are capable of
performing, and consequently cannot be included in the latter of these Texts,
but must be so in the former, unless some Scripture can be shown to the
contrary which hitherto I presume has not been done.

But if they shall still persist, and say, that this place is not express and
plain enough for them who make Scripture their Rule, and go no further then
they have express warrant from thence; then I desire that they would please to
show any authority out of Scripture for the communicating of women, or the
observation of the Lords Day, so strong and full as this is for the baptizing
of Infants.

My second Argument for Infant Baptism is from Reason.

Infants stand in need of this Sacrament, and this Sacrament is effectual as to
what they need, and therefore in all reason they ought to be admitted to it,
and it is a sin to deny it them. They stand in need of it in regard of the
pollution of their natures by Original sin; being conceived in sin and born in
iniquity. Psalm. 51.5.
Now that Baptism does take away Original sin, as to the guilt of it, and
washes them clean from that, is clearly the consequence of what the Church
delivers as her avowed Doctrine, mentioned before, where she says, It is
certain by Gods Word that Children which are baptized, dying before they commit
actual sin, are undoubtedly saved, which cannot be true, unless their Original
sin be forgiven in Baptism. St. Austine considering this, does think it very
reasonable, that if by the sins of another (that is, of their first Parents)
they are made capable of Damnation; so by the Faith of others ( i.e. their
Sponsores, or those that undertake for them) they may be admitted to that
Sacrament which makes them capable of Salvation.

Therefore (says he) being in the state of Original sin, and standing in need
of the Laver of Regeneration, but not being able to present themselves to it,
accommodat eis matter Ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum corda ut
credant. Being not able to come themselves, they are brought by others; and
being not able to undertake any thing for themselves, others undertake in their
names, and for them: The great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, being willing
to give them Induction by Proxy, into his Kingdom, because it was by Proxy, or
in the person of another that they first fell from it. Peccant in alio, Austin.
credunt in alio, inquinantur in alio, purgantur in alio: And if God, in
Justice, may impute the sin of another unto them, and reckon that Original
guilt, contracted in Adam, as theirs; May he not, as well, in mercy, accept
that profession of faith made at their Baptism, and those vows and promises, as
if they were their own, especially since they become their own, as soon as they
come to understand them.

Practice.

My third Plea for the Assertion of Infant Baptism is from the universal
practice of the Church.

That it is at present the universal practice of all that in all the world call
themselves Christians, themselves, I mean Anabaptists excepted) is a thing that
they themseves cannot deny.

For precedent Ages, there is no Writer, how ancient soever, but mentions it;
and St. Austin concludes it to be of Apostolical Tradition, and gives this Rule
whereby we are to judge it to be so; Quod semper in Ecclesia retentum est, nec
in scripturis invenitur, nec a concilio sancitur, id ab Apostolis traditum
esse, recte creditur. That which has ever been practiced in the Church, and is
neither delivered in the Scriptures, nor enjoined by a Council that is rightly
to be looked upon as derived unto us by Apostolical tradition: and instances,
for example, in the Baptism of Infants.

So that whereas they say it is a late Invention crept into the Church, since
the mystery of Iniquity began to work; if they mean to be believed when they
say so, they are bound to show the time when it was first introduc't, and this
under the penalty of lying under that severe charge that Mr. Calvin upon this
account lays upon them. Quod antem apud simplicem vulgum disseminant, Insti^
c. 17.
longam annorum seriem post Christi resurrectionem praeterusse, quibus
incognitus erat paedobaptismus, in eo faedissime mentiuntur. Siquidem nullus
est Scriptor tam vetustus, qui non ejus originem ad Apostolorum tempora pro
certo referat. Whereas (says he) they spread it among the simple vulgar, that
many years after Christ's Resurrection, there was no such thing known, as the
Baptizing of Infants, they lie most filthily; for there is not any Writer so
ancient, but does refer the original of it, for certain, to the Apostles times.

The case standing thus, the meanest Christian that is, may confute this error
out of that place in St. Paul, where he says, If any one be contentious, we
have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. From which passage I shall
desire to recommend these two short notes, and so to conclude this whole
dispute.

1. In cases of this nature, Dissenters ought to be concluded by the practice
of the Church. 2. They that refuse to be concluded by that, are to be looked
upon as contentious persons, such as neither reason nor authority can satisfy;
Rationibus non convincantur quia non intelligunt, Authoritatibus non
constringuntur quia non recipient. They are not convinced by Reason, because
they understand it not; nor silenced by Authority, because they own it not; as
one long since found cause to complain.
And now having done with this dispute, I find my self at liberty to conclude;
which I shall do with a short (but necessary) Reflection or two, first upon our
selves, and secondly upon the present occasion.

First then considering what has been said, and admitting it for Truth, we
cannot but find our selves obliged to entertain a high and venerable esteem of
the sacred Rights and Institutions of our most holy Religion: particularly of
this Sacrament of Baptism, as a thing high, holy, mysterious and sacred, not
only in respect of the Author and Instituter of it, (which was the coeternal
Son of God, our blessed Savior; (himself God above all, blessed for evermore)
but also in regard of the happy effects of it, To. 9.50
and the blessings which are conveyed to us thereby. It being the Laver of
Regeneration, the Seal and Instrument of Illumination, Justification,
Sanctification, and Adoption. A right that our blessed Savior first sanctified
by his personal susception, afterward consigning it over as an essential right
and necessary duty to his Church, never to be disused or laid down till his
second coming; and last of all does make it effectual to his Church, to
several great and high purposes, by the Ministry of his holy spirit, which
according to his own promise, shall accompany the right and due use of it, to
the end of the world, as has been formerly shown, and proved.

It is the sin and shame of this present age to disvalue and slight the holy
Rights and sacred Institutions of that Religion they pretend to own; to
question their validity, and dispute their efficacy. And (more is the pity)
they are not a few that place the greatest part of their Religion in so doing,
accounting themselves Christians for nothing more, then for either not having
received, or having renounced their Baptism.

If a Jew under the Law of Moses, should have said any thing by way of derision
or contempt of Circumcision, he should certainly have suffered death, if it had
been proved against him, by three, Heb. 10.28.
or but by two witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment (according to St. Paul's
own argument) ought he to be thought worthy, which despises this Sacrament of
the new Covenant, which succeeds in the room of that, and of which that was but
a type and shadow: especially considering that since Christ both instituted it
by his precept, and sanctified it by his example, and accompanies it by his
holy spirit, and has commanded a perpetual use of it to the end of the world.
Such affronts and contempts as these are, cannot be offered to such an
Ordinance as this is, by any, Ver. 19.
without treading under foot the son of God, who ordained it; nor without
counting the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified (the Benefit of
which is consigned to him in this Sacrament) an unholy thing; and without doing
despite to the spirit of Grace.

Not only the Jew but the Gentile, not the old Synagogue alone, but the old
Pagan world, shall rise up in Judgment against this generation of profane
Saints, and condemn them; for they were true to the Religion they professed, and
held all that related to it sacred, and worthy of their highest veneration.

It Is true, the Pagan Religion and Rights thereof, were impious and idolatrous,
but they looking upon it as divine, and knowing no better, if they should have
trampled upon the Temples, Sacrifices, and Rights of those that they held for
true Deities, they ought to have been looked upon in all reason, not so much
for Idolaters as Atheists.

To despise the sacred Rites of Christianity, which are the known and confessed
Institutions of Christ, can proceed from nothing else then a Tincture (at
least) of the spirit of Atheism, which is notoriously known to have been very
predominant in some of the Apostles of that Sect.

Secondly, Col. 2.24.
which is the Body of Christ, by this means, to consider the obligagation that
lies upon them, to labor to walk worthy of this vocation wherewithal they are
called.

Think what a horrible Apostasy it is, after we have sworn Allegiance to God,
to revolt to the Devil. 2 Cor. 7.21.
Consider what zeal, what care, what vehement desire (to use the Apostles
words) we ought always to have, to correspond with this Vow and Obligation of
ours; yea, what Indignation and Revenge we ought to entertain against our Sins,
which are the deleteryes and defacers of our Baptismal Innocence.

Every single Act of Sin is a Receding from this Vow; But a confirmed Habit
therein, unsettles our calling, disascertains our condition, as being a Relapse
and Apostasy from our Allegiance, a treacherous Revolt from our Liege Lord, and
Sovereign, and a running over to his open and professed Enemies; a divorcing the
Dove, to espouse the Serpent; which must needs throw us into great and
horrible, if not (sometimes) into irrecoverable dangers.

It Is better (in the judgment of St. Peter) not to have been washed, then after
they have been so, to return with the Sow, 2 Pet. 2.22.
to her wallowing in the mire.

Let all of us then that have been made partakers of this Grace, see that we
walk circumspectly, 2 Pet. 1.10.
redeeming the time, and giving diligence to make this our high calling and
holy election sure, by adding to Faith, Virtue; to Virtue, Knowledge; to
Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance, Patience; Verse. 5, etc.
to Patience, Godliness, etc. that we may not be barren and unfruitful members,
but may go on from strength to strength, and from virtue to virtue; that so our
Adoption through Grace may have its consummation in glory, and that in the day
of the Restitution of all things we may be owned by the character imprinted
upon us in the day of our entrance into the body of Christ's Church and
communion of the Faithful.

Lastly, with respect unto the occasion of our present meeting, I shall only
add: That since it is the acknowledged duty of all Christians (as being all
baptized into the same hope, and thereby made fellow Members of the same
mystical Body) to have a fellow-feeling and Christian sympathy in each others
concerns, whether of weal or woe; to rejoice with them that rejoice, and to weep
with them that weep. To. 12.15.
I conceive it no less then the duty of all that fear God here present, to
join in their Gratulations, and to offer up their thanksgivings unto God, for
this his great mercy and signal favor at this time bestowed upon this noble
Family, in that he has been pleased to give them beauty for ashes, Isa. 61.3.
and the oil of gladness for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit
of heaviness: so that now they may invert those sorrowful words of Job (Deus
dedit and Deus abstulit) which was all that lately they had to comfort
themselves withal: The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, Job. 1.21.
blessed be the name of the Lord.

And now (Blessed be the name of the Lord) Deus abstulit and Deus dedit: The
Lord has taken, and the Lord has given. For one, and that then an only Son,
lately taken into the Kingdom of Glory, he has given them another this day to
be admitted into the Kingdom of Grace.

Which we being now solemnly going to do, give me leave solemnly to move and
beseech you all, That since the Prayers of the faithful are the means of Gods
own appointing and hallowing for effectuating (through the merits and
Intercession of Christ Jesus) of this his own Ordinance, and for procuring the
sacred energy and influence of the Holy Spirit, to the pouring forth of those
various graces conveyed in the Administration of this Holy Sacrament; you would
join in the contribution of your unanimous and hearty prayers, that God would
be pleased to open (at this time) the Heavens, so as that the Holy Ghost may
descend, to sanctify these waters, to hallow this Infant, to wash away his
original guilt and stains, to enrol him for a Soldier of Christ, and a Son of
God.

And further, that if God in his infinite mercy shall please to prolong his
life, and give him length of days (and we pray that his days may be many and
happy) that he would throughout his whole life prevent him with his goodness,
pouring out upon him those Graces that may be needful for the holy and happy
conduct of it through the waves of this troublesome world, till such time as he
arrive at the land of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

That He may never break, or recede from this his Baptismal Vow; but that being
steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, and rooted in Charity; He may grow from
Grace to Grace, and strength to strength, till he become as eminent in his
moral and religious, as he will be (if God bless him with life) in his civil
and politic capacities.

And may these our Prayers upon Earth, be ratified in Heaven, by God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ; To whom, with the holy Ghost, in the unity of the
same Godhead, be all Honor, Praise and Thanksgiving world without end. Amen.

The End.

