INNOCENCY's COMPLAINT AGAINST Tyrannical Court Faction in New England.
THE Priests and Elders that pernicious Seed
Of Rebel Jews, as we in Scripture read,
Opposing Christ, did with Consent prepare
A Law to trap him, and his life ensnare:
Upon the Trial, he does make demand,
What Precept he has broke, or just Command?
For want of Crime, the Jews make this Reply,
We have a Law, and by it thou shall die:
A cursed Sentence, and to be abhorred,
Embraced by none, but Murderers of the Lord.
The making Laws for to ensnare the Just,
Of God is hated, and to be accursed.
They murdered Christ, regarding not his loss,
Nor 'swag'd their Malice, though he on the Cross,
But then proceed against his own Elect,
By Means preposterous and indirect;
Nay, ever since, the Wicked in their Rage,
Have murdered Righteous Men in every Age:
But Innocence, that no Ill does fear,
Has worn out Tyrants wrath, do what they dare.
This Time, with sober Men does seem to be
A Parallel with the Apostasy.
The Massachusetts is alike for Crime,
Unto Judea, in Christ Jesus' Time:
Here Laws are extant, that does terrify
Well meaning Men, and Liberty deny
In serving God, except in their own way.
In their own Method, and on their made Day.
Here Innocents are fined, whipped, and branded,
Ears cropped, some sold for Slaves, some slasht, some hanged;
Whoever is contrary to them found,
Though in his Spirit their Fine must be Five Pound,
Or else three Days in Goal, ever a discharge,
And with a ten lasht whiping be enlarged:
Such Cruelty forbore in other Parts,
Does now possess American's brutish Hearts.
Lament, New England, like a tender Mother!
To see thy Children one destroy another:
The humblest sort, and none but such as they,
Unto the fiery Zealous are a Prey:
Those that in Conscience cannot wrong a Worm,
Are fined and whipped, because they cannot conform;
And time has been, which never shall be forgot,
God's Servants have been hanged, none knows for what,
Except for serving of their blessed Lord,
For Quaking and for Trembling at his Word.
Let those black Days, like the fifth of November,
Be writ in Red, for Ages to Remember.
And thou, July, forbear thy round delays,
Instead of Mirth, let Mourning end thy Days.
Twelve Innocents, without ever Guilt or Crime;
With cruel Whips were scourged at one time;
And six Days after, fifteen more by Force,
Were like the first twelve, beaten without Remorse
Seven tender Women, young and old, were stripped,
All naked to the Waist, and cruelly whipped.
Immodest Action! greatest Wrong with Shame,
Which never will be clear of Guilt or Blame:
And twenty Men, well bred, of good Descent,
Fit for Assistants to their Government,
Each of such good Report and high Repute,
Their Foes could not accuse them, but were mute,
Only a Law unjust forbid their meeting
To serve the Lord, and Whips must be their Greeting.
Admire, O Heavens! be Earth astonished
At this profuse Expense of guiltless Blood!
In such a Case where nothing is concerned
But a Religion, they in Scripture learned;
Christ's own Command, the Apostle's Approbation,
All good Men's Care, our wise Kings Toleration.
Why should Men's Liberties be thus abridg'd,
And Conscience hindered in what is privileged?
Why should a petty Government constrain Men to
What Acts of Parliament does scorn to do?
CHARLES is not forgot, that bloody Spirit
Does in their angry Humors still inherit.
Amongst the Heathens, Turks, and Catholics,
Are no such cruel and unchristian Tricks.
Had they complied with a wicked Law.
And of a whipping stood in common Awe.
Five Pounds their tender Backs had saved, so
They had been freed from Stripes, to stay or go;
Nay, were they criminal, enlarged they had been.
Newengland's Law admits of buying Sin:
But for obedient Service to their God,
Thus to be beaten with the scourging Rod.
And from their Meetings to be dragged off,
By merciless Men, and made a common Scoff.
To Ishmael's Race, and unto Prison sent,
Cain may his Purpose on meek Abel vent,
It is so ridiculous, and such a snare,
All wise and sober Men a Judgment fear.
Their Blood does cry, and loud for Vengeance call,
Tho they do heartily forgive them all.
Regard, O Lord! thou powerful God of Host,
The Goal, the Gallows, and the whipping Post!
Repeal those wicked and pernicious Laws,
That Innocents be not destroyed without a Cause,
And grant such Rulers as may be devout
For Christ and Saints, and turn the other out.
George Joy, Mariner.
1677.

