A JOURNAL OF THE War with Holland, SINCE His most Christian Majesty's
departure from PARIS, until His Return.

With a continuation of what happened after the Kings return into FRANCE.

Translated out of French.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER. Anno Dom. 1673.

A JOURNAL OF THE WAR WITH HOLLAND.

Since his most Christian Majesty's Departure from Paris, until his Return.

Translated out of French.

At the THEATER in OXFORD. M.DC.LXIII.

A LIST of the General OFFICERS Of his most Christian MAJESTY'S Armies in
Holland.
Officers of the Kings Army.
THE KING, at the head of all his Forces in person. MONSIEUR, Generalissimo.
Monsieur de Turenne, General.
Lieutenant Generals.
Monsieur the Count de Soissons. M. de la Fueillade, Duke of Roannez. M. the
Count du Lude, General of the Ordinance. M. the Count de Lorge. M. the Marquis
de Rochefort. M. de Gadagne.
Feild-Marshals.
Monsieur the Chevalier de Lorraine. M. Martinet. M. de Montal. M. the Marquis
de Genlis. M. de Vitry.
General Officers, with Titles.
Monsieur de Turenne, General of the Hors^ M. the Count de Soissons, Colonel
Genera^ of the Suisse. M. the Marquis de Ranes. Colonel General of the
Dragoons. M. the Chevalier de Fourille, Camp Maste^ of the Light Horse.
Quartermaster General.
M. the Count de Froulle.
Major General of the Army.
M. de Saintsandoux.
Quarter Masters of the Army.
M. de Langlee. M. de Champlay, the Son.
Brigadiers of Horse.
Monsieur the Count de Roye. M. de la Fueillee. M. de Chazeron. M. de ^illoys.
M. de Koniksmarck. M. de Caluaut. M. de Rouvray. M. de Villiers.
Brigadiers of Foot.
M. the Marquis de Beauveau. M. the Marquis de Castelnau.
Adjutants of the Camp.
Monsieur the Count d' Ajen. M. the Marquis d' Albret. M. the Chevalier de
Nogent. M. the Count de Grance. M. the Marquis d' Angeau. M. the Marquis de
Breaute. M. de Cavois. M. the Marquis de Terms. M. d' Artois. M. de la
Roche-Courton.

Besides these Adjutants of the Camp, there ^re others that belong to each of
the Lieu^enant Generals, and to the Feild-Marshals.

A List of the General Officers of the Army of Monsieur the Prince.
MOnsieur the Prince, General. Lieutenant Generals.
M. the Count de Guiche. M. de S. Aure. M. Foucault. M. the Count d'Estrade,
the Father.
Feild-Marshals.
Monsieur the Count du Plessis. M. the Count de Nogent. M. de Magalotty. M. de
Choiseul.
Major General of the Army.
M. de Trassy, Captain of the Guards.
Commissary General of the Horse.
M. de la Cardonniere.
Brigadiers of Horse.
M. de Montauban. M. de Fourneaux. M. de Beauveze. M. Vivien.
Brigadiers of Foot.
Monsieur de Puysieux, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment de Turenne. M. de S.
Micault, Colonel of the Regiment de Conde. M. de la Motte, Colonel of the
Regiment d' Anguyen. Monsieur.......
His Majesty, who is a person of an admirable judgment and a deep foresight,
thought it would be of great consequence to secure his Frontiers; and to that
end he sent a flying Army of 10 or 12 thousand men into Flanders, under the
command of Monsieur de Nancre. He appointed also an Army for Roussillon, and
gave the command of it to Monsieur le Bret, Colonel of the Regiment des
Vaisseaux, and Governor of Doway. And whereas the Marshall de Crequy, who was
designed to command an Army in Holland, was impeded, His Majesty was pleased to
recall Monsieur the Count de Chamilly, who was gone Lieutenant General to M. the
Archbishop of Colen, and bestow on him the command of that Army, with two
Mareschals de Camp, who were M. de Vaubrun Nogent, and M. the Chevalier du
Plessis Pralin.

Major General.
Monsieur de la Marilliere.
Brigadiers of Horse.
M. de Joyeuse. M. de Pierrefitte.
Last of all M. the Duke of Luxembourg, was sole Commander of all the Forces of
the Allies of Munster and Colen.

Camp-Master of the Horse of the Allies.
Monsieur the Marquis de Renel.
Colonel of the Foot.
Monsieur de Mornas.

So many Armies from all sides could not but contain a prodigious number of
Soldiers; which are usually distinguished into Companies, out of which are
composed Regiments, and of a number of these Brigades. Of which here follows a
particular.

An Account of the KINGS Forces, for his War with Holland.
Forces belonging to the Kings House.
The Horse.
THE first body of horse, belonging to the Kings house, is at present the
Gardes du Corpse, since his Majesty has declared for them against the
Gendarmes, who formerly held the first rank. And the first Company of the
Gardes or Archers du Corpse, is the Scotch Guard, under the command of M. the
Duke de Nouailles, and M. the Count d' Again his son in reversion. It consists
of 360 Maistres, two Lieutenants, two Ensigns, two Exempts, two Adjutant
Majors, four Brigadiers, eight Vnder-brigadiers, and so in the three other
Companies.

The second, commanded by M. de Rochefort, of 260 men.

The third, under the command of M. the Duke de Duras, of 260. men.

The fourth was under the command of M. the Marquis de Lauzun, and since is
commanded by the Duke of Luxembourg, of 260 men.

The Company of the Gendarmes of the Kings Guard was under the command of M. de
la Salle Caillebot Captain Lieutenant, and at present is commanded by M. the
Prince Due de Soubise Rohan, of 200. men.

The Light Horse of the Kings Guard, under the command of the Duke de
Chevreuse, of 200 men.

Two Companies of Musketeers, the first called the Gray, commanded by Mons.
the Count d'Artagnan, of 300 men.

The second called the Black, under the command of M. Colbert de Maulevrier, at
present commanded by M. de Monbron, of 300 men.

Scotch Company of Gendarmes, under the command of M. the Chevalier de
Haut^feuille, of 100 men.

English Company of Gendarmes, commanded by Sr George Hamilton, of a 100 men.

English Company of Light Horse, under the command of M. the Marquis
d'Hautteman, of a 100 men.

Company of Gendarmes de Bourgogne, commanded by M. the Count de Broglio,
formerly Eusign of the Kings Gendarmes, of a 100 men.

Company of the Queens Gendarmes, under the command of M. the Marquis du Garot,
of 150 men.

Company of the Queens Light Horse, commanded by M. de Velliers, of 150 men.

Company of Monseigneur the Dauphins Gendarmes, under the command of M. the
Marquis de la Trousse, of 200 men.

Company of Monsieur the Dauphins Lighthorse, commanded by M. the Count de
Rieux of 100 men.

Company of Monsieur Gendarmes, commanded by M. the Count de la Roque, of 150
men.

Company of Monsieurs Light Horse, under the command of...... of 150 men.

Company of M. the Duke d' Anjou's Gendarmes, under the command of M. the
Marquis de Genlis, of 100 men.

Besides a Company of the Gardes de la Port, under the command of M. the Count
de Valseme.

As also Cent Gardes de la Prevoste, commanded by the Marquis de Sourches; but
these do not fight.


The Foot Guard belonging to the Kings House.
French Regiment of Guards, consisting of 30 Companies, 100 men each, M. de la
Feuillade Colonel.

Swiss Regiment of Guards, 10 Companies, 200 men each, M. de Molondin Colonel.

The hundred Swiss, under the command of M. the M. de Vardes.


Other Regiments of Foot. The Old Body.
Picardie, under the command of M. the Count de la Marck, 70 Companies, 50 men
each, besides Officers.

Champagne, under the command of M. the Marquis de Monimes, 70 Companies.

Navarre, under the command of...... 70 Companies.

Piedmont, under the command of M. de la Meilleraye, 70 Companies.

Normandy, under the command of M. the Marquis de Meil^y, 70 Companies.

La Marine, under the command of M. the Count de Tonnecharante, 70 Companies.

Besides these there are several other Regiments, some of which were heretofore
called the Little Old ones, but are now mixed with the others, and are
distinguished only by seniority. Of which here follows a List. Auvergne, under
the command of M. the Marquis de Coeuvres, 33 Companies.

Sault, under the command of Monsieur the Count de Sault, 33 Companies.

Castelnau, under the command of M. the Count de Castelnau, 33 Companies.

Rambures, under the command of M. de Rambures, 33 Companies.

La Marine, under the command of..... 33 Companies.

Bandeuille, under the command of M. the Marquis de Bandeville, 16 Companies.

The Regiment du Roy, under the command of M. Martinet, at present commanded by
M. de Monbron, 100 Companies.

The Regiment Royal, under the command of M. the Duke d'Arpajou, and M. de
Pierrefitte, 70 Companies.

The Regiment d'Anjou, under the command of Monsieur the Count de S. Geran, 70
Companies.

Lyonnois, under the command of M. the Marquis de Villeroy, 25 Companies.

Praslin, under the command of M. the Chevalier du Plessis, 18 Companies.

Dauphin, under the command of M. de Beringhen, 70 Comp.

The Regiment des Vaisseaux, under the command of M. le Bret, 80 Comp.

Crussol, under the command of M. the Count de Crussol, 18 Comp.

Montaig^, under the command of M. the Marquis d'O, 10 Comp.

Turenne, under the command of M. de Turenne, M. the Marquis de Puisieux,
Lieutenant Colonel, 33 Comp.

La Motte, under the command of M. the Count de la Motte, 17 Comp.

Dampierre, under the command of M. the Marquis de Dampierre, 16 Comp.

Louvigny, under the command of M. the Count de Louvigny, second son to M. the
Marshall de Grammont, 18 Comp.

Grance, under the command of M. the Marshall de Grance, 16 Comp.

La Reine, under the command of M. the Marquis de Moussy, 70 Comp.

Mompezat, under the command of M. the Marquis de Mompezat, 16 Comp.

Orleans, under the command of M. the Marquis de Beaufort, 33 Comp.

Artois, under the command of Monsieur the Marquis de Senlis, 33 Comp.

Bretagne, under the command of M. de Noyon, 16 Comp.

Carignan, under the command of M. the Count de Carignan, 16 Comp.

Chasteau-neuf, under the command of M. the Marquis of Chasteau-neuf, 16 Comp.

Sourches, under the command of M. the Marquis de Sourches, 18 Comp.

Vendosme, under the command of M. the Duke de Vendosme.

La Ferte, under the command of M. the Marquis de la Ferte, 18 Comp.

Conty, under the command of Monsieur the Prince de Conty.

La Fere, under the command of......

Conde, under the command of M. the Prince M. de S. Micault, Colonel, 17 Comp.

Anguyen, under the command of M. the Duke, M. de la Motte Colonel, 17 Comp.

Jonzac, under the command of M. de Jonzac, 18 Comp.

Monperoux, under the command of M. the Marquis de Monperoux, 16 Comp.

Bouillon, under the command of M. the Duke de Bouillon, 16 Comp.

Bourgogne, under the command of M. the Marquis de Chamilly, 33 Comp.

La Marine nouveaux, under the command of.......

Vermandois, under the command of M. the Count Gassay, 20 Comp.

Fusiliers, under the command of M. the Count de Lude, General of the
Ordinance, for the guarding of which this Regiment attends, of 24 Comp.



The Foreign Regiments of Foot.
Alsace, under the command of......... of 12 Comp. Each of which of 180 men,
besides Officers, which are not comprehended in the number of which the
forementioned Companies were said to consist, that is, there are 50 men
complete in the French bodies.

The Scotch and English, under the command of Sr George Hamilton, 10 Companies,
120 men each.

Roussillon, under the command of...... 20 Companies, 120 men each.

Furstemburg, bears the name of its Colonel, 12 Comp. 100 men each.

The Irish, under the command of M. the Marquis du Glass, 24 Comp. 100 men each,
who also commands the following Regiment.

Another Irish Regiment, under the command of Mr Merrow, Colonel to Sr George
Hamilton, 16 Comp. 100 men each.

The Royal Italian, all under the command of M. de Magalotty, 27 Comp. 100 men
each.

The Royal English, under the command of the Duke of Monmouth, 8 Companies, 100
men each.

Stouppe Suisse, bears the name of its Colonel, 12 Comp. 200 men each.

Erlac Suisse, bears the name of its Colonel, 12 Comp. 200 men each.

Festa Suisse, as the former.

Salis Suisse, the same.

The English Regiment, under the command of the Duke of Monmouth, 8 Comp. 100
men each.

The Regiment of the Duke of Monmouth, of 7000 men.

Besides these there are two Regiments of Dragoons, the first called the
Colonel, under the command of M. the Chevalier de Tilladet, 6 Comp. 100 men
each.

The Regiment Royal, under the command of M. the Chevalier de Bouffiers, 6
Comp. 100 men each.


The Regiments of Light Horse.
The Colonel General of the said Horse is Monsieur de Turenne, the Regiments of
6 Troops, and of 50 men each Troop, besides the Officers, which are, Captain,
Lieutenant, Cornet, and Quartermaster.

Camp-Master General of the said Horse, is M. the Chevalier de Fourille.

Commissary General of the said Horse, is M. de la Cardonnierre.

Royal du Roy, under the command of M. the Count de Gassay, a Foreign Regiment.

Another Foreign Regiment.

Cravates du Roy, under the command of M. the Count de Talar.

La Reine.......

Dauphin........

Orleans, under the command of MONSIEUR, the Kings only Brother.

Conde, under the command of Monsieur the Prince.

Anguyen, under the command of Monsieur the Duke.

Rouvray, under the command of M. de Rouvray.

Gassion, under the command of Monsieur de Gassion.

De Joyeuse, under the command of M. the Duke de Joyeuse.

Fourille, under the command of M. de Fourille.

Des Fourneaux, under the command of M. des Fourneaux.

Resnel, under the command of Monsieur the Marquis du Resnel.

La Fueillee, under the command of M. de la Fueillee.

Montauban, under the command of M. de Montauban.

Pillois, under the command of Monsieur de Pillois.

Beauveze, under the command of M. de Beauveze.

De Roye, under the command of M. the Count de Roye.

Calvaut, under the command of M. de Calvaut.

Chazeron, under the command of M. de Chazeron.

And so of the following Regiments, which bear the names of their Colonels.
Cabonet.

Coulange.

Merlin.

S. Loup. In this Regiment there are nine Troops.

Cachan.

Saint Aoust.

Derdelin.

Douget.

Du Conde.

Tilladet, under the command of M. the Marquis de Tilladet.

Sourdis, under the command of M. the Marquis de Sourdis.

Saint. Rut.

Hislez.

Bligny.

La Fabliere.

Lambert.

Humieres, under the command of M. the Marshall d'Humieres.

Caberel.

Prouille.

Bartillac.

Beaupre.

Paulmy

Beaufort.

Carendo.

Sanzay.

Chenuet.

Nouart.

Sommieure.

Anjou.


The following Regiments consist but of three Troops of 50 Maistres, besides
Officers. Coislin, under the command of M. the Duke de Coislin.

Estrades, under the command of M. the Count d'Estrades.

Bethune, under the command of M. the Marquis de Bethune.

Montgeorge, under the command of M. de Montgeorge.

Busenval, under the command of M. de Busenval.

Basleroy, under the command of M. de Basleroy.

Thiange, under the command of Monsieur de Thiange.

Longueville, under the command of M. the Duke of Longueville.

Ragny, under the command of M. the Marquis de Ragny.

Bouillon, under the command of M. the Duke de Bouillon.

Auvergne, under the command of M. the Count d'Auvergne.

Grignan, under the command of M. the Count de Grignan.

Vantadour, under the command of M. the Duke de Vantadour.

Laurieres, under the command of M. de Laurieres.

Granville, under the command of M. de Granville.

Du Roulle, under the command of Monsieur the Count du Roulle.

Mere, under the command of Monsieur de Mere.

Tury, under the command of M. the Marquis de Tury.

Valavoir, under the command of M. de Valavoir.

Arnolfiny, under the command of M. d' Arnolfiny.

Harcourt, under the command of M. the Prince d'Harcourt.

Armagnac, under the command of M. the Count d'Armagnac, Grand Escuyer.

Saint Aignan, under the command of M. the Duke de S. Aignan.




A JOURNAL OF THE War with Holland, From His Majesty's departure from Paris,
until his return.
According to the order of Action and Time.
THE States of Holland were raised in a short time to such a pitch of Pride and
Insolence, that 'twas impossible they should maintain it long. Their Irreligion
was so great, that Heaven could no more be deaf to the just complaints of the
Oppressed. They were so blind, as to take no notice of the Favors of that
Monarch, who had, as it were, raised them out of nothing: and they pretended to
give Law to those Powers, from whom, not long before, they had had petitioned
to receive it. In fine, their Ambition, their Tyranny, and their Ingratitude
did exceed all bounds: and they were so puffed up with the thoughts of being
Princes, and understood withal so little what Sovereignty was, that they
imagined all the World ought to stoop and pay Obedience to them.

There was then a necessity that some one or other should charitably interpose
to disabuse them; and none could undertake that Work more effectually, then our
Great Monarch. That care was his particular concern, and none had so great an
Interest in it as Himself. He had the Power, and nothing was wanting but a
Will; which he is always ready to exert, whenever so just an occasion offers
it self. As being The most Christian King, He was obliged to undertake the
defense of the Church: as one that had raised them, 'twas His Interest to
chastise their Ingratitude* and as being the most absolute Monarch in the
World, it became His glory to maintain His Sovereignty. 'Twas this that obliged
Him to declare War, and to put Himself at the head of a Hundred thousand Men,
to teach them such Lessons, as they should never forget.

His Majesty parted from S. Germains, on Thursday the 28. of April, in the Year
1672, and having taken the way of Soissons, He arrived at Rocroy the second of
May ensuing, where the Troops, that were to compose his Army, began to
rendevouz; as those, which were to make an Army for Monsieur the Prince, did at
Sedan.

The same day we came also to Rocroy, by the way of Fymes, Rheimes, and Retel.

The third of May in the Morning, His Majesty parted with all His Forces from
Rocroy, and came to Mariemburg, where we were scarcely encamped, but he
commanded the Marquis de Ranes to advance toward Philipville; which we
presently did, and found there several Troops.

The fourth, His Majesty came to Philipville, and we, with the Troops that we
found there, marched to Charleroy, where all the Army gathered into a Body,
during seven or eight days that His Majesty resided there.

The fifth, the King arrived at Charleroy: And having had intelligence, that
3000 Horse and 600 Foot were marched out of Maestricht, and run along the
Meuse, with design to plunder the Boats that brought our Provisions from Huy to
Liege; and that they were come up to the Gates of Huy, and being denied
entrance there, had threatened to pillage and burn the Town, unless the^ would
thrust out our Commissaries: Ther^ were dispatched 2500 Horse, and 200
Dragoons, under the Command of Monsieu^ the Chevalier de Fourille. Thereupon w^
marched to Gyblou, and in our way gave a^ alarm to Namur, which thought we were
coming to besiege it.

The sixth, whilst His Majesty stayed a Charleroy, where his Army increased
ever^ day; we encamped at Bonneff.

The seventh, we marched to Mosey.

The eighth, His Majesty tarryed still a^ Charleroy, and we thought to have
continued our Quarters at Mosey: But about 9 i^ the morning, the Commissaries,
that ha^ care of the Provisions at Huy, came an^ acquainted Monsieur de
Fourille, that they could not convoy the Provisions with safety unless we
advanced up to the Passage Whereupon we changed our design, an^ marching
toward the Gates of Huy, encamped in a Meddow over against the Village of
Chouquiere, at the foot of the Castle of Berloc, upon the edge of the Meuse,
about the midway between Huy and Liege^ where the Enemy two days before had
refreshed themselves, and plundered the Boats We learnt, notwithstanding, that
they were in so great fear, that their Horse had taken the alarm at the arrival
of their Foot, who could not come up so soon; and that mistaking their own
Forces, and thinking them to have been French Troops, they had secured
themselves by flight, if some had not run and acquainted them with the mistake.
At length our Provisions passed on guarded with 100 Horse, that marched along
the River on the left hand, and secured with a 100 Dragoons, that were placed
at the avenues on the right hand: and being arrived over against the Castle and
our Camp, the Guard of Dragoons was made to enter the Boats, and that of the
Horse was doubled, which marched all night as far as Liege, and returned again.

The ninth in the Morning, we went back, and encamped at Fallais, a Village of
Br^bant, belonging to the Spaniards, where Monsieur the Marquis de Louvois
joined with us, who came thither about ten in the Morning with a Guard of 500
Horse; and afterward about three in the Afternoon parted from us with 120
Horse, and went to Liege. The Enemy now began to shut themselves up, and issued
out no more in a great Body, but only as Pickeerers, 12, 15, or 20 in a
Company, and killed a Quartermaster, and six of the Horse men that guarded
Monsieur the Marquis de Louvois, and had tarryed a little behind the rest. The
same Evening two others, who had bin foraging in a Village, were killed by the
Enemy, who had hid themselves, and pretended they were Spaniards, belonging to
some of the Spanish Garrisons.

The tenth, we marched to Bierzey, and came near again to Liege. The same day
Monsieur de Turenne left the King (who tarryed still at Charleroy) and advanced
with one part of the Troops, of which he formed an Army for himself. The Troops
that had convoyed Monsieur de Louvois, rejoined with us, and he himself tarryed
at Liege.

The eleventh, Monsieur de Turenne continued his march, and we stayed at
Bierzey. Monsieur de Louvois sent word, that we should dispatch in the Evening
a hundred Dragoons to guard them along; which Monsieur the Marquis de Ranes sent
him. In the mean time Monsieur the Prince marched slowly on with his Army on
the other side of the Meuse, on the right hand.

The twelfth in the morning, Monsieur the Marquis de Louvois returned from
Liege, and we being joined with the Army of Monsieur de Turenne, went to encamp
at Greville near Tongren, which we took without resistance, and placed a
Garrison in it. Monsieur the Count de Chamilly, came to us from Huy, where he
had bin before.

The thirteenth, Monsieur de Turenne staid at Greville, but he sent away the
Foot Regiments of Alsace and Languedoc, that made six Bodies, three Companies
of Dragoons of the Regiment Royal, that came to 300 men, the Horse Regiments
de Joyeuse, de Tury, de Gassion, de S. Loup, de Rouville, and some others. This
party was commanded by Monsieur the Count de Chamilly. Afterward we went to
Bilsem.

The fourteenth, we went and encamped at Rakem, which lies two Leagues on the
other side of Maestrickt, and within one of Maesiick. M. de Turenne followed us
with his Army; and the King marched another way near Vize, 2 Leagues above
Maestricht. The 15. in the morning, we came up within sight of Maisiich, where
the army being drawn up, M. the Count de Chamilly summoned the Town, which not
seeming averse to a Parley, he went in, but they not agreeing upon Conditions,
command was given to prepare Faggots, and we began to raise a Battery for four
pieces of Canon; and not staying to throw up Trenches, some Companies of Foot
were drawn out, and commanded to come up under the shelter of some thick
Hedges, and old Walls which lay near the Town-ditch. All this was done by two
in the Afternoon, and then we began to play upon the Town, which did the like
upon us. They held out about five hours, and defended themselves well enough.
In this Action we lost in all but one or two Officers, and some few common
Soldiers, and the Enemy had not above 3 or 4 men killed: but notwithstanding,
about 7 of the Clock they beat a Parley, and denr'd to Treat; whereupon the
Count de Chamilly, and the Sieur de Ranes went in again, and came not back till
the Town was surrendered; and in the mean time, the Chevalier du Plessis, Camp
Marshal to the Army, commanded the Attaque.

But before this, not imagining the Place would, have yielded so soon, advice
was given thereof to Mareshal Turenne, who thereupon advanced, and was very
near when the Marquis de Ranes took Horse and left the Town, which had just now
yielded, to advertise him of it. Whereupon he made a halt, and encamped with
his Army pretty near ours, and himself retired into one of the M. de Ranes's
Houses, who went back immediately into the Town to Count de Chamilly and thence
they both returned to Marsha Turenne. This Action gave occasion to some Dutch
Railery, who thereupon told that the French had taken Maestricht, no no, I
mistake would they say, it is Maesiick: but this was the last time they were in
a ralling humor; for since then we have dealt with them in such earnest, that
they have not had time to bethink themselves, or give their minds to so much
relaxation, as to be in a fit of drolling or playing the Satyrists.

The sixteenth, we left the Sieur Chamilly at Maesiick with his Troops, and
Monsieur du Plessis, to see to the fortifying of the Place. The Marquis de
Ranes coasted along the River toward Maestricht with three Companies of
Dragoons, and took all the Boats he met with, to the number of 25, and had them
all brought back up the River to the Abbey of Ocq, where we were by that time
encamped, and where at our coming we found Monsieur Vaubrun Camp Marshal, with
a part of the Army which he there commanded.

The 17th in the Morning, we left that Party to the conduct of Monsieur Vaubrun
their Commander, and marched with some Guides to Vize, whether His Majesty came
also the same day; but in our March, coming within Canon shot of Maestricht,
there issued out thence some Horse, one part of which seemed to turn off
toward Monsieur Vanbrun's Camp, and the other to advance toward us. The
Sieurs T^renne, and de Ranes, made up toward them, but they thereupon nimbly
retired, the Enemy only letting fly 30 or 40 Canon, and some volleys of small
Shot at us, which did no harm. A League from thence, we met the Count de Lorge
with his flying Army, who had encamped hard by, upon the way to Tongres: He
drew near likewise to Maestricht, and beset it closely on his side, as Monsieur
de Vaubrun had on the other.

The 18. the King went to take a view of the outworks of the Fort... which
belongs to the Spaniard, and lies on the right from the Meuse, near a League
from Vize, and two from Maestricht: he was saluted by the Garrison, which is
always very strong, with many great Guns, and volleys of small shot,

The 19. Monsieur the Prince encamped within two Leagues of us, and came the
same day with Monsieur the Duke, to visit the King; and afterward (having
first been at Council) returned to his Camp.

The 20. the Kings Army, as also that of the Prince, rested.

The 21. They rested again, and a Bridge of Boats was begun upon the Meuse
below Vize. Monsieur Vaubrun went and joined his Troops to those of Monsieur de
Chamilly, who have since been employed, almost during all the rest of the
Campaigne, in fortifying Maseick, and in coursing about Mastricht.

The 22. they continued working about the Bridge, which was well forwarded. The
same day the Prince's Army marched.

The twenty third, His Majesty rested again, the Bridge was finished, and the
Colonel Regiment of Dragoons left Vize to go and join with the Army of
Monsieur the Prince, under whom it served during the rest of the Campaigne.
Three Companies of the Regiment Royal, which had been left about Maestricht,
came back. The heavy baggage past the River all that day. In the evening some
were drawn out of the Kings Household to go and get Intelligence of the Enemy
toward Maestricht: it fell to the lot of the Marquis of Saurebeuf, a younger
Brother, one of the Kings Guards, to be first picked out to go, and see what
might be discovered at the Pallisado. He brought back word to the Brigadier of
Musketeers who commanded the Party, that he had seen a Sentinel without the
Pallisado, and within many lighted matches, which made him think it was well
manned. The Commander not being satisfied with this account, told him, That
would not serve his turn, and that the King would know whether any body had
gone out of the place or no, wherefore he must return and do his utmost to
learn that; which he presently did, and going straight to the Sentinel, asked
him, If the Party that went out that day, were yet returned; to which, he
received no other answer then a Musket Shot in his throat, that was followed by
at least forty more, which however mist him; but the first wound was in so
dangerous a place, that he immediately fell, and was altogether unable to make
his Escape; so that the Enemies carried him into the Town, where he was long
kept Prisoner and ill of his wound.

The 24. His Majesty passed the Maes upon the bridge of Boats, with the whole
Army, except only Five hundred Foot, which were drawn out by lot to be left in
Garrison at Vize, a little Town lying on the right side of the Maes, between
Maestricht and Liege; so we went and encamped at Biernaw upon the little River
Berwine, in the Country of Limbourg. The same day in the morning, Monsieur the
Vicount of Turenne, and the Marquis de Ranes, marched with some Horse and
Dragoons to the Fort called Fouquemont, (otherwise Fauquenton, or Valkemborg.)
This is a Castle three hours Journey from Macstricht, on the other side of the
River, built on a steep Rock; at the Foot of which there is a great Town,
bearing the same name, and depending on it. There was in it a Garrison for the
Hollander, but upon notice of the march of the foresaid Persons, they retired
into Maestricht, and quitted the Castle, though it be inaccessible and
impregnable without Canon. There are within it Caves of a Prodigious depth and
bigness, wherein a whole Army might be hid: there was little Provision in it,
for which reason the Sieur de la Rouillardiere, Captain of a Company of
Dragoons, who was left there with One hundred men, was forced to buy some from
the Town, and other neighboring places; the King having ordered, That he should
take nothing but what was paid for.

The 25. His Majesty rested.

The 26. the Kings Army still rested, and nothing extraordinary passed.
Monsieur the Prince still marched forward toward the Rhine, upon the resolution
which had been taken not to set upon Maestricht, but to go straight on and take
the places which lie along that River, and so drive straight forwards into
Holland.

The 27. at night, the Weather grew very bad, and in the morning it was very
cloudy and louring, but we departed notwithstanding, and came to Willers, where
the Rain did not a little incommode us.

The 28. The Weather being good again, the King went and encamped at Rolduc,
and upon some Intelligence, a Council was called, where it was resolved, That
Monsieur Turenne should march on with 15000, or 16000 men, which he did: but
this Order not having been foreseen, many of those who were commanded to
accompany him having marched before, went on with the Kings Army, till being
told of their duty, they were forced to march all night to overtake the Army of
Monsieur de Turenne, who went and encamped at Erkelens.

The 29. the King came within half a League of Juliers, and Monsieur de Turenne
encamped at Telns, a little Village between Nuis and Keiserwort, in the Country
of Colen. The same day the Prince's Army passed the Rhine upon a certain Float
of Wood, which carried 2000 Foot and 200 Horse, with all their baggage at a time:
and his Highness and the Duke of Newbourg treated them so well at their arrival
at Keiserwort, that they were all very merry, which yet hindered not the Duke
of Newbourg from coming in the Evening to see Monsieur de Turenne, and to
invite him to Dinner the next day.

The 30. We stayed at Telns. Monsieur de Turenne dined with the Duke of
Newbourg, and in the Evening at his return he had 96 Prisoners brought him,
sent by Monsieur de Montal, Governor of Charleroy, who commanding a Party of
our Troops, had fallen into an Ambush of theirs, and with five or six more had
born up against all their Firing, amongst whom Monsieur the Chevalier de
Marsillac was mortally wounded. In the mean time, forty Dragoons lighted off
their Horses, and with 30 Musketeers, did so bestir themselves, that before
the Enemy could make a second discharge, they had quite routed them, killed
eleven, and took their Commander (who defended himself so manfully, that they
were forced to use him worse then they desired) with all the rest, excepting 2
or 3 who at first betook themselves to their heels. Afterward, the Captain
being known by some of the Officers of our Party, had quarter given him; and
being not yet dead, all possible means were used to save his Life. He was
carried off into a Castle, where Monsieur de Turenne sent him his own
Surgeon, but to little purpose, for he dyed soon after. The rest of the
Prisoners were brought to Nuis, where Monsieur de Strasbourg arrived the same
day, and was saluted with the great Guns of the Town.

The 31. in the Morning, Monsieur de Turenne took with him a party of the Corpse
de Guard, all the Light Guards of the Kings Household, three Companies of the
Regiment Royal of Dragoons, a part of the Regiment of the French Guards, and
some Light Horse; who, after having wintered in the Country of Colen, came by
order of His Majesty to encamp and entrench themselves upon the banks of the
Rhine, on the left side near Keiserwort, where they encamped and fortified
themselves very commodiously. Afterward we marched all day, and encamped under
a great Hill above Orsoy. The King marched on to Nuys, and Monsieur the Prince
advanced by the side of him in equal marches.

The first of June, the King left Nuys and besieged Orsoy, a little Town of a
reasonable strength, situate on the left side of the Rhine. As soon as His
Majesty came before it, He caused it to be summoned, but the Governor refusing
to yield it up, we were immediately employed about making of Faggots, and putting
our selves into a condition to attaque it.

The next day Monsieur the Prince came before Wezel, and did that day only
encamp and invest the Town, which seemed strong and considerable enough to make
us proceed cautiously in our attaque. Wezel is a very great Town, situate on
the right side of the Rhine, at the Mouth of the River Lyppe. It has a great
Ditch faced with good brick, and is divided in the middle by a great Trench,
and very good Fortifications, so that if one half of the Town were gained, one
should be put to the trouble of a Siege to get the other. Monsieur de Turenne
with whom we were, came before Burick, which we invested; and after the Camp
was settled, he sent for some Foot to raise a Redout between this Town and
Wezel, which are over against one the other, on each side the Rhine. Burick is
two good Musket Shot distant from it, but not so far, but that they might give
one another mutual assistance. For this reason it was thought necessary to make
this Redout, as well to hinder their communication, as to cut off the Passage
between Burick and the River, from whence the Enemy might have mischiev'd us in
the Trenches, which we were about to begin on the other side, so to make our
approaches to Wezel. At the same time we were employed in raising a Battery on
the bank of the River, to hinder the Dutch Vessels going to and fro upon the
River, and assisting the Besieged. At our first coming thither we took two of
them, which we manned with Dragoons, and placed in the middle of the River. The
Duke of Luxembourg, who commanded the French Troops belonging to the Bishops of
Colen and Munster, besieged Lokem.

The second, the King commanded an Assault to be given to Orsoy, whereupon we
presently made our selves Masters of the Counterscarpe, and gained all the
outworks, which made the Governor desire to come to composition; but no other
Articles being offered, but, That the Garrison should surrender themselves upon
discretion, He would not hear of that: so the King sent him back, threatening,
That if they discharged but one Canon more, He would have no mercy on them. But
this hindered not their firing much more freely then they had don before, which
greatly incensed the King. Monsieur the Prince caused the Fort of Lip to be
attaqued that Evening, which was carried by the Count de Nogent by Assault.
This very much terrified those of Wezel, because that Fort was near, and did in
some manner command the place. The Governor was there killed, with his Pike in
his hand.

In Monsieur Turenne's Army, they were all busied in making their Lines of
Circumvallation, and blocking up the Town. The Battery, begun the day before
upon the bank of the River, was finished, and nine pieces of Ordnance mounted
on it. Monsieur the Prince raised also another on his side of the River,
consisting of 6 Pieces; and in the Evening we were busied in repairing the
Redoute, which had been almost beat down that day by the Guns of the two Towns.

The third, Orsoy yielded. For the Governor seeing himself unable to make any
longer resistance, was fled with his Family, and all that was most dear to him,
in a small Vessel, designing to gain Rhineberg; but His Majesty having
intelligence of it, and being incensed against him for his stubbornness, caused
the Canon to play so hard upon him, that at last, seeing one of his Wives Women
cut off in the middle by a Canon shot, he was forced to come ashore, and yield
himself up to the mercy of the Conquerors. The Plunder of the Castle was given
to the Soldiery, and the Garrison made Prisoners at discretion. The chief
Persons whom we lost in the Action, were the Sieur de Valens, and the Chevalier
D'Arquien, which last was killed by a Canon-shot near the Kings Person, who
presently afterward commanded Rhineburg to be invested. At the Prince's Army,
the whole day was spent in parlying, for the Inhabitants would by no means hear
of standing it out; and the Garrison, tho finding themselves so weak as not to
be able to undertake any thing, could not resolve to yield themselves upon
discretion, so that the whole day passed without any Action. As for us who were
before Burick, we prepared our selves to attaque it so vigorously, as not be
behind-hand with the other Armies. We made Faggots, and in the Afternoon
carried them almost as far as the Pallisado's, not without the loss of some
Troopers and their Horses, as well there as in our Camp, which lay level with
the Canon of the Town. In the Evening, that part of the Regiment of the Kings
Guards which was in our Army, and the Regiments of Burgundy and Artois, opened
their Trenches. The Marquis de Ranes, with 150 Dragoons which he commanded, was
to attaque a Half Moon, and intending to make his way forwards, resolved
himself to be at the head of them. A like number were drawn out of the
Regiments of Castelneau and Turenne, to do as much on the other side; which
returning all safe, could not properly be said to have gone upon the Forlorn.
But just as we were about to fall on, we heard a Trumpet from the Town, and
as soon as we had answered it an Officer came forth, and after him a second, so
that the Soldiers of the Guards, without staying for the issue of the designed
Conference, began to cry, That they might leave off working at their Trenches,
seeing the Enemy yielded, and desired quarter. But the last Officer seeming a
little more fierce and resolute then the other, because he had not a ready
answer; we prepared to fall on immediately if they did not yield without delay;
which the Enemy perceiving, and having discovered some Scaling-ladders just
ready to be made use of, they opened their Gates, and the Regiment of Guards
entered the Town just about Midnight, and feasted themselves with the
Provisions which they found were bringing to the Soldiers that were upon
Service in the Outworks. All the Garrison were made Prisoners at discretion.

Burick is a reasonable great Town, situate upon the left Bank of the Rhine,
within two Musket Shot of the River, in a fine even fertile Soil. The space
that is between it and the Rhine, is a great Marsh, and delicate Fields and
Meadows, which are nothing near so boggy and wet, as the most part of the rest
of Holland, Zeland and Frizeland. It lies over against Wezel on the other side
of the Rhine, which is a very fair great Town. Burick is none of the least
Towns which the Dutch have in these parts; its Fortifications are good, and it
has good Bastions and Halfmoons, almost wholly of earth, but their Outworks
are too big. The C. de Chamilly speaking of this Town, said, It might well have
held out 3 Months: From whence it is plain, that in the confidence of its
strength the Hollanders had been negligent: and not having taken care to keep
their Fortifications in good repair, we found them laboring day and night in
making Gabions for the top of the Ramparts; but they were so suddenly and
briskly set upon, that they could by no means perfect them. The same day we
took two Barques upon the Rhine, and by that means we doubled the Guard we had
placed in the middle of it. As soon as Burick was yielded, M. de Turenne
received a Packet from the King, upon which he immediately hastened to wait on
His Majesty.

The fourth, nothing was done at the Kings Army, nor at Monsieur Turenne's; but
at the Princes they opened Trenches before Wezel, which would not yield up to
mercy. They were begun on the side of the Town that lies toward the River, and
a Drain was made to empty the Ditch, which would have been done the night
following, had not the Enemy at last, seeing his Highness resolved to set on
then vigorously, sent the Keys of the Town, and yielded themselves up to mercy.
At the same time we were informed, that the Duke of Luxembourg had taken Lokem.

The fifth, the Kings Army was busied in making Faggots and Gabions for the
attaquing of Rhineberg. His Majesty sent a Command to M. de Ranes to meet him
there with the Regiment Royal of Dragoons, which was then with him before
Burick, which he did. M. the Prince at 6 in the Morning entered Wezel, and
visited the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison, where he searched for
Frenchmen, and finding 10 or 11, had them hanged. The Duke of Luxembourg
turned off toward Grol, and M. Turenne's Army rested. M. Cajax was made
Governor of Orsoy.

The fixth in the Morning, 10000 Faggots more were ordered to be made, which
the Dragoons performed, but the Garrison at Rhineberg finding themselves too
weak to resist a Victorious Royal Army; and being likewise out of hope of
receiving the Succors were promised them by the States, resolved to yield. The
Officers of the Garrison came, and laying themselves at his Feet, begged of him
not to take advantage to their cost of the trick which the States had put upon
them, in promising them 2000 Men more as a reinforcement, which they had not
performed. His Majesty considering the falsehood of the States Promises, even to
their own Soldiers, was moved to compassionate their condition, and thereupon
gave them leave to march out, Drums beating, Colors flying, with Match
lighted, and Bullet in mouth; which they did, and marched toward Maestricht,
the King having given them a Convoy, and Provision for four days. The Regiment
of Guards entered the place about one of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Rhineberg is a pretty large Town, belonging to the Archbishopric of Colen,
situate on the left side of the Rhine, in the midst of a very low Marshy
Country, which contributes much to its strength. The States had taken it again
and again from the Spaniards, they having wrongfully took it from the Elector
of Colen, who ever since has been demanding it of them, and making complaints
upon that account in every Diet; till at length the Spaniard proposed to give
it him back, on condition he might keep a Garrison there: But this condition
not pleasing the Elector, they at last promised, without any reserve, to put it
into his hands; but how instant soever the Elector was with them, he could
never persuade them to be as good as their word: they had so many shifts,
feigned excuses, and pretenses, that at last they proved the chief cause of the
Electors declaring War against them. Whilst it was in their possession, they
fortifyed it to their own minds; and being it was a Frontier Town, they had
made it one of their strongest Holds. The Fortifications are very regular;
there are good Bastions and Half-moons, good Ramparts, and very broad Ditches:
but their Outworks are to big, as in most of their Towns. All the Works are of
Earth, which makes them the easier to be assaulted, though it better resist the
Canon, which can only make a hole in them.

The same day some Foot were sent over the Rhine to plunder a certain Castle
there, but the Prince had sent some others to the same purpose the day before;
so that those who came last, did but lose their labor. The Princes and Monsieur
de Turenne's Armies rested again, and the Count d'Estrade was made Governor of
Wezel.

The seventh, Monsieur de Turenne left the King, and so did M. de Ranes, and
the Regiment Royal of Dragoons. We went and joined with the Army which was left
before Burick, and having sent all our heaviest baggage to Rhineberg, where we
left the new Companies of the Regiment of Turenne in garrison, we went and
encamped at Worstemberg near Santein, in the Country of Cleve, which belongs to
the Duke of Brandenbourg. M. the Prince left Wezel, and advanced likewise on
his side. The King's Army stayed still at Rhineberg, and the Duke of Luxembourg
with the Munster forces attaqued Grol.

The eighth, the King left Rhineberg, and came to Burick, whether the Float was
brought to waft over the Army to the other side of the Rhine. We left
Worstemberg in the morning, passed by Zante or Santein, and went and besieged
the Fort of Rees, which we presently beset so closely, that the frighted
Garrison durst not fire so much as one gun. But the Town which lies on the
other bank of the Rhine, was not so civil, for their Canon did much harm to our
Dragoons, especially those, who being come close up, lay open to them. There
were many of them lost, and more of their horses. But notwithstanding the
Capitulation went on at the Fort, which was but ill manned, and because the
Governor stood upon terms, and would not deliver the place before he had seen
and felt our Canon, M. de Turenne commanded the Foot to advance and begin the
Assault, which they did without any resistance from the Enemy (who had retired
into a Redout which was very strong.) Wherefore he caused a bridge of hurdles
to be made, by which he passed over and entered the place himself, and
commanded the Governor and his Garrison to be beset, who at last yielded.
Afterward we turned the Canon of this Fort upon the Town, and much shot past
on both sides. Many of the Enemies Guns were dismounted, and the whole Town so
tired out that the next day they were forced to carry the Keys of their Gates
to M. the Prince, who came up as we did, and made a show as if he would also
have attaqued it, though his design was to go straight on toward a party of
the Enemies which kept the Passage of the Isle of Beter and of the Yssel, that
the King might go and besiege that Town and Emerick. As soon as the Fort had
yielded, Monsieur de Turenne left there a part of his Horse, all his foot, the
Artillery and Baggage; and upon no tice that 4000 of the Enemies Horse had
passed the Wahal, with a design, as 'twas thought, to set upon us, we went to
meet them. To that purpose we went and passed the River near Calcar, a little
Town (in the Country of Cleve) defended by a Citadel, whose fortifications are
all of earth without any other facing. We were saluted in our passage by at
least 100 great Guns, and thence passed to Cleves, where our Army was
victualled gratis. It is the capital City of the whole Province, but is a place
of no defense. Afterward we encamped a quarter of an hours riding from that
City, by a park, which belongs to a House of pleasure of the Duke of
Brandebourg.

The ninth was wholly spent in passing the Kings Army from the left to the
right side of the Rhine. The town of Rees quite spent and wearied out by our
Canon from the Fort, brought in her Keys, and yielded as the rest had done.

Rees is a fair great Town situate on the right side of the Rhine, 3 leagues
below Burick and Wezel, and 2 leagues above Emerick. It is strengthened by a
good Fort of its own name, separated from it only by the Rhine, whose waters on
the right side wash the walls of the Town, and on the left those of the Fort.
This Town is very great, her fortifications very complete and good. It has
good Bastions, Horn-works, Half-Moons well strengthn'd with good Pallissados,
large ditches, and covered ways, all very regular. In fine, when M. de Turenne
entered the Fort, he told them that were near him, that their friends that knew
Rees, and heard they laid Siege to it, would certainly be very much concerned
for them: and thereupon having sent for the sieur Paul, a Flemming Engineer, to
ask his opinion of it, he answered him, that if any body would have an
excellent Model of a regular Fortification, they need not seek it any where
else, but might take it from Rees and its Fort; which is a Pentagone, whose
outworks were a little out of repair, but within there was a Redout which they
call the Castle, which is very well and in good case. It is separated from the
Body of the Fort by a great flat broad ditch, which is deeper then it is broad,
over which there is a little Drawbridge, and a good Gate on the other side,
and a high rampart well pallissado'd and Gabioon'd, which at each corner has
two little Horn-works, which flank upon the bridge and ditch.

At the same time M. the Prince advanced toward Emerick, which made no
resistance, the Dutch having withdrawn their Garrison some days before.

Emerick is a pleasant town, seated on the right side of the Rhine, a league
above that place where the river divides, and makes the Rhine with its right
branch, and the Wahal with its left. It Is a reasonable good town, and its
fortifications, that are all of earth, are well enough maintained. However the
Dutch some few days before the Princes arrival, withdrew themselves and quitted
their Garrison; either because they thought it could not endure a Siege, or for
some other reason, that I am ignorant of, and cannot imagine what it should be;
for since that time we have taken several Towns not so strong as that, wherein
they had made very good Garrisons.

That morning M. de Turenne with some Officers, and a small Guard, went to take
a view of Skinksconce, and came so near as to be within hearing of the
Garrison: from whom we received about 40 musket, and several Canon shot, but
they did no execution. Thereupon, having learned the retreat of the enemy, we
returned back, and joined with the rest of the Army, near the Fort of Rees, in
the mid way between Calcar, and another place called Hompel.

The same day M. the Prince advanced above Skinksconce, the Rhine lying between
him and it, and discovered the enemy on the other side, guarding that passage.

In the mean time the Dragoons of the Colonel Regiment were commanded to
attaque Demecum; but that place held out so little a while, that they had time
enough to come back, and share the Glory of that passage, that was made two
days after.

The 10 his Majesty came to Rees, we stayed with M. de Turenne's Army, where we
received the news of the taking of Grol by the Bishop of Munsters Forces. That
Town, if not the strongest and most considerable that the Hollanders were
masters of, was yet of great consequence to them, as lying on the Frontiers of
Germany, and being excellently well seated; on which account it was fortified by
Charles the Fifth. It has five Bastions, fair and good Ramparts, besides a
great ditch, that cannot easily be emtied, by reason of the river Sling, that
discharges it self into it.

The 11 his Majesty being advised that M. the Prince intended to swim the
Rhine, and endeavor to force the enemy from the other side, though they
appeared to be considerably strong, resolved to be present in person at that
Enterprise, which never had any equal, nor attended with like success, and, as
it were, divest himself for some time of his Title and Dignity, to share with
his Soldiers, under the quality of a Feild-Marshal or private person, the
honor of a day, that was almost to decide the fortune of all Holland.

To this intent he left his Army in their Quarters; and having taken with him
his house Guard, and 2000 loose horse, he encamped on the side of the River, on
the right hand of Tolhuys, a small Fort about a league below Skinksconce in the
Isle of Betaw. The enemy, that lay entrenched on the other side, in number
about three or four thousand, gave fire, and skirmished all that day. We on our
side caused some Foot to advance, whilst we raised a battery of five pieces of
Canon. In the mean time the Army of M. de Turenne approached to pass over the
Rhine, over against Rees, on a float of wood: who after he had convayed over
his Majesty, with his Army and the baggage to Wezel, came down to do the like
with his own Army: but the water being low, and no great wind stirring, they
encamped at Nerdmormter, and began not to pass till the evening: and so the
foot continued to pass all night, and afterward the horse.

The 12 in the morning, his Majesty having expressed he should be glad to have
the passage of Tolbuys sounded, to try if it were not too deep before they
ventured on it, M. the Count de Guiche went immediately, and sounded it
himself. Thereupon command was given to horse; and his Majesty, vexed to see the
enemy pretend a desire to engage, and not being able to endure those outward
signs, that were so contrary to their inclinations, without staying to draw up,
and not considering whether his Guards, Gendarmes, and light horse were present
or no, who were to make the first onset, having found the Cuirassiers near at
hand, he commanded them to fling themselves into the water and cross the river;
which they did so briskly, that the poor M. the Marquis de la Salle, whom they
happened to meet in their way, received from them five or six dangerous wounds,
as if he had been a Hollander (for indeed they took him for one) though he was
clothed after the French mode, and had a white scarf on. Monsieur the Count de
Guiche was at the head of them, and did all that a good Captain and a brave
Soldier could have done on the like occasion. The Forces of his Majesty's house
were commanded to pass next, and to swim the river; which they immediately did
with so much courage and resolution, as struck a terror into the Enemy. They
were followed by a great number of Volunteers; and immediately our Canon began
to play, as also did that of the Enemy. In the mean time General Wurts,
Commander of the Troops that guarded the passage, being a stout and well
experienced Captain, marched at the head of the first squadron, and caused them
to advance into the water up to their Horses bellies, having given order to all
the rest to follow him into the river, some on the right, and some on the left
hand. The first squadron advanced with resolution, and made a brisk discharge,
at which M. the Count de Nogent, Feild-Marshal to that Army, a person of a
brave and daring spirit, received a wound in his head, which made him sink into
the water, where he was unfortunatly drowned. But the following squadrons that
had orders to enter the river, not daring to run that hazard, stayed in the
rear of the former, and by that means gave liberty to our men to pass, both on
the right and the left wing, and at the same time to come upon them on the
flank. In the mean time the Dragoons, being impatient also to cross the river,
though having had no order they did not dare to do it, advanced part of them
into the water, that they might skirmish more commodiously, and never ceased
giving fire. At length the Dutch took the rout, and the Commander himself, that
had entered so briskly into the water, was forced to consult his own safety by
flight. For having comforted his men, and told them that no Nation but ours,
was capable of such bold enterprises, and that nothing would be able to resist
us, trusted his life and his honor to his Horses feet, and at length made his
escape, after he had fled a league or two, and suffered a continual loss of his
men in the pursuit. During this time, the Generals and Monsieur the Prince
himself having past the river, the Enemies Foot, that could not take the same
course that the Horse had done, and had nothing to hope for but death or mercy,
began to mollify, and M. de Longueville with the Duke and other Volunteers were
coming up to them. But M. the Prince observing the Enemy to yield, and fearing
the youthful heat of the young Gentlemen would produce some bad effect, run
up, crying they would cause his son to be killed: and having made all possible
have, he came up to the trenches as soon as the rest, and cried out to the
Enemy they were all Rogues, and if they shot once more, he would have them all
hanged. His threats made them all lay down their arms, and cry out in their own
Language Kartyr, Kartyr. But the misfortune was, that M. de Longueville, not
taking notice of what had past, and desiring to free that Post, found a passage
too soon; and falling upon the first Officer that he met, killed him on the
place: and upon the confused noise he heard of Kartyr, which the Enemy
demanded, he gave a sign with his hand, and cried, no Quarter, being immediately
followed by all his men that were then present. Thereupon the Enemy, despairing
of their lives, betook themselves again to their arms, and gave one shot more,
which proved a very fortunate one to them: for at it the sieur de Longueville,
M. de Guitry, Grand Master of the Kings Wardrobe, M. d'Aubusson, the Marquis de
Tasse, nephew to Monsieur the Marshal de la Force, and the Count de Theobon
were killed upon the place. Several others also were wounded, amongst which
were M. the Duke de Coistin, and M. de Vivonne, M. the Prince de Marsillac, M.
the Count de Saulx, the last in the face and the arm, after he had been engaged
in the general and a single Combat: For having gone too far in the pursuit of
the Enemy, he found himself alone with one of their Officers, who put himself
upon his guard, and wounded the Count in his face. M. de Brouilly dyed in a
short time of his wounds, M. de Terms was also wounded, and M. the Count de
Revel received a wound on his arm, and another of a musket shot in his thigh.
M. de Beringhen was shot through the breast. The other persons of note that
were wounded, were the Marquis de Beauveau, de Mont-revert, de Beaumont, de S.
Arnoul, and which was worst of all, Monsieur the Prince had his left arm broke
at the wrist; which accident did much retard and lessen his Majesty's
Conquests: for his name alone made the Enemy tremble, and they began not to
make resistance, till they had learnt the news of his mishap: considering too
that from that time Monsieur de Turenne was obliged to command in his place,
and to join the Troops of his own Army with those of the King: so that of three
Armies there remained now but two. The enemies also on their side lost in this
rencounter three or four hundred men, that were killed upon the place, besides
a great num^e^ that were taken prisoners. After all this ^laughter the Forces
of the Kings H^use draw up on the edge of the Rhine, and the s^de of the
Island, and quartered at Bih^va^. The A^ny that had hitherto been commanded by
Monsieur de Turenne, continued all day passing the Rhine over against Rees, and
were all over that night.

The thirteenth, the Bridge of Boats, that had been making the day before, was
finished; and the Army of M. the Prince began at break of day to march over
with M. de Turenne, who from that time commanded always in the place of his
Highness. When they were all over they pillaged Tolhuys, a plain Castle with
one great Tower, guarded only by a ditch and a wall: but being seated within a
musket shot of the river, near the passage, a hundred looss horse, that had
been drawn out of the Fort of Schain to secure that Castle, had time enough to
give two volleys of musket shot, and discharge twice or thrice a piece of Canon
that carried eighteen pound bullet charged with cartridges, before we could get
over and come up to them: and afterward they had the convenience to retire
before our coming, because M. the Count de Guiche, who was the first that
passed, had busied himself in pursuit of the horse, and M. the Prince of the
foot, as was said before. We found in this Castle store of fair and good
Movables, some persons also, that had retired thither in hope that we would
not have attacqued Holland, about this Isle, but have passed directly on to
Yssel, where the Prince of Orange, and the Count Maurice were both with their
Armies.

After the pillage of this Castle, Monsieur de Turenne marched on close after
the Enemy, a party of which he overtook, and found breaking a bridge, upon the
Channel that runs from Arnhem to Nimegen, over which we must necessarily pass.

These men, though but a small party, had a mind to finish their enterprise,
perhaps because they thought they might be seconded with the rest of the Army,
that was not gone far; but having skirmish'd a little with the Vanguard, the
Dragoons lighting of their horses, set upon them so vigourously, that they gave
them the rout, and forced them into Arnhem. And finding themselves well enough
at the end of a bridge that lies over the Rhine, and reaches from this Town to
the Isle of Betau, they lodged there, maugre the Canon and musket shot of the
Enemy, that fortunately killed more horses then men.

His Majesty having called a Council before the departure of M. de Turenne, as
soon as it was ended began to march toward Emerick, to join with his Army,
which all this time lay in their Quarters at Rees. The Army also, that had been
commanded by M. de Turenne, came thither likewise, and made up one body with
that of the King. The Troops that had followed his Majesty's two days before,
and those of his own House did the like.

M. the Duke of Monmouth, natural Son to the King of England, arrived the same
day at the Camp at Emerick, with 7000 foot, that were all brisk and active men.
Monsieur the Cardinal de Bouillon that day consecrated anew the great Church of
Rees.

The 14th his Majesty rested with his whole Army, at the Camp of Emerick. After
dinner he visited M. the Prince (who the day before had caused himself with the
rest that were wounded, to be removed into this Town) and at his return took a
view of the Duke of Monmouths Forces. Monsieur de Turenne seeing his affairs
so well advanced before Arnhem, resolved to lay siege to it, and thereupon
having taken a view of it, and taken up his Quarters, he sammoned the Town.

In the mean while, that no time might be lost, M. the Count du Plessis
employed some men about repairing the boats that the Enemies had began to
break, as being necessary for our passage; but in that action he was killed
with a Canon shot to the great regret of the whole Army. The Dragoons, which
were much incommoded by a guard of the Enemy placed in a redoubt on the other
side of the river, were resolved to venture the passage, which, after orders
were given, they performed with so much resolution and success, as struck a
terror into the Town; whereupon the Burghers began to mutiny, and at length
forced the Garrison to leave of firing.

The Fame of General Wurts defeat, and of our entrance into Betaw, was not long
a spreading, and the noise of it no sooner came to the ears of the Prince of
Orange, who with his Army guarded the passage of Yssel, but the Enemy, being
daunted with the news, thought of nothing but a retreat, which was done in so
great have, as terrified all the places through which they passed.

In the mean time M. de Turenne ordered 150 horse under the command of a
Captain of the horse of Conde, to swim the river, and to fall on their rear
Guard, that passed pretty near Arnham. The Enemy little expecting this attaque,
as thinking themselves secured by the River, were so surprised at this assault,
that the Guard of the Baggage abandoned it all to those few horse, who made
themselves masters of it at their leisure, and returned loaded with so great a
booty, that they had enriched themselves by it, though they had not joined to
it the two other of, which they had also the spoil, which amounted to no less
then forty thousand Francks. The same day M. the Cardinal de Bouillon
consecrated anew the great Church of Emerick.

The 15. The Kings Army rested, and His Majesty took a view of it after dinner.

Upon the Summons that M. de Turenne had given to Arnhem, the Citizens began to
mutiny, and threatened the Garrison to cut all their Throats if they fired any
more; whereupon they came and demanded Articles: but M. de Turenne sent them to
the King, and immediately marched away with the greatest part of his Army, to
besiege Knotzembourg, otherwise called the Fort of Nimigen, because it is
seated on the right side of the Wahal, directly opposite to that great Town,
that lies on the left hand. He arrived thither time enough to open his Trenches
that Evening, it being but three little Leagues from Arnhem. That Night we
worked with so much success, as to lodge our selves on their Counterscarpe, by
which we became Masters of their covered way, but not without some difficulty,
and the loss of several Men: for they defended themselves from the Fort very
briskly, and gave continual fire from the Town; besides three Boats, each of
them provided with 8, 10, or 12 pieces of Canon, came round, and fired at us
with full Charges at about thirty paces distance. During all that Night, there
was fired so great a number of Canon-shot, that those that heard it from
Emerick, where His Majesty's Army lay, could not imagine where so continual a
noise should be made: but from another place where the noise could not plainly
be heard, one would have thought they had been Musket Shot, and only an
engagement of some Foot.

The 16. His Majesty early in the Morning parted with all His Army from
Emerick, and encamped at Latem upon the River Yssell, or rather the Channel of
Drusus. A branch of this River that runs from Arnhem to Doesburg, is a Channel
that communicates between the Rhine and the Yssel, which was made by Drusus in
the time of the Romans, whence it is called the Channel of Drusus, or the
Drusian Ditch. In the mean time we advanced to Zevenaer, a small Town, that
has no other Fortification but its Ramparts, so that we made our selves
Masters of it without any great difficulty. Presently after that, M. the Count
de l' Orge, and M. the Marquis de Ranes, had command to pass the Yssel; the one
with 4000 Horse, and the other with the Regiment Royal of Dragoons, to take the
places that lie before Doesburg, which immediately they did. But the Deputies of
Arnhem having came to the King, and brought the Keys of their Town without
Conditions, His Majesty in the Afternoon gave order to the M. de Ranes to go
with his Dragoons to take possession of the Town. M. the Marquis de Louvois
went thither also; and the Inhabitants had granted them a freedom of their
Religion, with all their Privileges, but the Garrison were made Prisoners of
War, and disarmed, to the number of 3000 Foot and 200 Horse, which were very
sufficient to have defended the place. The Dragoons were hardly masters of the
Gates, when 200 Bores that came to the Garrison with Provision, desired
entrance; whom we suffered to come in, and afterward made Prisoners with the
rest.

Arnhem is a great Town, seated on the right side of that Branch of the Rhine
which keeps its name, and washes the Walls of the Town. Its situation is partly
high, partly low, being commanded on that side that looks toward the Velue by
a Hill, which to repair the Injury it does it, sends down a torrent of Water,
that defends it on the other side by a great flat bottomed Ditch, all lined
with Freestone, which is the fairest and largest that one shall any where see,
and which does almost surround the Town, except on that side where the Rhine
washes the Walls, and does sufficiently defend it. For the rest, the Hollanders
have taken care enough, and bin very diligent in fortifying it; and I may very
well affirm, They have not very many Fortifications so good as these. They are
all lined with Brick, which is not ordinary in their other Towns. The Ramparts
also are very fair and large. To conclude, all things are very good, and it
might be very well looked upon as one of their best Towns.

At nine in the Evening, M. the Count de Guiche brought thither the Regiment of
Navar, and the Dragoons came back and encamped on the side of the Yssel. In the
mean time M. de Turenne continued to storm the Fort of Nimigen, which defended
it self almost all day with equal force: but having fired also on the Boats,
they were run a ground so well, that the Enemy fearing least in the night we
should make our descent into the Ditch, and so enter the Town, they rendered
themselves up, after having killed 1000 or 1200 Men, of which the Sieur de la
Plastriere, Lieutenant Colonel of the Regiment Lyonnois, and the Sieur Alsan
the son, Lieutenant of the Colonel of Champagne, were the principal. M.
Magalotty Camp-Marshal, lost a Finger of one Hand, and was hurt in the other.

The 17. in the Morning, the Marquis de Ranes repassed the Yssel with his
Dragoons, upon a Bridge of Boats which he made over it, and went and joined
with the Kings Army, which by reason of a great maras was forced to turn back
by the way of Zovenaer; and then passing by Dutecum went and besieged Doesburg.
M. the Prince removed to Arnhem, that he might not be far from the King. M. de
Turenne, who came himself to acquaint the King with the taking of Knotzembourg,
returned immediately, and caused us to march toward Skenkssconce, which since
our passage over the River had been blocked up. The Marquis of Sauvebeuf, who,
as has been said, was hurt before Maestricht the 24. of May, and there taken
Prisoner, came back to the Camp cured of his Wounds, and without having paid
any ransom, by the means of the generous C. Rhingrave, who, together with the
Spaniards in the Garrison (whose Commanders had taken his part) had a contest
with the States and Dutch party upon that account; for though the Dutch were
willing enough to release him, yet they were very eager for to have him pay his
ransom first: But at last, after a great dispute on both sides, the Spaniards
threatened to forsake the Town if they would not agree; which made the States
consent to give him his liberty freely, together with a Pass to return to the
Army.

The 18. The King summoned Doesburg, but the Governor refusing to hearken to
the Trumpeter, or receive the Letter he brought, His Najesty ordered
preparations to be made to attaque it. Faggots and Gabions were commanded to be
provided, which was done with all diligence. The Count de Lorge who lay on the
other side of the River with 4000 Horse, advanced toward the Town, to hinder
any Succors from being put into it that way. M. de Turenne caused Trenches to
be opened against Skenksconce, in which was a Garrison of 1900 Men. The same
day, about four of the clock, M. de Rochefort, Captain of a Company of the Life
Guards, and Lieutenant General in this Campaign, who had received Orders to be
ready to march with 4000 Horse, set forward only with 1800, because at so short
warning the Victuallers had not had time to bake Bread enough for so great a
number. M. de Genlis was given him for his Camp-Marshal. The Marquis de Ranes
set forward likewise with the Regiment Royal of Dragoons. We swam our Horses
over the Yssel, and marched on all the rest of that day, and the night
following, without drawing bit.

The 19. was spent in preparations for opening of Trenches before Doesburg, in
making Faggots, Gabions and Bridges for communication. M. de Turenne on his
side so vigorously assaulted Skenksconce, that the Garrison beginning to be
disheartened, and dispairing of any succor, were thinking upon capitulating;
which M. de Turenne suspecting, sent the Colonel Regiment of Dragoons to
attaque the Fort of S. Andrew, which made no long resistance, though there were
in it 200 Men; and it be, I think, the best Fortress the Enemy has. It lies
in the narrowest place of the Isle of Bommel, compast with five good Bastions,
and watered almost quite round by the River Wahal, so that it is impossible to
drain its Ditches, and almost so, to make any Bridge over them without the
consent of the Besieged. M. de Rochefort, with whom as I said we swam the
Yssel, and marched all night, continued still his march all this day, so that
we were almost 23 hours continually on Horseback without drawing Bit.

At two of the clock in the Afternoon, as we came out of a very fine Village,
which we found deserted, our Vanguard discovered a Body of Foot; which as soon
as we went about to pursue, saved themselves in the neighboring Woods, which
made us think they were only some Peasants, or some that had been laid in
Ambush by Count Maurice, whose Army we were in pursuit of. At last we came to
Amerfort, with design to attaque and take it by assault; but the Inhabitants,
who had ever since the Prince of Orange his flight, kept some at the top of a
Steeple to give them notice of our coming (that they might not fall into the
Trap we had laid for them) and being advertized of our coming, came out before
us, and obtained the free use of their Religion and preservation of their
Rights and Privileges, opened their Gates to the Marquis de Ranes, who entered
the Town with the Regiment Royal of Dragoons which he had brought with him, and
staid there until the 27 of the same Month. The Sieur de Mazelles, a Captain of
Horse, having at the same time been drawn out (with his Company, which
consisted of 50 Maistres, and the Sieur de Bonneval Captain of Dragoons, with
100 Maistres of the same Body) to go forward and get intelligence of the Enemy,
marched all night toward Naerden, a little, but very strong Town, which has
six Bastions, and lies just upon the Frontier of the Province of Holland, 3
little Leagues from Amsterdam; in which was a Garrison of 200 Men, as well
Horse as Foot. At his arrival, he made all the noise he could with Drums and
Trumpets, beating and sounding diverse Marches, and afterward summoned the
Town; which being terrified and surprised, the Burgomasters of it came out to
Treat, which they spun out so long, that the Garrison had time to make their
escape: And when they were all gone, they opened their Gates and admited him.
As soon as he was in the Town, he made enquiry to know if there was no Soldiers
in the place, and was told there was not; but considering that place to be of
too much importance to be left without a Garrison by the Hollander, he caused
one of the Burgomasters to be apprehended, and told him, They should all lose
their Heads, for not discovering to the King truly whether there were any
Soldiers in the Town. These threats made them confess, That truly there had
been some there, but as soon as they heard the noise of the French Troops, they
had fled toward Amsterdam; whereupon he immediately caused the Gates to be
opened, and went out in pursuit of them; and at the same time ordered his
Lieutenant, with some Horse, to follow the Enemies Horse, who were not yet out
of sight; and were some a Horseback, and others on Foot, their Horses being
laden with their Baggage. The Lieutenant pursued them to the Gates of
Amsterdam, got the greatest part of their Baggage, and in his way homewards
summoned Muyden, which not finding in case to make any resistance, he entered,
and was master of it for 2 hours: but at last finding himself to weak to keep
that place, he returned to fetch more Men; but in the mean time things put on
another face. At the same time the Sieur de Mazelles on his side, had pursued
the Foot, which took the way of the Fields and enclosures, and passing over 3
Bridges, still broke them as soon as they were got over, so that he was forced
to his Horses strength to follow them. But the third time as he swam, his Horse
was mired, so that taking only his Pistols, he left him there and follow*d on,
only accompanied with about 20 more of his Company, who making up to them upon
the very mouths of their Muskets, at last took almost all the Soldiers, and two
of their Captains Prisoners.

This day the Inhabitants and Burgomasters of Vtrecht, and the Towns depending
on it, being frighted by the sudden Conquests and Enterprises which His
Majesty so fortunatly and vigorously prosecuted, after 3 or 4 days consultation
sent a Trumpeter to ask for a Pass, for them to come and bring the King the
Keys of their Town and its dependents, viz. Amersfort, (which we had unknown to
them already taken) Ewick, Rhenen and Montfort. The same day we were informed,
that the States General had left the Hague in a fright, and retired to
Amsterdam with all their Writings and Riches; how they arrived there the
seventeenth, and assembled themselves to consult on Saturday the eighteenth,
being very much frighted and full of consternation. That they mistrusted the
Prince of Orange who had so soon taken flight, and retired with his Army to the
Country about Leiden. We heard likewise of the pitiful condition to which
Count Maurice and his Army were reduced, (who some days before had fled beyond
Vtrecht, they having refused to admit him) and that he was now marching for
Amsterdam, whether he had been sent for: That some of his Companies had not
above five or six Men left, the rest having forsook him and fled to diverse
parts: That when they were near Amersfort, a Bore having in sport told them, he
had seen a great party of French thereabouts, immediately upon hearing of it,
they took their heels and ^^ed above 2 leagues, without stopping. The Duke of
Luxembourg came now, and laid ^^^e to Deventer.

The 20 the Kings Army opened their Trenches before Doesburg: they wrought hard
all night pretty freely and undisturb'dly, under the command of the Duke of
Roannez, at the head of four Batalions of the French Guards, defended by
Monsieur de Rommecourt, who commanded the horse Guards; for the Enemy fired but
very sparingly. Monsieur de Rochefort left Amersfort in the morning, and with a
party of horse marched toward Vtrecht, and by the way heard that Naerden was
taken, and that the Count Maurice was not far from it. M. de Rancs came back to
Amersfort, and took with him 150 horse, 50 of which were Dragoons, and we
marched all night that way. In the mean time the Marquis de la Trousse, who had
been out by the King with 3 Squadrons to march toward Zutphen, frighted them
of that place not a little, so that the Burgomasters considering that the
longer they held out, the worse conditions they should have, and that on the
other side they could hope for no succors, sent to let him know that they
desired they might send Deputies to the King to Capitulate for them, and that
their Governor would not be against it: the Marquis de la Trousse presently
informed his Majesty of what had passed, whereupon Monsieur prepared to march
thither, and in the mean time the Marquis de Ranes sent some Dragoons to the
Castle of Em, who possessed themselves of it. This Castle takes its name from the
little river Em, which runs from Amersfort, and discharges it self into the
Zuiderzee, after it has run by this Castle which lies near the mouth of it.

The 21 the Garrison of Doesburg, which the night before were as quiet as if
they had been a sleep, began to bestir themselves in the morning, and at break
of day began to fire very furiously: but this hindered us not from going on in
our work happily enough, and with little loss, so that the Batteries were made
fit to play.

Monsieur being come to Zutphen, summoned it, but they absolutely refused to
yield it up, which so much the more incensed his Royal Highness, because the
day before they had sent to propose the yiedling it.

The Marquis of Ranes arrived at Naerden about 2 of the clock in the morning,
he reinforced the Garrison with 50 Dragoons, besides those 100 which were there
already, with the Company of the Sieur de Marelles, upon notice that Count
Maurice was thereabout with his Troops, and that he had put 2000 men into
Muyden (which he had that day done so suddenly, that the Lieutenant, who had
been master of it 2 hours, and went to fetch more men to put into it, when he
came back, found the Enemy possessed of it) and had now retrenched himself on the
other side of the stream of Wesep. Monsieur de Turenne at last made himself
Master of Skenksconce, and then turned his Arms toward Nimegen.

Skenksconce is a little hole (as I may say) so famous that it were unnecessary
to say any thing of it, but it is also of more than ordinary concern to the
Possessours, because of its situation, which is just on the point of the Island
Betaw, just where the Rhine divides it self into two great arms, whereof one
retains its own name and runs toward Arnhem, and the other takes the name of
Wahal, and leads to Nimegen. No Vessel can go up or down either River without
their leave, who are Masters of this Fort; so that it is the Key which either
opens or shuts up all communication between Holland and Germany. This makes it
of very great importance; for no Merchandise as Rhenish Wine, Timber, and
chiefly Firr-trees, which continually come down that way from Switzerland,
Suaveland, and other places of Germany, and bring a great income both to those
who send for them thence, and also to those who sell them again at second hand
to other Nations, who come thither to buy them; so that the trade both of these
Commodities, and a hundred more, cannot go on without the leave of this Fort.
And as its situation is most advantageous, so is its strength proportionable,
for on 2 sides Nature has so strengthened it with the defense of this great
River, that it is not to be set upon that way, and on the other, which is that
that faces the Isle, Art has fortified it with a great ditch full of water,
good Bastions and half Moons, and a strong Rampart, which make it in a manner
impregnable. The Inhabitants of the Country round about, who can still remember
former Wars, do assure us it was always thought impregnable, and in History we
never find it ever was taken above twice, the first time in the year 1636, when
a certain Captain of a Garrison in Guelderland for the King of Spain, called
Enhoolt, being very much incensed against the Hollanders, for putting diverse of
his friends and kindred to death, took it by surprise, so that this can hardly
be called a taking of it: the second time was after a Siege which will be
remembered many ages to come, since it lasted 8 months, and consumed so many men
before it, that in many places it is yet known by the name of the French
burying place, for they had then taken part with the Dutch, and did with their
blood purchase there both Glory and Victory. It is likewise reported that when
it was taken, there were left in it but 12 men, who did even then maintain the
place.

Deventer, at last being tired out by the Bishop of Munsters Granados, yielded,
and it is Garrison marched out with their arms toward Nimegen, with a Convoy,
but so weak a one, that when they came near Zutphen, the Hollanders in spite
of the Convoy, cast themselves into it, and this recruit it was which made the
Governor change his mind, and deny to yield up the Town to Monsieur, as he
himself had proposed the day before.

The Marquis de Ranes having visited Naerden, and left good directions for the
preservation of that Place, departed thence about 6 of the clock for Amersfort,
and left the Burgomasters of Muyden not a little confounded for having profer'd
the Keys of that Town, when it was no more in their power to let him into it,
and even them selves were shut out of it. The same day Deputies from the States
left Amsterdam to come and find the King at Doesburg, whose Garrison attempted
to make a sally, but without any success, for they were presently repulsed.

The 22 the Sieur Martinet Camp-Master to the Kings Regiment, appointed
Governor of Emerick, and Camp-Marshal in this Campaign, imagining that some
persons did daily watch him out of a suspicion, that he had not so much courage
as he pretended to, did all that day and night run himself upon all dangers,
and so fortunately, that without receiving any wound, he advanced with his
party much further among the Enemies Posts then could be expected; so that by
ill fortune the Count of Soissons, who commanded the Isle of Yssel, and was
ordered to shoot cross way upon a Post of the Enemies, not being aware that the
said Sieur Martinet had already gained it, played upon it, so that Martinet was
killed by a Canon shot; the same ill fortune took away the Sieur Sourry a
Switzer Captain, and the Sieur Cyron, who was appointed Governor of S.
Menehould. This gave occasion to some who delight in railery, to say, that
Doesbourg, which the Hollanders had taken such pains to fortify, and had 4500
men in it (who yielded themselves up to mercy) had cost the King but one
Swallow, one Mouse, and one Worm, from the signification of the French names,
for indeed the Place yielded upon it.

Doesburg is a Town which has not been long famous, and indeed was at first
very inconsiderable, but since the Hollanders have found the possession of the
Yssel to be so necessary to the preservation of their Country, they thought fit
to fortify all the Places that lie upon that River, and chiefly this which is
situate just where the Channel of Drusus mingles its waters with those of this
river. So that at present it is in a very good condition, having good
Fortifications, which for the most part are coated on the outside. It is
strengthened on one side by the River, and on the other by a great Marsh, which
lies between it and Arnhem, which altogether hinder it from being any way
accessible, but by one neck of Land.

This place yielded notwithstanding this day upon the same terms as did the
rest. Afterward his Majesty sent Monsieur a recruit of 4000 foot and 1500
horse, because he had with him but 6000 foot and 200 horse before. His Majesty
sent him likewise the particulars of the Capitulation at Deesburg, wherefore
Monsieur caused Zutphen to be again summoned, and sent the Governor a sight of
the Articles of the Capitulation at Doesburg; but this taking no effect, his
Royal Highness caused many faggots to be made, and in the evening had the
Trenches opened by the Regiments of Normandy, Turenne, and Orleans.

Monsieur de Turenne continued battering Nimegen from the Fort of Knotzembourg,
without attaquing it on any other side; but sent and took in Worm.

The Sieurs de Rochefort and de Ranes went to Naerden, and drew near to Muyden,
to take a view of the Enemy, who appeared in great numbers upon a Bastion, but
never offered to sally out. From thence they returned to Amersfort, whither
came also a party of Musketeers and 1800 horse from the Kings Army. The body
of Monsieur the Count de Nogent, who had been killed by a musket shot, as he
swam the Rhine, was found about 3 leagues lower, and buried in the great Church
at Zevenaer with all possible State.

News was brought to the King of Deventer's being taken by the Confederate
Armies of Munster and Cologne, and that Swol, Campen, Elburg, Alderwick,
Hasselt, Hattem and Ommen had upon the single summons of a Trumpet, drove out
their Garrisons, and received those sent them by the Confederates.

The 23 Monsieur de Turenne sent news to the King, of the taking of the Forts
of S. Andrew and Worm's, which are the Keys to the Island of Bommelle. Before
Zutphen the Canon was in a condition to play by break of day, and did the Enemy
considerable damage. An hour before day, the besieged tried to give a false
Alarm, but it succeeded not as they hoped: for the Chevalier de Lorraine, who
had not stirred from that Trench, discovered their design, and kept the
Soldiers in due order. At 2 in the morning Monsieur de Rochefort, who had
returned to Amersfort, left it again to go with all his horse, as well those
who came the last night, as those which were in the Town before, and encamped
at the Gates of Vtrecht, between the Town and the Enemy. The Marquis de Ranes
stayed at Amersford with his Royal Regiment of Dragoons, and in the evening
caused all things necessary for an Assault to be carried upon the works, that
they might be ready in case of need. About nine in the morning the same day,
the Sieur Hotain, a Colonel of the Munster Troops, who then commanded a flying
Party, came before the Town, and summoned it, but understanding it was already
possessed, he commanded his Army to make a halt, and gave order that 800 horse
and 500 Dragoons, which he commanded, should refresh themselves. Afterward he
desired he might come in and salute the Governor; which he did, and
breakfasted with him, he, and 3 or 4 more of his Company. He confirmed the news
of Deventer, and of the deaths of M. de Gerzey, and M. de Beaufort, Camp Master
to a Regiment of horse, who in a sally which the Enemy made, beat them back
into the Town, but having engaged himself beyond possibility of retreating,
received a great many wounds, of which he dyed on the place, as well as the
sieur Mallet, a Captain of horse in the same Regiment, and the sieur
Mauvoisiniere his Lieutenant. The same person affirmed he had newly made
himself Master of Elbairg and Harderwick, which are two little Towns above
Campen, near Zuiderzee.

After breakfast, as he took leave, he said he was going to raise contribution
of all the places that depended upon those two Towns, and that he had taxed the
Peasants at a Patagon (which is equal to a French Crown) for every Hearth, and
then was returning to Harderwick.

A party of the Colonel Regiment of Dragoons being sent to Waningen, took it,
and stayed there some days, as well to refresh themselves, as to stay till
there should come thither a body of foot.

Waningen is a pretty Town about the bigness of Meaux in Brie, situated in an
uneven Country. On the upper side of it there lies a heath of 4 or 5 leagues
extent in the narrowest place, on the other side there are very good Pastures,
intermingled with some Arable land, which is very fruitful. This town lying in
the midst of many others, the States thought it unnecessary to fortify, but
left it in its ancient condition, so that it has hardly any Fortification
besides its rampart.

The same day a Swiss Drummer, who had been at Amsterdam to carry news of some
Prisoners to their Relations, and to desire them to send them money to pay
their ransom, brought back word that he had been brought before Count Maurice,
and mightily questioned by him: that his Army within their Retrenchments did
not seem to contain above 4000 men, that they seemed much dismayed, and that
all the fierceness which he strove to put on, could not hide his concern when
he heard in what condition the Kings Army was, and that the Count had taken
order to let him see as little as might be of the disorder and slenderness of
his Army. Let us therefore give them a little leisure to take heart again if
they can, and leaving a while the continuation of our Journal, let us rejoice
with the whole Kingdom of France, at our Great Monarchs fortunate Progress,
and the Birth of a Prince, which GOD has now sent Him.

A JOURNAL OF THE War with Holland.
THE SECOND PART.
ALTHOUGH Men naturally love change, and novelties carry still with them
somewhat of delight, yet there are some things that immediately disgust us,
particularly those that are forced upon us. As God at our Creation made us
free, so is there nothing more repugnant to our natures, then to be forced or
constrained to any thing, or deprived of that loved liberty, to which we were
born. This it was which made the Philosophers say, that nothing which is violent
or forced could be of long continuance, because such things directly oppose our
nature, whose power cannot long be withstood, it being nothing but the Will of
God impressed upon his Creatures. We ought not then to think it strange, that
those who have from their youth been brought up under one kind of Government,
should find a great deal of difficulty in weaning themselves from that, and
accustoming themselves to live under another, seeing it is natural to us so to
do, and the very irrational Creatures do as much by instinct: as we see every
day in Horses, who if they have been used to the Saddle cannot without much
difficulty be brought to draw; and Dogs that have been used to hunt, will not
without much trouble be brought to couch when their game is in view. It is a
common saying that a Monkey will never leave his Apish tricks, and that a Fox
will ever love Geese to his last: and so it is with Men, for those who have
lived under a Monarchical State, are very hardly brought to be contented with
Democracy, and all men think that kind of Government best, under which they
themselves have been brought up. So that, though the French yoke be much less
grievous to the Subject then that which the States have laid on the People of
Holland (amongst whom the very Servants pay Taxes out of their wages) yet we
had great reason to watch very carefully over those whom we had now lately
conquered, upon the account of what we mentioned before, least Nature should
prevail in them, as it usually does in other Creatures. But good Fortune, which
has always attended the French Arms, and that peculiar blessing which Heaven
has bestowed on our King, of being equally both feared and beloved where ever
he goes, had taken care to make our suspicions groundless, by inspiring into
the People of those Countries as strong inclinations, and as much love toward
his Majesty, as was to be found in the hearts of his most Loyal French
Subjects; and we did very remarkably discover in many of them so greedy and
earnest a desire of seeing us, that in many places they were even afraid, least
we would not come and take their Towns; and I have been told they desired
nothing so much as to become his Majesty's Subjects, and feared nothing more
then not to be so. The timely course that all the Province of Vtrecht took,
does sufficiently justify what I have said, and it is likewise certain that
had not the States gone in good time to Amsterdam, the Inhabitants of that
great Town were thinking of delivering us up the Keys: But those blood sucking
Leeches, whose power would by this means have come to nothing, and who could no
longer have fed upon and enriched themselves with the spoils of the poor
Subject, hindered their design, inspiring into them a false and imaginary kind
of courage, which they took from despair, and by which they let themselves be
misled, never thinking of that happiness and quiet which their neighbors did
now enjoy under the French Government, and how much they were pleased with the
change. Their rejoicing at it did visibly appear, when they first heard the
news of the birth of the Duke of Anjou, which every body with one voice did
congratulate; and for Joy Bonfires were made in all places, every body striving
who should with most zeal show his resentment of so welcome news. But it will
not perhaps be impertinent here to inform the Reader how that this kind of
Ceremony is by them performed in a much different way from what we do on the
like occasions in France: for whereas we do generally assemble our selves
together to some Public place, where a great Fire is made on the Public charge,
no man contributing any thing more to it then he needs must, though he defire
never so much to be thought a good Subject; with them on the contrary, every
Housekeeper makes a fire before his door, and the greater the fire it is the
sign of the greater zeal; neither do they make their fires by piling of wood
up, but fixing a stake, at the top of which they fasten pitch barrels and such
like combustible matter, which being lighted, they make merry and sing about it
in the same manner as we do.

The 24 his Majesty sent a supply to Monsieur, that he might hasten the
reducing of Zutphen, where the same day we made our selves masters of a Sluice
which did us good service in draining the ditch. The besiedg'd made a sally
hoping to regain it, but they were beaten back into the Town without being able
to do any thing. The Chevalier de Lorraine behaved himself bravely on that
occasion, and used them so severely that they have not since dared to show
themselves. The Regiments of Piedmont and des Vaisseaux were in their turns
relieved by those of Castelnau and de la Reine, who gained the Counterscarp,
which put the Enemy into no little fright, so that they now began to reflect
upon the desperate condition they were in.

M. de Turrenne seeing that the playing of the Cannon from Knotzemburg did not
so work upon those of Nimegen, as to make them think of a surrender, prepared
himself to lay a formal Siege to it.

As for Monsieur de Rochefort, when the Inhabitants of Vtrecht, who had refused
to admit a Dutch Garrison, or give Count Maurice passage, had put two of their
Gates into his hands, he caused them to be kept by his Musketeers, and backd
them with all the other forces he had with him, which were encamped over
against S. Catharine's Gate, on the border of the channel that goes hence to
Leiden and so to Rotterdam, and then sent to give notice of what had passed to
the King, on whom the Bishop of Stratsbourg waited the same day.

The 25 the Bishop of Munster made the King a visit, and after having made his
appearance with the ordinary solemnity on such occasions, he had a private
conference with him, which lasted a great while; and having dined he returned,
having been presented by his Majesty with a Cross of Diamonds of great value;
afterward his Majesty gave audience to an Envoy extraordinary from the Elector
of Tiers. The Duke of Roannez was ordered to go to Vtrecht with 3 Batallions of
the French Guards, as many of the Switzers, and two Companies of the life
Guards, to relieve the Musketeers who kept that place, and the horse who
backed them.

The same day Monsieur de Turenne, came and dined with the King, and informed
him of the obstinacy of the Garrison and Inhabitants of Nimegen; afterward he
returned back to give such further orders as should be found necessary.

At last Zutphen was reduced to that condition, that the besieged began to beat
a Parley betimes in the morning, and desired to capitulate. The Articles of
Capitulation at all the places which have been won from the Hollander were in
general the same, and therefore here as in other Places the Garrison was made
prisoners, and the place yielded up without any other conditions. The Chevalier
de Lorraine went to receive their Hostages, which were a Burgomaster and two of
the Officers of the Garrison, whom he brought to his Royal Highness; who
granted the Inhabitants as well here as in other places liberty of Conscience,
and their Privileges, and presently gave notice of the business to his
Majesty: acquainting Him withal, that the number of his Prisoners was
increased by 3000 foot and 250 horse, besides the Governor. I cannot but take
this opportunity of doing Justice to Monsieur, in letting the World know that
in this Siege he performed all that could be done by an expert General, and a
valiant Soldier; he was very circumspect and watchful, looked after every
thing himself, and was always where there was the hottest service, going with
an undaunted courage to the most dangerous place in all the Trenches, where
many were killed round about him, both with great and small shot, he remaining
all the while fearless; so that the Chevalier de Lorraine was at last forced to
beg of him by all means to retire from so evident danger, or at least to give
him leave not to be in the same place with him, least if any harm should befall
the Prince, he should be called to account for it.

Zutphen is one of the chief Towns of the Duchy of Guelderland, and the
Capitial of Zutphania, otherwise called the County of Zutphen, to which it
gives the name. It is situated on the right bank of the Yssel, as it runs
toward the Zuiderzee, just by the mouth of the river Borkel. It is one of the
best and the strongest places the Hollanders had, it has 9 Bastions almost all
coated on the outside, 4 half Moons, 2 horn works, and without all this a very
broad ditch, besides the inner one, which is twice as broad and flat bottomed;
it has also trebble Ramparts, which make it strong almost beyond belief.

Ysseltein, Oudewater, Buren, and Croanamburg, opened their Gates and received
Garrisons from Monsieur de Rochefort.

The Count Maurice seeing himself so straightened, and closely pursued, imagining
he should ere long be set upon, and not thinking himself strong enough to stand
to it, resolved at length to retire still further: and that he might be in some
place where he might sleep safely a while, he got on the other side of a great
Channel, which runs on the other side of Wesep, and quited Myen to our mercy,
but because from thence there was a near way to Amsterdam, they let out the
waters all thereabouts.

We heard of the wounds which the Here de Wit, the emprison'd Counselor,
received within 100 paces of his own house, as he was returning home at
midnight from an Assembly of the States; how he was set upon by 4 men, two of
which were Citizens, and the other two Sons to a certain Counselor in the
Court of Justice, who was likewise one of the States, called Vander Graef, who
had given him diverse stabbs in the head, neck, shoulder, and side, leaving him
for dead; but that the Surgeons notwithstanding affirmed his wounds not to
be mortal, and gave some hopes of his life, though the Assassinates, who were
taken, had little hopes of theirs. However this accident did not a little
fright all men, especially the great ones, who now began to contrive how they
might make an escape out of the Town, and were preparing to do it with all
their Goods of value: but the multitude openly withstood their design, not
suffering so much as the Ministers of other Princes to depart.

The 26. The King left the Camp at Doesburg, and went to a place called Biloin.
The Sieur Groot (commonly called Grotius) who came to mediate Peace between the
King and States, returned without doing any thing. Monsieur sent Father Zocoli
a Jesuit, and his Confessor, to Zutphen in the Morning, there to say Mass in a
Tent which was pitched for that purpose in the middle of the Town, and about 3
of the clock, after Dinner, made his entry into it, and viewed the Town with
its Ramparts, and other Fortifications.

We heard the Hollander had quitted Gennep, and that Monsieur the Count de
Chamilly was gone to possess himself of it; and Grave seemed not to intend any
resolute resistance.

The 27. The King left Biloin, and advann'd toward Wagemingen, after having
lef^ orders that the Regiment de Vendosme should go and secure Arnhem. About 8
in the Morning, the second Bataillon of the Dauphins Regiment arrived at
Amersford, together with some Horse, making up in all between 8 and 900 Men;
some of which were to stay there, and some to march on to Naerden; so that
their arrival gave liberty to the Marquis de Ranes, and his Dragoons, which
were at Amersford, to go and join with the Marquis de Rochefort at Vtrecht,
where the Duke de Roannez likewise arrived with 4500 Men of the Regiment of
Guards, and two Companies of the Life-Guards, but they entered not into Vtrecht
that day.

In the mean time the States at Amsterdam were not a little disquieted; they
sat in Council every day, and could not any way be satisfied, till they had
dispatched the Sieur Grotius back to the King in all have, with new Orders, and
a more ample and unlimited Commission. The Towns of Dort, Goud, and Roterdam,
began openly to proclaim the Prince of Orange Captain General of the United
Provinces, misusing and Imprisoning some Burgomasters, who went about to oppose
them in it, which made others more wary how they venter'd to displease an
incensed multitude. Soon after all the rest followed their example; Amsterdam
only excepted: which however a while after yielded, notwithstanding all the
shifts and devices which the States, to whom the Peoples Acclamations on this
occasion seemed a very unwelcome sound, contrived to divert it.

Woerden also opened its Gates, and received a Garrison from M. Rochefort.
Woerden is a little Town, situate on the Rhine, five little Leagues from
Leiden: and therefore not far from the Camp where the Prince of Orange had
retired, and in which he had entrenched himself, being not a little troubled to
see us Masters of that place; and advancing so nimbly toward him, that he
would not be able easily either to make an escape thence, or to enterprise any
thing against us, though he should have desired it. The Castle belonging to
this Town is very strong, and the whole Town secure from any sudden assault.

The 28. the King raised his Camp at two in the Morning, and went to encamp at
Amerongen, whither the Sieur Grotius came the same day. On the other side,
Monsieur de Turenne finding the obstinate Resolution of those of Nimegen, in
which were 4500 Men in Garrison, ordered Faggots, Gabions, and other like
Preparations to be made, resolving the next day to open his Trenches; and
caused likewise his whole Army to pass the Wahal, that they might set upon the
Town on the other side of the River, whilst the Fort played upon it from this.

The Duke de Roannez entered Vtrecht with his 3 Batallions of Guards to defend
that place, whose strength consists more in the number of its Inhabitants
(though they be very seditious, inconstant and wavering) then the goodness of
its Fortifications, which are made up only of a pretty broad, but shallow
Ditch, and a Rampart which is very much out of repair. But as to the Buildings
of the Town, they are very stately, neat, and costly, especially in the heart
of the Town. The little Rivolets which run through many of their Streets, do
not a little contribute to the beauty of the place. The out-parts and skirts of
the town are likewise very pleasant, having many Canals; and the entry into the
town is very fine. There are many pleasant Houses scattered about, and the
Suburbs are large and convenient; about which lie many rich Meadows and Pasture
Grounds (stocked with abundance of all sorts of Cattle) as far as one can see
every way. Because the Burgomasters, when they came to yield up their Town, had
desired to have no Garrison forced upon them, promising to defend the place
themselves for his Majesty; and being they staid not till they were summoned,
but of their own accord had yielded up the place, it was resolved they should
be thereupon considered and kindly used. And that they might have no reason to
complain, M. de Roannez pitched his Tents upon the Rampart, where he still
continued, as did likewise the rest of the Officers and Guards after his
example. The Musketeers, who had kept the place ever since the Surrender,
retired and encamped without St. Catharin's Gate, with the Marquis de
Rochefort's Army, upon the Bank of the River that runs hence to Rotterdam. The
two Companies of Life-Guards entered the Town, and dispersed themselves into
diverse quarters of it, where they lay upon the Guard; and afterward the
Horse-Guards belonging to the Kings Household mounted the Guard by turns,
relieving one another every Morning at six of the Clock.

The news of Count Maurice's retiring still farther, was confirmed to us, and
that he had also broken down most of the Banks that kept out the Sea, having
left only one which lay inwardmost standing; and that thereabouts he made
Intrenchments, which he very carefully guarded, and fortified with diverse
pieces of Ordnance.

Groot (or Grotius) in his passage, told M. de la Fueillade, That he had a
Blank to present to the King if he would treat, and so unlimited a Power
granted him, as the States had never before given to any Plenipotentiary.

The 29. the King leaving Amerongen, went and encamped at Zeist and Stotwegen,
where Grotius had Audience, and made his Proposals for a Peace, but without
success; for the King would not admit of them: so that being acquainted with
the Kings Pleasure, he prepared for his departure the next day. Monsieur de
Turenne opened his Trenches before Nimegen, where the besieged behaved
themselves like Men, that intended to defend themselves resolutly, but without
making any sally. The Marquis de Ranes drew out 70 Dragoons of the Regiment
Royal, to strengthen the Garrisons at Montfort and Isselsteing, and marched
with them himself to visit those places, and give such Orders as he should find
necessary for the defense of them. The Count de la Mark was left sick at
Vtrecht.

The 30. Nothing extraordinary was done at the Kings Camp which lay at Zeist
and Stotewegen. M. de Turenne proceeded on in his approaches before Nimegen,
where the besieged still defended themselves very vigorously. The Marquis de
Rochefort went out betimes to view and take notice what Forces lay upon the
River that goes from Vtrecht to Amsterdam. After Dinner Grotius returned to
Vtrecht, and thence to Amsterdam, to acquaint the States with the Kings
pleasure as it related to a Treaty of Peace, which was now diversely talked of.

The first of July His Majesty lay still, and rested where he did before, and
so continued until the 10th. The Marquis de Louvois, and of Pouange, came to
Vtrecht after dinner. The King in Person reviewed his whole Army very strictly,
and then issued out severe Prohibitions to hinder any of his Army's wandering
from their own Colors, upon pain of certain death without mercy; so that
whoever should offend, they should all be hanged, and not hope that any should
be put to the Lot for their Lives; with command likewise to all Officers, That
they should bring in every Night to the Commander of each Body, the names of
all such as had been absent from their Companies.

It was now reported, That a pail of fresh Water was worth 12 Stivers at
Amsterdam, which are equal to 15 French Sols.

The second of July, the Cardinal of Bouillon came to Vtrecht, where he was
almost crowded to pieces by Roman Catholics, who followed after him as an
Angel sent from Heaven, praying him with much earnestness, to Bless and
Consecrate the Churches of the Town. The Archbishop of the place himself
desired it of him with much importunity, in the name of all the People; but he
desired to be excused, till he should have order to do it from the King. The
Marquis de Ranes, and the Chevalier de Bouflers, Camp-master to the Regiment
Royal of Dragoons, going over from Vtrecht to His Majesty's Camp, which lay but
two Leagues distant, were ordered to send two Companies of the said Regiment to
the Count de Lorge, who was about four Leagues thence, drawing toward Arnhem
with a flying Squadron, which made M. de Bouflers return post to Vtrecht, from
whence he sent two Companies, that of de la Faye, and that of de la
Rouillardiere.

Monsieur, who 2 or 3 days before had joined with the Kings Army, after the
taking of Zu^phen went to Vtrecht, where he dined with the Chevalier de
Lorraine, who treated him very splendidly.

The night following there chanced to be a Fire in the Town, which burnt down
two Houses; and we were told, That one of the 36 Burgomasters of Amsterdam, who
had been one of the 3 that had been against the giving up the Town to the King,
when the Inhabitants would not resolve to acknowledge the Prince of Orange, as
the most part of the rest had done, we heard, I say, that this Burgomaster had
received a Musketshot from a Sentinel, for not answering in time, when he was
asked, Who goes there? and that he was in great danger of death by it. And that
the Sea finding no opposition, since the Count Maurice's cutting down the
Banks, did come into the Country with a dreadful impetuosity, and had already
overwhelmed a great part of the Country which lay between us and Amsterdam.

The Count de Chamilly, whom M. de Turenne had ordered to march toward Gennep
and Grave, and make himself master of them, arrived before Gennep, thinking the
Inhabitants, whom the Dutch Garrison had forsaken, would without difficulty
have yielded it up, but found not what he expected: for a Colonel belonging to
the Brandenburger, being ordered to put some Forces into it, and keep it as
belonging to the Elector his Master, having performed his Orders, refused to
give it up to Monsieur de Chamilly. The truth is, this little Town, which is
not extraordinarily strong, and lies upon the Meuse between Ruremonde and
Grave, had formerly belonged to the Duke of Brandenbourg; but having been taken
from him, and long possessed by the Hollander, it was now no more reckoned to be
his. Wherefore M. de Chamilly resolving not to be put off, sent him word, That
unless he would be gone and leave the place to him, he would certainly put all
his Men to the Sword, and hang him without mercy. But the Colonel being not
moved at this Threat, the Count de Chamilly made his Troops immediately prepare
to assault the place; but then the Colonel searing a dismal Halter, which he
foresaw would be his fate if he stood out any longer, sent us word, That rather
then disgrace his Family with being hanged, he would consent to any thing to
avoid such an ignominious death; wherefore, he desired to be used as an Officer
of the Duke of Brandenbourgs, who having not as yet declared himself, ought not
to be reckoned nor used as an Enemy; he therefore desired, he might freely
march off and return to the place from whence he came; and earnestly entreated
M. de Chamilly, that least he should be hanged at his return for not
maintaining the place, he would give him an Certificate under his Hand, that he
was ready to give an Assault to the place, and had threatened to hang him before
he yielded it up; which having been granted him, he retired into the next
Garrison, as well satisfied as if he had gained some great Victory, or done
some memorable exploit. So that the Count Chamilly presently ordered his Men to
enter the place; and then marched toward Grave, whose Garrison was retired,
and which was now in the possession of the Sieur Cleodore, who by order from M.
de Turenne, kept the place with 40 or 50 Maistres.

The third, the Marquis de Louvoys went and visited the Townhouse of Vtrecht,
and commanding the Maps of the Country to be brought him, informed himself of
the number, bigness, and other qualities of the Channels which compassed the
Prince of Orange's Camp; that being beforehand instructed in these matters, he
might be ready to go and attaque him in case a Peace were not concluded. It
must be confessed, that the prudence and conduct of the Marquis de Louvois are
almost incredible; he has managed things in this Campaign, as he does all
things else, with marvelous vigilance, care and success. The Kings Troops, the
care of which lay wholly upon him, were the best ordered that might be; nothing
was wanting in the Army: he had taken such care for all things necessary, that
the King needed only wish that things should be done, and they were so. He
found in that Man an inexhaustible Treasure of all those good Qualities which
fit a Man for ordering business dexterously; he had established such good
Orders, and such a way of living among the Soldiers, that they found themselves
as well accommodated as if they had been in Paris, and that without any way
being grievous to the Countries where they lay. There were every where continual
Fairs and Markets, to which Merchants, Victualers, and Country people resorted,
with as much security as to St. Laurence's Fair. In a word, he so well
contrived all things, that we never wanted any thing.

After Dinner the King came to the Camp, and having walked about it and viewed
his Troops, without causing them to take Horse; he also rounded the outside of
the Town, and then went into it likewise, but incognito. Monsieur de Turenne
continued still battering Nimegen, which did still courageously defend it self.
Notwithstanding, he dispatched a Courier to the King, to tell Him, he hoped
that very day to spring a Mine, or that at farthest it would be sprung the next
day. The Sieur de Carman, Lieutenant Colonel of the Champagne Regiment, was
killed before this place.

The Count de Lorge made his Men labor hard all day about making a Bridge over
the Rhine, that by it he might get into the Betaw. The News of the Prince of
Orange's being chosen Statholder, and Protector of their Country, by all the
Towns of the United Provinces, except only Amsterdam, was confirmed to us, and
at the same time the Sieur Groot, who was this day to return and bring the King
an answer about the ratification of the Peace, instead of coming himself, sent
to desire, That his time might be prolonged two days more, which were
accordingly granted him. It is to be noted, That His Majesty would treat with
him not as coming from the States (whose Authority he would not acknowledge)
but only as from the People of Holland.

The fourth, nothing extraordinary happened in the Kings Army, which continued
resting and refreshing it self after all the hardship it had undergon. M. de
Turenne, after having had his design of mining Nimegen twice frustrated by
Countermines, at length, notwithstanding all the Enemies care and pains to
hinder it, almost finished one; so that they finding they should ere long have
a breach made in their Walls, and be forced to endure an assault, and come to
handyblows with the French (which they feared above all things, as knowing how
good our Nation is at that kind of Service, and how dangerous it is to fall
into their hands) resolved at last to come to a Composition. The Count de Saulx
had a piece of his Breeches shot off, and one of his Servants killed with him
by a great shot before this place, which gave occasion to the spreading of a
rumor, that he was dead, and made him as much lamented in the Kings Army, as if
he really had been so.

The fifth, at break of day, 2 Horsemen from Naerden came to Monsieur de
Rochfort, to give him notice of the Count Maurice's last retreat, and how he
had cut down the Banks and let in the Zuiderzee, whose farther course was now
stopped by nothing but only one Dike, which was only broad enough for 3 Horse
to march abreast on. At the same time M. de Rochfort dispatched a Courier to
the Marquis de Louvois to give him notice of it, and M. de Roannes drew out a
party of the Life Guards, which were of the Guard at Vtrecht, and some of the
Kings Men at Arms, who were come thither, and sent them under the Command of
the M. d'Ambre, to view and take cognizance of the Post which the Enemy now
possessed. They did accordingly, and stood within Pistol-shot of their
Intrenchments two long hours, none of the Enemies in the mean time daring to
come out toward them; only they were free of their Musket Shot, which yet did
no harm, so that our Men came back just as they went: which is an infallible
token of the Dutch cowardice, who dared not stir out when they might have cut
the whole Party to pieces: and though they had feared some ambush, yet might
they have come round in their Barks, and set on them behind without any danger
of being any way surpised, being sure of a safe retreat when ever they desired
it. Monsieur de Turenne at length became master of Nimegen, which yielded upon
the same terms as others had done, only the Governor and other chief Officers
had liberty to depart with all their Baggage.

Nimegen is a very great Town, and full of Inhabitants, situate on the left
side of the Wahal, which runs by its Walls, and separates it from the Fort of
Knotzembourg; it lies high on one side, and low on the other. On the higher
part of the Town stands an old Castle, which is still strong enough, and
commands both the Town and River. The lower part is plentifully furnished with
Towers, Bastions, and Half-moons of an excessive bigness, and upon that account
they need more Men to defend it then we do in our Towns, who are more concerned
to have them well lined and flanck'd. Those who have Traveled in Holland, may
have observed the prodigious dimensions of all parts of their Fortifications,
so that each Work requires as many Men almost to defend it, as a whole Town of
ours.

In the mean time the Count de Chamilly, who was marched toward Grave, found
strange alterations there, as well as he had at Gennep. Some of the States,
either those that were at Maestricht, or others, hearing that their Garrison
had so causelessly quitted the Town, which is very strong, and whose Works are
in very good repair; and knowing withal that there were not in it above 40 or
50 of our Men, sent a command to the Governor that had quitted it, to return
thither and defend it upon pain of death; and ordered the Governor of the Busse
to give him all possible assistance in case of need. Wherefore, upon this Order
he was forced to turn back again, and the Governor of the Buss took with him 33
Companies of Foot, and 100 Horse, to go and perform what was commanded him.
There being as yet no Garrison put into the place, and the Townsmen refusing to
keep the Gates, it was easy for him who came before in have with 100 Maistres
to enter the Town, whilst the Foot followed softly after; though as it proved,
they made too much have to their own misfortune. He therefore visits the place,
and reckons upon those Men of ours which he found there, as so many Prisoners.
But whilst this was doing, the Van of the Count de Chamilly's Army was
discovered, and he withal gave notice of his coming, which was but ill news for
the new Conqueror, who by this means was not like to wear his Laurel long.
Hereupon the Townsmen began to change their note, and declared they would not
suffer themselves to be plundered by us, and therefore bid the Governor shift
for himself, which he could no otherwise do, then by sending to desire a Pass
from M. Chamilly, that he might come and capitulate with him, which he did, and
was suffered to return again to the Busse with his 100 Horse; he mentioned not
the Foot in the capitulation, which he thought was so far behind, that he might
easily give them notice to retire homewards and none of us the wiser. But to
their misfortune he was out in his calculation, for M. de Joyeuse met with
them, who though he had then with him but a small party of the Brigade of Horse
which he commands (the rest being gone before under command of the Marquis de
Tury, to recover the Town) he fell upon them so furiously, that they had only
time to make one discharge at us. In this Encounter most of the Enemy were
killed, and the rest taken, so that there hardly escaped one to carry home the
bad news: we got at this bout 33 Colors.

The night that followed, and the sixth day, there happened a Fire in the Kings
Quarters, which began in the Duke of Monmouth's House, and burnt down together
with some others; the damage the Duke had by it was computed to amount to
100000 Crowns. The fire reached the Kings Stable, and destroyed many Horses and
their harness, and at last grew so dreadful, that the King was forced to rise,
least the fire should also come to his Appartment; many of his Pages having had
their cloths burnt.

We heard of the ill success of Monsieur de Nancrud's attempt upon Ardemburg,
which had faild by his guides and spies saults, these having misinformed, and
the other misled him. The Particulars of that business were as follows; Word
was brought to him that the Garrison was both very small and also negligent,
which made him resolve to try if he could surprise it; and to that purpose he
ordered his march so as to arrive before the Place at midnight, with a design
to attaque it in four several places at once, but it so happened, his Guides
either not being sufficiently acquainted with the Country, or mistaking their
way in the dark, that his whole party met at the same place, and so were forced
to make their attaque all on one side of the Town; which being performed very
courageously, they beat out the Enemy and gained a half Moon, which Post
designing greater things they cared not to secure from the Enemy's shot; but
day at last beginning to break, the Enemy who had received supplies from Sluice,
now made more vigorous resistance; and having discovered our men, who lay leuel
and open to their shot, killed many of them, so that they were forced to retire
with loss of 1000 or 1200 men.

The Marquis de Ranes went to Isselstaing and Monfort, leading thither some
Dragoons to reinforce those Garrisons. The same day about evening, the King
came to visit Vtrecht; and he was scarce gone thence when the Duke of
Buckingham and the Earl of Arlington, Ambassadors from the King of England
arrived, hoping to have found his Majesty there, to whom they were sent by the
King their Master.

The 7 the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Arlington went from Vtrecht to
the Camp at Zeist, where the King presently gave them Audience, after which a
Courier was dispatched to the King of England, who was mightily solicited by
the Dutch Ministers to a Peace.

The Enemy came and attaqu'd Oudwater, and beat back our horse Guard, after
having killed 5 or 6 of them with the like loss on their side, but the Alarm
being straight given to Monsieur de Rochefort, he presently went to their
assistance, as did also the Marquis de Ranes with his Regiment Royal of
Dragoons, but they at their arrival found the Enemy retired, so that all these
supplies kept a guard all that night upon the Place. The Musketeers, who ever
since the surrender of Vtrecht had been either within the Town to secure it, or
encamped just before it with Monsieur de Rochesorts Army, returned now to the
Kings Camp at Zeist, a part of whose Guard they were. The three Bataillons of
the Regiment of Guards, which the Duke de Roannez had with him in the same place,
did the like, and in their stead were sent thither, one Bataillon of the Kings,
and another of the Queens Regiment, the Regiment of Castelnan, the Royal
Regiment de la Marine, and that of Suitzers, whose Colonel is the Sieur
Stouppe, who also commanded the Place, as belonging of right to him whilst that
the King had yet appointed no Governor of it. The rest of the Regiment of
Turenne was sent to Naerden, to relieve those of the Dauphin's which lay there,
and many foot were sent to reinforce M. de Rochefort's Army, which his Majesty
intended to leave about Vtrecht, as well to keep all that part of the Country
quiet, as to hinder the Hollanders Armies, which lay not far off, from attemting
any thing upon the new conquered places that lay that way.

The eight in the morning, Monsieur de Rochefort ordered some powder and shot
to be sent to Oudewater, with a Convoy of horse, and then he returned with the
Troops he had brought the day before. The Marquis de Ranes came back also with
his Regiment Royal of Dragoons: The King prepared to leave Zeist; and the
Cardinal de Bouillon went and consecrated the Church of Vtrecht, which was
performed with great pomp, to the great Joy of an infinite number of Roman
Catholics, who impatiently expected that day.

The 9, the Duke of Luxembourg returned to the Kings Army, with the Marquis de
la Valiere, having left his Baggage and Equippage near Emerick, and the command
of his Army to the Bishop of Munster, who came likewise to give the King a
visit, and then returned toward Frizeland, where since he has done the Enemy
much harm. The Marquis de Ranes, who during all this Campaign had commanded the
Regiment Royal of Dragoons, left that, and took the command of the Regiment
Colonel, and went to the Kings Camp to follow his Majesty. The next day, the
Prince who had been conveyed to Arnhem, and continued there ever since his
Majesty left that place, found himself worse then he had been of his wounds,
and was much tormented with a fit of the Gout.

The King gave 8000 livres, among those who had lost their horses in the late
fire.

The 10 the King left Zeist (which lies within 2 leagues of Vtrecht) where he
had lain 8 days, and went back to encamp between Rhenen and Wageningen. The
Duke of Luxembourg went to the Camp before Vtrecht to command that Army, which
M. the Marquis de Rochefort left to follow the King; which Army was found to
consist of between 15000 and 16000 men.

The 11 in the morning, the King went and encamped in the Suburbs of Arnhem,
the Government of which, together with those of Nimegen, the whole Isle of
Betaw, and Grave, he bestowed on the Count de Lorge, with a pension of 1000
Crowns monthly, M. de Turenne, who had marched with his Army toward Grave,
came to wait on his Majesty soon after his arrival, and having assisted at the
Council which was held, returned and lay at Nimegen. The weather which had some
days threatened a change, at last became very fowl, and from this day forward,
rain, wind, and cold did as much trouble us, as if it had been the middle of
Winter, till we returned again into the Climate of France. This stormy weather
was very favorable to many Towns, which otherwise would certainly have been
taken as others had been.

The 12, the King left Arnhem, and having passed the Rhine, over a Bridge of
Boats made for that purpose a little below the Town, marched through the Isle
Betaw, and passed the Wahal also upon a Float over against Nimegen, where he
lay that night. All the former night and this day we wrought hard in making a
Bridge, to pass over the Army, Artillery, and Baggage, but not being able to
sinish it time enough, one part of the Army was forced to stay in the Isle till
the next day. Monsieur de Turenne left Nimegen betimes in the morning, and went
to Grave, where he found his Army passing the Meuse, over a bridge of boats
which had been, made above the Town, and the Marquis de Ranes met there a part
of the Regiment Colonel of Dragoons, which had staid there for the defense of
the Place, whilst the rest were gone to join with the Count de Chamilly's Army,
which lay beyond the Busse, between that Town, Heusden and the Fort Crevecoeur,
at a place called Vlymen. As soon as the whole Army had passed the River, we
marched on and went to encamp at Bergen, which is within three leagues of Grave.

We must not forget to let you know, that Grave, though it be but a little
Town, yet is one of the prettiest, pleasantest, strongest, and easilyest
defended places, that I have seen. It is situated on the right bank of the
Meuse, which does very much strengthen it on that side, and on the other side
it has a great marsh, always full of water, which makes it inaccessible at all
times, besides it has excellent Fortifications, and in good repair, but above
all a great Hornwork very well secured with a covered way, which goes to the
very Gate, with excellent Ravelins, besides a good Counterscarp, and a
Pallisado which is but newly made, and is in very good order, and strong
Bulwarks: so that I may truly say that I have not seen in Holland a prettier
Town, better in order, or in a likelier condition to defend it self. It has
been often taken and retaken, the first time was in the year 1586, when the
Prince of Parma besiedged it, and had it surrendered to him upon Articles; and
then it was again retaken in 1602, by Prince Maurice of Nassau, and since has
continued in their possession.

The 13, because of the Bridges not being time enough in readiness the day
before, the King kept at Nimegen, whilst the rest of the Army all that day
passed over from the Isle of Betaw. Monsieur de Turenne passed from Bergen in
the morning, and encamped at a Village called Hempel, within a league of the
Busse, and half a league from Crevecoeur, and immediately set his men to work
about making a bridge over against his Camp, and at the end of the bridge
raised a Redout to keep the Enemy from putting any succors into Crevecoeur,
which he intended to besiege.

The 14 the King left Nimegen, and marched toward Grave, where he passed the
Meuse, and encamped on the left side of that River. Monsieur de Turenne went
and viewed the Fort of Crevecoeur, and though news came that the Inhabitants of
Bommelle had sent to the King to capitulate, he notwithstanding sent a Trumpet
to summon it. M. de Montauban advanced on the other side of the Busse with 4000
horse. The weather began to make the Country almost unpassable; the cold, rain,
and wind grew very troublesome, so that we could hardly find the Causseys,
though there be no going any where else, the whole Country being nothing but
marshes and dikes.

The 15 his Majesty left Grave, and came within a league of Boxtel, a little
Town near the Busse, but of very great importance, because it commands the
Sluices, which either keep in, or let out the waters, all over this part of the
Country. But at this time they had no great need of them, the rain having
already so plentifully fallen, that all about the Town was overflown, which
hindered us from besieging it, as we before designed.

The Bridge which Monsieur de Turenne had ordered to be made over the Meuse,
for communication between his Camp and the Isle of Bommelle, was now finished;
he ordered 10000 Faggots to be prepared, and viewed the Fort again, which he
found to be a very good one, and that it commands the Sluices below the Busse,
as Boxtel does above it. It has 5 good and large Bastions, though they be not
coated: the Garrison consisted of 800 men, who might well defend the Place,
which was secured on one side by the River, and on the other by a great
unpassable Marsh, and which (had we not provided against it by setting a guard
on the passage) might have kept correspondence with the Busse, and been
releiv'd and assisted from thence as often as they would.

The 16 the King went to Boxtel, where he found no resistance. Monsieur de
Turenne as soon as the Faggots he had ordered were ready, made the horse carry
them, and in the evening caused the Trenches to be opened by the Regiments de
Champagne, Lyonnois, and de Louvigny, who advanced them very far, and raised a
Battery on that side where the Champagne Regiment was, whereon were planted two
pieces of Canon, which were ready to play by day break. They likewise very much
forwarded another, which was began in the Lyonnois Regiment's quarters, to
plant 8 pieces on. The besiedged, who were certainly by the ill season lulled a
sleep, and thought it not possible we should work in such tempestuous weather,
discharged not above 7 or 8 Guns at us, which hurt no body. The Duke of
Luxembourg, who, as we said, staid at Vtrecht with 15 or 16000 men, encamped
without S. Catharin's Gate, changed his quarters, and passing the Canale which
runs from thence to Rotterdam, went beyond a part of the Suburbs which lies on
the other side, and encamped not far from the Town, between it and Naerden,
after having defeated a party of the Enemy, who had set upon his Vanguard.

The 17 the King rested with all his Army at Boxtel, and departed not thence
till he returned for France. In the morning as we said the Lyonnois Regiment's
Battery began to play upon Crevccoeur, and beat down a Redout which lay on the
left side of the Fort toward the River, so that some Soldiers which were in it
were forced to abandon it, and retire to their fellows in the Fort it self;
afterward 100 Grenadiers were placed upon the Channel that comes from the
Busse, to hinder the communication of the Enemy with that place, and a Serjeunt
with 20 men lodged about 30 paces from the declivity of the works, behind the
ruins of a Redout, which the Enemy had quitted and fired some days before. The
Grand Master of the Artillery came and brought with him 16 pieces of Canon, 8
of which were sent to be mounted on the Battery finished the night before in
the Champagne Regiments quarter. The Marquis de Ranes took with him all the
Dragoons that were in M. de Turennes Army after dinner, and went with them to
the Count de Chamilly's, with whom was the rest of the Vlymen Camp: this Army
was likewise now busied in carrying Faggots, to set upon Crevecoeur on their
side also.

The 18 his Majesty kept at Boxtel, where nothing extraordinary happened. The
Battery of 8 pieces of Canon which was begun the night before by the Lyonnois
Regiment before Crevecoeur, was finished and ready to play by break of day; and
the Enemy soon were made sensible of it by having 6 of their Guns dismounted in
a little time; on the Count Chamilly's side, Trenches were likewise opened,
from which they gave a false Alarm. M. de la. Forest Lieutenant Colonel of the
Dragoons, went in the morning, and caused all the Trees about the Avenues of
his Camp to be felled to hinder the Enemy, who was very strong in Heusden, from
setting on him behind, but they attemted no such thing; on the contrary the
Marquis de Ranes, after dinner accompanied by some of his Dragoons, marched
toward them, and beat back their Guards, and made them retire within their
Pallisado, on purpose to entice them out to fight, but none of them stirred,
only some volleys of small shot were let fly at us from their works. In the
mean time, the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Arlington, the English
Ambassadors, having dispatched their business, took leave, and returned by
Brussels, that so they might require the Count Monterey, the Governor of the
Netherlands, to withdraw all the Spanish Forces from the Dutch service, or upon
his refusal to denounce War against him in the name of the King of England; and
tell him that he would immediately fall to acts of hostility against the
Spaniard. Monsieur de Villacerre accompanied them to be a witness of their
Conference, and the English and French Fleet came up as far as the Texel, with
design to land, if he refused assent to the proposal: but the Count de Monterey
made answer, that the business was of such importance as he could not answer
till he had acquainted his Superiors with it, and therefore desired time till
he might send to Madrid, and then he would act according to the instructions he
should receive thence.

An Officer that went a pickering with a party of Horse toward Breda, met with
a party of the Enemy, and though ours was but 30 against 80, he made them give
ground, and after someresistance wholly routed them: but 500 Peasants, which
had gathered together, and strongly entrenched themselves endeavored to cut
off the retreat of our men, so that they were feign to force their way, which
they did happily enough through their first barricado, but when they came to
the second, the case was altered, for the Peasants had sent to the routed party
of the Enemy, to bid them rally and set on our men behind, whilst they would
oppose them before, and stop their passage. The project took so well that they
defeated our party, and though there were not many killed upon the place, yet
it fared the worse with them that escaped; for falling into the hands of the
Peasants, there was no sort of cruelty which they endured not from them; but
they were not long unrevenged, for the King hearing of their barbarous usage
the same evening, presently ordered a party to go and put all those Villages to
fire and sword.

On the 19, which was the day following, the Chevasier Fourille marched out by
break of day with the Brigades de la Feuillee and de Roye, and 200 Dragoons
which M. de Ranes had sent him, under the command of the Chevalier de Tilladet,
Camp master to the Regiment Colonel, with orders to burn, plunder, and put to
the sword all that they should meet; and accordingly they burnt and plundered
the Villages: but the Peasants having heard of the design, were for the most
part fled, so that few of them fell into our hands; but being very near Breda,
some Dragoons who were commanded to set fire at any place where they could,
went up to the very Gates of the Town, and there fired some houses whilst the
rest of the party and the Horse defended them; this troubled the Town a little,
who thought sure thereupon that we were coming to besiege them.

The Governor of Crevecoeur, finding we should now soon be in a condition to
assault the Place, resolved to stand out no longer, and that he might get the
better conditions, went himself to make them; so he came forth and desired to
speak with M. de Turenne, who gave order he should be civilly entreated, but
would not see him. He only disarmed the Garrison, and because we had more
Prisoners then we could well tell what to do with, he had them all conducted a
league from the Place, and there gave them their liberty, as he had done before
to those of Nimegen, among which he had found 500 or 600 Citizens of Vtrecht,
whom he sent to their own homes.

Hinkel which is a little Fort between the Busse and Crevecoeur, was taken by
the Count de Chamilly, with more ease then he himself did expect: for the
Garrison either being frighted, or having heard that we intended to assault
them, quited it after having set fire on their powder and the houses of the
Fort, a part of which were notwithstanding saved.

The 20, the King, who continued still at Boxtel, having heard of the surrender
of Crevecoeur, came and viewed the Fort, and afterward returned, whilst M. de
Turenne passed over the Island of Bommelle, and sent and summoned the Town
which bears the same name. The Inhabitants were at a stand what answer to make,
on one side they found not themselves in a condition to hold out a long Siege,
and despaired of being relieved; they likewise saw that many Towns better
fortified and Garrisoned then they, had not been able with all their strength
to defend themselves; and that all the Country round about them was already in
our possession; but on the other side also they remembered that they had
formerly born up against all the fury of 25000 Spanish foot, when their
Fortifications were by no means in so good a condition as at present: and
besides a certain little Colonel, who had before been in Nimegen whilst we
besiedged it (and who would have still been among the rest of our Prisoners had
he not been released) and was afterward made Governor of this Town, thought
himself engaged in honor of which he had much bragged to M. de Turenne, not so
lightly to yield up a Place of that importance; wherefore we were forced to set
on them, and as we came before the Place, the Guides brought M. de Turenne so
near that a Cannon bullet, which had been shot from the Town, fell just at his
feet; but that hindered not our proceedings, we therefore went and encamped at
Stelst; which is a little Village lying upon the River, within Canon shot below
the Town.

Whilst the Kings Quarters were preparing, some attendants, having retired
themselves into a certain grove to refresh themselves till a house should be
appointed them for their Master, perceived the ground had lately been turned up
there, which gave them the curiosity to search if nothing were hidden
underneath, whereupon one of them felt with his sword, and finding some
resistance, uncovered the place before some Officers that were then come
thither, and there found 28 dead bodies newly killed, piled one upon the other,
diverse of which those Officers knew to have been our horse.

The Count de Chamilly left Vlymen, and went over with his Army to Monsieur de
Turennes Army at Hempel, and in the mean time ordered the fort of Hainkel to be
slighted.

The 21 about 10 in the morning, the besieged in Bommel, who from the top of
their works could easily see that we were encamped upon the River, ventured out
of the Town, without any opposition, filled a Fregate, which carried 4. or 5
pieces of Canon, with Soldiers, and coming down the River ere we were aware of
them, arrived over against our Camp, where they landed and made a discharge of
their muskets and Canon loaded with small shot, amongst our Tents, by which
they killed some few of our Cavaliers, and many of their horses: thereupon some
of our men made up to them, and our foot beating them back to the River side,
showed them so much vigor and courage in the Skirmish, that they retired to
the other side of the River, which is out of Musket shot. They came back
however two or three times to discharge again, but were still repulsed, though
not without difficulty and the loss of some men; for the Marquis de Ranes
having got between the Town and them at a place where the River is much
narrower, forced them to stand one of our discharges, which they did, but not
to be behind hand with him, answered it with their Muskets and Canon charged as
before; so that one Dragoon lost an arm, and another a leg. But as ill fortune
for them would have it, the fire caught in their powder room, and so fired one
end of their Vessel, whereupon 7 or 8 of them for fear of being burnt, flung
themselves into the water, where they all perished, being either drowned or
killed by our men, who were skirmishing on the shore, this accident frighted
them so, that from that time forward they dared not venture out. At the same
time Monsieur de Turenne ordered Faggots to be made, and sent a Trumpet to
summon the Place once again, the besiedged let him in, and went to counsel,
which lasted 5 or 6 hours, wherefore M. de Turenne sent M. Baleroy, a Captain
of horse, with another Trumpet, to enquire what was become of the first, the
Governor desired M. de Baleroy to come in, which he did, and they assured him
they would surrender, beseeching him to desire M. de Turenne to send Articles,
which he thereupon presently did. In the mean time, M. de S. Abre, who was
Lieutenant general that day, not to loose any time, caused Faggots to be
carried, and way made for the Canon, which he brought forward, and when night
drew on, he began to open the Trenches, but proceeded not far in them, because
the besiedged sent back the Articles signed.

An hour or two after dinner, a Fregate with men to put into Bommel, came up
the River from Worcum, (or Gorcum) but having been made more cautious by what
happened in the morning, we had placed a Corpse de Guard on diverse places of the
Banks, so that they could not pass, and were forced to go back as they came,
after having made a discharge or two of their Muskets and Canon charged with
small shot. By which amongst others poor M. Clodore (whom we had occasion to
mention before, for making the Capitulation at Grave, and the history of whose
life was known to many) was killed, one half of his head having been taken off.
At length, the Place being yielded up in the evening, one Monsieur d'Espagne
was made Governor of it the next morning, and there were put into it 4
Companies of Switzers and the Regiment de la Ferte for a Garrison.

Bommel is a great Town, situate (as we said) on the left bank of the Wahal, 3
leagues above Gorcum; its situation is very advantageous both upon the account
of the Wahal, which defends one side of it, and of the Marshes which encompass
it on the other, and which are so deep that one can neither undermine nor keep
Trenches long open before it. Its Fortifications are likewise good, and the
Hollander who have made it one of the Keys of their Country, have not forgot to
keep them in repair, but made its preservation one of their chief cares. It is
surrounded with good Cortin's, Bastions and Towers, a double Rampart, and a
double ditch. It was besiedg'd in 1599 for the Spaniard by Don Francesco de
Mendoza high Admiral of Arragon, who after many stratagems, at last vented all
his fury upon this Place, which he besieged with 30000 men, but was
notwithstanding forced after a fortnight's stay to raise his Siege. By which we
may judge of the strength and consequence of this Place.

The 22, after a Garrison had been put into Bommel, the whole Island became
subject to the King, the Forts of S. Andrew and of Wornes being already possessed
by our Dragoons, Monsieur de Turenne departed hence with his Army, and came
back to Hempel, where being to march through the Town he dined. The Artillery
by reason of the bad ways having not been able to keep pace with the Army, came
behind under the Convoy of the Dragoons. Those who had been drawn out on the 19
to fire the Villages, whose Peasants had beaten and so barbarously used our
party, returned after having routed 100 foot and 50 Maistres of Breda, which
they met with. Monsieur de Montauban was made Governor of Zutphen, M. de
Beauveze of Rees, and M. de Villiers of Doesburg. This day there arrived at
Boxtel an Envoye from the Prince of Orange, with many Propositions for a Peace;
which made the World think it would at last come to something.

The 23 after the Prince of Orange's Envoy had made known his Propositions, the
King ordered a Drummer to go with him to Brussells, that he might know the
Count de Monterey's answer to the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of
Arlington's demands in the King of England's name, which was to call back all
the Spanish Forces that were either in Breda, the Busse, Bergen-op Zoom, or the
Dutch Army's. M. de Turenne came to wait on his Majesty at Boxtel, and lay
there that night following, and his Army the while rested at Hompel, whether
the Ordnance being arrived with their Convoy, they were sent on a league
forward of the next day's journey toward the Kings Quarters.

The 24 the King called a Council of War, at which he himself was present, as
he always used to be; and it was there resolved, that after his Majesty's
departure, (who intended to return and refresh himself a while in France after
the toil he endured in the Campaign) Monsieur de Turenne should stay behind in
Brabant with 20000 men, and should have for his Lieutenants general, the Sieurs
de S. Abre and Foucault; for his Camp-Marshals the Sieurs de Choiseul,
Magalotty, and de Vitry; that the Count de Chamilly should come and lie below
Maestricht, and the Marquis de Rochefort with the greatest part of the Kings
Household above it, that so betwixt them they might wholly block up that Town;
that M. de la Feuillade should go with his own Brigade, and some others which
he should have given him to the number of 4000 horse, and lie about Wezel. And
because the King intended to return again, as soon as he should have given such
orders at home as were necessary, he sent most part of his Equipage and
heaviest Baggage to Grave, that he might not be troubled to send them
backwards, but that at his return he might meet them there in readiness.

The same day the Duke of Neubourg came to Boxtel to give his Majesty a visit,
and Monsieur de Turenne's Army leaving Hempel, advanced toward Beerlicon
within 2 leagues of the Kings Quarters, and remained there till after his
Majesty departure; whom M. de Turenne left not till then. At the same time the
Spanish Troops in the Hollanders service, having heard of the Proposals which
the Duke of Buckingham and the Earl of Arlington were going to make with Count
Monterey, and knowing that the Spaniard was not in a condition to maintain a
War of that importance as he was thrcaten'd with upon refusal, packed up bag
and baggage, and made themselves ready to depart, upon the first orders to that
purpose, which they doubted not but they should speedily receive. Some persons
whom we met in our march told us they went every day to the Busse, and assured
us they had seen the said Troops there, who were very weary of the service, and
complained much of their ill diet and pay.

The 25, the King after having treated the Duke of Neubourg, had him out to
view the Troops that belonged to his person, and some others that were then
with him, and in the evening when he came back, he let us know that he would be
going the next morning for France, and accordingly gave order that all things
should be in a readiness for his departure against that time.

The same day he committed the Government of Lorraine to the Marquis de
Rochefort.

Monsieur de Turennes Army rested at Beerlicon, and the Count du Lude
Grand-Master of the Ordnance left it, and came to Boxtel with a part of the
Artillery, which was to follow the King. Some few days after, the Marquis de
Ranes General of the Dragoons, and the Count de Guiche Lieutenant General of
the Prince's Army, came thither likewise, the King having ordered them to
follow him into France.

The 26 in the morning, the King departed from Boxtel, and came to lie at
Borkel, which is a great Abbey of white Friars in the way from Boxtel to
Tongres. His Majesty lodged in the Abbey, but almost all the Court was forced
to encamp about it, because there were very few houses thereabouts. A great
part of the Regiment of Guards staid behind, to join with M. de Turenne's Army,
as did all the rest of the Foot which was in the Kings retinue, because they
could not keep pace with the King, who intended thence forwards to take great
Journeys; only 12 Companies were ordered to follow softly after him to Paris.
Monsieur de Turenne returned to lead his Army, which lay still at Beerlicon;
and the Prince of Mechlebourg came to visit the King at Borkel.

The 27 in the morning, the King left Borkel, which lies in Brabant, and within
the Territories that belonged to the Hollander, and having passed by Beringen,
which is a little Town in Liege, went and lodged a league beyond that Town.

The 28 in the morning, the Light Horse which had hitherto accompanied the
King, returned to join with M. de Turenne's Army, which had not yet
disencamped; his Majesty came to a little Village called Leuve, within a league
of Hannuy, a little Town of the Spaniards, where we met some Cravates belonging
to the Spanish-Troops. The heavy baggage of the Court, and those that belonged
to them, had orders not to accompany the King any farther, but to march after
leisurely with a Convoy which was ordered for them all. The same kind of
baggage which belonged to the Kings Household, was sent to Maesiick with another
Convoy. The King in the middle of this day's Journey met Monsieur Vaubrun with
2000 horse, a 1000 of which he left with his Majesty to guard him beyond
Binche, and returned with the rest to M. de Turenne's Army.

The 29 the King left Leuve betimes in the morning, and having staid to dine in
the middle of his Journey, he was informed that all the heavy Baggages had been
taken and plundered, some said by a party which sallied out of Maestricht, and
others by the Cravates we met at Hannuy. His Majesty thereupon sent in have to
know the certainty of the business, but the Courier brought back word, that
only M. Brancas's Baggage had been taken by some horse of the Enemy's who being
aware that his Waggoner drove a good way before the rest, made him turn into
the Woods, where they took away the horses, and left the rest to be riffled by
the Peasants, who had hid and sheltered themselves there ever since the
beginning of the War.

The 30 the King, continuing his march, left Ameley betimes in the morning, and
came by Binche, where without entering the Place he dined at the Gate, and
afterward went and lodged a league beyond that Place, upon the road of
Quesnoy. This day he ordered the Van of his Life Guard, and the Brigades of the
Men at Arms and light Horsemen to go before, and expect him at the Castle of
Cambray, where he intended to spend the next day.

The 31, the King setting out by break of day, arrived at Quesnoy about 11 of
the Clock, where taking only a little broth, he went to bed, and rested till 5
in the evening, and then after a light repast, took Coach, (which he had not
done before during all this Campaign, but had always travailed on horseback
whatever weather it was) and rode on all night accompanied by a strong Convoy,
which had been drawn out of the Life Guards, Men at Arms, Light Horsemen and
Musketeers, who accompanied him to the Castle of Cambray, where he dismissed
them, and made use of those he had sent two days before to expect him there;
and so marched on with them all the night following. Almost all the Court staid
at Quesnoy to come leasurely after, because the King had horses laid for him
by the way, and the rest of the horses that came from the Army were not able to
keep pace with them. The Troops that belonged to the Kings Household encamped
before the Gates of Quesnoy.

The first of August the King arrived at S. Quintin by 4. of the Clock in the
morning, heard Mass in the Church of S. James, and having taken a little broth,
which was brought him from M. de Pradelle the Governor of that Town to a
Semstresse's Shop, took Coach again and went on to Ham, where he left his
Convoy, and at length arrived by 10 at night at S. Germains, where the ^ueen
did not expect him till the Thursday following. The Troops which had staid
behind at Quesnoy, marched this day to Landreby, whether the party that had
conveyed the King came also, that after two or three day's rest they might
return toward Maestricht, whether Monsieur de Rochefort had order to march
with them.

A LIST OF THE PLACES Conquered by His Majesty in this Campaign.
Tongres. Maesiick. Foucmont. Vize. Orsoy. Rhinemberg. Burick. The Fort of
Lyppe. Wezel. Rees. The Fort of Rees. Emerick. Skensconce. The Castle of
Tolhuis. Tolhuis. Arnhem. Doesbourg. Zevenaer. Zutphen. Deutecum. Ouageningen.
Rhenen. Wick. Utrecht. Amersford. The Castle of Em. Naerden. Monford. Woerden.
Oudwater. Isselsteing. Dussel. Croanembourg. Tiel. Wyanem. Culembourg. Buren.
Knotzembourg. Nimegen. The Fort of S. Andrew. Woorn. Bommelle. Crevecoeur.
Hekel. Borxel. Grave. Gennep.
Besides many Castles about Utrecht and Amsterdam, whether the Enemy used to
retire, and secure themselves.

The Author to the Readers.
REaders, I grow weary of venting my Wares thus by retail. The rest are of the
same kind with the former, but I will give them out to you now in the gross.
They are not deceitful I can assure you: for though I have not been an
Eyewitness to what I shall henceforward relate, as I was to all that passed
during the Kings stay in Holland, yet I have it from some of my Friends who
sent me their memoirs, and having no design to misinform me, took care to write
nothing but what they knew for certain truth. And what has confirmed me in my
good opinion of their veracity, is, that I find them altogether conformable to
the Accounts that were constantly brought to Court of what passed in our
Armies. You will find here some Particulars and Circumstances, which it is
likely you have not heard of before, and which I promise my self you will not
be sorry to know. I wish I could have done more both for your Service and
Satisfaction, and in requital, desire you to pardon what you shall find amiss.
I willingly confess my weakness: and unfitness to be an Author. As I never
valued my self upon appearing in Print, so what I have done now, was only in
complaisance to some who desired it.

A CONTINUATION Of what happened in the Dutch WAR, After the Kings return into
France.
OUr invincible Monarch having sufficiently humbled the haughty States, and
left a general consternation all over their Country, which made his very name
formidable to the stoutest of them, took his way for France as we before
mentioned.

His absence a little raised their spirits, so that they ventured out of their
Intrenchments and marched toward Woerden, Croanembourg, and some other small
Towns, which we had left ungarrison'd only upon promise of their Fidelity, not
judging it necessary to bestow Garrisons on them, that did of necessity fall
into the Hands of him that was Master of the Field. They put some Forces into
them, and possessed them awhile quietly enough, and it may be we should not
have concerned our selves so far as to drive them out, had not the Prince of
Orange designed to make Incursions into the liberties of Vtrecht, and to use
Woerden as his retreat. Whereupon the Duke of Luxembourg, who, as we said
before, commanded the Army near Vtrecht, and now permitted it to rest and
refresh it self, glad to find an opportunity of doing something for his Kings
Service, took the Field, and straight marched to Croanembourg, where (the Horse
upon notice of their design, securing themselves by a timely retreat) they soon
made themselves masters of the Foot, who without much resistance, were made
Prisoners of War: and not only they, but 72 more, who entrenched themselves in
a Castle that lay on the way, and for 5 or 6 hours kept our Dragoons in play,
having killed 10 or 12, and broke Monsieur de Rouvray's arm, who commanded our
Horse and the Attaque on one side, with a Musket Shot. Afterward the Duke
marched to Woerden, which fared no better then Croanembourg, and the Count de
la Mark was left there with the Picardy Regiment.

These proceedings did more trouble the States then one can well imagine: for
besides the confusion it put them in, the loss of this last place, though it be
little, and in it self inconsiderable, yet was of great importance to them,
because it gave us admission into the heart of their Country, and cut off all
communication between diverse of their great Towns. So they presently called a
Council of War, and very earnestly desired the Prince of Orange presently to
besiege it, who, thinking it a business of no difficulty, the Town being but
slenderly fortified, closed with the proposal, not doubting of carrying it, and
reckoning it would do well to flesh his heart less Men; wherefore he presently
betook himself to the march. Whether it was because the Prince had willingly,
upon their req^est, undertaken this business, or that they did imagine Woerden
would not be so easily taken, I know not: but so it was, that hereupon they let
not their Gallant Protector depart, without bestowing on him more new
Testimonies of their Kindness; wherefore they drew out a very considerable
supply out of their Ships, with which that he might join, he went and encamped
at the head of a Pass between Wesep and Naerden, where he caused a strong
Intrenchment to be raised behind a great Canale, and placed a guard on it.

Such preparations could not be made without the Duke of Luxemburgs knowledge,
for every body talked of them; and because it seemed probable, their designs
were either against Naerden, which they had long threatened, or Vtrecht, toward
which their march seemed to incline, he presently drew out to prevent them.

This happened on the 8th of October, for though they had long known of the
Kings return into France, yet were they 2 or 3 months before they could so
recollect their spirits as to think upon attempting any thing. The Duke
therefore by 4 in the morning, leading with him 4000 Foot, and all his Horse,
went and took up his post near the Pass through which the whole Dutch Army was
to march; but this he did so suddenly, that he surprised them; so that their
Vanguard, without staying to discover who we were, betook themselves to their
heels with as much have as if they had been already beaten, which gave our
Vanguard occasion to laugh at them sufficiently: yet with all their haste they
could not escape some of our Dragoons, who flung themselves into the Cannel,
which served them as a Baricado, and swimming over killed diverse of them, and
took 40 Prisoners just before the Intrenchment within which the whole Body of
their Army lay, not one of them daring to stir out to bring off their
Companions; only they let fly some Volleys of Shot from their Canon,
notwithstanding which, our Men encamped themselves there.

The next day being the ninth, our Army, which had purposely taken this post to
observe their motions, was very intent all day upon that, and getting together
some Forage, without enterprising any thing else: But the Hollanders lay not
so quiet as we, for they had been too long upon the defensive part already, and
therefore resolved now to enter upon the offensive; 20 or 30 of their bravest
Fellows seeing us lie still, had a great mind to take our Forragers, who were
as securely at their work, as if they had been at the Gates of Paris, not
thinking any body would dare to come and disturb them. This their confidence
gave the Enemy the better opportunity, who thereupon enclosed both the Men,
Horses and Forage. The truth is, the Sieur de la Rouillardiere, Captain of a
Company of Dragoons, and the Sieur Vieuxpont his Cornet, had been ordered to be
their Convoy; but because the extent of the Country, which they were to defend,
was somewhat large, they had divided themselves, each taking 15 Maistres which
they commanded; so that they could not hinder the Enemies design, neither did
they oppose it, but suffered all to be taken. Yet the Hollander had no reason
to brag of the Exploit; for our Captain and his Cornet, instead of coming
toward them, left them masters of the Field awhile, and wheeling a little
about, joined, and took up their post in a narrow passage, by which they saw
the Enemy must come with his prize, and there waited for them; where, after
having stood their first discharge, they made them all Prisoners, not one
escaping, and brought them, and all the Forragers, back to our Camp. In the
Evening, the Duke of Luxembourg gave order to his Men to be ready by the next
Morning, resolving, seeing they stirred not, to approach them nearer, and try
if he could entice them out: and at the same time ordered a Captain of the
Piedmont Regiment, with 12 Granadiers, to go and attaque them within their
Barricado, and try if any of them sallyed out, to take some Prisoners, whilst
he would be ready, in case of need, to bring them off. The Captain performed
what he was commanded very courageously, past their first Barricado without any
resistance, and marched on to the second, where he found as little opposition;
and seeing nothing but Men that fled, he advanced to the third, which chanced
to be a House, so he set fire on that, and went on with intent to take some
Prisoners if he could, as he had been ordered, but he lost his labor; for the
Dutchmen, notwithstanding their pursie fat bulk, plied their legs so nimbly at
this time, that it was not possible for him to overtake one. Wherefore he
returned, and being to give account of what he had done, told the Duke, He had
forced and fired their Barricado's, and ran after the Enemy, but without being
able to catch any, because they flew, fear having put wings to their feet. The
truth is, they never left running till they came to Bodengrave, so that M. de
Luxembourg finding there was likely to be no more action, returned to Vtrecht,
where he was not long idle; for the Hollanders prepared more Laurels for him,
as you shall hear.

The tenth in the Morning they set forward, and embarking upon the River to the
number of 14000, came and took up their post before Woerden, which the Prince
caused presently to be blocked up, hoping to surprise the Garrison, who indeed
had no notice of their coming; but they not having been negligent in their
duties, the business was not likely to be effected so soon as the Enemy hoped,
who now began to fear this little paltry Town would cost them more then they
imagined, wherefore they spent the rest of this, and all the following day, in
Intrenching themselves, and fortifying all the Avenues to their Camp,
especially that part of it which lay toward Vtrecht, imagining if any succors
came to the Town, it it would be from thence. In the mean time, the Count de la
Mark took care to give notice to the Duke of Luxembourg, and not doubting but
he would speedily come to his assistance, was still upon the watch, ready to
sally forth and set upon the Enemy on his side, as soon as he should find some
succors come to second him.

Upon this Intelligence, which came in a very ill time (because the Duke of
Luxembourg was then in the Field with so small a party as could not be able to
attempt any thing of themselves, any one but he would have been sufficiently
puzzled; but it was not then a time to stand considering, wherefore he commanded
those that were with him to march on toward the besieged place, whilst he went
post to Vtrecht, where he ordered the Marquis of Genlis to take all the Horse
he had, and some Foot, and follow after with all possible speed, ordering 2000
which were then ready to march immediately, because the danger being great
required a like remedy. These Orders were given most prudently, and if they
were not accordingly executed, I can give no reason for it; but this I can
certainly affirm, That the Duke, being impatient till he got to the Enemy, left
all these Forces to be brought after by Monsieur de Genlis, and put himself at
the head of those he had sent before, when he first received the news of the
Siege; and the other 2000 Foot which he found ready, resolving with this small
party to set upon the Enemy, and venture all, rather then suffer the place to
be lost so under his nose, without ever attempting any thing to save it.

It must be acknowledged that this Enterprise was strangely hazardous, and the
happy issue of it beyond belief. For it seemed morally impossible, that our
party should swim over a River, and the Causeys being as good for the Hollander
as so many Rampires and Gabions; that they should rout an Army ten times as
numerous as their own, and win a Fort from them furnished with five
Intrenchments well flanked and pallizado'd. Yet notwithstanding all this, the
Duke of Luxembourg having staid a little for Monsieur de Genlis, and as long as
was convenient to prepare himself for an attaque, began to set on the Enemy,
who in spite of all his courage, and theirs that he commanded, beat him twice
back; but at the third Onset, the Marquis de Meilly gave the rest a good
example, by leaping into the Water up to his middle, which made many Officers
and Volunteers, and at last the whole party to do the like, and so they passed
over upon the very mouths of the Enemies Guns, and got within their
Intrenchments, which they were glad to quit and betake themselves to slight, as
their last and best refuge.

The Count de la Mark in the mean while, who as I said before, was still ready
to receive the Enemy if he had assaulted the place, or to sally out, if he saw
any likelihood of being assisted, being aware of the Duke of Luxembourgs
arrival and attaque, lost no time, but sallyed out in person, and fell in
amongst them like Lightning, killing many with his own hand, and being very
well seconded by those that followed him, who had before tried the Enemies
Courage in a Sally that 400 of them made at the beginning of the Siege, in
which, driving the Enemy out of a part of the Suburbs where they had sheltred
themselves, the better to make their approaches, they fired it, and beat the
Enemy out of three Intrenchments which they had made to hinder any sallies from
the Town. The M. of Bois Dauphin was killed in this first action, with six
other Soldiers. So all their Intrenchments, Banks, Canales, Sluices, Forts and
Redouts, wherewith they had fortified themselves, and all their Canon, were
obstacles too weak to keep us out, for they were presently quite routed, and
the Prince of Orange himself was forced to put all hopes of safety in the
fleetness of his Horse. But he was fortunate enough, not to be of the number of
about 500 who were taken, and 800 slain; amongst which were the Sieur
Zulestein, who had been Tutor to the Prince of Orange, and Colonel Bis his
Steward; with 2 other Colonels, 3 Lieutenants, and about 70 or 80 Officers,
besides a great many that were drowned, and whose number could not be certainly
known, but may be guest at by those who were since taken up at diverse places;
which among the rest, amounted to 50 in one little Canale.

Their flight was too sudden for them to think of any thing but saving their
lives, wherefore all their Baggage and Canon, which were nine Pieces, three of
which were on Batteries against the Town, and the rest within their
Intrenchments, against any succor that might come to relieve it, fell into our
hands. These were all put into the Town, and will be made use of to repulse the
Enemy again, if they dare ever attempt any thing against it.

As there are no Roses without Prickles, nor great Pleasures, which have not
either accompanying or soon following them some alloy of sorrow, so this
strangely fortunate success, could not be attained without some loss of our
side. We lost in the Action many Soldiers, and among the Persons of Note were
the Count de Meilly, the Colonel to the Normandy Regiment, and who commanded
the Foot in this Service, the Sieur de la Tilhays his Lieutenant, a Gentleman
of Normandy, and the Sieur de Parville Tibout, a Voluntier of Normandy
likewise, in the same Body. The M. de la Meylleraye, Colonel of the Piedmont
Regiment. M. de Lardiniere, Lieutenant Colonel of the Navarre Regiment, and the
Chevalier de Boufflers, Colonel of the Regiment Royal of Dragoons were
dangerously wounded; besides diverse Volunteers who did wonders.

As the success of so perilous an Enterprise could not but be very glorious to
the Duke of Luxembourg, so upon that account it did reward it self; but neither
proved it less advantageous to him, then glorious. For the generous Monarch,
for whose service it had been undertook, no sooner heard of it, but with many
Commendations bestowed on him, He presently thought how he might recompense it;
and besides a great sum of money, sent the Duke a Commission to be Captain of
his Guards, in the stead of the Marquis de Lauzun Peguilain, that he and all
Men might thereby see, That no Man serves him for nothing, That whatever is
done for him, is presently followed by its recompense; and, That he better
knows how to reward Virtue then punish Vice.

This first Essay of the Hollanders, for the execution of which they had taken
all possible care, and done all that might assure them of a good event,
succeeding so ill, was not however altogether useless to the Prince of Orange;
who being made more cautious by his ill success, resolved from henceforward not
to venture any thing, nor make the least attempt where he was sure to find any
great opposition. The States likewise began to discover how unseasonably they
had put him upon this Siege. Wherefore, that he might not be forced to be
always doing nothing, to which he was here reduced by the Duke of Luxembourg,
who was still at the heels of him, as soon as he took the Field. He thought he
might do something to more purpose, if leaving Holland he went toward Liege,
either against Tongres or Fouquemont, which were neither fortified, nor like to
be succor'd by any Army that lay near them: for M. de Turenne was marched after
the Imperial and Brandenbourg Forces, or else against Maesiick, whose
Fortifications not being yet finished, would more easily be taken. In this
resolution he chose out his best Troops, and most experienced Commanders, in
whom he chiefly confided, and made up a Body of about 14000 or 15000 Men. And
thus having given all necessary Orders for the security of his Camp at
Bodengrave, (which had hitherto been his retiring place in all his Misfortunes,
and which having been fortifying it all the Summer, he had made a Bulwark for
the security of all the rest of Holland) he set forward by the ways of Worcum,
Gorcum, and Breda, designing to take with him a part of the Garrison of this
last named Town, as well as those of the Busse, Berguen-op-Zoom, and
Maestricht, to augment his Army; but did not execute what he intended, either
because he changed his mind, or because he could not, the Garrisons of those
places being for the most part Spaniards. However it were, it matters not, but
Bommelle lying in his way, and that being a great rich Town, and one of the
chief of those that lie on the Wahal, he thought it would be no bad prize if he
could compass it, and would be a happy beginning of his intended Progress;
wherefore he marched thither, and began to make his approaches; but going in
Person to view it, he chanced to bleed at the Nose; which seeming ominous, he
would not obstinatly stay any longer before it, but marched straight on to
Tongres, with design to set upon that. But the Sieur Montal, Governor of
Charleroy, having had Orders from the King, who had intelligence of their
design, to put some Soldiers into it; having done accordingly, spoiled their
design. Maesiick would have been a better bit for them, but they were too
dainty to stoop to such course fair, and therefore went on toward Fouquemont,
upon which the Prince vented all his fury, and took it with as much greediness,
as it had been defended generously, by the Lieutenant Colonel of the Jonzac.
Regiment, who was in it only with 200 Men, endured four Assaults very bravely,
but at last was forced to yield it up. After this, the Prince resumed his
design against Tongres, and marched toward it; but let us leave him awhile to
see what was done in the mean time in his own Country.

The Hollander had not so much reason to rejoice at the taking of Fouquemont,
as they had of being sorrowful at the success of our Arms, and those of the
Bishop of Munsters in Friseland. The Count de Saulx, having been told by a
certain Captain in his Regiment, who had learned it from some German Fugitives
from the Dutch Army, that the Bampfield Regiment lay at Hylestein in very ill
plight, and that there was a way to come to them which was not well guarded,
and whose Fortifications were not capable of giving us any stop, the Guard it
self consisting but of 40 or 50 Men, which lay a great way from the rest within
an Intrenchment beyond the Canale of Gorcum; and that their retreat might be
cut off, not to lose any time, sent some to take knowledge of the Post, and in
the mean time gave intelligence of it to the Duke of Luxembourg, who was very
glad of the news, but however expected the return of those who were gone to take
an account of the place; who soon returning, confirmed almost all that the
German Fugitives had related. Hereupon the Count de Saulx received the Order
which he had desired of marching thither; he had given him to that end 300 Men
of his own Regiment, and 200 out of that of Castelnau, 50 Dragoons, and as many
Horse, with Commission only to take all the party that were guarding that
passage, and not to venture, for fear of being lost in going to the Enemies
Quarters.

The 15 of November was the day which conferred on him the glory he gained in
this enterprise. He set out about 3 of the clock after dinner, having at least
100 Reformades Officers that followed him as Volunteers; and the first thing he
did, was to send a Captain of his Regiment to go before and secure the Avenues,
that no intelligence might be given to the Enemy of the march. But he was but
just got beyond a place called Lexmende when he saw the Captain return, who
brought word, That the Enemy had certainly smelt the Design, being since they
were sent, the number of the party was increased, and they had made up a
Barriere before their Intrenchment, where they had placed some of their new
comers, whom he had seen relieved by others, and that the outward Guard seemed
to consist of about 10 Men.

This news increased the joy of our brave Commander, who now saw, that though
he was confined to do nothing but carry away all that guarded that place, yet
he now should carry away at least twice as many; and that if he afterward
marched on to the Enemies Quarters (as he intended) he should with more ease
master them, since they had weakened themselves by sending this party to the
others assistance. Wherefore he commanded the same Captain, with his Company,
to take only their Swords and leave their Firearms behind, that so they might,
if possible, make the other party yield without noise, least the Alarm should
be thereby given to the Enemies main Quarters. This was very well contrived,
but the party proving to be Horse (which he knew not of his Scouts, who saw
none of their Horses) some of them gave notice to the rest time enough for them
(who had received very considerable succors upon the intelligence they received
2 hours before of the Design) to prepare themselves to receive us.

So great an alteration was enough to have sent the Count back as he came, but
it did only heighten his courage, who thought himself now too far engaged to
leave off so, wherefore seeing all his men desiring nothing more then to
engage, he continued his march, and within a little while came within
Pistol-shot of the Intrenchment. There were two ways which led to it, and gave
him an opportunity to attaque it in two places at once, but one of them was
hardly passable upon the account of a Sluice five or six foot deep; yet
notwithstanding he resolved to make use of them both, and to that purpose
mended the other a little first, and then immediately commanded the Grenadiers
to advance and cut down the Pallisados; but they not being able to perform it,
because of their thickness, he commanded the Officers to climb over, which
succeeded so well, that the Enemies, after a short resistance, betook
themselves to flight, and gained their Quarters where they staid not long; for
seeing themselves pursued, they stole away without any noise of Drum or
Trumpet, though they were 1000 or 1200 Men.

It must be confessed, that as the Enemies were always very vigorously set
upon, so was their Cowardice extraordinary, otherwise it had not been possible
1200 Men should suffer themselves to be routed and beaten out of a Fort, which
on one side was strengthened by a great Canale that ran at the foot of it, and
on the other by two rows of strong Pallisado's 7 Foot high, a Parapet Canon
proof, 8 foot high, with two pieces of Ordnance, which they had placed there
upon notice of our Design; besides 3 Fregats upon the Canale, who with their
Canon were to defend the Intrenchment.

The Marquis of Castlenaw, who was one of the Volunteers, after having killed
three with his own hand, in the heat of the Action had his hand lifted up to
have done as much to a fourth, but was prevented by a Musketshot, which so
shattered his Arm, that it was fain to be cut off; and afterward,
notwithstanding all the Chirurgions care, gangrend, so that he dyed of it some
days after at Vtrecht, and was much lamented by all, as one of the most
courageous and brave Men we had: but his death was soon revenged by that of him
that had shot him, and 50 of his Companions, which were killed on the place,
and 100 more who were taken: the Fire destroying the rest of them.

The same day being the 15th, the Marquis de Moussis, Colonel of the Queens
Regiment, having been ordered to go and beat up a party of the Enemy Quartered
near Wesep, went accordingly with 300 Men, drawn out of the Garrison of
Naerden; but he found no body, for they had retired upon notice of his march,
so they fired the Village which they had quitted.

At the same time the Enemy took a fancy to attaque a place in Frizeland,
whether they went with 5000 Horse and 300 Foot, and not having been able to
surprise it as they hoped, they laid so formal a Siege to it, that it lasted
too long to their misfortune. For the Marquis Reinel, Camp-master to a party of
Horse of the Confederate Forces, hearing of it, got together all the Men he
could in have, and went to its relief, where he broke through their Lines,
getting into the Camp among them, killed many, routed the rest, and gained all
their baggage.

The Elector of Brandenbourg, their Protector, had no better fortune then they,
or the Imperialists that he had with him.

Monsieur de Sainfandaux at this time Foraging about the Country with 20 or 25
Maistres, was betrayed by a Peasant who was his Guide, into the Hands of a party
of theirs, consisting of 800, where after a long and brave resistance, he was
at length overpowered by numbers, wounded, and carried away Prisoner. This was
done before any Declaration of War from that Elector, but this act of Hostility
was not long without Reprizals. Monsieur Turenne hearing they had left 100
Horse for the Guard of the Bridge, by which they had passed over the Main, sent
150 Maistres of the Kings household, under the command of Monsieur Brizac,
Lieutenant of the Life-guards, to take cognizance of them, and discover whither
what had been done was out of some particular grudge to M. Saintsandoux, or
that they intended an open War. He went accordingly, and having found the
Bridge guarded as he had been informed, advanced toward the Commander in
chief, and after having asked who they were for, demanded free passage, which
was granted him: afterward he demanded Quarters in the neighboring Houses,
whereupon the Officer told him, That being there was not sufficient room to
quarter both parties in, there was no reason he who had first taken up the
Quarters should be turned out of them; this satisfied him as to that point, he
having no design to quarter there, wherefore M. Brizac asked him if he would
send for some Wine, saying, They must needs drink a Bottle together: but the
German smelling a design of making him speak more in his drink then he was
minded to do now he was sober, replied, He had already drunk his Mornings
draught; and that if they must needs drink to one another, it must be at a
distance: whereupon Monsieur de Brizac commanded his Men to advance, saying,
Why then you are not our Friends? and so sell on and defeated them. A part of
whom were killed in the Encounter, and the rest were either taken, or saved
themselves by flight, so that our Men became masters of the Bridge; but
Monsieur Brizac having had no order to keep it, came back with his party.

The keeping of this Bridge was of main consequence to the Duke of
Brandenbourg, both upon the account of his Interest and Honor: it being the way
by which he was to retire, in case of ill success; and he having bragged and
promised he would maintain it. Wherefore, having been told by those who had
fled, that they had been defeated by one only Squadron, imagining we should
have kept the same post, he sent 2000 Men to take it from us; but we saved them
a labor, because we thought it not worth keeping. But it seems they were not of
our mind, for those 2000 Men strongly entrenched themselves at the end of the
Bridge, and seting a strong guard there, disposed of themselves as well as they
could in the Quarters thereabout, but with order to be ever upon their guard,
because they foresaw that as long as Monsieur Turenne lay so near them, he
would not fail frequently to visit them.

They were not out in their conjectures, for Monsieur Turenne having had notice
of their being his neighbors, two days after their return thither, and
imagining they were come thither with a design not to forsake the place without
engaging, took with him the Kings Household, and marched toward them with all
speed, to take cognizance of them himself, being resolved once more to beat
them from that post.

He had not marched far, when being yet above three quarters of a mile short of
the Bridge, passing through a Wood he met the Count d'Onak, a near Kinsman to
the Duke of Brandenbourg, who being out upon a design of getting intelligence,
hearing some Dogs which had followed our party, and were hunting in the Wood,
he followed the Cry till he came near our Vanguard, and hearing a noise of Men
and Horses, came on toward us, but found other kind of Hunters then he was
aware of, for he soon perceived they were our Troops by their marching in rank
and file; he came up to us notwithstanding very resolutly, and having asked who
we were for, let fly at us first; who returning the same salute, wounded him in
five or six places, whereof he dyed on the place cursing and swearing: part of
his followers, which were 15 or 16 in all, were taken Prisoners, and the rest
fled to the Bridge, where they put the whole party in such a fright, that M.
Turenne at his arrival found it deserted.

These were the worthy Exploits the Hollander and their Partisans performed at
home, whilst the Prince of Orange ranged about in the Country of Liege, with
intent to surprise some place on that side. He went to set upon Liege it self,
but staid not long before it: but because Tongres, and the Garrison there had
done him much mischief, he had a great spite at it, and was always framing some
design against it. After the taking of Fouquemont, he resolved to besiege it in
good earnest; and it was in his march toward it that we left him but now, and
therefore we will now pursue our discourse of him, and see how his design sped.
But if we would have found him before the Place, we must have returned sooner,
for though he came thither with intent to sit down before it, yet Count Marsin
made the project miscarry, who (seeing though the Place was not over well
fortified, yet the Garrison in it was very strong, and might defend themselves
very long, and cost a great many lives to winn it, M. de Montal being in the
Place, who doubtless would maintain it to the last), advised him not to pursue
the design any farther.

This advice which was well grounded, suggested to them another more likely
project, and the issue of which would be of much more consequence. Monsieur
Montal being now in Tongres, whether he was come and had brought with him a
great party of men to reinforce the Garrison, made them judge Charleroy, whose
Governor he was, and out of which he had drawn those men, might easily be
gained, both upon the account of the Governors absence, and thinness of the
Garrison, which they imagined was much weakened by the party that M. de Montal
had thence carried with him to Tongres: upon these grounds, they resolved to
besiege it, and gave Count Monterey notice of their design, to oblige him
considering the importance of the Place, to send them more Forces; which, it
seems, he too carefully and zealously did. For he unfurnished many of his Towns
to make up a body of 16000, which was directly contrary to the Treaty at the
Pyrenaeans and Aix la Chappelle.

The 15 of December the Count Marsin, who commanded that Body, went and sat
down before the Place in expectation of the Prince who was to follow with his
Army.

In the mean time the Sieur de Montal being informed of the design by some
prisoners, and by 50 Maistres, whom he had ordered to follow the Enemy at a
distance and observe their motions, (though he could hardly believe they would
venture upon so great and difficult a business) yet sent intelligence of it to
the Court (as they also did from Charleroy) withal desiring a Commission to
return, and get into the Town; which he immediately prepared himself to do,
without staying for orders, so soon as he should be sure they were resolved
upon the Siege of that Place.

The 16 Monsieur de S. Cla a Brigadier of Horse, hearing of the same design at
Maesiick where he then was, went thence accompanied by the Sieurs de S.
Sylvestre, and d'Arty Captains of Horse, the Sieurs de Labadie, Vignart, de
Treuil Lieutenants Levigny and Magny Cornets, and Lopair and Empereur
Quarter Masters, together with 50 other Horse, and brought the confirmation of
this news to M. de Montal at Tongres, offering him withal, to accompany him in
his design of getting back into the Town; he accepted their profer, and without
any farther delay, disposed himself to set forward the next morning.

The 17 he set out about 10 in the morning, as he had appointed, accompanied by
the forementioned Gentlemen and their 50 Maistres, besides 60 more which he had
brought along with him to Tongres, and marched all day and all night, intending
to get thither the next day, whatever it cost them. In the mean time, the
Couriers, who had been sent with the news, making all possible speed, arrived
all three one after another to Versailles, were their Majesty's then were.

The news they brought, was so extraordinary, and it seemed so improbable that
the Prince of Orange should come into Flanders to besiege one of our principal
Places there, that had not all the 3 Couriers successively confirmed what had
been related, of the Count Monterey's drawing out 15000 or 1600 men out of his
Garrisons, and sending them to begin the Siege, the Couriers would have been
laughed at as mad men, rather then believed; besides that after all, there was
another reason that added to the improbability of it, which was the violation
of the Treaty, which after this Count Monterey could not excuse. They were
notwithstanding believed, because they all said the same thing, and the King
thereupon that same night sent the Marquis of Louvois thither in post, and sent
orders to the Marshal d'Humieres, who was at his own estate near Compiegne to
go immediately to Lisle, of which he was Governor, and there to expect farther
orders. As M. de Louvoys is a man of excellent conduct and foresight in
managing business, so is he indefatigable when their is need of dispatch, he
therefore set out at midnight as soon as he had his orders, and having sent to
the Chevalier de Nogent to accompany him, went by Peronne, and thence to Athe.
The Marshal d'Humieres likewise though he had kept his bed three days before,
being tormented by the Colic, set out immediately for Lisle. As to Monsieur de
Montal, he took the same way along the Caussey, by which the Enemy had marched
before him, that so he might not be discovered: he had not marched above 5 or 6
hours, before he overtook some of the rear of their Army loitering behind, all
which he stripped and hamme-string'd their horses, that they might not follow
nor give notice of his march.

The ^8 before day he came pretty near the Enemy, 1500 or 1600 of whose foot
were quartered in a Village called Perruis, and all the horse who conveyed them
were disposed of in other Villages along the Caussey, as far as Giblow; all
these he passed without being discovered, but coming nearer Charleroy, was
aware of other Troops, whom to avoid he was forced to turn out of his way, and
fetch a compass on the right hand to gain the Woods.

All this was don in the night, and at day break he arrived within sight of
their Camp, but there made a halt, not being willing to appear till their
guards were releiv'd, least when he would have forced his passage, all the
whole Army should be upon his back, which succeeded as he could have wished.

The first body of Men he came at, after coming out of the Woods, was a
Regiment of Spanish foot, amongst whom he intruded so far, before they were
aware of it, that though they began to suspect him, yet they dared not give the
Alarm, but on the contrary saluted him civilly, and he returned them the like.

If Monsieur de Montal had found all the Spaniards and Hollanders of the same
obliging and civil temper, he would certainly have ever after commended their
good breeding, and found no use for the swords which he and all his party
carried ready drawn under their cloakes. But that would not be, for as he came
near a Glass-house where a great many were quartered, as well as in all the
outhouses thereabouts, some body having spied their naked swords, cried to
Arms, saying they were Enemies, and thereupon they shot at them from every
part, because they still marched on, not minding what was don; but by this time
the Alarm was every where spread, and it was time for our men to think of
defending themselves, which they did so much the more easily because the
Enemies Horse-guard, which consisted of 150 Maistres, and were posted between
the Town and Camp had newly unbridled their horses, so that not above 70 or 80
were found ready, who came upon us and were most of them killed, amongst whom
was he that lead them called Floris Major, who was in great repute amongst
them. 13 or 14 of our party were either killed or taken, whom we staid not to
relieve, least by so doing we should have lost the favorable opportunity of
getting into Charleroy, for if we had obstinatly staid to disengage them, it
may be the whole Army had fallen upon us. We therefore presently gained the
Town, in number 100 horse, besides the Officers, and got into it on Brussels
side, where at our coming M. de Montal found every one doing their duty, and
very watchful against any thing the Enemy should attempt.

The Place was close beset by the Enemy, who lay within Carrabine shot of it,
yet without attemting any thing upon the outworks: The truth is M. de
Franclieu, the Kings Lieutenant in that Place, who commanded in chief during
the Governors absence, had done every thing that was possible, and applied all
imaginable diligence, to put all things in the best posture that could be, in
case they should be attaqu'd. Monsieur Desbonnais, a Brigadier of foot, who by
good chance had staid there, did likewise much contribute to it, as did the
Sieur Terrade, an Engineer, who took on him the care of the works: so that
every body strove who should show most zeal for his Majesty's and their
Country's service, there being no body who deserved not much commendation on
this occasion.

As soon as Monsieur de Montal was arrived he took care that all things should
be ordered to the best advantage, and finding that the party of horse which he
had brought with him, might be very serviceable to him against the Enemy, and
likewise very troublesome to the Place if their Forage began to fail, he sent
out 50 of them to defend 150 Musketeers, commanded by the Sieur Desbonnais,
whilst they should get together all the Forage they could find all along the
Sambre, in the most remote houses, this was 3 hours doing, and had been sooner
performed had not the Enemy strove to oppose it, and so hindered our men from
returning so soon as otherwise they might. And yet we lost nothing by the
bargain, for our men beat the Enemy on this occasion from a Post which they
kept with a considerable guard of horse and foot, and killed many of them, we
loosing but 2 Soldiers in all the Action.

Whilst all this went on so gloriously, every body was severaly employed in the
Town, M. de Montal betook himself to discover the designs of the Enemy, and
having observed a Battery which they were raising upon a rising ground that lay
before the two little ponds, where the works chanced no to be coated, nor quite
finished; he judg'^ they would make their chief attaque on that side, which
made him particularly provid for the security of that quarter, that h^ might
defend it to the last. Now Monsieur de Franclieu, having before foreseen how
the business would go, had drawn a traverse acrosse the whole length, which
though it was not yet quite perfected, yet was forward enough, to be capable of
sheltering those Soldiers, which M. de Montal immediately commanded to be
placed there, together with some horse which were ordered to take up their
station in the ditch, which was not fenced with Pallisados, that they might
have the freer passage in and out. The Sieurs de Franclieu and Desbonnais
placed themselves where they thought they might do the best service in their
own persons.

But the Enemy, who by this time discovered from their Camp, which lay very
near, that they should not easily carry the Place, began to flinch, and abate
much of their fury; so that the night following, instead of assaulting the
Town, as they ought to have done, they discontinued their Battery, so that on
the 19 in ^ he morning Monsieur de Montal observing this, resolved to send out
all his Horse, with orders to sally out upon the high ground that lay toward
Brussels, and to line the Counterscarpe, and outworks with all his Musketeers,
that so they might get some prisoners. This succeeded according to his wish,
and indeed all was ordered with admirable courage and conduct. Twenty Horse
were first sent out, who falling in with the Enemies outguard, enticed out
their main Guard consisting of 150 Horse, commanded by the Baron of S. John,
with three Colors; but Monsieur de S. Cla, who was ready with all the rest of
the Horse upon the first onset to follow and second them, came just in time to
fall on those who came in a greater number to relieve the Enemy; he utterly
routed them, killing many, among which was the Sieur de S. Jean, who received
two mortal wounds: there was a Lieutenant, and some others taken prisoners, and
carried into the Town, whilst the rest of our men retreated leasurely toward
the Counterscarp, on purpose to draw on the Enemies that way who pursued but
faintly, but were set forwards by the Prince of Vaudemont, and the Count of
Louvignies, who hearing the Alarm which had by this time been spread over their
whole Camp, were come to their relief, with many others of the most
considerable persons in their Army.

They came near enough to receive a salute of small shot from a small party of
our foot, which hurt many of them, and a discharge from our Canon, which played
so well that many of them were cut off by it, and among others 3 Cornets, one
of which belonged to the Prince of Oranges Guards; the Prince of Vaudemont lost
his horse and his heel, which had like to cost him his life; and they were all
so roughly handled, that they afterward kept at a greater distance, and not
dared to make any approach, though we did all we could to invite them to it,
but on the contrary they placed a party of foot behind their Horseguard, to
second them, in case we should sally out again.

All this while our indefatigable King, whom neither the time of the year, nor
the ill weather, nor any other difficulty could ever fright, being accustomed
to expose himself to as many dangers as if he were a private person, resolved
to go himself to provide for the defense of the Place, and the Queen being
sensible how impatient she should be of his absence, if she could not
constantly hear from him, resolved to go as far as Compiegne, that she might be
nearer him; so their Majesty's the same day left Versailles, and went to S.
Germain in Lay.

The 20 was spent at the same place in giving order for their Majesty's
progress. The Enemy before Charleroy, whether it were because they began to be
sensible that they should loose their labor. if they staid any longer, or that
they apprehended some design against them from Monsieur Louvois, who was at
Athe, giving orders for every thing that might any way inconvenience them, or
from the Marshal d'Humieres, who was there likewise, and had by this time
gathered together a body of 15000 or 16000 men, or that they had intelligence
of the Duke de Duras his marching with all speed toward them; whatever it was
I cannot determine, but they began to prepare for a retreat, and without
offering to stir a foot forward, whatever sallies we made upon them, were
content to stand on their own defense.

All this while Monsieur de Montal not knowing of their design, and
understanding they had ready great numbers of Faggots and wool packs, and 2000
Barrels, besides all other necessary's for making an assault, kept all night on
the Guard, and lined the Counter scarps as thick as he could, that they might
be well defended.

The 21 their Majesty's continuing in their first design, the King for
Charleroy, and the Queen for Compeigne, left St. Germain in Lay, and went and
lay at the Louvre in Paris. Monsieur de Montal, who had all the night been upon
the Watch, expecting that the Enemy should attaque his Outworks, or open their
Trenches, was frustrated in his expectation; for betimes in the morning, Count
Marsin sent away all his Wool-packs, Baskets, and Sacks to put Earth in,
together with twenty pieces of Canon, and two Morter-pieces, to be carried back
to Namur.

The 22. their Majesty's went and lay at Verberye, which is a great Village
almost in the mid way between Senles and Compeigne. At last the Enemies raised
their Siege, and about daybreak all their Troops, both Dutch and Spanish,
discamp'd and marched off; the Hollanders going by the ways of
Marchienes-au-pont, and Fontaine-l'Evesque toward Binche, which they attaqu'd
as they came from the Siege of Charleroy; and the Spaniards toward..... where
the Prince of Orange, Count Marsin, and some other Generals met, and afterward
marched toward Rennel, Viennotte, and other places, and then departed every
one to their several Quarters: and among the rest, Fifteen hundred Foot, and
some Horse, which had been drawn out of Maestricht, returned thither.

The 23. Their Majesty's arrived at Compiegne, which the King intended to leave
and pass on further, according as he should hear from the Courriers; but those
who arrived that night, bringing news of the Enemies retreat, made him change
his mind; but being likewise told of the Hollanders sitting down before Binche,
he resolved to stay there till he could further see into their designs.

The 24, 25, and 26, their Majesty's rested at Compiegne, and talked not of
stirring thence, because of the return of the Dutch Forces to Binche; their
Majesty's were not willing to go back thence, till the Dutch were retired from
before that place, which at last they did, after having beat down the Gates of
it as a mark of their fury.

The 27, whilst the Hollanders venter'd their last stake before Binche, the
Duke of Luxembourg left Vtreeht, taking with him Two thousand Horse, and all
the Foot he could make, and went to Woerden, where he would not stay, but made
his Men march on all night, intending to set upon Bodengrave, which was the
Hollanders refuge, to which they used to retire, when ever they had ill
success, as to an assured place of safety. So that the next day, in spite of
the Thaw, the Snow, the Bogs, and Canales, in which he many times had like to
have been lost with his whole Army, he came in good time to a Village called
Wells, where the Enemy was quartered, and had cast up two Intrenchments, which
he easily forced, with the loss of one only Soldier, who was killed by one of
five or six shots, which they made before they betook themselves to their
heels. From thence marching along a Dike, which made his march much easier then
it had been hitherto, he met with six hundred more at a Village called
Swammerdam, where they were entrenched in all the Houses, from the windows of
which they were very liberal of their shot, and port-holes for Canon, which
were many. He attaqued them at two several places, at one of which the Count de
Saulx, chief Brigadier of the Army, commanded in chief; and at the other, the
Marquis de Moussy. And because there were two Bridges to pass, which were
guarded by the Enemy, the Soldiers of their own accord, without being
commanded, leaped into the Water, and waded through it to beat them down,
showing in such a voluntary action much of their courage and zeal; and so much
the more, in that the Enemy made a very resolute opposition to their Designs,
insomuch that they had like to be worsted, had they not been seconded by a
party that was drawn out to that purpose, and advanced to skirmish the Enemy,
which they performed so well, that they forced them to retire into the Houses
of the Village to their Companions, where the Count de Saulx got almost as soon
as they; and notwithstanding all their Shot, forced the Doors of all those
Houses, and made himself master of them. The Duke of Luxembourg immediately
commanded them all to be fired, not sparing so much as that of the Prince of
Orange, in which many Men, Goods and Cattle were burned, to be revenged of him
for assaulting the Castle of Marimont, one of the Kings Houses of Pleasure,
which had been yielded him at the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle.

After so many Toils, Perils, and so much Execution done, one would have
thought it would have been but reasonable to give the Soldiery a little rest;
and truly had they desired it, they could not in reason have been denied it.
But it is to be admired, that the Soldiers marched on of their own accord, till
they came to Bodengrave, where they found not that resistance which they
expected, for the Count Koningsmark had quitted it with all his Troops.

At Compeigne their Majesty's being certified of the Prince of Orange's
retreat, resolved to return to St. Germains.

The 29. Orders were given at Compeigne for their Majesty's departure, and
preparations made to set forward on the 31.

The Duke of Luxembourg, who staid awhile at Bodengrave, to give his brave
Soldiers a little rest and refreshment, found himself necessitated to march on
yet further: for being informed that some of those whom he had routed the day
before, had not dared to stay at Niverburg, and by their fright so infected all
those that kept the Garrison (which was most advant giously fortifyed) that
they had all forsaken it; he thought himself obliged to march thither: where at
his coming he found no living soul, only 21 pieces of Canon, 8 of Iron, and 13
of Brass fell into his hands, which he sent to Bodengrave, to be secured by his
Foot, which were left there, the Horse and Dragoons having been all left at
Woerden.

After this, the Prince of Orange took his way homewards, having had as ill
success in Flanders and the Country of Liege, as in Holland. And because
Monsieur de Duras lay between Tongres and Charleroy, and had possessed all the
ways by which the Prince was to return, he was forced to go a great way about,
to avoid meering any of the French Forces, which he dreaded above all things.

The 31. their Majesty's left Compiegne about 9 in the Morning, and came that
night to Senlis, from whence they went on the first of January, 1673. after the
Queen had been at her Devotions, and lay that night at the Louvre in Paris,
from whence they went to St. Germain en Lay.

FINIS.

