Abraham's Death, THE MANNER, TIME, and CONSEQUENT of it. Opened and Applied IN
A FUNERAL SERMON, Preached upon the Death Of the Reverend Mr. THOMAS CASE,
Minister of the Gospel.

June 14th, 1682. With a Narrative of his LIFE and DEATH.

By THOMAS JACOMB, D. D.

LONDON; Printed for Brabrazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1682.

To Mrs. Anne Case, Wife to the Reverend Mr. THOMAS CASE, Minister of the
Gospel, lately deceased.
Much Honored Friend,
IT was the reiterated Request of your Dear Husband, (and my worthy Friend),
that I would perform the last Office of Respect to him in the preaching of his
Funeral Sermon, whenever it should please God to take him hence. And this
Request of him (whilst living), your self was pleased to back after his Death.

I have again and again publicly testified my Averseness from engaging in
Services of this Nature; and (possibly) as to engaging in this, there were some
special Reasons and Considerations to heighten my Averseness. Yet, considering
how I was pressed to it, by the Desires both of the Dead and of the Living; I
thought, I should be disingenuous and defective in the Obligations of
Friendship, if I did not comply with them; which therefore accordingly I did.

Having discharged the Preaching Part, you further desired me to publish what I
had preached. To gratify you in that, I was the more inclinable, because I had
left things in the Sermon so imperfect and unfinished; (for I had not time to
go through a considerable part of what I had to say, both upon the Text, and
also upon the Occasion). The Truth is, while I graspt at too much, I did
nothing (to purpose); and therefore was willing to do what you desired, that I
might have an Opportunity of filling up what then was wanting.

I am very sensible what a Captious and Litigious Age we live in, how Divisions
and Animosities do abound amongst us, how hard a matter it is for One to
commend One of his Party, (especially if he be of any considerable Eminency
therein); but some or other of a differing Party will be finding fault, and
picking out something to be the matter and ground of severe Censures. If this
shall be my lot, I must submit; but I have done whatever I could to prevent it*
For I have so commended the Person discoursed of, as not in the least to
reflect upon any others of a different Persuasion. And as to the commanding of
him too, I have not done is (...); but all along, (to the best of my Knowledge
(...) ha^^ kept with in the strict Bounds of Truth and Justice. Yea, to avoid
Partiality and Flattery (the too common Attendants of Funeral Sermons), I have,
(with all due Modesty), taken notice of his Infirmities as well as of his
Excellencies. If all this will not (...), I hope I shall bear them with
Patience, (if not with Contempt).

How many Funeral Sermons did your dear Husband live to preach for others! here
is now one preached for himself; and God knows how soon some may do that for
me, which I have now done for him. We live in a fluid State, and have no
Abiding hare. No sooner had I dispatched what I had to do upon the Death of
this Friend, but God threatens me with the Death of Another; (a most Eminent
Person of another Profession): Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity!

The Lord bless you and yours; and grant you all to reap the Benefit of those
many, many fervent Prayers, which he (who is gone) sent up to the Throne of
Grace daily for you. All that I shall further say it, but to assure you, that
now you are deprived of the Prayers of the Dead; you shall ever have the hearty
Prayers of him, who whilst he lives, shall be ready upon all occasions to show
himself,

Your Servant and Friend in Christ, Tho. Jacomb.
July 21, 1682.
Abraham's Death.
GENESIS 25.8. Then Abraham gave up the Ghost, and died in a good old Age, an old
Man, and full of Years, and was gathered to his People.


THE Words, give us a brief Historical Account of the Death of the Patriarch
Abraham. A large Description we have, of his Genealogy, Birth, and Life (from
the close of the 11th Chapter to the beginning of this 25th Chapter): But as to
his Age, Death, and Burial, the History of them is contracted within the short
Bounds of three Verses here; (the 7th, 8th and 9th Verses.)

It Is the Death only of Abraham that I shall discourse of. Concerning which,
here is as much said in a little as could well be expected, or desired, upon
such an Argument.

The Occasion of our present assembling is, That we may pay our last Respects
to the Reverend and Worthy Mr. Thomas Case, Minister of the Gospel, (lately
deceased) With whom the Text does so well suit, as that, mutato Nomine, we may
read it thus; Then CASE gave up the Ghost, and died in a good old Age, an old
Man, and full of Years, and was gathered to his People.

In the managing of the Work in hand, I will first speak to the Instance here
mentioned, and to the Matter asserted of him; and then bring that down to our
precious Friend, (upon whose account we are come together this Day).

As to the first, observe; 1. The Person spoken of, [ABRAHAM.] 2. What is
spoken of him here; [he Died.] 3. The Amplifications about his Death. 1. From
the Manner of it; [He gave up the Ghost.] 2. From the Time of it; [In a good
old Age, an Old Man, and full of Years.] 3. From the Consequent of it; [And was
gathered to his People.]



It Is the Third Head that I design to stay upon; the Two First I Will put
together, and briefly dismiss.

[ Then ABRAHAM -- Died.]

This Abraham was a great Man, a great Saint: who, in the whole Catalogue of
Saints bears a greater Name than He? He was a Prophet, Genesis 20.7. the Friend of
God, Jam. 2.23. The Father of the Faithful, Romans 4.16. One who was, and for
ever will be, renowned for those two unparalleled Acts of Obedience and Love
to God; (his forsaking of his own Country, and his readiness to offer up his
dear and only Son.) Well! what became of this eminent Person? Surely, his
extraordinary Grace and Holiness, that high Rank of Faith and Obedience wherein
he stood, exempted him from that Death which we poor Striplings are exposed
unto! No, 'twas not so, he Died, went the way of all Flesh, under-went the
Stroke of Death just as we do.

Saints themselves, the highest and choicest of them; Observe.
the Servants of God, they who are most eminently useful and faithful; even
They are subject to Dying as well as others.

'Twould be tedious, and unnecessary (in so plain a Case) to heap up parallel
Instances: That great Servant of God, Moses, he died; that great Prophet
Samuel, Deuteronomy. 34.5. 1 Samuel 25.1. Zech. 1.5.
he died; all the Prophets of the Old Testament, all the Apostles of the New,
all died; (as we have it in Scripture-Record).

All the Exemption from Death that the Best can claim or hope for, is, to be
exempted from Eternal, but not from Natural Death. Grace does free Believers
from the former; ( Whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die; Joh.
11.26. -- Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a Man keep my Sayings, he shall
never see Death. Joh. 8.51. -- Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first Resurrection; on such the Second Death has no Power --. Rev. 20.6.) but
it does not free from the latter. It may indeed, and does, as to this Death,
exempt from the Curse and Sting of it; ( O Death, 1 Cor. 15.55.
where is thy Sting?) but not from the Stroke of it; not from the thing it self
Naturally considered, (as it consists in the dissolving of the Union 'twixt
Soul and Body). Christ has unstung Death for every Believer; the Serpent now
may hiss, but it cannot hurt; yet it may sting so far, as to put a Period to
the present Life.

Do Abraham's die? must they die? Oh happy Necessity! blessed be God for it!
This is grounded, not only upon their Natural Frame and Constitution; (as they
are Flesh and Blood as well as others, and made of the same brittle Materials):
Nor only upon their having Sin as well as others; (and where that is, Death
must follow upon it): Nor only, upon that Universal Statute, [It is appointed
unto Men once to die]; Heb. 9.27. -- But also, upon the special Love and Grace
of God to his People. He has prepared an Heaven for them, they are designed to
a future State of Blessedness, shall be rewarded above for their Service below.
Now, that they may be put into the actual Possession of all this, they must
die. Death, to the Saints, is but their Transition into their everlasting
Blessedness; and so, it is not their Misery, but their Felicity, that they die.
This, to the Wicked, is in Judgment; but to the Godly, in Mercy: The former
die, because God will glorify his Punitive Justice upon them in another World;
but the Other die, because God will glorify his free Grace and Mercy upon them
in another World. Death shall come to an Abraham, but it comes to him as a
Friend, not as an Enemy. Whilst he is paying the indispensible Tribute due to
Nature, God is carrying on the glorious Designs of his Grace toward him. (But
this I pass over).

I proceed to the threefold Amplification, or to the three Specialties
observable in the Death of Abraham. The first of which, points to the Order,
and to the Manner of his Death; in this Branch.

Then Abraham [gave up the Ghost, and died.]

In the Syriac Version, it is, infirmatus est, he was debilitated and weakened,
so he died. In the Septuagint; (...), he fainted, and so he died: (thus also
the Chaldee Paraphrast, the Vulgar, Oleaster, and diverse others) Male in 70
Interpretibus additum est, [ and deficiens Abraham mortuus est]; quia non
convenit Abrahae deficere and imminui Q^ast. Heb. in Genesis
Hierome objects against this Rendering the Words, as if it did reflect upon
such a Person as Abraham to faint: But what Disparagement could it be to him,
at such an Age, to lie under bodily Fainting? so long as he was not weak in
Faith, -- but strong in Faith, giving Glory to God, (Romans 4.19, 20.) mere
Natural Weakness could not at all reflect upon him, or be unbecoming to him.

The Samaritan Version renders it by Expiravit; he expired, breathed out his
last Breath, or his Soul and Spirit; his Breath and Soul went out of him, so he
died. (This Reddition is most generally followed by Expositors).

The [giving up of the Ghost], is the usual Expression to set forth Death by;
so its used as to Isaac, Genesis 35.29. -- as to Jacob, Genesis 49.33. as to our
Savior, Joh. 19.30. (and passim).

We'll consider it, as it is expressive not only of Abraham's simple Dying, but
also of some Adjuncts and Circumstances about his dying: It notes,

1. The Order of his Dying; and what was the Antecedent to it. Abraham first
gave up the Ghost, then he died. First the Soul departs, and then we die; and
when that is once gone out of the Body, Death immediately follows. That being
the living, vital, quickening Principle in Man; when that is once separated from
the Body, this must necessarily be turned into a dead Carcass, a dead lump of
Clay. So long as that stays with us, we live; but when it takes its Flight from
us into its higher Mansion, forthwith we die. The dissolving of the Union
'twixt Soul and Body, as it necessarily antecedes Death; so Death necessarily
succeeds upon it. This is the Order of Nature, (as to what goes before and what
follows after), in that which I am speaking of.

By the way, let such who believe, (and who thereupon are united unto Christ),
rejoice in this spiritual and mystical Union: inasmuch, as it does secure to
them the Perpetuity of their Spiritual Life. The Natural Union of the two
Constitutive Parts of Man, is dissoluble; and so, the Natural Life that results
from it, may cease: But the Spiritual Union between Christ and the Believer,
being indissoluble, consequently, the Spiritual Life resulting from it, is and
shall be Abiding and Everlasting. The Soul may leave the Body, therefore that
may die; but Christ and the Animating Spirit will never leave the Soul,
therefore that shall never die. How may Believers comfort themselves from this!

2. It holds forth, the Manner of Abraham's Death.

1. As to the Speediness and Easiness of it. 2. As to his ready and willing
Submission to it.
1. His Death was quick and easy. He was not long in Dying, did not stand out
any long Siege, Death did but summon him, and he presently surrendered up
himself; he breathed out his last Breath, and the Work was done. Neither did he
grapple with those sharp Pains, those grievous Agonies and Conflicts, which
many feel in a dying-hour; no, he just expired, just gave up the Ghost, and
that was all. The Hebrew Word, used in the Text, is (...); which the Dictio,
expiravit, egressionem Spiritus e Corpote significat, quae sit subito sine
Dolor and Mora Aben-Ezra. Putant Rabbini (...), esse mortem, quae Homini
accidit absque ullo praevio morbo and dolote Munster: Expirando mortuus est,
mortis quadam facilitate usus, quam (...), Vatab. Verbum (...), apud Hebiaeos
dicitur de Morte sine Dolor, Grot. (so Oleaster, and quamplurimi alii.)
Calvine rejects this Exposition.
Rabbinical Doctors, (and many Interpreters after them), make to import a
quick, speedy, and easy Death.

But others observe, Vid, Fagium in Loc.
that we can lay no great Stress upon the Word, (as importing, and easy Death
to belong to good Men; at least, not so as to be appropriated and limited to
them): because, elsewhere, we find it applied to wicked Men in their Dying. As
it is, to those that perished in the General Deluge, Genesis 7.21. to Ishmael
himself, (in this Genesis 25.17.)

And for the Thing it self, Abraham might have this easy Death; but we cannot
from him conclude that all Saints, and they only, shall have it. This is wholly
at God's dispose, who orders every Man's Death to be easy or painful as he
pleases. Even the Godly sometimes have a rough Passage to Heaven, while the
wicked have a calm Passage to Hell. Do we not see this verified in daily
Experience? the Good, dying with sad Groans, sharp Conflicts, acute Pains; and
the Bad, dying like Lambs, having a very serene and placid Death? As to this,
all things fall alike to all; and there 's no Knowledge of the Love or Hatred of
God, by it.

All that I can say upon it is this;

An easy Death is a great Mercy. Observe.


There can hardly be a parting of the two old Companions, such a Violence
offered to Nature, but there will be some Pains and Difficulties attending
this; but the less there is of These, the more there is of Mercy. This (...),
Suiton, in V. ^ng.
was passionately desired by the Emperor Augustus for Himself and all his
Friends. And indeed, it is a Blessing much to be desired! provided, that this
be done with due Submission to the Will of God. We must not be our own Chusers,
as to the Circumstances either of Life or Death; but in both entirely refer our
selves to the Sovereign Pleasure of God. And Christian, comfort thy self in
this, whatever thy Pains may be in Dying, thou art secured from those worser
After-Pains that will succeed these to the ungodly and unbelieving. That Death
which is so painful to thee, for a few Minutes, Hours, or Days, when it has
done its Work, will put an end to all thy Pains, and to whatever here is
afflictive to thee.

2. It imports, Abraham's readiness and willingness to die. He [gave up the
Ghost], when God called for his Soul, he freely gave it up; there was in him no
striving, struggling, or reluctance; nothing but a quiet and willing Resignation
of himself to die. 'Twould have been strange had it been otherwise! He that was
willing, at God's Command, Genesis 12.1.
To go out of his own Country; from his Kindred and Father's House, to a Land
that God would show him; Heb. 11.8.
though he knew not whither he went; Acts 7.5.
had no Inheritance in the Place, no not so much as to set his Foot upon: I
say, it would have been strange, that he, who so readily complied with this
Command of God, (when as to his Earthly Interest things were no better
Circumstantiated); should have been backward to have complied, with God's Will
as to his removal from Earth, when he knew, upon this, he should be taken up
into Heaven. This was in his Eye in his removal from his Country here; [for he
looked for a City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God]; Heb.
11.10. -- But surely, he might have, and had, a more immediate and proximate
view of the Heavenly Inheritance, in his Departure by Death, which would put
him into the present Possession of it. No wonder therefore he should be thus
willing to die!

A good Pattern for our Imitation!

Saints should be willing to die. Observe.


Thus it was with Abraham himself, and thus it should be with his Seed also. We
must with the greatest Readiness give up the Ghost whenever God demands it. Not
die, out of Force or Necessity, (because we cannot help it), but out of Choice,
and ready Resignation of Life to God's Will. Sapientis est exire, non ejici;
Sen. Ep. 30.
a wise Man, is not forced out of the World, but he spontaneously goes out of
it.! The wicked, Oh how averse are they from Dying! (and can we blame them for
it)? Their Souls are pulled out of their Bodies, whether they will or no; they
do not give them up, but they are taken from them; Thou Fool, this night, etc.
Prove. 14.32. [The wicked in driven away in his Wickedness]; (it is an Allusion
to things, that are hurried away by some tempestuous Winds, quite contrary to
their own Natural Inclinations): [but the Righteous has hope in his Death]; and
upon this Hope he dies willingly.

Certainly they who duly consider the Miseries of the present Life, the true
Nature of Death, the Gain and Advantages of it to the Upright, the Quam
praeposterum est, quamque perversum, ut cum Dei Volun atem fieri postulemus
quando evocat nos and accersit de hoc Mundo Deus, non statim Voluntaris ejus
imperio pareamus. Cyprian de Mortal. Sermon. 6.
Sovereignty of God over Men, as to Life and Death; cannot but be ready and
willing to die. Ripe Fruit, how easily does it fall into the hands of him that
gathers it? Oh such who are fit to die, ripe for Heaven, how readly should they
fall into God's Hands when by Death he comes to gather them!

The Truth is, it is not enough for such barely to be willing to die, but this
they should passionately, (yet not impatiently), desire and pant after. Having
a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better; (...). Phil.
1.23.
In this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our House which
is from Heaven. 2 Cor. 5.2, 4.
-- For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened.

So much for the First Amplification in the words, about Abraham's Death. The
Second, is taken from the Time of it:

Then Abraham gave up the Ghost, and died [in a good old Age, an old Man, and
full of Years.]

In a good old Age] (...), (Sym.); in an hoary Age; (like that of Samuel, I am
old and gray headed; 1 Samuel 12.2.)

This, God had promised before to Abraham; [Thou shall go to thy Fathers in
Peace, thou shall be buried in a good old Age] Genesis 15.25; and here it was made
good to him. The same is said of David, 1 Chronicles. 29.28. of Gideon, Judge. 8.32.

It may here be queried, Object.
How is Abraham said to die in a good old Age? when, if we compare his Age with
those who lived before him, it comes much short of theirs? What Is an 175 Years
to those several hundreds of Years, that the Fathers before the Flood arrived
at? (according to what is recorded of them, Genesis 5.) And in the Computation of
the Lives of the Fathers after the Flood, ( Genesis 11.) we find all of them, (one
excepted, viz. Nachor, who lived but 148 Years) to be older than Abraham was?

Some answer, He is said to die in a good old Age, Answ.
an old Man, Senex dicitur, non spatio dierum and Temporum, (cum junior obierit
omnibus Avis suis); sed quia sensu, Fide, Sanctimonia Vitae, profecerat in
immensum.
not as to the measure of his Life by Days or Years; but in regard of the great
Progress he had made in Faith and Holiness. A more satisfactory Answer is this;
That Abraham's Age, absolutely considered, (especially at that Time wherein he
lived, when God shortened the Lives of Men very much), was a good old Age;
although it was not so, if taken comparatively with those that lived before
him: And, in a comparative Notion too, it was so, Auctor Cat. in Lipem
if we compare it with the Age of them who did succeed him: It Is true, Isaac
lived somewhat longer than he; (for his days were an 180 Years, Genesis 35.28.);
But as to the rest of his Issue, and as to the Body of succeeding Mankind, few
(if any) ever did attain to his Age. The Days of our Years are threescore Years
and ten; Psalm. 90.10; (and not one of a thousand now live to this); Abraham
much exceeded this Proportion; and so it may be well affirmed of him that he
died in a good old Age, an old Man, full of Years.

From this Head, I Will raise three Observations.

1. That to live to, and to die in, a good old Age, Observe. 1.
is a great Blessing.

It may be said to be [a good old Age] either,

Upon a Natural and Physical, or a Moral and Spiritual.
Account.

According to the first Consideration, it is either a great and long Age, or a
strong and healthful Age; either sera, or sana Senectus.

1. A great and long Age: Namely, when a Man's Days and Years are many, when
the Number of them rises very high, when he has full measure of them, (measure
pressed down and running over). Some divide Old Age into three Periods;
(according to which, they distinguish it into First, Second and Last): the
First, they make to commence from the 60th Year of Man; the Second, from his
70th; and the Last from his 80th; (...); (V. Drus^an loc.) Now, when a Man's
Life is prolonged not only to the First and Second, but also to the Third of
these Stages; surely his is a good old Age.

Now this is a great Blessing: So the Scripture represents a long Life, and a
late Death. God himself makes use of it as a Motive to Obedience; (the Apostle
turns it into a Promise, Ephesians. 6.2.) Honor thy? Father, etc. that thy days may
be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee; Exodus 20.12. Its
Promised, -- Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full Age, like as a Shock of
Corn comes in in his Season; Job 5.26. -- The number of thy days, I will
fulfill; Exodus 23.26. -- You see this good old Age is promised as a Mercy: The
opposite to it, is threatened as a Punishment: So in the Case of Eli, and his
Posterity, 1 Samuel 2.31. Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine Arm,
and the Arm of thy Father's House, that there shall not be an old Man in thine
House. Psalm. 55.23. -- Bloody and deceitful Men shall not live out half their
days: Job 15.32, 33. It shall be accomplished before his time, and his Branch
shall not be green. He shall shake off his unripe Grape as the Vine, and cast
off his Flower as the Olive. David therefore deprecates this, O my God, take me
not away in the midst of my days; Psalm. 102.24. -- It Is observable when God
would set forth the glorious State of the Church, in the latter days, he does
it by this Allusion; Isa. 65.20. There shall be no more thence an infant of
days, nor an old Man that has not filled his days: for the Child shall die an
hundred Years old, but the Sinner being an hundred Years old, shall be accursed.

To prove it to be a Mercy, it appears to be so, 1. In regard of Others. 2.
With respect to the Aged themselves.


1. In regard of Others: It Is a great Mercy, to be serviceable and instrumental
in the promoting of the Good of Others; it is that which we are all born for,
have all our Graces and Gifts for; that which all stand obliged unto by many
Bonds; that which is the highest Expression of true Love and Charity; that
which will much conduce to the securing and heightning of our own Future
Happiness. This Life now being the only time for this Service, must it not be a
great Mercy, if God will lengthen it out, and spare a Person to a good old Age?
In this respect (and upon this account) the Life of Christians here, is
preferable before the glorified Life of the Saints in Heaven; inasmuch, as here
they may be serviceable to others; which there they cannot be. Oh the longer
thy Life is continued, the more Good thou may do! the more thou may bring
in to God, the more thou may instruct, exhort, comfort, (and the like); and
is not this Mercy? He that goes not to bed till nine or ten at night, may
certainly do more Work, than one who enters upon his Repose early in the
Morning, or at Midday.

And besides this; Old Age does both qualify Persons for Service, and also make
their Service most successful. It Is to be presumed, that the Aged have a
greater Stock of Men's and Ratio and Consilium in Senibus est -- Temeritas est
slorentis Aetatis, Prudentia Senectutis. Tull. de Sen.
Wisdom, Experience, than the Younger; and so are more able to advise,
convince, reprove, and every way to further the Good of others. And then, upon
that Reverence and Veneration, which all (but profligate Persons) have for
these, what they say, and do, comes with great Apex Senectutis, Authoritas.
Tull. de Sen.
Authority. That Admonition, Counsel and Reproof, which is slighted as it comes
from the Young, is received with awe when it comes from the Aged. An eminent
Mr. Gattaker, Abraham's Decease, ^. 282.
Divine, (treating of this Subject) cites this Speech of one. A few gray Hairs
may be of more worth than many Locks; and a few gray Beards do more than many
green Heads. Old Age, (where it is not decrepit and superannuated), is not the
unuseful and unserviceable part of Man's Life (as to others); but quite the
contrary.

2. With respect to the Aged themselves. The longer they are continued here,
the more time they have to set their House in order; to prepare for their
everlasting State; Isa. 38.1. Phil. 2.12. 1 Timothy 6.19.
to work out their Salvation; to lay a good Foundation for Eternal Life; to get
clear Evidences for Heaven. The longer the Fruit hangs upon the Tree, the riper
it grows; 'twould be sad, if they who live long, should not be full ripe for
Glory when they die. Upon this twofold Consideration, its a great Blessing to
live to a good old Age.

2. Let Us consider it, as it speaks a strong and healthful old Age. Abraham
dyed in a i. e. Prospeta valetudine, haouit faci^em Senectam. P Martyr. Vid.
Oleast. Piscat. Semectute bona, i. e. quae aliena a ^^dlis and incommodis
Senectutis. Vatabl.
good old Age; though he was old, yet he was hail, vegete, and vigorous; not
bowed down with those Infirmities that usually attend old Age. Some are Old
when Young, others Young when Old; their Senses, Parts, are as vivid and fresh
as ever. We have two famous Instances of this (...), in Holy Writ: That of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.7. And Moses was an hundred and twenty Years old when he died:
his Eye was not dim, nor his natural Force abated. And that of Caleb, Josh.
14.10, 11. And now behold, the Lord has kept me alive, and he said, these
forty and five Years, even since the Lord spoke this word unto Moses while the
Children of Israel wandered in the Wilderness: and now lo, I am this day
fourscore and five Years old. As yet I am as strong this day, as I was in the
day that Moses sent me: as my Strength was then, even so is my Strength now,
for War, both to go out, and to come in. Profane Val Max. l. 8. c. 13 Cie. de
Sen. Diusius says of himself, Col Senectus melior quam ipsa Juventus.
History abounds in variety of Examples of it; (but I Will make no Citation of
them).

Now that this is a great Blessing, needs no Proof. To be full of Years, and
yet free from the Diseases, Pains, Weaknesses, which are the common Retinue of
old Age; it admits not of the least Doubt but that this is an eminent Mercy.
Some bring the forecited Promise, Job 5.26. unto this; Mr. Caryl (...).
Thou shall come to thy Grave in a full Age, i. e. full of Strength and Health;
thine old Age shall not be a troublesome Age; thou shall not be weak and crazy,
distempered and sick, a Burden to thy Self and Friends; but shall die in a
lusty old Age: It Is promised us as a Mercy (you see), and it must be owned to
be so.

This for the Natural and Physical Notion of a good old Age! But then,

2. There is the Moral and Spiritual Notion of it. And so it may be said to be
good, either in respect of Grace, or of Peace and Comfort: when it is a
virtuous, religious pious old Age, or a peaceable and comfortable old Age (the
Soul having the Peace of God and Divine Joy in it); this is, truly, Tenen dum
est -- praecipuam partem bonae senectutis in bona consc^entia, animo sereno and
tranquillo consistere. Vnde soquitur, nonnisi in ver^s just^^ia cultores
competere quod Deus Abrahae promitit. Calv.
eminently, a good old Age; and that which is peculiar to Good Men.

In both respects, Abraham's old Age was good. First, as it succeeded an holy
and well-spent Life; and then, as it self was filled up with Discedens in
Cratia. Lyra.
Grace and Holiness; (for, according to the Promise, Psalm. 92.14. He brought
forth Fruit in his old Age.) And Secondly, Expirare and mori in Senectute bona,
est placide mori, and excessi^ d^lcissimo hanc vitam finire. River.
as in it, he enjoyed much inward Serenity of Mind, and Peace of Conscience.
This he had, this he died with; so he died in a good old Age.

If we state it thus, Does it not carry much Mercy in it? In a full Age, (when
Death is making its near Approaches); for any then to be able to reflect upon a
good and gracious Life; to appeal to God (as Hezekiah did), Isa. 38.3.
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth,
and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy Sight. Lord,
I have not lived a vain and wicked Life, thou know; I have not spent my best
Age in Folly and Vanity, all my days I have endeavored to live in thy Fear, it
has been my great Design all along to glorify thee in my Conversation, to do
Good to Men, to serve my Generation: And now I am old, yet still I keep my
Integrity, still I love thee, and fear to sin against thee; still (to the
utmost of my Strength) I am for Prayer, Meditation, hearing the Word, all
Religious Exercises: Oh good and blessed old Age! Is not the end of this Man,
Peace? Conscientia been acta vita, multorumque been factorum recordatio,
juc^^dissima est. Tull. de Sen.
does he not leave the World, and go off the Stage full of Comfort (as well as
full of Days)? Does he not now find the sweet of his Sincerity, (past and
present)? To die in such an old Age, is Mercy indeed!

Long Life and old Age, simply and abstractly considered, are not so great a
Blessing as to make a Person blessed; For the Sinner of an hundred Years old
shall be accursed; Isa. 65.20. Take them thus, they do but aggravate Men's
Guilt here, and Condemnation hereafter. Ah but when they are attended with
serious Piety and Goodness, then there is a great Blessedness in them, and a
greater Resulting from them. As the Wise Man states it, (as to the Honor of
old Age); An hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness; Prove. 16.31. So we must state it, (as to the thing in hand.)
Long Life, Old Age is a Mercy, if it be found in the way of Righteousness: if
not, what ever it may be in it self, as considered Absolutely, to the Person,
Eventually, it will have more of Judgment than of Mercy in it.

USE.
Let me a little apply this Point.

1. To the Aged. Have any here lived to this good old Age? You can number 70,
80, some (may be) more Years? you have had a long Lease of Life, and it is not
yet expired? Pray, look upon this as a great Blessing, and own it to be so. Let
it not be burdensome to you, be not querulous and impatient under it; but
thankful, blessing God that he has spared you so long. Old Age all desire, (all
would live long); and yet the most when they have it, [Senectut^m] ^t
adipiscantur, omnes optant; candem accufant adepti. Cic. de Sen.
ure discontented and disturbed at it: this is not ingenuous; let it not be so
therefore with you. You are apt to judge of it by the outward Inconveniences and
Hardships that attend it; (and these render it afflictive to you): Whereas you
should judge rather by this; Oh what a large space of Time have I had, for the
honoring of God, doing good to Men, and saving my own Soul! Oh when thousands
and thousands about me have been cut off, in the first blossomings of their
Age, or as soon as they were grown up to Maturity, (and so hurried into their
Everlasting Estate; I am yet spared to make further and better Preparation for
Eternity! I say, would you but judge by such Considerations as these, they would
prevent Impatience, and promote Thankfulness in you to God, for lengthening out
your Lives so long.

It was the Saying of one, (...); he whom God loves, Men and. in Plutarch.
dies when he is young: I cannot assent to this Assertion without some stating
and qualifying of it. It Is true, when God is bringing great Evils upon a
Family, or a Kingdom, then to be taken away young, (in order to being preserved
from such Evils), does carry the Love and Mercy of God in it; (as we see in the
Instance of Jeroboam's Son, 1 Kings 14.12, 13. and of good Josiah, 2 Kings
22.20.) But to make this Proposition general and universal, that we have no
ground for. He that promises long Life as a Mercy, must be looked upon as
loving the Persons to whom he vouchsafes it.

That which makes old Age to be so generally burdensome, and which causes
Inquietude of Mind in Persons under it; is, the muny Afflictive Evils that
accompany it. Within, there is a sad Decay in the several Faculties of the Soul;
(the Understanding darkened, the Reason clouded, the Memory blunted, the
Affections dead and flat). Without, there are various Infirmities in the Body;
the Eyes dim, the Ears deaf, the Feet lame, the Joints benumbed, the Hands
tremble, the Bones full of Aches, the whole Body a Mass of Diseases: what an
Accumulation of Evils is here! Hence old Age is commonly called, Aetas mala,
the evil Age: And Solomon speaks of it, as such; Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days come not, nor the Years
draw nigh, when thou shall say. I have no pleasure in them. (He first in
general calls it the evil Days, and then particularly, in the following Verses,
he most elegantly sets it forth, in the Decay of the several Parts of the Body).

O quam continuis, and quantis plena Senectus, Longa malis!

Juv. Multa senem circumveniunt incommoda.

Hor. Now, can any be patient under the Conflux of such Evils? much more, can
any be thankful to God, for extending their Lives to an Age which exposes them
to such Discomforts?

Answ. They may, and they ought to be so. You that feel all these, reflect upon
what is past. How many Years did you live in Health and Strength? how long was
it before it was thus bad with you? And should not the weighing of past Mercy,
quiet you under present Afflictions? When all the Day has been fair, can you
not bear a shower at the Evening? When your Way has been good in your whole
Journey, can you not submit to a little spot of bad Way, when you are just at
the end of your Journey? This calls for Patience and Thankfulness from you.

And besides, you are to consider the present Good, as well as the present
Evils, that attend your old Age. Ye are not yet wholly unserviceable; something
yet you can do, for the Good of others, and for the saving of your own Souls.
All these Calamities do but set you nearer to Heaven; every Wave drives your
nearer to the Shore; every Wind is but for the throwing down of the Earthly
Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1.
that you may ascend to that House, that Building of God which is eternal in
the Heavens. So that, upon a spiritual account, you have no reason to be
impatient, or to find fault with your old Age; but to carry it like that
Georgias Leontinus, in Val. Max. l. 8. c. 13.
Aged Person (that we read of), who being an 107 Years old, and being asked,
Why he would be willing to live so long? answered, Quia nihil habeo propter
quod Senectutem meam accusem; I undergo nothing for which I have cause to blame
my old Age. Do but you consider the whole matter, and you will have more reason
to say the same.

Tull. de Sen.
The Orator objects Four Evils in old Age:

1. It disables for Business and Work. 2. It renders the Body infirm and
sickly. 3. It deprives of all Pleasures. 4. It brings near to Death.
The Vanity and Weakness of all these Imputations upon old Age, he particularly
makes out with great clearness and strength of Reason.

When Heathens have such sound Notions of this, shall we Christians entertain
false Notions of it? Oh where God has blessed any of you with it, do not murmur
at it, and give way to Discontent, but heartily bless him for it.

2. Is it a good old Age, not only for the length of it, but also for the
Strength and Healthfulness of it? where it is so, surely there must be great
Thankfulness. To live so long, and yet to be strong and vigorous? free from
those Infirmities of Age that have been instanced in? Nature yet keeps up its
youthful Vigor? there is nothing in the Senses, Organs, Limbs, Faculties of the
Mind, to show that old Age is upon Persons: nothing but only the hoary Head? Oh
what Mercy is this! Whether we consider, the Paucity of them that have it; or
the Advantage resulting from it for Service. This is very good, not only
because it is delightful and comfortable to him* who has it; but because it
renders him serviceable to God and Man! Alas! the old, decrepit, decayed Man,
here lives, and that is all; his time of Service is over, (in a great measure);
he is laid by like the Ship that is worn out, unfit to go to Sea any more. Ah!
but he that is old, and yet hail and lusty, that retains his former Vivacity
(of Body and Soul); he is as fit for Service as ever, as useful in his Station
as ever; a wonderful Mercy! What would some zealous Christians give for it! If
you have it, I beseech you prize it, improve it, and be very thankful for it.

3. But thirdly, Is it a good old Age in the moral Notion of it? Here is the
highest Obligation to Praise and Thankfulness. Can you take a view of your
selves in the former Stages of your Lives, that in all of them you have feared
God and walked with him? that all along you have been good, and done Good? that
Holiness and Obedience have run through your whole Conversation? And that now,
in the last Period of your Days, yet you hold on in the good ways of God? yet
you are acting Grace? yet bringing forth Fruit unto Holiness? Romans 6.2^. Rev.
3.2.
yet your Works are good? nay, your last Works are your best? better filled up
than formerly? Oh, where it is thus with any of you, rejoice, rejoice! call upon
your Souls and all within you, to bless God for his rich Grace displaid toward
you! Here Is good old Age indeed! (Oh that thee was more of it in the World)!
Well, here is living to, and in a good old Age; 'twill not be long before it
will be dying in this good old Age: And how safe, how sweet will that Dying be
unto you whenever it shall come! (so much to the Aged).

2. Something I would say to the Young: Psalm. 39.5. Job 21.24.
To you who are in your best State, in the prime of your Days; whose Bones are
full of Marrow, and whose Candle burns very bright. Old Age has not as yet
seized upon you, but you are hastening to it; the Shadows of the Evening are
every Minute drawing nearer and nearer to you. Jer. 6.4.
That which I would urge upon you, is, that you would so order your Course now,
in the time of your Youth and Manhood, as that when old Age shall come, it may
be to you a good old Age, both living and dying. Indeed, it is very uncertain
whether you shall ever arrive at it, (as I shall show by and by); but possibly
it may please God to continue you here so long: Oh! let it be your great Care
and Endeavor to provide now, (if it shall be so), that it may prove an happy
and blessed Age to you.

How is this to be effected?

Why, Eccles. 12.1.
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth; close with God betimes, make
an early Dedication of your selves to God, let him have the First Fruits of one
Time; now engage in serious and universal Piety; fill up your greener Age with
Grace and Holiness: Thus do, and then 'twill be a good old Age in the winding
up of all. The way to end well, is to begin well; and so to hold on in what is
good. If the Youth and Manhood have been vain and sinful, it cannot well be
expected that the old Age will be holy, and comfortable: (what God may do in
the Sovereignty of his Grace, who converts when he pleases, I do not meddle
with; I only speak of what may probably and rationally be expected. The Fruits
which do not set well in Spring seldom come to any good Maturity in Autumn, so
it is here. Besides the Disingenuity of putting off Virtue and Goodness to your
old Age; Non tantum minimum in imo, sed pessimum remanet, Sen.
(for what is that but: in effect to say, that your worst is good enough for
God? that Sin and the World shall have your Flower, and God have only your
Bran? that they shall have the first Broachings of the Vessel, and God only the
Dregs and Lees)? I say, besides the disingenuousness of this toward God, it is
a thing that will prove highly injurious and fatal to your selves* For, if you
be not good at the finsh twill be hard for you to be so at the last. Oh! let
God and Godliness have all your Time! make him the Alpha and the Omega of your
Days; let the whole Web of Life be spun with even Thread; wallo in an uniform
Courso of Obedience; let it be good Youth, good Manhood, good old Age, all
good, (This is a (...), of must not expatiate upon it).

I go on to a Second Observation:

None live solong, but at lust they die.

Abraham here had lived 75 Years, (a great Age)! but then he died. The longest
Day will have its Night: There will be the setting of the Sun, as well as the
rising of it; (tho sometimes it is very late before it sets). There Is none
continue so long upon the Stage, but they go off at last. The Glass that has
but the ordinary Proportion of Sand in it, is soon run out; suppose there
should be another with a far greater Proportion, yet even that too, by
continual running, at last would be empty: So some Men's Time is soon run out,
there is a speedy Period put to their Lives; Others hold out, and hold up a
longer time; but yet they too fall and die at last. The Ante-Diluvian Fathers
lived very long, yet they died; of every one of them ( Enoch only excepted)
it is said, And he died; Genesis 5.5, etc.

Not to enlarge upon a Point so plain and indubitable, let me subjoyn but a
word of Advice:

1. To the Old. Use.
How does it concern such, always to be expecting and prepared for Death! This
should be done by the Young, but much more by the Aged; because of their more
uncertain State as to Life. Oh how near are old Age and Death to each other!
there is but a small distance betwixt the hoary Head and the slimy Grave; that
which David said of himself, [there is but a step between me and Death, 1 Samuel
20.3.
] every old Man may apply to himself. The Young may die, the Old must die:
Death lies in Ambush for the Young, but it openly shows it self to the Ancient;
Senibus in Januis, Adolescentibus in insidiis; Bern. There Is but a little Sand
left in their Glass, but a little Oil to keep their Lamps burning; their Lease
is now almost expired; (and what follows but a Writ of Ejectment?) It Is Folly
in any to dream of long Life; but this would be prodigious Folly in you, to
whom the Residue of Life is so small: (And yet the Orator tells us, Nemo est
tam senex qui se annum non putet posse vivere.
There Is none so old but he thinks he may live one Year longer). It being thus,
how should you live in a constant Expectation of Death? how should you be
always ready and prepared for it? What! after you have had so long a Space to
prepare for your Change, yet to be unprepared? what, to be neither fit to live,
nor fit to die? not fit for work, (because your Strength is gone,) nor fit for
Wages, (because not ripe for Heaven)? what a dismal Case is this! Oh therefore
be always ready! that when you come to die, you may have nothing to do but just
to die, and to go to God.

2. Does this Counsel concern the Aged only? no, it reaches to others also. For
do not the Young die as well as the Old? Verily, every Man at his best State is
altogether Vanity, Psalm. 39.5. One dies in his full Strength, being wholly at
ease and quiet, Job 21.23. There are in the Grave the Skulls and Bones of
Infants, Youths, strong Men, as well as of the Aged. The old Ass often carries
the Skin of the young one to the Market, (according to the Jewish Proverb).
Quis est tam stultus, quamvis sit Adolescens, cui sit exploratum se ad vesperam
esse victurum. Cic. de Sen.
Who can assure himself (be he never so young) that he shall live a Day? much
less that he shall live to old Age? What is Life more in the Young than in the
Old? it is but a Breath in both; and that, God can stop as soon in the one as in
the other. Omnes eodem cogimur, we are all going the same Way, and must all
tread in the same Common-Path. Death puts no Difference betwixt the Weak and
the Strong. The new-built House sometimes falls, when the old one stands.
Wherefore it lies upon you, that are young, to look and prepare for Death, as
well as upon the Eldest. Oh that you would be wise to consider your latter End!
Deuteronomy. 32.29. Psalm. 90.12.
that you would so number your Days as to apply your Hearts to Wisdom! Do not
procrastinate and delay what you have to do, (presuming upon living long, and
old Age; which is the highest Folly, and the most groundless Imagination): But
to day, whilst it is called to day, repent, believe, make sure of Christ, get
your Peace made with God, (and the like). And then let Death come as soon as it
will, 'twill be an happy Death to you.

[And full.]

V. Ainsworth in loc.
In the Original there is no more. It Is an usual Ellipsis in the Hebrew; Psalm.
73.10. Waters [of a ful] are wrung out to them; (i. e. of a full Cup). And so
here.

Satur, accumulatus omnibus bonis and divitiis. P. Mart.
Some fill it up, Abraham died full of Riches, Wealth, Honor, and all earthly
Prosperity: (As it is said of David, He died in a good old Age, full of Days,
Riches and Honor; 1 Chronicles. 29.28.) Others thus; Full of Grace, of Faith, of
good Work: (a much better Fullness than the former)! But the most fill it up, as
here we do, full of Years, or Days, (...), Sept. (and so in diverse other
Versions).

The same is affirmed of Isaac, Genesis 35.29. of David, 1 Chronicles. 23.1. -- 29.28.
of Jehojada, 2 Chronicles. 24.15. -- of Job, chap. 42.17. -- The Prophet uses this
Expression, Ier. 6.11. -- The Aged, with him that is full of Days.

But this (according to Expositors) is said of Abraham, not only as expressive
of the many Days and Years that he had lived; (with respect to which, it falls
in with what precedes, and is but a repeating of the same Matter; [he died in a
good old Age, an old Man, and full of Years]: But it also intimates what was
the Temper of his Mind, the inward Frame and Working of his Soul, as to Life;
(and so it carries distinct Matter in it). He was full of Years, i. e. he was
Saturatus diebus suis. V. Sir. Saturatus aetate. V. Arab. Ut non appeteret
vitae prorogationem: Calv. Oleast. Pertaesum est eum vitae, mortem optavit:
Zwingl. Noluisset ulterius dies suos pertrah: P. Mart. Hebraismus est, pro
Saturata erat anima ejus; non cupiebat diutius vivere, n^ec dies suos innovari.
Fagius.
satiated with Life, satisfied with the Time he had lived; he had lived long,
and now he desired to live no longer; he had his Fill of the natural Life, (as
one has of Meat and Drink, when he has been at a Feast); he was very willing to
have a Period now put to it.

Hence note, that

A gracious Man, ( a true Child of Abraham), Obj.
after he has been here his appointed Time, and done the Work allotted to him;
has enough of Life, so as not to desire to live any longer.

Jacob, when he had seen Joseph, thought he had lived long enough; Now let me
die (says he), since I have seen thy Face, because thou art yet alive, Genesis
46.30. Simeon, having had a Sight of Christ, was very willing to die; Lord now
let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation. Thus it is, thus (to be sure) it ought to be, with every true
Christian.

I put in, [when his appointed Time is come, and his Work done], for the better
stating of the Point. Till these be accomplished, Life can never be too long;
when these are accomplished, Life can never be too short. When a good Man is
convinced, it is God's Will to translate him into another World, and that his
Work is done in this; Oh (says he) let me die, I have enough of Life!

Here Is one great Difference betwixt the People of God and other Men. The
wicked are always desiring Continuation of Life; as knowing, whenever that
shall end, all their Pleasures of Sin are over, and everlasting Punishments
shall succeed in their room. The worldly too, are upon the same lock; as
knowing, here is their Portion, that they have their good things here. Luke
16.25.
And therefore, as they have insatiable Desires after the having more of
earthly Things, so also after the protracting of that Life, in which those
earthly things are to be enjoyed. If these might have their Will, they would
never die, but live on in infinitum. They may indeed sometimes be impatient of
Life; but they never are, (upon good Grounds, and in a right manner), satiated
with Life. Ah! but such who are sincere with God, this is their Frame and
Temper: Does God say, you shall live no longer? they answer, Lord, we have
enough of Life, let us die.

Some Heathens have gone very far in this; I have lived (says Vixi quantum
satis erat, mortem plenus expecto. Sen.
one) as long as suffices, I am all for Death. And Si quis Deus mihi largiatur,
ut ex hac aetate repuerascam, and incunis vagiam, valde recusem; nec velim,
quas^ decurso spatio, a calce ad carceres revocari. Cato in Tull. de Sen.
another, If some God would grant me to grow young again, I would by no means
accept of it; I would be loath, having run my Race, to begin all again. If these
(by the improvement of Reason and natural Light) went thus far; surely they,
who have an higher Light, do not come short of them: and what (I fear) in them
was but Words, by the Saints is really put in Practice.

And in these, the Grounds of their Satiety of Life, are to be considered. This
does not result, merely from the Troubles, Losses, Crosses that here they meet
with; but from something of an higher Nature. They are convinced of the Vanity
of things below, that there is an Emptiness in what this World affords; that
there is nothing here justly to make them fond of Life: That so long as Life
continues, Sin will continue: That there is an higher and better Life to
succeed, (which cannot be enjoyed till this expire): That it is first Dying, and
then being with God. Upon these Grounds, gracious Souls are even glutted with
this Life, and care not how soon they are deprived of it.

Well, Use.
let us show our selves to be Abraham's Seed in this, in our being satiated
with Life: He is an excellent Christian who is so, but there are but few who
are so.

Rarus qui exacto contentus tempore vitae,
Cedat uti conviva satur --.
Hor. Should God measure out but a short Duration of Life to us, yet that
should satisfy us, as being long enough. But much more should he grant a
liberal Proportion of it, we have no reason to desire more. True, in respect of
Work and Service, we should think Life never to be long enough: Vixi satis
Naturae, satis Gloriae, non satis Patriae.
He said well who said, I have lived enough to Nature, enough to my own
Reputation, but not enough to my Country. He speaks much better who says, I
have lived enough to Nature, enough to my Self, but not enough to my God). But
when we have good Grounds to conclude, our Work is finished, God has no more
for us to do; it becomes us to say, Non ace^bum jam judicant vivere sed
supersluum. Sen. Ep. 24.
We have our sill of Life, we would not live a day, an hour, a moment longer:
(Not because its bitter to us to live, but because it is unnecessary for us to
live). 'Twould be an Act of Singularis est Dei Gratia, vitae saturi^as, ut ex
ea migrare parati sumus cum Animi Tranquilitate, etc. Rivet in loc.
singular Grace from God, if, by his Spirit, he would bring us to this blessed
Temper!

I have dispatched the two first Amplifications about Abraham's Death, from the
Manner, and the Time of it; let me add a little upon the Third, viz. the Issue
and Consequent of it. He died, what became of him after that? why,

He was gathered to his People.

This, like the preceding Expressions, (of giving up of the Ghost, dying in a
good old Age, being full of Years), does often occur in Scripture. It Is used of
Isaac, Genesis 35.29. of Jacob, Genesis 49.33. of Aaron, Numb. 20.24. (of many
otheres). Sometimes it is expressed by being Gathered to their Fathers: I will
gather thee to thy Fathers (says God to Josiah) 2 Kings 22.20. And also, all
that Generation were gathered unto their Fathers, Judge. 2.10. David was laid
unto his Fathers, Acts 13.26. The Promise to Abraham was, Thou shall go to thy
Fathers -- Genesis 15.15. -- We read again and again, of sleeping with their
Fathers; 1 Kings 11.43. 1 Kings 2.10. (and passim).

It Is an usual Hebraism to set forth, entering into the State of the Dead.
There Is a kind of (...) in it; it being a more soft and pleasing Description of
that State, instead of that which is more rough and harsh.

The Grave being the common Receptacle of all that die; ( All go unto one
place, Eccles. 3.20. I know that thou will bring me unto Death, and to the
House appointed for all living; Job 30.23): therefore, though Abraham died and
was buried in Canaan, where Genesis 25.10.
Sarah only was buried, and none of his Progenitors; yet, upon his Death and
Burial, he is said to be gathered to his People, (or Fathers).

The Papists Gloss upon it is, he went to the Limbus Patrum. Their Doctrine is,
that the Fathers, and all the Old-Testament-Saints, (who lived and died before
the Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection of Christ), were not immediately
taken up into Heaven, but shut up together in some secret Recesses or Cavernes
of the Earth, till Christ should come, and suffer, and rise again; and then
they were to be admitted into the Heavenly Glory. And they tell us, that these
Fathers and others, in this State, did not feel any Paena Sensus, (as they in
Purgatory do); but only Paena Damni, in their not having the immediate Presence
of God and the Beatifick Vision. And amongst other Proofs that they give of
this, my Apponi ad Populum suum, est consociari. Non in majorum Sepultura juxta
corpus, sed perduci juxta Animam ad consortium Animarum Patrum illius, quae
erant in poenis tenebrarum usque ad discensum Filii Dei ad Inferos, etc. and
post Salvatoris Domini Resurrectionem transferendus ad Paradisum faelicitatis
aeternae. Lipem in loc. So Lyranus, P. Burgensis, in Genesis 49.33. Bellarmin. de
Anima Christi, Cap. 11. Pet. Galat. Arcan. lib. 6. c. 7.
Text, (with other parallel Texts), is insisted upon for one: Abraham was
gathered to his People, i. e. he was not presently translated into Heaven, but
for a time shut up in a common Cell (with the rest who died before him), as
only an Expectant of Heaven. And hence they observe, a Variation of Words, in
the setting forth of the Death of those who died since Christ came, and of
those who died before Christ came: The former are said to die in the Lord, to
sleep in Jesus, (and the like); but the latter, are said to be gathered to
their People, to sleep with their Fathers; (and so on).

This Opinion we reject, as having no solid Foundation in the Word of Truth:
And hold, that as all Believers who now die do immediately enter into Glory;
(for the Spirit returns to God who gave it, Eccles. 12.7. To day shall thou be
with me in Paradise; Luke 23.43. We know, that if our earthly House of this
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with
Hands, eternal in the Heavens; 2 Cor. 5.1.) So, that all who lived before
Christ, and believed in him, did also, upon their Dying, immediately enter into
Glory. See this Limbus Patrum refuted, and the Protestant Doctrine defended, in
River. in Genesis E^ercit. 151. Idem. summa controv. Qu. 42. Rainold. Censura
libr. Apochryph. Prael. 79, etc. Chamier. Panstrat. (...). 3. l. 25. c. 5, etc.
Christ being the same to Them, that he is to Us, Heb. 13.8; his Merit
extending to Them as well as to Us, (he being the Lamb slain from the
Foundation of the World; Rev. 13.8); and They believing in the Messiah to come,
as well as we believe in him as come; what reason can be assigned, why they
should not partake of the same Blessings, the same Happiness, that we now
partake of? and consequently, upon Death, be put into the immediate Possession
of the Glory of Heaven, even aswe are?

But blessed Abraham! was it thus with thee? was this thy gathering to thy
People to be shut up in some dark Caverns of the Earth, (God knows where)? and
to be kept out of Heaven, (God knows how long)? In thy Life, at God's Command,
thou wentest thou knew not whither; and at thy Death too, did thou go thou
knew not whither? Wast thou the great Instance of Faith, Romans 4.3.
the Father of the Faithful? and yet does it fare better, with the meanest of
thy Seed now, than it did with thy Self? Was Heaven so much in thy Eye, did
thou look for a City which had Foundations, Heb 11.^0.
whose Builder and Maker is God; and yet so long kept out of it, and thrust
into some Recluse whose Builder and Maker is Man? Is thy So Austin expounds it,
Q^e^. Evang. l. 2. c. 28. and in Ep. ad Evodium. So Muldonate in loc. ( who yet
to save himself, is fain to say, Non quod Abraham in Coelo esset; sed quod ita
loqui singarur, quasi esset in Coelo.
Bosom made use of to represent Heaven; and that before Christ died; and yet
wast thou not as yet in Heaven? Blessed Saint! these things we poor dim-sighted
Protestants, know not how to understand!

The Adversay has led me out of my way, I return to the words; which I shall
consider not only as a Periphrasis of Death, or of the dead State that follows
upon it; but as holding forth something of a far higher nature: As namely, that
Abraham's Soul, as soon as Death had seized upon his Body, was forthwith
translated into the Fellowship and Society of the glorified Saints, who lived
and died before him.

Two things Expositors infer from them.

1. The Existence of the Soul in its separated State from the Body. They apply
Abraham's being gathered to his People, to his Soul; and from thence assert,
the Existence and Immortality of it. And whereas some affirm, that in all the
Books of Moses there is nothing said, to prove the Soul's Immortality; In Loc.
Cajetan confutes them from this very Text: And many Vatab. Pererius in Genesis 25
Tom. 4. Disp. 8. page 789, etc. Ainsworth. Theodoret. Q. 109. in Genesis
others concur with him therein. 2. The Advancement and Felicity of the Soul
upon its Separation from the Body, which consists in this, that it is presently
joined with, and admitted into, the Society of the glorified Souls that are
with God in Heaven.
I must not engage in the discussing of these Heads; in brief take this
Observation.

That whenever the Godly die, immediately they are translated unto the Society
of the glorified Saints in Heaven.

We cannot ground this, merely upon the Phrase of Abraham's being gathered to
his People; but we must also take in the Grace and Holiness of the Subject.
It Is said of Ishmael here ( ver. 17.) He was gathered to his People; but how?
not as Abraham was, because he was a bad Man. The Sense of the Words must be
stated, according to the Ad foelicitatem per se ^on pe^tiner, sed tantum pro
Subjectorum ra io^e intellecta. Rivet.
Subject to whom they are applied: When the Wicked die they are gathered to
their People, i. e. they are thrown into the Company of the Damned in Hell: But
when the Godly die, they are gathered to their People, i. e. taken up into the
Company of the glorified Saints in Heaven.

It Is foretold and promised, Mat. 8.11. That many shall come from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Hebr. 12.22, 23. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of
the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of
Angels: to the General Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men
made perfect: And to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the Blood
of sprinkling, that speaks better Things than that of Abel. The first
Intendment of the Apostle in this Scripture, was to describe the Gospel Church
as it is here on Earth, in the Glory and Privileges thereof. One of which is
this, that under the Gospel, Saints on Earth have Communion with the Saints in
Heaven; (all making up but one Body, or one Assembly): But yet so, as that the
Things (here spoken) have their fullest Accomplishment in the Church
triumphant. When any are taken up into that Church, they go indeed to the City
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, an innumerable Company of Angels,
the Church of the Firstborn, the Spirits of just Men made perfect. And this is
the Portion of all that fear, love and obey God, whenever Death removes them
hence. Luke 16.22. And it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's Bosom.

And is it thus? Us. 1.
then (1.) What an incentive is this to Godliness! Abraham died in a good old
Age, (an old Age which succeeded a pious and well-spent Life); what followed
upon it? he was gathered to his People; admitted into the Society of the
Blessed in Heaven. Now as we desire to partake of his happy End, we must
conform to his holy Course. Let us show our selves to be his Children by the
doing of his Works; Joh. 8.39.
Let us believe, obey, live as he did, and then we shall be Heirs with him of
this, and all that other Blessedness, which he now possesses. To be with all
the glorified Saints in Heaven? (much more to be with the blessed God there)?
what Tongue can express, what Heart can conceive, how great a Thing this is!
But how is this to be attained? only by being good, and doing good. Heb. 12.14.
Without Holiness no Man shall see God, nor any who are with God. Oh let the
Age be what it will, ( old or young), see that it be good and gracious; and
then this happy Gathering will follow upon it: but otherwise, it is not to be
hoped for. Pray tell me, you that live as Antipodes to the Saints on Earth, can
you hope to be imbodied with those in Heaven? You that hate and persecute the
Saints on Earth, can you hope ever to be joined with them that are in Heaven?
You that are all for the Society of Sinners below, can you expect to be
admitted into the Society of Saints above? surely you cannot so grossly impose
upon your selves! At death there is a sorting of all Men into their several
Companies: the Wicked go to the Wicked, the Godly to the Godly; the former to
their Predecessors and Companions in Sin; the latter, to their Predecessors and
Companions in Sin; the latter, to their Predecessors and Companions in Grace
and Holiness. Oh let the Consideration hereof prevail with us, to put away Sin,
and to engage in all serious Piety! Be Followers of them who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises; Heb. 6.12.
that you may be gathered to them when you die, psalm. 125.5.
and not ranked amongst the Workers of Iniquity.

2. It may be improved, Use 2.
to support against the Fear of Death. How are many, through this Fear, all
their Life Time subject unto Bondage! Hebr. 2.15. But if ye be Abraham's Seed
and Children, why should it be thus with you?

Here are in the Words of my Text three notable Antidotes against this Fear:

1. What is Death? it is but the giving up of the Ghost; the expiring of the
Breath; and that is all (to the Sanctified and holy): And is this a Thing so
much to be feared? Every Breath that comes from thee, is a kind of Death; when
it is the last Breath then it is Death, (there is all the Difference). ^ Thessalonians
4.14. Isa. 57 2. 2 Cor. 5*4. phil. 1.23.
Elsewhere it is but a Sleep, a lying down in Bed, an uncloathing, a Departing:
Oh what mollifying Expressions does the Scripture set forth, Death by! and all
to keep down our inordinate Fear of it.

2. All (sooner or later) are subject to it. It Is not we alone that die, all
are Companions with us in this. The Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, nay Christ
himself, all died: and shall we be afraid to walk in that Path which so many
have trod before us? When Phocion saw one, who was to die with him, afraid to
die; What (says he) art thou not glad to fare as Phocion does? Plutarch. in
Apoth.
So when Abraham gave up the Ghost and died, (with innumerable others), shall
we be overwhelmed with Fear when it shall be our turn to die?

3. After the Dying comes the Gathering. That Death that breaks our Company
below, advances us to far better Company above. It takes the Key of Heaven (as
it were) and lets us into the Society of Saints and Angels, yea of God himself,
and the blessed Jesus. And shall we then Ejus est morieim ^imere, qui ad
Christum noll^t^lr^^ Cyprian.
fear to die? Oh let us get above this!

3. Let all God's People rejoice in the Thoughts of Heaven. Vsm 3.
What a Place and State will that be to such! when you shall be gathered into
the Fellowship of the glorified Saints; shall see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob (with
all the rest of that vast Body); shall converse with them and have Communion
with them in the praising, admiring and magnifying of God for ever: what a
transcendent Happiness will this be! Here your Company is mixed, there none but
Saints shall be with you. Here your Company is often afflictive to you, there
it shall be wholly rejoicing to your Souls. Here, the Best you converse with
have their Infirmities; there, all shall be perfect. Here, you see this and
that Saint, (scattered as a little good Grain in the midst of a Field of
Tares); there you shall see the whole. Body of Saints from first to last. The
Sight of one St. Paul would be a blessed Sight; but to see all the Apostles,
all the Martyrs and Confessors, all the great Instruments of God's Glory
(ancient and modern)? Lord, what a transporting and ravishing Sight will that
be! How should the serious Sense of this both fill up our Joy, and also inflame
our Desires after Heaven! How divinely does the Orator speak! O blessed Day,
when I shall go to that divine Society and Convention of Souls, O praeclarum
diem, cu ad illud di inum Animarum Concillium coetumq e proficiscar; and cum ex
hac turba and colluvione dis^edam! Tul. de Sen.
and shall be freed from those Crowds and filthy Persons that are here! had he
such Notions of a future State, and of the Happiness thereof? what Notions
should we have of it!

And yet that which I have been upon, is but the least of Heaven. To be
gathered to the glorified Saints, is very good; ah! but to be gathered to God,
to Christ? to be admitted into the immediate Presence, Vision, and Fruition of
these? surely this is incomparably better! This is the Heaven of Heavens, the
very Top and Zenith of Glory. And this shall be the Felicity of all who are
sincere with God: 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. So shall we ever be with the Lord: Having a
Desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Philip. 1.23. In
thy Presence is Fullness of Joy, at thy right Hand are Pleasures for evermore,
Psalm. 16.11. Oh therefore, you who fear God and walk with him (as the great
Instance in the Text did), how may you comfort your selves in this! and what
cause have you, to say, My Soul does magnify the Lord --. Bless the Lord, o my
Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name.

THe first part of my Work is dispatched; I go on to the second. The Example
which the Text propounds, I have done with; I come now to that Example, which
the Providence of God sets before us this day.

You all expect I should say something of that Ancient, Faithful, Eminent
Minister of Christ, and Servant of God, Mr. Thomas Case, whose Funerals (in the
Religious Part of them) we now solemnize.

Concerning him therefore, I will,

1. Give a brief A count of his Life and Death. 2. Then give a more particular
Narrative of him, in his several Capacities.
Not to instance in the Time and Place of his Birth, he was the Son of a
Minister in Kent; (a Person eminent in his time for Parts and Piety). This he
testified, as in all other things, so in his great Care to give this his Son a
pious and religious Education: which he was the more excited and encouraged
unto, upon his perceiving of those more than ordinary buddings and blossomings
of Grace and Ingenuity, that were in him in his Childhood.

When he was grown up, and sit to be sent abroad, he was put to School; first
at Canterbury, then at Merchant-Taylors School (in this City). And there he was
continued, until his Father, meeting with Troubles and Embroy Iments in his
Estate, (by Lawsuits and other Occasions), was forced to remove him from these
Nurseries, and to take him home to himself; where he gave him all that
Instruction in the Arts and Languages, that his many Diversions would admit of.

Having arrived at a Competency of Age and Learning, Add p^ssent and alij haud
pauci, ab eruditione merito celebrandi; quales. crediderim --, Thomam Case,
etc. Antiq. Vniv. Oxon. l. 2. p. 283.
he was sent to the University, admitted in Christ-Church in Oxford, (that
Famous Society); where his Industry and Proficiency was such, as that, by the
Dean and Canons (then being), he was unanimously elected Student of that House.
There he resided till he had commenced Master of Arts, and a Year or two after.

From thence (he now being in a considerable measure fitted for the Work of the
Ministry), by the great Importunity of Mr. R. Herrick, (his most intimate and
affectionate Friend), he was prevailed with to come to him, and to be with him
at his Benefice in Norfolk. After some short stay with him, he was called to
the Exercise of his Ministry at Erpingham, (a Town in the same County). There
he continued eight or ten Years; indefatigable in his Work, preaching twice
every Lord's Day, expounding the Holy Scriptures, catechizing the Younger,
repeating in private what he had delivered in public. Hither many resorted to
him, to partake of his Labors; and God wonderfully succeeded them to the
Conversion of many Souls.

But meeting with Troubles in that Diocese, (under Bp. Wren), he was forced to
remove out of it. His forementioned Friend, (being made Warden of Manchester)
took him into Lancashire with him: there in a short time he was presented to a
Place in the Neighboring County. But great Revolutions happening in the Nation
a little after, he was, (by the Urgency of some Persons of Quality) persuaded
to accompany them to London: So Providence first brought him hither, and then
fixed him here.

Here he was chosen first Lecturer, then Pastor at Milk-Street; where, how
laborious and faithful he was in his Lord's Work, many yet living can testify.
Besides his Lord's-day's Pains in this Place, he preached a weekly Lecture
every Saturday; (in order to Persons being the better prepared for the
Sabbath). And here he first set up the Morning Exercise; which has been kept up
in this City (from place to place) ever since; (it too having lived to a good
old Age, and not as yet given up the Ghost).

And not confining his Labors to this Parish, he also preached a Lecture at
St. Martin's in the Fields every Thursday; which he kept up above twenty Years.

In those days, the Engagement being vehemently urged, and he refusing to take
it, he was put out of his Place at Milk-Street. But God would not have him to
be idle; if one Door be shut upon him, another shall be opened. He was
therefore called to preach as Lecturer, at Alderman-bury, and at St. Giles
Cripplegate. In which Congregations, he continued preaching Christ and the
Gospel, till he was sent Prisoner to the Tower; (where he was confined about
six Months). The Grounds of this Imprisonment, (wherein several others, of Name
and Worth, were Companions with him; to Two of which, it ended in more than
bare Imprisonment, in Death it self); I say, the Grounds of this, are well
known to all that know any thing of the Transactions of the late Times. We then
thought they suffered for their Loyalty and Fidelity to their Sovereign; if the
present unkind Age have other Notions of it, we must submit.

After his Release he was invited to be Lecturer at St. Giles in the Fields.
Mr. Moline (then Rector there) dying, he was chose in his Stead. And so
continued, till, upon his Majesty's Restoration, the ancient Incumbent was
readmitted.

In the Year 1660 he was one of the Ministers, deputed by his Brethren in this
City, to wait upon his Majesty at the Hague, to congratulate his Restoration.
With respect to which I may confidently say, as none (in his Sphere) did more
cordially endeavor to promote it, before it was accomplished; so none did more
cordially rejoice in it, when it was accomplished.

When that black and fatal Day, Aug. 24. 1662. came, he fared as the rest of
his Brethren did, (who were not satified to conform). Here his Ministry in
Public was at an end; yet (as God gave Opportunity) he ceased not in Private
to be doing all the good he could. And in this Diligence he held on, till the
Infirmities of his great Age wholly disabled him for any further Ministerial
Work.

One remarkable Passage of his Life must not be omitted; (I hope, the Recital
of bare Matter of Fact will give no Offense). He was a Member of that Assembly,
which, in the Year 1643, was called by the Parliament (as then sitting) to
advise in Matters of Religion. And I think, he lived to survive all of that
Body, (one only excepted).

I have gone over the several Turns and Motions of his Life, and led you from
one Stage to another of it: it is the last only that remains yet to be spoken
unto.

It pleased God, (the great Arbiter vitae and necis) to lengthen out his Life
to a very old Age: He lived to Tully's Age. Quartum annum ago and octogesimum.
Lib. de Sen.
84 Years, and then died. On May 30th last past he finished his Course; and on
June 14th was decently interred in Christ Church in this City. And now, how is
my Text exemplified in him as well as in Abraham! He gave up the Ghost, and
died: how willingly did he resign up his Soul to God! Death found no Resistance
from him, (alas! he had been long desiring and waiting for it); he quietly and
readily yielded to it. And what an easy Death did God bless him with! The Oil
was spent, so the Lamp went out. There was no Sickness, no Pain, no Groans, or
Agonies at the last; he just breathed out his last Breath, and that was all.
It Is said of Jacob, when he had made an end of commanding his Sons, he gathered
up his Feet into the Bed, and yielded up the Ghost, Genesis 49.33. Just thus it
was with our deceased Father; for rising from Dinner he desired some repose
upon his Bed; where, as soon as ever he was laid, he gathered up his Feet, and
so yielded up the Ghost. This facil Death he had much desired, and often prayed
for, and he had it: Sortitus est facilem exitum, and qualem semper optaverat;
(as the Historian of Augustus).

And he died in a good old Age. Good, as to the Greatness of it: Good, as to
the Health and Strength of it; (a few Years indeed before his Death, his Limbs
were much enfeebled, his Memory much impaired; but till then, he had as much
Vegetenes and Vigor every way, as could be expected in one of his Years). Good,
in the best Sense, as it succeeded a well-spent Life, and as it was filled up
with gracious and holy Actings to the Last. He began with God betimes, and he
kept close to God to the End.

And now he is gathered to his People; translated into the blessed State, gone
to the general Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, to the Spirits of just
Men made perfect. Taken up to his People; to those now in Glory, who by his
Ministry were converted: (and oh what rejoicing is there, in Them to see their
Spiritual Father; in Him to see the Children that God has given him!) He has
now a view of all the glorified Saints, and is one of them: Yea, he has now the
Vision of God himself, and of his dear Redeemer. What he wrote in his Pisgah
about Heaven, he has now the experimental Knowledge of. He that died in
Abraham's good old Age, now lies in Abraham's Bosom. He that was a decayed and
decrepit Man here on Earth, with what Strength and Vigor is he loving,
praising, adoring God in Heaven! Holy was his Life, and happy was his Death. He
is with God, and so shall be for ever.

Thus I have given you a short Narrative of his Life and Death; but a more
particular and distinct Account of him, as to what he was, must be further
added. And in order to this, I will consider him in a fourfold Capacity.

I. As a Man. II. As a Christian. III. As a Minister. IV. As standing in such
and such Relations.
In the Characterising of him under these Heads, I will keep close to the
Truth, and say nothing but what I apprehend to be truly so. And as I would not
diminish his Merit, and any way lessen his real Worth, (which would be
disingenuous toward him); so neither will I advance it above its just Pitch
and Measure; (for that would be injurious to my self).

I. Let Us consider him as a Man. So he was one, whom God had endowed with
excellent Parts, (Natural and Acquired: (some I know are not of my Opinion in
this; be it so, they have their Liberty of judging, and I have mine). He was
very happy in a good and quick Invention; which first furnished him with smart
Notions (upon all Occasions), and then with apt Expressions to utter them: and
this too was attended, in a good Proportion, with a solid Judgment. It Is very
rare, for one and the same Person to be eminent in all the Accomplishments that
are proper to the several Faculties; Strength of Reason, Depth of Judgment,
Quickness of Fancy, Retentiveness of Memory, seldom concur in the same Subject;
we value him who is eminent in any One of these, though he be not so in the
Rest too. I speak very modestly of our deceased Friend when I make this to be
his Case; (but of the two I choose rather to go too low than too high). Toward
the Close of his Life, when the Infirmities of a great Age were upon him, there
was a sensible Decay in his Parts; yet even then it might be seen what he had
been in the Prime of his Days; (as the Glory of Carthage might be discerned in
the Ruins of it).

For his Natural Temper, he had fervidum Ingenium, a pretty quick and warm
Spirit; zealous he was for, or against, what he approved or disapproved;
(especially if God and Religion were concerned therein). And this, in the late
unhappy Controversies, exposed him to severe Censures from more than One Party;
(whether justly or not, it is not for me to determine). Only this I would say
for him, if sometimes undue Heat did prevail in him, either in Words or
Actions, much Allowance is to be given for it to his natural Temper.

And further he was an open, plain-hearted Man; One, who was totally a Stranger
to those little Arts and Frauds, those subtle Reserves and Pretenses, which
the World is too full of. He knew much of other things, but as to
Dissimulation, I think he knew as little of that as any. What Opinion he
embraced, he never concealed; and what Affection prevailed, he usually
disclosed. He was so honest and true, as always to think what he spoke; and
(for the most part) so un-reserv'd, as to speak what he thought. He could (I
question not) had he pleased, have acted the Wisdom of the Serpent, as well as
others; but he was wholly for the Simplicity of the Dove; (If this was a Fault,
pray pardon it; there are but few that err on this hand).

In his Converses, he was hearty, affectionate, all Love and Kindness; not
morose and magisterial, but affable and obliging; not vain and frothy, yet
facetious and pleasant; not confining to himself what might be useful to
others, but very communicative. He was somewhat hasty and passionate, but his
Passion was soon over; Anger rested not in him, the Fire was quenched as soon
as kindled; (the sooner the better)! Many other Characters of him might be
heaped up; but these few are sufficient to give a short view of him, considered
as a Man.

2. As a Christian; and such he was not in Title and Profession only, but in
Truth and Reality; (so far as we can judge) a truly gracious and upright Man.
How sincere, eminent, conspicuous, were all the several Graces in him!

He was an ardent Lover of God, of Goodness, and of all Good Men. His Fear of
Sin, and of offending God, was very great; his Public Ministry was very dear
to him, yet when he could not enjoy it without submitting to that which to him
was sinful, (not that he judged others by himself), he patiently laid it down.
His Heart was full of Penitential Brokenness: how often have I seen him pouring
forth Tears, in the Confession of his own and other Men's Sins! His Zeal for
God, was exceeding high; (wherein his natural Fervor was helpful to him): he
could quietly bear his own Sufferings, all the Indignities offered to himself;
but when he saw God dishonored, the Gospel reproached, the Truth thereof
opposed and undermined, the good way of Holiness evilly spoken of, this he
could not bear without great Commotion of Spirit. He minded Heaven more than
Earth; (as appears by that small Estate which he left, after he had been in the
Ministry so long, and in such considerable Places for Gain and Profit). He had
a large Heart for Charity, (had his Purse been equal to it). His Communication
was savoury and edifying; and although, (as has been hinted) he sometimes would be
facetious in his Dicourses, yet so, as that always he would miscere utile
dulci; mingle that which should profit with that which should delight. Under
his greatest bodily Infirmities at the last, when any came to visit him, he
would still be dropping some spiritual and heavenly Matter into them. Who more
sensible of the Church's Calamities and Distresses than he? Oh how did he use
to melt and dissolve in Prayer, when he was spreading the Concerns of Zion
before the Lord! He was indeed a praying Man; one that was frequent and fervent
in this blessed Duty. Not contented with the stated and more ordinary
Performance of it, how did he set apart, upon special Occasions and more than
common Emergencies, whole days to be spent in solemn calling upon God! And when
he himself, in his old Age, was much disabled for Prayer he would scarce let
any Minister (who came to visit him) go from him, till he had prayed with him.
Indeed, his first Conversion began with this; and so too, it continued with
this. It pleased God, (as he himself related it to me) to work upon him
betimes, when he was but six Years old. And at that Age, through the Influence
of Divine Grace, he was inclined by himself, every Morning and Evening, to
pray: And this he did, not by the help of any Book or Form (read or remembered);
but by the gracious Assistance of the Holy Spirit: Nay, this he did, not upon
any Precept or Direction, either from his Father or any other Person; but
solely upon God's drawing of his Heart to it: (So as that of Tertullian is very
applicable to him, -- Sine Monitore, quia de Pectore). Some things I am
credibly informed of, relating to his managing of Prayer with others, when he
was grown to eight Years of Age; but fearing many will not believe them, and
many will turn them into Ridicule and Derision; I judge it best not to mention
them. By what I have said it appears, that from a Child of six Years, to an
aged Man of 84. Years, he kept a continued, uninterrupted Course of Prayer.

Several other Graces shining in him might be instanced in: As his great Love
to Ordinances; how did it afflict him in his confined Condition that he could
not enjoy these! His patient waiting for his long-desired, but long-delaied
Release, was very admirable. (But I grasp at too much! these, with some other
of the like nature, I must pass over).

By what I have (or should further have) said, do I design to represent him as
one that was perfect? Good, and unmixtly Good? Oh no! He had his dark side as
well as his bright side, his Corruptions as well as his Graces, his Infirmities
as well as his Excellencies: And where shall we find the Person with whom it is
not thus? He was a good Man, yet but a Man; he was in the State of Grace, but
it was but in the imperfect State of Grace. I would give him his due Worth,
(which was very great); but yet so as not to advance him above what he was. And
the truth is, when I consider his Natural Temper, the Personal Infirmities
which he lay under, (which have been glanced at), the many Temptations which
he, as well as others, was assaulted with, I conclude, all his Grace was little
enough for him: Nay, assuredly it would have been too little, had not an higher
Grace been sufficient for him.

3. As a Minister: And as he stood in this Capacity, his Worth and Eminency
cannot but be so well known in this City, (where he exercised his Ministry, in
Public and in Private, about forty Years); as that it will be superfluous for
me to say much about it. In short therefore, he was an excellent Minister of
Christ; who, if he be not to be ranked amongst the first three, 2 Samuel 23.23.
(the most famous and eminent of our Preachers in England), yet he may well be
looked upon as more honorable than the Thirty.

His Ministerial Abilities were very considerable. He was another Apollos, an
eloquent Man, and mighty in the Scriptures; a Scribe, instructed unto the
Kingdom of Heaven; in whom the Word of God dwelt richly; out of which Treasure
he ever brought things new and old.

He was as Scriptural Preacher; had a singular Happiness in citing of Texts
pertinent to the Matter he was upon, and then in the opening and applying of
them. And as his Preaching was solid and judicious, so it was acute too; filled
up with quick and nimble Invention: He would sharpen plain, practical
Doctrines, with considerable mixtures of Ingenuity and Fancy. His great design
in his Ministry was, not to perplex his Hearers, but to edify them; not to fill
them with quaint Notions and Speculations, but with serious and important
Truths; not to please their Ears, but to better their Hearts, and awaken their
Consciences; not to advance his own Reputation, but the eternal Salvation of
them who heard him.

So long as God spared him Strength, none more constant and frequent in
Preaching than he; and when God laid him aside, that he could preach no more,
what an Affliction was that to him! And his Frequency in it, did not lessen his
Pains in due preparing for it; his Sermons were well weighed and studied, (he
not daring to offer to the Lord that which cost him nothing.

What a great Man he was in Prayer, all they can testify who ever joined with
him therein. Indeed, God had endowed him with an admirable Gift as to this; (I
firmly hope it was something more than a bare Gift). He was severely Orthodox,
sound in the Faith to a degree of Rigor, a thorough paced Calvinist, a firm
Adherer to, and Assertor of the Doctrine of our Church; (though he differed as
to some Rites and Ceremonies imposed in it): And herein he stood steadfast and
unmovable to his last Breath.

God blessed his Labors wherever he came, with considerable Success. In all
Places, whither the Providence of God carried him, he had the Seals of his
Ministry in the Conversion of many Souls. There are many now in Heaven, many
yet remaining here on Earth, who with Comfort can call him their Spiritual
Father.

He has not published much of his Labors; but what he has His Pisgah.
Corrections, Instructions. Sermons upon particular Occasions.
published, shows him to be an able, Practical Divine.

4. I come to the fourth and last thing, to consider him in his Relative
Capacity: In which, he was as praiseworthy, and does as much deserve
Imitation, as in any of the foregoing Considerations of him.

God blessed him with a pious and prudent Consort; (I must say no more of her,
because she is yet living): And what an high degree of Love was there betwixt
them! Indeed, they may be Patterns and Examples of Conjugal Affection and
Concord to all who knew them. They lived together near 45 Years; and how often
have I heard him say, In all that time there had been no Contention betwixt
them, except in this, who should love one another most.

He had no Children of his own; but his Wives Children he was as tender over,
and as affectionate unto, as if they had been his own. His Love to them, and
Care of them, was scarce to be paralleled, sure not to be exceeded. And how he
prayed for them, instructed them, used all means for their Spiritual Good, I
hope they will never forget.

He had other Relations of his own; some of which, by Providence were cast upon
him, for his Care and Relief. And he was a Father to them, at once caring for
their Bodies and Souls too.

And as to his whole Family, he was ever careful of the Souls of all that came
under his Roof; in instructing them in the Principles of Religion, in helping
them to understand the Scriptures; which were read in his Family Morning and
Evening. And his Method was, to cause every Child and Servant to remember
something that had been read; which he would then in a plain and familiar way,
open to them, and so proceed to Prayer. He had many Servants, who lived with
him, that bless God that ever they came into his House.

I have paralleled him with Abraham in his Death; I might, (with a salva
distantia) also parallel him with Abraham in his Life: as they died alike, so
they lived alike. I Will go no further than the thing last mentioned. Abraham is
famous for his Zeal about his Family; God himself has put an high Character
upon him for this: Genesis 18.19. For I know him, that he will command his
Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he
has spoken of him. And just thus it was with our Reverend Father, (allowing
the Disparity betwixt Person and Person).

Well, I have shown you what a Man he was, who died in a good old Age, an old
Man, full of Years, and is now gathered to his People. Nothing now remains but
a word of Exhortation.

1. To Christians; to you, who move in a private Orb. Many things might be
suggested to you, upon the death of this aged and faithful Servant of God; but
I shall commend this only to you, Prize good Ministers while you have them, and
be afflicted when you lose them. How many Mercies do you deprive your selves
of, by your undervaluing them? And particularly, how many good Ministers are
removed from you, because you do not put such a value upon them as you ought?
When God takes them away, then you see the worth of them, but not till then.
Did not some of you sit under the Minstry of him, who is now dead and gone?
Pray, was his Person, Ministry, Labors, prized and estimated according to what
they deserved? True, he lived to a great Age; but I fear, the Lives of many
others are shortened, by that slighting of them which they meet with from their
People. Wherefore I beseech you, to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them highly in Love for
their Work's sake. And further, so prize them as to improve them; so as to
thrive and profit by them. Do the Prophets live for ever? your faithful Guides
and Teachers, do they not die? Now you have them, in a few days they are taken
from you; does it not then concern you to make the best of their Labors whilst
you partake of them? How many Ministers have you worn out and spent! and are
you not at all the better for them? The better the Minister, is under whom you
are placed, the worser it will be with you, if you be barren and unprofitable
under him.

And then, Be afflicted for, bewail and lament the loss of good Ministers.
Indeed this is a great loss! (whether ye consider the Benefits ye percieve by
them; or the Evils that this does presage and boad): and therefore, should it
not be laid to Heart? Indeed, as to our deceased Brother, (his great Age and
Circumstances being considered); you have more reason to rejoice for that he
lived so long, than to mourn that he died at last. Ah! but how many eminent
Instruments are cut off, when they are young, in their Mr. Charnock, Mr.
Stockton, etc.
best State? or when they are but just As lately, that useful Minister, and
faithful Servant of God, Mr. Richard Fairclough.
entered upon a considerable Age? Oh, when such die, with what grief of Soul
should that be resented by all serious Christians!

2. To Ministers: My Brethren, you see how your number is lessened day by day;
the ancient Oaks and Cedars are almost all cut down: and what is the Duty now
of you who survive? Surely, to double and treble your Diligence in your Lord's
Work; the fewer Hands are left, the more laborious those must be that are left;
when other Pillars are removed, the more Weight does lie upon those which
stand; the fewer there are to preach the everlasting Gospel, the more
industrious they must be in this, who are yet spared. The Ancient die, where
are the Young Ones to succeed them? to stand in their stead, and to fill up the
Vacancies made by their Death? Blessed be God for it, some such there are; (and
they too, Persons of excellent Accomplishments for the Work of the Ministry):
God increase their Number, and double the Spirit of his old Elijah's upon them!
that still there may be a Succession of faithful Laborers in the Lord's
Harvest.

3. To Relations; (the near and dear Relations of the Deceased). What shall I
say to you? shall I press Patience and Submission upon you, under this loss?
Certainly, (his Condition being considered) even his nearest Relation, (though
she has the greatest share in it), needs no Excitation to Patience. Had he been
taken away when he was in the Prime of his Days, then the Affliction would have
been very great; then all Motives to quiet Submission to God's Will, had been
little enough; but when it was otherwise, I hope there is not the least rising
of Impatience in you. Your Duty is, Thankfulness, and Imitation: Thankfulness,
that ever you had him, and that you enjoyed him so long: Imitation, so as to
tread in his Steps, and to write after that excellent Copy that he has set you.
And you that are Young, pray remember the Tears he shed for you, the holy
Counsel and Admonition he gave you, that great Love that he expressed to you;
and let all prevail with you, to love God, the People of God, and to engage
with your whole Heart in serious and universal Godliness. And then, if you be
Followers of him, as he is gathered to his People, to his God and Savior; so,
whenever your Dying time shall come, (as God alone knows how soon it will
come), you shall be made Partakers with him of the fame Felicity.

FINIS.

