THE PASTORAL LETTERS Of the INCOMPARABLE JURIEU, Directed to the Protestants
in France Groaning under the BABYLONISH TYRANNY, TRANSLATED: Wherein the
Sophistical Arguments and Unexpressible Cruelties made use of by the PAPISTS
for the making Converts, are laid open and exposed to just Abhorrence.

Unto which is added, a brief Account of the Hungarian Persecution.

LONDON: Printed for T. Fabian, at the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard, a
corner Shop next Cheapside; and J. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball over against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1689.

MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 171^

monument bearing royal blazon GEORGIUS D. G. ^AS BR PR. ET (...) D.
effigy of King George J.P.
sc


TO HIS HIGHNESS THE Prince of ORANGE.
GREAT SIR,
IT would be hard to find out Reasons which might justify the boldness of this
Dedication; did not the Subject of the Book direct it to Your Highnesses feet.
Whither can Religion and Truth fly for refuge from foul Superstition backed
with hellish Fury, but to the Protection of that fortunate Arm to which already
so many Nations owe the enjoyment of their Religion, their Liberty, and
whatsoever is dear to Men and Christians.

By Your Heroic Courage, and more than human Conduct it is, that Our Selves
are not the Subject of a like lamentable History, and that we read the salvage
Barbarities of these Bigots in a Translation. Few Years, it was hoped, would
have passed, before our own Country might have been the Scene of their
Villainies; and what we now upon reading can hardly believe, we should then have
seen and felt. But the God of Heaven of his infinite Mercy checked their
Progress, forbad the proud Waves, and set bounds to their Insolence.

Accept therefore, Mighty PRINCE, this humble Dedication of the best and
fittest Offering can be made to Your Illustrious Name by us the Fellow-Sharers
in that great Deliverance which Providence, by your Highnesses means, has
wrought for us.

Your Highness's Most humbly devoted Servants,

THE Translator's Epistle TO THE READER.
1. IT IS sufficiently known by those who have read the History of France, that
Liberty for the exercise of the Reformed Religion was established by Law: See
Mr. de Serres Hist p. 842.
The Edict of Nantes which allowed them that Liberty, was signed by Henry IV.
in April 1598. which Edict contained a Narration of the former Edicts of
Pacification, and of the Troubles occasioned in France about matters of
Religion.

2. It Is true the Parliament of Paris were something unwilling to confirm this
Edict, and some others made great opposition to it. The Bishop of Modena, who
was Pope 's Nuncio in France, and Berthier, one of the Agents for the Clergy,
made many Petitions to the King, and did greatly importune the Lords of the
Council very seriously and deeply to consider the matter. Ibid. 843, 844.
After the King had heard what was to be said on both sides, he was satisfied
of the Wisdom and Justice of what he had done, as well as of the Necessity
thereof for the establishment of the Peace of France, which had been almost
ruined by the Wars that had been made by reason of Religion. And thereupon the
King addresses himself by a Speech to the Parliament of Paris, and told them,
that he desired and expected they should establish the Edict that he had
granted to them of the Reformed Religion; and in brief tells them, I have made
it, and will have it observed, and his Will should serve for Reason, which is
never demanded of a Prince in such an obedient state. After this Discourse they
confirmed the Edict in February following.

3. This Edict the Reformed accounted their great Security for the free
exercise of their Religion, and it really was so in great degree for many
years. See also a new Systeme of the Apocalypse, p. 219, 220.
How many Violations were offered thereunto in the Reign of Lewis XIII. I shall
not enumerate in this place. Those that have been offered thereunto by the
present French Monarch before its utter Repeal, may be read in a little Book
written some seven or eight Years since, called the Policy of the Clergy of
France to destroy the Protestants of that Kingdom; to which you may add a
second, called, The last Efforts of Afflicted Innocence.

4. And the truth is, their Practice is agreeable to their Doctrine; they do
affirm, that no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, and that all Promises made
to them are void of all Obligation; as in the famous Instances of John Husse
and Jerome of Prague: more Instances of their Perfidiousness might easily be
produced, Vid. Chronic. German. Bucholt p 313. and Florimond de Ralemond in
Hist. of Heresy, p. 407.
but it is done so frequently by our own Authors in the English Tongue, that I
think there is no need thereof.

5. I do not think all those of the Catholic Religion equally false and
perfidious. Vid. Jesuits Morals, p. 46, 47, etc.
I do believe that there is something humane in many of them, that as an
Antidote does preserve them from the venom of their own Doctrine; and that they
may be morally trusted -- as other Men. But after so many Experiments as we
have had of their Falseness, I think they are bold people that will run the
hazard thereof.

6. What Cruelties have been exercised against the Reformed in France, both
before and since the Repeal of the Edict of Nantes, See Mr. Ju^ieu Advice to
all Christians, prefixed to his Accomplishment of Prophesies.
may be learned in part from the following Letters of the Learned Monsieur
Jurieu; concerning which, I think I may say, that instances of greater
Barbarity can hardly be found in the Histories of the Primitive Persecutions by
Heathen Emperors: and yet Court Flatterers would persuade the World, that there
is no Persecution in France, but that all the numerous Conversions made there,
have been by methods of sweetness, favor, and mercy: and by the same methods
of softness and indulgence, how many throughout Europe may be made Turks in a
short space of time, is not hard to conjecture.

7. I wonder with what front these Men can impose such notorious Falsehoods
upon the World: France entertains Ambassadors from all the Courts in
Christendom, Vid. Jurieu ibid.
and is full of foreign Travelers and Merchants, they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, the Miseries, Calamities, the Groans and Cries of the
Reformed. We our selves have seen thousands of them forsaking their Houses,
Lands, Friends and Estates, and coming over to us to find Bread in a strange
Land: and it was never yet known that Men should forsake Plenty at home, upon
the hopes of finding Clothes to cover their nakedness, and Bread to keep them
from starving in a foreign Country. Those that can believe, these Men are not
persecuted, must disbelieve their Senses in more things than the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

8. The persecuted French themselves do acknowledge, that their great Monarch
is not bloody; they impute all these Severities that have been exercised upon
them, to the Solicitations of those who have the conduct of his Conscience.
See a new Systeme on the Apocalypse, p. 224, 225.
They are the Priests and Clergy which have raised this Holy War against the
Reformed: it is they that have blown the fire, and sounded the Alarm to this
Persecution; and 'twere a wonder that there should be a Persecution, and
superstitious Priests and Clergy have no hand therein. One of the sharpest
Persecutions that was ever raised against the Primitive Christians, was
promoted and encouraged by the Pagan Priests, as Sozomen, (I think) relates.
The best things corrupted are the worst: profane Priests and Clergymen without
Conscience perpetrate and encourage the greatest Villainies in the World.

9. Though this Persecution be mostly, if not wholly, owing to the Clergy of
France, yet I do not think them all equally guilty therein. Mr. Arnold, in his
Preface to the Defense of the Perpetuity of the Faith of the Church, against
Mr. Claude, speaks more humanely concerning those of the Reformed Religion in
France, Vid. Preface in the beginning.
and professes a great unwillingness to disturb their outward Tranquillity and
Peace, or to diminish any thing of their temporal Enjoyments and Advantages: He
desires which all his heart (he says) that they might be won over to the Church
by all sorts of Charity, Softness, and Goodness; but abhors all violent means
and endeavors for their Conversion. And I am willing to hope, that there may
be others of the same spirit and temper of this learned Man.

10. But Men's Sentiments alter, and what is sound Doctrine at one time is
hardly so at another. The same learned Man, since the Persecution grew high in
France, has written sundry piqued Books with bitterness and gall enough
against the Reformed, and thereby has sufficiently countenanced and encouraged
their Enemies against them. The Bishop of Meaux late of Condum, is a gentile
Man, a florid Orator, and usually smooth in his Discourses and Conversation;
Vid. Sermon.
but has been a great Zealot (though more secretly than others) in promoting
the ruin of what he calls Heresy; and no man needs farther proof thereof than
to read that fulsome Sermon of his preached at the Funeral of the late Queen of
France; insomuch that I am sometimes under a temptation to say of them all in
the words of the Prophet, The best of them is as a briar, Mich. 7.4.
the most upright is sharper than a thornhedge.

11. I speak not these things with desire to exasperate the Government against
the Roman Catholics in England: Let us but be secured that we may enjoy our
own Religion in Peace, and I am content that they have the private Liberty of
their own. If they will hear what the Learned Men of our Church have to say for
the Doctrine of the Reformation, and against the Doctrines which are properly
and peculiarly Popish, and can be argued out of the one into a belief of the
other, I should very much rejoice therein.

12. Those Doctrines which are peculiar to the Church of Rome are evidently
Novel, and by degrees introduced upon primitive and simple Christianity. This
has been irrefragably proved by the Divines of our own Church against the late
Pamphlets and Pretenses of the Romanists, See the Council of Trent examined by
Catholic Tradition, by D. Stilling fleet.
as well as by the Famous and Learned Monsieur Jurieu in his Pastoral Letters.
Christianity is invariable; what it was in the days of the Apostles and
Primitive Churches, it is at this day: all Additions that have been made
thereunto are either needless or false; and such are all the Novelties of the
ROMAN Church.

13. But if those of the Church of Rome cannot be argued out of their Religion,
and become Proselytes to the Protestant Doctrine and Discipline, they must
remain where they are. The Churches of the Reformation have not learned from
their great Master to Dragoon Men into their Communion, and it seems to them to
be utterly contrary to the Gentleness, Softness, and Kindness of Christianity.
It accords well enough with Mahometanism and the Alcoran to proselyte Men by
drawn Swords and Pistols, for there is but little Argument, See Memoirs of P.
Mornay, vol. 1. page 25, 26.
Reason, or Demonstration, can be produced to persuade a Faith therein: and
where Men cannot be converted by Arguments, they must make use of Clubs if they
will gain any Proselytes. Christianity is furnished with so many of the one,
that it has no need of the other.

14. Whatever Provocations those of the Church of Rome may have given to the
Church of England to treat them with Severity and Rigor, I would by no means
that they should use them. They are Men, and partake with us in the same common
Nature, and I would not have them treated like Beasts. If care be taken that
they do us no hurt, I should never desire that any Violence be offered unto
them; let them sit under their Vines and their Fig Trees, and let no man make
them afra^d.

15. I should be sorry that the Church of England should repay the measure to
the Roman Catholics that the Reformed have suffered in France. The great
Author of our Religion has learned us other Doctrine, and I hope we shall never
depart from the Faith and Practice thereof. He has taught us to do good for
evil, to pray for them that curse us, Matthew. 5.44.
and bless them that persecute and despitefully use us. We are willing to live
peaceably with all men as much as in us lies, Roman. 12.18, 19, 20.
we will not avenge our selves, we will leave that to God, to whom Vengeance
belongs. If they hunger we will feed them, if they thirst we will give them
drink, and by doing thus heap coals of fire upon their heads.

16. I am as jealous and suspicious of the Gentlemen of the Roman Persuasion as
any Man, and hope that all care will be taken that it shall not be in their
power to do us hurt; and when that is secure, I wish they may be treated with
all the kindness that Christianity requires of us. I am sure the Christian
Religion is most full of Love, Sweetness, and Obligations; and there is nothing
in the World that commends it more to the Acceptance of Men: and none do it
more Honor, and more advance its Reputation, than those that delight in
Kindness, and scatter their Obligations upon all sorts of Men: herein they do
like the Majesty of Heaven, Matthew. 5.45.
who causes his Sun to rise upon the good and the bad, and his rain to descend
upon the just and unjust. It Is a thing of no great difficulty, to treat those
with Kindness that oblige us; but to show Love to our Enemies, and an Affection
for those that hate and destroy us, is a more difficult Lesson, and worthy of
the Christian Religion, which teaches Men those heights of Perfection which
cannot be learned any where else.

17. The Author of these following Letters is a Person far above all the
Eulogies that I can possibly give him. His Writings have been of very great use
to the Reformed in France; his Praise is in all the Reformed Churches in
Christendom, and he will be mentioned with honor to many Generations. The
Subject Matter of his Letters is partly Doctrinal, and partly Historical. In
the doctrinal part of them, he very well lays open the weakness and sophistry
of the Romish Priests, in the defenses they make for their Falsehoods and
Superstitions. In the historical part of them, he reports such inhumane and
beastly Cruelties exercised upon those of the Reformed Religion, as may cause a
just horror to all that read it. He that can believe such Cruelties do receive
any countenance or encouragement from the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
may believe what he pleases. He may believe that the Sun is the cause of
Darkness, and that all the Fruits of the Earth are the product of the Frosts
and Snows of the coldest and most Northern Climates.

18. When the Learned Arabian observed that the Romish Christians ate their
God, he said, Let my Soul be among the Philosophers. When I observe what
Cruelties and Barbarities are committed by them, upon their Brethren, their
Neighbors, and their Acquaintance, I do not say, Let my Soul be among the
Philosophers, but with old Jacob, I will say, O my Soul, come not thou into
their Secret, Genesis 49.6.
and to their Assembly mine honor be not thou united. Should I have Communion
with them in such Villainies, I should think, I should never have Communion with
my Savior in his Heavenly Kingdom. I can never believe that a Person so kind,
so tender, pitiful and compassionate as Christ Jesus was toward Mankind, could
ever preach such Doctrine as does encourage Blood and Rapine, Cruelty and
Oppression, among any of his Disciples. I could as easily believe all the
nonsensical Doctrine of the Alcoran, and all the ridiculous Fables of the
Jewish Talmud, as that the Doctrine of our Savior does countenance, or
justify the most Cruel and Imhumane PERSECUTIONS.

19. Concerning the Translation of these Letters, I designed it for the
Advantage of those of the Reformed Religion in this Nation, and I hope God will
bless it to that end, and that it may create upon the minds of Men a suspicion
of the falsehood of Popish Doctrines, and an abhorrence of Popish Practices. In
Translating I have endeavored to make the Author speak English: I have not
kept my self strictly to his Words, but have endeavored to represent his Sense
truly, and have not willingly perverted it.

The FIRST PASTORAL LETTER: IN WHICH Are discovered the Methods that are at
this Day used to make Converts.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
YOu may be assured, that we are pierced and wounded with your Sorrows and
Afflictions, and that from the Haven where the Providence of God has placed
us, we do behold with eyes bathed in tears, the terrible Waves of that Tempest
that tosses you, and has shipwrecked the Vessels in which you are imbarqued:
We advise with our own hearts and affections, with our duty, with the uneasy
state and circumstances in which both you and we are, what we may do for your
consolation and security against the peril of seduction, and we can find almost
nothing possible; insomuch that till God shall open those Doors that are at
this day closed, we shall choose to speak to you at a distance, in hopes that
God will not tarry long ere he give us the opportunity of a nearer and more
intimate conversation. We will obviate and oppose that evil that presses most
hard upon you. We do not think the Cross of Christ, which you now bear, is the
greatest calamity to which you are exposed. It Is your Glory: and we find by
Letters that come from those that persevere, that God is their Comforter, that
he has prevented our desires, that he has given efficacy to a few words, that
we have sent from far, that he has absolutely, and without us, wrought upon
you, that he has very much surpassed our hopes, that he is in you a living
Fountain of Consolations, more abundant than we could dare to hope. There do
come Letters from our Confessors which are in Chains, in the Galleys, in Holes,
and Dungeons of an hundred feet in depth, in dark Prisons, in Torments, which
ravish us, which revive the ancient times, which give a new birth to our
ancient Martyrs, which make us know, that the greater the Torments are to which
you are exposed, the greater is the courage and strength that God does
communicate for the bearing and overcoming of them.

That which we most fear on your behalf, is Seduction, the Examples that we
have seen with our eyes make us tremble. Persons that we looked upon as
Pillars, have been broken as Reeds. That which they call Conferences (that is
to say, the Sophistry of false Teachers, who employ all their art to deceive)
have perverted the Judgments of many, from whom we expected an invincible
stedfastness and perseverance. They oppress and confound you with Disputes.
They put into your hands Books, in which Falsehood is clothed in the dress,
habit and appearance of Truth. They take from you all those things that may
protect, and secure you from the Poison of those venomous Serpents that are
perpetually hissing in your ears. Whilst our Hands are bound, and our Tongues
tied, we do with grief behold the Sheep of Christ rent and torn from his Fold,
to be carried into the dark Prisons of the Prince of Lies. What is to be done
in this case? It seems to no purpose to write more Books, there are a thousand,
and a thousand ready written, and very lately one was published, as an Answer
to the malignant Subtilties of these false Teachers. But it will not come to
you, by reason of the great care that is taken to prevent honest Men from going
out of the Kingdom, and good Books from entering into it. If new Books should
be written, they would have the same fortune. Besides, it is uneasy to trouble
the world with Repetitions, when we cannot have the hopes or consolation of
being profitable unto you thereby. If Repetitions must be made, it ought to be
with some hopes of advantage. For this reason we are resolved to write no more
Books, but shall content our selves with Letters. It may be, that God may cause
them to fly over all those Ramparts that the new Inquisition has raised at
all the Ports of the Realm. At least there is some reason to hope, that they
will more easily get over those Obstacles and Impediments, which are opposed to
the design that we have to fortify you against Temptation.

We shall publish these Letters every month, or every fifteen days, or more
frequently, according to occurrences and necessities: and in them we shall
endeavor to discover the illusions by which we are assured that the Seducers
will attempt to deceive you. Among others they make use of the Discourses and
Writings of the Bishop of Meaux, of Petisson the great Converter, and Monsieur
Nicholas. They oblige you perpetually to read over the Exposition of the
Catholic Faith, written by that Bishop, to paint, and color the Popish
Religion. Some months since the same Prelate published a Pastoral Letter to the
new Converts of this Diocese with the same design and intention, that is to
seduce you, and withdraw from your eyes the Deformity and Ugliness of the false
Religion. They never cease to commend unto you, the mischievous difficulties of
Monsieur Nicholas his Book, entitled, The pretended Reformed convinced of
Schism. There it is proved to you, that by the way of Examination and Inquiry,
it is impossible to find out truth, and that you will never hit on it, but by
submitting to the Authority of the Church. Monsieur Petisson has revived the
same difficulties in a late new Book. And it is one of those Books to which
those that have been seduced do send us, as one of the Sources from whence they
have derived their Illuminations, These Books shall be the subject matter of
these Letters, not that I intend to examine, and confute them line by line, but
only to expose and lay open the falsity of these Teachers, the imposture and
gullery of their Sophisms, and the unfaithfulness of all their advances and
progressions, but we will not confine our selves within the bounds of
Controversy. We will take care to acquaint you with all things that are most
considerable in this Persecution, we will inform you in those passages of the
Life, Death, and Behavior of our Martyrs, and Confessors, which are most
proper for your establishment, and edification. For which reason we do entreat
all those that know any thing that is certain therein, that they will inform us
concerning it, that we may make it public for the benefit and advantage of the
weak.

We will begin with the Pastoral Letter of the Bishop of Meaux, to the new
Catholics of his Diocese. We shall pass by his Prologue, and engage with him
in the matter of his Letter, by reflections on the manner whereby the Reformed
have been brought to their pretended Change and Conversion. In the mean time I
cannot forbear to stay one moment on the Title thereof: The Pastoral Letter of
my Lord the Bishop of Meaux to the new Catholics of his Diocese. It Is one of
the pretended Successors of the Apostles, which causes himself to be Printed
under the Name and Title of my Lord.

These Gentlemen are well advanced since the Authors and Founders of
Christianity, who called themselves plainly by their own names, without any
other Title than that of Servants of Jesus Christ, and Apostles of our Lord. My
Lords St. Peter and St. Paul had forgotten to set the character of their
Grandeur on the front of their Pastoral Letters or Epistles. If the corruption
of the World proceed so far as to authorize the custom of calling Bishops
Lords, methinks their vanity should not be so great as to give themselves that
appellation. It Is not very edifying to see the marks of pride and wordly vanity
on the front of a Pastoral Letter. I do not observe this, to give any offense
to the Bishop of Meaux in particular; my dear Brethren, it is to make you
sensible of that Religion whereinto they would initiate and engage you; it is a
Religion the soul whereof is Pride, and the principal members and heads thereof
are monsters of Emptiness and Vanity. Christian Humility displays its
Characters upon all things, but the false Religion carries Pride to its utmost
height, and leaves the footsteps thereof on all things wherewith it has any
conversation. We shall one day have occasion to make you see it, in points of
much more importance than this, which nevertheless is not so light, but that it
deserves that we take some notice of it. Do not suffer your selves to be abused
by those that tell you, That in some Protestant States the Bishops retain the
same Honors. The Bishops of England have this to say for themselves, That they
are Peers of the Realm, to which state and condition the Name and Title of My
Lord does appertain and belong: but besides, I am persuaded that the wiser of
these Gentlemen, will willingly sacrifice these Titles (which do not
sufficiently bespeak the humility of a Minister of Jesus Christ) to a general
Reformation in the Church, when it shall be received. On the contrary, Pride is
so very much of the essence of Popery, that it will forsake all rather than
renounce it.

I come to the manner how Conversions are made in France according to my Lord
of Meaux. I do not marvel, my dearest Brethren, that you are returned in
Troops, Pastoral Letter; page 3.
and with so much ease, to the Church where your Ancestors have served God. The
foundation of Christianity, and as I have already said, the Character of
Baptism, has secretly called you thither. These Gentlemen rejoice at the
Facility they have found in bringing back the Protestants to their Church, that
is to say, in forcing Subscriptions from an infinite number of Persons, who
have conceded either to their threatenings, or the fear of losing their Estates,
or the torments and persecution of the Dragoons. It Is true there have been
seen, examples of weakness therein, which have been strange and prodigious; and
we know that they make a great prejudice and rock of Offense thereof; they tell
you, If it were the true Religion, would not those that profess it adhere more
closely to it? Some of our Brethren have wrote expressly to satisfy you against
this Scandal. They have showed you that things have happened much after the
same manner in the ancient Persecutions, and that Defections have fallen but
little short of being general. In those times men ran in Troops to offer
Incense to Idols, as in our days they have been seen running to make Signatures
and Subscriptions. At all times there have been few persons capable of
suffering torments. Martyrs are chosen Vessels, upon whom God pours out an
extraordinary measure of his Grace, to strike with Astonishment the Enemies of
the Truth, to shame and confound the weakness of those that fall, and to
support the Faith of the infirm. These are Miracles, but if they were frequent
and ordinary they would not be so. If the view and consideration of so many
Persons as have conceded to Violence, or the fear, of Sufferings does
scandalize and offend you, look not that way, but behold and consider the
stability and courage of your Ancestors, which established the Reformation in
the last Age. Consider the number of our ancient Martyrs, behold their
Constancy, their Christian Kindness, and the Blessings that they gave to those
that burnt them. Consider the strength which ennabled them to bear the most
horrible Punishments and Tortures. They were burned by a slow fire, they saw
their Bowels drop out in the flames, before they gave up the ghost: they were
made to live, by skill and art, in the most cruel torments, sometimes many
days, and sometimes many weeks together, and never did one word of murmuring or
impatience escape from them: they prayed for their Hangmen, they gave Thanks to
God, they sung his Praises, and to their last breath called upon his Name. When
they tell you at this day, If your Religion were true, you would adhere more
closely unto it; answer them, If our Religion had been false, they had never
had so invincible an Adherence to it, and so strong a Passion for it, nor had
they ever suffered death for the defense of it: or if there have been some
heady persons that have maintained their Opinions with obstinacy even to
punishment and death, their pains and death has not been accompanied with an
humility so profound, a patience so exemplary, a love and sweetness so perfect,
a zeal so ardent, a piety so pure and undefiled, a submission so entire, a joy
so firm, solid, bright and shining. The Spirit of Lies and Delusions does not
produce such effects. These are the Characters of the Spirit of God, they are
the effects of Grace, and of that Grace that is not given to Reprobates and
Martyrs of falsehood and imposture.

My Brethren, these Objects are at a distance, they are behind you, and you
will find some difficulty in reflecting on them, but you will find none in
considering those that are before your eyes: they are sufficient to defend you
against the scandal of that Facility wherewith they reproach you, and wherewith
they affirm that your Brethren have forsaken their Religion. Oppose thereunto
above one hundred thousand persons that have left the Realm within the space of
one year last past, without counting almost as many more that have forsaken it,
within twenty years that this Persecution has continued, tho not in its height
and rage. There are among them, those that have forsaken all those things which
are called Goods, Honors, Ease, and the convenient Accommodations of Life:
certainly they did not find it a thing so easy to enter with a satisfied mind
into the bosom of the Roman Church. Oppose thereunto more than forty thousand
Prisoners that are in the Goals and Cloisters of the Realm, which choose to
suffer all sorts of miseries and calamities there, rather than to embrace the
Popish Religion. Oppose thereunto Persons of Quality; such are the Marquess of
Bordage, condemned to the Galleys, and afterward to perpetual Imprisonment;
the Marquess of Musse, who every day expects the same condemnation; the
Marquess of Rochegade, and the Gentlemen his Sons; the Marquess of Cagni;
Monsieur Beringhen and all his Family; the Marquess of Lunge; the Marquess of
the Isle of Gast, who is in the Citadel of Angers; and an infinite number of
other Gentlemen, who prefer the Galleys or a Prison before the pleasure to
which the Bishop of Meaux invites them; that is, of rejoining themselves to
that Church in which their Fathers served God.

Oppose thereunto a considerable number of Martyrs and Confessors, whereof some
are in Dungeons, that are really the Images of Hell, they being deep, obscure,
dark, and a hundred feet under ground: such are the Reformed of Diepe, Haure,
and other places, which are in the Prisons of Aumale, of whom we shall be able
to tell you particular stories at some other time. Add to these more than six
hundred persons that are now actually in the Galleys for their Religion. This
is no hyperbolical Computation, but one made by a Roman Catholic, a maritime
Officer, now living at Marseilles: we have his Letter, and without naming him,
we shall be able to produce it at a convenient season: behold a line or two
thereof at present, Here are six hundred Gally-slaves of the Religion called
Protestant, who by their patience move compassion from the most hard-hearted
and unpitiful of their Officers. The number of them must needs be augmented
since that time; for the Letter was dated from Marseilles the 27th of June,
1686. that is to say, more than two months since; and without doubt there are
more arrived there. It Is newly reported, that at this time there are to the
number of two thousand, some say four thousand, in that miserable state and
case. The famous Monsieur Lewis of Marolles, Advocate of Stemenehaud, was not
then arrived there, for he parted not from Paris, with the other Prisoners
under the same condemnation with himself, till the 20th of July, and came not
to Dijon till the 30th of the same Month, from whence at last he arrived at
Marseilles laden with a Chain of fifty pound weight about his neck, and a
violent Fever, which never left him during the time of that sad Journey. He is
a Confessor of Jesus Christ, which all Paris beheld at the Tournello laden
with Chains of an extraordinary weight, A Court of Judicature in Paris, and
also a Prison.
and preaching in the midst of his Irons. All France have their eyes turned
upon him, as on the greatest example of Courage, Piety, and tenderness of
Conscience, that this Age has seen. We shall one day give you the History of
his Confession, and make you to understand his Sentiments by his own Letters,
where you will see the Spirit and Character of the ancient Martyrs. He is one
of our most illustrious Confessors, but he is not alone; God raises up others
every day, as you shall learn hereafter. The same Sea-Officer that wrote from
Marseilles that there were already six hundred Gally-slaves of the Reformed
Religion there, adds, It Is fifteen days since, that Monsieur de Lezan, a
Gentleman of Quality, was condemned to the Galleys, being accused and convicted
of having been at a Meeting. The day after, many persons were put to the Rack,
to oblige them to accuse some men of Name. These unhappy Wretches endured both
the ordinary and extraordinary Rack with such a constancy, as affrighted the
Judges, and softened the Spirit of the Hangman to that degree, that the chief
Magistrate was forced to stand over him with a Cane to oblige him to turn the
Wheel. Behold here truth in matters of fact, which can never be doubted seeing
they are attested by a person of a contrary Religion, who is upon the place,
and in the Country where these cruelties are committed. Behold Confessors,
which make it apparent that the Church of Rome does not find it a thing so
facile, (as the Bishop of Meaux reports it) to cause the Reformed to enter into
their Communion. Behold Examples of Constancy that are worthy of your most
attentive Consideration. Death is more easy to be endured than the ordinary
and extraordinary Rack, and those illustrious Confessors do well deserve the
Title of Martyrs. But will you oppose to that Facility which your Converters
find, and whereof they make an Argument to draw you into the Roman Religion;
will you, I say, oppose to your Seducers Martyrs in all forms? Oppose to them,
Monsieur Teissier Viguier of Durfort in Cevennes, who was hanged in the borders
or entrance into that Country some months since, in a place called La Salle,
only because he had served God in a public Assembly; as also one named Gysot,
who was burnt alive at N^rac. This poor man was so weak as to sign an
Abjuration of his Religion through fear and the persecution of the Dragoons, or
it may be through the weakness and infirmity of his Age, for he was more than
seventy, and drew nigh to eighty years of age. Being fallen sick, God restored
to him his Zeal and Courage, that he might obtain the Crown of Martyrdom. He
refused to communicate after the manner of the Church of Rome, and declared,
That he retracted that unhappy Signature that they had extorted and forced from
him. The Priest, that he might execute the Law, that ordains, that at any rate
whatsoever, they must give the Holy Sacrament to the Sick, forced him to
receive the Host, or consecrated Bread, and put it into his mouth: the old man
(according to his duty) spit it out; and therefore was condemned to be burnt
alive in the fire. He went to this horrible Punishment with the joy of the holy
Martyrs. He was bound to the Post without any appearance of commotion: He sung
the Praises of God in the midst of the Flames to his last breath. This
Constancy made so great an Impression upon the Spirits of all the Inhabitants
of Nerac, and gave so great an Astonishment to the Executioners, that they have
not proceeded to execute a like Sentence pronounced against one named Fabiores,
of the same City and of the same Country, condemned also to be burnt alive, for
having, as the former, spit out the Host, which by force was put into his
mouth. We have not yet heard that the Sentence has been executed; when it is
done, we shall give you notice of it. We have a Martyr of a more sublime and
raised Order; it is Monsieur Rey of Mismes, Student in Theology, who after he
had preached eight or nine months in Cevennes, was taken, arrested, condemned
to Death, and executed at Beaucaire on the 7th of August. The Circumstances of
his Martyrdom, his Courage, his Answers, his Piety, are too eminent and
peculiar to be wrapped up and buried in a short Narration. We do promise it you
at large, when we shall have collected from faithful Records all the parts of
the holy History of this glorious Martyr.

Behold already, my dear Brethren, many things that you have to oppose to those
Words of the Bishop of Meaux, I do not wonder that you are returned in Troops,
and with so much facility to the Church. But this is not all; Set him matter of
fact against this pretended Facility, and assure him, that for more than four
months time there have been Assemblies almost every day in Cevennes, and in the
adjacent parts, for the offering up Prayers and Supplications to God, sometimes
in Woods, and at other times in Caves, and Rocks, and Dens of the Earth. The
Dragoons, which almost always surprise them, put them to the Sword according to
their Instructions, they Kill, and Hang, and drag them into Prisons: but all
signifies nothing, they assemble nevertheless. In the month of June last, near
the end thereof, the Dragoons having surprised an Assembly near Nismes, they
killed many of them on the place, and four they hung upon the trees. The
Hangmen withdrew, supposing that they would have no great inclination to return
again to that place. But two hours after there was another Assembly in the same
place, on the dead bodies, and in the view of the Carcasses that hung on the
trees of the mountains. There is not a week passes without like Assemblies, and
like Massacres. They reckon more than sixty persons at an Assembly that was
made between Uzes and Bagnol in the beginning of July: some add, That women
were ravished, and others ripped up. But we reserve the particulars of these
things till afterward, and you may reckon that we tell you nothing but what is
true and c^rtain; for which reason, we choose rather to defer the edification
that you might receive from the firmness and constancy of our Martyrs and
Confessors, than to tell you any thing as certain that may prove false. But
this is enough at present to give the B. of Meaux and others of his spirit to
understand, that they have no great cause to triumph in our weakness, and the
facility they find in overcoming us. It may be they have boasted too soon, they
are not yet where they thought they were. We do already see the vanity of those
Bravado's, That in four months time there would not be any thing heard of a
Hugonot in France. These fine projects are shipwrecked, and the difficulty is
yet to come. As for you, my Brethren, that which we shall say, and the Objects
that we shall set before your eyes ought to shame you. If you have been so weak
as to fall, you ought to take courage, and rise again, and to redouble your
strength, if you have not had enough to support you hitherunto. But let us
continue to hear the Pastoral Letter of the Bishop of Meaux.

Not one of you has suffered violence, either in his Person or Goods. Let them
not bring you these deceitful Letters, which are addressed from Strangers,
transformed into Pastors, under the Title of Pastoral Letters to the
Protestants of France, who are fallen by the force of Torments. These Letters
concern you not any otherwise than as they are made by persons that could never
prove their Mission. So far have you been from suffering torments, that you
have not so much as heard them mentioned. I hear other Bishops say the same.
But for you, my Brethren, I say nothing to you, but what you may speak as well
as I. You are returned peaceably to us, you know it. Behold one of those
objects, whereunto we have not been accustomed. Maimbourg, Varillas, Brueys,
and multitudes of others have had the front to say, that Conversions are made
without violence. On that subject they have been baffled in a manner sufficient
to have covered impudence it self with confusion. But it is to wash the
Blackmoor's skin. These Gentlemen have Foreheads of Brass, and can blush at
nothing. By this little judge of the fidelity of your Converters. You that have
seen your Goods wasted, your Persons contained, your Neighbors dragged to
Prisons, Women shaven, and put into Convents, Christians let down into Holes,
where putrified Flesh and Carrion had been thrown. Others put into Prisons,
where the Water runs under their feet, being supported by narrow planks, upon
which they are mounted night and day, lest they fall as from a Precipice, and
perish. Others have been burnt and roasted, and others made fools by watching
them without cessation or intermission.

All France has seen it, all Europe is witness of it, and they dare affirm the
contrary to what your eyes have seen. Do you think that these Gentlemen dare
not lie about the Ages past, when they speak to you of Tradition, and of things
said and done a thousand and twelve hundred years agone, when they have no
regard to present Truths in matters of Fact, whereof there are as many
Witnesses almost as there are persons alive in this part of the World. In the
name of God think of it, when they forbid you all trial and examination of
Doctrines, and tell you that you must believe the Church; that is to say, false
Teachers, which affirm, that you must believe things without taking any
knowledge of them. See, I say, whether there be any confidence or trust to be
put in such men which have consecrated themselves to Lying, and have renounced
all modesty and shame.

The Bishop of Meaux has heard all the Bishops say, that no violence was used
in their Diocesses. We ought to understand how these Gentlemen do define
Violence, and what it is they call Torments. Among the Bishops, he of Autun will
find difficulty to say so, and Monsieur de Meaux, that those of his Diocese had
not so much as heard of Torments. He went accompanied with the Hangman to Madam
de S. Andrew Montbrun, Widow of a famous General, which had the Honor to
command in chief the Armies of the King, and those of the Venetians, with a
great deal of Glory. This Bishop, I say, with the Missionaries, accompanied
with the chief Magistrate, and the Magistrate taking two or three Hangmen, with
all the Instruments of Torture, went thus to endeavor her Conversion. If this
be false, they will do well to convince the Men and Officers of her House,
which have seen, said it, and writ it. But the Bishop of Meaux has done
nothing, nor seen nothing of like nature in his Diocese. We have good testimony
that violence has been committed there as well as elsewhere. But although what he
says should be true, behold a great marvel whereof he has great reason to
rejoice! Paris and the Country round about it were last of all attacked. All
France had been covered with Fear, Tears and Blood. Paris and the Brie saw
nothing round about but bloody Troops, and Emissaries laden with the Spoils of
the Reformed, and red with their Blood. It Is a great Miracle, that these
Objects, without drawing nearer have anquished, and overcome them. As if the
fear of an Evil, which one sees within four steps of him, were not as capable
of doing violence to the mind, as the Evils which are felt immediately. On the
contrary, a person has fallen under fear, which has resisted pain and torment.
The Dragoons of Bearn, of Guienne, of Poictou, of Languedoc, of Normandy had
labored for the Bishop of Meaux. After that let him glory if he can, of the
Facility of Conversions.

But I am weary of confuting these impudent Boldnesses by matters of fact,
which our Persecutors dispute, and by Witnesses which they reproach. Let us see
if Monsieur de Meaux will reproach and object against himself. He wrote his
Pastoral Letter in the Month of April last, a little before Easter, to invite,
and prepare the new Converts for the approaching Communion. It Is precisely on
the same time that he wrote to one of his Diocese which was fled, the Letter
following.

From Meaux, April 3, 1686. MONSIEUR,
I Continue to write to you, notwithstanding the Answer you made to my former
Letter. I have there observed a Character and Style too much of a Minister, to
attribute it to you. In a word, I apprehend, that it does not proceed from a
Spirit such as yours. But although it be so, I shall not cease to invite you to
return. I have seen in a Letter which you wrote to Mademoiselle of U. that the
true Church does not persecute. What understand you by that Sir? Do you
understand that the Church by her self never makes use of force? That is very
true, since the Church has no other Arms but spiritual. Do you understand that
Princes, which are Sons of the Church, never ought to make use of the Sword
which God has put into their hands to abase the Enemies thereof? Do you dare
to say contrary to the opinion of your own Doctors, who have maintained by so
many Writings, that the Republic of Geneva had power and right to condemn
Servetus to the Fire, for denying the Divinity of the Son of God. And without
serving my self of the Examples, and Authority of your Doctors, tell me in what
Text of Scripture Heretics and Schismatics are excepted from the number of
those Malefactors against which S. Paul says God has armed Kings and Princes?
And although you will not permit Christian Princes to take vengeance of such great
Crimes, because they are injurious to God, can they not take vengeance on them
because they cause trouble and sedition in States? Do you not see clearly, that
you build upon a false Principle? And if it were true, they were the Arrians,
Nestorians, and Pelagians which had reason of complaint against the Church,
since it was they that were the persecuted and banished, and Catholic Princes
those that persecuted and banished them. And at present also the Catholics
which are punished with death in Sueden, and so many other Kingdoms, would have
reason to complain of those that are called the Reformed, and every one in his
turn would have right and wrong, right in one place, and wrong in another, and
Religion would depend altogether upon uncertainties. But this is enough on this
Subject to convince so good a Spirit as yours. Only know, that when it pleases
God to abandon us to our own thoughts, and imaginations, the best Spirits are
touched, and affected by the least appearances. The fear that you have, that
they will make you adore Bread, has much appearance of truth through your
prejudice and prepossession. Consider in the mean time, without entering into
that Controversy, which passes the Bounds of a Letter; consider, I say, that
it was a fear of like nature which made the Arrians and Disciples of Paulus
Samosatenus, that they would not give divine Honors to a Man, an Infant, a
Creature, how perfect, and how great soever his privileges might be. 'Twas
human reason, 'twas sense, 'twas prejudice which inspired them with these vain
fears. Take heed, lest your Religion, after their example, do not too much call
in Reason and human Sense to its succor, and that your trouble and difficulty
do not proceed from the custom of following them. However it be, you see that
your Reformers have done nothing else but renew Controversies ended six hundred
years ago, when Berengarius moved them. And if you call in doubt the Judgment
which was given against him, others will doubt with as much reason concerning
all preceding Councils, and then behold us under an obligation to examine anew
all that has been decreed, as if we began to be Christians, and all that our
Fathers had resolved serve for nothing. In one word the meaning is, if
Christians, when they are not of an opinion concerning the Sense of Scripture,
will not acknowledge a living, speaking Authority, to which they must submit,
the Christian Church is assuredly the weakest of all Societies that are in the
World, the most exposed to remediless Divisions, the most abandoned to
Innovators, and factious persons. This is that to which your Ministers with all
their subtleties have never been able to find an Answer, and they content
themselves with bringing Examples, where they pretend that Councils have not
always determined well. All these Examples are false or ill alleged. In one
quarter of an hours time, you which are a Man of Sense, will be convinced
thereof; and you do receive things with too much credulity, without ever
putting your self on the labor to examine them. But without putting you upon
these Disquisitions, consider only whether it be likely that God who has
permitted so many depths in the Scripture, and from thence have arisen so many
Schisms amongst those that profess to receive it, has not left some means to
his Church to quiet and pacify them, in such manner, that there is no remedy
for Divisions, but to let every one believe according to his fancy, and thence
insensibly to carry Men to an indifferency in Religion, which is the greatest
of all Evils. Think, Master, think of it, hear your own reason, and not the
subtleties of your Ministers, who at what rate soever will defend their
Prejudices, and not pass for Teachers of Lies. Think of these things: excuse
those Expressions which may seem a little dark and disordered; it is much
better that you attend to the simplicity of a Brother that endeavors to gain a
Brother, than a polite and studied Discourse. Come, and assure your self, that
I will do all for you, whom I esteem, and who are dear to me; and that I am
cordially

Yours, etc.
Thus Signed, J. Benign, E. de Meaux.



Forasmuch as we have imposed a necessity upon our selves, not to go beyond a
Sheet, we pass by our Reflections on this Letter, till another Letter, which we
shall give you in a few days; for this serves only as a Preface. In the mean
time, we recommend you to the Grace and Mercy of God. Amen.

Sept. 1, 1687.
The SECOND PASTORAL LETTER: IN WHICH What Monsieur de Meaux says concerning
the right of Persecutors, for submission to Councils is confuted. A
considerable error of the same Gentleman about a matter of Fact in Antiquity.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
THE necessity of concluding, hindered us in our former Letter from adding our
reflections upon that which the Bishop of Meaux wrote to one of his Diocese
that was escaped by flight. At present we entreat both you my Brethren, and all
reasonable Men in the World, to compare these two Letters together, the
Pastoral Letter that is public, and this which is private, and particular.
Will any one find the Bishop of Meaux here? Are they two persons, or is it but
one? Himself in public, and the same person in private. According to Monsieur
de Meaux's Writing, and Printing for the new Converts of his Diocese, neither
he nor the other Bishops have ever heard any speech of Dragoons and Torments.
According to himself writing in his Closet to a particular person, the Case is
not the same. It is true there is a Persecution for the sake of Religion, but
it is just, it is allowed, it is authorized by our example, by that of the
Ancients, and by Divine and Human Laws. Good God! How do these Men govern
themselves? And what do they think? Could the Bishop of Meaux ever hope that
his Printed Letter should never fall into the hands of him to whom this written
Letter was addressed? I would fain know what will be answered thereunto. If
Monsieur de Meaux has right and reason on his side, in his Letter to Monsieur
Dev. -- why does he say that himself and other Bishops have not heard any
speech of Persecution? It is a pleasure, and an advantage to us to see these
Gentlemen deny this Persecution, and thereby against public knowledge, and
notoriety charge themselves with falsehood. It is an homage that they pay to
Truth. It is a confession intelligible enough, that violence, and the means
that they employ, are contrary to the spirit of Humanity, and that of the
Gospel. But what a shame is it for them to contradict themselves, to confess in
private, what they deny in public, and acknowledge themselves false Witnesses
by their own peoples declarations.

However it be, behold us carried from matter of Fact to that of Right. It is
no longer debated whether there be a Persecution, but whether they have right
to Persecute for the sake of Religion. It is a question on which so much has
been lately written, that nothing new can be said concerning it. Nevertheless,
having Printed the Letter of the Bishop of Meaux, and because there is something
that is dazzling, and apt to deceive in his manner of writing, we think our
selves obliged to Print also a refutation thereof: we will therefore repeat his
words, and examine them one after another. I have seen in the Letter that you
wrote to Mademoiselle de V. -- that the true Church does not Persecute; what
understand you by that Monsieur? Do you understand that the Church by it self
never makes use of force? That is true, since the Church has no other Arms but
those that are Spiritual. What means this little Paragraph of Gibberish, which
is formed and contrived on purpose to impose upon the simple? They are willing
that it should mean, that it is not the Church of Rome that raises the present
Persecution, nor is it according to the Principles thereof. For it is that
which they persuade the new Converts. It is by this means that they take away
the scandal that the new Papists take at the Conduct of their Church. It is the
King, say they, that does it, it is not the Church, for it serves it self only
of Spiritual Weapons: if what is done be disapproved, it ought not to be
imputed, they say, to their Religion, which neither appoints nor advises it.
That which was written to us not long since, by one of their most illustrious,
and best satisfied Converts comes to this. I do not answer, says she, to all
that which you have said concerning the ways that are made use of to gain
Converts. I believe that nothing is to be imputed to any Religion, but what it
appoints to be believed, and practiced. This answer is very Gentile, and worthy
of a Lady that thinks herself obliged to answer to nothing. But it ought to be
rememembred that there is a Tribunal where answers must be made one day,
without any regard to the difference of Sexes, where no evasions will be
permitted us, and that we shall be punished there, for having been unwilling to
attend to those things which might have made us understand the nature of that
Religion that we had newly entertained. However it be, these Gentlemen persuade
their Disciples that it is not the Spirit of the Roman Church that does cause
this Persecution. Nothing must be imputed to any Religion, but what it appoints
to be believed. The Church never serves it self of force, for it has no other
Arms, but such as are Spiritual. There is among the Doctors of the Roman
Church, on the one hand, an impudence, and hardness of Face, which is
inconceivable, and on the other hand there is in their Disciples an abyss of
credulity that is incomprehensible. Can hardiness, and shamelesness be greater
than to say that Persecution is not of the spirit of the Roman Church. One of
our See the Letter of Doctor Sonstelle.
Brethren has written concerning it a little while since, with so much brevity
that every one may read it, and with so much strength as to convince them of
the falsehood thereof. We prove that the Persecution is of the spirit of the
Church of Rome by its Principles, its Doctrine, and its Practice. I do not know
whether there can be any other source, or fountain of proofs, when we treat of
matters of Fact. The Principles of the Roman Church are, that all those that
are separate from their Church are damned eternally. Its Doctrine is that the
Secular Power, with Fire and Sword, may be employed for the extirpation of
those that she calls Heretics. The Council of Constance, which France esteems
as the most Authentic, that has been these thousand years, has so
determined, and so it practiced. For it caused John Lous, and Jerome Osprague,
to be burned. The Albigenses, Waldenses, Bohemians, and many others were not
Massacred but by order of Councils, and Popes who published Crusadoes against
them, and gave Indulgences, and promised Pardon of sin to those that should
destroy them. The Tribunal of the Inquisition, which burns all those that are
either suspected, or Convicted of Heresy, is a Tribunal of the Church,
established, and maintained thereby; and it is looked on by the Popes as the
great Rampart and Defense thereof. Never were there any Massacres committed
which were not either Commanded, or Approved by Popes. They are matters of Fact
notoriously known, and no body dares to dissent unto them. Rome has sung Te
Deum, that is, We praise thee O God, etc. and given thanks to him for the
Persecution of France. Nothing is more proper to make known what is the Spirit
of the Roman Church, than the Conduct of the Court of Rome. We have said that
the Pope publicly commends what has been done in France, and has caused Te
Deum to be sung for it. In the mean time it is certain, that all Men of good
sense in the Court of Rome, do both detest, and scoff at the Conduct of France.
Whence comes it then that this Court seems to approve in public, that which it
condemns in private. It is not to flatter the King, for they have no respect or
regard for him in that Country, and every one knows the indignation that they
have against him. But it is because that Rome dares not declare against the
Principles of their Religion. If the Pope should condemn ways of violence
against pretended Heretics, he would mutiny his whole Church against himself,
and make himself worthy of deposition. He would condemn his Councils, he would
reproach the memory of his Predecessors, he would overturn his own Principles
from top to bottom. So that the public approbation which he gives to
Persecution, is the Sacrifice which he makes of his Conscience, to his duty in
quality of a Pope. But like a Man of good sense, he reserves the right of
condemning in private all that which he publicly approves. The Letter of the
Queen of Sueden, which has been made public in the News of the Republic of
Learning, has conjectured discreetly concerning it. For it is not to be
believed that Queen Christina would dare so openly to declare her self against
the Sentiments of the Court of Rome, if that Court had approved of this manner
of Conversions. Behold a second Letter of the same Queen, which tells us
something more exact, concerning the Sentiments which prevail in the Country
where she is.

A Letter of Queen Christina to M --.
IT IS with astonishment that I have seen my Letter made public in your Parts,
I do not understand how it is come to pass, and I do assure you, that it is not
I my self that have published it: Nor do I believe, that he to whom it was
written, would so far disoblige his Master, as to be willing to do me that
pleasure. However it be, I do not repent that I wrote it, for I do not fear any
man. I pray God with all my heart, that this false Joy and Triumph of the
Church, do not one day cost her true tears and sorrows. In the mean time, it
must be known for the honor of Rome, that all those that are men of merit and
understanding here, and animated with true Zeal, do no more lick up the Spittle
of the French Court in this case than I do. They behold (as I also do) with
pity, all those things which pass in the World, where there is given so much
reason both of grief and laughter to those that are the Spectators thereof. Our
only consolation is, that God will not abandon his Church, but give a glorious
issue to all its Calamities, which are far greater than are imagined; but it
behooves us to adore God and the incomprehensible dispositions of his holy
providence in every thing that betides us. I heartily wish you prosperity.

From Rome, May 18. 1686. Christina Alexandra.


It behooves us to speak as the case is, the Court of Rome disapproves the
conduct of the King, because it is his Enemy. The Persecution is of no value,
because it is he that does it: However it be, we are in no condition in France
to make use of the moderate Sentiments of Italy. For the Galican Church has
renounced this moderation. She pays Men of Learning, to prove that ways of
Violence are permitted.

At this day all the Realm is full of Writers, which labor to justify, compel
them to come in. They quote S. Augustine; they report his opinions concerning
the Persecution that was raised against the Donatists. It Is notorious that the
Clergy of France have been the Authors of the Persecution. They cannot deny
that they have drawn up all the Edicts, and that they have solicited the
execution of them; so that we cannot comprehend how the Converters can endure
that their Disciples should say, That we ought not to impute any thing to a
Religion, but that which it appoints to be believed and practiced, and that the
Roman Church does not appoint any Violence to be practiced against Heretics.

But the Bishop of Meaux finds a very pleasant means to justify her, the
Church never serves it self with force by it self, says he, that is to say, it
calls to her succor the secular Power to cut off Heads, to hang, and burn;
therefore it ought not to be imputed to her. A Sovereign Magistrate contents
himself to be Judge, and to condemn to Death, but he does not execute, he leaves
that to the Hangman; by consequence, if he condemn the Innocent and cause them
to die, it ought to be imputed to the Hangman, and not to him. The Church does
a very fine honor to Magistrates, she makes them her Hangmen; she herself does
not kill, but she constrains Princes to kill and burn. She constrains, I say,
by Excommunications, Censures, Exhortations, Seductions, Solicitations; and
the end thereof is, she would be able to say, The Church dips not her hand in
Blood, the Church by it self never makes use of force.

Did the Devil ever cheat after a more impudent and frontless manner? I will
not say after a more fine and subtle manner; for it is to lie without any hope
to deceive, the Snare is so broad and so ridiculous.

It were better without Craft to take the way that the Bishop of Meaux takes at
last, and to maintain that Christian Princes, as such, have right to punish
pretended Heretics with Death. Understand you, says he, That Princes who are
Sons of the Church, never ought to make use of the Sword to abuse the Enemies
thereof? Do you dare to say contrary to the opinion of your Doctors, which have
maintaind by so many Writings, that the Republic of Geneva, had power and
right to condemn Servetus to the Fire for having denied the Divinity of the Son
of God? It must be avowed that these Gentlemen are admirable in their
confidence. Do you dare to say? Yes we dare to say it, since we say it with
most part of the Ancients, and with the wisest and most understanding of the
Moderns. We dare say that the Doctrine which the B. of Meaux maintains here, is
bloody and cruel, and that the Church ought to leave it in share to him who was
a Liar and Murderer from the beginning. Servetus was burnt at Geneva, therefore
it is lawful to burn Hugonots, and the Calvinists. God forgive these unhappy
men which have the Cruelty to compare us with Servetus. This man was not only
an Enemy of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, but he was an Enemy of all Divinity,
he was impious, he was a Blasphemer. And although he made profession of
believing one God, the irreverent manner wherewith he speaks of Holy Mysteries,
makes it plain enough, that he had renounced all Religion as well as all Shame.
It ought to be permitted us to quit our hands of such men. They object unto us
the Sentiment of our Doctors. I answer, Our Doctors never did believe that we
ought to persecute and burn men that confess God and Jesus Christ, according to
the three Creeds. They never put Papists to Death for the sake of their
Religion. But although some of our first Writers should have gone too far in
speaking concerning the punishment of Heretics; it ought to be known, that our
Authors are not our Teachers; we have but one only Teacher, and that is Jesus
Christ, speaking by his Prophets and Apostles. We swear to no man's words, but
to those of God. And without serving my self of the Examples and Authority of
your Doctors, tell me in what place of Scripture Heretics and Schismatics are
excepted from the number of those Malefactors, against whom S. Paul has said,
that God has armed Kings and Princes? It appertains not to us to show you,
that Heretics are not of the number of those against which God has put a
Sword in the hands of Princes. It Is for you Gentlemen Persecutors, to prove to
us that they are comprehended there: For we have sense, reason, piety, and
humanity on our side; and besides, we have the consent of sound Antiquity, for
more than four hundred years. How could the Church be able to put the Sword in
the hand of Magistrates for the punishment of her Enemies, in a time when the
most scrupulous Christians found it difficult to consent to the Death of those
Criminals that disturbed the public peace, and that of particular persons, and
did maintain, that Christians without exception, never ought to dip their hands
in Blood.

In what Dictionary has Monsieur de Meaux found, that evil thinkers and evil
doers are the same thing? Princes have right to punish evil doers with Death,
therefore they have also right to punish evil thinkers with Death. They have
right to punish those whose Crimes are apparent to the public ruin, therefore
they have right to burn men whose Crime is in the Conscience, the Empire
whereof appertains only to God. If the Church have right to call in the Secular
Power for the punishment of Heretics, why did S. Paul say simply, A man that
is an Heretic reject, after the first and second admonition? Why did he not
say, Deliver him to the secular Power that he may be burnt? Did he not know,
that in a few Ages Princes would become Christians, and have the Sword in their
hands? Did he only give Precepts for the present time and state? Has this
Cruelty of Massacring honest, well-meaning, but mistaken Persons, any affinity
with the Precepts of Jesus Christ, which commands us to serve our selves with
Sweetness, Humanity, Prayers, Exhortations, and reasons for the reduction of
them? It is then permitted to Massacre the Jews, for there are none greater
Enemies to the Church than they are. Is that the Spirit of the Gospel which
promises a return and conversion to that Nation? How shall they return if they
be destroyed? Will men never be ashamed of this Antichristian Barbarity? Will
they never know that it is the Beast in the Revelations, who makes himself
drunk with the Blood of Saints, devours their Flesh, makes War upon them and
overcomes them, and is therefore called Beast, Lion, Bear, and Leopard. For he
must have renounced reason and humanity, and be transformed into a Savage
Beast, that behaves himself toward Christians, as the Church of Rome behaves
it self toward us.

Monsieur de Meaux affirms, that what they do against us at this day, is
nothing but a lawful exercise of the Power that Princes enjoy by Authority from
God, for the punishment of Offenders. And I will prove to him in three words,
that it is false. 1. Princes in the use of the Sword against Malefactors design
their ruin; that public Societies be no more troubled with them. 'Twas the end
that was heretofore proposed in Persecutions for Religion. 'Twas the end that
Charles the Ninth pretended to have in the Massacre of S. Bartholomew. It Is the
end of the Inquisitors who burn all those that are suspected of Heresy. It
has been the end of all Persecutors in past Ages. But this is not their end at
this day; they intend not the Destruction of the pretended Heretics, but their
Conversion: Therefore although it should be true, that Heretics are not
eccepted out of the number of those Malefactors, against whom God has armed
Princes; this will be only a power granted to punish them, not to endeavor
their Conversion by Torments. It Is an abominable means of Conversion, which
only makes Hypocrites. It Is sufficiently known, that reason cannot be gained
thereby: The purging of Societies is the end of the Sword; but Persecution at
the rate that it is at this day managed, will corrupt and ruin Societies by
filling them with secret Heretics, who will disperse their Venom in a manner
by so much the more dangerous, by how much it is more private and secret. What
is there therefore of likeness between their treatment of us? Is the lawful use
of the Sword against Malefactors? Do not lightly pass over what I have now
said, but give attention thereunto. If that which Monsieur de Meaux has said,
to prove that Heretics are not excepted out of the number of those
Malefactors, that Princes are appointed to punish, seem a little to startle
you; tell him that is not the question; it is not debated whether obstinate
Heretics may not be punished with Death; his Catholic Authors do affirm it:
But we would learn whether they ought to extort Subscriptions, Confessions,
Communions profane and sacrilegious, because joined with Hypocrisy and
Incredulity; by Force, Plunder, Violence, and all kind of Torments. Now that is
it which all the World with one accord condemn, and is abominable, according to
the Principles of the rigid Inquisition, as well as our own: It Is that which
the Clergy of France have lately invented and practiced, and it is that which
will render their present conduct, the horror of all future Ages.

2. The use of the Sword that God has put into the hands of Princes, has
Justice and Righteousness for the reason and foundation of it, for it is for
the exercise of it; and secondly, Fidelity and Faithfulness, for it is to
preserve and maintain it. But that which is perpetrated upon us at this day, is
an uninterrupted course of Iniquities, Acts of injustice, violence, fraud,
falsehood, breach of Promises, contradiction of Edicts, violation of Oaths, and
of all things that can be imagined most horrid and affrightning. Does not this
well resemble the Sword of good Princes armed against Sins and Crimes.

3. To conclude, the use of the Sword for the preserving and avenging the
rights of God, preserves also the rights of Men. It has for its end the honor
of God, and the salvation of Souls: For Justice is exercised for the salvation
of the Souls of the wicked, by the punishment of their Bodies. But in the
present Persecution, they neither respect or regard the rights of God, or the
salvation of the Soul, but only the Honor of the King. They labor plainly,
not for the salvation, but damnation of Souls; and they take all imaginable
care to make it sure. There is no man that is not ignorant of what is done, to
whom what I have said will seem an extravagance and excess of discourse. But
behold the proof thereof: The Dragoons come into a Town or Village, and without
any antecedent instruction, demand in the Name of the King, from all the
Inhabitants thereof, Subscription and Abjuration, on penalty of wasting their
Goods, beating, imprisoning, and torturing their Bodies with all other evils
except Death. All the People faint and fall, they own the Romish Religion
without believing it; they sign the Condemnation of their own, they
anathematize and damn Luther, Calvin, and all the Reformers. He goes to
Confession, he goes to Mass, he communicates, he adores the Bread, he assists
at the invocation of Saints, and outwardly consents to that Worship that they
give to Images. He believes none of all this, but abhors it at his Heart. In
the mean time they are content, they have all that they desire, and they demand
no more. Now what have they made? They have made Hypocrites that say one thing
and think another, profane persons that hate what they adore; Idolaters, that
worship what they account Creatures, and the workmanship of men's hands. Behold
what they have done, and what they have desired to do. For to say, that by the
Dragoons, they desired the Calvinists to renounce their Heresy, is the most:
foolish of all extravagances; it is well enough known, that they are no proper
Arguments to persuade: Therefore they intended and desired to make Hypocrites,
profane, sacrilegious persons, abuses of Sacraments and Idolaters. Now if these
men be not in the high way to Damnation, I know not who are. So therefore
plainly the end of these Persecutions, it is to damn men.

But behold farther I do maintain that they take all kinds of security to be
certain of the damnation of the new Converts when they die. This appears by the
Declaration of the nineteenth of April, 1686, by which it is appointed, That if
any of our Subjects of either Sex, which have abjured the pretended Reformed
Religion, happening to be sick, do refuse to receive the Sacrament of the
Church, from the Curates, Vicars, and other Priests, I do declare, that they
will persist, and die in the pretended Reformed Religion. In case the said sick
persons do recover their health, Process being made against them by our Judges,
they shall be condemned, if they be Men, to make honorable satisfaction, and to
the Galleys for ever, with confiscation of their Goods; and if they be Women,
or Daughters, to make honorable satisfaction, and be imprisoned, with
confiscation of their Goods. This is the Declaration that the Priests make to a
person that thinks himself on his Deathbed, when he refuses to communicate.
There is no Man so sick but he may recover. He that at first (according to his
own conscience) refuses to communicate after the manner of the Romish Church,
at length begins to think, that if he recovers, he must away to the Galleys:
these thoughts affright him, and as the Disease of the Body increases the
weakness of his mind, he falls under the fear of that hideous punishment that
must last as long as life. He communicates, again he abjures the Truths which
are in his heart, he adores that which he believes to be but Bread, he is
profane in hating an holy thing, he is sacrilegious in usurping the Sacraments,
he is an Idolater in worshipping a Creature. The Priest which has seen him in
these Conflicts, in these long Oppositions, in his Refusals to communicate, in
Acts of Incredulity, and Aversion for these Miseries, constrains him by fear,
and the Declaration of the King. Thereby he gains an assurance of the damnation
of this wretch, and makes him dye in the most fearful dispositions in which a
person can die. These are no far fetched consequences, to discern them their
needs neither Natural nor Artificial Logic. This is to cause him to renounce
God before Death has stabbed him at the Heart. All the World were struck with
horror by the Declaration of the twelfth of July last, which condemned all
those, that should make any use of the Reformed Religion, to death. They cried
out that at this stroke the Persecutors could no more distinguish the Conduct
of this day, from that of Charles IX. and Henry II. They said that never did
any Persecution proceed further than blood, and that there was no further
pretense to say, that they served themselves with moderate ways for our
Conversion: but this Declaration of the month of July, is nothing in comparison
of that of the month of April, for I dare say that Hell never produced any
thing more horrible. I impute not this to the Supreme Powers, who have suffered
themselves to be surprised to publish such an Edict. A spirit so employed with
designs of finishing his Work, as is that of our King, is not capable of giving
attention to any thing else. But I impure it to the Counsel of Conscience, to
the Bishops, and Jesuits which draw up the Decrees, and cause them to be signed
with blinded Eyes. I do maintain that never was there any Society gave so great
marks and signs of reprobation, as that which forms and executes these
projects. After that Monsieur de Meaux has said that that which is done at
present, is an exercise of the right Fidelity and Justice that Princes have to
employ the Sword for the punishment of Malefactors. Let us see how he goes on,
And although you will not permit to Christian Princes to revenge great Crimes,
because they are injurious to God, may they not revenge them because they cause
trouble and Sedition in the State? Without doubt those that trouble the State
of what Religion soever they be, be they Orthodox, or otherwise, may be
punished. But who are these that trouble the State, are they those which Kill,
which Massacre, and Plunder, or those which live peaceably, and demand nothing
but liberty to worship God according to their Consciences, and agreeably to the
Edicts which have been granted them, with all sorts of promises and securities?
What trouble do we make in the State? What evil have we done in putting the
Crown in the Family of Bourbon, and in hindering it from falling from the Head
of Lewis XIV. during his minority? Where are our Seditions and Revolts? Europe
knows and sees who they are which trouble the State, whether we, or they which
lay wast the Provinces, which diminish the Revenues of the King, which weaken
and abolish Trade, and force more than a million of souls to search out ways to
get out of the Kingdom. The Bishop of Meaux adds. Do you not clearly see that
you build upon a false Principle? If it were true they were the Arrians, the
Nestorians, and the Pelagians that had reason to complain of the Church, seeing
they were those which were Banished, and Persecuted, and Catholic Princes were
those that did Persecute and Banish them.

First of all, I say, that they rendered to the Arrians no more but what they
had done to the Church. They had removed, and chased away the Orthodox from
their Churches: they had Banished the Orthodox, and they Banished them.
Secondly, I answer that it is false, that Catholic Princes ever did that
against the Arrians, the Nestorians, and Pelagians, that is this day done
against us. Let Monsieur de Meaux a little unfold his skill in History, and let
him make us see, that the Emperors did send Armies into the Arrian Villages,
and by the most cruel treatments force Abjuration. Let him make us see, that
they did exact subscriptions, that they did beat, imprison, send to the Mines,
or Galleys, those that refused it. To conclude, I say, that there is a great
deal of difference between Banishing, and Tormenting of Heretics. A Prince
that will preserve his State clean may send Heretics, whose Doctrine he would
not have dispersed, with their Families, and Goods elsewhere. If the King had
been contented to have Banished us with our Families and Goods, we had had
subject of complaint, because of the false opinion, that they have entertained
concerning us; that we are Heretics, does not give them any right to treat us
as such, and to break the Confederations made with us, and our Ancestors. But
nevertheless we would have suffered this injustice patiently, because it would
have been nothing in comparison of what is done against us at this day.

And at present also the Catholics which are punished with death in Sueden,
and so many other Kingdoms, would have reason of complaint against those that
call themselves Reformed, and every one in his turn would have right and wrong,
right in one place, and wrong in another, and Religion would depend upon
uncertainties.

Let not Monsieur de Meaux be displeased, it is not honest to advance matters
of Fact so barbarous as these without any proof, yea matters of Fact the
falsity whereof are notorious.

They punish the Catholics in Sueden, and many other Countries with death. I
demand for the Public, in the Age present, and in the Age to come, Justice for
this Calumny. Nothing is more false, and more known to be so, for there is not
a Protestant State, where the Papists have not permission to live, and live
according to their Conscience, although in some places they have not the
public exercise of their Religion, and they are very few: I know not whether
Sueden be one of them. The rest of that period, every one has right and wrong,
etc. is a Riddle which-covers at the bottom the most frightful Doctrine that
ever was published. It is that every Prince in his Dominions has right to
exterminate by Fire, and Sword, all those which are not of his Religion. It is
the established Law, which according to Monsieur de Meaux ought to be the same
every where, to the end that it be not exposed to uncertainties. It is, I say,
the most horrible Doctrine that a Christian can teach. For according to it, the
Turks have right to cut the Throats of Christians in all places where they are
Masters. Behold the argument of Monsieur de Meaux weakened and overturned, if I
do not mistake; nevertheless it is certain that it comprehends in brief the
best of all which these Gentlemen have to say on that behalf.

I had designed to leave the rest of Monsieur de Meaux his Letter, because the
Chapter concerning the Adoration of the Eucharist, and that of the Judge of
Controversies, which he touches transiently, will have their place in the
following Letters, and there be handled something at large. But I have thought,
that the Readers love to find an Antidote wherever they find Poison, for which
reason we will say something thereon, that the weakness of what he does advance
may appear, to the end that they may not be imposed upon by these appearances
of demonstration.

He touches the Adoration of the Bread, and says, The fear that you have that
they will make you adore Bread, has some appearance of truth according to your
prejudice. I am well pleased that they do acknowledge, that our fear has some
appearance of truth at least. If the real presence were engravers in the
Scripture as with a beam of the Sun, as they suppose, in producing those words,
this is my body, our fear would have no foundation. To defend us against this
prejudice, Monsieur de Meaux produces the false fear of the Arrians, and the
Disciples of Paulus Samosatenus, who feared lest they should be made to worship
a Man, an Infant, a Creature, however perfect, and highly privileged he were.
Let not Monsieur de Meaux be displeased, behold a shred of Antiquity ill
placed, and disposed for a person, that prides himself of knowledge. It supposes
that the Arrians and Samosatenians have heretofore refused to adore Jesus
Christ, under pretense that he was a Creature, a Man, an Infant, just as we
refuse at this day to adore the Sacrament under pretense that it is but Bread.
I would be very glad that he would a little show us those places in the
Ancients, where the Arrians refused to adore Jesus Christ because he was
nothing else but Man. First of all they did not say he was a mere Man, they
acknowledged he was God of God, and Light of Light, and that he was before
Abraham, but they said he was a God created before all Ages, and afterward
incarnate. And as for the adoration, they so little refused to give it to Jesus
Christ, that all the Fathers made it their Crime, and convinced them of
Idolatry, because supposing Jesus Christ was a Creature, they nevertheless
adored him. It is good my Brethren, that you observe this passage, and that you
conclude that these-Gentlemen know not how to quote the Ancients, without
impressing some footsteps of their falsness and perfidiousness on those
quotations. They ought to find an example about vain fear in Antiquity like
unto ours, they can find none, and therefore it is expedient to make one. But
although it were true, that the Arrians did refuse to adore Jesus Christ for
fear that they should adore a Man, an Infant, they had been mistaken, and we
shall have reason to be unwilling to adore the Sacrament for fear of adoring
Bread. For the Orthodox did invincibly prove to the Arrians, that this Man was
the Eternal Son of God, but the Papists will never prove that the Sacrament is
the true Body of Jesus Christ.

Your Reformers have done nothing but renew the Controversies ended six hundred
years since, when Berengarius moved them. And if you call in doubt the judgment
that was given against him, others with as much reason will doubt concerning
preceding Councils, and behold us then obliged to examine anew all which has
been Decreed, as if we began to be Christians, and that all that our Fathers
have determined is good for nothing.

It is not true that we have done nothing else but renew Controversies ended
six hundred years ago. We acknowledge no Authority in an Antichristian Church,
such was that in which Berengarius lived, to determine Controversies. It has
no right to determine them, or at least we have right to have no regard to her
decisions. It is precisely that which our Arrians do now at this day say unto
us, your Divines and Schoolmen have done nothing else but renew Controversies
already determined more than twelve hundred years ago in the Councils of Tire,
Jerusalem, Millan, and Ariminum. The date is a little older, and the Authority
in my opinion a little greater. For the Church of the Arrians was much more
pure than that of the Man of Sin.

It had been a great marvel if Monsieur de Meaux had neglected to bring into
this short Letter the Sophisms about the Judge of Controversies. These
Gentlemen have nothing else to say, it is their only Rampart, it is necessary
they always return thither. If it be permitted us to reject the Councils that
have condemned Berengarius, behold us under a necessity to examine anew all the
Councils which have decided the Controversies against the Arrians, Nestorians,
etc. This signifies nothing, neither according to my Principles, nor those of
Monsieur de Meaux. Has Monsieur de Meaux forgotten that according to his
Principles no Councils are infallible, but those that are General? Wherefore
then does he demand the same submission for the Councils that condemned
Berengarius, as for those that condemned Arrius, Nestorius, and Eutyches? These
last are considered as Oeconomical, and by consequence as Infallible in the
Church of Rome. But a Council of Tours, of Verseille, a Council of Rome, which
have condemned Berengarius, were but particular Councils. Therefore they were
not Infallible. Some of them had the Pope for their Head, yea, but according to
Monsieur de Meaux, a great friend of the Theology of the Gallican Church, the
Pope is not Infallible, nor can he communicate it to any one. Let these
Gentlemen fix their Principles, or let them not delude us by comparing Councils
which can err, to Councils which according to them are Infallible, and cannot
be mistaken.

If this be worth nothing according to the Principles of Monsieur de Meaux, it
is worth less according to mine. These Gentlemen will not take it amiss if we
have mote veneration for Councils held in the fourth Age, where they judged by
the word of God, than for Councils of the eleventh Age, held in a time in which
the Church was plunged into an abyss of Corruption, according to the confession
of Baronius, and others like unto him. Therefore one may doubt of the truth of
decisions of the Councils of that Age, and not doubt of those of all the
preceding Councils. But because we are willing to have some submission for the
decisions of the Councils of the fourth Age, must we therefore pluck out our
Eyes? Must we cease to see that they did decide conformably to the Scripture?
Must we cease to build the submission, that we have for Councils, principally
upon the conformity of their decisions with the Holy Scriptures?

Behold us obliged to examine all anew as if we began to be Christians. Behold
us obliged to examine all anew, yea, every one for himself. And does not every
one of us begin to be Christian when he begins to live, and to make use of his
reason. Monsieur de Meaux is at agreement, that when a Man begins to be a
Christian he has right to examine. Societies, and Confederate Churches do not
always begin to be Christians, and therefore it is not always necessary that
they examine. And when once they have formed their Confessions upon the word of
God, it is not necessary that they repeat it, at least unless it be made appear
that they have erred, and be mistaken. But every particular person begins to be
a Christian, he has therefore right to examine. And so behold the right of
single persons re established by the reasoning of Monsieur de Meaux.

We will not touch the rest of the private Letter of Monsieur de Meaux at this
time, because what he adds concerning the Judge of Controversies, and the
reflections which we have to make thereon, will fall in very well with what
follows in his Pastoral Letter, to which we shall return when we have finished
the examination of this. To fill up our sheet we will give you a Letter of one
of our most famous Confessors, which will begin to acquaint you with the
History of his Confession. And afterward you shall have some other Letters
which have followed this.

At Paris from the Tournel, May 16. 1686.
IT is so advantageous, in trials so barbarous, as that in which I have been,
for six months last past, to be assisted by your good Prayers, that it was my
design, Monsieur, to desire them from the very moment of my confinement at
Strasburgh. But the difficulty which I find to get passage for my Letters out
of the Kingdom, has deprived me of this benefit. Now when it seems, that I
have more occasion than before to procure for my self this happy assistance, I
do desire it Monsieur with all earnestness possible, and entreat you in the
name of God not to refuse me. The second of December last, I with my Wife, and
four Children, which God has given me, were arrested two Leagues on this side
Strasburgh, and conducted to a Prison in that City, where we all were almost
seven weeks. My Wife fearing to see our dear Family ruined fell under the
temptation, and did what the Declaration of his Majesty demanded of her. For my
self I have always supported my self by the Grace of God, and have suffered all
that, which Zeal has been able to inspire into the puissant Body of the
Jesuits, to make me fall, but God has perfected his strength in my weakness,
and has given me the Grace boldly to maintain his Truth both with Heart and
Mouth. From thence we were conducted by order of his Majesty with a good guard
to the Prison of Challons, where I was just six weeks, fifteen days whereof I
passed in a Dungeon, without being seen of any person, unless it were once or
twice by my Wife. I was visited by many Ecclesiastics, and amongst others
thrice by Monsieur Bishop of Challons, of whom I received nothing but
civilities. I was tempted by sweetness, by many offers of service, and in
conclusion by severity, and God by his Grace having rendered all the means
employed to seduce me ineffectual, the ninth of March last the President
condemned me to serve the King for ever in his Galleys, and my Goods to be
Confiscate as those of a Gallyslave. Two days after I was removed, and carried
to Paris, where I was put in a dark Dungeon, and where I have been two whole
months. After my arrival, I was twice present with the Procurator General in a
Chamber of the Prison. I answered to all that he said to me, that which Jesus
Christ inspired me withal according to his holy promises. He visited me also
once afterward, and gave me this testimony, that it was rare to see me do that
for error, which peradventure not one of them would do for truth. A little
after Monsieur the first President caused me to be taken out of the Dungeon,
after the most civil manner in the World. When I was in the Chamber where he
expected me, he caused all his retinue to go out, (which was made up of six or
seven persons of worth) and honored me with his discourse Face to Face for the
space of two hours, he testified a great deal of kindness toward me, and
desire to serve me, and as soon as he was gone out, he returned to his company
and told them, as one of my friends which was present reported to me, I come
from discoursing an honest Man. Monsieur, these are but words, nevertheless
there is something of consolation in them. I have also received many marks of
favor from Monsieur de Mesme, President of the Tournel Chamber of Justice,
where I was condemned, he talked with me at the entrance of the Dungeon, and
after a little discourse told me, that it was with grief he saw me there, and
that he wished me some gentle sickness, that he might have occasion to take me
thence, and put me in the Hospital, and that as often as I desired to speak
with him, I had no more to do than to tell the Jailer of it, who would give him
knowledge thereof, and he would not fail to come to the Prison, and see me. All
these civilities had their design, but they were (thanks be to God) utterly
ineffectual, God has put into my Heart to be faithful to the death if there be
occasion for it. In conclusion, upon the ninth instant I was brought into the
place of Judicature, and presented to my Judges, they brought me to the Bar,
and after I had taken my Oath, and they had drawn from me a confession, whereof
I glory, the President after some discourse of Religion said to me, Monsieur,
bethink your self well, you know that the Declaration of the King does expressly
determine your condemnation. I answered him, my Lord, I am past deliberations
in this case, I am ready to suffer all those penalties to which the Court shall
please to condemn me, how rough soever they may be, they will be less
troublesome than to act against my Conscience, and to play the part of an
Hypocrite, who is an abhorrence to God, and Men. They appointed me to withdraw.
Nevertheless, contrary to the usual method, I was not condemned that morning,
but the Tuesday following, the fourteenth instant my condemnation was confirmed
by a Decree of the Court, and about three hours after I was drawn out of the
Dungeon; they put Irons on my Hands, they put me in a Coach, and I was carried
to the Tournel, where they put the persons condemned to the Galleys. The
Governor here willing to treat me like an honest Man, put not the Chain but on
my left foot, but on the morning the fifteenth instant, Monsieur the first
President, and the Procurator General told me, that they beheld my misfortune
with grief, and that the King intended they should put the Chain about my Neck,
as is usually done to those that are the lewdest Villains. This news was soon
brought to me, I told our Governor I should obey the orders of the King with a
very respectful submission. At the same time they took the Chain from my Foot,
and put another about my Neck which weighed full fifty pound. Behold Monsieur
the abridgment of my misery, or to speak more truly of my glory, for I give
thanks every day to my God for the honor that he does me in not esteeming me
unworthy to suffer for his name. Join your prayers to mine I entreat you,
Monsieur, to obtain from the Mercy of God his assistance so long as it shall
please him to continue my sufferings. Let Mademoiselle your Wife, if she
pleases grant me the succor of her Prayers. Pardon the little order you will
find in a Letter written by pieces, and by stealth, and in the midst of twenty
seven Gally-Slaves. I pray God to heap upon you both the most precious of his
blessings.


I entreat you, my Brethren, to mark here, the Character of sweetness and
Christian patience, which is peculiar to those that suffer for the Truth; his
modesty hinders us from naming him, but in seeing him behind his Curtain, you
will learn from him after what manner we ought to suffer all things for the
Truth, and to suffer with patience, as our Lord has given us example. The Grace
of God be with you all.

September. 15. 1686.
The THIRD PASTORAL LETTER, AND Confutation of what Monsieur de Meaux says to
establish the necessity of a living, speaking Authority, concerning a
Succession of Chairs, without a Succession of Doctrine: General Methods for
making good the Sophisms and Fallacies concerning the Authority and
Infallibility of the Church.
My Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be unto you from God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ.
YOur Temptations which increase every day, do also redouble our grief, and
cause us to desire with the greater passion to give you assistance and succor,
for which reason we prosecute what we have begun. It Is to furnish you with
Lights, for the dispelling of that Darkness wherewith they endeavor to obscure
those Truths which you have learned from your childhood. Among other things
they make great and prodigious attempts to take you off from that adherence
that you give to the holy Scriptures, and to oblige you to forsake those living
Fountains, and to run after the broken Cisterns of Egypt, which will hold no
water. The last periods of Monsieur de Meaux his private Letter, and the second
Article of his Pastoral Letter look that way. They are these Periods, and this
Article upon which we shall make our Reflections, and we do beseech you to give
attention to them. Behold then how Monsieur de Meaux prosecutes his Letter to
Monsieur de V --

In a word, the meaning is if Christians, when they cannot agree upon the sense
of Scripture, do not acknowledge a living, speaking Authority to which they do
submit, the Christian Church is certainly the weakest of all Societies in the
World, the most exposed to remediless Divisions, and most abandoned to factious
Innovators. This is it to which your Ministers with all their Subtleties have
never been able to find an Answer. In truth it is to put great confidence in the
Credulity of Men, to tell them with so much impudence, that the Ministers have
not been able to find an Answer to this Sophism. I do not think that there is
any which has been rejected with more force and more success. And we do defy
Monsieur de Meaux, and Monsieur Nicholas to answer any thing that is reasonable,
to what has been said against the Infallibility of this pretended living,
speaking Judge, in the Answer which has been lately made to the Book of M. --
Nicholas, entitled, The pretended Reformed convinced of Schism. We have there
answered it, and will answer it again. But this is no place to answer to it at
large. We will content our selves to entreat you, my Brethren, to make two
general Reflections thereon. First, That Remedy can never be good, which never
produces the effect, which Men say it does always produce. M -- de Meaux
pretends, that this certain, living, speaking Authority is an infallible Remedy
against Divisions and Heresies. For without it, says he, the Church would be of
all Societies most abandoned to Divisions, Innovations and Factions. If this
Remedy be so good, why has it never produced its effect? Was not this living,
speaking Authority in the world, was it not, say I, from the times of the
Apostles, and the first Ages of Christianity? Why therefore have we seen from
the beginning swarms of Heresies and Heretics, Simonians, Corinthians,
Basilidians, Marcosians, Valentinians, Marcionites, Manicheans, and multitudes
of others? Wherefore in the fourth and fifth Ages of the Church was it torn in
pieces by Arrians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Photinians? Why do they account to
the number of two or three hundred Heresies? Why did this brave Remedy against
Divisions permit the Schism of the Donatists, more than three hundred years?
That of the Eutychians, more than twelve hundred? That of the Nestorians, as
long? Why does not this excellent Remedy put an end to the Schism of the
Greeks, after the duration of near eight hundred years? Was it this living,
speaking Authority which suppressed the Waldenses and Albigenses, or the Fire
and Sword of Simon de Montfort, and his Villains? Why has this living, and
speaking Authority permitted the Latin Church to be torn in pieces in these
latter Ages? Behold, in truth, a fine Remedy good for nothing, and which over
and above is established upon inconsistent Principles, as has been proved an
hundred times.

The other general Reflection which I desire you would make, is on the great
inconvenience that Monsieur de Meaux finds in acknowledging, That the Church is
the weakest of all Societies in the World. I do profess, that it appears very
uneasy to me, as well as to him, and I am not without all inclination to
reason with him, and say, There is no appearance or probability that the Church
should be the most impotent of all Societies under the Heavens, and by
consequence it is not likely that it should have been the Tennis Ball of
Persecutors, of Tyrants, of malignant Spirits, of Schismatics, of Heretics,
of factious Innovators, and vicious corrupters of the Truth, and Worship of
God. And so all that has been said of Persecutions, Punishments, Heresies,
Seditions happening in the Church, Strife among Bishops, their Quarrels and
Divisions, of the fury of Schisms, of the horrible corruption of Manners that
has been seen in some Ages, and is seen in this, all these things, say I, are
false. For it is impossible, that the Church should be the weakest of all
Societies, which it would be, if what has been said, yea, and what our eyes
see, be true. So that it must needs be that all Histories be Romances, and all
Objects that we see Illusions, and that there be a Wall of Fire about the
Church that hinders all sorts of Evils from approaching it. It Is a Prodigy in
my apprehension, that Men should be found that will destroy truths in matter of
fact, sense and experience by Discourses in the air. These Gentlemen do never
enter into the depths of God's ways, they do not perceive nor understand, that
it is indeed by the order of his Providence, that to the apprehension of sense
the Church is the most feeble of all Societies, most given up to the will and
lust of Persecutors, and Men of Faction and Innovation. Where is the Society
that has been given up, and exposed to so many Schisms, Divisions and
Persecutions as the Church? But the Power of God, and the Stability of the
Church consists in this, that it subsists in despite to all Assaults, and that
God preserves in the midst of those Schisms and Divisions, Errors and
Superstitions, those fundamental Truths, and Precepts of Morality, by which the
Elect are preserved, notwithstanding the general corruption that does involve,
and overwhelm it. Herein is the strength of the Church, and it is a Miracle, and
on the occasion thereof we ought to say, It Is the Finger of God.

Without putting you upon Inquiries, and Disquisitions, consider whether it be
likely, that God who has permitted so many depths in the Scriptures, and that
from thence have arrived so many Schisms among those that profess to receive
and believe them, has not left some means in his Church to quiet and determine
them. Is it likely, that there should be no remedy for Divisions, but that
every one may believe according to his own fancy, and the minds of Men be
thence led insensibly to an indifference in Religions, which is the greatest of
all Evils? Is not this what I said but even now? To discourse in the air
against known matters of Fact, and against such Truths as all the World confess
and avow! Let us say with Monsieur de Meaux, it is not probable that God should
leave so many depths in the Holy Scriptures, from which so many Divisions might
arise, and not leave to his Church some means to put a period to them. Behold
the Principle. And who can deny so plausible a Maxim? But behold my Conclusion.
Therefore there have been never any Divisions about the sense of Scripture,
which the Church has not found means to determine. Therefore it has well and
easily determined the Divisions which continued well nigh the space of four
hundred years about the Sense of those Words, The Father is greater than I.
Therefore it quieted the Difference about the Sense of those other Words, The
word was made flesh. And it is not true, that there are millions of Christians
in the East, Nestorians and Eutychians that have not agreed with the Church of
Rome about the meaning of them for 1200 years passed. Therefore it has raised
the Divisions about the Sense of those Words of Jesus Christ to S. Peter, Feed
my Sheep. And it is not true-that all the Greek Church is at a Schism with the
Latin Church thereon, and are not of the mind that they mean that the Bishop of
Rome ought to be universal Pastor of all Churches. They say, and it is believed,
that the Latin Church has been divided almost two hundred years, about the
Sense of those Words, This is my body. The Lutherans give one sense, the
Calvinists another, and the Romanists a third sense concerning them. But that
is not true, it is a popular Error, and an illusion. It is not probable, that
God should not leave any means to his Church to quiet the Differences that
should arise about the Sense of Scripture. A Man would think these Gentlemen
had a design to scoff and deride Mankind; they form an Eutopia, a world made at
pleasure, out of their own imaginations, and tell us, that the present world is
so made, and that we are in it, and very well and safe there. It Is in vain that
we deny it, and say it is not so, we see the contrary, the world is not made as
you report it. They answer us, you deceive your selves, you are blind Buzzards,
and see nothing; you seem indeed to see the contrary, but nevertheless it can
be no otherwise than we say, and we will demonstrate it by reason. My Brethren,
you may there perceive the falseness and illusion of the method of your
Converters. Learn from hence in three words what is the proper method of
confuting them, have recourse to experience, and tell them you will prove, that
it ought to be so, and I see with my eyes the contrary to what you say ought to
be.

It is not therefore true, that God has given a sure and easy means to quiet
the Differences, which may arise about the Sense of Scripture. God will save
his select, but he will abandon his Enemies to blindness.

It Is his pleasure, that there be Difficulties in the way of Faith and
Salvation, but he has filled the Holy Scriptures with Light to dissipate these
Darknesses with respect to his Elect. And as for the Reprobates, he permit,
this spiritual darkness, which hinders them from seeing the sparkling and
lightsome Truths, which are in the Scripture, to remain upon their Hearts. God
has not left certain means to prevent and pacify Divisions, we are convinced
of that by experience. For Divisions do continue among Christians, and have
done so for fifteen Centuries, what means soever have been used to heal them.
But he has left means sufficiently certain for the conduct of his Children to
eternal Life, by the way and path of Truth. It Is his Holy Word, together with
the direction of his Spirit, which conducts infallibly, not whole Societies,
but all that are his in particular, in all the Truths, that are necessary to
Salvation, and preserves them from all those Errors, that are mortal to their
Souls. Think, think of that, Mr. hearken to your own reason, and not to the
subtleties of your Ministers. Think, think of that my Brethren: consult both
your reason and your sense, attend to that which your eyes report, and don't
hearken to the vain reasonings of Men, who discourse not upon that which is,
but upon that which ought to be according to their imaginations. Behold, that
which we have to say at present about this important matter, which Monsieur de
Meaux touches in his private Letter, We must now return to his Pastoral Letter,
and see how he proves the Title of his second Article.

The second Article has for its Title in the Margin, That the Pastors of the
Catholic Church are the only true Pastors. He proves it by two Mediums. The
first is, That the Pastors of the Church of Rome alone have the advantage of
mutual succession in place and feat one to another. Monsieur de Meaux maintains
that he is in the place af those that planted the Gospel in hit Diocese. And
all other Bishops, he says, have the same Glory. The second proof is, that they
have also a succession of Doctrine. It Is well when these two things go
together, for otherwise to glory of a Succession. of Seats, without a
Succession of Doctrine is, in my opinion, the most pitiful glory that any one
can ascribe to himself. The Patriarch of Constantinople, who, according to
Monsieur de Meaux, is a Schismatic, he and all his Predecessors for above 800
years, is also in the place of those who planted the Gospel in those Countries.
Nevertheless the Bishop of Rome has anathematized him an 100 times, and does
anathematize him every year on Good Friday, in the Bull De Coena Domini. The
Arrian Bishops did hold the place of the Apostles in the East; and at this day
the Bishops of Denmark, Sueden and England are also in the place of them which
planted Christianity in those Countries.

Monsieur de Meaux perceives well, that the Glory of Succession can do him no
great good without Doctrine, and therefore does very fairly renounce it. To
separate sound Doctrine from the Chair of Succession, is to separate a stream
from the Channel, says he. It Is true, the Channel remains in the Church of
Rome, we agree with them in that, from the first Bishop of Rome to the last we
see no considerable interruption; either History is not to be credited, or
Bishops have succeeded one to another. Behold the Channel marked and noted. But
by misfortune they have separated the River from the Channel, and in this
Succession of Bishops there has succeeded a dirty and impoisoned River, to pure
water, and to a clean and clear River. Monsieur de Meaux is very happy
therefore in his comparison in this small Paragraph, but he is not so
altogethet in that which follows, And to vaunt (says he) themselves of the
understanding of the Scripture, when they acknowledge they have lost the stream
of Tradition in their Pastors, is to vaunt of having preserved the Waters after
the Pipes are broken. Surely, if the Waters were no where but in the Channel,
Monsieur de Meaux and his Brethren had some reason on their side, but it is
happy for us, and mischievous to them, that the Water is in the Fountain before
it can be in the Channel. The Channels may be broken, the Bishops Successors of
Seats may become Antichristian. The Fountain of the Gospel-Doctrine continues
always pure in the Holy Scripture. It had been very fine, if they had reasoned
so at the time when Jesus Christ came into the World. The Pharisees and Doctors
of the Law were in Moses's Chair, and, as such, Jesus Christ commanded to hear
them; but according to the new Philosophy of our Doctors, our Lord should have
done otherwise: for instead of thundering against the vain Ceremonies and false
Glosses of these Doctors which corrupted the Law, he ought to have followed
them, and caused his Disciples to do so to. For to boast of understanding the
Scripture, when they acknowledge they have lost the stream of Tradition in
their Pastors; is to vaunt of having preserved the Waters after the Pipes are
broken. The Pipes, that is, the Doctors were broken, but did not the purity of
the Law remain in the Books of Moses, as in his Fountain? Let that be remembered
therefore, and never be forgotten. The Gospel Church in this regard is in no
better condition than the ancient Synagogue. This had its Pharisees and false
Priests in the Chair of Moses, that has its false Bishops in the Chair of the
Apostles, and Founders of Christianity. Let it be remembered also, that when the
Pipes are broken, and the Rivers corrupt, we have the Fountain. Jesus Christ
had recourse thither: he said, From the beginning it was not so. Frankly
therefore it is to delude, and ridiculously to delude when they speak of a
Succession of Chairs, at least, unless it be proved, that Truth has remained
in them, and that Infallibility has always been placed there, and that in
matters of Doctrine there have been made no Innovation. And thither Monsieur de
Meaux comes at last. The Doctrine and understanding of Scriptures, says he, is
come even to him, without any change or alteration. And it has been the
pleasure of God that it should come to us from Pastor to Pastor, and from hand
to hand without any appearance of Innovation. This is easily said, but I do not
understand, how persons that write in an Age so knowing, and illuminated, as
ours is, should have the impudence to advance such a thing, that since S. Paul
to the Bishop of Meaux, the Doctrine is come down without any Innovation. My
Brethren, it is an important point, it is an Article about which they do
miserably blind you, it is a voice that founds perpetually in your ears, and
does almost make you deaf. Antiquity, Tradition, constant Succession and
Perpetuity of Faith; and how do they prove it to you? They tell you the Church
is infallible, therefore it cannot err, nor turn aside from sound Doctrine.
Secondly, Monsieur de Meaux tells you, If there had been such changes among us,
the Authors thereof would have been named, the Spirit of Truth which is in the
Church would have noted them, and their Names would have been infamous, as that
of the Arrians and Nestorians, etc. So that all which has been told us
concerning insensible changes in Doctrine, whereof they do not produce any
example in the Christian Church, is nothing but a vain accusation. Thirdly, To
conclude, they take up certain Shreds of the Fathers, which they set to be seen
with Glosses and in a false light, and afterward tell you boldly, behold the
Conformity of the Fathers with us, behold the Succession of the same Opinions
in the same Seats. There has happened no change or alteration.

This, say I, deserves that we stay on it a little, for it is the fountain of
Illusions, by which they have seduced, and made some new Converts. Concerning
the first of these three Proofs, which is drawn from the Infallibility of the
Church, we hope at some time to show you the absurdity of that pretension. We
will prove, that all that which M. Nicholas and M. Pelisson have advanced to
prove the necessity of this infallible Authority, without which, according to
them, truth cannot be found, is a Contexture of Fallacies, which lead Men
directly to impiety. But in expectation thereof (my dear Brethren) we entreat
you to give attention to what we are about to say concerning this sovereign and
infallible Authority of the Church of Rome. I will give you two general
methods, by which, without any great difficulty, you may be able to quit your
selves of the Fallacies of your Converters. First tell me, is there any reason
can hold good against experience? The Church of Rome cannot err, I Will prove it,
say they, by just proofs and demonstrations, because the Church cannot be left
without a Guide, because private and particular persons cannot understand the
Scriptures, because there is a necessity, that an Interpreter which ought to
guide others cannot himself be deceived. Behold, that which is the most stately
and magnificent reasoning in the world. But by blowing upon these pompous
Reasons of Right, I will make them vanish by one sole Proof and Demonstration
of Fact. It Is that the Roman Church has erred an hundred times by introducing
Images into Churches, and establishing the Invocation of Saints, in taking the
Cup from the Laity, and in causing a Sacrament to be adored, etc. Call to mind,
my Brethren, the Man, to whom the Philosopher proved by subtleties, which he
could not answer, that there was no such thing as motion. After having long
labored under the weight of his Fallacies, he rose up briskly, and walkd about
the Room. You find your selves often perplexed with the Sophisms invented to
support the ways of Prescription, and to prove the blind submission which ought
to be had for the Church of Rome. I do not doubt but you are oftentimes in some
perplexity in this respect. But go briskly out of that perplexity, and always
come to this. The Church of Rome has erred, therefore it can err. You will put
your Converters, in their turn, into some kind of perplexity. For there will be
a necessity either that they hold their peace, and say nothing but absurdities,
or else that they endeavor to prove by discussion of Opinions, that the Church
of Rome has not erred, and it is a Head of Discourse where I am in no fear or
concern for you; for how little soever you are instructed in the Word of God,
you will easily dismount the most able Sophisters, when you endeavor to prove,
that neither Transubstantiation, nor the Worship of Images, nor the Invocation
of Saints, nor the Adoration of the Eucharist, nor the Mass, nor Purgatory, are
in the Scripture. There needs no greater ability for that, than for a Man to
prove that a Chamber is empty when there is nothing in it. They object unto
you, that the Scripture has not said all, but it is a sensible absurdity, that
the Scripture should be given to instruct us concerning what we ought to adore,
and it should forget three fourth parts of the objects of our Adoration. It
speaks not to us but of the Adoration of God; and nevertheless Religious
Worship must be given to Saints, to Images, to Relics, and to the Sacrament
of the Altar. Are you so filly as to be taken in so pitiful a snare? The
Scripture has not said all, let it be granted with respect to the Ceremonies
and Orders of Discipline, which are not of the Essence of Religion; but to
believe that the Scripture has not told us all which is of the Essence of the
Christian Religion, is ridiculous: I do maintain, that he ought to have lost
all shame, that shall advance it, and to permit himself to be persuaded
thereof, he must have lost all reason, and be degenerated to a Beast. Was it
agreeable to the Wisdom of God, imperfectly to instruct the Apostolic Church,
and to leave to posterity the charge of adding those essential parts which were
wanting? But provided you can draw your Converters from these Methods of
Prescription, which are the true Snares of the Devil, invented as his last
Remedies, I shall not fear, or be concerned for you, although they should batter
you with the Arms of Tradition, and tho they should tell you an hundred times
the Scripture has not said all, Tradition adds the rest. For you will always
have an infallible Refuge in the Scripture, and you will be able to say, if
Tradition may add to the Scripture, at least, it ought not to destroy, and
teach or command that which the Scripture condemns. After which it will not be
difficult to prove, that not only the Scripture says nothing of
Transubstantiation, or the taking away of the Cup, or the Sacrifice of the
Mass, of Purgatory, or the Worship of Images, or the Invocation of Saints, etc.
but that the Scripture does formally condemn them. Behold the first general
method for ruining the fallacious Arguments on the behalf of Infallibility.

Behold another, the most sensible proof, (and that unto which you will be
obliged to have regard, when they would prove that you ought to have a blind
submission to the Church of Rome) is Texts of Scripture. It Is for example, that
which our Lord Jesus said, Matthew. 16. That he has built his Church upon S.
Peter, in such sort, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. That
which S. Paul says in 1 Timothy 3.15. That the Church is the pillar and ground of
truth. There Is that which is their strength. But first of all demand of these
Gentlemen, whether the Church of Rome be mentioned there? Say, I grant, that
Text signifies, that the Church is infallible, and that the Devil never can
introduce any Error; but how shall I know that it is the Roman Church to whom
this glorious promise of Infallibility is made? The Greek Church, that of the
Nestorians, Jacobites, or Eutychians, are very great Communions in the East,
which call themselves Christians upon as good a Title as the Church of Rome.
The Apostles certainly founded the Eastern Churches, it is without
peradventure, and it is apparent, that Jesus Christ has left the privilege of
being infallible to them. Why should he cause it to pass from the East to the
West? To that they will say, you see that it is to the Church of S. Peter that
the promise of Infallibility is made: Upon thee will I build my Church, and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Now the Roman Church is the Church
of S. Peter. Upon that, demand that they prove by the Scripture these two
Articles: First, That this promise was not made but to the Church of S. Peter.
Secondly, That S. Peter is the Founder of the Church of Rome. The first thing
is impossible to be proved. It Is a prodigious absurdity, that of the twelve
Apostles to whom Christ Jesus said, that they ought to found Churches, he
should have no regard but to S. Peter, and to the Church which he ought to
found. It Is more clear than the day, that that which our Lord promised, he
promised to the twelve Apostles and to other Churches. But your Converters will
have yet more trouble to prove by the Scripture, that the Roman Church is the
Church of S. Peter. There appears not any Footstep thereof in the whole New
Testament: on the contrary it is clear, there was a Church at Rome, before S.
Peter and S. Paul had been there. It may be, one may prove, that S. Peter was
never at Rome. At least it may be proved, that he never resided there in the
Quality of Bishop. For S. Paul says expressly, that S. Peter was the Apostle or
Bishop of the Jews, or Circumcision; and that he was the Bishop of the
Gentiles. Therefore S. Peter, in the Quality of the Bishop of the converted
Jews, ought to have his Seat either at Jerusalem or Babylon, in the Confines
whereof was the main body of the dispersed Jews. Moreover he writ and dated his
Epistles from Babylon. You may therefore hold your selves there, and say, I am
well content that there be an infallible Church on earth; but when I see with
all my eyes, that the Roman Church has erred, you shall permit me to search an
infallible Church elsewhere, and to keep me where I am expecting till I sind it.

You may, I say, keep you there, but don't do it; move on further, and tell
your Converters, Gentlemen, I perceive, that these words, the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against the Church, may have two senses. For they may
signify, that the Devil shall never introduce any error into the Church, of
what nature soever it be. Or it may signify, that the Devil shall never ruin
the Church, that he shall never entirely destroy it by ruining its Foundations,
i. e. its fundamental Verities. Tell me, do these words signify necessarily
the first, that is to say, that the Devil shall never introduce any capital or
considerable Errors into the Church, or to speak better, that the Church shall
never fall into any Error? Not at all: For if one say to a Prince, I will take
care that your Enemies shall never prevail upon you, that will not necessarily
signify, that the Enemy shall never have any Victory upon him, or gain any
considerable advantage against him. Although this Prince should lose some
Villages, yea, and some Provinces, yet if the gross and capital parts of his
Empire always subsist notwithstanding, he would have the accomplishment of the
promise made unto him. Provided therefore, that the Church subsist in all Ages,
although corrupt, provided that the Fundamentals of Christianity remain throughout
in their integrity, the promise, the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it, has its accomplishment.

But your Converters will tell you, these words signify not so; for they
signify that the Church can never fall into any Error. Answer them, That is
the thing that is in question between you and me. But who shall judge for us,
concerning the sense of these words? It must not be you, for you are a party;
and who can better judge than Scripture, and Experience? Now it is clear by the
Scripture, that the sense of these words, the gates of hell shall never prevail
against the Church, is not that the Church shall never suffer any considerable
Errors in its Faith. All the Holy Scripture affirms the contrary. It complains
sometimes that the ancient Church was become idolatrous, and had served other
gods. It foretells in express words, that the Christian Church should corrupt it
self: That grievous wolves should enter into the fold not sparing the flock.
That there would be perilous times in which there would be an Apostasy from the
Faith, and seducing Spirits would teach Doctrines of Devils. That Antichrist
the son of perdition should sit in the Temple, and in the Church of God. That
the Church should be hid, and as in a desert for the space of one thousand two
hundred and sixty prophetic days, that is one thousand two hundred and sixty
years. That when the Son of Man shall come he shall not find faith, nor love
among Men. That false Prophets, and false Christ's shall arise, and deceive
many. To conclude, for one Text by which it may be proved that the Church
cannot err, we can produce an hundred that do affirm, that false Teachers
should introduce Errors there-into.

Let us leave the Scriptures, and pass to Experience, and see whether the
Church has not actually erred. It is proved clearly that she has erred,
because she has established a Worship directly opposite to that pure, and
simple Worship, the Model whereof is found in the New Testament, (viz.) of
Images, of Saints, and Saintesses, of a second sort of Mediators, of Masses,
Sacrifices, and a hundred other things, that have not the least shadow of
appointment there. Let us return to our Text, The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church. It is disputed whether this Text does signify that
the Church can never Err in any wise, or whether it signifies that the
foundations and fundamental verities of the Church can never be overturned. In
truth, the last sense is that of Jesus Christ. And all that can be granted to
the Papists, is that they are capable of the other. But is it not very clear
that we ought to choose the latter, seeing the Holy Scripture and experience
determines us thereunto by a manner wholly invincible? It is true, and we see
it, that by a singular Providence, God has not permitted the Foundations of
Christianity to be subverted in any of the Christian Communions, all receive
the Creeds of the Apostles, Nice, Constantinople, yea even that attributed to
St. Athanasius. Behold therefore what our Lord would mean thereby. But besides
this we see that there is no Communion that has continued pure, all have
embraced Errors, and some of them such as are filthy, shameful, and mortal.
Therefore it is not that which our Lord Jesus Christ would say, it is not a
promise of absolute infallibility that is made to the Christian Church. Without
doubt he foretold what is come to pass, and not that which never happened.
Behold, my Brethren, two general methods by which you may be able to rescue
your selves from the Sophisms, and fallacious Arguments, which they call ways
of Prescription, till we can clear up those difficulties that you your selves
cannot resolve, about that submission that people ought to have for their
Guides, to the end that they may walk safely.

The second medium, or argument, wherewith all these Gentlemen serve
themselves, and whereof Monsieur de Meaux serves himself here to prove that
they have a succession of Doctrine, as well as a succession of Seats, is the
impossibility of insensible changes. If the Invocation of Saints, say they, the
worship of Images, Masses without Communicants, the taking away of the Cup had
been newly introduced, the Innovator would have been known, and his name would
have been branded with infamy, as that of Arrius, and Nestorius. I do not think
that ever any thing has been done more opposite to reason, and fidelity, than
the disputes these Gentlemen have thought fit to raise against insensible
changes and alterations. I say first it is opposite to fidelity: For it is not
possible that these Gentlemen can believe what they say, when they tell us,
that we cannot determine the Authors, nor the times of the principal Changes
whereof we complain, seeing on the contrary we observe to them the times, the
principal Authors, and the noise that these Innovations made in the World. Does
not every one know, that the introduction of Images into the Church, the taking
away of the Cup, and the establishment of the Papal Authority did make a
terrible noise, suffer great contraditions, cause great troubles, and even the
shedding of much blood in the Church? It is therefore notoriously to dispute
against honesty, and fidelity, to deny that we are able to give any account of
the most eminent, and principal Innovations.

But is it not to dispute against reason, and sound judgment, to say as
Monsieur de Meaux does, that if there had been any Innovators in the Church,
the spirit of Truth would have marked them, and their names would have been
infamous, as those of Arrius, Nestorius, etc. How could the names of these
Innovators be infamous, seeing their Innovations were received, and
entertained. The Authors of Heresies, and Superstitions which are rejected, are
indeed noted with infamy, but those that are received are Canonized, and
adored. Therefore those of the fourth Age, which introduced the Invocation of
Saints had no note of infamy put upon them, because the beginnings of that
unhappy Superstition were greedily embraced. The reason why those things, in
those Ages, were not treated as Innovations, and the Authors of them as
Innovators, was because they adopted and received them. Had they assigned any
note of infamy upon them, they had condemned the worship which they admitted,
they had accused it of Novelty, and by consequence the Authors thereof of
boldness, and temerity, seeing it is an opinion that has always prevailed,
that it is a Criminal enterprise to Innovate in Religion. And so the
Superstitions of the fifth Age were well content to suffer posterity to believe
that the Invocation of Saints, and the Adoration of Relics were more ancient
than the preceding Age.

To conclude, about insensible changes, whereof the possibility is denied, I
beseech you my Brethren, observe the spirit and temper of your Converters, and
tell me what name ought to be given to them. We prove to them the changes that
are happened in the Church by proofs more clear, and evident than the light of
the Sun. For example we show them that in such an Age, there was no Invocation
of Saints or Angels. We show it them, I say, not only by negative proofs, as we
use to speak, that is to say, by the silence of the Writers of such an Age, but
by positive proofs, and because the opinions of the Writers, and the practice
of the Church then were wholly opposite thereunto. Afterward we show them the
first beginnings, the original, and the progress of Error, Superstition, and
Idolatry. In one Age we see plainly that such worship was not practiced, in the
Age following it is as plain that it was practiced. I do maintain that a Man
must have renounced all shame to say as these Gentlemen, that from such an Age
to the following there was no change, and the foundation of this impudence is
because no single person is found, whose name is known, that did arise, and
labored to introduce such, or such an Error, or Superstition, which met with
great opposition, but at length surmounted them all. They that please to make
use of their understandings, and consult with History, may find that this
affirmation has no truth, nor place but in changes that happen at a push, and
all together, the Novelty whereof does affright, and stir up opposition; but in
Customs, and Opinions that prevail gradually, and by little and little, it is
not so. The Invocation of Saints, and the Worship of Images were not
established by one single person, nor at one single heat. A whole people by a
false Devotion, permitted themselves insensibly to fall into certain practices,
that seemed very Innocent, and it may be they were not very Criminal. They
which came after thrust forward this Superstition, and in fine it came to
Idolatry. I will say yet once more, I know not how a Man's mind and spirit must
be made to say that such manner of changes are impossible. These Gentlemen
cannot deny that the Worship of the Church of Rome at this day, is very much
different from that of the Apostolic Church. Take it for granted, my Brethren,
that there is no Roman Catholic Doctor, who will not acknowledge that the
Liturgy of the Mass at this day is more compounded, and less simple than it was
in the days of St. Paul. Were these additions made in a sensible manner? Were
not these changes introduced by little and little? The more sincere of these
Gentlemen, as Monsieur Baluzius, and the Author of the Dialogues against the
Iconoclasts of the Sr Maimbourg, do acknowledge that in the first three Ages of
the Church there were no Images; and we do affirm that in the fifth and sixth
Age there were many. We cannot name the first Author of this attempt, and of
the introduction of Images into Churches. Will Monsieur Baluzius therefore
affirm that from the time of the Apostles there were Images in Churches?

But What? It is to small purpose to speak; these Gentlemen persevere to
maintain that no change has been made in the Doctrine and Worship of the
Church, and that none can be made: and we do maintain it can be made, because
it has been made. We have precisely the same thing to say which we said
concerning the infallibility of the Church: the Papists say it has not erred,
for it is infallible, and we say it is not infallible, for it has erred. Also,
they say there has been no change made in the Doctrine of the Church, for it
was impossible any should be made there; and we say it is very possible changes
should happen there, for so it is come to pass. Who is it that reasons best?
That depends only on the question in matter of Fact. We must see whether
changes have actually happened in the Doctrine and Worship of the Church. Now
it is my design to make it apparent that changes have arrived there; this is
necessary for the dissipation of an unhappy illusion wherewith they serve
themselves to blind you. It is Antiquity, Tradition, Conformity with the
Religion of St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose. I shall therefore
undertake to give you a short History of the changes which have happened in the
Church, at least for the first five Ages thereof. It is the surest method to
show you how false the impossibility of insensible changes is, and this will be
the surest remedy to lessen the charm of false Antiquity, by which they
endeavor to deceive you. This shall be the matter of our following Letters,
where we will set before your Eyes the State of Christianity, and the changes
which are arrived there during the space of five hundred years.

To finish this Letter, my dear Brethren, I will set before your Eyes an
example which ought to shame the most of you. If you confess God, it is in
secret, if you sigh it is in your own Bosom: the most part of you dare not give
any public mark, though never so little bright and shining of the Sentiments,
that are in the bottom of your Soul. Learn the Conduct of our poor Brethren the
Inhabitants of Cevennes. The Edict of Nantes was made void the year past, on
the month of October: the Pastors were chased away, and all exercise of
Religion forbidden upon great penalties expressed by the Declaration. But these
Inhabitants of the Mountains began their private Assemblies from the month of
November following. And God raised up from among them persons that without
Study, and without Learning, put themselves at the head of these Assemblies for
their Edification. I will not tell your their names, lest I should put them in
hazard and danger.

There was a private person of the place called V. -- to whose word God gave so
much efficacy, that after some Assemblies where there were but a few persons,
one night he had the pleasure of comforting many hundreds. And these Assemblies
continuing almost every day, one day a little before night, there were found
more than eight hundred persons upon the Mountain of Brion near to Caderles.
They had there the consolation of hearing two excellent Prayers, and one
Sermon: after all, those that had the courage to resist temptation, did partake
in the Sacrament of the Supper of our Lord.

Many of those which had fallen, with a great many fears, desired the
Communion; among others a Woman of Quality was very desirous thereof weeping,
and professing that she would never go to Mass; but it was refused her, until
they should receive greater marks of the sincerity of her return and
repentance. A few days after there was another Assembly in a Desert, under the
covert of a Barn, in the Parish of St. Martin de Carcones, where there were
full out sixteen hundred persons. It was in the night, and continued until two
hours before day. Two days after there was another Assembly in the Parish of
St. John de Gardoningue, where there were seven or eight hundred persons. The
day after, on the Lords day, in the Parish of St. Cross de Caderles, there was
another, where there were about fourteen hundred persons from all the
Neighboring Villages. They had knowledge of this Assembly. The Intendant and
Judges sent an Advocate named Joly, to inform them concerning it; all their
diligence went no further than to discover three or four persons, there was so
much fidelity among those that made up these Assemblies. They took one which
they threatened with death, he seemed to comply, and promised to tell what he
knew. But whether indeed he knew no body, or was not willing to name them, he
discovered at first but two persons. Nevertheless those of the Village of St.
John, who believed that they had been all discovered by the persons that had
been taken, fled and saved themselves in the Woods. This flight discovered
them, and the way with which they serve themselves to force confessions, learnt
the Persecutors almost all those which had assisted at these Assemblies. But
they found the number of them so great, that it forced them, and also
constrained them to cease these Persecutions, seeing that they must depopulate
the Country if they proceeded rigorously against the accused. They therefore
resolved to send them back upon promise that they would return thither no more,
reserving nevertheless liberty to themselves of chastising those which they
called Heads of these undertakings.

These threatenings and these Persecutions could not oblige the faithful to give
over, and a few days after, without more delay, they had another Assembly in a
Meadow in the same Parish of St. John, where there were near two thousand
persons. There was Prayer, Preaching, and the Communion. As they were in the
middle of this exercise, a voice was heard to say that the Dragoons drew near,
upon which, he that performed the Office of a Pastor, cried out La those that
fear depart; but not one person stirred, every one prepared himself to suffer
Martyrdom. The Dragoons came not on the place until the day after. They saw the
Grass trodden, and thereupon the Priest which accompanied them, said that the
Devil had kept his Sabbath there the day before. They made Prisoners some of
the Peasants of the neighboring Villages, and carried them to Montpellier,
where they took their Depositions, and released them. These methods of
proceeding were designed to affrighten them, but they prevailed nothing, for
the Monday following there was another Meeting, or Assembly of two thousand
persons in another place of the same Parish. An unhappy Apostate of the Town of
Caderles, named Mazel, went and accused, and discovered them to the Curate of
the Village of St. John, who went thither the day after with some Officers of
Justice, that he might repair to Bebe, which was the place where the Assembly
was held, they must pass over Precipices, and Rocks, which made them think it
was impossible, that they should pass that way by night, and the Curate said in
a Language common enough with those honest Men: I do not know how these Devils
could pass here in the night.

I would, my Brethren, that you should compare your tenderness with this
unwearied Zeal. This is nothing to what you will see afterward, but it is
nevertheless enough to show you, that God has chosen the weak things of the
World to confound the strong. These poor Inhabitants of the Mountains, with
their ignorance, and rusticity, will rise up in judgment agaiest you. We hear
that you run in troops to the Popish Churches, to hear their Sermons. It is not
there that you ought to seek the word of God. You will not find it there, but
corrupt, and mingled with human Traditions, and although some Preachers should
affect, and choose to Preach nothing but Morality unto you, nevertheless there
will be danger in going to hear them. But we intend to discourse you more at
large on this subject, till when we recommend you to the Grace of God.

October 1. 1687.
The FOURTH PASTORAL LETTER TO THOSE That frequent the Popish Churches.
Assemblies of Christians in Cevennes. The Martyrdom of many Christians of that
Country, and particularly of Sr Fulcran Rey, Student in Theology.
My dearly beloved Brethren in our Lord Jesus Christ, Grace and Peace be given
to you from our God.
WE will begin our Letter where we ended the precedent. We have learned that
those among you which have not yet been prevailed on to go to Mass, do
nevertheless fill the Popish Churches at the hours of Service, and worship,
particularly in great Cities, as Paris. You intend thereby to satisfy your
Persecutors in part, you think by this means to turn away, or at least delay
the violence wherewith they threaten you, that they may force you to go to
Mass, and communicate. And besides you imagine that yon do no evil, because you
go to hear Men that preach the Word of God, tho not in a manner so pure as you
desire it; and you think your selves sufficiently able to separate the good
from the bad. Moreover among Preachers you choose those, that out of
complaisance and kindness to you, speak little of Controversy, and with very
much moderation, and entertain you for the most part of the time with Truths
which are common to us, with the Church of Rome, and Duties of Morality, the
necessity whereof is acknowledged by all Christians. It is better, say you, to
hear the Word of God in this manner, than not to hear it at all. Behold, these
are your Excuses. But I pray, my Brethren, give heed to what I am about to say.
You do not perceive whither this conduct will lead you. 1. In frequenting
constantly the exercises of Devotion of the Romish Religion, and being often in
the Popish Churches, you will insensibly abate in the aversion you ought to
have for those places of Devotion, which Superstition has rendered entirely
profane. You enter without indignation into those places in which the great
God, jealous of his Honor, is provoked to jealousy by Idolatry. You accustom
your selves to see Images before which men prostrate themselves, and to which
they give Religious Honor, contrary to the express Commandment of that Law
which was given in the midst of Thunders, to signify that the Transgressors
thereof should be smitten with the just Thunders of the Divine Vengeance. You
behold without emotion those Altars where that unhappy Sacrifice is offered,
which is so great a shame to the Christian Religion, and does expose it to the
reproach of Infidels, who reproach Christians as Furies, and mad Men, that
offer their God in Sacrifice every day, and eat him when they have done. You
account this nothing. We see the Images and Altars of the Roman Church, you
say, without indignation, but we have no Faith, or Veneration for their
Mysteries, and in this respect we are at the same distance that ever we were.
Alas, how ill are you instructed in the windings and turnings of the Heart of
Man! The Devil serves himself of every thing; by diminishing the aversion that
you have had for the places where this Worship is performed, you will
insensibly lose your aversion for the Worship it self. After you have beheld,
without any emotion of mind, the Altars on which they sacrifice, by little and
little you will accustom your selves to be Spectators thereof, and in
conclusion you will soon come to partake therein. Believe me, you can never be
too much on your Guard against Error and Superstition. They will gain upon you
at such places where your Guard is weak; and with much more ease will they find
means to enter into you by ways so sensible, and so open. A Christian, that
has any tenderness of Conscience, grows into some passion when he goes into a
Mosque; or into a Pagan Temple. A tender person cannot behold those places,
wherein his Parents or Friends have received violent outrages, without some
commotion of Spirit. And how can you, without any turning of your Bowels, enter
into those places, in which a Worship is practiced, by which God is offended
and dishonored, and for which hitherunto you have no kindness, or adherence? Do
you not remember that your Fathers were burnt, torn in pieces and quartered,
because they would not meddle with this false Worship, and that they sacrificed
them to those Idols of Jealousy that are before your Eyes? The memory of the
outrages offered to the Blood that runs in your Veins, should preserve a just
resentment thereof in your minds.

Consider moreover that thereby you do not only accustom your selves to the
places of Superstition, but you do also habituate your selves to behold the
Romish Religion on its best and fairest side. They preach to you the
fundamental Truths of Christianity; they display with great pomp the moral
Precepts of Jesus Christ. In a little while you will come to say, yea, you do
say it already, that the Romish Religion is not so bad as it has been
described; our Ministers have deceived us. Unhappy people who labor to deceive
your selves! Have we ever said, that there was nothing of Christianity in the
Romish Religion? Why have we received its Baptism, if there be nothing in it
that is Christian? But does that which it has of good hinder it from having an
infinite number of things that are evil? It Is an Idol's Temple built upon the
Christian Religion, but it is an Idol's Temple for all that. It Is a part of the
Church, but it is that part where the Son of Perdition sits, according to the
express Prophecy of Saint Paul, That the son of perdition ought to sit in the
temple of God. Does the good Morality that they preach, hinder it from being
true, that there are persons tolerated there, that teach that we may commit
sins without offending God but in a venial manner? That we may kill to preserve
our Honor entire, and without spot? That we may steal with impunity? That we
may continue in the habits of sin, when we cannot free our selves of it? That
simple Fornication is no great sin? That Repentance is not necessary during
life? That we may be saved without having exercised one single act of love to
God all the days of our life? That we may kill Kings when we are persuaded that
they are become Tyrants? We do not say that these Men are tolerated, but that
they tolerate others; for they are far the greatest number. They do not show
you Popery on that side, nor on the side of its Idolatries, Images, Saints, and
Saintesses, which they have set so near to God, that they cause them to partake
with him in his Glory: nor on the side of its Pilgrimages, and the Relics
which it adores, and a thousand other Superstitions: notwithstanding it is
certain, that by accustoming your selves to like and fancy the Preachers of the
Popish Church, you will soon come to like all that they shall please to preach,
and teach you. When an object has two faces, the one fair, and the other foul
and deformed, to the end that we preserve in our selves that just aversion that
we ought to have for it, it is necessary that we always look on it on the
ill-favored side. The way to Hell has its Roses, bus it is the way to Hell for
all that. If you look not on it but on the side of its Flowers, you will forget
that there are Thorns wherewith your Souls will be pierced, and wounded with
wounds incurable. Once more, my Brethren, run not to those Sermons where that
which is good cannot please, without diminishing the hatred that you ought to
have for the evil that is found there.

This is not all; by going to these Sermons, you fill those Churches where they
celebrate those unhappy Mysteries, for which you ought to have a very great
aversation; and there you are at the very hour that those Mysteries are
celebrated. I understand, that from seven in the morning you fill these
Churches, to hear a Sermon, which is not preached till nine or ten. And in the
mean while, in the Chapels round about you they say Mass, they elevate and
adore the Host; and you call that no going to Mass, because you have not your
eyes precisely turned toward the Priest that celebrates, and are not obliged
to change your posture in the moment of Elevation, because you are removed at
some distance from it. But good God! do you think, that he whose Eyes are so
pure, and Spirit so clear, will approve a conduct so faulty? Is it not a
consent to Idolatry, to be found in the same place with Idolaters? They are
there for the Mass, and you are there for the Sermon. But in expectation of a
Sermon don't you assist at the Mass? You see it at a distance, but you will
accustom your selves very shortly to behold it nearer hand. And is it not to
this very end and purpose, that at present they leave that, which they call the
Holy Sacrament, always exposed in their Churches, that you may not be able to
enter there, without seeing persons prostrate at the Feet of the Altars of
Superstition, and being your selves constrained to bear a part in that criminal
Worship.

To conclude, you assist at the Sermons of these Popish Preachers with a great
deal of diligence; are you assured of what they will tell you? At the beginning
they affect to speak nothing to you, but things that will not affright you; but
very shortly they will take the liberty to set the Opinions and Worship of the
Roman Church in open light. Are you assured you shall be able to resist these
deceitful Charms, these curious Devices, these false Appearances, these gilded
Sophisms, this studied Eloquence, this Logic full of artifice, wherewith they
serve themselves to cover the ugliness of Falsehood, and to obscure the Beauty
of Truth? It Is visibly to expose your selves to a Temptation, against which God
has made no promise to protect you. So that, my Brethren, if you do not give
over frequenting Popish Churches, I do foretell, that God will permit the bud of
Truth, which is yet in you, to die, and that he will abandon you to a Spirit of
Error.

But you will say what shall we do then? Must we live without all Exercise of
Religion? Must we be deprived of the Word of God? No; but you must enquire
after the Word of God in your Houses, and amongst your Brethren. You must
assemble amongst your selves as often as you can, read the Scripture together,
and good Books of Christian Morality, and you must recall what you can remember
of former Sermons. You must mutually comfort one another by good Prayers, and
good Conversations, and good Discourses, which without being studied are
oftentimes of greater edification than Sermons, on which the fancy of a
Preacher has toiled and labored many days. To conclude, you must imitate the
zeal of our Brethren of Languedoc, of whom I have spoken something already, and
will now go on to pursue their History.

We left their Assemblies in the midst of Winter. And we have seen, that in
despite to the rigor of the season, the Precipices wherewith the ways are
bordered, and the darkness of the night,, these believing Christians did not
fail to be found in those places, in which they agreed to meet together, and
pray to God. The last of the Assemblies whereof we spoke in the precedent
Letter, was that which was made in a place called Bebe. We have seen that the
Priest and Officers of Justice having removed themselves thither, found no Body
but the Wife of him that dwelt in the Farm with her Child. They carried her
Prisoner, with many other persons of the neighboring places, which had not
signed their Abjuration. They put them in the Castle of S John, where they were
for the space of a Month, to oblige them either to change, or to confess those
who were found at these Assemblies. They made them a Fire with Leaves and
Straw, and all that which might make a dark and thick sinoak to choke them.
They endured this kind of Torment. At the end of a Month they separated them,
to the end they might cause them to fall the more easily. They said to one that
his companion had subscribed; to another that he had confessed those that were
found at these Assemblies. All this signifying nothing, they carried these poor
People to Montpellier, where after three Months Imprisonment, they were
condemned, and sent to the Galleys, except one old Man, named Mauris, who was
imprisoned with some Women in the Tower of Constance.

There happened at that time a thing considerable. A Man without Learning, of
the Village of Colignac, being one night in Bed with his Father, believed he
had a Vision, and heard a Voice saying, Go comfort my People. I know not
whether it were the force of his zeal, and imagination which produced this
effect, or whether it were actually a Voice from Heaven; however it were, all
the reasonings and warnings of his Father, who turned both his Vision and
Design into Ridicule, could not hinder him from following this Call, which he
esteemed as coming from Heaven: he gathered Assemblies, he spoke there with so
much success, and with so much order and method, for a person of his quality,
that every one was surprised at it, and all that heard him edified by it. Under
his Direction Assemblies were made of three thousand persons; amongst others,
one in a place called Cabanis, near S. Hypolite, and another in a Farm of the
Parsonage of S. Roman, situate upon the Mountain Gezas, there were full five
and twenty hundred persons in that Assembly. After the Sermon they named many
Elders for the several parts of Cevennes, and charged them with giving notice
of the places, and hours of Assemblies. Of these many have been since taken,
and sent to the Galleys, as Monsieur Arnaud of S. Hypolite, and Monsieur Nadal
of the Village de la Salle. There is no danger in naming of them, and it is an
Honor we owe them, seeing they are at this day among the Confessors of Jesus
Christ, in the Galleys of Marseilles or Thoulon. Many others, which we will not
name, because they are not taken, were hanged in effigy. In the same Assembly
they agreed to give to him, that should preach to them, power to administer the
Sacraments. In which we may not imagine that they committed any Irregularity.
For the true Call depends on the People, and on the choice of Assemblies. The
Mission of one Pastor by another is but a form, which ought to be observed in
peaceful times of the Church, but may be neglected in cases of necessity.
Before they departed they caused all those that were present, to enter into new
obligations, not to go to Mass; and resolved to make another Assembly the
Wednesday following, between S. Felix and Durfort. The Curate of S. Roman (or
the Incumbent whereof the Farm depended, where this Assembly was made) caused a
Vessel of Holy Water to be carried thither, and sprinkled it about every where,
to expiate the place, as if the Devil had kept a Sabbath there.

The Assembly was made the Wednesday following according to the project, and
there met near four thousand persons, which was the cause they left the Farm
which at first they had chosen, and assembled in a Field, and hung up Lamps on
a Pear Tree that was found there. This Assembly was discovered, they sent
thither some Dragoons under the Conduct of one called Villeneufeu, an Apostate
of the Town de la Salle; but the Dragoons durst not draw near, because they
believed themselves too weak to attack so great a people: therefore they kept
themselves in Ambuscade, and when the people began to depart, they took of them
such as they could. Among others one named Pouget, of the Town of
Valestalieres. They Arrested also some days after in his own House, Monsieur
Teissier, of the Town of Durfort, who freely confessed that he was at the
Assembly of St. Felix. Among many Prisoners, they chose Pouget of
Valestalieres, and Monsieur Teissier of Durfort, to make examples, as they
speak, that is to say, to make Victims of their fury. They were condemned to
dye in the Village de la Salle, by the Intendant, and President of Nismes.
Monsieur Teissier publicly confessed the Crime for which he dyed, and declared
that if he had escaped their hands he had continued it, and would yet continue
it if it were possible for him. Upon the Ladder he sung these words of Psalm
xxxi. Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me O God of
truth. Pouget was so weak as to change his Religion on promise that they would
give him his life, but they hanged him for all that. Their vengeance did not
stay upon these Victims, it proceeded even to things inanimate. They pulled the
Farm down to the ground where the Assembly was made, they plucked up the
Pear Tree by the Roots, on which they hung the Lamps, that they might see to
sing Psalms: It is a circumstance very singular, and which makes known how far
the fury of false Zeal may go. It is well nigh to what they do by the places
where Sorcerers have celebrated their horrible Mysteries, and where Sodomites
have exercised their abominable Brutalities. There happened on this occasion a
thing which seems to me very surprising. It is that at the same hour that they
condemned Monsieur Teissier of Durfort to dye for having been at Assemblies;
one was made at midday in a Farm of Sr. Roman, two Leagues from de la Salle,
where there were found fourteen, or fifteen hundred persons. And the day after
the Execution, another was made at midday also, near to Valerangue: whilst
they were at Sermon an Apostate named Couchon, of St. Andrew, went away, and
made have to advertise the Dragoons thereof, which were in their Quarters at
Valerangue.

The Intendant, and the Marquess of Trousse, being in a rage, when they saw
that nothing would hinder these nightly Assemblies, caused some Files of
Dragoons to be drawn off, which ran too and fro all night over the Mountains,
but they could meet with no Assemblies. But they made Prisoners all the single
persons that they found, supposing they had been at Assemblies, or were going
to them. The Lords Day after the death of Monsieur Teissier, another Assembly
was made on the top of the Mountain Liron, to the number of four or five
hundred persons. A while after there was another in a Farm near St. Germain: it
was so numerous that the Planchers of the Room cracked and brake under the
weight of them. But there was none hurt but one old Man, whom they were forced
to carry away. The day after there was another near Connas. Whilst they were
preaching, a Sentinel, that they had set at the entrance of the place, went and
advertised the Dragoons, and Curate of S. Germain, and betrayed the Assembly.
The Dragoons discharged upon these poor people, who had no other intention than
to pray to God. Many were left upon the place dead, and wounded; others betook
themselves to flight, and in flying fell into a great Gulf of Waters, where a
great number of them were drowned; others hid themselves in the Rocks, whither
the Soldiers went, and apprehended them. 'Twas in one of these Assemblies that
one of the Gentlewomen of Belcastell was wounded, by a great blow on the Head.
A Priest or Jesuit standing by, cried out, Make an end of her. But nevertheless
they were content with leading her, and many others, away Prisoners.

A few days after another Assembly was made, near a place called Boucovitan,
where there were found full two thousand persons, and there they gave the
Communion. Many persons which were present at this Assembly were discovered,
and made Prisoners, and the Men were sent to the Galleys.

We here take no notice of any Assemblies, but those that are considerable, for
a great number of others have been made in Caves, and Woods, and private
Houses, and the most part of them have been made peaceably enough, and without
being discovered. It was this inconceivable firmness of resolution to assemble
in despite to so many punishments, and persecutions, which produced that
terrible, Declaration of the twelfth of July last, by which the penalty of
death is imposed upon all those that shall be Convicted of having exercised any
Religion but that of the Church of Rome. Before that time, the Dragoons had
orders to put to the Sword all such as were found at Assemblies. And they
discharged their Commission very well, as it appears by what we have reported
concerning the precedent Assemblies, which were all made since October on the
last year, and June on this. It was thought that the Order that the Dragoons
had to Massacre, and the Declaration of the twelfth of July, would have put an
end to these Assemblies. Nevertheless they are as frequent as ever, and many
times at midday. And from that time there have been Massacres and effusion of
blood.

On the thirtieth of June there was an Assembly of about two thousand persons,
upon the Road, from Calmette to Barutet. The Dragoons of Nismes were there, and
took about thirty or forty Prisoners, which they carried to the Tower of
Vineliere, it is a Tower that is joined to the Walls of Nismes, above the
Arones. The Thursday following there were two Assemblies, the one at St.
Cesari, a Village half a League from Nismes, the other at Iron Cross, which is
not above a quarter of a League from the same City. There have been many others
in those parts, and every where there have been Massacres, bloodshed, and
persons Hanged upon the place, and great numbers made Prisoners. But the most
considerable Massacre was that which was made near Uzes upon the Road to
Bagnol. Upon the seventh of the month of July, there were found on that place
twelve hundred persons. The Dragoons of Uzes being informed thereof, hasted
thither, and found them at their Devotions. They compassed them round. These
Christians did nothing, but with Hands, and Eyes lift up to Heaven, fell on
their Knees, and in that posture expected death. The Dragoons discharged upon
these poor people without Arms, and without defense. They succeeded so well
therein, that besides the wounded, the field was covered with the dead. An Eye
witness that passed over the place three weeks after, found then there the
bodies of thirty Women half rotten. Besides this, the Dragoons strangled many
with the Halters of their Horses. They took more than three hundred Women,
which they knocked, and beat upon the Breast and Sides with their Daggers, they
cut off their Coats to their Hips, they stripped them naked, and having covered
themselves with their Cloths, they returned with their spoils, and Prisoners to
Uzes. Behold on one side how the Devil defends his Gospel. And on the other
part, it was thus that the Primitive Christians, and our first Reformers
planted the Gospel of Christ in the midst of Paganism, and Antichristianism,
that is to say by Courage, Patience, and Sufferings.

Since the month of July, Languedoc, and Cevennes have been a field of blood,
and slaughter. The Dragoons, under pretense of Assemblies, kill all they meet,
and Letters from those Countries report that a Man can scarcely take four steps
upon the Mountains without finding a Carcass, either Hanging on a Tree, or
lying on the ground. On the thirteenth of July, a Lieutenant of Dragoons having
been informed that there was a Man near the old Castle of Vauvert, about three
Leagues from Nismes, that sung Psalms, he ran thither, and finds this poor Man
at the foot of a Tree, reading in his Psalm Book, having no other company, but
another poor Man sleeping by him. He caused this to Hang the other upon the
^^ot. The Intendant, and Marquess of Trousse, publicly commended this action.
A little before this a barbarous action was committed upon a Gentleman of five
or six thousand Crowns Annual Rent, at the Bridge of Montvert in Gevaudan. This
Gentleman that he might avoid the temptation of Abjuring his Religion, had
passed seven or eight months in Caves. At last being forced from thence, being
able to subsist there no longer, he returned to his House. As soon as the
Commander of the Dragoons had notice of it, he sent a Detachment of eight or
ten Dragoons, who having found him at one of his Houses, wounded him in the
presence of his Wife, Plundered the House, threatened to cut off her Fingers,
because she refused to give them the Rings that were on them. The Gentleman at
the end of five days dyed of his wounds, and being about to expire, he called
the Villain that wounded him, (for he never stirred from his House) he took him
by the Hand, and assured him that he forgave him with all his Heart, and in
this disposition of mind gave up his Soul to God. The Widow with three Children
that she had, was carried to Nismes, the Children were taken from her, and sent
to Beaucaire, and she had liberty to go whether she pleased upon her word.

All these cruelties have nothing abated the Zeal of the Reformed in this
Country. They continue their Assemblies, although they have taken from them one
of their principal Guides, under whos^ Conduct they held and observed them. It
is Monsieur Fulcran Rey, a Native of Nismes, and a Student in Theology, who was
hanged at Beaucaire, on the seventh of the month of July. I promised you an
exact relation concerning him; but it has been Printed since that time: it is
worth your search and inquiry, that you may know the acts of the passion of
this Martyr; we shall content our selves to observe here the principal passages
thereof, to the end that if these Letters go further than the entire relation
thereof, those which shall not be able to read that, may know at least
something thereof here.

This young Man was not above twenty four years of age when he suffered
Martyrdom. He had been Consecrated from his childhood to Divinity, by his
Father and Mother. By the Declaration of October in the year past, he was
obliged to go out of the Kingdom in fifteen days, as well as the other
Ministers of the Gospel: he either could not, or would not go out in the time
appointed, insomuch that he was found and imprisoned in the Kingdom, and
exposed to the penalty of the Galleys, according to the terms of the
Declaration in case he were taken. God put it into his Heart to use no
endeavors to go out, which without doubt he might have found, as well as so
many others, who had that advantage. As yet he was only Student in Theology,
the malignancy of the times hindering him from Ordination, but an extraordinary
Call supplied that defect. He understood that when the House was on fire, all
the World ought put to their hand for the extinguishing thereof, and that God
who derives Praise from Children that suck, may very well serve himself of him
to edify his Servants, notwithstanding his Youth and meanness of Learning. He
traversed the whole Province of Languedoc. He went from Montaub to Milhaw, from
thence to St. Affrique, from thence to the Bridge of Cammares, from thence to
Nismes, and to Montpellier, every where searching out persons that were willing
to be edified. But the fear was then so great, that it had stifled all other
Thoughts and Sentiments. Nevertheless they recovered a little, and this young
Man found opportunity to gather some Assemblies in the Neighborhood of Nismes,
which cost liberty, or life to many persons, for of them some were Hanged,
Massacred, and Imprisoned, and others sent to the Galleys. And this put a stop
to the course of these Assemblies, and our Martyr himself ran a great hazard by
the treachery of one named Audoyer, which made profession of friendship to him.
He escaped this danger because his hour was not yet come, and God would yet
make use of him some time for his Work. After he had made some Journeys to and
fro on the borders of Castres, at last he returned to Cevennes, where he found
a great many people disposed to hear him, and he resolved to fix himself to the
edification of that part of the Country, because he believed he should there do
most good. Nevertheless well understanding that he could not long escape the
vigilance of Persecutors, who had filled that Country with Dragoons and Spies,
he wrote to his Father a Letter of fare. ^^l, by which he declared he was
perfectly ready to offer himself in Sacrifice to God, and suffer Martyrdom, and
prepared his Father to hear soon the News of his being taken, and consequently
of his death. This presage was not false, for it was not two months wherein he
had edified the Faithful by his Sermons, by his Visits, and his private
Discourses, before he was apprehended at Auduze by the falseness of one
Almeras, an Inhabitant of that Village. This wretch had accompanied our Martyr
in all the places of Cevennes where he had been, insomuch that he believed he
had reason to confide absolutely in him. Nevertheless it was he that delivered
him into the hands of the Dragoons. He was then at a House out of the Village,
they took him on a Saturday night, whilst he was employed in Meditation. One of
the Ministers of the fury of the Persecutors took him by the Hair, cast him to
the ground, and cruelly beat him. Our Martyr complained thereof with great
moderation, adding that God would punish him for an outrage so unjust. This
Prophecy had its accomplishment, for the Soldier was slain two days after by
one of his Companions, with whom he engaged in a quarrel. The Martyr was put in
the Prison of Anduze, where he was laden with Chains, and treated with all the
severity they use to exercise toward the greatest Criminals. It was there he
was first examined, they asked him whether he had Preached. He confessed it,
and gloried therein, and declared that he had done his duty, and that he would
yet do the same thing if he were in condition. They endeavored to learn from
him the places where he had Preached, and what persons had been present at his
Sermons. But to that he would say nothing, because he would bring no person to
hazard. After he had undergone this interrogatory, they put him into the hands
of thirty Dragoons which carried him to the Prison of Alez, where he was to
undergo the Persecution of the Monks of all Orders, besides the severity of the
Judges. But he answered to all these people with firmness, and an admirable
presence of mind, which touched them with admiration and compassion; a
sentiment which is not ordinary with persons of this Character, when they are
Persecuting true Christians. They saw well, that seeing the Monks were touched
with his Discourses, they might produce the same effect upon others, for which
reason they forbad all persons to see him. A few days after they took him from
the Prison of Alez, to remove him to that of Nismes. Those that had been
hindered from seeing him when he was in Prison, were willing to recompense the
loss which they had sustained; an incredible multitude of people of all Ages,
and Sexes, pouring out tears, followed him on the Road, accompanying him with
their Prayers and good wishes: he returned them blessings, and added vehement
Exhortations to rise speedily from their fall, and to glorify God, as he did,
by their Sufferings. Whilst he was in Prison at Alez, there were no ways
imaginable which were not employed to oblige him to change his Religion. The
Ecclesiastics served themselves of ways of Seduction, the Judges with that of
Authority. They promised him not only impunity for what was past, but all kinds
of Favors and Advantages. He equally resisted all, and with the same courage
surmounted these different temptations. Whilst they carried him From the Prison
of Alez to that of Nismes, approaching the place of his Nativity, and that
where his Father and Kindred dwelt, he felt some movings of his Bowels, which
made him fear, lest that should be the place where he was to endure the
strongest temptations, through the softness and tenderness of nature. He
earnestly desired of the Judges, that they would not let him see neither his
Father, nor his Relations. Therefore he did not see them, but was content to
let them know, that they might be assured of his stability, of his constancy
and perfect resignation to the will of God. They kept him but a few days in the
Prison of Nismes: the Monks and Ecclesiastics of that City engaged him in new
Combats, but 'twas with as little success as those that went before. They had
no intention to put him to death at Nismes, because that City was full of Men
of the Reformed Religion. They feared either some emotion, or at least, that
the beholding the Martyrdom of this young Man, and his Constancy, should waken
the Conscience of a great many People, who preserving the truth in their Heart,
hid it under the veil of Dissimulation. They carried him therefore from Nismes
to Beaucaire, a Village where all the People are of the Roman Religion. 'Twas
there his Process was to be made, and he to receive the Crown of Marty^dom.
'Twas there also he was to sustain the most terrible Assaults. The Intendent
was present, who began by Engines of Sweetness and Promises, adding thereunto
all that which is most terrible in death. But to his Promises he answered, I
love not the world, nor the things of the world, I esteem all those advantages
whereof you speak as dung, I tread them under my feet. Unto the threatenings of
punishment he said, My life is not at all dear to me, if so be I may finish my
course with joy, and gain Jesus Christ, whatsoever death is prepared for me, it
will be always glorious if I suffer it for God, and for the same cause for the
which my Savior died. An incredible company of other people came to see him in
the Prison, all to the same end; and nothing was forgotten of all that which
might soften the mind, and weaken the firmness of his courage. All these means
being unsuccessful, in conclusion the Intendent proceeded to his condemnation.
He appeared at the Bar: when he was there, the Intendent said to him, Mr. Rey,
there is yet time for your preservation. Yea, my Lord, answered he, and for
that reason I will employ the time that remains, in endeavoring my salvation.
He replied to him: But you must change, and you shall have life. Yea, says he,
I must change, but it is to go from this miserable world, and go to the Kingdom
of Heaven, where a happy life attends me, which I shall speedily enjoy: don't
promise me the present life, I am entirely disengaged from it, death is much
more eligible. If I had been afraid of death, you had not seen me here. God
has caused me to understand his truth, and does me the honor to die for it.
Speak no more to me of the good things of the world, they have no savor or
taste with me; for all the Treasures of the Earth I will not renounce that
which I expect in Heaven. When the Judges saw him thus firm and steadfast, they
gave over vexing him about his Religion, and proceeded to make his Process. He
answered to all their Questions with a respect, sweetness, and moderation,
which melted all the Auditors. When they were ready to pronounce his Sentence,
they solicited him anew to have pity on himself, and not by an unhappy
obstinacy sacrifice a Life which was given him to preserve. I am no more, says
he, in condition to advise about what I am to do; I have made my choice, here
is no farther place for bargains, I am ready to die, if God has so appointed
it. All the promises which can be made will never be able to shake me, nor
hinder me from rendering what I owe to my God. Therefore they read his
Sentence, by which he was condemned to be hanged, and put to the Rack before he
was led to the Gibbet. He heard his Sentence read without any commotion; and
when it was ended, he said, They treat me more gently than they treated my
Savior, in condemning me to so easy a death; I had prepared my self to be
broken on the wheel, or be burnt. And lifting up his eyes to Heaven, he added,
I give thee thanks, Lord of Heaven and Earth, for all the Blessings that thou
have bestowed upon me. I give thee thanks, that thou have found me worthy to
suffer for thy Gospel, and die for thee. I give thee thanks also, for that thou
have called me to suffer so easy a death, after I had prepared my Heart to
suffer the most cruel death for thee. In execution of the Sentence he was put
upon the Rack, he suffered it without any complaint, or one word of murmuring;
answering no other thing, but that he had said all, and had nothing more to
answer. And when he was taken from the Rack, turning to the Judges, he told
them, I have not suffered the pain which you would have made me suffer, I
believe that you have suffered more than I, I have had no sense of pain, I do
profess before you. It Is an extraordinary effect of Grace; for although we should
not give credit to those relations which tell us that the Rack was so violent,
that it was believed, that he could not have made use of his Legs to go to
execution; it is nevertheless certain, that naturally it cannot happen, that a
person should be on those Instruments of Torment without feeling very great
pains. But it is a Miracle which has a hundred and a hundred Examples in the
History of the Martyrs, both of the ancient Church, and that of the Reformation.

They bring back our Martyr to the place where he was to prepare himself for
death: he dined because they would have it so; and whilst he was eating, he
said to those that gave him his meat, very calmly, Others eat to live, and I
eat to die; this is the last Repast that I shall take upon earth; but against
the Evening there is prepared a Banquet in the Heavens, to which I am invited,
and whither I shall be conducted by the Angels. These happy Spirits will
suddenly remove me to make me partaker with them of the Delights of Paradise.
The rest of the day they let loose upon him many Monks, who received no other
Fruits of their Assaults but disappointment, and confusion. Amidst all those
Distractions, into which they endeavored to cast him, he employed himself in
singing of Psalms, in lifting up his Soul to God, and presenting fervent
Prayers to him. About the Evening, as he went forth of the Prison, to go to
Execution, two Monks drew near to him, saying, We are here to accompany, and
comfort you. He answered them: I have no need of you, I have a Comforter that
is more faithful, and which is within me for my Consolation. I have a Guard of
Angels round about my Person, and which have assured me they will be with me to
my last Breath. He marched toward the place of Execution with an appearance of
satisfaction, and tranquillity of Spirit visible to all the Spectators; and
having observed some of our Brethren, that were fallen, pouring out floods of
tears while they saluted him, said to them, Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, I shall be soon out of Sufferings, and far from this Vale of Tears; but
I see, and leave you there. In the name of God recover, and repent, and he will
have pity upon you. When he was in a place and distance that he could see the
Gibbet, where he was to end his Combat, he cried out with transport of Joy, Be
strong, be strong, this is the place which I long since proposed to my self,
and for which God himself has prepared me; how welcome does this place appear
to me? I there see the Heavens open to receive me, and Angels coming to
accompany me thither. He would afterward have sung a Psalm, as he drew near to
the Gibbet; but the Judges, which saw, that the Crowd was moved, and pierced,
by the signs and tokens of his constancy, imposed silence on him, and forbad
him to sing. He obeyed, because they constrained him; and arriving to the Foot
of the Ladder, he said, Oh, how welcome is this Ladder to me! sine it must
serve me as a step to finish my course, and mount to Heaven. They permitted him
to say his Prayers at the Foot of the Ladder. And when he was ascended, he saw
Monks ascending after him, which obliged him to repel them, saying. Retire; I
have told you, and I tell you again, I have no need of your succor. I receive
enough from my God to enable me to take the last step of my Journey. He would
have gone on, and given a Reason of his Faith to that innumerable Crowd of
People, above which he was raised. But they feared the effect of a Sermon
preached from such a Pulpit, and by such a Preacher. They well foresaw, that he
would speak, and therefore had set round about the Gibbet many Drums, which
they appointed to be beaten at once. It Is a new kind of Gag, which is not
altogether so frightful, as that of another kind, but produces the same effect.
The Spirit of Hell is always the same, and has always the same fears. He has
often felt the force of those Preachers which preach from Gibbets, and out of
the Piles of Wood, he fears their Eloquence, and judges it most safe to impose
silence on them. Our Martyr therefore speaks not but for himself, but his
Countenance, his Eyes, his Hands bespeak his Courage, his Faith, and Constancy;
and this Language was so effectual, that the Village of Beaucaire, although wholly
plunged in darkness and prejudices for Popery, was moved thereby in an
extraordinary manner.

I do very earnestly wish, that three or four sorts of persons would make
Reflections on this death. 1. The Enemies of Truth. Is it possible, that they
cannot observe therein the Character of true Religion? I do conjure them to
consider what most resembles Jesus Christ and his Apostles, whether a Man that
dies, as we have seen this young Man die, or persons which cause him to die for
his Religion, and because he would not renounce it? 2. I set this Object before
the Eyes of the new Converts, who being seduced either by their Passions, or
Illusions, behold the Religion which they have left as abominable, and such
wherein the Spirit of God is not to be found, can they well persuade
themselves, that so much Courage, so much Piety, so much Constancy, so much
Moderation, so much Sweetness does proceed from him, who is the Father of Lies,
and the Fountain of Abominations? If it be the Spirit of God which produces
these miraculous effects in our Martyrs, then our Religion is not deprived of
it, then God has not forsaken us, then we are not out of his Church, out of
which there is neither Grace, nor Holy Spirit.
To conclude, I demand here the attention of the weak, of those Men who bless
themselves because they yet preserve the Truth in their Hearts, and which
persuade themselves, that the Fault which they have committed in subscribing is
very light, I demand of them, are not you obliged to do what this Martyr has
done? Has he given to God more than he owed him? Who is he that is not obliged
to seal and confirm the Truth by his Sufferings? You have withdrawn your selves
from paying that which you have received from God, in the opportunities which
he has offered you. And you have withdrawn your selves by a faulty weakness,
and negligence, by a lie both of Heart and Hand. In what estate should we be,
if God had not left us a Remnant? We should be like unto Sodom and Gomorrah, we
should not have had one Martyr, i. e. one Witness of the Truth of our Lord
Jesus. You will say, all are not capable of suffering Martyrdom. At least
confess then, that you are in this respect in a great degree of Imperfection,
and that your Fault is great. Don't justify your selves at all, recover your
selves by Repentance, if you would that God should pardon you.

I have given you the History of the Vigor which our Brethren of Languedoc have
had to continue their Assemblies without interruption, and thereby expose
themselves to Martyrdom and Death, with design to convince you of that which I
have proved in the beginning of this Letter, i.e. that you ought not to procure
to your selves consolation by hearing the Word of God in Popish Churches, where
you will find it seasoned, and tempered in a way mortal to your Souls.

It is necessary, that you search it after the manner that our Brethren (of
which I have been speaking) have done. I know well that your Flesh has many
things to say to me concerning it. Some will say they are a great People in
that Country, and we are here but a handful of Men. The more easily may you
communicate together, the fewer you are in number, the less are your motions
perceived. Others will say, these People are favored by the situation of their
Country, we are in Cities where they watch us night and day. Has the situation
of their Country hindered them from the danger of being discovered, hanged, and
sent to the Galleys? Have they been discouraged by having been discovered once,
yea, twenty times? I do declare to you on the behalf of God, if you don't
renounce this Spirit of Fear, and put on the Spirit of Martyrs, God will
forsake vou; you will not find a Man that will be able to comfort you; yea, you
will not receive Letters to support you. You are afraid of the shadow of
danger. God will be very much beholden to you, you will love him, and you will
enquire after him when there shall be no danger therein. But it is at present,
that you ought to make it appear, whether you yet love God, in exposing your
selves to all dangers, and often as you search consolation for your Souls, and
edification for your Faith. I pray God to have pity on your state, and that he
will give you such sentiments as you ought to have. The Grace of our Lord be
given to you again. Amen.

October. 15. 1686.
The FIFTH PASTORAL LETTER. THE Christian Purity of the Apostolic Church
opposed to that of Popery. Letters of some Confessors.
My well beloved Brethren in our Lord Jesus Christ, Grace and Peace be given to
you from our God.
IN our third Letter, we promised to give you a brief History of the changes
that have happened in Christianity, in the first five hundred years of the
Church, that from thence you may understand the-unfaithfulness of Monsieur de
Meaux, and your Converters, which tell you with so much impudence, that
Christianity is come down from the Apostles to them without alteration. We have
been obliged to delay the performance of that promise, that we might make some
reflections upon an information, that has been given us concerning the Conduct
of the new Converts. This was the subject matter of our fourth Letter. We will
return again at this time to the matter which we have discontinued, and give a
short pourtraiture, and description of the Christianity of the first Age, that
you may see the changes that have happened in the Ages following

The first Age of the Church.
WE cannot know the opinions, and practices of an Age, with any certainty but
by the Authors of that Age. We have no Authors of the first Age of the Church,
but the Apostles and Evangelists And though others should be found, that may be
referred to that first Age, we shall leave them to the second, to which also
they do belong, because it is certain that those, ( i. e. the Apostles and
Evangelists) do suffice to teach us what was the Religion of the Apostolic
Church. It is above all things just, that we see what was the Religion of that
first Age, and by consequence we must consult the Writers of it. This is the
more certain, because they were Divinely inspired, and are the only infallible
Doctors that we have. In so much that if the Romish Religion be founded in
these infallible Writers, we are content that you abandon, and give up your
selves to your Converters. But on the contrary, if nothing thereof be found
there, it is just that you believe, that all that we reject has been added to
the Christian Religion.

It is a prodigy that surpasses all belief, that Popery should be the Christian
Religion, and that the Founders thereof should not speak one word concerning
it. It is true, the Evangelists, and Apostles, learn us to believe one God in
three Persons, and one Son of God made Man, who dyed for the sins of Mankind,
Rose again, Ascended into Heaven, and will come again to judge the quick and
the dead, and to send one part of them into everlasting Torments, and to give
the other Rewards infinite, for extent and duration. But this is not Popery,
this is Christianity. Popery is a Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of our Lord,
every day offered to God for the sins of the living and the dead. It is a new
Jesus made of Bread, descending at all hours between the Hands of the Priest,
which they adore as the great God. It is the Worship, and Invocation of a
second sort of Mediator, and Intercessor, to whom they build Temples, erect
Images, and Altars, to whose honor they Sacrifice Jesus Christ, by whose name
they swear, to whom they make Vows, and in one word to whom they give all those
divine Honors that are given to God himself. It is an intermediate state
betwixt Heaven and Hell, called Purgatory, in which for a time Souls endure the
pains of fire, and the torments of the damned; Purgatory which is the
foundation of a thousand other Worships, Penances, Prayers for the dead,
Masses, indulgences, Stations, Jubilees, Mortifications, and human
satisfactions. To conclude, for I will nor say all, Popery is an institution of
a new Head, and Spouse for the Church, into whole hands the Lord Jesus has
committed all his Authority, and Rights to pluck up, and to plant, to build,
and to destroy, to bind and to loose, to make and unmake Kings, and to keep the
Keys of Heaven and Hell. Behold what Popery is, and once more I will say, it is
a prodigy that God should give us Scripture to instruct us in his Religion, and
that he should not say one word of the greatest, and most considerable parts of
it there. In the Name of God, my Brethren, be not taken in this unhappy snare,
into which I perceive that some of you are fallen. The Scripture could not say
all, say they, it has left Commission to the Church to say the rest. Now is it
possible that persons can permit themselves to be taken by so gross an
illusion? If the thing under debate were small, peradventure it might be
conceded, but it is about Adoration of the Sacrament, that is to say a piece of
Bread, and giving religious Worship to Creatures, and Images. The thing debated
is about Celebration of a Sacrifice, the most important thing in the World in
Religion, yea about the Sacrificing of Christ himself, the greatest Sacrifice
that can be imagined. And can it be believed that God will send us to Tradition
concerning it. It is to have renounced all honesty to advance such a
proposition, and to be credulous even to blindness, to believe it. Therefore if
I can prove that the Scripture says nothing at all for the establishment of
Popery, I have gained my Cause, at least for the first Age, in which I now am,
and have proved sufficiently that Popery was then unknown. Let us proceed to
some of its Articles.

The Sacrifice of the Mass makes a great figure in the Roman Religion, and
holds a principal place there. It is the Idol for which they have the greatest
jealousy. We cannot better understand what has been the Opinion, and
Sentiment of the Church in all Ages, concerning it, than from the Ceremonies,
Actions, and Words which have been practiced in the Celebration of the
Eucharist.

To search the Sacrifice of the Mass in the Old Testament, as the Papists do,
is an extravagance that has no example, for the Old Testament speaks only of
the Worship, and Ceremonies of the ancient Religion. To search it in other
Texts of the New Testament, than those which teach us the manner of its
Celebration, is to search it where naturally it ought not to be found. It is
therefore precisely in the Institution of that Sacrifice that we must find the
Nature of it. Now the Evangelists, and St. Paul tell us with one consent, that
what Christ Jesus did in that memorable Action is there. The night in which he
was betrayed, he took Bread, he blessed it, brake it, and gave it to his
Disciples, saying take eat, this is my Body. Afterward he took the Cup,
blessed it also, and said this Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is
shed for you, drink ye all of it, take, and divide it among your selves, do
this in remembrance of me. In fine they sung a Hymn, that certain Psalms
according to the Custom of the Jews. They arose, and so the Ceremony was ended.
On that, I beseech you my Brethren, call to witness the Consciences of your
Persecutors, and Converters, and enquire a little of them, what there is in it,
that can have any resemblance with the Mass? Where is the Gradual, the Introit,
the Canon, the Ite, Missa est? But you will say these are but indifferent
Ceremonies, which may be added. It is a great question whether they might be
added, yea, or no. Nevertheless let us let that Point alone at present. Let
them show you at least what is essential therein. Where is the Oblation? Where
is the Elevation? Where is the Adoration? Where is the Genuflection? Where is
the Sacrifice, and presentation of the Victim? Jesus Christ took Bread, and
gave it to his Disciples, saying this is my Body. In the Roman Church these
words are not said to the Communicant, they are said at the Consecration, a
long time before the Communion. Jesus Christ gave Bread to his Disciples to be
eaten without Cremony, or Mystery. They were sitting, or rather lying upon
Beds, at a Table, as the manner of the Ancients was. It was a prodigious
stupidity in the Disciples not to cast themselves on the ground, and Adore the
great Miracle of Transubstantiation, and the Real Presence of Jesus Christ,
lying hid under the Species of Bread and Wine, whilst they bore him in their
own proper Hands. These ignorant persons so prone to admiration, who Adored
Christ Jesus when he appeased a storm at Sea, which was an action assuredly,
that a Spirit of a Nature infinitely inferior to God could do, would they not
have Adored him, when he did a Work so great as the Creation of the World. But
if the Disciples were so stupid as not to Adore this Mystery, would Jesus
Christ be so negligent as to suffer them in this state of impiety and
indevotion? It was that which the Disciples did, or rather did not do. Has it
any thing in Commune with the Service. of the Roman Church, with that Action by
which the Host is lifted up that it may be Adored, with that Worship that all
the World give to it, by kissing the ground at the sight thereof, with the
Custom of carrying it in Pomp about the Streets that it may be Adored. Press
your Converters, and enquire of them, did the Apostles Adore it? If they say
yea, ask them why they continued sitting, and why they never said one word of
it? If they confess that they did not Adore, ask them why they will constrain
you to do it? Why do you desire that we should do more than the Apostles?

And as to the Oblation and Sacrifice, where are they? The Oblation of the
Victim cannot be made till after the Transubstantiation, after that the Body of
Christ is made present by Consecration, after these words, This is my Body. Now
after these words, Jesus Christ presented nothing to God, he presented to his
Disciples, yea he did not pronounce those words, This is my Body, but as he was
giving the Bread to his Disciples. The Oblation therefore is not necessary, the
Sacrifice is not essential, for Christ Jesus did not practice it.

Stay not there. Press these Doctors to tell you, whether Christ Sacrificed
himself in the first Institution of the Sacrament of the Eucharist? You will
see them perplexed, if they say that he Sacrificed himself. Ask them why he
Sacrificed himself upon the Cross the next day? The first Sacrifice of his Body
which he made by breaking the Bread, was it not Propitiatory for the sins of
the Living and the Dead? Behold then the sins of Men expiated before his Death,
and therefore there was no need of his Death to make that expiation. The
Sacrifice of the Mass is at this day, says Monsieur de Meaux, a Sacrifice of
Commemoration.

Now the Sacrifice which Jesus Christ offered in the first: Eucharist was no
Sacrifice of Commemoration, for we do not Commemorate a future event, and a
thing which is not yet come to pass, so that the Sacrifice which is at this day
made, is not the same thing with that which was made by Jesus Christ in the
first Eucharist. The Sacrifice of the Mass is the Sacrifice of the Flesh of our
Lord bruised, and his Blood poured out, but in the first Eucharist the Flesh of
Christ was not broken, nor his blood spilt. So that Christ Sacrificed that
which yet was not, and presented an Oblation under a relation under which he
did not yet subsist. There be certainly a thousand absurdities in saying, that
Jesus Christ Sacrificed himself in the first Eucharist, many Papists have
acknowledged it. If your Converters have as much sincerity as many of their
Doctors have had, to confess that Jesus Christ did not Sacrifice in the first
Eucharist, demand of them by what right they Sacrifice at this day? For they
ought not to do any more than Christ did. And he has not commanded them in
saying do this, to do any thing but what he himself did. So that if he did not
Sacrifice, he has not commanded them to Sacrifice afterward. Therefore it
ought to remain certain, that in the first Age the Sacrifice of the Mass as
well as its Ceremonies were entirely unknown.

As to what appertains to other Sacraments, as is that of Marriage and Penance,
he must have a mind blinded by prejudice beyond all imagination to believe they
may be found in the Scripture. Marriage and Penance are indeed found there, but
there is not one word which does establish them as sacred Ceremonies designed
to seal the Covenant of Grace, and to confer forgiveness of sins. Confirmation
is found there, i. e. the custom of laying on of hands for the giving the Holy
Spirit, and that of Anointing the Sick to recover them from Diseases. Some of
the Proselytes of these Gentlemen make a great business of it, and have said to
us, as a great reproach, that we have taken away Confirmation and Extreme
Unction. It is a great pity that minds which seem enlightened, should stumble at
trifles. And is it not clear, that this Imposition of Hands, and Extreme
Unction was designed for doing of Miracles, which are long since ceased? But
they say that the following Ages did nevertheless practice it. That we shall
see afterward.

The Invocation of the Holy Virgin and Saints, the Worship of Relics, Adoring
of Images, and the Service of Creatures in Popery, is an affair so considerable
that it fills almost all. Nevertheless the Scripture of the New Testament says
nothing of it. Nor is it possible, that Men well Educated can persuade
themselves, that these are Apostolical Traditions, when we see not the least
footsteps of them in the Writings of the Apostles. It is a blindness which
cannot be understood. As to matter of Fact we can have no dispute with Papists
concerning it. They must acknowledge that the Apostles, and Evangelists speak
not one word, either of the Invocation of Saints and Angels, nor of the
Veneration of Relics, nor of the Adoration of Images. As to matter of Right,
if the Church has power to introduce these new Worships, let it be proved, and
put past doubt and Controversy: for I do affirm that he must be smitten with a
spirit of blockishness, that maintains that we may Religiously invoke creatures
without the Authority of God, and order of his Apostles. Plainly it will be
said, that the Apostles have appointed the Invocation of Saints; and that they
themselves have practiced it, but they have left nothing written concerning it.
I do affirm, that he must have a Forehead made of Brass who shall say such a
thing. And the new Converts, who can be persuaded of it, make no use of their
reason. It will never enter into the mind of a reasonable Man, that the
Apostles have appointed Invocation of Saints, and said nothing of it in their
Writings.

Purgatory, which they would have pass for a little thing, is nevertheless a
very great one. For Prayers for the dead, public and private Masses, and
almost all the Roman Worship is founded thereon. So that the Holy Spirit could
not let it slip. If there be a Purgatory, it must be in the Scripture, or there
is none.. I take it for granted, and it is to scoff People, to go search this
pretended Fire, in the prison whence we must not go out till we have paid the
utmost farthing, in the fire that ought to try all things at the end of the
world, in the prison where are the Spirits to which Noah preached. If Heaven
and Hell were no other ways revealed in the Scripture, the profane would have a
fair opportunity to laugh at us.

The Authority of the Pope is the last of those Articles of Popery that I have
represented. It Is an Affair about which there can be no Controversy, which has
any foundation in the World. Ask your Converters where-is the Pope in the
Scriptures, they will quote to you the Words of Jesus Christ to S. Peter, Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my church. Call a Turk, a Jew, or
any other Man, that has common sense, and ask him, whether he sees therein,
that God has established a Man at Rome with full authority to guide the whole
Church, to damn, to save, to judge of all Differences, to determine without
Appeal, to excommunicate Kings, Princes and Sovereigns, he will believe you
laugh him to scorn. The new Converts which see therein the Apostolic Chair
from S. Peter to Innocent the Eleventh, have very good Eyes.

I beseech you, my Brethren, take your Converters a little to those Texts of
Scripture, where S. Paul enumerates the Officers of the Church. He has given
some to be Pastors, Teachers, Apostles, Evangelists, Bishops, Deacons, Elders
and Prophets; in those places where he declares the Duties of those who enjoy
the Offices of the Church. Press them, say I, and demand of them, whether they
dare say, that the Apostle has omitted the first of all Offices, an Office
alone in its kind infinitely superior to all others. Ask them if they do
believe in good earnest, that S. Paul declared the Duties of Bishops in
general, and that he said nothing for the Regulation of the Bishop of Bishops.
I am persuaded, if you press them earnestly thereon, they will blush in your
Faces.

Behold, I do maintain, that I have said enough already for the History of the
first Age. The silence of the Scripture about all the Articles of Popery is an
indisputable proof, that then it was wholly unknown. But there is much more,
you have an hundred positive Proofs, that then the Christian Religion was
wholly opposite to Popery. Against the Real Presence you have all those
Passages where the Eucharist is called Bread, and a Commemoration of the Death
of our Lord; all those where it is said, our Lord is on high, and not here
below. Against the Sacrifice of the Mass you have all the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Against the Worship of Creatures you have the Decalogue, and a
thousand other Commandments which do appoint, that you adore and invoke God
alone. Against the taking away the Cup, and the Adoration of the Eucharist, you
have the History of its Institution. Against Purgatory you have an hundred
Texts which tell you, that after this life Believers go to Heaven. Against the
Pope you have all those places, where our Lord, and the Apostles forbid the
Domination of Churchmen, both over their Flocks, and one another. This is not
a place to engage in a long Controversy by the Scripture; we compose a
History, not a Disputation. Know therefore historically, in the following
Articles, what was the Primitive Christianity. Behold what was the form of the
Apostolic Church.

1. Christians having as yet no Churches, assembled where they could for the
Service of God; and it was almost always from House to House. This is apparent
both in the History of the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles of S. Paul.

2. In the Assemblies they preached, and declared the Word of God. This is also
certain, and read in diverse Texts in the Book of the Acts.

3 They brake Bread from House to House, the Sacred Scripture says so expressly,
that is to say, they had no Altars, Pattins, Communion-Cloaths, or holy Habits
to remove from place to place. The Mysteries were celebrated in a perfect
Simplicity.

4. Ordinarily the Sacrament was celebrated at ordinary and sober Meals, where
Christians came by invitation. About the end of the Meal they brake Bread,
precisely with those Ceremonies which S. Paul describes in 1 Cor. 11.

5. The Sacrament of Baptism was also administered with the same simplicity,
they contented themselves with dipping persons in Water, with the Invocation of
the adorable Trinity. As is seen in all the Baptisms spoken of in the Book of
the Acts.

6. It had been an Abomination to have seen Images. And those which have the
confidence to show at this day Images, as made by S. Luke, and from the time of
the Apostles, are impudent beyond all imagination. Although these Images should be
things indifferent in Religion, how is it that the Apostles should scandalize
the Jews, who had Images in that horror, that they broke in pieces the Ensigns
of the Roman Emperors. How is it, that the Jews, which sought pretenses against
S. Paul to destroy him, as an Apostate, and Violater of the Law, never objected
to him, that he proposed Images to be adored?

7. In the Holy Places there was no Altar, but to consecrate, and communicate
they served themselves of the first Table that came to hand, they sprinkled no
Holy Water on those that entered their Churches, they made no Sign of the Cross
in the Celebration of the Mysteries.

8. They spoke and Preached in a Language understood by all the world; they
officiated in Greek throughout all Greece, in Latin at Rome, and in all the
West to every one according to their Language.

9. They gave the Communion to all under both kinds.

10. Celebration without Communicants was a thing altogether unknown; for the
Eucharist was called a Supper or common Meal. Now a Meal where one Man drinks
and eats alone was never called a Supper, or common Repast.

11. The Pastors were equal amongst themselves. Not to enter into the
Controversy about the Difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter, which is
not at all necessary for you. It is certain, that all the Bishops of different
Churches were all equal among themselves.

If we falsify in any of these Articles, your Converters shall do well to
shame us; but they will be obliged to do it by Holy Scripture. For they and you
must remember, that we are upon the History, and that we follow the Ages in
their order; and so it is necessary, that in the first Age they show us all by
the Writers of that Age, which are the Apostles and their Disciples.

Seeing it is not at all in our Design to make a Treatise of Controversy upon
the first Age, no more than on those that follow, this is sufficient for its
History, and we must pass to the second. But forasmuch as we cannot, at the
present, go very far in the second Age, we will delay the History thereof to a
following Letter, and we will finish this with some Letters of our Confessors,
where you will see the Character of true Christianity, and Martyrs; you have
already seen one Letter of a famous Confessor, behold another of the same
Author. You will understand the Loveliness of this second Letter the better by
reading that which was the occasion thereof, which was an Answer to the first.
And therefore you shall have them both here.

May 27, 1686. To our Dear Brother Monsieur de M -- Confessor, and Martyr of
Jesus Christ, condemned to the Galleys at the Tournelle.
I Have received your Letter, my dear Brother, dated from the Tournelle. It
has caused me more joy than if I had received one from the Palace at
Versailles, or Louvre, written by the Hand of the greatest King in the World.
You do me much greater Honor than I do deserve, to choose me to whom you may
impart the glorious advantages that God bestows upon you. Another, it may be,
would answer by condoling, and complaining of the Evils that you suffer. But as
for me, God forbid, that I should look upon you as unhappy. Your state is
worthy of Envy, your Chains are heavy, and your Irons shameful, according to
the opinion of the world; and if you bore them with any other Spirit than you
do, I should complain thereof. But with the Courage and Piety, which you seem
to me to have, I do not believe, that there is a person in the world more
happy, and more glorious. The Yoke of Christ is heavy to the Men of the World
which are weak; but it is sweet and easy to faithful Souls that bear it with
patience. Your Sentiments and Dispositions are Christian, my dear Brother, and
worthy of emulation, but beware of one thing, that is Pride. If you continue
this glorious Work as you have begun it, your name will be put in the Catalogue
of holy Martyrs, whose names yet live laden with Blessings. God will
distinguish you in his Rewards, you shall be with Jesus Christ amongst the
first raised from the dead, which shall judge others. But attribute the Courage
that you have to the Grace of God, which works this great Work in you, so
worthy of admiration. Alas, we have seen pillars broken by the wind of
Temptation, Men fall unhappily, which we had called the Successors of the
Martyrs, but which have been found Successors to Peter, who through weakness
denied his Master. Who is it that has sustained you among so many Falls, but
the Hand of the Almighty God, who supports whom he pleases, and permits to
fall whom he will by the ununsearchableness of his Judgments? What an Honor is
it, my dear Brother, to have been willing to choose you, and make you an example
of that holy perseverance which is so rare at this day. Be of good courage in
the name of our great God, and most compassionate Savior Jesus Christ, and
remember, my dear Brother, that you suffer for him who suffered for you, and
render to him that which you have received from him. Remember that the loving
Savior offers you a Crown at the end of you Race, and that he says to you,
Soldier of Jesus Christ be of good courage, Fight the good fight, he which
overcomes, I will cause to sit down on my throne, as I also have overcome, and
am set down with my father in his throne. Remember, that the Angels, are at
present, Spectators of your Combat, that they wait the issue, and that they
prepare a place for your holy Soul in their holy Society. Either you will
continue in these Torments, or you will surmount and escape them. If this last
happens, as I very much hope, how glorious will you be among your Brethren! You
will have right to say as S. Paul, Let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body
the marks, and scars of our Lord Jesus. We shall kiss your wounds, and we shall
behold you with envy and admiration. If you lose your life in your slavery and
pains, God will prepare for you in the Heavens a Glory distinct from others;
for you must believe the Crown of Martyrs is more rich, and illustrious than
that of ordinary Believers. Say them, All things well considered, this light
and transient Affliction is not worthy to be compared to the Glory which is to
come, and which shall be revealed in me. Would to God I could depaint before
you the Glory of Heaven, the Joy of Souls which see God and possess him, the
Satisfaction of the Blessed, which are plunged in an Ocean of Delights, the
Transports of Saints, which embrace their Divine Savior, which are in the
glorious Society of the Patriarchs, which sing the Praises of God with Angels,
and are full of Joy, which exceeds all understanding! In the name of God, dear
Brother, lift up your eyes that way, and let that grand object support you.

Take heed of the perilous Temptations, to which the World, and your own Heart
may expose you. 1. Your Heart may peradventure say, the Difference which is
between the Roman Religion and mine is so little, that it is not worth the while
to suffer Martyrdom for it. Say thereon, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an
offense unto me. Rome is that spiritual Babylon, concerning which, God has
said, Go out of her my people. The Church of Rome is the Court trod under foot
by the Gentiles for the space of twelve hundred and sixty days. The Papists are
the Gentiles, which tread under foot the Church of God, and oppress it; their
Images are the Idols of the ancient Pagans, and their Saints are in the place
of the false Gods of Antiquity. The Sacrament which they appoint to be adored,
is an Idol which cannot be adored, without stirring up the holy Jealousy of
the true Jesus Christ. Remember, my dear Brother, that our Truths are not less
important than they were an hundred and fifty years ago, when our Fathers went
joyfully to death, in defense of them. They deserved that they should die for
them then, they deserve that we should suffer for them at this day.

Take head of another very grievous Temptation. Your Heart will say, What, must
I condemn to Hell all those persons that have fallen through weakness, which go
to Mass by constraint? Without doubt God will show them mercy, and save them.
He will do the same by me, I will follow their example, I shall have the same
lot with them. To that, remember the Precept of Jesus Christ, Judge not that ye
be not judged. Leave the Brethren that are fallen to the Judgment of God. We do
hope that God will show them mercy, that is to say, that he will give them
Repentance of their great fault; but in the name of God, be not tempted to
imitate them. Is it not certain, that the state in which they are, is at least
doubtful? And is not yours certain? Will it not be then a madness to quit a
state, and way which certainly leads you to the Greatest Glory of Paradise, to
put your self in a way which may lead you to ruin and damnation; this is the
best that you can think of it. Moreover, my dear Brother, you ought to
remember, that where much has been given, much will be required, the Favors
which God has bestowed upon you hitherto are so great, that you can never make
sufficient acknowledgments for them. He has given you a courage and resolution
that has few Examples. Oh! how precious is the Talent that you have received?
But also how faulty will your laziness be if you go dig and hide it? When a
person falls at the beginning of his Race, it will be said he was not fit for
so long a Course, and Men will excuse him. But if he run vigorously within two
steps of the end, and having his hand already upon the Crown, lets it go, and
loses it, all Men will blame him, and treat him as wretched, and sloathful. Run
you therefore the race that is set before you with patience, and perseverance,
seeing you are encompassed with so great a Cloud of Witnesses. Look to that
Cloud of holy Martyrs of Jesus Christ, which have gone before you, which have
been Burnt, Tortured, torn with Pincers, sometimes whole years together, which
have seen their Bowels fall out in the Fire before they gave up the Ghost. The
Chain which you wear about your neck is fifty pounds, but it is more
supportable than flames of Fire. Say therefore, We have not yet resisted unto
blood fighting against sin. How glorious is the Chain that you bear about your
neck! It is more precious than if it were of Gold and Diamonds. Being colored
with your sweat, and sometimes with your blood, it may one day prove, (if it
pleases God) the most precious of your movables, and you will say, behold
there the Carcanet, and Collar that my Divine Spouse has given me. Behold the
Nuptial Jewel wherewith he has honored me. He has done me the honor to make
me conformable to him in his Sufferings, that I may be conformable to him in
his Glory.

In the name of God, my dear Brother, do not suffer your self to be softened by
the memory of your Wife and Children. God who is rich in Mercy, the Father of
the Fatherless, and Husband of the Widow, will take care of her and them, and
not leave them without all Consolation. He that loves Father or Mother, Wife or
Children, more than me, is not worthy of me. We ought not to love any thing but
God, and for the love of God, this good God will be to us in the stead of all
things, and will comfort us effectually. The moment of time in which you leave
the Prison, to go to the Galleys, to which you are designed, will be a terrible
moment to you; but in the name of God fortify your self against the horrors of
it, and say, I follow Jesus Christ my Savior, he went forth of the
Judgment-Hall bearing his Cross, and I go out of my Prison bearing my Chains. I
shall arrive at my Calvary, but I shall also arrive at the Mount of Olives, at
the Mountain, of Peace, and at last I shall ascend up into Heaven to my God,
and dear Redeemer. In your Journey you will bear your Chain by the Roads, but
it will sparkle with glory, and whereas the shame and infamy wherewithal
Galley-Slaves are laden, is usually the heaviest part of their burden, on the
contrary you will be laden with glory, and your Enemies themselves will admire
you. I praise God for the moderation with which you speak of your Persecutors,
therein I observe a proof that you are a true Martyr of Jesus Christ. Continue
to bless, and pray to God for them. When Men suffer for an ill Cause, it is
always with impatience, and fury against those that are the cause thereof. But
the true Religion inspires this spirit of sweetness and kindness. So that
without going further than your own Heart, you may there find evidences of the
truth of the Religion that you defend. Call to mind our glorious Ancestors, and
their Sufferings, and say, they were not Fools, and desperate persons, when
they sufiered for the same Truths that I defend. On the contrary, they were
full of Piety, good Understanding, and Zeal. I will therefore imitate them, and
not be troubled at the Judgment that the Men of the World shall make concerning
it. Endeavor to get a Bible, or a New Testament, it matters not what
Translation it be, it will be always sufficient for your Consolation. If this
Letter come to your hands, inform me, if possible, where your dear Wife is, to
the end that I may comfort her. She it a good Woman, and I have always esteemed
and loved her, and I hope God will have pity on her. Farewell my dear Brother.
Mademoiselle de P -- your Sister, is well. I communicated to her your Letter
for her Consolation. Do not fear lest we should forget you in our Prayers. Do
not forget us in yours. Pray to God to preserve this small Country, in which
there are so many of his Children. Your Prayers proceeding out of Irons will be
more effectual than ours. The Grace of our Lord Jesus be with you. Amen.


From the Tournelle, July 2. 1687.
I Have received that which you did me the honor to write, it has been a great
Consolation to me, and I did not expect less from so faithful a servant of God
as you are. It has not only edified and confirmed me, but it may produce the
same effect upon some few others to whom we have thought fit to communicate it.
I have not the satisfaction to read it, as often as I have desired, and do yet
desire. I have not read, it but in secret, because of the difficulty of getting
any thing from abroad without the knowledge of our Guards. I return you thanks
for the care you have had of representing so much to the life, what I ought to
fear, and hope, in the condition and state wherein I am. I had already formed
to my self Ideas sufficiently clear of those things, and thanks be to God, your
good advice has impressed them more strongly upon my Heart, so that I have
reason to hope, that with help from on high, God will finish that good Work
that he has begun in me, and that my Sufferings shall end in his Glory, my own
Salvation, and the Edification of my Brethren. When I make reflection upon the
merciful conduct, of God toward me, I am ravished in admiration thereof, and
cannot find words sufficient to testify my sense of them, and my
acknowledgment for them. There are few Prayers that I make which are not
accompanied with tears of joy, when I make mention of them. As soon as our
Churches were shut up in the Province where I lived, and that precious liberty
lost, which now we breath after, God put it into my Heart to go and search it
at Lixim, where yet they did enjoy it, and a few days after we were deprived of
it there, as well as elsewhere; without staggering I put my self to find it
among Strangers, forsaking with courage and joy, all the accommodations of Life
which we enjoyed in France. In these Travels, and in the different Prisons, and
Dungeons, through which the providence of God led me, I have been preserved
from violent temptations, which have made almost all our Brethren fall, and
which would not have failed to have born me down with the first. For the
imprisonments that I have suffered this day seven months complete, are a small
matter in comparison of those terrible trials, and nevertheless I have not been
without giving some marks of my weakness. The tears of a Wife, and Family which
are dear to me, and which could not shake me at Strasburgh, joined to those of
two Brother-in-Laws, which came to see me at Chalons, prevailed with me to
accept certain propositions, which were made to me by two persons the most
considerable of that Province; but a few days after God having showed me my
fault, and presented me an occasion to repair it, I embraced it with Zeal, Joy,
and Tears, and the Father of Mercies, that knows how to bring light out of
darkness, made use of my infirmities to give me that vigor and firmness that I
have had ever since. This gives me ground to hope that he will continue this
favor to me to the end, and that he will always proportion his Gifts and
Graces to the trials whereunto he shall please to expose me; for that which was
done not being executed, other offers were afterward made unto me, which
touched me less than the former, and I rejected them without any deliberation;
wherewithal they were so provoked, that on the morrow I was put in the Dungeon.
Thirteen days before my Condemnation, being in the Prison at Paris, one of my
friends, Tutor to the Children of the King, and Madam de Mortespan, with his
Majesty's leave came to see me; he proposed to me, that I should go eight or
ten months to the Bishop de Meaux to be instructed (so they speak here.) I soon
returned him thanks, and assured him, that time was not capable of changing my
Illuminations and Persuasions, and that I did believe, that Monsieur de Meaux
would give me no more satisfaction than other Ecclesiastics that I had seen.
It is about eight days since that M. Morel le Rich Partisan sent me word, that
he would take me out of my Chains on the morrow, if I would take time, and that
undetermined, faithfully to employ for my Inst^uction, and did assure me, that
the promise that should be made me should be faithfully observed. 'Twas Le --
which spoke to me in his Name. I prayed him to go quickly and tell M. Morel,
that I was sensibly affected with the kindness that he testified toward me,
and that I made him all the acknowledgments imaginable, and gave him my humble
thanks; but I was resolved to expiate my fault, by suffering the penalties to
which I was condemned. I give you this particular account of things M. that you
may know the Disposition of my Soul. The manner after which I suffer, and the
bright side on which God causes me to behold all my Evils, persuade me, that he
will do me the favor to be faithful to him even to the death. I do not fix my
consideration on the estate; in which I am, which is much more uneasy to all
those that see it, than to my self. I carry it only to those Recompenses that
God has promised to those that fear his Name. I am certain that the light
Afflictions wherewithal he is pleased to visit me, will produce in me,
according to his promises, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. I
comfort my self on this, that the Sufferings of the present time are not worthy
to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed in us.

I assure my self of what S. James says, Blessed is he that endures temptation
when he is tried, for he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to those that love him. I rejoice in this, that our Savior declares
them happy that suffer for Righteousness sake. M. I make all my Glory and all
my happiness to consist in this, that my Savior has not thought me unworthy to
suffer shame for his Name. I support my self on the Rock of Ages, I put my
whole trust in him, I expect no succor or assistance but from him alone. Upon
a Foundation so solid, I promise my self that nothing shall be able to shake
me, at present he makes me feel the effects of a singular goodness, in the
midst of wicked Passengers, which it pleases him that I suffer, he makes me to
taste the sweetness of true and solid good, he fills my soul with that joy
unspeakable and glorious, which surpasses all understanding, he fills me with
that hope by which he has sustained all the happy Confessors of his Truth, and
by which I hope he will sustain me, as well as they. My principal study is to
disingage my self from Earth, to conceive a disgust for the World, and an
ardent desire for Heaven. This, Monsieur, is my ordinary employment, as far as
the infamous place where I am imprisoned will permit it. I call it infamous,
because one never hears an honest word there, all rings and sounds again with
filthiness and execrable Blasphemies. There is such a noise for the most part
night and day, that I have scarcely found heretofore one happy moment to lift
up my Heart to God. I have been so oppressed with sleep that I have oftentimes
fell under it before I finished my Prayers, when I awake at three or four in
the morning, I endeavor to sleep no more, to the end that whilst we are a
little at roast, I may with some attention perform my Devotions to God. I have
had more liberty for ten or twelve days, for when the weather is fair they let
the Prisoners go forth, and keep them in a Court all the day, unless it be six
which they keep enclosed. I employ one part of this time in Reading,
Meditation, and Prayer, and I take the liberty to sing some Psalms, as I have
done in all the places of my Captivity, and no body has complained thereof.
Behold in two words an abridgment of our misery. We lie three and fifty of us
in a place which is not above five fathom in length, and one and a half in
breadth. There lies on my right side a Countryman sick, with his Head at my
feet, and his Feet at my Head, and so it is with others. There is not it may be
one among us, which do not envy the condition of many Dogs and Horses. This
makes us all wish that the Prisoners may soon depart, but that is a secret that
must not be told us; but as far as we can judge, they will depart the next
week. There were 95 of us yesterday condemned, but there dyed two on that day,
and one on this, and we have yet 15 or 16 sick, and there be few escape. I have
had five fits of a Tertian Ague, but God bethanked I am very well recovered,
and prepared to take my Journey to Marseilles. We shall take in Burgundy some
of our Brethren, which are in Prison for the same reason with my self, who am
the first that have had the honor to be Condemned by the Parliament of Paris.
There remains no more, Monsieur, but that I entreat you to continue* to me the
assistance of your Holy Prayers. I desire the same favor of Mademoiselle your
Wife, whom (with your leave) I do here assure of my respect. Obtain for me, if
you please, the same advantage from those Frenchmen of your acquaintance, which
God does admit to your Holy Assemblies. Monsieur M -- arrived yesterday, but I
have not yet had the honor to see him. Not having the liberty to write to my
Sister, nor my Nephew her Son, I must be content here to give them my
Salutations. I do not write this, but in great uncertainty whether it can go
hence. If your great employment will permit you to give some Consolation to my
Wife and Children, as you have made me hope, and she expects with a great deal
of joy, I entreat you do it. You may well imagine that our separation will be a
thing terrible to us all, and above all to her. Before I received your Letter,
I did nor forget in my Prayers those things which you recommended to me. I pray
God encompass you about with his protection, and preserve you many years to
labor profitably in his Vineyard.

N^^^mber 1. 1686.

The SIXTH PASTORAL LETTER. WHAT WAS The Form of Christianity in the second Age.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Soviour Jesus Christ.
WHereas many things worthy of your Curiosity, and proper to nourish your
Piety, have been communicated to us by many of our Brethren, we have been
tempted (for a few months) to communicate them to you at this time. But in
conclusion we have chosen to satisfy the impatience of those, which are
willing to see what we have to teach them, concerning the Christianity of the
second Age. We remit therefore to the following Letters, that which we do not
do in this, and we do promise those that have sent us any Memorials touching
our Martyrs and Confessors, to enter them afterward in this Work, according as
we shall find place and occasion therein.

The second Age of the Church.
WE must consider, first of all, the manner wherein they did Celebrate the
Sacraments, and thereby we shall learn what Opinion they had of them.

They were Celebrated as yet with great Simplicity in the second Age. Behold
that which Justin Martyr says, concerning the manner of Administering Baptism.
We will here Expound after what manner we Dedicate our selves to Jesus Christ,
fearing lest if we pass over any thing concerning it, we should be suspected of
malignity and dissimulation. All those therefore, which are persuaded of the
truth of our Doctrine, and promise to live according to our Rules and Laws, are
commanded to Pray, to Fast, and beg the forgiveness of their sins, and we Pray
and Fast with them. After that we lead them to a place where there is Water,
and we Regenerate them after the same manner which we our selves were
Regenerated: for we Wash, or Baptize them in the Name of the Author of all
things, of the Lord God, and Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit.
Hitherunto we see nothing changed from the Apostolic Form. There is neither
sign of the Cross, nor Exorcism, nor Salt, nor Spittle, nor nothing of that,
which is at this day practiced in Baptism.

Behold after what manner the Mystery of the Eucharist was Celebrated in the
same Age, according to the Testimony of the same Author, and in the same place.
After, says he, we have Baptized after the same manner, him that does believe,
we conduct him to the place where are those Believers that are called Brethren,
which are assembled on purpose to Pray earnestly to God, both for themselves,
and for him that has been illuminated or Baptized, and for all others in all
places, to the end that we may be worthy to be found Disciples to the Truth,
and Observers of those things that are commanded, and to converse in all good
Works, for the obtaining of eternal Salvation. When Prayers are ended, we
mutually Salute each other by a Kiss. After that they present to him of the
Brethren which does preside, Bread, and a Cup of Wine mingled with Water: he
takes it, and pronounces over it praises to the Father of all things, in the
Name of the Son, and by the Holy Spirit. Afterward he inlarges much in
Praises, for that it has pleased him to give us these things. And when he has
finished his Prayers, and Praises, the people that are present, concur by their
acclamations, saying Amen. Now Amen in the Hebrew Language signifies so be it.
When the President has finished his Praises, and Thanksgivings, and the people
have said Amen, those which amongst our selves we call Deacons, distribute to
every one, that are present, of this Bread that has been blessed, and of this
Wine and Water, and they carry thereof to the absent. And this Aliment is
called among us the Eucharist. It is not permitted to any one to eat thereof,
unless he receive our Doctrine as true, and has been partaker in the washing
of Regeneration for the remission of sins, and lives according to the
appointment, and Laws of Christ Jesus. To conclude, we do not receive this
Bread as common Bread, nor this Drink as common Drink. But as by the word of
God Jesus Christ our Savior was made Flesh, and took Flesh and Blood for our
Salvation: So we have been taught that this Aliment upon which have been
pronounced Praises and Thanksgivings, are the Flesh and Blood of that Jesus
that was made Flesh. Behold what was the Worship of the Ancients, and the
Ceremonies with which they Celebrated their Mysteries. 1. They caused him that
was to be Baptized to confess and own the Name of Jesus Christ, and his
Doctrine. 2. They obliged him to Fast and Pray, and they Fasted and Prayed with
him. 3. After that they carried him into a place in which there was Water
appointed for Baptism. 4. The place was separate, because then Baptism was
performed by immersion, and that they might not expose the Nakedness of Men and
Women to the view of other Believers. 5. He that was Baptized, was plunged in
the Water, and they pronounced over him the Invocation of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, i.e. they Baptized him in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. 6. Afterward they brought him back to the full Assembly, and there he
was gathered, and received into the number of the Faithful. 7. All the Assembly
continued their Prayers, in which they Prayed for the Church, for the person
Baptized, for the Powers in general, and in particular. 8. When Prayers were
ended, they prepared themselves for the Communion by a Kiss of Charity, which
they mutually gave each other. 9. They presented to the President, and to him
that had Prayed, common Bread, made after the ordinary manner, and a Cup in
which there was Wine mingled with Water. 10. The President uttered, or
pronounced some Prayers to the Glory of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
11. He adds some Prayers, and Thanksgivings to God, that he has been pleased
to give to us the precious Gift of the Flesh, and Blood, of his Son at the Holy
Table. 12. When he finished his Prayers, all the people said Amen. 13. In
consequence whereunto the Deacons distributed to the People the Bread and Wine
that had been Consecrated by Prayer. 14. They carried it to the absent, they
Collected the Alms of the People, they dismissed the Assembly, and finished the
business and exercise.


Observe first that which seems added to the Practice of the Apostles. 1. They
mingled Water with their Wine. We do not observe, that it was either Practiced
by the Apostolic Church, or that any such thing was appointed by them. 2. They
carried the Consecrated Bread to the absent.
It does not appear that this was Practiced in the first Age. These are indeed
small changes, but nevertheless they ought to be observed, for the better
knowledge of those that followed. But on the other side observe that we see not
here, 1. Either Oblation or Sacrifice. 2. He speaks nothing of any Altar. 3.
That there was no Elevation made. 4. That no signs of the Cross were seen
there. 5. That no Prayers were made but to God, and no Intercessions made use
of but those of Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit. 6. That he speaks nothing of
Adoration. 7. That it does not appear that they Communicated upon their Knees.
8. That they gave to the People the Communion under both Kinds. 9. That the
Service was performed in a Language understood by the People, for they answered
Amen to the Thanksgivings. 10. That all that were present did partake in the
Mysteries, and not the Priest only.


We Conjure you, my Brethren, to give attention to all this, and so if there be
any thing therein that has the least taste, or savor of Sacrifice. What a
prodigious change must have happened since that time, to compose and frame such
a Worship as they call the Mass, where a Priest covered with extravagant
Garments, (which they say are Mysterious) heaps one upon another, in a Language
that the People do not understand, a multitude of Prayers, some good, and some
bad, all without order, and without reason, make Oblations, signs of the Cross,
Elevations, where the people Adore, and Prostrate themselves before the
Sacrament when it is lifted up, where the Priest eats alone, after he has made
a hundred Ceremonies on the Bread and Wine, Ceremonies that signify nothing,
but render the Celebration of the Mystery ridiculous. Do not insist
pertinaciously on what remains, (viz.) That Justin Martyr calls the Bread and
Wine of the Sacrament, the Flesh and Blood of Christ Jesus. So we call them our
selves, and so have the Writers of all Ages called them. So our Lord Jesus, and
S. Paul calls them. And it signifies no more in Justin Martyr, than those words
of our Savior, This bread is my body, this cup is my blood. Theophilus of
Antioch, who lived in the same Age with Justin Martyr, acknowledges, that it is
a Denomination, not a Transmutation. When Jesus Christ, says he, said, This is
my body, he called his Body Bread, which is made of many Grains. It Is not
common Bread, says Justin Martyr, it is the Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ.
But it is such Flesh and Blood of Jesus Christ, as nourishes our Flesh and
Blood, according to him. That is to say, which is changed into our bodily
Nourishment, and passes through our Veins. Now no Man ever believed, or can
believe, that the true Flesh of Christ passes into the Nourishment of our
Members. The same Justin which calls the Eucharist Flesh and Blood, calls it
Bread and Wine after the Consecration, and at the time of the Distribution.
They give, says he, to all those that are present, Bread and Wine, over which
Praises and Thanksgivings have been made. Because he has said, that it is not
common Bread, we must not conclude, that it is not Bread at all, if it be not
thought fit, that we say a great Man is no Man, because it has been said, that
he is no ordinary or common Man.

I must also give you notice in this place, my Brethren, that you beware of a
snare, that they compose or make of several Passages of the Fathers of this
Age, where they make you read the words Altar, Oblation, and Sacrifice on the
Subject of the Eucharist, and by these Words and Terms, they endeavor to
persuade you, that the Sacrifice of the Mass was then known. The word Altar is
not found in the Authors of the second Age, whose Writings are indisputable.
It Is found in the Canons attributed to the Apostles, and in the Epistles of S.
Ignatius. But it is known, that their Writings are not owned by all the World.
Nevertheless I am inclined to believe, that from that time they called the
Table of the Eucharist Altar. For why should they make any scruple of using the
word Altar, seeing they made use of the words Oblation, and Sacrifice when they
spoke of this Sacrament?

But you must know, 1. That 'twas an Innovation in the Terms, and that in the
Writings of the Apostles, you never find the words Altar, Oblation or Sacrifice
on that Subject. Read the History of the Institution of the Eucharist, the Acts
of the Apostles, where the breaking of bread is often spoken of, that is, the
Celebration of the Sacrament of the Supper. Read the tenth and eleventh
Chapters of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where much is said of this
Sacrament; you do not see these Terms there. 2. You must know, that these terms
Altar, Oblation and Sacrifice took their originals from the custom that
Christians had in those times of bringing their Offerings of Bread and Wine,
and other things necessary for the Service of the Church, and the maintenance
of its Pastors, and setting them as an Offering to God on the Communion Table.
Yea, they offered them to God by certain Prayers, the Forms whereof are still
found in the ancient Liturgies. 3 To conclude, you ought to hold for certain,
that these Oblations, these Sacrifices, etc.
of the second Age, had no relation to the consecrated Signs or Elements. For
no Oblation was made to God of the Signs or Elements of Bread, or Wine after
their Consecration. Observe that in the passage of Justin Martyr, immediately
after the Consecration of Bread and Wine, the distribution was made, and no
Oblation between them. And for an undoubted proof thereof, observe, that they
are the Believers that make these Oblations, and not the Priests alone. Hear S.
Clement Romanus, the Disciple and Companion of S. Paul: Those, says he, who
make their Oblations at appointed times are acceptable, and happy; for in
following the Commandments of God they commit no sin. By this we do not intend
to affirm, that afterward the Priest don't bless these Oblations, and present
them to God. But learn from S. Ireneus what is understood by these Oblations,
and what they were: Jesus Christ, says he, has given advice to his Disciples
to offer to God the first Fruits of his Creatures, not that he has any need of
them, with respect to himself, but to the end they might not appear with
respect to themselves, ungrateful and unfruitful, he took Bread, which is a
Creature, and gave thanks thereon, saying, This is my body, etc. And he has
taught us a new Oblation of the New Testament, which the Church receiving from
the Apostles, offer, as the first Fruits of his Gifts to God, which gives us
food and nourishment. You very well see, that the Church offers not Jesus
Christ the Creator to God, but Bread which is the first Fruits of his Creation.
You see well that this Oblation is presented to God as a Thanksgiving, because
he has given us the Nourishments of Bread and Wine, and not transubstantiated
Bread, for a propitiatory Sacrifice. Hear how he speaks yet of these Oblations:
They are not Sacrifices, that sanctify the Man, but it is the Conscience of
him that offers, sanctifies the Sacrifice, etc. seeing then that the Church
offers with simplicity, it is but Justice that its Oblation pass for a pure
Sacrifice before God. Behold an undoubted Blasphemy, according to the
Principles of Popery. The Eucharist is a Sacrifice, but the Sacrifice of the
Body of Jesus Christ does not sanctify the Man: on the contrary, it is the
Conscience of him that offers, who sanctifies the Sacrifice of the Body of our
Lord in the Mass. There is, say I, a Blasphemy in all shapes and forms.
Acknowledge therefore, that nothing is debated there, but the Offerings that
Believers set upon the holy Table. And that ye may have a perfect knowledge of
what was then done in the Celebration of the holy Supper; add from S. Clement
and S. Ireneus, that which was wanting in S. Justin: 1. It Is the Believers
brought Bread, Wine, Wax, Oil and other things necessary in the Church. And as
for Fruits and Animals, Apples and Pulse necessary for the maintenance of life,
they carried them to the Bishops House. 2. These things set upon the Table were
consecrated to God by Prayer. 3. Of the Bread and Wine which had been thus
offered, they took one part for the Celebration of the Eucharist, and the rest
was spent by the Ministers of the Church, and divided among them for their
support and maintenance.
Behold the only Oblation that was then made, and it is nothing: nevertheless
from thence is come an Innovation in the Terms, and from thence insensibly is
come the Sacrifice of the Mass. Behold the meaning of the third, the fourth and
the fifth Canons attributed to the Apostles. The third forbids, that they
present upon the Altar Honey, Milk, Birds, Beasts and Pulse. The second permits
to offer Ears of Corn, Raisins, Oil for the Lights, and Incense. And the fifth
ordains, that they carry their Fruits to the Bishops, and Presbyters, to be
distributed among them, and their Deacons. In the Margin of these Canons the
Roman Doctors set these Words, The Sacrifice of the Mass appointed by our Lord.
What shameless Foreheads have they? Do Men sacrifice Oil, and Incense in the
Sacrifice of the Mass?

In the second Age, where we now are, nothing is found of that which is called
Confirmation, which is one of the Popish Sacraments. But it does not appear,
that the Primitive Christians, even to the end of the second Age, did employ
any Unction for the giving the Holy Spirit, and for the Confirmation of those
that had been baptized. It Is true, they imposed Hands on those that were
baptized, both before their Baptism, and it may be after. But it is ridiculous
to make a Sacrament of this Imposition of Hands. Concerning which, my Brethren,
you ought to know, 1. That Imposition of Hands is a Ceremony descended from the
Jews; our Lord approved and practiced it; for which reason he laid hands on all
the Children they brought to him, when he blessed them. 2. You ought to be
advertised, that Imposition of Hands was an Appendage of Prayer, and that they
served themselves of that Ceremony, as often as they would implore the
extraordinary assistance of God upon any one.
When any one was sick, they prayed and laid their hands on them. When any one
was reconciled to the Church, they begged of God pardon of sins for him, laying
their hands on him. When any one was admitted to a public Office, they prayed
to obtain that assistance that was necessary for him, and laid on him their
hands. When they sent any one upon a difficult Commission, they laid hands on
him, and prayed, as may be seen in* Acts 13. The fathers after they had fasted
and prayed, laid hands on Paul and Barnabas; to the end they might go preach
the Gospel amongst the Gentiles. They were already Presbyters, and had received
Mission from God and the Church. When they married, they received also Prayer,
and the Benediction of the Church with Imposition of Hands annexed unto it.
It Is a prodigious Blindness, to make of these differing Impositions of Hands,
so many Sacraments. I should as soon choose, or rather sooner choose, to make of
these differing Prayers, which were made on sundry occasions, so many
Sacraments. For it is certain, that Prayer over the baptized, the penitent, the
sick, those that took Office, those that were sent on Commission, those that
were married, was the chief of the Action, and Imposition of Hands was but a
decent Gesture and a Rite; which signified, that they desired the Grace of God
and his assistance on the person that was concerned therein. It Is a pityful
thing, that Men lay hold always on the Skin, and meddle not with the Marrow, and
if the principal Action be accompanied with some little Ceremony, which is but
accessory, the love of that which is external, and easy to practice, presently
changes the principal into accessory, and the accessory into principal. Bowing
the Knee and Imposition of Hands are two Rites of the same kind, and of the
same necessity. To bend the Knee, and lift up the Hands, have been two signs,
which almost always accompanied Prayer, the first signifies the Humiliation of
the Spirit; the second the Elevation of the Heart; and when this Elevation of
the Hands is made on the Head of any one, it is to signify, that the Heart
lifts up it self according to the desire, and intention of him, over whom they
lift up their hands. Behold the whole Mystery of this Ceremony, whereof they
have made four or five Sacraments. And it is the first original of the Sacrament
of Confirmation, of Penance, of Marriage, of Orders, and of Extreme Unction. If
the Humor of Popery and Superstition had turned on the other hand, we had had,
it may be, fourteen Sacraments instead of seven. For of the Genuflection, which
is made in praying for the whole and sound, of that which is made in praying
for the sick, for hardened Sinners, and for those that are penitent, etc. Of
these Genuflections, say I, they might have made as many Sacraments with as
much reason as they have made five Sacraments of the five Orders of Prayers, to
which Imposition of Hands has been annexed. Let this serve, my Brethren, to
make you understand, that nothing is more absurd, that to make a Sacrament of
Confirmation, because in the first and second Age they laid hands on those
which had been baptized. The Apostles practiced it also because they had power
to obtain the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost for those which had received
Baptism. The Bishops affirming themselves Succession of the Apostles,
appropriated to themselves afterward a Ceremony which became vain and empty,
because they had not the power to cause the Holy Ghost to descend upon those on
whom they laid hands. Jesus Christ laid hands not only on Children brought to
him, but also on the sick, as it appears in the Gospel of S. Mark Mark 6.5.8.13.
, and that of S. Luke Luke 4.40.
. When he healed the Woman that had been bowed together during the space of
eighteen years, he also Luke 13.13.
laid his Hands upon her. When Act. 9.17.
Ananias would give sight to Saul, he laid his hands on him. When S. Paul would
heal the Father of Publius, Prince of Malta, of his Fever and Bloody Flux, he
laid his hands on him. To conclude, a Man must have a Spirit prejudiced beyond
all that can be imagined, not to see, that Imposition of Hands is a simple
Ceremony annexed to Prayer.

Concerning Extreme Unction, i. e. the Ceremony of anointing the dying to
obtain for them Vigor and Strength, necessary to overcome death; it is that
whereof there is not found the least footstep in all the Authors of this second
Age. We do not doubt at all, but that they did serve themselves of that Unction
of which the Evangelist and Apostle speak, an Unction wherewith they served
themselves for the miraculous Cure of Diseases. As in the second and third Ages
there continued in the Church some Remainders of the Gift of Healing, they
might also serve themselves with the Ceremony of Unction. But boldly defy your
Converters to show you, any Example of a Man dying, that was anointed with Oil
in the second Age, with this intent to make the passage of death more easy to
him.

Press them with the same confidence about their other false Sacraments,
Orders, Penance, and Marriage, and oblige them to show you by antiquity in the
second Age, that the Doctors of the Church did regard them, as Sacraments.

Purgatory in Popery is a Foundation upon which they build an infinite number
of idolatrous and superstitious Worships; for which reason it is of importance
to see what Men believed of it in the second Age of the Church. The State of
Souls after death has always been an Abyss, in which Men have seen nothing
without Revelation. And for that reason the Pagans fell in this regard into
prodigious Errors; and the Jews, before our Savior, floated about in great
Uncertainties. The Primitive Christians fell close to that which our Lord said
to the good Thief: This day shall thou be with me in paradise. To that which S.
Paul had taught, 1 Cor. 5. Phil. 1. That if our earthly house of this
tabernacle, etc. And that when we depart from hence we shall be with Christ
Jesus. To that which the Holy Spirit has said in the Revelations, that those
which die in the Lord are happy, and their works follow them. About the middle
of the second Age, a Christian apparently come over from Judaism, but bred up
in the Schools of the Greeks, having sucked the Spirit of Fables and Lies
(wherewith those two Nations are justly reproached) forged the Oracles, which
he attributes to the Sybils, he caused to enter there as Oracles of those
ancient Prophetesses, all that which he believed proper to support the
Christian Religion, and render it plausible to the Pagans. The better to
persuade the Greeks, he there mingled their Fables; and to please the
Philosophers, he entered their Dreams there, making himself all things to all
Men, that he might gain some. Among other Philosophic Dreams he inserts two in
his Work: The first was drawn from the Platonic Philosophy: 'Twas that there
was a certain separate place, into which he pretended the Souls of the Faithful
were carried after death, and where they were lodged till the Day of Judgment,
without enjoying the happy vision of God. The other was this, that at the end
of the World, there would be a great Fire, through which all Men must pass that
should be saved. An imagination which seems to have some likeness to the Stoic
Philosophy, which teaches, that the World would be burnt, after which it would
return into the State wherein it was at the beginning, and in a continual
vicissitude pass through the same Revolutions and Changes. Or rather, it is
taken from what the Holy Scripture says, that the World at last must be burnt
by Fire.

We are not able to say how these two Opinions, the one concer^^ng the separate
state of Souls, and the other concerning the Torrent of Fire, through which
they ought to pass, did readily diffuse themselves among those which had any
Learning, and read any thing besides the Sacred Volumes. The Ancients, good
Men, and credulous, being ravished to find Books, under the name of Pagan
Prophesies, which foretold the coming of Jesus Christ, his Names, his Passion,
the Circumstances of his Birth, of his Life, Death and Resurrection, much more
clearly than the true Prophets, embraced with greediness what they found in
these false Prophesies. Justin Martyr who wrote well nigh in the same time that
these false Oracles were forged, falls into the persuasion, that Souls after
death are in a separate place, where even in some sort they are subject to the
Power and Persecution of the Devil. From thence it comes to pass, that he said
it was the Devil that caused the true Samuel to ascend, by the Charms of the
Witch of Endor: Dial. cum Tryph.
For which reason, says he, when a person is near death, you ought to pray,
that his Soul don't fall under such a power. S. Ireneus, Bishop of Lions, the
most considerable Writer of this second Age, was of the same opinion concerning
this separate place, where all Souls must be enclosed until the Day of
Judgment, without seeing the Face of God. Advers. Haeres. lib. 5.
He calls this place Paradise, whither Enoch and Elias were transported, but he
also calls it Hades, Hell, and a place invisible. Note, that this Opinion is
universally at this day rejected by the Papists, and passes among them for an
Error. Pope John XXII. having been accused to be of this Persuasion, there was
a terrible noise about it, and he was forced to retract it. Now this Opinion is
the original of Purgatory. For as we shall see afterward, this place changes,
by little and little, its-nature, until at length they made of it a place of
Torments and Punishments for the purging of Souls.

This separate state produced, a little while after, Prayer for the Dead, which
we shall see had its original about the beginning of the third Age. But whereof
nevertheless we see nothing in the second, unless it be toward its end. On the
contrary, Justin Martyr tells us, that we must pray for dying Souls, to the
end, that (in the place of their Separation) they fall not under the Power of
Devils. He would not have failed to have added, that we must pray for Souls
after death, to the end, that we might draw them from under the power of
Devils, if Prayers for the dead had then been in use.

On the Subject of this praying for the Dead, whereof they make such great
boasts in Antiquity, tell them these three things, 1. That it was not in use in
the first and second Age. 2. That the Reason why they began to pray for the
Dead, is very different from that which causes Prayers for them at this day. At
this day it is to draw them from Purgatory; then it was, to the end, that in the
terrestrial Paradise, or other place of Separation where they were, God would
increase their rest and joy; for it was believed, that they were there in the
beginning of Happiness. 3. To conclude, tell them, that these Prayers for the
Dead are no important business in Religion, and that they are not the Reason of
our Separation.
After that press them to show you in the second Age the least footsteps of
this place of Torments, whither penitent Souls must go after Death, to pay the
remainder of those punishments which they could not satisfy during their life.
Demand proofs from them, that in this Age the Church prayed for Souls, that
they might quickly get out of torment, and you will see them forced to confess,
that there are none.

I come to the Worship and Adoration of Creatures, such as are Relics, Images,
the Blessed Virgin, Saints and Angels. They treat this as a small business: we
shall have occasion to prove to you one day, that without running into any
extravagance, it is a Pagan Idolatry. But for the present we will content our
selves to show you, that we do not find the least footsteps of these worships
in the second Age, wherein we now are. If they did invoke Saints, the Blessed
Virgin, and Angels, if they had Images, if they did kiss, and adore Relics,
let them show it you, let them cause you to read one Author that speaks of it.
Bellarmine has the impudence to produce the words of Justin Martyr, to prove
the Worship of Angels, We adore and venerate the Father, and the Son, which is
come to us from him, who has taught us, both us and others, which follow him,
and the Army of good Angels, by the Spirit of Prophecy, etc. Apol. 2. He refers
the word we adored, to that of Angels, as if the design of Justin Martyr had
been to say, that they adored Angels. Whereas he ought to refer Angels to the
word teach, his Sense being that Jesus Christ has taught the Angels as well as
us, the Mystery of the Gospel, according to what S. Paul says: To the intent
that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known
by the Church the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. It is so clear, that this
is the Sense of S. Justin, that at this day none of your new Doctors dare quote
these words to prove, that they worshipped Angels in the second Age. This
passage being set aside, let them produce you another. Was there therefore no
Saints in these Ages? Had they no Martyrs? Why did they not invoke the
Apostles, that had newly received their Crowns? Why did they then neglect the
Intercession of the Virgin? Was it that her Credit was not well established in
Heaven at that time, and that she wanted time to obtain the Empire which at
this day she possesses?

But why have the Authors of this Age been so impudent to say, that they adore
God alone, and that they adore none but He? Justin Martyr says, speaking of
Jesus Christ, He has taught us, that we must adore but one only God, when he
said, This the great commandment, thou shall worship God, and him only shall
thou serve, Apol. 2. And a little after having quoted those other words of
Jesus Christ, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the
things that are Gods: He adds it is for this reason that we adore but one only
God. And as to what concerns you, we give you our Services with gladness in all
other things. Let not your Eyes be dazzled by crafty Tricks upon the word Adore,
as if Justin Martyr spoke of Sovereign Adoration, which they give to none but
God, according to your Converters; for you ought to be advertised, that he
serves himself of the word Proskunoumen, which signifies all sorts of Worship
and Religious Service. A word which signifies properly to prostrate our selves,
and wherewith the second Council of Nice serves it self, when it appoints the
Worship of Images. So the sense is, We do not prostrate our selves, we do not
give any Religious Worship but to God. See if they can say so at this day in
the Church of Rome.

Theophilus of Antioch, and Author of the same Age says, Lib. 1. ad Autol.
The King will not that they call those Kings, which command under him. For
King is his name, and it is not permitted to another to take it. So it is not
permited to adore any other but God. St. Ireneus, Bishop of Lions, speaking of
the God, which gave the Law, Lib. 5. cap. 22.
It is he alone to whom the Disciples of Jesus Christ ought to perform worship,
etc. And a little after, The Law commands us to praise the Creator, and serve
him alone. But hear a Testimony which will instruct you sufficiently concerning
the opinions, and practice of that Age about it. They are the Acts of the
Martyrdom of St. Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna. After the death of this Holy
Bishop, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15.
his Church writ to that of Pontus an excellent Letter, which is one of the
most precious monuments that we have of Primitive Antiquity. In this Letter the
Believers of Smyrna, having reported all the circumstances of the death of
Polycarpus their Bishop, say that the Devil used endeavors, that our Brethren
might not obtain his body, which many among us did very much desire, to the end
they might participate of that sacred body. Some therefore suggested to
Nicetas, Father of Herod, and Brother of Dalces, to go find out the Proconsul,
to advise him not to give us the body, for fear, say they, that having
abandoned Christ, the Christians may come to Worship him; it was at the
suggestion of the Jews, and at their pressing solicitation, that these Men
thus represented the matter. For they were the Jews that observed our Brethren,
when they endeavored to take the body from the Pile of Wood. Fools which know
not that we can never forsake Jesus Christ, who has suffered death, for all
those that must be saved, nor serve any other. For we Adore him as the Son of
God, and as for the Martyrs, we love them, and are kind to them as Disciples,
and imitators of the Lord, because of the great love which they have shown to
their King, and Master, and we wish to be their Associates, and fellow
Disciples. The Centurion therefore seeing the obstinacy of the Jews, caused the
body to be burnt upon the place, according to the custom. After which we
gathered together his Bones, more precious than the most precious Stones, and
more pure than Gold, and laid them up in a convenient place. In which place if
it be possible for us, and God permit it, we will hold our Assemblies to
Celebrate with joy, and gladness, the Birth day of his Martyrdom, in memory of
those who have undergone this glorious Combat, and to instruct, and confirm our
descendents by such an example. The passage is altogether such as we would
wish, for we there see all which we search after, and what was the Religion of
the ancient Christians with respect to Relics, and Saints, and from whence
began the Superstition, and Idolatry which after appeared in the World. First
of all you see that in the second Age they served no other but God, we serve no
other but God. Secondly, That the Worship given to the Martyrs was a Worship of
love, and simple imitation, we love them and have a kindness for them. These
people had lost all sense not to have added, and we pray to them, if so be they
had them prayed to the Martyrs. Thirdly, That they had no regard to the merits
of Saints, and Martyrs, nor did they pray to God to make us partakers of them,
we wish to be their Companions, and fellow Disciples. They might as easily have
said, as they say now adays, we desire to be made partakers of their merits.
Fourthly, That they did not assemble at the Tombs of the Martyrs, that they
might invocate and serve them, but only with design to celebrate the Birthday
of their Martyrdom, and the memory of their Sufferings. It is an amazing
stupidity not to have added, and to recommend our selves to their prayers, and
intercession, if any such thing had been in use. Fifthly, That they did not
rend the Bodies of Martyrs in pieces, nor distribute their Bones to fill
Reliquaire's. For they took the bones of Polycarpus, and laid them in a
convenient place: that is to say, they laid them honorably in a Tomb. In all
this we see the innocence of the worship of the ancient Christians. But in that
which follows we see the first bloomings from whence afterward proceeded
Idolatry.

1. We see here an excessive love, which Christians did show toward the bodies
of Martyrs, they say that they are more precious than the most precious Stones,
and more pure than the purest Gold. 2. They assembled upon their Tombs, and
their burying places served them as Temples, not simply through necessity, for
they might have assembled more conveniently in Houses, but because they
believed those places more Holy, and more proper to excite Devotion, because of
the memory of the Martyrs. 3. They Consecrated certain days to remember the
Passion day of the Martyrs. Indeed they did not Invoke, or Pray to them, but
nevertheless this was done in their honor, as we Celebrate the Birthday of a
Prince, to whom we give no kind of Religious Worship, and this is that which
the Ancient Christians call here, to communicate with the body of the Martyr:
that is to say, assemble where he was buried, Pray to God, and Celebrate the
Mysteries of the Christian Religion in the same place, and even over the Tomb
of the Martyr.

In this there is nothing Criminal, all is done with a good meaning.
Nevertheless we shall see how insensibly all did degenerate into Superstition.
It does not appear that either they Prayed to Polycarpus, or that they Prayed
for him, on the day Consecrated to his memory: but we shall see in the third
Age they Prayed for the Martyrs, and in the fourth Age they Prayed to them.
Give attention to this passage I earnestly entreat you.

As to what appertains to Images, I think, I shall do a thing of great
advantage, if I prove, that the Christian Church had none in their Temples in
the second Age, for it will appear by the Ages following, that they had all
sorts of Images, even out of Temples, in the greatest abhorrence.

Fasts, Lent, Abstinence from certain Meats, and other Mortifications of like
kind, which makes so great a part of the Roman Religion, which dazzle the Eyes
of some of our New Converts, were entirely unknown in the second Age. We there
see, and observe Prayers, and Fasts very often, but there is nothing Read which
may make us suspect, that they were affixed to certain days of the week, or
certain months of the year: all the days of Prayer, except the Lords day, were
almost always days of Fasting. But it was by accident, because the Fasting of
the New Testament was often joined with Prayer, that the Ancient Christians
made it a duty to Fast on days of Prayer. But it was a thing unheard of,
precisely to make Devotion to consist of Fasting, without any respect to
Prayer, and those that do affirm it was the use of the Primitive Church must
prove it. Now we are certain, that they cannot find any proof thereof in the
Writings of the second Age. And as to what remains, as we shall make it appear
by the clearest evidence, that the Popish Fasts were unknown in the third Age,
it will appear by consequence, that they were of no use in the second, only it
appears that they prepared for the Communion of Easter by a Fast of two days.
St. Ireneus writ to Victor Bishop of Rome, on occasion of the Controversy
touching the day on which they ought to Celebrate Easter. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 5. cap. 24.
is not only disputed concerning Easter Day, but also concerning the form of
the Fasts antecedent thereto, for some think they ought not to Fast but one
day, others two, others more, and others measure their Fast Day by the space of
twenty four hours, night and day, and this diversity in the observation of the
Fast, had not its being in our Age, but has begun from the time of our
Fathers, who by negligence, simplicity, and ignorance, have suffered this
custom to slip in. Nevertheless they lived in peace with each other, and we
retain it to this day. Observe well, it is not Lent, but the beginning, and
original thereof. These forty hours of Fast are greatned, and grown up to forty
days. So it is, that the most innocent practices have been the original of
Superstition, so dangerous is it, to make Innovations, although they seem
without hazardous consequence, let them show you other solemn Fasts besides
this in the second Age.

It remains, that we speak a word concerning the Pope, and the prodigious
Authority he arrogates to himself. It is a Capital affair in Popery, he is the
Principle of Unity, he is the Center unto which your Converters tell you, you
ought to be united, if you will be saved. God knows what they think of it, but
we defy them to show you, that the Church of Rome had then any Superiority
over other Churches. We may assure you without rashness, that the most part of
the Churches, which were in the extreme Parts of Asia, scarce knew whether
there were any such thing as a Church of Rome, they neither knew the name of
its Bishop, nor the form of its Government, nor Customs, and therefore were far
enough from being subject to its Orders, and Decrees. We may also assure you,
there were also Christians in Persia, and in the farthest parts of the East,
which knew not whether there were a Roman Church in the World. Send your
Converters to the famous de Launy, Doctor of the Sorbonne, who makes appear
with sufficient clearness, and evidence, the independence of other Churches,
and the few bonds and ties that they had with Rome, by proving, that the
adherence they had to the Roman Seat, was not accounted necessary in any Age of
the ancient Church. They produce to you in the second Age Victor, who cut off
from his Communion the Churches of Asia, on occasion of the Controversy about
Easter Day. But you ought to understand, that this was an attempt without
example, and which had no effect, but was despised of all the World. And
besides this was no right, that was particular to the Bishop of Rome; for other
Churches pretended to have that right of cutting off other Churches from their
Communion, as well as that of Rome.

Moreover, the nearer the Churches of the World were to Rome, the more respect
and consideration they had for the Church which was there. The Churches which
were without the Bounds of the Roman Empire, scarce knew that there was a
Church at Rome. The Provinces at a distance from Italy, such were Asia and
Africa, beheld her so far off, that they scarce knew either her Customs, or her
Doctrine, nor did they think themselves under any obligation to be instructed
in them, or to follow them. And therefore they continued a long time to
celebrate Easter with the Jews, and to rebaptize Heretics, without any regard
to the Decisions of Victor and Stephen, Bishops of Rome. The Churches of
France, which beheld her near at hand, had her in greater value and estimation,
because they were smitten and amazed, not at the Majesty of the Church, but at
the Majesty of the Empire, which had its Seat at Rome. This is it which made
Ireneus, Bishop of Lions, to say, That it was necessary, that the whole Church
should travel to the Church of Rome, because of its more powerful principality.
That is to say, because it was the Seat of the Empire, that all Nations come
thither, and that Christians were found there of all the Provinces of the
Empire, from whose Mouths might be learned what was that Faith which was
scattered all over the Earth. Behold what was the Christianity of the second
Age. And behold the Additions that we find there, which afterward was the Seed
of Superstition and Idolatry.

First of all they mingled Water with the Wine in the Eucharist, which was not
used in the time of the Apostles. 2. They carried the Sacrament to the absent,
which was not usual neither in the Apostolic Church. 3. They undertook a
custom of bringing Offerings, and Alms, not in Silver, but in Merchandise,
Bread, Wine, Corn, Raisins, Fruits, etc. And of that they offered on the Holy
Table those things, which might be of use in the public Service, whereas in
the Apostolic Church we see no other Alms, but such as were gathered by the
Hands of the Deacons, either at the end, or beginning of their Assemblies. 4.
Of these Alms of the Believers, they made Oblations to God, consecrating them
by Prayer. 5. At the end of their Prayers before the Communion they added the
mutual kiss, which was not of Apostolic Institution, and was afterward
abolished. 6. Many persons entertained an opinion of the separate state for
Souls after death, a third place which was utterly unknown to the Apostles. 7.
They conceive an excessive Love for the Bones of the Martyrs, nevertheless
without giving them any kind of Worship, or Religious Homage. This excessive
love for Bones was not reasonable, nor was it of the Apostolic Age. 8. About
the end of the second Age they appointed Feasts, to celebrate the memories of
the Martyrs; which was not neither of Apostolic Institution. 9. They appointed
a day or two for Fasting before Easter. Behold the principal Innovations in the
second Age, in which there is nothing almost that can be blamed, considered in
it self, and separated from the Fruits and Consequences thereof.

To conclude, to the end, that you be not abused by false Authors, you ought to
know that we entertain none for the Writers of the second Age, but these: S.
Clement, the Disciple of S. Paul, who writ an Epistle to the Corinthians: S.
Ignatius, of whom we have many Epistles, concerning which the Learned doubt
with reason, but we will nevertheless receive them in the present Affair: S.
Polycarp, who wrote an Epistle to the Philippians: the Epistle of the Church of
Smyrna, concerning the Martyrdom of S. Polycarp: Justin Martyr, whose Works
ought to be distinguished, for there are many among them which are falsely
attributed unto him: Athanagoras the Athenian, of whom we have an Apology for
the Christians, and a Discourse concerning the Resurrection: Theophilus of
Antioch, of whom we have three Books written to Autolycus: Tatian, of whom we
have a Discourse in Defense of the Christian Religion, and against that of the
Pagans. And in fine, S. Ireneus, Bishop of Lions, of whom we have a
considerable Work against the Heresies of his Times. If they quote unto you the
Liturgies of S. Mark, of S. James, of S. Peter, the Works of Dionysius the
Areopagite, the Canons of the Apostles, and other like Discourses, you ought to
reject them, as being false and forged, in the opinion of all the Learned, who
have any thing of sincerity.

November 15, 1686.
THE SEVENTH PASTORAL LETTER. CONCERNING Songs, and Voices, which were heard in
several places in the Air.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
IN the last of our Letters we engaged our selves to communicate unto you
certain notable matters of Fact, which some of our Brethren have thought
advisable to impart unto us. Amongst these matters of Fact, I do not think
there is any one that better deserves to be examined, than that which has been
reported to us, That in many places where there have been formerly Churches,
Voices have been heard in the Air, so perfectly like to our singing of Psalms,
that they could not be taken for any thing else. If this be true, it is a wonder
which very well deserves the labor of our attention. We shall think our selves
very ungrateful to the Divine Goodness, if we should suppress so illustrious a
Testimony of his Approbation. He must be bold, in this Age, that dares speak of
Prodigies, Marvels, Presages and other such like things. There are times in
which Men believe every thing; in this wherein we now are, they believe
nothing; I think there is a mean to be chosen, we may not believe every thing,
but surely something ought to be believed. For this Spirit of Incredulity, and
this Character of a brave Spirit, is good for nothing, and I have not as yet
discovered the use thereof. It Is true, Credulity has destroyed Religion, and
introduced a thousand Superstitions; for these unhappy Tales of Miracles done
at the Tombs of Saints, these Apparitions of Souls, these pretended Visions of
Spirits, that come from the other World, these, say I, have produced the
Invocation of Saints, the Adoration of Images, Purgatory, Masses, the Prayers
of the living for the dead. For which reason I am content, that Men stand upon
their Guard, when any thing is debated, and reported concerning wonderful, and
pious Histories. The generality of those which are called honest Men are come
so far from thence, that they have cast themselves on the other extreme, and
believe nothing. It Is to expose a Man's self, and to be turned into Ridicule,
to maintain that there have been Miracles, and that there may yet be, they mock
at Presages, and have no Faith for that which they call Prodigies. Nevertheless
whither goes this, and what will be the Issue of it? It Is to deny Providence,
it is to make our selves believe, God does not intermeddle in the Affairs here
below, and to ruin all the Principles of human Faith, and by consequence to
cast our selves on a perfect Skepticism, which is peradventure a disposition of
mind the most dangerous to Religion of any in the World. By doubting all
matters of Fact which have any appearance of extraordinary, they tell us they
have no intention to extend it any farther than the History of the World. But
we don't perceive, that we insensibly entertain a habit of doubting, which
extends it self to every thing. There is a God, we all consent thereto. There
is a Providence, we all profess, and avow it. Nothing comes to pass without
him. Is it possible, that God should so hide himself behind his Creatures, and
under the veil of second Causes, that he should never at any time, tho never so
little, draw aside the Curtain? If we have taken a resolution to deny the truth
of all extraordinary matters of Fact, what shall we do with History, both
sacred and profane? Can we persuade our selves, that the Historians of all Ages
intended to deceive us, by making us believe, that the great Revolutions which
have happened in the Societies of Men, and the Church, have been preceded by
extraordinary Events, such as Earthquakes, Signs in Heaven, and Prodigies on
Earth? They will say the most part of these Histories are Fables, it may be so:
but if the most part be Fables, there have been some which have been true. If
there had never been any true Prodigies, they would not have reported those
that were false; for falsehood is an imitation of Truth. He must have a hardness
and impudence that I understand not, that can put all Historians in one rank,
and range them all together amongst Forgers of Lies. I admire the agreement of
those Writers, which lived two or three thousand years from one another, who
nevertheless have all conspired to deceive us, according to our Moderns, and
there is neither Sorcerers, nor Magicians, nor Possessions, nor Apparitions of
Demons, nor any thing like it. It Is much, that these Gentlemen have not pushed
on their confidence, even to deny the truth of matters of Fact contained in the
Scriptures, which would be very convenient for them. In the times that the
Sacred Writers writ their Books, there were all these things; and where do we
find, that they ought to cease, and that a time was to come, in which Devils
should no more deceive Men, and in which he Heaven should speak no more
Prodigies? Because Historians have not been infallible, must we believe they
have been all Liars, and in all things? Can a Man, for example, honestly call
in doubt the prodigies which Josephus reports to us, as coming to pass a little
before the final ruin of Jerusalem? A Man walked round the City, and its Walls
perpetually, crying, Woe, woe to the Temple, City, etc. and in fine, during the
Siege, as he was upon the Wall, he added, Woe to me aso: that which he never did
before, and in the very moment, a great stone coming from the Engines of the
Besiegers, knocked him on the Breast, and brake him in pieces. A Sword of Fire
passed over the City Jerusalem, for a whole year together, from East to West. A
Voice was heard in the Temple which said, Let us go hence. A brazen Gate in the
Temple, which eighteen or twenty Men could scarce open, opened of it self. It
must be, that Josephus had a design to prostitute his Reputation, reporting
such matters of Fact, the falseness whereof he might be convinced of by a
thousand Witnesses yet living, if they were not true. The Savior of the World
was willing to honor some mute presages, although he might well have passed them
by, since he had so many living Testimonies on his behalf, 'twas his pleasure
that the Heavens should produce a new Star at his Birth, or at least, that the
Air should produce a new Meteor, that deserved that name. And what shall we say
of that great Miracle, which was at the Pool of Bethesda, where an Angel
descended, troubled the Waters, and the first sick person that went into them
after the action of the Angel, was healed? This marvel was not ancient, and
without doubt it had not continued long. It Is clear, that this was done about
the time that our Lord arrived at the age of thirty years, and entered upon the
Office of Mediator; and 'twas an admirable presage of the coming of him, who is
called, A fountain opened to the house of Jacob for sin, and for uncleanness:
whose Water, that is to say, whose Grace, was to heal and cure all our
Maladies. I could bring you an infinite number of matters of Fact very well
attested, that is to say, Visions, Prophetic Dreams, Signs seen in the Air,
and in the Heavens, which have been Presages of Events little less considerable
than those we see at present. It Is true, that under color of Signs and Marvels,
an hundred and an hundred Fables have passed current in the World; but all that
we ought to conclude thence is, that every wise Man will have great Securities
before he will believe. As soon as any event may have natural Causes, it
signifies nothing according to these Gentlemen, as if God was not at all the
Master of natural Causes, and could not dispose them for the production of
certain Effects, when he would presage great Revolutions in the World. It seems
to me, that Earthquakes have their natural Causes, and so have Famines,
Pestilences and Wars: nevertheless Jesus Christ puts these things among those
things which are to presage his coming. Nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom, there shall be famines, earthquakes and pestilences in
diverse countries. And why may we not interpret that which he adds of Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon, and of Signs which are seen in Heaven, The Sun shall be
turned into darkness, and the Moon shall not give her light, the Stars shall
fall from Heaven, and the powers of Heaven shall be shaken. It Is believed, that
this is a Description of what shall be at the last Day of Judgment; but if this
were a place for it, I could prove, that it is no such thing. Not that I am
persuaded all Eclipses, and all Earthquakes are Presages; but there are such
Circumstances of time and place, and concomitant Signs, that a Man cannot (as I
think) without rashness deny, that the Providence of God does dispense them to
strike the minds of Men with astonishment, and make them attentive to his
Judgments. What shall we say concerning the Bow in the Heavens? It is made
without doubt by natural Causes. Nevertheless it has been the pleasure of God
in all Ages of the World, that it should be a Sign by Institution to assure
Mankind, that there should never be an universal Deluge upon the earth. God
granted to Gideon a Sign in Nature to assure him of the truth of his Mission.
Ezekias received one in the Sun, at least, in the shadow of the Sun on the Dial
of Ahaz, as a Sign of his restoration to life, we may not therefore imagine,
that it is contrary to the order of Providence to do extraordinary things in
nature for the marking and noting extraordinary events in the World. Let us
conclude therefore, that the Credulity of our Ancestors has caused many
mischievous Tales to be received as faithful Histories; but also, that it has
been the cause, that very faithful Histories do at this day pass for false
Tales. I could not refuse this little Prologue to the Year wherein we are
presently to engage, as abundant in Prodigies as any has been for a long time:
for on all sides, we have heard speak of nothing but extraordinary Storms,
Fires falling from Heaven, others coming out of the Earth, of Signs speaking
loud, which have appeared in the Air, of Insects of an unknown shape, which
have been believed to have fallen from Heaven. The Writers of public News have
not been able to forbear remarking them, and making their Reflections thereon.
I believe it is the interest of the public to make evident all these Events;
and there lies an Obligation on those that desire to fear God, to give a very
exact Relation concerning all these Prodigies; if they intend to learn us any
thing concerning them, we entreat them, that it be not on Reports and
Hear-says, yea, that it be not on the report of persons whose fidelity is not
very well known; for we have no design to deceive either our selves or others:
this will be known by the manner wherein we shall report a matter of Fact, that
is to say, the singing of Psalms in the Air, which has been heard in diverse
places.

It is near a year since, that we first heard any speech concerning it, and
they told us, that these Singings had been heard in Bearne, the first Province
whither the Dragoons were sent. Behold our Witnesses, every one will judge of
what worth they are. Monsieur Magendie, Pastor of the Church of Orthez, having
been questioned concerning this Affair, has interrogated diverse persons,
according as it appears by his Certificate.

I do declare, that Monsieur de Bazin, a younger Brother, and an Inhabitant of
Orthez in Bearne, has told me, that walking with some of his Friends, after
midday, near the City of Orthez, he heard Voices which sung Psalms, and as he
imagined, that it might be some Women that washed Linen in a certain River
which passed through Orthez, he ran to them to demand of them, whether it were
they that sung; they told him, that it was not they, and that they themselves
for a long time had heard the same singing of Psalms. This happened some months
before the Interdiction of our Church. The said Monsieur Bazin is a very honest
Man, very judicious, and of great integrity. 2. I add, that Mademoiselle de
Casenaue of Orthez, said to persons worthy of credit, that being not able to
believe that which was said concerning this singing of Psalms, a Woman said to
her, that if she had the curiosity to hear them sing, she would come and take
her at her own House, at a time convenient, which she did; for this Woman being
at eleven of the clock at night in the uttermost part of the City, with
multitudes of other persons, to hear these Voices which sung in the Air the
Praises of God, having heard this singing of Psalms, she ran to Mademoiselle de
Casenaue, who immediately gets out of her Bed, causes one of her Neigbours to
rise, and they ran to that quarter of the City which was far removed from her
House, where they found multitudes of persons, who were ravished with that
pleasant Melody which they heard in the Air; they themselves returned to their
Houses, with this great consolation to have heard those Psalms sung in the Air,
which they could no more sing in their Church, which had been interdicted for
some months past; and they added, that it seemed to them, that they heard them
sing after the same manner which they used to sing in their Church, and that
after the singing had ceased, there was a Voice which spoke, but after a manner
inarticulate and confused, so that they could not distinguish what was said.
This Gentlewoman is very well worthy of Credit. 3. I say moreover that an
infinite number of the persons of Orthez do say, that they have heard the
singing of Psalms, which they call the singing of Angels, and that they
exhorted each other on the day to be present in the night, in certain places of
the City, to satisfy this holy Curiosity, which was the reason, that the
Magistrates of Orthez published an Ordinance, whereby they forbad all persons
from going out of their Houses, or assembling themselves by night for hearing
these Voices, which filled this poor afflicted people with joy, and
extraordinary consolation. This is it which has been told me concerning this
singing of Psalms, to which In find no difficulty to give a full consent,
because the persons that have reported it, are of great sincerity.

Given at Amsterdam, November. 23, 1686. Signed Magendie, heretofore Minister of
Orthez in Bearne.

M. Garsin, another Minister of the said Church of Orthez, declares this which
follows, concerning the singing of Psalms, which had been heard at Orthez for a
long time.

I whose Name is underwritten, heretofore Pastor of the Reformed Church of
Orthez in Bearne, do certify to all those whom it may concern, that my
Brother-in-law De Roux, a Lawyer, told me, that between the hours of eleven and
twelve at night, being on the back side of his House in the City of Orthez, he
heard a singing of Psalms above him, and that a little after he heard the same
singing come from a place at a greater distance. After that he was fully
convinced of the truth of this singing of Psalms, so much discoursed of all the
World over. Moreover he thought, that sometimes during the whole night, when
his Gout hindered him from sleeping, that he heard the same singing after a
manner less distinct and intelligible. I am informed by Monsieur Clavier, a
Lawyer of the same City of Orthez, that the Curate of the place, and a certain
Priest, called Dufau, and Monsieur Lichigarai another Lawyer, as also a Brother
of the Curate, called Monsieur De la Roque, sent to search out a certain Popish
Damosel of Moncade, to know of her, if it were true, that she had said, that
she had heard this singing of Psalms, and that she told them yea. And having
demanded of her how she knew it was the singing of Psalms; she told them it was
because she had heard the same thing, at such time as they sung in the Church
of those of the Reformed Religion. And having further asked her how she had
heard the singing of Psalms in the Church, she answered them, she had been once
there at a Baptism; but that going to a certain Fountain, she had often heard
this singing as she passed by the Church, at the hours of Preaching, and
Prayer. After this Monsieur Clavier told me, that the Curate and others
strictly forbad her to say any more, that she had heard the said singing of
Psalms.

Given at Amsterdam, September 23. 1686. Signed Garsin, Minister.

I whose Name is underwritten, certify to all whom it may concern, that in the
year 1685, about the Month of August, or September, I heard in the Air the
singing of Psalms with different Voices, and very melodious, and this at two
several times; the first time before the House of Poey, where I was lying upon
a Bank half asleep, I was awakened by this singing of Psalms, which continued
almost half an hour. Afterward I went into the House of Monsieur du Poey, a
Merchant Draper, with whom I wrought at that Employment. Having told this to
Mademoiselle du Poey and her Daughters, they were much offended at me, that I
had not given them notice of it at the time I heard the said singing. The
second time, I and many others about an hour after midnight having gone on
purpose to a place most high, and raised, in the City, near to Moncade, named
the Posterle, I heard many Voices in the Air, sometimes on one side, and
sometimes on the other; withdrawing my self a little, I found Mademoiselle des
Pagnou, Daughter of Monsieur Dombideau, Merchant of Oleron, Wife to Monsieur
des Pagnou, Merchant-Tanner, accompanied with many other Women of the
Neighborhood, I asked them from whence they came. They told me they came from
the Bank of a River called Le Gaur, which passes by the City, near a Mill which
they call the New Mill. I asked them if they had heard the singing of Psalms.
They answered me, Yea. I asked them from what side they had heard the Voices:
they told me it seemed to them it was from the place called the Posterle. I
told them I came from thence, and that I had heard those Voices in the Air, and
that it seemed to me, that they came from that side the New Mill stood; and
both they and I agreed with one consent, that they were in the Air, and that
they never had heard Voices so pleasant and charming. My Father (being a
Neighbor of the said Mademoiselle des Pagnou) and those other Women being at
the Gate two hours after midnight, with a Marshal named Maresque, a Papist of
the Town of Lembege, of the Quarter of Bilbil, which belongs to the Partement
of Navarre, my Father, I say, who had changed his Religion about two years and
half since, inquiring of these Women if they had heard the singing of Psalms.
They answered, Yea. And I too, said my Father. And Maresque the Marshal
replied, he had never heard better singing: let Men say what they will, for my
part, said he, I am persuaded, that it is a true singing of Psalms. The said
Monsieur Poey, my Father, and the said Maresque came from a place called De
Part, near to Orthez. And I add, that I have heard a Prohibition published to
all sorts of persons, at the sound of a Trumpet, by the Crier of the City,
called Monleres, containing, that none were to go out at night to hear the
singing of Psalms, under the penalty of Imprisonment. In witness whereof I have
signed the present Certificate, as it was desired of me. Given November 22,
1686. Signed Peter Mauperg of Orthez in Bearn, aged twenty three years.

One named Monsieur Bergerit has declared under his Signet, this which
follows. About the month of September last, being in my Mothers House, she told
me, that the Evening before they had heard singing of Psalms in the Air. I
believed nothing thereof, but went away to Bed, because I was weary; this was
about eight at night; about half an hour after some of the Neighbors came to
the House to inquire whether I were so great a fool to sing Psalms, considering
the strict Prohibition had been made thereof; and at the same instant my Mother
entered into the Chamber to awake, and tell me, that Psalms were sung in the
Air. I awoke, and awaking, heard this singing of Psalms, and thought it had
been in the Garden belonging to the House. I arose and went forth into the
street Montcade at Orthez, where all the Neighborhood were gathered together,
and they heard the singing of Psalms repeated two or three several times.
Signed Bergerit.

A person named John de la Bordette, has declared under his Signet, this which
follows. About the month of September last, being in my House at Orthez, the
place of my Habitation, and having heard, that it was said, that Psalms were
sung, I went out into the street about eight in the Evening, to see and hear
what was said, and done, and I heard in the Air Voices which formed a Vocal
Music perfectly, like to the singing of Psalms. Nevertheless, without being
able to distinguish what Psalm it was. Of the of this same thing many persons
of the Neighborhood were witnesses. Another time as I was at the Wine Press,
amidst the Vines, above ten in the evening, I heard the same thing with many
other persons. Signed John De la Bordette.

A Damosel called Mademoiselle Deformalagues, has declared under her Signet,
in these words. I underwritten, do declare in the presence of God, that being
at Orthez in Biar, the place of my Habitation, I heard clearly at three several
times, on the month of October last, this which follows.

On a Friday in the said month of October, about 8 or 9 at night, being in my
Chamber, some Neighbors called me with earnestness, saying, that I must hasten
to hear the Angels singing Psalms; I hastily went out of the House, and being
arrived at the Street called St. Gille, I there found a great number of people,
which had ran together from all parts to hear this Heavenly Music. And at that
instant my Ears were smitten with a Melody so ravishing, that I never heard any
thing like it. I could very well discern the Air and Tune of our Psalms, which
were sung admirably well. I heard many persons say, they heard distinctly the
first verse of the 42. Psalm. Like as the heart does breach and bray. There were
others that confirmed the same, and assured us moreover that they had heard the
whole Psalm Sung. For my part I do acknowledge that I could not distinguish the
words. I only heard a charming Music, which represented to me a great number
of Voices that agreed exceeding well. There was one that raised his Voice above
the rest, and made himself observed when the rest had done. After I had heard a
long while this Melody with ravishment; I perceived that these Voices drew off,
and abated by little and little, until they were insensibly lost in the Air.

The same evening being on my return, and near the Gate of my House, with many
of my Neighbors, as we discoursed together of the mavelous things that we
had heard, behold all of a sudden the same Voices which we had heard some hours
before, striking again our Ears with great pleasure, they filled us anew with
ravishment, for the space of one quarter of an hour, after which this Melody
withdrew, as it had done at the first.

The Tuesday following, being at the door of my House, with one of my Relations
at Evening, we both heard a great number of Voices in the Air, which resounded
with strength, and made themselves heard with the greatest clearness: hearing
this melodious singing, I ran hastily to the Lodgings of a Popish Physician who
dwelt in my House, and was that year one of the Magistrates of Orthez, to the
end that he himself might hear this wonderful Melody. He followed me to hear
what it was. The singing founded clearly, the night being calm and serene, but
he pretended to hear nothing. A while after the Voices reinforced themselves,
and then having pressed this Magistrate to tell me if he heard the singing, he
could no longer dissemble the truth. It is true said he (in the presence of all
the world) I hear very lovely singing. I think I hear the Voice of such an one,
and such an one, naming several persons in Orthez, which sung exceeding well;
to this I replied, Monsieur, if Men hold their peace, the very stones will
speak: but he, as if he had been troubled at the confession he had made,
complains that, alas, I observe here a crafty wile of the Devil, he causes
these Voices to be heard in the Air, to keep the World in error, and hinder
this poor people from Converting, and embracing the Catholic Faith. Whereupon
I inquired if he had ever heard that the Devil sung the praises of God; he
smiled, and retired hastily to his Lodgings: nevertheless we bless God for the
favor that he has done us, in admonishing us of our duty by these heavenly
Voices, who melodiously sung those holy Hymns, which we were wont to sound
forth in our Church, which was then laid wast and destroyed.

I protest before God that these things are so as I have reported them, and I
am very glad to make known these truths, for the Edification of all those that
fear the Lord. In Testimony whereof I subscribe my self at Amsterdam, September
4. 1686. V. Deformalagues.

I do maintain that a Testimony, such as this, though it were alone, is capable
of putting the spirit of incredulity to distress: for what that is reasonable
can be said against it? It will be said this is the Testimony of a Woman, but
by being a Woman has she renounced all Honor, Shame, and Conscience, in the
matter of Testimony? She must have renounced all those things, to attest with
an Oath a matter of Fact, with so many circumstances. She is but a Woman, but
she is not a Woman that reports some Visions of the night, or particular
Revelations, she is a Woman that reports things that happened in public, and
whereof she has for witnesses with her self many hundreds of persons. Though
she be a Woman, it does not follow but she may be endued with good
understanding: now she must have lost all sense to advance such a falsity, and
to expose her self to be overwhelmed with shame, as a maker of Fables: to
conclude, she is a Woman, but she speaks of a thing happened not above seven
days ago, if I may so say.

To conclude, behold a Memorial of Monsieur de Brassalay, a Gentleman of Honor,
and acknowledged such by all that know him.

Some days before the Interdiction of the Churches of Bearn, there were many
persons, that heard the singing of Psalms in the Air, in the City of Orthez.
The first that heard it was Lichigaray Brunier, a Lawyer, revolted some years
since, the most malignant of the Persecutors, and who continually stirred up
troubles to those of the Reformed Religion. He rose from his Bed to go tell the
Curate, that there was an Assembly of people that sung Psalms without the City,
he also went to a Sergeant named Gowlan, to conduct him to the place where he
thought to surprise them, but this Popish Sergeant having laid his Ear to the
Window, answered him there was nothing to be done, for he well perceived the
singing was in the Air. Afterward it was heard from time to time, more than a
month, by diverse persons, sometimes at night, and sometimes by day: among
others Lichagaray Canneille, an Elder of the Church of Orthez, protested and
told me, that sitting upon the bank of the River, a thousand Paces from the
City, reading in a Book, he heard a great singing of Psalms on that side the
Church stands, which is in the midst of the City, and not doubting at all that
is was an ordinary Assembly, that were met together at Evening Prayers, which
was then very numerous, because of the hazardous conjuncture, and consisted at
the least of two or three thousand souls, he hasted to go thither, and always
heard a great singing of Psalms till he was entered into the City, but having
found the doors of the Church shut, the Neighbors told him, that it was not
yet the hour of Prayer. It is to no purpose to say they sung in some Cavern or
Cave, for there is nothing but Houses, and the parts adjacent to Orthez are
Vineyards, Meadows, and Fields, it has been a long time since forbidden to sing
Psalms in Houses, and no body has dared to venture thereon, and least of all
would they think thereon in a time when they every hour feared the Interdiction
of their Church, and when they advised by all sorts of methods to defend
themselves from it. Moreover this Elder has assured me, that he never heard
more lofty singing in the Church. This he told me, being in Bearne, about
sixteen months since, in the presence of very many honest Men.

After the Church of Orthez was razed to the ground, this singing of Psalms was
heard no more for some time, but about the months of September and October
last, it was heard by most part of the people of Orthez, and many others of the
Country which tarried till night before they went home on Market-days, those of
the Suburbs, as well as those of the City, heard it, every one in his Quarter,
ordinarily at the same hour, viz. between eight and nine at night, some heard
the words, others heard the Tune of the Psalms, and there is not it may be, a
House in Orthez of which some one of the Family has not heard it. The said
Lichiguray Bruneir, went one night, he and two others, to that part where they
heard this singing without the City, and they all three heard the singing for a
long time over their Heads, the Tune of the 138. Psalm, whereof they could not
hear distinctly but these words: Toward thy holy Temple I will look and worship
thee, and praised in my thankful mouth, thy holy name shall be: even for thy
loving kindness sake, and for thy truth withal, for thou thy name, have by thy
word, advanced over all. Du Faur a Physician, and Magistrate of the City,
another Papist, heard it diverse times, but their malice made them say they were
Sorcerers and Devils. A young Damosel of the Suburbs of Moncade, which is near
the Castle, the ancient Habitation of the Lords of Bearn, heard this singing,
being in her Bed; she rose, and caused more than fifty persons to go out, who
having heard it fell on their Knees, and wept through the joy they conceived to
hear so incomparable a Melody in the Air, which continued more than half an
hour. And it must be known that it was in a place much raised above the City,
even as a very high Mountain, and the people heard this singing over their
Heads, as if it had been in the Clouds: I have heard an honest Man, who was one
of the Spectators, make this relation, who poured out Tears then when he spoke
of it: the same thing I have heard from other places. To conclude, it is
impossible to doubt of a truth, which the far greatest part of the Inhabitants
of Orthez are able to certify.

The Parliament of Pau, and the Intendent of Bearn, have also given their
Testimony thereto by a Decree, which forbids Men to go hear these Psalms, and
to say they have heard it on the forfeiture of five hundred Crowns: and by
another Ordinance, which forbids the same thing, under the forfeiture of two
thousand Crowns. The Consuls of Orthez did publish these Ordinances in their
City.

I do not as yet very well understand, what can be opposed to the Testimony of
Monsieur Brassalny. Those that know him as we do, know that he is not of a
temper to impose upon any one, nor to suffer himself to be imposed upon by any
one whoever he be. Those things which he reports are not hear-says at a great
distance, for they are persons of Credit an Reputation, who put into his Hands
those things which they themselves heard.

If after all this, the matter of Fact be false, I do avow that we must no more
believe any thing. But there are but few people into whose minds it can enter,
that two or three thousand persons, (for there are not less of the Reformed
Religion in Orthez) should conspire to lie about an affair, which after all, is
not of any great concernment to them. For although the Angels should not have
sung in the Air, their Religion would not be the less true. Moreover it is to
be observed, that our people are not Educated in the Spirit of Superstition and
Credulity for Miracles. On the contrary, it is known that we have always made
it part of our business to defend them against those delusions. Besides this he
must have an impudence which cannot be found but in very few Men, to feign
events as happening in the view of a whole City, and to introduce on the Stage,
Men who can give them the lie, and whose interest it is so to do. To conclude,
I do not know how any one can imagine that the Magistrates of Orthez, and the
Parliament of Pau, should publish Ordinances to hinder Men from going to hear
these Voices, if the thing it self were false. At least it must be granted that
the Reformed in Orthez did believe they heard it. Incredulity which always
finds out some intrenchment, and defense for it self, will demand that we
produce the Ordinances of the Parliament of Pau, and of the Magistrates of
Orthez. It is not at all probable, that Men who would stifle both the knowledge,
and memory of so extraordinary an event, and which was so disadvantageous to
them, should be willing to transcribe them upon Paper, and yet much less Print,
and deliver these Ordinances, which would have immortalized the memory of that
Fact, which they were willing should be forgotten. But having heard above the
Deposition of a person of honor, who said that he heard with his Ears, the
publication of these Prohibitions, he must be very incredulous that will deny
the truth of this circumstance. And he must suppose that two thousand persons
are furnished with a great measure of impudence to attribute to a Court of
Justice, and to the Magistrates of a City, a thing that is false. If this be
not sufficient to convince those that doubt, they may tarry if they please,
till Men have found the secret of collecting the impressions that words make
upon the Air, and rendering them visible, and then they will be made to see all
things in their Original.

The same thing has happened in Cevennes: as this Country is full of
Mountains, where there are Eccho's, which multiply and return the Voice, and as
night Assemblies have continually been made there where they sing Psalms with a
loud Voice, therefore the relations of singings, which have been made in the
Air, would be more suspected by me. But the Affair of Orthez, which is a
Country close and without Mountains, being well proved, I see no reason to
doubt of that of Cevennes, for which reason without scruple we will produce the
Certificates which come from that Country.

The first Certificate. I Certify that one of my Sisters wrote to me on Feb.
8. last, from a place called Collet, in Cevennes, where she then was, in these
words.

My dear Brother,
you would be informed touching the singing of Psalms, which Men have told you
that they hear in this Country, there is nothing more true, Monsieur the late
Baron of Cadorve, heard it two or three hours in the night, with his whole
Family. I my self, and almost all the World in this Country, have heard this
Voice, but we have not been able to discern whether they were Psalms, yea or
no. It seems to us that it is a complaint, and even now at the hour I write to
you, I hear, and am sensible of it.

La Roquette, Minister of Manoblet in Cevennes,
given at Lausanna, March 30. 1686.
The second Certificate. I attest that Monsieur of the Dark Valley, a Gentleman
of Cevennes, living near St. John de Gardonnengue, writ to me September 17.
1685. this which follows. We see strange things in all the places in Cevennes,
we hear singing of Psalms in the Air by night, as if it were in the Church.
Wednesday last I was lying alone in my Chamber, and about midnight I heard upon
the roof a Voice very shrill, which awoke me, and afterward five of six other
Voices that assisted it, and they sung five or six verses of the fifth Psalm:
all those of the House heard it many times. The said Monsieur of the Dark
Valley, confirmed me in this belief, by a second Letter, Jan. 27. 1686. That
this singing of Psalms does constantly continue. The said Monsieur adds, now
the beating of a Drum is heard, as if Men of War were marching, and this is
heard at midday in many places. Barjune, Minister of St. Marselle in Cevennes,
now fled to Lausanna in Switzerland.

The third Certificate. Toward the end of the month of September last, being
with M. d' Esperies, a Gentleman of merit, which is of Vigan in Cevennes, and
we flying to the Castle of a Gentleman of our friends, named M. de Montualian,
we heard in the Air a considerable number of Drums. Five or six days after,
being with the said M. d' Esperies, in a little place named Ablatatz, in
Cevennes, in the Parish of Fraisin, and Fourques, and in the Diocese of Mand,
whither my Family was fled for refuge, we heard in the Air a Holy Harmony,
singing the Holy Praises of God; this is that which I do certify to be true,
forasmuch as I heard it. Saligne de Marnis in Cevennes. D' Esperies de Vigan in
Cevennes, do attest the abovesaid to be true.

The fourth Certificate. Extracts of two Letters written to Lausanna, to
Mademoiselle Louise d's Vignoles, by her Cousin Mademoiselle Jane de Vignoles,
a Maiden of Vebron, Sister of M. De Lavalett, who was Arrested in the Citadel
of the Holy Ghost on the month of October. 1683. as it is reported in The defense
of the Project, etc. which makes the third Tome of The Estate of the Reformed.
This Jan. 3. 1686. How happy are you my dear Cousin, that you can Pray, and
sing the Praises of God in public, when in the mean time so many good souls
have their mouths stopped, and dare not discover that which passes in their
minds. But as to the business of singing the Praises of God, it is necessary
that I speak to you of the miracle which makes so much noise in this Country,
which is, that since the entire loss of our Churches, and our Pastors, there
has been heard in the Air Voices, and sounds of Instruments, very melodious,
and that which is most extraordinary, is that many persons distinguish the
Tunes of the Psalms, and I can assure you of the truth thereof, since I may
self have distinguished more than thirty. It has been told me that my Brother (
she means M. de Mont Vaillant, elder Brother both of her, and M. de Vallette)
distinguishes them all perfectly well. Can you imagine that we hear these
Voices night and day, and that we can so much as doubt that they are Troops of
Angels which God sends to us for Consolation; to assure us that he has not
utterly forsaken us, and that our deliverance is at hand, God grant that we may
make profit by these things. I had forgotten to tell you, that the noise of a
Drum is also heard so clearly, that no body can doubt thereof.

It has been answered to this Letter, that this might be natural, considering
the situation of the Country, in which they then made Assemblies, together with
other circumstances, to which the following reply was made.

This March 6. 1686. Be no more incredulous, I do conjure you, about the
singing of Psalms, for there are so many persons of good understandings
convinced thereof, that we ought to give up our selves to the power of truth. I
do avow that the thing passes all imagination, but be assured that all care
imaginable has been taken to prevent delusion.

The two Letters whereof my Brother has made the extracts above, were truly
written to me by my Cousin de Vebron from Cevennes, whose Character and Spirit
I so well understand, that I cannot be deceived therein. Louise Des Vignoles.

Mademoiselle de Vebron, is a person which has so much of Wit, Understanding,
Honor, and Piety, that I am persuaded as much as any one can be, that she has
no intention to deceive us. I do not at all doubt, but that all those that have
known her, will readily give her the same testimony with my self. She has
always been of the Reformed Religion, and God has preserved her hitherto from
the general fall, as it appears by two Letters, the original whereof I preserve
to show them to such as desire it. From Lausanna, March 30. Still. Vet. 1686.
Signed Des Vignoles, Minister of Lower Languedoc.

I give the same Testimony to the Merit and Piety of Mademoiselle de Vebron.
Baschi Aubais.

We may add to these Certificates from Cevennes and Bearn, the Testimony of M.
Jacquelot, Pastor of the Church of Vassy, whom we have heard say, that he was
informed by one of his Parishoners (a Man that never did appear to him of a
humor inclined to sell Fables for truth) that two hours after midnight passing
by the Church of Vassy, he there heard the singing of Psalms. Testimonies of
like nature may be reported from many other places, but these are enough. As to
what remains, I am willing before I conclude here to defend our selves against
an injustice, which is very ordinary in this kind of affairs, and it is this,
by one sole Negative Testimony, to endeavor to destroy many Affirmatives. They
will say, I have asked a person that came from that Country, who has said that
there is no such thing, and the proof thereof is, that he never heard it.
Behold a great Marvel, that in a large Country, and in a place where there are
multitudes of persons scattered, some on one side, and some on the other, there
should be some of them that should not see and hear that which thousands of
others did! Let any Man judge if it be just to call in doubt, that which a
hundred Witnesses have seen, for the sake of one that affirms he did not see
it. But it will be said yet, that there are persons in Switzerland that after
they had said they had heard the singing of Psalms in Cevennes, had aft^rwards
retracted it. It is a matter of Fact that is told us here without any proof.
But I am content at present to receive it as true. It is not a thing very
extraordinary, that a Man hearing speak of a Prodigy which holds all minds in
doubt and suspense, should boast to be of the Party, and cry with the crowd, I
saw it, I saw it. These sort of Affairs were never otherwise, a hundred false
Witnesses mingle themselves with true ones, when the thing discovered is only
matter of report and hearsay. And it is likewise very possible that some may
return to their integrities, and confess that they saw nothing. But can this
invalidate the fidelity of those which Persevere, which Write, which Depose,
and which Sign with an Oath? These Histories being set in so much light, that
it appears to me sufficiently difficult to call them in doubt. I think it may
be permitted us to draw some Conclusions from them. Some will be for us, others
against us. Against us, for it is a reproach, that the Providence of God makes
unto us, because you have so easily suffered your mouths to be stopped, and
because you have not dared, nor been willing any more to sing his Praises, and
Songs of Thanksgiving, which are the Symbols of your Reformation. God has made
mouths in the midst of the Air, and he causes his Praises to proceed from
Stones and Rocks. And don't ye doubt but Rocks, and these invisible mouths,
will rise in judgment against those that fear Men, and will not glorify God
generously, and in the presence of Persecutors. The other Conclusions are for
us, and against our Enemies. This event speaks, and tells them if these hold
their peace, the Stones will speak. You ought to give thanks to God, that he
approves your Worship by a Sign so considerable, and by a Testimony so evident.
Let them not tell you that all this is nothing but delusion; for all illusions
come from the Devil, who is the Father of lies, and who has the Praises of God
in horror and detestation. To conclude, behold the Event as a happy Presage,
that God will not suffer your Voices and your Songs to dye; the Angels have
seized on them, and will shortly restore them, that you your selves may sound
them forth in the Air. You are obliged to make a great change in your life,
that you may be worthy to receive this Grace from God. For which reason you
ought to think of renouncing these worldly vanities of Clothes, Customs, Words,
Food, Houses, Furniture, Pleasures and Divertisements; to take Sackcloth and
Ashes, to Cloth your selves with an Humility, and Modesty truly Christian.
The time of your deliverance is at hand, but it will not come till that of your
Repentance has gone before it: the Spirit of Life will not return, till the
Spirit of Piety and Devotion be reentered into your souls.

December. 1. 1686.
THE EIGHTH PASTORAL LETTER. Alterations happening during the Third Age.
Concerning Baptism, Confirmation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
WE continue at this time the History of the Alterations that happened in the
Doctrine and Worship of the Church. We are in the third Age thereof, we will
divide what we have to tell you concerning this Age into three Letters, to the
end that we may not overcharge your memory, and we will fill the Sheet with
matters of Fact, respecting the Persecution which you suffer, and whereof our
Brethren from diverse places have given us information. The Doctrine of the
Church is a Flood which rolls and swells in rolling, it unhappily gathers more
of impurity than good things, we shall see it in the third Age. We have already
observed Additions and Alterations in the Simplicity of the Christian Worship
arrived in the second Age. We shall see many more in this.

We will begin with the Sacraments, as we have done in the second Age. The
first of these Sacraments is Baptism, we have not observed by the manner
wherein Justin Martyr tells us they did administer it, that there was made unto
his time (that is to say, until the year 160. of our Lord) any considerable
Addition. But Tertullian, a Priest of Carthage, who wrote in the beginning of
the third Age, about forty years after Justin Martyr, learns us, that in his
time they had added some Ceremonies to Baptism, that they gave Milk and Honey
to the baptized, when they came out of the Baptismal Font. E fontibus egressi
lact is and mellis concordiam praegustant. During the space of seven days after
Baptism they abstained from ordinary Washings, i. e. from going unto the Baths,
they added also an Unction of Oil after Baptism, and the Imposition of Hands.
Afterward, says the same Tertullian, when we are gone out of the water we are
anointed with the blessed Unction, according to the ancient Discipline by which
they were accustomed to anoint the Priests with Oil, which they poured out of a
Horn, etc. As to what concerns the Imposition of Hands, I believe sufficiently,
that it was a Ceremony not used in Baptism. For it has always been an Appendage
of Prayer when they prayed for any one in particular, and demanded on his
particular the Spirit of God and his Grace.

Tertullian does not say, that it was the custom to kiss those persons that
were received to Baptism. But it appears by the Answer of S. Cyprian to Fidus,
that Custom was afterward introduced. This Bishop Fidus made scruple to baptize
Children before the eighth day, because that before that day the Impurities
which proceed from their Birth do not appear well wiped off. Thereupon S.
Cyprian tells him: Concerning what you say, that a Child in the first days
after his Birth is not sufficiently clear, and that every one of us have some
abhorrence to kiss him: we do not think that that can be any hinderance to the
giving of him Grace. In the mean while, as we find no Authors of this Age who
speak of this kiss, as one of the Ceremonies of Baptism; so it is more
probable, that S. Cyprian speaks it with respect to the kiss which the faithful
gave each other before the Communion: For then they caused Infants to
communicate after their Baptism all together, after the same manner they did
the adult; and before they did communicate it was necessary that they should
salute them. The same S. Cyprian speaks of certain possessed persons, which
they did efficaciously exorcise in Baptism in such a manner, that the Devils,
which had resisted all kinds of Conjurations, gave place to the Sacramental
Waters. But it does not appear, that this Exorcism was, as at this day, a
Ceremony practiced in the Baptism of all Catechumens in whatsoever state they
were, nor did the Devil go out by virtue of any Exorcism, but by the sole
virtue of the Baptismal Water sprinkled on them. So that we see nothing added
to Baptism in this third Age but Milk and Honey, which they caused the baptized
to eat, and the Unction wherewithal they did anoint them when they came out of
the Font.

These Ceremonies of Unction and Imposition of Hands, which were of use in the
third Age, do oblige us to observe here, that they were not at all the
pretended Sacrament of Confirmation, as they would since make us believe. It is
true, they are that whereof the Roman Church have made their Sacrament of
Confirmation. But it is false, that the Church did then consider it as a
Sacrament. They were purely Ceremonies of Decency or Mystery, which made up
part of the Baptismal Administration. 1. This appears because this Unction and
Imposition of Hands was performed immediately after Baptism, this no Man
disputes. At this day Confirmation is deferred a long time after Baptism, and
thousands of persons even amongst the adult die without being confirmed. 2. The
same Minister that had baptized was he that performed this Unction and
Imposition of Hands, whereas afterward this privilege was affected by, and
appropriated to the Bishop. 3. To conclude, Tertullian tells us expressly, that
this Unction was in imitation of the ancient Jewish Discipline, according to
which the Priests were anointed.
Which he would never have said, if he had believed it a Sacrament of the
Christian Church. For the Sacraments of the New Covenant derive their original
from Jesus Christ, and not from Moses. It Is the opinion of the Learned Dr.
Reynolds, of the famous Grotius,. and of almost all the Learned that are
unprejudiced, that these Ceremonies were Appendages of the Baptism of the
Ancients, and that they were added in the second and third Age.

But it is of very little importance to know how the Ancients did consider these
Ceremonies of Unction and Imposition of Hands, whether as Dependances of
Baptism, or as Ceremonies separate and distinct from it. It is sufficient, that
they did not consider it as a Sacrament descended from Christ Jesus; and that
Tertullian, who is the first in whom this Unction is observed, professes that
it is in imitation of Judaism, just in the same manner, as is the Imposition of
Hands. The English Church, amongst the Reformed, has rejected this Unction,
which makes the principal part of Confirmation, and has retained nothing but
the Imposition of Hands, to which she has left the Name of Confirmation. It Is
an Ecclesiastical Ceremony, which she might retain without crime, and which we
might abandon without any prejudice to Christianity.

We have learned that many of the new Converts, which have suffered themselves
to be seduced, are very obstinate and wilful thereupon (viz.) about the
Sacrament of Confirmation, about its antiquity, and because we have rejected
it; but they ought to know that we have renounced it: 1. Because they have made
a Divine Sacrament thereof, whereas it was nothing but a Ceremony of human
Institution. 2. Because it is always permitted to reject those observances
which are of no necessity, as the Roman Church, at this day, does not practice
the giving Honey and Milk to those that are baptized, nor to forbid them
bathing, during the space of seven days: Unction is a Ceremony of no other
nature or importance than this. 3. To conclude, we have judged it to purpose to
omit the Ceremony of Unction with the others, because we were willing to
restore the Christian Worship to its ancient Simplicity.
And it is certain, that these are Additions of the third Age.

We must therefore know, that the Christians of the second and third Age being
disgusted at the Simplicity of the Apostolic Worship, did blow up the
Sacraments with Ceremonies that were added with intention to signify the Grace
that God did communicate and give there. They caused the new baptized to eat
Wine and Milk, because they were the nourishments of Infants, and they would
signify, that Believers newly baptized, ought to be as Children new born. For
which reason Tertullian makes the word infantare to design the Action, by which
they made the new baptized to taste Wine and Milk. They anointed them with Oil,
to signify that spiritual Unction of Grace which Believers did receive, they
laid hands on them to signify the Descent of the Holy Ghost. The following
Ages added Wax Candles and Torches to signify spiritual Illuminations; white
Garments to represent the Innocence of the newly baptized, and with the same
intention many other Ceremonies. But I know not how by an imagination which may
be called rough and impolished in a little time after the Institution of these
Ceremonies (which were not instituted by the Church but to signify) Men came
to believe they had the virtue to confer Grace. And of the diverse Graces which
are confirmed to the Believers in Baptism, they attribute one to the washing
with Water, another to Unction, and another to Imposition of Hands. They
imagined, that the Water in Baptism did precisely give the Remission of Sins,
that the Oil did bestow the spiritual Unction, and that the Imposition of Hands
gave the Holy Ghost. This Divinity is found in Tertullian, in the Book which he
has left us concerning Baptism. Where he proves the Imposition of Hands, after
Baptism, causes the coming of the Holy Ghost; and he does it thus: 1. Because
the Priests and Magicians of Paganism did cause malignant Spirits to come upon
their impure Waters by a Ceremony much like unto it. 2. Because by the
Imposition of Hands, Jacob drew down a Blessing upon the Children of Joseph. 3.
By the Figure of the Ark and Dove, who brought an Olive Branch from the the
midst of the Waters of the Deluge, wherein this Dove was a Figure of the Holy
Ghost, which falls upon him that comes out of the Baptismal Waters.


S. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, who lived a little while after, taught the
same thing (viz.) that Baptism gives forgiveness of sins, and that the Holy
Spirit is communicated by the Imposition of Hands. But let it not offend these
great Men, This Discourse signified nothing in their Age, and a person may see
that it is a Language which is descended from the Age of the Apostles, and from
those times in which extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit were communicated by the
Imposition of Hands. For will they say, that Remission of Sins was given by the
washing of Water, and the Holy Spirit by the Imposition of Hands, is it to be
thought, according to their opinion, that sanctifying Grace and the Spirit of
Regeneration are not at all given in Baptism? No, on the contrary S. Cyprian
lays it down in express words, That the Spirit is received by Baptism. And in
another place he does affirm, that sanctifying Grace whole and entire is given
in Baptism, and that Men augment or diminish it afterward by the good or evil
use that they make of it, there is therefore no need of a new Ceremony for the
donation of the Holy Spirit. He himself teaches us whence the Church took that
custom of imposing Hands after Baptism. It Is from the Action of the Apostles
Peter and John, who laid Hands on the People of Samaria, to the end, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost. Which thing is done among us, says he, Those that
are baptized present themselves to the Governors of the Church, and receive the
Holy Spirit by our Prayer, and the Imposition of Hands, and are completed by
the Seal of the Lord. The original of this Ceremony, which S. Cyprian
acknowledges, ought to have made him confess the inutility thereof in his Age,
since they had no longer the power of communicating the miraculous Gifts of the
Holy Ghost.

This Imposition of Hands was an imitation of the Apostles ill understood, and
Unction was also a pure Addition in this Age, the effect whereof they were very
much perplexed to express. They said indeed this Unction was designed to give
Grace; but what Grace since Baptism communicates it whole and entire? It is
necessary, says S. Cyprian, that he who is baptized should also be anointed, to
the end, that having received the Chrism, that is to say, the Unction, he might
be the anointed of God, and have in himself the Grace of Jesus Christ. Now the
Eucharist, and the Oil which they make use of to anoint the baptized, are
sanctified upon the Altar. It is clear by these words, that Unction is nothing
else but a Ceremony of Baptism, and that the Donation of the Grace of Jesus
Christ is not attributed to it, but because it is annexed to Baptism. For to
give the Grace of Jesus Christ is the proper effect of Baptism, according to
all the Ancients. It seems by this Passage, that the Oil wherewith they
anointed the baptized, was consecrated Oil; for S. Cyprian says, It was
consecrated on the Altar. But this is not all; for the sanctification of the
Oil upon the Altar signifies no more than what we have observed concerning the
second Age. 'Twas that Believers brought Bread, Wine and Oil, and placed them
upon the Holy Table. They consecrated these Oblations by Prayer, and they
served themselves of them for the Usages of the Church: among others, they
served themselves of Oil for Lights, when they assembled by night, and for the
Unction of the baptized. As to what remains you may observe, that in the third
Age nothing was seen but one Unction in Baptism, whereas we shall find two
afterward. Behold the Alterations which have happened to the Sacrament of
Baptism in this Age. Let us consider the Eucharist.

We have observed, that in the second Age they had added the mixture of Water
with Wine, the Custom of sending it to the absent by the Deacons, and above all
they had there annexed the Oblation of those Gifts that Believers made on the
Altar, as a part of the Ceremony. This had already given it the appearance of a
Sacrifice, and indeed gave the name to the whole Action. We shall not need to
doubt, but this imagination increased with time, Christians having a very great
desire to give to their Worship some appearance of a Sacrifice, to take away
the scandal which the Pagans conceived against them. For they perpetually said
to Christians, You have no Temples, Statues, Altars, nor Sacrifices, and by
consequence you are impious. There was nothing in the Worship of the Christian
Religion which might be dressed up in the likeness of a Sacrifice, but the
Eucharist. They had that respect for the converted Pagans, that they added as
many innocent Ceremonies as they could, to give to this Sacrament the
appearance of a Sacrifice, with the same intention they gave it the name, with
this intention, to the first Oblation used in the second Age, they added
another. And they began to present to God by Prayer the Bread and Wine they
were about to consecrate, and wherewith they made the Eucharist. This is called
Oblation and Sacrifice. The Writings of the third Age are full thereof. And
it is from thence, that Popery would draw some advantage, as if they found
therein their Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead. But this
pretense is false, for first of all it must be observed, that the Fathers says
expressly, that it is a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine; we shall hear afterward the
Fathers of the fourth Age, and those following. At present we are to hear those
of the third, Clemens of Alexandria says that Melchisedec gave Bread and Wine,
as sanctified Provisions, in Type of the Eucharist. Which St. Cyprian explains
in these words, Our Lord has offered to God the same Sacrifice that
Melchisedec offered, that is to say Bread and Wine, viz. his Body and his
Blood. We see, says he farther, the Sacrament of the Sacrifice of our Lord
prefigured in the Priest Melchisedec, according to what the Scripture
testifies, where it says Melchisedec brought forth Bread and Wine. And a little
below, The Lord accomplishing, and rendering perfect the image of his
Sacrifice, has offered Bread and Wine. Now, who ever heard say that there were
Propitiatory Sacrifices of Bread aad Wine? All propitiation is in the effusion
of blood, and death of the Sacrifice. 2. Moreover, it is certain that the
Fathers of the third Age called the Eucharist a Sacrifice, because it is the
commemoration of the Sacrifice of the Cross. We make mention of the Passion of
the Lord Jesus Christ in all our Sacrifices, says St. Cyprian. 3. We have yet
an invincible proof, that the Fathers of the third Age did not look upon the
Eucharist as a true Sacrifice, from the manner in which they answered the
Pagans, upon the reproach which they continually offered to them, because they
had no Sacrifices. In the second Age, Justin Martyr said, That the Prayers and
Thanksgivings of Saints and Believers, were the only Sacrifices which were
perfect, and acceptable to God, and were the only Sacrifices which Christians
have learnt to Offer, even then when they celebrated the Eucharist. In truth
this Author had lost either his understanding or his memory, if the Eucharist
it self had been a Propitiatory Sacrifice. Athenagoras, who lived in the same
Age, answered also the Pagans after the same manner. What have I to do with
Sacrifices and Burnt Offerings, since God cares not for them? He demands an
unbloody Sacrifice, a reasonable Service. Can any thing be more express, and
more lovely than that which Minutius Felix says, in answer to a Pagan, that
objected to him, The Christians have no Temples nor Altars, do you think that
we hide what we adore, under pretense that we have no Temples nor Altars? The
Sacrifice that ought to be offered to God, is a good Mind, a pure Conscience, a
sincere Faith, it is to live Innocently, exercise Justice, abstain from Evil,
and prevent his Neighbor from Perishing, this is to Sacrifice a fat Victim,
these are our Sacrifices, this is our Service. Origin answers absolutely after
the same manner, to the Objection which was made by the Pagan Celsus. If we
read Clemens of Alexandria, he expresses himself almost in the same words.
Arnobius producing the Objection of the Pagans, How then will some say, that
you are under no obligation to offer Sacrifice? And answers after a manner very
exact, We are not at all obliged thereunto. Lactantius answers no otherwise
than those which went before. Now it is a prodigious blindness in these Men not
to have answered the Pagans: You deceive your selves, we have a Sacrifice, and
the most glorious of all Sacrifices. For we offer the Body of Jesus Christ as a
Propitatory Sacrifice to God, his Father. I entreat you, my Brethren, press
your Converters, and demand of them whether they dare say to a Pagan, we have
no other Sacrifices than Prayers and Thanksgivings, as for true Sacrifices we
have no need to offer them.

To Conclude, my Brethren, give attention to this last proof, that the Ancients
of the third Age, did not account the Eucharist a true Sacrifice. It is that
they Consecrated, and Celebrated this Sacrament out of Churches, in private
Houses, and at their Meals, besides their solemn Communions, which were made in
public Assemblies, they Celebrated the Mysteries in private, and among their
Domestics. This we see in a Letter of St. Cyprian, where he disputes against
certain persons who out of Mortification, and Abstinence from Wine, especially
in the morning, will not Celebrate the Eucharist but with Water. Let not any
one, says he, flatter himself with this consideration, that although in the
mornings they offer with Water alone, nevertheless when they come to Supper,
they offer the Cup mixed with Wine and Water. For when we eat this Supper, we
cannot call together all our people, to Celebrate this Sacrament in all its
truth, in the presence of all our Brethren. His sense is, these Water drinkers,
against whom he disputes, did not satisfy the Commandment and Institution of
Christ Jesus, to Celebrate with Wine, by these private Communions which were
made in Houses, in which they mingled Wine with Water, because they ought to
follow the Institution of Jesus Christ, and to Celebrate the Sacrament in its
purity, and integrity, in the presence of all the Brethren, and in the midst of
public Assemblies. It appears then from thence, 1. That they Celebrated it in
private Houses in the Evening when they Supped together. 2. That they there
Consecrated the Cup, and that it was not brought from Elce, where, 3. That the
Bread, as well as the Cup, was Consecrated at the same instant, for why should
they Consecrate the Cup, if they had not power to Consecrate the Bread? 4. To
conclude, these Communions were private amongst a few-persons, and out of the
presence of the people.
I do not doubt at all but it is of these private Communions whereof Tertullian
speaks in Chap. 3. of his Book concerning The Soldiers Crown. We take, says he,
the Sacrament of the Eucharist at Meal-time, as also at Morning Assemblies
before day, where we do not Communicate but at the hand of the Presidents. It
is a passage that Men do not, or will not understand. For the understanding of
it, we must know that Tertullian made this Book on the occasion of a Christian
Soldier, who would not set a Crown of leaves upon his Head, because it was
forbidden to Christians. By this refusal he discovered he was a Christian, and
exposes himself to Martyrdom, which he suffering, many blamed him, and said,
why did he refuse to bear his Crown on his Head, where is the Text of Scripture
that forbids it? Tertullian answers, that though it was not written,
nevertheless the Soldier had done well, because when we dispute concerning
Customs, Tradition without Scripture, is sufficient to Establish them, and he
proves it by the Trine Immersion in Baptism, which was more commended, as also
by the Milk and Honey that they gave to the new Baptized. Among the observances
which had not been commanded, and in which they did a little deviate from the
first institution, he puts the Custom of receiving the Eucharist in the
Morning, in Assemblies before day, as St. Cyprian calls them. And he pretends
that the Custom of taking the Eucharist at Meal-time, is that alone which Jesus
Christ has commanded, that is to say, has Authorized by his Example: from
whence it is clear he makes two sorts of Celebration of this Mystery, the one
Solemn, which was done in their night Assemblies, the other private, that every
Family did in their own House.

Now it is to be observed, That in these Domestic Eucharists, it was the
Master of the House, or of the Feast, that did Celebrate, that did Consecrate
and Distribute. This is clear by a passage of Tertullian, where endeavoring to
prove second Marriages unlawful to all sorts of persons, and not only to
Priests and Ministers of the Altar, he says that all Believers are Priests,
that all Celebrate, that all Baptize, and by consequence they are obliged by
the Law which forbids second Marriages to Priests and Presbyters. We deceive
our selves very much, says he, if we imagine that what is forbidden to Priests,
is permitted to Laics, for are they not all Priests? It is written he has
made us Kings and Priests to God his Father. It is the Authority of the Church
which has put a difference between the Clergy and ^he People, and which has
established this sacred honor for the body of the Clergy, this is so true, that
when there ^s no Clergyman in a place, thou do Celebrate, thou do Baptize,
and thou art to thy self a Priest: now where there are three, there is a
Church, though they be Laics, for every one lives by his own Faith, and God
has no regard at all to persons. Here are diverse things which are contrary to
false Principles that have been established some time since. First of all, In
this time it was not believed that the distinction of Laity and Clergy, and
with much more reason that of Priest and Bishop, was by Divine right. It was
the Church, and positive Law, made this difference. 2. Every one for himself,
and for those that were his might exercise the Ministry. 3. And above all, All
might Baptize, and Consecrate, and Administer the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
Offers and tingis, you Laics Administer the Eucharist, and you do also
Baptize, that is to say in private Houses. For as to public Assemblies which
met before day, Tertullian tells us, that they did not Communicate in them, but
from the hand of the Presidents: that is to say, from the hand of Bishops, or
Priests, which were present. In which he insinuates clearly enough, that out of
these public Assemblies they Communicated by the hand of Laics. And I my self
do not doubt, but that this Custom continued in some places, even till St.
Austins time; who assures us that in his time they Communicated after Supper
the Thursday before Easter, although on all other days of the year they thought
it necessary to Communicate in the morning, and before they had eaten. And it
was the Head of the Family that Administered the Sacrament on that day, in
memory of the first Communion, where Jesus Christ, as Father of the Family,
distributed the Holy Bread to his Disciples. The same thing was done also in
the Churches near to Alexandria, and in Thebais, according to the Testimony of
Socrates. We conclude at present from hence two things, 1. That in the third
Age they did not look upon the Eucharist as a true Sacrifice, for would they
have permitted every private person to Communicate among themselves, whilst
they were eating at the Table amongst their Domestics? Sacrifices are not
offered but in Temples, and upon Altars. 2. That according to the Christians of
the third Age, Oblations, Liturgies, and other Ceremonies, were not considered
but as parts of Decency, and by no means as things that were of the Essence,
and of necessity in the Sacrament of the Eucharist: for in these Domestic
Communions all this was omitted, they practiced nothing but Consecration,
Fraction, and Manducation of the Bread, it was nevertheless a true Eucharist.
3. We conclude a third thing by the way, it is that there is no need of
Mission, nor Vocation, for the Administration of Holy things, and by
consequence those people who trouble us so violently about the Vocation of the
Reformers, and our own, have no foundation for it in any Law, Divine or
Apostolic.
We will here conclude what we are willing to say, at this time, concerning the
Christianity of the third Age, we will add diverse things for your Edification
and Instruction.

First of all it has been judged convenient to let you understand what is the
fidelity and honesty of M. de Meaux, and your Converters, on the Subject of the
means wherewith they serve themselves to Convert you. It has been thought fit I
say, to inform you, that we have received Letters from the Diocese of Meaux,
which do fully confute, what the Bishop of the Diocese has dared to publish in
his Pastoral Letter, viz. That the Reformed of that Country had not heard of
any torments. There is a Letter dated December. 15. 1685. that says, We are in
confusion, Pray to God for us, the Dragoons are at Meaux, after they had caused
all the Country of Claye to change their Religion, nothing stands before them,
behold the pitiable state whereunto our sins have brought us. In another Letter
of January 3. it is thus, In the confusion wherein we are, what shall I say to
you? I am not able to speak to you but with tears of blood, the Dragoons have
made all to change by force in the Provinces of Meaux and Soissons. Another
Letter of Jan. 6. from the Diocese of Meaux, makes mention of the violences
that were offered to a venerable old Man, de la Ferte au Col, of the Age of
seventy eight years, called M. de Monceaux, Dr. in Physic. The Archers came to
carry him away in the midst of Winter, and without giving him one days respite,
they carried him away by force. When he was in the middle of the Woods he fell
into so great weakness and faintness, that he resolved to cast himself down in
the mire, and dye there, but they would not do him the favor to let him dye in
peace. They tempted him by all sorts of methods, and in conclusion being able
to again nothing upon him, they chose to imprison him with very many others. I
do profess that reading the Pastoral Letter of M. de Meaux, I was tempted to
believe that the Reformed of his Diocese had all fallen only under the fear of
evil, for I was not able to imagine that any one should write falsely concerning
a matter of Fact, whereof there are thirty or forty thousand Witnesses. But
behold the Letters which teach us what we ought to believe concerning it. There
are others by which it appears that all those Violences have been done in the
Diocese of Meaux, which have been committed elsewhere. It is also known by an
Eyewitness, that M. de Meaux himself made use of the Kings Declaration to
prevail with a sick person to Communicate, which Declaration appoints, that
those who do not Communicate in their sickness, shall be sent to the Galleys if
they recover their health.

These things which precede are not reported but accidentally, for we do not
make it our duty to report to you the Violences and Cruelties that have been
done, and which shall be done, if it be not in such degree and measure, as
shall be necessary to give you example of the courage and strength of our
Martyrs. For the design that we have in these Letters is not to irritate and
provoke you against your Persecutors, but to comfort and edify you by the
constancy of those which Suffer. Upon this consideration, and with this
intention, we will report some Histories which have been communicated to us,
which will learn you, that thanks be to God, our Enemies have not accomplished
the cruel design which they had formed against us, which was to hinder us from
having Martyrs.

We ought not to refuse this Name, and Honor, to those which after they had
been so weak as to sign I know not what form of Abjuration of our Religion,
have had the courage to raise themselves, and to persevere even unto death in
the profession of the Truth. We owe also the same honor to those which are dead
amidst the torments, which the Dragoons, and Persecutors have inflicted on
them, and which have persevered even to the last breath in the bold profession
of the Truth. To conclude, it seems to me that without extending the
signification of the word Martyr too far, we may give it to those, who after
suffering long and cruel torments, have seen death as very near them, and have
beheld it as certain, without being the least shaken thereby. So that without
reckoning those that are dead by the hand of the Hangman, or by the Sword of
the Soldier, formerly for the sake of Religion; behold three sorts of Martyrs,
whereof we ought to have some estimation, and of every one of these three
Orders, we will repoot unto to some Examples which have been writ unto us.

An Eyewitness has written to us, that in a Village of Poictou, called Gods
Town Dannai, an honest Man called M. Palmenteir, after having suffered all the
first violences by the Dragoons, to wit Blasphemies, Threatenings, Plundering of
all his Goods, and other things of like nature, not yielding was treated as you
shall understand, and in conclusion dyed amidst the torments. The Archbishop of
Bourdeaux returning from the Assembly of the Clergy at Paris, about the end of
the month September in the year past, comes into the House of the said
Palmenteir, and asked the Dragoons why they had done their duty no better, and
whether there were no fire to warm this Gouty old Man? After he had given this
order, he went up the Chamber on high, and the Dragoons dragged the weak old
Man out of his Bed, full of the Gout for many years. They dragged him on the
floor, they applied an Iron Plate red hot to the bottom of his Feet, and to his
Hands. In this torment he uttered dreadful cries; the Archbishop in the Chamber
above laughed at it, and diverted himself with it. The Wife of the said
Palmenteir came to the succor of her Husband, they knocked her down with blows
of their Daggers, and the butt end of their Pistols: she fell-into a Swoon. In
this estate they bathed her with two or three Buckets of Water. This punishment
being endured a long time, this poor Man was so weak, not to Abjure his
Religion, but to promise to use means for his instruction and information. The
Archbishop desired at least, that he would sign this promise, but the condition
his hands were in not permitting him to move them, the Archbishop signed for
him, and sent the writing to the Bishop of Poicters, entreating him to send
Missionaries to Convert this Family. This poor sick person had no sooner
consented to this Signature, but he retracted it, and caused a person to write
to the Bishops that he had no need of instruction, and would dye in his
Religion. In the mean time the Wounds of his burning, wherewith he was covered
all over, grew to inflammation, and resisted all remedies, a Fever joins it
self thereunto, and he dyed within a few days after, bewailing without ceasing
his weakness, and repeating every moment those words of Psalm 51. God be
merciful to me a sinner, and repelling courageously the temptations of a
Carmelite, and a Jesuit, which persecuted him to the last breath. I see no
reason why we should refuse the honor of Martyrdom to this Man, since he dyed
confessing the name of God amidst the cruel Wounds, that had been given him,
because he would not abjure it.

We ought not to refuse a place in the Catalogue of our Martyrs to M. de
Villiers, a younger Brother, of the House Juigne, a Family sufficiently known.
This Gentleman was arrested at Francy, near to Bolonia, endeavoring to save
himself by flight. They carried him to Calice, from whence the Intendant sent
him to Paris by the Provost, where he was put in prison in Bishop-Fort, there
he continued from Jan. 8. till the 22. of August last. During the whole time of
his Imprisonment, he preached by his actions and words, after a manner the most
efficacious in the world. He was both Learned and Pious, that he confounded all
the Converters, after a manner that edified the other Prisoners, which suffered
for the same Cause. The chief President took the pains one day to come and see
him. They entered into Discourse; but there was found that inequality betwixt
him and Monsieur de Villiers, that he was constrained to leave him, saying what
formerly a Cardinal said to Ariosto, on occasion of his Poem, called Orlando
Furioso, Oh God! where have you gotten so much Roguery? An Answer well worthy
the Gravity of a chief Magistrate, about so serious an Affair. M. de Villiers
had to do with all sorts of persons; Men of the Church, and Men of the Sword
assaulted him, and he disingaged himself from all their Attacks, always with an
admirable success. The inconveniences of the Prison caused him to fall into a
Bloody Flux, whereof he died at the end of six weeks. During his Sickness they
denied him all commerce, with the other Prisoners of his own Religion, he saw
none but Persecutors and Tempters. But nevertheles it was known by themselves,
that he never ceased to praise God, and to bless him, that he died in and for
the Defense of his Truth and Gospel; his Soul was always raised toward Heaven,
his Discourses were full of Piety, Disingagement from the World, and of ardent
Desires for the Kingdom of Heaven.

I have told you already, that I do not believe, that we ought to refuse the
Glory of Martyrdom to those who, through weakness, made their Subscriptions.
Nevertheless without partaking in any Idolatrous Worship did afterward
recover, and die between the fear of being sent to the Galleys, if they
returned to health, and the horror of being dragged all naked upon a Hurdle
after their Death. This Fear and the Horror are true Punishments, so that I
reckon those Women, which surmount the horror of nakedness, to which their dead
Bodies were to be exposed after death, as dying in the midst of Torments for
the Faith. Nothing makes a more violent impression on the Spirit of a modest
Woman. And all the World knows the History of the Christian Damsels, which
were cured of a certain melancholic Distemper, which put them upon hanging
themselves. Nothing could give check to this rage. In conclusion, they thought
it advisable to draw some of them stark naked through the Streets in the view
of the People. The fear of being thus prostituted to the Eyes of Men, staid
others, and hindered them from being their own Executioners.

Of this sort of Martyrs we have an infinite number. For of all the new
Converts which are dead in great numbers within a year past, particularly in
Poytou, where by a just Judgment of God Death has made such Spoils, that great
Parishes are entirely depopulated of all these new Converts. I say there are
not, it may be, one of an hundred which have given way to their Threatenings,
and permitted themselves to communicate after the Roman Manner. Thus it is also
in Languedoc, there have been Women which they have affrighted with this
punishment. But they answered courageously, that what they threatened as an
evil, they desired as an advantage, and that they would offer this shame which
they prepared for them to their Savior, as an Expiation of their Crime. This
great Resignator has not at all mollified the rage of their Persecutors. At
Montpellier has been seen the Body of a venerable Woman, named Mademoiselle
Cauquet, Wife of M. Samuel Cauquet, a Physician, exposed all naked through the
Streets, besmearing the Pavement with her Blood and Entrails poured out
thereon. And when she was left at the Dunghill, there came two Dragoons, which
caused their Horses to pass and repass over this poor body an hundred times.
But that which is most edifying, is to know, that during her Sickness, the
Answers that this holy Woman made to her Judges, and which are mentioned in her
process, bear the marks of a profound humility, and of an extraordinary
goodness. It may be they may be found one day in the Registers, if the malice
of the Devil does not cause those precious Monuments to be suppressed, as they
have almost entirely blotted out the Procedures against the ancient Waldenses,
to the end that the proofs of their Innocence might be all made void. We have
seen the Carcass of one named Peter Crousel, the Son of a Merchant of Clermont
of Lodeve, dying a Confessor in the City of Montpellier, dragged at a Horses
Tail, and a Prisoner taken from the same Prison where the Martyr died, leading
the Horse, and a Hangman striking the Body of the living person more frequently
than the Horse which dragged the dead.

The number of this kind of Martyrs being so great, we cannot make a Catalogue
of them, without the assistance of those which are scattered in diverse places
in France, and have been eyewitnesses thereof. I will only report here two,
which are more particularly come to my knowledge, and which have something
peculiar in them, because of the Quality of the Persons. The first is M. Robert
d' Ully, Vicount d' Nouion, of the Church of Couci in Picardy, an old Gentleman
of about eighty years of age, who had been Master of Camp to a Regiment of
Infantry, and Governor of a place called La Motte au Bois, all covered with
Wounds and Scars that he had received in the Service of the King, during forty
years space, and having yet a Bullet in his Knee, which could not be taken
thence. This old Man was so weak, as to make his Subscription, as many others
did; but he had also the courage to retract it not only by word of mouth, but
also by a Writing signed with his own hand. They caused a Hangman with a Hurdle
to come before his door, and told him he must be dragged. M. de Novion told
them, that they should not tarry for him, for he was ready to go to the place
of Execution. He arose from his Bed, although he had not been able to walk for
many years; the Provost being astonished at this constancy, paid the Hangman
and others for their Journey, and sent them back. This Gentleman a few days
after was dragged from his House, and put into a Convent of the Order of the
Premonstrants, where the Monks discharged themselves so well of the Commission,
that they killed him by harassing him without ceasing. They made him lose his
Voice many days before he lost his Life, by speaking eagerly to him, and he
repelling them with vehemence. He died, continually thrusting them from him
with his hand, and lifting up his Hands and Eyes to Heaven, when he was no
longer able to lift his Voice thither. As soon as he was dead the Monks caused
his Body to be cast into a Dog's Kennel, and gave notice thereof to the chief
Magistrate of Couci; he came and caused his Body, without so much as a Shirt,
to be laid upon a Cart to carry it to that City. A frightful Spectacle was
there seen, the Head of this poor Man hung out of the Cart all bloody. All the
Wounds that he had formerly received reopened all at once, and became so many
mouths, which vomited Blood, and demanded Vengeance, that after so long
Services they were so rewarded. When the Body was arrived at Couci, they cast
it, in this condition, into the Sink of the Prison, they caused his Bowels to
be torn out by a Surgeon, they threw them to Dogs upon the Walls of the
City. This Body lying in the dirt continued some weeks, expecting that his
Process would be made. At the end of fifteen days Sentence was pronounced, and
executed, the Carcass was drawn through all the Streets of the City: and in
conclusion, thrown into the Ditch, whither the Rabble went, and pelted it with
Stones, till they left not one whole Bone; and for fear lest any one should
take him by night, and bury him, they set a Sentinel upon the Wall of the City
for many nights together near the place where they had cast him. And they added
a Prohibition upon pain of death, that no Body should bury him, so that there
he is to be eaten of Dogs, if it be not done already.

To this Martyr so famous in the Wars, we will join M. Paul Cheneuix, famous in
the long Robe, Dean of the Counselors of the Parliament of Metts, more than
eighty years of age, and who had sat upon the Flower de Luces from the 35th.
year of his age. This venerable old Man died about the end of November, without
ever having communicated, begging pardon of God for his weakness, confounding
the Priests and the Bishop of Metts, the Governor, the Procurator of the King,
and the principal Members of Parliament, which urged him vehemently by
Threatenings, lewd Reasonings, and Argumentations. When he was dead his Body was
carried to the Prison in his own Coach, and condemned by the chief Magistrate
to be drawn upon a Hurdle. The Parliament, who had some horror to see the most
ancient Member of their Body thus treated, suspended the execution of the
Sentence. But an Order came from the Court to execute it, and 'twas done the
28th. of the last month. This venerable Body was stripped stark naked, without
the least covering for its shameful parts, they dragged it with the utmost
reproach, all the Militia was put in Arms, and the Hangman himself was armed.
The People at this Spectacle sent forth Cries that pierced the Heavens; and the
Reformed of Metts did an Action of Courage, which ought to be immortalized;
when the Body was on the Dunghill, they took it thence, and interred it
honorably with a train of 400 persons, they did the same to a little Coffin
wherein they had enclosed his Bowels, upon the Dunghill they sang Psalm 79.2.
The bodies of thy saints most dear, Abroad to birds they cast: The flesh of
them that do thee fear, The beasts devour and waste. A few days before they
exercised the same cruelty in the same City of Metts, upon the Body of a Man
named Robert a Knacker, a poor Man for his quality, but whose Courage appeared
heroical, during a sickness of many days, in which he rejected with very great
constancy and stability all those temptations, which without ceasing were
offered to him. I do not report this with intent to introduce horror upon your
minds for inhumanities so prosecuted, but to the end that you may learn, that
without doubt God has given the Crown of Martyrdom to Souls whose Bodies have
suffered so many reproaches, and to have opportunity to conjure you to despise
the like outrages which are prepared for your Bodies, provided you take care to
put your Souls in a state of Security, and in the way to Glory by a holy and
serious Repentance.

December, 15. 1686.
The Ninth PASTORAL LETTER. A Continuation of the Alterations happening in the
Christian Church during the Third Age. Concerning Masses for the Dead, the
communicating of Infants, the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
WE told you in the last of our Letters, that we should divide the third Age,
at least, into three parts, to the end, that we may not charge your Memories
with too many things at once; we have found some Additions made to the
Ceremonies of Baptism, and some in those of the Sacrament of the Eucharist. The
most notable Additions are Offerings, and Prayers for the dead, which are added
in the Liturgy, which concerns the celebration of this Sacrament. Look to this
point, there is a snare laid for you. In the Extracts, which your Converters
make for you from the Fathers, of the third Age, they will show you some
Passages of Tertullian and Cyprian, where they speak of Oblations for the dead,
of performing Sacrifice for the dead, and of desiring refreshment for the dead.
And upon this they cry boldly and say, Behold the Sacrifice of the Mass and
Purgatory at the same time; for this Sacrifice is that of the Mass; these dead
for which they pray are the Souls in Purgatory, and this refreshment which they
beg for them is the deliverance of Souls out of that Fire. But these Men which
instruct you are either ignorant Sots, which never saw the Fathers, unless in
little Extracts; or else they are Knaves, which cheat and deceive you. For
behold the Truth pure and entire as it is.

So it is, that in the beginning of the third Age, or just at the end of the
second they began to pray for the dead; the most ancient Writer which speaks
thereof is Tertullian, a Priest of Carthage, who died in the year 217.
Secondly, it is to be observed, that the Prayers, in favor of whomsoever made,
and for whatsoever it was, were put into the Liturgy of the Celebration of the
Eucharist, because the Ancients were persuaded, that Prayers joined to this
Sacrament, which is the Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, were
much more efficacious, and acceptable to Almighty God. So that those who
recommended themselves to the Prayers of the Church did carry, or cause to be
carried, their Names to the Pastors, to the end, that they might insert them
into those places of the Liturgies, where they prayed God on the behalf of
particular persons. And it is from thence came the custom of saying Masses for
all persons and all things.

Those that desire that they should pray for their dead did not fail to bring
their Names, and cause them to be inserted in their Liturgy.

Now it must be remembered, that it was the custom of Christians from the first
Age to bring their Alms and Offerings to the Holy Table. Before the Celebration
of the Eucharist they consecrated these Offerings by Prayer, and the Names of
those which had offered them were mentioned therein.

When the custom of praying for the dead was introduced, the Kindred which
desired that they should pray for their dead, brought Offerings according to
their appointment. They declared, that these Oblations or Alms were made by the
order of the dead, or that of their Relations, to the end that they would pray
for them, and that mention might be made of them in their Liturgy, and in their
Prayers. And those Oblations or Alms are called Oblations for the dead.

And as those Offerings which are made by the living, have given the Name of
Oblation to all the Action of the Sacrament: so these Oblations made for the
dead, to the end they might pray for them, give the name of Sacrifice for the
dead to all the Prayers made for them in the Celebrations of the Mysteries.

To conclude, it must be known, that the Church of the first Age, which had a
respect (it may be excessive) for the memory of the Martyrs, caused their Names
to be registered in the Liturgy of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, particularly
in the Celebration of the Mysteries, which were performed on the day of their
Martyrdom, which was called the Birthday of the Martyr, and this was also
called Oblations for the dead: We offer every year on the day of the Death of a
Martyr Oblations for the dead, says Teruillian.

Behold from whence comes Masses for the dead, and the shadow of resemblance
with what is done in the Church of Rome is capable of dazzling ye. But observe
these great Differences. The first is that the Sacrifices that were offered for
the dead (so they call them) were not accounted true Sacrifices, much less
propitiatory Sacrifices. 2. That they did not beg of God deliverance from the
pains of Purgatory. For Purgatory was not known at that time. The third is that
they did not commemorate Saints and Martyrs as they do at this day, to have
part in their Merits, or to offer their Merits to God.

First of all it is indisputable, that the Church of the third Age did not
think, that Prayers for the dead joined to the Sacrament of the Eucharist were
a true Sacrifice, I will not repeat the proofs, those that please may see them
in the preceding Letters. For since we have proved, that they did not at all
account the Eucharist in general a true Sacrifice, although they gave it that
name, it is clear, that they could not account as a true Sacrifice the Prayers
which were joined to the Eucharist for the repose of the dead. So that the
Ancients did not call that part of their Worship, which they called Oblations
for the dead, Sacrifice, for any other reason, than because the Offerings which
were consecrated upon the holy Table, were there placed on the behalf of the
dead, either by their order, or according to their will and intention. And
because these Prayers for the dead were joined to the Sacrament, which is a
Sacrifice of Praise, and the Commemoration of the propitiatory Sacrifice of the
Cross.

Secondly, we say, that the end for which they make mention of the dead in the
Celebration of the Eucharist, was not for deliverance from Purgatory, whereof
no Discourse had been yet heard. To be assured thereof, there needs no more
than to hear the Ancients concerning it. 1. At the beginning they were only
simple Commemorations of the dead, to give thanks that they died in the Lord,
and in the fear of God. 'Twas wholly to this end that they made mention of the
Martyrs. S. Cyprian speaking of two Men of War who had suffered death, says,
that they were true and spiritual Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and that in
overthrowing the Devil by the Confession of the name of Jesus Christ. They had
by a generous suffering been worthy to receive the Palms and Crowns of the
Lord. Now you may remember, says he, that we offer Sacrifices for them.
Observe, the S. Cyprian says expressly, that these two Martyrs were crowned in
Heaven. Nevertheless he says that they offered Sacrifice for them; therefore it
was not to fetch them from Purgatory. How could it be that S. Cyprian and the
Ancients should offer a Sacrifice to fetch the Martyrs from Purgatory, when
they believed they were in a state of Blessedness? 'Twas to do an injury to
Martyrs, to pray for them, say they, according to that saying so much known
among the Ancients, Injuriam facit Martyri qui orat pro Martyr. For 'twas to
doubt of his happiness. The same S. Cyprian says in another place: Observe well
the days on which they died, speaking of the Martyrs, to the end that we may
remember them when we celebrate the Memories of the Martyrs. Although Terullian,
our most faithful and devout Brother has written to us, and does write to
inform us of the days in which our blessed Brethren, which were in Prison,
passed to a glorious immortality, to the end that we may here celebrate
Oblations and Sacrifices for their Memory, expecting, that with the help of God
we shall celebrate them with you. That which he calls in the beginning
Remembering the Martyrs, he calls afterward Oblations and Sacrifices for the
memory of them.

But if to the Commemorations, that is to say, to the Praises which they gave
to God for the glorious death of the departed, they added some Prayers to God,
it was with respect to the Opinions then prevailing, touching the state of
Souls after death. And these Opinions were such as had their Birth in the end
of the second Age, and was almost generally established and received in the
third. 1. That Souls did not enter into the Heavenly Paradise till after the
Resurrection. 2. That they remained in a separate place and state, till that
day. 3. That they might go thence sooner or later, by a quicker or slower
Resurrection; for they thought that the Resurrection was not accomplished in a
day, but continued the space of a thousand years, at many and diverse times. 4.
That at the day of Judgment the Souls pass through that fire which shall
consume the World. 5. That in conclusion, they present themselves in the day of
Judgment, either to be Absolved, or Condemned.
There is not a learned and upright Man, which does not acknowledge this was
the Divinity of the third Age, yea, and of those that follow. So that with
respect to these Opinions then prevailing, they begged of God for the Dead. 1.
That he would fix them in the place of Repose, which they call locus
refrigerii, or the Bosom of Abraham. 2. That he would increase their happiness
in that place, and moderate the desire they have to go from thence. 3. That
they may go early thence, and partake in the first Resurrection. 4. That they
may pass through the fire at the last-day without receiving and damage. 5. And
to conclude, that they may be Absolved when they present themselves before the
Throne of God: all this was not expressed in the Prayers of the Church.
On the contrary they were conceived in general terms, it was the intention of
those which made Prayers for the Dead.

But to what purpose is it to dispute farther, whether they offered Masses for
the repose of Souls in Purgatory at that time, since we have ancient Liturgies,
where we may see what they begged of God for the Dead. There are two Liturgies,
of which one bears the name of St. James, the other of St. Mark. We shall do
them a great honor if we put them among the Writings of the third Age. The
Liturgy attributed to St. James, says, Lord God of the Spirits of all flesh,
remember the Orhtodox, of which we have made mention, and whereof we have made
none, from Abel the Righteous unto this day, cause them to rest in the Land of
the Living, in the Bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in thy Kingdom, in the
delights of Paradise. And that of St. Mark, Cause the Souls of our Fathers, and
of our Brethren, which are dead in the Faith of Christ Jesus, to rest, etc.
Cause them to rest in the Tabernacles of thy Saints, and give them the Kingdom
of Heaven. That Composition which is called the Constitutions of the Apostles,
is a Work of the fourth, and it may be of the fifth Age. Nevertheless we do not
see there in the Prayers for the Dead, any Prayer for the deliverance of Souls
out of Purgatory. According to the Liturgies of that time, they requested two
things for the Dead. 1. Pardon all his sins, voluntary, and involuntary, give
him Angels for his guard. For the believed that in these separate places they
were assisted by Angels. 2. Place them in the Bosom of the Patriarchs and
Apostles, and of all those that have been acceptable to thee from the beginning
of the World, where there is neither sorrow nor sighing.
It is the separate place, where according to them Souls rest to the day of
Judgment.

To conclude, will you have any thing more than all this? Behold it in the Book
of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, of the false Dionysius the Areopagite. It is
to do him great honor to quote him among the Authors of the third Age, since he
is much more modern. But at least in teaching us what was done in the following
Ages, he will learn us what was not done in the Ages preceding. He says, 1.
That when a Man was dead, hi Relations and Friends sung Praises to God that had
given him the Victory, and caused him to arrive at the end he desired. 2.
Afterward they carried him to the Bishop as if it were to receive the Sacred
Crown. 3. The Bishop caused him to be carried, if he were a Laick, to the
entrance of the Quire of the Church, and there they performed the Office of
Prayers, which began with Praises, afterward they read the Promises of the
Resurection, and sung Psalms: before they passed farther they caused the
Catechumens to go out, after which they mentioned all the Saints heretofore
dead, in whose Praises they thought the deceased might have some part. They
exhorted all those which were present, to breath after a happy end in Christ
Jesus, and in conclusion the Bishop made Prayers for the Dead, he saluted the
deceased person, and after him all the living.
But what did these Prayers for the Dead contain? It is, says he, that all the
sins which they have committed through human frailty, might be forgiven them,
and that God would conduct them into the Land of the Living, into the Bosom of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to the place where there is neither grief, sorrow,
nor sighing. In all this there is nothing of Purgatory.

To conclude, For the third and last difference of the Sacrifice of the Mass at
this day, where they make mention of the Dead, and the services which the
Christians of the third and fourth Age did for them, it must be known, that at
this time they distinguished the Dead, whereof they make two sorts, there are
those which they put in the Liturgy to Pray for them for their rest, and
deliverance from Purgatory: and others whereof they make mention to present
their merits to God, and to be aided by their Intercession. For in the Mass
they make mention of the Holy Virgin, of the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
etc. to be aided by their Prayers, and to partake in their Merits, that is to
say, they Prayed to them, instead of Praying for them, but this was a thing
unheard of in those Ages. It was a thing so impossible that they should Invoke
God by the Merit of the Apostles and Martyrs, that they Prayed to God even for
them: just in the same manner as for the least Believers. This may be seen in
the Liturgies that we have quoted, where we have seen they Prayed for all
Saints, from Abel to this present day: and the Liturgy of St. Mark makes
express mention of Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, as of persons for which it
says, Cause them to rest in the Bosom of Abraham. This by the way makes it
appear, that these good Men make little reflection upon what they say, for they
request on the behalf of the Apostles and Martyrs, that God would set them in a
place of rest, nevertheless it is one of the Articles of their Faith that they
are there already, and that they had been there from the moment of their death.
But as Bellarmin has well observed, their Prayers for the Dead were conceived
in the same terms as if they had been made at the instant of time when their
Souls left their Bodies, an instant which is the precise time of Praying for
the forgiveness of their sins, and the rest of their Souls. If after this the
new Converts through their prejudice and blindness, will find the Sacrifice of
the Mass in the third Age, we know not how to help it; let them only know, that
this heap of Prayers for the Dead, and Oblations for the Deceased, which were
added to the Celebration of the Eucharist in the third Age, was the unhappy
Seed which the Spirit of Lies and Superstition did Sow in the Church, that he
might cause from thence to spring the false Sacrifice of the Mass, Propitiatory
both for the Living and the Dead: so that they ought not to be astonished if
there be some shadow of likeness between these Oblations for the Dead, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass, since the one is the Seed, and the other the Fruit, the
one the beginning, and the other the end.

This Article might suffice, not only for the Sacrifice of the Mass, and for
Prayers for the Dead, but also for Purgatory; for what we have said proves that
Prayer; for the Dead was by no means established upon the Opinion that Souls
were in fire after death, from whence they might be drawn by Masses. And you
may, my Brethren, boldly defy your Seducers to show you in that Age any
passage in the Ancients that say so. Suffer not your selves to be abused by the
Word Refrigerium, which signifies refreshment, as if they had desired for Souls
some abatement of the heat of the flames, for this Word signifies no other
thing in the Authors of those times than pleasure, and locus refrigerii, a
place of pleasure. Beware also of the Knavery of your Translators, who in those
places where they find offerre pro dormitione, that is to offer for those
asleep, they Translate it to offer for their repose, as if the Souls for which
they Prayed had been in some Pain and Travel. For to offer for those asleep, is
simply to offer for the Dead. Sleep, according to the Style o Scripture,
signifies nothing but Death, and to offer for the Dead, or for those asleep,
was to offer by making mention of the deceased.

Behold that which was added to the Sacrament of the Eucharist in the third
Age, which began to give it some appearance of the Mass, but they yet wanted
three great things, the Elevation, the Adoration, and the refusal of the Cup.
We do not find the least trace of these three things, take it for granted, and
put your Converters upon the necessity of proving the contrary, and you will
reduce them to what is impossible. As for us, if we would bring you Proofs that
they did Communicate under both Kinds, that they did not Elevate nor Adore, we
should have nothing to do but to produce a hundred places where it is clear
that they gave the Communion under both Kinds, without ever speaking of
Elevation or Adoration. This Communicating of Infants which is not disputed,
and by consequence we have no need to prove it, is a thing worthy of
observation, for it is an addition of the third Age, which makes it appear, 1.
That the Church is not Infallible, by the confession of our Adversaries. For
the Church of the third Age, and those that followed it, has erred, according
to them, in judging that the Eucharist was necessary to little Children, as
well as Baptism: therefore she is not Infallible in the interpretation of the
Holy Scripture, for the has misinterpreted those Words, If any one eat not my
flesh, and drink not my blood, he cannot have everlasting life. Since she has
believed that Children could not be Saved without Communicating. 2. That Custom
makes it appear that the Church is capable of introducing considerable
Innovations, and those Universal, and of long duration. Your Converters grant
that it was no Apostolic Tradition, that at the beginning it was not so,
nevertheless it was an important Innovation, as it is clear, for according to
us, It is no less than to profane a Sacrament, which requires self
examination, by giving it to persons that cannot prepare themselves: and
according to the Roman Doctors it is to expose the true Body of Jesus Christ to
horrible indignities, by putting it in the mouth of an Infant, of some few
days, or months old. And that which cannot fail to happen, is, that the Body of
Jesus Christ was oftentimes spit out upon the floor. For Children do not fail
to reject whatsoever does not please their Palate. Moreover, this important
Innovation was so Universal, that the whole Church embraced and entertained it,
and of so long duration, that we find examples thereof many Ages after the
fourth. 3. Learn from this Custom, that in those Ages they were not obliged to
Adore the Sacrament before they cat it, for Children could not perform any act
of Adoration.
Therefore press your Converters vigorously with this Example, and ask them if
the Church cannot Innovate in other Articles of importance, since it has
plainly Innovated in this, and if we may not Correct Ancient and Universal
Customs, since the Church of Rome has rescinded practices, where were
introduced but one Age after the Apostles.

Behold thus much for Worship and Practice. As to Opinion, do not suffer your
selves to be persuaded that any change in Doctrine, touching the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, did happen during the third Age. The proofs that your Converters
bring thereof unto you, are very pitiful. For they are passages where the
Fathers of that Age called the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, The Body, the
Flesh, and the Blood of the Lord. Behold verifying proofs! What is to be said
concerning them, since it is the language of Jesus Christ himself, and of his
Apostles? The question is not what they said; but that we are to know, is in
what sense, and after what manner the Fathers of the third Age understood that
the Bread of the Eucharist was the Flesh of Jesus Christ. Now I do maintain
that your Converters must be either Fools or Knaves beyond all imagination,
that dare to say, that according to the Fathers of the third Age, that the
Bread of the Eucharist was the Body of Jesus Christ, by way of Reality and
Transubstantiation, for the Fathers of that Age spoke as plainly, and clearly
concerning it, as we do. Hear then Tertullian, who lived in the beginning of
that Age, among other Heretics, with a sort of impious Villains, who said that
our Lord Jesus Christ had no true Body. Thus he reasons against them, Our Lord
having taken Bread, and distributed to his Disciples, made it his Body, saying
this is my Body, that is to say the figure of my Body. Now this had not been a
Figure if he had not had a true Body. That is to say, if the Figure had no
relation to the true Body. For an empty thing, as is a Phantasm, is not capable
of having a Figure. Another Author of the same Age, whose Work is ascribed to
Origin, Disputing against the same Heretics, called Marcionites, says, If as
these pretend, our Lord were destitute of Flesh and Blood, of what Body, of
what Flesh, of what Blood, has he given us the Signs, and the Images, viz. The
Bread and the Cup, by which he has commanded his Disciples to preserve and
renew his memory? These Men had lost their Reason to speak in this manner, if
they believed the Real Presence, above all in disputing against those which
denied that Jesus Christ had a true Body. They say Jesus Christ was no
Phantasm, he had a true Body, for he gave us in the Eucharist the figure and
Image thereof. Now Phantasms have no Images, they themselves being Images and
no more. These Men, say I, had lost their wits, for they should have said Jesus
Christ was no Phantasm, he had a true Body, for he gives this true Body to us
to eat every day. Since at this day he has a Body, and we eat thereof, with
great reason it may be affirmed he had one when he was upon Earth. The first
Reason taken from the Image and Figure, is of some weight I do acknowledge. But
this taken from the Reality in the Eucharist, had been a hundred time better,
and according to the Opinion of the Church of Rome, is an argument altogether
invincible. So that we must suppose these Authors did betray, and abandoned the
Cause of the Church, by making use of feeble Arguments against the Marcionites,
when she had furnished them with one that was utterly impregnable. For, after
all, it is not wholly true that Phantasms can have no Figures or Images. It is
a reflection that you ought to make, to discover the vanity of the Sophistry
wherewith your Converters serve themselves to answer to those passages, and an
hundred others, without Hyperbole, where the Fathers of the seven first Ages,
called the Eucharist, the Figure, the Type, the Image, the Symbols, the Signs,
the Antitypes, of the Body and Blood of the Lord, it is, say they, because
there are two things in the Eucharist. There is Figure and Reality. Figure,
because of the Accidents of Bread and Wine, which are the Figures of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ. Truth and Reality, because of the Real Presence of
the Flesh inwardly contained under the Species. Now the Fathers sometimes
respected the Sacrament on its external part, that is to say, by the Species,
in this respect they have called it Figure. It it be so, at least the Ancients
ought not to consider the Sacraments on the side of the Figure, when it was
necessary for the Cause which they defended, to consider it on the side of the
Reality, as it was in the disputes against the Marcionites.

Hear yet the same Tertullian, to the end that ye may not think that this slipped
from him through inadvertency. Disputing against the same Heretic Marcion, and
upon the same Point, he sites to him certain Words of Jeremy, where according
to the ancient Translation it is thus, let us cast the Wood upon his Bread, or
let us cast the Bread upon the Wood, He would prove that this Bread signifies
the Body of Jesus Christ, and that the Prophet had respect to his Passion, in
which they put the Body of Jesus Christ upon the Wood of his Cross, and he
adds, speaking to Marcion. So has God revealed it in our Gospel, calling the
Bread his Body, to the end that thou may understand that at this day he has
given in the Bread the Figure of his Body, which the Prophet before had figured
by Bread. The same Author says further, That Jesus Christ did not reject the
water of the Creator by which he washed those that were his own; the Oil
wherewith he did anoint them, the Honey and the Milk which he causes them, as
Infants, to take from the Bread, by which he represents his Body. Mark these
words, by which he represents his Body. I know not whether a Disciple of Calvin
could speak otherwise.

Hear Clemens of Alexandria, an Author of the same Age. Expounding the words of
Christ, John 6. he says, That by the Flesh and Blood which Jesus Christ
commands us to eat, we must Allegorically understand Faith and the Promise. It
is the fame Author that says, and maintains that that which Jesus Christ said
Take drink this is my blood, ought to be understood by way of Allegory, and
that it was true Wine: Ye know well, says he, that he drunk Wine forasmuch as
he was a Man, and he blessed Wine, saying, Take drink, this is my Blood, the
Blood of the Vine. And the word signifies by Allegory the sacred blood of joy,
which was shed for many, etc. But that what he blessed was Wine, he caused his
Disciples to understand, when he said to them, I will drink no more of this
fruit of the Vine, until I drink it new with you in the Kingdom of my Father.
This good Doctor was openly a Disciple of Zuinglius and Calvin, for he serves
himself exactly with their Arguments.

St. Cyprian says, That the Lord called his Body Bread kneeded and made up of
many Kernels, and his Blood Wine drawn from many Grapes. He says not that he
made, but that he called. He says that by the Wine is shown, or signified the
Blood, as by the Water which is mixed with the Wine, is signified the People.

To conclude, Origin in the same Age, Writing on those words Matthew. 15. That
which enters into the mouth defiles not the Man. He makes a difficulty on
this, that it seems the Eucharist that enters into the Mouth does not sanctify
the Man, if so it be that what enters into the Mouth do neither sanctify nor
defile him. To this he answers that the Bread which is sanctified by the Word
of God and Prayer, does not of its own nature sanctify him which makes use
thereof, for if it were so, says he, it would sanctify him which eats
thereof unworthily. He adds that there is advantage in eating the Bread of the
Lord, when we participate thereof with a clear Mind, and a pure Conscience,
etc. And at last concludes with these words, If all that which enters into the
Mouth goes into the Belly, and be cast out into the draught, this Bread which
is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer, according to what it has that is
material, goes into the Belly, and from thence to the place of Excrements; but
in relation to the Prayers that have been made thereon it is profitable in
proportion to a Man's faith, which does illuminate the mind, and make it
attentive to those things which are profitable. And it is not the matter of
Bread, but the Word which is pronounced over it, which profits him that does
not eat unworthy of the Lord. Behold thus much concerning the Typical and
Symbolical Body. Many things also may be said concerning the Word it self,
which was made flesh, and which is become true food, whereof whosoever shall
eat shall live for ever. No wicked man can eat thereof. For if it were
possible, that he that perseveres in evil could eat the Word which was made
flesh, that is, as it is the Word and the living Bread, it would not have been
wasted. He which shall eat of this Bread shall live for over. I know not
whether Calvin could have written more clearly: 1. That the Bread, as to the
matter thereof, remains. 2. That this matter suffers all that which other
Aliments do suffer, even to its descent into the draught. 3. That it is Faith
which makes us partakers of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, and that we eat in
proportion to the Faith and Attention that we bring thither. 4. That it is a
symbolical Body of the Symbol of the Body of Jesus Christ. 5. That no wicked
Man or Unbeliever can eat Jesus Christ, because he is not eaten but by Faith.


I do profess unto you, that I know not how these Men's Minds and Souls are
made, to maintain after these passages, that they believed the Doctrine of the
Real Presence, and Transubstantiation in the third Age. It is some kind of
pleasure to see how our Adversaries bestir themselves, and sweat both Water and
Blood over these passages. Give attention, my Brethren, I do adjure you, and
call to mind also that notable matter of Fact practiced in the third Age, which
we have proved unto you in the preceding Letter. It was that the Father of the
Family, though no Priest, Consecrated the Eucharist at the end of his Meal.
This continued in the Church of Africa till the time of St. Augustine. Judge you
whether ever private person had the power of doing this great Miracle, that is
to say, of changing the substance of Bread into that of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and whether they would have permitted such a Profanation of the Son of God.
Consider therefore, 1. That in the third Age they spoke as clearly against the
Real Presence as we do. 2. That this ought to be the Rule of all the following
Ages.
For, when afterward they produce unto me an hundred hard improper expressions
on the subject of the Sacrament, I am assured that they ought to be interpreted
according to the Faith of the third Age; for what reason? Because none of the
Ancients has accused either Tertullian, or Clemens of Alexandria, or St.
Cyprian, nor Origin of Heterodoxy, although they condemned without scruple many
of their Opinions. I have been longer upon the Eucharist of the third Age,
because it is important to understand well the Faith thereof, for it being the
last Age of the Purity of the Church, it ought to serve as a Rule to Judge of
those that follow.

I will finish this Letter by continuing the History of our Martyrs, whereof we
have made 3 Orders. I come to the third kind, such to whom they have presented
death as present and certain, and who have courageously offered themselves
thereunto. For it is a divertisement that the Persecutors often give themselves,
and a kind of temptation which they have often exercised to declare to our
Confessors, that the Sentence of Death is pronounced against them, and that
they must die if they did not change their Religion immediately. And we have
not heard that any one has fallen under this kind of trial. M. de Voutron, a
Gentleman in the Neighborhood of Rochel, has given us within a few days a
great example of this kind of Constancy.

He endured for the space of a year the most cruel Imprisonment that could be
imagined; he suffered hunger and thirst, he lay upon the ground with Irons on
his feet in a Dungeon dark and deep without light, without fire in the winter,
and without other nourishment than a little Bread and Water, whereof oftentimes
they did not give him the half of what was necessary for his nourishment. At
last in the end of the year, the Governor of S. Martin de Re, where he was
Prisoner, came to see him, and told him, that it was with extreme grief that he
was constrained to tell him very unhappy news: 'Twas that the King had
appointed, that all those that were Rebels on the Subject of Religion, should
be put to death; the Gentlemen were to be beheaded, and the others hanged, that
he would very willingly have been excused from this Commission, but could not
avoid it; that nevertheless he felt some joy in this, that at this time he
might be the Instrument whereof God might serve himself to rescue him from
Heresy, and the Precipice from which he was about to fall, that he had but one
step to make to deliver himself from it, to gain Paradise, to establish his
Fortune, and that of all his Family. Our Confessor believed the thing in good
earnest, and it is not difficult to believe, that they would prosecute their
cruelty to the uttermost, when they had continued it to an imprisonment so
long, and so barbarous. But he was not moved thereby the least in the world,
unless by emotions of Joy. He answered; Monsieur, this news is so far from
afflicting me, that it rejoices and comforts me, since it will end all the
troubles of my Imprisonment, and I shall enjoy the sight of my God. I have made
my choice, and when it shall please you to cause me to mount the Scaffold, I am
ready. The favor that I beg of you is, that if you cause any one to die before
me, you will permit me to accompany him to his Execution.

Instead of executing the Threatening, within two days after they drew him out
of the Dungeon, and gave him the Castle at large for his prison, with liberty
to see his Kindred and Friends. We shall see how long this will last.

It is written also from Picardy, that two Damsels of inferior Rank, of Laon,
Seamstresses by their Profession, saw the little that they had, wasted, without
being moved or shaken; after which they imprisoned them in places where they
passed the whole Winter without fire, or covering, but one single Coat. During
the space of eight months, they made use of all that which the craft and rage
of Persecutors in these last days could invent to vanquish and overcome them.
They resisted all. In conclusion they pronounced their Sentence, which
condemned them to death; they carried on the Play to the last, for they led
them to the place of Execution, and caused them to see a Pile of Wood inkindled
to burn them. Nothing struck them, they persevered; they undressed, and
prepared themselves to be bound to the Post. The chief Magistrate laughed at
what astonished all the world, and said, These are fools enough to suffer
themselves to be burnt. They released them, and drove them out of the City;
they forbad all the world to entertain or feed them. For my part, I do not see
why this may not be called Martyrdom, seeing God regards the intentions and
dispositions of the Soul much more than external actions, we cannot doubt that
he does not reckon those for Martyrs, which have offered him their life, and
put it into his hands with so much resignation, although death did not follow as
they expected and believed.

If we will have Martyrs according to the most perfect Rules and Laws, the
Constancy of our Brethren in Cevennes will not fail to furnish us with a very
great number, if we may believe some Letters that come from Nismes. The
Governor and Intendant have within a few days caused 75 Men and one Woman to be
hanged at S. Hyppolite. This Butchery appears to me so terrible, that I am
resolved not to give a full belief to it till further confirmation. We may see
in one of our precedent Letters the perseverance of these honest Men to
assemble for Prayers to God, notwithstanding the Punishments and Dragoons. The
severe Declaration of July 12. which condemns to death all those which exercise
the Reformed Religion, has not at all abated this heat and zeal. For know, that
they assemble every day, and that they cause them every day to suffer
Martyrdom. The public News Printed at Amsterdam are sufficiently true and
exact on this point, because they are published from Memorials that come from
persons that are upon the place. These Memorials have told us that 40 persons
were killed upon the place at an Assembly, that they have seized on a very
great number of other persons, and that they have discovered and surprised
these Assemblies. That a young Gentleman of the House of M. Julian, named M. de
Frumey-rolle had his Head cut off, and that he received death with a piety and
constancy in nothing inferior to that of the greatest Martyrs. His Brother, the
eldest of the House, was sent to the Prison of Ayques Mortes. They have hanged
of Men and Women a number that cannot be determined, because the reports
concerning it are something various. But it is certain that Executions are done
every day, and that they die with all the Characters of the Martyrs of God, and
of his Truth. A favor for which we are to give eternal Praises to our dear
Savior.

The Martyrs of the Valleys of Piedmont alone would deserve a large Chapter.
But we must delay it till we can receive exact Memorials concerning them. That
which we know of them is, that some of the Ministers made Prisoners by the Duke
of Savoy were hanged. Among others M. Leydet, whose constancy did astonish, and
make the whole Court of the Duke to tremble: the poor Prisoners suffered
unheard of Cruelties in their Imprisonment. The Duke's People have published
abroad that they were very well treated, and that they gave to them the same
quantity of Provisions which they gave to their Soldiers, that they oftentimes
gave them fresh Straw, that they suffered the sick to take the air, and also
that they gave them Wine. But the truth is, they did all that could be done to
destroy them, that they might deliver themselves from the fear of seeing them
in Arms, and returning to their own Estates and Possessions. They put Mortar in
their Bread, they gave them nothing to drink but stinking water, and they let
them die in their dung and ordure. And they have been so successful in their
design, that there is a place where, of 400 persons, there are 250 dead;
nevertheless we have not heard that any one did renounce his Religion, it were
injustice to refuse both the Name and Glory of Martyrdom to those which have
died in so constant and so difficult a Confession.

The Church has put its Confessors one degree below Martyrs, but in truth I do
not find that they are much inferior to them. I do openly avow that there are
Confessors which I admire more than Martyrs. It is in my opinion a more
glorious Work to endure a terrible and furious Combat, during the space of many
months or years, than to behold the face of death for a few moments. And we may
say with assurance, that such persons have fallen in a long Confession, which
would courageously have endured the sight of death. Therefore, my Brethren, do
honor to so many Believers which have suffered to afford you an example.
Remember how many righteous persons are in the Galleys, laden in Chains, but
incircled with Glory. We have there two which are very famous among many
others, who, it may be, are not inferior to them, tho they be less known to us.
We have there M. de Marolles, of whom we have spoken already, and some of whose
Letters we have communicated unto you. We have there another Man of Learning
and Merit, called M. Le Feure, of a considerable Family of Chastel Chinon in
Nivernois, of the Church of Corbigni. This faithful Christian, after he had
avoided with a great deal of labor, the occasions and seasons of Subscriptions,
by shifting hither and thither, at length he puts himself on the way to go out
of the Kingdom. He was seized upon the Frontiers, toward the beginning of the
month of March, he was conducted to Besancon, where he was put into a Dungeon,
in which, during the space of three months, he experienced all the Severities
which they put upon the greatest Criminals, and he endured all the Temptations
of Threatenings, Promises and Disputes, which the Persecutors are wont to make
use of, to vanquish the Constancy of the Saints. By word of mouth and writing
he caused all his Friends to know, that they had no reason to fear on his
behalf, and all his Letters bore the Marks and Characters of true Christianity,
by the Humility, Sweetness, Piety and Patience which were manifested and
displayed there. After he had languished many months in Dungeons, with a Body
naturally weak and sickly, he was condemned for ever to the Galleys. They sent
him in Chains to Dijon, where he met with M. de Marolles, which they brought
from Paris. So these two illustrious Confessors, who already knew each other by
the report of their Courage and Sufferings, were joined together to be a pair
of eminent Witnesses to the Truth. They had the same Fortune as they had the
same Heart, both were sick even unto death upon the way, whilst they dragged
their Chains after them; both arrived at Marseilles, and both are actually in
the Galleys, bearing their Chains both night and day, by express order from the
Court, and both of them with the same courage pursue the glorious Race of their
Martyrdom, until it shall please God to grant them the Crown after which they
breath.

Amongst the Confessions which are well worthy of Martyrs, I cannot forbear to
place that of a Gentlewoman of Poictou near St. Maixant, about the Age of fifty
or fifty five years, whose name is slipped from us, though there be many
Witnesses of the same place, who have informed, and assured us with one consent
of the truth of the following History. She endured the first rage of the
Dragoons, that is to say, the wasting of her Estate, their Threatenings,
Blasphemies, and other Evangelical means of our modern Converters. Her Goods
being wasted, the Soldiers attacked her Person, and there was not any kind of
Torment, Violence, Blows, or Reproaches, which they did not offer to her. They
tied her to the post of a Bed, where she remained a long time the object of the
impudence and fury of the Soldiers, who proceeded to commit all the outrages
upon her, that an honest Woman could suffer, except Violation. In conclusion,
one of these Wretches thought fit to tell her, if you can suffer a living Coal
upon your hand during the space of a Pater Noster, we will let you go. She
consented very freely. They then took the greatest, and the most burning Coal
that was in the Fire; she had the Courage to stretch out her Hand, and to hold
it herself stretched out, without complaint, and to pronounce Our Father, etc.
from the beginning to the end, a Dragoon in the mean time blowing the Coal for
fear it should go out, which scorched her Flesh and Skin, and made her Blood
and Humors to bubble and boil: when this as done, one of the Soldiers raging,
and swearing said, thou haft said the Pater Noster too quickly. I will say it
my self, and if thou can endure a light Coal of Fire on the other Hand,
whilst I repeat my Pater Noster, we will give thee thy Liberty. This poor Woman
consented to this second proposition, with the same cheerfulness which she had
manifested at the first, this was done. The Soldier takes the Coal, she
receives it, and held up her Hand in the Air, with the fire Coal, which
consumed it, whilst the Soldier said his Pater Noster, putting a great distance
between word and word. In conclusion, another Soldier overcome by an example of
Courage so extraordinary, blamed him for repeating his Prayer so slowly, and
struck off the Coal from her hand, and so they left her. Behold say I, in my
Opinion, a Confession well worthy of a true Martyr. Praised be God, that we
have yet souls so inspired of God to overcome such punishments, and so inflamed
with his Love, that they can surmount the burning Fire.

Jan. 1. 1687.
The TENTH PASTORAL LETTER. Two Articles; the one of Antiquity, the other of
Controversy: The Article of Antiquity, The Faith of the Third Age about the
Invocation of Saints, Relics, Images, Fasts, Indulgences, Human Satisfaction
and Confession. The Article of Controversy, Concerning the Unity of the
Church; that it is not included in the Church of Rome, and that we are not
excluded from it.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
WE have already begun in the last Letters, to give you a History of the Faith
of the Church in the Third Age; and the last thing upon which we staid was the
Real Presence and Transubstantiation. We have nothing more to say about the
Article of Purgatory than what we have said concerning it on the Subject of
Oblations, and Sacrifice for the Dead; we will only add, that Origin, a Man of
great sense in that Age, and also of great boldness, who among many bold and
rash Opinions advanced that of a temporary Hell, that is to say properly, of
Purgatory, of a Fire in which the Wicked ought to be purified, that they may be
saved after some Ages of Torment. And it is of this temporary Hell, jumbled with
the separate state of Souls, that the Purgatory of the Roman Church is at last
formed and made.

We therefore pass to Worship, Adoration, and Invocation of Creatures, of
Saints, of the Blessed Virgin, of Angels, of Relics, and of Images: This is a
place of Triumph for the Truth, and Confusion for Error. Ask, my Brethren, ask,
and be you never weary thereof; bid them show you Tertullian, Cyprian, Clemens
of Alexandria, Minutius Foelix, Gregory Thaumaturgus, Arnobius, Lactantius, and
Origin, of whom we have so many Writings; let them show you them (I say)
recommending the Worship of the Virgin, the Invocation of Saints, and the
Adoration of Relics. Their Silence suffices to make it known, that then men
knew not what this unhappy Superstition was: and if their Silence be not
enough, remember that which we have proved unto you; it is first, that then they
prayed for all Saints in general, both Apostles and Martyrs: now it is
inconsistent to pray to a Saint and for him, as your Converters will
acknowledge; seeing to pray to a Saint supposes him glorified, and to pray for
a Saint or Martyr supposes him not glorified. Secondly, Remember also, that in
those Ages the prevailing Opinion was, That the Martyrs themselves and
Apostles, were not yet in Heaven, and by consequence, did not see the face of
God; so that they could neither learn from God the necessities of the Living,
nor intercede for them before him.

After this know, That in this Age, as well as that preceding, Christians made
open Protestations, That they did not serve, adore, nor invoke, any other but
God. Tertullian said, Scorpiac. cap. 4.
That it is appointed, that I call upon no other God, that I may no more make
another God by my tongue, than by my hand. It Is ordained that I adore or
worship no other, after what manner soever it be, besides the One God, which
commands this in his Law. Ad Scapul. cap. 2.
We serve but one only God, which you naturally know, whose Thunder and
Lightnings you fear, and from whom you receive Blessings with great joy. He
serves himself of the Words Venerate, and Serve, and they are general words:
Where is the Papist that will say, That he gives no Worship but to God alone?
Clemens of Alexandria says, Strom. lib. 6.
The Greeks ought to learn from the Law and the Prophets to serve but one only
God, who is truly Almighty. Origin repeats the same thing in a hundred places,
That Christians worship and serve God alone.

But if this be not enough, hear Origin after he had said in express words,
Lib. 5. cont. Cells.
That we ought to address all Prayer, Supplication, Request, and Thanksgiving,
to the Supreme God, Lord of all things by the Eternal Word, God the High
Priest, who is above all Angels; after that say I, he excludes by name Angels
from the number of those which ought to be invoked. To the end, says he, that
Angels may be propitious to us, and that they may do all things for us, it
suffices in the first place that we be very closely united to God, and disposed
to imitate Angels who imitate God, etc. That it is best to trust in God, and to
beg of him all the aid, and all the succor which can come to us from good
Angels, etc. For it is, says he, a thing altogether unreasonable, that we
should invoke Angels, seeing we know nothing of their service, or knowledge,
because it is above men. Although we should grant that their knowledge, which
is admirable and secret, may be understood, this same knowledge which we have
of their Nature, and of the thing over which every one of them presides, would
hinder us from daring to invoke any other but the Lord who is over all things,
and sufficient for all. It Is certain, that Origin had lost his Understanding,
if at that time they invoked Angels; and if they did not invoke Angels, how
could they invoke the Saints departed? Do we not learn from Scripture, that
Angels are round about us, and by consequence, that they hear us? Do we not
know that God has committed to them the care and preservation of his Children?
we know nothing of all this concerning Saints: so those which did not invoke
Angels certainly never did invoke Saints. As for Relics, my Brethren, ask your
Converters, ask their Proofs, that men took them from their Tombs, that they
put them in Boxes, that every one carried his part thereof in great Devotion,
that they wrought Miracles, that Men went in Pilgrimage to the Tombs of
Martyrs, where Relics were laid, that they kissed them, and fell on their
knees before them. If they cannot prove this, let them confess that this
Worship was perfectly unknown in the third Age. Mr. Demabis, a revolted
Minister, confesses clearly enough, that in the first Ages they gave not this
external Honor to Relics; because, says he, the state in which they were did
not permit it. Is not this a miserable defense? They say, 'twas a time of
Persecution; I confess it; but it was the more easy for them to get the Ashes
and Bones of Martyrs, for they made them every day: it is true, that in some
places the Pagans hindered the Christians from taking their Bodies, but in many
others they left them on the Dunghill to him that would first take them; and all
their rigor could not hinder them from getting some one of their Bones from
the flames, as did the Believers of Smyrna those of Polycarpus. The Persecution
did not hinder Christians from kissing these Bones on their knees, in their
private Houses and Oratories.

As to what concerns Images, I cannot resolve to make an Article thereof,
although I had intended it; for I do not think that there is any learned man
among your Converters, who has the impudence to maintain that there were
Images in Churches during the time of the third Age, and that men worshipped
them, after we have proved unto them, that in that Age Painters and Statuaries
were accounted infamous, and that they drove them from the Communion of the
Church, as they did Comedians, Bauds, and other instruments of Wickedness and
beastly Pleasures, and that there the Christians scoffed at the Pagans, which
prostrated themselves before Images of Wood, Copper, Stone, Gold and Silver,
which might be stolen, and carried away; in the mouths and ears whereof Mice
made their Habitations, and upon which Birds laid their Ordure. They offered, I
say, a thousand Reproaches to the Pagans about their Statues, all which might
be retorted against the Christians, if they had had any themselves; and to
expose themselves to these Replies, it must be said, that they had lost both
Memory and Sense. I would very willingly know what Clemens of Alexandria would
have said, had he seen Images in Churches, who said concerning Women that
beheld themselves in Glasses, Pedag. lib. 3. c. 2.
If Moses did for* bid Men to make any Image which represented God, how can
these Women be innocent, who by a fictitious Representation, make Images of
themselves? Read therefore, Tertullian, Arnobius, Minutius Foelix, Lactantius,
Clemens of Alexandria, and Origin. And if ye be not qualified, my Brethren, for
the reading of them, ask your Converters, if what we have said above be not
true: they will not have the impudence to deny it; it is a matter of Fact, which
is confessed by the more honest of the Roman Religion; amongst others, by
Baluzius, in his Notes upon Lactantius, concerning the Death of Persecutors.

In the Third Age they began to give Rules concerning days of Fasting. The
African Church, besides the Lords Day, had two other days in the week
consecrated to Prayer, that is to say, Wednesday and Friday. Instead of Friday,
the Roman Church set apart Saturday to that end and use. According to the
Discipline of the Ancient Church, it was not permitted to fast on the Lords
Day, and for that reason, she set apart two other days in the Week to join
Prayer with Fasting, and called those days Stations. They were reckoned for
half Fasts, because they fasted no longer than till three hours after Noon;
whereas in complete Fasts, they abstained from eating till the Sun were set. At
this day, instead of half Fasts (as they call them) they ought to call them
Fasts less than half, for they fast not but from six in the Morning until Noon,
in the Church of Rome; a great Mortification to make so great account on! These
half Fasts were accompanied with public Prayers: For the Christians assembled
together, continued in Prayer at the Church until three hours after Noon; and
as it was the custom of that time to communicate in all public Assemblies,
they concluded these Stations or half Fasts with the celebration of the
Eucharist. They did not communicate in the Morning, in the beginning of their
Assembly, because those days were accounted days of Fast, and they then
believed that the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, did break their Fast; for as
yet they were not instructed in the method of withdrawing the Substance, and
leaving nothing but Accidents there.

To conclude, Lent, and the other Fasts of this day were then wholly unknown.
They fasted in this Age (as they did in the second) the Passion-day and that
which followed it, but no more. And because the Montanists, a sort of
Heretics, amongst which Tertullian listed himself toward the end of his life,
would consecrate two Weeks in the Year to fast in; The Catholic Church made a
great stir about it; and that which is remarkable is, that then the Church
served it self exactly of the same reason against the Montanists, which we make
use of against the Fasts of the Papists, Tertul. Lib. de Jejun. c. 15.
particularly they made use of those words of S. Paul, who said, That false
teachers should come, who should command to abstain from meats, which God had
permitted to believers; that we must not observe days, and months, and years;
that we must eat of every thing, and at all times, without asking questions for
conscience sake. We must suppose an extravagance of mind, without excuse, to
believe that men who disputed thus against the Montanists about two Weeks
Fasting, should themselves have and observe five or six. Nevertheless you must
hold this for certain, that these two Weeks of Fasting of the Montanists were
the beginning of Lent; for a little while after, the Church was ashamed to see
it self surpassed with Mortifications, by persons they accounted Heretics, and
therefore she was willing to out-bid and out do them.

My Brethren, they make you extracts from S. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, a
great Man, and a very holy Martyr, in which you oftentimes read the words
Satisfactions and Indulgencies. But let this example teach you, not to suffer
your selves to be seduced by a similitude of terms and words; for those
Satisfactions and Indulgencies have no alliance or cognation with those of the
Church of Rome. Then the Discipline of the Church was extremely severe upon
men's Faults and Crimes, against which, the Romish Confessors at this day, do
oftentimes appoint but very gentle Penances, and no forbearance from the
Sacrament: But they commanded Sinners the forbearance of many years together,
with many long and tedious Fasts and Mortifications. Those who had accomplished
their years of Penance and Forbearance, were said to make, and have made
Satisfaction. But, First, They did not then imagine that these Satisfactions
were intended to excuse them from the pains of Purgatory, as has since been
believed. Secondly, These Satisfactions were properly made to the Church, and
its Discipline, and not to the Justice of God. It Is true, that S. Cyprian
speaks sometimes of Satisfying God; but these words with him, signify no more
than to appease God with Prayers and Humiliations.

Those Christians which fell through the violence of Persecution, did owe to
the Church very rough and severe Penances, according to the Rules of her
Discipline. All were not capable of bearing the trouble of long Penances,
therefore they desired that they would remit the whole, or some part of it, and
receive them to the Peace of the Church. To obtain which, they made their
applications to their Martyrs and Confessors which were in Prison for the Cause
of Jesus. Cypr. Epist. 10, 11, 12, etc.
These Confessors wrote Letters of intercession, addressed to the Bishop,
Presbyters, and People, to the end that they might receive these Sinners to the
Peace and Communion, without causing them to pass through the rigor of their
Discipline. They had so great a respect to the Confessors of the Name of Jesus
Christ, that they could deny them nothing. So that at their Intercessions they
admitted Sinners without Penance, and this was called Indulgence, this is it
whereof S. Cyprian complains in many of his Epistles. I entreat you, my
Brethren, to observe in this place how the Devil takes occasion from things the
most innocent, to establish Opinions and Practices greatly faulty and criminal.
For behold the first original of application to the Intercession of Saints,
Indulgences, and Merits of Supererogation.

From Saints who were in Prison for the Name of Jesus Christ, they ascended to
the Saints who are in Heaven. At first they prayed the Holy Martyrs that were
on earth to intercede for them with the Church. Afterward they came to pray
the same Martyrs in Heaven to intercede with God for them. They called
Indulgences the relaxation of the Severity of Discipline, which the Church
granted at the request of the Martyrs. At this day they call Indulgence the
relaxation of the Justice of God, which he grants as they suppose, in
considerations of the Merits and Sufferings of the Martyrs, who suffered more
than was necessary for themselves. To conclude, they have changed the
Consideration and Respect which they had for the Intercessions of Confessors
and Martyrs, into Merits and Works of Supererogation. The Church did retard the
rigor of her Law against Sinners, because of the esteem which she had for those
that suffered for the Name of Jesus Christ. At this day they grant Indulgences
by the application of the Merit of those which have suffered too much, either
by involuntary Persecutions, or by chosen and voluntary Mortifications. But
hear how the same S. Cyprian speaks very aptly concerning one of these
Confessors named Lucian, who carried himself too haughtily, and desired too
earnestly that they should have respect to his Letters of Intercession. Epist.
34.
The Lord Jesus Christ has said that we must Baptize Nations in the Name of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and that all Sins past are
forgiven in Baptism. But this man, that is to say, the Confessor Lucian,
knowing neither the Law nor the Commandments, commands that we give Peace, and
pardon Sins in the Name of S. Paul, not considering that they are not the
Martyrs who make the Gospel, but that it is the Gospel which makes the Martyrs.
Therefore at that time they did not allege the Threats of S. Paul, S. Peter,
the Martyrs and Confessors, as the reasons for which they granted Indulgences,
that is to say, the relaxation of the Discipline of the Church.

In the same Age, that is to say the third, they will produce unto you the word
Confession, and the terms of being on their knees at the feet of their Priests.
And they will not fail to find for you there the Auricular Confession practiced
at this day; but there is nothing more false. For those which dazzle your Eyes
thereby, do very well know, that the Greek word which signifies Confession, was
not at that time any secret Confession. But the whole Act, or Actions of
public Penance were so called: And if at that Age Penitents were seen at the
feet of Papists, this was not done in secret, and in a place appointed for the
receiving Confessions, where they acknowledged all their Sins in the Ear of the
Priest. But in Churches and in public, that they might be admitted by Prayer
and imposition of hands, either to Penance or to the Peace of the Church. It
was so certainly a public Action, that the Pagans took occasion from thence to
accuse the Christians of adoring the shameful parts of their Priests. This
Confession was made in public, with Sackcloth, Ashes, and Tears, begging the
Prayers and Assistance of all Christians. This may be seen fully explicated in
the Ninth and Tenth Chapters of Tertullian's Book of Repentance.

A Point of Controversy, Concerning the Unity of the Church, that it is not in
the Church of Rome, and that we are not departed from it.
WHen a City is besieged and assaulted of all sides, those that have a desire
to defend it, would be every where at the same time, but they cannot, which is
their trouble. My Brethren, we have the trouble at this day, you are besieged,
you are attacked at an hundred places, they batter you by a thousand wicked
Reasons, we would be every where, and defend you on all sides; but whilst we
endeavor to defend you on one side, they deceive and ruin you on another. The
rash and bold adventure of the Bishop of Meaux (who has told you in his
Pastoral Letter) That from the Apostles days to his, no alteration has happened
in the Doctrine of the Church, has engaged us (that we may confound him) to
make you perceive the essential Changes which have been introduced, both in its
Doctrine and Worship, at least in the first five Ages, to the end, that from
thence you may judge of all the rest. But whilst we pursue this design, which
cannot presently be executed; I understand that they seduce you by the Sophisms
of the Church, of its Unity, Visibility, and the horror of Schism. And that
which grieves us most is, that by the Letters which come, or are communicated
to us, we see that the most part of you, who are willing (at any rate
whatsoever) to be at ease and rest where they are, do also endeavor to possess
themselves of, and obstinately to maintain these wicked Reasons, and it may be
that one of you will know himself in the following words, All the World reasons
concerning Religion agreeably to their own Light and Passions. But the
Questions which do most trouble and confound it are these: 1. The positive
separation which our Fathers made: It Is said that we ought to suffer without
separating from the Communion of the Church, that the Abuses introduced by
Governors may not be imputed to Believers. But the Scriptures that make mention
of the Heresies that must arrive in the Church, do not command Separation for
the sake of them: On the contrary they exhort us mutually to bear with one
another; they say that Wood, Hay, and Stubble may be built on that foundation,
which is Christ Jesus, and that he alone will separate one from the other, that
the good Grain and the Chaff shall be separated at the last day, but we must
let them grow together till then. Behold exactly the Religion, 1. Of our
revolted Ministers. There has been sent unto us an Account of a Conference
which Cheyron an Apostate Minister of the City of Nismes had with the famous
Confessor called Mr. Matthew an Advocate of Duras, who is in the Town of
Constance at Aggues-Mortes, that which this Wretch says is the same with what
has been written and you have read. 2. It Is also the Religion of all those
which have any understanding or illuminations, they cannot but see, that the
Church of Rome is extremely corrupt.
But the question is, say they, whether we ought to separate from it because of
its Corruptions, yea, they say, we ought to bear them; and add further after
all, there is but one true Church; and although it be corrupt, it is
nevertheless the Church, and we must endure its Diseases and Imperfections. The
Poison of this illusion is so eating and dangerous, that we have reason to fear
that it continues long upon your Minds; it will penetrate into them and totally
corrupt them, and so whilst we are pursuing other Subjects, your hearts will be
poisoned by this mischievous Sophism, in that manner and to that degree, that
you will never recover. This is it which obliges us to return to the Bishop of
Meaux's Letter sooner than we intended. Nevertheless without forsaking the
subject matter we are upon, for we will endeavor to intermix things in such a
manner, that in every one of our following Letters you will find one Article
concerning Antiquity, and another concerning the Questions of the Church, as
you will find in this. And forasmuch as these Letters ought to be instead of
Sermons to you, we will join unto them some words of Exhortation as often as we
can. We return therefore to the Letter of Monsieur de Meaux, one of the Bishops
of Rome. We are considering the third Article of his Pastoral Letter: This
third Article, and that which follows, will give us an occasion to confute the
Sophisms which they make, or you make for your selves about the Church. The
Bishop of Meaux in his Pastoral Letter does six things: 1. He endeavors to
establish the Idea and Unity of the Church principally upon the Testimony of S.
Cyprian, and in consequence thereunto, the Unity of the Ministers. 2. He
proves, Page 12.
There is none allowed to separate from the Church, and that all separate
Assemblies are in a state of Damnation Page 14.
; so that a Martyr which dies for the Faith of the Church out of this Unity, is
nevertheless damned. 3. Page 13.
That we must not examine Opinions to know whether such an Assembly be the
Church Page 14.
. But we must know if an Assembly be the Church, and judge from thence
concerning the truth of Opinions. 4. He endeavors to answer to that Text,
Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I will be in the midst of
them. A Text that proves wherever is Truth, there is a True Church; and then
comes to his Chimera, that all Separation ruins Unity; a Chimera which he
supports by the Testimony of the great S. Cyprian, who is indeed his only
Author. 5. Page 17.
By the same S. Cyprian he proves that the Church, with whom we must preserve
Union, is the Church of Rome, or the Chair of S. Peter. 6. In conclusion, he
falls on the common place of the invalidity of the Call of our first Reformers,
he proves their Vocation invalid; because they were either Laics or Renegado
Priests which had renounced the Ministry.
The first never having Mission, the last having it no longer, cannot be lawful
Pastors. This is the Abridgment of a great number of Volumns, which have been
made to seduce you within twenty years last past; concerning which we do
entreat you to be attentive to these invincible Arguments which we have to
produce for the subversion of these wicked Engines. Although we do not account
it a Duty to follow precisely the order of the Articles of the Bishop of Meaux:
Nevertheless, seeing he begins with the Unity and Visibility of the Church, we
will begin there also, and we will make you understand, 1. What is the true
Unity of the Church. 2. What is the Unity of its Ministry. 3. What is its
perpetual Visibility. 4. That to separate from a corrupt Church, is not to
break the Unity thereof. 5. That there is such a degree of Corruption that
obliges to separation, and that the Church of Rome is corrupt to that degree.


First, My Brethren, it is necessary that you make to your selves a just and
ligitimate Idea of the Unity of the Church. They tell you that there is but one
Catholic Church, and that there cannot be many. This is true, there is but one
Church universal, and even the Word Universal, that is added thereunto makes it
apparent, that there can be but one. Just after the same manner that the word
Universe (by which is signified the World) signifies also that there is but
one, for if there were another World besides this, ours would not be the
Universe, seeing it would not comprehend totally all. But the Bishop of Meaux
and those that are like unto him, give you a pleasant Idea of its Unity and
Universality both together. The Church of Rome, say they, is this universal and
only Church, it is universal, and yet nevertheless, out of it, and separate
from it there are many other Churches. This is just as if I should say, our
World is the Universe, nevertheless there be many other Worlds besides it. Is
not this absurd? But it will be said, that these Propositions are not alike nor
the same, for we mean thereby all other Churches; besides, the Roman Churches
are false Churches. This is another absurdity altogether alike, as if a person
or a man should say; It Is true, there are many Worlds besides ours;
nevertheless, ours is the Universe, because all the rest are false Worlds. If
they Church of Rome did say, Indeed I am but part of the Church Universal; but
I am the only sound and entire part, the others are sick and diseased. where a
man cannot be saved: If it should speak thus, say I, it would speak false, but
it would speak nothing absurd or contradictory, and there would be reason to
examine its pretensions to the bottom, to know if indeed it be the only Church
that is sound and without Errors. But it must have renounced common sense, to
avow that out of her Bosom there are many Churches, and nevertheless call her
self the Church universal.

However it be, her pretension is, that the Unity of the Church consists in a
certain Communion, characterized and distinguished from all others by certain
limits and boundaries, and under certain Pastors, out of which Communion,
whether you believe in Jesus Christ or not, whether you have considerable
Errors or no, you are always out of the Church and hopes of Salvation, although
you should believe and maintain all the truths of the Gospel from the beginning
to the end, tho you should be Orthodox as S. Paul, retaining all the Articles
of the Christan Faith, yea, of the Faith of the Church of Rome, if nevertheless
you live in separation with this certain Seat and this certain Church, which is
the Church Catholic you must be certainly damned. I entreat you, my Brethren,
before you go further, propose a Question to your Converts. Tell them I am
content to grant there is a certain particular Church, in which is that Unity
from which we must never separate. But how shall I know that this Church, in
which is that Unity to which we ought to adhere, is the Church of Rome? for I
have heard say, that there are many other Churches; among others, it has been
told me, there is a Church in the East, called the Greek Church, which has six
Patriarchs, that is to say, for Popes, the Bishops of Constantinople, Antioch,
and Alexandria, and these do all in like manner Anathematize the Pope of Rome.
Propose to them, say I, this difficulty, and press it home, and you will see
them brought into such streights, that they can say nothing but impertinences
and absurdities: They will tell you that Rome is the seat of S. Peter, it is to
her that this Privilege was granted, all those which separate from her, depart
from Unity. So that the Greek Church, and the three Popes whereof we have
spoken, are out of the Unity. Can there be a greater Absurdity than to answer
by that which has been under dispute? It is not true that Rome is the Chair of
S. Peter, we shall it may be have occasion to prove it to you in some other
place. But although it should be true, where is it said that the Privilege of
Unity ought to be affixed to the Chair of S. Peter? The Pope of Constantinople
says, I am in the Chair of S. Andrew, who was an Apostle. The Pope of Antioch
says, It Is I who am in the true Chair of St. Peter; for according to Tradition,
St. Peter was seven years Bishop of Antioch before he was Bishop of Rome: so
that it is the first Chair, sounded by the chief of the Apostles. The Pope of
Alexandria says, I am in the Chair of St. Mark, who was an Evangelist, and had
the Spirit of Infallibility as well as St. Peter. Behold three Popes against
one, three Churches against one, three Apostles or Evangelists against one;
wherefore then, Gentlemen Converters, would you that I should esteem you as
only in the rightful possession of Unity, to the prejudice of Persons which
pretend to have as good a Title to it as your selves? Press these false
Babylonish Teachers on this point, and you will see such confusion, and such a
multitude of Words in their Discourse, which will discover to you the falseness
of their pretensions.

After this we will consider the Proposition in it self, The Union that is
necessary to Salvation is included in the Church of Rome alone; out of it there
is neither Salvation, Faith, Grace, Remission of Sins, nor the True Church: so
that every man which is separate from it by Schism alone, without Heresy, dies
eternally. I do maintain, That this Proposition is the most foolish, but
withal, the most cruel and barbarous that ever was asserted: and I do beseech
you, my Brethren, to be attentive to the proofs that I shall make thereof.

First, According to the Scripture, Fathers, and Evidence of Reason, the Unity
of the Church ought to contain Universality in it self; that is to say, That
Church which is One ought to be universal, and extended through all the World;
it ought to comprehend all Christians. I will not prove this, for it is clear
and also confessed: it is a truth so known among the Ancients, that they look on
certain Schismatics of the fourth and fifth Age, called Donatists, as Fools.
These People, in the beginning of the fourth Age, separated themselves from the
rest of the Church of Carthage, and all Africa: this Separation was caused by
the Election of a Bishop of Carthage. This has always been one of the most
fruitful Sources of Division. These Donatists said precisely that which the
Church of Rome says at this day, Aug. de Agone Christi, Cap. 28.
All the Church is fallen into Apostasy, and is only preserved in the
Communion of Donatus: upon which St. Augustine thus cries out, Oh proud and
wicked Tongue! Certain other Schismatics called Luciferians, fell into the
same dotage, That the Church was perished, and continued not but in Sardinia,
and some Mountains near Rome, where they had Followers and Disciples. St.
Jerome treats them on that Subject, as men that had lost their Understanding.
Jerome Dialog. adv. Lucifer.
If it be so, says he, Jesus Christ died only for the Peasants of Sardinia:
Where then is the accomplishment of that word of the Father, Ask of me and I
will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance? Behold exactly the folly of
the Papists, the Church is perished throughout the World, except at Rome, and
in the West; but we, with the Scriptures and the Fathers, say, Let the North
give up, and let not the South keep back. All the parts of the World shall
bring forth Children to God; and the Church ought to be extended to all places
where the Gospel is. Now the Church of Rome is not at Constantinople, nor in
Muscovy, Asia, Egypt, Africa, or Ethiopia, where nevertheless there are
multitudes of Christians: it is not in England, Holland, Sweden, Denmark, nor
in a great part of Germany. The Church of Rome reaches not to all the
Countries and Kingdoms; for it is ridiculous to say that it is dispersed
throughout the World, because there are some Jesuits at London, in the Low
Countries, Sweden, Constantinople, and in the East, and some Latins hid here
and there, where they have small Congregations, but little known, and as it
were under ground. I might as well say that Calvinism is extended through all
Italy, because there are some of the Reformed scattered here and there in it.

Secondly, According to the Hypothesis of the Church of Rome, every one that
errs, though never so little, that is to say, who goes off from that which the
Romanists determine, is out of the Unity of the Church, and without hopes of
Salvation. Behold how ill this agrees with that notable Passage whereof those
of ours that are weak and fearful make great use; it is that of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
iii. 11. where the Apostle says, For other Foundation can no man lay, than that
is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon this Foundation,
Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble; every man's work shall be
made manifest, etc. and the fire shall try every man's work, etc. And if any
man's work be burnt he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved. Without
taking notice of what may be difficult in this Passage, it is clear, That those
which build are Teachers, that the Gold, Silver, and precious Stones are sound
Doctrines, that the Wood, Hay, and Stubble are such as are unsound and false;
it is also clear, that they which teach these false Doctrines may be saved, and
with greater reason they which are seduced by them. It follows not from thence,
as our perverted People pretend, that a person may be saved in the practice of
that Worship which ruins the Foundation, as they do in the Church of Rome: but
it follows at least, that a person may be saved that teaches Doctrines opposite
to Truth, provided that they subvert not the Foundation: and by consequence,
the Church of Rome is ridiculous, as well as cruel, to damn all those which are
out of her Communion for Errors that are light and trifling; for having
pronounced Anathema against those which deny, for example, that Infants dying
without Baptism are damned, Mr. Nicholas makes no difficulty to condemn all
those, which do not believe the sovereign and absolute necessity of Baptism.

Thirdly, We have a third proof of the falseness of this Pretense, that the
Roman Church is in possession of that Unity out of which there is no Salvation,
in this, That God preserves the Ministry of his Word in many Places, and in
many Churches, which do not submit to the Latin Church. The Word of God never
returns without effect. The Wisdom of God will not permit, that he should
preserve the Ministry in places where there are none but Non-elect and
Reprobates; so that it is absurd, that God should cause his Gospel to be
preached to a herd of Reprobates, among which there is not one person on whom
the Word can produce its effect. It will be therefore in vain, that God should
preserve Christians in all the East and South, for these Christians being out
of the saving Unity, will be damned just in the same manner as if they were
Pagans.

Fourthly, The Schism of the Ten Tribes gives us a convincing Proof that in
Schismatical Churches every single Person is not in a state of Damnation.
Jeroboam separated ten Tribes from the other two; he would not suffer them to
go up to Jerusalem, but engaged them in a formal Schism; nevertheless God there
preserved both Prophets, as Elijah and Elisha, and a multitude of Persons which
he affirmed to be his own, because they had not bowed the knee to Baal. There
is therefore no particular Church that has reason to boast it self of having
Unity alone, to the prejudice of all other Churches.

Fifthly, The truth is, that on one side the Jews converted to Christianity in
the time of the Apostles, and on the other side the Pagan Converts lived in a
true Schism; for these Jewish Christians would have no Communion with the
converted Pagans, nevertheless they did not mutually damn each other: therefore
we ought not to damn those which live in Schism, whatever it be. The converted
Jews had considerable Errors; they observed the Law, and would retain
Circumcision with all their might, Things incompatible with Christianity, as S.
Paul declares so positively as to say, If any one be circumcised Christ should
profit him nothing: nevertheless, God suffers and saves them with considerable
Errors. It is not therefore true that the Church is shut up in one sole
Communion, and that every Error damns when we separate from a Society, that is
justly called the Church: but it is true, that remaining in a Society bearing
that Name, we may nevertheless be damned, when there are mortal Errors there,
as there are in the Church of Rome.

Sixthly, Ask your Converters, who would oblige you to return to the Church of
Rome on pain of Damnation, under pretense that Unity is in that Church alone;
ask them, I say, whether they would pronounce, that all the Greek Christians
(of whom there are millions) are damned for this only reason, because they will
not adhere to the Roman Church, who alone has Unity in her possession? If they
have the front to say yea, ask them if they acknowledge the Greeks for
Christians? They will also also answer you yea: pursue and press them, by
asking how God can abandon to eternal Damnation an infinite number of
Christians, who according to the Church of Rome hold no Capital Errors, and are
only mistaken in things of small consequence? If the Papists boast of the
consent of all Christians of other Communions, and particularly of the Geeks,
in the Invocation of Saints, in the Adoration of Images, in the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, the real Presence and Adoration: they do therefore hold all
that the Church of Rome esteems necessary to Salvation; why therefore will they
damn them for little things, and for this alone, that they will not live in
this pretended Unity?

To complete the confusion of your Converters, by themselves, on the subject of
this Unity, out of which we are departed, Ask them if this Unity be not a
certain circle in which the true Church is enclosed? They will answer you yea:
proceed to ask them, Whether this certain Circle of Unity has not its Center,
that is to say, a certain eminent Church to which all the rest ought to have
their Relation, to the end that they may be within the ci^cle of Unity? they
will also answer you yea; and they will add that the Pope, or Bishop of Rome,
is this center of Unity.

Monsieur de Meaux finds a way to secure himself from the Thunders of Rome by
frequent repeating this: and indeed this Supposition, according to their
Hypothesis, is of absolute necessity; for if this Circle of Unity have no
Center of Adherence, it vanishes immediately; a man will always be able to say
with good reason, To what Church would you that I should adhere? is it to that
of Paris, or that of Toledo? These are particular Churches which may err; if
therefore the Pope be ruined, if the necessity of Adherence to the Pope be
removed, the circle of Unity perishes with him, which they call the center of
Unity. Now observe, that at this day the Divines of the French Church, your
Converters, ruin the Pope from head to foot; they take away the center of
Unity, and by destroying the center they destroy the circle. It Is to this that
so many modern Writings of Maimbourgh, Gerbas, Noel Alexander, made, after the
Kings Declarations, and the Definitions of the Bishops on this Subject, or in
prospect of them, do tend. But the Gallican Church never spoke so openly as she
has done but a little while fince, by the Pen of a Doctor of the Sorbonne,
called Elias Pin, touching the ancient Discipline of the Church. Those among
you, my Breth^en, which do not understand the Latin Tongue, may consu^t those
that do; and they will inform you, that in this Book may be read, 1. That the
Bishop of Rome had originally no power over other Churches. 2. That in the
first Institution of Patriarchs, he had no power but over the Suburbicane
Provinces, that is to say, those near to Rome. 3. That the Popes, by little and
little, ruined the Rights of the Metropolitan Bishops, and by Usurpation
ascribed them to themselves. 4. That the Pope has no right to review, and
finally judge the Causes determined by the Bishops. 5. That the Privileges
which the Sea of Rome at this day enjoys, are not by divine Right, but either
by Usurpation or the Concession of Councils. 6. That to be a good Catholic and
a good Christian, it is in no wise necessary, in many Occurrences, to adhere to
the Sea of Rome. 7. That the Primacy of the Church, which the Pope possesses,
appertains not to him but by a tolerated Usurpation, or as a Privilege granted
by Councils.
This gives him no character of Infallibility, nor the right of judging
finally, and above Councils. Behold exactly the Divinity of the Gallican Church
at this day; for this man, in the view of the Court, had not written thus
without its Order. Behold also the center of Unity entirely subverted, and so
subverted as it was by Calvin and Luther. This being so, why do these Gentlemen
everlastingly beat upon your ears, about their Unity, and the center of Unity?
There is no more Unity in the Church of Rome since there is no center of it
there; for since adherence to the Pope is no farther necessary to be a true
Christian, you are not departed from Unity and Christianity by departing from
the Communion of the Pope: observe therefore thereon, that Monsieur de Meaux,
and your Converters, are not men of Fidelity, to press you by Principles the
falseness whereof they themselves confess: for in the Pastoral letter of
Monsieur de Meaux, in his Catholic Exposition, and every where else, to hear
him speak of the center of Unity, you would say, that the Pope possessed this
Title by divine Right: and behold these Gentlemen profess to us, That it is by a
handsome Usurpation tolerated, and by the concession of Councils. That which
Councils have given him they may take away from him. This makes it apparent how
little of honesty there is in the Quotations, which these Monsieurs make from
St. C^prian, who without doubt had a false Idea of the Unity of the Church, so
false, and so ill formed, that your Converters themselves will not dare to
warrant it. We have treated this matter at large in our Answer to Monsieur
Nicholas, where we have made it apparent, that this false Idea of the Unity of
the Church, which St. Cyprian did communicate to St. Augustine, did put the
latter to that perplexity and confusion, from which he could not withdraw
himself on the subject of the validity of the Baptism of Heretics. In the
following Letter we must say something as well on the point of Antiquity as
that of Controversy; and we will make it evident also in the same Letter, that
supposing this Roman Idea of Unity to be false, all their Arguments and
Sophisms vanish and come to nothing.

15. January, 1687.
The ELEVENTH PASTORAL LETTER. AN Article of Antiquity: the end of the History
of the Christianity of the Third Age: concerning Tradition, and the Primacy of
the Bishop of Rome. An Article of Controversy. Reflections upon a Writing
lately addressed to the Reformed of France: A Continuation of the matter
concerning the Unity of the Church.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
I Have not obliged my self to acquaint you with all the sad Accidents that do
betide us in our Exile and Persecution: but the death of the excellent Mr.
Claud is an event so grievous, that I cannot forbear speaking one word
concerning it. God has taken him to himself since our last Letter. He was the
Father of our Prophets, and we may well cry after him, My Father, my Father,
the Chariot of Israel, and the Horseman thereof. God had formerly affixed him
in a particular manner to the conduct of the most considerable of your
Congregations, but Providence made him become in a manner your universal
Pastor, by the care that he took to defend you from the dangerous Sophistry of
those that endeavored to seduce you; and he was herein successful in ^uch a
manner, as might cover all our Enemies with shame and confusion. I acquaint you
with the loss that you have sustained, that you may lament, and look on it as a
mark of the continuation of God's displeasure against you. His Justice was not
yet satisfied; the Arrows of his Quiver were not all drawn forth; this stroke
was still owing to us: I pray God this may be the last. If you be grieved, your
Enemies (you may be sure) rejoice at it; but they must know, that if the Ashes
and Blood of the Martyrs has been the seed of the Church, the Tombs of the
Prophets do preserve their Spirit which passes to their Disciples. If the
Grave enclose the Flesh and Bones of this great Man, his Writings will preserve
his Wit, Knowledge, and Illuminations; and God will not suffer a failure of
Persons, which shall prophecy on his Tomb, for the maintenance of those
Victories that he has gained for the Truth. God will do his work in your
fight, and you shall see this Church, which is* dead, rise again after four
days: but it may be he will do this work himself; and when you see those fall
and drop away one after another, whose Writings and Discourses might be of use
to ruin the success and triumph of Lies, be persuaded that God will derive his
Praise from the mouths of Children; and that he that laid the Foundation of the
Kingdom of his Son by Fishermen, will re-establish the Ruins thereof by
earthen Vessels, into which he will pour his Treasures. He whose loss we
lament, was* whilst he lived, one of those Instruments which God served himself
of, for your Edification and Defense. Whilst you pour out tears upon his Grave,
and throw your showers there, you may gather sweetness thence. Out of the Eater
came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. Death, that
devours and takes all things from us, cannot hinder us from searching and
finding our Edification in the Remains of this great Man. His last Words will
serve as a Support to our Faith. It was not the pleasure of God that he should
shed his Blood for the defense of his Truth; but he has made his last Words
(which are the effusion of his Spirit and of his Soul) give Testimony to those
Truths which he had preached and defended. I have, says he, labored all my
life in the search of the best Religion; and being now about to give up my Soul
to God, I do declare, That I have not found any but our own (which I have so
often defended, and in which I am now about to dye) which is the true way to
Heaven. The Words of dying men are the proper Voice of Conscience; for in that
last moment Dissimulation has no place; so that they are the Seal of all the
Truths which he has so gloriously defended. My design will not permit me to
speak all on this Subject which it were necessary you should know; I shall
leave it to some other Person, and return to the matter of our preceding
Letters.

This shall consist of one point of Antiquity, and another of Controversy. We
are to finish the History of the Christianity of the Third Age. And after we
have fortified you against the Illusions which your Seducers frame upon some
Passages of the Writings of St. Cyprian and Tertullian, on the Subject of
Repentance, Auricular Confession, and Satisfaction; I must also fortify you
against the Snares that they compose for you from the Writings of the same
Tertullian on the Subject of Tradition: for they do not fail to tell you, That
the Fathers nearest the Apostles had a great respect for the unwritten Word;
that they did often dispute against Heretics by Tradition, and that Tertullian
himself did maintain, That there was no other way of disputing against them.

But to secure you from this Snare, Learn First, That when Tertullian disputes,
and proves that which he advances by Tradition, it is almost always about
indifferent Ceremonies, and matters of practice. As in the Book concerning the
Soldiers Crown, where he proves by Tradition, the bearing of no Crown upon the
Head; of Dipping three times in Baptism; of giving Milk and Honey to be eaten
by the newly baptized; of giving Alms and Oblations for the Dead; of not
Washing seven days after Baptism. It Is true, that in his Book of Prescriptions,
from the 15th Chapter to the 22th, he proves that we may not dispute against
Heretics by the Scripture, but by the Tradition of the Churches. And he
returns to it again in the 37th and 38th Chapters thereof. But if the new
Converts which have written to us, and do send us to that Book, had read it
with some wisdom and attention of mind, they would have seen that it neither
does nor can concern us.

1. The Heretics, concerning whom the question is there, were no Christians,
they were Magicians, Disciples of Simon Magus, who retained the Name of
Christian, and no m^^^ Besides, Tertullian says plainly, Chap. 37.
That we must (...) them at a distance from the Scriptures, because being no
Christians, they did not belong to them. 2. These Heretics did not acknowledge
the Authority of the Scriptures; they rejected them, or received only some
pieces of them cut off from the rest, and which were wholly corrupt and
falsified. And when the Catholics quoted to them the Holy Scripture, they
derided it as a fabulous Writing. How then could any man dispute with them from
a Book whose Authority they did not acknowledge? there was a necessity of
having recourse to another sort of proofs.

2. That which was good in the time of Tertullian, is not good at this time of
day. I do maintain that it was then very easy, and very convenient to dispute
against Heretics by Tradition. It was then not above an hundred years since
the last of the Apostles died. There was nothing more easy than to learn what
had been their Doctrine by their Successors. It is about a hundred and fifty
years since the Reformed Church of Geneva had its existence. If the Doctrine of
Calvin were now under dispute, nothing were more easy, than to prove without
Book, that his Doctrine passed without alteration, even to those that now teach
in that Church and School. But is it the same thing, when there are 1200, 1500,
and 2000 years past? By what way can we search so far, and ascend so high
through an infinite number of Men, of whom not one has retained the Doctrine
that he did receive, in the same estate in which it was delivered to him?
Behold a very fine Comparison. 3. Add to this, that Tertullian sends us to the
Testimony of those Churches which were founded by the Apostles, because those
Churches had the Authentic Letters (as he calls them) that is to say, the
Original Writings of the Apostles; so that to send the Heretics to the
Churches, and to their Testimony, (by reason of those Authentic Letters) was
to s^^d them to the Scripture it self. 4. Besides, let these (...) and She
Converts, which have been seduced by the reading of this Book, read it from the
22 to the 32 Chap. and they will see, that the Doctrine which Tertullian would
have us search in Tradition, is the same which was contained in the Writings of
the Apostles, and not an unwritten Word, and certain Doctrines which the
Apostles did commit to the Ears and the Memories of their Successors. The
Heretics would not acknowledge the Authority of the sacred Volumes, Go to,
says Tertullian to them, lay by the Holy Bocks, and let us lay hold of
Tradition, let us see what the Bishops have taught since the Apostles, and I
will prove, that it is precisely the same Doctrine with that which is written in
our Books which you reject. Read, you that have suffered your selves to be
abused, read, I say, the 22 Chap. and those that follow, to the 27, and you
will see that the Heretics spoke exactly the same Language which your
Converters do, that we must not apply to, nor support our selves by the
Writings of the Apostles, Tertull. de Prescrip. c. 25.
That the Apostles indeed might know all, and agree in the things which they
did preach, but they did not reveal all things to all; that they said certain
things publicly and to all, but that there were other things which they said
in secret, and to a few; and that is it which St. Paul means, when he says to
Timothy, O Timothy, keep that good thing which was committed to thee. Behold
exactly the Doctrine of your Converters, and that of the ancient Heretics!
It Is that which Tertullian opposes, proving that the Apostles delivered nothing
by Tradition, but that which is written. 5. Poor silly Fools! which have
suffered your selves to be seduced by I know not what shadows and appearances,
and who put your selves to judge of Antiquity without knowing any thing
thereof. If you knew against what Heretics Tertullian disputed, you would see
that the Contrversie was not about things that were not in the Holy Scriptures.
These Heretics denied, that Jesus Christ was God, and that he was a true Man;
They said that he had no true Flesh, and that his Passion was nothing but a
Tragedy, and an appearance of a great many Phantoms; they denied the
Resurrection of the Flesh. Was there any need to recur to Tradition to prove
such things as these? Does not the Scripture contain those Truths that are
opposite to these wicked Imaginations, as clearly as Tradition? And do you not
see that Tertullian forsakes the Scriptures on this Subject only, because the
Enemies against which he disputed had forsaken them, and had no reverence for
their Authority? 6. To conclude, If there be any hard terms in this Book,
attribute them in the first place, to the heat of Dispute, which always carries
Men too far; secondly, to the Genius and African manner of Tertullian's
Expressions; and learn, that according to the same Author, Lib. Prescrip. c. 15.
One cannot prove any thing which respects the Faith but by those Letters and
Writings which are the Rule thereof. Learn by this excellent Passage of Tatian,
who was then the Judge of Controversies, and the Source and Fountain of
Instruction; it is to that he refers the manner of his becoming a Christian,
Tatian. Orat. in Graec.
As I sought every where with care, I happened on some Books of the Barbarians,
(so the Pagans call the Books of Christians and Jews) and I sound them, as to
time, much more ancient than the Philosophy of the Greeks, and much more
venerable, if we consider the Errors which are in the Grecian Books. I gave
credit to these Books, because their style was simple, and yet magnificent,
because there was nothing affected in them, because the Discourses were not
obscure, and many things to come were predicted in them: I was affected with
them because of the greatness of the Promises, and because they learned me that
there was but one Mo^^rch in the Universe. This Ancient knew not as yet the
Divinity of Monsieur de Meaux, that the first Article of Faith is, I believe
the Church, and that we ought not to believe that the Scripture is Divine, but
because the Church says so. And as to Tradition, you which suffer your selves
to be dazzled by the Words of Tertullian, ill understood, learn from the Example
of St. Cyprian, who lived in the same Age, That Tradition was at that time a
proof whereof Men made use according to the diversity of their Apprehensions,
and their Interests. Tertullian seems to make great account of it; and St.
Cyprian laughs at it, when on the subject of Heretics, which he would
re-baptize, contrary to the Practice of the Church, they objected to him
Tradition, Custom, ancient Usage and antique Practice, he rejected these Proofs
with Contempt and Scorn. Stephen had written to him, Let nothing be innovated
in Tradition. Where is this Tradition, answers he, Epist. 74.
is it in the Gospels, in the Acts, or in the Epistles? An ancient Custom,
without truth, is nothing but an old Error. And in another Epistle he says,
Epist. 63.
Since we must hear none but Jesus Christ, we need not examine what those that
went before us have done, but that which Jesus Christ has done before all; for
we must not follow the Custom of Men, but the Truth of God.

To conclude, they endeavor to put Scruples in your minds on the Question of
the pretended Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, and the Roman Church, by certain
Passages of Tertullian and St. Cyprian, either corrupted, or ill expounded. But
that is a business, the discussion whereof is too long to be handled at this
time; yea it is above the capacity of most of you: only know, that it is so far
from truth, that they did acknowledge the Sovereign Authority of the Pope in
that Age; that Tertullian makes no scruple to scoff at the Pretensions of the
Bishop of Rome, and to call him in Raillery the Bishop of Bishops, because of
some kind of Primacy which he began to pretend to. For even in that time, the
Mystery of Iniquity began to work. St. Cyprian despises the Excommunications of
Stephen Bishop of Rome, and opposes himself to the attempt of those who would
appeal to Rome about matters determined in the Provinces of Africa. This is
that St. Cyprian to whom some Persons attribute the Acknowledgment of the
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, who said on the Question of the Baptism of
Heretics, and of the Admission of Bishops which had lapsed and fallen, Epist.
72.
In which case we will do violence to no man, nor will we give Law to others,
observing that every Bishop may use the Power given him according to his Will,
in the Government of the Church, being under no Obligation to give an account
thereof to any one but the Lord. 'Twas to Stephen, Bishop of Rome, that he
spoke thus. Judge you whether he acknowledged him for his Superior. Hear how
the same Cyprian speaks in the face of a Council assembled at Carthage in the
Year 258. Let none of us call himself Bishop of Bishops, or endeavor to force
his Colleagues to a necessity of Obedience, by a tyrannical fear and terror,
seeeng every Bishop is Master of himself, and cannot be judged by another
Bishop, nor can he judge other Bishops. 'Twas also with respect to Stephen
Bishop of Rome that he spoke thus. Has any one the front to say, That speaking
thus he acknowledged him for his Superior? Observe that it was no small Affair
that was now under debate; 'twas about the Baptism of Heretics, a Question
which had made a great noise, and which Stephen would have decided with too
much Authority.

The Bishop of Meaux (after a hundred others of his Communion) to prove the
Primacy of the Pope by S. Cyprian, quotes a Passage from his fifty second
Epistle, which proves that these Gentlemen do not fear to make themselves
ridiculous, provided they may seem to say somewhat. It Is a Passage where he
pretends S. Cyprian says, That the Roman Emperor did suffer in Rome a Priest
which was his Rival, with more impatience than he suffered a Caefar in his
Armies which disputed the Empire with him; That is to say, that the Roman
Emperors did impatiently suffer that the Bishop of Rome should be called High
Priest, to the prejudice of that Dignity, which the Emperors assumed unto
themselves. So that according to this reckoning, they were jealous of the
Bishops of Rome, and looked upon them as their Rivals in the High Priesthood.
In truth this is more ridiculous than if one should say, The King of England
(who calls himself Head of the English Church) were jealous of the Curate of
the Parish of St. Martin in London. The Christians certainly were not above one
in a hundred in Rome, and the Bishops of Rome at that time made less Figure in
the World, than an Incumbent of five hundred Crowns per annum makes at this
day: for besides that they were Poor, they were also humble. What Agreement
could the Emperor, in quality of a Pagan High Priest, have with this pretended
High Priest of the Christians? To be his Rival, he must aspire to the same
thing. I should rather have chosen to have said, That the Muf^i looks on the
Patriarch of Constantinople as his Rival. The meanest Scholar knows that the
Word Aemulus which signifies Rival, signifies also Enemy; and it is clear, that
S. Cyprian means that that cruel Persecutor, the Emperor Decius, beheld with
more Indignation a Priest that opposed his Religion, than he would have looked
upon an Enemy that had disputed the Empire with him. To conclude, although St.
Cyprian should have intended to compare the Bishop of Rome with the Pagan
High Priest, it would not follow that the Bishop of Rome was Head of all the
Christians in the World; for the Roman Priest was not Head but of the Religion
of the City of Rome, and not of the whole Empire.

It Is true that St. Cyprian corrupted the Idea of the Church, and opened a door
to the most cruel Doctrine that ever was advanced: he made a false Idea of the
Unity of the Church, which he encloses in one only external Communion. And
because the Unity of one visible Head was not yet invented, he imagined I know
not what Unity of Episcopacy, which all the Bishops did individually possess;
whereof nevertheless they all administered but a part. This inconsistent
Imagination gave place afterward for the Substitution of one single Head, to
the end that a visible Head might be given to the Unity of the visible
Communion, which might be the center thereof. This suffices to give you an Idea
of the Christianity of the Third Age; and by this History you may observe what
was altered in Doctrine or Worship.

1. They introduced the use of the Sign of the Cross, at least in private; for
we find it not as yet in the public Acts of Religion. We have said nothing to
you concerning it as yet, because it is a little thing, about which we should
never make Complaints against any one provided they be not superstitious in the
use of it.

2. The Liturgy of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, was augmented and increased
exceedingly by many Prayers, so that it became very long; whereas it was plain
and short in the first and second Age.

3. There they added, particularly, Oblations and Prayers for the Dead.

4. To Baptism they added Unction, whereof has been made a Sacrament by it
self: they added there also Milk and Honey, which they gave to the newly
baptized, and some other unprofitable Ceremonies.

5. They appointed two days of Fasting and Regular Prayers every week: in some
Places Wednesdays and Fridays, and in other Places Thursdays and Saturdays; and
it is from thence the two Fish-days came, viz. Friday and Saturday, according to
the use of the Roman Church.

6. They increased their rigor of Discipline, on the one hand ordaining long
Penances to Sinners; and it is from thence that the Doctrine of Humane
Satisfactions had its birth.

7. On the other hand, they loosened the rigor of this Discipline with respect
to some single persons, by reason of the value they had for the Letters of
Intercession written by the Martyrs; and it is from thence that Indulgences have
their original, and the application of the merit of Saints to those who have
not enough of their own.

8. They began to put a value upon Tradition; and from thence came insensibly a
contempt of the Holy Scripture.

9. They introduced a false Idea of the Church and its Unity, by which they put
out of the Communion of Jesus Christ, not only Heretics erring in the
Foundation, but all Societies bespotted with Error, though never so little:
this is that which has produced so many bloody Divisions, so many Anathema's,
unjust Excommunications, Hatreds and Quarrels.

Add all these Alterations to those which we have already observed in the
second Age, and you will see, that the exterior face of Worship was already
wholly changed, although the interior had not yet received any considerable
Alteration: but this change in the exterior part did afterward wholly ruin
the interior, in such a manner, that we cannot deny but from the Third Age
Christianity has received a considerable Alteration. When they had dressed up
the Eucharist after the manner of a Sacrifice, it was not difficult to fall
into a persuasion that it was one indeed. When they had introduced the words
Merit and Satisfaction, they soon after changed the first sense and meaning of
them. When they had established Prayers for the Dead, it was a good step
leading to the Opinion of Purgatory. When they had clothed the Sacrament with
so many pompous Ceremonies, that did insensibly dispose men's minds to search
more than Bread in the matter of it.

An Article of Controversy. Reflections on a Writing newly sent to the
Churches of France. A continuation of the matter concerning the Unity of the
Church.
HAving finished our Article of Antiquity, it were convenient to engage in that
of Controversy; and we should have done it without any delay, if we had not
met in our way a Writing, Entitled, Charitable Advice to comfort the
Conscience of those that are obliged to conform themselves to the Worship of
the Roman Church; taken from the Letter of a private Person to his Friends.
This dangerous Letter has a design exactly opposite to ours; we would awaken
you; this would lay you to sleep, and persuade you, that the Superstitions they
oblige you to practice cannot hurt you, yea that they may serve you, provided
that you make them means of uniting your selves to God. That which makes the
Poison of this Writing the more dangerous is, That there is mingled in it a
character and appearance of Humility, Piety, and Devotion. We are informed,
That Persons, who to make themselves acceptable at Court do design to bring you
to a Submission to your Persecutors, have sent you many Copies thereof: so that
we have all sorts of reason to fortify you against the peril unto which this
pernicious Writing may thrust Persons who have already too much inclination to
flatter and lay themselves to rest. It shall not be by refuting the Reasons of
this Author, that we will defend you against him; it shall be by making him
known unto you. That will suffice to learn you what credit you ought to give to
the Principles of such a Doctor; you must know therefore, that he is none of
your ancient Pastors, that has thus written to you. It Is true, that the Author
of this Letter had sometimes this Character, but he renounced it many years
since, to put himself in the Arms of a certain Hypocondriack Woman called
Anthoniette de Bourignon. This Woman conceiving there was not already Sects
enough amongst Christians, had it in her Head to make another. And moreover,
Persons of her Sex having not been accustomed to be Foundr^sses of Religions,
she thought that hers would make her considerable in the World by the
singularity of its Original. With great appearance of Devotion (which is seen
in all hypocondriack and doting persons) she puts her self upon Preaching to
the World, by eighteen or twenty Volumes of Writings, which she either caused
to be printed during her Life, or left to be printed after her Death. In these
Works, besides Christian Verities, and particularly what appertains to
Morality, which she has adorned happily enough in some Particulars, she puts
off a thousand paradoxical Visions, and a thousand empty Dreams against the
Truths which are received by Divines. Mr. P. Author of the Writing of which we
are now discoursing, more through weakness of Mind than corruption of Heart,
put himself into this Sect, and is become the Head thereof. Thirteen Volumes of
his may be seen, which without doubt do explicate and much promote the
mysteries of his Mistress. It will suffice to learn you what is the character
of these Gentlemen, by giving you some draughts of their Religion, drawn from
that very Writing which has been sent unto you. First of all, Their Opinion is
to have nothing, to be fond of no body, to entertain among them Papists,
Lutherans, Remonstrants, the Reformed, Socinians, Mennonites, Anabaptists. All
are there welcome, without being obliged either to change their Opinions or
Practices, if they think fit to retain them. But also their Religion is, to
practice nothing externally. They go neither to Sermons, nor to Mass; they
perform no exercise of Religion, neither public nor private. They have no
Assemblies, as other Sects among Christians. If the humor takes them, they will
go this day to Mass, and to morrow to the Church of the Reformed; but that does
not happen, it may be, once in a year, nor peradventure once in all their Life,
for they do profess a very mean opinion and a great indifference for the
exercises of Piety, looking on them as things without, which are of no use any
further than the intention and manner of using them (to rectify the Mind and
Conscience) makes them profitable, yea they do more hurt than good, because
they draw the Soul out of it self. I believe that they have in this a great
correspondence with the Followers of Dr. Molini, whom they call Quietists, and
who make a very great noise in Italy. They reproach the Pastors excessively,
and under an appearance of Zeal, there is nothing which they do not say, to
make odious and contemptible both the public Ministry and those that exercise
it, in the one and other Religion. This may be seen in the Writings of their
Foundr^ss, Anthoniette de Bourignon. They perform no private Exercises of
Devotion in their houses, at least, which are visible: for Mr. P. himself has
made known to the Public, that Madam Meiselle de Bourignon had no Prayers in
her Family unless it were at Table; and yet he observes, that that also was
done with a low Voice, not that they do not permit the use of Prayers to such
as will, as they permit them to go to Sermons, or to Mass indifferently: but
those which are perfect among them do not concern themselves about it. And one
of the Principles of Mr. P. is, That Desires, Prayers, Elevations of Heart
toward God, and Meditation, are perfectly contrary to the Spirit of perfect
Christianity, and hinder the descent of the holy Spirit, and the coming of his
Grace. According to him, the only estate proper to draw down the holy Spirit,
is that which he calls a state of Inaction, by which, in a privation of
Prayers, Desires, and Motions, a man lets himself fall into nothing. And this
annihilation of all the Faculties, is that acceptable Sacrifice to God which
causes a descent of the Holy Spirit. They have perpetually those Words in their
mouth, Let all Creatures keep silence, and let God speak; by which they
signify, not only that we ought to impose silence on our Passions, that we may
hear God, which is very true, but also that we ought to shut the doors to all
external Objects, and to lay all our internal Faculties asleep, to procure a
kind of Ecstasy, which whilst it continues, God speaks to the Heart
immediately, and by himself. Behold one of the Dreams of this Sect; whereof you
will see some footsteps scattered here and there throughout the whole Letter;
for this is the meaning of those Humiliations, Annihilations, and internal acts
of Adherence to God which you are there exhorted to make.

Behold another Dream of these diseased Minds, which is read also in this
Writing, in the fourth Page thereof, and the second Column: Moreover, says he,
it must be remembered, that it is said in the Gospel, That all things are
possible to him that believes, That Faith can remove Mountains, and that Jesus
Christ always said to Men, Be it unto you according to your Faith. So that if
those which officiate, and assist at the Celebration of the Eucharist, do
believe that Jesus Christ is present there, this Faith is ratified by God, and
it engages him (beyond his Word and his Promises) to make himself present, as
it is believed; and this is a Conception so clear, that I do not doubt but you
will comprehend the force thereof. Must not he have a besotted mind to call
this a clear Conception? I will explain it to you. One of the Opinions of this
mysterious Cabala is, that originally God created Man master of all things, in
the literal signification of the Words, so that he was able to stop the Sun in
his course, to remove the Globe of the Earth, to remove Mountains, etc. and the
Instrument by which he does this, or could do it, is his Faith; for all things
are possible to him that believes, without any Figure, or Exceptions. The state
of Perfection to which Christ calls us, is that of Faith, which makes all
things possible to us: so that, at this day, to overturn the order of the
World, you have no more to do, but to believe that you can do it, and it shall
be done; for it is precisely in the literal sense that they would have us
understand the words of Christ, If you had Faith but as a grain of
Mustard Seed, you should say to this Mountain, be thou removed and cast into
the Sea, and it would be done. And that it was not a Privilege of the
Apostles, but for all Believers. Behold that admirable Conception which he
tells you is so clear, that it is impossible you should not understand the
force thereof. If you don't understand its strength, at least you will
understand the convenience of it; for when it shall please you to believe that
Christ is corporeally present in your Andiron, and in the Mantle-tree of your
Chimney, it will be so; and by that means, without going out of your
Chimney-corner, you will go to Mass, and every one of you, by his Faith, will
consecrate and transubstantiate all the Utensils of his House.

In the same Writing you will find another Dream, which to me seems yet more
ridiculous. It Is in the sixth Page, and the second Column, on the Subject of
Purgatory. Then when it happens that a Soul departs this Life in the love of
God, having nevertheless some impurities and evil habits in it self, the Blood
of Jesus Christ, or the purifying Grace of Jesus Christ which comes after death
into this Soul to purify it, or to finish its purification from all sin,
finding there, as yet, more or less of the remainders of Evil, and of evil
Habits and Inclinations, fights with them that he may expel them; this Combat
of the purifying Grace of Jesus Christ against the evil which is in a Soul very
sensible, which he would cleanse from all the remainders of Sin, is not done,
nor can be, without great and sensible sorrows. Is not this very singular, That
when a Soul is separated from his Body, the blood of Jesus Christ should thrust
it self in there, (like Sand to scour) to cleanse this Soul, which is an
occasion of quick and pungent Sorrows. Surely Mr P. could not have done better
to excite the curiosity of the Public, than to give us this little spark of
his Mysteries. This also will be worth something to his Printer; for I am
assured, that the Curious of France would at any rate whatsoever see a complete
Systeme of this admirable Theology.

However it be, it is not without a particular Providence that it happens, that
in a Writing, otherwise apt enough to flatter the minds of our Nicodemites, the
Author has sufficiently discovered himself, and made known what he is. After
this, my Brethren, judge what credit you ought to give a man, who gives you an
Idea of Piety according to which the Israelites might worship the Golden Calf
without fault, because they believed it to be God; according to which, a Man
may be a Turk, and adore even Cabages, provided he makes use of them as a means
of uniting him to God, and to excite his Love. These Gentlemen desire of us to
leave them in peace; let them leave us so then, and let them not intermeddle to
give Advice to our Congregations, being not called thereto. With all my heart,
I am willing to leave them at rest, for I take no pleasure to trouble any body;
and I will leave them in their Retirement very peaceably, provided they put
themselves into a state of Inaction, as well in respect to us as to God; but if
they continue to trouble us, the Dispute may have an Issue which will not turn
to their honor.

This Digression, which has been longer than I could have wished, will be the
cause that we cannot proceed far in the Article of Controversy. We are on the
true Idea of Unity. The last part of our preceding Letter was employed in
refuting the false Idea of Unity. We have made it appear, that it is a foolish
and cruel Opinion to shut up Salvation in any single Communion, and that of all
the Sects of Christianity, that of Rome has the least right to pretend to it.
The Bishop of Meaux brags much of four or five Passages of St. Cyprian, to
prove this cruel Paradox. This ancient Doctor goes so far as to say, Lib. de
Vnitate.
That there can be no Martyr but in the Church; that when a man is separated
from its Unity, it is in vain that he sheds his blood for the Confession of
Christ Jesus. This Maxim, in a large signification, may be endured; for indeed
there may be Heretics, who confessing the Name of Jesus Christ, but on the
other side ruining the Foundations of the Christian Religion, may dye for the
Religion of Jesus Christ to no advantage: but the Application which S. Cyprian
makes thereof, is one of those faults over which wise men ought to draw a
Curtain. He proceeds so far as to apply it to the Novatians. Now it must be
known, these Novatians were good Christians, a thousand times better than are
the Papists, seeing they did not ruin any of the Foundations, but retained and
believed all the Christian Verities: only they were something severe in
Discipline, and would not receive those that fell in times of Persecution to
the Peace of the Church. Was not this a great crime? Was not this a fine
occasion to say, as Cyprian did, That a Novation was no Christian? Was not this
a very fine Foundation for that terrible and cruel Sentence, That a Novation
dying a Martyr for Jesus Christ, was nevertheless damned? Of what make and
constitution are the Doctors of the Roman Church, that make use of these
Excesses, which ought to be hid out of Honor to those great men which fell into
them. These are Scars remaining in their Flesh, to the end that we should not
exalt them too much by reason of their great Virtues. Behold, my Brethren, the
eye wherewith Mr. de Meaux looks on you: he, for your sakes, makes use of the
eyes which St. Cyprian had for the Novatians, concerning whom he said, A
Novatian is out of the Church, he is no Christian. So says Mr. de Meaux
concerning you, The Calvinists are out of the Church, and are no Christians.
And why then, Gentlemen, do you address to us Pastoral Letters? Why do you call
us your wandering Brethren? Will you dare to say, that we are no Christians? Let
these Writers of Pastoral Letters, says Mr. de Meaux, who shroud themselves
with some shreds of S. Cyprian, take all his Doctrine entire. Go to Mr. you may
say unto him, If you find the Doctrine of S. Cyprian so good, why don't you
take it whole and entire? Why don't you say that all the Greeks and all the
Christians of the East are not Christians? Dare you say that all the Greeks
which have been martyred by the Turks and Saracens since the Tenth Age are
damned, and that they did not suffer Martyrdom although they suffered for Jesus
Christ? For my part, I am persuaded, that if you press your Converters on this
Subject with their Passages of St. Cyprian, they will blush on both Cheeks.
Remember therefore, with respect to St. Cyprian, that the love which he had for
the Peace of the Church, and the horror that he had for Schism, ran him into
that excess, to believe, or say, That out of that, I know not what, exterior
Unity of the Church, a man could not be saved. 'Twas in this Age that men began
to corrupt the Idea of the Church, as I have already observed.

To what will all this come, and what profit will you draw thence, my Brethren?
It Is that thereby you will prove to your Converters the falseness of this
Doctrine, That the Unity of the Church is included in the Roman Church, that
out of this Church, or in any other private Communion, there is no Salvation;
and thereby you will convince them, that they are not infallible: for if this
Article be false* That the Roman Church alone possesses that Unity, she has
erred, and that in an important and capital Affair. You will also thereby
convince them, That the Roman Religion is the most cruel, and the most damnable
of all the Sects of Christianity, forasmuch as it condemns the most men: For by
defming that she alone possesses saving Unity, and by condemning all those that
are not in this Unity, she damns three fourth parts of the Christian World. And
to conclude, you will establish your selves in a holy confidence, that by
being, or having been, out of the Roman Communion you have not been out of the
Unity, and you have not shut the door of Salvation upon your selves, since
Salvation is not included precisely in the Roman Communion, and that saving
Unity is not shut up within the circle of any certain Communion.

On the Subject of this Unity, you will desire me, without doubt, that I will
furnish you wherewithal to answer the Question which your Converters will put
to you. In what then does the Unity of the Church consist, if it does not
consist in adherence to such and such Pastors? Answer them, my Brethren, That
this Unity consists, 1. In the Unity of Spirit, forasmuch as God and the Spirit
are the Soul of all Christian Communions which do retain the fundamental
Truths. 2. In the Unity of Doctrine, which is one through all the World where
Jesus Christ is purely taught. 3. In the Unity of Sacraments, which are the
same every where, where they have been preserved and not corrupted.
Let Churches be separated, and set at a distance one from another as far as
the Antipodes are from us, let them have no knowledge one of another, They will
not cease to be one by this triple Unity of Spirit, Doctrine, and Sacraments.
If there were a pure Church in the farthest part of Ethiopia, or in the utmost
part of China, we should be one Church with them, though we had never heard any
thing said one of another. It is not therefore the Unity of Ceremonies, of
Worship, Discipline, and Pastors, which makes the Essential Unity; that is an
accidental Unity, which a man may break without going out of the true Unity. So
the Novatians which were separated from the Church for a little unhappy point
of Discipline, were in the wrong no doubt, and greatly in the wrong, and
Novatian above all, who was the first Author of that Separation. But it is a
ridiculous Chimera, to imagine that they were out of the Essential Unity,
seeing that when they went away, they carried with them the true Jesus, the
true Doctrine, and the true Sacraments. They were yet the Church; they were
Christians, whatever St. Cyprian says of them: and not only their Martyrs
obtained the Crown of Martyrdom, but their penitent Christians obtained
Salvation, although they died in Schism. There are particular Unities, and a
general Unity. Particular Unity consists in certain Bonds, such as are common
Ecclesiastic Government, common Discipline, and certain common Ceremonies. You
are not in particular Unity with the Episcopal Church of England with respect
to Government. But this Unity signifies nothing to Salvation: he must be a mad
man to damn Christians because they either have or have not Bishops. The
general Unity, which consists in the three things which I have said, is the
only essential, necessary, and saving Unity. If you agree with the Church in
Government, Discipline, and Ceremonies, and don't agree with it in Opinions, in
Sacraments, and Spirit, you have no Communion with it; if you differ in
Government and Discipline, and agree in Truths, Sacraments, and the same Jesus,
you are at Unity. with it, and with God.

This Unity of the Church, whereof we have now discoursed, makes me think of
that unity of Souls which ought to prevail among the true Members of the Body
of Christ. It is the Character under which the Apostolic Church is described
unto us, They were all of one heart, and one mind. It Is this holy Unity which
draws down the holy Spirit; for when the fiery Tongues fell upon the Apostles,
they were all with one accord assembled in one place. It Is the absence of this
holy Unity which in part has drawn down those unhappy Effects of the Wrath of
God under which we now groan. Call to mind the Divisions, the immortal Hatreds,
Jealousies, Quarrels, and Strifes, which have been seen in the midst of you,
even on occasions, and in things, for which Peace, and the Spirit of Charity
were particularly requited. One was of Paul, another of Peter, but not one for
Jesus Christ. Men made their own Passions and Interests to triumph, and
trampled under foot the Glory of God, and the public Edification. The
strictest friendships were always ready to break on the first transport of
Passion. The Spirit of Vengeance had no rest, till it had revenged the Injuries
it thought it had received; and we knew not what it was to sacrifice a
resentment to the Love of God, and his Christ. God has made these civil Wars to
cease by a cruel and strange War. You have a common tie more than you have had:
you have had the same Faith, the same Sacraments, the same Churches, and the
same Holy Table; besides, you have at this day your common Affliction, and your
common Misfortunes. It Is certain, that even in the World this makes a tie among
Souls, and it should do, with far greater reason, when men suffer the same
grief, for the same cause, and for the same God. You ought mutually to love
each other, because you are afflicted for God; and by consequence, you ought to
love those also who suffer for you: they are your Confessors, who have the
glory to maintain, in the Prisons, those Truths with you have been so weak only
to keep close in your Hearts, having not the courage to show them openly. Among
those which are in diverse Prisons of the Realm, for the Cause of God, there are
an infinite number that want all things: these are Voices that cry against you
to Heaven in a terrible manner, and say, What a shame is it that Jesus Christ
is in Prison, that he is Sick, Hungry, and Thirsty, that he freezes with cold
during the rigor of the Winter, and that these Peter's, who grew pale at the
word of a Servant, don't go to visit him, to give him Bread and Clothes. You
know what will be the Sentence that the Lord will give to such; think of it,
and partake-in the Bonds of your Brethren, though they be at the utmost ends of
the Kingdom.

Feb. 1. 1687.
The TWELFTH PASTORAL LETTER. AN Article of Antiquity. The beginning of the
History of Christianity of the Fourth and Fifth Ages. Of the Original of Monks.
An Article of Controversy. Of the Unity of the Ministry.
HAving finished the History of the Christianity of the Third Age, we enter
upon the Fourth. We shall not distinguish that of the Fourth and Fifth, they
are so interwoven, that they cannot be separated. All the Superstitions, false
Worship, and Corruptions of Discipline, which are found established in the
Fifth Age, took their beginning in the Fourth. We enter upon Ages in which the
Church had entirely changed its Face; it is no longer a persecuted Church; it
triumphs, it reigns, it ascends the Throne. The Emperors becoming Christians,
drew along with them by their Authority and Examples, an infinite number of
Pagans, who had that Complaisance and Civility for their Masters, as to become
Christians. But the Church also on her part, had the Complaisance to burden
Religion with vain Worship and Ceremonies borrowed from Paganism: All that
which she thought might be innocently taken from thence, she took to draw them
over to her. The Bishops enriched by the Liberality of Constantine and his
Successors, became proud, they would have a distinct Jurisdiction from the
Civil; they established for themselves Tribunals. It appears by the Book of
Constitutions, falsely ascribed to the Apostles, that the Bishops had
Flatterers which said of them, or rather they said of themselves, many
incredible, proud, and impertinent things. Vit. Constable. lib. 2. cap. 37, and 38.
They set themselves above Kings; they said that they must pay them Tributes
and Tenths, and that Men owed them greater Honors than Kings, and that they had
power to condemn to everlasting Fire. Above all, the Pomp and Pride of the
Bishops of Rome, that ruling City, became such, that they gave jealousy to the
Chief Magistrates of the Empire.

They added to the Sacraments new Ceremonies, an Unction before Baptism, beside
that which followed after it; the Prayers and Ceremonies of the Liturgy of the
Eucharist, which they call at this day the Mass, were much increased and
augmented; they made use of Holy Waters; they consecrated Oils and Chrism;
their Funerals were enriched with Ceremonies borrowed from Judaism or Paganism;
they had their Ninth day, their Fortieth day, and their yearly Obits or Prayers
for the Dead; they affixed Prayers to certain hours, which at this day they
call Canonical, the Cock crowing, Nine of the Clock, Midday, Three of the
Clock, and Vespers. In these Ages they did essentially alter Divine Service, by
intermingling therewith the Service of Creatures. A kind of Fury for Relics
seized on the Spirits of Men, nothing was heard to be spoken of but Visions, by
which they had been discovered, and Miracles which had been done by them; they
carried them in pomp, they kissed them, and built Churches to them; They prayed
unto Saints, they relied upon their Intercession, they put themselves under
their protection. To conclude, as the time of the manifestation of the Man of
Sin drew near, and Christianity to be established, all things moved to wards it
with prodigious speed.

There was nevertheless a profound divine Providence which appeared then, and
deserves to be admired, and to which we can never give sufficient attention.
Antichristianity, which then advanced it self, was not to ruin Christianity,
nor overturn the Foundations thereof. It was to be built upon those Foundations
which were to remain entire from Age to Age. To set these Foundations of
Christian Religion in security, God permitted that they should be violently
assaulted by Heretics, and zealously defended by the Orthodox. The Arrians
denied the Eternal Godhead of the Son; the Macedonians that of the Holy
Spirit; the Nestorians gave him two Persons as well as two Natures, that is to
say, they renewed the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, and Photinus, who made a
simple or mere Man of Christ Jesus. This is a thing which some Persons at this
time have not well considered, who excuse Nestorius and his Heresy. It seems
to me, that it is easy to comprehend, that he which places a human Person in
Christ, makes of him a mere Man: For if the joining the Divine Nature be not
made in a personal Union, it can be no more than a Union of Grace and
Assistance, such as is that of inspired Men. The Eutychians, by an opposite
Error, confound the two Natures. All these Heresies gave opportunity for the
clearing these matters, and setting the Foundations of the Christian Religion
in great light and in lovely order, and fortifying them with the consent of all
Christians. This is it which produced diverse Creeds besides that of the
Apostles, which is too general. If Providence had not taken this care and
precaution, Antichristianity, which came a great pace, had entirely ruined the
Christian Religion; for besides these Fundamentals, whereof God had taken care
and set them in safety, in three or four Ages their remained nothing else sound
in the Church.

We will not therefore busy our selves in reckoning all the Changes which
happened in Religion during these Ages, that would carry us too far, and would
not be peradventure very profitable for you; we will stay our selves only on
the most considerable Innovations: For example, we ought not to forget, that it
was in the Fourth and Fifth Age that Monastic Life had its Original. Those
among the Doctors of the Roman Church which will grant us nothing, make it
descend from Elijab, the Rechabites, John the Baptist, and the Apostles; but
this Opinion is so difficult to be maintained, that I do not know whether, at
this day, any Men of Learning, which make any pretense to sincerity, will deny
that this kind of Life had Paul and Anthony for its first Authors, who during
the Persecutions of Dioclesian in the beginning of the Fourth Age, or about the
end of the Third, withdrew themselves into the Desert of Thebais, and were
followed thither by many Men, and there began that which they call the
Eremetick Life. It must be, that this truth is plain in History, since many
Doctors of the Roman Religion, notwithstanding the Interest they have to
maintain the antiquity of this Institution, do confess that it is but of the
Third and Fourth Age. It Is a long while since that Polid. Virg. lib. Invent. 7.
cap. 1.
Polidore Virgil, Bishop of Vrbin proved it; and in our days Mr. d' Auteserre,
Professor of Law at Toulouse, not only confesses it, but proves it by the
Testimonies of S. Hierome, Ascet. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Cassian, and Sozomon, and indeed he must be ignorant
in Antiquity, or very knavish, that will not own it; and you may reckon this as
a thing certain, since it is confessed by Popish Authors ^t this day, and by S.
Hierome who lived in the Age when Monkery had its original, and who was one of
the most zealous Lovers of Monastic Life that ever was. It Is true, that in the
preceding Ages, the Fathers tell us of Virgins consecrated to God; yea, and of
Men who preserved their Virginity, and lived in a chaste Celibate, to the end
they might serve God with greater freedom; but this has nothing common with
the Life of the Monks and Nuns of the present Age. These young Damsels were
not cloystered; it appears by S. Cyprian Cyprian Epist. 72.
, that they might marry when they pleased, that they lived with their Friends,
or in their own Houses. And even in the time of S. Jerome the most part of them
were so little restrained, that they made and received Visits, they went to
Weddings, they were found at Feasts, they went to the Baths, they adorned
themselves with the same Pride and the same Excess as did the Daughters of the
World.

Paul and Anthony having been driven by Persecutions into the Deserts, did
there first establish the Hermetick Life: Afterward they formed there some
kind of Convents and Societies. So they instituted in the Desert a kind of
Cenobitick Life; but this kind of Life received its most perfect Figure about
the end of the Fourth Age, by three Bishops, whereof two were Heretics, and
the third Orthodox; one of these Heretics was Marathon Socr. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Bishops of Nicomedia an Arrian and a Macedonian: The other Heretic was
Eustachius of Sebaste in Armenia, a semi-Arrian, deposed by the Arrians, the
eldest of all those who made Rules for the Cenobitick Life Sozom. lib. 3. cap.
14.
The Orthodox was S. Basil Bishop of Cesaria in Capadocia: This last drew the
Monks from the Desert, under pretense of confuting the Arrians, he formed
Societies of them near Cities, and gave them Rules: It Is he which the Greek
Monks at this day acknowledge for their Author; and there are no Monks of any
other Order in the East, but of that of S. Basil, whereas in the West there is
an infinity of Orders.

We doubt not many of those, and these, who in the beginning engaged themselves
in this kind of Life, did do it with a good intention, yea, and there led a
Life eminently Holy: But as God does not bless Institutions which respect
Religion, which are but humane, we may observe that the Spirit of Darkness, and
we may say, a Spirit of Malediction, fell upon this Institution, even from its
beginning. It was not above a hundred years after there had been discourse of
Monks and Nuns, but the Spirit of Fables, and Legends had seized on their
Societies. S. Jerome has left us the Life of Paul and Hilarion, two Founders
of the Monastic Life: These Lives are written in good Latin, but with so
little judgment and truth, that we may be ashamed thereof, for the sake of so
great a man. There is the Life of S. Anthony attributed to Athanasius, which is
also a Spiritaal Romance, made up of Stories which do no Honor neither to S.
Anthony nor S. Athanasius, nor in general to the Christian Religion. I know not
what Spirit of Fanaticism and Melancholy, does mingle it self therein; they
had, or they feigned themselves to have Visions, the Devils appeared to them,
they tempted and solicited them to fleshly Sins, and when they could not
prevail upon them, they beat them cruelly. The Abbot Serenus in Cassian says,
Cass. Collat. 7. cap. 23.
, As soon as we have formed a Convent of Eight or Ten Monks, the fury of the
Devil rages in such a manner against them, that they experience his Assaults
very frequently, and in a plain and obvious manner, for which reason, they dare
not sleep all together, but whilst some sleep others watch. To this may be
joined a Spirit of Superstition, which produces Excesses, some whereof are
capable of horror and astonishment. A Monk named Batteus Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 34.
, mortified himself through Fasting to that degree and measure, what Worms were
bred in his Gums, and came out of his Teeth; another named Cyrus Ibid.
, lived Seventy years without tasting any Bread. Another named Acepsemus Theod.
lib. 4. cap. 28.
, lived Sixty years shut up in a Cell, never going out, or being seen of any
one. One named Macarius Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 23.
, during the space of Twenty years lived by Bread and Water, he did eat and
drink by weight, he fastened his Body by night to a Wall that he might not
sleep. Another called Dorotheus Sozom. lib. 6. cap. 29.
, made it a thing necessary, and a part of Devotion, never to stretch out his
Legs upon his Bed. Another called Didymus, lived to the Age of Ninety years
without speaking to, or seeing any Person. Another named Pior Ibid. 6.
, having made a Vow never to see any Person; his Sister, after Fifty years,
passionately longed to see him, and he was obliged by his Superiors to give her
that satisfaction. He came therefore and presented himself at the Door of his
Sister, he made himself seen to her, but he shut his Eyes that he might not see
her, and after he had repeated certain Psalms he went his way. Another Surnamed
Stilites Evag. lib 1. cap. 13.
, (because of the Pillar on which he lived) spent Thirty Seven years thereon.
And many afterward in imitation of him did the same things, and obtained the
Surname of Stilites. Niceph. lib. 11.
Amonius, a Companion of S. Anthony, being chosen Bishop, cut off his Ear, to
the end that he might not be so, and declared he would cut out his Tongue if
they pressed him farther thereon. A Monk named Thomas Soz. lib. 6.
, an Inhabitant of Thebais, lived Thirty years without speaking. Another Monk
named Paul Ibid.
, in his Devovotions imposed a necessity upon himself of making three Hundred
Prayers to God every day, and that he might not miscount, he had three Hundred
little Flints, whereof he threw one out of his Bosom at every Prayer that he
made. Behold what was the Character of the Monks of the Fourth Age, and behold
that which at this time men report to the Honor of these poor Idiots, which did
pass for great Saints, or of these Hypocrites which did impose upon mankind.

But can a Man read without horror that which Evagrius reports concerning the
customs and manner of Life of the Monks of Jerusalem, in the time that the
Empress Eudoxia Wife of Theodosius the younger went thither? Some of them made
a War upon themselves so cruel, that oftentimes they remained upon the ground
without appearance of Life, and were taken for unburied Carcases; others lodged
themselves in Holes where they could neither lie nor stand; others hid
themselves in Caves, and made it a piece of Devotion to live among wild Beasts;
others, both Men and Women, stripped themselves naked, covering only their
shameful Parts, and in this nakedness exposed themselves to be roasted in the
Beams of the Sun from Morning to Evening in the Summer, and in the Winter they
continued in the same estate, exposing themselves to the severest rigors of
cold, they ate nothing of what Men do use to eat, they fed on Grass like Oxen,
they were also called Boscoi, i. e. Eaters of Herbs; and in time they became
altogether like Beasts, not preserving the very appearance of Men, and human
shape; if they saw Men afar off, they ran to hide themselves, as from Bears in
some Cave, or they secured themselves upon Rocks with the swiftness of a wild
Goat. But all this is nothing in comparison of what Evagrius adds, There are
Monks who to make it appear, that they had extinguished Concupiscence,
conversed in the World promiscuously, Men and Women all naked, they went into
Brothel Houses, into the most infamous places, they lay together both Men and
Women, the Men bathed themselves with Women, and Women with Men, and all this
in public view without Shame, and without covering their Faces. Besides the
Madness, is there not Impudence in these Devotions, and must not a Man have a
depraved taste in matters of Piety, to look on these Extravagancies with
admiration, as at that time they did?

Besides all this, the Spirit of Lying and Error seized on these Men; a Man may
say truly, that all the Depravations of the Christian Religion did take their
Original from Monks. In the Fifth and Sixth Age they became Anthropomorphites,
and Originists; and those who have any knowledge of the History of the Church,
do know, that they stirred up many Troubles there. They maintained their
Opinion and their Friends, not only by Words and Clamors, but by Blows.
Socrates reports, that during the Controversies that Cyril Bishop of Alexandria
had with Orestes Governor of Egypt, Soc. lib. 11. cap. 14.
, five Hundred Monks came from the Mountain Nitria to the City, for the
assistance of Cyril their Bishop: They stirred up a Sedition against the
Governor; one of these Monks, called Ammonius, gave him a knock on the Head
with a Flint, whereby he lost a great deal of Blood. There are no Heresies or
Superstitions, of which they may not be called the Authors, it is they which
introduced the Superstition of invocating Saints and adoring Relics. Eunapius
a Pagan Author, who lived at the end of the Fourth Age, says, That in Egypt
they appointed Monks in the Village Cannopus to worship Slaves; so they called
the Martyrs. And S. Austin, in the Book concerning the Work of Monks, says,
That in his time a Swarm of Monks scattered themselves abroad every where, and
made Merchandise of the Bones of Martyrs. It was they who brought Images into
the Church, and that Worship which gives so much Grief to Souls, which are
jealous of the Love of God, and so much Scandal to Christians. Also in the War
between the Breakers of Images, and the Worshipers of Images, they were the
principal Agents. The Monks at this day think it an Honor to acquaint us with
the Combats, and the Travels which the Men of their Order have sustained to
hinder the Worship of Images from falling. 'Twas in the Convent of Corbie, and
in the Brains of Paschasius the Monk, that the Opinion of Transubstantiation
had its Birth. When that new sort of Monks which are called Mendicants came
into the World; a Man cannot tell the Evils which they caused there, the
Superstitions that they brought, and the Corruptions which they introduced into
it. It is from them that those Excesses (whereof the honest Men of the Church
of Rome themselves, at this day, have an abhorrence) took their Original: These
Excesses, say I, which respect the Worship of the blessed Virgin, the
Invocation of Saints, and the Adoration of Images and Relics; Excesses which
are gone so high by the assistance of the Monks, that all which is most odious
in Pagan Idolatry, did never go beyond it. It Is that whereof your Converters
themselves are at an Agreement with us, it is of that which they tell you that
we ought to make no use, that we ought not to impute those things to the
Church, which were the foolish imaginations of the Friars of the last Ages, and
the Devotions of Monks, as they themselves call them, and that honest Men did
never approve. It Is a thing far enough from Truth, that the Church of Rome
never approved these Excesses. But it is not a thing upon which we have any
p^rpose to stay at present: It is sufficient for you that it is evil by the
confession of your Converters, and that this Corruption took its original from
Monks.

They are the same Men which have dishonored Christianity by a an Historical
Theology more shameful and fabulous than was that of the Pagans and Poets: It Is
to them that we owe the Legends, the Lives of Saints, the Ch^onicles, and
Annals, the Orders of S. Francis, the Jacobites, and the Carmelites, in which
Works, the least trace of Truth and Purity is not to be seen, but a heap of
ridiculous Fictions, impertinent Miracles, and filthy Fables, whereof at this
day Men of the Character of Canus Bishop of the Canaries, and de Launoy are
ashamed, and make no scruple to confute them in all their Shapes and Forms. Do
not these Gentlemen also confess, that the Monks have been always the
Instruments of the Violence of Popes, and the Incendiaries of Christendom? They
were the Men that preached the Croisades against pretended Heretics: 'Twas
they that kindled the Fires, and committed the Massacres: They were those that
mutinied the People against those Kings and Emperors that would not obey the
Pope: They were they that seized on the Rights of Bishops, and favored the
Pope in all those ways whereof he served himself to oppress the other Bishops.
They have withdrawn themselves from the Authority of their Ordinances, by
Immunities obtained in the Court of Rome. They have withdrawn Confessions from
the ordinary Pastors: They were the Masters of the Chairs, and public Teachers
during the space of four Hundred or five Hundred Years. To conclude, it is
certain they have always been the most potent Supports of that Throne of
Iniquity which has raised it self in the Church.

For their Manners, I can make it appear by Testimonies that cannot be
reproached, that never were Lives so debauched as those of the Monks, that
during more than seven or eight Hundred Years, they were the Sinks of all the
Impurities that could be imagined, and we have the Confession of the Arnolds,
the Maimbourghs, and other famous Defenders of Popery in this Age concerning
it. They add that it is not so now, and that the Convents at this day are well
governed, and the Monastic Life very clean and innocent. He must be very bold
to advance a matter of Fact so little known: If there be some Convents
reformed, there are a great many others that are not so.

I have a little enlarged my self on this Article concerning the original of
Monks, their History, their Spirit, and their Conduct, because I know it is a
Snare in which many Persons shut up in Convents have unhappily fallen. They
have written to us from thence, that they have been much moved with the great
Piety which they have found in these Houses, with the Mortification of the
Nuns, with their constancy in Prayer, with their Humility, with the continual
elevation of their Hearts to God, and with their entire renunciation of the
World. And they have given us to understand, that this has been the principal
Motive of their Conversion. And even very devout and pious persons, who, thanks
be to God, do yet persevere in the Truth, have not been able to escape some
surprise, by these fair Appearances and Formalities. God is witness that we
have no intention to lessen the Reputation of any Person in particular, and yet
much less of these Nuns, of whom so much good is spoken, we wish that there
were more of truth therein. And if it be so, that there is so much virtue in
Some of them, we hope that God will not suffer them to die in the sad estate
wherein they are. But we do advise our Brethren and Sisters to be on their
guard, and beware of this Temptation, and to consider First, That these
Mortifications wherewith they seem to be so much charmed are human Devotions,
upon which God does not pour down his Blessing. It may be seen by that which we
have reported concerning the Mortifications of the first Monks, how far this
miserable Spirit of superstition and false Devotion may go. That kind of Life
observed by the Monks of Attrappe, for example, does not find its Original or
Model in the Gospel, and they are those Worships of which it will be said, Who
has required these things at your hands? We must not make it a thing of Merit
to be more wise than God, than Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, and do more than
they have done. It is a folly and madness to believe that a Man is more
acceptable to God, by shutting himself up in a place where he may see no body,
where he speaks to no body, where he renounces his Friends and Relations, where
he deprives himself of the society of good Men, whose conversation might assist
his piety. 2. I do entreat them to consider, that in these kind of things the
false Religions go farther than that which is true. Ask your Converters, and
they will not deny, that the Mortifications of the Mohammedan Monks, and those
of the penitent Indians and Mexicans, are infinitely more cruel to the Body
than are those of our most mortified Europeans; so they are at least equivocal
things, with respect to which, we must be extremely upon our guards.

3. In the third place it must be known, That there are depths in the conduct
of God, which cannot be fathomed: it is his pleasure that we walk always in the
midst of Thorns, and among Snares: it is for this reason, that in the true
Church there be so many Scandals, so much Negligence, so much Indevotion, so
many Debaucheries, so much Luxury, so little Reformation of Life, and so little
Zeal for the conversion of those which go astray and wander. It Is for the same
reason that he permitted the Reformers to have their faults, that they did not
agree together, and that they intermingled humane Passions in their conduct:
and on the other side, for the same reason God permits that in Churches the
most corrupt both in Doctrine and Worship, there be Souls that seem to seek
seriously their Salvation, who have at least the appearance of Christian
Virtues, and it may be good Intentions. If the true Doctrine were always
accompanied by a holy life, and an edifying conduct, in those that follow it;
and that on the other hand, Error and Superstition were never found without
disorder and an ill life, the choice would be too easy: Where would be the
difficulty? Where would be the snares? Where would be the danger of wavering?
Therefore God, who will lead his Elect to his end by obscure ways, that they
may have recourse to him for his light; by rough Paths, that they may support
themselves on him, suffers this mixture and confusion of good and evil, of evil
Doctrine and good Manners, of good Doctrine and evil Manners. It Is his
pleasure, by this profound conduct, to oblige us to regulate our Faith, not by
Prejudices, but by his holy Rules and Word.

4. In the fourth place, once more, though I condemn no Person in particular,
nevertheless, I conjure you, my Brethren and Sisters, to stand at a defiance
with Hypocrifie: it is a grand Comedy, and an inexhaustible Fountain of
Illusions; it is the Character of Persons that live in Convents, and a Character
that has prevailed for a great number of Ages. I could produce to you Witnesses
concerning it, against which nothing can be said; Arnald d' Villeneve, Nicholas
de Clemangis, Archdeacon of Bayeux, and an infinite number of other Popish
Authors, have made descriptions of the humble and devout Appearances of Monks
and Nuns, which hid and disguised an Abyss of Pride and Impurity. Do you think,
my dear Sisters, which are in Convents, that you see the inward part of the
Houses where you are, and of the Souls with whom you converse? Do you not
think, in the first place, that the Persons with which you are placed have
order to show themselves to you on the fairest side, and that they do not take
care of letting you see their Faults, their Jealousies, their Quarrels, their
Hatreds, their Lusts, their Mirths, if they have any? Besides this, Do not you
apprehend, that they have chosen the Houses which they know to be best governed
to lodge you in, and that you ought not to judge of all Convents by those in
which you are? If you read the Relations of those which have traveled in Italy
and Spain, they will inform you, That in those Countries, those Houses that are
called Religious are infamous Places, where the most criminal Debaucheries are
exercised with Impunity. Those of France are less irregular: but so it is, that
we do not at all know the inside of them; but when the curtain is drawn never
so little, we see that it is there almost as it is elsewhere. The Business of the
Nuns of St. Claire and of Provence against the Cordeliers of the same place,
which was pleaded a little more than twenty years ago, informs us thereof, and
makes it apparent, That at that time, all the Convents of Nuns under the
Government of the Cordeliers, in what place of France soever they were, were
places of Prostitution. This is of no ancient date. Behold the original of
Monks, which have caused so many Evils.

An Article of Controversy concerning the Unity of the Ministry.
WE having refuted, in our two preceding Letters, the Fallacy which your
Converters take from the Unity of the Church. Before we leave the matter of
Unity, we must say something of the Unity of the Ministry: for that also is
another source of the Illusions of your Converters. The Ministry of the Church
is one, and only one, say they; it has proceeded from Jesus Christ and his
Apostles; they have delivered to their Successors that which they received from
the Lord; these delivered it to others: at length, this only Ministry is come
to us, and he that has not Communion with us has no Communion with Jesus
Christ, of whom we are the only legitimate Successors and Ambassadors. Is it
possible that men should be capable of suffering themselves to be cheated by so
great a Chimera? Certainly if we did not see this we could not believe it. That
men of good sense should be capable of believing that God has tied Salvation
to a Succession of men, which hang upon each other, and are fastened tail to
tail like Sampson's Foxes, in such a manner, that out of this file of men,
there is no Salvation, whatever a man does or says. These men make us a cruel
God, who damns Christians only because hazard, birth, and a thousand other
accidents, hindered them from being born and living under this thread or chain
of certain Doctors which call themselves the Successive Bishops from Jesus
Christ even to us. That is to say, that in the Bishopric of Meaux, for
example, there has been no Salvation but for those who have been precisely
under the Pastoral Staff from Mr. St. Faron unto Mr. Bossuet, who shall be also
one day Mr. St. Bossuet, if the Gods which rule at Rome favor him. In the
extent of the whole World, he who has not lived under the long Succession of
those Bishops which have sat at Rome, from St. Peter to Innocent the XI. is
damned as certainly as the Devil; be it that he that been chaste as Joseph,
patient as Job, zealous as St. Peter, orthodox as St. Paul, pure as the Virgin:
for there is but one Ministry, and out of this Ministry all are in a state of
Perdition. The Greeks have a Ministry, they have Bishops, and those true
Bishops. According to Mr. de Meaux, they hold all the Doctrine of the Church;
they believe. Transubstantiation it self: for we have good testimonies, that
they have been well paid for it in these last days: but that signifies nothing,
they are all damned, because they are separated from him who is the center of
the Unity of the Ministry; they are not under that one Ministry which alone is
saving. I do maintain, that the time will come, when we shall no more believe
that which we see at this day. It will be said, you would fain make us believe
it, you would persuade us that the men of past Ages have lost their sense; yea,
I do maintain they must have lost it to suffer themselves to be deluded with
such Imaginations. It must be that the Medicine be given thee by such a hand,
if thou will be healed, else it will poison thee. Ah! my Brethren, open your
eyes upon this folly, and be ashamed thereof. Be assured, that every hand which
gives you the true Doctrine, is good in that respect; the saving Remedy of
Truth heals from whomsoever it comes. Where is this pretended Unity of the
Roman Ministry? Where was this Ministry, and this Unity of Ministry, during the
space of a hundred and fifty years, in the Tenth Age and half the Eleventh? a
time in which Baronius, and all the Roman Doctors, do confess to us, that the
Popes were Monsters, Ungodly, Wicked, Adulterers, Magicians, Poisoners,
Simoniacks, and Blasphemers. It Is the Popish History it self which teaches us
this. Was not this a very fine center of Unity? The Lines which proceed from
this Center to the Circumference, were they not very clean? The Rays which beam
from such a Star, do they not pour down benign Influences? These were the
Successors of the Apostles. Blessed Successors! They left what they did
receive; they gave one another an infamous Mission (irregular and against the
Canons) by the Ministry of two Whores which ruled at Rome. Behold the brave
Unity and Succession of this pretended Ministry. What became of this glorious
Unity of the Ministry in the time of the Western Schism, when we saw, for the
space of fifty years, a Pope at Rome, and another at Avignon, which damned one
another, of which one was the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and the other of
Antichrist, who not only mutually damned each other, but also thousands of
millions of Men which lived in the different Obedience of Avignon and Rome?
What a fine thing was this, to see two Centres of Unity? How finely at ease
would Mr. de Meaux, and his Colleagues, have been at that time? they who speak
so much to us of the center of the Unity of the Ministry, instead of one only
center to have had two. Confess, my dear Brethren, that this Unity of Ministry
is a foolish dream in it self, yea vain in the Church of Rome, who find it no
more there than elsewhere.

The Church, as all Societies in the World, in its progress suffers a thousand
changes in its form. We may not imagine that the Ministry of the first Ages of
the Church was constituted as that of this Age. The Bishops were neither
Worldlings, nor great Lords, nor Plenipotentiaries, nor Tyrants in the Church.
They were the first Presbyters, and the perpetual Presidents of the Elders, or
Presbyteries who were of the same Order with themselves. It Is the Pride and
Vanity of Man which has made this distinction between the Bishop and the
Presbyter. It Is the mystery of Iniquity which began to work even in the times
of the Apostles. The Presbyters were then so little distinguished from the
Bishops, that even the Clergy were not essentially distinguished from the
People. Remember, my Brethren, that which you have read in the eighth Pastoral
Letter, that in the time of Tertullian all the Laics were accounted
Presbyters, and that it was permitted even to them, to celebrate the Eucharist
in private, and in their Families. So that this Unity of the Ministry could not
depend upon I know not what external form: for this external form has changed
perpetually, until at length it degenerated into this Antichristian Power which
is seen in the Roman Hierarchy. This Unity is no more in Succession. For we
cannot find a Church which has not suffered Interruption in its Ministry,
either by the Violences of Persesecutions, or by the intrusion of false
Pastors, or by the Crimes and Vices of wicked Bishops. If Mr. Bossuet were
obliged to prove the Unity of his Ministry without interruption from Mr. St.
Faron to himself, he would, it may be, have something of trouble therein. In
what then consists the Unity of the Ministry? In the Unity of Doctrine and
Religion. If the Bonzes of China, and the Brachmans of India did preach the
same crucified Jesus with my self, and the same Christianity, pure and without
corruption, they would have the same Ministry with me. It would signify very
little, with me, from whence they derived their Succession, whether from St.
Thomas the Apostle, or from another Thomas, a Nestorian Heretic. God has not
tied Salvation to such and such hands, nor has he obliged us to a necessity of
receiving the Gospel from some certain men rather than from others.

But enough concerning this Article of the Unity of the Ministry, because it is
a matter which must be handled again, when we come to dissipate the cheats and
juggles by which your Converters endeavor to perplex you, about the Character
and Mission of those from whom we have received the Reformation.

If we would see a lamentable Desolation, we must behold the Province of
Languedoc. Persons worthy to be believed lately arrived from thence, do
represent unto us this Desolation as one of the most hideous and frightful
Objects which ought to have place in the Histories of these days. It can never
be well understood how the fury of false zeal should transport the Court to
make a horrible Desert of one of the most lovely Territories of the Kingdom.

Cevennes and lower Languedoc are covered with Troops which find means to live
where Turks would have died of Famine more than six months since, after the
Plunder, Extortions, and Wastes that have been made there, that is to say,
after these miserable People had suffered those Oppressions which had drawn
from them that little Blood that did remain; so that Paleness, Fear, and Death
may be seen written and engraven upon their countenances. There are Villages
and Towns wholly depopulate. The Inhabitants that could not flee are guarded by
Dragoons, which carry them to Mass with Muskets and Swords in their hands; and
who at their coming out of the Church put them into Files, that they may number
them, and see whether any be wanting yea or no. There are a great number that
lie in Woods, which have no other places of Refuge but Rocks, no other Houses
but Caves, neither Nourishment, but Roots of the Field, because whereof, they
do better resemble Carcasses than Men. The City of Nismes have had experience
of new Severities; They have banished to the Islands, and I know not whither
beyond the Seas, four hundred of its Inhabitants; and they have hanged eleven,
and sent Prisoners the Heads of the chief Families; M. Baudan la Cassaigne, and
others, all eminent Persons, to Carcassoon and Pierre An Cise. Who can doubt
but this is a just Castigation of that unworthy Action which the Country
suffered to be extorted from them? France did oblige a great number of men to
give under their own hand, that from henceforward they would do all the duty of
good Roman Catholics; that they would be found no more at Conventicles; that
they would discover their Relations and Friends; that they would Communicate;
and that if they failed in any of these things, they entreated the King to
chastise them severely for it. Who doubts but such an Action as this is capable
of bringing down the most terrible Judgments of God? It Is Violence, you will
say, that has extorted it from them. I doubt it not at all; but as men have
Honor and Conscience, so they have also Lives to give, rather than consent to
such base and abject Actions, unworthy Men of Honor as well as Christians: but
it will be said, that these Persons of Quality upon whom the Chastisements
fell, did not all sign this horrible Obligation. This may be; but nevertheless,
they have been justly punished for not maintaining the Courage of their
Brethren to assemble and pray to God. We know that they were not Persons of
Quality that made up these Assemblies: but God has chastised them in causing
the punishment to fall upon them as well as on those which were found there.
They could have been in no other condition if they had done their duty:
moreover, they are culpable in that they did not oppose the Cowardice of their
Countrymen, which have signed a Contract to renounce all their Duties, and
have desired a severe Castigation in case they should serve God according to
their Consciences. An Action done by some Persons, and tolerated by the silence
of others, causes the Thunder of God's Vengeance to fall upon the whole body.
To conclude, all the face of this Territory is hideous and frightful. There are
nothing but Solitudes caused by the dispersion of the Inhabitants, of Soldiers,
which outrage the poor people which are reduced even to the point of Death by
reason of Famine, Cold, and other miseries. There are others which perish in
Prisons, particularly in that fatal Tower of Aygue-Mortes, called the Tower of
Constance, where the evil Air of the Place, Want, Misery, and the Stinks of the
Prison kill a vast number of these miserable Creatures, which go out from
thence dragged at the Tail of a Horse till they come to the Dunghill. On the
other side we see in this Country a confused mixture, which also may be called
frightful, a mixture I say of Courage and Weakness, of Lapses and Recoveries,
of Sin and Repentance. Being constrained by the Violence of the Dragoons, they
go to Mass, or suffer themselves to be dragged thither: on the day after they
are found at a private Assembly to make their Prayers and Applications to God.
Happy were they if their Conduct being always equal and always alike to it
self, had made them Martyrs without spot and without offense. Amongst all this
confusion of Light and Darkness, there are nevertheless found some lovely
places: and from many hands the Courage of a Woman is brought to our Knowledge,
of which we cannot doubt; She was one of those condemned to death for having
been at a private Assembly. At the foot of the Gibbet she caused her Child
which she suckled to be brought unto her, and once more gave it the Breast; The
Hangman said unto her, Unhappy Woman, what Milk do you give your Infant in
these horrors of Death in which you are? Is not the Milk become poison? To
which she answered, If Death had been a horror to me, I had not been now here.
This is an Example in which there is something of Prodigy or Miracle, in a
Person of that Sex, and in that Condition.

If you will have another sad Relation, I will give you that of the Persecution
of our Brethren in the Valleys; a Persecution more cruel than the past Ages
have ever seen. These poor People taken in one day, as in a Net, were wasted
and consumed in the cruel Prisons of the Duke of Savoy, by the most inhuman
Treatment that ever was. The Duke's People did industriously publish every
where, that they were treated very well, and Letters to that purpose were sent
to us out of Switzerland: but this Treatment was such, that at Turene and
Verselles, of more than a thousand Prisoners there are not above sixty or
eighty sent to Geneva; of whom we will give you the History in an Extract of a
Letter from Geneva, expecting a more ample Relation thereof hereafter.

An Extract of a LETTER from Geneva bearing Date January 24. 1687.
BEhold, at length those brave and generous Men, the Confessors of our Lord
Jesus Christ, arrived here; but they are but a small remnant of a great number
who have all died Martyrs under long and grievous Sufferings. We have as yet
received but the first Squadron, made up of 70 persons, of all Sexes and Ages,
who came hither about two days since, in a Season so cold, that the Rhosne was
frozen to the bottom. These 70 persons are the Remains of more than a thousand,
who had been kept in two differing Prisons. And these 70 came not at us till
after they had left twenty of their number on the way, who died of Cold,
Famine, and other Miseries, and with this cruel circumstance, that their
Conductors would not suffer any others to remain behind, to assist their poor
Brethren dying and expiring, some here, some there, in the Snow and Ice, as if
they had been dogs. It may be there was a Father which left his Child, a Mother
her Daughter, Children their Parents, they with the rest following their
pitiless Guides with bitter and piercing grief, as well through fear of blows,
as through the rigor of the season, which was such, as seemed to extinguish all
other Sentiments in these poor men, but that of their own proper Misery. Shall
I tell you in what estate we have seen them arrive with us? All rent and torn,
benumbed, and almost dead with Cold and other miseries, and those which could
not go, laid like Calves on Horses. Moreover, they were no sooner arrived
within our Gates, but they fainted through weakness and misery, mingling their
tears with them of their brave Brethren, which had made so glorious a
Capitulation for themselves in their Mountains; for to the Glory of Geneva be
it said, all are yet here. But what grief did betide both the one and the
other, when examining and endeavoring to count each other, one was found to
have lost his Father and his Mother, another her Husband or his Wife, another
his Children, not knowing as yet who they might find in the residue which were
to come of those that were most dear unto them, and what to expect from the
Remains of more than fifteen thousand Persons, who are reduced to two; for it
is not believed that there are more left. (And it is a thing wonderful, that of
thirteen or fifteen thousand Persons there are not ten which have renounced
their Religion, if you except young Boys and Girls which were taken from their
Parents in their Prisons, to be dispersed here and there.) This is that which
makes the grief of all these poor men, the true Confessors of the Truth of
Christ, the more sharp and bitter. Their History, whether with respect to their
Calamities or their Piety, will be believed with difficulty in the Ages to
come, as well as the Cruelty of their Prince.


Feb. 15. 1687.
The THIRTEENTH PASTORAL LETTER. A Prosecution of the History of the
Christianity of the Fourth and Fifth Ages. The Original of Ecumenical
Councils; Seven Reasons against their Infallibility drawn from their Original.
An Article of Controversy. The true Idea of Schism. All those which are called
Schismatics are not out of the Church.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our god and
Savior Jesus Christ.
IN our preceding Letter we began the History of the Novelties which appeared
in Christianity during the Fourth and Fifth Ages, and the first which we found
there, was the Original of the Monastic Life: The Second thing considerable
(to the Original whereof we ought to give attention) in the Fourth and Fifth
Ages, are the Councils called General or Ecumenical. Not as to the Original of
a thing evil in it self, but as to a thing of which ill use has been made, and
of which they make a snare at this day for ignorant and feeble Minds. The
pretended Infallibility of the Church is the great Illusion by which they
endeavor to deceive the new Converts. They know not where to fix this
Infallibility, sometimes they fix it in the Pope, and sometimes in a Council:
But the French Church, by the Authority of the King, has declared her self
boldly, a little while since, for the Infallibility of Councils against the
Infallibility of the Pope; for which reason it is expedient, that you here learn
in a few words, the History of the Birth of General Councils, that you may
understand the absurdity of the Principle upon which your Converters build.

You must therefore know, my Brethren, that the French Church not knowing
assuredly where to place the Infallibility of the Church, distinguishes
Councils into Diocesan, Provincial, National, Oecumenick, or General. Diocesan
Councils are those which the Bishop assembles, where he reads his Ordinances to
his Curates. Provincial Councils are Assemblies of the Suffragan Bishops of one
and the same Metropolitan. National Councils are those where the Bishops of one
or more Nations are Assembled. They have not been so bold as to ascribe
Infallibility to any one of these Assemblies; but there are Councils of an
higher Order, which it pleases these Gentlemen to call Ecumenical, or General
Councils, to which they ascribe Infallibility; they are, say they, those in
which the whole Universal Church is assembled. When we ask them, where is the
Institution of these Assemblies in the Holy Scripture? they cannot find the
least footsteps thereof: I say the least; it is true, they there find
Assemblies of Believers, of Pastors and Elders, who considered Matters that
were disputed. We see one among others in the 15th Chapter of the Acts: Some of
the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren which were at Jerusalem, assembled to advise
about means to determine the Controversy, which the Pharisees had raised in the
Church concerning the necessity of observing the Law of Moses. But it would be
ridiculous to call a very small Assembly and very private, a General Council,
where there appeared but three Apostles of thirteen, and only the Clergy which
happened to be then at Jerusalem. When we continue to ask these Gentlemen,
where we must then take the Original of Ecumenical Councils, they answer us,
in the Fourth and Fifth Ages of the Church; and indeed they have reason for it.
The First of those Councils which bears this Name, is that of Nice, assembled
by the Authority of Constantine, in the year 325, to determine the Controversy
of the Divinity of the Son against Arrius. The Second was assembled by
Theodosius the Elder, in the year 381, to determine against Macedonius, who
denied the Divinity of the Holy Spirit. The Third was called together at
Ephesus, under the Empire of Theodosius the Younger, in the year 431, against
Nestorius, who affirmed two Persons in Jesus Christ. The Fourth was assembled
in the year 451, by the Authority of the Emperor Martian against the Heresy
of Eutyches, who confounded the two Natures. Behold four in 125 years or little
more; before this Men knew not what a General Council meant. Now I entreat you,
my Brethren, give attention to six or seven short Reflections which I shall
make thereon, that you may understand the great absurdity of affixing
Infallibility to these kind of Assemblies; this is at this time of the greatest
importance to you. You must throw to the ground this Phantome of Infallibility,
which serves as a support to all the Errors of Popery: Now this Phantome knows
not where to fix its foot, and when you shall have forced it out of this last
Entrenchment where your Converters have placed it, you will see it vanish and
disappear.

1. Make reflection upon the silence of the Holy Scripture concerning it, and
see if there be any probability, that the design of God was to establish a seat
of Infallibility in certain Assemblies, and that he should never speak a word
thereof. It must be granted, that there is nothing in the World more important
in Religion than this. It is not enough that the Scripture has established the
Infallibility of the Church in general, as they pretend; for it would be in
vain for God to say, the Church is Infallible, if we know not what this Church
is, where the seat of this Infallibility is placed; and by what Mouth she ought
to give her Oracles. It Is true, they send you to Tradition, for all that,
whereof the Scripture says nothing. But this cannot be a Point for which we are
to be sent to Tradition, for this is the Foundation of Tradition it self:
Tradition is the consent of the Ancients, and this consent is found in
Councils: All the Authority of Tradition is nothing, at least before the
Infallibility of Councils is established. The Infallibility of Tradition is not
in the testimony of single Persons, of S. Austin, S. Chrysostom, etc. for these
single Persons were not infallible; and as yet it has not been thought
advisable to make them so. It Is therefore the Infallibility of Councils which
alone can make Tradition certain: Now Tradition is the second Rule of Faith,
equal in Authority to the Holy Scripture; it is therefore necessary at least,
that the Scripture has given credential Letters to these Ecumenical Councils,
that their Authority, and that of Tradition may be confessed and acknowledged:
This is not, say I, an Affair for which we are to be sent to Tradition, as well
because it is the most important Point of Christianity, on which the Faith of
the rest depends, as because this were to send to Tradition to prove the
Authority of Tradition it self, which is absurd; it is not absurd in the
Scripture to have recourse to the Scripture it self, to prove the Authority of
the Scripture, because it is the highest Principle, and because there is
nothing beyond it, it must be that it prove it self. But the Scripture is above
Councils and Tradition, and by consequence it is necessary, that the Scriptures
establish the Authority both of Tradition and Councils.

2. I entreat you to observe, that the Church continued three Hundred years
without having one word of General Councils, she passed without them during all
that time: Nevertheless, she had never more need of them, supposing them to be
infallible means of ending Controversies and suppressing Heresies. For in the
first three Hundred years the Church was plagued with near Fifty differing
Heresies. Now judge you, whether it be likely, that God should appoint an
infallible Judge to his Church, and a sure way of knowing the Truth, and that he
should deny her the use of this means for the space of well near two Hundred
and fifty years, that is to say, from the death of S. John the last of the
Apostles, till the Council of Nice. So that in the Ages of greatest purity it
will be found, that the Church did not derive this purity from any other
Fountain, but from the simple and pure word of God; it makes it evident, that
the Church may be pure without an infallible Judge in the midst of her. Now if
the Church may continue pure for the space of two Hundred and twenty five years
without a General Council, that is to say, without an infallible Judge, why may
she not continue pure three, four, or five Hundred years? For my part, I call
this a Demonstration, that the Church may very well make a shift without those
Judges that are called Infallible. Let them answer it when they please. Observe
also, that the Church was tormented with Fifty horrible Heresies, which thought
to have overwhelmed and sunk her, and having no Councils, she was then left to
a Spirit of Error, in those times that she had greatest need of a Guide, for
she had no other Rule but the Writings of the Apostles, which according to our
Adversaries, are Medals with two Faces, which may be looked on in a various
manner, and which all men expound in favor of their own Persuasions. It is not
amiss to bring hither Tertullian's Book of Prescriptions, of which they make
use, with such success to deceive those that are weak among us. It appears by
this Book, that the Orthodox were in the greatest distress in the World, to
convince and stop the mouths of Heretics. The Heretics gave themselves to
expound the Scripture after their own manner, and in a sense contrary to the
truth. Tertullian complains thereof, and says, That false Interpretations do as
much injury to Truth, as the boldness of those that corrupt the Scriptures. He
adds, That the weak find themselves confounded, seeing Heretics, as well as
Catholics, dispute from the Scripture. To get out of this perplexity, he
recurs to the Succession of Bishops, by whom it might be proved, that they
taught nothing but what the Apostles had taught before them, he found no other
way of escape; this man had a Mind very much straightened, or he was very
ignorant. Why did he not think of General Councils, who are the only infallible
means of knowing the sense of the Scriptures? Neither he, nor any of the
Writers of this Age, and of that which followed it, had any knowledge of them.
Nevertheless, as it is said, it was a means established and appointed by God;
and yet for the space of two Hundred years, it must be acknowledged, that God
hid this means from the whole Church, and that he left her in a straight given
up to the Humors of Heretics, and to their lewd and false Interpretations. No
reasonable Man will ever swallow such a Prodigy.

3. I entreat you, my Brethren, to consider if it be likely, that God should
place Infallibility in Assemblies, whose Original was wholly casual and
accidental. The occasion which gave birth to General Councils, was the
Conversion of the Roman Emperors to Christianity, and the great extent of that
Empire: For if the Emperors had continued Pagans, Councils from all parts of
the Empire had never been assembled; the Emperors would have looked upon it as
a Conspiracy, and would never have permitted it. Besides, if the Roman Emperors
by becoming Christians, had lost half the Provinces of the Empire, there had
never been any General Councils neither: For the diverse Princes which had
possessed themselves of the Provinces of the Empire, would not have permitted
their Subjects to assemble with those, who continued under the Rule of the
Romans, for fear lest these Conferences should be designed, to search out ways
of returning under the Government of their first Masters. Now judge, if a
Tribunal, which in the purpose of God, was to be the Fountain of the Oracles of
the Church in all Ages, ought to owe its birth to a concourse of Affairs, and
Mundane Circumstances, that were wholly and purely so. Ought not God to have
established this Tribunal without dependence on the World and the Affairs
thereof, as from the beginning he established Presbyteries (so S. Paul calls
the Assemblies of Pastors) is every City, and in every particular Church? He
must have a very obdurate Mind, I think, who is not moved and touched with this
Discourse and Reason.

4. What may be the assurance that a Man may have of such an Article of Faith
which is founded on a Matter of Fact notoriously false. It Is that the Councils
of the Fourth and Fifth Ages were assembled from the whole Universal Church.
That, say I, is notoriously false; there were not above three Hundred and
eighteen Fathers in the Council of Nice, the most ancient and the most
venerable of all the Councils. What are three Hundred and eighteen Bishops for
the whole vast extent of the Roman Empire, where there was an infinite number
of them? It does not appear that all the Churches did depute their Bishops
thither, nor that all the Provinces of the Roman Empire did assemble to choose
some one out of their Body, who should carry their Counsel and Advice.
Constantine called together all the Bishops in general, those that could, and
those that would, appeared there; none appeared there, but those of the Eastern
Church, there were not Twelve of the Latin Church there; out of all Spain, none
were seen but Hosius Bishop of Corduba; out of all France, none but Nicasius
Bishop of Die, or Dijon. Besides this, there were Churches out of the Roman
Empire; it may be there were Churches even in the Indies, at least, those which
tell us, that S. Thomas carried the Gospel thither, ought to believe so. It Is
certain at least, that there were large Churches in Persia. Ecclesiastical
History speaks of a great Persecution which was raised at that time against the
Christian Churches of Persia, by the Impudence or ill guided Zeal of Maruthas a
Bishop, who burnt one of the Temples which the Persians had consecrated to the
Honor of the Fire. These Churches of Persia were not called to this Council,
nor did they appear there. All the World are at an Agreement, that the first
Council of Constantinople, held under Theodosius the Great, was not General:
There were none but Eastern Bishops there; yea, two Hundred years after, in the
time of Gregory the first Bishop of Rome, the Western Church did not as yet
receive the Canons thereof: So that frankly and openly, it is to scoff Men to
call them General Councils in the sense which is given to the Word at this day.
It Is true, that these first Councils called themselves so, but why, and in what
sense? It was according to the Style which was then in use. The Roman Empire
was then called Orbis, the World Universal, the Greeks called it Oikoumene the
habitable part of the Earth, the Emperors thereof were called the Universal
Emperors; the Vanity of the Emperors occasioned this; the great ones always
blow up their Titles. The extent of the Roman Empire was great indeed, but as
if they had been Masters of the whole Earth, they caused themselves to be
called Masters of the World Universal. A General Council in this sense
signifies no more than a Council assembled from all parts of the Roman Empire.

5. I entreat you to give attention to that which is necessary, according to
these Gentlemen, to make a Council Ecumenical. Is it necessary that there be
Bishops from all parts of the Church? by no means; for then the Council of
Constantinople were not Oecumenick. The Pope was not there, either by himself,
or his Legates; and it is not known that there was any of the Western Bishops
there. Nevertheless, it is Oecumenick; but why? because that all the Church
consented to it at last: for its Canons were not received at Rome more than two
hundred years after. The Church Universal, say I, has approved it, not by
Subscriptions and a formal Consent, but by a Consent which they call tacit and
implicit: and this is indeed the Opinion of the Doctors of France, That to
make a Council Oecumenick, it is enough that it be afterward approved. That is
the reason why the Canons of the Council of Antioch, which is generally
believed to have been an Arrian Council, are at this day seen in the Code of
the Universal Church. That is the reason why many men are willing the Council
of Sardis should be Ecumenical. It Is because though there were none but
Western Bishops there, yet the most part of the Bishops of the East subscribed
it afterward. Now I entreat you observe the Absurdity which I am about to make
you sensible of. Behold a Council, for example, the first Ecumenical of
Constantinople, which in its form is but a particular Council, and by
consequence cannot be Infallible; nevertheless, because God foresaw that the
Council would be approved by all the Church, he presides there by a Spirit of
Infallibility against all the Rules which he has established for his own
Conduct with respect to Councils. So that when God foresees that a Council
which is particular in its Composition, will one day be accounted Ecumenical,
because of a consent that will be given to it either by Subscriptions sent and
separately made, or by a tacit consent, he there pours out a Spirit of
Infallibility. But if he foresees that this Synod will be neglected, as a
particular Synod, he lets it pass for as much as it is worth, and does not make
it Infallible. Is not this to play with the Spirit of God, and the Reason of
Men? Who sees not by this example, that the Character of an Ecumenical Council
does in no wise depend upon a Spirit of Infallibility which presides there, but
on the consent of men, which persuade themselves, right or wrong, that such an
Assembly has happily hit on the truth.

6. I pray judge whether it be probable that these Assemblies, called
Ecumenical, were infallible Judges of Controversies, without knowing it. At
this day, when the Pope assembles an Ecumenical Council, this Council believes
it self to be Infallible, it acts and speaks as such. Let them demonstrate to
us this Character in the first Councils; let them show us, that they acted as
infallible, and that they spoke as such. If I should make a Book, whereas I am
only making a Letter, I could show you a hundred circumstances of these ancient
Councils, which will make it evident, that this Dream never crept into the
minds of any of the Members of those Assemblies, that they were there as
Infallible Judges. But in this case, it is not we that are obliged to prove,
it is the Papists, for they are those which do affirm. Press them, say I, about
it, and ask them their Proofs, that the Ancient Councils believed themselves
Infallible. Go farther, and ask them, Whether it be possible that these
Councils should be Infallible, and that not one of the Divines of those Ages
should doubt of it; and that in their Disputes with Heretics they should make
no use of this Authority? St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, St. Austin, St. Gregory,
Nazianzen and St. Athanasius, had great Disputes against the Arrians, but they
never thought fit to oppose unto them the Authority of the Council of Nice, as
Infallible. Where were their Wits? Why did they not tell them, God has
promised, That when two or three are gathered together in his name he will be
in the midst of them? It Is a Promise of Infallibility, belonging to General
Councils. The Council of Nice was assembled in the Name of God, held in all its
forms, and assembled from the whole Church: it is therefore Infallible, and by
consequence you are obstinate not to submit unto it. Thus they reason against
us, and it is thus that men ought to reason naturally when they are of the
Opinion and Principles of Popery. We do not see one word of this in the Authors
of the fourth and fifth Ages. On the contrary, St. Austin tells the Arrians,
Let us lay by the Council of Nice on my part, and the Council of Ariminum on
your part, and let us dispute from the Scripture, Cont. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14.
confessing, the one and the other of these Assemblies might err, although it
be very certain that the Council of Nice did not actually do so. It Is as if I
should say to a Mohammedan, Let us lay by my H. Scripture and your Alcoran, as
supposing it possible that both the one and other of them may be false. It must
be granted, that I were wicked, or a fool, to speak thus, if it were not upon
those Suppositions which are called false, and whereof we sometimes serve our
selves to draw an Adversary to an absurdity. Behold then a Prodigy which passes
all imagination; the Christians had among themselves infallible Judges, and
knew nothing of it: but behold much more, St. Austin not only knew not, that he
had right to oppose the Authority of the Council of Nice as Infallible, to the
Arrians, but he even confesses to the Donatists, that no Authority of Council
was supreme, and without Appeal. The Donatists, to prove to him that the
Baptism of Heretics was worth nothing, brought him the Testimony of St.
Cyprian; He answers, without ceremony, That he acknowledged no Testimony sure
and certain but that of the Canonical Scriptures of the Old and New Testament;
that as to the decisions of Bishops, those which came after, and above all
Councils, might very well correct them. After which he adds, De Bapt. cont.
Donat. lib. 2. cap. 3.
And even the Councils which are held in every Country, and in every Province,
do without difficulty give place to full Councils, which are assembled from all
the Christian World; and these full Councils, (so he calls Ecumenical
Councils) may be corrected by those which follow; when that which was hid is
discovered, and by some experience men come to know what they were ignorant in.
Observe, that the thing under debate was not a matter of Discipline only, as
they will tell you, but to know whether the Baptism of Heretics were of any
value. 'Twas a Point of Doctrine, if there were ever and such.

7. To conclude, I conjure you, my Brethren, give yet attention to this, it is,
that although the Dream of your Converters should have some foundation, and
that the Church Universal assembled in a Body by its Guides were Infallible,
the Church of Rome would have no part in this Privilege, nor would it extend it
self to the Councils since Berengarius, which they desire you should look upon
as the Rules of your Faith. For these Councils were never Assemblies of the
Church Universal since the Schism of the Greeks: they are at most but Councils
of the Latin Church: but the Latin Church, say they, is become the Universal
and Catholic Church, excluding all other Christian Communions which are
separate from her; and by consequence, her Councils are those of the Church
Universal. This is the most foolish of all Pretensions, That the Roman Church
should be the only Church, excluding all the Communions of Asia, Africa, and
Europe. We have shown the extravagance of this Pretense in our former Letters,
for which reason, at present we may well suppose it as indisputable, viz. that
the Church of Rome, for 800 years past, has had no Ecumenical Councils in the
sense that she her self understands the Word; from whence you may conclude,
that she has had no Infallible Councils.

Furthermore, it is necessary to oblige you to give attention to this Original
of Ecumenical Councils in the fourth and fifth Ages; because, without doubt,
it was one of the means which the Devil made use of to establish the Empire and
Domination of Antichrist. Not that the first Councils called Ecumenical were
not assembled with good intention, and were not very useful at that season, and
in that time. But it happens to this good thing as to the most part of others
which have been introduced with a good intention, the Devil has taken occasion
from thence to bring in either Opinions or Practices which have destroyed the
Church. Martyrdom is an excellent work; yet from thence men have taken occasion
to introduce the Opinion of Merits, and Works of Supererogation. Respect for
the Martyrs is very just, and very reasonable; yet that has made way for
Indulgences, the Invocation of Saints, Adoration of Relics and Images. The use
of Ecumenical Councils has been found good upon several occasions. The
Bishops coming from all Parts have appeared not as Judges, but as Witnesses of
the Faith of their Churches, and this unanimous consent in the Faith has
produced a very good effect for the establishing of Points fundamental. But the
Spirit of Lies has nevertheless made use thereof afterward, as a means to
build that Universal Empire over the Church; an Empire which is one of the
characters of Antichrist. At the beginning it was the Emperors which assembled
these Councils. These Assemblies were made by their Authority; the Bishops of
Rome were of the number of those called to them: he must have renounced all
Sincerity that does not agree unto it, after he has read Eusebius, Socrates,
Zozomon, and Theodoret. When the Roman Empire was ruined in the West, the
Emperors having no Authority and longer to call Assemblies of the whole Church,
because they were no longer Masters of it; the Popes, who advanced according to
the measure that the Emperors declined, were willing to lay hold of this Right.
They endeavored to reunite, under their Authority, all the Provinces which
had formerly been united under the Emperors; in which they were successful, and
thereby formed the second Roman Empire, which is the Empire of the Boast and of
Antichrist. These Ecumenical Assemblies were of great use to them in this; at
the head of which Assemblies they placed themselves in the quality of the first
Patriarchs. The custom which the Councils took in the Fourth Age, of adding
Anathema's to their Decisions, did also serve them afterward to possess men
with a Chimera of their Infallibility. I have not been able to find that
Councils did anathematize any one before the Council of Nice. We have the
Council of Carthage, reckoned for the third in the Collection of Father Labbeus
held under Cyprian in the year 258. Zonarus holds it for the most ancient of
all the Councils, he means, whose Decisions we have. It seems to me, we have
therein the form of the ancient Councils. Every one there speaks his Opinion
modestly; that which had the plurality of Voices passed, but they there made no
Decrees nor Anathema's.

We do not see that in the first two Ages, they held Councils for the deciding
matters of Faith and Doctrine. There was one held about the Controversy
concerning Easter, that is to say, Whether they ought to celebrate the
Fourteenth of the Month of March? but this was a Point of Discipline. There was
in those times an infinite number of Heretics, as appears by the Book of
Irenaeus; but I have not observed that they did assemble Councils against them
before the third Age: nevertheless, if they had looked upon Councils as
Infallible, it would have been necessary to prevent Seduction, and to secure
the Faith of Christians.

An Article of Controversy. The true Idea of Schism. That those which are
called Schismatics are not out of the Church.
AFter having spoken of Unity, and confuted the Sophism which they draw from
this Unity in the preceding Letters; we must answer the Sophism, which is drawn
from the Schism which ruins this Unity. It Is a Point which your Converters do
continually repeat, and beat upon you. Schism, say they, is a hideous crime:
Schismatics are out of the Church; there is no Salvation for them: and
although the Church of Rome it self were corrupt, you ought not to break with
her. Their modern Writers which seem willing to soften the Maxims of the Roman
Church, do nevertheless observe no measure on this Subject, and on this Point.
They proceed so far as to maintain, That although it should be true that even
the Church of Rome should be fallen into Idolatry, we ought not to forsake her,
and could not justly set up Altar against Altar. We must return to these
Gentlemen, not Paradox for Paradox, but Truth for Lies: but a Truth which is
opposite to their Falsehood, as our Antipodes are opposite to us. They say, that
though even the Church should fall into Idolatry, we cannot be saved if we
separate from it. And I say, although even the Church of Rome should have
Reason at the bottom, and were not Idolatrous, and that we were out in our
Separation, we should not hazard our Salvation by continuing as we are. Men are
every where well where they have Christianity and the marrow and substance of
it; and it is a folly to imagine that the Salvation of men depends upon the
humor of their Guides. It may be therefore that Luther and Calvin were
mistaken, i. e. That the corruption of the Church of Rome was not great enough
to oblige the Faithful to go out of her: let us suppose, they had done better
to leave things as they were, I do nevertheless maintain, that at this day you
do not in any wise hazard your Salvation by continuing where they have placed
you; because however it be, you have Christianity in its integrity, you have it
wholly pure and incorrupt. In every Society where that is found, a man may be
saved, after whatsoever manner it be formed. The Idea which men have formed of
Schism for many Ages past is the most false that can be imagined: but besides
the falsehood of it, it is the most dangerous and cruel Chimera that could be
found. Every Society would be Catholic Church to the exclusion of all others.
The Church of Rome pretends thus far for her self. The Greek Church makes no
less pretense thereto. He that goes out of this Church breaks the Unity, and he
that breaks it is no longer in the Church. Now he who is no longer in the
Church, is no longer in a state and way of Salvation, whatever he say and
whatever he do. Behold what they say; behold the Chimera.

We must therefore rectify this Idea of Schism, according to the Unity which
we have given you. The Unity of the Universal Church does not subsist within
the bounds of one certain Communion, nor in adherence to certain Pastors, to
the exclusion of all others: but in the Unity of Spirit, Doctrine, Sacraments,
and Evangelical Ministry in general, i. e. of Pastors declaring the Truth of
the Gospel. What must be done then to make a Schism with respect to the Church
Universal? He must renounce the Christian Doctrine, the Sacraments of the
Church, and the Gospel Ministry; that is to say, He must be an Apostate, or an
Heretic. But every Society that goes out of another and greater Society of
which it was a part, makes no Schism with respect to the Church Universal,
whilst it retains the Doctrine, the Sacraments, and the Ministry of the Gospel:
it goes not out of the Church because it carries the Church with it, and it
carries the Church with it, because it carries Christianity with it. It
carries, say I, the Church with it, in such a manner nevertheless, that it
leaves it in the Society which it leaves; for leaving true Christianity there,
it leaves the true Church there also. And the advantage of being the Church,
and of having Christianity, is a Privilege which may be possessed entire, and
without prejudice to other Christian Societies.

We must therefore know, that there is an Universal and Particular Schism.
Particular Schism is a Separation from a particular Church: a Universal Schism
is a Separation from the Universal Church. Universal Schism consists in the
Renunciation of the Universal Church, by renouncing her Doctrine, Sacraments,
and Ministry. For example, If the one half of Christians should separate from
the other, and set up a new Gospel, according to which Moses should be set side
by side with Jesus Christ, the legal Ceremonies re-established, the Evangelical
Ministry should be changed into the Ministry of Priests after the Order of
Aaron; the Sacraments of the Church should be joined to the Sacraments of the
Old Testament; it were certain that this would be a true Schism; for these Men
would renounce the Doctrine, the Sacraments, and the Ministry of the Gospel.
The Mahometans, without renouncing Jesus Christ, and calling him false Prophet,
have set up a Prophet superior to him, and receive the Impostures of Mahomet,
admit Circumcision, and reject Baptism, have made a Religion truly and
essentially different from that of Christ's. It Is therefore a true universal
Schism. The Socinians, who have renounced almost all the Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion, who despise and neglect the Sacraments by going out of the
Church, are become Schismatics, and true Schismatics with respect to the
Church Universal; for they have not carried the Church with them, because they
have not carried Christianity with them. According to this Idea, Universal
Schism, or Schism with respect to the Universal Church, does not essentially
differ from Heresy and Apostasy.

Particular Schism is when a Man separates from a particular Church, be it for
some Point of Doctrine, be it for some quarrel about Discipline, be it for some
personal Differences of the Guides among themselves. Of this sort of Schisms
there is an infinite number of Examples. In the Second Age there was a Schism
between the Church of Rome and the Church of Asia, about a controversy of
Ceremonies, about the day on which Easter ought to be observed. The Churches of
Asia maintained, that the Christian Passover ought to be observed on the same
day that the Jews observed theirs; and they said, they held it as a Tradition
from St. John. The Church of Rome, on the contrary, said that Christians ought
to observe Easter on the Lord's Day following the Jewish Passover. And for the
sake of this goodly Controversy, Victor Bishop of Rome was so rash, as to
separate the Churches of Asia from his Communion. This Schism continued not
only until the Council of Nice, but a very long time after; for mention is made
of the Quartodecimani in the General Council of Ephesus against Nestorius in
the year 431. So they called those who celebrated Easter with the Jews, on the
14th day of the Month of March. In the Third Age, Novatian formed a
considerable Schism, about a Point of Discipline; viz. Whether we ought to
receive those who fell in times of Persecution to the Peace of the Church. This
Schism continued a long time. We find this Schism continuing amidst all the
great troubles that were betwixt the Arrians and the Orthodox; the union of
Opinions that was between the Novatians and the Catholics with respect to the
Doctrine of Arrius, did not put a period unto it. In the same Age, the
Donatists made another Schism in Africa, about the choice of a Bishop of
Carthage. Two Parties being formed about it, a Division was made, it spread
through all Africa, and continued many Ages. There happened another in the
beginning of the Fifth Age, by one named Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople,
who taught there were two Persons, as well as two Natures in Christ. Another
was made a little while after by Eutyches, Abbot of a Monastery in
Constantinople, who desiring to oppose Nestorius, who distinguished two Persons
in Christ Jesus, confounded the two Natures that he might not separate them;
and these two Schisms have continued for 1200 years, and do continue to this
day. In the Tenth Age happened the great Schism of the Greek Church from the
Latin. The Church of Rome it self has had an infinite number of Schisms in her
own Bowels, occasioned by her Anti-Popes, And the greatest (which may serve for
a Rule for all) was the great Schism of Popes and Anti-Popes, whereof the one
sat at Rome, and the other at Avignon. This Schism divided the West into two
different Parties, under two distinct Heads. To conclude, in these last times a
great Schism is happened in the Latin Church, which is divided into three great
Bodies, the Papists, the Lutherans, and the Reformed. I pass by an infinite
number of little Schisms, which have been in the East between Church and
Church, and oftentimes among the Members of the same Church. Two Bishops were
seen for a long time at Antioch; the Party of one of them was called Milesians,
the other Party Eustathians, this was in the Fourth and Fifth Ages. These are,
say I, particular Schisms. And it may be said, that not one of these
Schismatical Parties did separate from the Universal Church, because not one of
them abandoned Christianity; they returned and carried it with them.

Now the Illusion in this matter comes from hence, that we confound these two
sorts of Schisms, those that are Universal with those which are particular, and
we ascribe to particular Schisms that which belongs only to Schism universal,
viz. Exclusion from Salvation. For it is true, that he who makes a Schism from
the Universal Church, by renouncing her Doctrine, Sacraments, and Ministry, is
utterly out of the Church, and without any right to eternal Life. But it is
false, that particular Schism either from the Church of Rome, or from the Greek
Church, or Schism of the Church of Rome in it self, does exclude from
Salvation. This folly proceeds from another, and that is, that every particular
Church looks on herself as the Catholic and Universal Church, and her
particular Doctrines as the Universal and Fundamental Doctrines of
Christianity: In such manner, that those who separate themselves from her, and
renounce her Doctrines, she looks on them, as being separate from the Universal
Church, and as having renounced the Universal Doctrine of Christianity. But no
Church has carried this folly to that degree of extravagance as the Church of
Rome has done; for she calls herself the Catholic and Universal Church, to
the exclusion of all others: And she would fain, that the Doctrines which are
peculiar to her, as the Supremacy of the Pope, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
etc. should be accounted the Universal Truths of Christanity. Thence it comes
to pass, that she considers as Schismatics, and damned all those which
separate from her, and renounce the most inconsiderable Doctrines which she
has consecrated by her Anathema's. To make this foolish Pretension vanish and
disappear, no more is to be done, but to make more evident the true Idea of
Schism, which the Disputes of these last Ages, and the Prejudices of the
Ancients, have strangely perplexed and confounded. To this end it will be
useful to consider diverse of those Schisms of which we have spoken, and see
what we ought to judge concerning the Salvation of those who lived in them.

First, there have been Schisms which have been made without any Controversies
about Doctrine or Discipline, only upon personal Quarrels between Bishop and
Bishop; such was that furious Schism of the Donatists in Africa, which was made
only upon the occasion of the choice of a Bishop of Carthage: Afterward the
Donatists espoused the Opinion of S. Cyprian, about the Nullity of the Baptism
of Heretics, and it may be, some other Opinions of little importance, that
they might the more easily maintain and continue their Schism with the
Catholics. But the true foundation of the Schism was nothing but a particular
Quarrel. The Donatists held all the Opinions of the Catholic Church, they had
the same Sacraments, the same Discipline, and the same Ministry. This being so,
he must be very cruel that will damn an infinite number of private Persons, who
followed their Guides, as the Inhabitants of Jerusalem followed Absalom, in the
simplicity of their Hearts. I say nothing concerning the Authors of the Schism,
nor of those who did maintain it; as they violated the Laws of Charity, and
troubled the Peace of the Church, we leave them to the Judgment of God: We say
nothing neither of the Circumcellians, a sort of People which arose among the
Donatists, and offered an Hundred Violences to the Orthodox. I speak of those
plain People, who in the simplicity of their Heart, do without Dissimulation
believe in Jesus Christ, according to the Creed explicated according to the
sense of the Church Universal, who believe all the Christian Doctrine, from the
first Article to the last; and besides, labor with great diligence in the
practice of Holiness and Devotion: to condemn these Men, say I, only because
they do not communicate with the Pastors of the Catholic Church, is a foolish
and a barbarous Doctrine, of which I do not think there is a Man in the World
thoroughly persuaded, although there be a Thousand and a Thousand pretend so to
be.

There are other Schisms which were made about Controversies in Doctrine, such
is the Schism of the Nestorians and that of the Eutychians, who continue at
this day, and comprehend an infinite number of Christians in the East. I
believe that Nestorius designed to reduce the Opinion of Paulus Samosatenus to
another form; which Opinion is that of our Socinians, who make Jesus Christ a
mere Man. But we must judge otherwise of their Successors. At this day the
Nestorians and the Eutychians embrace the Apostles Creed, and that of
Constantinople, as do the Greeks and the Latins, they believe in Jesus Christ
the eternal Son of God, God himself, dead, and raised again for the Salvation
of Men; and the Disputes which they have with the rest of the Church, are at
present, nothing but Questions about Words and differing manners of expression.
To damn these Millions of People, because of the rashness of a single Man, who
had the boldness a Hundred and twenty years ago, to teach contrary to the
manner after which we ought to conceive of the Incarnation of the Word, is a
Cruelty founded in a most prodigious Error and Mistake. It Is evident, that we
ought to range them with the rest of the Eastern Church, which is not much more
pure, than that of the West, and to leave their Salvation to the judgment of
God, who alone knows how far his Patience will proceed. These two Schisms were
without doubt criminal in their Original: But time has changed the state of
things, and at this day those Christians which are called Jacobites, and follow
the Schism of Eutyches, supposing they embrace all Christian Truths necessary
to Salvation, are as well where they are, as if they rejoyned themselves to the
other Christians of the East, provided they be endowed with a Spirit of
Charity. If they be so rash as to condemn the rest, therein they sin; but the
Greeks which condemn them are not less guilty than they, although they descend
directly from the Catholic and Orthodox flock, and the others be only a
separate branch. And this helps to show you, that although a Schism were
criminal in its Original, and headily and rashly made, nevertheless it is not
always necessary under pain of eternal Damnation, to return from whence we
came. From whence I confirm the Thesis which I laid down at the beginning of
this Question; that the Idea which they make to you about the horror of Schism,
is a Dream, and that tho it should be true, that our separation from the Church
of Rome in the beginning of the past Age were rash, the People which followed
it in the simplicity of their Hearts, would not hazard their Salvation thereby,
they that made it were to account for it, and at the most, those which do
maintain it. So my Brethren, you would be in safety, and only we in danger. But
I very well perceive, that this is not enough to calm the Perturbations which
your Converters, and your own Thoughts may give you about it: For you will say,
supposing that our separation from the Church of Rome in the last Age were
unjust and rash; it is true, that we who did not make the Schism shall not
suffer thereby. Our Fathers when they went out of the Church of Rome, carried
the Church and Christianity with them, and this Christianity may nourish, and
save us, maugre the Separation. Nevertheless on this supposition, we do no ill,
yea we shall do well to reunite our selves to the Church of Rome: We shall
heal a Wound, which being open, renders the Church deformed; Peace is to be
preferred before Division: This is without doubt, the descendants which
acknowledge that their Ancestors did wrongfully separate from a certain stock,
do well to reunite themselves thereto for edification, although it were not
absolutely necessary to their Salvation. Therefore that we may come nearer to
the case in which you are at present with the Church of Rome, we must suppose a
Separation which was made for reasons of some worth and value, i. e. because of
Corruption in Doctrine and Worship. This is the case in which you are, and on
this supposition we will show you in what follows, that you cannot return to
the Church of Rome.

March 1. 1687
The FOUTEENTH PASTORAL LETTER. AN Article of Antiquity. The Original of the
Hierarchy, and the Antichristian Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome. An Article of
Controversy. A Continuation of the matter of Schism: Although the Corruption
of the Church of Rome were not extreme, it would not be lawful for us to return
thither. Some Objections of the new Converts concerning it.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
SInce we have been upon the History of the fourth and fifth Ages, we have
found there two great Novelties, which have had very unhappy effects in the
following Ages. They are the Monastic Life, and the Councils that are called
Oecumenick. Behold a third of them; it is the Original of the Hierarchy, which
has given birth to the Antichristian Tyranny. This Word signifies sacred Rule
or Government: and thereby is understood that Subordination of Pastors, which
has been seen in the Church for a 1000 or 1200 years. In this Subordination
are seen the lowest Orders in the lowest Seats; above these lowest Orders are
seen Priests subdivided into Curates, Deans, rural Deans, etc. Above the
Priests are the Grand Vicars, above the Grand Vicars are the Bishops, above the
Bishops are the Archbishops or Metropolitans, above the Archbishops are the
Primates, above the Primates are the Exarchs, above the Exarchs are the
Patriarchs, and above all these is seen a Head, which was framed insensibly,
and by little and little, and placed there; this is it which is called the
Pope. All this is a new Invention with respect to the Apostles, and this
Hierarchy was unknown before the Fourth Age. We have the Happiness at this day
to have the French Church, that is to say, your Converters, for testimonies of
this Truth. They do maintain, That the Apostles established no precise form of
Government, that they contented themselves to preach the Gospel, to send
persons to do so, and to place in every Church a Bishop to govern it. They say,
that it is not certain that S. John, the eldest of the Apostles, i. e. he which
lived longest, did give to the Churches of Asia, amongst whom he died, any form
of Government; that it was in the Fourth Age that the Hierarchical form of
Government was given to the Church; that therein they followed no divine Right
or Institution of the Apostles, (who determined nothing concerning it) but the
Polick Order and Form of Government found in the Roman Empire. As this Empire
was divided into Provinces, Metropolitical Cities, and Prefectures, i. e.
Governments, so they also divided the Churches into Metropolitan, Provincial,
and National.

And indeed, from the time of the Apostles there was no Principality, nor so
much as any Primacy in the Church. The Apostles, by an Authority which they
received immediately from Jesus Christ, governed the Church without
Subordination, and without Division. The Spirit which guided them being one,
and poured out on them all, they were always at agreement it what concerned the
Edification of the Churches; but they did not leave any Successor that had the
same Authority with themselves. It is not true that St. Peter was their Prince,
it does not appear that he had any Primacy of Order above the rest; it is true
he is often named first; but that does not prove that he was the first, or the
President of the Apostolical College. We see that the other Apostles treated
with him after such a manner, as makes it apparent, that they did not
acknowledge in him any kind of Pre-eminence, which should advance him above
them. We see that they sent him to Samaria; it would have appertained to him to
send, and not be sent, if he had been the Prince of the Apostles. We see that
after he had preached the Gospel to Cornelius and some other Pagans, they made
great complaints thereon. We see that S. Paul rebuked him to the face, and even
in public, because in the presence of the Jews he warped, and used some
dissimulation with respect to the use of indifferent things forbidden by the
Law of Moses: Men do not use to deal so with their Prince. The Successors of
the Apostles left in all Churches Presbyters or Bishops to preach the Word, and
administer the Sacraments: but in the beginning the Presbyter and the Bishop
were not distinguished. Those which S. Paul calls Bishop in one place, he calls
also Elders or Presbyters, in the same place or in another. It Is a matter of
Fact which our Adversaries cannot deny. In the 20th of the Acts, the Apostle
speaking to the Presbyters or Elders of the Church of Ephesus, calls them
Bishops; and in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, where he speaks sometimes of
a Bishop, he speaks more frequently of Elders, and by Elders he understands the
very same which he had called Bishops. In the Cities where the Churches were
great, there were many Presbyters; one of them did preside over the rest, not
by turn, but by a privilege which did always appertain to him. St. Paul speaks
of this President, The Elder which rules well is worthy of double honor. This
presiding Presbyter, in the beginning of the second Age, arrogates to himself
the name of Bishop, (which before was common to his Colleagues,) so that there
was no other but the President of the Presbytery who called himself Bishop. He
attributed to himself also the right of imposing hands as well on those which
were received as Pastors, as on the Penitents, and those which were received to
the Communion of the Mysteries. In all this there was as yet no Hierarchy, no
Dependence, no Appeals, no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Every Bishop, with his
College of Presbyters, was Sovereign in his District, and in his Church; and
this Church was not dependent of any other. You may remember how S. Cyprian, in
our Eleventh Pastoral Letter has told us in express words, Epist. 74.
Every Bishop may use his Authority in the Government of his Church according
to his own Will, being under no obligation to give an account thereof to any
but the Lord. And elsewhere, Council. Carth. Anno 258.
That every Bishop is Master of himself, and cannot be judged by another
Bishop, as he also cannot judge other Bishops. All honest men are agreed at
this day therein. The Divines themselves of the Gallican Church maintain it,
and at this time they lend us their Studies and Illuminations to refute the
Flatterers of the Papal Tyranny, who would find in the three first Ages of the
Church Proofs of the Primacy, i. e. of the Principality of the Bishop of Rome
over all the Churches of the World. The Defenders of this Antichristian Power
quote to us the Action of Victor Bishop of Rome, who about the end of the
Second Age excommunicated the Churches of Asia, because they would not keep
Easter precisely the same day that he did: and from thence they conclude, That
the Pope was even then the Prince of all Churches. But to this your own
Converters do answer for us, that in this Victor exercised no Right but what
was common to all Bishops, and that the Bishops of Asia might exercise it on
Victor, as he had exercised it on them; that this Excommunication of Victor was
a separation from his Communion; that the Bishops did communicate one with
another by Letters, which they called Letters of Communion, formed Letters,
etc. When they were angry or discontented one with another, they did no longer
write these Letters of Communion to those of whom they believed the Church had
reason to complain, and they received no more from them; that this is it which
Victor then did, and that all Bishops have Right, by custom, to do the same
thing. The Flatterers of Popes quote to us also the Words of Irenaeus, who
speaking of the Church of Rome, says, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
That it was necessary all other Churches should have recourse to this Church,
because it was the principal, and the most potent. But the French Roman
Catholic Doctors answer for us, that the sense is, That the Roman Church,
because the City of Rome was the Capital City of the Empire, and because of its
grandeur might be a sufficient Witness of Apostolical Tradition, because
Christians came thither upon business from all Parts of the World, and that
coming thither they might there be Witnesses of the Faith of all Churches
scattered throughout all the Empire: and that so the Roman Church, made up and
formed of all Nations, might be a Witness of the Faith of all the Churches in
the World. They object to us also, That it appears by the Works of St. Cyprian,
that Bishops condemned and deposed in Africa, had recourse to the Bishop of
Rome for their re-establishment. But the French Doctors answer with us, That by
the same Letters of St. Cyprian it appears also, that these Attempts were
disallowed and condemned, and that they gave the Bishop of Rome to understand,
that he had nothing to do to receive the Complaints of any of the
Ecclesiastics of the African Church. So that these Gentlemen acknowledge with
us, that in the three first Ages of Christianity there was no Principality, no
subordinate Jurisdiction, nor no dependence of one Church upon another, not
excepting the Church of Rome it self. But we do also maintain unto them, That
from the Third Age, the Churches that had their Seats in those Cities which are
called Metropoles, i. e. Heads of the Provinces, did obtain a certain
Superiority upon the lesser Churches that were in the little Villages of the
Neighborhood, because of the need they had of them. The Metropolitan Cities
were the dwelling places of the Governors of the Provinces, the Courts of
Justice were there, 'twas thither they carried their Tributes; so that all the
Provinces had business there: besides, the Bishops of these Cities were
ordinarily more able than those of little Cities; for it has always been the
ordinary custom to choose the ablest men for the conduct of the most important
Churches, and such as were most exposed to the Temptations of human Authority.
Besides this, there were in these Cities many Presbyters which assisted the
Bishop, and who with him, made a Senate able and knowing in matters of Faith
and Discipline. For these Reasons the Churches of the Country, and such as were
Provincial, addressed themselves to the Churches of the Metropolitan Cities in
all their doubts, and in all their necessities: sometimes to obtain Pastors,
sometimes to know how they should suppress Heretics, and those which were
scandalous, and sometimes in other cases, and on other occasions. This was the
reason that the Churches of the Metropolitan Cities obtained by consent a kind
of Superintendence over others. They confirmed, by imposition of hands, Pastors
in vacant Churches, after the People of those Churches had made an Election of
them. This is the estate in which the Government was found in the beginning of
the Fourth Age. Before that time the Names of Archbishops, Primates, Exarchs,
Patriarchs, and every other Name of Power and Dignity, were wholly unknown in
the Church. But the Emperors becoming Christians, Pride introduced it self into
the Ecclesiastical Government; and in the space of an 150 years, or thereabout,
that Hierarchy was seen to be born and to establish it self, which certainly
made way for the birth of the Antichristian Empire of Rome: and behold how it
came to pass.

Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, assembled a Council in the
City of Nice, to determine the Controversy which Arrius had unhappily raised
about the Divinity of the Son of God. The Council, after it had determined
those matters which respected Faith, were willing also to regulate matters of
Discipline, and made twenty Canons concerning it: in which they caused those
Practices which were then in use, to pass into Laws, supposing it may be, that
they were much more ancient than indeed they were. For example, it found that
the Churches had yet preserved this mark of mutual Dependence, that is to say,
not to make void the judicial Sentences of one the other, and not to suffer
that a person excommunicated in one Church should have recourse to another to
be re-established in its Communion. It made a Law thereof in the fifth Canon,
As to those that are separated from the Communion, be it that they are Layicks,
be it that they are of the body of the Clergy, let the Bishops of every
Province observe this agreeably to the Canon that says, Let those that are
rejected by one, not be received by others.

But finding also that it was a custom, that in difficult matters respecting
Faith or Discipline, when it happened that any Persons were excommunicated or
deposed, the neighboring Churches were wont to assemble to judge thereof, of
that also it made a Law in the same Canon, and ordained, that for the
examination of Causes determined by particular Churches a Synod should assemble
twice a year in every Province, to the end that the Bishop of the Province
being assembled, might examine these sort of Questions. As the Chymera of the
Sovereign Authority of General Councils was not yet born, so the Fathers of the
Council of Nice contented themselves to ordain, That Provincial Councils should
be held, but gave no advice for the appointing General Councils, from ten Years
to ten, as lately the Council of Constance did.

The Bishops assembled at Nice also found, that by custom, the Churches that
had their Seats in Metropolitick Cities, and entertained some superintendency
over the Churches of the lesser Cities of the Province, they confirmed this
usage, and made a Law thereof in the sixth Canon. Let the ancient Customs, say
they, be observed, that is, that the Bishop of Alexandria have power over the
Churches of Egypt, of Lybia, and Pentapolis, because it is so also, that the
Bishop of Rome has been accustomed to have. In like manner at Antioch, and in
the other Provinces, let the Privileges of other Provinces be preserved. There
is nothing that has less foundation than the pretense of most part of the
Doctors of the Roman Church, who imagine that here is the establishment of those
Seats which were afterward called Patriarchal: Neither the Name nor Power of
Patriarchs were known at that time. And the Council of Nice had no other
design, but to confirm by a Law, that which it found established by custom,
that is to say, that the greater Churches should have some superintendency over
the lesser. There were then three great Governments in the Roman Empire, Rome
for Italy, Alexandria for the South, and Antioch for the East: The Churches
which were in these three principal Cities of the Empire, had arrogated some
pre-eminence over the neighboring Churches. The Council confirms to them this
pre-eminence. But we may not imagine, as the Roman Doctors would persuade us,
that the Council did then divide the whole Church into three Patriarchates,
Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, as if all the other Churches had been subjected
to these three: These three Churches are named but for example, because they
were the principal. Besides, it is added, Likewise, let the Privileges be
preserved to other Churches; that is to say, let the Churches, which by custom
have obtained a superintendency over their Neighbors, as lesser Churches,
preserve that Pre-eminence. So the Church of Asia (which is not named in this
Canon) is one of those which had Pre-eminence over her Neighbors, to whom this
Privilege was preserved for some time. At that time therefore, by custom, and
by the Law of the Council of Nice, Alexandria had inspection over the Churches
of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis; the Bishop of Rome, had inspection over the
suburbicarian Churches, that is to say, the Cities which were either of the
Government of the Vicarship of the City of Rome, and no more. Now the Vicarship
of Rome was so far from extending it self to the whole Empire, that it extended
to but about half Italy on the side of Naples; the other part of Italy which is
on the side of Milan, was of another Vicarship, that is to say, of another
Government, whereof the City of Milan was Capital, and the Bishop of Rome had
nothing to do there. The Bishop of Antioch had inspection over the Churches of
Syria, and no more. The other Churches in the Roman Empire were independent of
these three Seats, and had their Metropolitan Churches, under which they ranged
themselves for the assembling of their Synods, so that in the Canon of Nice
nothing is found of the Institution of Patriarchs, but only a Confirmation of
the Privileges that the Churches of the Metropolitan Cities had obtained by
consent from the lesser Churches round about them.

It is nevertheless true, that soon after the Metropolitan Bishops of these
three Cities, Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria, began to play the Masters, and to
claim Right over the neighboring Churches, much beyond the ancient use and
intentions of the Council of Nice. They took advantage from this, that these
three Cities were the three great Cities of the Empire; and because they alone
were named in the Canon of the Council, they made use thereof, say I, to extend
their Jurisdiction as we see: But it must be observed, that this Council of
Nice (having found, that by custom the Metropolitan Bishops had inspection over
other less considerable Cities, by contributing their assistance and their Care
to establish Bishops there) did confirm also this Privilege by the same sixth
Canon. This must remain certain, says the Council, that he who has been made
Bishop without the Advice of the Metropolitan, the Great Synod declares, that
he ought to be no Bishop; but if Two or Three, through Obstinacy and a Spirit
of contradiction, oppose themselves to an Establishment made by a reasonable
common consent, and according to the Ecclesiastical Canons, let the plurality
of Voices prevail against them. This second part of the Canon makes it appear
sufficiently plain, that in the first part thereof, nothing is handled
concerning the Establishment of the pretended Rights of Patriarchs, but only of
the Privileges of the Metropolitan Cities, without which, the Council will not
suffer that any Ordination of Bishops be made in the Cities of the Province.

The Bishops of these three Cities, Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, making use
of the Canon of the Council, began to raise themselves above all others. In the
same time Byzantium, which had not been hitherto any other than a very obscure
Church, subject to the Metropolitan of Heraclea, a City of Thrace, sees her
self honored by the presence of the Emperors. Constantine carried thither the
S^at of the Empire, and called it Constantinople, after his own Name, and
obtained for it the Name of New Rome. Then the Bishop of Constantinople began
also to make use of an Advantage by the Dignity of the City where he was: So
that instead of three Tyrants in the Church, which aspired to make themselves
Masters of the Flocks, there are found four; the Bishop of Rome, he of
Alexandria, he of Antioch, and he of Constantinople. But as Rome always
preserved a Character of Greatness and Pre-eminence over other Cities, because
it was the stock and root of the Empire, they allowed a Primacy of Order to the
Bishop of that city without contradiction. And this by so much the more easily,
as the Spirit which built the Mystery of Iniquity had universally established
the Opinion, that S. Peter accounted the chief of the Apostles had placed his
Episcopal Seat at Rome, where he established Successors; in such a manner that
all Bishops in the World did silently consent to grant this Primacy of Order,
and of Presidence to the Church of Rome for these two Reasons: the first that
the City of Rome was the Capital of the Universe; the second, that the chief of
the Apostles had had his Seat there; so the Bishop of Rome was acknowledged for
the first in order in their Assemblies, but without any kind of Power or
Jurisdiction over others. In the mean time, the rest of the Hierarchy was
formed after the Model of the Government of the Empire. The Rome Empire in the
East was divided into Five principal Governments: 1. That of the East, whereof
the Metropolis was Antioch, and which extending it self over Syria, is called
East by distinction from the other Oriental Provinces. 2. That of Egypt, whose
Head was Alexandria. 3. That of Pontus, whereof the Capital was Caesarea. 4.
That of Asia, whereof the Capital was Ephesus. 5. That of Thrace, whereof the
Metropolis was Constantinople:
So that these five Cities, Antioch, Alexandria, Caesarea, Ephesus, and
Constantinople, were the places where the five great Governors of the Oriental
part of the Roman Empire had their abode. The Bishops of the same Cities
advanced themselves also above the other Bishops of the Provinces, and formed
five Exarchates, i. e. five sorts of Patriarchates independent the one from the
other, in every one of these Exarchates or Patriarchates, there were many
Bishops, and even many Metropolitans in the sense that the Word is taken at
this day. The Exarchs of Antioch, of Alexandria, of Ephesus, of Caesarea, and
of Constantineple, every one in his Exarchate, was above the Bishops in
Government, whether they were Metropolitans or simple Bishops; so it was in the
West also. There was in Italy two principal Governments under the Name of
Vicarships; the Government of Rome and that of Milan, for which reason the
Bishops of these two Cities imitating the Civil Government, advanced themselves
also in the Ecclesiastic, above the other Bishops of Italy.

The Bishop of Rome had therefore at that time a Primacy of Order and
Presidence, as we have observed, because of the Pre-eminence of the City, and
the false Opinion that had obtained, that S. Peter had been Bishop there. But
he exercised no Act of Jurisdiction or Superiority over others. It was not
permitted him to receive Appeals, nor to make void the Decisions of other
Bishops. They were not the Bishops of Rome that called General Councils, they
were the Emperors; it was not they that determined Controversies of Faith, they
were the Councils; they could not send out their Interdicts, nor
Excommunications against other Churches, or constrain them to Obedience by any
Censure. If the Bishops of Rome did separate other Churches from their
Communion, other Churches also kept themselves separate from their Communion,
adherence to the Bishop of Rome was of no necessity to obtain the esteem of an
Orthodox, and Catholic Church, and there were Churches in those Ages which
continued many Years in separation, and without any Communion with the Church
of Rome, without ever being esteemed either Heretics or Schismatics.
Nevertheless, it was in the Fourth Age, that the Bishop of Rome did sow the
Seeds of his Tyranny, and took upon himself to judge those which other Bishops
had already censured. And this happened chiefly on the occasion of the Troubles
which the Heresy of Arrius raised in the Church. The Arrians became Masters in
the East, and drove the Orthodox Bishops from their Seats, as Athanasius Bishop
of Alexandria, Paul Bishop of Constantinople, etc. These Bishops unjustly
deposed and driven away, retired themselves into the West, where Arrianism had
made far less Ravages. The Bishops of Milan, Rome, and the principal Seats of
Italy, continued Orthodox. S. Athanasius, and others came into Italy, and to
Rome, to implore the Succor of the Bishop thereof, and other Bishops of the
West, to the end that by their Credit and Authority, as well with other
Bishops, as principally with the Emperors, they might be re-established in
their Seats. The Bishop of Rome receives them, treats them as Bishops, and
declares that he had no regard for the unjust and violent Decisions of the
Arrians; yea he did all that was in his power to re-place them in their Seats.
At this time, i. e. in the heat of these Controversies stirred up by the
Arrians, the Bishops of the West which were Orthodox, held a Council at Sardis,
in the Year 347. there to judge the Cause of Athanasius, and Paul Bishop of
Constantinople. In this Council the Bishops of the West observing that the
Violences which the Orthodox Bishops of the East had suffered from the hands of
Heretic Bishops were without remedy, whilst these Heretical Bishops should be
absolute Masters, they thought fit to make three Canons or Ecclesiastical
Rules, according to which, when a Bishop found himself oppressed by unjust
Judgment, he might have recourse to Rome; that the Bishop of Rome should have
power to appoint a review of the Process, and for that reason send Deputies on
his part which should cause a Synod of the Province to assemble and re-judg the
matter a second time, that in expectation of this second Judgment, the Affairs
should remain in suspense, and the place of the deposed Bishop should not be
filled. Behold exactly the fatal Point of the first conception of this
tyrannical Power, which has since swallowed up the Church. The truth is, that
the Council of Sardis was made up of Western Bishops, which had no power to
make Laws for the Eastern Church: It is also true, that the Churches of the
East have always scoffed at the Canons of Sardis, and never would receive them:
It is also true, that in the West it self, these Canons were not received but
very lately, and a long time after. But it is also true, that since that time
the Bishops of Rome have never ceased to make valid, and even to extend these
Canons very far beyond their intention. They have been willing to persuade,
First, That they have right to receive Appeals, whereas the Council of Sardis
grants them nothing but the right of appointing a review, which is very much
different from it. Secondly, And above all, they would make us believe that
they have this Power by Divine Right, and from the Apostles, whereas they have
it not, but by the Canons of this Council of Sardis. In the Year 383, that is
to say, about Sixty Years after the Council of Nice, and Thirty six after that
of Sardis, was held the first Council of Constantinople, which is reckoned for
the second of those which are called General, although it were made up of an
Hundred and fifty Fathers, and no more, and tho there were none at all of all
the West. This Council enlarges and confirms the Hierarchy. But it did not yet
establish the Patriarchs, i. e. the four Seats which pretend to have Dominion
over all the Churches of the World: On the contrary, in the second Canon it
ordains, 1. That the Bishops of one Diocese, i. e. of one Province, for then a
Diocese did not signify the particular Church of one Bishop, 'twas a
Collection of many Bishops under one Exarch. It appoints, say I, That the
Bishops of one Province should not intermeddle in the Affairs of another; and
this without excepting the Bishop of Rome. 2. It appoints, That the Bishop of
Alexandria administer only the Affairs of Egypt. 3. That the Bishops of the
East, i. e. of Syria, govern their Churches, preserving to the Bishop of
Antioch the Pre-eminence that had been given him by the Council of Nice. 4.
That the Bishop of Asia, whereof Ephesus was the Head, govern the Diocese of
Asia, without being subject to Antioch, Constantinople, or Rome. 5. That the
Churches of Thrace be governed by the Bishops and Synods of the Province,
without any other Superior. 6. That the Churches amongst the barbarous Nations
govern themselves according to the custom of their Fathers, without Patriarchs
and without Pope.
There is no footstep of any Papal Authority, nor even of any Patriarchal and
Universal. In the following Canon we read these words, That the Bishop of the
City of Constantinople has the Privileges of Honor after the Bishop of Rome,
because it is new Rome. A Canon which gives to the Bishop of Rome nothing but
Privileges of Honor and Presidence, and grants them to be enjoyed by New Rome
in the second Place: For this reason the Bishops of Constantinople would no
longer sit below the Bishops of Antioch and Alexandria, because the City of
their Seat was the Imperial City. This makes it appear, that the Bishops had no
Pre-eminence one before another, but by reason of the Cities where they had
their Seats, and not by any divine Right. The Case is the same with the Bishop
of Rome: That Bishop gained nothing by all this, as is evident; nevertheless,
the truth is, he always grew higher, according to the measure that the
Hierarchy advanced. For the Exarchs assumed unjust Rights over those which were
merely Bishops. The Bishops of the Four first Seats, Rome, Constantinople,
Alexandria, and Antioch, raised themselves by little and little above the
Exarchs, and at last subjected and swallowed them up. Particularly he of
Constantinople, whose Ambition was not inferior to that of the Bishop of Rome,
made himself Judge of the Exarchates of Pontus and Asia, and that of the
Barbarian Churches, with that of Thrace, which he had already. 'Twas in the
Fourth Ecumenical Council held at Calcedon in the Year 451. where it was
ordained, that Can. 28.
The Church of Constantinople should enjoy the same Privileges and Honors in
Ecclesiastical Matters, seeing the City of Constantinople in Temporal Matters,
did enjoy the same Privileges and Honors with ancient Rome. But if
Constantinople did then exalt it self, Rome did not do it less in proportion.
Already the Bishops of Rome began to Lord it over all the West. Leo I. was
placed in that Seat, a Man who had great Parts, but of great Pride, who played
the Master in the Church: He declared that a Man is not of the Church, when he
does not obey it; he proceeded so far as to say, That Jesus Christ intended
that all his Gifts should run down from the Chair of S. Peter, as from the
Head, on all the Body of the Church, and that he which dared to separate
himself from the Chair of S. Peter, ought to understand, that he is excluded
from the divine Mysteries, i. e. from the Church. This was the Leo that
obtained a Law from the Emperor Valentinian, by which he was established
Sovereign Judge of all other Bishops; for which reason we take this Episcopacy
of Leo for the first Point of the birth of the Antichristian Empire.

This is enough for my end, which is not to give you a History of the
Hierarchy, and after that of the Papal Tyranny in all their Progressions, but
only an Abridgment of the History of their birth in the Fourth and Fifth Ages.
That which I have to observe for the conclusion of this Article, whereunto you
ought to give good attention, is, that the brief History that I have given you,
is perfectly agreeable to the Spirit of the Gallican Church at this day. She
maintains 1. That the Church of Rome is no more but a particular Church as
others are. 2. That S. Peter had nothing but a Primacy of Order and Presidence
above the Apostles. 3. That S. Peter could give (to his Successors) over other
Bishops, no more, but that Primacy which he had over the Apostles. 4. That the
Bishop of Rome originally and by divine Right, had no power over the Universal
Church. 5. That he did not receive Appeals in the first Ages of the Church. 6.
That he had no Right to assemble General Councils. 7. That he could take
cognizance of the Affairs of no other Province but his own, no not by Appeal.
8. That he had no Right to take knowledge of Matters of Faith, to make
Decisions therein, which should oblige the whole Church. 9. That before the
Council of Nice and after, he had no inspection over other Churches, but those
which were in the Neighborhood of Rome. 10. That he could no excommunicate
other Bishops, any otherwise than the other Bishops could excommunicate him.
11. That a Man might separate himself from the Bishop of Rome without being a
Schismatic, and out of the Church. 12. That the Pope had no Right over other
Bishops. 13. That the Council of Sardis is the Fountain of that Right of
receiving Appeals, which the Pope claims. 14. That the Rights which the Pope
has at this day, excepting his Primacy, are by human Law; and because he has
assumed them to himself, or because they have been conceded to him. 15. To
which they add, he is not Infallible, nor superior to Councils, nor Master of
the Temporalities of Kings.
Behold the Foundation upon which we at this day exhort you, to make to your
selves no longer a frightful Phantome of the Authority of the Pope. Surely the
Gallican Church in all this takes great steps in your favor, and you are
obliged unto them for it. But yet there remains one, without which all the rest
are absolutely nothing, and that is to break with the Pope. We are preparing a
Work, in which we pretend to make it plain to these Gentlemen, that they cannot
dispense with themselves from finishing that which they have begun, and that in
the Estate in which their Divinity concerning it is at this day, they ought to
consider the Pope as the greatest and the most hateful Usurper.

A Point of Controversy. A Continuation of the matter of Schism. Although the
Corruption of the Roman Church were not extreme, yet it would not be lawful for
us to return thither. Objections of the new Converts about it.
MY Brethren, in the preceding Letter we have made it appear, that although we
had been in the wrong in our Separation, and that the Church of Rome had not
been corrupt, you would not wholly hazard your Salvation by continuing out of
it. I am at present to make it appear that the Church of Rome being corrupt,
with far greater reason you need fear nothing by not returning thither again.
But for the greater illustration of this matter, let us suppose two sorts of
corruption, the one in some sort tolerable, and the other wholly intolerable.
Let us argue upon the first, and suppose that Persons separate themselves from
a Church which has Errors in Doctrine, which nevertheless retains the
Fundamentals in their Integrity, which has Superstitions, and those very
great, in its Worship, but which is no formally Idolatrous. Those which
separate from such a Church had done better if they had made no Separation.
They ought to have attempted all sorts of methods to have reformed their
Church. Those Remedies not succeeding but exasperating the evil, they ought to
exercise Patience, and to expect a more favorable time for Reformation. But
supposing that whilst these men employ methods of Softness, matters insensibly
grow warm, and fierce by the Contentions of Men, a thing which happens almost
always, and necessarily; supposing, say I, that the fierceness and heat of the
one and the other Party thrust on things to an entire Rupture and Schism, do
you believe that the Party which separates it self from the main Body, and
embraces a Religion more pure than that which it left, is obliged to return to
the corrupt Party from which it is separated? Not at all. It may, and ought to
say, If things had proceeded otherways, it is true, we could have born for a
while those Corruptions which are in some sort tolerable; but things, by the
Providence of God, happening thus, we will stay where we are, and keep our
selves in that Purity which we have chosen and not return to the corruption
which we have forsaken. I do maintain that this separated Church had reason,
and were not obliged to return. It were not obliged to return for Salvation for
having carried Christianity with it, yea having purged it, it would be sure
that a man might be saved in its Communion. It will not be obliged for
Edification, for it is not for Edification, that being in a pure Church we
should join our selves to another Church which we believe impure, and is really
so. I go farther, and maintain, That such a separate Church were obliged not to
return to its corrupt stock. For when God has separated us from corruption,
although this corruption be not extreme, we are obliged to keep far from it.
It Is true that Preservation of Peace is worth much; but it is a good thing which
must not be purchased at the price of Truth. Schism which is making, and in
action makes a great noise, and gives great scandal: for which reason I have
said, that when the corruption of a Church is in some sort tolerable, it were
better to suffer it than to make a violent Separation: but the continuation of
a Separation is not of the same scandal; Custom reconciles us to every thing:
and the scandal of such a continuation is not so great that we should sacrifice
important Truths for the sake thereof.

Let us at present apply these Reflections to the Subject that we are debating,
and do the Church of Rome that favor, to suppose, for one moment, as true that
which is very false, viz. that her corruption is in some sort tolerable; that
she has Errors, but does not ruin Fundamentals; that she is Superstitious,
but not Idolatrous. Let us suppose also, that for this reason our Fathers did
not do ill in continuing for some time in the Roman Church, and exercising
Patience therein. But let us consider at the same time, that things did not
take this course there; that the Providence of God did otherwise dispose
thereof. Our Fathers did their duty in demanding a Reformation: they were
obliged thereunto, although the corruption were in that degree where we suppose
it, i. e. tolerable. But whilst the one demanded Reformation with Zeal, and the
other refused it with Passion, a Separation is made. There came Anathema's from
Rome, and Thunders from the Temporal Powers, with Fires and Gibbets, etc. which
took from us the liberty of remaining there. It signifies nothing who had right
or wrong in the manner of Separation: however it were, behold it done. Now I
maintain, my Brethren, the thing being done, neither Edification, Conscience,
Honor, nor your Salvation, can suffer you to re-enter into the Roman Church,
although you should suppose that her corruption is not extreme, but in some
sort tolerable. First of all, your Edification will not permit it. You suppose
that the Worship of Images, the Invocation of Saints, the Adoration of the
Eucharist, etc. are at least great Superstitions; how does the Edification of
the Church permit you to partake in all these things? The Edification of the
Church obliges you to do all that you can to purge it from these Superstitions;
and your returning to a Union with the Roman Church, is a proper means to
confirm all Men in them. Conscience will not permit it neither; for being
convinced that they are Superstitions, although you believe them in some sort
tolerable, you ought to have no more part in them. It Is a kind of Sin against
the Holy Ghost to sin against Conscience, and the Illuminations which God gives
to you; and that which would be a small fault in a state of Ignorance and
Error, becomes a great crime, when it is committed against knowledge: so
although the Invocation of Saints were but a little fault in an ignorant and a
prejudiced Papist, it is certain, that in you it is a heinous crime, because you
know the evil thereof. Don't say that you do not invocate Saints, for you do
invocate them in the public Service, wherein you do partake, and that is
enough. I add, that neither will Honor permit this reunion with the Roman
Church, even on supposition that her corruption is not extreme; for it is a
shameful cowardice, and unworthy of an honest man, to betray his own
Sentiments, and to give to a Church which he believes impure, that homage which
is due only to a Church that is clean and undefiled. To conclude, I say, that
your Salvation will not permit you to put a period to your Separation from the
Roman Church, even supposing that her corruption is in some sort tolerable: for
that corruption which might not destroy your Soul when you were there, having
been educated, brought up, and instructed therein from your Infancy, becomes
mortal when you receive it, not having been born, brought up, nor instructed
therein. The difference is clear, and the reason thereof is evident. It is
certain that there is a Superstition, ungrateful to God, which he tolerates in
an ignorant Person, but he will not suffer nor endure it in a Man of Knowledge
and Understanding; for a Person which practices a considerable Superstition
against his Conscience, makes appear therein an Abyss of Perverseness, contempt
of God, his Laws, and Truth, and such a love of the World, and the interests of
the Flesh, which put him absolutely out of the state of Salvation. Behold
already something advanced, to deliver you from those vain horrors which they
would thrust upon you for your Separation, under the name of Schism; for, 1.
Although the Schism or Separation had been rash, you would have no reason to be
afraid of your Salvation. 2. Although the corruption of the Roman Church had
been in some sort tolerable, and although there had been something of
Precipitation in the Separation, nevertheless you would have no Obligation to
return to the Roman Church, but you would be obliged to the contrary.


And here we shall find an occasion to answer to the Fallacy which the new
Converts (as they call them) put upon themselves, and which we have mentioned
in our Tenth Pastoral Letter, and which is one of the most effectual means by
which they lay themselves to sleep in that unhappy state where they are. There
is in it a Question of Right, and another of Fact. The matter of Fact is to
know whether indeed the Roman Church be corrupted to that degree that we report
it. The Question of Right is, Whether supposing the Roman Church very corrupt,
we may separate our selves from it, and persevere in that Separation to this
day. We will first handle the Question of Right, because it is thereby that they
enchant you, and thereby that the most part of you do quiet and calm your
selves, it is thereby, say I, that they do enchant you; for your Converters
following the Principles of the Author of the Legitimate Prejudices against the
Calvinists, and Mr. Ferrand's Treatise concerning the Church, tell you, Book of
Prejudices. p. 147, 148, etc.
That although the Church of Rome were Idolatrous and Heretical, the Calvinists
had no right to separate themselves from it, and to set up other Churches, and
another Ministry. It Is also thereby that those which would be at rest in the
Roman Church do lull themselves asleep: for this Proposition, that though the
Roman Church were Heretical and Idolatrous you ought not to separate from it,
in the Writings of your Converters Mr. Nicholas and Mr. Ferrand, is nothing but
a false Supposition, to make you see the more clearly the necessity of
Adherence to the Church of Rome, and the horror of Schism. And if they found
themselves pressed too hard on this spot of ground, they might be able always
to retrench themselves behind, and say, Now it is not true that the Church of
Rome is Heretical and Idolatrous. But at this day one part of these new
Converts, from a false Supposition draw a very solid Conclusion. They receive
the Supposition as true, That the Church of Rome is very corrupt; and maintain
this Thesis, That nevertheless they ought not to separate from it; and that Men
may or ought to return to it. We have heard the Reasonings of one of these Men
in our Tenth Letter; we must hear it once more; for he says all that these Men
think. Speaking of the Questions which perplex the New Converts, First, says
he, on the positive Separation which ous Fathers made, we say, that we ought to
suffer many things rather than separate from the Unity of the Church; that the
Abuses introduced by the Governors thereof may not be imputed to the Faithful;
that all Scripture which makes mention of Heresies does not command Separation
for the sake of them; on the contrary, it commands us to bear them. It says,
that we may build upon the Foundation, which is Christ, Wood, Hay, and Stubble;
that Jesus Christ only will make Separation the one from the other; that the
good Grain and the Chaff will be separated at the last day; but that they must
grow together till then. After he adds some Reflections on a Conjecture of the
Author of the Accomplishment of Prophesies, which it is not necessary to report
here, because they will have their place elsewhere. And he concludes this
Points with these Words, And although the Pope should be Antichrist, that would
not infallibly hinder Christians from being saved in the Roman Church. The
Letter contains another Article on the Question, Whether the Roman Church be
Idolatrous in worshipping the Eucharist, or Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. This
also shall have its place elsewhere. Afterward he adds, At last they conclude
two things; the first, That all the Fundamental Truths of Christianity being
confessed by the Roman Church, we are obliged to continue united with it,
without making a positive Separation, which is against all the duties of
Charity, and which instead of bringing back those which err, produces nothing
but an eternal Distance and Animosity. In the second place, they do maintain,
That we do not necessarily partake in the Errors of a Communion in which we
are; the common Confession of Faith ought to be esteemed as an agreement to
live under the same Ministry: but we are not therefore responsible for all the
Abuses which may be or can be introduced into the Ministry. Provided we adore
the same God, and profess the same Fundamentals of Christianity, the rest
cannot be imputed to single Persons, above all, when there is a necessity of
joining our selves to this first Christian Society, and we cannot find any
public Worship more pure and more edifying. The Examples of our Fathers before
the Reformation prove clearly, That we may secure our Salvation in the Roman
Communion even in adhering to the public Worship. Whatever Men say, it is
inconceivable that Men born and brought up in a Religion, who never heard speak
of any other Doctrine, and who lived and died without protesting against the
Opinion of their Church, should not partake in the Worship thereof. Behold an
exact account of all the Illusions which these new reunited Persons put upon
themselves, and an account which does honor enough to the Spirit and Wit of
him that made it. Would to God he would take as exact an account of his own
Heart. Our Sheet being full, you shall have no Answer to these Juggles till the
following Letters.

March 15. 1687.
The FIFTEENTH PASTORAL LETTER. AN Article of Antiquity. The Birth of the
religious Worship of Creatures in the Fourth and Fifth Ages. The proofs of the
Novelty of this Worship. An Article. An Answer to the Reasons of the new
Converts on the Subject of Schism and Separation.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
SInce we entered into the Fourth Age, we found there three great Innovations,
Monnachism, General Councils, and the Hierarchy. The fourth important Change,
which altered the form of the Church happening in the Fourth and Fifth Ages, is
the Worship of Creatures, the Adoration of Relics, and the Invocations of
Saints. If there be any thing certain in the World, it is, that this Worship
was wholly unknown in the preceding Ages; and no man can give attention to
those few Proofs that heretofore we have made thereof, without being convinced
of it: it is certain that we have seen the Occasions, and if I may so say, the
Blossoms thereof, in that excessive respect which they had for the Persons of
their Confessors, in the regards which they had for their Intercessions, and in
the care that they took to collect their Bones, and to bury their Bodies
honorably: and this is it which gave occasion to the Pagans of accusing the
Christians for worshipping their Martyrs; as we have seen that the Jews of
Smyrna did accuse the Christians thereof on the occasion of the Body of
Polycarpus, which they hindered from being given unto them. This is that which
caused the Pagans, under the Persecution of Dioclesian, to dig up the Bodies of
those two Martyrs Dorotheus and Gorgonius, and throw them into the Sea, For
fear, says Eusebius, Lib. 8. Hist. Eccl. cap. 6.
that if they continued in their Tombs they should be adored and taken for
Gods, according to the Opinion they had concerning us. We have seen how the
Christians of Smyrna, and Eusebius who transcribes their Epistle, did refute
this calumny. Moreover, Eusebius says in this last Passage, According to the
Opinion that they have concerning us. This makes it appear, that the Opinion
was false. They had therefore in the beginning of the Fourth Age a very great
respect for the Tombs of Martyrs; but 'twas a thing unheard of, to open them,
take out their Bones, and put them in Chests and Boxes, to the end that they
might be scattered over all the World; yea long before in the fourth Age, St.
Anthony being about to dye, declared that it was his Will that his Body should
be buried, and not kept upon a Bed, after the manner of the Egyptians Because,
says he, it is an affront, and a Violation of the Laws, not to bury the Bodies
of the Dead, how holy soever they might be. These were the last Words of dying
Truth; for afterward Men began to search all Places, and to disinterr the
Bodies of Saints. The deceit of Priests, the Innocence of the People, and the
malice of the Devil, advanced this unhappy Superstition. Persons ran about in
the search of Relics, nor would they build any Temple or Church without them;
they feigned Visions and devious Dreams, which revealed unto them where the
Bodies of Saints were laid, and they took the pretended Bodies of Apostles and
Martyrs from their Tombs, three hundred and four hundred Years after their
Death. As it was impossible that this foolish Superstition should not soon
degenerate into Idolatry, so it did not fail to come to pass: for these Relics
drawn from their Tombs wrought Miracles, these Miracles were ascribed to the
Saints whose Relics they were: Men could not fail of invoking those Saints,
which they believed did work Miracles in favor of those who did venerate and
honor their Relics. We see no sensible marks of the Invocation of Saints,
till after the year of our Lord 360, and the most ancient Authors that speak
thereof are St. Ambrose and St. Basil; not that we are not persuaded, that the
People (the Authors of this Superstition) did not practice it a long time
before, as in the time of St. Austin, we observe the Worship of Images to have
taken its birth by the Superstition of some ignorant People; notwithstanding
the generality of the People and Pastors did not suffer themselves to be
carried away to this unhappy Idolatry, till a long time after. In like manner,
it may not be doubted, but that from the beginning of the Fourth Age, there
were some ignorant Persons among the People, who ran into excess in the respect
which they gave to the Ashes of the Martyrs. But the practice did not become
universal till the Fifth Age, and the Doctors and Teachers began not to be born
down thereby, till about the end of the Fourth. And yet there was but little of
it, for in all the former part of the Fourth Age, we see very few Monuments or
Footsteps thereof in the Authors of those times; but in the Fifth Age this
Torrent ran with a prodigious swiftness, in such a manner, that in less than
Fifty Years this Superstition became as it were the reigning Religion of the
People. Behold then a matter of Fact, which we dispute not with the Papists,
it is, that about the end of the Fourth Age, some Examples of the Invocation of
Saints are seen, and a great many more in the Fifth; so that it is to no
purpose that they quote to us Passages from S. Austin, S. Basil, Chrysostom,
and Theodoret, to prove the Invocation of Saints in that Age; for it is a Point
we do not dispute with them. But we do maintain these Two things, 1. That the
Worship of Saints took its original from that of Relics, and that Men only
invoked the Martyrs whose Relics they had. 2. That this Worship was new in
that Age, and that it was unknown in the Ages preceding:
The first Point will serve in what follows for a proof of the second, which is
the important Point we have to prove, viz. The novelty of this Worship in the
Fourth and Fifth Ages.

1. We prove the novelty of this Worship by the silence of Christian Authors
during the space of three Hundred or four Hundred Years. It Is a thing
impossible that so many Writers having so much occasion to speak of the Martyrs
and Saints, and having said so much concerning them, did never find it
convenient to speak one word concerning the Worship and Honor that was to be
given them after their death. The lesser Doctors among the Papists, such is
that from whom Mr. Pelisson produces a Latin Fragment, treat this negative
Argument with Contempt; but no Man of good Sense will treat it so, and no wise
Man will ever persuade himself, that for the space of three Hundred and sixty
Years Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Ireneus, Cyprian, Eusebius,
Athanasius, Hillary, and so many others, should not speak one word of this
religious Worship of Creatures, if it had been then in use. Besides this
negative Proof, we make use of all those positive Proofs which we have proved
from the Second and Third Age, by which it appears, that the Primitive
Christians invoked none but God, and that they did not invoke even Angels. It Is
that which Origin has plainly told us, and it is that which Ireneus had said
before him Iren. lib. 2. cap. 58.
: That the Church does nothing by the Invocation of Angles, nor by any other
wicked Curiosity, but by Addressing purely, plainly, and openly her Prayers to
the Lord the maker of all things.

Among these positive Proofs, we have seen some of them which formally tell us,
that the Church neither worships, invokes, nor adores Martyrs, such is the
Epistle of the Christians of Smyrna about the Martyrdom of Polycarpus. Is it
not therefore an amazing boldness in your Converters to mantain to you, that
there was no change in the Doctrine and Practice of the Church thereon in the
Fourth Age? It Is clear that Men did not invoke Saints in the Third Age; it is
clear that they began to do it about the end of the Fourth; it is therefore
clear, that a Change did happen. But they will say, where is the Author of this
Change? Where is the Innovator? This Question is absurd. 'Twas not one single
Person that introduced this alteration in Worship, 'twas the superstitious
People, the great respect which the People saw Men had for the Tombs of Martyrs
carried some Dotards to advance, that the Souls of Martyrs were about their
Tombs. And it is apparently according to the conjecture of Albespinus that which
the Thirty fourth Canon of the Council of Eliberis has respect unto Albasp.
Annot. in Council. Eliberitan.
, That we ought not to light up Torches in the day time in the Coemetaries,
lest we disturb the Spirits of the Saints. They imagined that these Spirits
fluttering about their Tombs, might suffer inconvenience by the Smoke of
Torches and Candles. Is not this a pleasant Imagination? S. Jerome writing
against Vigilantius does also say, That the Souls of Martyrs love their Ashes
hover about then, and are always present with them. We know that the Vulgar are
naturally inclined to Superstition, and it is easy to conceive how the People
instructed in such an Opinion should conceive an extraordinary respect for
those places, where were the Bodies and Souls of Martyrs: And conceiving that
these. Souls which conversed about their Tombs, had also the liberty of flying
back to Heaven, when they thought good; it was very easy for ignorant People
to fall into a persuasion that it was very good to recommend themselves to
their care and intercession: There was therefore no need of an Innovator or a
new Preacher, nothing more was needful, but to let the People do as they
pleased. Mark this well, all Heresies have been introduced by Doctors, for
there is need of Wit and Knowledge to innovate in Opinions; but all
Superstitions have been introduced by the People: For nothing more is needful
to become superstitious, than Sottishness, Simplicity, and Ignorance; therefore
the Authors of Innovation in Doctrine may be observed, for they are ordinarily
single Persons; but we cannot observe the first Innovators in matter of
Superstition, because they are the People. But it will be said, why did not the
Doctors oppose themselves to the Superstition of the People? First, it is not
true, that the Doctors did not oppose themselves to Superstitions at their
birth. S. Austin, and S. Jerome himself blamed the Superstitions which began to
take place in their Age, and which afterward overcame all Contradiction. But
nevertheless it is true, that they did not oppose them as they ought to have
done, yea, that they suffered themselves to be carried away with them as others
did, because that these Superstitions were established by little and little,
and that the beginnings which the Doctors did easily suffer (because 'twas but
a small matter) gave place to the toleration, of that which was introduced
afterward, which nevertheless was altogether intolerable. To conclude, it is of
little importance to us, how and why the Doctors suffered themselves to be
carried into Errors and popular Superstitions. The matter of Fact is certain,
and ought to be indisputable, by the proof that we have made thereof, and by
that which we shall make thereof in what follows.

Our Second Proof of the novelty of this Worship in the Fifth Age is, that then
Men did not invoke all the Saints, as it is done at this day; yea, they did not
invoke those Saints which are most eminent, such were the Apostles, excepting
S. Peter and S. Paul, whose Relics were believed to be at Rome, others had no
Churches, Temples, Memorials, nor Persons devoted to them. S. Basil the most
ancient of all those which speak of the Invocation of Saints, celebrates the
Memory only of the Forty Martyrs, that of Julitta, and the Martyr Mamas: In
this Homily upon Julitta the Martyr, there is nothing that teaches us they did
invoke her: In the Homily upon the Forty Martyrs, he says indeed, that Persons
fled to them for refuge, and that the pious Wife prayed there for her Children,
that she there desired the return of her absent Husband, and his Health when he
was sick: First it appears, that this was the Devotion of Women, who are
inclined to Superstition. Secondly, it is not very clear, that these Prayers
were addressed to Martyrs; for in the beginning, these Prayers are addressed to
the God of Martyrs, with respect to the Merits and Sufferings of Martyrs, to
whom God would do Honor by Miracles. It Is true, that in the Homily on the
Martyr Mamas, the Invocation of the Saint appears more express. But observe,
that this Julitta, this Mamas, and these Forty Martyrs were obscure Saints, and
of little Reputation in comparison of the Apostles, concerning the Invocation
of whom, S. Basil speaks not one word. This is a strange thing, and that
whereof they know not how to give us a reason. Make the same observation upon
the Passages of S. Austin, which they quote unto you for the Invocation of
Saints: He there speaks of the Invocation of S. Protais, and of S. Garvais;
Good God! what Saints are these in comparison of S. Matthew, and S. John. It Is
true, that this Father speaks of the Invocation of S. Stephen the first Martyr.
But however eminent this great Saint was, he was but a Deacon, and we ought not
to make him equal with the Apostles. Nevertheless there appears no Invocation
of the Apostles in the Writings of S. Austin. I call not this a simple Proof,
it is a Demonstration of the Novelty of this superstitious Worship. If the
Worship and Invocation of Saints were ancient, if they were from the time of
the Apostles, why is it we see so few Saints called upon in the Fourth Age? Why
did they not call upon S. Peter, S. Paul, and all the Apostles? Is it not clear
from thence, that neither the Apostles, nor the Apostolic Church did institute
this Worship? Why did they forget all the Saints of the Old Testament, and
almost all those of the first and second Ages of the Church? it is evident, that
it was Men's Superstition for Relics which gave birth to this Superstitious
Invocation, and that then they invoked only those whose Relics they believed
they had, as I shall make appear in what follows.

Behold a third demonstrative Proof of the Novelty of this religious Invocation
of Saints. It Is that in the same Age in which they invoked Saints, they
formally condemned the Invocation of Angles. Theodoret is assuredly one of
those Authors of the fifth Age, where we see the most express Invocation of
Saints Lib. 8. De curandis Graec. affect.
: nevertheless the same Author condemns the Invocation of Angels in a manner so
express, that one knows not what to answer to it. It Is in his Commentary on
those Words of the second Chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, Let no man
persuade you through humility to the Worship of Angels: Those which were for
the Law, says Theodoret, persuaded Men also to the Worship of Angles, saying
that the Law was given by Angels; and this Superstition continued a long time
in Pisidia and Phrygia, for which reason a Synod assembled at Laodicea, the
Metropolis of Phrygia, made a Law to hinder the Invocation of Angels. Behold
the most ridiculous and fantastical Conceit that ever was. It is certain by the
Scripture, and the consent of all Christians, that Angels are administering
Spirits sent forth for those which shall inherit Salvation; they are in our
Churches, they assist at our Assemblies, and by consequence hear and understand
us; moreover, they give an account to God of their conduct: they know what we
do; they hear our Prayers; whereas according to the Opinion of the Doctors of
the Fourth and Fifth Ages, it was very uncertain whether the dead Saints did
hear the Prayers of the Living, and yet more uncertain whether God gave them
any Commission or Charge with respect to us; nevertheless they looked upon it
as an impious folly to adore Angels, but were willing it should be accounted a
reasonable Worship to invoke a Saint. What a fantastical Imagination is this?
And is it not clear that this savors of Superstition in its birth, which has
as yet no Principles, and which guides it self by the practice of the People,
and establishes it self upon popular Errors? We have yet some invincible Proofs
of the Novelty of this Worship, but we will reserve them for the following
Letter.

An Article of Controversy. An Answer to the Reasons of the New Converts on
the Subject of Schism and Separation.
AT the end of the preceding Letter, we heard the Reasons which the New
Converts offer to themselves, to abide peaceably in the Estate where Violence
has placed them. Behold exactly the Disposition of these Gentlemen's minds:
they find some difficulty to resolve to acknowledge that there is Idolatry in
the Church of Rome; or rather, they find it difficult to confess it; for at the
bottom, we may believe they are convinced thereof. But this Point being
excepted, they do confess that there are all sorts of Corruption in the Roman
Church; that the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation, are Errors; that the
Sacrifice of the Mass established only upon this Transubstantiation is
therefore a false Sacrifice; that Adoration, which is a consequence of the real
Presence (as they pretend) is superstitious; that Masses, without Communicants,
are contrary to the Institution of Jesus Christ; that the Privation of the Cup
is criminal; that Purgatory is a dream; that Service for the Dead, Masses,
Penances, and Indulgences, are Superstitions; that the Invocation of Saints,
the Worship of Hyperdulia, which is given to the Blessed Virgin, the Service of
Images, Veneration for Relics, are loathsome Additions made to Christianity,
and that they pollute and dishonor it; that the Latin Tongue, to very ill
purpose, has been preserved in the Public Worship, to rob the People of that
Edification which they might find by understanding what was said, that the
Government is tyrannical, that the Pope usurps a Power which appertains not to
him, and that it may be he is Antichrist, that the Church of Rome is so far
from being Infallible, that she has erred in a Hundred and a Hundred things.
Behold, say I, exactly, the Idea which these Gentlemen form of Popery:
Nevertheless, they prove by Reasons which we have heard, that they may continue
there. Now upon this supposition let us hear them speak, and examine their
Opinions one after another.

It Is said, That we must suffer, and not separate from the Unity of the Church.
My dear Brethren, who seek to deceive your selves, hear me: What is this Unity
of the Church, according to your Principles, from which we must not separate?
Do you believe that this Unity of the Church is the Unity of the Roman Church?
If it be so, according to you, there is no Church out of the Roman Communion;
if there be no Church out of the Roman Communion, there is then none among the
Christians of the East which are out of the Communion of the Pope, and the
Latin Church. If there be no Church out of the Roman Communion, there is no
Salvation out of it; and if no Salvation, it follows that you damn all those
Men which are in those Christian Communions, some whereof are far less corrupt
than the Roman Church. But that is not all; in the Church where you have lived
hitherunto, and where your Fathers died, there has been no Church; for what
reason? Because these Assemblies, according to you, were out of the Unity of
the Church. Nevertheless, you do acknowledge, that the Assemblies of your
Fathers had a Christianity more pure, without Mass, Images, Invocation of
Saints, Purgatory, a barbarous Language in the Worship of God, and other
Superstitions, and that the Roman Church has all these; so that you will put
the Church, and Salvation in a Society where Christianity is altogether
corrupt, according to you, and you will take it from a Society where, in your
own opinion, Christianity is entirely pure. Are not these foolish Errors, and
such whereof you will be ashamed, my Brethren, as soon as you shall duly
consider them? It comes from this, that you are willing to reconcile the Form
of the Communion in which you are entered, with those sentiments of Truth which
you have preserved in your Hearts. They inculcate these Maxims to your Ears
continually. Unity must not be broken, you must not go our of it. There is but
one Church, you ought to keep in it, to separate is to go out of the Unity.
These miserable Juggles have some probability, whilst we suppose as the Roman
Church does, that the Church is included in her Communion, that she is
Infallible, that out of her there is no Salvation: But this Language becomes a
frightful Gibberish in the mouth of Men which are convinced as you are, 1. That
the other Communions of Christians which do not adhere to Rome, are
nevertheless as much Christians, or more, than she. 2. That your Fathers doing
ill in separating, nevertheless did well in purging Christianity, and that
their Christianity is entirely pure. 3. That the Communion of our Reformers was
not dangerous, and that a Man might be saved therein, yea, much more easily
than in that of the Roman Church, because he would not have the trouble of
making a Separation in his Mind of true Opinions from false ones. 4. That the
Roman Communion is corrupt. 5. That in separating from it, a Man separates from
the Corruption without separating from the Christianity, seeing that he carries
that which is Christian along with him.
Behold, say I, that which you think, and that which the exact account of your
Illusions speak, being formed by one of your selves. Now see how this agrees
with this Unity, and with separation from that Unity whereof you speak: For if
the Church be out of the Communion of Rome, I may go out of that Communion
without going out of the Church, and by consequence without separating my self
from the Unity; where the Church is, there is the Unity. If the Roman Church be
corrupt, as you confess, by separating from that which is corrupt in her, a Man
does not separate from the Unity, seeing that Unity is not in Corruption, it is
in Christianity. If a Man may be saved out of the Roman Communion, as you do
fully believe, not concluding us damned, we are not out of the Unity; for
whoever is out of the Unity, is out of a state of Salvation, because Salvation
is not found, but in the Church, which is one, and which alone possesses Unity.
In the Name of God, my Brethren, learn by this Example not to speak without
understanding what you say, to please your Converters, and above all your own
Self-Love.

But let us return and retake the same Opinion. It Is said, that we must suffer
without separating from the Unity of the Church. I entreat you, my Brethren,
how far must this Toleration go? Set me the Bounds unto which my Toleration
must proceed, that I may continue in this pretended Unity. Are you of the
opinion of M. Nicholas, and of M. Ferrand, That though the Roman Church were
Heretical and Idolatrous, yet we ought not to separate from it by a positive
Separation; all that we are obliged unto, is not to communicate in its Heresies
and Idolatries; I do very well perceive, that the inclinations of your own
Hearts would carry you even thither; and indeed, that is needful to set you in
full security. For whilst you say, if the Church of Rome be not Idolatrous,
although she be very corrupt, we ought nevertheless to continue there; you will
never have your Hearts at case and liberty, and you will never be without Fears
lest the Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, and the Eucharist should be
Idolatry. The Heart finds it difficult to rest upon an it may be; the Roman
Church is not it may be Idolatrous; so that to procure that false Peace which
you seek after, you must disenthral your selves, and say with your Converters,
That though the Roman Church were Heretical and Idolatrous, we ought not to
separate from it. My Brethren, I knock hard at the door of your Consciences;
awake you that sleep, and behold the horror of this Proposition. If it be true,
we know not reasonably how to give any bounds to this toleration for the Errors
of the Church. If we ought to continue there, though she become Idolatrous and
Heretical, we must continue there if she embrace the Heresy of the Manichees,
who believed two Gods and two Principles; if she embrace the Error of the
Socinians, who destroy the Trinity and Incarnation, who deny both the
Resurrection of the Body and Immortality of the Soul. We must continue there
though she embrace Mahametism, and adore the Sun and Moon, provided she
continue to worship Jesus Christ, and bear the Name of Christian. Are ye able
to stand firm against these frightful Consequences? Every Church which is not
Infallible, but may err and be corrupt, may ascend to the highest degree of
Corruption: For who is it that shall stay it in the midst of its descent from a
Precipice, or hinder it from tumbling to the bottom? Tell me, do you believe
that a Society which becomes indeed Heretical and Idolatrous, can continue at
the same time the true Church, and the true Body of Jesus Christ? Is there any
thing more opposite to Christianity than Idolatry? How will you reconcile this?
It is true, that God who is rich in means and ways of bringing Men to
Salvation, may save some Persons in Idolatrous Communions: This is that which
we shall consider, and therein we shall follow the order of your
Ratiocinations: But does it follow from thence, that therefore we must tolerate
Idolatry and Heresy, without separating from it? This is that which we shall
see hereafter.

My Brethren, make a third Reflection upon this unhappy Principle; We must
suffer the Corruption of the Church, rather than separate from its Unity. And
give me leave to tell you, that in the apprehensions wherein you now are, there
are the loosest Dispositions of mind which can happen to Men of Honor, such as
you make profession to be; for you are not of opinion, that the Corruption of
the Church extends it self only to Manners and Discipline; you confess that it
extends to all things, you do not believe that her Errors and Superstitions are
light and small, and how can your Conscience be otherwise than dead and past
all feeling, to have Churches full of Images, before which Men offer Prayers,
Incense, Supplications, Adorations, and Homages to Creatures, to Saints and
Saintesses; to have withdrawn the Cup, made a false Sacrifice, covered a hidden
divine Service under a barbarous Language, to amuse the People with Relics,
Bones, Indulgences, Stations, Jubilees, etc. How, say I, are you able not to
perceive, that this is not an extreme Corruption? But what need have I to
solicit your Conscience thereon? Your mouths speak, and your selves tell us;
though the Pope he Antichrist, we may not separate from him: This is that which
I call the loosest Opinion that can be imagined; to perceive that a Man is in a
Communion so corrupt, that it may well be Antichristianity, and to say that we
may not separate our selves from it: Tell me, I pray you, is the state of
Corruption in which you find the Roman Church, is it, say I, the natural state
of the Church? Is it well in this condition? You will answer me, no: If your
Answer be true and sincere, is it not true, that it is my Duty to do all that I
can to recover the Church from this state of Corruption, because it is a state
of Violence, and against Nature? Now how can we recover the Church from this
Corruption, but by separating our selves from it? You will say, we ought to
continue in it, and remonstrate against its Corruption. But you know well that
this is impossible, you know that they burnt our Fathers, because they made
remonstrance against it. By continuing and remonstrating against Idolatry and
Superstition, should we not be immediately seized by the Inquisition, or by the
Bishops and secular Judges, where there are no Inquisitors? Should we not be
put in Prison, hanged, and burnt? Therefore it is necessary that we go out, or
remain there in silence. Now behold, what kind of looseness is this, to know
that we are in a very corrupt Communion, and which is, it may be,
Antichristianity, and to keep and continue there without saying any thing! If
this state of Corruption be violent to the Church, if it be contrary to the
nature of it, certainly the intention of God cannot be to leave her always in
it; for the intention of God is, that when things are at a distance from their
own natural state, they should return unto it as soon as may be. Now with what
means can God serve himself for the Reformation of the Church? Certainly he
ought to serve himself of Men; for it is not his ordinary method of proceeding,
to send Angels to preach upon earth. Now how can these Men reform the Church,
if they do not represent unto her her Corruption, and if they do not break with
her in case she do not reform? If separation be not granted, Reformation will
never happen: For a Church persuaded that she is pure, and even Infallible,
takes no care to renounce those Doctrines and Worships, for which she produces
to you a possession of many Ages, and a Title of Infallibility. Tell me a
little, I entreat you, my Brethren, what will you do to reform the Roman
Church, by continuing in it? If you speak freely, saying, that her Worship,
Innovations, and Adorations of Creatures, are true Idolatries, they will send
you the Dragoons, and peradventure hang you: If you hold your peace, will your
secret Sighs and Groanings reform the Church? Will God send from Heaven a
secret and immediate Inspiration for Reformation, though no body speak one word
of it. And this in the favor of whom? Either the ancient Catholics who are
plunged in Superstition, or in favor of many ancient illuminated Papists, and
those that are reunited to them, who, both one and the other, are loose
Dissemblers which retain the Truth of God in unrighteousness? You ought to
understand at present, my Brethren, that we shall never attain the end of
reforming the Roman Church, unless we have right to go out of it; because she
will never stir for Complaints and Counsels; experience has made it plain
enough: And therefore the temper of your Soul ought to be such as this, rather
than move our selves, and trouble our repose, it is better that we suffer the
Church to perish, and be overwhelmed with Corruption. This, say I, is the most
wicked sentiment which can enter into the Mind of an honest Man, and much more
of a Christian.

But let us continue the examination of your Illusions: Abuses introduced by
Governors may not be imputed to private Christians, you tell us. This is it
which we will refute in that which follows, at present we go on: All the holy
Scripture which makes mention of Heresies, does not command Separation. How
dare you say this? Do you not read that Passage so express? Go out of Babylon
my People, for fear lest by partaking in its Sins you partake in its Plagues:
This Babylon is a false Church, which says of her Church, I am a Queen, and
shall see no sorrow: I am the Church which cannot fail. It imports not at
present where this Church is; but do you not see, that God commands those that
are there to go out of it? Wherefore does S. Paul say to his Disciples, A man
that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject. How can a
Person shun any one, and stand at a distance with him without Separation from
him? Does not S. Paul say to the Corinthians, Put from among you that wicked
person; will you restrain these wicked Persons to the vicious, and except the
Heretics? See how the same Apostle describes those Heretics that denied the
Resurrection? he says 2 Timothy 2.
, That as to the faith, they made shipwreck thereof, that their words eat like
a gangreen, that they have proceeded even to impiety, and that they are vessels
of dishonor. These are therefore wicked Wretches, and by consequence ought to
be cast out. Do you not remember, the same Apostle says to the Galathians,
That if any none preach to you any other Doctrine besides that which you have
received, let him be to you Anathema. Do you believe that it is allowed you to
adhere to those which you ought to have in execration, and to whom you ought to
say Anathema?

The Scripture on the contrary exhorts us to a mutual support of each other.
And where is it that you find this? It exhorts you to support the weak, but
about what? About the distinction of Meats, about the use of some Ceremonies of
little importance. Behold the things about which St. Paul commands that we bear
with each other. Romans 14.
Now as to him which is weak in the Faith receive him to you, but not to
doubtful disputations; one believes that he may eat all things, another that is
weak eats herbs. But where do you find that we must tolerate Heresies, which
ruin the Worship of the true God, and oppress and sink Christianity under a
heap of Superstitions? But I will confound you with your own Weapons. If it be
the Spirit of Christianity, and of the true Church, to tolerate Abuses and
Corruptions, you are not in the true Church, for that Church will allow no
Toleration; she burns and condemns to Death. If we are obliged to suffer her in
her Corruptions, at least she is obliged to bear with us in our Complaints and
Admonitions. If we ought to hear with her when she speaks false, with much more
reason she ought to bear with us when we tell her the Truth. She has no
Charity, she is cruel, erroneous, and raging in her Error. See if you can have
Communion with such men.

The Scripture says that we may build upon the foundation, which is Christ,
Wood, Hay, and Stubble. Do you understand, that this Wood, Hay, and Stubble,
which we may safely build, are Idolatries, Superstitious Doctrines,
Depravations in Morality, monstrous and enormous Opinions, such as are found in
the Roman Church? Is that it which you think? But to persuade our selves into
the belief of so great a Paradox, we must have either Authorities of Reasons.
For Reasons, have you any which can persuade you, that the Invocation of
Saints, by which are given to the Blessed Virgin all the Title, Attributes,
Privileges, Powers and Homages which appertain to the Deity: That the Worship
of Images, by which we prostrate our selves before Wood and Stone against an
express Prohibition of the Law, by which we adore that which is but Bread: That
the setting up a new, real, and true Sacrifice, unknown to Jesus Christ and the
Apostles: That the taking the half of one Sacrament, and the addition of five
whole ones: That to cover a superstitious Worship, and bury it in a barbarous
Language; do you believe, say I, that all this is called Wood, Hay, and
Stubble? Does not sound Sense tell you, that Wood, Hay, and Stubble are light
are trifling things, but that they are not filthy and wicked, and by
consequence that it does not represent any thing but light and trifling
Doctrines, but such as have nothing in them that is filthy or evil, such as are
besides the Word of God, but not against it? There is no Man which does not
perceive this; and he must be blinded by Interest not to see a thing so obvious
and visible. You have not therefore any reason to put the pernicious Doctrines
of Popery amongst Wood, and Hay, and Stubble: nor have you any Authority for
it. I do not know any Text of Scripture which may make you suspect, that God is
not jealous of seeing you give that Worship to Creatures, which is due only to
the Creator. He hates Idolatry, and defines it by giving his Honor to another,
As I live, says the Lord, I will not give my glory to another. Now are not
Temples, Sacrifices, Prayers, Vows, Oaths, and Altars, the Honors due to God?
and by consequence, they not of the number of those things of which he says, I
will not give my Glory to another? Nevertheless in Popery they are given to the
Saints, and above all, to the Blessed Virgin. You may fairly pluck out your
eyes, you cannot hinder your selves from seeing it; and in what follows we
shall have an opportunity to prove it.

Jesus Christ alone, you add, will make Separation of this Wood and this Gold;
the good and the fair Grain shall be separated at the last day, but we must let
them grew together till then. I fear, my Brethren, that if you go on to blind
your selves, God will abandon you to your darkness. You are strange
Commentators on the Gospel Text, you ought first to read the Interpretation
which the Lord gives of the Parable, before you give your own: Behold it
proceeding out of the Mouth of Jesus Christ, He which sowed the good seed is
the Son of Man, the field is the World; the good seed are the children of the
Kingdom, the Tares are the children of the wicked one. The field is the World,
then it is not the Church; it is therefore in the World that we ought to tolerate
Heretics and Idolaters, and not in the Church. But besides know two things, 1.
That Parables are good Proofs when we don't abuse them; but it is very easy to
abuse them, when Piety and Religion does not guide us. I compare you to your
Converters, who at this day press those Words of the Parable of the Marriage
Supper so hard, Constrain them to come in. Behold their Text, Let them grow
together till the Harvest, and then I will separate them; behold yours. The one
and the other is unhappily wrested and turned to another sense, because Men
will not enter into the Spirit of the Parable, which is the only thing
essential, and to which we must give attention to make a good use of
Similitudes. It is therefore necessary, in the second place, that you learn the
design and inward meaning of those Words, Let them grow together till the
Harvest, etc. It Is to show the Patience of God toward the Wicked, and not the
Patience that we ought to have toward them. God represents himself as a Master
which has Right to destroy the World, and ruin both good and bad; because
that the Wicked are infinitely the greater number in the World than the Good.
But he will not do it. He stays to display his greatest Judgments upon the
World till the last day, when he will make a Separation of the Good from the
Bad: therefore he has no design to teach us, that we must peaceably suffer
Heresies and Idolatries to grow together with the Truth: and I can prove it by
a hundred Reasons; but I will content my self to show you that these Words, Let
them grow together, etc. cannot signify, Let Heresies grow together, suffer
them, and live peaceably in a corrupt Church; since the intention of God, on
the contrary, is, that with all our Strength we pluck up the Tares out of the
Field of the Lord; That he has appointed us to say Anathema to him who shall
preach any other thing to us than what has been preached in the Gospel; that
we should avoid an Heretic, that we should cast the Wicked out from among us;
that we should go out from Babylon, and that we should not drink of the Cup of
her Enchantments. If the end of the Parable, Let them grow together till the
Harvest, were that which you give to it, we should have no right to drive from
our Society neither the Vicious, nor the Troublers of the Church, nor any sort
of Criminals. A Magistrate might not hang a Murderer, nor burn a Sodomite. It
might be always said unto him, Let them grow together till the Harvest. I may
add to this, that by the Tares which grew up with the good Grain, we must
understand Hypocrites and false Christians. Now it is true that we must have
this kind of men, and give them up to the judgment of God; for he only
perfectly knows them, and has the only right to punish them. We will answer to
the rest of your difficulties in the following Letter.

The Uniformity of the Persecution is the cause that we have less of History to
furnish you withal. It Is always and every where the same. Persons are
imprisoned, others are sent to the Galleys, Women are shut up in Cloisters,
Bodies are drawn on Hurdles, and thrown to the Dunghill: so that it will be
always the same thing; there will be nothing but differing Names, which may
increase the horror which you have for the Persecution, as you see the rage of
your Persecutors increase: for example, in that kind of Executions which are
made upon the Bodies of those which will not communicate in their last
Sickness. Was there not something singular in the Cruelty which was exercised
on the Body of a Woman about 60 years of Age, who died at Soubize the 16th of
November in the Year past? This Woman was called La Jarnat, Widow of one named
Rame; fell sick about the end of the Month; during her Sickness, the Curate and
the Officers of Justice employed Exhortations, Threatenings, Kindness, and
Terrors, to obtain of her to communicate against her Conscience, i. e. that she
would damn her self with all possible care. This poor Woman, fearing God more
than Men, resisted all their Temptations, and constantly refused to participate
in this false Mystery, which would have deprived her of true Communion with
Jesus Christ. After her Death the Justice seized on her Body, and before
Sentence was pronounced against her, they plucked out her Eyes, they cut off
her Nose, pulled out her Tongue, they cut off her Fingers and Toes, her Lips
and Ears, and committed those kind of Indignities on this poor Body which we
dare not name. Good God! What Spirit is this, what kind of fury? And of what
Persons did the Holy Spirit speak, if it be not of these men, when it said,
Even the Seamonsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones,
but the Daughter of my People is in the hands of cruel and barbarous persons
like the Ostriches in the Wilderness. [So some translate the Words.]

We will place here a matter of Fact, which we had determined to have
acquainted you with long since, but could not find a convenient place for it.
And eyewitness has sent us the Relation of the Martyrdom of one called
Monsieur Charpentier, of the Village of Rufac in Angoulmois, who died in the
midst of Torments about the time that the Edict of Nantes was revoked. We shall
pass by the ordinary Violences committed by the Dragoons on the Goods of this
poor Man. These mischievous Villains fell on his Person, they lighted up many
Candles, and caused him to dance round about them, until he had lost both Sense
and Breath. They hindered him from sleeping, which having heated his Blood, put
him into a malignant Fever; the Dragoons seeing him in this condition, forsook
him, and he was carried from his own House to that of one of his Relations.
When he was there the Dragoons of Pinsone came to Rufac; they soon learned the
House where the sick Man was; thither they went, and at first contented
themselves to keep guard about his Bed, offering him a thousand Outrages,
accompanied with Threatening and Blasphemies. At last, seeing this did not shake
him, they caused him to drink down twenty great Glasses of Water; and his
Daughters drank as many more to excuse their Father. This prevailing nothing as
yet, they caused melted Grease to drop down upon his Eyes for a whole Night
together. He lost his Sight, and his Eyes never opened more. He lost his Life
also, and died in those Torments without the least appearance of Weakness,
confessing the Truth courageously to his last Breath.

April 1. 1687.
The Sixteenth PASTORAL LETTER. An Article of Antiquity: A Fourth Proof of the
Novelty of the Invocation of Saints in the Fifth Age: They did not Invoke the
Blessed Virgin: And Article of Controversy: A Continuation of the Answer to
the Illusions of the New Converts about Schism.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
IN our preceding Letter, we have confessed to your Converters, that the
Invocation of Saints began to be practiced about the end of the Fourth Age, and
in the Fifth. But we have offered to you three Proofs, that that Worship was
New. Behold a Fourth proof, of the Novelty thereof; it is, that in the Fourth
and Fifth Ages nothing was known concerning the Invocation of the Blessed
Virgin. We know what difference Popery puts at this day, between the blessed
Virgin, and other Saints. She is vastly preferred before them; her Worship is
called Hyperdulia, and the Worship of others simple dulia. For one Prayer
addressed to other Saints, there are a hundred to the blessed Virgin: where St.
Paul has one worshipper, she has a hundred. The Titles which are given to the
holy Virgin are a thousand times more pompous and great than those which are
given to the greatest Apostles. And there is some reason for it. For surely the
Mother of our Lord Jesus Christ ought to have greater Privileges than his
Servants. If then the Invocation of Saints be an Apostolic Tradition, we ought
to Invocate the holy Virgin Mother of God in the first place, and as the Head
of our He and She Mediators of the second Order. The Second Age ought to have
known this Worship, or if any politic reason had hindered the Invocation of
Saints from manifesting itself in the Third Age; certainly the Invocation of
the Virgin ought to have appeared in the front of the Fourth Age amongst
others, like the Sun among the Stars. What folly, what a humor was it then to
Invoke St. Mamas, St. Julitta, and forty Soldiers which suffered Martyrdom in
the beginning of the Fourth Age, and not to Invoke the Virgin Mother of God.

As to matter of fact, we do maintain, that the blessed Virgin was not prayed
unto, till near 100 Years after the first birth of that Worship. And you may,
my Brethren, boldly defy your Converters on that subject. Whilst there were
Churches consecrated to St. Stephen, St. Mamas, St. Julitta, to the forty
Soldiers, to St. Gervais, St. Protais; and many others which they show unto
you, there was not so much as a little Chapel for our Lady. Nothing was then
spoken of but Miracles done by the Martyrs: Mothers desired of them the
recovery of their Husbands, and of their Children, the blind went to them to
recover their sight, and the paralitick to be restored to strength and
soundness, they took them for Protectors in their Voyages. And as a mark of the
acknowledgment of the miraculous Deliverances they had received from them, they
enriched their Churches with precious and invaluable Treasures. This we learn
from Theodoret, who writ about the Year 450. And all this while, nothing is
said of the Miracles of the Virgin, who nevertheless afterward wrought many
more than all the other he and she Saints together, except only that Zozomen
says by the by, that about the time whereof we speak, it was believed at
Constantinople, that the Virgin appeared there; and wrought Miracles in the
Church of the Resurrection, called Anastasia. But he does not say, that they
prayed unto her in that Church. The Martyrs had not only their Churches, but
they had also their Feasts in the Third Age, in which mention was made of their
grievous sufferings. The Virgin had then no Feasts. At this day she has seven,
but the most ancient of them is not above 800 or 900 years old. It Is true, that
that which at this day is called Candlemas, which the Greeks call Hypapante, is
more ancient. But at the beginning it was celebrated in the honor of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and not of the Virgin. 'Twas the Presentation of Jesus Christ in
the Temple, and not the Purification of the Virgin. It was called Hypapante,
which signifies meeting, because of the meeting of Simeon and Anna, the
Prophetess who went before the Child, and both concurred to prophecy
concerning the Wonders of this newborn Infant. To conclude, that which is
found most ancient for the Invocation of the Virgin, is what Nicephorus
Calistus says Lib. 15. c. 28.
concerning it; viz. that Peter Cnapheus, the false Patriarch of Antioch, an
intruding Eutychian Heretic did of his own head mention the Mother of God in
all his Prayers, and invoke her Divine Name. This was about the Year 470, or
480. Behold a great reputation for the religious Worship of the Virgin to be
invented by an Heretic. This unadvised Zeal for the Virgin began upon occasion
of the Nestorian Heresy, who affirmed a Humane Person in Christ Jesus, as well
as a Divine, and for that reason did not think fit that the Virgin should be
called the Mother of God, because she had not been made use of for any thing
else, but to conceive in her Womb the Humane Nature and Person of our Savior.
To oppose this, men fell into other excesses, they began to give to the Virgin
great and magnificent Titles. But Invocation and Worship of her came not so
soon. It Is true, 'twas the first original of her adoration. Nestorius was rash
without doubt, and God forbid that we should ever be of his Opinion, if he did
indeed put two persons in Christ Jesus, as well as two Natures. Neither do we
deny, that the Holy Virgin may in a good sense be called the Mother of God,
seeing she is the Mother of Jesus Christ, who is God. But nevertheless, it was
an unhappy rashness in the Doctors of the Fifth Age, to innovate in the terms.
The Virgin is not called the Mother of God any where in the New Testament, but
only the Mother of Jesus, and we ought to have kept there. This Name, the
Mother of God, has something which sounds ill, and is opposite to the Idea of
God, who can have no Mother. Moreover, God did not pour out his blessing upon
the false Wisdom of these Doctors. On the contrary he has permitted, that the
most criminal and excessive of all the Idolatries of Antichristianism should
take its original from thence. Theodorus Lector tells us of a Temple of the
blessed Virgin Lib. 2.
; In which the Patriarch Timothy appointed Prayers for the day of preparation.
But this was under the Empire of Anastasius, at the end of the Fifth Age. If
they quote to you Authors of the Fourth Age, and those that did precede it for
the Invocation of the blessed Virgin, maintain boldly to them, that they are
suppositious Pieces, and we are ready to prove it by the Testimonies of our
Adversaries themselves.

Father Crasset has lately taken a great deal of pains, to find Testimonies in
the Ancients for the Invocation of the Virgin before the Sixth Age. But although
all his Book be a declared war against good sense and honesty, nevertheless
there is not any subject in which he has bid greater defiance to the one and
the other than on this. He quotes to us two Epistles of St. Ignatius in the
First Age, the one to St. John, the other to the Virgin; two sottish Pieces
which are acknowledged supposititious by the learned of the Church of Rome, as
well as by those of our own. And yet what is there in those two Epistles? No
religious Invocation, but only some excessive Praises, and a Prayer to the
Virgin, who was yet living, that she would fortify the New Converts in the
Faith. He produces Dionisius the Areopagite, another false Work, and which some
Impostor did forge under the Name of this Saint, more than 400 Years after his
death. And yet there is no Invocation of the Virgin found there, but only
excessive Elogies and Praises. In the Second Age he quotes under the Name of
Justin Martyr, a Book of Questions and Answers to the Orthodox. He must have as
little Judgment as this Jesuit, to quote under the Name of Justin Martyr, a
Work where the Author speaks of Clemens Alexandrinus, and of Origin, who writ
almost of hundred Years after the death of Justin. Moreover, they quote nothing
from this Book to which we cannot subscribe, for it is an explication of the
just Honor, which is due to the Virgin, exactly according to our apprehensions
and sentiments. Father Crasset could quote nothing more to his own
disadvantage. This Jesuit, who heaps together all the Impertinencies of those
which went before him, could not forbear to imitate the falsehood of those who
quoted those words of Ireneus; That the Virgin Mary was the Advocate of the
Virgin Eve. As if St. Ireneus intended to say, that Mary prays and interceeds
at this day in the Heavens for the sins of Eve, the Mother of all men. But
these Gentlemen have been advertised a long time since, that the word whereof
Ireneus serves himself in the Greek, which is lost, is Paraclete, which
signifies rather a Comforter than an Advocate; His meaning is, that Mary
becoming Mother to the Savior of the World, has comforted Eve concerning the
evil which she did by destroying Mankind. And Father Crasset is so injudicious,
that in the same place, he quotes from the same Ireneus another passage, which
ruins the advantage he would drawn from the first. It Is a passage where St.
Ireneus says Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
, Eve by her disobedience, was the cause that she herself and all mankind have
been subject to death. But the Virgin Mary by her obedience, was the cause of
her own salvation, and that of all mankind. By her obedience, i. e. by the
faith which she gave to the words of the Angel, by which faith the Lord was
conceived in her Womb. Behold now this Ancient understands, that Mary was the
Comforter and the Advocate of Eve. In the Third Age he quotes a passage of
Origin, ( Homily the 1st, in Matt.) which says nothing which we don't say every
day touching the purity of the Virgin. In the same Age he quotes under the Name
of Gregory of Neocesarea, called Thaumaturgus, three Sermons on the Feast of
the Annunciation. But this man knows not that the Feast of the Annunciation was
unknown in the Third Age in which Gregory of Neocesarea lived; how could he
make Sermons on that Feast? And how could there be a Feast in that Age to the
memory of the Annunciation, when there was none as yet to the honor of our
Lord and Savior's Birth? St. Chrysostom learns us, that it was in his time, i.
e. about the end of the Fourth Age, that men began to celebrate this latter
Feast. That which he reports from St. Cyprian and Dionisius of Alexandria, is
nothing to purpose. He reports in this Third Age, a passage attributed to
Methodius, Bishop of Tire, who suffered Martyrdom under Dioclesian; but this
Sermon belongs not to him, nor to any other contemporary Author. For there are
Impertinencies therein which we cannot ascribe to a wise man; as this which he
says, that God is debtor to the Virgin, and that God who has said, Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, ought himself to observe the Commandment which he has
given to others. In the Fourth Age he quotes St. Athanasius, St. Ephraim, St.
Jerome, St. Chrysostom, and St. Austin, Sermons or Works that are none of
theirs: and a man needs but indifferent Learning and little Sincerity to be
convinced thereof. But Father Crasset, who has neither the one nor the other,
neither Skill nor Science, takes and gives all for good. In the Fifth Age he
quotes Cyril of Alexandria, who is surely one of the first which gave occasion
to the Religious Worship of the Virgin. For by opposing Nestorius, who would
not suffer Mary to be called the Mother of God, he passed unto the other
extreme, and advanced as far and as high as he could the praises of the Virgin
Mary. Nevertheless this might be reduced to Apostrophes, Figures of Oratory,
and great Elogies; but there is nothing of Invocation therein. No Author of the
Fifth Age speaks more expressly nor vehemently of the Invocation of Martyrs, and
of the Worship which is given to the Relics than Theodoret. Nevertheless in
the passage which Father Crasset quotes from him in his Commentary, on the
words of Solomon's Song, My beloved is one, there is nothing that favors the
Worship of the Virgin in the least. He applies these words, My Dove, my only
one, to the Virgin, and that were the place to speak of the honor, which ought
to be given to her, if ever there were any. But all that he says concerning her
is, that she is the Mother of God, a pure Virgin, that all Nations call her
blessed, that she is the Dove, and the only one which brought Christ Jesus into
the World, that in Charity she surpasses the Cherubims and Seraphims. That were
the place to have said, that we ought to commend ourselves to her Charity, and
invoke her as our Mediatrix. To conclude, let these Gentlemen find us in the
Fourth and Fifth Ages, Chapels and Oratories consecrated to the Virgin, as
they find them consecrated to the Martyrs, unless it be about the end of the
Fifth age. Now this being supposed, I dare say, that a man must have renounced
all honor, all modesty, all sincerity, and all judgment, not to confess that
here is an indubitable evidence, that Invocation of Saints was a Novelty in the
Fourth and Fifth Ages. For these men had been fools not to have invoked the
Virgin in those times when they invoked St. Protais, and St. Gervais, if they
established Invocation upon the merit, the dignity, and the reputation that
these Saints might have with God. I would fain know if those two Giants which
suffered Martyrdom under Decius, were in condition to intercede with God with
so much efficacy as this Virgin Mother to the Savior of the World? This false
Worship had its birth from that foolish love which men had for Relics. And as
they had no Relics of the blessed Virgin, so they consecrated no Churches or
Chapels to her, and in consequence thereof, they did not call upon her. We
shall bring you yet in what follows new Proofs of the Novelty of this Worship.

An Article of Controversy: A Continuation of the Answer to the Illusions of
the New Converts.
LEt us take up again, at present, what follows of the Illusions, which the New
Converts make for themselves, who endeavor to lay their Consciences asleep:
They conclude two things, 1. That all the fundamental Truths of Christianity,
being Confessed by the Church of Rome, they are obliged to remain with her, so
you go on. These fundamental Truths which Popery has preserved, are the
Articles of the Three Creeds, that of the Apostles, that of Niece, or
Constantinople, and that which is called by the name of St. Athanasius.

It Is true that the Church of Rome has retained these; but to conceive how you
cheat yourselves, I entreat you to suppose Christians which receive these three
Creeds, and who nevertheless Adore the Sun, the Moon, the Earth, and almost all
the Idols of Paganism; you will say that these things are inconsistent. But you
deceive yourselves: for there is nothing more possible, than that, that a man
should believe God is the Creator of Heaven and Earth, that Jesus Christ is
his eternal Son, and the Creator of the World, that he was Born, that he Died,
that he was Crucified, that he will come to Raise and Judge the Living and the
Dead; and nevertheless, that he should believe that we may Adore the Earth, the
Trees, the Sun and Moon, because God does animate and fill them. The Greed says
not, that we must Worship none but God, yea, it says not that we must Worship
him. So that a Religion may receive the Creed in good earnest, in the sense of
the Universal Church, and adore every thing but God: Why may not men be capable
of Adoring the Stars, because God fills them, since they Adore Bread under a
supposition that Jesus Christ is there, after a manner invisible, precisely as
God is in the Stars and Elements? It is therefore, a particular Providence,
that Christians, who Adore the Eucharist, are not fallen so far as to Adore the
Sun, Moon, and Stars; for I do maintain, that the Papists may be carried to
Adore a Stone, as naturally as they are carried to Adore the Bread in the
Eucharist, on supposition that Jesus Christ is included under it. Suppose you,
that they were come so far, would you yet say, Since all the fundamental Truths
are Confessed by this Communion, which Adore the Sun and Moon, yea, Stones, we
are obliged to continue with it? Learn you therefore, that we may retain the
fundamental Truths of Christianity, and build thereon Dung, Poison, and all
sorts of Impurities: The spirit of Man is capable of reconciling those things
that are molt irreconcilable.

Behold another thing, whereof you ought to be advertised, that you ought to
distinguish fundamental Truths from fundamental Errors: You imagine, that to
retain all the fundamental Truths, and to have no fundamental Errors, is the
same thing; and because we do confess the Roman Church retains all the
fundamental Truths, you think, that we confess to you, that she has no
fundamental Errors. In this you are much mistaken: a person may retain the
fundamental Truths of Christianity, and add thereunto fundamental Errors. I
gave you an Example in men who might believe the Creed in good earnest, in the
sense of the Church, and which might add (under a hundred false pretenses of
Devotion) Pagan Idolatries. I do maintain, that a man may adopt into the
Religion of Christians, almost all the Abominations of the Bonzes of Japan, and
the Brachmns of India, without any formal Renunciation of the Doctrine of the
Christian Faith. I demand, if whilst men retain the fundamental Truths, they do
not add fundamental Errors by espousing these Pagan Worship? It Is exactly that
which the Church of Rome has done: upon the Foundations of Christianity, she
has built a thousand Superstitions, which are purely Pagan: Popery is Paganism
renewed, and built upon Christianity; it is an Idol Temple raised upon the
Temple of Jesus Christ. A fundamental Error is therefore an Error or Practice
which in itself is inconsistent with the Foundation.

I say, in itself, and by itself; for men find ways of reconciling all things,
Impiety and Religion, Piety and Superstition: But we may not conclude, That all
that which men do join together, is in itself reconcilable, and compatible.
The Roman Church has a hundred Errors and Practices of this sort: her Worship
of Saints, Images, Relics, and of the Sacrament, is not by any means
reconcilable with the Worship of the true God, and with true Faith in Christ
Jesus.

There is yet a third Advice which I have to give you, on this subject, it is
that to be able to say as you do, That the Church of Rome confesses all
fundamental Truths: It Is necessary not only that she hold the fundamental
Truths of the Christian Religion, but also those of Natural Religion. It Is a
Fundamental of Natural Religion, that we ought to Worship God; the Church of
Rome retains this Fundamental. It Is another Fundamental of Natural Religion,
that there is but one God, and that we must Worship none but him; Popery has
ruined and rejected this Fundamental, for it Adores a many other things beside
God: So that to speak properly, we cannot say, that the Church of Rome retains
all Fundamentals. We might yet observe other Fundamentals, which flue receives
not. Don't flatter yourselves therefore, my Brethren, any more by this wicked
Illusion, The Roman Church confesses all fundamental Truths, therefore we may
continue there in safety: For that reasoning is no better than this, This Wine
retains all the substance, the strength, the taste, and the spirits of Wine,
therefore we may drink of it, with safety, though it be mingled with Poison.
Idolatry, Errors, and Superstition take away from the Doctrines of
Christianity, all that which is saving in them.

We are obliged to continue in Union with the Roman Church, rather than make a
positive Separation, which is contrary to all the Duties of Charity, and which,
instead of bringing back those which Err, produces nothing but an eternal
Distance and Animosity. This is that which your Apologist says, concerning
which you ought to know, That Christian Truths are Friends, and do not desire
that we should sacrifice one for the other: We must not sacrifice Faith and
Truth for Charity. It Is a false Charity which makes those that are reunited to
the Church, speak thus; it is indeed self-love, and the love of ease: If they
could find means to cast off the Popish Superstitions, which are uneasy to
them, from Religion, without prejudice to their own Advantages, it is sure that
they would do it, without having any regard to Charity, and without concerning
themselves about the scandal of Separation, and the trouble of their
Countrymen. For which reason, while the King permitted every one to live
peaceably, without offering Violence to his Conscience, Separation did not
appear scandalous unto them. I entreat you, my Brethren, to know, and examine
yourselves thereon; do not suffer the Devil and Self-love to illude you, and
disguise himself into Charity, and an Angel of Light. Charity demands
Toleration; I confess it, but it has its bounds: For it is not expedient that
you imagine, that we ought to suffer all things under pretense of Charity.
Popery is Anti-christianity; you cannot doubt it, without blinding yourselves;
Popery has fundamental Errors; to conclude, Popery has spoiled the Efficacy
of those fundamental Truths which it has preserved, and by consequence is in
no condition to require or expect Toleration. Instead of bringing back those
that Err, Schism produces, nothing but an eternal Distance and Animosity, say
you: Do you think that this lead Complaisance, which you are willing to have
for those that Err, is capable of reducing them? Will you not confirm them in
their Errors, by living with them, communicating with them, and by partaking
in their false Mysteries? But let us hear what you have farther to say to us.

In the second place, you say, we do maintain, That persons do not necessarily
partake in the Errors of a Communion in which they are: This is that you told
us in the beginning of this Writing. Abuses introduced by Governors, cannot be
imputed to the Faithful. You add, The common Confession of Faith ought to be
esteemed as an Agreement to live together under the same Ministry; but we are
not therefore, accountable for all the Abuses which may be, or can be
introduced into this Mnistery. My Brethren, this second thing which you tell
yourselves, and one another, is no better than the former: Where have you found
that Abuses introduced by Governors, may not be imputed to the Faithful? Do
you not very well know, That there are no Abuses in the Church, which have not
been introduced either by the Malice, or by the Ignorance of Governors? They
are the Doctors and Teachers which frame Heresies: Were not those private
persons seduced by Arrianism, culpable, because that Heresy was introduced by
the Bishops? Are you obliged to follow your Governors without examination.
Have you not a reasonable Mind as well as we? And ought you not to make a good
use of it? And if you fail therein, do you think that God will fail to take an
account of you for it? If we mull give no account of the Abuses introduced by
Governors, when the People of Israel suffered themselves to be seduced by a
false Pastor, to commit Idolatry, were they not therefore culpable?
Nevertheless, you see how God, on such occasions, thunders against both People
and Governors, When the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch,
says our Lord. He did very ill to speak so, according to your Principles;
there was no body but the first blind man, that lead the way, who ought to fall
into the Ditch. Jesus Christ said to the Jewish Doctors, You compass sea and
land, to make a Proselite; and when you have gained him, you make him twofold
more the child of hell, than yourself. And why so? why does this poor Proselite
become a-Child of Hell, since he follows his Governors, yea, Governors which
had a lawful Call, and were Pastors of the Church? If Truth be the only way to
Heaven, it concerns you much how you go out of it, be it of your own
inclination, or by the instigation of another, you will always fill short of
Heaven: Whether you go to Hell, or whether another leads you thither, what
difference will it make, will you not be certainly there? Discharge yourselves
therefore, of this pernicious Chimera, That you are not at all accountable for
Abuses introduced by your Guides.

But you say, Me do not partake, necessarily, in the Errors of a Communion
where we are. How do you understand that, whilst you subscribe these Errors,
and practice these Idolatries? There are Errors of Speculation, and Errors of
Practice; the means of not partaking in Errors of Speculation, is openly to
disavow them, without Scruple or Hesitation: The means of not partaking in
Errors of Practice, which are Superstitions and Idolatries, is, to abstain
from them, give no consent to them, not assist at them, but condemn and call
them by their own names: If you can continue in the Roman Church, doing thus, I
consent unto it; say, without Scruple and Hesitation, That the corporal and
real Presence is a Dream, Transubstantiation a Monster, Purgatory a Fable,
Humane Merits and Satisfactions Doctrines of Pride, the Mass a Profanation of
Mysteries, the Worship of Bread, the Service of Saints, and the Adoration of
Images Idolatries: be never present at the Mass, never Adore the Bread, never
be found at those Vespers and Martins where they call upon Creatures; retract
the Subscriptions you have given to Lies, and after that, stay, if you can, in
the Communion of Rome. But you call it no participation in the Errors of the
Roman Communion, to subscribe them, as you have done without believing them; to
assist, or be present at Mass, accounting it a vain pomp of Ceremonies; to
prostrate yourselves before the Eucharist, believing, nevertheless, that it is
but Bread; to communicate under One Kind, retaining an Opinion, in your Heart,
that they do you wrong, to take away the Cup; to assist at Vespers and Mattins,
at Processions where they bear Images and Relicques in pomp, and where they
give Religious Worship to Creatures, in the mean while believing these are
Superstitions, whereof it were well to discharge Religion: Behold, say I, that
which you call not to partake in the Errors of a Communion where we are; and
this is that, which I call, (and all those that are wise, with me) to partake
in them after the leudest manner in the World, and that which, is most
criminal, and capable of ruining you. Be assured, that these poor Biggots,
which are perpetually kissing their Images, and who know no other God, but
their Patron Saint, are in a better estate than you; for they partake honestly
in Errors and Superstitions, but you partake in them against your Conscience.

TO satisfy the Promise that we have made, to acquaint you with some
Circumstances of the present Persecution, we will tell you, what we certainly
know concerning it: At this day the great Theater, on which the Persecutors
execute their greatest Rage, is Languedoc, where nothing is heard spoken of,
but Punishments, Imprisonments, Bodies drawn to the Dunghill, Persons
condemned to the Galleys, others appointed for America, and embarked to be
sent thither: The particulars there will be very curious, and make a
considerable part of the History of this Persecution. The fear, which the
Prelates assembled in the Country of Nismes, and the Dragoons (a People at this
day of the same Order) have put the minds of men into, has forced the most part
of the Inhabitants of Nismes and Cevennes, to consent to all that they have
demanded of them: but by such a Consent, as gives horror and amazement to
those that have done it, and to all that hear thereof: For these speak and
unhappy People have proceeded so far, as to make Subscriptions, in which they
beseech the King, to Chastise them with the severest Rods, if they fail to
perform all the Duty of good Catholics. We may judge how sincere they were
therein, by all that has been seen since that time: They did not cease to
assemble on the Feastivals of Christmas last, in great numbers in the
Neighborhood of Nismes, and their hearts not being able to Ratify the
Promises, which their mouths and hands had made, they have acquitted themselves
of those Duties of good Catholics, less than ever; so that the Rage of 'their
Persecutors is grown to its height. The Intendant Mr. de Baville, caused five
or six of those which were imprisoned for being found at their last Assembly,
to be hanged, and sent to the Galleys: He caused these six to draw Lots, that
he might hang but two of them. The happy and glorious Lot fell upon Mr.
Barbutt, Merchant, who dressed the. Stuffs of the Country, and upon one named
Miblasse; a Youth of the same Profession, neither the one nor the other would
redeem their Life, by promising to practice the Popish Ceremonies and Worship.
Mr. Barbutt exercised, to the utmost, all the Patience, and all the Art of the
Jesuits, which accompanied him to his Death: He spoke the most Edifying things
in the World; and did not testify less of Constancy and Greatness of Mind,
than the Illustrious Mr. de Rey had lately done, who died at Beaucaire: When
they saw they could gain nothing upon these two Martyrs, they caused a Drum to
be beaten at the foot of the Gibbet, that no body might hear the edifying
Discourses which proceeded out of their mouths. Since this time, they have made
two Martyrs at Ledignan; in the same Province of Languedoc: One of them is
named Meyrien, and the other Satindse; this lag never changed his Religion, nor
made any Subscription. After he had been a long time Prisoner in the Tower of
Constance, he escaped thence, but being retaken with his Companion, whom they
surprised at an Assembly, they were both Martyred about the beginning of the
Month of March, this present Year.

To overcome the Constancy of those who have resisted Prisons, Galleys,
Dungeons, Hunger, Thirst, Vermin, and Rottonness, they have thought of a new
kind of Persecution, in the Council of Persecutors, and it is to send our
Faithful Brethren to Canada: They conduct them in Troops to Marseille, and to
Casteldy, where they must be embarked. In one Month's time they have drawn
from the Prisons of Mempellier, of Aygues-Mortes, of Nismes, and of all the
parts of Ceuennes, a number of Prisoners so great, that we know not how to
count them, for fear of speaking it too little, or of not being believed, for
reporting it too much: This is certain, that the Letters which have been
written, more than six Weeks or two Months since, do say, that there are
already 400 Prisoners at the least, which have been embarked at Marseille, or
are ready for it, to be led into Slavery in those new Countries.

It is expedient, that you see here some extracts of Letters that came from
that Country: One Letter from Arles says, That a great number of Men has been
seen to pass with their legs tied under the bellies of Horses, followed by
twelve long Carts, covered over, and filled with Men and Women, tied by the
wastes to the Carts: These are persons of Upper Languedoc, which were carried
to Marseille, to be sent into America. Among these persons there were some very
famous: Amongst others, an Advocate of Nismes, who is famous by a Confession of
eighteen Months, which he passed in a dark. Dungeon, nasty and infectious,
tired with the Verbal Persecutions of the Bishop of Mire-poix, but was never
prevailed upon, to make any Subscription. A more glorious Testimany cannot be
given to the Courage, Piety, Constancy, and Zeal of a Confessor, than is with
one consent given to this man; Behold him at present going to carry the Torch
of his Faith into another World: and I hope that it will kindle other Torches
there. There are also Mr. Guirant and Mr. Martin, both of Nismes, which are not
less Illustrious for their Perseverance and their Piety, having never made any
Defection from the Faith. Mr. Serre, of Montpellier, Mr. Guy, of Bederieux, a
Widow named Madam de Bosc, and her Sister, Mademoiselle de Cavaille, with Mr.
Martin also of Mompellier, two Sisters of Mr. Anauld, Minister of Vaunert, are
also of this number. There are also Gentlemen and Persons of Quality, which we
will not name unto you, until we are perfectly assured thereof. Behold, a
Letter from one of these honest Men, which will acquaint you with the
disposition of Mind in which they are, on the Subject, and in the prospect of
this new kind of Punishment.

Feb. 12 th, 1687. From Aigue-Mortes, from the Tower of Constace.

I Have thought (my dear Mother) that before I am removed into another World,
as they threaten us, it is my Duty, to inform you of my State, and to acquaint
you with the true sentiments of my Soul: Oh how happy are you, and my dear
Sisters, whom GOD, by his infinite Mercy, has preserved so long in your
Retirement, and preserved from the Snares that have been so often laid for you,
but more especially in that he has led you in so miraculous a manner out of
this sad and unhappy Kingdom, that you may taste his Divine Consolations in
Holy Assemblies, with all the liberty that can be desired. Be never forgetful
of Benefits so great, if you do desire that GOD should continue his Belssings
and Mercies upon you, and yours: Pray continually for the Liberty of Zion; for
all our poor Brethren that have unhappily fallen; and for the Prisoners of
Jesus Christ. You have begun gloriously, but all that is nothing, if you don't
persevere to the end; therefore give up yourselves to Divine Providence, and be
assured that God will give you, all that is necessary in this life, and that
which is to come, if so be you offer unto him that acceptable Sacrifice of your
Goods, your Families, and even of your Lives: Never turn your face back again
through Trouble, and regret for what you have forsaken; don't do as the Wife of
Lot, least you partake in the same Punishment. I do acknowledge, that there is
need of extraordinary Endeavors, and very great Grace to surmount our Natural
Affections; and that Tenderness and Natural Compassion which does so strongly
bind us to eath other, but when the Glory of God, and our own Salvation is
discoursed, on, we ought not to stagger one moment from following our Duty; for
he which loves Fathor or Mother, Husband, Wife or Children more than his
Savior, is not worthy to be called his Disciple: Wherefore, my dear Mother and
Sisters, make appear to your last breath, the difference you make between Earth
and Heaven, betwixt the perfect love which we have for our Divine Redeemer, and
that which we have for the things of the World; and let us assure ourselves of
his Protection and Favor, if we persevere to the end. The death of my Father
has extremely edified and comforted me, his Patience and Perseverance has
given a joyful and certain Assurance of his Happiness; that it is so far from
afflicting me, that I desire to be dissolved, as he is, to be with Christ
Jesus, which is much better: I reserve my Tears for the sad and deplorable
State of the Church, and for the fatal hard-hartedness of my poor Brethren, for
whom I pray unto God night and day, that he would cause them to return from
their wanderings, and show them Mercy and Grace: This is that true Affliction
which eats up my Soul, and sadly overwhelms my Spirit; for my own part, I was
never more content, and at rest, than I find myself at present: So that after
having exactly considered the World, and all its Vanities, I esteem (with St.
Paul) that all things duly reckoned, the Sufferings of the present World are
not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be Revealed. So that, my
dear Mother, I am fully resolved to do my Duty, even to my last moment: They
have already conducted to Marseille a hundred Prisoners; and the seventeenth of
this Month, we, being Seventy in number, departed from Montpellier thither.
They have brought from Sommieres twenty four Maids, or Wives, and to morrow
they bring forty more from thence: it is the general Randevouze. I know not what
will be the eevent of all this; nevertheless, all are perfectly resolved for
this long Voyage. Monsieur de Cross is always here, who is shortly to be
embarked with his own Daughters, and four of Monsieur Audemard's, who never
changed their Religion. Whatever be our fate, we shall always be under the Eyes
of God, and his Protection: Pray for us, as we do for you; and let all our
Friends, and all your Churches redouble their Prayers for those poor unhappy
Persons which are carried away, it may be to the Shambles. God be with you, my
dear Mother, and dear Sisters; be assured, that I shall be Faithful to my God,
to my last breath, in whatsoever place I shall remain.

This last kind of Punishment has stricken men with more horror than all the
preceding; whilst persons remain in their Country, they endure the labors of
flight, the uneasiness of sojourning in Woods, Famine, Thirst, Prison and the
Galleys, in some hopes of change, and alterations; but to see their Entrails
torn from their bosoms, the half of ones self, a Wife, a Husband, Children
unmercifully forced into another World, exposed to the rage of the Sea, to the
dangers of a long Voyage, and at the end of all, to a cruel Slavery upon
barbarous or unknown Shores, where they live without any Communion which those
that are their own, without Consolation in the Rigours of a very calamitous
Servitude: This is the new kind of Punishment, say I, which puts the Patience
of the most Confirmed to a period. But nothing does more discover the temper of
the Devil of Persecution: It does not suffice to lay waste the Kingdom after a
hundred manners, to put to flight an infinite number of Men, and to make
Wildernesses of Countries heretofore well Peopled, they will Depopulate the
State, and Transport the best of its Inhabitants into barbarous Countries. Poor
Slaves remember, that God is everywhere, and that the Gates of Heaven are open
in all places: Be you persuaded, that Canada will rejoice to see your
Constancy, and that the Voice of your Confession will pass the Seas, and come
even to us; but above all, that it will pierce the Heavens, and arrive even at
the Throne of God, where you will find favor, and it may be your Enemies will
find displeasure, and wrath, for the Voice of your Suffering will solicit
Divine Vengeance, and hasten their Punishment: the Lord have pity on them, and
convert them; they ought to be the Objects of our Compassion, rather than those
of our Wrath. Whilst they empty the Cittadels on one side, they fill them on
the other. A Letter written ab^^^ three Months since, says, That they had
conducted from the Country of Castres to Montpellier, more than five hundred
Prisoners, who, without doubt, must travel into the New Found World, as well as
others. How sad soever the lot of these poor People, that are carried into
another World, may seem, I reckon it more easy than the state of those who are
in the Prisons of the Province of Languedoc, where they treat them as cruelly
as they can do the worst of Criminals and Parricides, yea, they insult over
them in a more insolent manner. It has been written within a few Months, That
one of the Prisoners of Aigrie-mortes, having had license to go out of his
Dungeon, to take the Air for a few moments, and having delayed to return to it
a little longer than a Soldier which stood Sentinel, thought he ought to have
done, immediately he discharged his Musket at him, and killed him upon the
place. It Is an action like that which, I think, I may have reported elsewhere,
concerning one named Moliere, a gallant man, and a very good Christian,
Prisoner in the same Tower of Constance, who was taken thence to assist at the
drawing of one of his Brethren to the Dunghill, his heart failing him, he fell
down, and a Soldier, that was near him, knocked him on the head, without giving
him leisure to return, or recover from his langour and weakness. We have also
Letters, that of many Prisoners transported from Nismes to Aigue-mortes, three
finding themselves very ill, desired that they might be visited by Physicians,
to the end it might be certainly known, that they were not in a condition to
undertake the Journey. They laughed at them, and on the evening, when they
arrived there, they cast them into a hideous Prison, where, not being able to
obtain so much as a little Water, to moderate the Fire which devoured them,
they fell into Delivation, and died the day after. And this is exactly that
which they desire, for they don't tire them, by these Transportations and
hideous Prisons, to any other end, but that they may make them die without
noise, but after a manner more sad and lamentable, than a death upon a Gibbet,
or the Wheel would be: If they excuse some Women, from the Voyage to Canada,
it is to put them into the hands of Rapine, the most wicked of all the Hang-men,
Converter to the Bishop of Valence: The Punishment to which he exposes those
Women, is to whip them night and day, till the blood come; none has escaped
his hands, except one that died in the Dungeon. To the end that the new
Converts, whose Conscience is a kind of Hell, may receive no Consolation by any
Communication which their Brethren, they have established a new kind of
Inquisition upon Letters: They have not only granted Commission to Persons at
all Post-houses, to open Letters, but on the sixteenth of February, they made a
general Inquisition in all the Houses of the new Catholics, to find not only
persons that might be hid there, but also the Letters which discovered the
Commerce which they held with those which were gone out of the Kingdom. By this
Search, the City was in the state of a place where they were about to make a
Massacre; and indeed all the Inhabitants were under the fears thereof, and
every one believed himself at the point of Death: for all the quarters of the
City, and all the corners of the Streets, were filled with Soldiers and
Guards, and men were forbidden upon great Penalties to go out of their Houses:
Thus the Persecutors tempt the Weak by fear, and the horrors of Death which
they set before their eyes: this Tragedy ended in the Imprisonment of a great
number of persons: To conclude, as the Rage of Persecutors never went farther,
so the Fear and Terror that has seized the minds of Men, was never greater.

All the Attempts of our Enemies would be vain, if we had the Spirit of
Martyrdom, and Feared God more than Men. This is that (my Brethren) which you
must endeavor to obtain; and to that end, set always before your eyes, the
great difference that God proposes and promises to those which shall suffer
Martyrdom; we know not how, sufficiently to express them: Consider the glorious
Rewards that God promises in the two first Chapters of the Revelations, the
Crowns, the Thrones, the hidden Manna, the new Name, the Rule over Nations, the
Iron Scepter to Subdue them, and the White Garments. It Is true, that all true
Believers will have part in these advantages; but it is true, nevertheless, that
it is of Martyrs only that God speaks there: and it is certain, that they shall
possess these advantages in a degree of pre-eminence above others. The Peace of
GOD be with you all.

The 15th of April, 1687,

The Seventeenth PASTORAL LETTER. An Article of Antiquity: Three new Proofs of
the Invocation of Saints in the Fifth Age. An Article of Controversy. A
Continuation of the Answer to the Illusions which the New Converts put upon
themselves on the Subject of Schism.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
THere is not a Point of Practice in the Roman Church, concerning the Antiquity
whereof your Converters make so much boast, as that of the Invocation of
Saints, which they find in the Fifth Age. For which reasons you ought not to
think it strange, that we heap Proof upon Proof, to make it evident to you,
that this unhappy Superstition did not descend from the Apostles, nor their
Successors, but that it had its birth about the end of the Fourth Age. Behold
yet a new Mark of the Novelty of this Worship. It Is, that at the beginning men
prayed only to the Martyrs, and not to the other Saints. What is the meaning of
this? At this day there is no necessity of being a Martyr to obtain a
Canonization. There are a hundred and a hundred persons in the Popish Calendar,
which were no Martyrs. We must not do that injury to the Church, to believe
that she has had no persons of eminent Sanctity, except such as have suffered
Martyrdom. The Principles upon which the Invocation of Saints is established,
are, That the Faithful see God; that in him they can know all our needs and
wants, and understand and hear our Prayers; and that being near to God, they
can intercede for us. Now these Principles ought to establish an Invocation of
other Saints, as well as of the Martyrs. There were without doubt, in the four
first Ages of the Church, many holy persons, which were not martyred: but they
never prayed to any of them, and we desire your Converters to show us any
instance thereof.

It Is necessary that you know, that they did not Invocate even all the Martyrs,
they prayed only to those whose Relics they had in possession. Examine well
all the passages which you quote from St. Basil, St. Gregory, St. Austin, St.
Jerrome, and Theodoret, and you will find that they all generally express this;
that they went to the Shrines and Memories of the Martyrs, (so they called the
places where they had put the Relics) that there they performed their
Devotions, that they recommended themselves to the intercession of the Martyr,
that they expected from him miraculous deliverances. But not one will tell you,
that they invocated the Saints in their Closets, or in Churches, where their
Relics were not. Now who does not see, that this is an extravagance? If the
Invocation of Saints be good, why is it not as good in a Closet, as in a
Church? Why not in a Church where there are no Bones nor Ashes of a Martyr, as
well as in one where they are? But this practice was founded upon a vulgar
opinion, that the Souls of Saints were not found, but near their Tombs, and
that they loved their Ashes, as St. Jerome tells us. And behold the reason why,
1. They did not invocate Angels whilst they did invocate Martyrs, 'twas because
the worship of Saints began with that of Relics, and Angels having left no
Relics here below, their invocation did not make the same progress. 2. It Is
for the same reason that they invocated only Martyrs, and not other Saints,
'twas because they had recollected with care only the bones and ashes of the
Martyrs, and for others they suffered them to rest in their Graves, because
their flesh had not been honored by the Cross of Christ. 3. It Is the reason
also why they did not invocate all Martyrs, but only those of whom they had
Relics. 4. To conclude, It Is for the same reason that they began so lately to
invocate the Virgin.
They had no Relics of her, they knew not where her Tomb was; and this was it
that gave occasion to the Fable of the Assumption of her Body into Heaven. Her
other Relics, her Shifts, her Slippers, her Girdles, her Vails, her Hair, her
Milk, all these were not invented and produced till a long time after. This is
a point upon which you will do well to press your Converters. Desire of them,
that they will show you in the fourth or fifth Age, those Relics of the
Virgin which are at this day the object of the Piety of the Devote's. Those
believers were very negligent in not searching after the Milk of the Virgin,
whereof at this day the World is full. And it is wonderful, that among the
Relics which gave occasion to invocate the Martyrs in the fourth and fifth
Ages, they did not reckon those old Clothes and Rags which have since been put
among the precious movables of the Devote's. There was nothing but Ashes and
Bones which did then pass for true Relics, and such as were worthy of
veneration.

Gather together I entreat you, my Brethren, all these things, and make
reflection upon them. About the end of the fourth Age men began to invocate
Saints. But 1. They did not invocate all Saints, no not the Apostles
themselves. 2. They prayed only to the Martyrs, nor did they invocate all the
Martyrs themselves, and those which they did invocate, they did not invocate in
all places, but only where their Relics were. 3. They did not invocate
Angels, who are much more worthy of honor and invocation than the Saints. 4.
They did not invocate the Virgin, who is above all Saints and Angels.
Is it not plain, that this was an unformed Worship, a Worship in its birth, a
Worship which as yet had no Principles to establish it upon, and which had for
all its foundation, a popular superstition for the ashes of those who had
suffered Martyrdom?

Last of all, to convince you, that, indeed, this Superstition was as yet a
Religion in its birth, without Form, and without Principles, give attention to
this which follows: it is that this Devotion was without form in its Doctrine,
as well as in its Worship. All Religious Worship is founded in some Doctrine.
The Worship of Saints is established upon the opinion, that they know our
Needs, hear our Prayers, and see the Face of God, with whom they can intercede.
Now in the fourth and fifth Ages, all men were in doubt concerning these
things. They knew not whether the Saints did hear the Prayers of Men, yea, or
no. Gregory Nazianzen, in his Funeral Oration for his Sister Gorgonia, speaks
to her, but knew not whether she heard him: If thou have any regard, says he to
her, to the Honors that we give thee, if holy Souls receive from God the gift
of knowing things, kindly accept our Discourse. St. Ambrose, in the Book
concerning the Death of his Brother Satyrus, says, that God had withdrawn him
from the World, to the end that he might not see the miseries of the age, and
speaking to him, says, Considering the compassion which your holy Soul had for
those which belonged unto you, if now you know that Italy is oppressed by an
enemy, so near unto it, how will you sigh, how much grief will you feel by
reason of it?

It seems to me, that this supposes, that the dead know not what is done below.
St. Jerome, who speaks often of the dead, speaks always of them as not knowing
what the living suffer. He says concerning Nepotian, that he saw not what was
done here, and that we could not speak unto him. He says to Demetrius, to
comfort her concerning the death of her Father, that he is happy in that he did
not see the desolation of his Country. We see that it is Nature that speaks;
and St. Jerome in these passages deserves much more to be believed, than when
he tells us, that the Souls of Saints move about their Tombs.

It Is a thing very observable, that St. Austin was very unquiet and uncertain
in this matter, whereby we discover also the uncertainty of the Divines of his
age. This is seen chiefly in the Book which he writ concerning Care for the
Dead. Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, had consulted him about the Devotion of a
Woman, who wished that her Son had been buried near the Tomb of St. Felix the
Martyr, formerly Bishop of Nola. This gave him occasion to handle the Question,
how the Dead knew our Necessities. He durst not deny, that the Martyrs did help
and assist us, because of so many Miracles that were done, says he, near their
Remains. But he doubted very much, whether they heard us, and knew our wants.
Afterward he proceeds beyond doubt, and lays down, and proves plainly and
strongly, that they do not hear us Cap. 13. De cura pro mort.
. Afterward he says, that Souls may know not all, but part of that which is
done here below, either by the report of Angels, or by that of the Dead, or by
some immediate Revelation Cap. 14.
.

But at last it may be seen apparently, that he enclines to believe, that Souls
have no knowledge of our Prayers, and that they are Angels which do Miracles in
the name of Saints; yea, that although the Souls of Saints are said to appear,
it is not they which return, it is the Angels which appear, and speak for them.
Behold, I pray you, how unformed and floating this Theology is.

But there is more than this, in these same ages, when they prayed to Martyrs
at one time, they prayed for them at another. They prayed, say I; for the
Martyrs, and for the Apostles, yea, for the blessed Virgin; and this is a new
Proof of the Novelty of this Superstition. This appears by the Liturgies of
that time: In that of St. Chrysostom we read, We offer to thee this reasonable
Service, for those which rest in the Faith of our Ancestors, our Fathers, the
Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Preachers, the Evangelists, the
Martyrs, the Confessors, the Continents, and for all the Spirits which were
initiated in the Faith, principally for the most holy immaculate, and blessed
above all Women, our Lady Mary, Mother of God, and always a Virgin. And in that
which is attributed to Cyril of Jerusalem: O God, have mercy on our Fathers, on
our Brethren, which are at rest, whose Souls are acceptable unto thee, give
them repose; and remember also all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, Evangelists, and all the Spirits of the Just, which are
dead in the Faith, and principally the holy and the glorious Mary, Mother of
God, always a Virgin.

It would be at this day the greatest of all absurdities to pray for a dead
man, and pray to him at the same time. Indeed if he be in a condition of doing
us good, if he see God, if he be with him, he has no need of our Prayers. The
inconsistency of these two Worships, which nevertheless were both used at the
same time, is a demonstrative proof, that the Invocations of Saints was a
Novelty. Prayers for the Martyrs were found in the ancient Liturgies; out of
respect to Antiquity they were left there, but the torrent of Novelty added
unto them Prayers unto the Martyrs, without taking notice, that these latter
were inconsistent with the former. To conclude, I do maintain, that those who
will not give attention to these Demonstrations, which prove the Novelty of the
Invocation of Saints in the 4th Age have an insensible and seared Conscience,
and so I think it unprofitable to dispute any more against them.

I well understand, that the New Converts, who are willing to be content with
their change, will yet find two Fortifications for their security. They will
say, that this Worship of Saints was then new, but that it was not evil, and
that therefore the Church might introduce it, as a pious Custom, and proper to
incline the minds of men toward Devotion. But let these Gentlemen have a
little patience: Monsieur de Meaux, in that which follows, will give us
occasion to make it plain to you, that this Worship, and this Invocation is
Paganism renewed, and that it is in nothing better than the Invocation of
Angels, and Hero's which the Pagans practiced in their Devotions: we will make
them see that it is a true Idolatry. The other Fortification is the Antiquity of
this Worship: However it be, say they, you do confess, that the Invocation of
Saints has more than one thousand two hundred Years on its head. Does this put
you to no troubles? Have you no respect for so goodly a piece of Antiquity? and
how can you believe that God has left his Church under Idolatry, for so many
Ages? We answer, That we cannot have respect for Antiquity without Truth; and
in this we are of the Religion of St. Cyprian. We add, That we are not
astonished to see an Idolatry so aged in the Church, because it has been
expressly predicted to us: The Prophet St. John calls Idolatrous Christians
Pagans; and the Spirit says to him, Revel. 11. cap. 12.
I have given up the outward Court of the Church to the Pagans, that they may
tread it under foot for forty two Months: These are the thousand two hundred
and sixty Days in which the Woman, i. e. the Church ought to be hidden, as in a
Wilderness, for the space of these thousand two hundred and sixty Days. And the
two Prophets which prophesied in Sackcloth, i. e. the Truth published by a
small number of Witnesses, and those under the Cross ought to continue under
the oppression of Idolatry, the same number of Days, i. e. a thousand two
hundred and sixty: Now these thousand two hundred and sixty Days, are so many
Years, according to the style of the Prophets, who denominate Years by Days. We
shall have, it may be, in what follows, an opportunity to prove it to you. It
must be therefore, that Idolatry Rule in the Christian Church one thousand two
hundred and sixty Years. It has done so almost for that space of time; it is
therefore near its end. But we ought not to be amazed that it has continued so
long.

An Article of Controversy: A Continuation of the Answer to the Illusions that
the New Converts put upon themselves.
WE take up again the Continuation of the Controversy, at the place where we
left the Illusions of the New Converts: The common Faith, say you, is a kind of
Agreement to live under the same Ministry, without being accountable for all
the Abuses that have slipped into the Church. By this fine reasoning, we may live
in safety among the Turks, we believe, as they do, that there is one GOD, one
Paradise, one Hell, and that Jesus Christ is the greatest Prophet which ever
came into the World. This common Confession of Faith will be an Agreement to
live together safely under the same Ministry: And we will leave to the Turks
their profane Abuses, and their absurd and impious Doctrines. Believe me, such
an Agreement resembles that of Pilate and Herod, who agreed to despise and put
to death Christ Jesus. When the Ministry introduces small Corruptions, this
may be granted; but when Corruption goes to the heart of Religion, the
Agreement signifies nothing, and lays no obligation; all is deadly, either by
itself, or by its neighborhood or contagion: Provided that we Adore the same
God, and Profess the same Fundamentals of Christianity, all the rest is not
imputable to private persons: Above all then, when there is a necessity of
joining ourselves to this first Christian Society, and when we cannot find any
public Worship more pure and edifying.

This is the Continuation of your Apology: There are two words therein,
Provided and above all, which destroy you: Provided that we profess the same
Fundamentals. I have made it appear already, that this provided is
insufficient. You must add, Provided that fundamental Errors be not added to
the Foundations. Now Popery has added to the Foundations of Christianity,
Tyranny, Superstition, and in one word, Antichristianism: So, behold yourselves
thrown out of your Fortification, Provided that. The Above all is no better:
Above all, when there is a necessity of joining ourselves; There is no
necessity of joining ourselves to a Communion which we acknowledge corrupt, and
defiled in its most noble Parts. Do you believe, that those Illustrious
Confessors, which fill the Prisons and the Galleys, and whom you yourselves
admire, do you believe, I say, according to them, there is a necessity of
joining yourselves to Popery? They have found ways of dispensing with this
necessity: But your necessity of joining yourselves unto it, comes from the
love and adherence that you have for your Estates, your Ease, and your Lives.
An unhappy Necessity, which has not its original in Charity, but in
Covetuousness; in the Name of God take heed of it.

But, you say, we cannot find any public Worship more pure and more holy. I
answer, It is not always necessary to adhere to public Worship, whatever it
be: The Martyrs and Confessors of Jesus Christ, served him after a more
grateful manner, although their Worship were not only private but hidden, but
covered in the darkness of a deep Prison; although you cannot assemble your
selves to pray unto God with your Brethren, you have your Closets, of which you
may make Churches, and your Hearts, of which you may make Sanctuaries and
Altars. This necessity of Adherence to public Worship, is another Illusion
made by your love of the World: It Is better, says one, that has written to
us, to adhere to a corrupt Worship, than to live without Religion: What lewd
Morality it this! Those seven thousand men which were so hidden, that Elijah
knew nothing of them, had they therefore no Religion, because they did not
adhere to the public Worship of Baal, which was intermixed with that of the
true God? To refuse to participate in an Idolatrous Worship, is to be truly
Religious; to adhere to a Worship which is known to be full of Superstition and
Impurities, is to have no Religion at all.

In conclusion, you come to the example of our Fathers: The example of our
Fathers, say you, before the Reformation, proves clearly, that we may secure
our Salvation in the Roman Communion, though we adhere even to the public
Worship: Whatever men say, it is inconceivable that men born and bred up in a
Religion, and which never heard any thing said of any other Doctrine, and who
lived and died without protesting against the Doctrines of their Church, should
never partake in the Worship thereof. Would to God you would stay yourselves on
the examples of your Fathers, and Grandfathers, without ascending so high as
your Ancestors: When you have done all that you can, you will not save them
all; you will find among them, by ascending, a great number which worshipped
Devils, and the Idols of the Pagans, you must necessarily leave them to the sad
Judgments of God. This example of your Fathers, which were saved in the Church
of Rome, is a subject which comes to us often, and from all parts; it is the
universal Illusion; it is the Pillow on which you all lay yourselves to sleep:
Many of your Ancient Pastors have endeavored to dispute this unhappy Illusion;
this would be a large Chapter, if we should say all that may be said concerning
it, but I do not think it necessary, therefore I will say but two or three
important things about it.

First, The first is, That we do willingly confess, That before the
Reformation, there were persons saved in the Roman Communion: About two hundred
Years agone, there were no Communions in the World which were not corrupt, at
least no considerable Communions or Societies. It must needs be, that God had
his Elect there, for he never leaves the World without them: Do not fear least
we should send you to find these Elect among the Waldenses, Abbigenses,
Wicklefists, and Hussites; these were Forerunners, and like Mornings which
went before the Sun of Reformation: but these Societies did not continue, nor
did they make a Figure great enough in the World, to include all the Elect
there.

Secondly, But on the subject of those men which were saved in corrupt
Communions, before our Reformation, know first, That we must not (almost at
all) seek them among the Adult: Of a thousand Children that are born, there is
not the tenth part of them that attain to the Age of Reason; now all Children
born in the Popish Communion, are saved, dying before the Age of Reason,
because they have part in the advantage of the general Covenant of
Christianity, which is preserved in Popery, and they have no part in the
Corruptions which have been added thereto; for persons have no part in the
Errors which corrupt the Covenant, but when they know, receive or tolerate
them: Behold, therefore, nine hundred of a thousand which were saved in the
most corrupt times. Now, when God has nine hundred Elect among a thousand men,
we cannot say he has left the World without Elect persons, and that
Christianity remained uprofitable: there were therefore always a great number
of Elect persons in the Roman Communion.

Thirdly, But after all, it must be known, That among the Adult, the number of
those, of whose Salvation we might well presume, in the times preceding our
Reformation, is so small, that we may well be amazed to think of it: for
Histories do represent the Corruption not only of Worship, but also of Manners
so horrible and universal, that a man knows not where to fix his eyes, to find
a person that might be saved: The Clergy were overflown with Debauchery; the
Monks were Assemblies of profligate Persons and Hypocrites; the Houses of Nuns
were filthy Bawdy-houses: The People suffered themselves to be born away by the
torrent and examples of their Guides; the devout People scarcely knew the
difference between the Creator and the Creature, and their Piety spent itself
in Superstitions, which are even a horror to the wiser Doctors of the Roman
Church at this day.

Fourthly, Nevertheless, let us suppose, that among all these, there were some
Elect, and some saved, I do maintain, that it was absolutely by Miracle; I say,
by Miracle, in the litteral sense of the word, and without figure: As a man
which lives in a hideous Mire, sunk over head and ears, lives there by a
Miracle. For the Roman Communion is damnable; that is a certain point: Men are
saved there; it is because the Promise of God cannot be in vain, and he cannot
be without Children; but the time of Miracles does not continue always; and we
do not find ourselves obliged to explicate unto you the manner of Miracles; for
we do not know, by that alone, that these are Miracles. And it is to you, my
Brethren, a prodigious rashness to re-plung yourselves in a Communion, where
your Fathers did not live, but by Miracle, in hopes that naturally you shall
live there: It Is just as if the Jews, at this day, should run headlong into
the Red Sea, in hopes to pass well through it, because their Ancestors did
heretofore go through it without danger. God has ways of withdrawing those
that are his, from a Spirit of Lies and Superstition, whilst they live, or at
least at their death, which we do not exactly understand. Nevertheless, what
your Apologist has advanced, is very rash, and very criminal; for he
supposes, with Monsieur Nicolas, Monsieur de Meaux, and your other Convertors,
That all those that live in the Romans Church, and which were saved there, did
partake in all her Superstitions. This is false: and we are persuaded, that an
infinite number received Christianity there, without taking part in
Antichristianity, or that they repented of it before their death: Because they
do not comprehend how this may be done, was it not therefore done? This is to
put bounds to the Divine Power: God has his ways which are known to none but
himself.

Fifthly, But I have almost no need of all this, that I have said in the
present Affair; for I declare to you, that although all your Ancestors should
be saved in the Roman Church, whilst they pertook in her Worships, although all
the honest Papists at this day should be saved, nevertheless you would not be
in the way of Salvation, in the way in which now you are; and I will convince
you thereof, in two words: the first is, That your own Apologist condemns you,
Your Father, says he, were born and bred up in a Religion, and never heard any
other Doctrines discoursed on. How dare you compare your state to that?
Although he should have mercy for such persons, would he have it for such who
have been brought up in the Bosom of Truth, who have not forsaken the Faith,
but only the Profession of it, who have subscribed to Errors against their
Conscience, who adhere to Worships whereof the strong and the weak do know the
Filthiness and Impurities? I have already said unto you, and I do say it over
again, To act contrary to Conscience, has something so aggravating in an evil
action, that it makes a moderate Superstition become a kind of Sin against the
Holy Ghost. You do well perceive this, when, you go to Mass with such terrible
regret and reluctance: it is your Conscience that accuses and condemns you. The
other circumstance, which puts you absolutely out of all condition to compare
with your Ancestors, is, That by your weakness, you have ruined the greatest
Works of the Grace and Providence of God, which has appeared since the
Establishment of Christianity, that is to say, the Work of Reformation. It Is a
thing past doubt, that since the death of the Apostles, there has nothing
happened so great as this magnificent Work, whereby God at one shock did
overthrow almost half the Antichristian Empire, and very much weakened the other
half.

God is jealous of his Works, and he cannot but look with a Sovereign
Indignation upon the lapse of those, who by their fall runied the late glorious
Reformation, and who proceeded so far as to blame it, and say as you say to us,
We must not Separate, we must tolerate Abuses, we must expect the Separation
that Jesus Christ will make at the Day of Judgment. Oh criminal Imagination! We
must live in the Dirt and Slime; we must not restore to the Church her
primitive Beauty; we must not disengage the Truth from a hideous Mass of Lies,
that do oppress it; we must not restore to God that Worship that has been
ravished from him; we must not remove from before his eyes so many Idols of
Jealousy; Have you never no holy Compunction for entertaining such thoughts?
Do not you perceive that your weakness in suffering yourselves to be led to
Mass, will ruin the Reformation, if God don't bring a speedy Remedy thereunto?
The Protestants of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, will
have the same Complaisance for their King, that you have for yours. Popery
reunited, will confederate against all Protestant States; and then behold them
speedily tumbling into Superstition by your Principles, and by your Conduct: So
that by following you, we shall soon see the fruit of much Blood, so many
Martyrs, and so many glorious Confessions perish and come to nothing. If you
give attention to this, you will no more compare yourselves to those poor
miserable Ignorants, which went whither they were led, who being placed in a
night of deep Superstition, saw not a beam of better Light, which way soever
they turned their eyes; on one hand they saw behind them a multitude of Ages
corrupt as their own, a Corruption which came by so long a descent to them,
that it appeared a natural state; on the other hand, they saw before them an
Authority which swallowed them up; a Clergy Magnificent, Powerful, Tyrannical,
Numerous, rich, and abounding in Spiritual and Temporal Thunders; all this
amazed them in such a manner, that they could not distinguish the state in
which they were: We do not think them savable in this state, but we think you
far less so in the estate in which you are. God by a blow from Heaven (the most
miraculous that ever was seen) has broken this dismal Charm, he has thundered,
he has lightened from Heaven, and dispersed this Darkness. See whether you who
have been Partakers of this Heavenly Light, be in an estate to flatter
yourselves with a Tolleration which God might have for your Ancestors; so then
if you gain any thing by your reasonings, it will not be for you, but for your
Children: for it is of them concerning whom we may say, it seems, they were born
in that Religion, they were educated therein, it is probable God will save them,
although they do communicate in a Worship Impure, and full of Superstitions.
But, in truth, you gain nothing either for your Children or yourselves. The
past time will return no more: the times of Darkness and Ignorance may indeed
return, but the times of Tolleration and Sufferance will never return again.
That which is done, can never be undone. The Light of the Reformation has cast
abroad a very great Luster, and although at this day men endeavor to stifle
it, the memory thereof will never be extinguished, and the Truth which we have
set in so great a light, can never be abolished: For which reason, both we and
our Posterity, in all following Ages, are obliged to see, follow, and entertain
this Light: If we do otherwise, there will be neither Excuse nor Illusion which
will be able to save us out of the hands of the Judge of the World.

IN the preceding Letter, we sent you some News from Languedoc: Behold a Letter
that will tell you more, we will give it you without any change or mutation.

You have heard of the Death of Monsieur de Cross, Monsieur Brousson had bailed
him, seeing him sick in the Vessel which was to carry him, with others, into
America. He was an Example without Equal. The Bishop of Marseilles, told him,
Monsieur, If your Religion be true, I must confess that you are a Saint. Let
him die in his Religion, and be buried in a Dormitory of the Turks. He had not
the grief to understand the death of his youngest Daughter, who had been
carried some little time since from the Castle of Saumiere to Valence, with
another of her Sisters, and four Daughters of Monsieur Audemane's, and
Mademoiselle de la Farelle: All these persons are a thousand times worse
treated, than if they were among Barbarians. At their arrival in the Hospital,
he which has the Government thereof, caused them to be shaven; afterward he
caused them to be stripped of their Shifts, to give them others of Hair, which
made Sores and Ulcers on them to their fingers ends. They give them little
Food, and a great many Blows: Mademoiselle de la Farelle received a blow with a
Cudgel over her Face, which beat out all her fore-teeth. They seize on persons
every day of the Reformed Religion, on the Borders of Lions and Geneva. Some
days since they killed Monsieur Quista, who was conveying his Wife and Child
out of the Kingdom. Meeting some Countrymen, and finding himself well horsed,
he made opposition to them; but one of them gave him a knock with a Flint,
which overturned and killed him. His Wife and Child are now Prisoners. On this
Accident the Wife of M. Bonigoll escaped, and is now at Geneva.

April the 5th, 1687.

HE which commits these Cruelties, of which this Letter speaks, is the famous
Rapin, of whom we have already told you something. The Cruelties which he
exercises in the Prisons of Valence, deserve a particular History; which we
will give you as soon as we can.

I hope that Marseilles, which has seen the last hours of the Martyrdom of Mr.
Du Cross, will become more famous by the number of Martyrs, than by its
Antiquities, and other Singularities. We have been informed that two good old
men of Vassi in Champagne, have there received their Crowns. One of them is
called Monsieur Chantguyon, of seventy four years of age, of which he employed
thirty four in the service of that Church, in quality of an Elder, which great
care and fidelity. This good old man was arrested on the Frontiers of
Champagne, endeavoring to go out of the Kingdom; he was condemned to the
Galleys; he appeals to the Parliament of Mets, whither he was transmitted; his
Sentence was confirmed, and there he received that glorious Chain under which
he breathed his last: he was so oppressed with Age and Infirmities, that he was
so far from being able to bear a Chain, that he was not able to bear himself.
His Judges were touched and afflicted with it; but they said, they must make
Examples. He went from Mets about the end of September, with his Brother-in-Law
Mr. Chemet, who was Sixty nine years of age, and also in Chains, and much more
infirm than he, having both a Rupture and an Asthma. They were both full of
joy, and gloried that they were found worthy to suffer for the Name and Truth
of God. In all the places, through which they passed upon the Road, they found
persons which have given Testimony to their Constancy and Courage. These two
Martyrs bore their Chain to Marseilles; but the end of their Journey was the
end of their Race, and the time of their Coronation. They both died within a
few days of each other, giving glory to God, and confessing his Truth, having
never had any inclination to deny it, to deliver themselves out of this sad
condition. Mr. Chantguyon is of the Blood of the Martyrs; for he had for
Grandfather Peter Chantguyon, who was one of those that suffered death in the
Massacre of Vassi, which was the Signal to the Civil War of the past Age.

How sad soever the state of these Confessors, which suffer for the Name of
Christ, may seem to be; it is nevertheless infinitely less calamitous than that
of those who are lapsed and fallen, whose Conscience makes them feel those
torments, which cannot easily be expressed. We have thought our selves obliged
to communicate to you on this subject, the Letter of a Person of great Quality,
Wife to one of our most famous Confessors. She had imitated the courage of her
Illustrious Husband for the space of above a whole year: but the Tempter
assailed her at an ill season, and caused her to lose her Crown. Behold how
bitter the Tear are, which dropped from this unfortunate Gentlewoman!

Alas, my dear Mr. --, blame me not, if I have not acquainted you with the
unhappy State in which I am; so great is my Confusion, by reason of my Fall,
that I have not the boldness to publish it my self. It is impossible to express
unto you my Grief; it is such, that I am not able to bear up against it; I am
oppressed by the weight thereof; I am neither able to live, nor die; no body
can conceive how lamentable my State is. I was so content with my Trial, and so
resigned to the Will of God, that I could willingly have suffered death, if he
had called me thereunto. I was acceptable, and in good reputation among all
persons, and enjoyed a wonderful rest, and repose of mind. It Is true, it was a
little disturbed by the coming of my Son, who tormented me extremely; but all
was to no purpose. God bestowed those Mercies on me, that I did not deserve,
nor did I make any suitable returns for them. I presumed too much on my self,
yet I was not altogether without suspicion. Alas, how do I find true in
experience, that the Spirit is ready, but the Flesh is weak; and that it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of an offended God! How great are my sins,
since the castigation of them is so terrible! Whilst I write, I pour out tears,
I do assure you; and they flow from me night and day. I repent, O my God, help
my weakness. I forgive you, that upon the first hearing of this thing, you
cried out to all against me, and did judge that it was the World, Estate, and
Ease, and to conclude, whatsoever you please, that was the cause thereof. I do
not justify my self at all, nor do I plead any thing for my excuse. I was weak
and feeble, my Faith failed me in a time of need, and God did not enable me to
suffer for his Name. In my unhappy state, I have nevertheless this perfect
confidence in the mercy of my great God, that he will raise me up, and I shall
glorify him, whether it be in life or death, and that my Christ will be always
gain to me, whether I live or die. He desires not the death of a sinner, but
his conversion and life. My God, draw me, and I will run after thee, and do
thou lead me to the Haven of Happiness. Thou see my heart, O my God, it is
entirely thine, as well as my mouth: I will confess thee everywhere. For the
space of four hours I was tormented by fifteen persons; I cried with all my
strength, begging the Gallows and Death. I was nigh unto death; and how happy
had I been, if I had died. I had not one moment of rest, I knew not where I
was, by reason of the great noise that was made: They made use of this great
trouble and confusion, and well perceiving that if they suffered me to return
to my self, they would gain nothing; therefore they repeated their Assaults
with the greater force, and reduced me to the most pittiable condition in the
world. I do not hide my anguish from any one; and I speak with greater courage
than ever, by the grace of my God I am prepared to suffer all the evil which
can betide me in the world. The good God will be my defense, and my support. I
entreat you to pray to God for me, and don't think that I am fastened to this
World, I am more estranged from the love of it than ever. It seems to me that
my House is a Tomb: I will never more see any person; every thing that I see,
reproaches me; my own Soul smites me so sharply, that it is deplorable. Suffer
with me in my grief, I pray you, I am worthy of pity: and oh that the great God
would pardon and deliver us quickly from the Torments which we feel.

From -- 15 Jan. 1687.

THis Letter, which has made known what Conscience can do, in the matter of
Subscriptions, obliges me to bring to your minds a matter of fact which
happened lately. In the month past, forty persons embarked themselves on the
Borders of Normandy, in a Veslel of seven Tuns, that is, to speak properly, in
a Challop, and this without any Provisions for the support of Life: They
abandoned themselves to death, and it may be said, to a death apparently
inevitable. For in such a Vessel, if the Wind and Sea had been contrary to
them, they might have continued there long enough to have died of Famine. But
as it pleased God, they were not above four days e're they gained the Coast of
England, and they passed them without eating. Behold what the force of
Conscience can do, and it is a good proof, that those who are newly reunited to
the Roman Church, are in great distress and perplexity. Amongst these persons
there was Monsieur the Count of Marancay, aged about seventy years, of the
Province of Normandy; and Madam his Wife, Sister to Monsieur the Marquess of
Rochegifar. This new Story brings to my mind another of an elder date, which
makes it farther appear what horrible Violence these forced Subscriptions do to
the Consciences of men. It Is the examples of a Woman named Jane Baille, Wife of
a Surgeon named Isaiah Viridit, of a little Village in the County of
Charollois, named Parayle Moyneau. This poor woman being pressed to the
uttermost by her Persecutions, took Pen from the hands of a Jesuit named Father
Langeroon, but at the same instant she fell down as one dead, without any other
sign of life, than a convulsive motion in her right arm: The Jesuit returned
again another time accompanied with the Major, the Delegate of the Intendant,
and many other Papists. This poor woman, for fear of losing her Children, took
the Pen a second time in her hand to make her Subscription; but in the very
moment that she made the letter J, which is the first letter of her name, she
fell into the same condition, and continued in it more than six hours. Every
body was affected with it; the Major protested that he would have given a great
deal of Money not to have been there on that occasion, and it was more than
five days e're he did recover from the disorder that this Accident did occasion
to him. The Delegate himself was also moved at it, and promised to endeavor to
get her a Pasport. There was no body but the Jesuit, which was not moved at it;
who said, Let her burst, she is but an Hypocrite. The Delegate, instead of a
Pasport for this poor woman, received Order to carry her to a Convent: to
execute his Order, he caused her to be seized on by four Sergeants, in whose
arms she fell into the same state in which she was in the two preceding times.
But nevertheless, they laid her on a Horse, like a Pack without motion, and
without life, and carried her to the Convent of the Religious of St. Mary.

On occasion of these Events thus happening, (which discover the cruel
Oppressions and Troubles of Mind in which those are which have signed their
Abjurations) I cannot forbear to speak to those that have been so unhappy, and
have yet no sense of it, nor sorrow for it. And here I will speak not only to
those who are yet in that unhappy state, but also to those who have found
opportunity of getting out of the Kingdom, and are risen from their falls. We
have seen some that have been touched and affected with it; but in truth the
insensibility of the most part, makes me fear: And I tremble for some persons,
whose Piety was very eminent, who nevertheless count as nothing the fault which
they have committed, in withdrawing themselves through cowardice from the
honor whereto God called them, by suffering for his Name. I will make but one
Reflection thereupon, to make you perceive how much their heart deceives them.
Let us suppose that all the Reformed of France had imitated them, and that all
preserving the Truth in their hearts, had abandoned themselves to this unhappy
complaisance for their Persecutors, and signed their Abjuration; I say, if all
had done so there had not been at this day in France one Confessor, one Martyr,
one man that had spoken for God, and maintained his Truth in Prisons, and in
the midst of Torments. Now this would have been the most dreadful of all God's
Judgments, the greatest mark of Reprobation for the Church, and the most
frightful Curse of Heaven. For this would have been a Castigation of God,
singular in its kind; for since there was a Church and Persecutors, there was
never any such thing seen: there have been always Martyrs, always Confessors,
always Believers that have persevered in Prisons, and in the midst of
Punishments. It Is the Honor of the Church, it is her Triumph, it is the Glory of
God, and the Crown of Men: Yea, in humane Affairs, in Interests purely secular,
in causes where men suffer only for Truth and humane Right, there are no
Examples where all forsook it, and no body remained steadfast thereto. So that
if the Reformed Church of France had remained without Confessors and Martyrs,
she would have been charged with an eternal Reproach, which the Blood of all
mankind would never have washed off. Now it is not owing to these weak persons,
who have subscribed to save their Lives, and secure their Ease and Repose, that
the Church of France is not branded with this horrible Reproach. For if all had
imitated them, that had been exactly our case. I easily forgive this weakness
to those whose Zeal and Piety was not eminent; but I do acknowledge, that
without difficulty I cannot forgive those, who after they had obtained the
Reputation of very Pious and Devout persons, have denied and refused to Jesus
Christ the Sacrifice of their Sufferings. Good God? what discouragement is
this, to those who persevere in the Confession of the Truth, the most part of
whom never appeared so zealous as some of those who are fallen, and flatter
themselves because God has given them the opportunity of going out of the
Kingdom, and recovering themselves in a Country of Liberty and Freedom. I do
not call this Perseverance. I commend the prudence of those which secure
themselves, but to account it their honor and reputation, I cannot. They
sacrifice their Country, their Wives, their Children, their Goods, and their
Ease. I confess it, and it is true that is much. But what will not a man give
for his life? Every one will give skin for skin, and all that he has, for his
life: but put forth thine hand and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
curse thee to thy face. He who has not suffered thus far, has not as yet
given sufficient proof of his love for the Truth. What shame and abatement of
glory do these weak ones bring to our glorious Confessors, who reckon their
lapse and fall, for a thing of naught. According to them, our Martyrs are fools
and obstinate persons, who suffer for a trifle, for a signature and
subscription which is required of them; which when they have given, they may
save themselves by going out of the Kingdom. Alas, if this fault be so small a
thing, why do the holy Champions of God suffer so many Evils to avoid it? Is it
the Spirit of God which inspires them with this Courage? If it be God that is
the cause of this Holy Perseverance, to what Spirit may we attribute this
cowardice of refusing to Jesus Christ our Bodies to glorify his Name, and do
honor to his Truth? All that these poor Wretches say to us, is this: If you
had been in our place, it may be you would have done no better than we have
done. This may be true, but is it a lawful Excuse? Is the Crime the less,
because we are all capable of committing it?

I complain therefore, but do not rigorously condemn those who have been so
weak as to yield by Persecution, provided they sigh and lament in the secret of
their own Souls, acknowledging and confessing their fault and their sin. But I
confess, I am not able to bear those, who after they have received much, have
returned so little, and who being persons of great understanding, have had so
little stability and courage, and cannot yet confess the fault they have
committed, is ver^ great and heinous.

The first of May, 1687.

The Eighteenth PASTORAL LETTER. A. M. D. J. Upon occasion of an Act falsely
ascribed to the Synod of Montpazier in Perigort; by which they would prove,
that in the year 1659. the Reformed of Lower Guyenne did Treat with the English
about their entering into France, and delivering several Places in the Kingdom
into their hands.
Monsieur,
YOU have thought that the Accusation, which Soulier the Priest has renewed
against the Protestants of France, does deserve, that we interrupt the course
of our Pastoral Letters, to give the Public a small Apology concerning it. And
indeed seeing we do employ our selves in refuting errors in matters of Right,
for the justification of our holy Religion, we man, and ought to confute
errors in matters of Fact, for the justification of persons who make
profession of this Religion. So that I yield to your Reasons, and at this time
shall make an Apology for our selves against this barbarous and inhumane
Accusation. And first I advertise the Public, that they give attention to the
business about which we are now to treat, for they will see one of the most
famous Impostures, that the eyes of him who sees all things, ever did behold;
they will see what is the Spirit of the Religion which for so long time we have
opposed: they will know what our Persecutors are capable of.

I Know not what cheating Priests, and Apostate Ministers, did forge some years
since an Act in the Name of the Synod of Lower Guyenne which was held at
Montpazier in the year 1659. on the first of July, and some days following,
that they might persuade, that the Reformed of that Province did at that time
treat with the English about giving them entrance into the Kingdom, and
delivering into their Hands all those places of which they could make
themselves Masters. This piece of Forgery appeared at that time, when they
labored with an incredible Heat, to thrust the Reformed of France with all the
speed they could to their utmost Ruin. 'Twas all this time, that all the World
(to please the Court) thought it a Duty to endeavor by all sorts of
Accusations, to render them Odious. All places were full of Books, and Libels
against Calvinism, endeavoring to show the Impurities of its Birth, the
Horrors of its Life, the Furies of its Conduct, the Civil Wars that it did
occasion, the Spirit of Rebellion wherewithal it is animated, the Dangers in
which it engaged the Crown, the Precipices, to the very borders whereof, it
carried the Realm, its diverse attempts against the Persons of our Kings, and
the State. All then was well received which promoted the principal end of the
Clergy, and Court of France. And 'twas to animate the King to a speedy
execution of his Design, that this piece was forged. This Conspiracy of the
Synod of Monpazier, which was sufficiently new, was the most proper means in
the World to swell, and enlarge the Libels, which were made against the
Reformed. Nevertheless no Writer would own, or assert this Villainous Piece,
because 'twas visible to be bad Metal; Mr. Maimbourg was not a person
scrupulous in the value, and worth of his Testimonies, when he endeavored to
support what he had advanced; and this pretended Conspiracy of Montpazier was a
Testimony sufficiently good, it seems to me to prove the Thesis which he had
endeavored to defend in his History of Calvinism, it is that the Spirit of
Violence, Fury, and Rebellion is the Soul of our Religion. Nevertheless neither
he, nor Mr. Arnald in his Apology for the Catholics, nor Mr. Feure who came
sine, did ever dare to hazard their Reputation on a Calumny so evident, and an
Accusation so ill proved and established. I entreat you judge, whether it be
true as they pretend, that the Court had the Act, and the Proof of this
Conspiracy in their hands, that the resolution of Montpazier in its Original
had been put into the hands of the King, by Mr. Joly Bishop of Again, and by the
Cardinal Bouillon, and that the Court had judged the piece true. Consider, say
I, whether Mr. Maimbourgh who writ by the Order of the Court, and on purpose to
make Calvinism Odious, would have had no knowledge, or cognizance of it? And in
case he had known, or understood it, is it not plain, and clear, that he would
have made use of it, if he had thought it good, and valuable?

But at last a Person is found fit to serve as a Godfather to this Reprobate,
and Bastard-Child, it is Soulier the Priest, a man the most given up to the
Spirit of Calumny, that ever was in the World, the most desperate, and
frontless Liar that Popery ever bred up, and to make his Elogy in one word,
Bipedum nequissimus, the greatest of Knaves. This man publishes in the year
1682. a furious Libel against the Reformed, under the Title of, The History of
the Edicts of Pacification, in which amongst other Proofs of our lewd, and
Criminal Conduct prosecuted, and carried on to the end, he makes use of this
Act, drawn up says he, by the Synod of Montpazier, in the form, and words, in
which it is here seen.

The Pastors and Elders of the Churches of Lower Guyenne, Assembled in the
Synod at Montpazier the first of July 1659, and some days following.
UPON the report made by Mr. Ricottier, The first was the Minister of Clairac,
the other of Nerac.
of the Care that he has taken with Mr. Vignier now absent at the desire of
some of the Society, to obtain that our Brethren of England should concern
themselves in the preservation of our Liberties, which they endeavor every day
to destroy, wherein they think he has labored happily by the interposition,
and assistance of Mr. Daret. And having learnt from the Mouth of Mr. Daret, and
seen by Letters which have been written to him, and whereof he had given a Copy
to the said Mr. Ricottier that to maintain us in our Privileges, and prevent
the dissipation of our Flocks, they offer not only to interceed for us, but
also in case of refusal to bear Arms into this Province, if we promise them,
Cromwell was yet alive.
and give them assurance to put into their hands all the Cities, and places
whereof we can dispose. The Society approving the Care of the said Messieurs
Ricottier, and Vignier, after having all promised by Oath made to God not to
reveal a Secret of this importance, return Thanks to the said Mr. Daret for
what he had already done to make it successful, and do entreat him to go as soon
as he can, and know what assurances they desire, and promise on our part that
we shall give all those that are possible, and as a Pledge thereof, they have
drawn up the present Act which shall be dispatched to him to this end, and
purpose, and the Original put into the hands of the said Vignier, to be
secretly, and faithfully kept there, until the business can be executed to the
Glory of God, and the Comfort of our poor Afflicted Flocks, etc.

The Original is Signed by the President, the Assistants and the Register of
the Synod.

This Imposture caused all those that saw it to tremble, and the Reformed
stirred all that they could to justify themselves from this Calumny; but this
was no time to succeed in an Enterprise of Justification, for Persons whom they
had resolved to destroy after the most cruel manner in the World, and whom by
consequence they would look upon as Criminals. Nevertheless the Synod of the
Province of Guyenn^ did what they could, and took the Resolution expressed in
the Act of the last Synod held in the Province, and I think she last Synod that
was held in France. Behold the Act faithfully printed according to the Copy,
Signed by the Secretary himself.

An Extract from the Legier Book of the Acts of the Synod of the Reformed
Churches of Lower Guyenne, held in the City of the upper Thonneins, by the
Permission of the King, the ninth of December, and some days following, in the
year 1683.
ARTICLE the Sixth.
THE Deputies of the Church of Bordeaux having represented to the Society, that
in a Book made by Mr. Soulier the Priest, printed at Paris, 1682, Entitled; A
History of the Edicts of Pacification; the said Soulier in the 393 page of that
Book, and in that which follows, it has reported an Act, which he pretends to
be made by the Synod of Monpazier, to give thanks to Mr. Ricottier, and
Vignier, both Ministers for the Care they had taken to engage the English in
the Interests of the Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, with these two
Circumstances noted in the Margin of that Book, the one that the said Mr.
Ricottier was Minister of Clairac, the other that Cromwell was yet alive then,
and at the time of the said Act, adding that the Original thereof had been put
into the hands of the said Vignier, and taken in his Closet after his Death by
Mr. Monier Minister of Nerac, that this Act was put into the hands of Monsieur
the late Bishop of Again, and whereas this Act is a suppositious piece, and
injurious to the Honor of the Synod, and to the Memory of the said Ricottier,
who was then Minister of the Church of Bordeaux, they account themselves
particularly concerned to make the Calumny of this Act appear, and also their
inviolable Fidelity to the Service of the King; therefore they represented the
said Book, and likewise the said Legier Book of the Synod held at Montpazier,
the first of July 1659, desiring the Commissioners to view the said Book in the
page marked, and quoted, and likewise the Legier Book of the Synod of
Montpazier; but the Gentlemen, the Commissaries said, it was no part of their
Commission to examine Books, or Papers of preceding Synods, that it
appertained to the Society to look to their justification, where, and as they
should think good, that for their parts they pretended not to take any
cognizance thereof. Whereupon the Society after they had reflected upon the
Importance, and meaning of the said Act, and having examined it together with
the Legier Book of the Synod held at Montpazier, the first of July, 1659, it
appeared by comparing these two pieces, that the aforesaid Act printed in the
Book of Soulier is not in the said Papers of the Synod; and moreover that the
falseness of this pretended Act is clearly proved by two Circumstances in
matter of Fact, one whereof is that by the Table of the said Legier Book of the
Synod of Montpazier, it appears that the late Mr. Ricottier was not Minister of
the Church of Clairac; the other Circumstance is this, that it is certain that
Oliver Cromwell died the thirteenth of September, 1658, and so it was impossible
that the Churches of this Province could have any Correspondence with him in
the year 1659. After which the Society resolved that humble Remonstrances
should be made to his Majesty, to assure him of the inviolable Fidelity that
the said Churches had preserved, and should always preserve for his Service,
and to desire that he would be pleased to appoint that the said Soulier should
be Condemned to make them such satisfaction. as he should judge fit, with
prohibition both to him, and all others, that for the time to come they injure
them no more by Calumnies of that nature.

The present Extract is taken from the Papers of the Act of the Synod held at
the City of the Upper Thonniens, the ninth of September, and some days
following in the Year 1683, by me Francis Senilh, heretofore Minister of
Lavardac, in Guyenne, and chosen to Collect the Acts of the said Synod, who
have the said Papers in my possession.
Given at Amsterdam the five and twentieth of April, 1687. F. Senilh, Secretary
of the said Synod.

The Priest Soulier has made his Reflections upon this Motion and Act of the
Synod of Thonniens, after his manner; we will examine them by and by. The Court
of France being under no disposition to hear the Justifications, which they
could produce on this subject, they were obliged to justify themselves to the
Public. And because France was no place, nor had been for a long time, in
which it was permitted to defend the cause of God, and the Innocent, they were
forced to Print what they had to say thereon in a strange Country. The Author
of a Book entitled, The Spirit of Monsieur Arnold, inserts in his Work, the
Arguments by which this pretended Act might be proved false: and he finds no
less than Nine which he calls invincible, and which indeed are so, and will
always be so, in the opinion of every equal and disinterested Judge. At the
said time he there makes a little History of the diverse Gradations, by which
the Priest Soulier has passed to become an Author, since he was either a
Tailor or a Shooemaker, at Paris, to show what credit ought to be given to the
Reports of such a man, who owes his Advancement to his Missionary Spirit, i. e.
to a Spirit of Violence, Passion, and Falsehood against the Reformed. For behold
exactly the Spirit of Mercers, Shooe-makers, and Cutlers who have left their
Trades and Shops to ascend the Bench, and to run about France with the Memoirs
of Veron. The Priest Soulier, who had been very well recompensed for his
History of the Edicts of Pacisication, by a Pension which the Clergy had
assigned unto him, being allured by the Bait, judged it convenient, to make a
great Book exactly on the same subject, upon which he had made a little one.
It Is no longer the History of the Edicts of Pacification, it is at this day, The
History of Calvinism, containing its Birth, its Progress, its Decay and End in
France. But don't mistake yourselves, it is the same thing, the first was in
little, this is in great; it is, nevertheless, the same Countenance, the same
Picture, as well as the same Author, and the whole Dedicated to the King, that
is to say, Monsieur Soulier is willing to raise himself Successor to Monsieur
Maimburgh. He had put his Calumnies against the Reformation of France, into an
Abridgment in his first Work, this got him only a moderate Pension; his
knowledge and his parts are very mean and limited; to turn to some other
subject, and make a new Book against the Calvinists, to gain a new Pension;
this was not very easy, therefore he judged it more convenient to make again
the same Book under a new form, much larger than the former, hoping that this
would procure for him a much more ample Reward: Nor was he mistaken, for as a
Recompense of this last Work, they have procured for him an Abbacy in
Xaintonge; so that from hence forth 'twill be no longer Soulier the Prist; it is
Monsieur the Abbot: and I hope for his next work it will be, My Lord the
Bishop. And then we shall see the Proverb exactly turned, it will not be from a
Bishop to a Miller, but from a Miller to a Bishop.

In the Preface of this new Book, which we expect, and which must promote
Monsieur Soulier to a Bishopric; he will say no more as he has in the Preface
of this, I content myself to answer these passionate Writers, that my
Conscience does not reproach me, about any of these matters of Fact, and that I
have so little labored for temporal Considerations, that I assure myself the
Minister Jurien, how able soeven he seems in his Searches and Inquiries, will
not find my name in the distribution of Rewards, nor of that of Benefices. The
Ministers without being very able in Searches and Inquiries, will then easily
find the name of Monsieur Soulier among the Distributions of Rewards and
Benefices, and they hope that this lucky Historian will suddenly have a new
degree of Honor, when he shall have put the History of Calvinism under a third
form. In expectation of this new Dignity, and without regarding what he has at
present, we shall not take notice of this honest man, under any other
appellation but that of Soulier the Priest, as has been customary unto him. So
then Monsieur Soulier the Priest has thought good to give Calvinism a hundred
Blows after its Death, and to covet it with Infamy by a great Book of seven
hundred Pages, in Quarto: He must be an Enemy to his own Repose, and search out
business out of briskness of Humor, that will trouble himself to Answer the
Accusations and Falsities wherewith this great Volumne is filled: for excepting
a few matters of Fact, there is nothing in it but what Monsieur Arnold and
Monsieur Maimburgh, and others have said, to which it is believed that the
Calvinist of Holland, as Monsieur Soulier calls them, have answered very well,
and very much at large. But we cannot, nor ought not to neglect this business
of the Conspiracy of Montpazier, because it is a new thing, and because Soulier,
in pursuit of a Commission granted him by the King, has made a furious expense
of Wit to defend the Truth of what he had affirmed: As he has repeated in his
History of Calvinism, all which was in his History of Edicts, but dressed up
after a more magnificent and ample manner, he has likewise repeated the
Conspiracy of Montpazier, with all the circumstances and reasons which may
support the truth of it. We have seen the first Act without Form, and without
Subscriptions; we must see it, such as it is, at present, in this new History,
corrected and augmented by the Author: corrected in the name Daret, which is
changed into Durel; augmented by four Subscriptions which are here below. But
after all, maimed of three Marginal Annotatiods, which do a great deal of
Honor to the Piece, and him that produced it. Behold it therefore according to
its new Edition.

The Pastors and Elders of the Churches of Lower Guyenne, Assembled in a Synod
at Montpazier, the first of July, 1659, and some days following.
The Conspiracy of the Synod of Montpazier.
ON the Report made by Monsieur Ricottier, of the care that the took with
Monsieur Vignier, now absent, at the desire of some of the Society, to obtain,
that some of our Brethren of England should concern themselves in the
Preservation of our Liberties, which they endeavor every day to destroy:
wherein they think he has labored happily, by the interposition and
assistance of Monsieur Durel. And having learnt from the Mouth of the said
Durel, and seen by Letters, which were written to him, and whereof he had given
a Copy to the said Monsieur Ricottier, that to maintain us in our Privileges,
and prevent the Dissipation of our Flocks, they offer not only to Interceed for
us, but also in case of Refusal, to bear Arms into this Province, if we promise
them, and give them assurance to put into their hands all the Cities and places
whereof we can dispose. The Society approving the care of the said Messieurs
Ricottier and Vignier, After having all promised by Oath, made to GOD, not to
reveal a Secret of this importance, return Thanks, to the said Monsieur Durel,
for what be had already done, to make it successful, and do entreat him to go a
soon as he can, and know what Assurances they desire, and promise on our part,
that we shall give all those that are possible; and as a Pledge thereof, they
have drawn up the present Act, which shall be dispatched to him to this end and
purpose, and the Original put into the hands of the said Vignier, to be
secretly and faithfully kept there, until the business can be executed to the
Glory of GOD, and the Comfort of our poor afflicted Congregations, etc.

Signed, Ricottier, Moderator. E. Durel, Assistant. J. Asimont, Chosen to
Collect the Acts. J. Meysonnet, Secretary.


There are no attempts imaginable which the Priest Soulier does not make, to
defend this false Piece: But we see that God does strike these Impostors with a
Spirit of Blindness, so that they stumble in places where it were easy for
them to be upon their guard. The Work has appeared in public a long time
since, and we were advertised from France, that this part thereof was
envenomed, lewd, and worthy that we should make the Injury and Reproach thereof
fall upon its Author. But the Calvinists of Holland, of whom Monsieur Soulier
speaks with so much contempt, have so little esteem for his Works, that they
did not put themselves to the trouble of obtaining this. And the Printers of
Holland, who print all things at are saleable, did not think that the Sale of
the History of Calvinism would pay the charge of the Press. The reason
therefore why we Anwer to it so late is, because we could not recover any Copy
thereof, at last we resolved to obtain it by an Express, otherwise it had never
passed our Frontiers. We have therefore seen and read it, and have judged that
the Conspiracy of Montpazier, did indeed deserve that we should reply to it.
But before we defend our Arguments for the Falsehood thereof, and produce new
ones, it is necessary once more that you know who the Priest Soulier is, that
you may also know of what weight his Authority is: but I choose rather that you
know it from the mouth of one of his Brethren, than from ours; for which reason
we shall here produce a Letter which Monsieur Le Feure, a Doctor of the
Sorbonne, did write to one of his Friends concerning this Gentleman, and this
since the History of the Birth, Progress, Decay, and Ruin of Calvinism
appeared in the World.

A Letter of Monsieur Le Far, Doctor of the Sorbonne, to Monsieur de M.
concerning Monsieur Soulier the Priest.
I Must confess faithfully, Monsieur, that I have always believed, that a
politic Dissimulation of those Resentments, which a man cannot discover
without prejudice to his interest, was not the Vice of our Nation, and that it
ought to be the horror of men of the Character which we bear; I speak of
Resentments which are believed just, and whose end is the Defense of Truth, and
not a Chimera of Reputation, or false worldly Honor: I have been hitherto, and
am yet persuaded that it is to be an Enemy to Truth, to suffer it to be
oppressed then, when there is reason to fear that a man shall draw upon himself
the Persecution of those which oppose it; for I have made to myself a Rule of
that ancient Maxim of the Fathers of the Church, Let us be Banished so the
Truth be Preached. Behold, Monsieur, the only reason why I have had so few
Contests with persons of eminent Merit, so that the Priest Soulier had passed
in silence, if he had not observed a quite opposite conduct. Judge thereof,
Monsieur, by the following History, in the Year 1681, the learned Jesuit,
Father Mesnier, being chosen by the Clergy for their Agent-General, and Counsel
to the Syndicks of the Diocese of this Kingdom, prosecuting the Destruction of
the Temples of those of the Reformed Religion, built contrary to the Edicts,
published a Collection about those matters, printed at Paris by Monsieur
Leonard, Bookseller to the Clergy: In the time of this Impression, Monsieur
Soulier published a little Work, where, by way of Essary, he accuses the
Syndecks of Ignorance, as having suffered the Preservation of many Churches
which ought to have been destroyed. The Father Mesnier, seeing that this blow
would fall directly upon him, thought himself obliged to refute this Dream of
Monsieur Soulier: he therefore employs about twenty of the last Pages of his
Book, to convince this Monsieur of Ignorance. He concludes them by accusing him
of Falsehood, of Calumny, and of being a person that at most knew no more than
to Read and Write, and sending him to the exercise of his first Trade and
Employment.

Monsieur Soulier saw and dissembled the thing from 1681, until the end of this
Year 1686, that is to say near six Years. Why did he keep silence so long? and
why speaks he now, after he had been so long dumb? Think of it what you please,
Monsieur, but behold that which I think most reasonable concerning it: The
Father Mesnier was alive, and is now dead. Soulier owed to him what he knew in
the matter of Edicts, against those of the Reformed Protestant Religion, which
he has dressed over again to give a taste of them to the World. The Father
Mesnier made use of him to be a Servant and a Scribe, and he is not the first,
who from the Servant of an Author, is become an Author himself. The Servants of
Physicians do every day steal the Secrets of their Masters.

The Father Mesnier is therefore dead, and Monsieur Soulier has filled up his
place in a very short space of time. The Revocation of the Edict of Nants
followed, by the Destruction of the Churches of those of the Reformed
Protestant Religion, having rendered his pretended Employment much more
unprofitable, than the Work which he reproaches me for sending into the World a
little too late; nevertheless, being puffed up with his new Place and
Preferment, he was not able to endure any longer to be accused of Ignorance.

But why does he fall upon me? It Is because I being necessarily engaged to take
part in the business contested, by Father Mesnier, and him, I put myself on the
side of the Master against the Servant, and to save myself the labor of
confuting Soulier, I said that it had been done by Father Mesnier. Yea, I had
the Charity not to name Soulier, when I said, as a simple Historian, in the
208th Page, of the second Part of my Colection, That this Father, knowing what
had been his first Employment, counseled him to explain that Greek of
Aristophanes, (...), which is expressed by another Proverb, Let not the
Shooemaker go beyond his Last. Nevertheless Monsieur Soulier fears not to
advance, by the blackest Calumny which can be imagined, in the 678th Page of
his Book, That I have exceeded (in that which is most gross) what all the
Protestant Writers have published against him. Where is Faith, where, is
Conscience! The Father Mesnier (which I have transcribed, in the Chapter
concerning Monsieur Soulier) doing him the same favor in a multitude of heads
wherein he is accused by this Father; Is he a Protestant? I could sooner have
pardoned him, if he had only dissembled that the Father Mesnier is the Author
of the Evil which I have done him: Dogs bite the Staff wherewithal we strike
them. But that he makes me the Echo of the Protestants, in the contempt which
they put upon him, when I played the good Husband in what concerned his
Reputation, by treating him less ill, than those of our Religion which know him
better than I; this is that which cannot be endured.

I do nevertheless affirm, Monsieur, that I find my self all at once disarmed,
when I think that there is nothing of Merit or Honor to be gotten by such an
Adversary. He boasts at this day, that he has studied the business of Edicts
thirty Years, and in his Work of 1681, he confesses (as Father Mesnier
reproaches to him) that he had never seen those that Henry the Fourth had
granted to the Cities of the League, whereof, nevertheless he was willing to
make use against the Syndicks, and the Censors of the Diocese of the Kingdom.

Who will not despise an Adversary which proves that I have not the least
knowledge of the Affairs of those of the Protestant Reformed Religion, because
I have quoted a National Synod held at Loudun. And to maintain this false
Accusation, he says, Page the 681 of his Book, That if I had only read the
first leaf of the Ecclesiastical Discipline of those of the Reformed Religion,
I should have found in the Table of the National Synods, of those of that
Religion, that there war never any held at Loudun. For if there were never any
held at Loudun, why did he write in the 63 Page of his New Bernard, this which
follows in express terms: The twelfth Article of the National Synod held at
Loudun, the 5th of April, 1596, etc? This was pity, but there is more in the
case. This Doctor, in point of Tables of Books, this man conversant in the
matter of Edicts, for these thirty Years, knows not, that in the Year 1659,
there was a National Synod of those of the Reformed Protestant Religion held at
Loudun, by the permission of his Majesty: A man is therefore Ignorant,
according to this unlearned Author, because he knows that which is, arid is not
ignorant of it; or because he does not fain himself ignorant thereof, as he
does.

After this, is he to be believed, when he, says, I have transcribed, or copied
him? My Work contains 800 Pages, and he accuses me to have Abridged the
biggest, and the most considerable of his Books, in the fifteen first. Never
was falsehood published with so little color: I make the Public Judge thereof;
and if I have any thing wherewith to reproach myself, it will be that I was not
willing to see the faults of his Works, that I might not be obliged to reprove
them. I have said for example, in the twelfth Page of my Work, that Peter
Mengin was burnt at Meaux, with thirteen of his Companions, by a Decree of the
Parliament of Paris; he says, in the ninth Page of his History of Edicts of
Pacification, that he was burnt with fourteen of his Companions, which is
contrary to the Decree, which takes notice of no more but thirteen, and those
mentioned by their Names, and Sirnames. I could produce a hundred faults of
like nature, but to what good purpose would It be? An Author like him, who
fears not to give the Lie to the Clergy of France, and to some of its
illustrious Members, bears so visible a Character of Malice, in the opinion of
all honest men, that if they would pray for him, it is that the Clergy might
double his Pension to put him to sitlence.

Behold the proof of what I affirm, Authors of the Reformed Protestant
Religion, having maintained in their Works, that the Edict of Nantes was
granted to their Fathers, as an acknowledgment of the Service they had done for
the State, Monsieur Soulier, in his History of Calvinism, says, That it was the
strangest Paradox that ever was published it being not true that they had
obtained this Edict by their Services. Nevertheless, the General Assembly of
France, held at Paris in the Years 1655, and 1656, in a Session where Cardinal
Mazarine sat President, did acknowledge, that King Henry the Fourth, coming out
of the bosom of Heresy, Page 152, of the Verbal Process of this Assembly.
and being willing to acknowledge the Services which had been done him by those
of that Party, granted them the Edict of Nantes. And the late Monsieur de
Perefixe, History of Henry the Great, p. 223. of the Paris Edition in 1662.
Archbishop of Paris, speaks of him in these words: Henry the Fourth, with all
his Prudence, had scarce enough to govern himself in such manner, that the
Catholics, and the Pope might be content with his Conduct, and that the
Hugenots might have no cause of Fear, or Division; his Duty and Conscience
inclined him to the assistance of the former, but Reason of State, and the
great Obligations he had to the latter, would not permit him to make them
desperate. Therefore to keep a necessary temperament, he granted them an Edict
larger than those which went before, which is called the Edict of Nantes.

After this, Monsieur, will you not think me dispensed withal, for answering
more at large to the Dreams and Dotages of Monsieur Soulier.

'Twas six Years since that Father Mesnier reproacht to him, That he understood
not Latin, and that he had scarce wit enough to Write and Read: He ought at
least to have applied himself thereto sine that time, but he has neglected to
do it, and labors himself to revive the old French Proverb, It Is a brave thing
for a Priest to know how to Read and Write. Behold some proofs thereof: He
writes in Page the 632, of his last Book, Je plaide ces affairs; it ought to
have been written, Je plaidai: at the 678, J' y ajoute, j'en done, instead of
saying, J' y ajoutai, j'en donnai; the same place he has written Plagieres
instead of Plagiaires; you will find a hundred of this kind.

But behold enough to justify me against so feeble an Enemy. Let him write
till Doomsday about these matters, I shall not loose my time to recover him
from his Wanderings, because the Public never loves Repetitions; and besides,
when a person has once written things, like a man of Honor and Conscience, he
must leave God to do the rest, and ought to be assured, that time will always
acknowledge and confess true Merit. It Is a long time since it was said
concerning the Books of Homer, That they would become more valuable every day:
Posteritate suum crescere sentit opus. I am very much mistaken, if the contrary
be not verified concerning the Works of Soulier. But to what purpose is it to
offer violence to Nature; he was never born to make choice Works: Nevertheless
he is willing that men should range him amongst illustrious Persons. He may
pretend to it with as much reason as he has to maintain what he had advanced in
his History of Edicts, that Cromwell dying in the Month of September, 1658, was
yet alive in the Month of July 1659, becaucause his Son, which Posterity will
never know. under the name of Cromwell, lived then; I consent, that Posterity
acknowledge Soulier for an Author, when it shall acknowledge Cromwell the Son,
under the simple name of Cromwell.

From Paris the 7th of September, 1686.

It seems to me, that these two Authors, Father Mesnier the Jesuit, and
Monsieur le Far, are worthy of credit in the present Affair: We have
therefore affirmed nothing against Soulier the Priest, which is not certain: he
is of base Extraction, he came from the Dunghill; he understands neither Greek
nor Latin; he was a Mechanic; he stole some Learning from Father Mesnier, and
of a Servant is become a Master. We have reported this after others, without
any intent of making an Accusation or Crime thereof: On the contrary, it would
be much to his Reputation and Praise, if he had advanced himself by honest ways
and methods: If could be said, he was nothing, but has made himself something
by his Industry, and by the Learning he has obtained; he ought to he commended
instead of being blamed for it. But we conclude quite otherwise from thence,
it is that taking his Original from the Dunghill, and receiving a mean
Education, he retains the inclinations thereof, and is become eminent by
surpassing his Masters in Cheats, in Iniquities, Falsehoods, and Lies, etc. On
this last point we call his Master, Mesnier, Witness against him, who
instructed him in the Profession of bidding Defiance to Honesty, and
Conscience, in favor of the Catholic Church.

He concludes, says Monsieur le Far, by accusing him of Falsehood, and
Calumny, and as being a person who at most knew no more than to write and
read, and by sending him to the exercise of his first Trade and Employment.
Monsieur le Far is not content to prove the Falsehood of the Priest Soulier,
by the Authority of Father Mesnier, he makes it evident by Instances, and
Examples which he gives thereof, which does demonstrate, that this man is
capable of denying the most notorious matters of Fact, as is this, that the
Edict of Nantes was granted by Henry the Fourth, to our Fathers, as an
Acknowledgment of the Services which he had received from them. Such is that
which he affirms everywhere, that we have always been the Aggressors in all the
Civil Wars; such is that which he says, That upon all occasions, by secret
Practices, or open Rebellions, we have conspired the Ruin of the Monarchy, and
the Regal Authority: To conclude, such is that which he maintains, That the
Massacre of St. Bartholomew was not a contrived business, but the Resolution
was taken upon the spot, and that it was rather an event of Chance, or Hazard,
than an effect of Deliberation. A man may find a hundred passages in this
History, much more loud and heinous than these, which make it appear how much
this man is consecrated to Lying, and devoted to the Prince of Darkness:
Therefore nothing has been affirmed in the History given of his Life, but what
is true, and those two small circumstances, concerning the Falsehood whereof, he
makes such Outcries, viz. his Residence in the Street Geures, and his Curacie
in one of the Lordships of Monsieur de Marillac, are not sufficiently
important, to make thereof an Accusation of Falsehood, especially when we had
been misinformed therein: Seeing these are the only things to which he has
thought fit to reply, in the Abridgment of his History, it is a proof he has
nothing to say, about all the rest which is much more important; but this is
enough to make known our Accusor; let us come now to the Accusations.

We will follow our Author step by step, nevertheless without staying ourselves
upon the Impertinencies which he mingles among things, which may seem to be of
some weight. After he has reported the pretended Act of the Conspiracy of
Montpazier, he gives the reason why he produced it in his first History without
Form, and without Subscriptions.

As I had no design to do wrong to particular persons, says he, but only to
show what was the Spirit of Calvinism, and what it is capable of; I suppressed
the names of those who Signed this Confederation, in my History of Edicts. So
that it is out of Charity, that Soulier the Priest did suppress the Names of
those that Signed this Act; This is admirable, good Priest! Who is there that
does not admire his Charity? Are not all his Writings full of the Characters of
this excellent Virtue? It Is out of Charity that he blew the fire to kindle the
Persecution, and that he made odious Libels, full of Lies, against persons that
never did him any wrong. Observe that the Charity of this good Priest does not
consider, that to spare some single persons, it neglects what it owed to the
King: for a man is always obliged to discover Conspirators, without having
regard to single persons. He will not fail to answer to this, the King knew the
business: for he tells us, that this Act was given to Monsieur the Cardinal of
Bouillion, by Monsieur Joly the Bishop of Again, and that Monsieur the Cardinal
of Bouillion, gave it to the King. This is very well, but this is the very
thing that makes us suspect his Charity. For since the King knew the Names of
the Conspirators, a man could not do them wrong, nor expose them more to the
Displeasure of the King: his Majesty having not judged it fit to chastise them,
they had nothing farther to fear by the publication of their Names. So that
till the Priest Soulier has given us more valuable proofs of his Charity, we
will say, that the true reason why he gave us this Act without Subscriptions,
was because he very well foresaw that the Subscriptions would discover the
Mystery, and the Cheat.

It may be that his Monsieur Daret, who was not in the World, nor never had
been, and of whom he had never heard any thing spoken, did appear to him, a
person very improper to fill the place of an Assistant-Moderator, in which he
ought to do and say much, and by consequence could not be supplied by a
Phantome. Besides Monsieur Asimont, who was the Secretary then living,
speaking, and residing in France, would have been able, although he were a
Minister, and a persecuted Minister, and had his mouth stoped, to have returned
upon him the injury of this Falsehood: for it is known that single persons take
these sort of matters more warmly, than whole Bodies and Societies of men,
because the danger is more urgent and pressing upon them.

It Is true, that the Synod of Thonnins, in the Month of December, in the Year
1683, drew up the Act which we have seen above. But the Priest Soulier says
thereon, Nevertheless these Gentlemen, who had never taken this Resolution, but
the better to hide their Game, staid there. And some Pages after, Did they
proceed any farther in pursuit of this Resolution? That is to say, to carry
their Complaints to the King, and prosecute Soulier as a Calumniator: All these
threatenings, says he, are vanished into smoke, and it was well seen, that all
this noise war nothing else but a pure effect of their Policy. This is very
wicked in the mouth of a man who knows, as all the World does, that from the
Synod of Thonnins, unto the first Mission of the Dragoons, there passed not
above fifteen or sixteen Months, that the ruin of the Reformed was sworn, and
determined to a stated time, that for the space of four Years no Paper of
Remonstrance, Complaint, Justification, Request, or thing of like nature would
be received from them; that the person of the King was inaccessible for them;
that all the Tribunals of the Kingdom had in like manner been shut upon them:
Soulier tells us, that the Province of Guyenne had Monsieur Janicon for
Deputy-General at Paris; but he might very well have known also, seeing he
knows so many things, that it was in the Synod of Thonnins, in 1683, that
Monsieur Janicon discharged himself of this Office, because he knew that from
thenceforth it would be to no advantage, and that they would hear no man who
had any thing to say for Justification of the Reformed. It Is true that the
Synod named Monsieur Charron an Advocate, and another Deputy to go and carry
this Complaint to the King; But who then dared to appear at the Court? He must
have a desire to see the Bastile, and to understand what Bread men eat there.
This Villain knows all this, and insults over poor oppressed persons, because
of their silence in a time when it was for them a Crime no less than Treason,
to dare to complain of any kind of Injustice whatever it was. The Deputies of
the Synod of Lower Guyenne, would have been well received, had they gone to
complain of Soulier, a man that the Clergy had purposely set up to Defame,
Injure, and Destroy them; in a time when the Court had already dispatched, if I
may so say, Commissions to the Dragoons to treat the Reformed as Rebels, and
open declared Enemies.

The first Argument of Falsehood, and the Justifications thereof.
I pass the Reflections which Soulier makes use of to destroy the Arguments and
Mediums which we have made use of, to prove this Act of Montpazier to be a
false Imposture. First we have said, That there never was a Synod more known,
and understood by our Enemies: Besides an infinite number of Papists, Monks,
and paltry Priests, the Bishop of Cahors was there, and especially Monsieur
Soulier, as he himself informs us. This Circumstance may be of use to us, to
make very probable Conjectures concerning the Original of this Act. Besides all
this, the King had a Commissary there. From all which we conclude, that there
was no likelihood that these Ministers should be such Fools, to treat of an
Affair of this nature in a place where there were so many persons their
Enemies. Soulier says thereon, That the Catholics were not admitted to their
Assembly; that we know well, but we also know that the Clergy are at expense
for Spies, and that they never fail to know all that they please. It Is known
that this Assembly was made up of about one hundred Pastors, and well near as
many Elders: that among these men there were those which had no true Piety, nor
any Zeal for their Religion, as it appears by their Revolt and Apostasy. These
men are indiscreet, interested, easy to be gained, and the Agents of the
Clergy know them very well.

Concerning the Commissary, Soulier says things which the Providence of God
has permitted, to confound these Impostures. First, he says, That Monsieur of
St. Blancard was the King's Man in this Synod, and we shall see by and by, from
the Deposition of four Witnesses, which were there present, that it was
Monsieur de Villefranche of Vivans, who was Commissary. This is, say I, an
effect of the Vengeance of God for the Confusion of these Impostures. For there
was nothing so easy as to know who was the King's Agent there; the Acts of all
the Synods were sent to the Court, the Commissaries were always named there,
and they even subscribed, and made a particular mark on the Copy which they
sent to the King. And these Copies are kept in the Office of Monsieur
Chastean-neuf. This makes it suspicious, that this Imposture was not formed at
Paris, but in the Province, in some place where not having sufficient
Memorials, they depended too much upon the treacherous Memory of the
Contrivers. Yea, it appears that Soulier is a Liar, when he speaks as an
absolute Disposer of all that was in the Office of Monsieur Chastean-neuf. For
if he had been admitted thither, he would have rectified the Error that
himself, or other Authors of this Forgery had made. And that Soulier may not
deceive the Public, by saying, that Monsieur St. Blancard, and Monsieur de
Villefranche de Vivans are two names, but not two persons: it must be known
that Monsieur Blancard was a Gentleman of Agenois, Uncle of the Chevalier
Montand, heretofore Captain in a Regiment of Dragoons, and this Monsieur de St.
Blancard has been dead these six or seven years: And Monsieur de Villefranche
de Vivans was a Gentleman of Perigort, Uncle to Monsieur the Count of Vivans,
Lieutenant General in the Army of the King. He died not above three or four
years since.

The second thing which he says is, That Monsieur St. Blancard was of the
Reformed Religion, that he might be of Intelligence with the Synod in this
Conspiracy, and that so it is not to be admired, that he did not reveal it. What
a Prodigy is this! That a Commissary of the King in our Synods, should betray
his Master, and his Prince in a point of Conspiracy against the State, without
giving him any notice of it: Although these Commissaries had been capable of
shutting their eyes on some small thing, has there been any example in these
last times of a man commissioned by the King, in our Assemblies, who has
suffered, or dissembled such undertakings? Would not the Justice of the King
have prosecuted a person guilty of such a Crime, with the utmost severities of
punishment? The King knew, saw, and was informed of all this Conspiracy, and
the Court kept silent, both with respect to St. Blancard, the pretended
Commissary, and with respect to the Synod. Be it St. Blancard, or de Vivans,
the one and the other were yet in the Land of the Living, in the Year 1677,
when this forged Piece was put into the hands of the King, and yet they were
never prosecuted. We see this man has lost all judgment and understanding.

The third thing which Soulier says is, That although the Commissary were
faithful to the King, they might act in this Affair without his knowledge, or
participation, because in Affairs of this nature, the secret is not committed
but to some principal persons, and the other Members of the Assembly have no
part therein: Behold another Conjecture well worthy the contrivance of Soulier
the Priest: that is to say, that there are four persons which made this great
Conspiracy, and without communicating it to the Pastors, or the Elders, they
treat about introducing an Enemy, and a foreign Nation into France: And how
could four Ministers give Assurances in an Affair which depends upon so many,
without communicating it to them? Four Ministers attempt to manage a whole
great Province! We know the Jealousy which reigns among all men of what
Character soever they be: Is it imaginable, that a hundred Ministers, and so
many Elders, should think themselves obliged to follow the Inspirations, and
discharge the Obligations of four Ministers, in an Affair wherein they were not
trusted, and in which there is no less than their Life, and being broken alive
upon the Wheel, at stake? In truth a man would think that a clap of Thunder had
astonished this miserable Calumniator.

The second Argument of Falsehood, and the Justification thereof.
The second Argument that we employed, to prove the Falsehood of this Impostour,
was* That there was no likelihood that the Reformed of Guyenne should attempt a
thing which might have such mischievous Consequences, in a time when they had
no reason to complain of the Court, because they enjoyed their Liberties
peaceably enough. To this Soulier says two things, First, That in our Conduct
there are many examples of Unfaithfulness, in the very times that we peaceably
enjoyed the Favors that had been granted to us; and therefore we have been
very silly in desiring to justify ourselves from this Treason, because we had
no occasion that should prompt us to commit it. Thereupon he reckons up the
proofs of this Accusation: For Example, says he, they enjoyed peaceably all
the Privileges which had been granted them by the Edict of January, in the
Year 1561: they had the public Exercise of their Religion, in the Subburbs of
Paris, etc. this did not hinder but that they treated three Months after with
the English, and delivered unto them Haure de Grace. Another Example: These
Gentlemen enjoyed peaceably the Edict of Peace, which was granted them before
Orleans, in the Year 1563, nevertheless, to the prejudice of this Peace, and
the Edict which the Calvinists did very peaceably enjoy, they took Arms again
in cold Blood. He adds many other Examples to prove his Accusation; but in
truth my patience is spent, and for the ease and quiet of my mind, I cannot
resolve to follow this Calumniator to the end: Who can endure, without
Indignation, that which he has the boldness to affirm, That it was the Hugenot
Party which began the War, after the Edict of January. All the World knows that
it was the Princes of the House of Guise, who caused the Massacre at Vassy, in
the midst of that Peace which we did so quietly enjoy. He who answered
Maimburgh's History of Calvinism, has made it appear, by the clearest light,
that the first Civil War which came after the Edict of January, was no War of
Religion, that it had its source in the implacable Hatreds which were between
the Houses of Guise and Montmorrency; Mizeray Castalnau. le Labourreur Cardinal
d' Ossat. Daubigne.
that it was caused in part by an infinite number of Discontents, which the
Tyrants of the Court had made in the Kingdom; and in part by an infinite number
of cashiered Soldiers, and disbanded Troops which had been accustomed to live
in disorder; that the principal spring thereof, was the Resentment of Lewis of
Burbon Prince of Condy, who had received the utmost Outrages from the Guises,
seeing they had caused him to be condemned to death, and had procured his
Execution, had it not been prevented by the death of Francis the Second: To
conclude, it was the enormous Ambition, and detestable Policy of Catherine de
Medices, who united and knit together this Party, and set all the great Men of
the Kingdom together by the ears, that she might Reign in the midst of these
Dissentions, and Ruin the one by the other. All this has been made good by
Witnesses that cannot be reproached; it has been made evident, that Religion
was only the pretense, which the great men made use of to mutiny the people:
It has been proved, that during this pretended Peace, which the Calvinists did
quietly enjoy, under the shadow of the Edict of January, says Soulier, there
were above three thousand persons which perished by Massacres, or by Courts of
Justice; that the Duke of Guise came to Paris with twelve hundred Horse, that
he seized of the King, and the Regent, which were at Fountainblean, and that
'twas properly there, that the Declaration of War was made. And this villainous
Calumniator has the boldness to tell us, that we were the Aggressours in this
first War, and Aggressours in full Peace. It must be observed here, that this
man follows none of the Rules of an Historian, he generally dissembles, and
passes over all those matters of Fact which give light to a History, and show
the original of an Evil; he insists only on those things by which he may be
able to give a very ill aspect to the Actions of the Protestant Party.
Maimburgh, and other Popish Writers have not carried their Unfaithfulness so
far.

The Unfaithfulness of Soulier, is not greater on occasion of the second War,
which broke the Peace of Orleans; We were, says he, in full Peace when we made
that hideous Attempt which is called the Conspiracy of Meaux. Lying costs this
man nothing. All the Authors of that time, who have any thing of Honor of
Conscience, do agree, that never was there War more mischievous than this
pretended Peace of Orleans. They oppressed the Protestants everywhere by the
utmost Violences; no Justice was to be had for them; they Massacred them with
Impunity; they conspired their Ruin, they treated about it with the Duke of
Alva, Mezeray. L^ Labourreur. La Noue.
the House of Austria, and the Pope; they killed a great number of their
Nobility; they Massacred more than three thousand of them; they resolved to
seize the Prince of Condy, and the Admiral, to cut off the Head of this, and
commit the other to perpetual Imprisonment: To conclude, they did not re-take
their Arms, but to repel those which were taken against them, and to give way
to the greatest necessity that ever was of defending themselves. By these two
Examples we may judge the Fidelity of Soulier in the rest.

The second thing which this Priest says upon occasion of that which we had
said, That in the Year 1659, we were not treated so ill, as to incline us to a
Conspiracy with the English, 'twas that even then the Court designed our Ruin,
that we knew it well, and that it already appeared by many Declarations which
had been published to our disadvantage, which he quotes. To this we answer,
That the design of the Clergy, was to destroy us, we do not doubt, and that it
may be the Court might have the same intents and purposes; that it is true some
Declarations had been already published against us. But we say, That the fear
of a future and uncertain Evil, or some little present Evils, did never engage
us to make use of actual Conspiracies for our Preservation: The Declarations
and Decrees which the Clergy obtained against us, were as yet nothing, and then
did us no Evil. The King himself granted us a National Synod at Laudun, in the
Year 1659; a Favor which had not been conceded to us since the Year 1641; an
evident proof that the Court was not then under those wicked Inclinations, in
which it has been since engaged, or at least, if it had already conceived the
design of destroying us, it was not possible for us to guess at it, seeing
their actions spoke the contrary.

The third Argument of Falsehood drawn from the State of England and France.
But to the sense of this second Argument drawn from the Condition of the
Affairs of the Protestants in France, we will add a third, drawn from the State
of Affairs in France and England at that time, which will show both the
Ignorance and Bruitishness of Soulier himself, and the other Authors of this
Imposture: They are pleased to affirm, That in the Month of July, in the Year
1659, we did treat with the English about their entering France. We must enquire
whether it be not a thing against all Sense, at that time, to attribute to the
English a design of entering into France, with Weapons in their hands, through
Guyenne: First we must know, that then the English were in the most strict
Alliance with France, which could be betwixt two States: The English had caused
their Troops to pass into Flanders, to join those of the King: Dunkirk was
jointly Besieged by both Nations; it was taken from the Spaniards, put into the
hands of the English, to the astonishment of all Europe, and the scandal of all
true Frenchmen; yea, there were some that had the boldness to complain thereof
by their Writings. This may be seen in a Writing made by Monsieur Sillon, to
justify the Conduct of Cardinal Mazarine, his Master; and in some of the
printed Letters of Monsieur Coster, Archdeacon of Man's. This Union of England
and France, was yet so great in 1660, that an English Garrison was received at
Amiens, to whom the public Exercise of their Religion was allowed in the City:
This obliged the General Assembly of the Clergy, to make complaint thereof to
the King, and to content them, a Promise was made, to give to the English a
Farmhouse in the Suburbs, there to exercise their Religion out of the City.
Behold the English and French at Peace and perfect Correspondence, and their
Armies united against the Spaniard, and France in so great a confidence of
them, that it delivers to them the important place Dunkirk, and receives their
Garrisons into their proper Cities. When men make Fictions, if they are not
directly brutish, they choose proper seasons for them: he should have assigned
to this Conspiracy of the Protestants of Guyenne, some time in which France had
been in War with England; but in truth it is to have a distempered mind, to take
a time of the most perfect correspondence, that ever was between the two States.

But this is not all, it is needful to see in the second place the Condition of
the Affairs of the English in themselves, to know whether there be any
probability, that they then had a design of entering France: It must therefore
be remembered, that Cromwell died in the Month of September, 1658, and that from
that time, till the return of Charles the Second, England was always in a
dreadful Confusion, as may be seen by the History of that time, and by the News
Books published one after another. Richard was proclaimed Protector immediately
after the death of his Father; and he who has collected the News of that time,
tells us, See the Collection of News, Ordinary and Extraordinary. Relations and
Reports of things happening in this Kingdom, and elsewhere, in the Year 1659.
Printed at Paris 1660, with Privilege.
That Richard did not think he could do better, than preserve himself in the
Friendship of those whose Alliance his Father had sought after, and to continue
War against those against whom his Father had declared it. He continued
therefore in a strict Alliance with France, and at War with Spain. Behold the
man which they make to Treat with the Protestants of Guyenne, to carry his Arms
into France, against the only Support that he could have to maintain himself in
the place which he possessed, who was otherwise incapable thereof. If Richard
were not a mad man, I don't understand how he could engage in this Affair: This
new Protector calls a Parliament, in the beginning of the Year 1659, which is
exactly the Year of the Conspiracy of Montpazier: the Extraordinary of the
sixth of March speaks of the opening of this Parliament, and says, That from
the fifteenth of February, to the twentieth, it was employed in examining the
Title and Rights of my Lord Protector. In the following Sessions, they
endeavored to Regulate the Power of this new Protector, and to retrench the
Excesses which he enjoyed to the prejudice of the Rights and Liberties of the
Nation. From that time, behold Richard attacqued, and yet he enterprises new
Work abroad, which alone required a man, and a whole Kingdom besides. From the
thirteenth of March there were great Contests in the Parliament, touching the
manner how it ought to be composed, whether they should there permit two
Houses, the Upper and the Lower; what persons ought to be received into the
Upper House, in case they suffered it to subsist. These Differences continued
all the Month of April, with the utmost heat, and with great violence and rage:
Behold these people in a good condition to carry Arms into France. In the
Extraordinary of the fifth of May, is seen a large Remonstrance presented to
the Protector Richard, by the Officers of the Army, in which they complain, 1.
That they were not paid. 2. That they blasted their Reputation, by blaming all
which they had done under Cromwell, as faulty and against the Laws. 3. That the
Officers which had served the King, had their Cabals and Assemblies in diverse
places of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, from whence it
may be judged, say they, that the public Safety of the State, is in such ill
condition, that it is in danger of being destroyed.
Was not the Militia in very good state to be transported to make an Irruption
into a foreign Kingdom beyond the Sea? At the same time Richard being
displeased with this Parliament, who would have reduced his Authority, to a
very little thing, dissolved them in the beginning of the Month of May; and
three days after, on the fifth of the same Month, he published a Proclamation;
by which he appointed all suspicious persons to go out of London, in three
days, and to come no nearer to it, that within twenty Miles. Immediately after
the Parliament, which the Protector had assembled on the Month of February, was
dissolved, on the second of May, the old long Parliament assembled, and began
to sit on the seventeenth of the same Month: This old Parliament pulled down
Richard, and appointed, that Monarchical Government should be abolished,
together with the House of Lords. It caused also the Effigies of Cromwell,
which was at Westminster, to be taken away, Fearing, say they, least it should
give occasion to some popular Commotion in this Conjuncture, and change of
Affairs. This is plainly the time when the Protestants of Guyenne, promised to
introduce the English into the Realm: for the circumstance of Affairs was
altogether favorable to them: as they had nothing to do among themselves, so
they might succor their good Friends everywhere else. On the twenty second of
May, old Style, the Officers of the Army agreed with the old Parliament, to
abolish all Title of King, and Protector, and to establish the three Nations in
a Government entirely Free. On the twenty fourth the Parliament appointed, That
no other Seal should be farther made use of, but that on the two sides whereof
were engraven the Arms of England and Ireland; and caused the Seal which Oliver
Cromwell made use of, to be broken: They named, for the space of many days,
thirty one persons to make up a new Council of State: 'Twas at this very time,
i. e. upon the beginning of the Month of June, in the Year 1659, that they
forced the Protector, Richard, to remove from Whitehall. Behold then the three
Kingdoms in a perfect Anarchy. Without doubt it was in this happy and tranquil
Estate, that the English made offer to the Protestants of Guyenne, to succor
them, provided they would deliver to them all the places whereof they could
dispose: To speak seriously, it is unavoidable, that the Forgers of this Piece
were the most ignorant Bruits that were in the World, or that their Brains were
disordered to that degree, that there was never any thing like it. Let not
Monsieur Soulier be displeased at all this: He has neither Science nor
Knowledge of the matters of the World, nor common Sense; for if he had one
grain of Understanding, or good Knowledge, he would never have engaged in so
durty a Business.

Let us go on, for this is not all: After we have considered the State of
Affairs in England, let us consider those of France: This Kingdom was in an
Estate of Prosperity, with respect to Affairs abroad, which would have taken
away all thoughts from troublesome persons, of making any Commotions at home,
although there should be such which had it in design and purpose: It Is the very
Year of the Peace of the Pyreneans, and of the Marriage of the King. In the
beginning of the Summer, in the Year 1659, a Suspension of War, by Sea and
Land, was signed: that nothing might cross the Negotiations of Peace, which
were already advanced very far, Marshal Turenne was gone to execute the Orders
of the King, on the subject, of this Suspension. Cardinal Mazarine, at the same
time that this pretended Conspiracy was made in Guyenne, passed through the
Province, to go to the place where the Peace was to be concluded. He arrived
the twelfth of July at Libourne, on the nineteenth at Cadillac, and at the same
time their Majesty's parted from Fountainbleau, to begin their Journey toward
the Frontiers of Spain. Must it not be confessed, that the Ministers and Elders
of Guyenne, are very cunning at Confederations, and Conspiracies; that they
know admirably well how to take their time, and that no circumstances could be
chosen more favorable to Embroil a Kingdom within, than a time of general
Peace, which leaves the King in a condition to fall with all his power upon the
Conspirators? To conclude, Has Soulier no Shame, and will he never cover
himself with wholesome and salutary Confusion? If you don't think him
sufficiently sunk, and overwhelmed, take pains to follow me a little farther.

The fourth Argument of Falsehood: Soulier convinced of Juggling in his Answers.
We brought for a fourth Argument, the evident Falsehood that is in the name and
in the person of Daret: This is the man, says the Act of Soulier, which
negotiated this Affair, and treated with the English to engage them to enter
into France. This Daret is a man unknown, a phantasm; and, if without saying
any thing else, we had obliged Soulier to find out his Monsieur Daret, we had
reduced him to the utmost difficulties: but, happily for this Historian-Priest,
a Conjecture was made, which was thought sure, that the Impostors having heard
say, that there was in the Province, a Minister born a Subject of the English,
named Monsieur Durel, they might very well choose this person, to make of him a
Negotiator with those of his own Nation. Soulier, ravished to find this passage
open, to go out of this dirty place, has stooped thereto: Yes, says he, it is
Durel, the Copy which was taken from the Original, was ill transcribed, they
took an a for an u, and a t for an l, and whereas Daret in the first Act was
nothing else but a Negotiator between the Ministers and Elders of Guyenne, and
the English, in the second Edition, he becomes Assistant-Moderator, and is
subscribed E. Durel. Here is a heap of Juggles and Lies, so pressed upon each
other, that it is a difficulty to rang them into order: first it is certain by
the Table of the Synod of Montpazier, the Acts whereof ought to be in the
Office of Monsieur Chastean-neuf, that Monsieur Durel was not
Assistant-Moderator at this Synod, 'twas one named Monsieur Dorde, Minister of
Montpazier itself. And we do entreat the honest men of Paris, that they may be
assured hereof, to go and consult the Original hereof, in the Office, if they
will not believe four living and speaking Witnesses, which were at the said
Synod, whose Depositions we shall suddenly see in good form and method: I hope
that in the third Edition, of the Act of Montpazier, Monsieur Soulier the
Priest, will tell us, they took the o in Dorde for an u, that they transposed
the d, and set it at the end, and made thereof an l; so we shall find Dorde in
Daret, and Durel, as good Etymologists in plat do find chopine. A new Falsehood,
Monsieur Durel had no name which began with E, 'twere expedient that it were
Etienne, or Elijah, or Esaias: but, by misfortune for Monsieur Soulier, his name
was John; at least it is the name which he gave himself in the Thesis which he
maintained at Saumur; it is the name that he has set in the front of a Book
called, Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, i.e. A Vindication of the Church of
England. To conclude, it is the name that the Approbator of the Translation,
which he made of the Liturgy of the Church of England into French, has given
him. I have read the French Version of the English Liturgy of Mr. John Durel,
and I have found it in all things agreeable to the original English. Signed,
George Stradling S. T. P. Chaplain to Gilbert Bishop of London, from the Savoy,
April the sixth, 1663. Therefore I know not what we shall do with this capital
E. in this Act of Soulier the Priest, unless we make an F. of it to find Friar
John there. But by misfortune Mr. Durel was never a Monk.

Another misfortune for Soulier, much greater than the former, is, That Mr.
Durel was never Pastor in the Province of Guyenne, nor Deputy in any Synod, he
was only Minister to Monsieur the Duke de la Force; he preached indeed at la
Force when the Duke was there, but he was properly affixed to his person and
his Family: for which reason he followed him everywhere, and did not belong to
the Synod of any of the Provinces. 'Twas one named Mr. Barte, who as then
Minister of the Church de la Force, a Member of the Province, and lawful Deputy
to the Synod. It Is true, that Mr. Durel appeared at the Synod of Montpazier,
and was therein favor of one named Mr. Hesperien, who was his Friend, and had
business there. And Mr. Betoule, Minister of Duras, who was Plaintiff against
Mr. Hesperien, seeing Mr. Durel in the Assembly, said to him, What do you here?
you are no Pastor of the Lower Guyenne, nor Deputy to the Synod. To whom Mr.
Durel answered in these very words, I am no fixed Minister in any Province; but
in all Provinces where the Duke is, I have the honor to assist at the Synods
which are held during the time of his residence there. The Synod took this
Remonstrance into consideration, and granted to Mr. Durel no decisive Voice,
but only Session among them, and a deliberative Voice. The said Mr. Durel was
never seen in any of the Synods of Guyenne, but only at this time, and never
was seen there afterward. Behold a subject well chosen, to make him
Assistant-moderator of a Synod, and the Negociator in a great affair; of a
Synod, say I, of which he was no Member, where he was no Deputy, where he had
no decisive Voice, and where he had never appeared before. Behold therefore a
new Errata of the third Edition of the Act of Montpazier. It may not be doubted
that the Art of Soulier, which has made him find Durel in Daret, will also
make him find Dorde in Durel. But we do advertise him, that this new Correction
will be of no service to him; for when Durel shall be taken away, and Dorde put
in the place thereof, all his Engine will be overturned: we shall have no
Englishman proper to negociate with the English, no man unfixed from any
Church, and by consequence fit to employ his time in Negotiations; no man which
was oftentimes in Paris, and in Normandy, places proper to entertain
Gorrespondence with the English. All this was found in Mr. Durel, for which
reason they judged it fit to make him the Negociator, and afterward
Assistant-moderator. But poor Mr. Dorde was a Minister of the Province, serving
in a little Town or Village of Perigort, very far from the Sea, without
Commerce, without all advantage to entertain Correspondencies, not stirring
from his place, affixed to a Congregation made up of persons very unfit to
furnish means of Negociating Treaties. In good earnest, behold a heap of cross
Accidents for Mr. Soulier. Is not a man very unhappy, when he would edify the
Church by a pious Deceit, to find so many stumbling blocks in his way?

To strengthen this Argument, we added a matter of fact, notorious to all those
who had never so little knowledge of Mr. Durel, viz. that there was not a man
amongst the English, who had a greater hatred for the Parliament than he. So
that it was to lose all sense, to choose this person to treat with them of a
Conspiracy against France. This matter of Fact is notorious, and it is known by
all the English Church, that the King of England looked upon him at his return
as one that had suffered exile for his sake, and recompensed him not only with
the Deanary of Windsor, but with many other Benefices which he had given him
before that. To this the Priest Soulier answers, A very fine thing it is that
Cromwell was then dead; and that though Durel were an Enemy to Cromwell, it does
not follow that he was an Enemy to his Son, and to those that then ruled among
the English. That is to say, that Mr. Durel, who had a general indignation
against the Enemies of his King, reconciled himself to them, as soon as they
had lost their Head, and joined another party to them to betray another King,
into whose Country he was fled for refuge. This is very well contrived. He adds
to this a Letter from Mr. de Vane a Gentleman belonging to the Queen Dowager of
England, who says, That the Deanary of Windsor was not given to Mr. Durel to
recompense his fidelity, but to discharge a Debt of 2000 l. Sterling, which was
owing to him by my Lord of Manchester. As we have not the honor to know Mr. de
Vane, so we shall leave his Testimony to signify according to its worth. We
shall only say, that the Deanary of Windsor is at the Nomination and Disposal
of the King, and not in the Disposal of the Counts of Manchester; and that it is
not probable that the King, at the solicitation of the Lord Manchester, should
give a Benefice of that importance to a man who was not known to be a zealous
Friend to the Royal Family. Seeing we are now showing the Falsehoods of this
Act, and the ignorance of those who framed it, we must not forget that these
men make Ricottier the Minister of Clairac. By consulting the Table of the
names of those who appeared at this Synod of Montpazier, it may be seen that
Ricottier being Minister of Bourdeaux, and not of Clairac, he could have no
other Title, seeing he appeared at the Synod on the behalf of the Church which
he then served. It must be confessed, that never were there so many Falsehoods
heaped together.

For a Fifth Argument, we produced the Marginal Note of Mr. Soulier; A fifth
Argument of Falsehood: Soulier's Impertinencies thereon.
Cromwell was yet alive. Now he had been dead almost a year. To this he answers,
that he might say that Cromwell was yet alive, For that could not be referred to
any one but his Son, which succeeded him in the Government. For this I remit
him to the Letter of Mr. Le Feure, which we have seen above. This is curious,
and will give very fair advantage to the Learned to resolve the difficulties of
History. Such a one was yet alive, it is true; he was dead some ten years since,
but that signifies nothing, his Son was alive, and reigned in his stead: It Is
the same thing. At the most, says Mr. Soulier, this can be no more than a
mistake of the Historian, which cannot prejudice the truth of the Act, which
speaks not of Cromwell, or his Son, but of the English in general: By your
favor, Mr. Soulier, it is a great prejudice to the Act: For if it had been made
whilst Cromwell lived, it would have been much more probable, because it is known
that Cromwell did very much concern himself, or appeared so to do in the
preservation of the Reformed Churches of France. Besides, his Throne was so
well established at home, that he could attempt any thing abroad. It Is also
known that France never feared any man so much as He. So that whilst he lived,
the English were in condition to attempt, and it may be to execute the Project
which they charge upon them; but after his death it was no longer so, the Scene
changed from white to black. If the Priest Soulier did put Cromwell in the
Margin, under this apprehension, as it is very probable he did, this makes it
appear, that he was not altogether a Beast. He thought it was much more
reasonable to make the Ministers of Guyenne treat with Cromwell, than with that
Chaos of Government that came after him; there was only this little difficulty
in the way, that Cromwell was dead. But this is a small matter with these
Gentlemen, who have done in our days that which we thought impossible.

A sixth Argument of Falsehood: the lewd Answer, of Soulier.
Among the Arguments, we said, that it was to invent without judgment, to
suppose that an affair of this nature could be treated of in a Synod, where
there was a hundred and fifty Deputies, that it was to put a Rope about all
their necks, and deliver their lives into the first Fool or Traitor. To this he
answers, what he had already answered elsewhere, It Is that there is nothing
more easy than to cause an Act to be signed by those who preside in these
Assemblies, without passing it by a plurality of Voices; and above all, then
when the Moderator is in the Conspiracy, as he was upon this occasion, where
Ricottier was one of the principal Instruments thereof. But this is called
reasoning like Soulier the Priest, and like Doctor Shoemaker. We are not
disputing about signing an Act, or causing it to be signed. We know very well,
that nothing is more easy, than to get Acts signed by the Presidents in a
Chimney-corner: That which is disputed, is about the execution of an Act, and
of putting it into a condition to be executed. For this it is necessary not only
that it pass all the Voices of the Synod, but also that it be debated and
considered in all the Consistories; otherwise the Signatures of Ricottier, and
three others, would serve as little to give assurance to the English for the
pretended delivering up of places, as the word of the poor men of the Hospital
of Quinzevint in Paris. Now we demand once more, whether in such a time as
this, there were men foolish enough to make such a deliberation pass before a
thousand or twelve hundred persons? for there were not less in all the
Consistories of Guyenne. Surely this were to expose their lives at a very cheap
price.

A seventh Argument of Falsehood; and the Fooleries that Soulier speaks thereon.
For a new Argument, we had said, that these men of Montpazier had lost their
sense, to engage to deliver places to the English in the year 1659. when for
almost forty years they had had no places or Town which they could deliver to
Strangers. Soulier the Priest makes very judicious Reflections thereon. First
he says that they make this Act speak what they please, to render it
ridiculous; But the men of the Synod did not engage precisely by this Act to
deliver places to the English. We know not whether this man dotes, or has a
design to make himself ridiculous. The men of the Synod did not promise to
deliver places; what then do those words signify? The English require that we
give them assurance to put into their possession all the Cities and Town
whereof we can dispose. What did the Synod thereupon? It gave command to Mr.
Durel to know what assurances they desired; and of what? of the delivery of
places? for there was nothing else under dispute. At the same time they give
order, To promise on our part all the assurances that were possible. I
understand not the Language of the Synod of Montpazier, if this be not in
formal words to promise the delivering up of places: so then in despite to the
exceptions of Mr. Soulier, behold four or five Ministers, and it may be so many
Elders, promise to the English to deliver them Bourdeaux, Blage, etc. and other
places of Guyenne. In truth, this is so absurd, that the Priest Soulier cannot
hinder himself from seeing the absurdity thereof; and for that reason he gives
a ridiculous gloss to this Act. The second thing which Soulier answers, is,
that we need not be amazed that this Act took no effect: the Act, says he, was
in the month of July, in the years 1659. Now immediately after two things
happened, which hindered the execution; the one was the Peace of the Pyreneans,
the other, that the Minister Durel arriving in England, found many differing
Factions there. But Mr. Soulier ought to remember, that the two things, which
according to him hindered the execution, ought to have hindered the project,
and the deliberation: for they happened not after, but before. We have made it
appear that these Factions happened in England immediately after the death of
Cromwell; and for the Peace of the Pyreneans, it is true, it was concluded after;
but the Negotiation thereof was begun, and the success certain, many months
before the Synod of Montpazier. The third Answer of Soulier, is taken from a
Book entitled, The last Efforts of afflicted Innocence: Where to that which
the Author objects, that the Hugenot party was in no condition to make
themselves feared, he answers, Remember what the Poet said, Furor arma
ministrat; Fury finds Arms, and when they have no Cities, they will take them.
There is some probability that Mr. Soulier knows how to read Latin, for he has
transcribed three words thereof, and this makes much to his honor against the
Accusation of his Master Mesnier, and Mr. Le Feure. We answer to Mr. Soulier,
that we cannot warrant all the thoughts of other men; but though it should be
true that there were yet some reason to fear the Reformed, as much abased, and
subjected as they are, because Fury furnishes Arms, yet there was no reason to
fear them in the time of the Synod of Montpazier, because then there was
nothing which might move their Rage. Lambs become Lions, when they are run
against the Walls. The despair into which they thrust the Reformed, might
indeed have furnished them with Arms, if God had not prevented those unhappy
Commotions. But it was impossible that the condition in which they were in
1659. should put them into that despair, which puts them upon any thing, and
makes them sometimes successful therein.

An tighth Argument of Falsehood; and its Defense against the Wrangles of
Soulier.
We drew an invincible Argument of Falsehood, against this wicked Piece, from the
Silence of the Court: The King knew many Years since, by the means of Joly
Bishop of Again, and the Cardinal of Bouillion, That they had formed a horrid
Conspiracy in Guyenne, against his State; he knew the Authors thereof, they
were yet alive, but he said nothing of it, he did not chastise those who had
made this bold Attempt: He complained not of it any where; and from whence
comes this Spirit of Patience? Have they forgiven the least fault to the
Reformed, for the space of twenty Years? Have they not laid to their charge, a
thousand false Crimes? Have they not had an open Ear for all their Accusors?
Have they not punished them severely for Faults falsely imputed, and ill
proved? And would they neglect the punishment of Treason, in him that was
Principal therein; who will believe it, and whom can Soulier persuade of the
truth of it? Besides, at what time was this? Observe, it was at a time in which
they had sworn the Ruin of the Protestants; in which they earnestly wished to
find them culpable; in which they did even all that can be imagined, to make
them so: Was there any thing so much desired by the Clergy, and the Court, as
to have a small occasion to say, Seeing that our said Subjects have always
persevered in a Spirit of Faction and Rebellion, even in the times when they
entirely enjoyed our Favor, under the benefits of our Edicts, as appears by
the Conspiracy of Montpazier. This would have been conveniently inserted in the
Edict which revokes that of Nantes: but there is nothing like it seen there;
they give no other reason there, But that the greatest, and the best part of
our Subjects, of the said Reformed Protestant Religion, had embraced the
Catholic, so that the Edict of Nantes, and all that had been granted in favor
of the said Reformed Protestant Religion, continues to no purpose. It is very
much worthy of Observation, that only two Years before, in the time when the
utter Destruction of the Reformed was resolved, the King gives a public
Testimony to their-Fidelity; it is in the Act of Oblivion, granted to the
pretended Rebels of Dauphine: that is to say, to those poor Men who were
willing to pray to GOD upon the Ruin of their Churches, without doing injury
to any one, but also without desires of being troubled there. The King, say I,
in the Oblivion which he granted to these men, says, The immovable Fidelity of
all our other Subjects of the said Religion, has inclined us rather to
entertain thoughts of Clemency, than of Rigor toward the Guilty. How could it
be, that the Court should have such apprehensions of the Fidelity of the
Protestants of the Kingdom, if it had in its hand an Act capable of convincing
them of desiring to expose the Kingdom as a prey to Strangers? And if it had
them not, but knew well the Conspiracy of Montpazier, and gave credit to it,
what could oblige it to insert a Clause so false in this Act of Oblivion? I
know very well, that Kings in these fort of Acts pretend themselves satisfied
oftentimes with persons which they do commend, at that very season when they
are least satisfied with them. But it is when there is something to fear: it is
when they would oblige men to lay down their Arms, who are in a condition to
make themselves feared, and when actually, and indeed they are afraid of them.
But, I entreat you, what is it that the King, with 200000 Men in Arms, without
any foreign Wars, has to fear of a thousand or twelve hundred Peasants of
Dauphine, Vivarets, and Cevennes, of whom they had already massacred more than
two thirds? If Soulier can reconcile this with a pretended persuasion, that the
Court has of the truth of the Conspiracy of Montpazier, he will do us a
kindness to do it: But, says he, the conclusion which they draw from the
silence of the Court, is no proof, that it doubts the truth of this Act: the
liberty which the King has given me of defending my self, and maintaining it,
is an indisputable proof; that his Majesty does not doubt thereof. A very fine
proof! The King has permitted Soulier to defend this Piece, therefore it is
true, and he believes it is so. First, the King it may be knows not who this
Soulier is, and it is known that these kind of Permissions pass by the means of
a Father Confessor, or some other Ecclesiastic, who says concerning it, what
he pleases, being much assured, that he shall never be reprehended for it.
Besides, behold a great Wonder, that they suffer such a man as Soulier is to
hazard his Reputation: If he succeed to persuade this pretended Conspiracy of
Montpazier, with good luck, the Court will always gain thereby; and 'twill be a
reason and pretense to justify its Conduct. If he does not succeed therein,
the shame will remain upon him alone; no name or person of Quality appears
therein, the hurt will not be great. It Is thus that men reason naturally in the
World: So that the Permission which the Court gives him, to defend the truth of
this Conspiracy, is so far from being a mark of the value they have for him,
that it is a proof they look on him as a Wretch which they abandon, and leave as
forlorn. Let him show us any man of Reputation, which joins with him in this
Cause. There is nothing more pleasant, than to see the Value and Reputation
which this Priest Soulier puts upon himself: He demanded leave from the Court,
says he, to defend himself, and the King was pleased to permit it. And speaking
of an Author which goes for a person a little more able than he, If this Writer
expects I should do him the Honor of Answering him. This makes a man smile;
and he can hardly forbear to remember the Lesson which his Master, Father
Mesnier, gave him, Let every one meddle with his own Trade: Ne Suitor ultra
Crepidam; Let not the Cobbler go beyond his Last. I never knew those Authors,
which took it for an Honor to have such an Antagonist: First, a Lacque;
secondly, a sorry Mechanic; thirdly, a small Missionary, though in the last
place, he be Monsieur the Abbot, for men ascend by a criminal Ability more
easily, than by a true Merit. But let us go on, since we have begun, and see
what he says to prove the truth of his Act.

If those, says he, which are accused to have Signed this Act, find themselves
as Innocent, as this Author would persuade us, how comes it to pass, that they
have not attempted it, since the time that my Book appeared in the World? We
have already answered to this: How, and before whom could they provide for the
maintenance of their Innocence, seeing there was no Judge to receive their
Complaints, nor Notary who dared to receive their Protestations, nor even a
Bailiff that dare signify the least thing on their behalf? Soulier the Priest
knows this, the thing is of public Notoriety, and he has the boldness to draw
advantage from a Silence forced, and which was impossible to be broken.
Therefore these Gentlemen speak when they can speak; and I pray take the pains
to hear them in the following Act:

UPon this day, being the 24th of April, 1687, the Gentlemen, Joseph Asimont,
James Brun, Isaac Goyon, and James Philipot, all Minsters, fled to this City,
were personally present before me Henry Ram, public Notary, admitted thereto
by the Noble Court of Holland, residing in the City of Amsterdam, and in the
prefence of the Witnesses under-named, who at the desire of him to whom it
appertains, have said, and do declare to be true and certain, under Oath
offered to them, and made by them; And first, Monsieur Asimont alone says,
That yesterday he received a Letter, by which he is Summoned and Adjur'd to
speak the Truth, on the subject of a pretended Act of the Synod held at
Montpazier, in Perigort, in the Year 1659, which Monsieur Soulier has produced
in his History of Calvinism, at p. 552, of the Paris Edition, containing in
substance, That the Ministers and Elders of Lower Guyenne, assembled in Synod
at the said Montpazier, had made an Act to call the English to their Help, and
solicit them to Arms for the Defense of their persecuted Churches: Upon which
Monsieur Joseph Asimont, after he had read, and considered exactly the Tenor
of the said Act, did say, That indeed he remembers that he was chosen to draw
up the Acts of the Synod of Montpazier, but at the same time does Protest, and
that with an Oath before GOD, who searches the Hearts, and as if he actually
stood before the Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST, who must Judge the Living and the
Dead, That he, the first Deponent, never drew up, nor signed the said Act; and
that he never heard any thing spoken of it, till since the said Soulier
inserted it in his Writings; and that therefore it is a Piece forged by a
Spirit of Lies; and he calls the GOD of Truth to be both Witness and Judge of
this Imposture, which bears in its own Characters, the marks of its Falsehood;
forasmuch as the said Act is said to be Signed by Durel, Assistant, which is
notoriously false, as may be seen by the Papers of the Acts of the Synod, which
were put into the hands of Monsieur de Villefranche de Vivans, who assisted
there on the behalf of the King, and which Monsieur de Villefranche sent to the
King's Council, according to the Custom. And afterward the other Witnesses,
upon the same Summons, did declare, That they remembered that they assisted in
the Synod of Montpazier, in the Year 1659, from the beginning to the end; that
Monsieur de Villefranche was there sole Commissary of the King; and that
Monsieur Durel, Minister to the Duke de la Force, was not Assistant to the
Moderator there, but Monsieur Dorde, Minister of the said Montpazier. In this
manner they did protest, by Oath which they made to God, That they heard
nothing there, of the Act alleged by Soulier in the said History of Calvinism,
in the 552 Page; and that since that time, they never heard any Minister or
Elder speak of it, nor any private person of the Reformed Religion, but on the
report which Monsieur Soulier has made thereof; alleging, for reasons of
their knowledge, That they assisted at the Synod held at Montpazier, from the
beginning to the end, and consequently what is abovesaid, must be well known
unto them.

This thus passed, and done faithfully, in the City of Amsterdam, in the
presence of John Hoekeback, and Marcus Bauelaer, called as Witnesses thereunto;
which I Testify, Henry Ram.
WE Burgomasters and Governors of the City of Amsterdam, do make known, and
certify for Truth, by these Presents, That the Gentlemen, Joseph Asimont,
James Brun, Isaac Goyon, and James Philipot, all Ministers, fled for Protection
to this City, did appear before us, who, at the desire of him to whom it
appertains, by solemn Oath have said, declared, affirmed, and deposed the
Contents of the Attestation, and Affirmation abovesaid; for all, and every one
of them did declare and affirm it to be true and certain, after the reading of
it unto them by the Secretary underwritten: So help them GOD.

In Testimony whereof, we have Sealed these Present by the Common Seal of this
City, the 25th of April, 1687. The place of the Seal. Pelters.



As to the Form, nothing can be found to object against this Protestation: It
was received not only by Notaries, but by the chief Magistrate of the most
considerable City of the Country, and is sealed with the Common Seal thereof.
As to the Sincerity of those who protest, and attest it, he must have renounced
all Modesty, 'who shall call it in doubt: They are persons that are in a place
of security, who have almost nothing more to hope, or fear from France: it
cannot be conceived, that men would damn themselves by such an Oath as this,
for the maintenance of a Falsehood. If the Accusation were true, why do they not
permit Soulier, and his Book, to pass without saying any thing to it? What
great good can come to them hence forward, when they shall have obliterated in
the minds of the Public, the opinion that there was a true Conspiracy at
Montpazier? If the Affairs of the Reformed were in sound and good condition in
France, they might say, That by this false Oath, they have been desirous to
prevent the Evils that such a thing, if it were believed, might draw upon the
whole Body, and also every single Member of it: but at present, when the
business of our Ruin is consummate, must he not have the Soul of a Devil, and
be willing to damn himself out of humor, by engaging the name of God, and
those which bear his Image upon Earth, to maintain a Lie which he knows to be a
Lie, and a Lie from which very little good can come, in comparison of the evil?
The pleasure of making Soulier pass for an Impostor, is not (I think) great
enough to be willing to purchase it by Perjury. When Soulier, and his
Companions Forged this Act, they were supported in their Crime by the
consideration of the great advantage which was to come (according to them) to
the Catholic Church, by hastening the Ruin of the Heretics in France. But
behold men who commit a crime by an horrible Perjury, without being suported by
the consideration of any profit or interest: Can this enter into the mind of
any man of sound sense and understanding? Behold then four irreprovable
Testimonies, who assisted at the Synod of Montpazier, who attest the Falsehood
of the History in all its parts; who say that Durel or Daret were no Assistants
in this Synod; that Saint Blancard was not Commissary, but Villefranche of
Vivans; that nothing of like nature did pass in the Synod against the Service
of the King: But behold in particular, this Monsieur Asimont, who was Secretary
to the Synod, he who by consequence must be privy to the business, who must
have digested the pieces that were drawn up, and who did really Sign the Act,
as the Priest Soulier pretends: it is this Asimont to whom Soulier addresses
himself in particular: As to what respects the Signatures, and the
Subscriptions of the Minister Asimont, and the Secretary Meyzonet, says he, I
know them so well, and they are so conformable to other Acts which they have
signed, that I assure myself they will not dare to disavow it: However, it will
be very easy for me to convince them by other Acts which they have signed; the
Minister Asimont may remember the Conference that we had in the City of Eymet,
in the Diocese of Sorlat, in the Year 1657, and that the Original, signed by
him, at the foot of all his answers, is remaining in my hands. If any honest
men have a desire to compare the Signature of the Act of Montpazier, with the
true Signatures and Subscriptions of Monsieur Asimont, they will see them very
true, and very well attested; and till then, seeing the Priest Soulier appeals
to the Conscience of the Minister Asimont, and to the Conference of Eymet, I am
of opinion we ought to hear Monsieur Asimont himself in particular.

The Letter of Monsieur Asimont.
I Never was of the humor to detain the Truth in Unrighteousness; on the
contrary, I have always taken a great freedom to declare it, as far as Charity
does permit it; and I have had great joy in seeing it triumph over Lies and
Falsehood: As you labor vigorously to make it victorious, and triumphant over
its Enemies, I received with respect the Adjuration you have given me in your
Letter, to bear Testimony to that Truth, which Monsieur Soulier does engage,
and combat in his History of Calvinism. I have shown your Letter to the
Gentlemen, the Pastors of the Province of Guyenne, who can give Testimony
concerning it with myself, and I have sent you their, and my Declaration upon
the subject of the Act of the Synod of Montpazier, with the Affirmation upon
Oath, which we made before our Lords the Sovereign Magistrates of this City: My
Brethren have thought that we ought to note the name of the Assistant to the
Moderator of the Synod, to prevent the Impostures of this Wrangler; for my part
I have not expressed it in my Deposition, for fear least it should make a new
wrangle about the names of Dorde, and Durel, and least he should say, that the
Transcriber, by this allusion of names, putting Dur for Dor, and al for de, in
imitation of the great Etymologist who derived the Latin word panis from the
Greek word (...); And how so? Why, by changing, says he, (...) into pa, and
(...) into nis. Make what use of them you judge fit. As to what concerns me in
particular, as Soulier attributes to me the Subscription of this pretended Act,
and says that he knows my Subscription, because of a Conference about Religion,
which we had by Writing in the City of Eymet; so I heartily wish I could
recover an Original of the said Conference, which I have among my Papers in
France, to make it appear, that he has the gift of Impudence in the highest
degree, and cannot forbear Lying, since he there gives himself the Lie by a
gross and manifest Contradiction: but I fear this Writing was burnt with many
others, as well as my Books: But for want of this Piece, which would render him
unworthy of all Belief: I can say, to justify myself from the Accusation, by
which he charges me to have signed an Act of secret Correspondence with the
Enemies of the State, That I have been so far from being suspected of
Unfaithfulness to the King, that some of my Brethren grew jealous of me in
their own minds, by the very close adherence which I testified to his Service
in the Civil Wars, and by reason of a Letter under the Great Seal, which his
Majesty caused to be written to me in the Year 1654, to assure me, That he took
in good part my Fidelity and Zeal, with assurance of Recompense according to my
Merits, when occasion should be offered to him. By the Grace of God I never
desired, nor caused it to be requested of him, although occasions thereof
presented themselves unto me: This Letter could not protect me from diverse
Decrees of Imprisonment, which the Parliament of Guyenne did afterward grant
against me, for the cause of my Religion, nor from the Decree of the Intendant
of Agesseau, for preaching in forbidden places, by the order of the Synod; nor
from the Imprisonment and Quartering of Soldiers, appointed by the Intendant
of Ris, because, going from Bergerac, I wrote to one of my Friends, That I went
away because I would not see the Abomination of Desolation, which was about to
fall upon this Church. God has bestowed on me the Mercy of escaping happily
out of these troublesome Affairs, by manifesting the Integrity of my Conduct,
and the Sincerity of my Intentions. It Is true, at last, perceiving I could not
serve two Masters, in France, who were of such contrary Sentiments, viz. GOD,
and the Most Christian King, I desired of him, in the Year 1683, three
Pass-ports, for myself, and two Sons, both Ministers, (by Monsieur of
Corbichet, heretofore the Steward of the Duke de la Force, and who was then in
the Service of Monsieur the Prince of Condy, who obtained them with great ease)
to allow me the liberty of going out of the Kingdom. From whence I reason thus
against Soulier: If the King, having been informed of the pretended Act of
Montpazier, had given credit to the Accusor, would he so easily have granted my
Passport, before our general Banishment? Is it credible he would have
permitted a Minister convinced of Rebellion against his Majesty, and of
Conspiracy against the State, to go out of his Kingdom? He who had kept in
Prison other Ministers of Guyenne, for Preaching or Praying after the
Prohibitions, would he have given the Keys of the Gates to a Minister known
guilty, not only of the same faults, but of a crime worthy of the severest
Punishment? Certainly there is nothing could have protected me, and I must have
expected to have been condemned to Prison, or to the Galleys for ever: Seeing
therefore, that after the sight of this Act, he gave me my Passport, and was
content with my Banishment, as well as with that of others, it is an
indisputable proof, that he gave no credit to it, and knew the Falsehood
thereof, only he thought fit to leave Soulier at liberty to fight us with the
Weapons of his Tongue and Pen. To conclude, though we have to do with a King
who has condemned his Faithful Subjects to Banishment, even those who exposed
their Goods, their Lives, and Liberties to his Service, yet I do not repent the
performance of my Duty; it is matter of Confidence to me, and gives me the
boldness to implore the Protection of GOD against the Cruelty of Men.


Two things are considerable in this Testimony of Monsieur Asimont; the first
is, That he is a man of great Age, and of whom it may be said, that he expects
the moment in which he must go and appear before God. Can any one believe that
a man so near to leave the World, should be willing to keep measures with it,
for the preservation of I know not what trifle of Honor and Reputation; and
that being so near his appearance before God, should dare to profane his holy
Name by so many Falsehoods and Perjuries? The other thing observable is, The
Circumstance which he observes in his Letter, concerning the suspicion, though
unjust, under which he fell, in the minds of some of his Brethren, by reason of
a certain Letter of Favor, and Thanks, which the King caused to be written to
him, as an Acknowledgment of his Fidelity to his Service. This is notorious,
and all the World knows it. Is there any probability, that they would trust
such a man with a Conspiracy, which they knew to have been so faithful, and so
perfectly in the Interests of the Court? But is there any probability, that a
man who had been so faithful to the King, and so fast and sure to his Service,
would have any part in such a Confederacy and Conspiracy? I do acknowledge,
that I have no more to say after this, and that if the Priest Soulier does
continue to maintain his Act, and Conspiracy of Montpazier, he may very well
boast, that he has the gift of Impudence to the highest degree and measure:
For never had Romance and Fiction, so many marks of Falsehood. Let us see them a
little altogether.

1. Ricottier is here Minister of Clairac; and in truth he was Minister of the
Reformed Church of Bordeaux. 2. Saint Blancard is here Commissary for the King;
but in truth 'twas Monsieur Vivans of Vilefranche. 3. Daret is he by whose
Mediation they treated with the English; this Daret is a Phantome who never was
in the World. 4. Durel, Minister of the Duke de la Force, substituted in the
place of Daret, was not Assistant to the Synod; 'twas Dorde Minister of
Montpazier itself. 5. To Durel, who treated with the English, they give the
name of Elijah, or Estienne, or Esaias, or some such name beginning with an E;
and yet his name was John. 6. Durel is present, he receives the Act, and
nevertheless he was not so much as deputed to the Synod. 7. Durel treated with
Cromewell, who even had been dead ten Months. 8. Durel treated with the
Parliamentarians, to whom he was a mortal Enemy, and by whom he was mortally
hated. 9. The English offer to enter France with their Arms, in a time when
they were in the greatest Confusion among themselves, in an Anarchy, and by
consequence in a state of the utmost weakness. 10. A Conspiracy is discovered
to the Court, part of the Authors are living, and the Court says nothing
thereof. 11. Asimont, one of the principal Conspirators, begs leave for himself
and his two Sons, to depart the Kingdom, it is granted him without any
difficulty. 12. They suppress the Edict of Nantes, they Persecute the Reformed
even to death, without objecting this Conspiracy as a fault unto them. 13. Men
enterprise and attempt to deliver places to an Enemy, which they have not had
in their hands these fifty Years. 14. Men attempt to raise a Civil War in the
time of the Peace of the Pyreneans, at a season when the Kingdom remained
without any trouble from abroad. 15. They are four or five Ministers, and it
may be as many Elders, which make this Conspiracy, and pretend to execute this
great Design without communicating it to any one. 16. Or they did communicate a
Secret on which the Lives of an infinite number of persons depended, to an
hundred and fifty Deputies, yea, to all the Consistories. 17. To conclude, the
Reformed attempted to trouble a Kingdom, and themselves in a time when they
enjoyed a very great Peace. I do maintain, that here are a heap of Falsehoods,
Contradictions, and Follies so plain, and sensible, that a man must have a head
and heart made like those of Soulier the Priest, to be able to digest them.

To conclude, let us see a little the Channels by which this Piece has passed,
and Providence will therein show us new Indications of Falsehood: As to its
source, it is sufficiently difficult to discover it; according to Soulier, this
Act made by the Synod of Montpazier, is put into the hands of the Minister
Vignier; Vignier died in the Year 1666, and dying, committed this Piece in
trust, into the hands of Mounier, Minister of Nerac also, and his Colleague;
the Minister Mounier turns Catholic in the Year 1675, and dies in the Year
1677, at Paris, in an Inn near the House of Soissons. Monsieur de Quesne,
Archdeacon, and Vicar General of Condom, goes to see him in the time of his
Sickness, he gives him this Act of Montpazier, Monsieur de Quesne gives it
Monsieur Joly, then Bishop of Again, Joly gives it to Monsieur the Cardinal of
Bouillion, the Cardinal of Bouillion gives it to the King, and at last the King
gives it to Monsieur Chasteau-neuf, who puts it in his Office, where it is
sealed up, and joined to the Acts of the Synod of Montpazier. Behold a great
many hands which are either unknown to us, or suspected by us. As to the
Minister Mounier, we do continue to say, he was a man wounded in his
Reputation, by Suspension from his Ministry, he was besides an Apostate from
the Truth, and had the Character of all voluntary Apostates, i. e. hatred for
the Truth, and for those which do profess it.

But there is in this place one circumstance so evident, to convince these
Villains of their Knavery, that a man cannot escape the sight thereof, The
Minister Vignier died in the year 1666, as Soulier himself says: Why did he,
when he was about to die, give this Act of Montpazier, as a thing in trust? To
what could this Act serve? It was seven years since that this pretended
Conspiracy with the English was made; the Affairs of England had entirely
changed their face, the King was restored, and at War with the Hollanders:
every one knows he was so far from entering Leagues in favor of the
Protestants, that on the contrary, he rather engaged against them. There was
not a man living in the World, upon whom they could cast their eyes to
accomplish the Conspiracy, but Cromewell, or the Parliamentarians: this Piece
therefore was absolutely on one hand of no use, and on the other hand, 'twas
capable of destroying an infinite number of single persons, and the whole
entire Body of the Reformed in France: Monsieur Vignier therefore, when he was
dying, lost his Understanding and Charity itself, to be willing to preserve a
Paper which was good for nothing, but to destroy his Brethren; a Piece which
ought to have been burnt, and which he should have burnt when he was dying. The
father we look into this thing, the more we find that these Villains were
smitten with a Spirit of Blindness, in all the circumstances of their Fiction.

As to the Bishop of Again, he was a Court Bishop, which had always a thousand
good reasons to continue at Paris about the Affairs of his Diocese. I have had
a long time in my hands a Letter of Monsieur the Procurator-General, who
appointed him in the name of the King, in a manner very rough and harsh,
speedily to put an end to his Non residence, and to return to his Diocese,
whither he went very seldom. These sort of men are always at watch, that they
may have something to produce, which may make them stay at the Court, where
they are willing to be, that they may be always ready to hunt after a Benefice
greater than their own. As to Monsieur de Quesne, Vicar General to the Bishop
of Condom, we know him not: he may say true, and yet all that we have said,
receive no blemish nor disadvantage thereby; he might really receive the Piece
from Mounier, a revolted Minister: Mounier might be the man that forget it. And
that which I find most probable is, that Soulier and Mounier are the two
Authors of it: Soulier was at the Synod of Montpazier, he rejoices to produce
an Affair which passed there, in a Synod where he was. Mounier, principal
Author of the Falsehood, might furnish the Names, he inserted that of Durel, as
a person proper to Negotiate with the English. Soulier, who knew not Monsieur
Durel, reading over the Act forged between them, read Daret. And it is probable
that 'twas he who made him Assistant-Moderator, at the foot of the Act, for
Mounier would never have committed so gross a fault. Soulier had a Conference
with Monsieur Asimont, the Missionaries, above all, those of the parts and
strength of Soulier, who knew neither Divinity nor Language, receive nothing
but confusion from those Conferences, and they always carry a mortal hatred
against the Ministers that do confound them, with design to revenge themselves
at any rate. Monsieur Asimont had been really Secretary to draw up the Acts of
the Synod of Montpazier, for which reason this Synod was to be chosen rather
than another, that the Minister Asimont might be chastised for the trouble
which he had put this Missonary to, in the Conference. This Act was put into
the hands of the King, the King delivered it to Monsieur Chasteau-neuf. Neither
the one nor the other made any account of it, because Monsieur Chasteau-neuf,
who had the true Acts of Montpazier, saw no conformity betwixt them, neither in
the Commissary, nor in the Assistant; besides that, the Piece bore many other
Characters of Falsehood: Nevertheless it is kept in the Office, as they keep a
thousand and a thousand false Pieces in such places. For example, the Chests of
the Evidences of Abbeys are inexhaustible Fountains of forged Pieces. Monsieur
de Launoy has given us notice thereof some-where on the subject of the Abbey of
Saint Dennis, by reason of the Pieces which Doublet has produced in his
History of Saint Dennis. And saving the respect which is due to the King, and
his Library, it is full of false Manuscripts. For example, the Jesuit Mesnier,
the Priest Soulier, and Doctor le Feure, do say, that they have drawn from that
Library, the Secret Articles of the Edict of 1577, in one of which it is said,
The King permits to the Prince of Condy the Exercise of Religion in his House
upon the Loire, yea, although he himself were absent. Nevertheless it is
certain, that there never was in the House of Monsieur the Prince, any Land
which bore the name de la Ferte, upon Loire, and that there is not any City or
Village of this name upon the Loire, from its Fountain till it enters the Sea.
Let this be observed by the by, That we may know what account we ought to make
of the Manuscripts of the King's Library, which Soulier quotes so often. Men
throw into these Repositories all Pieces that go up and down, whether they be
true or false; the true, fifty Years hence, will be so confounded with the
false, that nothing will be certainly known. Fifty Years hence the Act of
Montpazier, well kept in the Office of Monsieur Chasteau-neuf, will be as good
as if it were true. Behold how things go! If the Son of the Minister Mounier
(at present Canon of Tarbies) be troubled, that we make such a Knave of his
Father, he ought not to accuse us, who do not make men, but take them as they
are. As to the Letter which he has written for the Justification of his
Father, it is evident, that it is worse than nothing in the present Affair; his
Testimony is of no weight, and henceforth 'twill be his interest to retract it,
unless he will have his Father pass for the most profligate of all Men. For if
it be true, as he would have it be believed, that his Father put this Piece
into the hands of Monsieur de Quesne, it is unavoidable, that he was the Forger
of it, it being certain, as we have proved it, that the Piece is false, and
that he could not receive it from Monsieur Vignier. So that it is no officious
Lie in favor of his Father, it is an Act the most wounding to his Reputation,
that could be produced against him.

We will stop here, because we have imposed a necessity upon ourselves to speak
nothing but of the Act of the Synod of Montpazier, for which reason we will not
refute all the Calumnies of Soulier, nor repel all the Injuries which he speaks
in every Page against the Author of the Policy of the CLERGY, and of the Answer
to the Calvinism of Maimburgh: We only know concerning this Author, by report,
that he has a great Contempt for Soulier, and his Works; so that if he make
Books expressly to vex him, he may set his heart at rest, for he will never
obtain his end.

The Ninteenth PASTORAL LETTER. An Article of Antiquity: The Original of
Images: An Article of Controversy: A Continuation of the Matter of Schism: The
Corruption of the Roman Church was so great, that we were forced to a
Separation: A notable Letter concerning the Confessors carried to America.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given unto you, from God and our
Savior Jesus Christ.
WE have been obliged to interrupt the subject of our Pastoral Letters, to
refute a heinous Calumny cast upon one of our Synods, and which reflects upon
the whole Body. At this time we take again our matter and our order: we
remember that the last Article of Antiquity which we handled, was that of the
Invocation of Saints, which took its birth in the fourth and fifth Age: It Is
the fourth change which altered Christianity in those Ages: the first was the
Original of Monkery; the second was the Establishment of the Hierarchy; the
third was Ecumenical Councils; and the fourth was the Invocation of Saints,
and the Worship of Relics: Behold a fifth, it is the Introduction of Images
into Churches. The Worship and Adoration of Images did not come so soon, and we
do not see the spreading thereof, till the sixth Age: But in the fourth and
fifth Ages men began to bring Images into some Chapels consecrated to the
Memory of Martyrs. And it is a thing that could not fail to happen; One depth
calls to another; and when men fell into Idolatry to men, they were not far
from Idolatry to Images: for it is very natural to represent those men which we
Invoke, and to give Honor to their Images. For which reason I am amazed that
the second Part of Paganism, viz. The Adoration of Images came so slowly after
the Worship and Adoration of Saints. But the aversation which the first
Christians had for Idols, held firm as yet for some time after the Birth of the
Superstitious Worship of the Martyrs, and their Relics: It is therefore true,
that in some Provinces, about the end of the fourth Age, a person may show you
Historical Representations in the Churches; they began to paint the Histories
of the Bible: It appears by a passage of Gregory Nissen Greg. Niss. Orat. de
Divin. filii and Sp. S.
that the History of the Sacrifice of Abraham was painted in some Church* And
by another Homily of the same Gregory Nissen Orat. in Theodor. Martyr.
, it appears, that they began also to paint the Histories of some Martyr, or
Martyrs in their Temples: The Painter, says he, has expressed the Flowers of
his Art, drawing on a Table the great Actions of the Martyr, his Resistance,
his Combats, the savage and brutish Assaults of Tyrants, the flaming Furnace,
and the happy Consummation of the Martyr; and a Table in which was Jesus Christ
in Humane shape, over-looking the Combat. If we were of the mind of your
Convertors, we would hide such things, as you might very well be ignorant in;
but we are sincere in our Confessions, as we are willing to be in our Defense
and Allegations: 1. For first we do maintain, That in the fourth Age the Church
had as yet a horror for all Worship of Images: They begun to introduce them
into Churches only for Ornament. And if your Convertors do produce to you any
thing of these Ages, which seems to signify that they Adored Images, hold it
for certain, that they are false passages, or taken from false and suppositious
Books. 2. We do maintain, That the use of painting Historical Tables in
Churches, did not begin till about the end of the fourth Age: And before
Gregory Nissen of Capadocia, who lived about the Year 380, we do not find any
mention thereof among the Ancients. 3. In the third place, you ought to know,
That this Custom was then very rare, and that we cannot discover any Churches,
but those of Cappadocia, in Asia, and a certain Church in Italy, where Images
were seen in their Temples.
It Is true some quote a passage of St. Basil, taken from his Homily upon the
Martyr Barlaam, by which they would prove, that in the Chapel of this Martyr,
they had set the History of his Martyrdom: for St. Basil there invites the
Painters to represent magnificently the Combats of the Martyr. But it is
certain, that the Painters to whom he speaks are Orators, which he exhorts to
represent well in their Discourses, the glorious Sufferings of Barlaam. But
although it should be to Painters (without Figure) that Basil speaks, as the
City of Cesarea, whereof he was Bishop, was in Cappadocia, this would serve to
fortify that which we maintain, (viz) That this dangerous Custom of
introducing Images into Churches, was not any where else, but in the Province
of Cappadocia: for no Author of this Age speaks of it, but the Bishops of that
Country: unless it be Paulinus Bishop of Nola, who tells us, That he caused the
Representation of the Sufferings of St. Faelix the Martyr, to be put in the
Chapel that was dedicated unto him. Now it is to be observed, that this
Paulinus Bishop of Nola, fells us also two considerable things, First, That the
Custom of placing of Pictures in Churches, was very rare. The second, That that
which put him upon doing it, was a design to represent to the Eyes of the
Country People, those Combats, the painting whereof would make more impression
upon them, than Descriptions made by the mouths of Orators.

Some peradventure will demand of me, Faulinus Bibliothec Pat. Tom. 14. Edit.
Lugdu.
says he, what was the reason which occasioned me to resolve to make the
Figures of Animate Creatures, to be painted in Sacred Houses, seeing the Custom
thereof is very rare. And he adds, That it was to try whether the sight of
these enameld and raised Shadows of Colors, would not make some impression
upon the gross and stupid minds of the Vulgar. He says also, in the same place,
That his end was to employ these Dregs of the People in the Contemplation of
these Figures on Feast days, to the end that they might spend the less time in
Debauchery. Observe thereon, that then it was very rare to see Pictures in
Churches, therefore they did not expose them to the Adoration of the People.
For Objects of Adoration and Worship ought to be known by all: besides, they
were put there only for the use of the Vulgar; 'twas not therefore to give any
Worship to them: for they are not only Country People which are obliged to
Religious Worship. To conclude, Paulinus says expressly, That it was only for
Commemoration, and not for Worship. It Is therefore from this good, but
superstitious man Paulinus, that this lewd saying has taken its original, That
Images are the Books of the Ignorant. 4. The fourth thing to which you ought to
give attention is, That then they did not set in Churches any Figure, Image, or
Statue of a single person, but Historical Representations in large Tables,
where many persons and many actions were represented. This makes almost an
infinite difference: for it never entered into the mind of Man, that Historical
Tables, whereon were some times represented the Devil tempting Jesus Christ,
oftentimes Hang-men pblucking off the flesh of a Martyr, with Pincers, were
placed there for Worship. For so men would Worship the Devil, as well as Jesus
Christ, and the Hangmen as well as the Martyr. Indeed when the Idolatry of
Images was brought into the Church, 'twas by Pictures or Statues which
represented but one or two of the Saints. Now it is certain, say I, that about
the end of the fourth Age, those which gave themselves liberty of introducing
Images into Churches, placed nothing there but Historical Pictures and Tables.
To prove the contrary to you, they may produce a passage of Gregory Nazianzen,
where he complains of this, That some would destroy the City of Diocesarea,
raze the Temples, and pull down the Statues thereof: Epist. ad. Olympium.
Our greatest grief, says he, is not that the Statues are plucked down, although
that be troublesome too. Because immediately before he was speaking of the
Ruin of Temples, some it may be will serve themselves of that, to persuade
you, that Statues were in their Temples. But that is false, and it is certain
that he speaks of Statues which were in their public places: Our grief is,
says he, that with the Statues, they pull down and destroy an ancient City. And
to the end that you may not be able to delude your selves thereby, be
advertised, That the Greeks would never suffer Statues in their Churches, and
that yet to this day they Adore nothing but Images, or plain and flat Pictures;
and by a humor sufficiently pleasant, they accuse the Latins of being
Idolators, because they Adore Statues: As if their Images of Mosaic Work, were
much more worthy of Adoration, than Embossed Figures. However it be, this
demonstrates, that Gregory Nazianzen could not speak of Statues which were in
Churches.

5. To conclude, the last thing whereof you are to be advertised, about the
Original of Images, is, That in the time that this mischeivous Custom of
putting Images in Churches began in some places, the good Bishops opposed
themselves thereto with Zeal, and treated it as an Abomination. It were
convenient that you should read thereon a passage of Epiphanius Bishop of
Salamina in Cyprus, who lived about the year 375, that is to say, exactly in
the same time that Gregory Nissen suffered Pictures in the Churches of
Cappadocia, I came one day, says Epiphanius, into a Village which is called
Anablata, ('it was a Village in Palestine) Epiphan. in Epist. ad Joh. Jerus.
having seen there, as I passed by, a burning Lamp, I enquired what place it
was; I learnt that it was a Church, and being entered there to Pray, I found on
the Door of the Church, a died Vail hanging there, having an Image painted on
it, as it were of Christ, or some Saint: for I do not remember, in good truth,
whose Image it was; having therefore seen that contrary to the Authority of the
Scripture, they had hung the Image of a Man in the Church, I rent the Vail, and
advised the Sexton of the place, to employ it rather to wrap up the body of
some poor dead person to carry him to his Grave.

John, Patriarch of Jerusalem, took it ill, that Epiphanius had attempted such
an Action in a Diocese where he had no Jurisdiction, but he did not condemn the
Action in itself.

This passage is without reply, and your Seducers will never have any thing to
answer to it. It appears that the use of introducing Images into Churches, was
so rare, and so little received, that he which undertook to put one in the
Church of Anablata, did not dare to put it any farther then the Door. At this
day men have the insolence to set them upon Altars. And even Epiphanius, a
little while before, in the Church where this Image was, looked upon the attempt
as the Violation of the Law, although it were even the Image of Jesus Christ:
for he supposes it might be the Image of our Lord; nevertheless he made not the
least scruple to rend it, and hated not the attempt ever the less.
Notwithstanding it is very probable that after St. Epiphanius, the Custom of so
placing Pictures and Tables in the Churches of the Martyrs, did continue and
increase. The People which naturally fall into Superstition, did not tarry long
ere they abused those Images, which were placed for them in the Sepulchers of
the Martyrs: it is from the People that the Worship of Images came, as well as
the Invocation of Saints; that could not stay long after this; for when they
adored men, which might be painted, it is natural to make Images of them. So St.
Austine learns us, that in his time the Invocation of Saints passing from the
People to the Pastors, the People running much father, began to Adore the
Pictures of the Martyrs. But behold how he speaks of it: The Manichees heaped
together all the popular Superstitions, and all the Actions of private Persons,
to make Crimes of them against the Church; and upon that St. Austine tells
them, Lib. 1. de-Moribus Eccl. c. 34.
Do not collect those who making profession of being Christians, have nothing
which answers to their Profession; do not join yourself to the crowd of
ignorant People, who being on the side of true Religion, are superstitious,
etc. I know there are many which Worship Pictures, and Sepulchers. Unto the
middle of the fifth Age, nevertheless, few Images were seen in Churches: after
the year 450, many of them were seen there: 'Twas not only those of the Martyrs
that were placed there, they put also those of the Bishops in the Churches of
their Diocesses. The Image of Thomas Bishop of Apamea, was set on the top of
the Church Evag. lib. 4. cap. 26.
: Theodorus Lector, tells us, That in the Reign of Anastatius, Lib. 2.
Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople, caused his Images to be set in Churches;
and that Timothy, who was put in his place, some time after, would not perform
Divine Offices in any Church, before he had caused the Images of Macedonius to
be removed. It cannot be imagined these Images were set there for Adoration,
for no man makes his own Images to be adored.

But that in the fourth and fifth Ages men did not give any Religious Worship
to Images, by the public Authority and Approbation of the Pastors, is a truth
which cannot be disputed by those who have any remains of Conscience and
Honor: This appears by the Testimonies of Authors of that time: by the Deed of
Epiphanius, which we reported touching the Image which he found in Anablata;
and by another passage of the same St. Epiphanius, cited by the Council of
Constantinople, against Images, in the Reign of Constantine Copronimus, and
reported by that Image-worshipping Council of Nice, Evag. l. 4 c. 26.
Take heed to yourselves, says Epiphanius, retain the Traditions which you have
received, turn not from them to the right hand, nor to the left; Remember also,
that you put no Images in Churches, nor in the Dormitories of the Saints, etc.
nay, put them not even in your own Houses.

St. Chrysostom says, in a passage alleged by the same Council Synod. 7.
Act. 6.
We have the presence of Saints by the Scriptures, and not by Images.
Amphilochius Synod. ib.
Bishop of Iconium, Contemporary of St. Basil, also says, We take no care to
paint the fleshly Countenance of Saints with Colors upon Tables, but we
immitate their Life and Conversation, by Piety and Virtue. St. Austin, upon the
123 Psalm, does expressly deny, That among the Movables and Ornaments of the
Church, there were any Images that had Mouths and spoke not, and Eyes that saw
not. This appears also by the Fact of Serenus Bishop of Marseilles, and of
Gregory the First, Bishop of Rome, which was not till the end of the sixth Age:
Serenus had broken the Images of his Church, because the People adored, and
fell down before them; as those of which St. Austine speaks. Gregory blames him
for breaking the Images, and praises him that he hindered men from worshipping
them; which makes it evident, it was not then believed generally, that they
might be adored. It Is true, nevertheless, that in the fifth Age, the brutish
and superstitious People in some places began to believe, that the Images of
the Saints had some Virtue in them. For Theodoret, in the Life of Simeon
Stylites, reports, That it was said, that at Rome men set the Images of Simeon
Stylites at the entrance of all their Shops, to obtain some Protection and
Security from them. But besides, that this was but a report apparently false;
'twas a popular Superstition in which the Church was not concerned.

An Article of Controversy. A continuation of the matter of Schism; that the
great Corruption of the Roman Church, forced us to a Separation.
HItherunto in speaking of Schism, we have reasoned upon one or other of these
two suppositions; either that our separation was not established upon good
Reasons, or at least that the corruption of the Church of Rome was not at the
highest degree, and therefore it was in some sort tolerable. We have proved in
our thirteenth Pastoral Letter, that although our Fathers had done ill in their
Separation, nevertheless you do not hazard your Salvation by continuing in the
Protestant Communion. Afterward we made it appear, that supposing the Church
of Rome very corrupt, although the Corruption were not wholly intolerable, you
cannot return thither at this day, without destroying yourselves, because the
Providence of God has drawn you thence by a Miracle, in the persons of your
Fathers. And we have dispersed the Illusions which you put upon yourselves
therein, and which some amongst you have communicated to those which are fled
for Protection into these Countries. But at present let us no longer suppose
any thing which is false; let us consider things as they are, i. e. let us
consider the Corruption of the Church of Rome in its utmost extent, and reason
upon it: It is the third Supposition, according to which I will show you, that
you cannot with a good Conscience return to Popery: If the Corruption of the
Church of Rome be extreme, if she be Idolatrous, if she be Impure, if she be
Antichristian, if she have introduced true Paganism into the Church, we must
necessarily Separate from her, as soon as we can; and the Separation being
made, to reunite ourselves unto her is a Crime for which we can expect no
Mercy. There can be nothing of doubt in this kind of reasoning, but the
Supposition, (viz.) That the Corruption of the Church of Rome is extreme, and
wholly unsufferable; So that this is the only thing which remains to do, about
the matter of Schism, to justify our Separation, and prove to you, that you
cannot return to Popery without Damnation; this we shall do in this, and the
following Letter.

To give you a true and natural Idea of the Corruption of Popery by a short
Description, it is necessary at first, That you discharge yourselves of those
vain Charms, and false Appearances, wherewithal they dress, and present it to
your Eyes. First, you may not consider Popery by the Christianity upon which
it is built, for it is thither that you turn your Eyes immediately. It Is a
Religion, say you, where the true God is worshipped, and the true Jesus, where
the Holy Trinity is believed, the Incarnation of the Son of God, Redemption by
the Death of Christ Jesus, the last Judgment, the Resurrection of the Flesh,
everlasting Life, and everlasting Death. How can such a Christianity be ill?
Distinguish my Brethren, in the Popish Church Christianity from Popery. That
which I would have you consider, and which I have told you is Christianity. But
that which I will describe unto you, the ugliness whereof I will set before you
in an abridgement, is quite another thing, it is that which has been added to
Christianity, it is Popery. Say not it suffices us that Christianity does
continue in the Roman Church, that is false, it is not sufficient. It Is not
enough that the Substance does continue in poisoned Wine to make it safe, and
wholesome. Do not you imagine that this is only a plain Comparison, it is an
example that does demonstrate, and prove Wine as good, and excellent as it is,
is not more spoiled by the Mortal Poison mingled with it, then Christianity in
the Church of Rome is spoiled by the Popery added thereto. Have you never read
any where that the Roman Church is like a great double Temple, whereof the
lower part is consecrated to God, and the superior part to an Idol? This is a
Comparison which has all the force of Examples to prove, and demonstrate. Do
you believe, that a man after he had worshipped in the Church below,
consecrated to the true God, should ascend into the Church above, and adore
Idols? Do you believe, say I, that such a man were in a good and safe way? It Is
true, Christianity remains in the Roman Religion, it is the Church below; but
they have built upon it the Idol Church, and that is Popery. Do not you imagine
therefore, that you can Worship only in the Church below, or live in the
Christianity of the Roman Church without partaking in Popery. This cannot be,
these two parts of the Roman Church are not built together as two Churches,
whereof the one is below, and the other above. By an unhappy Art of the Devil
you cannot enter into the one without entering into the other. You cannot
worship God without partaking in the Worship of Idols. You cannot partake in
the Heavenly Sacrament of Jesus Christ without participation in a false and
corrupt Sacrifice; and without prostrating yourselves before the Idol of Bread.
You cannot confess Jesus Christ Head of the Church without adhering to a false
Head, to the Head of a Body which is altogether Antichristian. You cannot call
upon God in public Worship, unless at the same time you call upon Creatures:
It remains therefore, that we prove unto you, that Popery, so confounded and
mixed with Christianity, is mortal, impure, and intolerable.

The second general Advice which I have to give you is, That well to understand
Popery, you must not look upon it in the Books of your Convertors, in the
Explications of the Catholic Doctrine, or other painted Tables which disguise
to you the Religion into which they force you to enter. Discharge yourselves
also from this wicked imagination, That we ought to attribute nothing to Popery
but what is ordained by its Councils. For there is nothing more false, and more
distant from truth, then that the Councils have not expressed in their
Decisions, all those frightful Excesses into which Popery is fallen, therefore
they are not to be imputed to her. It Is a wicked consequence, all that is done
in a Church, be it by order of her Councils, be it by use and common custom,
ought to be imputed to her. It Is true, that St. Austine, in a passage which we
quoted above, would not grant, that the Manichees should impute certain
Superstitions which the People practiced, to the Church: but 'twas because
there were few persons, in comparison to others, that fell into them: And the
Teachers condemned them, instead of supporting and maintaining them. But we
impute nothing to Popery, but Extravagances universally practiced, and defended
by their most famous Doctors. I will give you yet a third Advice, It Is that for
the true understanding of Popery, and all its Deformities, you must not look on
it in certain places, and at certain times. For Example: At this day in France,
they show you the Popish Religion in a smooth and polished condition, with
respect to the Authority of the Pope: they tell you, that to speak properly, he
is no more than the first Bishop, he is not the Vicar of JESUS CHRIST, that he
is not the true Head of the Church, nor the true Center of Unity, that he is
not Infallible, that he has no more Power over the Bishops, than the Bishops
have over him: they speak to you with great indifference concerning the Worship
of Images, as a thing esteemed not very necessary; they do extremely mollify
the Invocation of Saints, reducing it to a small matter. The Bishops give
order, that little of those popular Devotions which are capable of giving you
scandal, be practiced in their Diocesses. I do declare to you, that it is not
by the small Country of France, nor by this little space of present time, that
you ought to look on Popery, to know and see all its Deformities. In what
follows, we shall have occasion to show you, that all these Reformations are
nothing, that they are fictitious; and that although they should go further
than I know not what appearances, it would not suffice; but in expectation of
that, I advise you at present, my Brethren, that for a true understanding of
Popery, it behooves you to look on it everywhere, and in all times: You must
behold it in Italy and Spain, as we as in France and Germany: you must look on
it in all preceding Ages, at least in the seven hundred or eight hundred Years
which went before our Reformation; observing these three Rules, 1. That you
look on Popery such as it is in itself, distinct from Christianity. 2. That you
look on it in its practice, and universal usage. 3. To conclude, that you look
on it above all in Spain and Italy, as well as elsewhere;
and that you look on it in all those times which preceeded the Reformation. If
you do thus, say I, I do maintain that you cannot behold the Deformity of
Popery without horror.

First you will there see a Head which calls himself the most Holy Lord, his
Holiness, and the Vicar of Jesus Christ, who bears on him all the Characters of
Antichrist: He sits in the Temple of God, as if he were God; he makes himself
to be adored as God; he has his seat at Rome, the City upon seven Hills; he
has ten Kings under him, which give Obedience to him; he is clothed in
Scarlet, as the Whore in the Revelations; he bears a Triple Crown; he has upon
his Forehead the names of Blasphemy, calling himself God on Earth, the Vicar of
Jesus Christ, the Spouse of the Church, the Mouth which pronounces infallible
Oracles; he sits upon a Beast, i. e. on an Empire, viz. the Roman Empire, which
he has raised up again: He makes the Image of the Beast to speak, and be
adored: he has established in the Church the true Image of the Roman Empire;
and causes this Image to be adored on pain of Death; he has two Horns, two
Powers, as a Lamb, the Temporal and Spiritual; speaks like a Dragon; and is the
Protector of Lies and Falsehood: He works false Signs and Wonders to support his
false Religion; his Teachers make profession of Austerity, Celibate,
Abstinence, and Fasting, and refuse Marriage: He has his seat in Babylon, that
City of Merchandise, where all things are sold, and where they make Merchandise
even of the Souls of Men: He causes his Mark to be born, i. e. his Profession,
upon the hands and upon the forehead; The name of Latin Church, and Latin
Pope, contain exactly 666, which is the number of the Beast: This Pope, this
pretended Vicar of Jesus Christ, is seen under a Canopy, or Cloth of State, in
pomp, and in magnificence; he is seen trampling crowned Heads under his Feet,
making himself to be carried on the shoulders of Emperors; causing Princes to
kiss his Feet: He has been seen as a furious Lion in all Ages, covering the
Earth with Blood, dethroning Emperors, pulling off their Crowns, Absolving
Subjects from the Oaths of Fidelity given to their Kings, and thereby putting a
Sword into their hands, from whence have followed cruel and barbarous Civil
Wars: He has been seen encouraging the Father against the Son, and the Son
against the Father; Subjects against their Kings, and stirring them up to run
their Swords into the Bowels of their Sovereigns: He has been seen putting all
Europe into a flame, and carrying confusions, blood, and disorder everywhere
by his Ambition: He has been seen fighting with Competitors, called
Anti-popes, conducting Armies, shedding Blood, dispeopling Cities, and laying
wast Fields by Fire and Sword: He has been seen with his Arms in his hands,
like a mad man filling the World with Horror and Desolation, to maintain his
pretended Succession to the Inheritance of Christ Jesus: He has been seen some
times keeping Whores, sometimes a Sodomite, some times a Sorcerer, sometimes a
Murderer, and a Paracide, sometimes an Adulterer, and Corrupter of Wives, and
Women; sometimes like a Bloud-sucker devouring Provinces, swallowing up
Kingdoms, exhausting their Substance, and drawing Tributes from all the Earth:
He has been seen Cheating, Deceiving, making false Oaths, violating Treaties,
stirring up Seditions, moving to Wars: He has been seen to make an horrible
Traffic of Sins, selling Pardon for Sodomies, for having lain with Sister and
Mother, and even with a Beast, for having killed his Father, his Benefactor,
and even his King: He himself has been seen killing, poisoning, robbing,
exercising rage, ambition, and dreadful robberies. I do profess, that he must
be fallen to a reprobate sense, to call such a man the Vicar of Jesus Christ,
and to imagine that such a See is the seat of the Church.

After you have looked upon the Head, if you consider the Members of Popery, you
will see great Lords, Lovers of the World, who call themselves the Princes of
the Church, who being oftentimes nothing but the dregs of the People, dispute
place with Sovereigns: They keep Houses, and the Train of Princes, they have
magnificent Equipage, stately Lodgings, sumptuous Furniture, and delicate
Tables: They are the Councils, and the Senate of the Pope; they are the
Cardinals which call themselves the Pillars of the whole World, upon which the
Church stands: These are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who said to his
Disciples, That he who will be greatest among you, let him be your servant.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, That if you humble not yourselves as a little
child, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Below these
Prince-ministers of the Antichristian Empire, we see Bishops, another sort of
secular Princes, Governors of Diocesses, i. e. the Provinces of the Pope, who
call themselves Bishops, Archbishops, etc. by the Grace and Favor of the Holy
See, after the same manner that the Govournours of the Provinces of a Kingdom
take the Title of their Dignity, by the Favor of their King: These men possess
a great Revenue, which was appointed by the Donors to nourish the Poor, but
serves nevertheless to maintain the best Table in the Province; a great number
of debaucht and unruly Servants, Cooks that are most expert in the Art of
making curious Meats and Sawces, Coaches with six Horses, paeks of Hounds, and
oftentimes a race of prostituted Whores. These men cause themselves to be
called my Lord in the World, and treat their Inferiors like Pages and
Foot-boys: These have not the least grain of that which is called the Spirit of
the Gospel, but are animated by the Spirit of the World, that of Disorder,
Debauchery, Ambition, and Avarice: They watch not over their Flocks, but after
some Benefice greater than their own, after which they gape always like Wolves
after their Prey. Below these Superiors are seen an inferior Clergy, composed
either of Cannons appointed to sing Vespers and Mattins in Cathedral Churches,
whose repose, ease, good cheer, long sleep, drunkenness, sloth, fat and
plumpness have always served, and do serve still for matter of Satyrs and
Jests: or they are Curates who are not only for the most part the dregs of the
Clergy, but dregs of the People; excepting those of great Cities, who put
themselves to the labor of instructing themselves at the least, in the way to
live like the World, the rest are ignorant, brutish, drunken Whore-masters, and
given to the basest and most shameful Vices: And besides this, the Clergy is
made up of an infinite number of little Priests, which are (above all in Italy
and Spain) as they were heretofore everywhere, Ministers of the filthiest
pleasures, and of the most criminal attempts. Are these the Guides of
Jerusalem, or the Builders of Babel? My Brethren, look not upon the Clergy of
Paris, who are better governed, consider that during the space of seven or
eight hundred years, the Popish Clergy were of this make in all the Roman
Church; look upon Spain and Italy, where it is publicly known, that the Clergy
are yet thus formed and fashioned: Consult those which have seen Rome a little
near at hand: Learn from them that Religion there is an Interlude, and that all
the Ecclesiastics are Comedians which do not believe in God. An honest man
came a little while since from Italy, and told us, from his own observation,
That when they are at their Devotions, they commit Indecencies, and make such
noise there, that honest men in France would not do at play. Judge whether it
be likely, that God has permitted so horrible a Corruption of Manners in a
Church pure and infallible.

From the Clergy, i. e. from the Priests pass to the Monks, which are the holy
part of Popery, where are found the Reverent Fathers, the seraphical and
angelical Doctors: Draw the Curtain from their Hypocrisy, and you will see an,
Abyss of Impurities; men who under pretense of long Prayers, devour Widows
Houses, Wolves gaping after a prey, which compass about the Beds of the sick
and dying, to obtain great gifts and presents; men who think Gain to be
Godliness; who dress Religion like a Play, that they may draw Spectators, who
in their Houses perform Paganish Devotions, and such as are ridiculous and
worthy of the Theater, to draw the crowd of people, and to obtain Offerings,
who by this means obtain those Alms which belong to the Poor, who by these Alms
maintain themselves in a criminal sloth and idleness, without being of any use
to Church or State; who behind their own Walls and Curtains, abandon themselves
to the utmost Extreamities of Wickedness, who eat, and drink, and sleep like
Hogs, who go not without the Walls of their Cloisters, but to run after strange
Flesh, who corrupt Wives and Daughters, and to that end, serve themselves (...)
all the most hideous and diabolical ^^rts: The pretense of Religion,
Sacraments, ar^ the most hol^ things are employed therein. You will see Houses
of sacred Virgins, (so they call them) which are the Lodgings of Impurity, the
Houses of ^rostitutes, the places of those that are Debauched. Behold those who
are the principal, and the most illustrious Members of Popery, during the space
of seven or eight hundred years, by the confession of all the World, and what
they are yet to this day, in an infinite number of places unto which the
Reformation has not come: It Is by this, that you ought to look upon the Members
of Popery, and not by some Reformed Societies which are in France, whereof they
let you see nothing but the outside. Judge whether the true Church, and the
true Religion, could permit and suffer such horrible Disorders! Are these the
Pastors of Jesus Christ, or the false Pastors of him, who in the last times was
to teach a Doctrine of Devils, by men whose Consciences were seared with a hot
Iron, forbidding to Marry, and abstaining from Meats, which God has created to
be received by Believers.

IN our seventeenth Letter, you may read the Continuation of the Cruelties
which are exercised in Languedock; you have there seen that they fill Vessels
with Confessors to send them to America: The last News from that Country does
inform us, That two of these Vessels are gone for Martinique, and among other
eminent persons, there is Monsieur the Barron of Verliac, with Madam his Wife,
but with this augmentation of Cruelty, that they have put then in diverse
Vessels, to the end that whether they li^^ or die in the Voyage, they may be no
Consolation to each other. Monsieur Matthew, an Advocate of Durass, of whom we
have spoken heretofore, one of our most illustrious Confessors, is also of
that number. How sad soever the lot of these exiled Confessors which are
carried into another World, I do not think that they have so much reason to
complain, as those that abide in the Kingdom: For the most cruel Hang-men
remain there to put the Constancy of those which persevere in their Religion,
to the utmost trial. Above all, Rapine continuing in France, the New World
cannot boast to have a more cruel Tormentor. This Monster, nevertheless, would
be very proper to revive the Cruelties, which the Spaniards exercised
heretofore upon the poor Indians. We have promised you a History of the
horrible Actions of this Villane, and we will not fail to give it you, when it
shall be sent unto us.

We thought, even at this time, to have given you the memorable History of the
Martyrdom of which he caused Monsieur Menuret to suffer, the most illustrious
Martyr it may be that the Church has ever seen; and also the History of some
other Women martyred by the same Rapine, the most cruel Rrascal in the World:
But this Letter which comes to be communicated to us, must go before it; it
comes very opportunely to acquaint you with the News of the Confessors, which
are sent to America, and whereof we speak but now.

From Cadez, April 17th, 1687 MOnsieur --
I don't doubt but you are informed of what passes in France, with respect to
our Families, which groan under the Yoke of cruel Persecution; but it may be
you are not yet informed of a new kind of Persecution which they have lately
invented: After they had tired out the Constancy of an infinite number of
unhappy persons; for seeing that they had made no farther progress in the Work
of Conversion, they send them to the Islands of America, in the King's ships,
to be sold to them who give most for them. These things are an abhorrence of
Nature, that those who are called Christians should sell other Christians for
Money; it is a thing that was never heard of, till this miserable Age in which
we live. The Tears which I have, and do pour out every moment, permits me not
to tell you all that I have seen, being accompanied by Monsieur --, your Son,
and an Officer, which escaped, and is now in our Vessel; a tempestuous Wind
has caused us to put in, and refresh our selves in the Haven of Almaria, which
is in the Kingdom of Granada, and has kept us there five Weeks, and every day
we see Vessels arrive there from some Nation or other, which this tempestuous
season does oblige to seek some place of safety. On the sixth of April, a
Vessel, bearing the Admiral's Flag of France, arrived there: As soon as the
stormy season was over, Monsieur the Count of Stirum, sent one of his
Lieutenants to the said French Vessel, to inform himself whence it came, and
whither it went; we learnt that it came from Marseilles, and that it went to
carry them for Slaves to America. This obliged me to desire a Challoupe, that I
might satisfy myself in the doubt wherein I was, suspecting there might be in
it men of our Religion; and indeed it proved two true. After we had been on
Board the French Vessel, they brought us a Collation, and soon after we saw
some Gentlewomen appear, upon whose Countenances Death was drawn, who came upon
the Deck to take the Air: We asked them upon what account they went to America;
they answered us, with an Heroic Constancy, Because they would not Worship the
Beast, nor Prostrate ourselves before Images: Behold, say they, our Crime. We
enquired of them, if there were any from Cevennes; they answered, there was two
from thence, the one of fifteen, the other of sixteen years of Age, who were
below, and they were of a Village called St. Ambrose. This increased my
Curiosity to see them, the one was sick unto Death, the other was with her to
assist her in what she could: At my desire the Captain granted, that she who
was not sick, should come up; as soon as she appeared on the Deck, I well
perceived that her countenance was not unknown to me: Monsieur your Son asked
her, Made-moiselle, from whence are you? She said, I am from St. Ambrose. What
is your Name? I am named Peirique. I needed no more to assure me, that they
were my Cousin Germans: I had resolved to permit her to speak a while, but the
tears which began to run from my eyes would not suffer it: I drew near to her
and said, Madam, do you not know me? At that very moment, casting her eye upon
me, falling on my neck, she said, Is it possible, my dear Cousin, that I should
see you once again in my Misfortunes. She added a hundred other things so
affecting, that there was not a person in the Ship, which did not pour out a
river of tears, at least of those who had the guard and keeping of them. I
desired leave of the Captain to see her Sister, which was not able to come upon
the Deck, which he freely gra^^ed me: I was no sooner below, but I saw
fourscore Women, or Maids, lying upon Matts, overwhelmed with Miseries; my
mouth was stopped, and I had not one word to say. They told me, the most moving
things in the World, and instead of giving them Consolation, they comforted me;
and I not being able to speak, they told me, with one common voice, We put our
hands upon our mouths, and say that all things come from Him who is King of
Kings, and in Him we put our trust. On the other fide, we saw a hundred poor
miserable persons, oppressed with old Age, whom the torments of Tyrants had
reduced to their last gasp: We saw there of all sorts, of all ages, and of all
qualities, for they spare none. They told me, when they left Marseilles, they
were two hundred and fifty persons, Men, Women, Girls and Boys; and that in
fifteen days, eighteen of them died. There is but one Gentlewoman that is of
Poictou, all the rest are of Nismes, or Mompellier, and the Countries in the
Neighborhood thereof. A Countryman who lived about a League and half from St.
Ambrose, who had suffered all that he could suffer, upon whom these Barbarians
could gain nothing, was put on board among others, and is since dead in the
Harbor of Granada; his Son, who was in the same Ship, knew me at first sight;
he is called Griollet, and the Village of his abode Ceurla. There are yet six
Vessels upon their departure from Provence, laden with these poor Men, who
expect nothing but a fair Wind to hoist sail. I was willing to have encouraged
my Kinsewoman, she told me, Dear Cousin, it is not Death that I fear, if God will
call me hence, I shall escape a great many Miseries which I have yet to suffer,
but I am resigned to whatever he shall please to lay upon me. A young Gentleman
which the Captain entertained at his own Table, died of Grief about some eight
days since. After I was returned to our Vessel, and had given a particular
account of what I had seen, Monsieur the Count of Stirom signified a great deal
of trouble at it, and sent me back again with some Fowls, Wine, and other
things, together with some Money for their refreshment; and if it had been in
his power to have rescued them from their Misery, I am sure as he would have
spared nothing to have done it. Mademoiselle, your Sister, is yet wandering
about, as my Kinsewomen informed me; they themselves lay hid a long while in
the Woods of D^forfre and Arowbac. They told me so many things that I have not
power to express them to you. The day after we drew up our Anchor, at the point
of day, to my very great trouble; I went to bid them Farewell, and in that
little time that I was there, with one voice, they repeated to me, We entreat
you to remember us in your Prayers, that God would give us Grace to persevere
unto the end, that we may obtain the Crown of Life. You will take it in good
part, Monsieur, that I desire, on the behalf of these poor unhappy persons, the
same thing which they desired of me; I assure myself that you will entreat
Monsieur d' Marais to be mindful of them; they repeated it to me a hundred
times after the most moving manner in the World. I conclude in professing my
self --

The Mother of a Minister, and her Sister, who are also in the same Ship,
entreated me to give intelligence concerning them to her Son, who is a Minister
in Holland, he is called Monsieur Arnolt, of Languedock. Monsieur, your Son
would have written to you, but we have thought that this will suffice for us
all.


As soon as this Letter was communicated to us, we have not delayed one moment
to give it you, that it may be scattered all over Europe, and that all the
Reformed Churches may answer the Wishes and Desires of these illustrious
Confessors, by praying to God for them, by Name, and that without ceasing. We
see by this Letter, what false Zeal and Cruelty, animated by a Spirit of
Superstition, may do; this is an example thereof which has no president. It
cannot be said, that these were Rebels, and such as defended themselves by
Arms: they were poor innocent Women, and such as had no other Faults, but that
of desiring to Worship God without serving the Creature: It Is a voice that
cries loud toward Heaven. Oh God of Vengeance, when will thou awake? We
entreat all those who have Friends in diverse parts of the World, to disperse
this Letter among them, without delay, that the Voices of all Believers, united
together, may pierce the very Heavens, and render God favorable to these poor
Victims, who bear our Iniquities into another World, and suffer the Evils of a
Persecution which our Sins have caused. They are the Innocent and the most Just
which suffer, the Criminal and Faulty withdraw themselves from Sufferings,
either by their Apostasy, or by their Dissimulations. Those among them, who
are of this number, ought to make serious Reflections thereon.

The first of June, 1687.
The Twentieth PASTORAL LETTER. An Article of Antiquity: Concerning the
Sacrifice of the Mass, in the fourth and fifth Ages: An Article of
Controversy: A Conclusion of the Matter of Schism: A Description of the
Corruption of Popery, which engaged us to a Separation.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given unto you, from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
IN the preceding Letters we have Examined the diverse Alteration which have
happend in Religion, in the fourth and fifth Ages, and we have there found five
very considerable ones: 1. The Original of the Monastic Life. 2. That of
Ecumenical Councils; to which at this day some men ascribe Infallibility. 3.
The Hierarchy, which has been changed into a Government purely Monarchical. 4.
The Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Relics. 5. And to conclude, the
Introduction of Images into Churches.
I will not speak of other Changes, such are the Establishment of Lent, and
Fasts, which took their utmost perfection in these Ages, because these things
are of less importance, and were not the Causes of our Separation: I will
conclude the History of these two Ages, with four or five things which were not
changed: 1. The Sacrament without Sacrifice. 2. The Opinion of the Real
Absence. 3. The Communion under both Kinds. 4. The kind of Veneration men had
for the Sacrament. 5. The Opinion touching the State of Souls after Death.


1. The remained in the Opinions in which the Church was, with respect to the
Sacrifice, which at this day is called the Sacrifice of the Mass: The Heresy
of the Church of Rome about it, is one of the most novel, and also of those
which have had the longest time to digest and complete itself; it received not
its highest perfection till the Council of Trent. In the fourth and fifth Ages,
men continued to speak of the Sacrament as of a Sacrifice; the exterior form
of Sacrifice did augment by the addition of some Ceremonies, and because the
Liturgy did always enlarge itself by some new Prayers: Nevertheless, at the
bottom they understood that it was no new Sacrifice, but improperly so called,
a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, a Sacrifice of Commemoration, the Image of a
Sacrifice, a Sacrifice as the other parts of the Worship of Christian Religion
are Sacrifices. We need no more than hear the Authors of those Ages upon this
subject: Eusebius says, Lib. 1 c. 10. Demonst. Evang.
That Jesus Christ has appointed us to offer unto God the Memory of his
Sacrifice. St. Chrysostom Homil. 17. in Heb.
says, That we every day offer the same Sacrifice, or rather the Commemoration
of the same Sacrifice. St. Austine Lib. Quest. 83. Quest 61.
That we Celebrate the Image of this Oblation in memory of his Passion. Lib.
20. Cont. Faust. cap. 21.
That we Celebrate the Sacrifice of our Lord, by a Sacrament of Commemoration.
Theodoret Eusebius. Them. Evan. lib. 5. c. 3.
That we offer no other Sacrifice, but we celebrate the Memory of that only
Saving Sacrifice of the Cross, etc. to the end that by the Contemplation of the
Figure, we might call to mind that which he has suffered for us. I do not know
whether a man can say more plainly, that the Eucharist is nothing but a
Sacrifice of Commemoration: And if it be a simple Commemoration, where is the
Real Presence, where is the Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead?

They are the same Authors which say, That Jesus Christ by his Servants, In
Epist. ad Heb. cap. 8. verse. 4.
has accomplished among men, that which respects Sacrifice, representing by
Bread and Wine, the Mysteries of his Body, and of his Saving Blood. The Author
of the imperfect Work upon St. Matthew, under the name of Chrysostom, s^^^h,
That the Christian Homil. 19. ib.
offers the Sacrifice of Bread and Wine. And St. Jerome, Jer. lib. 2. Advers.
Jovin.
That Melchizedeck did not offer the Victims of Flesh and Blood, but that he
did dedicate the Sacrament of Jesus Christ with Bread and Wine, which is a
simple and pure Sacrifice. And St. Austine, Lib. 16. de Civit. Dei. c. 22. and
lib. 17. c. 5. and 17.
That to eat Bread under the New Testament, is the Sacrifice of Christians, and
that men offer everywhere under the High Priest Jesus Christ, that which
Melchizedeck brought, when he blessed Abraham: That is to say, Bread and Wine.
And Isidore of Pelusium, Lib. 1. Ep. 401.
That the Oblation of Christians is an Oblation of Bread. And St. Fulgentius,
Ad Petrum de Fide. cap. 19.
That the Catholic Church does not cease to offer throughout all the Earth, an
Oblation of Bread and Wine. And Eucherius Bishop of Lions, In Genes. lib. 2.
cap. 18.
That Jesus Christ has commanded Christians to offer in Sacrifice, not Victims
of Beasts, as did Aaron, but the Sacrifice of Bread and Wine. I would willingly
know, how an Oblation of Bread and Wine, can be a true Sacrifice of Humane
Flesh, propitiatory for the sins of Men? They have not spoken otherwise even
until the establishment of the Opinion of the Real Presence, for venerable Bede, in the eighth Age, says, In Psalm. 133.
That the Lord has changed the Sacrifices of the Law, into the Sacrifices of
Bread and Wine. And Isidore of Seville, in the seventh Age, Lib. de Alleg.
That the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, i. e. the Oblation
of Bread and Wine, is offered through all the World.

The same Fathers have also said, with one consent, That the Christian has no
other true Sacrifice, but that of the Cross: Origin, in the third Age, did say,
Homil. 17. in Numb.
That when the perfect Oblation, and Lamb without spot, came to take away the
Sins of the World; the Sacrifices which were offered to God one after another,
did seem superfluous, seeing that by one only Sacrifice, all the Worship of
Demons was destroyed. It had been natural to say, that the Worship of the
Sacrifice of the Mass was put in the place of the Worship of Devils.

And St. Chrysostom, Homil. 17. in Johan.
That Jesus Christ has offered one only Sacrifice for Sins, and that he always
cleanses us by this Sacrifice alone. And elsewhere, Hom. 13. in Heb.
There is no other Sacrifice, one Sacrifice alone has purified and cleansed
us. To speak thus, is indeed to forget ones self, seeing we have a daily and
continual Sacrifice, which is that of the Mass. It would be to no purpose to
quote more Authors, for they all speak after the same manner.

An Article of Controversy. A Conclusion of the Matter of Schism; the extreme
Corruption of Popery has forced us to a Separation.
IN the preceding Letter, we began to make for you a Picture of Popery, to
convince you of the Justice and Necessity of our Reformation. This Corruption
of Popery may be either considered in its Guides, its Head, and principal
Members, or in its Doctrine: We did consider this Corruption in its Head, i. e.
the Pope; in its Guides, i. e. the Cardinals, Primates, Archbishops, and
Bishops: in its principal Members, such are the Priests, the Monks, and the
Nuns; and in all this, we have seen the Characters of the Conductors of Babel,
and the Emissaries of Antichrist.

These are the Mouths of Popery, but what can proceed out of such Mouths? It Is
easy to judge: They appoint for you at this day, Preachers which speak good
things. There have been for some time past, a number of persons raised up to
obtain the use of the Word of God, and the Holy Scripture, for the people: But
this is neither ancient nor general, you must know the Popish Ministry by what
it was not long since, and by what it is in all places where it is regnant: hear
those which tell you the Holy Scripture is a dangerous Book, an obscure Book,
all full of Traps, Snares, and Precipieces; that an infinite number of men have
ruined themselves thereby; that it is from thence that Heretics have drawn
their Heresies; that it is imperfect; that it contains not half the Christian
Religion; that to understand the true sense of this half, there needs another
which is called the Unwritten Word, Tradition, the infallible Voice of the
Church. And a man knows not where to find this Voice. However it be, they do
assure you, that the Scripture has no Authority without Tradition; that without
the Testimony of the Church, we were no more obliged to believe the Gospel,
than Titus Livius, or the Fables of Homer. Moreover, at this day the
Jansenists, great Defenders of the Holy Scriptures, tell you plainly, and
without scruple or hesitation, That by the Holy Scripture we cannot prove the
Divinity of Jesus Christ; and that it were a Folly more clear than the day, to
go about to prove the Divinity of the Holy Scriptures by the Scripture itself.
There is nothing that Popery does not do to decry this sacred Book: Not only
it is insufficient, obscure, it has no authority by itself, but it is maimed,
imperfect, many Books thereof are lost, those which remain are corrupt, either
by the Jews, or by the negligence of Transcribers; we cannot know with any
certainty what is entire, or what is not; the Translations thereof are spoiled,
there are none of them conformable to the Original. Good God, what a Prodigy is
this! And how great must the patience of God be, to tolerate a Religion which
makes it its business to annihilate, to vilify, and abase those Oracles which
ought to be so venerable among all Christians? What Christianity is this, but
that, in which for the space of more than a thousand years, the Scripture was
an unknown Book almost to all Christians, and is so yet at this day in all
those places where Popery domineers without contradiction? Observe also the
profound Ignorance in which those people live, that are subject to the Popish
Inquisition. To find among them the Figures of Aretine, or some other infamous
Work, is no fault; but to find there a Bible, in the Vulgar Language, is a
crime not to be forgiven: for which reason, in these Countries, they know GOD
no better, and it may be a great deal worse, than in Turkey. The sacred
Histories are utterly unknown to them; they know nothing of Christianity, but
what we find thereof in their Catechism, mingled and confounded with the
Errors and Superstitions of Popery.

Instead of the true Gospel, what do they preach in those places that are under
the Dominion of Popery? And what have they preached in the times when it did
Rule, and prevail without contradiction? They did there preach, 1. Corrupt
Morality, according to which a man might commit Murder, to save a Crown, to
defend his Honor, and secure himself from some small Affront; according to
which a man might Rob, when a person did not think himself sufficiently
recompensed for his labors; according to which a man might exercise Usury, and
infamous Monopolies; according to which a man might keep Concubines, and
abandon himself to Sodomy, without mortal Sin; according to which a man might
Lie by Equivocation, and mental Reservations; according to which he might live
all his life without the Fear of God, without performing one act of Contrition,
or the Love of God to his death; and he might be Dispensed with, that at the
point of death, provided he exercised an act of the fear of Hell, when he
receives the Sacrament of Penance. Popery has produced this detestable
Morality; it has taught it where it could, inspired it into private persons,
and suffered it where it durst not teach it. For Holy History, instead of the
pious and sacred Histories of the Scripture, which might turn men's minds
toward Devotion, they entertain the people with Fabulous Legends: Instead of
speaking to them of the Miracles and Greatness of Jesus Christ, they speak of
the Greatness of the Virgin; they say that she was conceied without sin; that
her Father and her Mother had been advertised of her Birth by an Angel; that at
her Birth the Angels assembled together, and formed a Quire and Consort in the
Air; that this Celebration of the Birth of the Holy Virgin, is repeated every
year on the same day; that many Saints have heard them in the Air; that this
Holy Virgin was bred and brought up in the Temple, and in the most holy Place
called the Sanctuary; that when she conceived Jesus Christ, it was by three
drops of her Blood, which the holy Spirit took from her heart; that after she
had lived most holily, she died in the presence of all the Apostles, whom the
Holy Spirit brought in the Air from all parts of the World, whither they were
gone to preach the Gospel; that three days after she rose again, and was
carried up into Heaven, with charming Music made by the Voices of Jesus Christ
and the Angels; and that she was set very near to Jesus Christ, above all the
Seraphims. After the Assumption of the Virgin into Heaven, they made her do a
thousand and a thousand ridiculous Miracles upon Earth: sometimes she appeared
to a Monk, sometimes to a Pilgrim, sometimes to some one of her devoted
Servants: she kisses them, she makes them kiss her; she opens her bosom to
them; she gives them suck from her breasts; she appoints them to build a
Chapel to her in such a place, and that they should perform such or such
Devotions to her; she fixes herself in certain places, and there makes her
choice to dwell, and do Miracles: All those which come thither for Sickness,
Blindness, Palsy, loss of Blood, Deafness, loss of Members, return thence safe
and sound: when one of her Houses formerly frequented, ceased to be so, she
transported it beyond the Seas, and fixed it in another Country to draw thither
new Servants to her Devotion; she forgets nothing that may favor those which
serve her: In one Convent she takes the place, office, and figure of a
debauched Nun, which ran to the places of Prostitution, because this Nun, when
she was going, did devoutly commit the Convent into her hand; In another place,
because an Abbess did most devoutly commend herself to her, when she had
polluted herself with her Domestics, she delivered her in private of her great
Belly, and restored her Virginity, in such sort, that those who had accused
her, remained ashamed and confounded.

Instead of entertaining the people with the Miracles and Virtues of true
Saints, as were the Apostles, to oblige them to an imitation of them, Popery
has substituted unto them new Saints, which were Fools, and wicked Fools too,
St. Francis, St. Dominick, St. Hyacinth, St. Vincent Ferrerius; or imaginary
Saints, as St. Christopher, and the eleven thousand Virgins, or modern and
unknown Saints, such as St. Milorus, St. Alldem, St. Colganus, and a thousand
others: To which they attribute ridiculous and impertinent actions for Virtues,
and such sottishnesses for Miracles, as are unworthy of those little Demons
called Hobgoblins. One to testify his Humility, made himself to be tossed in a
Sieve by little Children; another, to draw upon himself contempt, counterfeited
the Fool and the Idiot; another fouled the Bed of his Host, that he might be
despised of him; another kept company with Beasts, Wolves, and Swallows;
another preached to Fishes, or Birds; another stripped himself naked, and in
that condition exposed himself to public view; another made himself Women of
Snow, and embraced them to cool and extinguish his Lust; another, through great
Mortification, lay with the fairest Women without touching them; another made
himself a Bed of Stones, and Sticks, and crowns of Nails, and Girdles of Iron;
another thrust Thorns into his Body, washed his hands in quick Lime, and
covered his face with an eating Powder, which made the flesh thereof one entire
Ulcer. Behold a small part of the Idea that Popery gives us of the Virtue of
its Saints. As to Miracles, they produce to the people faithful Chronicles, as
they say, by which it appears, that some of these Saints, for their parts, have
raised fifty two dead persons; another thirty; another twelve; another six,
three, or four: They have healed desperate Diseases, raised Dogs, Parrots, and
other Animals from the dead. The Water in which they washed their hands cured
all sorts of Diseases; the clippings of their Hair, and the parings of their
Nails, put into the craks of Walls, closed them up again, and have made Houses
ready to fall, firm and strong. When these Saints preached to the Birds, these
Animals reached out their bills, and clapped their wings; when they preached to
the Fishes, they gathered together on the top of the Water, that they might
hear; when they pleased they drove away not only evil Spirits which troubled
them, but also living Creatures which interrupted their Discourse: They made
Angles serve them not only at Mass, but also they used them as Grooms to dress
their Horses: They caused themselves to be carried by the Devil to places
whither they would go; they made him hold the Candle till he burnt his fingers
therewith: if the Devil turned himself into a Cat, they put him into such
distress, that he left behind him a matter which infected the Air: When Birds
were roasted, and set upon the Table, with signs of the Cross they made them
fly away: Another nourished a Child in a Desert, by making him suck the clapper
of a little Bell: another hung his clothes upon the shadow of a Tree, or on a
ray of the Sun, as upon a Peg: another made whole again a Basket of Eggs that
had been broken: another made a golden Cup of a pound of Butter: another by
sucking a leprous person, drew from his Navel three great lunchions of fat
matter, whereof he made so many Ingots of Gold: To conclude, there are no
Impe^tinencies, nor ridiculous things which Popery does not make its Saints to
do; and behold the History which they put in the place of the Evangelical Story.

As to what concerns Doctrine, they speak but little of the August Mysteries of
Religion to the People, such as are those of the Divine Attributes, the Persons
of the Trinity, the Incarnation and Redemption of Christ Jesus. These Mysteries
were laid by and neglected, or if they spoke any thing of them, 'twas after a
Scholastical manner, and method, 'twas by mingling with it a barbarous
Philosophy of entities and quiddities, with obscure and unintelligible
distinctions; 'twas by raising foolish questions on the subject of the most
venerable Mysteries: For example, Whether God could make matter without form;
whether he could command sin; whether this proposition, God is a Beetle, or a
Gourd, could be as true as this, God is a Man; whether the number of three
Persons in God, ought to be referred to the first, or second intentions;
whether the second Person in the Trinity, could take the nature of a Devil, or
of an Ass, as he took the nature of Man? The Books which contain these fine
questions, are not yet destroyed.

At least they entertain people with the false Doctrines of Popery. Instead of
speaking to them of the efficacy of the venerable Sacrifice of Jesus Christ
upon the Cross, they speak nothing to them, but of the greatness and utilities
of the Holy Sacrifice of the Altar called the Mass. It was good for every
thing, for the sound, and for the sick, to cure all diseases for Travelers,
for those who undertook great things, to find Silver, Horses, Asses, and Hogs
that were lost. 'Twas good for the Dead, as well as for the Living, 'twas
excellent to fetch Souls from Purgatory, or to abate their Sufferings, for
which reason they could not tell how to say too many for that purpose, 100.
200. 300. 1000. 2000. 3000. 4000. and all with design to draw by this practice
Maintenance for a million of Sluggards, who have nothing to live upon but these
Masses. Instead of exalting the divine Virtue of the Blood of Jesus Christ,
they spoke nothing but of Purgatory, of a certain Fire which was to burn Souls
after Death; but of what sort of Men? of those who had not made pious
Foundations, who had not left great Revenues to Convents, and who had not left
great Alms to the Monks to say Masses. And upon this account they had always
some Soul in pickle which came from Purgatory bringing News from thence, who
desired Masses, and Suffrages, and who complained lamentably that his Friends
had forsaken him. Amongst the means of appeasing the wrath of God, true
repentance which consists in contrition, and amendment of life, was passed over
very lightly. But they insisted mightily upon Satisfactions, Mortifications,
Whippings, hair Clothes, and Pilgrimages; they advanced the value of these
things they spoke of them with prodigious Excesses, and ascribed Salvation
wholly to them. And because all the World were desirous to be saved, but few
were capable of these hard penances, they found out ways more easy, and
commodious. If you give money to a Monk, he will whip himself for you, and you
shall go to Heaven for him. If you give great Alms to a Convent of the Frior
Minors, or the Preachers, or the Augustines, or the Carmelites; if you take the
Cord-girdle, or the Rosary of the Fraternity, and bestow great bounty and
liberality on them, and get the Letters of Adoption of St. Francis, or St.
Dominick, by these means you partake in the merit, i. e. in all the scourgings
and macerations of the Monks of that Order scattered all the World over. For
greater security they have established a lovely, good, and inexhaustible
Treasure of Indulgencies, made up of all the superabundant scourgings of the
good Monks, mingled with the infinite merit of the passion of Jesus Christ. And
from this Treasure the Bishops, and the Popes as Sovereign Dispensers fetch
Indulgencies, and Remission for all Sins, for 40000 years, for a 100000 years,
for 500000 years, and all this by paying well for it. So that if a man had
committed so many enormous Crimes, that they could not be expiated under less
than 500000 years penance, he becomes discharged of them in a moment by his
Money. And there was no distinction of Sins, Incests, Adulteries, Paricides,
Sodomies, Brutalities, all fell under the grace of Indulgencies.

Instead of abasing man before God, by speaking nothing to him but of Grace,
and the forgiveness of sins; instead of saying to him perpetually you are saved
by Grace, through Faith which is the Gift of God; instead of making him
understand that his good Works could merit nothing before God, because they
were very imperfect; instead, say I, of doing all this, they endeavored to
fill man with himself; they spoke nothing to him but of the merits of his
Works, and of the profitableness of humane satisfactions. They made him believe
that above all in matter of satisfactions he could do more than he was obliged
unto, that he had merit remaining, and that he did works of supererogation, and
there are found even in this age devout persons so foolish, and proud, as to
say to their Friends, that they will give them their Merits. They never speak
any thing to them but of their power, of their free will, of their good works,
of their merits, of the crowns which are prepared for them above others. And
above all these works to which they affix these Crowns, are not prayers,
devotions, severe Morals, or holy lives, Charity, and alms to the poor. But
they are sack-cloaths, and hare-cloaths, it is to shut themselves up in Covents,
and there make vow of Virginity, it is to abstain from certain Meats, it is to
live in Retirement without seeing or speaking to any one, it is to wear a Frock
without a Shift. With this Furniture of good Works these men look on Heaven as
an Inheritance, by full Right, and according to all the Laws and Rigor of
Justice. And for other men, these pretended righteous persons full of
pharisaical pride looked on them with a great contempt, by saying, Come not near
me, for I am Holy.

Instead of instructing men in the true way of possessing, and uniting
ourselves to Christ Jesus, they have invented a carnal and corporeal manner,
and of small expense to receive him, and taste all the saving Fruits of his
presence. They have enclosed him under a morsel of Bread, from whence they have
withdrawn the substance, leaving nothing but the accidents there. And under
these accidents they have conveyed in the substance of Jesus Christ, by the
virtue of Transubstantiation Concomitancy, and I know not how many monstrous
Imaginations, and barbarous Expressions. Behold thus much for the Opinions and
Doctrine of Popery.

Let us a little consider its Worship instead of the Adoration, and Worship of
the only true God, who is jealous of his Honor, and Glory, they have truly
re-established pure Paganism. The most blessed Mother of Jesus Christ has
taken the place of the Mother of the Gods, they have set her upon the Throne of
God, they call her the Mother of Mercies, the Redemptrix of Mankind, the
perfection and accomplishment of the Trinity, the Queen of Heaven. They give
her the power to command her Son by the Authority of a Mother, they address to
her in all their needs, they desire of her remission of Sins, Health, the life
of Men, the recovery of the Sick, and the resurrection of the Dead. Those which
are devoted to her, are much advanced above all others. Devotion to the Blessed
Virgin is an infallible Mark of Predestination. He cannot be damned that prays
to the Blessed Virgin. She has oftentimes fetched men from Hell, she has
raised them to the end that they might do penance, she has rescued the Souls
of wicked men out of the hands of Devils, who had already dragged them down
into the bottomless Pit. Persons rejected by the Son have been received into
favor by the Mother, the white Ladder of the Virgins Milk, is a more sure way
to ascend to Heaven, then the red Ladder of the Blood of Jesus Christ. In the
place of the Gods, and Demi Gods of Paganism, of their Tutelor Gods, their
Household Gods, their Protecting Gods, subordinate to the great God Jupiter,
Popery has put its Saints, taken not only from among the Apostles, Martyrs and
Confessors, but from among its Bygots, its devout People, its Hypocrites, its
Monks, its Founders of Orders, its Fanatics, and proud Pharisees. It has
placed them in Heaven very near unto God. It has pulled Jesus Christ from the
Right Hand of the Father, where he was to intercede continually for us, and
has placed there in Conjuction with him its Tuteler Gods, and the Patron Gods
that are there, not only to offer to God their Intercessions but their Merits,
for they pray unto God to have regard unto the merits of these Saints. These
Patron Gods have here below their Temples, their Chapels, and their Altars
which bear their Names. For here are to be seen the Churches, and the Altars of
St. Paul, St. Peter, the Virgin, and other Saints. They have their Sacrifices
of the Mass, that is to say, the adorable Body of the Savior of the World, and
God of the Universe, by a Worship as fantastical as it is criminal, is offered
to the honor of St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Roch, and St. Francis: Littanies,
Prayers, Supplications, Genuflections, and generally all Religious Worship is
given to these inferior Gods, to these canonized Saints: they have their part
everywhere, they are taken for Protectors, Kingdoms, Cities, Families, and
persons, are put under their Defense: Men beg of them Life, Health, Forgiveness
of Sins, and Eternal Happiness: They are constituted Princes, Regents,
Governors of the World, to break the Nations with Rods of Iron: It Is not
enough to adore their persons, men adore their Relics; they expose their
Ashes, their Bones, shreds of their Clothes, their Girdles, their Slippers,
their Shifts, the Iron, Nails, the Wood, the Blood, the Tears of Jesus Christ;
the Teeth, the Milk, the Hair of the Virgin; the Cradle of Christ, and a
thousand other things which are a shame to the Christian Name. These Relics
do wonders, heal the sick, open men's eyes, raise the dead. They are laid with
great respect and honor upon Altars; men bow down to them, and kiss them with
great devotion: they are carried in state about the streets; men cry before
them, as before Joseph, Bow the Knee; men expect from them rain and fair
weather, plenty and abundance, peace and war. That Paganism may be complete,
they have filled the Churches with Idols, which they call holy Images: They
picture God against his express command; they represent Angles, though altogether
spiritual, by corporeal Figures; they set up material Crosses, and Crucifixes
of wood, stone and metal in all places. The Virgin has her Pictures, where she
is painted with a Child in her arms. All the Saints have their seat in their
Churches, and upon their Altars; men fall down before them, they offer Incense
to them, they kiss them, and act toward them, as if they thought some divine
Virtue in them. For although the Doctors do sometimes say, that we ought not to
affix any divine Virtue to them; they do nevertheless authorize, by their
tolleration and examples, the fury of the People, who make their Nine-days
Devotions, and Pilgrimages to them; who there rub their Beads and their
Handkercheifs, who make their Children touch them to sanctify them thereby.
They dress them up after a stately manner on their Festivals, they crown them
with Flowers and Garlands, they carry them in pomp, and cause them to go in
procession, they put their confidence in these Relics and these Images. The
devout persons bear about them a little pieco of the pretended wood of the
Cross; some small filings of the Nails thereof; a pretended Thorn of his Crown;
and a little bit of the Bone of a Saint. They carry, say I, these about them as
Preservatives against the Devil, against death, and all perils by Sea and Land:
Every Family has his Patron, every particular person his Saint, for whom he
has a singular devotion; he has the Image thereof placed in his Oratory, he
prostrates himself before it, to make his Prayers. To indemnifie the true God
for all the losses which he has sustained in those Worships given to his
Creatures, they have dedicated to him in particular, an Idol which they call
the Sacrament of the Altar; there they adore, in his honor, a little morsel of
dry and flat Paste, which they call in great reverence Our Lord; which they
make all the World adore with great ceremony, which they carry in state about
the streets, that every one may worship it, and whoever does not so, is
execrable and accursed: they enclose Jesus Christ therein in a state of
Annihilation, without head, feet, hands, soul, motion, or life, subject to be
eaten by Rats, stolen by Thieves, trod under foot by the Profane, and vomited
by the Sick. But in compensation to God, they adore this Tomb of Jesus Christ,
as the sovereign God, Creator of Earth and Heaven. If on the one hand they have
corrupted the Worship by adding in the Eucharist, that which is not there, on
the other hand they have taken away half thereof: they give but one part of the
Sacrament, and by so doing give nothing. They have made private Masses,
contrary to the Institution of Jesus Christ, and the custom of all sound
Antiquity. To conclude, What have they not done, to disfigure the Worship of
God? How many vain and ridiculous Ceremonies, and of no use? How many signs of
the Cross, holy Waters, Exorcisms, Agnus Dei's, and other Toys And above all,
they cover this with the Vail of an unknown Tongue; they speak Latin to the
Peasants of France, Germany, and Spain, who are edified by what is said, as
much as if they spoke Arabic. Behold, my Brethren, a very short, but very true
Picture of Popery. After this, will you think that our Separation was unjust?
You will yet say, that we must bear many things; and that it is a Religion in
which a man may conveniently enough be saved. In the Name of God do not say
that this Picture is extravagant, and that you do not see all this therein. For
it is a true Description of Popery, such as it has been in France, as well as
elsewhere, for more than seven or eight hundred years. There is no man that
knows any thing of Antiquity, that can dissent from it; it is yet at this day
the Popery of Italy, Spain, Portugal, and all Countries where the Reformation
has not been tolerated. Yet at this day, do the people of Spain and Portugal,
know any thing of God, and of Jesus Christ, but the Names? The Object of their
Devotion, is an Image, which works Miracles on the top of a Mountain, or in
some Church of a Monastery; and their Piety spends itself in Foolish and Pagan
Processions, in which there are mingled all those things which may render a
Show ridiculous, and Devotion impious. We wish you could hear those which being
banished from this Country, a while since by the order of the Court of France,
are again returned hither. The Bible is imprisoned in those unhappy Countries:
An illustrious Fugitive carried one of them thither, the Inquisition, who laid
hands on him, seized it, and kept it as you keep a dangerous Enemy: and never
could that illustrious Exile get it out of their hands, till he came out of the
Country, then they permitted this dangerous Book to carry its poison elsewhere.
God grant that you may give attention to all this, to the end that you may
remain fully persuaded, that your Fathers were obliged to separate from the
Church of Rome, and that you cannot return thither without Damnation.

WE shall now give you that which we omitted in our last Letter, it is the
History of some Cruelties exercised at Valence by Rapine, which deserve to be
consecrated to the memory of all Ages of the Church. First you shall know how
he treated the Daughters of that illustrious Martyr Monsieur d'Cross, and
thereby at the same time you will learn after what manner he labors in the
Conversion of all others: When these Gentlewomen were arrived, and delivered
into his hands, he separated them, and put them in differing Dungeons filled
with Dirt and Ordure; he took away their Clothes and Linen, and sent them to
an Hospital to enquire for Shifts, which had been many Weeks, and sometimes
many Months upon Bodies covered with the Itch, Ulcers, and Carbuncles, full of
matter and putrefaction: after this manner he clothed the Daughters of
Monsieur d'Cross. This Villain gives them nothing to support their Lives, but a
little Water and Bread which Dogs would not eat. Rapine visits them many times
in the day, with his Lacques, by whom he strips them, and gives them many blows
with a Bull's Pisle, and he himself beats them with his Cane on the body, and
upon the very face itself, in such a manner, that they have nothing of humane
shape remaining; he breaks them with so many blows, that they are not able to
set one foot before another, nor lift their hand to their mouth, nor move their
arms; besides this, he causes them to be plunged many times in a day in a deep
Mire, moistened with stinking water; he draws them not from thence, till they
have lost all sense and knowledge; at last they faint under these Torments,
which have no example in the History of the most barbarous Pagans; after which
they were exported to a Convent, where they are having neither form nor figure,
covered with wounds from head to foot. This we have received from an honest Man
who saw them in this frightful state. Mademoiselle d'Farelle of Nismes, is at
this day in the hands of this Villain, with many other Gentlewomen. The
Parliament of Greenoble, a little while since, sent him twenty five, or twenty
six persons, both men and women, to be converted by these ways and methods.
Monsieur the Baron d'Faugere of Languedock, whose Fidelity is known to all
those who know his person, met the Rector of the Jesuits of Nismes, at S.
Esprit, who told him, he was going to Valence to labor in the Conversion of an
obstinate Hugenot, who had resisted all the means that they had made use of.
And a few days after, meeting the same Gentleman, told him, That he could
prevail nothing; and that he had said to Rapine, that no body but he could be
successful therein, and that he ought to labor in it. So that this poor
Gentlewoman, with many others, have without doubt passed the ingenious
Cruelties of this famous Hangman.

We may very well boast, that he has given us an example of Courage and
Constancy, which may dispute it with all the ancient and modern Martyrs: It Is
the famous Monsieur Menurett, an Advocate of Montlimar, he was eminent
throughout his Conversation, for an exemplary Life and Devotion: when the
Missionary Dragoons were sent into Dauphine, and to Montlimar, he strengthened
all persons about him, by his Exhortation and Example. The Governor of
Montlimar caused him to be arrested, they put him three Months into something
like a Chamber, where he had nothing to lie on but a sorry Matt. After these
three Months, they put him into a hideous Dungeon. He went thither full of joy,
comforting his Friends who wept, and bewailed him as they accompanied him
thither: He told them, they ought to rejoice, that God did him the favor to
suffer for his Name. He was six months in this noisome Dungeon, and there
became Dropsical. They drew him from thence to carry him to Valence, and put
him into the hands of Rapine, which is the last trial to which they put the
Faith of the Martyrs of that Country. Rapine drew near to him with the
countenance of a Lion, and with words like roaring, concluding, We will see
whether thou will be so obstinate in my hands. He put him into the entry of a
Chamber, under which ran all the sinks of the Hospital, even those of the
Bogg-houses, and Jaques; and for a bed, they gave him a Plank. This place was
opposite by another little entry to the Chapel of the Hospital, where they
said Mass every day; they would have obliged our Martyr to have assisted at the
Mass by this entry, but they could never effect it. All these evil treatments
not being able to vanquish this illustrious Confessor, Rapine comes to his last
Remedies; he caused Monsieur Menurett to descend into the Court, where there
was a Mulberry-tree, and fastened his arms on high thereto, his feet scarce
touching the ground; he rent off his Clothes to his very Shirt, and caused him
to receive an infinite number of blows with a Bull's pisle: this treatment was
continued for the space of fifteen days, with so much violence, that our Martyr
voided blood by his Urine, and by all the parts of his body. In the midst of
these horrible Torments, without ceasing, he begged mercy and grace from God for
himself, and for his Persecutors, and implored the compassion of his Hangmen in
so moving a manner, that two Capuchines, who heard his cries, exhorted Rapine
to cease his cruel punishment; he did so, and was content to employ our Martyr
to carry stones for a building which they were making at the Hospital. The
first day of April last, the Bishop of Valence went to visit him in this
stinking Sink, but gained no more upon him at this time, than at others. In
conclusion, Rapine enraged with his long opposition, entered like a Devil into
the Prison of this holy man, accompanied with two Lacques, or Sergeants, and
gave him so many blows with a Bull's pisle, and for so long a time, that the
cries of the Martyr did even rend the Air all round about. This Monster about
two hours after, (after he had been wearied with the pains that he had taken to
martarize this Saint) returned with his Searjeants, to repeat the punishment;
but he found our Martyr expired in the midst of these cruel torments. He was
put into the hands of Rapine in the month of June 1686, and died in the
beginning of April 1687. I cannot tell whether after this, they will have the
impudence to maintain, that all these Cruelties which have been exercised, have
not been authorized by the Ministers of his Majesty, and the Judges, nor by the
commandment of the Dragoons; but that they are the Violences of the Soldiery,
which have been condemned and punished when they have been known. Rapine is
neither Soldier nor Dragoon, he has no Commission to exercise these Cruelties,
but such as he receives every day: He is Guardian of the Hospital of Valence:
The Parliament of Greenoble have sent him twenty five or twenty six persons at
a time, as I said but just now, to be converted by these cruel Methods. The
Bishop, and the Jesuits put into his hands all those upon whom they cannot
prevail: But to the end that they may not say any more, that Authority does not
interpose in these Cruelties, they ought to be informed of a memorable story
happening at Uzes, and which I think has been attested by twenty Letters of
different persons, all which agree in the thing: There is at Uzes a House of
Propagation, governed by four Creatures, called the Daughters of the
Propagation; in this House are many Gentlewomen of the Reformed Religion,
imprisoned, who have resisted preceding Violences and Temptations: One of
these four Daughters of the Propagation went to complain to the Intendant, of
the rough answers which these poor persecuted Gentlewomen gave, and of the
small disposition they had to be converted. The Intendant, Monsieur d' Bauille,
whose name for his conduct in Languedock, deserves to live to all future Ages,
this Intendant, I say, immediately appointed Scourging against ten of the most
intractable. In the execution of this command, four Soldiers were set at the
Gate with Muskets charged, and lighted Matches, ready to give fire. Two
Priests went in with the Major of Viuon, and the Judge Larnac, Sub-delegate to
the Intendant: in their presence these Creatures of the Propagation, stripped
these Gentlewomen from the Girdle upward, and doing the Office of Hangman,
scourged them after the most cruel manner, with straps made of Coards, at the
end of which hung Bullets of Lead; afterward they were thrown into a dark
Prison. During the time of this punishment, they uttered cries which were heard
into the street; but they encouraged each other to suffer these Trials for the
Name of Jesus Christ.

I will at this time tell you no more sad News, but on the contrary, I will
comfort you by giving you to understand, that in this general Misfortune,
wherein the Reformed Church of France sees so many persons, in some sort fall
under the Temptation, we have the joy to know, that scarce one falls in love
with this wicked Religion. We have taken care to enquire concerning it, of
those which came from all parts; and we have caused enquiries to be made upon
the places, as much as is possible for us; but we can assure you, my Brethren,
as a thing certain, that the hatred of the Roman Religion increases every day,
insomuch that the Persecutors are farther every day from accomplishing their
designs, than ever: We may say, without fear of lying, or hyperbole of
expression, that this Persecution has not gained to the Church of Rome two
hundred hearty Converts; and although I know a vast number of persons have been
prevailed withal to make their Subscriptions, yet the number of those, which
have with a satisfied Judgment embraced their Religion, is so small, that it
does not deserve to be computed. But on the contrary, by a surprising marvel of
Divine Providence, this Persecution has opened the eyes of a great number of
ancient Catholics, as they are called. That which we tell you, is no
Conjecture or Fiction, it is that which we know upon good Testimony: So that it
is certain, that the Church of GOD has gained more Souls than it has lost.
These Seeds will bring forth in their time. Every day we see persons arrive
here, who Abjure the Roman Religion; and amongst them there are such as are
eminent by their Merit, by their Birth, by their Parts, and by their Learning.
When we know that they will not take it ill, if we name them, we will do it;
for it is necessary that all the World know it, that the depths of Divine
Providence, and His Judgments may be admired thereby.

June 15. 1687.
The Twenty first PASTORAL LETTER. An Article of Antiquity: The Fathers of the
Fourth and Fifth Ages said, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist is the Figure
and Image of the Body of Jesus Christ. An Article of Controversy. An Answer to
the Prejudices that have been drawn against our Separation from the Authors of
it.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you, from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
WE have already seen one essential thing in which the Fourth and Fifth Ages
had introduced no alteration; it is the Opinion concerning the Nature of the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist. We shall now see that the Faith of the Church did
not change in the Point of the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation. This
Article being long, we shall divide it into two. And we shall see at this time,
that the Fathers did believe as we do, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist was
nothing but an efficacious Figure of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

As they persevered in the custom of calling the Sacrament of the Eucharist, a
Sacrifice and Oblation, they continued also in a custom much more ancient,
since it descended from Jesus Christ and his Apostles, that is, to call the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist, the Body, the Flesh, the true Flesh, and the
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. They said then, that we eat the Flesh of our
Lord Jesus; that we really receive him; that Jesus Christ has given his Flesh
to eat, and his Blood to drink; that it is truly his Flesh, and truly his
Blood; that we may not doubt, that Jesus Christ does not give what he promised,
viz. his Flesh and his Blood; nor that the Bread is not the Body of Christ;
that Jesus Christ, who changed Water into Wine, could easily change the Bread
into his Body, and the Wine into his Blood; that we must communicate with a
full certainty, as in the Body of Jesus Christ; that Jesus Christ, who is the
invisible Priest, changes the visible Creatures into the substance of his Body
and of his Blood. After all that which they quote unto you of most strength
concerning the Article of the Eucharist for Transubstantiation and the Real
Presence in the fourth and fifth Ages amounts to this.

But I pray you, what does all this signify? Is there any thing therein of
more strength than that which Jesus Christ and his Apostles have said? The Lord
said, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed, this, or this
Bread is my Body. St. Paul said, The Bread which you break is our Communion in
the Body of Jesus Christ. That which is under debate, is to know how they
understood this, and if we prove, that Jesus Christ and his Apostles did
understand that the Bread continues Bread, being nevertheless changed into the
Body of Jesus Christ, if we prove that they meant the Bread is the Body of
Jesus Christ, because it is the Sign, the Sacrament, and the Means by which the
efficacy of his Death is applied unto our Souls; it is certain, that we have
ruined all the advantages that can be drawn from these high Expressions. In
like manner, if we can prove, that the Fathers of the fourth and fifth Ages did
understand that the Bread and Wine became the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
and are changed into his Flesh and Blood, because they are the Sacraments, the
Signs, the Figures, the Images, and the Means by which God does communicate the
virtue of his Flesh, and the efficacy of his Death, without any change
happening in the substance thereof; if, say I, the Fathers of these Ages
declare this plainly, it is obvious, that they cannot draw any advantage from
all these Expressions, how high soever they appear; now I take it for granted,
that they could not declare themselves more plainly thereon, than they have
done, as we shall hear hereafter.

And to the end that their Declarations may appear to us more express and
significant, it is necessary that you be acquainted with one thing, of which
your Converters are at an agreement with us, and by consequence I need not
prove unto you; and it is this, in these Ages it was the custom to hide the
Mysteries not only from Unbelievers, but also from the Catechumens which had
not as yet communicated. This conduct had two Reasons or Foundations, the first
was the design to increase the respect which they desired Christians should
retain for these Mysteries; the second was an earnest passion to diminish the
contempt which the Pagans had for a Mystery wherein nothing was seen but Bread
and Wine. These two Considerations obliged them never to speak of the Sacrament
but in obscure and dark words. They desired never to name the Bread and Wine;
as much as they could they served themselves of Periphrases, saying sometimes,
that which you well understand, sometimes that which the Priest takes,
sometimes the nourishment made of many Grains, and the drink drawn from many
Grapes, or something of like sort. This was, in my opinion, the meanest
subtilty in the World. For in despite to all their Precautions, every body
knew, that they took nothing but Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, and they
themselves said it oftentimes contrary to the design which they had of saying
nothing concerning it. But at last the design of hiding the matter of the
Sacrament engaged them to speak nothing of it but in dark terms, and always to
serve themselves of the mystical terms, of the Body, the Flesh, and the Blood
of Jesus Christ, and always to use these expressions, and always to avoid those
that were plain and without figure, as much as they were able. So that when it
happens, that they call the Signs by their name, and to speak to things as they
are indeed, one only passage is more worth than a hundred, where they speak
figuratively and mystically. For this mystical Language was among them a
Language of necessity, and duty which they had imposed upon themselves, whereas
when they spoke of things plainly and nakedly, 'twas the Language of truth,
'twas the Language of the Heart and Soul which rescued it self from politic
slavery and bondage. It will not be therefore amazing, if we find few passages
in Antiquity, where the truth of the opinion of the Fathers was plainly
expressed. Nevertheless, we find so many of them, and so plain, that it is not
conceivable how prejudice hinders our adversaries from seeing the truth in this
case.

First of all, although we had no other passages of the Fathers, but those where
they call the Sacrament, the Figure, the Sign, the Image, the Symbols, of the
Body and Blood of the Lord, these were enough. Now of these there is almost an
infinite number, what other things do we say thereof, than that the Sacrament
is the Figure, the Sign, and the Symbol of the Body of Jesus Christ? why did
they say the same thing with us, if they had not the same thoughts and
conceptions with us? St. Austin said Cont. Ademas, cap. 12.
, Our Lord made no scruple to say, this is my Body. The Author of the Book of
Sacrament, under the Name of St. Ambrose, says Lib. 4. cap. 5.
, That the Oblation of the Eucharist is the Figure of the Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ. St. Ephraim says Lib. De Not. Dei non frut.
, That our Lord, taking Bread in his hands, brake it, and blessed it, that it
might be the Figure of his immaculate Body, and that he blessed the Chalice,
and gave it to his Disciples, to signify his Blood. St. Cyril of Jerusalem,
from whom they bring you many passages, to prove Transubstantiation, says, that
Mistagog. 4.
under the Figure of Bread, is given to us the Body, and under the Figure of
Wine, is given to us the Blood. And St. Gregory Nazianzen says Orat. 42.
, that we are made partakers of the Passover, but always figuratively, although
our Passover be much more clear than that of the ancients, for the legal
Passover, I dare say, was a dark Figure of another Figure, i.e. of the
Eucharist. St. Jerome says In Jerem. cap. 3. lib. 2. advers. Jovin.
, that the Figure of the Blood of Jesus Christ is made with Wine; and
elsewhere, that Jesus Christ has offered not Water, but Wine for the Figure of
his Blood. Theodoret says Dialog. 3. and 1.
, that the Eucharist is the Figure of the Passion, and that the Sacred
Nourishment is the Figure of his Body and his Blood. In these Passages the
Ancients make use of the word Type, which exactly signifies Figure.

They have also expressed the Nature of the Sacrament by the word Antitype,
which signifies an opposite Figure, or a Figure that has respect unto the thing
signified, as one Pillar answers to another, which is placed just over against
it. So the Author of the Constitutions attributed to the Apostles, says Lib.
5. cap. 13.
, that our Lord gave to his Disciples the Mysteries, which are the Figures
answering to his precious Body and Blood, and that we celebrate the Figures
answering to the Body and Blood of our Lord. In the Liturgy ascribed to St.
Basil, it is said Lib. 6, and 29.
, we beseech thee, by offering the Figures of the Body and Blood of thy Christ.
St. Cyril of Jerusalem says Mystag. 5.
, that we taste the Figures answering to the Body and Blood of our Lord.
Theodoret says Dialog. 2.
, that the Divine Mysteries are the Figures answering to the true Body.

Can any thing be more express than all this, unless it be what we see with our
eyes? In proper terms they tell us, that the Sacrament in nothing but an Image.
Eusebius, Bishops of Cesarea says Demonst. lib. 8.
, That Jesus Christ commanded his Disciples, to make the Image of his own Body.
Procopius, upon Genesis, says Cap. 49.
, that Jesus Christ gave to his Disciples the Image of his Body. And Pope
Gelasius, or some Author of the same Age, says Gelas. de duabus not.
, certainly the Image, or the Similitude of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ,
is celebrated in the Mystery. This therefore shows us plain enough, what we
ought to believe concerning Jesus Christ our Lord, even that which we profess,
that which we celebrate, and that which we receive in his Image. I do not
think, that Zuinglius and Calvin have spoken more plainly and significantly.

To conclude, they call the Bread and the Wine, Symbols, a word which every one
knows signifies as much as the word Figure. Eusebius says, Demonst. lib. 1.
cap. 10.
We have learnt to make a Memorial of this Sacrifice upon the Table with the
Symbols of his Body and Blood. And St. Chrysostom, Hom. 83. in Matthew.
If Jesus Christ be not dead, of what are the consecrated things the Symbols?
And Theodoret, 1 Cor. c. 11.
When we shall have the presence of our Lord, we shall have no more need of the
Symbols of his Body. Nothing is so common in the Fathers, as these Expressions,
To partake in the Symbols of our Lord, to take the Symbols, to burn the
Symbols, etc.

These same Fathers do give us the same Reasons of the Names, Body, and Blood,
which are give to the Bread and Wine, that we our selves give of them. It Is
because they are the effectual Representations of the Flesh and Blood of Jesus
Christ. If the Sacraments, says St. Austin, Epist. 23. ad Bonifac.
had no resemblance of those things whereof they are Sacraments, they would be
no Sacraments; and it is because of this Resemblance, that they take the name of
the things themselves: as in the Sacrament of the Body of Jesus Christ, the
Sacrament of his Body and of his Blood, are in some sort his Body and Blood. It
seems to me, that a person must be prodigiously blind, to believe, that he
which speaks thus, does not think as we do. The same St. Austin says
elsewhere, Sermon. ad Infantes apud Bertram.
How is the Bread his Body, and that which is in the Cup his Blood? My
Brethren, these things are called Sacraments, because it is one thing that is
there seen, and another thing which is understood; that which is seen, is a
corporeal Species; and that which is understood, is a spiritual Benefit and
Advantage. To what end does he take this compass of discourse? and why does he
not answer without scruple, It Is because the Body of Christ Jesus is really
there, after the words of Consecration?

An Article of Controversy. An Answer to the Prejudices which some persons
have raised against our Separation from the Actions, the Conduct, and the
Personal Qualities of the Authors thereof.
WE have finished our Answer to the Sophisms which they propose unto you on the
subject of our Separation, by making it evident to you, that it does not hazard
your salvation, that it was necessary, and that it was just. But before we pass
to other Questions which respect the Church, we must say something concerning
those who made this Separation; for it is the most fruitful Source and Fountain
of Illusions, and a Subject of perpetual Harangues and Declamations. And this
we owe especially to a Woman of Quality, among those which are called new
Converts, who places the little Edification that our Reformers have given to
the World, or rather the Scandal which they have given to it by their Conduct
and Divisions, as one of the Reasons which has most affected her, and
prevailed on her to embrace the Roman Religion. It Is a subject on which an
infinite number of Books have been made, to which I might send you, were it not
that Books are taken from you for the most part; besides, my design being to
spare you the labor of reading great Books, I am to abridge and reduce what
our Authors have said thereon, to the compass and extent of a Letter. Behold
then the Accusations which they form against the Authors of the Separation,
which I have justified in my preceding Letters. 1. That these pretended
Reformers did no Miracles, to support their extraordinary Mission and their new
Gospel. 2. That they led a scandalous life, and such as had no conformity with
the Spirit of a Reformed Gospel, which they boasted to bring into the World. 3.
That there appears in their Expressions a dark Malignity, and an implacable
Hatred against the Roman Church, and that their Books are full of cruel
Injuries both against the Roman Religion, and against its Doctors, a thing
absolutely contrary to the Spirit of Charity. 4. That they are divided into
three Sects, of which Zuinglius, Calvin, and Luther made themselves the Heads.
That if the Spirit of God had sent them to Reform the Church, he would also
have united them in this great design, and have inspired them with the same
thoughts, and the same apprehensions. 5. To conclude, they say, that they have
rent and torn each other by transports of Passion, which are the true
Characters of false Pastors, and false Christians.

As to the first Objection, I cannot avoid baptizing it by its own name, and
calling it an Impertinence. Why should our Reformers work Miracles, and why
were they obliged thereunto? When Jehu reformed the Church of Israel, pulled
down the Temples of Baal, broke in pieces his Statues, rooted out his Prophets,
and abolished his Worship, did he work Miracles, or had he any need thereof?
Was it any spot to that Holy Reformation, that Josiah made, when he
re-established the Service of God, which was almost wholly under a heap of
foreign Idolatries, that he wrought no Miracles? When Theodosius the Great
reformed the Christian Church, and drove away Arianism, which was become the
reigning Religion, did he do Miracles, or had he any need thereof? There is no
need to work Miracles, but when men bring a new Religion, and a new Revelation.
For that reason the Apostles wrought Miracles, because they had a new
Revelation to propose to the World. They brought a Gospel unknown to Jews and
Gentiles, and opposite to the prejudices of the one and the other. We brought
no new Gospel into the World, we propounded the Old and the New Testament; the
one and the other were received, without contradiction, by all those Christians
which we desired to reform. When it shall please God to convert the Jews to
Christianity, according to his promises, there is much probability that he will
send them some Prophets which will work Miracles, and that will be necessary.
For although the Gospel-Revelation be already manifested, and we have the Books
of the Evangelists and the Apostles, nevertheless this is nothing with respect
to the Jews, because they do not esteem our Books Canonical, but believe the
Apostles to be Cheats and Impostors. There is therefore need of new Miracles to
recover them from their prejudices, and oblige them to give attention to the
truth. But as for us, it was in no wise necessary to work Miracles to establish
that Book whereof we served our selves. Otherwise, as often as the Kings of
Judah produced the Law of Moses to make Reformation in their Church, they had
been obliged to work Miracles. They had nothing else to do, but to produce the
Book, and make it evident, that the Abominations which had been introduced into
Religion, were either forbidden, or not commanded there. Behold all that they
had to do; behold all that we have to do; and it is to misunderstand the Conduct
of God, and the Spirit of the Gospel, to imagine that the truth cannot be
commended to Unbelievers, but by Miracles. How many millions of men have been
converted to Christianity, since the days of the Apostles, and the cessation of
the gift of Miracles? Miracles are designed to deliver men from their evil
prejudices, and to endue them with such as are good, that they may hearken to
the truth: Men that believe not the Christian Religion, but only for the sake
of its Miracles, are very ill-Christians. And among those which became Converts
by the preaching of the Apostles, those who had no other reason to embrace this
New Religion, but the Miracles which they saw done by those which preached it,
were very miserable Converts; such persons are the seed of Apostasy, and adhere
to the Church but by a very feeble root. We ought to adhere to it for the love
of truth, now it is the knowledge of the truth, and not the sight of Miracles,
which gives birth to the love thereof. If Miracles be not necessary for the
Conversion of Unbelievers, with far greater reason they cannot be of necessity
for the bringing back of wandering Christians to the right way. For there needs
no more, but to show them the holy Scripture, which so exactly marks out the
path in which they ought to walk. As to what they say, that those who will
establish a new Ministry, must have Miracles for the support of it, it is an
Affair to be treated on elsewhere. We have already said something concerning
it, and we shall have yet farther occasion to speak of it, and show that we
have no more established a new Ministry, than we have introduced a new Gospel.
Where there is no new Revelation, there is no new Ministry; our Ministry is
that of the Apostles, because our Doctrine is theirs.

The second Accusation which they make against the Authors of our Separation,
is their Scandalous Life. There is no probability, say your Converts, that God
should suffer so strange an Alliance, as that would be, of a great abundance of
the Spirit of Light on the one part, and of so great disorders of Manners on
the other. And thereon they publish a hundred ugly stories to cry down the
Memory of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Martyr, Beza, etc. First we say, that
truth is truth, without any dependence on those who declare it. Your Converters
have said somewhere, That the Citizens of. Babel may sometimes build Jerusalem.
It Is a truth so certain, that to deny it, a man must be ignorant and false: For
in all Ages there have been very Evil men, who have defended the part of truth,
and who have even maintained it against Heretics, whose Conduct and Manners
have been very regular, and oftentimes more edifying than that of the Orthodox.
We must not form a prejudice against the Doctrine, upon the ill Conduct of
those which preach it; we must judge of Truth by it self. So that although it
should be true, that our Reformers were such as they report them, nevertheless
it would behove us to see whether these Citizens of Babel were not the Builders
of Zion. But God forbid that we should have no other fortification to defend
our selves. We have made to appear the innocence of the Lives of the Authors of
our Separation, by Apologies of so much strength, that their Calumniators have
been covered with Confusion; and the most part of our most resolved Enemies
have been obliged to renounce them. The Bolsacs, the Bertheliers, the Florimond
de Raymonds, and other like Calumniators, ought to be the Horror and Execration
of all Honest men. The Author of the Legitimate Prejudices against the
Calvanists and other like Authors, who are willing to preserve themselves in
the Esteem of Honest men, fortify and establish themselves upon notorious
matters of fact, such is for example, Marriage of Priests. Persons who have
made a Vow of Chastity, say they, and who were obliged to celibate by so many
Oaths, have violated their Vows in the face of the Sun; they have opened
Cloisters to take Wives from thence, and so have committed a double Adultery
against Christ Jesus. These are pitiful Declamations, according to my
apprehension. To judge of the nature of these Actions, we must know what were
the Principles of those who did them. Why should they observe Celibacy, since
they looked upon it as a Yoke of which they desired to deliver the Clergy,
because it had produced a world of Impurities and Abominations, so that a
Deluge was not capable of purging them? They have broken their Vows. They were
unlawful Vows, made under a tyrannical Empire, conceived in a false Religion,
unacceptable to God, because they served as a Vail to an infinite number of
Corruptions, and at the same time to a debaucht and hypocritical life. They
forsook Babylon, and it behoved them to forsake all the Badges thereof. This
kind of life, which under an appearance of Piety hides such great Disorders, is
the true Character of the Beast. These Monks are those Hypocrites whose
Consciences are seared as with a hot Iron, forbidding to marry, and commanding
to abstain from Meats which God has permitted; which teach a Doctrine of
Devils, and serve as a Support to the Throne of the Beast. So that these
Reformers being delivered from the tyrannical Yoke of this unhappy Empire,
ought to return to the enjoyment of all their Rights, and of all their Liberty;
and being put in the possession of it, they may and ought to use it. There
needs but one thing to confound all these Calumniators, who are willing to
stain and blacken the Lives of the Authors of our Reformation: What have these
Reformers gained, what have they gotten, to do the work of Impostors? Have they
gained Riches, Honors, or great Dignities? Have they left great Houses, have
they left Heirs, and Children that were great Lords? Never did persons despise
their own Interests more than they did, they never got wherewithal to be buried
decently, and scarcely got wherewith to live. Their Zeal, Firmness, Constancy,
and Perseverance, joined with a contempt of their own Interest, make up a
Character very opposite to that of dishonest men. If they had been debauched
effeminate Lovers of Pleasure, why did they go out of the Body of the Roman
Clergy, who enjoyed all the pleasures of the flesh, even those which were most
infamous, with so much convenience and advantage. These Gentlemen say, that the
principal reason which gave such success to the New Gospel, was the
licentiousness of the Churchmen and the Monks of that Age. This is it which
that same Lady does confess, who makes the ill Conversation of the Authors of
our Separation, one cause of her return to the Church of Rome. But this
Confession and this Truth which is publicly known, does it not utterly ruin
the Accusation which the Papists make against our Reformers? Is there any
probability that the great number of people, which forsook the Roman Church,
being scandalized by the wicked Lives of its Guides, should list themselves
under the Ensigns of other wicked persons, which were no better than those they
had forsaken? If they were not vicious and debaucht, at least, say they, they
were fierce, proud, Lovers of themselves, passionate, ambitious, vain, and
violent. These are strokes stricken in the Air, and Accusations which make it
evident they have nothing to say. Concerning Ambition, there does not appear
any footstep thereof in their Conversation. And that which they call Pride and
Fierceness, is according to us, Zeal and Vigor in the maintenance of Truth, as
we shall make* it appear in examining the third Accusation.

The third Accusation is, that it is evident the Authors of our Separation were
inspired with a dark Malignity against the Roman Church; they vomited out
against her, say they, floods of Injuries, and everywhere is to be seen a
Character of black Gholer, which discharges it self both upon their Persons and
Religion. They support and strengthen this Accusation by the Confession of some
Protestants, who were of another frame and temper of mind, and did not approve
those methods of proceedure that were so full of flame and fire. I answer, That
Grace which changes men's Manners, does not change their Temper and
Constitution, but governs and serves it self thereof. Although it should be
true, that there appeared a great deal of fire in the Authors of our
Reformation, that would be no sufficient cause to condemn them, it being the
temper of all Great men. And this temper is of so great necessity for the
execution of great things, that without it it is very difficult to carry on and
prosecute great Designs and Enterprises. This is a thing unto which those men
have too little regard, which at this day do so highly commend, and advance the
Elogies of sweetness and moderation in Controversies, and who persuade us to
imitate other Great men, who are of a quite contrary Character, and temper of
Mind. If these honest men of this last Order, that is to say, these soft and
moderate men, had been born in the past Age, and had been engaged in that great
Work, they had neither maintained, nor carried it so far, as did those men, the
heat of whose Temper they would fain make a Crime. If Luther had not had a
heart fearless, and of inconceivable courage, he had never been able to bear up
against the Torrent of Contradictions and Oppositions that he met withal, and
repelled. Father Paul the famous Venetian Divine, who became famous on occasion
of the Affair of the Interdict of that Republic, knew assuredly the Corruption
of the Roman Church, at least as well as Luther: He made no secret of it, no
eminent Protestant passed by Venice, to whom he did not discover himself
concerning it. They often represented to him, that he was obliged in Conscience
to break with a Church, the Impurity and Idolatry whereof he so well
understood. He had a thousand Reasons to offer on his own behalf: sometimes
that he separated the good from the bad, sometimes that he was of use to a
thousand persons that lay hid, and had good sentiments; at last when he was
pressed hard, he would say, that God had not given to him the Heart and Spirit
of Luther. It is certain, that if Father Paul had been of the Temper and Spirit
of Luther, Venice had been at this day what Geneva is. And it is also certain,
that if Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, had been of the Temper and Spirit of
Father Paul, all Europe had been yet what Venice is at this day. It behooves us
therefore to admire the great and profound Wisdom of God, who chose for so
great a Work, men whose Temper was fit to maintain, improve, and exercise Zeal
effectually. To this Consideration add another; the Authors of our Reformation
have indeed spoken ill of the Church of Rome, of its Priests, of its
High Priest, of its Monks, and its Guides. And why might they not speak ill of
them? I do maintain, that they said nothing but what was true; they could
scarcely speak too much ill of Popery. They said, that the Church of Rome was
mystic Babylon; that she was a famous Harlot; that she was a debaucht
Adulteress; that her Pastors were Dogs and Swine. This was true. There was
nothing in the World so corrupt as the Roman Clergy. Rome is Babylon, and all
her Members are the Inhabitants of Babel. Was this a time to speak things by
halves? What reason had they to flatter Rome? Ought they not to paint her in
all her Colors, that they might make her odious? If it had been possible to
exceed in the description of her, that had been more pardonable, than the
tenderness of those who abate her ugliness by their smooth and soft Pencils. It
was then expedient to awaken men who were in so deep a sleep, and in order
thereunto 'twas necessary to speak loud. And after all, these Gentlemen have
but little reason to reproach us with the Violences and Injuries of Luther and
Calvin, against the Church of Rome: that is little, in comparison with the Rage
which that Church has exercised against us. The Calvinists call the Papists
Idolaters and Swine, and the Papists returning a thousand Injuries more severe,
add thereunto Cruelties unknown to Pagans, and the most barbarous Nations. They
burnt them by a slow fire, they hanged and quartered them, they caused them to
die in Prisons by unheard of punishments, they hunted after them as after Lions
and Bears. Although there should have been something humane in the heat of our
first Reformers, had it been very surprising, that men whom they burnt, which
they rent and tore in pieces, should grow into some little choler against their
Persecutors? Let the present Conduct of those who at this day would form a
prejudice in the minds of the New Converts, on the occasion of the transport
and heat of our Reformers, be looked into and examined. These Gentlemen have
addressed Pastoral Letters unto us, with a Quill dipped in Gall, and afterward
have sheathed their Swords in our breasts and bowels. They condemn to death
those who exercise any other Religion but that of Rome. They drag the Bodies of
those to the Dunghill, who die refusing to embrace their Doctrine. They send
those to the Galleys, who will not submit unto it. They cause those who will
not subscribe to their Superstitions, to be burnt, torn in pieces, eaten up,
and devoured by their Dragoons: Those who resist them by the Weapons of the
Word of God, they sent for Slaves into the other World. And after this, they
tell you, your pretended Reformers were violent and passionate persons; they
could not be the Messengers of God, for God is Love and Kindness. Tell them on
this subject, you cannot be the Ministers of God, for you do the Work of the
Devil, and the Father of Lies, who was a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning.

But behold a new Accusation founded on this, that the Authors of our
Separation poured out their Gall not only against the Roman Church, but also
against their own Brethren. The Popish Authors of all Orders take a great deal
of pleasure in heaping together all the injuries which the Lutherans, and
Calvinists have said against each other; and they have found therein the marks
of Reprobation. On this subject we have answered, That we condemn these
transport, that we acknowledge them opposite to a Spirit of Charity. We say,
that the Authors of our Separation did not utterly strip themselves of all that
was Humane; that they did retain some tinctures of Popery from whence they
came, which were blemishes and spots in their conduct and conversation:
Impatience, fury, and transport against those who oppose themselves to their
sentiments, and contradict them, is the Spirit of Popery, and particularly that
of the Monks. This is certain, for which reason the Romish Church treats all
her Enemies as Devils, damned, reprobate, excommunicated Heretics. Let a man
read the History of Popery, and he will see these furies reigning everywhere:
let him observe what bloody and cruel Tragedies, the Monks stirred up a little
before the Reformation, on subject of the form of their Hoods; and of the
Question concerning the property of those Commodities and Goods which the
Friars Minors spent. The thing proceeded even to fire, for the Popes caused
some of these poor Monks to be burnt, who obstinately maintained, that what the
Minors spent, was not their own. What is the injustice of the Inquisition
against those who are guilty of the least contradictions to the sentiments of
Rome? Let a man read the Furies of the Popes, when they had Opposites, and
Antipopes. Let him read the frightful Bulls of Excommunications against Kings,
Princes, States, and persons, who had the boldness to oppose themselves against
the torrent of Corruption, and the attempts of Tyranny. It Is from thence that
the impatience and passion into which the Reformers fell against one another,
in the maintaining their sentiments, did derive: It Is from the same tincture of
Popery, that some of them took those harsh methods of procedure, which they
believed they might take against Heretics. So that if these transports, and
this impatience of suffering, with respect to their Brethren, has been in our
Reformers a mark of Reprobation, it is unavoidable that the Roman Church is
reprobate, and the Synagogue of Satan; for it is she that inspired this Spirit
into those which came out of her bosom. We say also, that in all Ages men have
been made much after the same fashion, they have grown into heat, and transport
one against another upon very light occasions, even to the making of scandalous
Schisms. The Bishops assembled in the Council of Nice, to condemn the Doctrine
of Arrius, tore one another, and gave Libels to Constantine to ruin each
others reputation. Constantine, to reconcile them, thought it convenient to
throw their Papers into the fire, without reading them. We learn from the
Writings of Athanasius, that the Orthodox, who agreed in the sense of the
Doctrines against Arrius, disagreed among themselves about the words Substance,
Persons, and Hypostasis; some being willing it should be said there were three
Hypostases in the Deity; others saying, That it was an Heresy, because it was
to make three Gods. The Luciferians, who with all the Church were enemies to
the Arrians, suffered themselves to run into the highest passions against those
who were willing to receive the Arrian Bishops, and permit them in their Sees,
after their repentance. The Controversies of St. Cyril of Alexandria, and St.
Chrysostom, who called each other Traitors, and Judases, have been already
quoted to these Gentlemen. Examples of this sort taken from the most happy
Ages, and such as were nearest to the fountain of Charity, have been quoted to
them, as the transport of Stephen Bishop of Rome, who treated St. Cyprian as a
false Christ, a false Apostle, and a deceitful Worker; St. Cyprian and
Firmilian, the Adversaries of St. Stephen, on the oother hand said concerning
him, That he was wicked, obstinate, presumptuous, proud, inhumane, bold,
insolent, schismatical, foolish, inept, blind, and smitten with a Spirit of
Giddiness. To conclude, their own Authors have been quoted to them, who in
these last times, on the subject of some Disputes about Grace, have spoken
against each other, a thousand and a thousand heinous Calumnies. Therefore if
eagerness and transport against Brethren, be always a mark of Reprobation, it is
unavoidably that St. Epiphanius, Jerome, Cyril, Chrysostom, as well as all the
Hero's of Popery, be esteemed Reprobates. This is enough to make it evident,
that instead of drawing prejudices against Doctrine, from the faults of those
who teach it, we ought to admire the profound Wisdom of God, who serves himself
of weak Instruments to execute great things, who leaves in men the faults of
their temper, and nevertheless fails not to use them profitably, in his great
Work of building up Jerusalem, to the end that all the glory may be of God, and
not of us, and that we may have reason to say, We have this Treasure in earthen
Vessels.

To conclude, the last Accusation is founded on the difference of sentiments in
which the Authors of our Separation were found, with respect to some points. I
consider, writes the Lady of whom we have spoken, I consider, says she, three
men which appeared almost in the same time, who attempting to reform the
Church, in the mean while could not agree among themselves in the most
essential points. If a person had a mind well formed and fashioned, as it ought
to be, instead of being scandalized at this, that the Reformers were at a
difference about some Articles, he would be edified by this, that they were at
an agreement in so many. I am troubled at this, that they were not at an
agreement in all; but I much more admire this, that without consultation, as it
appears by their Controversies with each other, they agreed in so many points;
and I look on it as an evident proof that God guided them in this great Work.
For it is certain, that if they had been inspired by a spirit purely Humane, as
all the Patrons of Heresies have been, they would have agreed in nothing, but
in the general design of troubling the Peace of the Church. Let a man read the
History of Heresies, and Heretics, and he will see, that they made Sects and
Parties that differed in every thing; the Gnostics, the Manichees, the
Arrians, the Entychians, the Nestorians, and a hundred others: They might agree
in certain points, as the Gnostics and the Manichees might agree in the
Heresy of two Principles, but it was with such enormous differences, that it
was visible they could not be guided by one and the same Spirit. But I entreat
you, by what accident did the Authors of our Separation, agree to condemn in
Popery, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the taking away of the Cup,
Transubstantiation, the Adoration of the Eucharist; the Procession of the
Sacrament, private Masses, Purgatory, Indulgencies, Humane Satisfactions, the
Adoration of Images, the Invocation of Saints, the Worship of Relics,
Monastic Vows, the Pope, and Antichristian Tyranny, a barbarous Language in
the Worship of God, Prayers for the Dead, false Sacraments, the abuse of
Ecclesiastical Power, the Merit of Works, Works of Supererrogation,
Pilgrimages, Idolatrous Devotions to the Blessed Virgin, Legends, Institution
of diverse Orders of Monks, Miracles, the Infallibility of the Church, the
supreme Authority of the Pope, or Councils over Consciences, Traditions, the
pretended imperfection, obscurity, and insufficiency of the Holy Scripture, and
the prohibition to read it. This is the object to which we ought to give
attention, that we may admire and say, it must be, that all this be false,
wicked, vicious, and of such corruption as is plain and obvious, since men that
were at no agreement or correspondence among themselves, yea, who divided, and
oftentimes evil entreated each other, should agree, and be at good accord
therein. Indeed it is a thing which we can never admire enough, that men who
were no Prophets, nor inspired persons, nor led by an infallible Spirit, should
condemn in Popery, not that which continues of Christianity there, viz. the
Fundamental Doctrines contained in the Creed, but precisely, and only all the
pernicious Additions, yea, and that one and the same Additions. Wherefore did
not one of them take one part of Popery, and reject another? Why, without any
correspondence, did they treat as Abominations, all these pieces patched on to
Christianity? Why did they agree, that we ought to receive only the Word of God
for the Rule of our Faith? Why, and how did they agree so admirably in the
Interpretation of this Word of God? If a man does not acknowledge something
Divine therein, he must be smitten with a spirit of Astonishment. But they are
not at an agreement about the manner how the Bread in the Eucharist is the Body
of Jesus Christ. Behold a thing very amazing, that among a hundred and a
hundred points, in which they are agreed, there should be one in which they
could not come to an accord: Moreover, Popery cannot reasonably draw any
advantage from this dissension; for if they be not at an agreement among
themselves, they agree to condemn the Opinion of the Roman Church therein. The
Lutherans have nothing in this point in common with the Papists: it is a thing
which we shall make plain to you one day. This is therefore but one point
against a hundred: Is this worthy of consideration, and thereof to make a
Stumbling Block, and a Scandal?

But however it be, some will say, how little considerable soever it may
appear, it is the Foundation of a Schism; the Lutherans, and the Reformed make
two different Communions. On this subject, and in general of all the Faults
which are observed in the Authors of the Separation, such as passion, excess of
heat, quarrels, divisions, controversies, too too warmly managed, injuries, and
calumnies; and to conclude, the Schism which their Successors live in among
themselves: It Is fit to admire the providence of God, and to bring hither the
excellent Reflections of Mr. Paschal, saying with him, A man will never
understand any thing in the Works of God, if he do not lay down this as a
Principle, That He does illuminate some, and blind others. Hear the Comment on
this Maxim, given by himself, Thoughts of Mr. Paschal, cap. 17.
God has been willing to Redeem Men, and to open the Door of Salvation to
those that search it; but Men make themselves so unworthy, that it is just that
He refuse to some, because of their Hardness and Impenitency, that which He
grants to others by a Mercy that is not due unto them. If He had pleased to
surmount the Obstinacy of the most hardened, He could have done it by
discovering himself so manifestly unto them, that they should not have doubted
of the truth of his Existence, and so will appear at the last day, even with
such a lusture and brightness, that the most blind shall see him: It was not
his pleasure to appear after this manner in estates of Grief and Humiliation;
because so many men making themselves unworthy of his Clemency, it was his will
to leave them deprived of those good things which they would not have. It was
not therefore just that he should appear after a manner so manifestly Divine,
and absolutely capable of convincing all men; but neither was it just, that he
should come after so secret a manner, that he could not be known by those that
sincerely search after him: He communicates light enough for those that desire
to see, and obscurity enough for those that have a contrary disposition;
brightness enough to enlighten the Elect, and darkness enough to humble them,
obscurity enough to blind Reprobates, and light enough to condemn and make them
inexcusable. This is the true Key of Providence; Light and Darkness throughout,
is exactly the Character of the Word of God, of his Mysteries, and of his
Conduct. It Is not the Will of God, that Babylon should fall all at a time;
Revel. 16.
The great City must be divided into three parts. Before it drink the last Cup
of the Wrath of God; Revel. 14.
it must be reaped before it come to the Vintage. The Latin Church before the
full or entire Reformation, was to be divided into Papists, Lutherans, and
Reformed: God to accomplish this design, came to Reform the Church the first
time by mixing darkness with light. There is light enough to save humble minds,
and there is darkness enough to offend and scandalize the proud. The Evidence
of the Testimonies of the Word of God, which the Authors of our Separation did
discover; the Ughliness of the Corruption of Popery, which they did observe;
the Zeal with which they began this Work; the admirable Success with which they
carried it on; the unanimous Accord in which they were to retain Christianity,
and reject Popery, all this, say I, forms the light in this great Event: but
their Divisions, private Quarrels, humane Passions, and the sad Schism found
among them, make that Obscurity that God has permitted, because his Design was
not to throw Popery down to the ground all at once. It is of necessity
therefore, that those who have any care of their Salvation, give attention to
the light to maintain and support themselves, and that they serve themselves
with the obscurities for their Humiliation and Abasement: It Is necessary that
they admire the Finger of God in this great Work; and that they admire it so
much the more, because he has accomplished it by Instruments so weak and
feeble. If you give attention to all this, I may assure you, that you will find
wherewith to satisfy yourselves, in all those Scruples they put into your
minds on the subject of the Authors of our Separation.

If you have at this time no matters of Fact, it is not because we have not
those that are sufficiently considerable to communicate unto you, but it is
because the Apologies for our Reformers, could not well be divided into two
Letters. You may please to know only at this time, That the Cruelties and
Violences do continue; but they dispense them after a manner that we little
understand, or can account for: In some places there is some Abatement and
Relaxation; that which may be understood concerning it, is that the Convertors
are in some distress what course to take, to carry on their great Work. The
desertion, and forsaking the Kingdom, which is greater than at first, makes
them well see, that as yet they have advanced nothing, and that they will keep
no more of the Reformed in it, than those which they shut up in Prisons, and
send to the Galleys.

July 1, 1687.
The Twenty Second PASTORAL LETTER. Testimonies of the Fathers of the fourth
and fifth Ages, about the Sacrament of the Eucharist: Concerning the Communion
under both Kinds: An Article of Controversy: Concerning the Visibility of the
Church; three false Consequences drawn from thence.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you, from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
WE began in our last Letter, to hear the Depositions of the Fathers of the
fourth and fifth Ages, about the Eucharist, and against Transubstantiation; at
this time we shall hear them farther, even as far as is needful to convince the
Papists of being Innovators. We have heard St. Chrysostom, St. Austine,
Theodoret, and Gelasius, i. e. the chief Lights of the Greek and Latin Church,
who tell us more boldly, and clearly than ever did Calvin and Zuinglius, That
the holy Symbols are Figures, Images, and Types of the Body and Blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ: Nevertheless they did not deny that any change did happen in
the Signs of Bread and Wine, nor do we deny it neither. But hear how they spoke
of this change: It Is true, when they spoke thereof before the Catechumens, or
before the People, to whom they desired to give the greatest and most venerable
Idea's of Sacraments, there is nothing great and bold in the Figures of
Rhetoric, and Similitudes which they did not borrow to express this Change.
From thence come those great and magnificent Expressions of St. Chrysostom,
which are abused, that an Opinion might be ascribed unto him, of which he never
thought. This St. Chrysostom oftentimes speaks, as if the Bread and Wine had
been really and actually changed into Flesh and Blood, and as if our Lips and
Mouths were died and stained thereby: But by one single passage of this Father,
learn what he understood, and how he ought to be understood; when it was
intended to speak without Mystery, and without Rhetoric, of the Change which
happens by Consecration, this Author, and others of the same Age, speak of it
as plainly as we ourselves can do. St. Chrysostom says in his Epistle to
Caesarius, The Bread of the Eucharist is called Bread, before it be sanctified,
but the Divine Grace having sanctified it by the Ministry of the Priest, it
bears no more the name of Bread, but is thought worthy to be called the Body of
our Lord, although the nature of Bread remains. And Theodoret Dialog. 1.
, Jesus Christ has honored the visible Symbols by the name of his Body and
Blood, not by changing their nature, but by adding Grace to Nature. And
elsewhere, Dialog. 2.
The mistical Symbols, after their Sanctification, do not lose their proper
nature, for they continue in their first substance, in their first Figure, and
in their first form, and are visible and palpable as they were before. The
contemporary Author, whom we have quoted under the name of Gelasius faith, De
Duab. Nature.
Certainly the Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ which we
receive, are a thing Divine, from whence also it comes to pass, that by them we
are made partakers of the Divine Nature, and nevertheless they do not cease to
be a substance of Bread and Wine. Ephraim the Patriarch of Antioch in the fixth
Age says also the same thing Apud Photiun. m. l. 229.
That the Body of Christ which Believers receive, does not loose its sensible
substance, and remain inseparable from the intelligible Grace: as Baptism,
being made entirely spiritual, preserves the property of its sensible
substance, i. e. of Water. This man had lost all sense to speak thus, if he had
believed Transubstantiation, or unavoidably he believed that a
Transubstantiation was made in Baptism. In the same sixth Age Facundus Bishop
of Hermiane does very neatly express, wherein this change consists, Lib. 9.
We call, says he, The Sacrament of the Body and Blood which is consecrated in
the Bread, and the Cup, the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, not that the Bread
is properly his Body, and the Cup his Blood, but because they contain the
Mystery of his Body and Blood; and thence it comes to pass that the Lord
himself did call the Bread, and the Cup which he blessed, and gave to him
Disciples his Body, and Blood. In what kind of frame of mind must a man be to
say, after this, That Facundus believed Transubstantiation, and the real
Presence. It must be confessed, that we owe something to the Heresy of
Eutyches, who confounded the two Natures in Jesus Christ. For it is in refuting
this Error, and for the confutation of it, that Theodoret, Gelasius, and
Facundus made use of the example of the Eucharist; and have explained the
change which is made there with such clearness, that our own Divines never did
it more plainly. It Is in disputing against these Heretics, that Theodoret says
this, That a man would believe it had been transcribed from the Books of a
Calvinist Dialog. 1.
, Our Savior, says he, did make a change of Names, he gave to his Body the
name of the Symbol; and as he named himself a Vine, so he also called the
Symbol his Blood, etc. Tell us in good earnest, whereof think you, that the
holy Element is a Sign and Figure? Is it of the Divinity of Jesus Christ, or of
his Blood? It Is evident that it is of those things whereof they take their
names: For the Lord having taken the Sign, says not this is my Divinity, but
this is my Body, and this is my Blood. My Brethren, as a matter of Fact, tell
your Converters, that those passages which we produce unto you, are not the
tenth part of what we are able to produce to the same sense and importance.

To conclude, when the Ancients please to express plainly, and without
circumlocution, the manner how we feed on Christ Jesus, they say exactly the
same things that we do. It Is a strange thing, that being of such contrary
sentiments, as they are supposed, they should have expressions so very much
alike: Behold a Calvinistical Paraphrase upon the sixth Chapter of St. John,
taken from Eusebius Caesariensis, he makes Jesus Christ to speak thus: Theod.
Ecclesiast. contra Marcel. lib. 3. cap. 12.
Do not think I speak of the Flesh wherewithal I am enclosed, as if it were
necessary that you should eat it; nor do not think that I appoint you to drink
sensible Blood, but know that the words which I speak to you are Spirit and
Life: For they are my Words, and my Discourses which are this Flesh and this
Blood, in which whosoever does always partake, shall be a Partaker of Eternal
Life, as being nourished with Bread from Heaven. It Is pity that St.
Athanasius, so great a Defender to the Truth against the Arrians, should have
also been a Calvinistical Heretic. After he had quoted these words of our
Lord, Does this offend you, etc. He adds, Our Lord Hom. On, That whosoever
shall speak a word against the Son, etc. speak of the one, and of the other, i.
e. of his Flesh and of his Spirit. And he distinguished his Spirit from his
Flesh, to the end, that not beleiving only that which was visible in him, but
also that which was invisible in him, they might learn, that the things which
he spoke were not carnal, but spiritual. For to how many persons must his Body
serve as Meat, to become the Nourishment of all the World? It Is for that reason
that he makes mention of the Ascension of the Son of Man into Heaven, that he
might withdraw them from all corporeal thoughts, and learn them, that the Flesh
whereof he had spoken to them, was a heavenly Meat, and a spiritual
Nourishment, which He must give them from on High. It Is a thing very
surprising, that the Arrians who watched the steps of Athanasius so very
warily, and made faults of every thing, did not accuse him for being estranged
from the Faith of the Church.

As to St. Austine, he is upon the matter more a Calvinist than Calvin himself:
And if the Jesuits have degraded him because he is a Jansenist in the matter
of Grace, I know not why they should treat him with more civility in this Case.
It Is he that says, Lib. 3. de Doct. Christiana, cap. 16.
That Jesus Christ seems to command a Crime, when he says, If ye do not eat my
Flesh, and drink my Blood, you have no life in you; but it is a Figure which
commands that we communicate in the Passion of our Lord, and that we do
gratefully, and profitably remember, that his Flesh was wounded, and crucified
for us. It Is he which says also, Se^^. 33. de Verhis Domin.
Do not prepare the Throat, but the Heart; Why do you prepare your Teeth, and
you Belly? Believe and you will eat him. You Converters, my Brethren, are not
ignorant that we could easily make a Book of like passages of this Father; for
he speaks often of the Eating of the Flesh of Jesus Christ, and never speaks
otherwise thereof. He says that this eating is by Faith, and that the Wicked
the Unbelieving and Unworthy Communicants have no part therein. I conjure you,
my Brethren, to consider, whether any thing solid can be opposed to Testimonies
so plain, and express? What can the Harshnesses of St. Ambrose, the
Rhetorications of St. Chrysostom, and the perplexed Ratiocinations of St.
Hillary, do against this? Can it hinder, that the Testimonies which we have
heard, do not make a clear and convincing Deposition against the Real Presence?
I enquire of you, Whether, if we must explain one by the other, it be just to
explain those which speak simply, clearly, and without ambiguity, by those who
speak like Orators, or in a mystic Style, that they may not be understood by
Infidels and Catechumens? Besides, is it not just to explain an Author by
himself? Are not five or six passages of St. Chrysostom, where he speaks in
plain terms, and discourses of things as they are in themselves, more than
sufficient to give the Reader a true understanding of the sense and spirit of
this Author? Where are the Christian Orators with whom a man may not find
Heresies, if he will thus take them at advantage? And in the Books of
Protestant Meditations, may not a man find a hundred passages which Posterity
may abuse after the same manner that they abuse those of St. Chrysostom, to
establish the Perpetuity of the Faith of the Eucharist, in the sense of the
Roman Church? I will stop here, and take it for granted, that the Faith was not
changed in this Article, neither in the fourth nor fifth Ages, nor in the three
that followed them.

There happened neither any change in the Administration of the Sacrament under
both Kinds. And we boldly defy all your Converters to give us any proof, or
any example of any Communion celebrated in those Ages under the Species of
Bread alone. Monsieur de Meaux, who writ last on this subject, has found no
other example but that of St. Ambrose, concerning whom the Author of his Life
says, That he died as soon as he had swallowed the Body of Jesus Christ. A fine
proof, that they did not also give him the Blood! As if it were not known that
the whole Sacrament were not often expressed by the Flesh, or the Body of Jesus
Christ: And as if there were any Figure more common, than that of signifying
the whole by a part. I will not stay on this Article, to prove that no Change
happened therein, in the fourth and fifth Ages, for it is a thing notorious, and
not disputed by our Adversaries themselves: All that they say is, That it was
also permitted to communicate der one Kind; although the Custom then was to
communicate under both. But that they can-never prove. Monsieur de Meaux could
not have made a Book which would have done him less Honor, than that which he
has made on this subject. It will never be believed that a man speaks
sincerely, when he charges himself with Falseness in a thing so publicly known
as this is: It Is that for the space of four hundred, or five hundred Years, the
Custom of Communicating under one Kind, was wholly unknown.

An Article of Controversy: An Answer to the fallacious Arguments drawn from
the Visibility of the Church.
I Thought that I had finished telling you, what was necessary you should know,
to dis-intangle your selves from the Sophisms which are drawn from the Unity of
the Church, and from that Schism which breaks this Unity. We have employed
Eleven Articles on that Subject in the Eleven Letters which are from the 9th to
the 21th. We shall at this time open a second Fountain of the Illusions of your
Converters, on the Subject of the Church, it is that of her Visibility. It Is a
long time since, that one of our most illustrious Confessors desired of me some
Elucidations thereon, not so much for himself, as for many plain persons which
they had ruffled and perplexed. But it was not possible for us to come at it
sooner, for if we had sooner left off our Discourse about its Unity and Schism,
we should have omitted something essential. Behold after what manner they form
the Sophism drawn from the visibility of the Church. It Is necessary, they tell
you, that the Church be always visible; for she is a City set upon a Hill and
cannot be hid. How could it be, that the Pagans in all Ages should be able to
come over to the Church, if she had been hidden? The Gate of Conversion had
been shut upon them. Your hidden Believers are Chimera's. Besides, it is
necessary that the Ministry of the Church be always visible. For you will never
persuade us, that the Ministry has entirely failed; so that it was needful,
(as your Confession of Faith says) that God should extraordinarily raise up Men
to re-establish it. Besides, it is of the essence of the Church to be visible;
your Church cannot be the true Church, for it was not visible 200 years ago; it
was not visible, say I, since it was not at all.

Concerning this, in the first place, Don't you engage yourselves to maintain,
that the true Church is Invisible, as if this point were necessary to defend
your Cause, and our Church that was hidden before the Reformation. Your
Converters quote many places of Scripture, (as Monsieur de Meaux has done in
his Instructions, to Mademoiselle de Duras) to prove to you, that the Church is
a visible Society. Tell them, that is to no purpose; for we are at an Agreement
therein with them. They may quote unto you many of our Doctors who have
maintained, that the true Church was Invisible. But know, my Brethren, that
this is nothing but a Dispute about Words, and that we are at an accord with
them in the sense of the thing. Our Divines mean, that the true Members of the
Church are Invisible, and not that the Society, in which the true Members of
the Church are, is Invisible. This is true, the true Members of the Church are
Invisible, for there are none but true Believers that are true Members of the
Church: If you hear my voice, then are you my Disciples indeed: Now true
predestined Believers are visible, as Men, but they are not visible as
Believers; for no body sees true Faith, it is in the heart, and the actions
which appear without may be equivocal: But the Society where these true Members
are, is visible; for it is a Society of Men that serve God according to his Word
and Laws, this is visible. Understand this by the example of a Man, he has a
body and a soul, but the body in which this soul is, is visible. True Believers
are the soul of the Church, that is invisible; the body of the Church is the
external Society, and that is visible. Therefore as you may say of a Man, that
he is visible, and invisible; invisible with respect to his soul, visible with
respect to his body; so it may be said concerning the Church, that she is
visible and invisible, invisible with respect to her soul, which is true Faith,
and true Believers; visible with respect to the Society, in which this soul,
i.e. these true Believers are enclosed. This is so clear and evident, that your
Converters cannot dis-allow it. Behold already one point of Sophistry made
void: The Church is visible, be it so, as a Man is visible.

After this, if they inquire of you, Is this visible Church the Body of Jesus
Christ? Distinguish, and tell them, She is the Body of Jesus Christ, forasmuch
as she contains in herself truly righteous persons, and true Believers; but not
because she encloses wicked, hypocritical, and vicious persons. For it is
impossible that these persons should be the Body of Jesus Christ; otherwise
Jesus Christ would have rotten and stinking Members; otherwise Dogs, Swine,
etc. would be in the Communion of Jesus Christ. Now this is absurd, for if any
one have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and there can be no
communion between light and darkness, Christ and Belial. So that a Christian
which has nothing but a simple Profession, and neither Virtue nor Charity, a
Lover of the Word, in the Christian Society, is no true Member of Jesus Christ,
or his Church, be he Priest, Bishop, or Guide thereof. Make Reflections in this
place on the monstrous Doctrines of your Converters, of whom the most part will
tell you, that to be a true Member of the Church, it suffices to make
profession of the Faith, and to adhere to lawful Pastors. So that Priests that
are Sorcerers and Sodomites, which you have oftentimes seen burnt at Paris,
were the true Members of Jesus Christ. This is capable of making a man tremble
with horror. They will say to you thereon, if they were not true Members of
the Church, and of the Body of Jesus Christ, they could not be the Guides
thereof. Such a one is an evil Man, he is nevertheless a true Bishop, he must
therefore be a true Member of Jesus Christ, and of his Body. Answer to this,
that which one of the Writers of Port Royal says somewhere, That oftentimes
those which Build Jerusalem, and Guide it, are the Citizens of Babylon. Tell
them, that to be a lawful Pastor and Guide of the Church, to be able to
administer the Word, and Sacraments, with Authority, its enough to be a Member
of the external and visible Society, it is not necessary to be a Member of the
true Church, to be in the hand of God an Instrument of his Work. A King may
administer Justice, and administer it very well by a wicked man, who has
inwardly all sorts of inclinations to Injustice. It will be said a man cannot
be the Head and Guide of a Body, without being a Member thereof, for the Head
is one of its principal Members. It must be answered, That false Pastors are
true Members of the visible Society of the Church, and that they are also true
Heads of that Society whereof they are true Members: but they are neither Heads
nor Members of the principal and invisible part of the Church, who are true
Believers, and truly righteous persons: They are not therefore true Heads but
of that part whereof they are true Members, and that suffices them for the
external Administration of the Word and Sacraments, for the truly Righteous
receive the Word and Sacraments in quality of the Members of the external
Society.

They will press you further, and tell you, You do confess the Church is
visible, because she has a Body, which is an external Society. But is it
always visible? Although you should answer, That it is not necessary that the
Church be always visible; they would not be able to convince you of the
contrary by reason: For a man who is visible by his body, may be sometimes
hidden, and by that means be invisible. May not the external Society of the
Church, which is visible, have been at sometimes, and in some seasons hidden,
through the Persecution of Pagans, or Heretics? But confess to them, that the
Church has been always visible, and will be to the end of the World. It Is
true, that the Persecutions under the Pagan-Emperours were very great, but they
never proceeded so far as utterly to destroy all Assemblies of the Church to
that degree that there were no visible Society of Christians; the Christians
were well known under the Persecutions, seeing they knew where to find them to
make Martyrs of them; the Church was visible in the midst of the flames: She
remained visible in the Heretical Assemblies of the Arrians; for those that
held the Truth in those Assemblies themselves, were more numerous than those
that erred concerning it. If there were any place where the Church were become
invisible, it was in the Papism, for never was there a Church so corrupt and
drowned in Superstitions, as that: Nevertheless the Church continued there
visible, because that Christianity, and the Fundamentals of the Christian
Religion did abide there: I do not say that they did remain there in their
Integrity, but the contrary; nevertheless it suffices, that they did continue
there, it is necessary therefore that you know, that wherever Christianity
fore that you know, that wherever Christianity remains sensible and visible,
the Church remains visible, for it is Christianity that makes the Church. If a
Sect become so corrupt that Christianity is no longer visible in it, such are
the Mahumetans, and the Socinians who have rejected the Foundations; the Church
is no longer visible among them, unless it be as a dead man remains visible,
but it is also visible that he is dead, without life, and without soul: so in
the Sects which have rejected the Foundations, the Church remains visible, but
it is also visible that such Churches are without life, without soul, without
salvation. In the Sects which preserve Christianity, although they have added
very many things thereunto, and even such things as overturns the Foundations
thereof, the Church does not fail to remain visible, because Christianity both
is there, and is seen there. If therefore they do inquire of you, Where was
your Church before Luther, and Calvin? Answer them, She was in the Christian
Societies that were in Aethiopia, in those which were in Egypt, and in Africa,
in those which are, and were in Asia, in the Greek Church that was at
Constantinople, and Antioch, in Muscovy, and the Churches of Russia, and she
was even in the Church of Rome itself. If they ask of you, Was the Church
visible in these Societies, or were the Members thereof hidden? Answer them,
That the Church was visible in these Societies, forasmuch as Christianity, and
the Creed of the Apostles, in the true sense thereof, explained in the first
six General Councils, were visibly preserved there: Add you, that the true
Members of Jesus Christ, and of the Church, were hidden, and not visible,
because those that sincerely and truly adhered to this true Christianity,
contained in the Creeds of the Christian Church, were not known by name: but
that these Believers were hidden, was not at all peculiar to these corrupt
Churches, because of their Corruption; for the case is the same in the purest
Churches, the true Members of Jesus Christ, and of his body are hidden, because
we do not certainly know those which adhere to the Christian Faith in
sincerity, and with the heart. Behold a pure and native Explication of the true
Visibility of the Church, and of the Perpetuity of that Visibility.

The Bishop of Meaux, and your other Converters, will seem to you very well
pleased in this, that you confess the Church is visible, and always visible.
Behold they will say one point gained: For if the Church be always visible,
it is of necessity that there be a Succession in the Ministry, a train of
legitimate Pastors: There will always be Teachers with whom Jesus Christ will
teach, and the true Teaching will never cease in the Church. These are Monsieur
de Meaux, that great Converter's own words: That is to say, from the perpetual
Visibility of the Church, he draws these three conclusions: 1. That pure and
true Teaching has never ceased in the Church. 2. That there will always be a
series and train of legitimate Pastors. 3. That Jesus Christ will always teach
with these Pastors, i.e. they must be Infallible.


I entreat you, my Brethren, to attend to what I shall say concerning these
three Consequences.

1. These Gentlemen suppose that the Church cannot be perpetual, and
perpetually visible, without being pure, and without continuing pure, and
exempt from corruption in the Faith. The Church is always visible, therefore
pure preaching must always remain there. Can a man argue more pitifully? it is
just as if I should say, Whilst Man has a Soul in his Body, he must be always
sound, and hail, as if Health were inseparable from Life. Where have they found
that Purity, with respect to Faith, is in separable from Visibility? And
because the Church is always visible, does it follow, that she is always sound?
if the nature of the Church consisted in an indivisible point. and in that
certain state of purity of Faith in which there was no kind of Errors; it is
true, the Church would perish, cease to be, and by consequence to be visible,
as soon as the Christian Doctrine should come to be mingled with any Doctrine
that is strange and foreign thereto: And indeed it is the supposition of your
Converters. But it is the most foolish Dream that ever entered into the mind of
Man, the most contrary to the Word of God and Experience, that ever was
asserted. The most contrary to the Scripture: for the Scripture says, That
there shall be in the Church thorns and thistles mingled with the good grain.
Wolves will creep in and destroy the flock. That there must be heresies. That
men will build upon the foundation wood, bay, stubble. And that even the Son of
perdition will sit in the Church and Temple of God. The most contrary to
Experience, for for the space of 1300 or 1400 years, which way soever we cast
our Eyes, we behold Christianity everywhere spoiled by false and strange
Doctrines. Lay down this therefore as a thing indisputable, that the Church
must be always visible, that she must always subsist, but not that she must
always subsist pure and underfiled. The Church began to be corrupt considerably
in the fourth Age; and in two Ages the Corruption became such, that
Antichristianity, which is the highest degree of the corruption of
Christianity, proceeded and came out from thence.

But in the midst of this great Corruption, Christianity nevertheless preserved
it self, it remained very visible, and by consequence the Church also continued
visible: for yet once more the Church remains everywhere, where Christianity
remains; and the Church remains visible everywhere, where Christianity remains
yisible. Remember-therefore that Popery is a very high and extreme Corruption
of Christianity, but it is not the Annihilation of it: for we must well
distinguish betwixt Annihilation and extreme Corruption of it. If the Church of
Rome had rejected the Foundations, as the Turks and the Socinians have done,
she would have been no more visible than as a dead Body is visible: But because
she has only added an infinite number of false Doctrines superstitious and
idolatrous, whilst she has retained Fundamentals, she has only corrupted
Christianity. But Christianity in the midst of these Corruptions, has not
failed to remain visible, to those which search, after it with diligence and
attention. Imagine you an Egg not broken, which swims in dirty and stinking
water; it is the perfect Emblem of the Roman Religion. The Egg whole and not
broken, is the Christian Creed preserved in its integrity in the sense of the
Church. The filthy and stinking Water where this Egg swims, is the heap of
Superstitions, Errors, and Idolatries of Popery. The Egg remains visible in the
midst of this filthy Water, and even the opposition of the blackness of the
Mire to the whiteness of the Egg, make it in some sort more visible. The Body
of Christianity is also visible in the heap of Popish Errors; and to him that
will give attention thereunto, it may be said, that the true Christianity which
does continue in the Roman Religion, serves to discover and make the ugliness
of Popery more horrible. The Mud and the stinking Water which encompasseth this
Egg, is visible as well as the Egg. It Is the light of the day which manifests
the one and the other. The Corruption introduced by Popery in the Roman
Religion, is visible as well as Christianity. It Is the light of the day, i.e.
the light of the Word of God which manifests both: for the Word of God
manifests Christianity in the Romish Religion, by the fair conformity of the
three Creeds; that of the Apostles, that of Nice, and of Athanasius with the
Revelation. This same word manifests Antichristianity, the Mud and the Dirt of
Popery, by the frightful dissimilitude and unlikeness which is between Popery
and Revelation. It seems to me that he must be very blockish, not to perceive
all this, and not to see that the Church may always endure, and always be even
visible, although it be not necessary that she always continue in perfect
Purity.

But nevertheless, there is in the first consequence of your Converters some
truth, which serves for a foundation to that gross Illusion which they would
put upon you. They say, The Church is always visible, therefore pure Preaching
must always continue there. If the meaning be, it is of necessity that something
of pure Preaching do always remain there, yea, and that the essential parts of
true Preaching remain there, it is true: for if the Fundamentals and essential
parts of Christianity were not there, there were no Church there. Moreover it is
true, that in Popery, in the Religion of the Greeks, in the Oriental
Communions, the Cophtis, the Nestorians, and the Armenians, pure Preaching does
continue, as to the Fundamentals of the Creed, which make the Essence of
Christianity. But it does not follow at all, that Preaching must necessarily
remain there wholly pure and incorrupt.

Not being able to proceed at this time to the examination of the two last
consequences, which your Converters draw from the perpetual visibility of the
Church; I will conclude by answering a Question which they put unto you, and
which it may be you put unto your selves: Can a man be saved in Communions
which you compare to a great Basin full of Dirt and stinking Water, in which
swims a good Egg, clean, and in its integrity? This respects those who desire
to save themselves in the Roman Church, because she retains the Egg, the Creed
of Christians, in its perfection. You may well think that we should have a
great many things to say to them, if we would say all, and were willing to
repeat what we have said concerning it in our Seventeenth Letter. But in this
place I shall only answer to them, That it does not follow, that a man may be
saved in a Communion which retains the Egg of Christianity, whilst he swims in
the Dung which compasses the Egg, and nourishes himself with it; a man plunged
in a hideous Mire, which receives the stinking dirt by his mouth, because he
sees some Fruits useful for nourishment swim in this slime, can he live
thereby. Yea, suppose that he eats of these Fruits, if at the same time he eats
this corrupt slime, will he die e're a whit the less? If this man finds an Art
to separate the slime from the nourishments which swim there, so that he take
nothing but the nourishments, I do confess that he may live. In like manner, if
a Christian can live in the Roman Communion, and separate the good from the
bad, he may be saved. But this is that which we do maintain to be impossible at
this time, for the adult. These corrupt and dirty Communions are therefore
saving to those alone, who partake in Christianity, without any participation
in the corruption thereof. For example: We ought not to call in doubt the
salvation of Infants which die in the Church of Rome; for they have eaten the
Egg, God has communicated to them his Grace by their Baptism, or their Birth,
because they were born within the borders of Christianity. As for the adult, if
they can eat the Egg, and not swallow the Dung, if they can partake in pure
Christianity, without taking part in its corruption, they may, I do confess,
live and be saved in that Communion. But this is the difficulty, or rather
impossibility, Who is he that can live in the Roman Communion, without
assisting at the false Sacrifice of the Mass, without worshipping Bread,
consenting to the Invocation of Saints, and the Worship of Images? This is
enough at present to disabuse our unhappy Indifferents, who would very falsely
persuade themselves, that they may be saved in the Estate wherein they are.

FOR News we give you this day a Letter, which will teach you the Constancy of
some of our Confessors of Dauphine.

We have yet in Dauphine some Illustrious Persons, which maintain the Cause of
God in the midst of their Enemies. There is Mr. de l' Alo of the House of
Epheluche, a Counselor in the Parliament of Dauphine, who being at Paris in
1685. and refusing to change his Religion, was banished with Madam his Wife,
into a paltry Village, where he could not get so much as one person that would
serve him for his money. After that they had been kept there some months, Madam
de l'Alo fell into very great indispositions; they sent her into Dauphine, and
removed Mr. de l'Alo to the Castle of Trompette, where he was confined within
four Walls, without suffering him to have any other society than that of a
Monk, who went every day to torment him after a thousand ways; and when he
could gain nothing, he left him, and said to him; He must make himself ready to
be transported to the Pyrenees. This is it that he wrote to one of the
Gentlemen his Brethren about six months since, testifying to him, That he
reckoned all that he had suffered as nothing, or any thing that he could
suffer; and that he would never abandon the Faith which he had professed to
that moment.

Monsieur the Marquess of Pierre, also a Counselor in the Parliament of
Grenoble, is one of our most Illustrious Confessors; he was extremely famous in
his Religion as well as in his Employ: so that his Zeal went an equal pace with
his Knowledge, and both the one and the other has gained him great Reputation
among his Brethren. The Court, which feared he might confirm them, if he were
suffered among them, commanded him to render himself at Paris, by a Letter
under the Privy Sign, which they sent him a little before the Dragoons came
into that Province. This Lord, who was not conscious to himself of any fault,
and who had long before prepared himself to suffer not only the loss of his
Office, and of all his Goods, and to beg from door to door with Madam his Wife,
and the Gentlemen his Sons, but also to lose his Head upon a Scaffold, yea to
be burnt alive, rather than betray his Savior, yea to be burnt alive, rather
than betray his Savior, as he said in these very words to a Pastor of his
Province. (It was to him who gave us this Intelligence about three weeks before
he received that Letter under the Privy-Sign.) He was in that generous
resolution, when he went for Paris in the month of August, with one of the
Gentlemen his Sons. Arriving at Paris, he addressed himself to the Ministers of
State, to know the cause of that Summons that they had given him. But they said
nothing to him. He abode at Paris about six months, without having any thing
said to him, at the last they proposed to him to change his Religion, he
refused it. They took from him Monsieur his Son, who was all his comfort, and
said to him, that the King would have him brought up in the Roman Catholic
Religion: This was the most smart stroke of all the rest. He resolved to depart
from Paris, he went thence with Mr. de Vic, and some other Gentlemen. They were
arrested at Laudrecy; the other for ^ear, changed their Religion. Mr. de la
Pierre would not do so. There was an Order from the King to convey him to the
Citadel of Cambray, and thither he was conveyed. A Counselor of the Parliament
of Tournay had a Commission to examine him, and to make his Process. He
answered him always with a perfect freedom of mind, and unmovable firmness. The
Commissary told him, that he deserved the Galleys, for attempting to go out of
the Realm without leave, and that he could not hinder his condemnation. He
answered him, That he was ready not only to go to the Galleys, but also to
death. We have not yet learnt that he has been condemned. He continues a
Prisoner, but always stout and firm.

We must put in the Rank of our Illustrious Confessors, Madam de Bardonnanche,
Wife of a Counselor in the Parliament of that Name, and Vicountess of Trienes
in Dauphine. This Lady who was formerly distinguished by her great Knowledge,
(above all in Piety) and by her Eminent Virtues as well as by her great
Quality, is now distinguished after another manner in these last Trials.

About four years since she saw that revolt of her Husband, which she testified
by a great Grief: Since that they took from her one of her Daughters, to bring
her up in the new Religion of her Father: she was more wounded for this, then
for the loss of her Husband: In fine, she saw the last and great Desolation of
our Churches: But all this has not the least moved her, nor frighted her in
any sort. When that the Dragoons had put all into Despair in her Country, and
the rest of the Province, she boldly exhorted every one to be firm, and as a
Pastor of her acquaintance, (it was he who wrote her Story) bad her to think of
departing out of the Kingdom, because she saw her self unprofitable there; (the
Edict of Nantes was not revoked) She wrote to him that she must not be one of
those Mercenaries, who seeing the Woolf coming fled away; and he alleging his
own Exemple, she said that she would not depart out of the State, at least till
the King commanded her, and that she hoped that God would give her the Grace to
surmount all, and abide firm. After that they had subverted all the Churches of
that Country. The Intendant Le Bret, M. le Camus, Bishop of Grenoble, and at
this time Cardinal, the Marquess de la Trousse, Commander of the Troops in
Dauphine, went to see her in her Castle du Monotier of Clermont; they disputed
against her, they made Requests to her, with Promise, and Threats; she defended
her self vigorously against all their Attaques, and in the end they left her.
Some days after they sent to take her away, by the Dragoons, to confine her in
a Covent at Grenoble: Seeing she was always the same, they threatened to send
her to Valence, and to put her into the hands of Rapine; she answered that she
would go whether they pleased, even to the Fire, but not to the Mass. In the
end they? executed one part of the said threatening upon her, sending her to
Valence, but not to the Butchery of Rapine, they put her into a Convent of the
Religious, with a prohibition to permit her to speak to any of them, which they
call the New Converts. This Lady suffered her Removal, and her Imprisonment in
that Cloister, with so much patience, and sweetness, that it is said she abated
the rage, and fury of her Persecutors. She entertained the Religious with so
much Decency, and spoke to them such handsome things of our Religion, that she
won at first their Heart, and almost persuaded them to be Christians. The
Intendant, and the Bishop of Valence understanding that this Prisoner triumphed
over her Goalers, gave order that she should be fetched from the Convent where
she was put, and be removed into another, which was done, and Madam de
Bardonnanche behaved her self there, after the same manner, there she made also
the same Progress upon the Spirits of her new Hostesses. They took her also
from that Convent, and confined her in another in the same place, with a
Command not to speak to her, nor to ^uffer her to speak to any body. Since we
have l^arnt by one of our Brethren well worthy of Credit, who came lately from
that Province, that there has been a new Order to remove her into another
Convent at Vif, a Town which is not above two leagues from Grenoble.

I could increase these Relations with diverse Circumstances, and with others
like them, as that of Monsieur de Saint Cross, the Son of a Counselor of the
Parliament of Grenoble, who has been at Pierre Size these five Months, because
he would not change; that also if the three Pastors of Orange, Mr. Chion, Mr.
Gondran, Mr. Petit, and Mr. Onet Pastor of Courteson near Orange, who have long
been kept in the Prisons of Valence, and who are now at Pierre Size, though
they be not able to reproach them for having done any thing against the King,
in whose State they lived not, and who testify an admirable Constancy,
although very many did yield before their Eyes. That of Monsieur de Beauregard,
Burgess of St. Anthony near to St. Marcelin, in the same Province, who after he
had seen all his Goods devoured, which were very great, has suffered the most
cruel torments in his Body, until they had hardened, and shrunk up the Nerves
of his Legs, by the violence of the approaching Fire, and had laid him upon a
pile of wood, saying unto him, that he should be burnt alive, in one word, whom
they had tormented till he lost his Reason, who being at length set at liberty,
is happily retired out of the Kingdom into Switzerland. That of Monsieur Delis,
a Gentleman of Trienes in Dauphine, who chose rather to suffer Martyrdom, and
has actually suffered it in the Month of January 1686, at Grenoble, rather
than change: But of this enough for this time.


News from Nismes, written June, 17th 1687.
EVery day they bring Prisoners from Lions into this City, and once or twice in
a Month they condemn to the Galleys, those which had abjured and communicated
and afterward were taken attempting to get out of the Kingdom. As for them
which neither have, nor will abjure, they condemn them to America. The Prisons
and the Tower of Vennatiere (which is a kind of Prison) are always full of
these poor miserable Creatures. They are very much relieved by those in this
City, which have done what they would never do; it is not known why God has
left them here, without it be for the relief of those Confessors of Christ,
which would dye else by Famine in Prisons. About eight days since they carried
twenty one Persons (some Women, and some young Girls, that were condemned) to
Marseille, viz. nineteen for America, and two for the Galleys, on whom they
bestowed great Charity Every Month we make a contribution for the General
Hospital which is established in this City, in the Church, and in the Houses
adjoining, which belong to the Consistory, every one according to his Ability.
Since the eighth of May we have had the Regiment of Vivonne, on which day they
begun to work upon the Citadel, though that were Ascension-day, and they take
great pains therein: They have enclosed from the form of Paulian unto the Wall
of the City, drawing a Line from the Tower of Corconne unto the Watchtower at
the end of the Tennis-Court. Two days since there was a Detachment of five
Companies to go to Valeraube, where there was a numerous Assembly in the
Presence of the Priest of the place, and before the Sermon the Priest would
dispute with him that was to Preach, and after that he would hear his Sermon.
We know not yet what was the issue of that Affair.

In this City whilst M. the Intendant was here, they say there are Assemblies,
notwithstanding all the ill Treatment with which they have been continually
exercised. They say that the Daughters of Mr. Ducros and of Andemar, are out of
the hands of Rapine, since their fall through their ill treatment. But Mrs.
Parelle persists with an incredible constancy: When her cruel Hangman said to
her, Madam, I am astonished that you can suffer such Miseries: She answered him
again, As for me, I suffer nothing, this is nothing, Jesus Christ has suffered
much more for me.

Since the writing of this Letter we are informed of two faithful Persons,
which have suffered Martyrdom in the said City of Nismes the 26th of the last
Month; the name of the one is Mr. Manuel, the other is called Iloque: You shall
have the History of their Martyrdom some other time. We could also give you the
News of our Brethren of Metz, if this Pastoral Letter could contain the Copy of
that which was written from that place. In the mean time, cease not to pour out
your Prayers in the presence of the Great God for the Consolation of these
afflicted Persons.

July 15, 1687.

The Twenty Third PASTORAL LETTER. An Article of Antiquity: The Church of the
fourth and fifth Ages did not Adore the Sacrament of the Eucharist: And Article
of Controversy: An Answer to the Consequences which are drawn from the
perpetual Visibility of the Church: Notable Matters of Fact.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to your from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
IN the two preceding Letters you have seen what the Ancients of the fourth and
fifth Ages did think on the subject of the Eucharist. You have seen that they
acknowledge nothing there but Signs, and Images of the Body, and Blood of our
Lord, and that they apprehended no other change there, but a change of Grace,
which made no alteration in the nature of the species of Bread and Wine. So the
Faith of the Church was not changed therein; there remains the Adoration,
concerning which it is also certain, that there happened no change in the Ages
where we are. They did not Adore the Sacrament in the three first Ages, nor did
they Adore it in these. Suffer not your selves to be surprised, my Brethren, by
five or six words which they quote to you from St. Ambrose, or St. Austine, who
say, That it is necessary that we Adore the Flesh of Jesus Christ in the
Mysteries, and that we must not eat the Flesh of Jesus Christ when we have not
Adored it. We must not search the practice of an Age in rambling, and
extravagant Expressions, as these are. It Is in History, and in matters of Fact.
There is not a person among us, that does not acknowledge, that we must Adore
Jesus Christ in the participation of the Mysteries; that is not the thing
whereof we dispute. It must be known whether they bowed the Knew before the
Sacrament, whether they lifted it up before the Communion, that it might be
Adored; now we do maintain that this was not done. And I do not know whether
your Converters have the boldness to say the contrary; at least they have not
Ability enough to prove it. They dazzle your Eyes with a passage of Theodoret,
who says, speaking of the Symbols of Bread and Wine, Dialog. 2.
That we conceive by the understanding that they are what they were made, that
we believe them, and Adore them as being that which we believe them. But
observe, it is the same place where this Author tells us, that which we have
mentioned unto you before; That the Mystical Symbols do not loose their proper
Nature after their Consecration, but that they remain in their first Substance,
their first Figure, and their first Form, they are visible, and palpable as
they were before. He adds then immediately after the words, which are abused to
prove the Adoration of the Sacrament. It Is the same Author which has told us
after a very express manner, that God in the Sacrament does not change Nature,
but add Grace to Nature. After this it is unavoidable, that he must have lost
his Wits to say, that we must Adore Bread, and Wine, which remain such, and
which have received no change in their Substance. Who does not see then that
the word Adore is here taken for Venerate, and in the same sense that we call
the Mysteries of Religion Adorable, and that we say we must Adore the Conduct
of Providence. In the sense that St. Isidore of Damietta calls the Gospels Lib.
1. ep. 136.
Adorable. That the Emperors were called Conc. Calced. part. 1.
Adorable by the Councils themselves: And that the Table was called the
Adorable Altar by the same Councils. To conclude, Theodoret must be understood
as he desires to be understood, for it is he that says in the following
Dialogue, If the Body of Jesus Christ seems to you vile, and of little value,
Why do you esteem its Figure whereof is Adorable, and worthy of Honor, can it
self be abject and contemptible? Behold again, the Eucharist which is nothing
but a Figure, and a Figure opposite to the Body, and which by consequence is
not the Body. But it is nevertheless an Adorable Figure. Judge whether Theodoret
were so pitiful a Christian to believe we must Adore a Figure.

If we would find the practice of the Church in passages like these, it were
better to search it in passages of St. Austin, where this Father says for
example, Sermon. 2. de diversis.
That that which he Adores is not a thing toward which he could stretch out
his Finger, and say, Behold the God which I Adore. Or rather in the place where
he says, Sermon. 74. de diversie.
Whilst we are in the Body we are absent from the Lord, and if any one doubt or
deny it, and say to us, Where is your God? we cannot show him. Jesus Christ is
always with his Father, as to the presence of his Glory, and Divinity; as to
his Corporeal Presence he is now above the Heavens, at the right Hand of the
Father, but he is in all Christians by a presence of Faith. It must be
professed, that St. Austin is an inconvenient Author for these
Transubstantiators, we cannot make him open his mouth, but Thunders proceed from
it against the now reigning Heresy and Idolatry. It appears here, that he
neither adored the Sacrament, nor looked upon it as his God; for he could not
have found any difficulty in answering that question, Where is your God? It
appear also, that he had comprehended this admirable corporeal presence of
Christ in the Sacrament: for he reserves all the corporeal presence of Christ
to the Heavens, and leaves nothing to Earth, but a presence of Faith. This poor
man understood his Religion very ill.

We ought also to give attention to what St. Austin says, speaking of sacred
Signs, that there are some of them subsist after the action, as the Brazen
Serpent, Lib. 3. de Trinit. cap. 10.
But others which cease after they have served the use to which they were
designed, as the Bread which we make expressly to be a sacred sign, and is spent
in the receiving the Sacrament. But because these things being made by men, are
known to men, they may well receive honor, and give occasion for admiration,
as things miraculous. What a poor man was this St. Austin, and how many
oversights in four lines! 1. He would not have us worship the Bread, we ought
only to give it some respect, as to a religious thing. 2. He would not have us
admire the Eucharist, as a thing miraculous. Of what did he think, thus to
speak of the greatest Miracle that ever was since the creation of the World? Is
it not a thing miraculous, that the Body of Jesus Christ with all his substance
should subsist in a point, should be stripped of all its Accidents, and be in an
infinite number of places at once? I cannot tell then any more what will be
called a thing miraculous. 3. He supposes that it is man that makes this
Transubstantiation, these things being made by men.
Behold an admirable Divine, which believes that a man can make a God, and do a
Miracle, if I may so say, that exhausts all the Divine Power.

To conclude, to these three or four words of St. Austin, That none eats the
flesh of Jesus Christ, before he has adored it, we ought to oppose what he
says in the third Book concerning the Christian Doctrine, De Doctr. Christ.
lib. 3. cap. 9.
That every one knows the Sacrament of Baptism, and the celebration of the Body
and Blood of our Lord, that it is well known whereunto they have respect, and
that they are reverenced not by a servitude, i.e. after a carnal manner, but by
a spiritual liberty. Here St. Austin desires that we give to Baptism the same
honor, as to the Sacrament of the Eucharist. We must confess, if St. Austin
did adore the Sacrament, we ought to make no scruple therein; we owe him this
complaisance, for that he has spoken as absolutely concerning it, as our
selves. For during the space of two hundred years past, there has not been
either Zuinglian or Calvinist, which has spoken more boldly or more clearly
against the Real Presence and Transubstantiation.

If this suffice not to know what kind of Worship was given to the Eucharist,
we must learn it from the History of matters of fact. We learn from Mr. de
Valois, in his Notes upon Eusebius, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 9. Hist. Eccles.
That the Believers which were to communicate, approached the Altar, and there
received the Body of Jesus Christ from the hand of the Priest, standing
upright, and not on their knees, as at this day. The Author has passed for a
good Roman Catholic, he is learned, and he is a Modern Writer: so that he
wants nothing to give him an authority in the hearts of the New Converts, who
refer themselves much more concerning Religion, to what their new Authors speak
of it, then to what is said thereof by those that are more ancient. And indeed
how could they communicate otherwise than standing, since they prayed standing
on the Lords day, and the fifty days which are from Easter to Whitsontide, in
memory of the Resurrection? When they were ready to consecrate, they put out
the Catechumens, i.e. well nigh half the Christians, is it probable that they
would deprive them of the comfort of adoring their Savior, if it had been then
the custom of adoring him in the Sacrament? In those Ages they did communicate
Infants, and how could they exact Adoration before the Manducation, since
Infants are not capable of performing an Act of Adoration?

I may also reckon amongst those Articles, concerning which there was no change
in the fourth and fifth Ages, that of Purgatory. For the opinion of a separate
place, where Souls were to be kept till the day of Judgment, without seeing the
face of God, but without suffering any thing there, was the Opinion of the
greatest men of those Ages; of St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, St. Hillary, St.
Jerome, and under names so great, it may not be doubted, but it was the
prevailing Opinion. 'Twas the third place of the Christians that then were, but
as yet there were but few footsteps of a fourth place seen. It Is true, that in
these Ages a man may show you some passages of Gregory Nyssen, and even some of
St. Jerome, which speak of a Purgation of Sins, which ought to be made after
death by the means of a Penal Fire. But this is not the Purgatory of Popery,
it is that of Origin: according to whom, we have seen that all intelligent
Creatures, without excepting Devils, and wicked men, who die impenitently,
ought to be recovered and re-established. Originism did not die with Origin,
and many famous Fathers of the fourth Age were infatuated with it. Those which
know the History of the Quarrels between St. Chrysostom and Epiphanius, are not
ignorant thereof. I think indeed that few men did then dare to maintain the
Opinion of Origin, crude as he left it, touching the future salvation of the
Devils and the damned. But many endeavored to soften and smooth it, and said
at least, Christians who died in the profession of the Faith, but without
Holiness and Repentance, would one day be recovered. It Is without doubt, that
this Opinion mitigated and softened, was one step which made the Church fall
into the Error of Purgatory: For after they had restrained those that were to
be purged by a Penal Fire, to such as died without Holiness and Repentance, by
little and little they restrained them to such, who dying without Repentance,
had not satisfied the Canonical Penances of the Church.

St. Austin was not of the opinion of those who believed that ill Christians
dying without repentance, were to be purged by fire; nevertheless he thought it
probable, Enchir. cap. 67
that those who had too much affection for temporal good things during the
space of this Life, after death would be afflicted with grief for the loss of
them, and that this would serve them for a Castigation. Nevertheless he
proposes this but as a doubtful conjecture. It is not incredible, says he,
Enchir. cap. 69.
but that something of like nature happens after death, and it may be disputed,
whether it be so, that some Believers shall be saved sooner or later by a
purging fire, according as they have more or less loved these perishing good
things. By this Purgative Fire, or Purgatory, he understands nothing but the
grief of being deprived of these perishing things. And this is that which he
means in the same Book Enchir. cap. 109.
That during the whole space of time between a man's death, and the last
Resurrection, Souls are in hidden Receptacles, according as they are worthy of
repose or misery, with respect to what they have been during this life. A man
cannot deny, but this is Purgatory in its birth, but it was not as yet believed
and received of all the Church, nor has it been received nor perfected any
where but in the Latin Church.

Behold that which I have to tell you concerning the changes happening in
Doctrines and Worship. I will not pass on to the following Ages, because it is
not my design to give you a complete History of all the changes which have
happened in the Church for 1700 years. I only desire to confound the boldness
of Monsieur de Meaux, and suchlike, which dare to affirm that Christianity in
their hands is in the same estate in which it was when it passed from the
Apostles to their immediate Successors; and that time has changed nothing that
is essential in the Doctrine and Worship of the Church; that insensible
changes, whereof some men speak to you, are but Dreams. Behold, say I, enough
to ruin these rash affirmations of your Converters: for from this short
History, which I have given you, of the Doctrine and Worship of the Church, for
the space of 500 years, it appears, 1. That during these five Ages there has
happened very considerable and essential alterations, since that in this time
men have overwhelmed Religion by an infinite multitude of vain Ceremonies,
which have degenerated into Superstitions; that they have introduced the
criminal Worship of Creatures; that they have established the distinctions of
Powers and Tribunals, which at last have destroyed the true Authority of the
Holy Scripture. 2. It appears by that which we have shown to you, that far
greater changes have yet happened since the fifth Age, than had happened
before; for seeing that in these Ages men knew neither Transubstantiation, nor
the Real Presence, nor the Adoration of the Sacrament, nor the Worship of
Images, nor Purgatory, nor the Sacrifice of the Mass, nor the Communion under
One Kind, nor the Sovereign Authority of the Pope; all these points being at
this day fundamental Articles of Popery, it is unavoidable that since that time
there have happened great changes and alterations.
And to prove the truth thereof against the illusion of the impossibility of
insensible changes, you have nothing to do, my Brethren, but to serve your
selves of the Proofs which we have put into your hands, and say, In the fifth
Age the Real Presence was not believed, it is believed at this day; they did not
adore the Sacrament, they adore it now; they did not worship Images, they do
worship them at present: therefore a change is happened.

To convince your Converters of the possibility of changes in things that are
essential, serve your selves only of the Example of Masses, without
Communicants. They will not dare to deny, that this is not a thing wholly
unknown to all Antiquity. And I dare tell you, that if they had seen a Priest
communicate alone in the Mysteries, they would have believed the Spirit of
Reprobation were fallen upon the whole Assembly.

Canon 10. of Apost. decret. de Gratian, de consecrat. Did. 2. Canon per acta
and distinct. 1. Canon Episcopus.
It was not so much as permitted to assist, when they did not communicate; and
the Regulations thereof are yet found in their Canon Law: nevertheless it is an
important affair, if there be any such in Popery. For it is a frightful
difference, that a Feast instituted to be eaten in common by all the Believers
should be changed into a Spectacle, where all the Devotion of the People
consists in seeing without eating, and without understanding. Besides, thereon
depends the question concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass: for if it be a true
Sacrifice, they have some reason to say, that it is not always necessary that
the Faithful eat thereof. But that the Ancients did never permit any to assist
at the Mysteries, without participation in them, is an evident proof that they
did not then look on them as a Sacrifice, the efficacy whereof depends upon the
Oblation, but as a Sacrament, the whole efficacy whereof depends upon the
reception.

An Article of Controversy. An Examination of the two last false Consequences
which the Papists draw from the perpetual Visibility of the Church.
IN our preceding Letter, we have explained how the Church is Visible, and
always Visible; and we have refuted one of the Consequences which the
Converters draw from thence: behold another of them, unto which it behooves us
to answer: The Church, say they, is always Visible, therefore it is necessary
that she should always have had a Succession of lawful Pastors. This is
designed to make you confess, 1. That the Pastors of the Church of Rome are
lawful Pastors, and always have been so. 2. And by consequence, that we are
separated from lawful Pastors, and a lawful Ministry.
To this answer, That from this, that the Church is always Visible, it does
indeed follow, that there has always been true Preaching in some points, i. e.
in fundamental Articles; in like manner, that it does follow, that there has
been always true Pastors in some things, and in some respect: but it does not
follow, that the Ministry which is legitimate in some things, is so in every
thing; for you must know, that the Ministry depends only upon the Doctrine. If
the Christian Doctrine be wholly corrupt, and annihilated in a Society, the
Ministry is nulled, nor is there any thing lawful there. If the Doctrine be
pure, and Christian in all its parts, the Ministry is entirely legitimate in
all respects. To conclude, if the Doctrine be partly Christian, and partly
Antichristian, the Ministry is partly lawful and partly unlawful. This is the
condition of the Ministry of the Church of Rome; in that Church there is
Christianity and Antichristianity, Christianity in the Creeds, and
Antichristianity in the superstitions and Idolatrous Additions. The Pastors of
that Church receive Commission to preach both Christianity and
Antichristianity; the Ministry is legitimate in that they receive Commission
to preach Christianity, their Ministry, and their Mission is wholly
illegitimate in that they receive Commission to preach Antichristianity: It Is
null, for we can do nothing against the Truth. If you well understand this, you
will easily answer the question proposed unto you, Why do you Separate from a
true and lawful Ministry? Answer, we do not separate from the Ministry of the
Roman Church in that which it teaches of Truth, in the preaching of the three
Creeds, nor in that which it has of Lawful. In this respect we are united, for
we are in the same Doctrine, and by consequence in the same Ministry: We are
not separate from the Ministry of the Church of Rome, but with respect to the
Commission she gives her Pastors to make the Body of Jesus Christ, and teach
Idolatry; now this part of her Ministry is null, vain, criminal and
illegitimate.

The third false consequence which your Converters draw from the perpetual
Visibility of the Church is, That Jesus Christ will always teach with these
visible Pastors. If Monsieur de Meaux, and those like him, understand thereby,
that Jesus Christ ought to guide them by a Spirit of Infallibility, the
supposition is false, and there is no necessity of adding any thing to make the
Falseness thereof appear: For I have proved that perpetual Visibility does not
signify, that the Church by remaining always visible, must necessarily be
always pure and infallible. This is true in its Pastors as well as in its other
Members; for the Pastors have no privilege of being infallible, any more than
the other parts of the Church. If you desire that I should add something
thereon, it shall be only this: It Is that the Church is as a Man, who after he
has been young and sound, becomes old and diseased: This Man is visible, with
his gray Hairs and his rotten Teeth and Wrinkles, just as he was when he had
his complexion fresh, his color lively, and the air of his countenance brisk
and vigorous. In like manner the Church has been young, sound and pure, in the
Ages next to the Apostles, by little and little she is grown old, and at last
is become deformed through corruption: but she is visible in this old age an
corruption, as she was visible in her youth and purity: so that neither her
youth nor her old age, neither purity nor corruption signify any thing to
Visibility. The case is the same concerning the Perpetuity of the Ministry:
the Ministry is perpetual, therefore it is incorruptible. Deny that consequence
without scruple, for it is false; but some will say, Does not the Lord teach
with those Pastors which follow one another in the order of Ages? Answer Ye;
because these Pastors teach the three Creeds, conformably to the Holy
Scriptures; Jesus Christ teaches with them, and they with Jesus Christ. But
because they teach beyond the three Creeds, Idolatrous and superstitious
Doctrines, they teach against Jesus Christ. My Brethren, that which I have said
unto you in this, and the preceding Letter, is sufficient to make you
understand what is the perpetual Visibility of the Church. Read it, and read it
again, until you understand, and possess it very well, and you will easily
answer the two Sophisms which your Adversaries put upon you.

The first is, That if the Church has not been always visible; the Pagans for
a thousand, or twelve hundred years before Luther's Reformation, had no door
open to their conversion: For how should they be converted, and how should they
find the Church, if she were invisible? Now it is a prodigy contrary to all
reason and probability, that God for the space of so many Ages, should hold the
door of the Church close and hidden: Besides, this is contrary to History and
Experience, which learns us, that the most part of the Northern Nations,
Sweden, Denmark, Poland, and many Provinces of Germany, did not receive the
Christian Faith till since the eighth Age, i. e. since the time that
Antichristianity was mixed with the Christian Doctrine: For the Roman Church
began according to us to be Antichristian before the sixth Age. This is a
difficulty which they propose to you; to which you ought to answer, That
according to what we have told you, we do not teach that the Church became
invsible by the Antichristianity which is entered there; she is corrupt but she
continues visible. Christianity has not failed to continue its integrity in
Popery, therefore the Church remains entirely there. I have told you that
Christianity and the Church are the same thing. This Christianity continuing
visible in the Books of the Old and New Testament, and in the three Creeds,
which the providence of God has preserved in Popery, the door of conversion
has been always open to the Pagan Nations: for Jesus Christ crucified, and his
true Mysteries, have not failed to preserve their force and efficacy, in
despite to all the Darkness which the bastard Mysteries of Antichristianity
have brought in thither.

There has been Conversion and Perversion, and Perversion in the Pagan
Nations, which have joined themselves to the Church of Rome since the eighth
Age. There has been Conversion, for they have entertained one God in three
Persons, one God Creator of Heaven and Earth, one Jesus the Eternal Son of God,
the Word made Flesh, who died and rose again for the Sins of Men, who will come
to Judge the Living and the Dead, and having raised men from their Graves, will
send some men to everlasting Torments, and some to the Kingdom of Heaven. This
is Christianity; by receiving this they became Converts to Jesus Christ. There
has been Perversion also; for by receiving a Vicar of Jesus Christ, a Vice-God
upon Earth, a Sovereign to all the World, a Master of Kings, as of Subjects, of
Crowns as of Shepherds Crooks; by adoring Bread, Angels, Saints, Relics, and
Images; they have done nothing else but changed their ancient Paganism for a
new one. But however it be, their Perversion has not hindered their Conversion;
and that they have entertained Antichristianity, hinders not that they have not
embraced also the Christian Doctrine. So that the Gate of Conversion to
Christianity was never shut. But the question is, Whether this Gate be saving?
whether these Conversions be profitable, or whether we ought to say of the
Missionaries of the Roman Church, what Christ Jesus said of the Pharisees, That
they compass sea and land to make Proselites, whom they made twofold more
children of hell than themselves? The question is, Whether the Antichristianity
which they have embraced, has more power to destroy them, than the
Christianity which they have received, has to save them? It behooves you to
answer, that these People who are joined to the Church of Rome, since the
eighth Age, have some portion and lot with her ancient Members; that God does
nothing in vain; that he has not converted so many men to Christianity, to
destroy them all: though it be a corrupt Christianity, which in the times when
there were no Churches, which were not very corrupt as well as the Church of
Rome, it may be granted that God did preserve unto himself children in these
corrupt Societies; that in these Pagan Nations which are joined to the Church
of Rome, God had his Elect, and that he found means to save these Elect from
among the Nations by the Christianity which they had embraced, and that he gave
them the grace to separate the Antichristianity, and not to be hurt or injured
thereby. How this was done is not for us precisely to determine. These are the
depths of the ways of God. We will say the same concerning the Conversions
which the Roman Church has made in the Indies: that God saves his Elect from
among these Nations by the Christianity which the Missionaries cause them to
embrace, and defends them from the wounds and hurts which the Antichristianity
that is joined unto it might do unto them, by ways known to his profound
Wisdom. We might believe this, say I, were it not that according to the report
that the Papists themselves make unto us of the Christianity which the Jesuits
teach the Indians, and the Chinesees, is not so much as an honest Paganism.
This is it which must be answered to the first Difficulty.

Behold the second: If you confess say they, that the Church is visible, and
always visible, the Church of Luther and Calvin cannot be the true Church, for
it was not visible two hundred years agon, having no existence in the World.
When you shall have made a dissection of this Difficulty, you will find it the
most pitiful one that ever was made. Know then, my Brethren, that when we say
the Church was visible, and always visible, we understand the Church Universal,
and not any particular Church. By the Universal Church must be understood
Christianity dispersed through all Nations in the East, West, North, and South,
in all places where they retain the Books of the Old and New Testament, with
the three Greeds, which are the Abridgment of them. This Church is always
visible, for God cannot permit that she perish wholly, nor yet that it be
wholly hidden: but the particular Churches of which the Universal Church is
made up and formed, neither have, nor can have this privilege of being always
necessarily visible. For Experience makes us see that God permits that they
perish wholly: For Example, the great Churches of Africa, of Carthage, and
Numidia, etc. where were the Cyprians, the Augustines, the Saints Fulgentii,
that is to say, the prime Lights of the Church. These Churches, say I, are not
at all; therefore they are not visible, and perpetual Visibility was not
affixed unto them. At present consider you, that the defect of Visibility may
be found in a particular Church for one of these two reasons, either because
she is no longer, or because she is not yet; the Churches of Africa are
invisible, because they are no more; and the Protestant Churches were invisible
two hundred years ago, because they were not yet. Understand, I entreat you,
the folly of the Objection which they make unto you by this: The true Church is
always visible, the Church of St. Austine, and St. Cyprian is no longer
visible, therefore the Church of St. Cyprian, and St. Augustine, was not the
true Church. Can any thing be more foolish and ridiculous than this? You very
well understand what you ought to answer, when the Church of St. Austine was in
the World it was visible, and it was then the true Church, but after it was
extinct and abolished by the Invasions of the Saracens and the Moors, how can
you wish or desire it should be visible?

So when they tell you, The true Church is always visible, now the Church of
Luther and Calvin was not visible two hundred years ago, therefore it is not
the true Church. You can answer, that a man can say nothing more absurd, and
that a Church is far enough from being visible, when as yet it is not. Ah, on
that occasion they will say to you, the novelty of your Church is a proof of
the falseness thereof. For a new Church cannot be a true Church. Another
Absurdity: The Church of China, erected by the Roman Missions is about a
hundred years since. I reason against that, as they reason against us: A new
Church which was not visible a hundred years since, cannot be a true Church,
for the Church is ancient, and always visible, now the Church of China is new,
and was not existent a hundred years ago, therefore it is not a true Church. I
desire that they would tell me the difference, unless it be that the Church of
China newly came out of the bosom of Paganism, and that ours is newly come out
of the bosom of Antichristianism. He must be a little cracked in the crown, not
to perceive by this example, that the new erection of a particular Church ought
to be no prejudice unto it. Nothing can prejudice it but new Doctrine: If a new
Society which teaches a new Doctrine does arise then in a new Church, and in
that case is worth nothing. But they will say, Behold exactly your own state
and case, you are a new Church that teach new things. That Is the question;
that is it which we deny, and which must be examined to know whether we teach
new things: We must therefore come to the Foundation, to see if we teach the
ancient Religion of Christ, and his Apostles, and not ridiculously amuse our
selves in wrangling about circumstances concerning a new Church, of new
Establishment, of perpetual Visibility, etc. for if we teach the true and
ancient Religion of Jesus Christ, all that they say of these things are
Illusions: And if on the contrary, our Doctrine be not that of Jesus Christ and
his Apostles, though we were as old as the World, and had been always as
visible as the Sun, we should be nevertheless a false Church. This is that
therefore which I will stand to, that we are not to search the character of
perpetual Visibility in any particular Church, forasmuch as it agrees only to
Christianity in general, and the Church Universal. Before our Reformation the
Church was not visible in our Society, which did not yet exist, but it was
visible in the Greek Church, in the Arm^nian, Cophti, Abyssin, and Ethiopian
Churches, because all these preserved Christianity entire in the three Creeds.
When we came into the World, the Church became visible in our Society, as it
was before in others, with this difference, that the Church and Christianity
were visible before our Reformation, as the Egg whereof we have spoken was
visible in the midst of that dirty, unclean, and filthy water in which it swam;
and that in our Church Christianity and the Church are there visible as the Sun
dis-engaged from dark clouds and fogs. My Brethren, if you take pains to read
and meditate deeply, and more than once upon what I have said unto you, I tell
you frankly, I shall no more fear on your behalf the Sophism concerning
perpetual Visibility.

WHatsoever desire we have to give you the News of our Martyrs, for this time
they must give place to certain Prodigies, more significant than any ever
happened before. The first shall be that which is come from St. Malo, attested
by a Letter from the Vicar General of that Bishopric.

The Copy of a Letter from Monsieur Simon, Doctor of the Sorborn, Archdeacon
of Rinan, Channon, Penitentiary and Vicar General of the Bishopric of St.
Malo, the sixth of July, 1687.
I Wrote to you the last Post, my dear Monsieur, but how can I forbear to tell
you of a late Accident which you will hear of by the public Relations? Behold
a small Extract of it, which I draw in haste: Upon Thursday last, being the
third of this Month, the Thunder (after a very small noise in the borders of
this City) fell upon our Church, by the Steeple, killed a young Man which
tolled the Bell in the Belfery, fell into the Seat of the Quire, or
Singing-men; broke all the lower part of the Crucifix in diverse pieces, and
left the Image hanging by its hands; it fell among the Musicians which sung,
and answered at a Mass in Music, that Monsieur de Sales celebrated at the
Altar of St. Julien, it smote down the said Sieur de Sales, with the Deacons
and Subdeacons, who were some time without knowledge; overturned the
consecrated Calice which stood upon the Altar, on the Ground, and on the
Garments of the Priests. The same thing happened at the Altar of St. Peter, at
the entrance of the Quire: A Priest being at the Post-communion, saw in an
instant (in a Chalice which fell not) one part of the Blood of our Lord
consumed; the rest sprinkled upon the Ornaments of the Priests, and upon the
Linen of the Altar. Monsieur Lagons being at the Credo of the Mass, at the
Altar of St. Malo, was thrown upon his back, and there the Sacrifice ceased.
The Thunder broke many parts of the Vestrie, burnt the Altar-cloaths, and left
a mark upon the Pattin, as if it had been shot with a Pistol, it left many
other marks upon the edge of the Chalice. In the Quire one named Banville, the
best Voice of our Church, whose back was near the Crucifix, remained there as
dead, and was there a long time without feeling, sight, or knowledge; it is not
known whether he can be recovered; for they say, to day, that all his back is
burnt, and that he vomits his entrails. The Gentlemen of the Chapter take all
possible care of him. As it was the first Thursday of the Month, immediately
after the Mass of the Sacrament, the Church was extremely full; very many
swoon'd, and were carried off without knowledge. The Church appeared for
sometime all on a fire, and filled with a thick black smoke, and a very
stinking savor. It would take more time than I have, to make you an exact
Picture of our Misfortunes. I was in the Chapter House upon the Tower, close by
the place where the Thunder fell. I thought it necessary to write to my Lord of
St. Malo, at Beignon, five Leagues from hence, to have his Orders and Advice
upon this whole matter. Our Express went thither in a few hours, and my Lord
came hither on Horseback, with two or three only of his men, where a great and
famous Procession was prepared against the Afternoon, at which all the body of
the Religions were to attend at three of the Clock. Behold the Advertisements
which God has given us, which afford fair occasion for Reflections. Adieu. I am
wholly yours. About two hundred years ago, the Thunder fell nigh the same place.

It is not safe in this Age to entertain the Public with Prodigees, and yet
much less to draw Consequences and Presages thence, nevertheless this speaks so
loud, that he must be as deaf as a rock that hears not: The Thunder almost
without any Tempest falls into the Church, attacks the Images, breaks the
Crucifix, goes directly to three Priests, saying Mass at three different
Altars, burns the Ornaments of the Altars, consumes the Blood of Jesus Christ,
(as they call it) in one of the Chalices, overturns the other, imprints the
mark of a Pistol-shot on the Pattin, kills the most famous Singer, fills the
Church with a most horrible stink. Behold enough! it needs no Commentary. Mr.
Simon had reason to say, that these are Advertisements from God, which give
fair occasion for Reflections. We desire these Gentlemen, at the same time, to
do so upon that which happened at Paris, upon Corpus-Christi day, which we will
report also as it has been written by an infinite number of persons.

The last Corpus-Christi day, in this Year, 1687. in most places it was as calm
as any Summer-day could be. On the contrary, it was very tempestuous almost
throughout all France; they could not make their Processions at Montpellier,
and other places of Languedoc, because of the Rain. And the same Tempest was
also at Paris. The Sacrament, being brought out of the Church of St. Savior,
had not gone far, when the Wind, or a Blow from Heaven smote down the Pix, or
Box, in which the consecrated Host was carried, to the ground. It fell into the
Water and Dirt, the Vessel opened, and the Host fell out, and mingling with the
Dirt, was confounded and moistened by it. And all the care which they could
take to restore it, by taking away the Dirt, the Water, and pieces of the
Ground that stuck to it, could not hinder it from suffering the utmost
indignities. Let him that please make Reflections, I cannot forbear observing
it as a visible Judgment from God, and as a Presage. In the greatest of the
Popish Festivals, in the greatest City, where Bread-worship reigns, in the
going out of a Church, which bears one of the Names of Jesus Christ, and which
ought not to be given to any thing but himself, the Idol of Bread fell with its
face on the ground, and was buried in the Mire.

Behold a third Matter of Fact, which is not less notorious, it is the burning
of the great Church of Rochel: this Church was formerly the great Church of the
Reformed. They took it away from them after the Siege and taking of the City.
Every one knows, that the day on which the Inhabitants made a Bon-fire, the
fire took hold on this large and fair Church, none knows how, nor where, and
that it was consumed, the Lead was melted, and all the Vaults burnt, without
being able to quench it: there is something singular in the event, the day, and
the occasion, and it is impossible not to see the finger of God therein. God
grant, that it may signify, that the Life and Health of the King may not be so
favorable to the Persecutors, as they hope.

If you would have Matters of Fact like that of St. Malo, behold here are some:
There happened one at God-derville, in the Country of Caux, upon Corpus-Christi
day, as the Inhabitants discharged their Muskets to the Honor of the
Sacrament, the fire took hold of some Houses, and ran in such a manner, that
there was more than 80 burnt down. On the third day of July, the very same day
that the Thunder fell upon the Church of St. Malo, at Seven of the Clock at
Night, the Thunder likewise fell upon the Church of a Place called Pouille,
situated in Normandy, carried away the Weathercock from the Steeple, entered
into the Church, and burnt all the Altars. It also fell at B^yeux, in Lower
Normandy, upon a Steeple, where it killed twenty five persons. In the Suburbs
of St. Gervas of Roan. It carried away the Roof of a Garden-house belonging to
the Curate of the Parish. It must be confessed, that the Thunder has done much
this Year to Churches, and all things belonging thereunto.

After these notorious Matters of Fact, which speak so loud, it may be
permitted us to report two others contained in a Memorial, which was sent us
from Poictou by a very honorable person.


The Memorial.
AT Jaseneuil, in Poitou, there happened this which follows, while Mr. Marillac
did such mischiefs in the said Province. A Peasant, by Name, -- Bardon, married
to a Wife of the Roman Catholic Persuasion, who pressed him vehemently to
change his Religion; meeting the Curate of the place, in the Field, suffered
himself to be persuaded to go to Mass, and to change his Religion. Which when
he had done, he immediately repented thereof, greatly, as he said to one of his
Neighbors, whom he found as he returned home; and being come to his House,
while his Spirit was in disorder, instead of opening his Lock, he hampered it
in such sort, that he was forced to send for a Locksmith to take it off: when
the Door was open, he saw all the Chamber on fire, and he crying out Fire, five
or six of his Neighbors ran, with his Wife, and altogether saw this miraculous
Fire, which filled all the Chamber, and burnt nothing, and in the end
disappeared. This Man, some days after, fell sick, praying God, without
ceasing, that he would give him the grace, that he might never return to the
Mass, and to this purpose, that he would take him out of the World; and because
that he well saw, that his only Son would be forced to follow that Religion in
which he began to be engaged, he prayed God to take his Son out of the World,
and that he might see him die before he died himself. Two days after the Son
fell sick, and in two days he died in the presence of his Father, and the
Father himself died the day after, rendering a thousand Thanks to God, that he
had heard his Prayer, and that he had taken them both out of this World to give
them a better Life.

I learnt this Story from St. Maixent, the 10th of August, 1684. from two
persons worthy of credit, viz. the Husband and Wife who had a Child nursed by
the Wife of the said Bardon; he which made me the Report of this Matter, is
called Mr. Lavergnac, Master of the Grange of the Village of Luzignan in
Poitou, a person of good credit, and full of zeal for Religion, his Wife also
being present.

In the Year 1685. the 20th of January, a Woman of Jonzac in Saintonge, called
Susan de Lisle, the Wife of Boynard, a Glover, being with Child, as she was in
her House, sitting upon a Settle by the Window, rising up, she felt that her
Child stretched it self in her Womb, and at the same time she heard it utter a
very extraordinary cry: and a little after, this Infant, having again moved it
self, cried out about a quarter of an Hour with the true Voice of an Infant,
whereupon the Mother was much frighted, and called some persons to help her,
she having then no body with her, but her own Daughter, about nine Years old,
who having plainly heard this cry, said to her, Mother, my little Broth^r cries
in in your belly: this Child was born three Months and nineteen Days after
this; it was baptized at Linieres by Mr. Couyer, Pastor of the said place, and
was a very vigorous Child, and grew in six Months time twice as much as it
ought to do. We have learnt this story from Liniers, from the mouth of the
Mother of this Woman, and from the Daughter, which was present, and from the
Husband of the God-mother of the Child.

From Martinique, the 24th of May, 1687.
MOnsieur Poysonnel, who commanded a Frigate from Marseille, which had taken
two hundred Maids and Women, and almost as many Gally slaves, to bring hither,
was lost three days since, as he was coming into this Town. The whole number of
persons, which were on board the Vessel, were 320, and were all drowned, as
it is said, excepting 30 of the Soldiers and Mariners. This was by the
imprudence of the Pilots. God has given rest to these poor miserable Creatures.

This Note teaches us the sad and glorious end of the Confessors, which we
spoke of to you. Others write, that this Shipwreck was by command, because the
Wind was very fair to bring them into the Haven of the Isle, and that all the
Soldiers and Mariners were saved. As for me I will not prejudice the Spirits of
men concerning this Fact, it being an Action so enormous. This is certain, that
God was pleased to deliver these blessed Confessors, and snatch them from the
cruel slavery which they had prepared for them.

August 1. 1687.

The Twenty fourth PASTORAL LETTER. That the Church of Rome is not visible, and
that she has no mark which makes her visible. A confutation of those Means
whereof Mr. Nicholas pretends to serve himself, to make his Church visible.
Dear Brethren in our Lord, Grace and Peace be given to you, from our God and
Savior Jesus Christ.
BEfore we pass to another part of the Controversy about the Church, and leave
the Question concerning its perpetual visibility, and after examination of the
visibility of the Church in general, it is needful that we take cognizance of
the visibility of the Roman Church in particular: It Is needful that you say to
your Converters, since it is so, that the Church is always visible, and that you
are the Church, help us to see her; in and by what is the Roman Church visible?
If they show you great Churches full of Men, that pray, and adore, which hear
Vespers and Mattins, who prostrate themselves before Wafers and Images, you
will answer, this is not to show me the Church. For if I were at
Constantinople, a Turk would show me his Mosques all full of Worshippers, which
cry, there is but one God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. Tell them, If you please
to go to London, I will show you the Church in England, as you show it me in
France: I will show you great Churches full of men, which pray, and adore,
which prostrate themselves before God, who pray, and understand what they pray
for. It Is unavoidable therefore, that you show me not Men, and heaps of Stones,
which are called Churches, but sensible and visible marks, that Popery is the
true Religion of Jesus Christ, and that the Church of Rome is the true Church.
Add to this, that the marks which they give you ought to be suitable to your
capacity, i. e. the capacity of plain persons, and without learning. For the
space of twelve or fifteen Years the Popish Doctors of France have changed the
Controversy this way. The business is not to instruct the learned, it is
acknowledged on both sides, that the multitude, and greater part of the Church,
is composed of men without learning, and of plain people, which must be saved
as well as the more able. From henceforth therefore it is necessary to furnish
a means to the common people, to inform them of the truth in matters of
controversy, and a means altogether suitable to their weakness. Particularly
in this Controversy, Whether the Church of Rome has certain and evident marks
of her truth, which make her visible. For it is an important Affair, and which
the weakest ought to understand. It is certain, that a Church cannot be visible
in quality of a Church, by any other means than what they call her marks; of
this we are at an agreement.

We must therefore see, whether the Church of Rome has those marks, which may
make the weakest perceive she is a true Church. I will not here engage you in
that Labyrinth of Disputes, which the Doctors of the Church of Rome have formed
about the marks of that Church. It Is their manner to bury the truth under a
prodigious heap of useless words and obscure questions. I will not examine the
sixteen marks which Bellarmine has given, nor the forty which others have
produced. You cannot read those Books, nor are they those which they put into
your hands; and since that time, they are become more able in Sophistry. Mr.
Nicholas, who is the last that has labored on this Subject, has employed
three Chapters to prove that the Church of Rome is very visible, even to the
most weak, and plain. In the first of these three Chapters, he says, Chap. 17,
18, 19, of the 1st Book, The Reformed convinced of Schism.
That a man may prove the Church to the weakest by Scripture. In the second,
That a man may prove the Church to the most weak by Tradition. And in the
third, That the Church of Rome is not unfurnished with exterior marks, which
make her known to be the true Church to the weak. Behold three Sources of
visibility for the Roman Church: 1. Tradition. 2. Exterior Marks. 3. The
Scripture As this is one of the Books which your Converters put into your
hands, I do entreat you to give attention to what I have to say to you thereon.


I begin with Tradition. They understand by Tradition, the Testimony of the
Fathers, Councils, and Authors of all Ages, therefore the meaning is, they can
prove the Church of Rome is the true Church by the testimony of the Greek and
Latin Fathers, and by the Councils of the Greek and Latin Church. And at first,
this is a contradiction that stares you in the face. It may be proved, says he,
to the weak by the Fathers, and the Greek and Latin Councils, that the Church
of Rome is the true Church. And how can a man prove to the weak, a truth by the
testimonies of the Greek and Latin Fathers? To those which understand neither
Latin nor Greek, or who have neither means nor time to turn over the Leaves, or
read and examine these great Volumes. Behold the way, nothing more remains than
to employ these two means, the first is a Principle founded on a Rule of St.
Austin, that all Customs that are found universally established whose original
and beginning we know not, may be very justly ascribed to the Apostles. The
second means is included in this Syllogism which Mr. Nicholas makes. The
Scripture and Tradition teach, that there has been always in the World one
Church, visible and successive, and that this Church is infallible for the
instruction of believers in the truths of Faith.

Now the Church of Rome is this only visible Church.

Therefore the Church of Rome is the infallible Church, and to her alone it
belongs to instruct men in the truths of Faith.

And behold how Mr. Nicholas forms a light upon the first medium which makes
the Church of Rome visible to the weak. All the Traditions which the Heretics
dispute, say he, have their certain Epoche's or beginnings which are not
disputed by them. The Calvinists agree, that in the fourth Age men called upon
Saints, adored Relics, and observed Lent, that in the seventh Age they
worshipped Images, in the eleventh they believed Transubstantiation: The weak
have no need to assure themselves of this matter of fact by way of examination,
for it is confessed on both sides. Apply the Principle of St. Austin, that all
Customs found universally established in one Age, and whose beginning we know
not, may be justly attributed to the Apostles. Now the customs of invoking
Saints, adoring Images, observing Lent, and worshipping the Sacrament, are
found generally established in some Ages, as the Calvinists confess, and we
know not where to find the original of them, therefore they ought to be
referred to the Apostles. A man cannot tell how many Illusions there are
therein, which are unworthy of an honest man, yea, a man of a good
understanding. First, it is to scoff at mankind, to say, it is a light proper to
make the Church visible to the weak. For this method of reasoning does
necessarily suppose, 1. That a person must know that this pretended Rule, on
which they support themselves, is St. Austin's. 2. That the Ministers consent
to the truth of this rule. 3. That they confess, that upon certain times, the
customs of adoring Images, praying to Saints, etc. were generally received. 4.
That from thence it follows, that these customs, generally established in some
Ages, ought to be referred to the Apostles.
All this is disputed, and there are large Books written on the Subject, which
the weak cannot read, and this requires an examination, which is above the
capacity of those which are not men of learning. This is that which we have
proved invincibly in our Answer to Mr. Nicholas System of the Church, l. 2. c.
16.
. Secondly, It is to be observed, that this fine Principle upon which this
pretended Evidence is founded, viz. the Rule of St. Austin is false, especially
if it be applied to all Ages. It has been observed, that the Fathers of the
fourth Age were very much inclined to support the Novelties crept into the
Church upon the authorities of the Apostles, and to make all things pass for
Apostolic, the beginning whereof the People were not then able to see. It is
therefore false, that all Customs which are found established in a certain Age,
although we be not able to find the beginning of them, in a distinct manner
ought to be ascribed to the Apostles. For example, The custom of adoring the
Sacrament of the Eucharist was not generally established in the Latin. Church
till the twelfth Age. Although we could not find the original of this Idolatry,
it were an impiety to attribute it to the Apostles. There are certain Practices
which are insensibly established by little and little, the first point of whose
original cannot be precisely observed. It does not follow therefore, that we
must ascribe the original to the Apostles. We must attribute nothing to the
Apostles but what is in their Writings. 3. I observe, that there is a faulty
and shameful falseness in the application of the Rule. Mr. Nicholas pretends,
that the Customs which are found generally established in certain Ages, ought
to be referred to the Apostles, and that for this reason, the custom of falling
prostrate before Images must be referred to them, because this custom is found
generally established in the eighth Age. I do maintain, that Mr. Nicholas does
basely betray his conscience in this example, for he is persuaded as well as I,
and all those Roman Catholics in France, which are men of knowledge and
understanding, do know, that the Apostles did not establish Image Worship; and
these Gentlemen do not refuse to confess it, when they are not in dispute.
Fourthly, I say, that this reasoning supposes a thing which is altogether
false, it is that we are not able to find the original of those Customs which
are generally established in certain Ages: this is false, the custom of praying
to Saints is found established in the fifth Age. In our preceding Letters, we
have shown the original and birth thereof. In like manner we find in all the
following Ages the birth of the Worship of Images, of Purgatory, the Sacrifice
of the Mass, the Real Presence, and Transubstantiation. They make a wrangling
with us about it, unworthy of honest men. Show us, say they, who was the first
Heretic that taught either the Invocation of Saints, or the Worship of Images,
or those other false Worships which you condemn.

I answer, that I have no need to name their Author, seeing I have shown the
Age of their birth. I prove for example, after a manner invincible, that they
did not invocate Saints in the three first Ages of the Church. I find
afterward the Invocation of Saints about the end of the fourth Age. Is not
this to observe the point of its birth? what does the name of the first Author
signify in this case? Besides, superstitious and idolatrous Practices had not
one single Author, they had many, it is the sottish and ill instructed people
who introduce Superstitions, and who introduce them insensibly, and by little
and little. But for speculative Heresies, it is the learned which give them
birth, for which reason it is easy to mark both their Authors, and the precise
time of their original. Fifthly, To conclude, I observe in this light which Mr.
Nicholas forms to us, to make the Church of Rome visible, there is no more of
sound judgment, than of honesty. For although even all that he says were solid,
and his method would prove the Invocation of Saints, the Adoration of Relics,
Lent, etc. were Apostolical Traditions, this would not prove, that which ought
to be proved here, viz. that the Church of Rome is the only true Church. For it
must be known, that the Greek Church, which according to the Papists is
schismatical, and which a man cannot secure his salvation, do also invocate
Saints, worship Images, and observe Lent. It Is therefore necessary to find in
Tradition a proof which makes it evident, that the Church of Rome is the true
Church, with exclusion to all other Sects; and this is it which the reasoning
of Mr. Nicholas does not prove neither directly, nor indirectly.

The other Source from whence Mr. Nicholas will draw a light by Tradition, to
make the Church of Rome visible to the weak, is yet more dark and obscure. It Is
a ratiocination, which supposes, 1. That Tradition teaches, that there has
been a visible and infallible Church in the World. Tradition does not teach it,
and although it should teach it, a plain weak man which cannot read the Greek
and Latin Fathers, the Councils, and the Opinions of the Doctors would not be
in a condition to assure himself thereof. 2. This reasoning supposes in its
second Proposition, that the Church of Rome is this only visible infallible
Church.
And this is that which must be proved, that is, that which is obscure, and
must be made plain to the eyes of the weak. Is it not therefore very absurd to
pretend to make a light for the weak to render the Roman Church visible, of
that which is denied and contested by all the World? yea, although it should be
true, that there is one visible and infallible Church, it would not follow,
that this were the Church of Rome, for three fourth parts of Christians dispute
this privilege with her. Mr. Nicholas has found an admirable secret to draw
the weak out of this difficulty. It is not needful, as he insinuates, to make
known to the weak, that there be other Sects as ancient as the Church of Rome,
who pretend to be the Church. Nothing more is necessary than to make them see
the new Sects of Lutherans and Calvinists in opposition to the Church of Rome.
For they will easily see, that this visible Church, which ought always to be in
the World, cannot be that of Luther and Calvin, and they will not be so much as
tempted to search any other Church but that of Rome. I think I have pressed Mr.
Nicholas thereon, after such a manner, as to cover him with a confusion, out of
which he will never escape. For I have made him see, that it is properly to
cheat the weak, to let them believe there is no other Church in the World but
the Roman and the Protestant. The Protestant Church not having the marks of
perpetual visibility, since she was not till about two hundred years ago, the
weak, without inquiring further, believe, that the Roman Church is the only
true Church, on supposition, that she is the only ancient Church. Mr. Nicholas
confesses, that this supposition is false, for he acknowledges the Greek Church
is as ancient as the Roman. But nevertheless, according to him, it is expedient
to permit the weak to believe this false supposition as if it were true, that
they be not tempted to search any other Church but the Roman. On this matter of
fact, and about all the rest of the Book against Mr. Nicholas, we do declare to
him, that his silence is looked upon as a conviction. They write, that he
prepares an Answer to the first Part of the System of the Church, where the
Nature of the Church is spoken to. If it be so, we declare to him, that that is
not the capital Controversy between him and me. It Is about the impossibility
of examination of particular Controversies, it is about the Authority of the
Church, which he ought to answer, and to which he will never answer.

the 2d light which Mr. Nicholas forms to make the Church of Rome visible, is
drawn from the external marks, which make her known for the true Church to the
weak and ignorant. These external marks, according to him, may be reduced to
two, they are Miracles and Sanctity. Now this Sanctity and these Miracles which
must make the Roma Church visible, are either those of the present, or those of
past Ages. Mr. Nicholas searches the visibility of the Church of Rome, more in
the Miracles of the first Ages, than in those of this. And behold how he
reasons, the Church of the two or three first Ages, had marks sufficiently
evident of the Divine Spirit wherewithal she was animated, the miraculous
Holiness of her Members, and the Miracles which were done there, made her
sufficiently visible, and sufficiently supported her authority. If the Church
of the three first Ages had this character both of authority and evidence, we
cannot refuse it to the Church of the fourth Age, for 'twas the same Church.
She possessed all the advantages of the three first Ages: That is to say, her
Miracles, and her Prodigies of Sanctity which appertained to her by right of
succession, and she had those which were her own, and which were not inferior
to them. For she had her Martyrs, her Prodigies of Sanctity, and her Miracles,
and these Miracles were done in that same Church where by the confession of the
Ministers, they prayed to Saints, and worshipped Relics. These Prodigies of
Sanctity, and these Miracles, did yet continue in those Ages, in which the
Ministers do confess that they had Images, and believed Transubstantiation. For
example, in the Age of St. Bernard, which is the 12th. This St. Bernard wrought
Miracles, and taught all that which is believed in the Church of Rome. Follow
on from Age to Age, and you will come even to the Church of the present Age,
who has right to attribute to her self not only the Miracles of the Apostles,
but all those which have been wrought since, and above all, those which were
done by the Relics of Saints in the fourth and fifth Ages. As the Miracles
which St. Austin reports to have been done by the Relics of St. Stephen in
Africa, those of St. Martyn in France, and those of the Anacorites in Egypt and
Syria.

Not to enter into a long dispute on the subject of this pretended mark of the
Church of Rome, I answer three or four things briefly, to which I pray give
attention.

1. That this pretended fountain of light, fit and proper to make the Church of
Rome visible, is not for the simple and unlearned. For to see the bottom and
solidity thereof, they must examine the History of the pretended Miracles which
were done in the fourth and fifth Ages. They must see what we have said in
opposition to it, they must examine circumstances, and see if there be not
reason to believe, that all these stories of Miracles are either frauds, or
fictions. They must also examine by History, whether these pretended Prodigies
of Sanctity, be not either Fables, or the disorders of sick and melancholic
minds. They must therefore be able to understand Latin and Greek, and to read
great and large Volumes. To offer this as a light suitable to the capacity of
the weak and unlearned, is to scoff and deride them.

2. I say, that the Miracles of the Apostles, which are certain, and the
Prodigies of the Sanctity of the three first Ages, does not appertain by right
of succession to the Church of the fourth and fifth Age, but as far as she
inherits the Doctrine of the Apostles. These Miracles were good to prove the
Divinity of the Christian Religion to Pagans. But they are worth nothing to
prove Novelties, as are the Invocation of Saints, and the Worship of Relics,
which are purely Pagan Practices. With far greater reason the Church of Rome
has no right by succession to the Miracles of the Apostles, to prove her
Worship, her Idolatries, and Superstitions. We have as much right as she to
these Miracles. They are truly and properly our Miracles. They are good for us
all in common against the ungodly, and against Infidels, to prove, that there
is one God in three Persons, that Jesus Christ is the Messiah and the true
Redeemer of the World. But they are nothing to prove our Additions, our
Corruptions, and our Alterations, if it be so, that either the one or the other
of the Christian Sects, whether Popery or Calvinism, have introduced them into
the Church. This is clear, the Miracles of the Apostles appertain not to us;
but as far as we have and do inherit their Doctrine.

3. As to the Miracles of the fourth and fifth Age, which were done in the
times when they prayed to Saints, and worshipped Relics, we say, that they
were false Miracles. It is to be observed, that from the death of the Apostles,
until the end of the fourth Age, nothing was spoken of Miracles in the Church,
or so little, and in so doubtful a manner, that it does not deserve to be
reckoned for any thing, but when the Devil desired to set up the Worship of
Creatures, he poured out a Spirit of Lying, and a Spirit of Credulity, which
began to entertain discourses of Miracles. It Is a thing of importance, press
your Converters thereon. Why did these Miracles cease for the space of well
nigh two hundred Years, or at least why were they so rare? And why did they
begin again exactly at the time when the Worship of Relics grew famous? Do we
not see clearly, that it is a Wile of the Devil? Has God any interest to serve
by Bones and Ashes? was it necessary that he should begin again to do Miracles
at that time? And if it were of use to persuade the truth of the Religion which
the Martyrs declared to the Pagans, why did not God work Miracles by the Bones
of the Martyrs for the first three Ages? This had been much more profitable,
than when Paganism was rampant, and the Church persecuted and oppressed.
Wherefore did not the Bones of Polycarpus, of whom the believers of Smyrna
speak with so much love, work miracles? Why did not so many Martyrs, whose
Relics they had, and whose Anniversaries they observed in the time of St.
Cyprian, work signs and wonders? your Converters will never be able to answer
this; be you therefore persuaded, that these pretended Miracles done by the
Relics of St. Stephen, St. Gervais, St. Protais, St. Martyn, etc. were
Illusions of the Devil, whom God permitted to work false Miracles, or the
Cheats of Villains, and lewd Superstitionists; or to conclude, Stories of the
Vulgar, and Fables which honest men received as Truths upon hearsay. And as to
the Miracles which are ascribed to the Anacorites of Egypt, and Syria; I know
not how Mr. Nicholas is not ashamed to draw from them a Light to make his
Church visible. They are Fables for the most part so gross, that the Falseness
of them stares in the face of the most Ignorant. The Lives of St. Paul the
Hermit, of Hilarion, and others written by St. Jerome, that of St. Antony
composed, as they say, by Athanasius, are written with so little modesty and
judgment, that a man ought to be ashamed of them.

The judicious Readers that would preserve respect for the Authors of those
Lives, say, that the Fathers composed them not as Histories, but as pious
Romances to divert Christians from reading the Pagan Fables. We see in the
Lives of those solitary persons of the Desert, such as found Centaurs in the
Woods, Satyrs, Men half Horses, and half Goats, who spoke to them, and prayed
them to entreat the common Savior to have pity on them, and to give them part
in the common Salvation with them. We see Hermites-which were in perpetual
contests with the Devil, always tempted, and often beaten by him. We see them
which herded among the Beasts. We there read in one word, almost all the
Impertinencies of our new Legends. This makes it evident, that the Fabulous
Spirit entered into Christian Religion, as soon as the Spirit of Superstition,
and Idolatry. 4ly, I say that although it should be true, that these Miracles
wrought in the Age of the establishment of the Worship of Saints and Relics,
should be true Miracles, it would not be a Light for the Roman Church, any more
than for the Greek, who also worship Saints and Relics. It Is therefore
needful that we have Miracles from the Church of Rome, since she was separate
from the Greek Church, and that it appear this Gift of Miracles is departed
from all other Churches to affix itself to the Church of Rome. Now the Greek
Schismatics have their Saints, their Legends, and their Miracles, as well as
the Latin Church: Besides, we do maintain that all the Miracles of the Church
of Rome, those of St. Bernard, as well as others, are Legendaries, Tales, or
Illusions of the Evil Spirit. 5ly, To conclude, I do maintain that every person
who has no other support of his Faith but Miracles, is a false Believer. I
have said it elsewhere, Miracles are not designed principally to prove Truth;
they are appointed above all to awaken men's minds, to oblige them to give
attention to Truth.

Mr. Nicholas to the Miracles and Prodigies of Sanctity of the Ancients, which
make the Church of Rome, according to him, visible, joins also the Sanctity of
the present Church of Rome, her Reformed Orders, her great Men, the Nuns de
Trap, etc. and concludes, That although a man should have regard to nothing but
the Sanctity of the Manners of the Church of Rome, she is even thereby
distinguished from all other Societies, and that she has, in persons of
eminent Piety, sensible Characters of the Spirit of God, which will animate and
inspire her to the end of the World. Mr. Nicholas speaking of all preceding
Ages, did always join Miracles with Sanctity: At present he lays by Miracles,
and why is this? He well knows his Church pretends, as yet, to have the Gift of
Miracles. And there is not a place eminent for Devotion, as are the famous
Ladies of Arsillieres, of Montferrat, of Loretto, where they do not pretend to
see Miracles. The Father de Aviano ran all the World over to make it evident,
that the Gift of Miracles did not dye with the Apostles. He dares not produce
to us, that as a Light, he perceives very well that all these Miracles are
suspected. Plainly, he himself has not much Faith for them. And so by this
silence Mr. Nicholas does tacitly consent, that at this day the Roman Church
does no Miracles. If it be so, I would very willingly know why the Roman Church
work no more Miracles at this day, when she had never more need thereof to
convert so many ill converted Heretics, and which cry out so loudly of the
Violence which they have suffered by the sending of the Dragoons? The Miracles
whereof they tell us, as done at present, may very well be Juggles or Fables,
according to what Mr. Nicholas lets us think by saying nothing of them, for
what reason may not all those of the Ages past for seven or eight hundred years
particularly, be very well also accounted Impostures? These Miracles of the
Church of Rome, and of Popery, do very well deserve that we should make larger
Reflections on them, and an occasion thereof will be presented to us elsewhere.
But in the mean while, I pray give attention to this: It is if they reckon the
Miracles which are found in the Legends from the fifth Age, wrought expressly to
support the Invocation of Saints, Adoration of Relics, Worship of Images, and
of Purgatory, it will be found, that God has wrought without Hyperbole, a
thousand times more Miracles for the establishment of these false Doctrines,
these wicked Worships, than he has wrought to confirm the Christian Religion.
We have told you long since, that a Monk for his part raised two and fifty dead
persons, and others in proportion. Now judge if it were probable that these new
Doctrines; supposing they were true, should be so important that to confirm
them, God should work a thousand and a thousand times more wonders, than he
has wrought to establish the Faith of the greatest Mysteries of the Christian
Religion. As to the Article of the Holiness of the Church of Rome at this day,
whereof Mr. Nicholas and Mr. Arnold make an evidence for her, I can destroy it
by making appear the enormous Corruptions which are yet seen in her most
considerable parts of Spain and Italy: I can prove the disorders of her Clergy,
and of her Monks; I can prove that these prodigious Austerities which they
produce to us as the effects of the Spirit of God, are but the effects of the
Spirit of Hypocrisy, or Fanaticism. But to the end that I may not trouble
those that pride themselves of the Virtue and Piety in the Roman Church, I will
say, that if there be Piety in some of the Members of that Church, they owe it
not to Popery and Antichristianism, but to the remainders of Christianity which
continue in that Communion.

I come to the third Light by which Mr. Nicholas would make the Church visible:
It is the Holy Scripture. To conclude, behold him come to the only place from
whence the true Light can be drawn: It is false, says he, that this Author
has believed that the point concerning the Church cannot be proved by the
Scriptures, and that the proofs are not accommodated to the capacity of the
Vulgar. We have shown Mr. Nicholas how much there is of Absurdity in what he
says here, that a man may prove the point concerning the Church by the
Scripture, after a manner that is fitted to the capacity of the Vulgar: and yet
we know not how to prove the other Articles of Faith which are controverted
after the same manner. It has been made evident, that the Controversy
concerning the Church, is the most difficult of all. It has been represented
to him, that to deside this Controversy by the Scripture, according to the
method which he has employed against us, it is necessary that an ignorant man
should be able to compare the Translations with the Originals, and by
consequence, that he should understand Greek and Hebrew, that he may be able to
read the Commentaries of the Ancients, and the Moderns, and by consequence,
that he should be able to understand Latin. All this is as necessary to
determine one single Controversy, as to determine a hundred. We have proved
unto him, that it is false to say, that a man may very well prove by Scripture
the Sovereign Authority of the Church, but that he cannot prove thereby the
Trinity or Incarnation, and on that subject, he is reduced to an eternal
silence. For which reason we shall not press him farther on an Article which he
grants us by his silence. But it is necessary to acquaint you, that his
Affirmation is entirely false and rash, viz. That the Holy Scripture furnishes
sufficient Light to the Vulgar, to make them see that the Roman Church is the
true Church. Either these Gentlemen mean, that by the Scripture they can easily
prove that there ought to be always a visible and infallible Church upon Earth,
or they mean that the Holy Scripture shows with its finger the Church of Rome,
and makes it known for the true Church, to the Exclusion of all other Sects of
Christians; or to conclude, they mean the Holy Scripture forms a Light to make
the Roman Church visible, because it contains, includes, and teaches all the
Doctrines and Worship which this Church does authorize and command.

As to the first sense, although it should be true Popery would gain nothing
thereby; although they should prove even by the Scripture, that there ought
always to be a visible and infallible Church upon Earth, this would not prove
that this must be the Church of Rome: For the Greek Church pretends to be that
Church which is built upon the rock, and against which the gates of hell cannot
prevail, to the exclusion of the Latin Church, and it is that in which we ought
to observe the perpetual Illusion of the Roman Doctors. They oppress you with
Sophisms, to convince you that there ought to be a Judge, an infallible
Interpreter of Scripture, a Church that cannot err. Answer them in one word,
Although all this which you say should be true, it would be no advantage to
you; we must seek this Church, and this infallible Interpreter elsewhere, for
it is certain you have erred. I come to the second sense, viz. That the
Scripture makes a Light which renders the Church visible, because it shows with
the Finger the Roman Church as the true Church to the exclusion of all others.
Now this is a Falsehood sensible to all the World, the Holy Scripture speaks not
one word of the Church of Rome, or of her Infallibility. It Is true there is an
Epistle addressed to the Church of Rome, but St. Paul so little thought of her
as infallible, that he speaks to her as a Church that would fall, or at least
as one that might be cut off from the true Olive, and from the root of Jesus
Christ.

There remains only the third sense in which your Converters can say, that the
Scripture forms a Light which makes the Church of Rome visible: It Is that the
Doctrine of the Scripture is found perfectly conformable to that of the Church
of Rome. That is it which they must say, if they will say any thing that is
solid: for the truth is, that there is not any mark of the Church but this,
viz. Her conformity to the Holy Scripture. Let alone therefore all this
pretended heap of Marks of the Church, which are either false, or equivocal,
and keep you close to this alone. Tell your Converters, if you will make your
Church visible to me, let me see it conformable to the Scripture; and it is
there you will reduce them to Extremities. It Is here that we have an evident
proof that Popery is an Antichristian Religion. Behold a proof to which all the
subtilty of Hell can never oppose any thing; we say then, every Society, and
every Religion which has nothing conformable with the Law of Jesus Christ, is
not the true Religion; now Popery has nothing conformable to the Law of Jesus
Christ, therefore it has nothing of Christianity.

I entreat you to give attention to this: If a Sect of the Turks, calling
themselves Mahometans, had nothing among them like to the Alcoran, which is the
Law of Mahomet, would you not tell them that they lie? If the Jews calling
themselves Jews, should re-establish a Worship which has nothing like the
Worship prescribed by Moses, would any one endure that they should say they
were of the Religion of Moses? Every Religion has its Books, and every Sect
(to show that it is of such a Religion) ought to prove its conformity with those
Books. Common sense say thus: If therefore Popery have nothing at all like the
Writings of Christians, it is clear that it is not Christianity. Now this is it
which we take for granted, and which we are ready to prove before all sorts of
Judges, even Jews and Pagans, viz. That Popery has no conformity with the
Scripture, which is the common Law of Christians. To be convinced of this, my
Brethren, first separate Christianity from Popery in the Roman Church, and
don't suffer yourselves to be blinded by what your Converters say unto you: Are
not we Christians? Do we not believe one God in three Persons, one Jesus
crucified for the sins of men, one Resurrection, one Paradise, and one Hell?
Does not the Scripture teach all this? Is not our Religion therefore
conformable to Revelation? Answer them thereon, Yea, you are Christians in all
that you believe with us; but you are Antichristians in that wherein you
believe without us. These points whereof you speak are in the Scripture it is
true, but it is my Religion rather than yours; it is Christianity whereof it is
true I acknowledge you have preserved the Fundamentals: But this makes nothing
for your Religion, which is Popery, it makes nothing for Purgatory, Invocation
of Saints, Adoration of Images, and Relics, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the
Adoration of the Sacrament, the Latin Tongue in the Worship of God, a
Communion without the Cup, a Head of the Church besides Jesus Christ. Behold
Popery, and it is that which we maintain has no conformity with the Scripture.
Indeed when your Converters will prove their Doctrines by the Scripture, it
seems they have renounced common Sense, as well as Faith and Honesty. To
understand this, there is no need to examine any Books of Controversy, as they
would fain persuade you, there needs no more but eyes to open and read them.
For Example: When they endeavor to prove the Pope is the Sovereign Head of the
Church, the Center of Unity, the Mouth that utters Oracles, and him to whom we
must adhere if we will be saved, and they produce to us, for the whole proof,
these words, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church; I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; feed my sheep. When, say I, they
produce this, and produce nothing else to prove the most important point of
Popery, which is the Authority of the Pope, I do maintain, that he must be
stricken with a Spirit of Blockishness to regard it as proof. He must, I dare
say, be abandoned to a Spirit of Reprobation, to suppose that the Scripture,
that tells us of Pastors and Teachers, as Guides of the Church, should not
speak one word of this great Office of Pope and Sovereign Pastor. When for the
Sacrifice of the Mass propitiatory for the living and the dead, they produce to
us, as proof, from the holy Scriptures, these Texts: Melchizedeck offered bread
and wine, they shall offer to my Name a pure sacrifice from the rising of the
Sun to the going down of the same. Sovereign wisdom has prepared her victuals,
and mingled her wine. We have an Altar of which they have no right to partake,
which serve the Tabernacle. Do this in remembrance of me. When, say I, they
produce these passages for the entire proof of the Sacrifice of the Mass, are
you not tempted to believe they do not speak in good earnest? for nothing seems
more opposite to sound sense. To prove that we must invocate Saints, they refer
us to those words of Jacob, The Angel which delivered me from all evil, keep
the lads; and those of Eliphaz to Job, And to which of the Saints will thou
turn thy self? that is to say, of the Saints which are upon Earth; and those of
Daniel, Have mercy upon Israel, for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. To
prove that we must prostrate our selves before Images, and worship Relics,
they produce those words of God to Moses, Pluck off thy shoes, for the place
where thou stand is holy ground; and those of David, Worship before his
footstool; and those of St. Paul to Timothy, From thy childhood thou have
learnt the holy Scriptures.

Here is nothing to be laughed at, it is that for which we ought to pour out
tears of blood, that Christians should fall into so prodigious a Stupidity, and
into so great a want of Reason, that if the Mahometans should fall into one
like it, and would prove their Religion after this manner by their Alcoran, we
should take them for mad men. They ought not to tell you I dissemble their
principal proofs drawn from Scripture, for those points whereof we speak unto
you, for they have no other, and the case is the same in all other Articles of
Popery, without excepting their Faith concerning the Eucharist. For these
words, this is my Body, although they should signify a real Presence, do not
signify Transubstantiation by any means in the World. It Is a truth so evident,
that Cajetan, and many other Doctors after him, have confessed it. Is it not a
shame, that on an Article so important as is the Adoration of the Sacrament,
when they should produce proofs from Scripture, they cannot produce so much as
one, but these words, this is my Body; which do not speak one word concerning
Adoration. When they ought to prove the Power which is given to the Church to
take away the Cup, again they quote, this is my Body. This is in propriety of
speech to mock men, being not willing to confess plainly that which is truth,
i. e. our Religion has no conformity to the Holy Scripture.

My Brethren, that I may completely possess you of this truth, that Popery has
no kind of Bond, Union, or Conformity with the Scripture, observe these two
things: First, That Popery treats the Scripture as a declared Enemy. It
disputes against its perfection, its clearness, its sufficiency, and its
authority. It makes vast Volumes to prove it is obscure; that it is a Nose of
Wax, that it is a Sword with two edges, that it has been an occasion (by its
obscurity) of all Heresies, that it contains not half the things that are
necessary for salvation, that it has no authority without the testimony of the
Church, that it must be interpreted according to the Voice of the Church and
her Practices, that she contains a hundred things capable of raising scruple,
and giving scandal. You have heard of the famous Cardinal Perron, who collected
together all that seems ridiculous to the profane in the Scripture, as the
Jaw Bone of Sampson's Ass, and other like things to make it lose its authority.
They add, that the Scripture is maimed and half lost, corrupted by the Jews or
Heretics, and as the top of all, the Popes, the Councils, the Doctors, the
Inquisitors, and the Parliaments, have even forbidden the reading of it to the
People, as a dangerous Book. Is not this to declare themselves, and to act as
enemies to the Scripture? The other Reflection, which I wish you would make,
is, that the Church of Rome looks on the Scripture as her Enemy; Popery is
always on its guard against the Holy Scripture, always prepared to give a Push,
always drawing back and recoiling, always answering, always distinguishing;
sometimes distinguishing Sacrifice into bloody and unbloudy, sometimes
Adoration into Dulia and Latria, sometimes the Head of the Church, into
Principal and Ministerial, sometimes the Essence of the Body of Jesus Christ
into natural and sacramental, sometimes Mediators, into Mediators of
Intercession and of Redemption; always to repel the Scripture, and always to
serve themselves of it. Is it not therefore very clear that Popery is at a
perfect opposition with the Scripture? It attacks it as an Enemy, by a hundred
false Accusations; it defends it self against it as against an Enemy, by a
hundred and a hundred imaginary distinctions to ward off the blows the
Scripture gives it. To attack and defend, is all that Enemies do to one
another. Observe well, my Brethren, in the Instructions which your Converters
give you in these late times, the Scripture does not enter among them. They are
ashamed of the proof which their Doctors have heretofore drawn from the
Scripture to support their Doctrines. At this day they beat and press upon you
by nothing but the pretended Authority of the Church, and Passages of the
Fathers, which you never read.

From all this I conclude, that Popery in the quality of true Religion, and the
Church of Rome in quality of the true Church, are by no means visible, seeing
they are destitute of that Light which alone can make the true Church visible,
viz. Conformity with the Holy Scripture.

An INDEX for the first Year OF THE PASTORAL LETTERS.
1 LEtter. A Refutation of what M. de Meaux says, in his Pastoral Letter,
concerning the Manner of Conversions. A Letter of M. de Meaux to M. D. V.

2 Letter. Concerning the Right of Persecutors. A Letter of Queen Christiana,
about Persecution. The Use of the Sword of Princes extends not itself over the
Conscience. They do all that is necessary to assure themselves of the Damnation
of the New Converts. A Letter of M. P. M. a Confessor condemned to the Galleys.

3 Letter. Against the Necessity of a living and speaking Authority: Against
Successions of Seats. Assemblies in Gevennes.

4 Letter. Advice to those which frequent the Sermons of Papists. A History of
many Assemblies in Cevennes. The Martyrdom of the Blessed Teyssier of Burfort
and Fulcran Rey, in Languedoc.

5 Letter. The Form of Christianity in the first Age. A Letter to M. de M. a
Confessor, and his Answer.

6. Letter. What was the Form of Christianity in the second Age.

7 Letter. Concerning Singing, and Voices heard in diverse places.

8 Letter. The Christianity of the third Age. M. de Monceaux, Doctor in
Physic, of La Ferte Au-Coll, his Confession. M. de Juigne of Villiers, a
Confessor, his Death in Prison. M. Palmentier, of Ville Dieu l'Aunay, his
Martyrdom. Mademoiselle Carquett, Vicountess of Novion, and M. Chenevix, drawn
to the Dunghill.

9 Letter. The Christianity of the third Age. M. de Voutron, with two Damsels
of Laon, their Confession. The Massacre of the Christians in Cevennes. M. de
Toumeyrol his Martyrdom. M. le Feure a Confessor of Niuernois. Mademoiselle de
Chalmot, endured the burning of her hand, her Confession.

10 Letter. The Christianity of the third Age. Concerning the Unity of the
Church, we are not gone out of that Unity.

11 Letter. The Christianity of the third Age. A Continuation of the matter
concerning Unity.

12 Letter. Concerning the Original of Monks. Advice to persons which are in
Convents. Concerning the Unity of the Ministry. A Letter from Geneva,
concerning the Christians of Piedmont.

13 Letter. Concerning the Original of Ecumenical Councils. Seven Reasons
against their Infallibility. The true Idea of Schism.

14 Letter. Concerning the Original of the Tyranny of the Popes, and the
Hierarchy. Concerning Schism: Although the Corruption of the Church of Rome
were not extreme, it would not be allowed us to return thither.

15 Letter. Concerning the Original of the Invocation of Saints in the fourth
Age: Three Proofs of its Novelty. An Answer to a New Convert, about Schism. The
Martyrdom of M. Charpentier of Rufac, in Angoulmois.

16 Letter. Concerning the Invocation of the Blessed Virgin: Its Original, and
in what Age. An Answer to the New Converts about Schism. The Martyrdom of M.
Barbut at Nismes. Confessors sent to the Western Isles. A Letter of M.
Guirant, Confessor of Nismes. The Martyrdom of M. Mollieres. A false Alarm
about a Massacre at Nismes.

17 Letter. Three Proofs of the Novelty of the Invocation of Saints. An Answer
to the New Converts about Schism. The Martyrdom of M. du Cross. Other
Confessors. M. Chantguion, and Chemer, Martyrs and Confessors of Vassey. A
Letter of Madam de V. The Confession of Jane Balle, in the County of Charollois.

18 Letter. An Answer to Soulier the Priest, about a pretended Conspiracy at
Montpazier.

19 Letter. Concerning the Original of the Worship of Images. The Corruption of
the Head, and Members in Popery, did force and constrain our Separation. M.
Matthew de Durass, a Confessor. M. the Baron of Verliac, and Madam his Wife,
sent to America, and drowned. A Letter from Cadez, concerning the Confessors
sent to the Islands.

20 Letter. Concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass in the fourth and fifth Ages.
A Description of the Corruption of Popery. A Confession of M. de Cross his
Daughters. The famous Martyrdom of M. Menuret. The Cruelties of Rapine. The
young Women Whipped.

21 Letter. The Faith of the fourth and fifth Ages, about the Eucharist. An
Apology for our Reformers. Father Paul the Venetian, his Reasons why he did not
break with the Church of Rome.

22 Letter. The Faith of the fourth and fifth Ages about the Eucharist.
Concerning the perpetual Visibility of the Church. M. de Lalo, M. de la Pierre,
M. de Saint Cross, M. de Beauregard, M. de Bardonnanche, Confessors of
Dauphine. M. de Lis a Martyr of Dauphine.

23 Letter. The Sacrament was not Adored in the fourth and fifth Ages. An
Answer to the Confequences of the perpetual Visibility of the Church. A Letter
of the Vicar General of St. Malo, concerning the Effects of the Thunder which
fell into the Church. An Accident happening to the Host on Corpus Christi Day,
at Paris, The Burning of the great Church at Rochel. Thunder falling on diverse
Churches. Confessors drowned at Martinique.

24 Letter. The Church of Rome has neither Tradition, nor Conformity with the
Scripture, which make it visible to the Vulgar.

Aug. 15th, 1687.
AN APPENDIX, Containing A NARRATION OF THE WARS and SLAUGHTERS Occasioned by
the Jesuits and Missionaries in Aethiopia, FOR THE Promoting and Establishing
their Religion there: AND Some brief ACCOUNT OF THE Late Persecution in Hungary.
IN the beginning of the precedent Age, James Alvarez, a Priest of Portugal,
brought Letters from David the King of Aethiopia, to Pope Clement the Seventh:
He found him at Bolonia with the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and gave him those
Letters, which promised Obedience to him on the part of the King of Aethiopia.
This Promise of Homage coming from the South, was very acceptably received by
Clement the Seventh, who saw all the West ready to revolt and shake off the
Yoke of the Roman Church. The Letters of King David to the Pope (which are
certainly very submissive) are yet to be seen, but at present the Aethiopians
pretend that James Alvarez was an Impostor and a Cheat, who falsified the
Civilities of the Emperor, and interpreted his Letters wholly otherwise than
they signified in the Original, because Obedience to the Pope, and the Terms
wherein they are expressed, were utterly unknown in Aethiopia at that time.
John Bermudes came to Rome at the same time to desire assistance from the Pope
against the Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Adel. The Pope received and treated
him with great kindness, and furnished the Abyssines which were at Rome, with
what was necessary for their entertainment, and to imprint Bibles and Littanies
in their own Language. All these Civilities were so many Snares to make them
fall by an entire submission to the Bishop of Rome, and oblige them to embrace
the Romish Religion. Ignatius Loyola, the Founder of the Order of Jesuits,
earnestly solicited a Commission to go and labor in what they call the
Conversion of this Great Empire. He could not obtain it, but it was given to
John Barrett a Jesuit, with the title of Patriarch of the Abyssines. This
Barrett took or received for a Companion Andrew Oviedo, with the title of
Bishop. They both embarked in Portugal for the Indies, to the end that they
might pass from thence into Aethiopia. King Claudius had succeeded to David his
Father. The Patriarch and his Suffragan Bishop, would not venture themselves
with this new King, without knowing of what spirit and humor he was. They sent
three Jesuits, James Dias, Goncal Rodrighes, and Friar Fulgentius Freyra, to
get intelligence concerning him; they came and were received with sufficient
kindness by the King of Aethiopia. But he learnt that the King of Portugal sent
him these men, and prepared others, to instruct him and his people in the Roman
Religion; this affrighted him. He stood in doubt a long time betwixt the fear
that he had, that these new Evangelists and Converters should trouble both
Church and State, and that of offending the King of Portugal, of whose
friendship he thought he had need. He had diverse Conferences with them, the sum
whereof on the part of the Portugese was, That if the Abyssines would be saved,
they must acknowledge the Pope for the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and submit to him
under that Character and Title. But the Abyssines answered, That it was an
Affair which could not be concluded without consulting the other Patriarchs. At
last King Claudius permitted that the other Priests of Portugal should come,
and promised to receive them kindly. The Patriarch John Barrett nevertheless
durst not hazard his Patriarchal Dignity upon the Word of the King. He
continued in the Indies, and sent the Bishop Andrew Oviedo, accompanied with
five Priests of that Society. The King of Aethiopia received them very civilly,
and permitted them to perform Divine Offices according to the Roman Church;
yea, it was permitted to all to join themselves to the Communion of the Church
of Rome. But Oviedo not content with that, was very importunate with the King
to oblige him to submit himself to the Pope. He answered, That his Ancestors
had never acknowledged other Superior in holy things, than the Successors of
St. Mark, that is to say, the Patriarch of Alexandria. This is worthy of
observation, and makes it apparent, that Alvarez exceeded his Commission, when
he came to yield obedience and submission to the Pope, in the name of David the
Father of Claudius. For the Son could not have said, that his Ancestors had
never acknowledged any other than the Successors of St. Mark, if very lately
his Father had designed to submit to the Bishop of Rome, and did actually do
it. Oviedo presses the business, Claudias obstinately refuses. At last he
consented to Conferences, in which the Jesuits had great advantage upon the
Abyssines, because they were very ignorant. But King Claudias interposing
therein, had almost as much advantage on the Missionaries of Portugal, as they
had on the Ecclesiastics of Aethiopia, because he was without comparison the
most able man of his Kingdom, as well in Divinity, as in the Art of Government.
Oviedo seeing that he got nothing by these ways, resolved to employ those which
were more violent. He left the Court to testify his displeasure, and published
a Writing injurious to the Abyssine Church, in which he accused it of many
Heresies, and forbad the Portugese to have any Communion with it. The King was
angry also on his part, but a little while after he was slain in a Battle, and
left his Brother Adamus Saghed Successor to his Realm. This Prince used more
rigor against Oviedo, and his Companions; he revoked all those Acts of Grace
which his Predecessors had granted to them. He forbad them, upon pain of death,
to trouble his Estates by their new Gospel. The Bishop withdrew to Fremone upon
the Frontiers of the Kingdom, and there abode thirty years with the Portugese,
under the Title of the Patriarch of the Abyssines, which he took after the
death of John Barrett. Adam Saghed died, and his Son Malec Saghed succeeded
him. He treated the Portugese more kindly; and they being reformed by the
correction they had received, acted more wisely, and with greater moderation.
Nevertheless, this Mission was extinct, because they had no way of sending
Successors, the Turks having possessed the Ports of the Red Sea, which gave
admission into Aethiopia. And the Portugese which would have converted all the
Nation, were found without Priests to give them the Communion.

But in the beginning of this Age, in the year 1604. a Jesuit named Peter Pais,
was more happy than all those who had preceded them. He entered into Aethiopia,
and made himself admired by an Ability, which although it were but very
indifferent, seemed extraordinary among people which knew nothing. He came to
the Court of Zadengel, who was then King of Aethiopia, and managed him so well,
that he obtained an express Promise from him, that he would submit to the Pope
and the Religion of the Romans. This Prince began with an Ordinance which
forbad the observation of Saturday, or the Sabbath, which the Abyssines
venerate as the Lord's Day. The Great Men of the Realm being provoked by this
Enterprise, conspired against him, and slew him, after a Battle, in which he
was not successful. Behold already the death of one King which Papery caused in
Aethiopia. This death cost the Jesuit Converters nothing; on the contrary they
found in Susneus, the Successor of Zadengel, a Protector much more proper to
make the Minister of their Violence. Susneus permitted himself to be managed by
these Missionaries of Portugal in such a manner, that they prevailed with him
to declare openly, that he would change the Religion of the Country, and submit
the Abyssine Church to the Pope. He wrote concerning it to Clement the Eighth,
and to Philip King of Spain, who was then also King of Portugal. Many Great
Lords of the Court, and Officers of the Army, out of complaisance to their
King, embraced the Religion of the Romans, and communicated with them. Susneus
having received many kind Letters from Paul the Fifth, writ to him again
another Letter dated the 31th of January, 1613. by which he acknowledges him
for Pastor of the Universal Church, and desires his assistance to confirm his
Religion. This Prince, guided by the Jesuits, to the end that they might do
things a little in form, caused many Conferences to be held upon the Question
of the two Natures in Christ Jesus. For the Aethiopians following the Schism of
Eutyches, acknowledge in him but one. But the truth is, there is at this day
nothing but a dispute of words thereon: for the Eutychians acknowledge the
Divinity and Humanity in Christ Jesus, but it pleases them to say, this Union
makes but one Nature compounded of two, as the Body and Soul in Man make but
one Compound; so that it is certain, that we may very well give our selves
indulgence therein, but it is not of the Spirit of Popery to tolerate any
thing. The King at the solicitations of the Jesuits, made an Edict, by which
he ordained, That henceforward they should believe two Natures in Christ Jesus.
The Abyssine Monks which fell in the Dispute, sustained themselves in their
ignorance with obstinacy in their Opinion; but one of them having spoken a
little too freely, was brought before the King, and was beaten with a
stirrup-leather. Behold the Spirit of Popery, which began to discover it self
without disguise.

This first Violence awakened their sleeping Spirits. Simeon the Metropolitan
of the Abyssines came to Court; he complains, That without consulting him, they
had done such things upon Religion. The King answered, That for his
satisfaction there should yet be a Conference on that subject. The consequence
was, that after the Conference the Jesuits obtained an Edict, by which it was
forbidden, on pain of death, to say there was but one Nature in Christ Jesus.
This frightful Decree was a clap of Thunder which seemed to reduce the whole
Empire of the Abyssines into powder; and Aethiopia knew then by experience what
Evils the Spirit of Popery drew along with it; all the Realm was alarmed, and
the most moderate lost their moderation, and considered that in truth the
Controversy about two Natures in Christ, in the estate in which now it was,
was of no importance, but that such a severity was unheard of in Aethiopia
since the times of the Apostles; and that it was wholly opposite to the nature
of the Christian Religion, for which Religion they concluded they must not
suffer such Violence. Jamanaxus, Brother by the Mothers side of the Emperor,
puts himself at the head of a very powerful Confederation, into which many
great Lords entered, with all the Churchmen, and a great part of the People.

The Metropolitan Simeon, who strove less against the two Natures in Jesus
Christ, than for his Dignity, (which they would have taken from him, in favor
of him whom it should please the Pope to name) excommunicated all those which
followed the Religion of the Franks, for so they call the Religion of the
Romans. This boldness caused some fear to the Emperor; he grew a little
moderate, and made another Edict, in which he gave Liberty of Conscience to all
his Subjects; and in all appearance he had continued so to do, if he had
followed his own Inclinations. But at the instigation of the Jesuits he
returned to more violent Counsels. The Queen Mother, the Metropolitan, the
Churchmen, and the Monks, threw themselves at his feet in favor of the
ancient Religion; but he rejected them all with violence, so that there was no
more hopes of Peace. Jamanaxus the King's Brother, Elias his Son-in-Law,
Governor of the Province of Tygris, with a great Party, resolved to oppose the
Violence by force. The Metropolitan renews his Excommunications; the Swordmen
take Arms: Aelius commands all the Portugese to go out of the Province whereof
he was Governor; they came to blows. The Party of the King and the Jesuits,
was the stronger. Aelius was slain. Simeon the Metropolitan was taken, whom
they beheaded: they made a great Butchery among the People; but Jamanaxus was
pardoned. Behold already how much Blood has been shed by Popery.

But things will not continue there. The Jesuits and their King, puffed up with
the success of their Victory, proceed to a new Reformation. The Prince forbad
them the observation of the Saturday-Sabbath, and commanded, that they should
labor on that day, upon the penalty of confiscating their Goods for the second
Offense. It Is indeed an affair sufficiently small, about which it were very
possible to have given a tolleration; but Popery understands not the meaning of
that word: they severely chastised, for an Example, one named Buc, a person
very eminent in the Kingdom for his Military Employments. This new severity
gave occasion of a revolt to one named Jonael Viceroy of Bageindra. All the
Court, the women, and the Favorites interposed in this affair, a little to
soften and bend the Spirit of the King, but the Jesuits prevailed upon him. He
would not comply with their Persuasions. So they came a second time to war;
Jonael was beaten many times, and withdrew from the Kingdom. This did not
affright others. Those of the Province of Damos took Arms for the ancient
Religion. The Hermites, which are there in great abundance, were willing to
signalize themselves in this Holy War. Nevertheless, their Party was beaten;
but there was great effusion of Blood on both sides.

Behold the ordinary Methods by which Popery arrives at Empire: After these
repeated Victories which cost the King of Aethiopia great part of his Subjects,
he accomplished his design. The Jesuits by his Authority entirely overturned
the Religion and Church of the Abyssines; all gave way either to seduction or
violence. They swore Fidelity and Obedience to Urban the Eighth; the Pope sent
there a Roman Patriarch; all those who would not obey were severely chastised.
The new Patriarch passed through the Kingdom, baptizing and confirming an
infinite number of persons. They established Seminaries of the Children of the
Abyssines, and Portuguese. In one word, Popery by its ordinary ways which are
violence, and the sword, became master of all Abyssinia. One named Tecla
Georgius, another Son-in-law of the King, put himself at the head of the
Malcontents, which were in great number, but the fortune of the Jesuits did
yet accompany the King in this Affair; Tecla Georgius was slain, and his Sister
hanged on a Tree, because she had spoken a little too freely against the Rites
of the Latin Church.

The Patriarch Alphonsus Mendez, a Jesuit, knew not how to use his good
Fortune, but believing that henceforward he might abandon himself without
constraint, to that spirit of Tyranny which has its seat at Rome, ill
entreated all the great Men of the Court, excommunicated the prime Officers of
the Kingdom, for things which were not Ecclesiastical: he domineered over all
with so much insolence, that at length the King himself, and all the Courtiers
opened their eyes upon the conduct of these new Tyrants. Rebellions were
renewed in most part of the Provinces; Battles were fought, and blood spilt
under the Authority of the King, who was still abused by Popery. But a certain
person called Ras Seelax, a great Favorite of the King's, and a great
Protecter of Popery, having lost his Reputation, the Affairs of the Jesuits,
and Popery sunk, and fell into decay thereby. The King being tired by the
Troubles which these new Evangelists brought to him every day by their Rigours,
and seeing that the Hydra of Rebellion, after it lost one head found a hundred,
began very much to abate of his rigor, and granted liberty to whosoever would
use it, to preserve, and observe the ancient Religion. This goodness of the
Prince which agreed very well with natural Equity, displeased these imperious
Masters; they made violent opposition thereunto; but favor continued no longer
on their side, the same Prince which had abolished the ancient Religion, does
re-establish it, or rather permits that it should be re-established after ten
or twelve years interruption. Susneus dies a little while after. This Protector
of the Religion newly established, being dead, Popery tumbled with haste and
violence toward ruin. They repaid to the Jesuits the cruelty they had used;
they took away their Churches, and Goods, and drove them out of the Kingdom.
They tried all ways, they set their Friends and Creatures on work; they
entreated, they desired the help of Arms, and Soldiers from Goa, for their
Defense, but all to no purpose. The Patriarch Alphonsus Mendez, was put into
the hands of the Turks, from whence he was redeemed with Money: but his
Companions the Jesuits Almeyda, Father Hyacynthus, Lewis Cardyra, and many
others were hanged as Disturbers of the public Peace. The Congregation for the
Propagation of Faith, were willing to attempt the Recovery of this brave
Kingdom, which they had lost: they send six Capuchines to try if they could
pass once again into Aethiopia; but two of them died by the hand of the Cafres,
two were stoned in Aethiopia, the other two returned without doing any thing.
In conclusion, three other Capuchines were willing to make another attempt:
they came ashore at Suaquene, a Port of the Red Sea, possessed by the Turks;
from thence they wrote to the King of Aethiopia, (as if it had been a thing
grateful to him) that they were there ready to pass into his Country, as soon
as he should furnish them with necessary Accommodations. For answer, Basilides,
who was then King of Aethiopia, after his Father Susneus, writ to the Turkish
Bassa who commanded the place, that he would do him the kindness to send him
the Heads of those three Franks. This was done, they cut off their heads, they
flead off their skins, which they filled with Hay, and sent them to Basilides.
So these poor miserable Wretches bore the punishment of all the Blood which the
Jesuits, and Popery had shed in the Kingdom of the Abyssines. This History, as
it seems to me, is very proper to show, that in all places, as well as in all
Ages, the spirit of Popery is the occasion of Trouble, Confusion, Tyranny, and
Persecution; and God did permit that Popery should prosecute its usual methods
in Aethiopia, as elsewhere, to hinder the Abyssine Church from continuing under
the Papal Tyranny. For if these Emissaries of the Court of Rome had proceeded
with more Moderation, and spared Blood, and offered no Violence to the
Consciences of men, without doubt Popery had this day been regnant among the
Abyssines.

The Liberty of the Reformed Churches of Hungary, was established upon very
good Foundations: the Kings of that Country had granted to the Protestants
diverse Declarations, by which the exercise of the Reformed Religion was
permitted in all places. On the year 1606, was made the Treaty called the
Pacification between Rodolphus Emperor, and King of Hungary, and Stephen
Bothskey Kis-ma-ria: The first Article whereof grants, That the Reformed
Hungarians should not in any thing be troubled in the exercise of their
Religion, and that all the Churches taken from them during the Troubles, should
be restored to them. All the Kings of Hungary which have been since Matthias,
Ferdinand the Second, and Ferdinand the Third, have confirmed these Privileges
by their Declarations: To conclude, the present Emperor in the year 1655, when
he was crowned King of Hungary, confirmed by an express Declaration, all that
his Predecessors had done. The eleventh Article of that Declaration concedes,
That for the Conservation of Peace amongst all the Orders and States of
Hungary, the business of Religion shall remain free without receiving any
Disturbance, according to the Constitution of Vienna, and the Articles
published before the Coronation; in such sort that the exercise of Religion
shall be entirely free for the Barons, Lords, Nobles, free Citizens, and
generally for all Estates and Orders of Hungary, as also for the Towns and
Villages which will embrace it; so that no person of what estate or condition
soever, may be hindered by his Majesty, or other Temporal Lords in any manner,
or under any pretense whatsoever, from the free use and exercise of the said
Religion.

Things were in this estate in the year 1671, when a Jesuit named George
Barze, Titular Bishop of Warradine, calling himself Counselor to his Imperial
Majesty, published a Book with this Title, Truth declared to all the World,
which makes it appear by three Arguments, that his Imperial Majesty is not
obliged to Tolerate the Lutheran, and Calvinist Sect in Hungary. It is easy
to understand what a Work of this Title, that has a Jesuit for its Author,
does contain: The design thereof was to justify the Persecutions which had
been already made against the Protestants of Hungary, as well as those they
were preparing to make: For already, a long time before the publication of this
Writing, some particular Lords had set up for cruel Persecutors. Among others
Francis Nadasti, Paul Esthersiazy, and many others, at the instigation of the
Priests and Jesuits, had employed both fire and sword: they had massacred the
Reformed in their Churches, hanged them up on the bars of their Church-doors,
and many others they had thrown headlong from Turrets. The Archbishops,
Bishops, and Popish Gentlemen had thus used them, and also pulled down the
Churches in the Countries which held, and depended on them. The free Cities,
and those who depended only on the Emperor, were exempt from this storm; but
they shall have their turn on the occasion following.

Many great Hungarian Lords of the Popish Religion, as the Nadasties, the
Serinies, the Frangipanes, join themselves to Francis Rakotsqui, and took Arms
against the Emperor for private Quarrels. The Troops of Austria on this
occasion entered into Hungary on the year 1670, and defeated these Rebels. The
Archbishops, Bishops, and Jesuits of Hungary, thought they must not let slip
the opportunities they now had to persecute the Protestants. They served
themselves of these insolent and victorious Troops in all the free Cities, to
do the same Violences which had been done by particular Lords against the
Reformed. Without form of Process they took away their Churches, they banished
the Ministers, they put them in Prison, they massacred a great number, they
charged the People, and even the Nobility with Taxes, Soldiers, and Garrisons;
they offered a thousand and a thousand Violences to oblige people to change
their Religion. All the Ecclesiastics every one by himself acted like
unbridled Furies. The Prisons were filled with these miserable Wretches; the
Churches were razed everywhere; in the most places there were horrible
Massacres, and even whole Villages burnt, because they were wholly inhabited by
Protestants; they hung the Ministers at the Doors of their Churches: There was
one named John Baki, a Minister of the Church of Comana, who was burnt. At
Cassovia and Posonium they put to death a great number of persons of all Sexes,
of all Ages, and all Qualities: They banished all those whom they dare not
kill. In one word, all Hungary became a place like Hell for the Reformed, where
death, punishments, and torments presented themselves everywhere before their
eyes.

To give some color of Justice to these Violences, they established a Chamber
at Posonium, made up of all such as were found most cruel Enemies to the
Protestants: They summoned the people before they summoned their Pastors,
hoping that they would fall the more easily by the Temptation, and that fear
would cause them to change their Religion; those which appeared, and supported
themselves on their innocence, were cast into Prisons, oppressed with Fines,
persecuted after a hundred manners, and constrained at last to change their
Religion. To those which had courage enough not to renounce the Truth, they
presented a Writing to be subscribed, by which they made them promise they
would forsake their Pastors, that they would not protect them, and that they
would not oppose the Priests in taking possession of their Churches: On which
Condition they promised to let them live in peace, in hope and expectation that
the Spirit would enlighten and Convert them. Some fell, and made their
subscriptions, others perished through misery, famine, and torments in the
prisons. When they had thus subdued and abused the people, they turn themselves
to their Pastors; they established three Chambers of Justice, the one at Tinew,
and two at Posonium, before whom they summoned at first a small number of
Pastors of the Confession of Ausburgh. They appeared to the number of thirty
two, or thirty three, the 25th of September, 1673; they presented them a
Writing to be subscribed, importing, That it was their will and pleasure, that
they should say, that to escape the sentence which might be pronounced against
them for their Rebellion, they did consent to one of these three things: Either
to Renounce all exercise of their Office for ever, and to live as good Subjects
privately in the Realm; or to go voluntarily into Exile, with promise never to
return again into the Estates of the Emperor; or to embrace the Catholic
Religion, in which case they might remain in the Kingdom, and enjoy all sorts
of Advantages there. The providence of God permitted this unjust, and
altogether unrighteous procedure, to the end that these poor accused persons
might have an opportunity to justify themselves from the Crime of Rebellion,
whereof they were accused. Is it so that men used to proceed against those that
are Traitors? And has it been usual to punish them with a voluntary Exile, or
by a simple Renunciation of their Offices, and Charges? They did all that they
could to oblige the Pastors to subscribe this Writing; and the most part of
them fearing death, did subscribe, confessing themselves culpable, though they
were innocent, and went voluntarily into Banishment.

Section.

This attempt having succeed sufficiently well to the Persecutors, the year
following, in the Month of February 1674, they summoned before their Tribunals
generally all Ministers, Regents, Professors, and Masters of Schools, of the
Reformed Religion in Hungary, as well those of the Confession of Ausburgh, as
those of the Confession of Switzerland: part of them refuse to appear, others
fled, and others tarried at home, under the protection of their Lords, who were
Protestants. Nevertheless there were to the number of two hundred and fifty
which had the courage to appear at the day appointed. These were they which God
had appointed to be the Objects of the most cruel Rage that ever was exercised.
Of these two hundred and fifty, they chose out six to answer in the name of
all, to the Accusation which was thus formed against them: That renouncing the
fear of God, and Men, they had accused all the Members of the Catholic Kingdom
of Hungary, and by consequence the King himself, of being Idolaters; that they
had spoken insolently in their Sermons against the Blessed Virgin, the Saints
departed, and against their Images, and those of Jesus Christ; that they had
violated the Oath of Fidelity made to their Prince; given Succors to his
Enemies, opened the way to the Turks, to the end they might possess themselves
of the Kingdom of Hungary, and by consequence, that they were guilty of Treason
against GOD, and Man, and worthy to lose both their Goods and Lives. The first
part of the Accusation was an Affair purely of Religion, and 'twas that alone
for which these poor afflicted persons suffered Persecution. For the fault of
Rebellion, there was not the least ground to suspect them guilty of it; their
Judges themselves justified them therein, and Forgatz the President of the
Chamber, said to some that did solicit him, In the Name of God trouble me no
more; for before God, I myself am in no security, for if I speak but one word
on their behalf, they will accuse me of Rebellion, and cast me into Prison. But
in truth they were ready to discharge them of the punishments which these
horrible Crimes deserved, and whereof they were accused, provided they would
sign the Writing which others had signed, confess themselves guilty, and go
into voluntary Exile: Yea, they offered to give them Money to conduct them
whithersoever they would go. There is a great deal of probability, that persons
who had caused the Turk to enter into the Country, should be permitted to quit
it by a voluntary Banishment: Moreover, this Accusation seems so absurd, that I
can see no reason why they should choose it for a pretense. It Is a hellish
Wickedness to determine Banishment to persons only for Religion, and yet make
them confess a Fault of which every one knows they were innocent, to the end
they might have opportunity to say, that they were punished for a Crime against
the State. It Is the Spirit that has always reigned among Persecutors. The
Pagans made the Christians suffer horrible punishments only for their Faith:
Nevertheless, to deprive them of the glory of Martyrdom, they would make them
confess these enormous Crimes whereof they were accused.

On this pretended Crime, or to speak better, upon the refusal of these
Hungarian Pastors to quit their Ministry, their Churches, and their Country,
on the fourth of April, 1674, they were condemned to dye. And happy had they
been if the Sentence had been executed upon them, since never were Martyrs and
Confessors under the first ten Persecutions of the Pagans exposed to such cruel
trials and temptations. Leopold of Colonitsch, Bishop of Newstadt, the Jesuit
Nicholas Kellion (Monsters of barbarity and cruelty) were the chief Ministers
of those horrible torments which they caused these glorious-Confessors of Jesus
Christ to suffer, whereof we shall give you a very short Abridgement: They had
no design to put them to death, according to the sentence pronounced against
them; that had been to deliver them too soon, and it 'twas in their design to
make them pass through a thousand deaths successively. Some of them they put
into Irons, giving liberty to others, thereby to oblige them to renounce the
truth, through fear of the Chastisement which they saw fall upon their
Companions. For the space of eight whole Weeks they employed all sorts of
Artifice to get them to sign the Writing, and to go voluntarily into
Banishment, confessing themselves guilty. But seeing they encouraged each other
to bear the trial, they separated them, and put the Ministers of the Confession
of Ausburgh by themselves. Many fell, subscribed, confessed themselves guilty,
and went into Exile. There was forty six which refused, and were cast into
prisons: and a few hours after they fetched them thence, and transported them,
some by Wagon, and some by the Danube, into diverse Fortresses of the Kingdom:
They carried twenty to Comarine, eight to Sawarine, eight to Berenstchine, and
nineteen to Leopolstadt; all of them laden with Chains and Irons. They gave for
Conductor to those nineteen carried to Leopolstadt, a Hangman, which carrying
Halters in his hand throughout the whole Journey, threatened to hang them on the
first Gibbet, if they did not yield to what he demanded of them. The Reformed
Pastors of the Confession of Switzerland, had more courage than the most part
of the Lutheran Pastors; for except two, they all resolved to suffer all
things, rather than sign that Writing, by which it was intended they should
sully their innocence by confessing a pretended Rebellion, and that they should
renounce their Ministry. Upon their refusal they distributed them (as the
others) to diverse Cittadels of the Kingdom. They carried seven of them to
Sawarine, as many to Kapuwarin, six to Eberard-Castle, and the twenty one that
remain were sent to Leopolstadt: they were all chained, and put into deep and
dark Dungeons. In all these places they received unheard of Treatments, those
which were conducted to Berentschin were coupled two and two, as they yoke
Oxen. They put Irons on their feet, all filled with Nails which passed through
their shoes and stockings, and pierced their very flesh. The Prison where they
were put was as dark as Hell, 'twas a low stinking Dungeon, full of Excrements,
Mud, Man's Dung, Serpents and Toads, into which they could not enter, but on
their hands and knees. The Governor of the Citadel having represented to
Colonitsch the Bishop of Newstadt, that these Prisoners had not strength enough
to suffer such torment, and that they would die under it; It Is no matter, said
the Bishop, when they be dead, earth enough will be found in the Fields to
cover them. They took them not thence, but to make them carry Wood for the use
of the Citadel, and to draw Water from a deep Well. Of those which had been
conducted to Comorin, the most part having suffered the most horrible Prison
during the space of many months, were so weak as to suffer themselves to be
overcome, and abandon their Confession. There were not in this place above
three Confessors that persevered, whom they caused to serve in all those
painful works, in which they employed Turkish Slaves.

The Archbishop of Eberard, eighty years old, full of fire and rage in that age
which naturally is of Ice, took the pains to beat with blows by a Mallet, those
which had been brought into the fortress of that place, and he had bruised and
broken their limbs in such sort, that the most part of them were not able to
move themselves. Others were employed in cruel labors under which he took
pleasure to see them sweat even to Blood. But nothing is like to that which
thirty nine Pastors suffered; seventeen of the Confession of Ausburgh, and
twenty two of the Confession of Swiss, which were conducted to Leopolstadt.
There were three which abandoned the Truth, being overcome by the length and
cruelty of their punishments. The rest were given up to the rage of the Jesuit
Nicholas Kellion, the most cruel of all the Monsters of Lybia. These poor men
protesting their innocence before him one day; he said to them, I do indeed
believe that the most part of you are not guilty of Rebellion against the King,
but you deserve all sorts of Punishments for your Rebellion against the Church.
This wicked Wretch takes them not from their dark Dungeons* but to make them
labor at those Employments which had killed the strongest men, to carry
horrible burdens, to remove Earth, and to make Fortifications about the
Citadel. And because those Martyrs (to whom they did not give of coarse black
Bread a quarter so much as was necessary to nourish them, and almost no Water)
could not lift up their hands, nor set one foot before another, he caused them
to be beaten by blows with rods, with staves, with the butt-end of Muskets, and
with cords moistened, and full of knots. After these horrible pains, he cast
them into a dark Dungeon, where lying among Rats, Serpents, and Toads, they
were not able to rest one moment. So that it is unconceivable how Bodies so
wasted, could be able to endure such long Torments. If any one touched with
compassion, did endeavor to give any refreshment to these Confessors, they
punished them severely. A certain Person attempting to give some Onyons to one
of them, the Jesuit caused both him that gave them, and him that received them,
to be torn with the blows of a Whip, by the hand of a Hangman. And because a
certain Woman had given them a little Bread, and some other Provisions, she was
dragged through the City, put in the Pillory, and treated as they do public
Whores. They gave them neither Shoes nor Clothes, insomuch that they went
barefoot, and scarce had they rags enough upon their Bodies, to cover their
more shameful parts: Upon the least and smallest pretense they saw a Hangman
come into their Dungeon, who beat them with Rods till the Blood came. We cannot
express the horrible Violences that were done unto them, to oblige them to
adore the Host; they dragged them because they would not go. On Feast-days, and
on the Sabbaths, the Jesuit Kellio came with a Troop of Soldiers, who with
kicks of his foot, blows with the Musket and wooden Bars, pusht forward these
miserable Creatures to their Churches; insomuch, that they made them at one
blow to leap a great height into the Air; they fell back upon the Pavement
bruised and broken; and when they could not go, they dragged them on the
ground, which they stained and tinctured with their Blood. The Jesuits one day
beat two of these venerable old Men to that excess, that they dyed a little
after. This Monster perceiving well that his Cruelties would do him injury,
even amongst those of his own Party, toward the end of his Commission, thought
it advisable to treat them a little more kindly, and afterward by violence,
threatenings, and evil treatments, he drew from them a Testimonial, by which
they acknowledged that Father Kellio had permitted the Money which was sent them
by their Friends to be given to them: That he had suffered them to eat the
Provisions also which were sent them; yea, that he had granted liberty to their
Friends, and Neighbors to discourse with them. And this vile Villain having
formed this Confession and Testimony after his own pleasure, immediately made
it public, that he might dissipate the Reports which had been spread abroad
concerning his Cruelty.

Nevertheless this was not the end of the Troubles, and Afflictions of these
Confessors: They were condemned to be sent to the Galleys in Spain; and on the
18th of March, 1675. they were delivered to some Companies of Soldiers that had
been raised in Austria; and to the 36 which had been taken from Leopoldstadt,
they joined five others, who had been brought from Brenchstin. We cannot
express the Barbarities exercised against these forty Confessors: They were to
travel those long distances which are from Hungary to the Adriatic Sea, on
foot, (there Feet being laden with heavy Irons) cross the Sands, the Rocks,
Mountains, and the Stones, beaten with Cudgels, and Bulls-pisles; their Feet
did crack, and were wounded, and you might follow them everywhere by the tract
of their own Blood, which fell from all parts of their Bodies. When they came
to Tergeste, they were in such condition that they could go no further with
their Irons; therefore there was a necessity that they must be broken off from
their feet, and this was not done without covering their feet with bloody
wounds, and taking away some pieces of their Flesh. They gave them not above
twelve Ounces of coarse Bread by the day to live on. Judge you if that could
support these miserable Creatures in so tedious a travel. At night they lodged
them in Stables like Dogs, where they could find no rest. If there was any one
not able to go, whom they were forced to set on Horseback, when the Beast did
not go, they beat him that sat thereon with great blows of Cudgels and Whips:
At Theate there remained six, four whereof died of these horrible Journeys, the
two other were transported to Naples.

When they were arrived there, they would have constrained them to be listed in
the Spanish Troops, which they refused: they sold them to Masters of the
Galleys of Naples, at the price of 50 Rix Dollers a piece. These poor miserable
Pastors treated as they had been, were in no condition to do any Service in the
Galleys; for which reason those which had bought them, made no have to pay for
them; whereupon the German Captains resolved to kill all these Gally-slaves;
but the Viceroy of Naples hindered them. They were nine Months in these
Galleys, where they suffered all the Evils, Reproaches, and Outrages that can
be imagined, At last God sent them, as by a Miracle, Mr. Ruyter the Holland
Admiral, who rescued them from these horrible Miseries. These are the
Adventures of those Pastors that had been Imprisoned at Leopoldstadt.

There were yet twenty in the Prisons of Sarwar, Capuwar, Tergeste and Buccari
in Dalmatia, who were treated as those of whom we have spoken. They caused them
to go down into Caves full of Dirt, Toads, Serpents, Excrements, that had been
long heaped together. At length, after they had passed through a succession of
Cruelties, whereof Phalaris himself was never guilty, on the first of July,
1675, they were ordered, as others, to be sent to the Galleys, in hopes that
somebody would buy them; for the Viceroy, and the Venetians absolutely
refused to buy those miserable Creatures, who on the one side were innocent,
and on the other were incapable of doing any Service, by reason of the
Afflictions that they made them suffer.

The Bishop, of Newstadt that famous Persecutor, put them under the conduct of
one of his Hangmen, and caused them to be conveyed to Tergeste, a City
situated on the Borders of the Adriatic Sea: There they shut them up in a
Stable, and because one of them escaped, they cruelly scourged all the rest.
The Fugitive being pursued and taken, they forced all the rest to whip their
Companion twice a day. Not content to satisfy their Rage on these unhappy
persons, they would satisfy their Avarice also, they treated with them for
their Ransom at a great sum of Money, which they received, and then delivered
but two men. In the month of October in the same year, they carried them from
Tergeste to Buccari, to put them on the Galleys of Malta: While they expected,
the coming of the Galleys, they put them in a Vault which belonged to the
Prison, where Ordure, Filth, Urine, and the Waters of the Prison ran; there
they cast unto them, by a hole, some morsels of Bread, which they went on hands
and feet to gather up in the midst of Man's Dung. They fastened them with Chains
which came under their Throats, and held the Chin raised up, that they could
not incline it downward. They put Irons on their feet, and they were bound
cross their bodies with Irons besides. They were thirty nine days in this
posture, and sometimes they carried them out into the Street to make them a
Spectacle to the People. Those who had endured a great many horrible
Punishments, fell under these. Ten of them signed the Writing which had been
required of them at first, and that Subscription having done nothing toward
their deliverance, they abjured their Religion some time after, being forced
thereto by the length of their Torments. Two of those which persevered, died on
the seventh of December, and their Companions buried them in the Sand on the
Seashore, having scraped with their hands to make Graves for them. There
remained but six of those which were cast into this horrible Prison. The one of
these six being in an Agony on the Sand of the Sea, after so many sufferings,
and being in no condition himself to return to Prison, was dragged by the
Sergeants with so much violence upon the Stones and Stairs of the Vault, that
in all places where his Body passed, there was left of the Blood, and pieces of
the Flesh of this poor Sufferer, who died within a few hours after, and
remained without burial in the stinking Sink. They told the other five, that
they were appointed to die in the same place of Dung, Misery, and Corruption,
if they did not abjure their Religion. God fortified them in these their last
Combats, in which they continued till the month of May 1676. at which time God
sent them for a Deliverer the Ambassador of the United Provinces, who demanded
them, and they were granted to him. When they drew them from their Cave, they
had no humane shape; their Throats were putrified their Teeth were fallen out,
and they could not endure any Meat in their Mouths, without feeling very sharp
and pungent pains. They put them in good Beds; two famous Popish Physicians
undertook their recovery; one of the five died at Venice the 24th of May; the
four others escaped by Miracle, and came into Switzerland, where Mr. Heydekker
says, that he saw with horror upon their Bodies the glorious Marks of their
long Confession: so that it is from themselves that he learnt the History of
their Martyrdom.

I am very much persuaded that there are no honest Men in the Church of Rome
itself, which do not tremble at such a Report; and I am unwilling to charge
these Roman Catholics, with the infamy of such Cruelties, which are not guilty
of it, nor capable of committing it. But this does not hinder, but that we may
see therein the Spirit of Popery. Behold what the Priests and Monks are capable
of, in whom this Spirit does properly reside. It Is the Spirit of Murder, and
Falsehood; and therefore it is the Spirit of the Prince of Darkness. If this be
not a powerful Prejudice against Popery, I think there can be none. Let a Man
look on Popery with its Cords, Whips, Gibbets, its Racks, its Wheels, its
Fires, and Flames, snarling and threatening like the Devil, to tear Bodies, shed
Blood, torture Souls, extend Sufferers upon Crosses, tying them to Posts, and
casting them into Flames: Let a Man behold it, I say, in this frightful Dress,
and horrible Employment, and let him tell me, if he finds any thing like it, in
the Character of the Christian Religion. How can a Man fail to find therein the
Babylon of the Revelations, which makes herself drunk with the Blood of the
Martyrs of our Lord Jesus.

These Two Histories are taken out of Mr. Jeurieu 's Prejudices against Popery,
Chapter the 27th, and 28th of the Second Part.

FINIS.

