KING JAMES HIS Judgment by way of counsel and advice to all His loving
Subjects, extracted out of His own Speeches by Doctor Willet concerning
Politic government in England and Scotland.
THese two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, having been long at variance,
and exercised in time past with long and bloody Battles, were by him united in
one* his Majesty was the Corner stone that conjoined these two walls together.

2. By his Majesty King James of blessed memory, the faith of the Gospel was
truly professed, and his Princ^ly ^ookes prote^ted still maintained.

3. King James was a wise and judicial King, whose (...) writings do give him
the prehe^i^^^ce before all his predecessors: Another Solomon, a king, and yet
an Ecclesiaste^, a learned Writer, such an one as Gra^^^ the Emperor was, of
whom Ambrose says, Scripsisti (...) Epistol^^ (...), ac ipsa apices fidem tuam
pietat^mque*loqu^^^uit^^. Epist. 26. ad Great. You have writ (not an Epistle
only) but whole books with your hand.

4. The doors of Protestant Churches were every where set wide open.

5. Christians went hand in hand* conferring freely, and edifying one another.

6. It was King James his godly Precept to his Princely Son; T^ach your
people by your example. P. 24. And such was his practice in his own Royal
Person, giving light by his Christian life to all his Subjects.

7. Whereas many feared an alteration of Religion, the Gospel set sure footing
in the Church of England, which as by his Majesty while he lived, so by his
Royal Posterity walking in his steps, we trust shall be continued to the
end of the world, wherein his Highness also delivered his sound judgment, and
constant resolution in his Med. on Revel. 20. p. 3. Art. 8. (...) the last
estate (when the Church is delivered from the thraldom of Antichrist) without
any more general motations, the world shall still remain to the Consumm^tion,
and end of the same.

8. By Gods mercy men planted Vine yards, and eat the fruits thereof, built
houses, and dwell in them, and increased in wealth.

9. It was admirable to consider the general Resolution of all English people,
and the conjunction of their hearts and affections, both of high and low
toward their Royal Sovereign.

10. Such was the (...) between England and Scotland, that not only the
external ^arres (...) then like to cease for ever between these two Nations,
but one uniforme Religion was also (...) to (...) them in perfect love and
unity, that neither the Church of Scotland should be jealous of the English
Church, as inclining in somethings to Popery, nor the English Subject the other
as affecting a popular parity: but as loving sisters, and fellow Tribes should
hold one Worship of God, and go up to Jerusalem together.

11. He caused Religion to be without mixture or tolleration as his Majesty
most godly professes in his Meditation upon the fifteenth of the first of
Chronicles, in the application. Is there not now (says King James) a sincere
profession of the Truth amongst us in this Isle ^ppugned by the Nations about,
haters of the Holy Word, and do we not also as Israel, profess one only God
ruled by his pure Word only? on the other part, are they not as Philistims,
adorers of Legions of Gods, and ruled by the foolish traditions of men? And
again in his Meditations upon the twentieth of the Revelations 3. P, art. 1.
he says: we must fear to fall from the Truth revealed, and professed by us,
that we may be free from the like punishment, etc.

12. His zeal for Reformation of things amiss was great, who in the Preface
to the Reader in his Princely Treatise, Queen Elizabeth then living thus
writes. I doubt nothing, yea (says he.) in her name, I dare promise, by the
by past experience of her happy Government, that no good Subject shall be more
careful to inform her of any corruptions stolen into her State, than she
shall be zealous for the discharge of her conscience and honor, to see the
same purged, and restored to the ancient integrity; and further during her
time, becomes me^ least of any to meddle in it, etc. And that which his Majesty
promised in behalf of her, God directed his wisdom to perform by himself:
the dealing wherein before, as it pleased his Princely modesty to call meddling,
so afterward the whole managing thereof of right appertained to him.

13. The Church of England was not then forced to hang their Instruments of
praise upon the willowes, with the Israelites in Babylon, and by the
intermission of some changes only to find an occasion of thankesgiving unto
God; but had indeed* as full, and as great cause, and as much l^berty as ever
to sound out praises: England might then say with the Prophet David, then was
our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy. Psalm. 126* 2.

14. The Courts of Justice were not interrupted, but the Laws, and (...) of
Judgment were open for every man, and to revive the hearts of his Subjects, he
thus writes to his noble son, p. 90. 91. press to draw all your Laws, and
processes to be as short, and as plain as you can, etc. weary not to hear the
complaints of the oppressed, aut ne Rex sis.

15. King James was no stranger, but of the Royal blood of the Kings of this
Land, a Prince of the same lineage, of the same Island, of the same English
blood Royal; yea of the same Religion: who* as he was no forrainer* so gave he
counsel to his Princely h^ire* p. 55. To hear ordinary Counsels, and Justice
seats in every Kingdom, of their own Countrymen.

16. Whereas the peace of this Church had been hindered by the opposition of
strange, and new Doctrines, he restored the peace of the Church, and brought it
to one uniforme Doctrine, whose advice Princely is, Page 20. ^. 1. That if any
do urge to embrace their own fantasies in the place of Gods Word, etc.
acknowledge them for vain men etc. and gravely and with authority redact them
into order again.

17* He had external peace with other Nations, who to wound them with
kindness, who was a Prince that used al other Princes Page 56. (...). As
brethren, honestly, kindly; and strove with every one of them in courtesy and
thankfulness, and when any performed to offend this Nation, he was a
courageous defendor, who revenged and freed his Subjects from all foreign
injuries done unto them, Page 55. (...)

18. There was domestic Peace and plenty, for which we have cause to bless
God at this day, for thereby we obtained godly education of our Parents, who
were then children, whereas without it we might have been distracted from our
parents, by the iniquity of unquiet times, which was then in danger to have
befallen this Land.

19. He was a loving Prince; who as the natural Father, and kind Master of
his Kingdoms, thought his greatest contentment to stand in his Subjects
prosperity, and his greatest surety in having their hearts, pa. 125. (...).

20. Such was his zeal to the house of God, that in his medita^^on in 1.
Chron. 15 part 2. p. 43. he holds that the chief virtue which should be in
a Christian Prince; namely fervency, and constant zeal, to promote the glory
of God that has honored him, and concerning the Ministers of the Church he
says, Page, 20. love no man more than a good Pastor, reverence, and obey them
as the Heralds of the most high God.

Dr. Willets Observations on KING James his respect to the two Tables of the
Law of GOD.
THat Princely Ecclesiastes King James, declared (...). Page 89. that a King
should be custas utriuiq^ tabula: The guardian of both the 2. Tables of the
Law, which his Majesty testified in every particular, in his Christian, and
judicial treatises.

1. Concerning the first Commandment he professes himself to be an enemy to
all Atheism. Basilic. p. 25.

2. Concerning the second Commandment, he condemns adorers of legions of
Gods, and such as are ruled by the foolish traditions of men. (...)

3. Concerning the third Commandment, he says, beware to offend your
conscience with swearing or lying, medit. in Chron. applicat. page* 17.

4. Concerning the 4. Commandment: He says always let the Sabbath be kept
holy, and no unlawful pastime used. Page 53.

5. Command: These be King James his own words, honor your parents for the
lengthning of your own days, as God in his law promises, Page 96.

6. Command: There are some horrible crimes (says His Majesty to his Princely
heir) that you are bound in conscience never to forgive (such as witchcraft,
wilful murder Page 31.

7. Command: He says) God commanding by the mouth of Paul, 1 Corin. 6, 20, to
abstain from fornication, declares that Fornicators shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God* P. 74.

8. Command; His Majesty showed his worthy resolution for the Reformation of
the robberies, and oppression of the borderers, page 36.

9 Command: That Royal Ecclesiastes says, beware to offend your conscience
with use of swearing or lying, etc. lying comes much of a vile use which
banisheth shame* page, 17, 18.

10. Concerning the last Commandment: his Majesty's Princely counsel is,
abstain from haunting before your marriage, the idle company of dames, which
are nothing else, but irritamenta libidinis, page, 127.

Dr. Willets Observations on KING James his Counsel and advice to all his
Subjects: according to their particular callings and Estates.
THe Nobility may learn not to thrall by oppression the meaner sort, that do
dwell by them, nor to maintain their servants, and dependants in wrong, page: 45.

2. Merchants are taught not to buy the worst wares, and sell them at the
dearest rates, page; 50.

3. Judges are admonished to take heed of bribery, advocates to decline the
longsomenesse of suites for the enriching of themselves, with the spoil of the
whole Country, Page 90.

4. Church governors to preserve Doctrine, and discipline in purity according
to Gods Word, Page 43.

5. Ministers and Preachers may receive information for their Calling. 1. not
to vary from their Text. 2. not to meddle with Matters of State, Page 8 9. and
3. that their speech be not fairded with Artifice, etc. but to eschew all
affected forms, Page 115. and 4. to use only Scripture for interpretation of
Scripture if we would be sure, and never (...) from the analogy of Faith in
expounding.

The Poscript.
THe Jews returning from Captivity did so wonder at their strange
deliverances, that they seemed to be as men that dream. As strange a work may
it please God to work for the Church of England if he please at this time; And
though our divisions be not yet turned into peace, yet have we many years
under our Gracious Sovereign enjoyed both true Religion and Peace; and though
there be now such great fears, and distempers in this Kingdom, under so
godly, pious and Religious a Prince, who is even a pattern of true piety and
love to all Princes of the World: yet let us not faint, oh let us pray* to God
that as his Royal Majesty after his Royal Father King James, was settled in
Peace; so this Kingdom may again be reduced to that flourishing Peace,
wherein under our gracious King it has hitherto stood as before under his
Royal Father the Lord grant that the glory of his own name may be advanced,
the Kings honor exalted, agreement between his Majesty and the Parliament
concluded; the flourishing of the Church obtained; the peace of the Kingdom
settled; and all divisions amongst us reconciled, Amen.

Printed at London for Thomas Cook, 1642.

FINIS.

