THE LATE K. James's Commission, TO HIS PRIVATEERS: To Ravage, Plunder, Burn,
Sink, and Destroy all the Ships and Goods of the People of England, Scotland,
and Ireland. With Remarks thereupon.
James, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, and Ireland, King, Defender
of the Faith, etc.
To Our Trusty and Well-Beloved, Captain Patrick Lambert.
KNOW ye, That we Reposing Special Trust in your Approved Fidelity and Valor
have Assigned, Constituted and Appointed you Commander of the Good Frigate
called the Providence; and further, We give you full Power and Authority to
enter into any Port or River of the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland,
or any Territories thereunto belonging, and either there or at Sea, to take and
apprehend, and in case of any Opposition or Resistance, to Sink, Burn, or
otherwise Destroy all Ships and Vessels, together with their Goods, Lading, and
Merchandises belonging to the Inhabitants of England, Scotland and Ireland, or
either of them, together with the Ships, Goods, and Merchandises of the States
of the United Provinces or Their Subjects, and to bring and send up all such
Ships and Goods as they shall ta^e in^^ some Port of France, and to procure the
same to be adjudged lawful Prize in the next Court of Admiralty, established by
our Dear Brother the Most Christian King. And the Tenths and other Dues arising
out of the said Prizes are to be paid to Thomas Stratford, or in his absence to
Jean Nimport of Breast, or to such other Persons as shall have Authority from Us
to receive the same.

Given at Our Court at the Castle of St. Germains, etc. Signed Melfort.
This is the Substance of the Commission.



REMARQUES, etc.
THE Passions and Affections of some People are so unaccountable, that it
puzles Imagination to conceive how strong a Zeal can arise from so undeserving
a Subject of their Veneration. For instance, not to Treat untenderly with on
the Ruins of Majesty, nor take up Royal Miscarriages, to make Reflections on
Greatness in Distress: The Publication of this following Commission, of the
Late King James, is not so much intended, as an Invective on that unhappy
Prince, as to express our Admiration at the unfathomable Extravagancies of some
over-bigotted Zealots in his Favor.

We are all sensible that it is the common Ambition of degraded Princes, how
justly soever Dethroned, to endeavor their own Restoration. There is a Chance
in a Crown, and it is an extraordinary Resignation, that can quit the Pretenses
to Titles so Great, though never so deservingly Forfeited. We do not therefore
at all wonder at the Irish and French Army, prepared for his once intended
Descent and Invasion of England; nor the early Naval Preparations of the French
on that Occasion. Such an Expedition on so important an Attempt, carried some
little Face of Glory in it. His very Enemies could not deny but such an
Enterprise had been an Ambition we^^ (...); and had he succeeded, he might
fairly have written himself James the Conqueror. But Gentlemen, as bold and
gallant Achievements, in the Universal Standard of Honor, carry a great Name;
and which true Greatness, possibly, has no occasion to be ashamed of.
Nevertheless, there may be those poorer Designs, that instead of being either
Great or Glorious, perhaps may carry the vilest and most abject Face, that a
much less Character then King James ought to blush at. As for Example, the
foregoing Commission.

There you will find instead of a more warrantable Ambition of recovering Three
Kingdoms, he poorly descends to grant his Commissions to Privateers to R^fle
and Spoil all the Subjects of England, Scotland and Ireland, indifferently to
Burn, Sink and Fire their Vessels, etc. and all this without respect of
Persons, Interests or Religion. The severest Romanist, or most violent Jacobite
(without exception) is to he swept in the common Doom. So that instead of
pretending all his former promised Impunity and Tenderness to the People of
England, or instead of Bravely grappling at his Royal Rival in the Imperial
Seat, he vilely sumes little less than a common Pyrate, Authorizes the
Depredations of the English Merchants even by the very hands of Englishmen.
This last poor Spirited Meanness must either plainly tell us, that he has
utterly renounced all hopes of recovery of his Kingdoms; and so under that
Despair he resolves to play at a small Game rather than stand out, (which
indeed is the best Title I can give it) and consequently (like the Famous
Dionysius sumed Pedagogue) when he can Scourge Kingdoms no longer, he prepares
his lesser Rods for a more humble Tyrannick Lash; or else that forgetting that
he ever was a Monarch, and therefore blushing at nothing though never so
Unprincely, he contents himself with being under Secretary to the French King,
whilst the little James is but a Subscription to the Greater Lewis. The French
King deputes him as his Emanuensis to Copy Commissions for hi^; and the
Contented Receiver o^ that high Favor is paid to officiate in the Trust. It
was remarkt of him, that at his first departure from England upon his Transport
from Feversham, he uttered this Expression. That he had rather be a Captain of
a Troop of Light Horse under the French King, than Reign King of England under
the Lash and Control of Parliaments. A Captain of a Troop of Horse is no
over-high Post. But truly of the two it is much the more Honorable than the
granting of such Commissions. But indeed all these tend to the aggrandizing o^
^he Freech King; the poorer the Subjects of England, the stronger the Grand
Lewis; his inviolable Zeal and Fidelity, therefore to that most Christian (so
titled) Nero, supercedes all other Considerations, and (fas aut nefas) right or
wrong, honorable or infamous, nothing comes amiss that carries the least
shadow of service to that darling Idol.

One thing is very Remarkable in the Janus Faces of King James's Prete^ces.
This very Commission found on Board one of the late Prizes, was dated at St.
Germans, the 22d of February: which (pray observe) bearing date before his
intended Invasion; impours this Privateer to enter into any Port or River of
England, Scotland, or Ireland; and commit all those Hostilities of Firing,
Sinking, Burning, etc. All Traders Vessels whatever; at the same time that his
Declaration, prepared for his Reception in England, intimated all the Affection
and Tenderness imaginable to the Interests Property, and what not, of his
Subjects of England, viz. That he was coming only to recover his own Right,
Establish and Restore their Laws and Liberties; and yet at the same time he
gave out Commissions to Waste, Ruin, and Destroy the most innocent Traders of
the Kingdom, possibly no ways interested in the Titles, and Disputes of
Princes, in Parties or Causes; but on the contrary only endeavoring a
peaceable Acquisition of their Dread, by their Honest Commerce and Industry.

London, Printed for P. Smart, in the Poultry, 1692.


