KING JAMES HIS APOPTHEGMES OR, TABLE-TALKE: AS THEY WERE BY Him delivered
Occasionally: AND By the publisher (His quondam Servant) carefully received;
AND Now humbly offered to public view, as Not impertinent to the present
Times.

By B. A. Gent.

London printed by B. W. 1643.

The Preface, or, Induction to the Reader.
AS the Queen of Sheba declared the servants of Solomon to be happy which stood
continually before him, and that heard his wisdom 1 King. 10. 8. I may as
confidently affirm, that never since has any Age produced a Prince of so near
affinity, or resemblance unto him (who of so ample indowments) in wisdom,
judgment, and equity, has enlarged himself in his life time; witness the
many, and manifold unparalelled Trophies of his excellencies yet remaining,
which flowed not alone from his pen, and indefatigable dexterity, but sacred
lips also, by eloquent discourses, as well as profound documents, and deep
Commentaries; whereof a late extraction is yet extant in view: I therefore
conceived it a needful duty, in pious imitation of the former, to revive the
memory of so just and learned a master, in his ordinary discourses and
Table-talke, accounting my self the most happy (though least worthy) of many,
to partake of such gracious opportunities which those Halcian days did
plentifully afford; conceiving it might be objected against me as a piece of
ingratitude, to have deprived the time or posterlty of such Gems and
inferences, meet for discourse upon contingent occasions. These were heedfully
observed, and carefully taken from the sacred mouth of the first Speaker, King
JAMES of famous memory, accidentally falling long time since upon discourse,
and Table-talke, at open meals, in his Majesty's royal presence, or privy
Chamber (doubtless in the hearing, and yet perfect remembrance of diverse of
his Majesty's near servitu^es and attendants yet living) they were assiduously
collected, as well at his Majesty's own standing houses, as also in his
foreign progress both in England and Scotland, with the sundry times and
places, when, where, and upon what occasions, or arguments they were uttered, a
Catalogue whereof, I have presumed hereafter to insert, for some peculiar use
of these refractory times; all which I may boldly affirm have been providently
preserved, and newly revised and published in times of distemper and
distraction; who knows otherwise, then to make good and accomplish the
ancient and modern prophesies and predictions of those contingencies which
have reference to the Royal Person of so incomparable a Sovereign; whereof
some have had their period already, in and upon his Person living, and now
since his decease, may from his Corpse and Ashes, reflect some analogy and
resemblance; as for example, in that of Mother Shepton, That England should
tremble and quake for dread; A dead man that should speak, etc. Before I dare
not conclude or determine, but then in fine, I am assured, when (together with
that royal, sacred, and divine Spirit of his, soul and body reunite) each
single person, no less members, as glorious Saints of God, with Angels, and
Archangels, shall in a joyful and heavenly Quire (with the Church Triumphant)
sing, Gloria in excelsis, etc. for evermore, Amen.

To wa^^ the Vulgars Cataract, and quit each single stake,
(I Have (...) the light grown dim) by what a dead King spoke.
Per me B. A.

KING JAMES HIS APOPTHEGMES; OR, TABLE-TALKE.
1.
THAT it is a Maxim in the Romish Religion, declared by most of their own
Writers, That the Pope may, if he will, at one Mass, free all the souls out
of Purgatory. His Majesty's inference on this Position was, with abnegation of
the Popes Charity, and admiration of his unparalleled cruelty, that being
granted to have power so to do, does not, nor may not apply his will unto it.
If it were possible for one man to free all the world from hell, ought he not
to do it, etc.

2.
That the wearing of Leeks on St. David's day by the Welchmen, was a good,
honorable, and commendable fashion; seeing that all memorable acts have by
their Agents something worn for distinction, and also to preserve the memory
thereof unto posterity; even as the Passover was to the Jews; that when their
children should ask why they went girded, with staves in their hands, they
might show them the cause, etc. So the Welchmen in commemoration of the great
fight by their black Prince of Wales, do wear Leeks, as their chosen Ensign,
etc.

3. At Cambridge, etc.
That an infallid thing may be discerned and known, by a fallid means; as for
example, our senses are fallid, but by them, we know many things infallid,
etc. whence the Papists infer; that because the Church is visible, therefore
the chief Head must be visible: The Universal Church consists of two parts,
one visible, the other invisible; to wit, a visible body, and an invisible
spirit, and therefore the chief Head of the Church should rather be visible,
but we grant many visible substitutes over the Church as subordinate Rulers
under the Chief, etc.

4.
His Majesty observed a quaint Interrogatory put to a jealous Lover out of
that famous Comedy of Ignoramus; the which his Majesty highly commended; viz.
whether he desired most, or rather to be termed, Publius Cornolius, or
Cornelius Tacitus. In further approbation of which Comedy, beside in
opposition and dislike of another Comedy performed and acted before his
Majesty by the Scholars of the Universitie of Oxford, that as in Cambridge,
one Sleep made him Wake, so in Oxford one Wake made him Sleep.

5.
Doctor Baily holding conference with the King touching the Popes Arrogance,
alluding to Christ's Answer to his Apostles, He that desires to bear rule, let
him be the least among you* and therefore the Pope does sometimes colourably
term himself Servus Servorum, etc. To which the King replies, that by such
Argument or inference he could prove the Pope to be humbly minded; to which the
Doctor answeswered, that he did not always so account himself; save only
when he had purpose to delude or deceive, otherwise he esteemed himself
Dominus Dominantium, etc. His Majesty's determination on the Point, was, that
the Popes calling himself Servus Servorum, etc. was rather in a more strict
and peculiar sense, as that he was Servus Petri, etc. sive Mariae Virgims, etc.
and so by consequence Servus servorum Dei, etc. toward all other Dominus
Dominantium, etc. So likewise to be a professed Catholic, is to be a true
Christian, but to be a Roman Catholic is it which marreth the matter. It was
the reproof of the Donatists, which were accounted Catholics, but confined
their profession into one corner of Africa. So also the Romanists; whereas the
true Catholic is universal.

6. At Edenbrough in Scotland; tertio dei Junii, Anno Dom. 1617.
That whereas our Savior says, It is as easy for a Camel to pass through
the eye of an needle, as for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
etc. The Pope perverteth that saying; for that none shall have no Pardons but
such as pay for them, so consequently, the rich are more easy to enter into
heaven then the poor, because the one can have pardon when he will, but the
other is not able to purchase it; and thereupon His Majesty concluded the Pope
to be justly called a Merchant of men's souls, as it is set forth in the 18. of
the Revelation, etc.

7.
Concerning that saying, That the gates of hell shall not prevail, etc. that
therefore their Church of Rome cannot fall; because of the certainty of Gods
promise to his Church, which they falsely attribute unto themselves. The
question only remains in the circumstance of time, as between their Church,
and the true Church, to wit, whether it be already past, or shall be hereafter;
for they deny not, but there shall be a general defection, and Antichrist
shall be revealed, etc. but they deny it yet to be, and we say it is already
past and fulfilled in themselves; but his Majesty's absolute determination upon
this point was; the question between them and us to be the same which is yet
between the Jews and Christians; for they deny not but that a Messiah and
Savior must, and shall come, and yet have him in a daily expectation; but the
Christian holds that he is come already, and has bin in the world, and has
performed all things preappointed of God his Eternal Father; even such or the
very like, is the question between the Papists and Protestants concerning the
right and true worship of that Messiah. The Church Millitant his Majesty
compared to the Moon so full of Changes, his reason for this opinion he gave,
was, for that he could not see a Church in any place peaceably settled, but
before he could duly consider thereof, he forthwith perceived the face of it
changed, except it were those of Germany and the low Countries, as the
Lutherans and Calvinists, etc

8.
At Edengbrough, and Fawkeland, and other places in the Kingdom of Scotland,
etc. 23. Junii, 1617.
God is never better honored, then in giving him true worship, and in Loving
good men. The King at that time declared himself resolved always to kneel at
the Sacrament, and that for to testify his humility toward God, being a King,
and the rather for example sake to others that are set under him; he said he
would not retain willingly a gout in the knee, alluding to Doctor Lawds Sermon
a little before made upon that subject. His Majesty confessed the gout in the
knee very troublesome and offensive indeed, and that by a particular experiment
of his own, upon an accidental hurt which he received on his foot at
Newmarket, being to receive the holy Communion on Christmasse day following,
and resolved to take the same kneeling, as aforesaid, provoked his whole body
into a very great sweat and anguish, and therefore concluded the gout in the
knee to be a maine impediment for sacred duties, and so conceived it the easier
way to sit, and then the mind might have the better opportunity to rove and
wander after other profane and wanton cogitations: His Majesty did
acknowledge that we could never do too much worship toward God; should we not
(said he) exceed the Turks: who in their false worship do fall often flat on
their faces, and rise often in the night to perform false worship, and this
they are enjoined to do, or otherwise they account themselves damned; he
confessed too much worship might be rendered to our Lady and other Saints, but
doubtless never too much to God, and Christ his anointed. On the contrary, his
Majesty's opinion concerning the essence of Gods deity, and how some will seem
to flatter him, etc. And thereupon commended a translation, that was so direct,
as it described God as he was; for he cannot be flattered. As for example, God
is said to be omnipotent, it is true; yet there are some things that he cannot
have done as he would, in respect of man's depraved nature. Again, he made all
things; true, all that we can behold; but there was a place in which he was
before he made the world. Again, it is said that he is every where; true, but
as a King is by his Ambassadors, not personally every where. Again, it is
further said that God is unchangeable; yet it is also said many times that he
repents; and therefore though Kings may sometimes be flattered, yet God never
can, etc.

That he did not know nor read of above three Jews converted in 20. years, etc.

That the Turk sent him Embassage since his coming to England, to follow the
steps of Queen Elizabeth, and not to profess Idolatry, for that would
overthrow his Crown, etc.

That the Turks will not suffer the Jews among them to sacrifice, for that was
flat against their Laws: As we will not suffer the Papists to worship the
mass, because against our Laws, etc.

That the Jews had been so bitten with punishments for Idolalrie, that they
would never endure any show of it.

That the Religion of the Turks was composed of the Jewish Religion, of the
Christian, and of the Arrians; and the policy thereof was to draw infinites of
people to his subjection that were uncertainly affected; as in the low
Countries they use diversities of Religions to strengthen their power, etc. but
this was observed by the King to be a strange policy.

That he confessed the Turk to be the greatest Prince in the world; and yet
that he did not commannd the tenth part of them which professed mahometisme,
etc.

That there was ten of his Religion to one that professed any kind of
Christianity, and therefore the Popes universality convinced.

That through the diverse compositions of the Turks Religion, a great part of
the world was infected, as both the Indies, America, Persia, etc.

The King professed that he would choose rather to turn Turk, then in some
fables believe Bellarmine, etc.

9.
Octavo die Julii, Anno Domini, 1617. At Fawkeland.
That a Germane was naturally the most constant to himself, for although he
could well fashion himself to any Country that he traveled into, yet
returning home to his own, he would appear to any man's judgment nothing
changed from the manner and condition of his own Nation; and so in him is most
truly fulfilled Coelum non ani^um mutant qui transmare currunt; but with the
English, or any other Nation, for the most part it is not so.

That he often heard the Lord of Northampton say, that a Frenchmun, though never
so grave and sober of countenance, yet at one time or other would have his
friske of vanity.

10.
That Tobacco was the lively image and pattern of hell; for that by allusion
it had in it all the parts and vices of the world, whereby hell may be gained*
To wit, first, it was a smoke, so are the vanities of the world a smoke and
vapor. Secondly, it delights them who take it, so do the pleasures of the
world delight the men of the world. Thirdly, It makes men drunken and light in
the head, so do the vanities of the world, men are drunken therewith.
Fourthly, He that takes Tobacco, says he cannot leave it, it does bewitch
him; even so the pleasures of the world makes men loath to leave them, they are
for the most part so enchanted with them. Besides the former allusion, it is
like hell in the very substance of it, for it is a stinking loathsome thing, so
is hell; it goes in at the mouth, and out at the nose, so does the smoke of
hell through the body and head.

11.
That he has heard an old Minister say touching conformity, that it would be a
scandal for himself to conform, yet will allow that his son may do it; as
if he living a fool all his life, desired so to die, etc.

Nono die Januar. An. Dom. 1617.

That the Puritan Ministers do give growth unto the Papists, and are a
scandal to the true Protestant profession, etc.

That on Christmas day last past, there were Sermons preached in diverse parts
of Scotland; viz. At Glas^oc, Holyredoes, and at Saint Andrews, and chose
Texts concerning the Nativity of Christ, which was more than had been done
there long before.

That the Rector of Saint Andrews, after the Kings last being there, said,
that in his Kirk he would constrain the Communicants to stand or kneel; for
he would have but few at one time, and where they received, should be neither
Stool nor Form, so that of necessity they should either stand, or kneel.

That a Minister in Edenborough did baptize a Child (through favor to the
Parents) contrary to their Presbyterian Canons* the which thing to do, none
can be drawn unto, by the Canons of the Church of England: As for example,
whereas it is by their Laws, that no baptism shall be administered, but upon
one certain day, and at a Sermon, and in the Church, and not elsewhere upon
any occasion, no not in case of necissity, when the child is like to die
without it; this is their Law absolute, and there is no minister will be
wrought by the King or Canons of the Church to do otherwise; yet upon a time,
this Minister (through favor of some particular parsons) did go to baptize a
child that was sick upon another day, without any Sermon, and coming hastily
to the Church, and finding the doors shut, did baptize the same child without
the walls of the Church, in the yard, without any scruple of conscience; and
yet being induced thereunto by the King and Cannons (of the Church of England)
he refused to do the like, etc.

That some of the ministers of Scotland did confess, that they were in as
great extreme on the one side, as the Papists were on the other. The like was
observed for the Sacrament to the sick at home; they refused in all cases of
necessity; yet it was once done through savor to one particular person; in
which case I confess they did not amiss; but very ill in refusing to do it by
the Kings order.

That a certain minister did refuse to do as the King bade him, albeit it were
a thing no way contrary to Gods command, or word; and said peremptorily, if he
did it, he was damned; being demanded his reason thereof: said, I am Gods
Ambassador, and if I perform any thing but what he expressly commands by his
word, I am a Traitor, and so consequently, I am damned.

12. Anno Dom. 1618.
That no man can thrive that keeps a whore at rack and manger, to wit,
openly, with justification, etc. That to rove is proper to express the action
of the body, but to rave is an action of the mind.

That miracles are now used and maintained among the Papists, to the end to
confirm a false belief on Saints, according as at first Christ used miracles,
to cause and confirm a true belief on himself.

Evanglikes are not all Evangelists, etc.

That he is not of opinion that all specches in Scripture, touching beasts or
fowls by allegory does agree with the proper and Peculiar natures of them; as
of that, Be Wise as Serpents, etc. or that comparison in Job to the Ostridge
that seems to neglect her young by leaving her eggs in the dust, etc. which
is not the proper nature of them, as has been approoved by Barbary merchants
that have seen them; but it seems so outwardly, because she hides her eggs
in the sand, and so removes a little from them, but surely for no other end
but to protect them, that at the time of need, and in the hatching, to break
the shell, which of it self cannot.

13. Anno Dom. 1619.
That there was never any noted Heretic, but the Sect of him were much more
heretical.

That he could find more arguments in the papists works for the Pope, then the
Pope himself could do, etc.

That the Canonists are the very Devils of all the rest, etc*

That Peter seeing Malchus his Kinsman witness against him, made him fear the
more, and so denied his Master.

That if they had accused Christ of riot, the same witness would have proved
matter to declare his Divinity in healing his ear again.

To commit a sin against the letter of the law moral, is greater then a sin
against the consequent; as for example, adultery is a greater sin then
fornication, etc.

That he styled a book once sent him, by the name of Melchisedecke, being
without beginning or ending* etc.

That he reads more Papists books then Protestant, and from thence finds
matter to confirm him in the Protestant Religion.

That taking all things to the strait tenor of the written letter, is the
matter of jarre 'twixt Puritans and Us.

That Henry 4. of France would have sent Cardinal Peron to convert him, the
which he denied, for that he held him weak and shallow; and refused to loose a
heavenly crown for an earthly, etc.

That he would not admit a public disputation between 12. Papists, and 12.
Protestants, himself being chosen Umpire; because he might loose more, that
would not be satisfied, then he could win, although the Papists side were
convicted.

That in 88. he almost converted a Papist, until he heard of the Spanish
invasion.

14. 4. November. Anno Dom. 1620.
At Theobalds. etc. Discourse concerning Alchymy.
The Alchymists from a true position do produce a false assumption to
maintain their practice; as for example, every creature or thing has a
natural inclination to the perfection of the same kind; as poor silly worms
by change of climat may become Serpents; and in all Minerals the perfection is
gold, so all inferiall Metals have inclination to gold, which is but as we say
the quintessence, fat, or cream of other Metals, and not consisting in any
vein of it self* Now from this general position, the Alchymist with a
certain composition with other Metals (most having some gold in them) do
think to ripen them into gold by Art, as men may do the other fruits of the
earth; which is no certain rule, and therefore a false assumption from a true
position.

That in some parts of Scotland might be in time by industry procured many
fair and rich Pearls.

That many learned Writers have recorded things for truth, which experience
has falsified; as for instance, His Majesty gave His own experience,
touching the worms found in a Stagges head; which are reported to die if put
into water, but will live in wine, the which being tried, they live equally in
both.

Sir Francis Kinnaston by experience falsified the Alchymists report, that a
Hen being fed for certain days with gold, beginning when Sol was in Leo,
should be converted into gold, and should lay golden eggs; which being tried
was no such thing; but became indeed very fat. His Majesty's answer and conceit
thereupon was, that surely somewhat was omitted in Sir Francis his experiment;
to wit, he wanted faith to believe, as himself did always in the like, or
such matters; but one thing more might have been added, more amply to satisfy
the Experiment; if the Cock had been first fed with gold, and afterward have
trodden the Hen, might happily have succeeded better, etc.

15. At Royston.
That no man can tell what part of the meat which he eats turns to
nutriment, and what to excrement; but it is the Divine power, which appoints
and orders the same.

That the often mentioning of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Scriptures, is to
signify that we should celebrate the memory of good men above others, and of
all, men above beasts, etc.

That it is termed in Scripture, the God of Abraham, etc. some infer
thereupon, that these Fathers are yet living in the flesh, because it is said
that God is the God of the living, and not of the dead, etc.

16. At Newmarket, etc.
Opon discourse of the strictness of the Civil Law, touching the power of
women's accusations in matter of Bastardy; His Majesty made mention of one that
Himself knew, that would not acknwledge to have had any child in her Husbands
life time; yet after his death above three years, she produced a son to
inherit her dead Husbands estate, and proved the same to be his, which he
never knew, nor owned in his life time; and for her excuse in concealing the
same in his life time, she cited his jealousy and other dangerous humors in
him, for which she durst not make known that ever she was with child by him.
And this is the usual custom of such as live at their stipends, and keep
houses by their Husbands allowance, where their Husbands are not themselves.

That all humane Laws cannot be perfect, but that some must rest in their
discretion of the Judge, although an innocent man do perish thereby: as his
Majesty further conceaved, that a Jury may cast upon Evidence, and a Judge may
give a just sentence, and yet the party innocent.

That it were better twenty innocents did suffer, then to have all dishonest
men go free.

That there is many ways to find out truth besides evidence of real witness;
to wit, the same and report of the delinquent; whereupon Master Hugh May
replied and mentioned Master Haddocks good report and opinion conceived of him
in Oxford; and yet was found at last a great offender; whereupon his Majesty
replied, the case in him was not after his meaning; and thereupon insisted,
further to exemplify his offense, confessing the same to be high and
cappitall in respect of God and man (meaning Master Haddock who preached in his
sleep) first that his Majesty did God and the country good service in
discovering that man. Secondly that his practice was diabolical, and a new way
to sin that his Majesty never heard of before. Thirdly, that he did therein
practice against God himself, in that he did endeavor to make his own
inventions as the Oracle of God, and by that means to bind men's cansciences
thereunto to believe. Fourthly, That his Majesty discovered him by his own
papers and notes which were brought unto the King, the which Master Haddock
confessed to be his own hand writing, and the notes of the Sermon, which (men
say) he Preached in his sleep; but for answer thereunto said, he only noted his
Sermons first in writing, and so in the night dreamt thereof, and of the same
thing he had penned before; but by this answer his Majesty convinced him upon
his own experience, concerning dreams and visions in the night; that things
studied or mentioned in the day time may be dreamt of in the night; but always
irregularly without order; but not as his Sermons were, both good and learned;
as in particular, in that very Sermon which he preached before his Majesty in
his sleep, concerning David's waters, etc. Psalm. 69. wherein he treated; first,
Phisically, then Theologically, which is not usually in dreams so to do.
Fifthly, that Master Haddocks sin being granted for liberty and good; then
would all capital sins have been protected and allowed; as blasphemy against
God, treason agninst the King, slander against any man, etc. and what not? and
at last all defended under color of being asleep. Six^ly, that in all his
Sermons, he had always some sayings in defense, or in excuse of the Puritans.

After the discourse ended concerning Master Haddock, as aforesaid; his
Majesty proceeded to mention his great trouble with that sect in Scotland, and
could never yet reduce the Ministers from slandering in their Sermons openly;
and would tell him the offenses of his servants by name, as if you keep such a
one (naming him) God will bless you; but if such a one (naming him also) you
cannot prosper.

That he has been constrained to make answer to Preachers in the midst of
their Sermons; who digressing from the word of God, have told him openly before
his own face, of certain communications wherein he has not pleased their
humors, although it had been privately done by me unto them, etc.

That for 12. years together in Scotland he prayed on his knees before every
Sermon, that he might hear nothing from the Preacher, which might afterward
grieve him; but since he came into England his Prayer was to edify of that
which he heard.

That one man whom the King openly called unto him in his Sermon, did
afterward complayn to the Presbitery, that the King molested him in the
Preaching of Gods word; To which complaynt his Majesty gave answer in this
manner; viz. Godforbid that I should molest any in the Preaching of Gods word;
but I consesse that the Preacher told me before my face, many tales of a tub,
as what I said to him at such a time, and what his reply was to me, and all
this raylingly in a Pulpit, me thought I could not conteyn my self, etc. but
the same Minister was afterward deprived, and by other Ministers it was
acknowledged to be justly done.

17.
That his majesty's opinion was, that the reasons that moved the foresaid
Master Haddock to put in practice his Preaching in his sleep; did proceed from
two natural infirmities to which he was subject; the one was stammering in
speech so finding himself more ready to speak, being quiet in his bed, and
his eyes shut from any object to trouble his mind, he could utter himself more
perfectly; The Second reason, was his pronesse to talk in his sleep, etc.
These two, as the King conceived pricked him on to that foul practice and
illusion of Satan, etc.

18. At Theobalds, Ann. Dom. 1621.
That there is more pride under Diogenes and a Puritans cap, then under a Kings
Crown.

That the not paying Tithes to the Church, is many times the ruin of great
estates.

That the King has observed some in particular, that after a long continuance
of prosperity with great increase in their ancestors; yet by neglect of tiths
paying, have been impoverished, although otherwise never so provident and
industrious.

That he should account nothing blessed, if he should deny the necessity of
tiths paying.

That, against all impugnors, he would demand what conscience there were to
expect ten pound use for every hundred pounds, and yet to question with God for
the tenth of his own.

That this is most impugned by Puritans and Lecturors, that are not beneficed.

That most Lawyers possessing much land, do as it were fright the Churchmen out
of their tiths by tricks of Law, and so fearing them with perilous and tedious
suites

That such as impugn it most, are most greedy of it, after they come to it.

19. Ibid. Ann. Dom. 1622.
That the King vowed never to be of that Religion, where so gross an opinion,
as Transubstantiation was so ignorantly maintained, while God kept him in his
right wits.

That he commended the Preacher of that day for stilling the puritans of our
Church, protestant Jesuits, as also the Jesuits of the Church of Rome, he
termed Jesuiticall puritans; for both of them are great enemies to monarchical
government.

To manifest the grossnesse of their error in their opinion of
Transubstantiation; The King had heard of a Jew, that once stobbed the bread or
wafer, and some affirm there issued out perfect blood, which among them is
still kept, and they premit sometimes mice and rats to eat it, etc. now consider
how disproportionable a thing it is after consecration (if it be the very body,
as they aver) that they should allow a Jew to crucify him again, and also for
mice and ratts to eat our Savior. His Majesty did vehemently inculcate the
grossnesse of this error; and furthermore said that Bellarmine was much
troubled about this point, whether the bread and wine, although much taken
together, do turn to Corporal nutriment or not, or transubstantiated as
aforesaid, and then a greater error follows, etc.

20.
That it was strange to look into the life of Hen. 8. how like an Epicure he
lived, etc.

It was once demanded by King Hen. 8. of one, what he might do to be saved? who
answered, that he had no cause to fear, having lived so mighty a King, and
done so many worthy acts in his life time; but oh said he, I have lived too
like a King; which King James inferred was rather like no. King; for the office
of a King is to do justice and equity; but he only served his sensuality like a
beast, etc.

21.
That a monarchical government by secular Kings and Priests is the only
ordinance of God; and the Republiques but only a depraved institution of man
for depraved ends, as appears manifestly by the whole current of Scripture,
even from Adam to the primitive Church after Christ, etc.

That God in his wisdom approved no fitter nor safer means to rule his
people, but by such an institution.

That from the beginning, there was instituted heads over every family, over
the good and bad, as Seth and his posterity, Cain, Lamech, even to the Devell,
etc. After that the 12. Patriarks were as Secular Princes, as free as I am
here, and more too; for they had potestatem vitae and necis in themselves,
without any Jury; after them the Judges, and so absolute Kings, with a promise
that the scepter should not depart, etc. and so also after Christ, to this very
day. Besides, among Heathen and Savages by natural instinct, they ordained
Kings and Princes, among beasts they have a King, and so among birds; the Dear
has his Master of a heard, the smallest creatures have their cheef; what shall
I say then to such as will have no concordance with God, with men, with beasts,
inferior creatures, with Devils, nor any, but with themselves, and are all for
a Republique in all which I have said; there is no mention of a Republique, as
if it were a strange thing to God himself.

That his Majesty did think many here in England, did wish their Estates were
lying by Amsterdam; which thing the King did also wish to such, etc.

That in Venice, which is governed by a Republique, they do createno honors or
dignities, but a Merchant of Venice, which is seldom, etc.

That the Mothers and Nurses do call their children in reproach, Barons, which
is with us a style of honor, etc.

That the Pope does create Kinghts as a secular Prince.

That the honor conferred upon any Centurion abroad is there with no esteem;
but the King has made many Knights of them here, etc,

That no jurisdiction elective, as Emperors, Kings, Princes, etc. is any honor
or precedence to any of the allies of him elected, but personal to himself,
etc.

That to have inployment in any republique, in that state is dangerous; for do
he well or ill he is sure to rue it, and he speedeth best that does worst; like
a Scottish tale I have heard of, one that never sped well among the Lawyers
when he had a good cause, because he then least suspected it, and the other
side bribed; but when his cause was ill, he then also bribed, and
countermanded, and so the greatest carried it for the most part, even so in
republiques.

That the Agent here for the Venetians, although he presented to the King a
Letter from their Duke, subscribed with his own hand, with addition of all his
titles, and the Kings inserted, yet at the delivery, no mention made of the
Duke himsefe, not so much as commendations; but our republique greets you, etc.

That the King in all his reading could never truly find what the name of a
Cardinal was, and yet he has sought much for it, unless it were a Cardo on
which the wheel moves, etc.

That in the Primative Church of Rome, there were inferiors to Bishops, and
were but seven in number, as Persons of the seven Churches mentioned about
Rome; but how they come to place them before Bishops, and make of them Princes
and Potentates; and how they become the Electors of the Papacy, I cannot get to
know.

That it is strange the Pope should create his own makers and electors.

That in attainder and trial of innocents, wherein is scruple, the Justice of
our State proceeds slowly, etc.

22. 28. May, Ann. Dom. 1622.
That the Preacher that day Preaching out of the 29 Psalm, That I offend not
in my tongue, etc. he could have wished might have been before so many women,
because they are most unruly therein, etc.

That silence was an incomparable virtue in a woman, touching which he
Commended the Lady Marquess Buckingham.

That it was strange to note, that although all the members of a man declined
by age, yet the tongue never, etc.

That although old men and women were prone to give ease to all their other
members; yet then the tongue most wanton, and coveting talk, etc. The Palsy
of all diseases most maimeth the tongue, and yet improveth its tatling or
unruly motion* etc. Thus was his Majesty's reply to Doctor Mountain the then
Bishop of London.

23. At Ramcsbury in VVi^t^^ire, July 28. Ann. Dom. 1623.
That upon report made to his Majesty of a Goose that loved a man, that it
would never be from him wheresoever he went, and upon occasion would guard him
from offense, etc. Whereupon his Majesty remembered that Goose of the Capitol;
and further said, he thought it as easy to prove the descent of the foresaid
Goose, from that Goose of the Capitol, as the Herolds now do prove the
descent of many Gentlemen of these times, etc.

24. August 3. etc.
That in the direct worship of God himself, we ought to be guided by the Word
of God, as he prescribes in the same, and not otherwise, etc. as also in the
matter of Sacrifices; but in the form and order of Ceremonies, that indeed is
soly left unto the Church; but not the immediate worship, we may not therein
follow our own wills, that is the maine difference between the Church of Rome
and us, if we may use a Will Worship, then they are in the right, but if we may
not, then we are in the right, etc.

October. At F^^^^i^gbrooke etc.
That it is as obsurd and wicked to account the Virgin Mary the Queen of
heaven (according to the Popes Doctrine) because she is the natural mother of
our Lord, then to think there is a Goddess, because we have a known God* etc.

That the Virgin Mary was more happy in bearing Christ first in her heart by
faith; then in her womb, etc.

That he did believe that Christ did effect and love her while he was on the
earth more, then any other woman; as he had reason; but not as he was God, but
as he was man the Son of her flesh. This does not derogate from her due
estimation, but to nullify her power now with Christ in heaven, as well as of
all other Saints to remit and get pardon for sin.

25.
That he lately heard news in Letters from his Ambassador, Sir Tho. Roe in
Consta^^inople of strange things concerning the Turks, etc. First,

That then in Constantinople there was committed by the Jannesaries and others,
all manner of open rapes, and deflouring of women, Theft, and Murders, and for
these Barbarism^s, no Justice administered by the Emperor, Bashaes, nor other
inferior governors* which things were so strange and novell, that he thought it
presaged some imminent ruin upon them, etc.

That he wondered how so mighty a State could subsist at any time without the
administ^^tion of Justice, especially toward such offenders.

That the Turks accouuted all Prophets among them but as mad men; and at that
time so esteemed their Emperor himself.

That he accounted all Tyrants but as fools, intimating all the Roman
Emperors, as Nero, and the rest, who delighted in nothing but foolish things,
as Stage Plays, Fidling, driving of Charets, etc. And yet Nero in some things
a singular man of excellent parts.

That if Nero had been a private man, might have attained the estimation of a
good and virtuous gentleman; but being an Emperor* fell to impious fopperies,
through the (...) of his will, etc. Stat pro ratione voluntas, etc. as (Doctor
Young) the Deane of Winchester employed.

That many private Persons being esteemed honest plain men, having assumed
dignity and being in place of Kings and Monarchs, have done many strange
things.

That Bethlem Gabor at this time had behaved himself very infamously in making
peace with the Turks for his own safety, and since, with the Emperor, without
the privity of the Turk; so that he plays Jack on both sides for his own ends.

That the Turk and the King of Poland* were in great league, and that he had
given the Polander leave to be revenged and repaired upon the Tartars, for his
late invasion upon him.

That Julian the Emperor was a witty Prince, but not a Tyrant, as the rest,
though an Apostata.

26. At Royston. Anno. Dun. 1624.
Whether boldness or bashfullnesse did soonest prevail in Court? his
Majesty's opinion was in that bashfullnesse did; alluding to the Lord Duke of
Buckingham, who at his first coming to Court exceeded in bashfullnesse, and
when his Majesty first cast his eye upon him, the Lord of Arundell being asked
by his Majesty what he thought of him, he answered, that his blushing
bashfullnesse was such, as he thought he would do but little good in Court
favors.

27.
That if there were no other quarrel between the Papists and Protestants, but
the number of Sacraments, he would himself be a Papist; for he held it not
worth the quarrelling; as appeared by a tale of two friends in Scotland, being
great in friendship, and in the cup falling out about that Subject, the one a
great Papist, and the other a Protestant, so they fought and were both slain;
a third said, before he would have lost his life in that quarrel, he would
have divided the seven into three and a half, etc.

That many things in Religion were rather carried by man's opinion, then perfect
intention to the truth, etc.

That himself would not condemn any thing for heresy, that had been
anciently confirmed by an universal consent.

That of extreme Unction, as of other things used by that Church of Rome, he
was of an indifferent opinion, so it might be continued according to the first
intention, and so of many other things with them, etc.

28. At Theobalds, Ann. Dom. 1624.
That of his wife the Queen Anne deceased (he spoke to his own comfort) that
she would often say unto him, look you keep your self in the right way; for
I am resolved to follow you whithersoever, even to the brinke of hell; for I am
within your charge; saying withal, that all good wives should never forsake
their husbands in any thing, being required by them, not directly against God;
not for any disease or sickness whatsoever.

That he knew many foster Parents and adopted children, much more affectionate
then natuturall; and Nurses more loving then mothers, etc.

That some children he knew that must have correction every day, and some
reformed with a word.

That he would never believe any news in Verse, since the hearing of a Ballad
made of the Bishop of Spatata, touching his being a martyr, etc.

That he would never use other Argument to convince the Papists of their
opinion of miracles, but by their own Doctrine, whereunto most of their
Miracles are altogether repugnant; as for example; (...) they have, that the
picture of our Lady should stir, etc. Their Doctrine is, that their Images are
but representative, etc. Now what disproportion appears between their opinion
and Doctrine? etc.

Apothegmata fideliter collecta ex ^re Regis Jacobi per me Ben. Agar.
Servatorem ejus i^ (...) sua, (...) suae ^2.

FINIS.

