His MAJESTY'S Letter To sundry of the Lords, and others of His Majesty's most
honorable Privy Council, calling them to be Witnesses of the Queens Labor.
JAMES R.

RIght trusty right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well;
Whereas Our Royal Predecessors used to call such of their Privy Council as
could conveniently be had to be present at the Labor of their Queens, and
Witnesses to the Birth of their Children. And whereas we have followed their
Example at the Birth of Our dearest Son James Prince of Wales, Though even that
precaution was not enough to hinder Us from the malicious Aspersions of such as
were resolved to deprive Us of Our Royal Right.

That we may not be wanting to Our Selves, now that it has pleased Almighty
God (the Supporter of Truth) to give Us the hopes of further Issue, Our dearest
Consort the Queen being big, and drawing near her time, We have thought fit to
require such of Our Privy Council as possibly can come, to attend Us here at
St. Germains, to be Witnesses of Our said dearest Consort the Queen her Labor.

We do therefore hereby signify Our Royal Pleasure to you, that you may use
all possible means to come with what convenient haste you can, the Queen
looking about the middle of May next, English Account. And that you may have no
Scruple on Our side, Our dearest Brother the most Christian King has given his
consent to promise you (as We hereby do) that you shall have leave to come, and
(the Queens Labor over) to return with all Safety.

Though the Iniquity of the Times, the Tyranny of Strangers, and a misled Party
of Our own Subjects, have brought Us under the necessity of using this unusual
Way. Yet We hope it will convince the World of the Truth and Candor of Our
Proceedings, to the Confusion of Our Enemies; So not doubting of your
Compliance herewith, We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at the Castle of St. Germains the Second Day of April,
1692. and in the Eighth Year of Our Reign. J. R.

Advertisement.
IF the imposing a Supposititious Son upon the Nation to the prejudice of the
Princess of O. gave the Prince her Husband the Provocation of invading the
Dominions of his Father, and the wresting his Crown from him: The offering to
repeat a Trick that proved so successful unto him, is the happiest Advantage
that can be given to W. of securing him in his Throne. But it will concern him
to use better Methods for the detecting this Imposture than any he has thought
fit to advance in proof of the former; For neither his own Credit, which he
has staked in his Declaration, nor the Topics insisted upon by Burnet and
Wildman, to disprove the Ligitimacy of the last, will pass any longer upon the
Nation, to bubble them into a Belief that they are to be Cheated afresh. And
therefore as they at Whitehall would not be thought to trust to the preserving
that by Power, which they acquired by Falsehood, they are bound in Wisdom, as
well as Honor and Justice, to gratify the Desire of the KING in the
preceding Letter. Nor can they take a more compendious way of being drove back
to Holland with indelible Infamy, than either to conceal the Letters addressed
to Persons of Honor and Quality upon this Occasion; Or to refuse them the
Liberty of going over with as much Safety on this, as is generously offered on
that Side.

Besides the Letters sent to most of the Privy Counselors as aforesaid, there
were also Letters directed to these Persons following. Viz.

To 12 Peeresses. Duchess of Somerset, Duchess of Beaufort, March. of
Hallifax, Lady Darby, Lady Mulgrave, Lady Rutland, Lady Brooks, Lady
Nottingham, Lady Lumley, Lady Danby, Lady Fretchvile, Lady Fitzharding.

To 6 Commoners Ladies, etc. Sir John Trevor the Speaker's Lady, Sir Edw.
S^^mour's Lady, Sir Christopher Musgrave's Lady, Sir Tho. Pope Blunt's Lady,
Sir (...) Guise's Lady, Tho. Foley, Esquire his Lady; Lady Stamp, Lord Mayor's La^^
(...) Ashurst. Lady Levet, the two Sheriffs Ladies: Dr. (...) Chamberl^^^


