THE TENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL, English and Latin, The English by Tho Shadwell.

With Illustrations upon it.

Licensed, May 25. 1687.

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet, for Gabriel Collins at the Middle Temple Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1687.

TO Sir Charles Sidley.
SIR,
YOU have so many years together pursued me with your Favor and Bounty, that I
ought to have been always upon the Watch for an opportunity of Publishing my
Gratitude. Your late great obligation in giving me the advantage of your
Comedy, called Bellamira, or the Mistress, has given me a fresh subject for my
Thanks; and my Publishing this Translasion affords me a new opportunity of
owning to the World my grateful resentments to you. I am heartily glad that
your Comedy (as I never doubted) found such success, that I never met with any
Man of Sense but applauded it: And that there is abundance of Wit in it, your
Enemies have been forced to confess. For some you have, though I cannot but
wonder why you should have any, who are so careful in all your Actions, that
you never injure any Gentleman: and so void of Scurrilitie in all your
Conversation, that I never heard you speak ill of one behind his back: a vice
too often practiced among our English Gentry. But there will be always Enemies
to Wit and Common Sense, who for that reason cannot be Friends to you For the
Judgment of some Ladies upon it that it is obscene, I must needs say they are
Ladies of a very quick apprehension, and did not their thoughts lie very much
that way, they could not find more obscenity in that than there is in every
other Comedy. These Nymphs though they are so over nice in words, may perhaps,
be frank enough in their actions. And I have have known the time when they
would have been more favorable to you. The great favor you did me, in giving
me this Play, with all the rest of your obligations to me, as I will never
forget, so I shall be always proud of an occasion to boast of so good a
Patron; who uses me not as some Supercilious Men would (who do good merely out
of Vanity) as a troublesome hanger on: But treats me with the civility and
kindness of a Friend. And I have had the honor to have always found as much
of both from him, as if I had obliged him in receiving, as much as he me in
conferring his benefits.

It is honor enough for me, that I have from my Youth Lived in yours, and, as
you know, in the favor of the wittiest men of England, your familiar friends
and acquaintance, who have encouraged my Writings; and suffered my
Conversation. I mean not any of the professed Poets; for I take none of them to
be of that Rank, and most of them God knows are far enough from it. But it has
happened in our time, that some few men of Quality have been much the greatest
wits of the age, nor do I think England ever produced so great in any age, the
loss of two of which, the Earl of Rochester, and the Duke of Buckingham, we who
had the honor to be acquainted with them can never bewail enough.

After all this I must think I hope without vanity, that the Author of
Mack-Fleckno reflects more upon himself than me; where he makes Fleckno commend
Dullness, and choose me for the Dullest that ever writ; and repeats dull, dull,
etc. over and over: indeed he gives his own dullness a civiller term, and calls
it being Saturnine. But sure he goes a little too far in calling me the
Dullest, and has no more reason for that, than for giving me the Irish name of
Mack, when he knows I never saw Ireland till I was three and twenty years old,
and was there but four Months

Besides as I have heard you observe the foundation of that Libel is false and
unnatural; for tho some may have mistaken dullness for wit, and commended it as
such; yet no man ever commended Dullness as dullness.

Had he staid till he had supplied the Stage with more new humor then I have
done, or till he had written a better Comedy then Epsom Wells, or the Virtuoso
(neither of which by the way are taken from a Novel, or stolen from a Romance)
he might with a better Grace, and more Authority have pronounced me dull. But
he is not content with that, but has another fling at me for playlng upon the
Lute. I must confess that that and all other Gentleman-like Exercises, which I
was capable of Learning, my Father was at the charge of, and let the Libeller
make his best of it.

I hope Sir you will not think me guilty of Arrogance in my own Vindication,
especially since there have been such strong endeavors to depress me, and by
those who had least reason to do it

It is hard to believe that the supposed Author of Mack-Fleckno is the real
one, because when I taxed him with it, he denied it with all the Execrations he
could think of. However my Dullness admits of an excuse, because I endeavor to
avoid it all I can. But had I been base or dishonest, I could have made none,
yet if he pleases to let my Reputation alone, I shall not envy him the Fame he
has.

And now Sir it is time to give you an account why I publish this Translation. I
have I must confess ever looked upon Translating as a difficult, and irksom
piece of Drudgery, and below any man who had a genius of his own, and have been
as much averse to it as I should be to the making of a Dictionary: For though
both of 'em are works of public benefit, yet they are unpleasant all the while.

I was provoked to this first by the supposed Author of Mack-Fleckno, who says
in another Pamphlet; that to his knowledge, I understand neither Greek nor
Latin, though in Bury School in Suffolk, and Cajus College in Cambridge, the
places of my Youthful Education, I had not that reputation, and let me tell him
he knows the contrary.

And Secondly by another Writer, who (without any provocation whatsoever, I
having seen him but once in my Life, when he was pleased to thank me for a
civility I did him.) abused me after that in Print, where he says Bavius and
Maevius ought to have been reserved by Fate to be Translated by me and Settle.
I will not compare my self with him, but I leave it to him to consider, whether
Settle has not outdone all that he has yet produced in Poetry. It was at best
an ungentile thing in his friend, who suffered those Verses to be prefixed to
his Book, since I had never given him the least offense, or so much as seen him.

But to trouble you Sir with no more Digressions of this kind, I have
endeavored in this Translation to come as near the words and thoughts of my
Author, as my skill in both Languages could enable me. I have omitted no part
of his Sense, nor have I varied from it, nor added to it, but in some few
places where it was necessary to a mere English Reader, for explanation. I will
not say as a Cock Translator does of Lucretius and Virgil, that he has added
nothing but what he is confident the Authors would themselves were they now
Living, by which arrogant saying he would insinuate that his Genius is much
like theirs, or equal with them.

I have not endeavored to make it an English Poem, nor to fit it to our
Customs and Manners, but to retain the Roman ones, and as much as ever I could
to preserve the Spirit of the Author; and to that end have made it as much a
Translation as I could. For I have observed in all Paraphrases upon the Greek
and Roman Authors of the first Rank, the Strength and Spirit of thom is deaded,
and in some quite lost.

At best the thoughts of those Paraphrastical Writers, mixing with those of
such noble Authors, look like patches of homely Woollen upon the richest Silk.
Because the modern ages have produced no Genius like theirs; the imaginations
must be very different and unequal; and methinks such Poems go down like Wine
of two tastes. Some by Paraphrasing do nothing but beat out the Sense thinner,
as Gold-Beaters do Gold.

In keeping close to my Author, I am forced to make my Periods sometimes in the
middle of Lines; contrary to the late English practice: and I have always
chosen rather to make a rough Verse, than to loose the Sense of Juvenal. Tho I
must needs say, I do not think great smoothness is required in a Satyr, which
ought to have a severe kind of roughness as most fit for reprehension, and not
that gentle smoothness which is necessary to insinuation.

I have added some Notes or Illustrations upon the Satyr, some being necessary
to all who are not conversant with the Author, though otherwise good Scholars:
And for the sake of those who are not such, I have added more. So that (as it
was my chief end) I hope I have made the Original clearly to be understood by
any one who is the least a Grammarian And, if I find this Essay to be
favorably received, I will go on with the rest of the Author, in which I have
already made some progress. Though I can only do it by way of diversion, I
having more material business upon my hands at this time.

My friend Mr. Higden has made an ingenious version of this Satyr, but in other
Numbers, and a different way, so that we shall not interfere one upon another.

I shall say nothing of the Author or his Life, till my translation grows into
a larger Volumne. For the Dry Critiiks who object that he is too severe and
bitter, and that his Satyrs are more fit for Declamations then Poems, I think
them not worth the answering. I have chosen this Satyr to give the Reader as a
Sample; it being one of the wisest, and noblest in the Book; wherein any man
may perceive the difference between the Wisdom and Dignity of true Roman Satyr,
and the Levity and baseness of false English Libells. But Sir I ask your pardon
for troubling you so long, and now shall only assure you that I am proud of any
opportunity of Publishing to the World that I am,

Sir, Your most obliged humble Servant. THO. SHADWELL.
Postscript.
I have prefixed before my Translation of this Satyr, a version of that famous
Answer of Cato to Labienus, who would have him consult the Oracle of Jupiter
Ammon in the Lybian Deserts.

Cato to Labienus, Lucan. Lib. 9.
FUll of the God (within his silent Breast)
Words worthy of the Oracle h' expressed.
What Labienus would y' inquire if I*
As a free Roman, had not rather dye
Bravely in Arms, than stoop to Monarchy from the time of the Tarquins, was
become odious to Romans, and Cato was the most obstina^ of all the Republicans.
Monarchy?
If we in Life can any value see?
Or whether long or short much different be,
If any violence can depress the brave?
Or Fortunes threats force against Virtue have.
Are great attempts by not succeeding less?
Does a brave act grow braver by success?
We of these truths such full conviction find,
Heaven cannot fix them deeper in the mind.
We all on God, as parts of him depend;
There does the mighty chain begin and end.
Were Temples silent, the Almighty will,
Spite of our selves, we cannot but fulfill.
Heaven needs no voice, to tell us what to do,
At first it plants in man all he shouid ever know.
Nor could a God so narrowly provide
For human kind, in these parched Sands to hide
Truth for a few, to all the rest denied.
Where can you think the Seat of God to find,
But in Earth, Sea, or Air, Heaven, or a Virtuous mind?
Why should we seek him farther then? for he
Is wheresoever you move, and whatsoever you see.
Let doubtful men their Fortune Tellers try,
And Anxious into future chances Pry
No Oracle can e're my doubt secure
But certain Death; that does my mind assure.
Impartial Death that strikes alike at all,
As well the Coward as the Brave must fall.
Cato ad Labienum, Lucan. lib. 9.
Ille Deo plenus tacita quem mente gerebat
Effudit dignas aditis e pectore voces
Quid Quaeri Labiene jubes? an liber in Armis
Occubuisse velim potius quam Regna videre?
An sit vita nihil? sed longa an differat Aetas?
An noceat vis ulla bonis? Fortunaque perdat
Opposita Virtute minas? laudandaque Velle
Sit satis? and nunquam successu Crescat honestum?
Scimus: and hoc nobis non altius inserit Ammon
Haeremus cuncti superis: Temploque tacente
Nil facimus non sponte Dei; nec vocibus ullis
Numen eget: Dixitque semel nascentibus Author
Quicquid scire Licet. Steriles nec Legit Arenas
Vt caneret paucis mersitque hoc pulvere Verum.
Estne Dei seeds nisi Terra and Pontus and Aer?
Et Caelum and Virtus? superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides quocunque moveris
Sortilegis egeant dubii, semperque futuris
Casibus ancipites. Me non oracula certum
Sed Mors certa facit, Pavido fortique Cadendum est.


JVVENAL Satyr X.
IN all the Earth, between the wide extremes
Of (1) Gades West, and Eastern (2) Ganges Streams
Free from a Cloud of Error few have skill
To know what is truly good for 'em, or ill,
With Reason what do we desire or fear?
(3) What do you aim at (be it never so dear)
Or luckily begun) but when it is gained,
You soon repent you of your wish obtained?
What Families the (4) easy Gods overthrow,
Granting those Prayers they make themselves to undo!
For harmful Offices we blindly pray
In Peace, as well as War, not seldom they,
Who flow with purest streams of Eloquence,
Show those rich Torrents at their lives expense:
(5) Milo confiding in the wondrous strength
Of Brawny arms, perish't by that at length.
But most by Wealth (raked up with anxious care
Exceeding usual Patrimonies far
As (6) British Whales do Dolphins) ruined are
In Nero's bloody times, Troops of armed bands
Begirt (7) Longimus House, at his commands,
And, in his Princely Gardens, did enclose
The too rich (8) Seneca, and Besieged the house
Of (9) Lateranus; but they never infest
The (10) Garret, or the poor man's Room molest.
Though Journying you but little Silver bear
By Night, a Sword, or (11) Quarter staff you fear;
And a Reeds motion in a Moonlight Night
Shall make you quake and tremble with the fright.
While the poor man void of all precious things
In Company with Thieves jogg's on and Sings.
Almost the first, and most known (12) vows are these
In all the Temples, may our Wealth increase;
Our Treasure swell, and may our Chest alone
Be for its lageness in the (13) Forum known.
No Poison is in Earthen (14) Vessels brought
In Gold adorned with (15) Gemms beware each draught
When in wide bowls there (16) sparkles (17) Setine Wine,
How do you then approve his wise Design,
(18) Who with continual scorn did Laughter vent?
When 'ere one step beyond his Doors he went?
Of The contrary, (19) Another still did wail,
To laugh at silly things we cannot fail.
But what prodigious Fountain could supply,
For each occasion, moisture to his eye?
Perpetual Laughter did the Lungs excite,
Of Wise Democritus the Abderite;
Yet no (20) Praetexta, nor no (21) Trabeae there,
No (22) Litters, (23) Fasces, nor (24) Tribunals were:
Had he within the dusty (25) Circus been
And our vain (26) Praetor, with exalted mien
(27) Standing within his lofty Chariot seen:
In (28) Joves embroidered Coat, and Tyrian Gown,
Hung with a Mantle from his Shoulders down,
Large as a Piece of Tap'stry with a Crown;
An orb too large for one neck to sustain,
His (29) public servant, with much sweat and pain,
Behind him does those weighty Ensigns bear,
And in that very Chariot must appear.
Not pleased too much must the great Consul be,
With him a slave to * check his Pride we see,
Add the (30) Pvry Scepter which the Praetor bears
On which the Eagle upon wing appears;
Here the loud Cornets march, and there before,
Long Troops of (31) Clients, and of Slaves great store*
A train of (32) white robbed Citizens attends
(33) The Chariot Wheels, which mercenary friends
(34) The Sportula did make. How had his spleen
Been exercised if he all this had seen?
Who could in all Assemblies of Mankind
(Then wiser much) just cause of Larghter find,
His wondrous prudence plainly does declare
A boggy soil, a dark and foggy Air
The Gountrey full of Sheepsheads may give birth
To greatest men, and best examples upon Earth.
He laughed at Vulgar business, Vulgar cares,
He both their joy derided, and their Tears.
When threatening Fortune seemed on him to frown,
Upon her power he could look bravely down;
With scorn he pointed at her, and could say
Be hanged, whilst every thing for which we pray,
And fix with (35) Wax our vows upon the knees
Of all the most propitious Deities,
Is or superfluous, or pernicious known,
Some from high power by envy headlong thrown,
(36) Some by inscriptions filled with each degree
Of all their Noble Titles, ruined be;
Their Statues are with Halters (37) dragged about
The Streets, as objects for the scoffing Rout.
The (38) Chariot Wheels must feel the Axes stroke,
And the poor innocent Horses Legs be broke.
Now the Smiths Forges hiss, the Bellows play,
And that same head so much adored to day,
That head, red hot within the fire became,
And great Sejanus crackled in the flame.
Mechanics soon from that so Worshiped face
Which bore in all the World the second place,
Forge little Platters, and small water Cans
With Basins, Chamber-pots, and Frying-pans.
With (39) Laurel Garlands be our Houses Crowned;
Make have and let the large White Bull be found,
And drawn to Capitolian Jove; for now
Sejanus is become a public show:
(41) Dragged by a Hook, fixed in his throat, and all
The Vulgar shout at this great Favorites fall.
(42) Bless me what ugly blabber-lipps had he!
A hanging look! and, if you will credit me,
This fellow I could never once abide.
(43) Can you tell pray for what great crime he dyed?
Who the Informer? who the Evidence?
What Ouvert Act? what proof of his Offense?
(44) None, none of these, but a long (45) Letter sent
From (46) Capreae, full of words and Eloquent.
(47) It Is well, I shall enquire no more: (48) what now
Does all the crowd of Roman People do?
It always follows Fortune, and does hate
All who are wretched, and condemned by Fate.
Her (49) Tuscans cause had Goddess Nurscia blessed,
And the secure old Emperor been oppressed,
Sejanus it had called this very hour,
Augustus, and saluted Emperor.
Romans, since they no (50) suffrages could boast
Supinely careless, all great thoughts have lost.
Who Fasces Legions Empire all things gave,
But two poor things solicitously crave,
That they may (51) bread, and Games 'th Circus have:
(52) Yet many more there are condemned I hear.
No doubt. (53) the Emperors rage does hot appear.
I met Brutidius pale and wan with fear,
At Mars his Altar, looking as (54) he would kill
Himself, like Ajax, when his cause succeeded ill.
Lets run with speed while yet the Carcass lies
Upon the bank under the Gemonies,
That we may spurn at Caesar's Enemy.
Call all our Slaves, and let 'am all stand by,
Least any of them should the fact deny.
And therefore should their trembling Masters draw
Bound by their necks, to trial of the Law.
Thus 'bout Sejanus they their thoughts declare,
And thus the Vulgars secret murmurs are
Now would you have Sejanus wealth and power,
And be saluted as he was before?
Give this 'ith State, the Chief Authority;
To this 'ith' Army highest Dignity:
Or would you Guardian of an Emperor reckoned be?
Who lulls himself in (56) narrow Capreae's Grots
With his lewd herd of Astrologick Sots?
Should you desire to lead a mighty Band
Of Foot and Horse, and the (57) Praetorian Camp command;
I grant that those may wish the power to kill,
Who are too merciful to have the will.
But what can prosperous Dignity avail,
When the ill outwei'ghs the good in every Scale?
Would you his noble Purple Garment wear,
Who to the Gemonies is dragged, or bear
In some small City small Authority?
In homely woollen Robes some (58) Aedile be,
And sit in Judgment over measures there,
Breaking those Vessels which too small appear?
You will confess Sejanus knew not then
What things were fit to be desired by men.
Who too great wealth or honors do acquire,
But raise their Towers so many Stories higher,
TO increase their fall, and make their ruin worse;
Which from the dreadful praecipice has greater force.
What Crassus or Great Pompey overthrew,
Or (60) him who Rome did to his lash subdue?
Chief Power by all vile artifices gained,
And vows from the maligning Gods obtein'd.
Most Kings to Death by Blood and Slaughter go,
And a dry Death few Tyrants ever know.
The rawest Boy who scarce has con'd one Rule,
His little Slave bearing his Books to School,
During the space of those (61) five solemn days.
When are Minerva's rites performed still prays
He may the Fame, and Eloquence possess
Of Powerful Tully and Demosthenes.
When deadly was their Wits oreflowing spring,
And (62) Death to both their Eloquence did bring.
For Wit those hands nailed to the (63) Rostra were
That head cut off too, but the Rostra never
Did silly Lawyer with his Blood besmear.
(64) Oh Rome innate most fortunate in me,
When I thy Consul did consult for thee
Had he spoke always thus; he safely might
Antonius rage, and bloody Cutthroats slight.
Of silly Verses I had rather be
Author, Divine (65) Philippick than of thee.
The second of Illustrious Fame against Antony.
So was the admired Athenian snatched away
By sudden death, whose Eloquence could sway
Which way he pleased, and make whole (66) Theaters obey.
Unhappy in his geniture, by the hate
Oth' angry Gods, and his own evil Fats.
(67) The old Man by Fumes of red hot Metals made
Blear-eyed removed, his Son from his own Trade,
From making Swords, the Anvil, Tongs and Coals,
From Smoaky Forges, sooty Vulcans Tools
To the most Fatal Rhetoricians Schools.
On (68) Trophies fixed the Spoils by Battle won,
An Helmet cleft, the Beaver hanging down,
A Coat of Mayle, a broken Axletree;
A Galleys Flag obtained by Victory.
On a (69) Triumphant Arches utmost height,
A Captive with a look disconsolate,
Then all our Humane Goods some value mote.
The Roman Grecian (70) Barbarous Emperor
Fiercely aspire at these, and from these Spoils,
Arise their several Dangers and their Toils:
Virtue's less thirsted for than Fame, for who,
Her, for her self, Rewardless will pursue?
Our Country yet by some, in Ancient days,
Has ruined been for Glory; for vain Praise;
And swelling Titles, which they had imposed
On Stones, in which their Ashes were enclosed.
Those Monuments of Stone were yet so weak,
Them the (71) wild Fig Tree could in pieces break.
The proudest Tombs have but a certain Date,
And Sepulchers themselves must yield to Fate.
Go weigh your Hannibal, how many pound
At length is of your mighty General found?
Yet Africa could not his Ambition bound
Whose Western Shores the Atlantic Ocean beats:
And Eastward stretches out to (73) Nilu's Heats.
To (74) Ethiopian Inhabitants,
And to a different kind of Elephants:
Spain must be joined; the (75) Pyrenaeans now
Be passed; Nature opposes the (76) Alps and Snow.
Rocks he divided, and the Mountains he
With (77) Vinegar broke, making his passage free;
And takes possession then of Italy.
Yet after all, says he; still pressing on,
My Carthaginian Troops have nothing done,
Till we the Gates of Rome have overthrown,
And fixed our Banners in the Heart of all the Town.
Rare Visage, what a Picture 'twould appear,
When the (70) Getulian B^ast does the one Eyed General bear!
Oh Glory! what of all was the event?
Conquered he headlong run to Banishment.
The great and wondrous Captive in's Retreat,
Is a poor (78) Client at a Judgment Seat:
Meanly he waits his sad Address to make
Till the (79) Bythinian Tyrant please to wake;
His Turbulent Life (which such Confusion hurld
With Swords, Stones, Darts into the shaken world)
By none of these could perish no one thing,
Vengeance for all the Blood he spilt, could bring,
Or Revenge (80) Cannae, but a little Ring.
Run over the rugged Alps, thou hot-braind Fool!
To be declaimed on, and please Boys at School.
(81) Philip's fierce Son, one World too little found,
And Frets, and Fumes poor Wretch! within the narrow
As if in Rocky (82) Gyarae he were pent,
Or small (83) Seriphus. Yet he was content
With a small Coffin, when to (84) Babylon he went
Death the plain-dealer does alone declare
How very little Great Men's Bodies are.
(85) Athos 'twas thought was Sailed about of old,
And men believed all tales which lying Greece e're told.
That all the (86) Hellespont from shore to shore
Was paved with Ships and Charriot-Wheles run over.
While (87) Xerxes dined the innumerable fry
Of this Great host, would drink deep Rivers dry,
As (88) Sostratus in's Cups was wont to lie.
When (89) Salamis he left, what fate's behind
For him who used to rage and (90) whip the wind?
Barbarian! what lash (91) Corus Eurus too?
Worse then even (92) Aeolus would in their Prisons do:
He did in Chains (93) Earth-shaking Neptune bind,
And 'twas his mercy he had not designed
To (94) Stigmatize him like a Slave: what God
Would not desire to be at such a Hero's nod?
But how returned he? slowly in one Boat
Through shoals of bodies, which did round him float
In b^oody Waves. These are oftimes the pains
Immoderate desire of glory gains:
Jove grant large space of life, and length of days
With Confidence and vehemence one prays.
Never thinking what continual griefs attend,
And under what great ills old age does bend.
A Face deformed, of horrid color grown,
Unlike himself, his flabby cheeks hang down.
'Stead of a Skin he has an ugly hide,
With^r'd and rough with wrinckles deep and wide,
Such as in shady Woods of (95) Tabraca,
On rivled Cheeks, old Mother Ape does claw:
In youth there many great distinctions are
One is more strong, the other is more fair.
But in all old men's Faces there is no choice,
Limbs paralytick, trembling is the voice,
With a bald pate, and with a nasty nose.
That Is ever dropping as an Infants does,
He mumbles bread between his toothless Gumms.
Irksome to's Wife, and Children he becomes.
He Is even by Cossa loathed, that abject Knave,
That fawns and waits a Legacy to have.
Nor Wine nor Meat delight as in time past,
His Palate 's now benumbed h'as lost his taste,
It Is long, long, since a Woman he Embraced.
A long forgetfulness has seized the part
Beyond the Cure of any Pains or Art.
Though all the Night he dallies, it is in vain,
It still does a poor Chiterlin remain.
What pleasure can the weak Old Doting Fool,
Expect from that infirm and Aged Tool?
Where Lust remains without Ability,
Men must suspect unnatural Letchery
Consider now another Sense declined,
In choicest Songs no pleasure he can find,
Sung by Seleucus, or the best of the kind,
Who all Embroidered on the Stage appear
Where e're he sits, the Songs he cannot hear,
Cornets nor Trumpets, be he never;
His Boy must hallow what is a Clock in's Ear.
In his Cold Corpse, what little Blood Remains,
Without a Fever, never is warm in's Veins:
In him what Troops of Maladies abound!
And in his feeble Carcass dance their round!
More than Adultrer's Hippia e're enjoyed,
Or then sick Men by (97) Themison destroyed
In a whole Autumn, or the (98) Associates
Plundered by (99) Basilus, or the Estates.
(100) Irus from all his Wards got by foul play,
More then the Cullies in a Summers day,
(1) Maura e're drein'd; and more then of his Boys,
(2) Hamillus the lewd Pedagogue enjoys.
And more than of his Villas now are seen,
(3) Who snapt his Fingers at my youthful Chin:
This Old Man's Shoulders, the others reins, his Thighs
Disabled are, this has lost both his Eyes.
And envies him to whom one Eye is left,
To this Man of the use of hands bereft,
Through his pale Lips, his Meat must others give.
He gapes while others fingers him relieve.
Yawn's like young Swallows (Meat being in their Eyes.)
To whom, with her full Mouth the hungry Mother flies.
But loss of Sense and Memory is more
Grievous, than all his loss of Limbs before
Even his own Servants Names he does forget,
And his Friends Face, with whom last Night he Eat.
Those he forgets whom he begot and Bred:
For by his cruel will, they are disinherited.
Which does his Wealth on (4) Phiale intail,
So does the subtle Strumpets Mouth prevail,
Who was so stale a prostituted Whore,
That many Years she stood in the Stews Door:
Suppose his Sense of mind when Old entire,
He must behold his Childrens (5) Funerael Fire.
His Loved Wives Pile, Brothers and Sisters Vrns,
And often for his numerous Kindred Mourns,
Who are by Death's repeated Blow destroyed,
With such like pains the long-lived Man's annoyed.
His Aged Heart with daily sorrow Bleeds,
And he grows Old still in fresh Mourning Weeds.
The (6) Pyllan King (if Homer you will allow)
For length of Life was reckoned next the Crow.
Happy so many Ages to withstand,
Death's Blow, counting his Years on his Right Hand;
And had so many Autumns drunk New Wine,
But how did he at Fates Decrees repine?
And on his too long thread of Life exclaim?
When he beheld within the Funeral flame
The fierce Antilochus his bearded Son?
To all his Friends long life he did bemoan,
And asked them all for what vile horrid crime
He had deserved to live till that unhappy time?
Thus Peleus mourned for his Achilles lost,
For (8.) Ithacus Ten years on the Ocean tossed
Laertes thus complained. While flourishing Troy
Yet unattempted, did full peace enjoy,
Old (9) Priam might amidst those happy hours
Have gone to the shades of his high Ancestors.
(10.) Hector with all his Brothers had the while
Their Fathers Corpse born to the Funeral Pile.
(11.) Cassandra had the weeping Matrons led,
And fair (12.) Polyxena her tears had shed,
And rent her Garments, for her Father dead.
If he had dyed another time, ere yet
(13.) Paris had rigged out his adventurous Fleet.
What did old Age avail him who saw all
O'return'd? By Fire and Sword saw Asia fall?
The old Soldier then his Regal Crown laid by,
And his forgotten Arms again did try;
And shaking, to (14.) Joves Altar ran, even so
The old (15.) Ox despised by the ungrateful Plow,
TO his Masters Knife his wretched neck does bow.
His was a human death, the Wife he left
Behind him of humanity bereft,
Was to a (14.) Bitch transformed most fierce and foul,
And with wide open Jaws did bark and howl.
To come to Romans now, and to let go
The (15.) King of Pontus and rich (16.) Craesus too.
Whom the Oraculous Solon did direct
That he should on his latter end reflect.
That Banished Marius to Minturnae, fled,
Hid in those Fenns, torn thence, to Prison led,
At length in conquered Carthage begged his Bread.
Came from long life: For what more happy 'ere
Did Rome or Nature on the Earth yet bear?
When him vast Troops of Captives did surround,
And all the Pomps of War his Triumph Crowned?
If at that time his glorious Life had ended
When from the Teuton's Chariot he descended,
On Pompey kind Campania bestows
Fevers were to be wished; but public Vows,
And Prayers of many Cities did overcome,
And Pompey's Fortune joined with that of Rome
Saved him to (19.) lose his Head. Such Butchery
Fate did to bloody (20.) Lentulus deny.
Even Traiterous (21.) Cethegus fell entire
And (21.) Catiline with a whole Carcass did expire.
(23.) The anxious Mother beggs at Venus Fane
That she may beauty for her Boys obtain
In gentle murmurs: But her voice does raise
When for the beauty of her Girls she prays;
This is her most delightful prayer: quoth she,
Why do you blame what is piety in me?
(24.) Diana's beauty does Latona bless.
(25.) But such a face as (26.) Lucrece did possess
You should not pray for, warned by her distress:
Her shape and form, the fair (27.) Virginia
Should wish to change with Hunch-back't (28.) Rutila:
A handsome proper Son does always make
His anxious Parents tremble for his sake.
For Beauty rarely agrees with Modesty
Though your plain House void of all luxury
Infuses naught but virtuous manners, there,
And imitates what ancient (29.) Sabines were.
Suppose kind Nature of her bounteous Grace
Chaste inclinations in the mind does place,
And modest blood often rises in the face,
(How could she better for a Youth provide?
No care, no Guardian can so watch or guide
As Nature). Yet scarce can they Men remain;
The (30.) Impudent Corrupter dares with gain
To tempt the Parents, by his lavish hand,
And thinks that nothing can his bribes withstand:
No Tyrant Boys deformed e're guelded yet.
No Noble Youth with Bandy-leggs was fit
For Nero's lust, nor (31.) Sporus would he make
Of one with out-bow'd-breast, or Bunch in's back:
Go and rejoice at your Sons beauty now;
Who yet must greater dangers undergo.
A common lewd Adult'rer he will become;
From injured Husbands rage fearing what doom
They please to execute. Nor happier yet
Than Planet (32.) Mars; always to escape the Net.
Their rage will yet more punishments impose,
Than to their rage yet any Law allows.
Some by the Sword, to Death the Adulterers put
With bloody stripes, their tender Flesh some cut,
(33.) By some a Mullets ramm'd into the gut.
But your (33) Endymion your lovely Youth,
By beauteous Matrons must be loved forsooth;
Yet when deformed (35.) Servilia please to pay,
Tho her he hates, he will her lust obey,
Who Will give her Cloths and Jewels all away.
For what he wastes, at any rate she will buy,
And for this sport she nothing can deny.
Even (36.) Hippia, or (37.) Catulla, or who e're,
Or stingy, or cross- humored did appear,
Shows all her breeding and good nature here.
(38.) But to the chaste what harm can beauty do?
(39.) Yes, what availed (40.) Hyppolitus his Vow?
And chaste (41.) Bellerophon's resolution too?
When Stenobaea's desperate shame; and spite
For being despised her fury did excite,
Equal with Phaedra's, they to rage most fell
Provoked themselves. A Woman's wrath does swell
Beyond all rule and to the utmost height,
When e're confounding shame adds spurrs to hate.
What would you do if you were in his case?
The (42.) best and fairest of Patrician Race
Is destined by the lust of Caesar's Wife
To Marry her: to certain loss of Life.
He is by (43.) Messalina's love ensnared.
She with her wedding Garment sits prepared;
The Bed is publicly in the Gardens made,
And as of ancient rite the Noble portion's paid.
The (44.) Auspex present, and the (45.) Notaries;
None but a lawful Marriage will suffice.
(46.) Do You think this secret trusted to a few?
Declare your Judgment now, What will you do?
If you refuse the sin, you dye that day,
And gain but little time if you obey.
Till the News blazed about the Streets of Rome
Happens at length to the Emp'rors Ears to come;
For he last hears his Families disgrace.
Obey her, if you hold a few days space
Of Life so dear. What e're you shall think fit,
You your (49.) fair Neck must to the Sword submit.
Shall man then pray for naught? If you advise
With me; To the all disposing Deities
The care of us, and our affairs submit,
And for what is pleasant, they will bestow what is fit.
To Heaven man's dearer than to himself we find,
We often by a strong impulse of mind,
Swayed by blind lust, would be in Marriage joined,
Then pray for Children: But the Gods foresee
What Children they, and what a Wife she will be.
Yet --
That you may ask, and offer at some Shrine
Or Holy place, your (48.) Sausages Divine,
And the choice entrails of a pure white Swine.
Pray for a healthful body, a sound mind
That Is never to the fear of Death inclined,
Which bravely can all toil and pain surmount,
And Death amongst Natures benefits account.
Which knows no wrath, covets not any thing
Which can despise the soft (49.) Assyrian King,
And e're his love, feasts, luxury and ease,
Will the hard labors choose, and griefs of Hercules.
I show you what you to your self may give,
Through Virtues path to quiet live w' arrive.
(50.) Fortune thou art no Goddess to the Wise,
Fools make thee so, and seat thee in the Skies.
Finis Satyr 10.
JUVENAL Satyr X.
OMnibus in Terris quoe sunt a Gadibus usque
Aurorem, and Gangem pauci dignoscere possunt
Vera bona, atque illis multum diversa, remota
Erroris nebula. Quid enim ratione timemus,
Aut cupimus? Quid tam dextro pede con^ipis, ut te
Conatus non poeniteat votique peracti?
Evertere domos totas optantibus ipsis
Dii faciles, nocitura toga, nocitura petuntur
Militia, Torrens dicendi copia multis
Et sua mortifera est facundia. Viribus ille
Confisus periit admirandisque Lacertis.
Sed plures nimia congesta pecunia cura
Strangulat, and cuncta extuperans patrimonia census,
Quanto Delphinis Balaena Britannica major.
Temporibus diris igitur jussuque Neronis
Longinum, and magnos Senecae Praedivitis hortos
Clausit, and egregios Lateranorum obsidit Aedes
Tota Cohors: rarus venit in Caenacula Miles.
Pauca licet ports argenti vascula puri
Noste iter ingressus, gladium Contumque timebis,
Et motae ad Lunam trepidabis arundinis umbram,
Cantabit vacuus coram Latrone Viator.
Prima fere vota, and cunctis notissima Templis
Divitiae ut crescant, ut opes, and maxima toto
Nostra sit Arca Foro.
-- sed nulla aconita bibuntur
Fictilibus: tunc illa time, cum pocula sumes
Gemmata, and lato Setinum ardebit in auro.
Jamne igitur laudas, quod de sapientibus alter
Ridebat, quoties de limine moverat unum
Protuleratque pedem: flebat contrarius alter?
Sed facilis cuivis rigidi censura cachinni:
Mirandum est, unde ille oculis suffecerit humor.
Perpetuo risu pulmonem agitare solebat
Democritus, quanquam non essent urbibus illis
Praetexta and Trabeae, Fasces, Lectica, Tribunal.
Quid sic vidisset Praetorem curribus altis
Exstantem, and medio sublimem in pulvere Circi
In tunica Jovis and pictae Sarrana ferentem
Ex humeris Aulaea togae, magnaeque coronae
Tantum orbem, quanto cervix non sufficit ulla?
Quippe tenet sudans hunc publicus, and sibi Consul
Ne placeat, curru servus portatur codem.
Da nunc and volucrem, sceptro quae surgit eburno,
Illinc cornicines, hinc praecedentia longi
Agminis officia and niveos ad fraena Quirites,
Defossa in loculis, quos sportula fecit amicos
Tum quoque materiam risus invenit ad omnes
Occursus hominum, cujus prudentia monstrat
Summos posse viros, and magna exempla d^t^ros
Vervecum in patria crassoque sub aere nasci.
Ridebat curas necnon and gaudia vulgi:
Interdum and lacrymas, cum fortunae ipse minaci
Mandaret laqueum; mediumq, ostenderet unguem.
Ergo supervacua aut pernitiosa petuntur,
Propter quae fas est genua incerare Deorum.
Quosdam proecipitat subjecta potentia magnae
Invidiae, mergit longa atque insignis honorum
Pagina, descendunt Statuae restemque sequuntur.
Ipsas deinde rotas bigarum impacta securis
Caedit, and immeritis franguntur crura caballis.
Jam st^ident ignes, jam follibus atque caminis
Ardet adoratum populo caput, and crepat ingens
Sejanus: deinde ex facie toto orb secunda
Fiunt urceoli, pelves, sartago, patellae.
Pone domi lauros, duo in Capitolia magnum,
Cretatumque bovem: Sejanus ducitur unco
Spectandus: gaudent omnes.
-- quae labra? quis illi
Vultus erat? nunquam, si quid mihi credis, amavi
Hunc hominem: sed quo cecidit sub crimine; quisnam
Delator? quibus indicibus, quo test probavit?
Nil horum: verbosa and grandis Epistola venit
A Capreis: been habet, nil plus interrogo, sed quid
Turba Remi? sequitnr fortunam, ut semper, and odit
Damnatos, idem Populus, si Nurscia Tusco
Favisset, si oppressa foret secura senectus
Principis, hac ipsa Sejanum diceret hora
Augustum. Jam pridem, ex quo suffragia nulli
Vendimus, effudit curas; nam qui dabat olim
Imperium, Fasces, Legiones, omnia, nunc se
Continet, atque duas tantum res anxius optat
Panem and Circenses. Perituros audio multos.
Nil Dubium: magna est fornacula: Pallidulus mi
Brutidius meus ad Martis fuit obvius aram.
Quam timeo, victus ne poenas exigat Ajax,
Vt male defensus. Curramus praecipites and
Dum jacet in ripa, calcemus Caesaris hostem.
Sed videant servt, ne quis neget, and pavidum in jus
Cervice obstricta Dominum trahat. --
-- hi Sermones.
Tunc de Sejano, secreta haec murmura Vulgi.
Visne salutari sicut Sejanus? habere
Tantundem? atque illi summas donare curules?
Illum exercitibus praeponere? Tutor haberi
Principis Angusta Caprearum in rupe sedentis
Cum grege Chaldaeo? vis certe pila, cohortes
Egregios Equites, and castra domestica? quid ni
Haec cupias? and qui nolunt occidere quenquam
Posse volunt. Sed quae praeclara and prospera tanti
Vt rebus laetis par sit mensura malorum?
Hujus qui trahitur Praetextam sumere mavis:
An Fidenarum Gabiorumque esse potestas?
Et de mensura jus dicere, vasa minora
Frangere, pannosus vacuis Aedilis Vlubris?
Ergo quid optandum foret ignorasse fateris
Sejanum; nam qui nimios optabat honores
Et nimias poscebat opes: numerosa parabat
Excelsae Turris tabulata: unde altior esset
Casus and impulsae praeceps immane ruinae.
Quid Crassos, quid Pompeios evertit? and illum
Ad sua qui domitos deduxit flagra Quirites?
Summus nempe locus nulla non art petitus
Magnaque Numinibus vota exaudita malignis.
Ad generum Cereris sine caede and Sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Eloquium aut famam Demosthenis aut Ciceronis
Incipit optare and totis Quinquatribus optat,
Quisquis adhuc uno partam colit ass Minervam,
Quem sequitur Custos, angustae vernula capsae,
Eloquio sed uterque perit Orator: utrumque
Largus and exundans Letho dedit ingenii fons.
Ingenio manus est, and cervix caesa, nec unquam
Sanguine Causidici maduerunt Rostra pusilli.
O Fortunatam natam me Consule Romam!
Antoni gladies posuit contemnere si sic
Omnia dixisset, ridenda poemata malo,
Quam Te conspicuae, Divina Philippica famae
Volueris a prima quae proxima. Saevus and illum
Exitus eripuit, quem mirabantur Athenae
Torrentem, and pleni moderantem fraena Theatri.
Diis ille adversis genitus, fatoque sinistro,
Quem Pater ardentis massae fuligine lippus
A carbone and forcipibus gladiosque parante
Incude, and luteo Vulcano ad Rhetora misit.
Bellorum exuviae truncis affixa Tropaeis
Lorica and fracta de casside buccula pendens.
Et curtum temone jugum victaeque triremis
Aplustre, and summo tristis Captivus in arcu,
Humanis majora bonis creduntur: ad hoc se
Romanus Graiusque ac Barbarus induperator
Erexit: causas discriminis atque laboris
Inde habuit. Tanto major Famae sitis est, quam
Virtutis. Quis enim Virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si tollas? Patriam tamen obruit olim
Gloria paucorum, and laudis titulique cupido
Haesuri saxis cinerum Custodibus: ad quae
Discutienda valent sterilis mala robora ficus:
Quandoquidem data sunt ipsis quoque fata sepulchris.
Expende Hannibalem: quot libras in Duce summo
Invenies? hic est, quem non capit Africa Mauro
Percussa Oceano Niloque admota tepenti.
Rursus ad Aethiopium populos aliosque Elephantos
Additur Imperiis Hispania: Pyrenaeum
Transilit Opposuit natura Alpemque nivemque
Diduxit scopulos and montem rupit aceto.
Jam tenet Italiam, tamen ultra pergere tendit.
Actum, inquit, nihil est, nisi Poeno milite portas
Frangimus, and media vexillum pono suburra.
O qualis facies and quali digna tabella
Cum Getula Ducem portaret bellua luscum!
Exitus ergo quis est? o gloria! vincitur idem
Nempe and in exilium praeceps fugit, atque ibi magnus
Mirandusque Cliens sedet ad Praetoria Regis,
Donec Bithyno libeat vigilare Tyranno.
Finem animae, quae res humanas miscuit olim
Non gladii, non saxa dabant, nec tela sed ille
Cannarum vindex and tanti sanguinis ultor
Annulus. I demens and savas curre per Alps
Vt pueris placeas and Declamatio fias.
Vnus Pellaeo Juveni non sufficit orbis
Aest uat infelix augusto limite mundi.
Vt Gyarae clausus scopulis, parvaque Seripho.
Cum tamen a figulis munitam intraverat Vrbem
Sarcophago c^ntentus erit. Mors. sola fatetur
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula, creditur olim
Velificatus Athos, and quicquid Graecia mendax
Audet in historia; constratum classibus iisdem
Suppositumque rotis solidum mare. Credimus altos
Defecisse amnes, epotaque flumina Medo
Prandente, and madidis cantat quae Sostratus alis.
Ille tamen qualis rediit Salamine relicta,
In Little atque Eurum solitus saevire flagellis
Barbarus, Aeolio nunquam hoc in carcere passos,
Ipsum compedibus qui vinxer at Ennosigaeum?
Mitius id save quod non and stigmate diguum
Credidit, huic quisquam vellet servire Deorum?
Sed qualis rediit? nempe una nave crnentis
Fluctibus, as tarda per densa cadavera prora.
Has toties optata exegit gloria poenas.
Da spatium vitae multos da Jupiter annos:
Hoc recto vulta, solum hoc and pallidus optas.
Sed quam continuis and quantis longa senectus
Plena malis: deformem and tetrum ante omnia vultum
Dissimilemque sui, deformem pro cute pellem,
Pendentesque genas, and tales adspice rugas,
Quales umbriferos ubi pandit Tabraca saltus
In vetula scalpit jam matter simia bucca.
Plurima sunt Juvenum discrimina, pulcrior ille
Hoc, atque ille alio, multum hic robustior illo.
Vna senum facies, cum voce trementia membra,
Et jam laeve caput, madidique infantia nasi,
Frangendus misero gingiva panis inermi.
Vsque adeo gravis Vxori, gnatisque sibique
Vt captatori moveat fastidia Cosso.
Non eadem vini, atque cibi torpente palato
Gaudia: nam coitus jam longa oblivio: vel si
Coneris, jacet exiguus cum ramice nervus,
Et, quamvis tota palpetur nocte, jacebit.
Anne aliquid sperare potest haec inguinis agri
Canities?
-- quid quod merito suspecta libido est,
Quae Venerem adfectat sine viribus? adspice partis
Nunc Damnum alterius. Nam quae cantante voluptas:
Sit licet eximius Citharaedo sive Seleucus,
Et quibus aurata mos est fulgere lacerna?
Quid refert, magni sedeat qua part Theatri,
Qui vix cornicines exaudiet, atque tubarum
Concentus? clamore opus est ut sentiat auris
Quem dicat venisse puer, quot nunciet horas.
Praeterea minimus gelido jam in corpore sanguis
Febre calet sola: circumsilit agmine facto
Morborum omne genus; quorum si nomina quaeras,
Promptius expediam quot amaverit Hippia maechos,
Quot Themison aegros autumno occiderit uno,
Quot Basilus socios, quot circumscripserit Irus
Pupillos: quot longa viros exsorbeat uno
Maura die, quot discipulos inclinet Hamillus.
Percurram citius quot villas possideat nunc
Quo tondente gravis juveni mihi barba sonabat.
Ille humero, hic lumbis, hic coxa debilis, ambos
Perdidit ille oculos, and Luscis invidet.
-- hujus
Pallida labra cibum accipiunt digitis alienis.
Ipse ad conspectum caenae diducere rictum
Suetus, hiat tantum, ceu pullus hirundinis, ad quem
Ore volat pleno matter jejuna. Sed omni
Membrorum damno major dementia: quae nec
Nomina servorum, nec vultum agnoscit Amici
Cum quo praeterita caenavit nocte, nec illos
Quos genuit, quos eduxit. Nam codice saevo
Hoeredes vetat esse suos, bona tota feruntur
Ad Phialen: tantum artificis valet halitus oris
Quod steterat multis in carcere fornicis annis.
Vt vigeant sensus animi, ducenda tamen sunt
Funera gnatorum, rogus adspicendus amatae
Conjugis, and fratris, plenaeque sororibus urnae.
Haec data poena diu viventibus, ut renovata
Semper clade domus multis in luctibus, inque
Perpetuo maerore and nigra vest senescant.
Rex Pylius, magno si quicquam credis Homero,
Exemplum vitae fuit a cornice secundae.
Felix nimirum, qui tot per secula mortem
Distulit, atque suos jam dextra computat annos
Quique novum toties mustum bibit. Oro parumper
Attendas, quantum de legibus ipse queratur
Fatorum,
-- and nimio de flamine, cum videt acris
Antilochi barbam ardentem: cum quaerit ab omni
Quisquis adest socius, cur haec in tempora duret,
Quod facinus dignum tam longo admiserit aevo?
Haec eadem Peleus, raptum cum luget Achillem,
Atque alius, cui fas Ithacon lugere natantem.
Incolumi Troja Priamus venisset ad umbras
Assaraci magnis solemnibus, Hectore funus
Portante, ac reliquis fratrum cervicibus, inter
Iliadum lacrymas, ut primos edere planctus
Cassandra inciperet, scissaque Polyxena palla:
Si foret extinctus diverso tempore, quo non
Caeperit audaces Paris edificare carinas.
Longa dies igitur quid contulit? omnia vidit
Eversa, and flammis Asiam, ferroque cadentem.
Tunc miles tremulus posita tulit arma tiara,
Et ruit ante aram summi Jovis, ut vetulus bos
Qui Domini cultris tenue and miserabile collum
Praebet, ab ingrato jam fastiditus aratro.
Exitus ille utcunque hominis: sed torva canino
Latravit rictu, quae post hunc vixerat, Vxor.
Festino ad nostros, and Regem transeo Ponti,
Et Craesum, quem vox justi facunda Solonis
Respicere ad longae jussit spatia ultima vitae.
Exsilium and carcer Minturnarumque paludes
Et mendicatus victa Carthagine panis,
Hinc causas habuere. Quid illo Cive tulisset
Natura in terris, quid Roma beatius unquam,
Si circumducto captivorum agmine, and omni
Bellorum pompa, animam exhalasset opimam,
Cum de Teutonico vellet descendere curru?
Provida Pompeio dederat Campania febres
Optandos: Sed multae Vrbes and publica Vota
Vicerunt. Igitur fortuna ipsius, and Vrbis
Servatum victo caput abstulit. Hoc cruciatu
Lentulus, hac poena caruit, ceciditque Cethegus
Integer, and jacuit Catilina cadavere toto.
Formam optat modico pueris, majore puellis
Murmr, cum Veneris fanum videt anxia Matter
Usque ad delicias votorum. Cur tamen inquit
Corripias?
-- pulcra gaudet Latona Diana,
Sed vetat optari faciem Lucretia, qualem
Ipsa habuit. Cuperet Rutilae Virginia gibbum
Accipere, atque suum Rutilae dare. Filius autem
Corporis egregii, miseros, trepidosque Parents
Semper habet. Rara est adeo concordia formae
Atque pudicitiae; sanctos licet horrida mores
Tradiderit domus, ac veteres imitata Sabinas.
Praeterea castum ingenium, Vultumque modesto
Sanguine ferventem tribuat Natura benigna
Larga manu, (quid enim puero confer potest plus
Custode and cura natura potentior omni?)
Non licet esse viros: Nam prodiga corruptoris
Improbitas ipsos audet tentare Parents,
Tanta in muneribus fiducia. Nullus ephebum
Deformem saeva castravit in arce Tyrannus:
Nec praetextatum rapuit Nero loripedem, nec
Strumosum, atque utero pariter, gibboque tumentem,
I nunc and Juvenis specie laetare tui, quem
Majora expectant discrimina. Fiet Adulter
Publicus, and poenas metuit, quascunque mariti
Irati debent: nec erit felicior astro
Martis, ut in laqueo nunquam incidat. --
-- exigit autem
Interdum ille dolor plus, quam lex ulla dolori
Concessit. Necat hic ferro, secat ille cruentis
Verberibus, quosdam maechos and mugilis intrat.
Sed tuus Endymion dilectae fiet Adulter
Matronae: Mox cum dederit Servilia nummos
Fiet and illius, quam non amat: exuet omnem
Corporis ornatum. Quid enim ulla negaverit udis
Inguinibus, sive est haec Hippia, sive Catulla?
Deterior totos habet illic Foemina mores.
Sed casto quid forma nocet, quid profuit immo
Hippolito grave propositum? quid Bellerophonti?
Erubuit nempe haec, ceu fastidita repulso.
Nec Sthenobaea minus quam Cressa excanduit, and se
Concussere ambae. Mulier saevissima tunc est,
Cum stimulos odio pudor admovet. Elige quidnam
Suadendum esse putes, cui nubere Caesaris Vxor
Destinat. Optimus hic and formosissimus idem
Gentis Patriciae rapitur miser extinguendus
Messalinae oculis:
-- Dudum sedet illa parato
Flammeolo, Tyriusque palam genialis in hortis
Sternitur, and ritu decies centena dabuntur
Antiquo: Veniet cum signatoribus Auspex.
Haec tu secreta and paucis commissa putabis?
Non nisi legitime vult nubere: quid placeat, dic:
Ni parere velis, pereundum erit ante lucernas.
Si scelus admittas, dabitur mora parvula, dum res
Nota Vrbi and populo contingat Principis aures.
Dedecus ille domus sciet ultimus: interea Tu
Obsequere imperio, si tanti vita dierum
Paucorum. Quidquid melius leviusque putaris,
Praebenda est Gladio pulchra haec and candida cervix.
Nil ergo optabunt homines? Si consilium vis,
Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Dii.
Carior est illis homo quam sibi. Nos animorum
Impulsu and coeca magnaque cupidine ducti,
Conjugium petimus, partumque Vxoris: at illis
Notum qui Pueri, qualisque sutura sit Vxor.
Vt tamen and poscas aliquid, voveasque sacellis
Exta, and candiduli Divina tomacula porci:
Orandum est, ut sit men's sana in corpore sano.
Fortem posce animum, mortis terrore carentem:
Qui spatium vitae extremum inter munera ponat
Naturoe. Qui far quoat quoscunque labores,
Nesciat irasci, cupiat nihil, and potiores
Herculis aerumnas credat saevosque labores,
Et venere and caenis and pluma Sardanapali.
Monstro quod ipse Tibi possis dare. Semita certe
Tranquillae per virtutem patet unica vitoe.
Nullum Numen habes si sit Prudentia: Nos te,
Nos facimus, Fortuna, Deam, coeloque locamus.
Finis Sat. 10.
Illustrations on the Tenth Satyr of Juvenal.
(1.) THE Spaniards call it Cadiz, corruptly Calis, we call it Cales, an Island
situate at the South Side of Spain, without the Streights of Gibraltar, where
they feigned Hercules to have set up two Pillars with his Ne plus ultra. This
the Ancients thought to be the farthest part of the Earth Eastward.

(2.) The great River in the East Indies, dividing them into two parts, extra
and intra Gangem: The old Scholiast says, Juvenal means the whole Earth by
Synecdoche.

(3.) Here I differ from Lubin, and Farnaby, (as Mr. Holyday does) who
interpret dextro pede with most prosperous Auspicies. For though Turnebus says,
Lib. 29. cap. 35. Dextra cum erant, Numina favere credebantur, Laeva contra.
Yet in auspiciis quae sinistra sunt been eventura putantur among the Romans
says Alex. ab Alex. genesis dier. lib. 5. cap. 13. in taking their Auspicia, the
Thunder and Lightning was supposed to come from the right hand of the God, when
it was on the left hand of the Auspex. Laeva auspicia answer to dextra Numina;
and so vice versa, and so intonuit Laevum Aeneid 2, is expounded by Donatus. So
that dextro pede could not be meant in Farnaby, and Lubins sense. But the
Romans thinking the Right Limbs were naturally more strong and worthy than the
Left, superstitiously fancied, That that Progress was luckiest that begun with
the right Foot. Some Jockies here among us superstitiously believe, That if the
Horse step out of the Stable with his right foot he will win the Race,
otherwise not.

(4.) I have Translated faciles literally, easy; because I take it to be as
good English as it is Latin.

(5.) Milo was a Man of predigious strength as Strabo writes of him: But going
through a Forest in Italy, seeing an Oak in part split, he endeavored to rend
it farther, and it closed with a spring upon him, and held him till he became a
prey to Wild Beasts.

(6.) Though Juvenal calls them British Whales, and Lubin says, they are the
greatest that are; yet we scarce see one in an Age here, and then not the
greatest.

(7.) Caius Cassius Longinus a very rich Lawyer, Nero commanded his Eyes to be
put out, and afterward ordered him to be killed; upon pretense of having
Cassius his Image who stabbed Julius Caesar in his House: But the true reason
was for his great wealth.

(8.) Nero's Tutor, an excellent Moral Philosopher, he had most magnificent
Gardens, and was prodigiously Rich, as Tacitus says, lib. 13. That in the
fourth year of Nero he was worth 100000 Sestertia; which Mr. Holyday computes
to be 781250 l. sterling, and he improved this Estate four years after that. At
the command of Nero, his Veins were cut, and he bled to death: He was accused
by Ruffus, and Tigellinus, upon pretense that he was in Pisa"s Cospiracy.

(9.) Plautius Lateranus appointed Consul, whom Nero commanded to be killed, so
suddenly, that he would not give leave that he should embrace his Children.
Turius the Tribune dispatched him, Tacit. 15.

(10.) Poor People always lay in the Cock-lofts, into which they climbed with
Ladders, Juven. Satyr. 3.

(11.) Contus signifies a Quant or Sprett, with which they shove Boats; it also
signifies a stronger sort of Spear, and a Weapon wherewith they used to fight
with wild Beasts: But I take it here to be a strong Staff with an Iron at the
end of it; like that which Tinkers, Pedlers, and Foot-pads use: And therefore I
have Translated it a Quarter-staff; and Foot-pads Rob most in the night.

(12.) Vows or Prayers, which when they were ashamed of, they did, susurrare,
mumble them in secret; but otherwise they spoke 'em loud, as Persius says,
aperto vivere voto.

(13.) The Senators and great wealthy men were wont to put their Money in Iron
Chests, and place them in the forum for fear of Fire. First in Mars his Temple
in the Forum of Augustus, till that was Robbed, which the Poet mentions Sat. 14.
after that in the Temple of Castor and Pollux, which was in the Forum Romanum;
after that in Trajans Forum, and as the old Scholiast says, the place was
called Opes.

(14.) Because the Poor drink in them, whom none hate, envy, or would supplant.

(15.) The Romans used to drink in Golden Cups adorned with Precious Stones.
Vid. Sat. 5. from the 37th. Line to the 46th.

(16.) Excellent Wine named from Setia a Town or City in Campania.

(17.) The Commentators doubting about this place say, That Ardebit may signify
that Wine looks of a flame color in Gold Cups; or that it may be applied to
the burning poison in the Cup: I am bold to apply it to the Wine, and translate
it Sparkle.

(18.) Democritus of Abdera a City in Thrace, an Anatomical Philosopher, who,
whenever he stirred out, laughed continually at the vanities and follies of
mankind, therefore surnamed Gelasinus the Laugher. Some People sent Hippocrates
to him, taking him to be mad; but Hippocrates thought him otherwise.

(19.) Heraclitus a Philosopher of Ephesus, who always wept at the follies,
villainies and miseries of mankind, he lived in the time of the last Darius; he
was surnamed (...) for his obscure style.

(20.) A White Mantle bordered with Purple, worn by Consuls, Dictators,
Praetors, and great men who had born great Offi^es; and by the Sons of
Noblemen, till they put on the manly Gown.

(21.) A Robe or Mantle of which there were three sorts, one all Purple for the
Gods, another streaked with beams of White and Purple for Kings; and a Third of
Purple and Scarlet, worn by the Augur when he took his Augury. See Alex. ab
Alex. genesis Dier. lib. 5. cap. 18.

(22.) Horse-litters which were very lofty, and magnificently rich, in which
they might sit or lie, carried by their Slaves. See Sat. 3.

(23.) The bundle of Rods carried before Dictators, Consuls, and the Praetor
Vrbanus, with an Ax bound to it, not in it.

(24.) The place at the end of the Judgment Hall raised and rounded, where
stood the Sella Curulis, or Judgment Seat, on which the Praetor sat.

(25.) The place where the Romans saw Chariot-races and other Games.

(26.) Here the Poet makes the Praetor and Consul to be the same; and anciently
the same man was called by both names, Praetor a Praecundo, and Consul a
Consulendo Senatum: But this was before the Praetor Vrbanus, somewhat like our
Lord Mayor was made, as Lubin notes from Pedianus.

(27.) They were wont to stand in their Triumphal Chariots, Sat. 8. lib. 3.
Stantes in Curribus Aemilianos.

(28.) These Triumphal Robes were brought out of the Temple of Jupiter, and
given to him who was to Triumph: See Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dierum, Lib. 5. cap.
18. The Toga and the Tunica are here different most certainly, though some would
have it otherwise.

(29.) Public Servants were the Servants of the Magistrates, as they were
Magistrates, and were bought in the name of the Commonwealth, and employed in
public works. This is to distinguish him from his own proper Slave.

* This Servant rode behind the Triumpher in the same Chariot, and put him in
mind of Instruments of punishment affixed to the Chariot, and cried out to him,
Respice post te memento te esse hominem, Look behind you, remember you are a
Man, and bid him mind the Whip and the Bell. Lubin and Farnaby.

(30.) He that Triumphed bore an Ivory Scepter, with an Eagle seeming to rise
and fly from it.

(31.) Clients were Retainers or Followers of Great men.

(32.) The Color of the Mantle or Sleeveless Gown for the better sort was
White, and this they wore (as Pancirollus says) Lib. 1. Tit. 43. at all public
Shows.

(33.) They marched on each side of his Chariot.

(34.) Sportula was the Supper or entertainment which the Rex, or Patron gave
his Clients, which at first was a Supper, but afterward was turned into Money:
As here it is meant, Defossa in Loculis quos Sportula fecit Amicos. When they
entertained them liberally at Supper, it was called Caena recta: but the more
proud and sordid great men gave them out Baskets of Mea^, and Money at their
doors. See Sat. 1. line 95. where Juvenal lashes the baseness of a proud
luxurious fellow, who would have Seven Dishes to himself alone, and keep out
his Clients. It Is hard to imagine that free Citizens of good Condition, should
be so slavish to follow the Sportula, as you may see, Sat. 1. after line 95.

(34.) Vervecum in patria Crassoque sub Aere nasci. The Country of Weathers,
sheepish, doltish fellows which I translate Sheeps-heads. Crasso sub Aere, like
that in Baectia, good rich Pasture, but thick moist Air. We observe here that
the driest Climate, and thinnest Air, produces the quickest Wits, Hor. in
Epist. Baeo^um crasso jurares in Aere natum.

(35.) The Ancients were wont when they made their Vows to the Gods, to write
them, some in Papers, and some in Waxen Tables, and with Wax, to fix them to
the Knees of the Gods: As says Farnaby, the old Scholiast, Lubin and Turnebus,
lib. adv. 1. cap. 21.

(36.) The Scholiast interprets this otherwise than Lubin, and in my Opinion
more truly to be a Brass Plate fixed under their Images, containing every
degree of their Titles and Honors.

(37.) When any great Man was condemned of a capital crime, his Statue was
pulled down, dragged about the Streets, and flung down the Gemonies, Tacit. lib.
3. Annal. See Satyr. 8. line 18. and Lubin upon it.

(38.) Their Statues were Erected in their Chariots. See Sat. 8. Stantes in
Curribus Aemilianos.

(39.) Here the Poet represents the people speaking to one another (not to the
Emperor as Lubin would have it) to Crown their Houses with Bays and Laurel, as
the Custom was in any general Joy: And this was to congratulate the Emperors
Happiness in being delivered from his dangerous Enemy Sejanus, his chief
Minister, and but a while before his greatest Favorite, whose extravagant
Ambition had made him design the destruction of the Emperor; and Usurpation.

(40.) They used to Sacrifice a white Bull to Jupiter, which Color was, as
they thought, acceptable to him. To the Celestial Gods they offered White
sacrifices, to the Infernal, Black, says Brittanicus.

(41.) Before he speaks of his statue being dragged about; now of his Body,
which was, like other great Malefactors bodies, drawn by a Hook in his Throat,
and thrown down the Scalae Gemoniae, which were on the Aventine near the Temple
of Juno, Alex. ab Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 3. cap. 5.

(42.) One of the Citizens speaks, beholding the Carcass.

(43.) Another Citizen speaks.

(44.) A third answers.

(45.) The subtle Letter which Tyberius sent to the Senate, which caused the
immediate destruction of Sejanus, who was killed by the Soldiers, drawn thither
for that purpose.

(46.) A Rocky Island not far from Surrentum a City in Campania.

(47.) Another Citizen speaks; these were not the Rabble, but as good as our
Common Counsel men that were.

(48.) Here the Poet speaks in his own person, for twelve lines together, of
all the Crowd.

(49.) Sejanus was a Tuscan, and Nurscia was the Protectress of the Country;
by some thought to be Fortune.

(50) Since the Emperors had deprived them of their right of choosing their
Officers by Votes.

(51.) Tessarae Frumentariae, it is thought were here intended, which were
Tokens brought to the Overseer, Praefectus dividendi frumenti, for the dividing
the Corn, by which the poorer sort claimed an allowance of Corn Monthly; but
Lubin says it is to be understood thus, That now the people grown supine, or
slothful and base, cared for nothing but food for necessity, and Games or Races
in the Circus.

(52.) Here the Citizens speak again.

(53.) Here the Commentators keep a great stir about the expression Magna est
fornacula: But it seems most naturally to be meant of the Emperor's Breast,
which though little, has great rage or heat in it.

(54.) Lubin applies Victus ne poenas exigat Ajax, to the Emperor: viz. That
his Cause being ill defended by the Senate, he would run mad, and kill Man and
Beast like Ajax; but he says many apply it to Brutidius, and it seems to me
that those many are in the right.

(55.) Tiberius had given power to slaves to swear against their Masters,
contrary to the Roman Law. These were the better and middle sort of Citizens.

(56.) The private Retiring Rooms, where Tyberius practiced his foul lusts and
villainous debaucheries.

(57.) The Praetorian Camp were the Guards to the Emperors person, which
Sejanus Commanded, which were encamped about the East side of Rome; and when
the Emperor was in the field, they were always about his Pavilion.

(58.) Aediles were the lowest of Magistrates, who overlooked Weights and
Measures.

(59.) Julius Caesar, who by his perpetual Dictatorship brought the Roman
Citizens under his lash.

(60.) The word Reges and Tyranni were become odious to the Romans ever since
the time of the Tarquins: And Juvenal here declares himself a Republican.

(61.) There was a five days Festival kept in Rome in honor to Minerva, the
Goddess of Wit and Learning, which according to the Roman Calender began on the
19th. of March, and ended the 23d. and this was called the Quinquatria.

(62.) Cicero's Head and Hands were cut off, and fixed to the Rostra by the
command of Antonius: And Demosthenes the famous Athenian Orator, Plato's
Scholar, when Antipater succeeded Alexander, to prevent being apprehended by
Archias (who was sent after him when he fled) took Poison which he had in a
Pen. See Plutarch.

(63) The Rostra signifies the place, or the Pulpit from which they spoke
Orations to the people, called Rostra first from the stems or heaks of Ships of
the Antiates, wherewith the Pulpit was adorned.

(64.) O fortunatam Natam me Consule Romam, a very mean Verse, made by Cicero,
notwithstanding Scaligers vindication of it. I found it impossible to be
translated; but I have written with the same fault, as Consul Consult.

(65.) A most incomparable Invective Oration of Cicero's against Anthony, which
he remembered, and paid him home for it.

(66.) The Theater at Athens was the place where the people were wont to hear
Orations concerning weighty matters of the Commonwealth, as Diodorus Siculus,
Plutarch, and Isocrates testify, and is to be found in the Acts of the
Apostles, chap. 19. verse 29. The people rushed, (...).

(67.) Demosthenes his Father was a Sword-cutler.

(68.) The Conquerors used to put the following spoils upon the stumps of
Trees, which were called Trophies; and this was done where they put the Enemies
to flight in memory of the Victory.

(69.) Upon the gaining of some City or Country to the Commonwealth, they used
to erect a Triumphal Arch of Marble, with Inscriptions in Brass, expressing the
Conqueror and the sad Captive.

(70.) By Barbarcus Emperor is meant the Persian.

(71.) The Wild fig tree will grow through Stonewalls.

(72.) The famous Carthaginian Captain, who Warred Sixteen years with the
Romans.

(73.) To the exceeding heats in the Country about Nilus in Egypt.

(74.) A Great Region on the South part of Egypt, now called the Abyssines, or
Prester John's Country.

(75.) The Mountains that part Spain from France.

(76.) The high Mountains that part France from Italy and Germany. As Livy
writes, by making vast fires upon the Rocks, and pouring a huge quantity of
Vinegar upon them, he broke them, and made them crumble. But this is surely
thought fabulous by Polybius, who omits it as is supposed for that reason.

(77.) An Elephant from the Getuli, a people of Africa; or as Lubin says, from
Getulia.

(78.) When he was Conquered by Scipio Africanus in Africa, he was Condemned to
Banishment. He fled to Antiochus King of Syria, suspecting him, be left him,
and came to Prusias King of Bythinia, etc. Of him the Romans demanded Hannibal
to be sent to them. Lubin renders Praetoria Regis, the King's Judgment Seat,
though it may be the King's Pavilion.

(79.) The Great slaughter which Hannibal made of the Romans at Cannae, where
so many of the Equestrian Order fell, that several Measures were filled with
the Rings taken from their Fingers, which he sent to Carthage. To avoid being
delivered to the Romans by the King of Bythinia, he took Poison which he had
kept in a Ring.

(80.) Alexander the Great, born at Pella a City in Macedonia, called by
Juvenal here Pellaeus Juvenis, who as Plutarch writes, hearing Anaxagoras
discourse of infinite Worlds, wept, and being asked by his Friends the Reason
of his weeping, Have I not reason, says he, since there are Infinite Worlds,
and I have with so much toil and pain scarce conquered one?

(81.) Gyara was a barren, little Rockey Island in the Aegean Sea, one of the
Cyclades, whither the Romans used to Banish people, see Satyr 1. Aude aliquod
brevibus Gyaris.

(82.) Seryphus one of the Cyclades, or Sporades too.

(83.) Here at Babylon Cassander Poisoned him.

(84.) Athos a Promontory of Macedonia, said to be cut off from the Continent
by Xerxes; and that then he Sailed with all his Fleet about it.

(85.) The Sea betwixt Sestos and Abydos, which he joined by a Bridge as Justin
says, lib. 2. It was of little Ships, or great Boats.

(86.) The Persian Emperor.

(87.) A Greek Poet who writ of this Expedition into Greece, who Juvenal thinks
wrote when he was almost drunk, he wrote so extravagantly.

(88.) An Island belonging to Attica, near which Themistocles in a Sea Fight
gave him a total defeat.

(89.) For breaking his Bridge of Ships, or great Boats as he did.

(90.) Corus is a Westerly Wind, and Eurus Easterly.

(91.) The God of the Winds, who is said to keep the Winds in Caves or Prisons,
and at his pleasure to let them loose. See Neptunes Speech to him in the
Aeneids.

(92.) Neptune the God of the Sea, who was feigned to cause Earthquakes with a
blow of his Trident, whom Xerxes was said to Fetter when he made his Bridge.

(93.) When Slaves ran away, and were taken again, they Branded them on the
forehead.

(94.) A great Wood upon the Coast of Africa, full of Monkies and Baboons.

(95.) Wife to Veiento a Senator, who ran away from her Husband with Sergius, a
Gladiator, to Egypt, Sat. 6. v. 83.

(96.) Themison was a great Physician commended by Pliny and Celsus.

(97.) Those of the Provinces which were Conquered, and had the Privileges of
Romans, were called Socii, or Associates.

(98.) A Prefect or Governor of Provinces.

(99.) Irus a notorious cheating Guardian; by Lubin he is called Irus, by
Schrevelius his Edition, with the Notae variorum, he is called Hircus.

(100.) A Lewd Common Whore, Sat. 6. v. 307.

(1.) A filthy Sodomitical Schoolmaster.

(2.) Licinius, or as some will have it, Cinnamus, who in Juvenal's youth was
his Barber, now a rich Senator, as the Scholiast and Lubin say. The Poet here
repeats the same Verse of him which he wrote of him in the first Satyr, Verse.
25.

(3.) An Infamous Common Strumpet, who had been long in a Baudy-house before he
had her; she stood at the door to inveagle Passengers. No doubt the Poet had
some one in his Eye who had done this.

(4.) The Romans laid the Bodies of the Dead upon a Funeral Pile, burned them,
and put the Ashes into an Vrn with the Bones. These Vrns were Vessels of Earth
or Brass, holding four Gallons and a half a piece; and so they placed the
better sort in stately Vaults belonging to their Families. Pancirollus tells
us, Lib. 1. Tit. 62. To preserve the Ashes from mixing with other Ashes, they
wrapped the Body in a Sheet made of a sort of Flax called Asbestinum and
Asbeston, mentioned by Pliny, lib. 29. cap. 1. which would not burn, and fire
did but cleanse it, which is now to be seen.

(5.) Nestor King of Pylos, who lived almost 300 years, The Crow they believed
to live 900.

(6.) The Ancient Greeks reckoned their Figures to a Hundred upon the Left
hand, and to a Thousand upon the Right; so when he had lived past a 100, he
reckoned his Age upon his Right hand.

(7.) The Father of Achilles was so unhappy to live till old age, to bewail the
death of his Son, treacherously slain by Darts by Paris and Deiphobus in
Apollo's Temple, when he thought to have Married Polixena.

(8.) Ulysses, for whom his old Father Laertes mourned while he wandered for Ten
years at Sea, after the Siege of Troy, ere he could get home again. He was
called Ithacus from Ithaca an Island in the Ionian Sea, of which he was Lord.
The Poet insinuates that these two old men had been happier if they had died
before these Misfortunes of their Sons.

(9.) Priam the last King of Troy, slain by Pyrrhus at the destruction of Troy,
after he had reigned Fifty two years.

(10.) Priam's, Son Priam, had 49 Sons more and 12 Daughters.

(11.) Priam's Daughter a Prophetess.

(12.) Polyxena another Daughter very fair, whom Achilles desired in Marriage,
etc. And after the destruction of Troy, in revenge for Achilles his death, was
killed by his Son Pyrrhus Neoptolemus upon his Fathers Tomb.

(13) Another Son of Priam's, who set out a Fleet to steal Helena the Wife of
Menelaus, which was the occasion of the destruction of Troy after ten years
siege.

(14.) Where he was slain by Pyrrhus.

(15.) The old useless Ox, for there was a Law both among the Romans and the
Graecians, De non mactando bove aratore, not to kill a Plowing Ox, despised by
the ungrateful Plow, is a very bold Catechresis, but it is my Authors. Ab
ingrato jam fastiditus aratro.

(14.) Hecuba Wife to Priam, who for her perpetual reproaching the Greeks, and
lamenting the fate of her Husband, Children, and the Trojans, was feigned to be
turned into a Bitch.

(15.) Mithridates King of Pontus, aged sixty nine years, had Reigned fifty
seven, Warred against the Romans forty; being at last wholly overthrown, when
he could not dye by Poison, having in his life time, as it is said, constantly
taken Antidotes against it, made one of his Soldiers kill him. See Florus, lib.
3. cap. 5.

(16.) King of Lydia, the richest Man then living, showing his Treasure to
Solon, one of the Seven wise Men of Greece, and Lawgiver to the Athenians,
asked him if he had known any Man happier than himself? To whom Solon replied,
he had known several; and instanced in them, telling him he must look to the
end; for no Man could be judged happy till they had seen all his life -- and
Ovid says, -- Dicique beatus

Nemo ante obitum supremaque funera Debet. (17.) Marius surnamed Cajus, born of
a very obscure Family; see Sat. 8. v. 245. by his Valor raised himself: He was
six times Consul before Sylla forced him to fly, when he was put to miserable
shifts to save his life. Minturvae's Fenns are in Latium, now called Campania
di Roma, where he was caught and Imprisoned; one was sent to Execute him, but
he was astonished at the majestic presence of him, and could not do it; from
thence he escaped, fled to Carthage, and begged in the Ruins of that City:
afterward he was recalled by Cinna, and a seventh time made Consul. See
Plutarch.

(18.) The Chariot in which he was carried when he Triumphed over the Cimbri, a
people of Denmark and Holstein; and the Teutones, a people of Germany called
Tuesch, or Ofsterlings.

(19.) After his overthrow at Pharsalia, he fled to Egypt, where, by the
Treachery of Ptolomy, his Head was cut off.

(20.) One of the Conspiracy with Cataline, who was strangled in Prison.

(21.) Another of the Conspirators, who died the same Death.

(22.) The chief Conspirator, who died fighting with his Enemies. See Salust.

(23) Here my Author passes to Beauty.

In the Temple of Venus the Goddess of Beauty.

(24.) The Goddess of Hunting, Daughter to Latona and Jupiter.

(25.) Here the Poet Answers the Question supposed to be asked by the Mother,
Why do you blame me?

(26.) Lucretia the Wife of Collatinus, for her Beauty Ravished by Tarquin,
upon which she killed her self.

(27.) The Daughter of a Captain, Virginius, whom Appius, one of the Decemviri,
caused his Pimp Clodius to claim as his Bondwoman, that he might the more
easily corrupt her; at which her Father slew her: See Florus, lib. 1. cap. 14.
The Rape of Lucrece was the occasion of the Expulsion of their Kings, and
Kingly Authority; and the fate of Virginia, was the occasion of the abolishing
the Government of the Decemviri, with the death of Appius and Clodius.

(28.) An ugly crooked Woman, who lived till she was 97 years old: Pliny, lib.
7. takes notice of her.

(29.) A People of Italy, near Rome, famous for the Chastity of their Women,
and their Piety and Religion to the Gods: A People who lived plainly, homelily,
and virtuously.

(30.) This Corrupter, is either he that would make a Pathick of the handsome
Boy, or Gueld him, and in both Cases they may be said not to remain men.

(31.) Sporus was a youth whom Nero endeavored to turn into a Woman, by
Guelding, etc. and Incision.

(32.) Whom Vulcan caught in a Net while he was lying with Venus, feigned to be
a Planet.

(33.) It was an Ancient punishment of Adulterers among the Romans, to take the
Mugilis, which we Translate a Mullet, but it must be unlike ours, a very
prickly Fish, which they ramm'd up the Fundament. The Athenians punished them
in like manner with a Raddish-Root.

(34.) A Nick name, Ironically given to this Mothers nown Son, from Endymion,
beloved by the Moon, as the Poets feign.

(35.) Lubin calls this Servilia, Mother to M. Brutus; if it were she, he must
mean deformed by Age, for she was Concubine to Julius Caesar: nor could she be
living now.

(36.) A Noble, Rich, and Prodigal Woman.

(37.) A Rich and Covetous Woman.

(38.) A Question put by the Mother.

(39.) The Poet Answers.

(40.) Hyppolitus the Son of Theseus King of Athens, whom his Mother in Law
Phaedra fell in Love with, and when he refused her, enraged thereat, she
accused him to her Husband of attempting to Ravish her. He fled from his
Fathers rage, the Horses in the Chariot being frighted by two Sea Monsters, ran
away up to the Hills, and he and his Chariot were torn in Pieces. He had made a
Vow of Chastity, and followed Hunting, wherefore Diana requested Aesculapius,
as they feign, to restore him to life, which was done, and he went afterward
into Italy, where he was called, Virbius quia bis Vir.

(41.) The Son of Glaucus King of Ephyra, whom Sthenobea Wife to Praetus King
of the Argives was so taken with, that She courted him to lie with her, which
he refusing, she accused him to her Husband of attempting her, which cost
Belleroph^n abundance of troubles and dangers, and hardly could he escape with
life at last.

(42.) Cajus Silius who was appointed to be Consul.

(43.) The Wife of Claudius the Emperor, mentioned Sat. 6. who when Claudius
went but to Ostia, would needs Marry this Cajus Silius publicly, with all the
Ceremonies used at public Marriages.

(44.) The Auspex was always present at the Marriage, and sacrificed, etc.

(45.) The Notaries were by to see the Writings signed and sealed.

(46.) This is spoken to Silius.

(47.) Here he intimates that his Beauty was the cause of his death; he was
afterward Crucified by Claudius his Command, before Messalina's Eyes.

The old Scholiast makes Claudius to be by, and sign the Marriage Writings,
dissembling his consent.

(48.) Tomacula were pieces of Liver and Pork enclosed in the Guts of the Hog,
and like what we call Sausages.

Swine were the most Ancient Sacrifices, as Varro says.

(49.) Sardanapalus, the last King of the Assyrian Monarchy, so excessively
Effeminate and Luxurious, that his Captains conspired against him to kill him:
But he made a Pile of all his precious things, and burned himself in his Palace.

(50) The labors of Hercules are so commonly spoken of, they need not be told
here.

(51.) I here follow the Lovre Print, and another Edition, in little, which I
have seen. Nullum numen habes, si sit Prudentia nos te
Nos facimus fortuna deam coeloque locamus.
which seems to express the Author's meaning better than the common reading:
Nullum numen abest si sit Prudentia sed te
Nos facimus fortuna deam coeloque locamus.
No Deity is wanting to the Wise;
We Fools make Fortune so, and place her in the Skies.


I have followed the former, because I think he does not mean that the Gods are
always on the Wise-mens side, who are often unsuccessful; or that wise men
needed no Gods, who had bidden 'em leave all to the Gods before; but that they
had no need of the assistance of Fortune for a quiet life, and Fortune is no
Deity to the wise, but to Fools.

Fortune thou art no Goddess to the Wise.
Fools make thee so, and place thee in the Skies.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle, page 2. instead of I must think, read I may think. In the
Translation, p. 1. for Longimus, Longinus. p. 2. for Aurorem, Auroram; for
extuperans, exsuperans; for noste, nocte. p 4. for codem, eodem p. 6. R.
fortunae. p. 7. for 'am, 'em. p. 14. for induperator with a little I, a great
one. p. 12. for posuit, potuit. p. 15. for Captive, Captain. p. 26. for
slamine-stamine. p. 28. for Optandos, Optandas. p. 32. for Immo, Olim; though the
Edition with the Notae Variorum, has it Immo. p. 38. for Pisa's, Piso's. p. 1.
for Cousul, Consul.


