THE King's Letter TO THE Great Council OF PEERS.
RIght Trusty, and Right Well-beloved Cozens; and Right Trusty, and
Well-beloved Cozens; and Trusty, and Right Well-beloved: We Greet you well.
We cannot have better Reason to Promise Our Self an end of our Common
Sufferings and Calamities, and that Our One Just Power and Authority will (with
God's Blessing) be Restored to Us, than that we hear You are again acknowledged
to have that Authority and Jurisdiction, which has always belonged to You, by
your Birth, and the Fundamental Laws of the Land; and We have thought it very
fit and safe for Us to call to You for Your Help, in the Composing the
Confounding Distempers and Distractions of the Kingdom; on which Your
Sufferings are next to those We have undergone Our Self. Therefore, You cannot
but be the most proper Counselors, for removing these Mischiefs, and for
preventing the like, for the future. How great a Trust We repose in You, for
the Procuring and Establishing a Blessed Peace and Security for the Kingdom,
will appear to You by Our Enclosed Declaration; which Trust, We are most
confident, You will Discharge with that Justice and Wisdom, that becomes You,
and must always be expected from You; and that upon Your Experience, how one
Violation succeeds another. When the known Relations and Rules of Justice are
Transgressed, You will be as Jealous for the Rights of the Crown, and for the
Honor of the King, as Our Self: and then you cannot but discharge your Trust
with Good Success, and provide for, and Establish the Peace, Happiness, and
Honor of King, Lords, and Commons, upon that Foundation which can only support
it, and We shall be all Happy in each other: And as the whole Kingdom will
bless God for You, We also shall hold Our Self Obliged, in an especial manner,
to Thank You in particular, according to the Affection You shall express
toward Us. We need the less enlarge to You on this Subject, because We have
likewise Writ to the House of Commons; which, we suppose, they will Communicate
to You. And We Pray GOD bless your Joynt-Endeavours, for the Good of us All.
And so We bid You very Heartily, Farewell.

V. Raker.

LONDON, Printed for W. Thomson, 1688.


