The late King James His Letter to his Privy Council of Scotland, with their
Answer, in reference to His Indulgence, containing His Absolute Power, without
Reserve.
His Majesty's Letter to His Honorable Privy Council of Scotland; together
with their Answer. Edinburgh, February 24. 1687.
ON Thursday, the 17 th Instant, His Majesty's Gracious Letter to the Lords of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of this Kingdom, was Read at the
Board; After which their Lordships Unanimously Ordered, That His Majesty's
Royal Proclamation therein Enclosed, should be Published here the next day,
which was accordingly performed with great Solemnity and Demonstrations of Joy.
The Copies of which Gracious Letter, together with the Councils dutiful Answer
to His Majesty thereupon, do here follow.

His Majesty's Letter to His Privy Council of Scotland.
JAMES R.

RIght Trusty and Right Well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, Right Trusty and
Right Well-beloved Counselor, Right Trusty and Entirely-beloved Cousins and
Counselors, Right Trusty and Right Well-beloved Cousins and Counselors, Right
Trusty and Well-beloved Cousins and Counselors, Right Trusty and Well-beloved
Counselors, and Trusty and Well-beloved Counselors, We Greet you well.
Whereas by Our Letter of the 21 st of August last past, We were graciously
pleased to inform you of Our Designs in order to the Ease of Our Roman
Catholic Subjects, unto which we had your Dutiful Answer in some days
thereafter; We have now thought fit to Publish these Our Royal Intentions, and
to give an Additional Ease to those of Tender Consciences, so to convince the
World of Our Inclinations to Moderation, and to evidence that those of the
Clergy who have been Regular, are Our most particular Care; though We have
given some Ease to those Principles, We can with any Safety Trust: We have at
the same time expressed Our highest Indignation against those Enemies of
Christianity, as well as Government, and Humane Society, The Field
Conventiclers, whom We recommend to you to Root out with all the Severities of
Our Laws, and with the most vigorous Prosecution of Our Forces, it being
equally Our, and Our Peopl's concern, to be rid of them. As for the other
Particulars of Our Royal Proclamation here enclosed, We doubt not but they will
appear to you most Just and Reasonable, as they do to Us, and that you will, in
your respective Capacities Assert, and Defend Our Royal Rights and
Prerogatives, which We are resolved to maintain in that Splendour and Greatness,
which can only make them Safe for Us, Supports for Our Friends, and Terrors to
Our Enemies. It is evident, We do not mean to encroach on the Consciences of
any, and what We will not do, We are resolved not to suffer in others: And
therefore it is Our Will and Pleasure, That these Our Commands be forthwith
obeyed, and that in Order thereunto, this Our Proclamation be forthwith
Printed and Published in the usual manner in such Cases accustomed; And if any
shall be so bold as to show any dislike of this Our Procedour, We desire to be
informed thereof by you, To the end We may convince the World, that We are in
Earnest, assuring all, That as We expect Obedience therein, and a Readiness
from you, and all Our Judicatures to assert Our Rights, so it shall be Our Care
on all Occasions, to show Our Royal Favor to all of you in General, and to
every one in Particular. For doing all these things, as well contained in this
Our Letter, as in Our Proclamation aforesaid, These Presents shall be to you,
and all others respectively, who may be therein any way concerned, a sufficient
Warrant. and so We bid you Heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twelfth day of February, 1686/7. And of
Our Reign the Third Year. By His Majesty's Command. MELFORT.

The Answer of the Lords of the Council to His Majesty's Letter.
May it please Your most Sacred Majesty,
YOur Majesty's Commands are exactly Obeyed. Your Royal Proclamation is Printed
and Published, by which Your Majesty has given a further Evidence of your
Favor and Goodness to all Your Subjects. And we are hopeful, that by Your
Majesty's extraordinary Acts of Mercy to some, who have been too ready on many
Occasions to abuse the Clemency of Your Royal Predecessors, they will be at
last convinced what they owe to so Gracious a King; And if any shall be still so
obstinate as to make any wrong use of Your Majesty's Goodness, We do
unanimously assure Your Majesty, That we will maintain and assert Your Royal
Prerogatives and Authority with the hazard of our Lives and Fortunes; And all
of us shall in our several Capacities do our Utmost, that Your Government may
be easy to all, whom Your Majesty thinks worthy of Your Protection.

We are very willing that Your Majesty's Subjects who are Peaceable and Loyal,
may be at Ease and Security, notwithstanding of their Profession and Private
Worship, and do conceive that such of them as are or shall be employed by Your
Majesty in Offices of Trust Civil or Military, are sufficiently secured by Your
Majesty's Authority and Commission for their exercing the same.

We return Your Majesty our most humble Thanks for giving Us Your Royal Word
for maintaining the Church and our Religion, as it is now established by Law,
and rest satisfied, believing Your Majesty's Promise to be the best and
greatest Security we can have. We are,

Edinburgh, 24. Feb. 1686/7. May it please Your Majesty, Your Majesty's most
Humble, most Faithful, And most Obedient Subjects and Servants, Signed by The
Earl of Perth Lord High Chancellor, the Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews, the
Lord Archbishop of Glasgow Elect, the Lord Marquess of Athole Lord Keeper of
the Privy Seal, the Duke of Gordon, the Lord Marquess of Douglass, the Earl of
Linlithgow, the Earl of Dumfermling, the Earl of Strathmore, the Earl of
Lauderdale, the Earl of Southesque, the Earl of Traquair, the Earl of Airlie,
the Earl of Belcarras, the Lord Viscount of Tarbat, the Lord Viscount of
Strathallan, the Lord Livingstoun, the Lord Kinnaird, Sir George Lockhart of
Carnwath Lord President of the Session, Sir John Dalrymple younger of Stair
Lord Advocat, Sir James Foulis of Collingtoun Lord Justice Clerk, Sir John
Lockhart of Castlehill one of the Senators of the College of Justice,
Lieutenant General James Douglas, Sir Andrew Ramsay of Abbotshall, Major
General John Grahame of Claverhouse, and Andrew Wanchop of Nidry..
And His Majesty's said Privy Council having Ordered, That the said Letter
should afterward be Signed by such of the Counselors as were not then
present; It was accordingly Signed at Westminster by the Earl of Morray, and
the Earl of Melfort, Principal Secretaries of State for the said Kingdom, the
Earl of Arran, the Earl of Drumlanrig, the Earl of Winton, the Earl of Seafort,
the Earl of Ancrum, and the Earl of Dumbarton.



Reprinted at Edinburgh, Anno DOM. 1689.


