ROBERTUS STAPYLTONIVS. EQVES AVRATVS (...) TAMEN ENERVATVS SED INTEGER PARQ*
SIBI, MODESTIAM SATYRARVM ET (...) DEBET: DEBET ETIAM ET DE^VS ET ^NCREMENTV


Mores Hominum.

THE MANNERS OF MEN, Described in sixteen Satyrs, BY JUVENAL: As he is
published in his most AUTHENTIC COPY, lately printed by command of the KING of
FRANCE.

Whereunto is added the Invention of seventeen Designs in Picture: With
Arguments to the Satyrs.

As also Explanations to the Designs in English and Latin.

Together with a large Comment, clearing the Author in every place, wherein he
seemed obscure, out of the Laws and Customs of the Romans, And The LATIN and
GREEK Histories.

By Sir ROBERT STAPYLTON, Knight.

Published by Authority.

LONDON Printed by R. Hodgkinsonne, in the Year 1660.

The Frontispice.
FAME, having filled her Trumpet with the praise
Of JUVENAL, flies from a grove of Bays,
And holds a Wreathe to crown his Statue, set
Where all his Satyrs, to act Men, are met.
A 1 Porter, to give rich men alms, attends.
A Goat 2, most gravely, Wantons reprehends.
The Country 3 whips the City. The Court-Fish 4,
Is dear. The Poor are mocked with a proud 5 Dish.
The old 6 Suitor. Learning's woeful period
The 7 Pedant shows, makes for himself a Rod.
Ancestors Arms he 8 boasts, that never fought.
The lustful 9 Ranter is to spoon-meat brought.
How vainly prays 10 Self-interest? Such 11 fruit
Crowned the Author's Table. Please you to recruite
A Ship-wrackt 12 Merchant? Strange Temptations lie
In friends full Bags 13, then, ere you trust Sir, try.
What Glutton left Male-issue, but he proved,
A 14 Master-Cooke? When was a People moved
To shoot 15 their poisoned Arrows with more gall
Then for Religion? The Spear 16 governs all.
These heads, digested by a matchless pen,
Express the Manners both of Rome and Men.


Libri Hypotyposis.
PLenam FAMA tubam Juvenalis laudibus inflat,
E Luco Phoebi volitans; and cingere gestit
Subjectam statuam merito diademate lauri.
Adsunt, turba procax, Satyri; praeludia MORVM.
Divitibus paucos quadrantes sportula 1 praebet.
Lascivos gravitas capri 2 arguit. Vrget honesti
Nequam urbem agricolae flagrum 3. Sex millia squamae 4
Aulicus impendit. Patina 5 luduntur egeni.
Turpe senex 6 procus est. Perituras cum docet arts
Grammaticus 7, propriis ferula virgisque feritur.
Degener ex proavis insignia 8 ventilat haeres.
Quod reficit lasso vires, sorbillat adulter. 9
In voto 10 quibus est sua res, quam vana petuntur!
Apponunt fruges 11 mensae Juvenalis inemtas.
Naufrago 12 in auxilium quis adest? Quam dulce fruenti
Depositum 13 locuples! cui credas ergo, probetur
Ante fidem. Haeredem nullum, nisi forte magirum, 14
Insignis generat gulo. Quando ferocius arcum 15
Gens tendit, quam cum furiosam in praelia nomen
Relligionis agit? lex terrae est cuspis 16 acuta.
Haec magni librum praecedit summula Vatis,
Qui Romanorum mores depingit, and Orbis.
The Life and Character of Juvenal.
DECIUS JUNIUS JUVENAL was born at Aquinum in Campania; his father (some say
his foster-father) a rich freed-man of that town, bred him a Scholar, and
designed him for a Lawyer. In order whereunto, he heard the Orator Quintilian,
declaming under him (according to Divaeus) till he was of middle age. Then,
being Heir to a Fortune, therefore not necessitated to make Law his Profession,
he wholly applied himself to the study of Moral Philosophy; and by that rule
measuring the actions of his Countrymen the Romans, which then gave as well
the Example, as the Law to all Nations, he found nothing so needful for the
corrupted World, as Reformation of Manners. This he resolved to make his
business, not by inflicting a penalty like the Censor, but by showing the
ugliness of Vice as a Satyrist, in Imitation of Lucilius: yet so far out-doing
his Pattern, that he read his Satyrs publicly, not alone with the general
applause of the people of Rome, but even Quintilian himself (as we may probably
collect from the tenth book of his Institutions) became his hearer and admirer.
Yet Paris, another of his Auditors, was not so taken with his seventh, though
it sets forth his high and mighty Munificence to the Poets, in this manner,

Many to honor in the wars He brings;
Puts Summer-Annulets and Winter-Rings
On Tragic Poets fingers; what, there lives
No Lord that will bestow, this Player gives.
Do thou attend the Camerini then,
And Bareae? a fig for Noble men,
Write Tragedies; it is Pelopea takes,
She Praefects; Philomela Tribunes makes.
It seems, the word Player was more then Paris could digest; who, to revenge
himself upon the Satyrist, moved his great Master Domitian Caesar, to bestow
upon Juvenal a Regiment of Foot in Egypt. This was a pretty handsome return
formed by Paris out of the very subject of his anger, bandying, as well as he
could, Satyr for Satyr, by making Juvenal one of his Tribunes, or
Poet-Colonels. An old Manuscript relates it thus, The Emperor Domitian
displeased with Juvenal, for touching upon his favors to the Player Paris; yet
not thinking it fit to put any public affront upon a man of that integrity of
life, banished him, under the name of an honorable employment in his service,
making him Prefect of a Cohort in Egypt. A Commentator says, this Employment
broke the heart of Juvenal, but sure he dreamed it; for, Juvenal (no more
troubled at his Colonel-ship then I express him in the 16th design) outlived
his back-friend Paris and likewise Domitian himself, as plainly appears in the
close of his fourth Satyr,

But He was lost; when once the Clown began
To fear him, he revenged the Noble man.
How many years he survived his banishment, may be easily calculated from these
words Sat. 13.

Is this news to one born when Capito
Was Consul, above threescore years ago?
Now reckon threescore years from the Consulship of L. Fonteius Capito Colleague
with C. Vipsanius in the year from the foundation of Rome, eight hundred and
twelve, you shall find, that not only Domitian was dead, and the short reign
of Nerva ended, but also the 21 years of Trajan; and in the second of Hadrian,
a. u. D.CCC.LXX.II. he writ the 13th Satyr to Calvinus, dying afterward in the
bosom of his Country, crowned with white hairs and Laurel, Emblems of
mortality common to all men, and eternity of Fame, the consequent of his
peculiar deserts.

And here, I know it will be wished, that Juvenal, from whose hands we have the
Characters of men of all conditions, had left us his own; and I believe he
would have done it, if he might have commended himself: to which (in that case)
truth would have obliged him. But, this not befitting him and well becoming
me; I shall shall deliver my Author, as his Life, his own Works, and others of
unquestioned authority, represent him to me.

He was born or made heir to a good Estate, but deserved a better, for using
the gifts of fortune with such moderation, as that he neither lived poor, in
hope to dye rich, nor exceeded the measure of his purse, either at his Feasts
or Sacrifices. He was bred up a Rhetorician, and arrived to that perfection in
his Art, that where he writes of any thing handled by former Orators, he adds
new matter and form, more delightful and more useful to the world: but where
he ends, it will be hard to show another, since his time, that ever raised upon
his grounds any considerable superstructure. He is an Author of so clear and
supreme a Judgment, that no other did ever make choice of nobler Arguments,
nor writ so many Maxims or Sentences, that, like the laws of nature, are held
sacred by all Nations.

He was a Judge of manners, so incorrupted, that his Enemy, though favorite to
Caesar and the Court-Informer, could not find matter against him for a charge
of defamation. In short, he was a Politician for the benefit of Mankind,
disguising Morality under the vizzard of a Satyr; for which he had his warrant
from Plato in these words, (...), It is the highest point of Science, to be,
yet not to seem a Philosopher, and to do serious things in jest. Thus divine
Plato, the scourge of Hypocrites, that calls it the greatest injustice, when a
man seems just, and is not so, approves of this Philosophical dissimulation;
whereby the vulgar, laughing at Vice and Folly, are cozened into Wisdom and
Virtue; in this Mystery no Artist ever came near to Juvenal* that, with the
bitter-sweetnesse of his Satyrs, not like Philip's 'Prentice, but like Galen
himself, cures the most desperate Patients, by pleasure opening the way to
recovery.

To justify this Character I could bring a Catalogue of witnesses, all great
Authors of his time, or ours* but, that I may not detain you too long in the
Portico of his work, these out of many shall suffice. In the first place, his
Rhetorick-Master Quintilian, enumerating the Latin Satyrists, admires
Lucilius, praises Horace, honors Persius, then adds, but after all these we
have Juvenal; a greater elegancy I observe not in all the works of that learned
Orator, marshalling his Scholar, then living, in his true place among the
Satirysts, last in time, and first in merit. The next is Martial, that sends
him a present of nuts with this Epigram, the monument of his Eloquence,

De nostro facunde tibi Juvenalis agello,
Saturnalicias mittimus ecce nuces!
Caetera lascivis donavit poma puellis
Mentula custodis luxuriosa dei.
Eloquent Juvenal, I send to thee
Saturnalitian Nuts: my store you see;
The wanton God, my Ortyard-keeper, trades
With fruit, and gave the Apples to the Maids.
To come from the Romans to the best of our modern Censors, Julius Caesar
Scaliger sets his mark upon PERSIUS for an affected and fantastic writer,
boasting an aguish kind of Learning, ambitious to be read, yet not desirous to
be understood, though now decyphered to a tittle: whereas Juvenal is eloquent
and clear, absolutely the Prince of Satyrists, so exact in all he writes, that
nothing is censurable by the Critics. Then comparing him with Horace, he calls
him a jeerer, content to give his Satyrs the title Sermones, Discourses,
inserting some loose sentences as it were in common talk, yet studied: not
regarding how his Verses ran; but so that he spoke pure Latin, his work was
done: In Juvenal, all things are quite contrary, when he is in fury, he
assaults and kills; his style is extreme handsome, wherein together with the
purest Latin, he has the happiness of incomparable Transitions: his Verse is
far better then Horace, his sentences nobler, he speaks things more to life;
and (comparing the Roman Satyrists) Scaliger concludes, that Juvenal is to be
preferred before Horace, by as many degrees as Horace is to be preferred before
Lucilius. To which Censure J. Lipsius makes these Additionalls, Who can be
displeased, to see Juvenal preferred before Horace by Scaliger the Father?
that, in my opinion, among the many excellent judgments he has given, never
pronounced a greater truth: certainly he passed a just sentence for Juvenal; in
heat, sublimity, and freedom (which are essential to a Satyr) he goes far
beyond Horace: He searches Vice to the quick, reproves, cries out upon it, now
and then he makes us laugh, but very often mixes bitter jests: and writing to
M. Muretus, Lipsius tells him; that in the public reading of Juvenal, he did
well seasonably; for if any Times ever needed a Satyr, ours do: and in Satyr,
none so fit as Juvenal to rectify the Manners of Men.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY VERY GOOD LORD HENRY, Lord Marquess of DORCHESTER,
Earl of KINGSTON, Viscount NEWARK, Lord PIERREPONT and MAUNVERS.
MY LORD,
WHen your Lordship laid your commands upon me, to interpret JUVENAL, it was an
honor I beheld with fear; for, though I knew him to be one of the greatest
Classick Authors, yet I doubted, I should not find him the easiest: because I
then 1638.
heard of no man that had attempted to put him into any other language: But
Obedience to your Lordship, carried me through all the difficulties of my first
Translation, and from the good success of that (answerable to the event of all
things acted according to your Lordship's judgment) I was encouraged to copy
him anew, out of his exactest Edition, printed 1644.
afterward at PARIS: to which I have added a large Comment, and the Design of
every Satyr in Picture. Thus restored to himself, and illustrated, I presume to
bring JUVENAL once more to kiss your Lordship's hand: from which I received
him, like an old ROMAN Coin, hard to be read, but worthy to be studied by our
ablest Antiquaries.

Truly, my LORD, if my abilities could have reached the height of my ambition,
I would have dedicated, out of the learning of the GREEKS and ROMANS (wherein
your Lordship is so great a Master) not my interpretation of another; but some
work that should have owned me for the Author, and treated of such subjects as
your Lordship daily reads: but since I cannot what I would, I acquiesce in what
I can: it shall be happiness enough for me, after the learned Authors of
Sciences, and Commentators upon Laws, have taken up your more reserved time,
if my Author may entertain your hours of recreation: which I would not promise
to my self, but that he DELIGHTS with PROFIT: For, your Lp^'s. divertisements
are more serious then most men's studies, your very mirth being observations
upon Men and Business, which your Lordship knows was the end that JUVENAL
aimed at: and undoubtedly MORES HOMINUM should at first have been the Title to
his SATYRS, if his modesty could have prefixed, what I have done, out of his
own words, QUICQUID AGUNT HOMINES.

But sooner may the Sun let fall his beams upon a solid body, without making a
shadow, then Merit can exist without Detraction: No marvail, therefore, if Envy
or Folly have stirred up Enemies against this incomparable Satyrist, in
several Ages. In his time, his Country was exasperated by too great a
CLEARNESS of his style, made (for the most part) by their own self-reflexions:
for, guilty men are shrewdly apprehensive. Afterward, to remoter parts, and
strangers to the ROMAN Customs, he appeared OBSCURE, and was looked upon,
like the Moon in an Eclipse, as drowned in the shadow of a foreign clime.
Lastly, though the greatest Scholars have made use of JUVENAL'S authority, as
CUJACIUS in the civil Law; DE LA CERDA to explane TERTULLIAN; and GROTIUS to
assert the Rights of Peace and War; yet, in our seed-plots of Learning, there
sprung up a Sect of little formal Stoics, that for a few wanton words (all
they could make sense of) cast JUVENAL out of their hands: just as if Pygmyes
should throw away Diamonds, set in Tablets bigger then themselves, only because
their foils were black.

My Copy will not (I hope) be liable to these exceptions: The first falls to
ground of it self, for, the bitterness of these Satyrs, being only PERSONAL to
the ROMANS, cannot touch the ENGLISH: therefore, I have made it my business,
to clear them from all OBSCURITY, which is the second charge. To perspicuity, I
have added language so well-qualitied, that (I am confident) the third sort of
accusers will never inform against this JUVENAL for Immodesty. And if when I
took off his obscenity, I could have set on the full perfections of his Pen, my
industry had been crowned to my wish.

But though I am too much composed of earth, to ascend to my desires: I know
your Lordship participates so much of Heaven, as to descend to the acceptance
of intentions. Yet when your name (now flying in the breath of every
University) shall be the Protection of such learned Pieces as I cannot SHOW,
but only can CONCEIVE: thus far my present Dedication will be happiest, as
being first authorized by your Lordship, which I look upon as the earnest of a
general approbation; for, the noble follow your opinion; all your example. But
if there should be some one that dislikes my way, because I go not his; such
an Adversary I shall not think considerable, since the Judge (from whom no
Scholar will appeal) gives sentence for

Your Lordship's Most humble Servant, ROBERT STAPYLTON.

THE PREFACE.
AGathocles, that being Son to a Potter, Plutarch in Apophth.
raised himself by military virtue to be King of Sicily, commanded earthen pots
to be set upon his Cupboard of gold-plate, and pointing to them, when he would
encourage his young Soldiers, said, Look friends, from these, I am come to
this. It may as much encourage the Youth of England, if they consider, how high
this Nation is in prosperity and honor, purchased by the industry and valor
of their Ancestors, from the low beginnings of the Britons, mentioned in these
Satyrs. Juvenal takes notice of one great Soldier here, Arviragus, Sat. 4.
and names him as the terror of Domitian Caesar: but this only shows the
Gallantry of our Countrymen; what was then their Art of War, their
Fortifications? poor huts: Sat. 14.
what their Manufacture? baskets: what their Erudition? Lawyers Rhetoric, Sat.
12. Sat. 15.
taught them by the French: what their Breeding? to be ranked with the Scythian
Picts, the Agathyrsians; But now, if Juvenal could live to review the World,
ibid.
he would find, that the spirit of Arviragus is diffused into thousands of our
Soldiers, every one of them able to lead an Army against his Romans, That our
Island is famous for the noblest Merchants, the greatest Scholars: and the
civilest persons living; which I have a particular engagement to acknowledge,
for the acceptance of my first Translation: wherein they not only pardoned mine
and the Printer's Errors, but likewise the corruptions of those Copies which I
then steered by. Therefore, when the most perfect and authentic Impression
came to my hands from Paris, I thought my self obliged to render it in English;
as well in Gratitude to, as for the Benefit of, the public. Yet I could not
rest altogether satisfied, without making some (as I conceive necessary)
Additions of my own. In the first place, from the subject matter of Juvenal, I
have given a Title to his Satyrs, viz. Mores Hominum, The Manners of Men, not
without the warrant of a president from Horace, that calls his own Satyrs,
Sermones. Withal, I have invented a Frontispice containing in one Picture my
Authors general Design, together with sixteen other Pieces, expressing the
particular of every Satyr, whereunto I have writ Explanations in English, and
also in Latin; that foreiners, if they please, may understand the Cuts, and our
Countrymen make use of their interpretation, as my former Arguments enlarged.
Lastly, that nothing within my power might be wanting, I have taken care, in a
new Comment, to set down clearly, though briefly, every Grecian and Roman
Custom, Law, and History; for all which I quote my Authors: yet I am not
ignorant, that our new Mode of writing will no more allow of quotations in the
body of a Work, then in the beginning of a Preface; but I shall desire to be
excused in both; for I humbly conceive, that reason is never out of fashion:
and in matter of weight or controversy, he cannot justly hope for credit, that
shows not authority, and he that does it well, makes a Book a Library. By the
way, I must give you this caution, that you will find the History of the
Ante-Trojan Times more pleasant then true, being wrapped up by the Greeks in
Allegories, in whose respective Mythologie, I have endeavored to unfold the
mysterious Wisdom of the Ancients. How this will be taken, I know not; but I
am sure, it is not conclusive, from a former favor to infer the necessity of a
second: Howsoever, I am no Alcibiades, for I dare trust my Country with my
Life, much more with my Book.

I shall conclude with a Request to my Reader, that he will not charge upon me
the literal or other coincident errors of the Printer, which for the most
part (if not totally) are corrected in the Table.

Figura Prima,
OCcurrunt oculis 1 Capitolia, Regia Romae,
Clara, uti Sol novus in terris, splendore triumphi
Elicito ex captis Armis, 2 Regumque Coronis;
Roma tamen, propius spectata, videbitur atra:
Area lata patet 3 Circi, pugnaeque theatrum
Multiplicis; coram saevi dux femina ludi
Tuscum figit aprum, in proprium magis effera sexum.
Furtiva uxoris been potus Leno 4 maritus
Oscula dissimulans, vigili sibi munera somno
Augurat. Insumpsit bona qui praesepibus, haeres,
E Roma impellens currus ad Caesaris aedes,
5 Flaminiam laceransque viam, contemnit avorum
Oppositas Statuas, majorum and transvolat Vrnas.
Alea ubi 6 Dominos, exercent praelia servos.
Obnubit pompam Latialem 7 sportula; sordes
Ecce trahit Procerum! Libertinusque Tribuno
Se dives praefert; lecticam, aulaeque ministros
Summovet exclusos, qui magnum limen adorant.
"Dicite jam, servi quid nomine dignius, Orbis
"A Roma victus, vitiis an Roma subacta?
"Dicite, cum cives agitet manifesta phrenesis,
"Nonne opus est Satyra media^ pertundere vena^?


The first Design.
THE Court of Rome, the 1 Capitol looks bright,
A new day breaking with triumphant light,
Struck out of Arms 2 and Crowns of Kings subdued:
But Rome it self looks foul, if strictly viewed.
Behold, in the 3 Circensian Lists, a Boar
Encountered by a Woman; that much more
Defies her Sex, then her Antagonist.
The tippling 4 Husband sees not his Wife kis't:
He dreams of Deeds of Gift. An Heir's undone
With keeping Chariots, from Rome to run
To Caesar's House in the 5 Flaminian Way:
Where his Forefathers might their Son dismay,
Their Urnes and Statues standing in his sight.
Insatiate 6 Gamsters play, their Servants fight.
Note lastly, what the Roman splendour clouds,
The Money-basket 7, where a Freed-man crowds
Before Sedans, braves Officers of State
Served like base Beggars at a lock'd-up Gate.
Then tell me; Which should Most a Slave be called,
The conquered World? or Rome, to Vice inthral'd?
Tell me, if Towns, where Luxury thus reigns,
Need not a SATYR'S Whip to breath their veins?
The Manners of Men. THE FIRST SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The Author, by the Wits, engaged
To hear long Poems, is enraged:
And to revenge himself, reads that
Which they will be more angry at.
For, no Romances he presents:
No Fables of the Gods invents.
His Subject is Rome's horrid Crimes;
His End, to disabuse the Times,
SHall I but hear still? never pay that Score?
Vexed with hoarse CODR'S Theseis over and over?
Shall he, unpunished, read me tedious Plays?
He Elegies? huge TELEPHUS whole days
Unpunished spend me? or ORESTES, writ
Margent and outside, but not finished yet?
None knows his own house better than I do
The grove of MARS, and VULCAN'S Grotto too
Near to the AEOLIAN Rocks: winds how they roll:
What Souls Judge AEACUS torments: who stole
The Golden-Fleece: what Ash-trees Centaures fling:
With these Theams JULIUS FRONTOS Plane-trees ring,
And marble Pillars, by fierce Readers burst.
These our best Poets write of, and our worst.
We from the Grammar-ferula have took
Our hand too, and the Rhet'rick-school forsook;
Where we have counseled SYLLA to lay down
The Sword, and sleep securely in the Gown.
It Is foolish pity, now so many are
Turned Poets, Paper which they spoil to spare.
But why we run in that Satyrick Chase,
Where great LUCILIUS rid his Chariot-race;
If you have leisure, and are pleased to hear
My Reasons stated, the account I Will clear.
When the Eunuch marries; When, her Spear all goar,
Bare-breasted MAEVIA foils the Tuscane Boar;
When all the Senate's not so rich as one
That with his Sissers played a tune upon
My youthful Beard, when it was grown too grave;
When, part of Nile's slime, the Canopian slave
CRISPINUS flaunts it in his Tyrian cloak;
Which, falling off, his shoulders still revoke:
A Sommer-hoop his sweaty fingers swing,
Nor brooks a greater Stone should load his Ring;
It Is hard not to write Satyrs: For who has
Spirits so mild, that will not be in wrath
At this base City? or so rib'd about
With Iron, to be held from flying out?
When, filled with his own bulk, in his new Sedan
MATHO the Lawyer comes; and then the man
That Is great friend peach'd, and will soon fleece the few
Poor Lords yet left; Prince of the informing Crew,
Whom MASSA fears, CARUS with gifts attends:
To whom his wife trembling LATINUS sends.
When they shall out thee of thy legall-right
That labor for their Legacies by night:
Whom the old rich Lady lifts with ease to heaven,
Leaves PROCULEIUS one Ounce, GILL eleven:
Each has his weight according to his measure,
And heirs her wealth, as he advanced her pleasure:
The price of blood, so wasted, let him take,
Turn pale, as stepping barefoot on a Snake:
Or as the Rhetor that in his sad strife,
Speaks at the Bar in LIONS for his life.
What rage inflames me, when the people's pressed
With crowds attending him that dispossessed
The Orphane, now a Prostitute? When this
Condemned to exile, but not punished is:
For, what is the hurt rich infamy can do?
Here MARIUS dined at three, drinks there from two;
The angry Gods He has, by losing, won:
But Thou, victorious Province, art undon.
Are, not these worthy HORACE? not write these?
What then? Romances? Tales of HERCULES,
Or DIOMED, or what a bellowing
Was in the Labyrinth, or shall I sing
The flying Architect and Sea-drown'd Boy?
When that which Law lets not the Wife enjoy,
Her Husband takes, that is expert at the sleight Of measuring, with his eye, the Chambers height;
And, nodding over his liquor, subtly shows
The trick of sleeping with a waking nose.
When to be Captain of the Guard he stands,
Whose stables eat up his Forefathers Lands,
Whilst he by their Flaminian Urnes drives on:
For, when he was the Boy AUTOMEDON,
He held the rains: and to his mantled Love
Bragged what a Charioteer he hoped to prove.
Who would not write vast Satyrs in the streets,
When there the forger of a Will he meets,
That in his Chair, transparent on both sides,
On six men's shoulders carried, proudly rides
Bolt-upright, like MAECENAS: a strange rise;
Moist wax and parchment made him in a trice?
Then comes the Lady, that, for rich wine, brought
Her thirsty husband Poison: she that taught
Beyond LOCUSTA'S art, rude neighbors how,
Through Fame and Men, to bear black corpses now.
Do what short GYARUS, or chains deserves,
If thou will prosper: Virtue's praised, but sterves.
It Is Vice to which their Palaces they owe
Their Gardens, Tables; and that goodly show
Of Plate, which on their Side-boards they set up;
And silver-Goat inboss'd without the Cup.
For covetous Daughters which Step-fathers keep,
Men-Brides, and loose young Gallants, who can sleep?
If Nature will not write a verse, Scorn may:
Like me, or CLUVIENUS, any way.
Er'e since DEUCALION sailed the showre-swoln Flood
To the Oracle that on PARNASSUS stood:
Since through soft stones a warm Soul gently flowed,
And PYRRHA to their Males Maids naked showed:
What men do, their hopes, fears, distasts, contents,
Sports, plots: this rapsody our book presents,
And when was known a higher flood of vice?
When minds more avaritious? When the Dice
So madly flung? Our Gamesters will not let
Their Purses now be brought, their Trunks they set.
How their armes-bearing Stewards fight, you see.
And less than mad can you think him to be,
That casts at once eight hundred pounds away,
Nor to his shivering man a coat will pay?
Who built so many Villas? When was it known
Our fathers with seav'n Courses supped alone?
The Sportula now hangs before the door,
A little Basket for the scrambling Poor.
But first the Porter viwes you, lest you own
Another name: you shall be served if known.
Our TROJAN Lords this Crier calls alowd;
(For they as well as we the threshold crowd,)
Give to the Praetor, give the Tribune; hold,
The Freedman, I came first, and will be bold
To keep my place; why should I ROMANS fear,
Though by EUPHRATES born, which in my ear
The loop-hole would confess, should I deny?
Five Houses worth three thousand pounds have I,
To make a ROMAN Knight, What more's required?
Is not Right Worshipful CORVINUS hired
To keep sheep near LAURENTUM? at my rate
The Freedman PALLAS lived not: my estate
Exceeds the LICINI: then TRIBUNE stay;
Let Riches carry it; nor he give way
To sacred Honor, whose bare chalky feet
At ROME first kis'd the stones that pave the street:
For here to money's Majesty we yield
Divine respect; though, fatal Gold, we build
To thee no Tempels yet: though Silver has
No Altars like to Victory, Peace, Faith,
Virtue, and Concord, where the Storks nest creaks,
When that young Brood the old one's welcome speaks.
But in their year's Accounts, when our great men
Sum up the Basket; What get Clients then,
Whose old shoes hang here, there a kind of cloak,
All a poor house affords, but bread and smoke?
Sedans full for these hundred Farthings throng
Big-belly'd or sick Wives are brought along:
He begs for the absent, a slye trick now common,
Holds forth the close-chair empty, for the woman:
My GALLA'S here, Dispatch, Why this delay?
Let Us see her; she sleeps; vex her not I pray.
The day it self's in handsome order spent,
First at the Sportula we complement:
Our business in the Forum next we follow,
Visit the learned in the Law, APOLLO;
And our triumphall Marbles, one I mark
Inscribed EGYPTIAN and ARABARCH:
Of which all I can say, is only this,
You may against that Statue more than piss.
Old Clients weary leave their Patrons Gate
And their own hope, though it had made them wait
Long for a supper: 'twas a vain desire.
Poor wretches, they must now buy roots and fire.
Mean time their Prince has, served up to his board,
All rarities the Seas and Woods afford:
On's empty beds, his ease he only takes?
And of so man'y old, fair, large Tables, makes
His choice of one, to hold his various meats,
And there alone his Patrimony eats.
He Will not allow the Parasite a place:
Who can endure a Luxury so base?
Huge Ravin, to ingross whole boares, a beast
That only seems created for a feast.
But swift's thy plague, when swelling and undrest
Thou bath'st crude Peacock, which will never digest.
Thus Youth untimely, Age intestate dies:
The laugh'd-at news to every table flies:
And at these Funerals, their angry friends
Applaud the justice of such fearful ends.
Posterity can no new Vices frame;
Our Nephews will but wish and act the same:
All Crimes are at the height. My Muse, away;
Hoist Sail; spread all thy canvas. Poet, stay,
Here Is Work; Where Is Wit and Freedom? as we list
To whip Vice, like the AURUNCANE Satyrist?
That simple Freedom I dare hardly name:
All Is one, if his poor MUTIUS like or blame;
Touch TIGELLINUS, and thou shall expire
Wrapped up in pitch and flax, and set on fire,
Like those with propt-up throats, that smoking stand,
And dragged to execution, plowed the sand:
Whilst he, that poisoned his three Uncles, born
In's pendent-Couch, thy death shall laugh to scorn:
If he come, lay thy finger over thy lips;
The Informer catches the least word that slips.
AENAEAS now, without indangering
Thy self, to fight fierce TURNUS thou may bring:
None vexes that ACHILLES feels his wound,
Or grieves for HYLAS with his pitcher drowned.
But when LUCILIUS like a sword draws out
Hot fury; he that feels cold guilt about
The heart, his crimes laid open blushing hears:
His entrails sweat: from hence springs rage and tears.
These things, before the trumpet sounds, debate:
The plumed Combatant repents too late.
Well then, I Will try, what I of those may say,
Urn'd in the LATIN and FLAMINIAN Way.
The Comment UPON THE FIRST SATYR.
VErse 2. Theseis.] A Heroic Poem (writ in imitation of Virgils Aeneis, but
not by so good a Hand) magnifying Theseus that built Athens, for encountering
with Monsters, killing of Giants, and such Herculean Knight-errantry, as had
been fathered upon the valor of his Youth, by fabulous Antiquity: For, the
first Historians described valiant Persons, as the old Geographers did the
unknown parts of the World, fancying impossibilities in Nature, (...), Shoars
without waters, or guarded by wild Beasts; as Plutarch observes in his
preamble to the Life of Theseus. The Author of this Latin Poem was Codrus; you
have an account of him Sat. 3.

Shorter then is Dwarf-wife, Codrus had a Bed.
Item, six little Juggs on's Cupboard's head.
Item, beneath it stood a two-ear'd Pot
By Chiron's Herball. Lastly he had got
A Chest with some Greek Authors* where the fierce
Barbarous Mice gnawed never-dying Verse.
To this Miserable Inventory of his Goods, might well have been annexed the
Schedule of this pitiful Poem, wherewith he had so often tormented the Ear
of Juvenal.

Verse 4. Huge Telephus.] The Tragicomedy of Telephus, base Son to Hercules, by
Auge the Daughter of Alaeus* from whose eyes, when she could no longer conceal
the shame within her, it put him into such a fury, that he resolved never to
see her more. In pursuance of this resolution, he committed her to a Master of
a Ship, commanding him to set her ashore in some far distant Country, where her
dishonor could not have arrived: but his private instructions were, that when
he had her at Sea, he should drown her. Before she came aboard him, in a Forest
of Mysia, she fell in labor, and was delivered of a Boy, that by the Midwife
was conveyed away, and hid among the bushes. Fortune having thus rescued the
Child, Beauty pleaded in behalf of the Mother; and so far the Master's cruel
heart was melted, that he landed her in Caria, and there sold her to
Theutrantes, who in a short time raised her from his Slave to be his Queen.
Mean time some Mysian Shepherds, driving their flocks through the Forest, saw
a Hind (singled from the Heard) that never offered to stir till they came up to
her, where they found her giving suck to a newborn Babe, which they took up
and carried home to one of their Wives. The news of the Child's strange
preservation flying through the Kingdom of Mysia, came to the King's ear, who
sent for the Infant, and was so taken with his beauty, that he eased the
Shepherds of their care, and bred him up as his own. In short, the King being
Childless, upon his deathbed, adopted this Child of fortune, to whom he then
gave his Crown, as he had formerly given him the name of Telephus in memory of
his Nurse the Hind. Telephus succeeding to the Kingdom, was courted by the
Greeks, in their march to Troy, for a passage through his Dominions; which he
denying, and with an Army of his own endeavoring to give a stop to theirs, he
was by Achilles wounded in the left thigh with a Spear; and when all the art of
Chiurgery failed to give him ease, the Oracle being consulted, answered, that
no humane help would save his life, unless he could receive it from the hand
that wounded him: whereupon he reconciled himself to Achilles, who, it seems,
made the first experiment of the weapon-salve upon Telephus, healing his wound
(says Pliny) with the rust of the Spear that made it.

Ovid. Telephus aeterna consumptus tabe perisset,
Si non quae nocuit dextra tulisset opem.
Consumed for ever Telephus had died,
Had not the wounding hand the Cure applied.
Others say that Achilles did this cure by virtue of certain herbs taught him
by his Singing-master the Centaur. Chiron.

Claud. Sanus Achilleis remeavit Telephus herbis,
Cujus pertulerat vires; and sensit in uno
Lethalem placidamque manum: medicamen ab host
Contigit, and pepulit quos fecerat ipse dolores.
Achilles, that gave Telephus his wound,
Cured him with herbs: from one hand death he found
And life: his Enemy his Surgeon proved,
And he that caused the pain, the pain removed.
Here was plot enough to make a Play, like the Thanks in Terence that were to
be sent to Thais, more than Great, Huge.

Verse 5. Orestes] The Tragedy of Orestes, Son to Agamemnon, and Clytemnestra,
that having murdered the King her Husband, to make way for her second marriage
with Aegistus; her next resolution was (in order to a settlement) to take the
life of her young Son Orestes. But she was prevented in this design by the
vigilant care of her Daughter, Princess Electra, by whom her Brother, with his
Governor, was privately sent to his Uncle by the Father, Strophius, Prince of
the Phocians; in whose Court Orestes was educated with the Prince's Son
Pylades, inseparable Friend and Companion to him in all the sad changes of his
fortune. When for some years he had remained with his Uncle, Orestes sickned
and dyed, as the world was made believe: the colorable Ceremonies of his
Funeral being over, Ambassadors from the Prince were sent to Aegistus and
Clytemnestra, to condole (that was to congratulate) for the death of Orestes,
who (attended by his Cousin Pylades) went himself in their train disguised,
shrinking his shoulders to disguise his height; and being admitted to the
presence of his Mother and Father in law, Orestes slew them both in revenge of
his own Fathers murder. With the horror of this committed matricide, he fell
distracted, imagining that his Mothers ghost, with a guard of Furies, haunted
him. He likewise slew Pyrrhus, the Son of Achilles in the Temple of Apollo, for
ravishing his Betrothed, the fair Herimone, the Daughter of Hellen by Menelaus:
and wandered with Pylades into Taurica Chersonesus; where the barbarous Custom
of the Europaean Sarmatians was, to offer up to Diana the blood of Strangers,
especially Graecians, which of all the World they hated. The King of the
Country Thoas, receiving intelligence that one of the Stranger-Princes was
Orestes, commanded that he, as the better man, should be sacrifized: but no
discovery could be made which of the two was he; for Pylades took upon him the
name of Orestes, and Orestes owned himself; their friendship being so strict,
as they refused not to die for one another. Cicero de Amicitia. These bloody
Rites were superintended by the Lady Iphiginia, one that before the Trojan War,
(when the Grecian Fleet lay winde-bound, for Agamemnon's offense of killing a
Stag in Aulis) was brought thither to appease the wrath of Diana as a
Sacrifice: but the goddess pitying her innocence sent a Hind to supply her
place at the Altar, and conveyed away the Princess to be her Priestesse in
Taurica; where she now coming to the knowledge of her Brother Orestes, saved
his life by joining with him to kill Thoas King of Taurica; from whence they
fled into Italy, carrying along the Image of Diana hid in a Faggot; and
therefore called Fascilides by the Romans, and adored by that Title in the
Aricine Wood, where the figure was left by these Wanderers. Lastly, Orestes
being told that he should find rest, and be dispossessed of the Furies in
Arcadia, directed his course thither; and there died, bit by a Viper. His body
was afterward dug up by command from the Oracle, and found to be be ten
foot and a half high. Pliny lib. 7.

Verse 8. The Grove of Mars,] Several Groves were consecrated to Mars, one in
Pontus, another at Athens, a third in Alba, where the Wolf gave suck to the
Twins of Mars, Romulus and Rhemus. This last, I conceive, my Author means, as a
subject on which his Countrymen, the Romans, used to exercise their Muses.

Verse 8. Vulcan's Grotto near to the Aeolian Rocks.] By Vulcan's Grotto is
meant the concave of the burning Mountain Aetna, where Vulcan the god of fire
hammered out Thunderbolts, as the old World was made believe; when the truth of
Histories was wrapped up in Fables by the wisdom of the Ancients. Right against
Aetna lie the 7. Liparen Islands, Liparis, Tremessa, Ericusa, Phenicusa,
Evonyma, Hiera, and Strongyle, the greatest of the seven; where Aeolus reigned,
that was believed to be god of the Winds, and blew from his Aeolian Rocks, as
the Bellows to Vulcan's great Forge in Aetna; who had likewise a little Forge
in Hiera, the least of these 7. Islands, called the Vulcanian Isle, and his
Liparen Workhouse, Sat. 13. -- But Vulcan powered
Nectar himself, and his own fingers scowr'd,
Foul'd in his Liparen Workhouse. --
The cause why this Isle was dedicated to Vulcan, was, from a little stony
Hill therein, continually vomiting up fire.

Verse 10. What Souls Judge Aeacus torments.] The three Infernal Judges were
Rhadamantus, Minos, and Aeacus: The first commissioned to hear the Charge, and
judge of matter of fact. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 5. Gnosius haec Rhadamantus habet
durissima regna,
Castigatque, auditque dolos, subigitque fateri.
Here strictest Rhadamant the Gnosian reigns,
Hears Crimes, makes Souls confess and suffer pains.
The second pronounced Sentence. Horace. Cum semel occideris, and de te
splendida Minos
Fecerit arbitria
No sooner shall thou die, and Minos pass
Clear sentence on thee.
The third saw Judgment executed; as in the words here commented upon.

What Souls Judge Aeacus torments. Verse. 11. Who stole the Golden Fleece.] The
Thief was Jason: his Fable Ovid gives you; the History of the Fleece, Justin
lib. 24. Phryxus Prince of Thebes, after the death of his Mother Queen Ino,
when he durst no longer trust his life to the madness of his Father Athamas,
and the malice of his Stepmother Mephele, committed himself to the mercy of
the Sea, and desperately attempted to pass the Pontick Straits upon the back of
the Golden-Ram, his Sister Hell riding behind him: but she, poor Lady,
frighted with the roaring of the waves, let go her hold, and was drowned in
that narrow Sea, afterward called Hellespont. Phryxus himself came safe to
Aeta King of Cholcos, where he sacrificed the golden-Ram to Jupiter; some say
to Mars. The Ram swifter then he stemd the Straits, flew up to heaven, and was
made a Star, retaining his former figure. The Golden-fleece hung up in the
Temple, until Medea charmed the Guards for Jason to steal both it and her.

Verse 11. What Ash-trees Centaurs fling.] Ixion had issue the Centaurs by the
cloud, which he imagined to be Juno: by his own Wife he had Pirithous Prince of
the Lapiths, married to Hippodame, the Daughter of Oenomaus, King of Elis. At
this Wedding the Centaures having drunk hard, nothing would content them but
the Bride; attempting to carry her away by force, they were fought with, and
defeated by the Lapiths, under the command of Piriibous, assisted by his Friend
(that afterward went with him down to Hell) Theseus. In the fight the Centaur
Rhetus plucked up by the roots, and flung at the Lapiths, such wild Ash-trees
as Boreas in a storm could hardly blow down. The expression is Lucans: The
battle Ovid most rarely describes.

Verse. 12. Julius Fronto.] A Tribune, by Galba discharged out of the City
Cohorts, Tacit. lib. 16. After this exauctoration Fronto lived in Rome most
nobly, his House and Gardens being free for all that would read their works, as
well for meanest Poetasters, Codrus and Cluvienus, as for the noblest Poets,
Juvenal, Statius: and Martial, that in an Epigram to Fronto styles him, Clarum
militiae Fronto togaeque decus.
Fronto thou Ornament of war and peace.


Verse 13. We have counseled Sylla to lay down the Sword.] To advise Sylla that
he should lay down his Commission for Dictator or supreme Magistrate, was a
Theme or Exercise as common in the Rhetoric Schools, when the Scholars were to
learn the point of persuasion, as it was for their Master to make them
deliberate for Hannibal, Sat. 7.

After the fatal day at Cannae won,
If he directly should to Rome march on;
Or, to get's weather-beaten forces out
Of storms and lightning, wisely wheel about.
A hard task it would be for the best Rhetorician living, to persuade Sylla, if
he were now alive (for that was the case) to resign the sovereign power,
unless he were such an Orator as could bring arguments to raise the love of
Pleasure above that of Ambition and Revenge: to all which Sylla was
passionately given, as you will find in this Summary of his life. Sylla or
Sulla was nobly born; but till the time of his Questorship, he much dishonored
the Patrician Family, from which he was descended, with drinking, wenching, and
acting in private among Stage Players, his wit making him an excellent
Comedian; for it was quick and sharp, as you may note from his animadversion
upon the letter writ him by Caphis the Phocian, advising him not to meddle with
the sacred treasure of Delphos, because he was told for certain that the God
was heard to strike his Lute in the Sanctuary. To this Sylla answered, That he
wondered Caphis understood the god no better; for one that is really sad will
have no mind to play Tunes: and therefore Caphis should not fear to receive
that which Apollo parted with so merrily. But Sylla was not happier in his
jests, then he was in serious concerns; wherein he had been without a Parallel,
if his Cruelty had not blemished his Fortune. He fettered King Jugurth,
defeated Marius, destroyed the Government of Cinna, proscribed Sulpitius; and
commanded that Sulpitius his Slave, for betraying of his Master, should have
his neck broken from the Tarpeian rock. He beat Mithrydates out of all Europe,
and Euboea, confining him within the limits of his hereditary Kingdom of
Pontus. At the walls of Rome, near to the Collin Gate, he fought a battle,
where the number of the slain was said to be 80000. Then he entered the City,
where he gave quarter to 4000 men; and when they had delivered up their
weapons, ordered them to be put to the sword, he himself (as Seneca reports)
then siting in Senate within the Temple of Bellona; where the Lords being
frighted with the shrieks of the dying men, he cried, To the business of the
day, these (my Lords) are a few seditious Rogues slain by my command. He
likewise put to death of his own party above 9000. In his first Roll of
Proscription he writ down 80000 names: in his second List 5000. By his order M.
Marius, Brother to C. Marius, had his eyes dig'd out, and was then cut to
pieces limb by limb: He also slew Carinates Praetor to Marius. In short, he
made not only Rome, but all Italy, a Slaughterhouse. He did ill valiantly: and
was cautious enough to secure himself He knew no fear of Heaven; had no Faith;
no Mercy. Four Marian Legions confiding in his false promise, and imploring the
pity that never dwelt in him, were slain to a man. Five thousand Praenestines,
that had his word for their indemnity, he caused to be slain and cast into the
fields, denying burial to their bodies. He drew his sword against women. He
commanded men's heads to be brought him only to make sport withal. The ashes of
Marius were dis-urned by his barbarity. From the time that he resigned the
Dictator-ship, until the very hour of his death, he recreated himself with
Players, Fools and Fiddlers. The day before his death, hearing that Granius the
Praetor deferred the payment of his vast debts in expectation of Sylla's death,
he sent for the Praetor to his Chamber, and there, after he had Rogu'd and
Rascal'd him, commanded him to be strangled: But the fury wherewith he ranted,
put his body into so violent an agitation, that his Imposthume (the bed of his
lousy disease) broke; and all that night struggling for life in his own blood,
next morning he gave up the Ghost. His Epitaph writ by his own hand was to this
effect.

Here lies Sylla, the greatest Friend, and the heaviest Enemy.

Plutarch. Verse 22. Lucilius.] The first Latin Poet that writ Satyrs, born at
Aurunca in Italy, a Town famous for Satyrists, Lenius, Silius and Turnus being
all three Auruncanes; whereof the last was a Person of great quality, and
gracious with the two Vespasian Caesar's, Titus and Domitian. In the six and
fourtieth year of his age Lucilius died at Naples, and was buried at the
public charge.

Verse 26. Bare-brested Maevia foyls the Tuscan Boar.] This may with great
reason have the second place among the motives that prevailed with Juvenal to
write Satyrs, and is as much against nature as the first. What a prodigious
sight it was for the Romans, in their great Show-place, the Circus, to see a
Woman fight with a Boar, and of all Italian Boars the Tuscan Boar was the
wildest: But, it seems, Maevia was a fiercer Creature: and no doubt but Rome
would have been astonished, if such a Prize had been played in King Numa's
days; when a woman but coming into the Senate House to plead in her own Cause,
they sent to the Oracle to know, what it portended to the State. Plutarch in
the life of Numa.

Verse 28. That with his Sissers.] Cynnamus the Barber, whose Fortunes were
raised by his Mistresses, to the quality of a Roman Knight, with a vast Estate,
as Juvenal tells us, Sat. 10. Sooner might my Arithmatick avow,
How many Manors he is Lord of now:
That when my youthful beard was grown too grave,
Correction with his nimble Sissers gave.
He was at last forced to fly from Rome into Sicily. Martial.

Qui Tonsor fueras tota notissimus urbe:
Et posthac Dominae munere factus eques.
Sicanias Vrbes, Aetnaeaque regna petisti
Cynname, cum fugeres tristia Jura Fori.
Qua nunc art graves tolerabis inutilis annos?
Quid facit infaelix and fugitiva quies?
Non Rhetor, non Grammaticus Ludive Magister,
Non Cynnicus, non tu Stoicus esse potes,
Vendere nec vocem Siculis plausumque Theatris:
Quod superest? iterum Cynname Tonsor eris.
All Rome knew thee a Barber; and then made
Knight- Cynnamus, for which thy Mistress paid.
Thy next trick was the Forum to beguile,
And fly from Justice into Aetna's Isle.
What Art shall now thy useless age maintain?
What can, unhappy fugitive, Quiet gain?
No Rhetorician can be made of thee,
No Pedant, Cynnick, Stoic can thou be;
Nor Actor in Cicilian Plays; what then?
Cynnamus, even turn Barber once again.
Verse 31. -- The Canopian Slave.
Crispinus flaunts it in his Tyrian Cloak]
Crispinus, Freed-man to Nero, was born in Egypt, at Canopus the lewdest Town
in all that Kingdom, and he as lewd a Knave as ever came from thence, but a
man of a most insatiable pride and curiosity. See the beginning of Sat. 4. Of
his Cloak thus Martial, Nescit cui dederit Tyriam Crispinus abollam,
Dum mutat cultus induiturque togam:
Quisquis habes humeris sua munera read precamur:
Non hoc Crispinus te sed abolla rogat.
Non quicunque capit saturatas murice vestes,
Nec nisi deliciis convenit iste color.
Si te praeda juvat faedique insania lucri,
Quo possis melius fallere sum togam
Who had's Cloak Crispine knew not, but 'twas gone
When he changed habits and his Gown put on.
Prithee, good Friend, restore his Tyrian riches:
This not Crispinus, but his Cloak beseeches.
Purple of Tire is not for every wear,
Great persons only in such Cloaks appear.
If thou be theevish, take a Gown, that over
Thy knavery thou may have a better Cover.


Verse 40. -- Filled with his own bulk, in his new Sedan
Matho the Lawyer comes. -- ]
From a poor Advocate Matho grew so rich an Informer, that he went in his
Sedan, and filled it, he was so fat with taking his ease: of whom Martial
Declamas in febre Mathon, hanc esse phrenesim
Si nescis, non es sanus amice Mathon.
Declamas aeger, declamas hemitriteus,
Si sudare aliter non potes, est ratio.
Magna tamen res est: erras, cum viscera febris
Exurit, res est magna tacere Mathon.
Matho in's Ague pleads; a Frenzy it is,
Thou Art mad, Friend Matho, if thou know not this.
Plead in a double Tertian? put the case
Thou could not sweat else thou might talk apace;
'Twill do me good: No, better hold thy peace
In hot fits, Matho, lest thou melt thy grease.


Verse. 41. -- And then the man
That Is great Friend peach'd. -- ]
This arch Rogue some think to be Cassius, Tutor and Impeacher of Silanus.
Tacitus lib. 13. But an old Commentator affirms the man to be Heliodorus the
Stoic, Nero's Informer-General. This grand Knave might well be called Prince
of Informers, unto whom the petty Informers, the Players, Massa, Carus, and
Latinus, were such obedient Subjects, that the two first presented him their
wealth, and the last his wife: yet were these Players Valets of the Chamber to
Nero, and such as he much delighted in. Bebius Massa is remembered by Tacitus at
the death of Piso. Pliny says, That by Carus a Libel was given to Domitian
Caesar, that would (if the Emperor had lived) have cost Pliny his life. As for
Latinus, he was put to death by Claudius, for being Pander to his Empress
Messalina.

Verse 48. Leaves Proculeius one ounce, Gill eleven.] The Civil Law accounts
the whole Estate as a Pound, or As. An absolute Heir is called Haeres ex ass.
The first named in a Will, Haeres primae Cerae; A Legatee, Haeres in ima Cera.
The twelfth part of a Pound or As, is an Ounce: so that he who is Heir to
eleven Ounces, carries away eleven parts of the Estate; and he that is Heir to
an Ounce, only one poor part.

Verse 53. -- As the Rhetor, that in his sad strife
Speaks at the Bar in Lions -- ] Sueton.
At Lions in France Caligula instituted Exercises for Rhetoricians: the Victors
had an Imperial donative: the conditions of the vanquished were, That they
should satisfy the Victors either by writing of their praises, or with a sum
of money, or lick out the Orations they themselves had written, or be beaten
with Ferula's, or drowned in the next river, at the discretion of the Judges.
No marvel then if the poor Orators looked as pale as consumptive Wenchers.

Verse 60. Marius.] Marius Priscus Proconsul of Africa, accused and prosecuted
by the Africans for poling of their Country, was banished and condemned by
Cornutus in the sum of 7000 nummi or sestertii: but this small sum (not ten
pound more then Crispinus paid for his Mullet) was paid in to the Exchequer:
the Province lost the charges of the Suit wherein they overthrew him; and the
vast remainder of the money which he had extorted from them, enabled him in his
banishment to live more riotously then he had done in Rome; for there he eat at
their ninth hour, which is our three of the clock in the afternoon; but in his
exile he drank from their eighth hour, which is our two of the clock in the
afternoon, being the time when the Romans bathed to prepare their bodies for
dinner; and so Marius by his banishment clearly got an hour of earlier riot.
And though his own Country Gods were offended, it seems the foreign Gods were
better pleased.

Verse 64. Hercules.] Son to Jupiter by Alcmena. The twelve Labors imposed upon
him by Juno, was a subject much handled by the Romance Poets. Panyasis writ the
Heraculea, fourteen books of Hercules.

Verse 65. Diomed.] The tale of Diomed is this: In a duel with Aeneas he
wounded Venus, that assisted his Antagonist her Son; and to revenge her self of
him, she sent her other Son Cupid to his wife Aegialia, that struck her in love
with Sthenelus; who set on by his Mistress, lay in ambush for her Husband as he
returned from the siege of Troy, routed him, his men flying to the Sea side;
where, their legs not being able to carry them farther, they found wings, and
were transformed into birds. See Lycophron and Solinus.

Verse 66. Labyrinth.] Thus runs the Fable of the Labyrinth. Pasiphae, Wife to
Minos King of the Cretans, was taken with a preternaturall and nefarious love
to a Bull; and by the art of Daedalus, she was enclosed in a Cow of wood; so
attaining her desire, she conceived and brought forth the Minotaur, half Man
half Bull. The Instruments of her wickedness being discovered by Minos, he shut
up Daedalus with his Son Icarus in that very Labyrinth made by his Master
Builder Daedalus: But he got out with another invention of Wings, and flew to
Cumae in Italy, where he laid them down. Sat. 3. But his Son Icarus flying too
high, the wax that fastened on his Wings, was melted by the Sun, and the Boy
drowned in the Sea.

Verse 68. When that which Law lets not the Wife enjoy.] Domitian Caesar made a
Law, that Adulteresses should be incapable of inheriting and of using close
Chairs or Sedans. Sueton.

Verse 72. Waking nose.] The Pimp to his own Wife counterfeited sleep so
artificially, that with snoring he made such a noise, as if his nose had been
awake.

Verse 73. To be Captain of the Guard he stands.] Fuscus (afterward General
against the Dacians) had consumed all the Estate left him by his noble
Progenitors, with keeping a Stable of Chariot-horses to follow the Court from
Rome to Caesar's Country House, whether he himself used to drive his Chariot
along the Flaminian way, where the Statues and Urnes of his Ancestors stood in
his sight, which might well have deterred him from spending prodigally the
fortunes they had left him, acquired by their Noble Industry. But, it seems,
that which flattered him to this expense, was a hope that Caesar would make him
Prefect or Captain of his Praetorian Guards.

Verse 76. Automedon] was Coachman to Achilles. It appears that Fuscus, besides
his expectation to be Captain of the Guard, had a natural inclination to be a
Chariotier; for, when he was the Boy Automedon, that is, before he was able to
drive the horses like a man, he used to sit with the Chariot-driver, and to
hold the rains, to show his affection to that Art, and withal to commend
himself to his young Mistresses that were so much taken with Chariotiers.

Verse 80. Forger of a Will.] The Author means Tigellinus, that poisoned three
of his Uncles (as you may read toward the end of this Satyr) and forged Wills,
wherein he made himself Heir to them all.

Verse 83. Maecenas.] That great Patron of the Poets Maecenas, was known to be
likewise so great a Voluptuary, that Juvenal never uses his name but in this
sense, as here, and Sat. 12.

Purple for soft Maecenases to wear. Verse 87. Locusta.] One of Nero's
Court-Instruments, that being chid for dallying with Britannicus, gave him a
dose that wrought so nimbly, he dyed before the boll could be taken from his
hand.

Verse 89. Gyarus.] The least Island of the Cyclades, to which the Romans
banished highest offenders.

Verse 96. Loose young Gallants.] The Praetextati, or young Nobility of Rome,
that wore the Praetexta or Gown bordered with Purple, of which they were
divested before they could be arraigned by Law.

Verse 98. Cluvienus.] Such another pitiful Poet as Codrus was.

Verse 99. Since Deucalion] That is since the World began again after
Deucalion's Flood; when he landing upon the top of the Mountain Parnassus,
consulted the Oracle of Themis about the restoration of Mankind, and was
answered, It might be done by him and his Wife Pyrrha, if they would cast
stones over their shoulders, which should be mollified into flesh and blood,
and inanimated with a rational Soul; and (if we believe the Greek Historians or
Fabulists) they did so, and it succeeded accordingly; to which Juvenal adds,
that Pyrrha put the Males and Females together.

Verse 113. Villa's.] Country-houses.

Verse 115. The Sportula.] When the Romans were grown so proud in their Luxury,
that a great man scorned to admit his Friends to his Table; instead of a Supper
they were entertained by a Porter at the Gate, with the Sportula, a little
Basket that held 100 farthings, as in this place: but sometimes the Sportula
was enlarged, and the Porter treated the Guests with variety of meats. Vid.
Sat. 3.

See not what smoke the Sportula breaths out. Verse 119. Our Trojan Lords.]
The Romans derived themselves from Trojan Aeneas.

Verse 121. The Praetor.] The Praetor Urbanus was an Officer in the nature of
our L. chief Justice, attended by the Lictor, or Officer of Death, that carried
on his shoulder an Axe within a bundle of rods, signifying the different
punishments of petty and capital offenders; those being only whipped, these
beheaded. To the Urbanus or great Praetor were added at last 17. Praetors more,
whereof two were Praetores Fidei Commissarii, in the nature of Lord Chancellors
or Keepers. Fenest. de mag. Romans c. 10.

Verse. 121. The Tribune.] The Tribunes of the People, from the number of two
in their first Institution, came afterward to be ten. These were Protectors of
the Commonalty; they sat at the door of the Senate; they were the Grand Jury
to inform the Lords: No Act could pass unless they subscribed it with the
letter T. but they themselves had not authority to make an Act at first; yet in
process of time they usurped such a power. Pomp. Laet. Stadius in Flor. Pigh.
Rosin.

Verse. 122. The Freed-man.] Was an Infranchised Slave; and this might be
Crispinus by his taking place of the Praetor and Tribune, or it might be any
other Infranchised Slave, that was a Native of Capadocia, Mesapotamia, Assyria,
or Arabia; for the river Euphrates runs through all these Countries.

Verse 127. A Roman Knight.] The Census Equestris, or that Estate which made
the Eques Romanus, (a dignity answering that of Knight with us) was 400
sestertia, about 3125 l. of our money. A Freed-man worth so much might claim
the Privileges of a Knight, and a Knight that had less could not sit upon the
Benches and Cushions at a Play by Otho's Law. Sat. 3.

Verse. 128. Corvinus.] One of the noble Family of the Corvini, but grown so
wretchedly poor, that he was enforced to serve a Shepherd, and keep his Flocks
near to the Town of Laurentum in his own native Country.

Verse 130. Pallas.] He was the wealthy Freed-man of Claudius Caesar, that
suffered him, together with Narcissus his fellow Freed-man, to have, not only
great Estates conferred by Decree of Senate upon them, but likewise the
Dignities of Quaestor and Praetor; and let them extort and monopolize so much,
that when he complained of the emptiness of his Exchequer, one answered, It
would be full enough if his two Freed-men might refund. See Sueton and Tacitus.

Verse 131. The Licini.] Licinus, Caesar's Freedman, was by Augustus made
Governor of Gaul, which he pillaged, and so got a mass of wealth. It seems
there were more Freed-men of that name, because it is put in the plural number.

Verse 134. Chalkie Feet.] A Slave that from foreign parts was brought to Rome
to be sold in the Market, had his feet marked with Chalk. So Pliny and Tibullus.

Verse 139. Concord, where the Storks nest creaks.] The Stork built in the
Temple of Concord, erected by the Senate in the Forum. App. lib. 1. and
therefore when the old Stork returned to feed her young ones, they would be
sure to salute her with a creaking noise. If it were not for the word creaking,
I should have inclined to Politian's opinion, that in his Miscellanies
interprets this to be a nest of Quails, the Emblem of Concord.

Verse. 142. Clients.] A Client had relation to some Noble man as his Patron.
The Patron was obliged in honor to protect his Client; the Client, besides his
attendance in public, was bound by Law to contribute toward his Patrons
assesments and Daughters marriages. If any Client could be proved unfaithful
to his Patron, to have informed, made oath, or given his vote against him, or
for his Enemy, he was for such disloyalty devoted to the Infernal Gods, and
not only accursed by the Priest, but outlawed by the Criminal Judge; so that
it was lawful for any man to kill him. Lazius de Repub. Romans lib. 12. c. 3.

Verse 153. The Forum.] The great Roman Piazza, where the Courts of Justice
sat, to which the Client, after he had complemented his Friends at the
Sportula, waited upon his Patron. Martial Prima salutantes atque altera
continet hora,
Exercet raucos tertia causidicos.
The first hour and the second we salute,
And in the third hoarse Advocates dispute.


Verse 154. The learned in the Law, Apollo.] The reason of this expression was
occasioned by the Library of Civil-law-books, made by Augustus Caesar, in the
Temple of Apollo-Pallatine* where the Judges also heard Causes, as appears by
Horace's delivery from the prating Fellow that was arrested and carried before
the Judge sitting in that Temple. Horace Sic me servavit Apollo.
Thus Apollo saved me.


Verse 156. Egyptian and Arabarch.] Crispinus the Egyptian, that by his
Master was privileged to have triumphal Titles, Ornaments and a Statue, in the
pedestall or basis whereof was engraven the style of Arabarch, which Crispinus
might conceive the Reader would take to be Arabian Prince. Some take Arabarch
for a Customer in Egypt, that received toll for Cattle brought thither out of
Arabia; but Juvenal seems to use the Word for an Arch-rogue.

Verse 161. A Supper.] The Supper which the Patron was ordered by Domitian
Caesar to bestow upon his Clients, was called Caena recta, a plain Supper, to
distinguish it from the Patrons Caena dubia, or Supper of varieties, such as
puzzled the Guests to know where they should begin. But at this time the
Sportula was not by Domitian reduced to the Caena recta, of which Martial
Centum miselli jam valete quadrantes.
Poor hundred Farthings now farewell.


Verse 171. Whole Boars.] The first that brought in fashion the having of a
Boar served up whole to his Table was Servilius Tullus. Pliny.

Verse 174. Crude Peacock.] Peacocks flesh never putrifieth. St. Augustine.
Then well it might be raw upon a Gluttons stomach, when he bathed before his
next meal. Hortentius the Augur, was the first that brought this meat in
request at Rome.

Verse 177. Angry Friends.] Near relations must needs be vexed at the death of a
Friend, by gluttony so surprised, as not to have time to make a Will. Yet even
they could not but laugh at such a Comicall disaster, though they lost their
Legacies by it.

Verse 186. Mutius.] A great Knave but a poor man; so that when the Auruncane
Satyrist, Lucilius, published his knavery, he had not a purse to see Advocates
in a cause of Defamation: but if Tigellinus, the Emperor's Favorite, had been
the man so defamed, he would have followed the Law, which was, Ne licet carmen
fieri ad alterius injuriam. Cicer. lib. 4. Tusc. Be it unlawful for any man to
make verse to the injury of another. And in favor of so eminent a Courtier,
Juvenal thinks it probable that the Judge would have sentenced the Offender to
die as cruel a death as was inflicted upon Christians; of which barbarous
cruelty read Tacitus lib. 15. Yet that very Judge might in his conscience know
that Tigellinus was a thousand times the greater Villain. M. Tigellinus
Ophonius poisoned three of his Fathers Brothers, and forging their Wills came
to a vast Estate most villanously. Probus.

Verse 189. Like those.] Christians, of whose living bodies Nero made bonfires,
using them as he had done Rome, with the firing whereof, he charged them. Note
that Juvenal, speaking here of the Christians Martyrdomes, writes nothing
disparageable to the Religion it self, as he does to that of the Jews in Sat.
3. and 14. from whence it may with reason be inferred, that because he scofs
not at Christianity, he reverenced it.

Verse 195. Aeneas.] Anchises his Son, that when Troy was fired, took his
Father upon his shoulders, carried him through the flames, and brought him safe
to Drepa^um, a Town in Sicily, where the old man dyed, that in his youth begot
this Pious Son upon the Goddess Venus at the Trojan river Simois. Virgil
Aeneid. 1. He was King of the Latins, and reigned eleven years after the death
of Latinus, in the right of his Wife Lavinia, Daughter and Heir to King
Latinus; and the Widow of Turnus slain by his hand. Aeneid 12. Eutropius. In
his voyage from Troy to Italy, he lost his Wife Creusa, buried his Father (as
you heard before) in Sicily, but never touched upon the Coast of Africa; and
therefore could not have seen Dido, if she had been then living. After a
tedious passage at Sea, he landed safe with his Son Ascanius in Italy; there
conquered and settled: and from him Julius Caesar derived himself.

Verse. 196. Turnus.] General of the Rutilians in their war against Aeneas,
with whom he fought single, and was very angry with Juno that she would not let
him stay to end the Combat. See Virgil Aeneid. lib. 6.

Verse 197. Achilles.] Son to Peleus and Thetis, that in his Infancy washed him
in the Stygian water, whereby he was made invulnerable in any part of his body
but only the foot, by which his Mother held him when he was dipped. His Tutor was
Chiron the Centaur, of whom he learned Horsmanship, Music, and Physic. His
Mother understanding by the Oracle, that he should perish in the Trojan
Expedition, concealed him in a woman's habit in the Court of King Lycomedes,
where he got the Kings Daughter Deidamia with child of Pyrrhus. At last
discovered by the subtilty of Ulysses, he was drawn into the war, because Troy
could not be taken by the Graecians until they had the assistance of Achilles.
To prevent the Fate which Thetis knew him to be in danger of, she prevailed
with Vulcan to make him arms that were impenitrable. After he had shown much
valor in the war, he was in such a rage with Agamemnon for taking from him his
beloved Prisoner, fair Briseis, that he resolved (notwithstanding all the
Prayers and importunities of his Countrymen) never more to draw his Sword
against the Trojans: But hearing that Hector had slain Patroclus, his fury for
the death of that Friend made him forget his rage against his enemy, King
Agamemnon, and dispensing with his solemn resolution, he fought again more
furiously then ever, slew Hector, and in his Friends revenge tied the dead body
to his Chariot, and dragged it three times about the walls of Troy; at last sold
it to King Priam. Finally, when he was to be married to Polixena in the Temple
of Apollo, Paris, Hector's effeminate Brother, to prevent his Sisters marriage,
concealed himself behind the Image of the God, and with an arrow hit Achilles
in the heel, where he was only capable of a wound. See Pliny, Homer, and
Gellius.

Verse 198. Hylas.] A most delicate Boy, Favorite to Hercules, that having
slain his Father Theodamant, fell in love with the Boy; and in his voyage with
the Argonauts to Colchos, when his Oar was broken and he forced to land, that
he might get another in the Mysian Woods; the day being extremely hot, he sent
Hylas with a pitcher for water to the river Ascanius* but the bank being so
high above water that he could not stand and fill his Pitcher, the Boy lay down
upon his breast and hung over the stream, running with such a violence, that
from his hand it carried away the Pitcher, which he suddenly striving to
recover, the Pitcher and Hylas were both drowned together. This occasioned the
Fable that the Nymphs had ravished Hylas. But Hercules, when he heard no more
news of the Boy, was so madded, that leaving the Argonauts, he searched Mysia
for him, calling aloud upon his name. Virg. Vt Littus Hyla Hyla omne sonaret.
That all the Shore with Hylas Hylas rung.


Verse 206. Latin and Flaminian way.] Highways from Rome full of dead-mens
Monuments. The Flaminian way, Arc and Forum were so called from the Consul
Flaminius, that fighting Hannibal was slain at Thrasimene, where his body was
by Hannibal searched for amongst the dead, but not found. Livi. lib. 22. The
Latin way, formerly called the Ferentian way, the Ausonian by Martial, not
far from the Latin Port, fell into the via Appia, that reached as far as
Capua.

The second Design.
REad this good Book, sweet Lady, study fame,
Leave gadding, hide your naked breasts for shame,
The 1 Stoic cries; whom by the sleeve she takes,
And out of it Glasses of Essence shakes
And Civet-boxes, that perfume the Knave:
Which of the two conceive you the more grave?
Or which shows lightest, the bare-shoulder'd Wench
At Bar, or 2 Judge in sarcenet on the Bench?
Yet these are modest, if you 3 men compare,
That fillet up with holy rites their hair,
And pearl their necks with oriental charms.
Then what is an 4 Emperor, that in his arms,
Paints his pale Cheek before a Looking-glass?
Here Is yet a 5 Lord whose face is tougher Brass,
That (when 6 the Consul like a King attired Sat. 10.

Comes to the Circus in a Crown) is hired,
A Trident in's right hand, the Stage to tread;
In's left a Float-net, raised to catch his Head
That follows with a Faucheon to invade
This Lord borne, but a Rogue by breeding made.
So Grapes, that grow upon the richest Vines
Vnprun'd, degenerate to poorest Wines.


Figura Secunda.
Hunclege, pulcra, librum; pereunti consule famae;
Ne vaga transcurras vicos; sit pectus opertum,
1 Stoicus exclamat: vulsa quem molliter ausa
Solicitare toga, tristi sub vest latentes
Prodit suffitus, secretaque aromata spargit.
Quemnam ex his, morum censes praeferre pudorem?
Aut uter est levior, quae coram 2 Judice mammas
Denudat moecha, an bysso pellucidus Ipse?
Illa modesta quidem, fictum dum respicis, aras
Ante, 3 Sacerdotem redimicula longa trahentem,
Feminea orantis jactante monilia collo.
Quid video? galea spectabilis 4 Induperator
(Proh Deus!) ad speculum pallentia purpuratora.
5 Monstrum succedit majus; septemplicis aeris
Frons illi, longo qui stemmate cretus avorum
Se locat ad Circum (hic Trabeae fert 6 Consul honores, Sat. 10.

Regalemque, manu quem portet Publicus, orbem)
Retibus in laeva libratis, lustrat arenam;
Dum dextra appensos effundit fuscina casses:
Mirmillo insequitur, si non cavet, ense paratus
Caedere degenerem. Vitis neglecta labascit
Nobilis, atque abeunt in vilem Massica vappam.
The Manners of Men. THE SECOND SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
Men are not what their looks aver.
Vice taints the grave Philosopher;
The Judge the Bench'es honor stains:
The Mock-Priest holy Rites prophanes:
The armed General paints his face;
The Nobly-borne foul Acts debase.
The Reason Babes that speak may tell*
For, none but they believe a Hell.
BEyond SARMATIA and the Frozen Sea,
I could fly hence; when to teach Manners they
Presume, that CURIAN Temperance profess:
And live like Bacchanals, in lewd excess.
The unlearned first, though you CRYSIPPUS see
Carved in all Studies: for, a great man's he
That can buy ARISTOTLE'S Counterfeit,
Or PITTACUS'es Statue copied get;
And bids CLEANTHES, done by' a Master's hand,
There, as his grave Library Keeper, stand.
No trust to faces: for, what streets but fill
With reverend vices? thou say, we are ill,
When thou thy self art known to be so right,
So perfect a SOCRATICK Catamite.
Indeed, rough hairy limbs, and arms that bear
Stiff bristles, promise minds extreme severe:
But, from their smooth posteriors when he files
Unnatural tumors off, the Surgeon smiles.
They dote on silence, speech with them is rare,
Shorter then eyebrows too they wear their hair.
More ingenuity PERIBONIUS shows:
In such a man whose face and mien disclose
His foul deboshery, I hold it fate:
Simplicity we should commiserate,
Plain madness speaks in his excuse: but them
As infinitely baser I contemn
That with HERCULEAN language vice assail,
And magnifying virtue, wag the tail.
Shall I, says infamous VARILLUS, fear
Thee bouger SEXTUS? make the odds appear?
The Strait may Cripples, White-men Negro's, jeer.
But who will endure to hear a Mutineer
Complained of by the GRACCHI? Who'd not cry
Till earth confused the sea, the sea the sky;
If MILO should a Murderer reprove:
VERRES a Thief, CLODIUS Adult'rous love:
CATILINE treason in CETHEGUS blame:
SYLLA'S three Scholars against his Roll declaim?
One lately married his own Niece, and then
Revived a Law, a bitter Law to Men,
That might have frighted MARS and VENUS too:
Whilst JULIA with abortives did undo
Her fruitful womb: lump after lump she teemed
That even the pictures of her Uncle seemed.
Such SCAURAN counterfeits, who would not slight
Though never so bad, and rated turn and bite?
Where Is now the JULIAN Law a sow'r-Sir cried,
Sleeps it? LARONIA with a smile replied,
Blessed times, that make thee Censor, chastely given
ROME now'll be, a third CATO'S dropped from Heaven:
But Sir, your hairy neck's perfumed, let us know
Whence the Essence comes? blush not, your Drugster show.
If you will needs wake the Statutes, reinforce
The Law Scantinian, note men, you do worse.
But your strong Phalanx multitude defends
And close-joynd shields: loose livers are fast friends;
Our sex has none of your detested tricks,
TEDIA, CLUVIA: FLORA never licks
CATULLA: HISPO passive pleasure knows,
And pale with doing and with suffering grows.
Do we plead? study we your Civil Laws?
Shake we your Courts with bawling in a cause?
Some few of us fence, diet-bread some use,
You spin wool, and in baskets bear your clews:
Thread from the pregnant spindle you can twine
More nimble then ARACHNE, and more fine
Then chaste PENELOPE; or she that spins,
Shivering 'ith' stocks, a penance for her sins.
It Is known why HISTER made his Freed-man heir,
And living gave his wife so large a share:
She Is rich that in a great man's bed lies third.
Secrets bring jewels: marry, not a word.
Yet for a Law that is death to us, you move.
Censure acquits the Crow, condemns the Dove.
Shamed by LARONIA our soft Stoics fly;
For what delivered she, they could deny?
But what in others can deformed appear,
When thou, grave Judge, do mingled sarcenet wear?
Nay sit'st in those thin silks, amazing ROME,
And do our PROCULA'S and POLLINEA'S doom?
FABULLA will the deed you wot of do:
Let her be punished for it; CARFINIA too:
Against her be, what ere thou will, decreed,
She will not, though condemned, wear such a weed:
But JULY'S hot, I sweat: then naked go,
For madness will not half disgrace thee so.
This Robe had our victorious Fathers seen
Thee passing Laws in, when their wounds were green;
Or had our Mountaineers beheld it, how
Would they have heard thee when they came from plough?
Heaven! that a Judge should put on such a Vest:
Were handsome if a Witness were so dressed?
Stern Legislative CRETAN, thou art now
Transparent, this disease was caught; and thou Will spread it further: as the scab but got
By one sheep, the whole flock will have the rot:
Hogs catch the measles; and the grape, that sees
A tainted grape, sucks poison by degrees.
This shameless habit will not be thy worst,
In time: none ever was stark-naught at first.
Thou will er'e long turn hedge-Priest: join with them
That Fillets wear, whose necks are all one Gemme;
That with great Bolls, and Sows fat Paunches pray
To our Good Goddess the contrary way:
For, Men perform these Rites, no Female by:
You profane Women, get you gone, they cry;
None sounds a Call with her loud Cornet here.
At ATHENS such the BAPTISTS Orgies were,
When they their private Torches did advance,
And tired out their COTYTUS in a dance.
He with an oblique steel his eyebrows dies,
Touched with moist soot: and paints his trembling eyes.
A glass-Priapus one man's wine must hold,
Another huge long locks a Cawl of gold;
Blew shield-work this, or rased white satin wears:
His Man too by his Masters JUNO swears.
He holds the Mirror Pathick OTHO bore
(AURUNCANE ACTOR'S spoils) that when he wore
His arms he viewed himself in; when he gave
The battails signal, and bid the Ensigns wave.
A gallant subject! for new Annals fit,
And should in our-times History be writ.
A Looking-glass did load the Generals Carre,
And was the Baggage of a Civil-warre.
O 'twas done like a General to kill
Old GALBA; like a ROMAN pleits to fill;
To hope spoils from the BEDRIACK field would grace
The Capitol; to grease and paint the Face:
Which proud SEMIRAMIS, when she put on
Her Quiver, would not do at BABYLON:
Nor did the pensive CLEOPATRA dip
Her Pencil, when aboard her ACTIAN-Ship:
Here Is lewd discourse; at Table no respect,
Foul PHRYGIAN talk, the lisping Dialect
Taught by the old white hair'd Man, the Man of note
For his so spacious and authentic Throat,
The Chief-Priest, most fanatickly inspired,
A Master for the gusto to be hired.
Why do not these with PHRYGIAN Razors take
That flesh away, of which no use they make?
A Piper, or a Trumpeter, had four
Hundred sestertia: GRACCHUS, for thy Dower
Deeds were drawn, joy given, a great Supper made,
The Bride was in his Bridegroom's bosom laid.
Do we the Censor or the Aruspex need
You Lords? Do not these horrid sights exceed
All Monsters, though a woman should be Dam
Unto a Calf, or a Cow calve a Lamb?
The Priest that in Procession sweating heaved
The ANCILIAN shields by leathers unperceived,
Now wears a Bride's gown, petticoat and vail.
O God of War! whence did these crimes assail
Thy Latian Shepherds? how, Rome's Father, sprung
These nettles up, that have thy children stung?
Behold, a man great both in wealth and birth,
Marries a man! yet thou into the earth
Run'st not thy spear, nor thy plumed helmet shak'st,
Nor a complaint to JOVE thy Father make.
Go MARS, and to some other God assign
Those sacred Fields not looked upon as thine.
To morrow morning early on my friend
I, in the Quirine valley, must attend.
Why thither? cannot your own Guess decide
That question? my He-friend's to be a Bride.
They bid few now, but notice they will give
To all men, and record it if they live.
Mean time, the Female's troubled much, she can
No issue have, so to oblige the man.
The best is, Nature to such minds denies
Power to change sexes: the wife barren dies:
Swollen LYDE'S salve-box helps not: nor to stand
Where the active LUPERCI may clap her hand.
More monstrous Fencer-GRACCHUS did appear
In's Cassock, armed with his three-forked spear:
And viewed the Lists round, as he fled the Chase;
Borne Nobler then the whole Capitoline Race,
MARCELLI, CATULI, the FABIAN name,
Those who their Pedigree from PAULUS claim,
And all that from the scaffolds saw the sport
He made: not bating that paid him for it.
That there be ghosts and regions under ground
And the oar, and black toads in the Stygian Sound;
And thousands rowed in one boat; finds not faith
With boys, but such as pay not for their bath.
Believe thou. What CAMILLUS, what now knows
FABRITIUS, CURIOUS, both the SCIPIO'S:
The Legion that fell upon the train
At CREMERA: the youth at CANNAE slain,
Souls of so many battles? ever when
Our ghosts descend, the spirits of these men
Would purify themselves, if they could get
Sulphur and torches, and a laurel wet.
To them poor we must go: indeed we boast
Our conquests, stretched beyond the Irish coast
And the ORCADES, which lately we have seized,
And BRITAIN with no night in summer pleased:
But what we do, that make the world our own,
The conquered do not: ZALATES alone,
One of the Armenian Youths, more lewd (they say)
Then all ours, to the Tribun's flame gave way.
See how commerce with ROME breeds our Allies!
He came a Hostage: men we womanize:
For had these boys staid, all had lovers took,
Their Countrey-cloths, whips, bridles, knives forsook;
Thus back to their Artaxata they bear
The manners, of the loose young Gentry here.
The Comment UPON THE SECOND SATYR.
VErse 1. Beyond Sarmatia, and the Frozen Sea I could fly hence -- ]Juvenal was
so moved at the impudence of pretenders to Philosophy, base Hypocrites, that
took upon them to reform the manners of the Romans; That, rather then stay in
Rome with such Knaves, he could be contented (if wings were to be got) to fly
beyond Sarmatia, that is, to trust himself with the most barbarous Russians,
Laplanders, Finlanders, and inhumane Cannibals; and so passing the River Tanais
(that divides the two Sarmatia's, parting the European Tartars from the
Asiatick) to fly over the Frozen Sea, which was then believed to be
innavigable; but the Hollanders have lately sailed so far in the North-east
passage, that they have discovered Nova Zembla within the Artick Circle, but
twelve degrees from the Pole.

Verse 3. Curian Temperance.] The Curian Family was enobled by the Temperance
and Valor of Marcus Curious, that triumphed over the Sabines, Samnites, and
Leucanians, and beat King Pyrrhus out of Italy; but his greatest triumph was
over himself and his affections, as appears by his answer to the Samnite
Ambassadors, that finding his Table covered by the fireside, furnished only
with earthen dishes, and Curious himself roasting of roots for his supper,
beseeched him to better his poor condition, by accepting a great sum of money
from their hands; to which he answered, that he had rather still eat in earth,
and command the Samnites that were served in gold. Being accused for
plundering, he produced a wooden vessel, which upon proof appeared to be all
he had of the spoil. Live.

Verse 4. Bacchanals.] The Celebraters of the Bacchanalia or Dionysia, the
libidinous Feasts of Bacchus, where virtue was death; for they that refused to
sacrifice to Lust, were sacrificed by the fury of the Bacchanals. Of the
abominable Ceremonies used at these Feasts, see Live. and St. Augustine. They
were at last as a Seminary of wickedness interdicted by the Senate.

Verse 5. Chrysippus.] The Philosopher Chrysippus, the most ingenious Scholar
to Zeno the first Stoic, and to his Successor Cleanthes; from both which
Masters he only desired to know Doctrines, and bid them leave the Proofs to
him; indeed he was so incomparable a Logician, that it grew to a Proverb, If
the Gods would study Logic, they would read Chrysippus. He was Son to
Apollonides (by some called Apollonius) of Tarsis, but he was born at Soli a
City of Cilicia. Having spent what his father left him in following a Kings
Court, he was compelled to study Philosophy, as being capable of no other
course that might buoy up his fortunes: but after he was an eminent
Philosopher, he never dedicated any of his books, as others did theirs, to
Kings; and therefore was thought to be a great despiser of Honors, Laertius.
But it is more probable, that he following his studies to enrich himself, would
neglect no good Medium to a fortune; and I rather believe, that he having
smarted so much by attendance at Court, would never apply himself to Princes
any more. He died of a violent laughter, with seeing an Ass eat figs, as some
say, but of a Vertigo, according to Hermippus, in the 143 Olympiad, having
lived seventy three years.

Verse. 7. Aristotle] Was born at Stagyra, a City of Thrace, seated upon the
river Strymon; his Father was Nicomachus the Physician, the Son of Macaon,
famed by Homer for his skill in Physic, which it seems came to him extraduce,
for Micaon was the Son of Aesculapius. Phaestias, Mother to Aristotle, was
descended likewise from Aesculapius, as some affirm; but others say, she was
Daughter to one of the Planters sent from Chalcis to Stagyra. He was a slender
man, crump-shouldered, and stuttered naturally very much: but, for his
incomparable erudition, Philip of Macedon sought to him to be his Son
Alexander's Tutor; and Alexander made him his Secretary. He was 18 years old
when he came to Athens, and there for 20 years he heard Plato. The City of
Stagyra, from its ruins, was for his sake reedified by his Pupil, Alexander
the great. When Alexander marched into Asia, Aristotle returned to Athens, and
read Philosophy in the Lyceum thirteen years, from whence his Scholars were
properly called Peripateticks of the Lyceum, (to distinguish them from the
Peripateticks of the Academy, the Platonists,) yet afterward they were known
by the name of Peripateticks only, whereof he himself is deservedly styled the
Prince. After all the benefits received from him by Athens, the return made,
was an impeachment drawn up against him, that he was no true worshiper of the
Gods. But this (as you shall presently see) had formerly been the case of
Socrates, by the sad example of whose death, Aristotle learned to decline the
envy and fury of that unthankful City; from whence he went to Chalcis in
Eubaea, and there died in the sixty third year of his age, and the 114
Olympiad, when Philocles was Archon: the very same year Demosthenes also died
in Calauria, both being forced to fly their Countries. Aristotle was the first
that made a Library, Strabo lib. 3. which together with his School, he left to
Theophrastus, that taught the Kings of Egypt how to order their Library, by
disposing of their Books into several Classes.

Verse 8. Pittacus.] Pittacus, one of the seven Sages of Greece, assisted by
the Brethren of Alcaeus the Poet, slew Melancrus Tyrant of Lesbos, in the
chief City whereof, viz. Mytelene, Pittacus was born. A war breaking out
between the Athenians and Mytelenians about the Achilleian fields, he was
chosen General for his Country, and finding his Army too weak to dispute that
Title in the field, he challenged Phryno, General of the Athenians, to a
single combat, and met him like a Fisherman, his visible arms being a
Trident, Dagger, and Shield; but under it was a Net, which, in the Duel, he
cast over the head of Phryno, and so conquered him by stratagem that had been
Victor by his Giantly strength in the Olympic Games. Strabo. Laert. This Duel
Lyps. says, was the original of those kind of prizes played by the Roman
Gladiators, called the Retiarius, and Secutor, or Mirmillo, described in this
Satyr, to the shame of so noble a person as one of the Gracchi was, that for a
poor salary was hired by the Praetor to venture his life as a Retiarius or
Net-bearer, against the Secutor's Fauchion. You may see their figures (as they
acted in the Circus) in the Design before this Satyr. So long as his Country
needed him to manage the wars, so long Pittacus held the Sovereign power as
an absolute Prince. But when the war was ended, he like an absolute
Philosopher, put an end to his own authority; and after a voluntary resignation
of his power continued for ten years, he lived ten years more a private person,
Laert. Val Max. being about fourscore, he dyed in the third year of the 52
Olympiad, Aristomenes being Archon.

Verse 9. Cleanthes.] Cleanthes the Stoic was Scholar to Crates, and Successor
to Zeno Founder of the Stoics; his Father was Phanius of Assus; by his first
profession he was a VVrastler, but it brought him in no great revenue; for all
he had was but four Drams when he came to hear Crates: and to get a
livelihood under him and Zeno, he was forced to work by night, to keep himself
from hunger and scorn in the day time. The Court of Areopagus citing him to
clear the suspicion of Felony, and give an account how he lived, he produced a
Woman, for whom he ground meal; and a Gardener that paid him for drawing of
water; and showed Zeno's Dictates writ in shells and Oxes shoulder-blades, for
want of money to buy Paper. He succeeded Zeno in his School, lived above
fourscore years, and died voluntarily; for his Physicians injoyning him to fast
two days; for the cure of an ulcer under his tongue; when they would have had
him eat again, he would not, but took it unkindly that they would offer to
bring him back, being two days onward on his journey; so continuing his fast
for other two days, he came to his last home.

Verse. 14. Socratick Catomite.] Socrates was son to the Statuary Sophroniscus,
and the Midwife Phaenareta, and husband first to Myrto the Daughter of
Aristides the Just, afterward to Zantippe, the arrantest Scold that ever
thundered with a tongue. He first reduced Philosophy from natural to moral
(that is) from contemplation to practice, it being his constant Maxim, Quae
supra nos nihil ad nos, We are not at all concerned in things above us. Anytus
the Orator, indeed the leather-Dresser, for that Trade enriched him; though he
was ashamed to own it, and therefore having been upon that score (reproached by
Socrates) to satisfy his spleen, he got Melitus the Poet and Lycon his fellow
Orator, to join in drawing up an Impeachment against Socrates, as no true
worshiper of the Gods, and a corrupter of youth, having first made him a scorn
to the people, by hiring Aristophanes to bring him upon the Stage in a Comedy.
From the abuse put upon him in this Comedy, others, many ages after, took
occasion to abuse Socrates; especially Porphyrius observed by Nicephorus to be
more malicious then were his Accusers, Anytus and Melitus. But I do not
believe that my Author intended to cast dirt upon him in this place; where
Socratick Catamite cannot be otherwise interpreted, then one of those
censorious persons, that would be thought as learned and virtuous as Socrates,
when they really were as vicious as men could be, and as unlearned as the very
Statues of the Philosophers, the purchase whereof was all the proof they could
make of their learning. Some there are that imitate their folly in our days,
as appears by the instance Lubine makes in a Scholar, his Contemporary, whom he
forbears to name, that gave 3000 drams for the earthen-lamp, that Epictetus
used, hoping, that if it burned all night by his bedside, it would infuse into
him the wisdom of Epictetus in a dream. If he bought the lamp for this reason
(as Lubine conceives he did) then he was guilty of the vanity of Juvenal's
Philosophasters but if he bestowed so much money upon a piece of Antiquity,
that might be useful to the present and succeeding times; in that case I
should honor him for his expense, as I do the memory of Thomas Earl of
Arundell and Surrey, (Grandchilde and Heir to the last Duke of Norfolk) for
the vast sums those Statues cost him, from which Mr. Seldom has picked out so
many learned notions; as you may find in his book entitled Marmora
Arundeliana: among which Statues is the inscription that proves Laches to be
Archon at the death of Socrates, which is to be made use of in this very place.
As for Epictetus his lamp, it might have been of great advantage to Fortunius
Licetas, when he writ De Lucernis absconditis. To return to our account of
Socrates, He was convicted of impiety and improbity by the false oaths of his
Accusers, and the testiness of his Judges, for being asked at the Bar, What in
his own judgment he deserved, he answered, To be maintained by you the great
Council or Prytanaeum, at the public charge; which so enraged the Senate,
that the major part, by above 80. voted him to death, and accordingly execution
was done, the Officer of death presenting him a draught of Hemlock, which he
cheerfully took off; and so Laches, as aforesaid, being Archon, in the first
year of the ninety fifth Olympiad, he was poisoned by that ungrateful City of
Athens, which as Juvenal says Sat 7.

-- to Scholars now,
Except cold Hemlock, nothing dare allow.
Verse 21. Peribonius.] The Archi-gallus or chief Priest of Cybele, Principal
of an Order of Rogues so infamous for drunkenness and debauchery, that it was
not lawful for a freeborn Roman to be one of the number. The original of
their institution was this, Cybele the daughter of King Minos, being in her
infancy exposed upon the Hill Cybelus in Phrygia, from which Hill she had her
name, and there nourished by the wild beasts, to whose mercy she was left, was
found by a Shepherds wife, bred up as her own Child, and grew to be both a
great Beauty, and a Lady of most excellent natural parts; for the Greeks from
her invention had the Taber, Pipe, and Cimballs. She was married to Saturn,
and therefore Mother of the Gods, her highest title. She was also called Rhea,
from her flowing or abundant goodness: styled likewise Pessinuntia, from
Pessinus a Mart-town in Phrygia; and Berecynthia, from Berecynthus a Mountain
in the same Country, where her Ceremonies were begun; and Atis, a handsome
young Phrygian, by her appointed superintendent over them, upon condition that
he would promise chastity during life: but not long after he defloured a Nymph:
for which offense Cybele took away his understanding; and in one of his mad
fits, by his own hand he was gelt, and after that, he attempted to kill
himself; but it seems the Compassionate Gods prevented him, and turned the
youth into a Pine Tree, Ovid. Met. By his example, the Phrygian Priests ever
after gelded themselves with the shell of a fish. Their Vest was parti-colored,
called Synthesis, or amictus variegatus; they carried the picture of their
Goddess through the streets of Rome in their hands, and striking their
breasts, kept tune with their Tabers Pipes, and Cymbals, called Era
Corybantia: as they were named Corybantes, from Corybantus, one of Cybele's
first Votaries, they wore Miters fastened under their chins, Sat. 6. -- Cybels
Priest, the tall
Grave half-man (with no obscene part of all,
A Fish-shell long since cut off that) comes in,
A Phrygian Miter tied beneath his chin.
In this manner dancing about the streets, they begged money of the people,
from whence the Romans termed them Circulatores Cybelei, Cybels Juglers, or
Collectors; they were common Bawds, as appears by this place, and
Master-Gluttons and Drunkards, as you may see in the following part of this
Satyr; and where the young Consul Damasippus lays the chief Priest of Cybele
dead drunk, Sat. 8.

With Cybels Priest on's back, his bells at rest: Verse 27. Herculean
language.] This referres to Xenophons Dialogue between Hercules Virtue and
Vice; where Hercules confutes the monster Vice with arguments, as he had done
other monsters with his club.

Ver. 29. Varillus.] A poor Rogue, that will acknowledge no difference or odds
in point of goodness between himself and the wicked great man Sextus.

Verse 33. To hear a Mutineer complained of by the Gracchi,] Signifies the same
with our English Proverb, To hear Vice correct Sin. Caius and Tiberius Gracchus
(Sons to that excellent pattern of modesty, Cornelia Daughter to Scipio
Africanus, that conquered Hannibal) were young men of incomparable wit and
elocution, but too much addicted to popularity. This made them relinquish the
Lords, and court the People, with whom to ingratiate themselves, they passed
the Lex Agraria, for division of the public lands between the Lords and
Commons, which Law, though grounded upon a fundamental Right, was the
firebrand to a sedition quenched in the blood of these two Brothers; Tiberius
being slain, as he was making a Speech to the people, by the hand of Publius
Nassica the Pontifex Maximus; and Caius, when he had fortified the Capitoline
Mount, by the command of the Consul Opimius. Plutarch in Caio and Tiberio.

Verse 35. Milo.] T. Annius Milo from the Papian Family adopted by T. Annius
his maternal Grandfather, slew Clodius Tribune of the People, that had many
seditions and dangerous designs against the Republic, for which reason Cicero
intended to make the people favorable to the Murderer, and spoke in his
behalf, but not that Oration which is at this day to be seen among his works;
and that afterward coming to the hand of Milo, then banished to Masilia, where
he lived in extreme want: Oh, says Milo, if Cicero had spoke this, I had not
gathered worms in Masilia, Nonn. in Romanorum Historiam.

Verse 36. Verres.] Caius Verres was first Questor to Cneius Carbo, then Legate
and Proquestor to Cneius Dolabella, both which he betrayed. When Lucullus and
Cotta were Consuls, he was made Praetor Urbanus, or Lord chief Justice of Rome;
and after the discharge of that office, Praetor of Sicily, where he exercised
his authority with so much lust, avarice and cruelty, that the Sicilians sued
him upon the Law De pecuniis repetundis, to make him refund: and in their
favor, Cicero managed the accusation against him with so much vigor and art,
that when Verres saw how his Patron Hortensius was over matched, he withdrew
into voluntary exile, where, after he had rested free from any further
molestation for twenty six years, he was by the Triumviri proscribed and slain.
Plin. lib. 34. The cause of his proscription, was for denying to Mark Antony
certain antique pieces of Corynthian plate, which that Triumvir much desired.
Seneca says he died like a stout man; but it seeems he had lived like a thief,
one that robbed not one man, not one City, but all Sicily. See Cicero in
Verrinis, Asconius Pedianus and Lactautius lib. 2.

Verse 36. Clodius.] Clodius, Cicero's capital enemy, made himself be adopted
by a Plebeian, only that he might be one of the body of the people, to vote
Cicero out of Rome, Cicero ad Atticum lib. 1. He was an Adulterer most impudent
and sacrilegious, for he came to the solemnity of the Good Goddess (where it
was unlawful for any man to be present) in the habit of a singing-Woman, Sat.
6. to meet Julius Caesar's wife, Plutarch. which occasioned the Julian Law,
that made adultery death. He married his own Niece, enjoyed three Sisters, and
corrupted Metella Daughter to the religious Pontifex Maximus, that lost his
eyes with zealous care to preserve the Temple of Pallas when it was on fire,
Sat. 3.

Or he that saved our Pallas from the flame. Verse 37. Catiline.] A Roman, for
his conspiracy against his Country, made famous by the pen of Cicero.
Catiline's fellow Conspirators were Lentulus, Cethegus, Statilius, Gabinius,
Ceparius: you may read their whole Plot at large in Salust; and Cicero's Orat.
against Catiline.

Verse 38. Sylla 's three Scholars,] Caesar, Anthony, and Lepidus; imitating in
the beginning of their Triumvirate, the bloody Roll of their Tutor in the Art
of Government, Sylla. See Sylla in the Comment upon the first Satyr.

Verse 39. One lately married his own Niece.] This might be Claudius Caesar,
that after he had put to death his Empress Messalina, married Agrippina his own
brothers Daughter, Mother to Nero, the Senate dispensing with the incestuous
Marriage: and she (lest she might bring a Coheir to her Son Nero) took potions,
and receipts to make her part with her conceptions: which deformed Embrions or
Abortives could not choose but be very like her Uncle their Father; for he was
(as the Mother of Antonius used to call him) a monster of men, a thing begun by
nature but not finished. And after the violation of the Law, in this marriage
with his Niece, he revived the Julian Law, which made adultery death; not only
a terrible Law to Men, but that would have reached Mars and Venus too, if
Vulcans Counsel might have pleaded it. Others, to whose opinion I subscribe,
understand this (One) to be Domitian Caesar, that was like wise very ugly, and
married his own Niece Julia, here named, Daughter to the delight of mankind,
his noble Brother Titus: forcing her to take so many drugs to prevent the
danger of childbearing, that by seeking to preserve, he destroyed her.

Verse 45. Scauran Counterfeits.] Aemilius Scaurus born of noble (but poor)
parents, raised himself by his elocution to the dignity of Consul: He having
once been so poor, that he was forced to trade in Charcoal for a livelihood.
In his Consulship he triumphed for his victory over the Ligurians, and
Cantisci: when he was Censor he made the Aemilian Way, and built the Aemilian
Bridge: He commanded his Son Scaurus (for giving ground to an enemy) never to
come into his sight again; the sense of which ignominy, made so deep an
impression in the bashful youth that he slew himself, Plin. But as the best
interpretation (of Scauran Counterfeits) Salust in his Jugurthines gives this
character of Aemilius Scaurus. He was a person noble, active, factious and
bold, but he had the art of concealing his vices. After the expiration of his
Consulship, when he was Consular, and Prince of the Senate: the House sent him
Ambassador to King Jugurth to diswade him from assaulting Cirra, and besieging
Adherbal.

Verse 48. Laronia.] A wanton, but a witty Lady, that tells the sour
Philosophy-monger, that Cato Major, (Censor by his office) and his Nephew,
whose constancy was admired by the Romans (being now in their ashes) it seems a
third Cato was come from heaven, meaning this censorious Stoic; but whilst
she thus looks upon him as upon a kind of God, she takes notice that he is in
something less then a Man; for she finds that he wears a perfume, and
desires to know his Drugster, that she might buy at the same Shop: such
essences being as proper for her sex, as contrary to his severe profession.

Verse. 54. The Law Scantinian.] Caius Scantinius, being accused by Caius
Marcellus, for offering to force his Son; a Law passed in Senate, that set a
Fine of 10000 H.S. upon the like attempt; and the foul Offender was either to
pay the whole sum or his life.

Verse 66. Arachne,] Idmon's Daughter, a Lydian Maid that had the vanity to
challenge the Goddess Pallas to weave with her, and being disgraced by the
Goddess, despaired: and had hanged her self but that Pallas as a monument of
her own mercy and the Maids presumption, saved her life and turned her into a
Spider, that is still weaving to no purpose. Ovid Met. lib. 6. Pliny says
Arachne was the Inventress of Lines and Nets* and that her Son Closter found
out the Wheels and Spindles for wool.

Verse 67. Penelope,] Wife to Ulysses, that in the twenty years absence of her
Husband, could never be wrought upon, either by her Parents persuasions or the
Courtship of her Suitors, to violate her faith in giving way to a second
marriage* but when the libidinous pretenders were so pressing that she feared
violence, she won them to a grant of so much time, for her to think upon it, as
till the work which she had in hand (and was then in the Loom) should be
wrought off: and she carried her design so politickly, that all which they saw
her weave in the day time, she unwove in the night. Thus she staved off their
fury, till her Husband returned, who coming home in a Beggars habit, desired of
his wife a nights lodging, and in that time made an end of all his Rivals.
Homer in Odyss.

Verse 80. Procula.] Procula, Pollinea, Carfinia, and Fabulla were famous Roman
Curtesans in Juvenal's time.

Verse 87. Victorious Fathers.] The ancient Romans; whose richest apparel was
their wounds, their strongest fortifications the mountains, and their
healthfullest exercise, the plough that maintained their Families: with what
indignation would they have looked upon the effeminate impudence of these
Sarcenet Judges.

Verse 93. Legislative Cretan.] The silken Judges that would be thought as
strict and just as Minos the Cretan Legislator.

Verse 101. Hedge-Priest.] The word is now so proper for a Mock-Priest, that I
rather choose it then my Author's expression, Qui longa domi redimicula sumunt,
a House-Priest, one of those that wear fillets and jewels about their necks,
which he calls House-Priests, to distinguish them from Priests belonging to the
Temples, appointed to sacrifice by public Authority; to which he adds the
wearing of fillets and jewels, to distinguish them from men, their effeminacy
disowning of their sex. These Separatists he parallels with the Dippers or
Baptists of Athens, that worshipped their Goddess Cotytus or Cotittus, with the
like abominable Ceremonies, being diametrically opposite to those used by the
Romans at the Feast of the Good Goddess; for there the Vestal Nuns were
Superintendents. Cic. de Arusp. respons. no man admitted to the Sacrifice, not
so much as a male picture, Sat. 6. (though it seems Clodius brought in a
masculine substance;) nay, the very Myrtle was excluded, because it was
consecrated to Venus: but here they had nothing appertaining to the Good
Goddess, but that which made her thought to be Ceres, the paunches of fat
Sowes, and bolls or vessels of wine, which they called by the name of Amphora's
of honey. Alex. Genesis Dier. lib. 6. c. 8. but they admitted no women, they
themselves acting women's parts.

Verse 116. Masters Juno.] It was the Roman mode for the man to protest by his
Genius, and the woman by her Juno.

Verse 117. Otho.] Otho Sylvius descended from the Hetrurian or Tuscan Kings,
came to be Emperor by treason, murdering his poor old Sovereign Galba. Tacitus
lib. 1. cap. 7. says, that Otho's Soldiers as if they had marched against the
Parthians, Vologeses, or Pacho, to unthrone them that had rooted out the
Arsacean Line, and not to murder their own Emperor unarmed and aged, scattering
the people, trampling upon the Senate, put spurs to their horses and charged
into the place of Assembly; neither did the sight of the Capital, nor reverence
of the Temples there, nor the memory of past Princes, or fear of those to come
terrify them from committing that inhumane act, which the immediate Successor
is obliged to revenge. Galba was slain by Camurius a Soldier of the fifteenth
Legion. Tacit. Plut. But Otho that when he was conquered by Vitelius, painted
his face before his great Looking-glass like an ordinary woman, (for it seems
the two Queens Semiramis and Cleopatra did not so in their last battles) yet in
his death, and only in his death, showed himself a man. Plut. Tacit.

Verse 118. Auruncane Actors spoil.] It relates to Virgils verse lib. 12.
Actoris Aurunci spolium, Auruncane Actors spoil; being a massy spear won in
fight from that great Soldier by Turnus: not greater for a spear then Otho's
Trophy for a Looking-glass.

Verse 127. Bedriack field.] The ground where Otho was defeated by Vitelius, in
all other but the Louvre-copy written Bebriack.

Verse 129. Semiramis.] Queen of Assyria, the Widow of King Ninus, that
perceiving the Assyrians would not endure to be governed by a Woman, concealed
his death, and took upon her self his person, till such time as her Son Ninus
should grow up and be able to manage the Affairs of State. She walled the City
of Babylon, Sat. 10. Brick-wal'd Babylon. Subduing her neighbor Princes, she
very much extended the limits of her Empire, Valor. lib. 9. cap. 3. Once, when
she was dressing her self, news came that the Babylonians had revolted, and
one side of her hair being uncomb'd out, she put on her Quiver, and in that
posture led up her Army against the Town, nor would she suffer the other side
of her hair to be put in order till the City was rendered. But the end of her
life answered not so glorious a beginning; for she fell in love with her Son
Ninus, that having no other way to be rid of her nefarious importunity, slew
her with his own hand.

Verse 131. Cleopatra,] Queen of Egypt, Daughter of Ptolomy Auletus, Sister
and Wife to Ptolomy the last: She was first Mistress to Julius Caesar, and had
by him her Son Caesario: Afterward Mark Antony lived with her as her Husband,
divorcing himself from his own Lady the Sister of Augustus, which he so
resented, that he declared a war against Antony, and defeated him at sea in the
battle of Actium, where he fought and fled in obedience to Cleopatra; at last
died upon his own sword, Plut. This example Cleopatra followed, that disdaining
to be made a scorn to Rome, and to follow the triumphant Chariot of Augustus,
procured a Country fellow to bring her in a basket of figs, a venomous Asp,
which she angering, it sucked her arm, and so the poison struck her to the
heart. Plut. in the life of Marc. Antony.

Verse 134. Foul Phrygian talk.] A lacivious Lecture read at mealtimes by the
Archigallus, Peribonius, to his Scholars that exactly followed him in
Trencher-doctrines, and point of gusto, but could not be brought to imitate him
in the use of his Phrygian Razor ( viz.) the Fish-shell wherewith he gelt
himself.

Verse 142. Gracchus for thy Dower.] This Gracchus a prodigy of that noble
house of the Gracchi, that being descended from Gracchus Sempronius the
Proconsul of Spain, to whom the Celtiberians rendered themselves, and from
Scipio that defeated Hannibal, to the dishonor of his Family and Nation,
basely married himself as a Bride to a Trumpeter; out of a mere wanton humor;
for he was able to subsist of himself, as appears by the Dower which he brought
to the Trumpeter, being 4000 Sestertia, about 3125 l. sterling, the Census
Equestris or legal Estate of a Roman Knight: yet was this very Gracchus one of
the four and twenty Salian Priests, of which were twelve, being the first
number, instituted by Numa Pompilius in the honor of Mars, and were to dance in
Procession through the streets of Rome, carrying in their hands the Ancile or
brazen Shield that dropped from heaven into King Numa's hand, Plut. in Numa.

Verse 145. Censor.] The Censors were two Officers chosen by the Consuls with
consent of Senate, to Register men's names, and to assesse or value their
estates: in the second place they were capacitated to reform manners, by
inquiring into men's lives and actings: and in this secondary sense, Juvenal
asks whether it be not more necessary, that a Censor should set a Fine upon the
head of Gracchus, or that an Aruspex should purify Rome, after the production
of such a Monster.

Verse 145. Aruspex,] A Soothsayer, that divined of things to come by
inspection of the entrails of sacrificed beasts, part of whose office it was to
lustrate or purge the place contaminated with any monstrous birth.

Verse 148. A Cow calve a Lamb.] Be pleased to take notice that calve in this
place is the proper action of a Cow in bringing forth a Lamb; and that in the
precedent verse Damme is the denomination received by the woman, after she has
teemed a Calfe. This I explane, lest my Reader, referring both the words to one
action, I might be thought to transgress against the rules of proportion.

Verse 150. Ancilian Shields.] The Ancile was a brazen Shield round at both
ends, and half-moon'd at the sides, which in King Numa's reign (as I said
before) fell down from Heaven at the ceasing of a plague, a voice being heard
(out of the cloud from whence it dropped, when Miracles were frequent at Rome)
that promised health to the City so long as that Ancile should be kept safe;
whereupon Mamurius was commanded by Numa to make eleven more such Shields,
which he did, and made them all so like the first, as they were
indistinguishable. These twelve Ancilia were delivered into the custody of
twelve Priests of Mars, which number was afterward increased to four and
twenty, (one of whose College this Gracchus was, before he married the
Trumpeter) called Salian or dancing Priests, because, as you have heard, their
custom was to dance when they carried the Ancilia. This stupendous marriage
of a Priest of Mars makes my Author cry out upon the God, that revenged not
upon his Priest this profanation of his Deity; and that being the Father of
Romulus, and therefore of the Romans, his Godheadship looked no better to his
children, but suffered them to act these abominations even in the Campus
Martius, the Fields of Mars, and in the Quirine Valley, which was likewise
consecrated to him, that was in his fury called by the Romans Gradivus, but
when he was amicable Quirinus, Ovid. 2. Fast.

Verse 171. Swollen Lyde's Salve-box.] A charm against barreness worn by the
superstitious Roman women, and sold by those Quack-salving Gossips of Lydia.
About the understanding of this word Lyde there have been great controversies
among the Critics: Junius will have Lyde to be the Lydian Maid Arachne, and so
to signify a Spider, which (the Naturalists say) if it be worn about a woman,
will make her fruitful. Politianus will have Lyde to signify one of those
Lydian women that went about Rome to sell receipts to Ladies. Now do but
suppose this Spider of Junius to be put into Politian's Salve-box, and to feed
upon the unguent that imbalmed the inside thereof (as those Spiders do which
at this day are worn in bags or walnut-shells against a Tertian Ague) and then
either interpretation of Lyde may stand good; and so the Spider may be sold for
a charm against barrenness by a Lydian woman, that should best know her nature,
being her Country-woman: and consequently the two Critics are reconciled,
without the learned scruple, that if Lyde had signified a Spider, condita then
must have been the nominative case, and so the verse would have wanted his true
quantities. And thus much shall suffice for these kind of Criticismes, being
difficiles nugae.

Verse 172. Active Luperci.] The Lupercalia were Feasts and Games solemnized by
the Romans in honor of God Pan, whom they called Inuus or Junus, Pomponius
Laetus de Sacerd. cap. de Luper. The time of their celebration was upon the
unfortunate days of February, a Februando, being the time of Purification;
though the Feast it self was called Lupercale, the Feast of Wolves, in memory
of the Wolf that nursed Romulus and Remus: and the Luperci, the Priests that
ran the Course, set forth at the foot of Mount Palatine, where the Wolf gave
suck to Romulus; likewise a Dog the VVolfs enemy was then sacrificed with two
Goats. These were the Ceremonies, Plut. in Romul. after the Sacrifice, two
young Lords waiting at the Altar, had their foreheads bloodied with the Popa's
knife wherewith he killed the Goats: the blood was presently dried up with wool
dipped in milk; and as soon as ever their foreheads were dry, it was their Qu to
laugh: then the Goats skins being cut into thongs, the youths took them in
their hands, and only girting a napkin about their middles, ran stark naked
through the streets, striking all they met with the thongs, and the wives that
never had children, would be sure to stand in their way, because they believed
there was a virtue in those touches that helped conception. The reason why they
ran naked, was, because the Shepherds God, Pan Licaeus, in whose honor the
Arcadians first instituted such Games, was ever painted naked, Fenest. de
Sacerd. cap. 1.

Verse 173. Fencer Gracchus] Juvenal seems not to be so much offended with
Gracchus the Salian Priest, as with Gracchus the Gladiator, because this
dishonored his illustrious Family in the sight of all Rome; fighting upon the
Stage as a Retiarius, or Jack-Pudding to the Clown the Myrmillo. The manner of
their fight was this; the Retiarius and Myrmillo or Secutor being so armed as
you see in the Design before this Satyr, and the whole City of Rome, as well
the Senate as the People looking on; the Retiarius tried all the ways of his
Art, to get the Myrmillo's head into his Cast-net, sometimes seeming not to
mind himself, that the Secutor might think he lay open to his Sica or crooked
sword, and whilst he cunningly gave him a blow at his leg or thigh, attempting
with his Float-net to halter him: but if he missed, he was forced to fly round
about the Lists till he could recover, and put himself into a posture of
offense: in the mean time he kept off the Sica with his Fuscina or Trident:
Sometimes they would come to a Parlee, and the Net-bearer would act the
Complementaster, telling the Follower, though he knew his blood was sought by
him, and always carried a sponge in his pocket, Plin. lib. 31. to wipe away
his fury, yet for his own part he meant no harm to the Follower himself, only
he desired to catch his Fish. See Lipsius in Saturnal. and Juvenal, Sat. 8.
where he describes this Gracchus in the Lists, not compelled by Nero to fight
as a Gladiator: but voluntarily, after he had spent his fortunes, selling his
honor, life and funeral to the Praetor, being a man of mean birth, in whose
Show this Lord fought for money, in the presence of the greatest persons of
Rome, but none of them, no not the Capitolini Marcelli, etc. so nobly born as
himself.

Verse 176. Capitoline Race.] Capitoline was the Cognomen or Surname of the
Manlian Family, whose Founder Marcus Manlius, for affecting the Sovereign
power, was adjudged to be cast down from the Tarpeian or Capitoline Rock.

Verse 177. Marcellus] was the proper name of the gallant Roman that in a
single combat killed the General of the Gauls, took Syracusa in Sicily, was
five times Consul, and at last, circumvented by Hannibal in an ambush, perished.

Verse 177. Catuli,] The honor of that name Qu. Luctatius Catulus, in the
first Punick war, with three hundred sail of Romans, cutting of provisions
from six hundred Carthaginian Ships under their Admiral Amilcar, and defeating
their whole Fleet, put an end to the war: yet granted them at their humble suit
peace, upon these conditions, That they should leave to the Romans Sicily and
Sardinia, with the rest of the Isles between Italy and Africa, and withdraw
their forces out of Spain that lies beyond Iberus, Live.

Verse 177. Fabian name.] The Fabii were those noble and potent Romans that
took upon themselves the war against the Vientes, only drawing with them into
the field their Clients and Slaves; and having worsted the Enemy in many light
skirmishes, at last by a stratagem at the River Cremera they were all slain to
a man, Ovid lib. 2. Fast. yet this sad calamity one of the Fabian Family
survived, being left at Rome a Child, from whom by a long series of descents
came that Fabius Maximus, created Dictator against Hannibal, whose dilatory
prudence restored Rome to her former greatness, much impaired and almost quite
lost by the temerity of other Generals.

Ennius. Vnus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem.
One man by his demurres preserved our State.
Verse 178. Paulus.] Paulus Aemilius the Consul, slain at the battle at Cannae
in Apulia.

Verse 180. Not bating him.] The Praetor that hired the Gladiator Gracchus.

Verse 182. Stygian Sound.] The River Styx, over which Charon (with the Oar
here mentioned) rowed thousands of souls at a Fare.

Verse 184. Pay not for their bath.] No children at Rome were exempted from
paying the Balneatick, or Bath-farthing, but only such Infants as were carried
in their Nurses arms; and it should seem that only such believed their Nurses,
that told them of Hell and Hobgoblins.

Verse 185. Camillus] Was called a second Romulus, as a new Founder of Rome
after the Gauls were Masters of it: ten years he held the Veians besieged, and
then took the Town by a Mine: Soon after he was brought to his Trial by
Apuleius Saturninus Tribune of the people, for riding in Triumph with white
horses, and for an unequal distribution of the spoil: being condemned he
withdrew into Ardea: but when the Gauls had possessed themselves of Rome, and
straightly besieged the Capitol, he was in his absence chosen Dictator, and
collecting the scattered Romans, surprised the Gauls that only busied their
heads about weighing of Roman gold; and so restored his Country to their
Liberty. After this, when the people of Rome would needs transplant themselves
to Veii, he stayed them with a grave and eloquent Oration, which you may read
in Livy, wherein you may see all the perfections and excellencies of the City
of Rome. The third time that he was made Dictator, he preserved the City
Satricum, confederate with the people of Rome, from the fury of the Latins. The
fourth time that he was chosen Dictator to pacify a sedition of the people, he
excused himself for want of health, and deputed another in his place. The fifth
time that he was Dictator, the Gauls once again marching toward Rome, and
quartering their Army near the River Aviene, were utterly defeated by him.
Lastly, at 80 years of age he died in Rome of the plague.

Verse 186. Fabricius.] The Censor, titled for his strictness Maximus, assisted
by his Colleague Q. Aemilius Papus, fined Pub. Cornelius Ruffinus, who had been
twice Consul, and put him out of the Senate, for having in his house a silver
vessel of ten pound weight, Agel. lib. 4. Val. Max. See Juvenal. Sat 9 and 11:
where he notes the like Censure passed by him upon his Colleague P. Decius*

Verse 186. Curious.] Of him in the beginning of the Comment upon this Satyr.

Verse 186. Both the Scipio 's] Scipio Africanus and Scipio Aemilianus, or
Africanus minor: the first when he was a boy used at certain hours of the day,
to retire himself into a private part of the Temple, and was thought by the
people to converse with Jove. At seventeen years of age his Father carried him
into the field, in the beginning of the second Punick war; and even then he
rescued his Father wounded and catched in one of Hannibals traps, Live. Plut.
After he had taken new Carthage in Spain, he passed his Army into Africa, where
conquering Hannibal, he made Carthage tributary, Live. Where he died is
uncertain; some say at Rome, and show a Monument at the Porta Capena with three
Statues over it, two of P. and L. Scipio, the third of the Poet Ennius Scipio's
friend, Cic. Others say he died at Linternum, and was there buried by his own
appointment, declining his ungrateful Country, that would have condemned him
for moneys received of King Antiochus, and not brought into the public
Treasury. By this Scipio the other Scipio was adopted (for he was the Son of L.
Aemilius Paulus) he utterly destroyed Carthage and Numantia, two Cities most
inveterate enemies to the State of Rome. At last, living privately at his own
house, he was there slain, for which murder the Gracchi were suspected, Live.

Verse 187. The Legion.] The three hundred and six Fabii before mentioned.

Verse 188. The Youth at Cannae.] The flower of all the Roman Militia, upon
whom the Carthaginians at the battle of Cannae did execution so long, till
Hannibal himself cried out Soldiers no more blood.

Verse 191. Purify themselves.] The Aruspex when he purified a place defiled
with Monsters, used a Torch and Sulphur with water, and a Laurel sprinkle,
Ovid.

Verse 195. The Orcades] Claudius Caesar added the Islands of the Orcades to
the Roman Empire.

Verse 198. Zalates.] One of the Armenian Children sent Hostage to Rome, and
there debauched by the Tribune, who had the custody and breeding of him.

Verse 205. Artaxata,] A City in Armenia, Strab. lih. 11. built upon the River
Araxes by Hannibal King of Artaxia.

Figura Tertia.
UMbricius 1 migrans 2 Juvenali narrat amico,
Quorsum tota domus rheda ponatur in una,
Et cur matre senex cupiat decedere 3 Roma;
Facta noverca pios quia pejus tractat alumnos,
Quam si quis longis venit improbus hospes ab oris:
Nam si tu frauds ignoras artis, egenus
Esto; ut 4 Judaeus Romae qui somnia vendit,
Cui 5 Templu^ Egeriae, cui 6 fonsque 7 nemusque locantur,
Arboribus populo mercedem pendere jussis.
Umbricii sine dote 8 puellam candida virtus
Agricolae jungat; lanam trahet otia ruris
Nacta, magis felix, quam serica Consulis uxor:
Filia 9 dum civis, dotata an pauper, in urbe
Cogitur infido misere succumbere Graeco;
Pharmaca qui miscet, cantus choreaeque magister;
Virginibusque legit, quae scripsit Achaia mendax.
Ambulet Umbricii per noctem 10 filius, ira
Jam praetextati spreta, contoque minantis;
Dissimilis 11 Romano inopi, qui basia dextrae
Caedentis figens, abit uno laetus ocello.
Quum virtus humilis magnas non incolat urbes,
Curru^ age, perge 12 Auriga, probis comes ibo colonis.


The third Design.
HEre from 1 Umbritius 2 Juvenal receives
A full account why his old friend thus leaves
His Mother 3 Rome, that treates the best of hers
No better then the worst of Foreiners:
For if no Cheats mean-fortun'd Romans use,
They grow as poor as fortune-telling 4 Jews,
That farm Egeria's sacred 5 Tenement,
Fountain 6, and 7 Grove, but fell it to make rent.
His 8 Daughter, without dower, her virtue now
May match to one that holds his father's plough,
And she live happier then a Consul's wife,
Crowned with the quiet of a Country life:
Whilst, poor or rich, at Rome a handsome 9 Maid
Will be to some sly Grecian's lust betrayed,
That gives her Physic, teaches her to dance,
To sing an Ode, or read a Greek Romance;
His 10 Son too may walk lighted by the Moon,
And now fear no wild rambling youth's batoon;
Like some poor 11 Roman, that in case he miss
But one eye, will the hand that struck him kiss.
No living for poor virtue in great Towns.
On 12 Carter! Have among you honest Clowns.
The Manners of Men. THE THIRD SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
Umbritius, with his Wagon load
Of household goods, upon the road
Meets Juvenal, and lays him down
The reasons why he leaves the Town;
Compares the Countries safe delights
With Rome's deer Rates, ill-Arts and Frights;
And saying on, is put in mind
Of parting, by the Sun declined.
THough grieved for my old friend's remove, I Am glad
He will at empty Cumae fix, and add
One Dweller to that Sybil's Town, the door
To Baiae, sweet retirement's pleasant shore.
I would plant Prochyta your petty Isle,
Ere dwell in our Suburra's goodly Pile:
For what so desolate, sad, horrid there,
As frights of fire, still falling houses here,
And thousand dangers which at Rome we dread,
Besides the Poets that in August read?
The Wagon, wherein all his house was laid,
At the ancient Arc by moist Capena stayed,
Where NUMA every night his Goddess met,
Whose Temple, Spring, and Grove the People let
Now to the Jews, and all their stock to pay
Their Landlords, is a Basket and some Hay;
Yet out of every tree the rent is made,
It Is Beggars-bush, no more the Muses shade.
Into EGERIA'S valley we descend,
To those fair Wells, which Art presumed to mend.
How much diviner had the waters been,
If with a border of eternal green,
The grass about the spring had still remained,
Nor marble had the native stone profaned?
Here thus UMBRICIUS says, since for our pains
In honest Arts, the City yields no gains:
My stock's less this day then the day before,
Yet will to morrow shrink that little more:
I mean to go and settle in the Town,
Where DAEDALUS his wearied wings laid down;
Whilst age strait-shoulder'd has some youth in it,
Whilst my hair's gray; whilst there is a remnant yet
For LACHESIS to spin; whilst I walk on
My own legs, need no staff to lean upon;
I bid the place where I was born, farewell.
There let ARTURIUS and CATULUS dwell,
Men that turn black to white, that can with ease
Farm holy earth, our rivers, and our seas,
Be Scavengers, bodies to burning bear,
And sell slaves under the commanding spear.
These Village-known cheeks, that in Country lists
Were Fencers men, these sometimes Flutenists,
Now sword-play Masters, with reversed thumbs kill,
The people shouting, what-poor Rogue they will.
Returning thence, hire the gold-finders place,
Indeed what not? since they are of that race
Which rises to high office, from mean birth,
As often as fortune is disposed to mirth.
What should I do at Rome? I cannot ly,
Nor when a book is vilely writ, comply
And beg a copy. How your Planet runs
I know not; promise fathers deaths to sons
Nor can, nor will I; I did never dissect
Toads entrails; what commands lewd friends direct
To others wives, conveyed by others be:
No Thief shall his Receiver make of me.
I therefore go lame, no companion left,
An useless member, my right hand bereft.
Who Is now beloved, but he that can reveal
Foul trusts, which he for ever should conceal:
He owes thee nothing, nothing will bestow,
That lets thee but an honest secret know.
Great VERRES with respect will that man use
That when he pleases VERRES can accuse.
Let not dark TAGUS buy thee from thy sleep,
Nor all the gold that rolls unto the deep;
Take not base bribes, which thy sad soul rejects:
Whilst thy great friend the faith, he hires, suspects.
Now what they are our rich men love so well,
I loath so much, I haste, nor blush, to tell,
I cannot, Romans, this Greek Town abide;
Nor's all Greek filth; for long since with the tide
To Tiber, Syrian Orontes flowd,
Their oblique strings and Fiddlers, language, mode,
Their Country Cimbals too they brought a-land,
And hackney-Sluts that in the Circus stand.
Walk thither you that do a fancy bear
To Curtezans that painted Miters wear.
Our nointed Clown, prize-playing ornaments,
Or a poor basket-scambling gown contents:
There Is born at Andros, Samos, Amidon,
Alaband, Trallos, or high Sicyon:
Have the honor in mount Esquiline to live,
Or that, to which a name the wickers give.
Now servants in great houses, some years hence
Their Lords; thanks to their desperate impudence,
Quick wit, and volubility of tongue;
ISAEUS had not his so smoothly hung.
Tell me, what is he in whom comes every man?
A Rhetorician, a Grammarian,
A Painter, Nointer, Augur, Geometrician,
A Dancer of the ropes too, a Physician,
Magician, he knows all things: bid him so,
To heaven the hungry little Greek will go.
In short, wings were not by a Thracian worn,
Tartar, or Moor: but one at Athens born.
Should I not fly from these great Lords? shall he
Seal first, and at a feast take place of me,
That has by that wind wafted hither bin
Which brings us Syrian figs, and sea-coal in?
Is it no privilege that we were bred
In Roman air, with Sabine olives fed?
The wise Greek Parasite will the speech commend
Of his unlearned, the face of 's ugly friend:
His long weak neck with HERCULES compare,
Holding earth-born ANTAEUS in the air:
Admire his clear voice, sounding harsher then
The Cock that treading bites his love the Hen.
We flatter thus, but they are believed, for they
Act better: when upon the Stage they play
A naked Sea-Nymph, or a modest Wife,
Or Curtezan, they do it to the life,
The woman seen, it is not the Player speaks;
All Is plain beneath the waste, and gently breaks;
Nor should their Mimicks be in that esteem:
ANTIOCHUS, STRATOCLES, DEMETRIUS seem
Such wonders: soft-tongu'd HAEMUS such a man:
Their very Nation's a Comedian;
Smile you? a louder laughter shakes him: weep,
He his friend company in tears will keep,
But griev's not: if you say the winter's cold
And call for fire, he will in a Rug be rolled:
Cry out it is hot, he sweats: can ours then match
His wit, that still lies at the nimbler catch?
That night and day put's on another look:
Praises his friend's new Suite, as strangely took:
Flourishing of his hands before his face
If he belch well, or piss with a good grace:
Or if, the gilt boll's bottom turning up,
He take the froth off, with a gallant sup.
Then nothing's safe from's lust, or unprophan'd:
Not your chaste Wife, your Son till then unstained,
The yet smooth Bridegroom, or your virgin-childe.
Have none of these? thy Grandmother's defiled.
They will know Chamber-secrets, and be feared.
And since some mention of the Greeks y' have heard,
See their Gymnasium, where our Youth now learns,
And hear a crime the reverend Gown concerns;
The Stoic murdered BAREAS, a State-Rogue
His Friend; his Pupil a grave Pedagogue:
An old Informer, nursed upon the coast
Where winged PEGASUS a feather lost.
No place for any Roman here remains,
Where ERIMANTUS or PROTOGENES reigns,
Or DIPHILUS, that by's Nation's vice will own
No Partner, but enjoyes his friend alone:
For if his clime's or nature's venom fall
Into an easy ear, good night to all
My tedious service, out a-doors I Am hurld;
A Client's the least loss in all the world.
But, not to sooth our selves, though night by night
We Clients run so hard, what gain we by it?
When now the Praetor bids his Lictor fly
To childless friends, that long since waking ly,
For fear that his Colleague the Tribune may
Wish MODIA, or ALBINA, first Good day?
The rich man's Slave and the poor Freed-man's Son
(That gives him the upper hand) together run;
The first whereof bestows what would have paid
The Tribune for a Legion, to Trade
With CATIENA, or pant once or twice
Upon Calvina: frighted at her price,
Thou take poor whores; so much thou can not spare
As will hand CHIO from her lofty chair.
At Rome produce a witness as sincere
As CYBEL'S Host, though NUMA should appear,
Or he that saved our PALLAS from the flame:
First his estate's examined, last his fame:
What servants keeps he? what is he worth in land?
On's Board how great how many Chargers stand?
As much coin as in's Cofers each man has,
So much is the estimation of his faith.
Should thou make oath by all those sacred powers
The Samothratians worship, and by ours:
That poor men thunder and the Gods contemn,
It Is held; and that the Gods dispense with them.
Then one's a common theme for mirth and scorn,
If's Gown be sordid, his Cloak old and torn,
His Shoe-sole gape, or in the stitcht-up wound
The several scars by the new thread be found.
In wretched beggary nothing's harder, then
To see what laughing-stocks it makes of men.
Get y' out, whose means fall short of Law, one cries,
For shame from off the noble Cushion rise:
Let some Whor's issue, or the Cryer's Heir
Sit down, and give his gallant plaudit there
With fine young Fencers, basket-scramblers; thus
It pleased vain OTHO to distinguish us,
Who (here) to Sons-in-law with mean estates
Gives portions? who the poor his Heir creates?
When Is he of the Aediles Counsel? ere this day
We meaner Romans should have troopt away:
Men seldom rise where want keeps virtue down;
But it is a miracle in this base Town.
Here Servant's bellies your expense enlarge:
A poor Room's dear, a slender Meal great charge.
We blush to eat in earth, they do not so
That hence removing to the Marsians go;
That are contented with Sabellian food,
And only wear a course Venetian hood:
There Is a great part of Italy where none
But only dead men have a gown put on.
Even in the majesty of some feast day,
When on the strewn Stage the old Jig ends the Play,
While the poor Country-Child in's Mothers arm
Fears the pale gaping thing will do it harm:
You see one habit worn, by all that sit
As well in the Orchestra as the Pit.
White garments serve the Aediles of the Town,
And it is esteemed a robe of high renown.
Here Is gallantry beyond our means: Here Is more
Then needs, often taken from another store.
Our common crime's proud beggary: not to hold
Thee longer, all at Rome is bought and sold.
What giv'st thou to have COSSUS daign a word,
Or great VIENTO but a look afford?
This mowes down beards, he must the Favorite trim:
The Patron's house is filled with gifts for him;
This for your self Sir: tribute we must pay
To servants, and make them as rich as gay.
Who fears, or ever feared in Country-Towns
Their bane? at moist Praeneste: where wood crowns
The Volsian cliffs: among the simple sort
Of Gabians: or in bending Tibur's Fort?
We fill a Town shoard-up with slender poles
Brought by the Boor, who the old wide-gaping holes
Dawbs over, and then bids us sleep secure,
When we to sleep for ever, may be sure.
Let me live where no night-shreiks terrify,
Here one, fire fire; here others water cry;
UCALEGON tugs out his lumber there:
Below they have chimneys therefore fire may fear;
But thou three stories high unwarn'd art took,
That could for no mischance but drowning look,
The rain from thy Loft being kept away
Only by tiles, where eggs soft pigeons lay.
Shorter then is Dwarfe-wife CODRUS had a Bed,
Item, six little Jugs on's Cupboards head;
Item, beneath it stood a two-ear'd pot
By CHIRON'S Herbal: Lastly he had got
A Chest with some Greek-Authors, where the fierce
Barbarous Mice, gnawed never-dying verse.
Who knows not CODRUS nothing had? yet crossed
By fire, poor wretch, he all that nothing lost:
And to accumulate the Begger's grief
None gave him house-room, or a meal's relief.
But when ACTURIUS his great house was burned
The City droopt, the Conscript-fathers mourned
The Praetor straight adjourns the Court, the fate
Of Rome we groan for, fire it self we hate;
While's house burns, one sends marble and great sums,
With milk-white naked Statues the other comes:
EUPHRANOR'S work, or POLYCLET'S rare piece
This gives, old buskins of the Gods of Greece:
Books, Shelfs, MINERVA to the waste, he brings,
A bushel full of silver he: more things
And better, then he his could ever call,
This Persian now receives, more rich then all
Rome's childless men, suspected to conspire
(Good cause) the setting his own house on fire.
Could you be from the Circus weaned, you may
Buy a neat house at Fabrateria,
At Sora or Frusino; for what here
You sit at, to hire darkness by the year.
There your short Well no bucket needs, but wets
With ease your little Garden's tender Sets:
Live, love thy rake, and sallets neatly dressed,
Which may a hundred Pythagoreans feast:
It Is somewhat, be where 'twil, to be decreed
Lord of so much as may one Lizard feed.
Most sick men here with over-watching die;
Such crudities breed meats that baking lie
Upon the burning stomach. What ease get
Poor Ttadesmen next the street? sleep's for the great.
Hence spring diseases, when the wagons meet
At the oblique turning of some narrow street:
The Car-men there, that stand and scold, would keep
Dull DRUSUS or the Sea-calf from his sleep.
When business calls, the crow'd a rich man shun,
Lest over them his huge Sedan should run,
Which he Reads, writes, or sleeps in as he goes;
For sleep will come if he the curtains close.
Yet he is there first: for as we haste, we find
A stream before us and a tide behind:
He shoves with his elbows, he with harder blocks,
Our heads this cowl-staffe and that barrel knocks,
Dirt noints our thighs: and then the great foot kicks,
And in our fingers the horsemans rowell sticks.
See thou what smoke the Sportula breaths out,
A hundred Guests, their Kitchin's lug'd about?
Scarce CORBULO could such huge Chargers lift
And Chafingdishes, as one Groom makes shift
To bear on's steady head; and runs so fast
He fans the coals, and tears his clothes with haste.
Now meets he Carts wherein tall Fir-trees quake,
Now some that Pine-trees at the people shake:
Then breaks the Axletree whose Carriage bears
Ligurian stones, and poured about his ears.
That mountain thy unlucky Slave intombes:
Of his beshatter'd Carkas what becomes?
Where limbs or bones lie, who can find the holes?
Poor men's whole bodies vanish like their souls.
His Fellows safe at home the dishes wash,
Blow with their mouths the fire, the Nointers clash,
And Boys do in their several places toil,
To fold up napkins full of sweat and oil:
Whilst Novice-Ghost, he sits upon the shore
Afraid of CHARON, hopeless to get over
Foul Styx, from's mouth not able to defray
(Poor soul) that token, should his waftage pay.
Note more dangers that attend the night:
To batter out our brains, from what a height
Pots are poured out which, cracked or slipping, print
The pavement with their weight, and hurt the flint.
Thou Wilt be thought dull, senseless of casual ill,
To sup abroad, and first not make thy Will:
For with so many fates thou art to meet
As waking windows open to the street:
Wish therefore, wretch, and pray they may but crown
Thy head with that foul sullage they cast down.
The wild and drunken youth, unless he fight
And kill his man, can take no rest that night,
But like ACHILLES, when for's friend he mourns,
Now on his face, then on his back he turns:
His own he looses if Rom's peace he keep;
A Quarrel still is prologue to his sleep.
Yet though rash years and hotter wine provoke,
He Is subtle, and avoids the purple cloak,
And his long train of Friends and Grooms, that pass
With burning torches and with lamps of brass:
But I, that have the Moon before me born,
Or husband a short candle, am his scorn.
Hear how we quarreled, if a Quarrel 'twere,
where he lays on, the blows I only bear:
He stands before me, and commands me stand,
And I must be obedient to's command:
Alas! what would you have a man to do,
In hands of one that is mad, and stronger too?
Whence come, he cries? whose beans have swelled thy gut?
Whose vinegar have drunk? what Cobbler put
His purse to thine, some rare chopped leeks to buy,
To eat with a fried Sheeps-head; thou wilt reply?
Speak or I Will kick thee; say, where dwel'st thou? what
Proseucha shall I find thee begging at?
Make answers, or say nothing, all is alike,
He Will beat thee, and make oath that thou did strike;
A poor man's liberty is only this,
He must the hand that bastinads him kiss:
And give the beater thanks, withal his heart,
He Will let him with some few of's teeth depart.
Nor is this all thy danger; he is not far
Will rob thee, when their doors Shopkeepers bar,
When every hinge is silent, Thieves then creep
To cut thy throat: for when our Soldiers keep
The Pontine Fenns, and guard the Galline Wood,
Rogues thence run hither for their livelihood.
What forge? what anvill, but where chains are wrought?
Such store of iron to make fetters bought,
That shortly to want plough-shares we may fear,
That pruning hooks and mattocks will be dear.
Our Great-grand-fathers Grandfathers were blessed,
They under Kings and Tribunes lived the best,
When throughout Rome one Prison served for all.
I could say more: But see the Cattle call;
The Sun too is declining, I must go,
The Carter cracks his whip, and tells me so.
Farewell, think on me, and when Rome signs thee
A Pass to thy sweet AQUINE, call on me;
From Cumae we'll to Elvine CERES ride,
To thy DIANA thou shall be my guide.
If us this shame not, booted I Will assist
In your moist grounds my fellow-Satyrist.
The Comment UPON THE THIRD SATYR^
VErse 2. Cumae,] A City in Campania, upon the Seacoast near to Puteoli, built
by the Cumaeans, a people of Asia, whose General Hippocles joining with
Megasthenes General for the Chalcidians, the Articles between them were so
drawn, that Hippocles was to have the naming of the City, and Megasthenes the
right of colony or plantation, Strabo lib. 5. Thus the Cumaeans of Aeolia gave
the name to that Town, from which the Sibyll called Cumaea received hers.

Verse 4. Baiae,] Another City of Campania, so named from Baius one of Ulysses
his Mates there buried. Near to this City were the Baths, or that confluence of
warm Springs whereunto the noblest Romans resorted both for pleasure and
health, which made it flourish with many fair and Princely Buildings, Martial
to Valerius Flaccus. Vt mill laudem Flacce versibus Baias,
Laudabo digne non satis tamen Baias.
Should I with thousand verses Baiae praise,
Her praises to her worth I could not raise.
As much in commendations of the place is said by Horace in his Epistles.

Nullus in orb locus Baiis praelucet amoenis.
Sweet Baiae no place in the world excells.
Verse 5. Prochyta,] A little desolate Island in the Tyrrhene Sea, one of those
called the Aeolian Isles: some say it was a Mountain in the Isle of Enarime,
which by an Earthquake was from thence poured out, and therefore by the
Graecians called Prochyta. But Dionys Halicar, lib. 1. affirms the name to be
derived from Prochyta Nurse to Aeneas.

Verse 6. Suburra,] One of the fairest and most frequented Streets in Rome.
Festus from the authority of Verrius says it had the name a fuccurrendo, for
as much as the Courts of Guard were there which relieved the Watch, when the
Gabines besieged that part of the Town; and to show that the change of the
letters came only by the vulgar error of pronouncing, he tells us that in his
time the Tribe or Inhabitants of the Suburra was written Tribus Succurranea,
not Suburrana; nor Suburana, as Varro would have it called, for being under the
old Bulwark, sub muro terreo. Varro lib. 4. de ling. lat.

Verse 10. Poets that in August read.] Among the sufferings of those that lived
constantly in Rome, my Author reckons the torment they were put to by the
Poets, whom they could not be rid of, even in the month of August, when the
extremity of heat was enough to kill a man that, being pressed by their
importunity, must stand in the open Street to hear their ridiculous Verses
read; and Vmbricius seems the more sensible of the misery in regard it only
fell upon the meaner sort; for all the great persons of Rome were then at their
Country-houses, to which they removed upon the Calends or first day of July.

Verse. 12. At the ancient Arc by moist Capena] An Arc was a Monument of stone
raised like to the Arch of a Bridge in memory of some triumph or victory: and
this Arc was built in honor of the Horatii: afterward it was called the
distilling or dropping Arc, because over it the pipes were laid that carried
the water into Rome from Egeria's Fountain, Ovid Fast.

Egeria est quae praebet aquas Dea grata Camenoe:
Illa Numae Conjux consiliumque fuit.
Egeria waters us, the Muses prize her:
She was King Numa's Wife and his Adviser.
Verse 13. Where Numa every night his Goddess met.] Numa Pompilius, second King
of the Romans, was born at Cures a Town of the Sabines. He was famous for
Justice and Piety: He pacified the fury of his Neighbors, and brought the
Roman Soldiers (that were grown cruel and savage in their long War under King
Romulus) to a love of peace and reverence of Religion. He built the Temple of
Janus, which being opened signified war; being shut, times of Peace: and all
the whole Reign of Numa it was shut, but stood open after his death for forty
years together. He created the Dial Martial and Quirinal Flamens or Priests. He
instituted a College of Twelve Salian Priests of Mars. He consecrated the
Vestall Virgins: declared the Pontifex Maximus or Chief Bishop: distinguished
the days Fasti and Nefasti, the Court-dayes, and Vacation or Justicium:
divided the year into twelve months: and to strike a Veneration into the
hearts of the Romans, and make them observe what he enjoined, out of an awful
religious duty; he made them believe that every night he met a Goddess or Nymph
which he called Egeria, from whose mouth he received his whole form of
government: their place of meeting was in a Grove without the Porta Capena,
called afterward the Muses Grove, wherein was a Temple consecrated to them and
to the Goddess Egeria, whose Fountain waters the Grove. Ovid that calls her
Numa's Wife says likewise, that she grieving for his death, wept her self into
a Fountain, Metamorph lib. 15. which Fountain, Grove and Temple at a yearly
Rent were let out to the Jews, grown so poor after the Sack of Jerusalem, that
all their Stock was a Basket for their own meat* and hay to give their Horses.
Lastly King Numa, after he had reigned forty years beloved and honored by his
own People and all the neighbour-States, died, not having any strugle with
nature, merely of old age. By his Will he commanded that his body should not be
burned, but that two stone-Chests or Coffins should be made, in one of which
they should put his Corpse, and in the other the Books he had written, Plutarch
in Numa, where he says (and quotes his Author Valerius Ansius) that the Coffin
of Numa's Books contained four and twenty, twelve of Ceremonies, and twelve of
Philosophy written in Greek. Four hundred years after, P. Cornelius and M.
Baebius being Consuls, by a sudden inundation the earth was loosned, and the
covers of the Coffins opened; but there was no part of his body found in the
one, in the other all the Books entire, preserved by the earth and water: But
Petilius (then Praetor) had the reading of them, which occasioned their
destruction by fire; for he acquaniting the Senate with their Contents, it was
not thought fit by the great Council of Rome, that secrets of such a nature
should be divulged to the People; so the books were brought into Court and
burned.

Verse 25. Vmbricius.,] A man rare at divination by the entrails of sacrificed
beasts, Pliny. He foretold the death of Galba, Tacit. but those honest Arts not
bringing in sufficient to maintain Vmbricius in Rome, he scorned to use cozning
Arts, by playing the Mountebank for a livelihood, as you see by his words. --
How your Planet runs
I know not; promise Father's deaths to Sons,
Nor can, nor will I: I did never dissect
Toads entrails. --
Upon these Premises he concludes. What should I do at Rome? -- From whence,
contemning the vanities and baseness of the Town, with his whole household in a
Wagon, this poor Aruspex went out in greater triumph at the Porta Capena or
Triumphal Gate, then ever any Conqueror entered by it into Rome.

Verse 30. Daedalus,] An Athenian Handicraft-man, Son of Mition, the most
ingenious Artist of his time. From his invention we have the Saw, the Hatchet,
the Plummet and Line, the Auger, Glue and Cement. He was the Inventor of Sails
and Sail-yards, which undoubtedly occasioned the Fable of his invention of
Wings. He set eyes in Statues, and by secret springs, wheels, and wyers, gave
motion to those men of marble so artificially as they appeared to be living: an
Art revived, in the reign of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, by his
Mathematician Janellus Turrianus. See. Strada in his Hist. Dec. 1. How Daedalus
built the Labyrinth, was imprisoned in it, and escaped by the VVings he made
himself; you have in the Comment upon Sat. 1. From thence flying to Sardinia,
then as far as Cumae; there he laid down those Wings, the Wings of Sails, as
Virgil calls them, and rested upon the Terra firma. Lucian lib. de Astrolo.
tells us, that Daedalus was a Mathematician: and his Son Icarus taught
Astrology, but being a young man full of fiery immaginations, he soared too
high, pride bringing him into error, and so fell into a Sea of notions, whose
depth was not to be sounded.

Verse 33. Lachesis.] The three fatal Goddesses which the Heathens believed to
dispose the thread of man's life, were Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, the
Daughters of Erebus and Night. The first bore the Distaffe, the second spun the
Thread, and the third (when it came to the determined end) cut it off. Apuleius
thinks the ternary number of the Destinies or Parcae, to be derived from the
number of three points of time; that the Flax wound about the Distaffe
signifies the time past, the Thread in spinning, the time present; and that
which is not twisted, the time to come. The old Latins called these three
Sisters Nona, Decima, and Morta.

Verse 36. Arturius and Catulus.] These two from poor beginnings had raised
themselves to great Estates and Offices, and made use of their wealth and
authority to ingross all good Bargains, and to monopolize all beneficial
places and employments, even to those of the Scavenger and Gold-finder.

Verse 40. Spear.] At Auctions or public sales of men's goods (part whereof was
their Slaves) the Romans ever stuck up a Spear, to give notice to the Town,
Cic. Phil. and when they came in, there was upon the place an Affix posted up,
which contained a Particular of the parcels to be sold, with their several
prices Sig. de Jud. Under the Spear sat the Crier, asking who gives most? and
by him an Officer, some Arturius or Catulus, for Voucher.

Verse 43. Reversed Thumbs.] At any Sword-play, either in the Circus or upon
Theaters, it was in the power of the People to make the Gladiators or Fencers
fight it out, and die upon the place: or to discharge them; and likewise to
restore them to their liberty, lost by the baseness of their calling, for the
present, and if they pleased for ever. The first was done by bowing down their
Thumbs; the second (as by these words appears) with turning up their Thumbs;
the third by giving them a Rod or Wand, called Rudis; the last by bestowing
Caps upon them. Qui insigniori cuique homicidae Leonem poscit, idem Gladiatori
atroci petat Rudem, and Pileum praemium conferat, He that will have a notorious
Murderer exposed to the Lions, even he will give to the bloody Gladiator a
Rudis, and reward him with a Cap, Tertul. de Spect. cap. 21.

Verse 54. Toads Entrails.] The skilfullest Aruspex that ever divined by Toads
Entrails was Locusta, much employed in that service by Agrippina, and by, the
Son of her vicious Nature, Nero.

Verse 65. Dark Tagus.] Tagus is a River of Lusitania rolling golden sands,
Plin. by which my Author conceives the stream to be darkened. Near to this
Spanish River (if we credit Pliny) Mares are horsed by the West-winde, and
foale Ginnets infinite Fleet, but their time of life is swifter; for they never
live to above three years old.

Verse 71. Greek Town.] Rome, where Graecians (that were John's of all Trades,
and could do every thing to please the humor of a Roman) carried away the men
like ships, with a breath: and where the very women affected and spoke the
Greek tongue, Sat. 6.

-- old Woman! fie, let Girls do so:
Will thou fourscore and six be Greekish? chaste
Greek is not when (...), thou say
Life, soul: and fool'st thy husband in a crowd
With words, for which thy Sheets were late a shroud.
Verse 73. Orontes,] A River of Caelesyria, that springs up not far from
Mount Lebanon and the City of Seleucia Pieria, where it sinks under ground, and
rises again in the Apemene Territory, running by Antioch, and falling into
the Sea near Seleucia. It was called Orontes by his name that first made a
Bridge over it, for before they called it Tryphon, Strab.

Verse 76. Circus,] The great Shew-place at Rome, near to that part of Mount
Aventine where the Temple of Diana stood. Tarquinius Priscus built Galleries
about it, where the Senators and People of Rome, to the number of a hundred and
fifty thousand, might see the running of great Horses at Lists, Fireworks,
Tumbling, and baiting or chasing of wild Beasts. In after Ages there was
likewise to be seen Prizes played by the Fencers or Gladiators: and in Vaults
underneath it stood women that would prostitute their bodies for money, Rosin.
Antiq. and as you may see in this Satyr.

And hackney-Sluts, that in the Circus stand. Verse 79 Our nointed Clown] The
meanest sort of Roman Fencers had their necks nointed with an artificial Clay
made of oil and earth; and so that they were able to compass such a nointing,
with a Trechedipna or a poor Poste-Gown, in which they might run to the
Sportula (either to get a share in the hundred farthings, or in the Clients
plain Supper) their ambition was satisfied. But the Greek Peasants, though
far meaner (as subject to these) scorned such low thoughts, aiming to recover
that by cozenage, which they had lost by fighting with the Romans.

Verse 81. Andros,] An Island in the Aegaean Sea, being the principal of the
Cyclades, where there is a Spring whose water every year upon the fifth day of
January tastes like wine, Plin. lib. 2. Samos is an Island in the Icarian Sea
right against Ionia, Ptolomy. Amydon a City of Paeonia or Macedonia, that gave
assistance to the Trojans. Alaband a City in Caria, Plin. Ptol. infamous for
effeminate men and impudent singing women; only famous for the birth of
Appolonius the Rhetor. Trallis a Town of Caria in the Lesser Asia, Plin. lib.
5. Sicyon an Island in the Aegean Sea, opposite to Epidaurum, very high and
eminent, Plin. From this Isle Minerva was called Sicyonia, because Epopaeus
there built a Temple to her for his victory against the Boeotians.

Verse 83. Mount Esquiline.] The seven hills that Rome stood upon, were the
Palatine, the Quirinal, the Aventine, the Caelian, the Esquiline, the Tarpeian
or Capitoline, and the Viminall; the last being so called from the VVickers or
Oziers growing upon it.

Verse 88. Isaeus,] The fluent Orator, whose Scholar Demosthenes was.

Verse 96. At Athens born.] Daedalus that put off his VVings at Cumae, as
before.

Verse 100. Syrian Figs] Syrian Figs, Sea-coal, and the Grecians came in with
one wind and for one purpose, viz. to be sold in the Market at Rome.

Verse 102. Sabine Olives.] Olives growing in the narrow, but long Country of
the ancient Sabines, which reached from Tyber as far as the Vestines, and was
bulwarkt on both sides by the Apennine Mountains, Plin.

Verse 106. Antaeus,] A Giant, begot by Neptune upon the Earth, sixty four
cubits high. He spent his youth in Libya at the Town of Lixus, afterward
called the Palace of Antaeus. Ever when he found himself weary or over-toyled,
he recovered his strength and spirits by touching of the Earth his Mother; and
therefore Hercules, when they two wrastled together, held him up in the air,
that the earth should not refresh him. The great Roman Soldier Sertorius, at
Tygaena a town of Libya, dug up the Sepulcher of Antaeus, and found his
body, Plutarch.

Verse 111. Doris,] A Sea Nymph, Daughter to Oceanus and Thetis, and Wife to
her Brother Nereus, by whom she had an infinite number of Children, Sea-Nymphs,
that from their Fathers name were called Nereides. Her Picture was always
drawn naked, and so it seems the Greek Players acted her.

Verse 112. Thais,] A famous Curtesan born in Alexandria, that setting up for
her self at Athens, drew the custom of all the noble Youth of that learned
City. She was rarely charactered by Menander the Poet in a Comedy, which
probably was acted in Rome by the rare Greek Comedians, Demetrius, Antiochus,
Stratocles and Haemus.

Verse 137. Gymnasium] is here taken for any Room wherein the Greek
Philosophers read to their Roman Pupills.

Verse 139. Bareas.] Bareas Soranus was impeached of high Treason by his Friend
and Tutor P. Egnatius, that took upon him the gravity of the Stoics in his
habit and discourse, to express the Image of an honest Exercise, Tacit. but the
Informer was paid in his own coin; for he that impiously and basely had
murdered his Scholar in Nero's time, was himself in the reign of Vespasian
condemned and executed upon the information of Musonius Rufus, Dio, Tacit.

Verse 142. A feather fell.] In Cilicia P. Egnatius was born, at a Town as
lying as himself; for there, as their History says, Bellerophon's Horse
Pegasus (having stumbled in the air and sprained his Fetlock) dropped a feather
from his heel, and ever since the Town was called Tarsus.

Verse 144. Erimantus.] Erimantus, Protogenes, and Diphilus were Greeks, which
the Great men of Rome trusted with the government of their Children.

Verse 158. Lictor.] See Praetor Sat. 1. whose Officer the Lictor was.

Verse 156. Modia] Modia and Albina were rich Ladies that had not any Children
of their own, and therefore the Roman Lords courted them in as servil a manner
as the Lords were attended by their Clients, Sat. 5.

Trebius obliged, has that for which he must
Break's sleep, and run ungarter'd and untrust,
For fear lest his saluting rivals may
Have filled the Ring by dawning of the day;
Or at the time when the Seven-stars do roll
Their cold and sluggish Wain about the Pole.
Verse 160. The Tribune.] I conceive this Tribune to be the Military Tribune
that commanded in chief with Consular power; not one of those six that had
every of them a thousand men in a Legion, consisting of six thousand.

Verse 161. Catiena.] Catiena, Calvina, and Chio were rich Curtezans, too dear
for the Common sort of Romans; for mean people were hardly able to pay their
Sedan-men or Chair-bearers.

Verse 166. Cybel's Host.] Scipio Nasica, whom the Senate judged to be the best
man; and therefore when Cybele Mother of the Gods was first brought to Rome,
with advice from the Oracle, that she should be entertained by the best man,
they voted her to be lodged in his House. When he found himself inauspiciously
named for Consul by Gracchus, he resigned his Authority. When he was Censor,
he made the Consulls Statues be pulled down, which had been set up in the Forum
by every man's ambition. When he discharged the Office of Consul, he took the
City of Deiminium in Dalmatia. His Army put upon him the name of Imperator, and
the Senate decreed him a Triumph, but he refused both. He was very eloquent,
very learned in the Law, and with an excellent wit, a most wise man; and in the
esteem of all Rome, worthy his noble Ancestors the two Africani. He left not
money enough to pay for his Funeral expenses; therefore they were defraied by
the People; and in every street through which the body past they strewed
flowers, Plin. lib. 22. cap. 3.

Verse 166. Numa.] See the beginning of the Comment upon this Satyr.

Verse 167. He that saved our Pallas.] L. Metellus the Pontifex Maximus before
mentioned, that when the Temple of Vesta was burned down, rescued from the
flame the Palladium or wooden Image of Pallas, brought from Troy: But his piety
had a very sad success, for venturing too desperately into the fire, he lost
both his eyes, Plin. lib. 7. cap. 44. This Metellus in the first Punick War,
for his victories over the Carthaginians, had a most glorious triumph; for he
led through Rome thirteen great Commanders of the Enemy, and sixscore
Elephants.

Verse 174. Samothracians.] Samothracia or Samothrace is an Island in the
Aegaean Sea, near to that part of Thrace where the River Hebrus falls into the
Sea, Stephan. It was anciently called Dardania, from Dardanus the Trojan, that
is reported to have fled thither with the Palladium; but the first name of this
Island was Leucosia, Aristot. in his Republic of Samothracia. The Gods
worshipped by these Islanders, were Jupiter Juno Pallas, etc. from the
Samothracians brought to the Romans, whose peculiar Deities were Mars and
Romulus.

Verse 188. Vain Otho.] L. Roscius Otho when he was Tribune passed a Theatrall
Law, wherein he distinguished the Roman Knights from the Common people,
assigning fourteen Benches in the Theater only for the Knights, that is, for
such as had an Estate worth four hundred Sestertia, being about three thousand
one hundred twenty five pound of our money, by which Law they that were not
worth so much incurred a penalty if they presumed to sit upon any of those
Benches, Cic. Philip. 2. See likewise his Orat. for Muraen.

Verse 191. Aediles.] The Romans had three sorts of Aediles. The first they
called Aediles Curules, from the Chariot they rid in: these were chosen out of
the Senate, Pilet. in lib. 2. Cic. epist. fam. 10. and had in charge the
repairing both of Temples and private Houses. The second sort were Aediles
Plebeii, chosen out of the People; and these came into Office when the Curules
went out, they ruling several years by turns, Alex. Genesis Dier. lib. 4. c. 4.
these were empowered (together with their charge of Temples and private
Dwellings) to punish the falsifying of Weights and Measures, to look to the
public Conduits, and to make provision for Festival Plays. The third sort
were Clerks of the Market, looking to the Corn and Victuals sold in public,
Alex. ibid. these were the Aediles Cerealis in ordinary: the extraordinaries
were the Annonae praefecti, Rosin. Antiq. l. 7. c. 38.

Verse 198. Marsians.] The Marsians were a poor but stout People of Italy,
Neighbors to the Samnits, descended from Marsus Son to the Witch Circe: Men
that with their spittle cured such as were bitten by Vipers, Plin.

Verse 199. Sabellian Food.] Such pitiful poor meat as served the Sabellians,
which inhabited that part of Italy lying upon the Mountains betwixt the
Marsians and the Sabines. They were conquered by M. Curious the Dictator. Their
ancient name was Samnites, Stephan lib. 3. cap. 12.

Verse 206. The pale gaping thing.] The vizarded Fool in the Play.

Verse 215. What giv'st thou] To the Lord Cossus his Chamber-keepers, to let
thee in.

Verse 216. Veiento] Fabricius Veiento, a Lord of the Senate: how proud he was
of his honor and excessive wealth, may be gathered from hence, poor men not
being able to get so much as the favor of a look from him, unless they bought
it of his Servants: how politic a Courtier he was, you may see Sat. 4. and how
unhappie in his Wife Hippia, in Sat. 6.

Verse 222 Cold Praeneste] Thus, not moist Praeneste, it should have bin
printed in the Satyr, if the Transcriber had not mistaken. It is a Town of
Latium fortified by nature, as standing very high: it was a Greek Plantation,
as appears by the old name Polystaephanus. In this Town was the Temple of
Fortune, which L. Sylla (the Fortunate) richly paved with square stones, Plin.
l. 36. ca. 25.

Verse 223. The Volscian Cliffs.] Those that dwell upon the rockie Mountains in
Latium. Camilla was a Volscian, she that assisted Aeneas against Turnus,
Aeneid. 7. Of all the Volscians the poorest were those of Gabium.

Verse 224. Tibur,] A City of the Sabines, sixteen miles from Rome, watered
with many pure Springs, and seated in an excellent air, Ovid. 4. Fast. The
three Sons of Amphiraus, Tiburnus, Catillus, and Chorax built the Town, to
which the eldest Brother gave the name. Solin. Sextus the Grecian. The Fort of
Tibur stood so very high, as to those that looked upon it at a distance it
seemed to be bending and falling like Grantham-Steeple.

Verse 233. Three stories high.] Poor Romans, such as Vcalegon, dwelt in
Garrets, Sat 10.

-- but in that sad time,
Seldom the Soldiers did poor Garrets climb.
Verse 237. Codrus,] the Author of the lamentable Heroic Poem, entitled
Theseis, Sat. 1. one that could neither make Friends nor money to buy a Bed
long enough for his Dwarf-wife Procula.

Verse 253. Euphranor,] A noble Picture-drawer, and as rare a Statuary, one
that writ some Volumes of Symetry and Colors. He flourished in the hundred and
fourth Olympiad: many excellent pieces he likewise cut in brass, Plin. l. 34.
ca. 8.

Verse 253. Polyclet.] Polycletus for his accuratness and the sweetness of his
touches excelled all Statuaries, Quintilian. He did things in brass honored
with the commendations of great Writers, particularly that of his Gamesters
playing at Dice was thought to be incomparable. He was a Sidonian and Scholar
to Gelades. Two Statues he made of one and the same design; the first
according to art, by his own judgment; the other following vulgar opinion, as
any that came in desired him to alter it: when they were finished, he exposed
them to the common view, and that which he did of himself was infinitely
commended, the other thought to be nothing near it: But friends (said he) you
must know, this which you cry up, is my work; that which you dislike, your own.

Verse 261. Circus] See the former part of the Comment upon this Satyr, there
you will find the reason why the Romans were so loath to leave the Circus for
any other place, where they were not like to have such rare sport for nothing.

Verse 262. Fabrateria,] A poor Town of Campania. Sora, another of the same
Country, taken (and I suppose slighted) by the Romans, Plin. lib. 3 cap. 5.
Frusino another neighbor Town in the Falern Territory, anciently called
Frusinum, Ptolom.

Verse 268. Pythagoreans,] The Disciples of Pythagoras, that first gave name to
Philosophy, and made himself be called Philosophus, not Sophus, a Lover, not a
Master of Wisdom, that title being proper to God alone, Laer. in prooem. l. 1.
See Comment upon Sat. 15.

Verse 278. Dull Drusus,] One that it seems was as drousie for a Man* as the
Seal or Sea-Calf for a Fish.

Verse 291. Corbulo,] A man of a vast body, and that spoak high and mighty
words, Tacit. lib. 13.

Verse 298. Ligurian Stones,] Marble dug out of the Quarries in Liguria,
upon the Appennine Mountains between France and Hetruria, now Florence.

Verse 308. Charon,] Brother to the Destinies; the Ferry-man of Hell, that
carries no Souls in his Boat under farthings a piece.

Verse 323. Achilles.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. from whence you may fancy
in what impatient postures the Players would act Achilles, when he was in fury
for the death of his friend Patroclus.

Verse 355. Pontine Fenns.] The Volsian Fenns near to Forum Appii, not far
from Tarracina, twenty miles from Rome: they were drained by the Consul
Cornelius Cethegus, to whom that Province fell, and turned into good Land, Live.
l. 47. After this it was overflowed again and a Trench for Thieves, until the
reign of Theodoric King of the Goths, by whose Command it was drained once
more. The Gallin Wood stood near to the Cumaean Bay, and was another shelter
for Thieves.

Verse 368. Aquine.] Aquinum a Town of the Latins, Plin. watered by the River
Melpha, Strab. now called Aquino, famous for the birth of two men incomparable
for their several kinds of Learning, my Author Juvenal the Satyrist, and
Thomas Aquinas the Schoolman, called by our Countrymen St. Thomas of Watering,
a word expressing the moistness of the place, which may likewise appear by the
adjacent Temple of Ceres, the Goddess of Husbandry, by the Title of Elvin
Ceres, that is, Ceres of the Washes or Marshes, from whence the Spring and
River of Elvis took their names; yet there was dry ground near to Aquine in
Juvenal's own Land, called Diana's Hill, Martial to Juvenal, lib. 2. Epig. 18.

Figura Quarta.
COnsedere Patres, moderantes cuncta, Quirini:
Ipse 1 Nero calvus, solioque animoque superbus,
Eminet: hinc claudit latus aegrae villicus urbis
2 Pegasus, interpres legum sanctissimus Idem:
3 Crispus deinde senex octogenarius, annos
Vix quadraginta numerans vultuque, jocisque:
Proximus, haud adeo jucundus, 4 Acilius iram
Caesaream in 5 natum metuit, quem saeva manebat
Pro Christo, (ut fama est) mors designata Tyranno:
Assidet huic 6 Rubrius tristis; 7 Montanus adestque
Immenso luxu, parilique abdomine tardus;
Mollis 8 Crispinus; jugulos aperire susurro
Doctus 9 Pompeius; meditans nova praelia villa
10 Fuscus; 11 Veiento dives; captusque 12 Catullus
Luminibus, nuperque exors, mendicus, and erro,
Concilio procerum regnat, de ponte satelles:
Conversus, cum dextra jaceret bellua caeco,
13 Piscatorem ipsum pro pisce capitque tenetque,
Astantem, and dubie expectantem aequalia pisci
Praemia praegrandi, qui summa est cura Senatus.
De patina post examen, sententia lata est,
Hic Rhomborum grex hoc integer orb coquatur.


The fourth Design.
THe Council sits that rules all Climates known;
First, proud Domitian 1 Caesar in the throne;
Next 2 Pegasus, on whose impartial doom
Depends the Civil Government of Rome;
Then sweet-tongu'd 3 Crispus, his years full fourscore,
His mirth but forty, and his face no more.
He Is not so cheerful, but this Senator,
Aged 4 Acilius looks as troubled, for
The Princes frown upon his 5 Son: become,
Some say, a Christian marked for Martyrdom.
There sits dejected 6 Rubrius: there the gust
Of fat 7 Montanus: gluttony and lust;
The Moor 8 Crispinus: whispering 9 Pompey there;
There bookish 10 Fuscus; rich 11 Veiento here;
Catullus 12 last, blind and a Beggar late,
But now a bloody Minister of State:
He magnifies, as much as flattery can,
The Fish, for which he takes the 13 Fisherman,
That waits in hope of the Imperial pay,
For bringing-in the business of the day.
Resolved upon the Question, that this shoale
Of Turbots in one Monster, be boild whole.
The Manners of Men. THE FOURTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The Mullet by Crispinus bought
Sets off the Turbot that was brought
To Court: a Rhombus, only for
The pallat of an Emperor.
The Senate's called, and charactered;
The Fathers, to the Fish preferred,
In Caesar's Albane Palace sit,
And pass a Vote for boiling it.
BEhold CRISPINUS once again held forth;
And often I Will show him, Monster, whom no worth
Redeems from vice; weak, only strong in lust,
Who merely does the Widow's sweets disgust.
What matter then how many Porticos
Tire his Coach, through what Groves in's Chair he goes?
Of what land, of what houses he is possessed
Near to the Forum? No bad man is blessed;
Much less a Villain that corrupts the good,
One that with incest cools his sun-burn'd blood;
For, not long since, a Vestall he deflowered,
That was alive by the earth to be devoured.
But these are his slight faults: had they been thine,
The Censor on thy head had set a Fine.
But what would prove TITIUS and SEIUS base,
Or brand another, must CRISPINUS grace:
His person's fouler then his crimes: the Slave
Who can describe? he for a Mullet gave,
Of six ounce weight six thousand it is said,
From those by whom great things, are greater made.
I should commend him, had it been his drift
To win the old childless man, with such a gift,
To write his name first, when he seals his Will:
There might be further reason in it still,
Should he this Present for's great Friend prepare,
Borne in her closs and large glasse-window'd Chair:
But no such matter, for himself 'twas bought:
We now see feasts that make APICIUS thought
Frugall and poor: CRISPINE, was fish thus dear,
When thou did thine own Country Canvas wear?
He might have bought for less (I dare well say)
The Fisher then the fish: a Lordship may
Be purchased in a Province at that rate;
In Italy a competent Estate.
What rarities may we think CAESAR eats,
When this poor dish, scarce missed among his meats,
Had so many Sestertia given for it?
Belch't by the purple Buffon of the Court,
Now Master of the Horse; that cried of old
Stale broken ware, and fish of Nilus sold.
Begin CALLIOPE, let us sit, but sing
We may not, this is truth, no fained thing:
Then speak Pierian Girls; your patronage
Give me, that call you Girls in your old age.
When our last FLAVIUS the cowed world disturbed,
When great Rome, as his Slave, bald NERO curbed:
A strange vast Adriatic Turbot lands
Where VENUS Fane in Greek Ancona stands:
It filled the Wharfe, and stuck ashore like those
The Sun pours from Maeotis, where they froze,
Into the Pontick Sea's dull mouth; which grow
With lying bound in Ice, huge, fat and slow.
This Monster the owner of the Boat and Lines
For our chief Bishop craftily designs:
For, such a Rhombus who dare sell or buy?
Along the coast Spies thick as Grass-wrack lie,
Informers, that would sue the naked man
For taking up a Fugitive, that ran
From CAESAR'S Vivaries, the Ponds that bred
The Prodigy, where it had long been fed:
And ought to be returned to its old Lord.
For if PALFURIUS credit we afford,
Or ARMILLATUS, it is Imperial food,
If it be rare and excellently good,
On whatsoever Billow it be tossed:
This fish was therefore to be given, or lost.
Now sickly Autumn froze, the Patient feared
A Quartan; Winter foul and stiff appeared:
What he had caught would keep, the Fisher knew;
Yet he makes haste, as if the South-winde blew,
The Lake past, at robbed Alba he arrives,
Where still poor Vesta's Trojan fire survives.
The wondering crowd first stopped him; but when they
Their admiration satisfied, gave way:
The Presence-hinges nimbly turned about;
The fish goes in, the Senate wait without;
It Is brought to CAESAR; thus the Fisher says,
Great Sir, what is so huge it would amaze
A private Kitchen, graciously accept:
Be this day to thy Genius sacred kept;
With speed thy stomach clear of common meat,
And this untill-thy-time-kept-Turbot eat:
'Twould needs be caught. Could any Rascal gloze
More plainly? yet his Peacocks feathers rose.
Nothing so gross but will belief incline,
When that powr's praised, equals the powers Divine:
But there is no Boyler big enough; his States
He therefore calls to Council, them he hates,
Whilst their looks show the paleness of a great
Sad friendship; the Usher cries, make haste, he is set.
First PEGASUS whips on his purple Gown,
Who was the Bailiffe of the amazed Town,
What then were Prefects more? whereof the best,
He was, and of our Judges, the honestest:
And yet his uncorrupted tongue was charmed,
In those base times when Justice was disarmed.
There likewise did old pleasant CRISPUS meet,
Whose nature, like his eloquence, was sweet.
Could he, that Rules the Earth Seas and People, choose
A friend he might with more advantage use:
If when his thoughts to blood and vengeance move,
He Would suffer him his cruelty reprove,
And that he would his honest Council hear?
But what is more violent then a Tyrant's ear?
With whom, of Spring-windes Rain or Heat, his friends
Discoursing, on a word a Life depends.
He therefore never swam a stroke to break
The Torrent; nor durst any Roman speak
The truth his soul thought; or in doing good
Employ his time: he many Winters stood;
And saw his eighti'th Solstice: in this sort,
At this Guard too lay safely in that Court
As old ACILIUS, that did next attend
With his young Son, unworthy of an end
So cruel, now designed him by the Prince;
But old Lords showed like Prodigies long since:
Let me be, rather then a man of birth,
The giants brother, the offspring of the Earth;
Poor youth, he escaped not though he naked threw,
His Javelin in the Alban lists, and slew
NUMIDIAN Lions: that Patrician art
Who knows not? who admires the old subtle part
That BRUTUS acted? 'twas an easy thing
To put a trick upon a bearded King.
Ignoble RUBRIUS looks no better, shamed
With guilt of a disgrace not to be named:
Yet was our Pathick Satyrist less base;
MONTANUS his Guts waddle a slow pace;
CRISPINUS enters sweating Easterne-Gums,
Enough to serve two Funerals: POMPEY comes,
A neater cutthroat from whose lips death creeps
In whispers: FUSCUS, that his bowels keeps;
For DACIAN vultures, making war his study
In's Marble-villa: wise VEIENTO bloody
CATULUS follows, that the Lover played,
And had a passion for the unseen Maid,
Our times great Monster, a blind flatterer,
Whom highway begging did to Court prefer,
Fit to run after ARICINE Horses heels,
And seems to kiss the tumbling Waggon-wheeles;
None more admired the Fish, much he did say
To's left hand turned, when that on's right hand lay;
So the Cilicians Sword-play he commended,
And the Engine when the Boys in Clouds ascended:
VEIENTO came not short of him; for he
Divined, BELLONA, as inspired by thee;
A mighty Omen, Sir, this Fish must bring,
Of some great triumph, or some captive King;
Or from the Pole of's British Chariot
ARVIRAGUS shall fall; perceive you not,
It is a foreign Monster, by the Scales
Prickt-up on's back: VEIENTO only fails,
In that he is not able to presage
The Turbot's native climate and his age.
Shall's cut him; speak? MONTANUS cries, oh no,
Twere a dishonor, Sir, to use him so;
Let Us have a thin-wall'd earthen vessel made,
Wherein his whole circumf'rence may be laid,
Some rare PROMETHEUS now should mould the pot;
With all speed let the wheel and clay be got;
Henceforth the Potters, CAESAR'S Fish to fit,
His Court may follow. This Vote carried it,
Worthy the man, who the old Court Riot knew,
And NERO'S midnights, and a hunger new
When Falern wine inflamed the lungs: in all
My time, his taste was most authentical:
If Lucrin Rocks or Circe's the Oisters bred,
Or were they with Richborough-water fed,
He found at the first taste: and by the look
Of Crab-fish, told upon what Coast 'twas took.
The Council rises; and the Lords receive
Commands, the Room and the Alban Tower to leave;
To which in such haste and astonishment
For them our mighty General had sent,
As if he would treat of something which the stern
SICAMBRI, or the CATTI did concern;
Or had received out of far distant Coasts
Distracted Letters, brought by flying Posts.
And would to heaven he had spent all that time
Thus innocently, when he robbed our Clime
Of many a gallant and illustrious soul,
Unpunished, or without the least control:
But he was lost when once the Clown began
To fear him, he revenged the Nobleman.
The Comment UPON THE FOURTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Crispinus] In the beginning of Sat 1. he is only mentioned as
Freed-man to Nero; but before this Satyr was written Nero had raised him to be
Master or General of his Horse Guards; and at this time the Moor Crispinus was
one of the Lords of the Council to Domitian Caesar.

Verse 5. Porticos.] When the Romans were at the height of wealth and pride,
they expended vast sums of money in building ground-Galleries, standing upon
Marble Pillars, of the form (as I suppose) of our Piazzas but longer and
higher, as made to ride in, both for their Coaches, as here, and for their
horses, Sat. 7.

His House costs much, his Portico costs more
Wherein he rides until the shower be over.
Verse 8. Forum.] The City of Rome had six Forums or great Piazza's; The first
was the Forum Romanum or Vetus, and in it the Comitium or their Westminster
Hall, where their Courts of Justice sat; there was also the Rostra or Pulpits
for Orations, and their old Exchange or Tabernae built about it, with the
Basilicae Pauli and other noble Buildings, Hen. Salmuth in Pancirol. lib. rerum
deperdit. cap. de Basil. and Tabern. The second was the Forum Julium, built by
Julius Caesar. The third was built by Aug. Caesar, and from him named Augusti
Forum. The fourth Domitian began, and Nerva finished: this they called
Transitorium, being a Transitus or Thorough-fare into their Marketplaces:
Martial calls it Forum Palladium, because in the midst of it was the Temple
of Pallas: Lips. de magnitud. Romans l. 3. c. 7. The fifth was built by Trajan,
where the Senate erected that Imperial Monument of Trajan's Column, a Pillar
that was a hundred and forty cubits high, wherein was carved all the battails
and actions of the Emperor Trajan, which was finished two years after Juvenal
writ the thirteenth Satyr; and therefore you see only a part of it in the
Design or brass-Cut before the second Satyr. The last was Forum Salustii,
opening into the goodly fair Garden, called the Horti Salustini.

Verse 11. A Vestal he deflowered.] The House that was dedicated to the Goddess
Vesta stood near to the Temple of Castor. In this House at first four Virgins
were cloistered, afterward six: their Charge was to keep the sacred fire of
Vesta, which if it went out would portend evil to the Romans, as they
believed: their penalty for such neglect, was to be stripped naked as far as
the waste, and then to be whipped by their Lady-superintendent: as for the fire,
it was only to be kindled again from the beams of the Sun, which was done by a
kind of Burning-glass. They were admitted between six and eleven years of age,
and were to remain in the Cloister thirty years; the first ten to learn
mysterious Ceremonies, the next ten to practice them, and the last ten to
instruct others. If in all these thirty years any Vestal was convicted of
inchastity, she was led to the Campus Sceleratus or Field of Execution, lying
within the walls of Rome near to the Colline Gate: Munster in sua Cosmog. there
in her closs Chair let down into a Vault, wherein was a Couch, a Lamp burning,
and a little meat: the hole they put her in was presently stopped up: Plutarch
in Numa, and so this poor defloured Vestall like an Anchorite lived and died in
her grave. The reason of this kind of death and burial, was because they held
it unlawful to lay violent hands upon a Vestall, and unfit to burn her body,
who had kept the sacred fire with no more sanctity.

Verse 14. The Censor.] Domitian Caesar, that acting the Censor, had executed
Cornelia a defloured Vestall according to the letter of the Law, and commanded
Adulterers to be whipped to death in the Comitium, where the Judges sat.

Verse 15. Titius.] Titius and Seius are the John a Nokes and John a Styles of
the Civil Law.

Verse 19. Six thousand.] Six thousand Nummi or Sestertii made six Sestertia,
being near upon fifty pound sterling; and the Mullet weighed six pound, equal
to the number of the Sestertia.

Verse 28. Apicius,] The most noted Glutton that was ever recorded in History,
he writ a volume yet extant of the art of Cookery. Seneca in his book of
Consolation to Albina tells us, that Apicius lived in his time, and hanged
himself, because when he took his accounts of an infinite sum of money which
he had laid up only to maintain his Kitchen, he found the remainder to be but
the tenth part.

Verse 33. Province.] Provinces were all Countries out of Italy, to which the
Romans sent a Prefect, Proconsul, or any other Governor.

Verse 40. Nilus,] The seven-channel'd River of Egypt, enclosing the City of
Canopus where Crispine was born.

Verse 41. Calliope,] One of the Muses, Mother to the Poet Orpheus, taken to be
the Inventress of Heroic Verse: Virg. in Epigram.

Verse 43. Speak you Pierian Girls.] The nine Muses were called Pierian,
because Pierius begot them of Antiopa: Cic. 2. de natura deorum; but the Poets
say they were so styled from a rich Macedonian, that by his Wife Evippe had
nine Daughters turned into Magpies by the nine victorious Muses, whom they had
challenged to sing: Ovid. 5. Metam. Now when they sung, the subject-mattter was
still fained, and therefore Juvenal says they must speak, because the story
is true.

Verse 45. Our last Flavius] The Flavian Family, as it was Imperial, began in
Vespasian and ended in Domitian, that by way of jeer was called bald Nero, for
that he had all the ill qualities of his Predecessor Nero, and would have
looked like him if he had not wanted his head of hair.

Verse 47. Adriatic,] The Sea that parts Italy from Dalmatia, and is now
called the Gulf of Venice.

Verse 48. Greek Ancona,] The chief City of the Pisans, built by the Sicilians
upon the Adriatic shore, where the Emperor Trajan was at the charge of making
a commodious Haven a work of great magnificence: Plin. lib. 3. cap. 13. The
name of the City is Greek, showing the figure of the place to be like a bended
Elbow, which the Greeks call (...).

Verse 50. Maeotis,] A Scythian Lake or Sea freezing in Winter, that in Summer
discharges it self into the Euxine Sea by the Cimmerian Bosphorus. The fish
there bred (as of a greater size then any other) is called Maeotick fish:
Stephan. These straits of Bosphorus are to the South, at the North is another
Bosphorus (or Straits, where Cattle have adventured to swim over) called
Thracius, which opens into the Propontis, the South end whereof is called
Hellespont, from whence to the Mediterranean, it bears the name of the Aegaean
Sea.

Verse 54. Chief Bishop.] There was in Rome a College of Pontifices or
Bishops, consisting of four, the number appointed by Numa, chosen out of the
Nobility, whereunto were added four more out of the Commons: Fenest. de Sacerd.
These eight were the Major Bishops, to which Sylla added seven Minor Bishops:
Rosin. Ant. lib. 3. cap. 22. This College of fifteen was exempted from all
temporal Jurisdiction, and commissioned in their own Court of Judicature, to
hear and determine the Causes of Priests and private Persons: the President of
this College was styled Chief Bishop or Pontifex Maximus, a title that after
the Inauguration of the Roman Emperors, devolved to the Crown.

Verse 60. Caesar's Vivaries.] The Emperor's Fish Ponds, where the great Turbot
had been formerly enclosed, and from thence made an escape into the Adriatic
Sea, as the Informers Palfurius and Armillatus would pretend, to avoid the Law,
knowing very well that by the Civil Law any man to his own use may take fishes
which never belonged to any Pond, as ferae naturae, the wild creatures of
nature.

Verse 71. Lake.] Albane Lake.

Verse 71. Robbed Alba,] A City in Latium built by Ascanius Son to Aeneas, and
by King Tullus Hostilius taken, slighted, and robbed of all the Treasure and
Relics which the Trojans had there placed in the Temple of Vesta: only her
fire was left, out of a superstitious fear that it boaded ill luck to have the
Vestall fire extinguished in any place. Alba took its name from the white Sow
with thirty Pigs sucking her, being the first living thing the Trojans saw at
their landing in Italy, Sat. 12.

-- Our white Landmark then.
The Albane Mountain came within their ken,
That seat where young Julus pleased his mind,
( Lavinium to his Stepmother assigned)
By the o're-joy'd Trojans, from the white Sow named,
That from her thirty ne're-seen paps was famed.
Verse 77. Caesar.] The word Caesar is put in upon my own account, for that
used by my Author is Atrides, Agamemnon: So Juvenal here calls Domitian
scoptically, as in the end of this Satyr he calls him our mighty General; and
in the beginning of this Satyr, Chief Bishop, Pontifex Maximus; because in his
Feasts he exceeded the Pontifices, from whom a great Supper was called Caena
Pontifica by the Italians, that have now varied the phrase to buccone per
Cardinale, a Morsel for a Cardinal.

Verse 80. Genius.] The ancient Heathens called God Genius; afterward they
took Genius for a subordinate Spirit, and thought every man at his nativity to
have a good and a bad Genius assigned him: but some conceived a Genius to be
the Spirit that stirs up men to pleasure* therefore amongst the Romans the time
of feasting were called Genial days; and when they made great treatments, it
was grown into a Proverb among them, that they met to indulge the Genius.

Verse 92. Bayliffe.] Pegasus a great Civil Lawyer born in Alba, (where the
great Turbot was brought to Domitian) now Praefectus Vrbis or Chancellor of
Rome, all Causes of what nature soever within a hundred miles of Rome being
heard in his Court, Fenestell. Alexand. Neopl. Sigon. But in the reign of the
Tyrant Domitian this great Judge stood only for a Cipher; and to be Prefect of
Rome, was no more then to be Bayliffe of a Village.

Verse 97. Crispus.] Vibius Crispus, a rich subtle and smooth-tongu'd Orator,
but his abilities were more in private causes then in public business:
Quintil. He was born at Placentia: Tacit. and lived to be fourscore years old,
in the several Courts of evil Emperors; yet he still kept in favor, by being
(as the Marquess of Winchester in the like case said of himself) a Willow and
not an Oak. In a Progress-time he followed Caesar's Chariot on foot. When he was
a Youth, Nero whispered him in the ear, and asked him, Crispus, have thou ever
enjoyed thy own Sister? he answered, not yet Sir: a cautious and a handsome
return from one that would not own a crime he never committed, and yet durst
not find fault with any that should offend in the same kind, it being Nero's
Case. In Domitians time, being asked if any one were with the Emperor, Crispus
answered, not a fly Sir: Sueton. This was a pleasant but a sharp reply; for
Domitian in the beginning of his Empire, used every day to withdraw for an hour
only to kill flies. Crispus was twice Consul, twice married, and left an
Estate of 00 H. S.

Verse 113. Acilius.] Acilius Glabrio, a Man of singular prudence and fidelity:
Plin. He was Consul with Vlp. Trajan eight hundred forty five years after Rome
was built, at the very time when Domitian commanded himself to be called Lord
and God: Eutrop. lib. 9. Sueton in Domit. That Acilius lived to be fourscore
years old, and then sat in Council about the Turbot, we have Juvenal's
authority; but after this he was charged with designs of innovation; so was the
Youth that came to the Council with him, his Son Domitius, and both of them
were condemned; yet was the old man's Sentence changed into Banishment, not out
of the Emperors mercy, but cruelty, that he might afflict himself with
remembrance of the untimely death of his Son: who knowing his life was sought
by Domitian at this time, soon after counterfeited madness, in hope that would
take off the Tyrant, in whose sight he fought naked with Lions in the Albane
Theater, where Domitian at his own charge brought wild beasts to be slain, and
killed a hundred with his own hands: Sueton. This Impeachment against the
Father and Son pretended to be for innovation in the State, was really upon
suspicion that the Son had been converted to the Christian Faith; as I was told
in Oxford by a Gentleman of worth, assuring me that he had the authority of a
great Author for it, which I thought to be Eusebius or Baronius, but having
searched them both, I find not Domitius recorded for a Martyr by either of
them; and therefore in the Design before this Satyr I only tell you, that some
say he was a Christian.

Verse 116. Old Lords showed like Prodigies long since.] Long before Domitian
reigned, it was news in Rome to see an old Lord, for this bald Nero took his
Pattern from Nero himself, qui nobilissimo cuique exitium destinabat, that
singled out the noblest persons for destruction.

Verse 124. A bearded King.] Tarquinius Superbus, whom Brutus beguiled, wore
his beard long; for in his time the Barbers were not come over to Rome from
Sicily.

Verse 125. Rubrius,] That in his youth committed some such foul crime as
pathick Nero did, and being come to man's Estate, was as bold a Writer of Satyrs
against others, as Nero was against Quintinian a notorious Pathick: Lub.

Verse 128. Montanus. Curtius Montanus (mentioned by Tacitus) a huge fat
Glutton, and a great Master in the Art of Cookery, whose belly Juvenal here
only takes notice of, but leaves him not so; you will meet him again in this
Satyr.

Verse 130. Pompey.] Pompeius Ruffus, not so gallant and fine a Courtier as the
Arabarch Crispinus in his Oriental perfumes; yet was Pompey the subtler in
whispering of accusations.

Verse 132. Fuscus.] Cornelius Fuscus, that having only heard of battails, and
studied stratagems of War within the marble walls of his Villa or
Country House, was sent General by Domitian against the Dacians, where his Army
and Fuscus himself was lost.

Verse 134. Veiento.] See the Comment upon the third Satyr.

Verse 135. Catullus.] Catullus Messalinus a blind man and a bloody Villain,
whose informations cost many men their lives: Domitian used to cast him at
great persons like a blind dart that will spare no man: Plin. He was by this
Emperor raised from begging at the foot of the Aricine Hill in the Via Appia,
to be one of his Counselors of State, Domitian taking it for granted, that the
tongue which begged so well would urge an accusation better.

Verse 143. Cilicians.] Sword-players of Silicia whose art in fencing this
blnde Parasite had commended upon the Theaters; as he had likewise praised the
Engine (such as we have in Masks and Plays) that hoisted up the Boys to the
Clouds, or the blue Canvas which they called the Velaria, covering the top of
the Theater: Xiphilin.

Verse 146. Bellona.] Minerva Goddess of War, (Sister to Mars) styled likewise
Enyo and Pallas, whose Priests sacrificed their own blood to her, and
immediately she so inspired them as to explane things present and foretell the
future: before her Temple stood a Pillar called the Collumna Bellica, whereon
lay the Spear which the Faecealis or Herald took in his hand when he denounced
war: Alexander ab Alexandro, lib 2. cap. 12.

Verse 150. Arviragus.] King of the South Britains youngest Son to Kymbeline, a
great Enemy to the Romans in this Island, both in Domitian's reign (when it
seems he flourished) and in Claudius Caesar's, whose Daughter Genissa (if we
may believe our British Historians that he had such a one) Arviragus married.

Verse 159. Prometheus,] Son to Japet by his Wife Asia; an excellent Potter he
must needs be, for he was the first (according to the Poets) that made a man of
clay: thus runs the Fable. Minerva, extremely taken with his ingenious
workmanship, promised to give him any thing the Gods had that would conduce to
the perfection of his Art; and when Prometheus answered, that he could not
conjecture how Celestial things would advantage him unless he took a view of
them, Minerva carried him up to heaven, where finding all the heavenly bodies
to be animated by fire, he thought that would be most isntrumental, and
therefore with a Rule which he had in his hand he touched a wheel of the Sun's
Chariot, and so with his Rule burning, he brought down to the Earth fire
wherewith he made his man of clay. Jupiter, enraged at this presumptious theft,
gave a Box to Pandora to be delivered to her Husband Epimetheus (Brother to
Prometheus) which being opened by him, filled the world with innumerable
diseases and calamities; as for Prometheus, Mercury was commanded to bind him
to the Mountain Caucasus, where an Eagle continually fed upon his heart: but
afterward, when Jupiter fell in love with Thetis, and declared that he would
marry her, Prometheus, skillful in future events, deterred him from the Match,
because he said it was decreed by the Fate, that the Son born of Thetis
should be a greater Person then his Father; and Jupiter remembering how he had
deposed his own Father Saturn, feared the same measure from his Son; and
therefore chose to loose Thetis rather then his possession of the Heavens. In
recompense of the service done him in this discovery, Jupiter sent Hercules to
Caucasus, where he killed the Eagle and unchained Prometheus. If I have
trespassed upon your patience with this tedious Fable, I doubt not but to
please you again with the Mythologie of it. Prometheus was the first that
taught the Assyrians Astrology, which he had studied upon the top of the high
Mountain Caucasus, not far from Assyria and near to the Heavens, from whence
he could the easier discover the magnitude rising and setting of the Stars.
An Eagle was said to tire upon his heart, because it was consumed with care,
and watching the motions of the celestial bodies: and being these were the acts
of Prudence and Reason, Mercury, the God of both, was said to have chained him
to the Mountain: moreover for that he showed to men how thunder and lightning
was generated, it was reported that he brought fire down from Heaven: N. Comes
Mythol. lib. 4. c. 6.

Verse 165. Falerne Wine.] That the Grapes growing upon the Falerne Mountains
in Campania made a rare Wine in Juvenal's time, you may know by his frequent
use of the word Falern, and at this day it is the absolute best Wine in Italy,
as they say that have met with it where it is pure, which is only in the
Cardinals or some great Princes Cellars.

Verse 167. Lucrin Rocks or Circe's.] The Lucrin Rocks were in the Bay of
Lucrinum in Campania; the Rocks of Circe were about Cajeta, where was a Temple
dedicated to Circe, and a Mountain that bore her name.

Verse 168. Richborough] in Kent.

Verse 176. Sicambri,] The People of Gelderland, between the Rivers of the Mose
and the Rhene.

Verse 176. Catti,] Germans, now Subjects to the Landgrave of Hessen called
Hassi, against whom Domitian made one voluntary expedition, as he did another
of necessity against the Dacians, now the Hungarians, where his whole Legion
was overthrown, and the General Fuscus slain, ut supr.

Verse 178. Flying Posts] Some conceive that Juvenal meant Carrier-Pigeons; but
he calls them not flying Posts either for the speed of bird or man; but because
in Packets of Overthrows or Insurrections, the Romans used to stick a Feather:
in expresses of victory, a Laurel: M. V. C. quoted by Lubin.

Figura Quinta.
Montanus, dubiae solvens aenigmata coenae,
Hunc figi narraret 1 Aprum Calydonis in agris;
Ionio 2 Mullum, tot abhinc per saecula, nasci
Aequore; 3 Muraenam grandem Scyllae que caninos
Rictus and stomachum Siculo irritasse profundo:
Alite multiplici 4 septum Jecur eque tonitru
Natis tuberibus, Judaeus and altor, and anser,
Dictetur: 5 Squilla 6 Virronem noverit emptum:
Has, unde hoc oleum, Venafri produxit olivas
Campus; and Albanae 7 succus praenobilis uvae
Spumanti flagrat patera, 8 Ganymede ministro.
Depascit panes Libycos 9 Conviva superbus,
Cui datur ad primos locupleti accumbere lectos.
Narratu facile est, quid mordeat ultimus hospes;
10 Frusta, and relliquias anguillae rodit, and unguem
11 Cammare parve tuum, putres qui spirat amurcas:
Aut potat faeces, medio quas territus haustu
Dejicit, attonitus 12 Maurum spectare ferentem.
Virro and 13 Virrones solum poma aurea gustant:
Cum Trebio and 14 Trebiis, quae projiciuntur, acescant.
Sic vere coenat dives, ridetur egenus;
Neglectusque Cliens macer est, epulante Patrono.


The fifth Design.
MOntanus that, but tasting any dish,
Knew the age and climate of the flesh or fish;
Would tell you, Calidonia fed this 1 Boar;
That 2 Mullet was upon the Ionian shore
Spawned ten years since; and that this huge 3 Lamprey
Made Scylla bark in the Sicilian Sea.
This great 4 Goose-liver, with fowls circumscribed,
The Jews crammed; and that 5 Squil rich Virro bribed.
He would pronounce, 'twas the Venafrian soil
Where the Olives grew which made this precious 6 oil;
That here old juice pressed out of Albane 7 Grapes
Is filled by Asian 8 Boys with lovely shapes.
No 9 Loaf but of the purest Libian bread,
Standing before the first 10 and second Bed:
But no man needs interpret what he gnaws
On the third Bed, Crusts, Eel-bones, 11 Cra-fish claws
Dipped in Lamp-oile; or that he spilt his draught
Of 12 dregs, scared at the Moor by whom 'twas brought.
Great Virro's stomach golden 13 Pipins close,
Green Crabs the Butler to mean Trebius 14 throws.
The Rich in earnest dine, the Poor in jest,
The Client's Fast sets off the Patron's Feast.
The Manners of Men. THE FIFTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The Client Trebius is reproved,
That will with no affront be moved
His Patron's Table to forbear:
Where he but seldom must appear;
And then, poor Creature, only sees
The precious Wine, but drinks the Lees;
At Virro's Feast eats scraps, or sterves:
Nor better, who brooks this, deserves.
ARt thou not yet ashamed? do thou intend
Thy Life, thy SUMMUM BONUM, should depend
Upon another's Trencher? art thou able
To take more scoffs then were at CAESAR'S Table,
By servill GALBA, or SARMENTUS borne?
I Would scarce believed, were thou a witness sworn,
I know the belly's cheaply fed; put case
Thou had not to fill up that empty space:
Is there no Hole, no Bridge, no Cottage-nook?
Art thou with a meal's injury so took,
So pleased with hunger? more gentile it were
To shrug thy shoulders and gnaw dog-crusts there.
First, when to supper thou art bid, thou have
The full reward of all thy service past;
A great friends bounty, meat; he thinks so, though
He bids thee seldom, yet he thinks it so:
After some Months neglect, if he admit
A Client, lest there should want one to sit
On's third bed, he says, We Will together eat:
What would thou more? thy wishes are complete.
TREBIUS obliged, has that for which he must
Break sleep, and run ungarter'd and untrust,
For fear lest his saluting rivals may
Have filled the ring by dawning of the day;
Or at the time when the Sev'n-starres do roll
Their cold and sluggish Wain about the Pole.
But then, what kind of supper is it? thy cup
Is filled with wine moist wool would scarce drink up;
The Guests transformed to CYBEL'S Priests you see:
Made with foul words their first encounters be;
Anon the cups, they drink in, fly about,
And thou thy wound wip'st with a crimson clout:
How often do the Libertines and You
Pots of Saguntum furiously imbrue?
What the untrim'd Consuls saw, his servant skinks:
The grape pressed in the Civil Wars he drinks;
Nor with one little Taster-full would part,
To's friend, that has the trembling of the heart.
From the Albane or the Setine hills, next day,
He something drinks, whose age has took away
The dusty Hogs-head's date, and climate; such
As THRASEAS and HELVIDIUS would touch,
When they drank Crowned, on the Nativities
Of CASSIUS and both the BRUTUSES.
VIRRO'S own wine's into large Amber put,
Or seagreen Berill into fascets cut:
They trust not thee with Gold, or if they do it
Sometimes, a Keeper is annexed unto't,
That counts the Gems, marks where thy sharp nail aims;
Excuse him, there the precious Jasper flames;
For VIRRO, to be a la mode, now brings
These stones into his Bolls out of his Rings:
Which in his Hilts the youth, preferred before
The jealous-spirited HIARBAS, wore:
Thou drainst a foul four-snouted glass, that is called
The Beneventine Cobbler, old and galled;
And going to the Glass-house every day
For scraps of brimstone to be truckt away.
With wine or meat if thy Lord's stomach glow,
Boild water's brought him, cooled in Scythian snow:
Did I complain none of the same wine came
To your share, alas your water's not the same?
Thy Cup is filled by the Getulian Boor;
Or raw-bon'd fingers of the Blackamoor,
Whom in the rough Latin way, at dead of night,
To meet by the Urns, would put thee in a fright.
The flower of Asia on thy Patron waits,
Bought at a price would purchase the Estates
Of TULLUS, warlike ANCUS: To such Boys,
In few words, all our Kings had were but toys;
Thou therefore when (the art dry) must call to thee
Thy black Getulian Ganimed; can he,
He that cost thousands, wine for poor men fill?
High looks become his form and youth; when will
This serve thee? or that Lord of cold and hot,
The Yeoman of the mouth, brew thee a pot?
He scorns the old Client should his pains command,
And is not pleased thou sitt'st, when he must stand;
Great houses with proud Servants swarm. How those
Grumble to reach thee bread, a knife would pose:
Hard moldy Crusts, which do the Grinders spoil,
And yet are hardly entered with long toil?
Thy Lord's loavs are of soft and snow-white flower,
Keep-in thy hand, reverence the Butler's power:
Should thou be bold with it in jest, a Clown
Stands over thee, that will make thee lay it down;
Remember, saucy Sir, where you were bred,
And know the color of your household bread:
Was 't this for which I left (so man'y a time)
My Wife, the cold Mount Esquiline to climb,
When Winter-JOVE poured down his cruel rain,
And my fur'd Coat did rain it over again?
See how thy Lord's long Squill bears down the dish
Garnished with sparagus; and how the fish,
With his proud tail, the Table seems to scorn,
When in the hands of the tall Servant born.
Thy Crab, with half an egg about it shred,
Comes in a Plate: a Supper for the dead.
Upon his Fish Venafrian oil he poures,
Lamp-oyle dawbs over thy pale Coliflowers:
For, stuff brought in MICIPSA'S picked cane
Thy Sawcer fills; for which all Rome refrain
The Bath, stunk up by BOCHAR, to come nigh;
From which the very Lybian Serpents fly.
Thy Patron's Mullet CORSICA sends in;
Or Tauromenian Rocks, when our's begin
To fail: when we, our luxury to please,
Have for the Shambles robbed the neighboring Seas,
Plundered the Tyrrhene Fishes, spoild our fry;
The Provinces our riot must supply;
Thence LENAS sends AURELIA Donatives
Wherewith she serves the Market; but he gives
To VIRRO a huge Lamprey from the Straits
Of Sicily: for when the South-winde waits
For's Jail-delivery, and his moist wings dries:
Carybdis our bold Fishermen despise.
Thy Eel is Cousin to the slender Snake,
Which the Ice of Tiber did so spotted make:
That fed with mud, and in the Kennel kept,
Through the Suburra's Common-shoar often crept.
I Would speak a word in VIRRO'S ear; none crave
What SENECA, brave PISO, COTTA gave
To their poor friends (for great as Fasces then
Or Titles, bounty shined in Noblemen;)
Only a civil usage we entreat,
Let Us eat, at the same Table, the same meat:
Do this and be (what most to be contend)
Rich to thy self, poor only to thy friend.
To VIRRO a great Goose's liver's set,
Girt with crammed Foul, or rarities as great:
A wild Boar foaming lies upon his board,
Worthy the fair-hair'd Meleager's sword:
Then, if it be Spring time, the pared Mushrom's dressed,
If wished for thunder make a greater feast:
ALLEDIUS cries, your Corn you Lybians spend;
Unyoak your Oxen, so you Mushroms send.
Mean time, lest any thing omitted be,
To put thee out of patience; thou shall see
The Carver, flourishing his knife, begin,
As if he were to dance a Matakin:
Nor ends till all his Masters tricks are done,
Till over all the dishes he has run,
And showed you what the different postures are
Of cutting up a Pullet and a Hare.
But thou, as HERCULES dragged CACUS, must
Drawn by the heels out of the doors be thrust,
Souldst thou, as if thou had three names, repine;
To thee when offers VIRRO his own wine,
Or pledges in thy dregs? which of you are
So rash, so lost, that to your Monarch dare
Say, drink Sir: many words may not be spoke
By a poor Fellow in a tattered Cloak.
But should some God, or God-like man then fate
More kind, give thee a Gentleman's estate;
Poor Rogue, how high from nothing would thou rise?
How gracious would thou be in VIRRO'S eyes?
Give TREBIUS this, set TREBIUS that meat:
Wilt please you (Brother) of these entrails eat?
Oh money! he this honor does to thee:
It Is VIRRO and thy self that Brothers be.
But would thou be one of the better sort,
A Lord, and thy Lord's Prince, about thy Court
There must no young AENEAS playing run;
Nor daughter, more a darling then a son?
A barren wife makes a friend sweet and dear.
Yet if thy MYGALE should children bear
Now thou art rich, set on thy knee three boys:
Even in thy pretty Parrat-Babes he joys.
For the green Stomacher his Servant goes;
The small nuts, and the penny he bestows,
That Is asked him, when this Beggar of small sums,
This little Parasite to his table comes.
To poor friends poisonous Toad-stools they afford;
The Mushrooms are served only to the Lord:
Pure Fungo's, such as CLAUDIUS eat: before
His wife's came: after which he never eat more.
VIRRO, and all the VIRRO'S apples taste,
Whose smell alone to feed upon thou have:
You Would think perpetual Autumn sent-in these
From the robbed Orchard of the Hesperides.
Thou eat'st Crabs, such as he gnaws in the Works,
That under's shield and in his helmet lurks:
And fears the whip still when he learns the art,
Out of the hairy Kid to cast his dart.
That VIRRO spares his purse thou may believe;
But he does this only to make thee grieve.
What Comedy, what Mimick can excite
More laughter then the coz'ned appetite?
Know, it is his aim in tears to see thee wash
Thy rage, to hear thy longing grinders gnash.
Your Lord's Guests, Freemen you your selves do think:
He thinks you Slaves, took with his Kitchin's stink;
And he thinks right; for, what poor man that had
Hetrurian golden bubbles, when a Lad,
Or wore their figure, with a poor devise
In Leather made, that can endure it twice?
Oh, but a hopeful supper fails us now;
You Will see another time he will allow
Some part of the reversions of a Hare;
We shall a Chick, or the Boar's haunches share.
This makes you watch his eye with untouched bread.
He Is wise that lets thee be no better fed;
For if thou can with all these scorns sit down,
In time thou wilt let him shave and crack thy Crown;
And take a good sound whipping in the end:
Worthy of such a Feast, and such a Friend.
The Comment UPON THE FIFTH SATYR.
VErse 5. Galba.] Apicius Galba, an excellent Droll in Tiberius Caesar's time:
Martial in his Epigrams names him very often. Sarmentus was such another piece
of impudence, in the reign of Augustus Caesar, and often came to his Table,
where he (being a Roman Knight) to the dishonor of his quality endured all
manner of affronts and scorns, yet at length by good drolling insinuated
himself into the Emperor's favor. The Scuffle between Sarmentus and Messius
Cicerra is described by Horace in his Journall, lib. 1. Sat. 5.

Verse 7. The belly's cheaply fed.] A little contents nature: Senec. in his
Epistles. Nature requires bread and water, no man as to these is poor. Wherein
a man can limit his desires he may boast himself to be as happy as Jove. Again
he says, Nature appoints but a little, and is contented with it: the belly
hears no Precepts; it asks and calls, but is no troublesome Creditor, if you
pay what you owe, not what it covets. Again, it is a high pleasure if you can
be content with such food as you can never be deprived of by the iniquity of
Fortune.

Verse 19. On's third Bed.] In the Triclinium or Roman Dining Room, was a Table
in fashion of a Half Moon or Hemicycle, against the round part whereof they set
three Beds, every one containing three persons when they had their full number;
the Hemicycle being left for the Waiters.

Verse 22. Saluting Rivals.] His fellow Clients, that put on their cursory
Gowns to bid good morrow, sometimes by break of day, to their Patrons; or
Patronesses, I mean rich Ladies that were Childless, such as Modia and Albina:
Sat. 3. For fear lest his Colleague the Tribune may
Wish Modia or Albina first good day.
Sometimes at midnight, as here. -- When the Sev'n-starres do roll
Their cold and sluggish Wain about the Pole.
Both times are taken notice of by Martial: Mane vel 'a media nocte togatus ero.
By daybreak or at midnight I Will be gown'd.


Verse 29. Cybel's Priests.] See the Comment upon the second Satyr, where you
will find the Priests of Cybele to be an Order of Rogues, Drunkards and
Gluttons, therefore very likely to quarrel and fight about their victuals.

Verse 33. Libertines.] A Libertine was properly the Issue of a Freed-man and a
Freed-woman, and the Son whose Father and Mother were both Libertines; nay, if
the Mother only were freeborn, was called Ingenuus: but after the Censorship
of Appius Caecus, Liberti and Libertini signified the same degree of freedom,
and Ingenuus was taken for one born free, whether their Parents were Freed-men
or the Sons of Freed-men: Justin Inst. l. 1. tit. de Ingenuis: See Franc. Sylv.
in Catilinar. 4.

Verse 34. Pots of Saguntum.] Course earthen Pots made in Spain at Saguntum, a
City famous for holding out against Hannibal: See Sat. 15.

Verse 35. Vntrim'd Consuls,] That wore beards like their Kings.

Verse 39. Albane.] The Albane Hills bore a very pleasant Grape: Plin. and the
Vines there growing have not yet degenerated; for, the Vino Albano is now the
best meat-wine in Rome.

Verse 39. Setine Hills.] Setia the City that denominates these Hills, lies not
far from Tarracina in Campania: Martial lib. 13. Pendula Pampineos quae spectat
Setia campos.
Setia that hangs over the Pampinian Medes.
The Wine that came from these Mountains was in great esteem with Augustus
Caesar, and Regis ad Exemplum with Juvenal: Sat. 10.

-- When thou rich Setine Wine do hold
Sparkling midst Diamonds in a Boll of Gold.
Verse 41. Date, and Climate.] The Romans writ upon the Vessels in their
Cellars (as the Officres of our English Kings set down in their accounts) where
the wine grew, and what day of the Month it came in.

Verse 42. Thraseas and Helvidius.] Thraseas Paetus was Son in Law to Helvidius
Priscus; both would as gladly have laid down their lives to preserve Rome from
the tyranny of Nero, as D. Junius Brutus ventured his to free the Romans from
Tarquin; or M. Brutus and Cassius theirs to deliver their Country from the
encroachment of I. Caesar. Tharseas was a Stoic, and accordingly he behaved
himself at his death; for when the Officer told him from Nero, that he must
die, with great constancy he repressed the tears of his Family, and cheerfully
holding forth his arm, when the floor was full of his blood, turning to
Demetrius the Cynick, with the courage of Socrates, he said, This blood we
offer as a Libation to Jove the deliverer: Tacit. lib. 16. Helvidius Priscus,
suspected upon the same account, was banished Italy by Nero; and after his
death repealed by Galba: See Tacit.

Verse 43. Drank Crowned.] When the Romans indulged or sacrificed to the Genius
(which was, as aforesaid, either at the Nativities or Marriages of themselves,
or those they honored) it was their custom to crown their heads with cooling
flowers to allay the heat of the wine, and by binding of their foreheads to
suppress the fumes then ascending.

Verse 46. Beril.] A Precious-stone often mentioned in sacred Scripture.

Verse 53. -- The Youth preferred before
The jealous spirited Hiarbas. -- ]
Aeneas, (See Sat. 1.) in whose time, when fighting was in fashion, the Hilts
of Swords were set with pretious-stones: Virg. Aeneid lib. 4. -- Stellatus
Jaspide fulva
Ensis erat. --
-- Bright Jasper sparkled in his Hilts.
but in Juvenal's days, when fighting in the field was out of date in Rome,
and eating and drinking only in request, it was the mode to take out the Gems
from their Hilts, and set them in their Bolls.

Verse 56. Beneventine Cobbler,] An ugly Glass that bore the name of Vatinius
the Drunken Cobbler of Beneventum; and the four noses of it were studed and
bossed like his nose: Martial.

Verse 63. Getulian Boor.] A Negro of Getulia in Africa.

Verse 67. Flower of Asia.] My Author means not the whole, but that part of
Asia (properly so called) within the Trojan Dominions, which took this name
from Asius the Philosopher: Suid. After the Romans were made Lords of those
Territories, by the gift of King Attalus, when they had brought them into the
form of a Province, they called it Asia: Strab. lib. 13. so that the Flower of
Asia signifies the loveliest Boys or Ganymeds of the Country about Troy, where
Ganymed himself was born, as you will see in the third Note following.

Verse 69. Tullus.] Tullus Hostilius, the third King of Rome, that took, sacked,
and demolished the City of Alba, as in the Comment upon the fourth Satyr; a
Prince no less active then Romulus. He revived the Roman courage buried in
sloth, and the arts of peace: and lest they should want employment, took
occasion to quarrel with his Neighbors: Live. He first reduced Coin to certain
rates: He brought in the Consuls Chariot-chair, or Sella Curulis or Eburnea, so
called, because it was made of Ivory, and carried about in a Chariot. The
Lictors were his Officers. He invented the Toga Picta and Praetexta; the first
being a Gown imbroidered in figures, was worn in Triumph, the other (guarded
with purple Silk) by noble men's Sons: and from Hetruria (now the Duchy of
Florence) he brought the golden Bullas or Bubbles, which in their infancy they
wore about their Necks: See Macrob. lib. 1. Saturn.

Verse 69. Warlike Ancus] Ancus Martius fourth King of the Romans, Numa's
Daughters Son; he subdued the Latins, enlarged the City of Rome, took-in the
Aventine and Martial Mounts, and with a wooden Bridge joined the Janiculum to
Rome. He extended the Roman Limits to the Seacoast, where he built the City of
Ostium. He made the first Prison that ever was in Rome, and the number of that
one Prison was not multiplied in the Reigns of the three Kings his Successors,
nor a long while after; as you may see in the end of Sat. 3.

Verse 72. Getulian Ganymed.] Ganymed was Son to Tros King of Troy, so sweet a
Boy that Jupiter fell in love with him; and, as he was hunting upon the
Mountain Ida, made his Eagle seize and carry him to Heaven: where for his sake
Jupiter put off Hebe, Juno's Daughter, that till then filled his Nectar; and
gave his Cup-bearer's place to Ganymed. The Mythological sense of this Fable
is, that the divine Wisdom loves a wise man, and that he only comes nearest to
the nature of God: Cicer. lib. 2. Tusculan: But this Negro, this Getulian
Ganymed, came nearest the nature of Pluto, and might have been the Devil's
Cup Bearer.

Verse 87. Remember.] These are the words of a proud controlling Waiter at the
Table, answered (in the next verse but one) by the poor upbraided Client.

Verse 90. Mount Esquiline,] Where many Patricians had houses; so had some
Greek Mountebanks: See the Comment upon the third Satyr.

Verse 98. A Supper for the Dead.] The Romans used to bring to a dead man's
Monument a little Milk, Honey, Wine, Water, and an Olive: Apulei. thus they
appeased the Manes or Ghosts: See Lips. l. 7. Tacit.

Verse 99. Venafrian Oil.] The Oil made at Venafrum (a City of Campania) the
purest in all Italy, mentioned likewise by Horace and Martial.

Verse 101. Micipsa.] Micipsa and Bochar were the names of two Kings, this of
Egypt, that of Numidia. It seems the Oil that came from their Countries was
so fulsom, as the very African Serpents would not endure the smell of that
which their own Countrymen used in the Baths at Rome.

Verse 105. Corsica,] An Island in the Ligustick Sea, lying North and South
between Italy and Sardinia, from which it is 60 furlongs distant: Plin. lib. 3.
cap. 4. it is environed West and North by the Ligustick Sea, on the East it
has the Tyrrhene Sea, on the South the Pelagus or main Sea: Ptol. c. 5. l. 2.

Verse 106. Tauromenian Rocks.] The Sea coast near Tauromenium in Sicily.

Verse 111. Lenas,] One of the Haeredipitae or Fishers for Legacies, that
bought up the Cream of the Market to present to Childless persons: This was a
rooking complement in fashion with the Romans: Sat. 6.

But Ursid likes the Julian Law, intends
To get an heir, and lose the gifts he sends,
That courts him with the Shamble's rarest things,
The Mullet, and great Turtle without Wings.
Verse 111. Aurelia,] A rich childless woman presented by Lenas with so many
Shambles-rarities, more then she could spend in her house, that with the
overplus she served the Market.

Verse 120. Suburra.] See the beginning of the third Satyr.

Verse 122. Seneca,] A Spaniard, born at Corduba, he was a Stoic and Tutor to
the Emperor Nero, that having raised him to so vast an Estate, that the calling
in of his bank of money in Britain, caused a Rebellion; at last, suspected to
be one of the Plotters in Piso's conspiracy, Nero commanded that he should
bleed to death: His works are extant which show his excellence of Learning in
Moral and Natural Philosophy: and though some have aspersed him, as a
covetous wretch, I think him to be fully vindicated in the noble mention here
made of him by my Author.

Verse 122. Piso.] C. Piso Calfurnius lived in the reign of Claudius Caesar:
Prob. he was adopted by Galba; magnificent in his bounty both to friends and
strangers: Tacit. At his Country House Nero often recreated himself: idem.

Verse 122. Cotta.] Aurelius Cotta a munificent person contemporary with Seneca
and Piso.

Verse 132. Meleager,] Son to Oeneus, King of Calidonia, by his Wife Althaea;
that as soon as she was delivered of him, imagined she saw the three fatal
Sisters holding in their hands a Brand, and that she heard them say, when that
fire-stick should be burned out the Child should die: The Destinies then
vanishing, the Brand was left, which Althaea extinguished, and kept it with
great care. Meleager being now grown a man, it fortuned that his Father,
sacrificing to the Gods, offered of his fruits to all the Deities, Diana only
omitted; this neglect so incensed her, that she sent a wild Boar which
destroyed the whole Country of Aetolia. Meleager with his Mistress Atalanta
(followed by all the gallant Youth of Greece) hunted this Boar, and slew him,
presenting his head to Atalanta (the Daughter of Jasius King of Argos) that
first hit the Monster with an arrow. This Present was resented with such a
strange animosity by his Mother's Brothers Plexippus and Toxeus (they as well
as she having ventured their lives in the Chase) that they attempted to take
her head; which so enraged her Servant Meleager, that he slew them both, and
immediately married Atalanta. The news flying to Althaea, that both her
Brothers were slain by her Sons hand; in her fury she threw the Brand into the
fire, and as it burned so did the bowels of Meleager, the Brand and he in the
same instant dying: Ovid Metam. lib. 8. Althaea to revenge her self upon her
Son with fearful execrations prayed for his death to Pluto and Proserpine:
Hom. therefore the story of the Brand only signifies her curses and the Magic
which she practiced: Sabin.

Verse 133. Springtime.] The best Mushromes grow in Africa, in the Spring of
the year, immediately after thunder; which though it blast the Corn, is
notwithstanding wished-for by such Voluptuaries as Alledius, that had rather
have the Lybians to send their Mushroms to Rome then their Corn.

Verse 145. Cacus,] The Aventine Shepherd (the great Gandfather of the Bandetti
or Italian Outlawes) from whose robberies the Latins could secure neither
their own nor strangers goods; so that when Hercules passed through Latium with
droves of Cattle which he had got from Geryon in Spain; at Midnight Cacus took
them out of the Pasture; and lest he should be trackt by the Beasts feet, he
dragged them by the tails into his Den. Hercules rising by daybreak, and
finding by his eye that he wanted some of his number, took a view of the Rocks
and Caves about the place, to discover by the footing, if any of his Cattle had
straggled thither; but when he saw by the print of their hoofs that they all
went from the Caves, not toward them, he knew not what to think of it; and
being about to remove, his Oxen (that wanted their fellows) began to bellow,
and were answered by those in Cacus his Den: thither went Hercules, and was
resisted by Cacus; that endeavoring to obstruct his entry, was knocked down
dead with his Club (and it seems dragged out by the heels) Live. lib. 1. Virg.
Aeneid. lib. 8.

Verse 163. Aeneas] Juvenal tells the Client Trebius, that if he should grow
rich, and have a Court like Queen Dido's, yet (if he mean that his Patron Virro
shall be one of his Courtiers) he must not wish as she did to have a young
Aeneas; for A barren Wife makes a Friend sweet and dear. Notwithstanding if
Mygale, the Wife of Trebius, should bring him three young Aeneases, Virro would
make much of them all, as he did of their rich Father, and for the same
consideration, Viz. Oh money! he this honor does to thee:
It Is Virro and thy self that Brothers be.


Verse 171. Claudius.] Claudius Caesar, whose Army brought into his obedience
the Isles of the Orcades: He was a dull sottish Prince, which his Empress
Messalina presumed upon, or else she had not dared in his life time to marry
her self publicly to C. Silius: Tacit. Annal. lib. 11. Juvenal Sat. 10. This
was told him by his Freed-man Narcissus, that governed him in chief, and
commanded him to take off her head, Sat. 14. After her death, his Freed-men
Narcissus, Calistus and Pallas held a Council about another Wife in her
place, and the last carried it for his dear Mistress Agrippina. She was Niece
to Claudius, and confidently, before she was his Empress, took upon her the
Authority of a Wife: Tacit. Annal. lib. 12. c. 1. When he had married her,
she made him betroath his Daughter Octavia to her Son Domitius; and soon after,
by the help of her Favorite Pallas, got him to adopt her Son Domitius by the
name of Nero; and then she had no further service to command him in this world;
therefore (making Locusta poison one of his beloved Mushromes, Sat. 5.) she
sent him into the next world, and so he descended into Heaven, Sat 6. See
Seneca in his Drollery upon the death of Claudius Caesar, where he says he
went up to Heaven, but by a Decree of the Gods was thrust down to Hell.

Verse 180. Hesperides.] The three Daughters of Hesperus Brother to King Atlas
their names were Aegle, Arethusa and Hesperethusa. The Poets tell us these
Sisters had an Orchard where the trees bore golden fruit, which was guarded by
a Dragon, till Hercules slew him and carried the golden Apples for a Present to
his Stepfather Eurysttheus. Some say this Dragon was only the doubling of a
point at Sea (the shore winding and foaming like a Dragon) which landed
Hercules in a Country full of Olive trees with fruit upon them as yellow as
Gold: Plin. Solin. See Vir. and N. Comes lib. 7. Mythol. cap. 7.

Verse 194. Hetrurian Bubbles.] Golden Bullaes or Bubbles, worn about the necks
of Noble-mens Children, by the appointment of Tullus Hostilius: imitating the
great Persons in this fashion, poor people hung about their Childrens necks a
leathern Bubble.

Figura Sexta.
POsthume, 1 dic, quid agis? seris an ineptus in annis
Ambis tu teneram juvenili in flore puellam,
Quae lasciva fugit, ducens hac fraud sequacem?
At tu, si sapias, 2 Juvenali attend monenti:
En Capitolinus stat 3 mons ibi, cautibus horrens;
Inde fluit 4 Tiber, hinc abituram cernis 5 Amicam:
Elige de tribus hisce tibi, vel saxa, vel undas,
Et te praecipitans canorum consule famae:
Crederis demens, nisi vincla jugalia vites,
6 Urbicus emulget cum vaccam pauperis Aeliae,
Et cantat Mimus; 7 Paris irritatque Tragoedus
Troiadas, Proceres ubi magno agit histrio plausu.
Add quod ad Phariam, (lippu^ comitata 8 Lanistam
Nupta Senatoris) properaverit 9 Hippia cymbam.
" Ursidium exemplis absterret talibus Author,
"Conjugii vetulus ne porrigat ora capistro:
"Non quod femineum Satyra perstringat honore^
"Paucarum ob maculas, quas ipso in sole notaris,
"Nec tamen eclipsin faciunt hae; sed neque splendet,
"Vt radiat coelo muliebris fama Latino;
"Astruit Vxorum Lucretia morte pudorem;
" Portia que abserptis Viduarum est gloria flammis.


The sixth Design.
HOW 1 Posthumus? thou will not sure engage
To this young Beauty in thy drooping age?
She Is coy, and shuns thee only to entice:
But follow thy friend 2 Juvenal's advice.
Here hangs the steep 3 Tarpeian Rock: here flows
Swift 4 Tiber: there thy 5 Iberina goes:
Choose two of three, a precipice, or wave;
Casting thy self away, thy credit save:
We shall conclude thee mad, to marry now
When 6 Urbicus the Clown milks Aelia's Cow;
And 7 Paris the young Player gains the hearts
Of Ladies, How? with acting great men's parts:
Whilst the ill-look'd Fencer 8 Sergius steals aboard
Fair 9 Hippia, married to an ancient Lord.
By the Author such examples are picked out
To cross her marriage, whom the old man's about:
Not to defame her sex, for these few blots;
Even in the Sun we have discovered spots,
Yet still he shines in heaven, and not more fair
Then Ladies fames fly in the Roman air;
Where Lucrece sealed the faith of Wives in blood,
Portia the constancy of Widowhood.
The Manners of Men. THE SIXTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The Roman Women full of Taints
And Blemishes, the Poet paints;
And sends them represented thus
To old Ursidius Posthumus:
Of whom he does compassion take,
And counsels him his choice to make
Of any death, ere such a Life
As he must look for with a Wife.
I Grant that Chastity when SATURN reigned
Was seen on earth, when one cold Cave contained
A little Household fire, and Lar; and made
For Shepherds and their Flocks a common Shade;
When first the Mountain-wife leaves sedges spread,
And skins of neighboring beasts, to make her bed:
Not like thee CYNTHIA; nor her, that cried
And swelled her fair eyes when her Sparrow died:
But whilst man Acorns belcht, his wife (more wild)
Had her full breasts drunk up by her great child.
For in the earth's nonage, under heaven's new Frame
No vice they knew that from the Oak's rupture came,
Or clay-born had no Parents; and yet much
Old virtue might remain, at least some touch
Even under JOVE: but ere JOVE had a beard,
Ere Greeks by others heads swore; when none feared
A thief would rob him of his herbs or trees,
But lived without enclosure; by degrees
To Heaven then Chastity ASTRAEA led;
And so together the two Sisters fled.
POSTHUME, it is old to steal another sweets,
To slight the Genius of the sacred sheets:
The Iron Age brought forth all other crimes,
Adultery was in the Silver times:
Yet Meetings, Contracts, Joyntures motion'st thou
In our Age? Nay, the Master-barber now
Trims thee; perhaps thy Pledge her finger fits.
Will thou wive POSTHUME? sure thou had thy wits?
What snake-hair'd Fury haunts thee? can obey
A Wife, so many halters in thy way?
So many windows open, those so high;
The opportune Aemilian Bridge so nigh?
If in this choice of deaths none pleasing be,
Think, is it not better thy Boy sleep with thee,
Thy Boy that reads no curtain-Lecture, fains
No coyness, till presented; nor complains
Because thou spar'st thy back, or that so often
As he commands thou do not come aloft?
But URSID likes the Julian Law, intends
To get an Heir; and lose the gifts he sends,
That courts him with the Shambles rarest things,
The Mullet, and great Turtle without wings;
What is not possible if URSID wed?
If this old Stallion thrust his foolish head
Into the Marriage halter, that lay pressed
So often, half smothered, in LATINU'S Chest?
Besides his Wife must be of the old chaste strain:
He Is mad, good Surgeon, strike his median vein.
Adore JOVE prostrate on's Tarpeian hill
Nice man; to JUNO a guilt Heifer kill,
If thou have luck to Nun's flesh: so few are
Fit to touch CERE'S Veil, their Fathers dare
Not kiss them. Thy dore-posts with Garlands crown,
Thick Ivy to thy threshold hanging down:
One man thy IBERINA satisfy?
She Will sooner be contented with one eye.
But she is cried up, lives at her Father's Grange;
Let her live next a Village-maid, then change
To be a Town-maid; and the Grange may pass.
But who swears nothing done in Mountains was,
Or Caves? are JOVE and MARS so wondrous old?
In all our Gardens do one Maid behold
Worthy thy choice? our Playhouse Boxes prove,
Can pick out one thou may securely love?
BATHYLLUS acting LAEDA, THUSCIA leaks
At's Gambolls; APULA as tickled squeaks.
THYMELE the long thing-before discerns,
Then Country-THYMELE the Town-trick learns:
The rest will pout when, the Arras taken down,
Noise leaves the Stage the Courts of Law to drown.
And when in CYBEL'S Games men act not, they
ACTIUS with his Visard, Thyrs, and Codpiece, play
AUTONOE'S loose Jigge, that laughter moves,
Sings URBICUS, him the poor AELIA loves:
These spoil the singing Boy; at high rates those
Do buy the unbutt'ning the Comedian's hose.
HISPULLA the Tragedian does affect:
That these should love QUINTILIAN can y' expect?
The Lutenist ECHION, if not he,
The Fiddler GLAPHYRUS shall Cocold thee:
Or she that for a Wife thou mean to take
Will AMBROSE Piper thy Child's Father make.
To straiten the large Streets long Scaffolds raise,
Adorn thy Gates and Posts with solemn bays,
LENTULUS, that thy canopi'd noble Heir,
May look like Rogue-EURIALUS the Sword-play'r.
The Lord VEIENTO'S Lady, HIPPIA,
With a base Gladiator ran away,
Following SERGIUS to the Pharian Isle,
Lewd Alexandria, and the banks of Nile:
Even dissolute CANOPUS crying down
The impudence of this prodigious Town.
Regardless of her Husband's reputation,
The honor of her Sister, House, and Nation;
She left her crying Babes; what may amaze
Thee yet more, she left PARIS and the Plays.
And she that richly by her Father kept,
Had in his down and deep-fring'd Cradles slept,
Scorned rocking waves; fame she long since did slight,
Whose loss upon a Bed of down weighs light:
She therefore Tyrrhene waves, the Ionian roar,
And various Seas with constant courage bore;
For danger let but some just cause appear;
Their frozen hearts do honest actions fear,
Their trembling feet, too weak to bear them are;
They bring strong souls to things they foully dare.
She that her Husband takes aboard will swound,
Then how the Pump stinks! how the air turns round!
She with her Knave's not sea-sick, that bespues
Her Husband; this eats such as Sailers use,
Runs on the Decks, to pull hard ropes delights:
But HIPPIA what Youth what Form invites?
What did she see to dote upon the style
Of Gladiatress? her Gallant a while
Had shaved; his cut arm craved a Writ of Ease:
And so deformed a face could hardly please,
Worn bald with his Helmet, on his nose a Wen,
His eyes sharp Rheum still dropped: but he was then
A Sword-man, this makes HYACINTHS; this to her
Lord, Sister, Country, Babes, she did prefer:
It Is Steel they love; had SERGIUS for his Sword
Took up the Wand, sh' had horned him like her Lord.
But what is a private house? what HIPPIA'S name?
See the Gods rivals, CLAUDIUS CAESAR'S shame,
Whose daring wife, when sleep had drows'd his head,
Preferred a Mat before his royal Bed.
The Imperial Strumpet with one Maid, stole out
In her Night-hoods, and having put about
Her black hair a red Perriwig, she got
Into the Stews, where the old rugge still was hot:
In a spare room, kept for her, there gold-chain'd,
Bare-breasted stood, her name LYCISCA feigned:
Highborn BRITANNICUS thy womb displayed;
Smiled upon all that came, her bargain made;
And when the Wenches were dismis'd, she last
('It Was all she could) sadly the door made fast;
And many thirsted-for encounters tried,
Departed tired with men, not satisfied:
And foul'd with candle-smoak, her cheeks smeared over,
The Brothel-steam to CAESAR'S pillow (...)
Their love-draughts, charms, and drugs (...)
Brewed for the Son in law, that drinks his fate.
Their sex kept under swells their vices so,
That lust appears a Peccadillio.
But why's CESENNIA by her husband graced?
She brought ten thousand, at that rate she is chaste:
Love's bow or torch, nor wounds, nor burns his heart;
Hence comes the flame, the Portion casts the dart.
Her freedome's bought; he by, she will write, or kiss:
A cov'tous man's rich Wife a Widow is.
How is it SERTORIUS BIBULA approves?
The truth discussed, the face, not Wife he loves.
Let but three wrinkles grow, her dry skin shrink,
Her teeth look rusty, her eyes deeper sink;
Pack up his Freed-man bids her, and be gone;
The art now a burden, thy nose drops, jog on,
Quick; let another that is dry nosed succeed.
Whilst fair she reigns, her Lord's Canusian breed
Of sheep and Shepherds, Falern Vine-yards craves:
That Is nothing: all fine Boys, all Jayles for Slaves:
What neighbors have, she wants, his purse must buy;
In Winter, when ashore the Merchants lie;
When the icy Tower the Pilot's art controlls,
Great Chrystalls he brings home, huge Myrrhine Bolls;
And the rich Diamond, that fairer showed
On BERENICES finger: this bestowed
The barbarous AGRIPPA, he to his
Incestuous Sister once presented this,
Where barefoot Kings the Sabbath sacred hold,
And ancient pity lets the Hogs grow old.
Is one of all these worthy thy embrace?
Be she fair, rich, neat, fruitful; though she place
The Statues of her Ancestors to guard
Her walks: and be her self then those loose-hair'd
Peacemaking Sabines more unknown to man:
A bird as rare on earth as a black Swan.
Who Will brook her if she be all this? give me
A Country-Maid, CORNELIA, before thee
The GRACCHI'S Mother: if as proud as great
Thou, as thy dowre, thy triumphs do repeat:
Thy HANNIBAL, thy conquered SYPHAX, pry'thee
Take and be gone, and take all Carthage with thee?
Hold PHOEBE; PHOEBUS, in my Children lies
No fault, their Mother kill, AMPHYON cries:
But PHOEBUS shoots; thus NIOBE, whilst her place
She boasts to be above LATONA'S race,
And fruitfuller then the white Sow her womb:
Did all her Children, and her Lord intomb.
What Is modesty, what is beauty, that she should
Upbraid thee with them? there is in that rare good
No pleasure: when corrupted by proud hearts,
More Aloes then Honey it imparts.
Yet who so fond a Lover, but he may
Abhor his Paragon sev'n hours a day?
Some trivial things, no Husband's patience brooks,
For what is more base? none thinks she handsome looks,
Till she her Thuscan can in Greek express,
And turns pure Atticke from a Sulmoness.
When they want native Latin (more their shame)
They speak all Greek, vex, tremble, laugh, proclaim
Their soul's deep secrets: what more? to it they go
In Greek: Old-woman, fie, let Girls do so;
Will thou fourscore and six be Greekish? chaste
Greek is not when (...) thou say,
My life, my soul: and usest in a crowd
Those words, for which thy sheets were late a shroud.
What will not this Provocative command?
There Is in a smooth and petulant tongue a hand;
Speak thou more soft then HAEMUS, charm our ears
CARPOPH'RUS like: thy face sums up thy years.
If thou wilt not love thy Wife, it is to no end
To seal the Contract, and in vain to spend
A Supper, and those Jellies made to give
High spirits; or that first-night's donative,
When, shining in rich Plate, she must behold
Dacian and German CAESAR cut in Gold:
If thou wilt uxoriously to one adhere,
Submit thy willing neck the yoke to bear:
There Is none will spare her Lover, though she burn
His spoils and torments to her sport she will turn;
To marry therefore him 'twill less behove
That would a kind and noble Husband prove.
Thou shall give nothing when she is not content,
Buy or sell nothing but with her consent:
She Will rule thy soul: that friend must be expelled
Now old, whose growing beard thy gates beheld.
The privilege of Law when Fencers take,
And Bawds are free their Testaments to make,
Thou must to Rivals thy estate bequeath.
Hang up thy Slave: how merits my Slave death?
Who Is witness? who informs? hear what he will say?
On man's life never was too long delay.
Fool, is a Slave a man? he is clear: be it so,
We will, and our Will shall for reason go.
Thus she her husband awes; straight quits her reign,
Shifts house, tears her bright Veil, returns again
To some scorned Bed: leaves the new wreathed door,
The rooms fresh hanged, green boughs upon the floor;
Thus numbers she eight husbands in five years:
How rare the Inscription on her Tomb appears.
Despair of peace whilst thy wife's mother lives;
She how to rob a husband precepts gives;
She to a servant no rude lines rescribes,
No simple stuff: the guard she cheats or bribes:
Then, her Child well, for the Physician sends;
Casts off the rugg; whilst the hid Knave attends,
And mastuprates mad to be so delayed:
Why, think you, can a Mother of the Trade
Chaste thoughts, or other then her own, imprint?
Besides, a Bawd's loose Daughter is her Mint.
Most Lawsuits women cause: MANILIA will,
If not Defendant, be the Plaintiff still:
Themselves draw Bills, they do Exordiums frame,
Give hints, teach learned CELSUS to declame.
Their Tyrian Cassocks nointings for the field,
Who knows not? sees not how with spear and shield
The wounded post is charged by Maids at arms,
And rarely well-train'd Matrons: whose alarmes
May Florall Trumpets claim; unless some Prize
They mean to play, and therefore exercise?
Where Is her chaste blush that puts her helmet on
And her sex off? that, though she dote upon
Man's strength, would not be man; for, but compare
Our pleasures, alas how little is our share?
'Twere fine if one should thy wife's Wardrobe cry,
Her Gauntlets, Belt, Plumes, Tases her left thigh
Half-cov'ring: or if for all fights she be
Thou blessed may sell her armor cap-a-pe.
These are the Dames that in thin holland sweat,
Whose silks too much their tender bodies heat.
Behold how fiercely the taught thrust she takes;
See what a blow her helmet bows, and makes
Her Hips spread, and thick folds in her short Gown:
But smile when she disarmed to the pot squats down.
Tell me, you Neeces to great LEPIDUS,
To blind METELLUS, spend-thrift FABIUS,
What Fencer's Trull thus armed was ever known,
When did ASYLU'S wife thus fighting groan.
Debates, alternate brawlings ever were
In Marriage-beds, no thought of sleeping there.
Fierce as a Tigress robbed she then begins
To chide, or sigh, when guilty of close sins:
Or her own Children hates; or swears he keeps
A Wench, and as she did believe it, weeps.
Her tears in troops still ambusht, wait to know
What Is her design, how she will command them flow.
That it is pure love thou pleased hedge-sparrow think,
And from her lips the briny moisture drink'st:
What Letters might thou read, if thou could get
Into the jealous Strumpet's Cabinet?
But she is caught with this Slave, that Gallant. Come
Plead her excuse QUINTILIAN? We are dumb.
Speak woman? 'Twas agreed, she does reply:
Thou should do what thou list, and so should I.
Out-storm a tempest, the air with clamor fill,
A woman will be found a woman still;
If once surpised, the earth has not bolder things:
Even from their crimes their spleen and courage springs.
But from what Lerna have these Monsters crept?
Their once-low fortunes chaste the Latins kept;
And vice out of poor houses labor barred,
Short sleep, and hands with Thuscan wool made hard:
HANNIBAL at our Gates with all his powers,
Their Husbands standing on the Colline Towers.
Long peace undoes us. Lust, then War more fierce,
Revenges now the conquered Universe.
When poverty left Rome, no horrid sin
But entered; then to our sev'n hills flowed in
Rhodes, Malta, Sibaris; Tarentum crowned
With flowers, and still in wine and women drowned.
That Bawd Coin first strange fashions hither brought:
Wealth to the weakened world foul riot taught.
For what cares VENUS drunk? she does not know
Her upper Region from her Coast below:
She now at midnight her great Oisters eats,
When Falerne wine with foamy Essence sweats;
When off the Flagons, round the Chamber goes,
The Table rises, each Light double shows.
Go now, why TULLIA snorts a doubt propose;
When she so snuffs the air up with her nose?
Or what COLLATIA to her MAURA talks,
When she by Chastity's old Altar walks?
There their Sedans wait; they do there distill,
And the carved Goddess with long spoutings fill:
They mount by courses in the Moon's chaste sight,
And so ride home; the morning scarcely bright,
Thou spatter'st thy wife's water, as thou go
To bid those friends good day thou honour'st most.
Now the Good Goddess has her secrets blazed,
When to the Pipe they frisk, and running mazed
With Wine and Cornets, their hair wildly roll;
Like Priapaean MAENADES they howl:
Then how they long for it! when it comes, what cries,
What torrents of old wine flow down their thighs!
LAUFELLA Wenches at the nimble heave
Dares challenge, and the Garland does receive:
Then she, whilst MEDULLINA lifts, kneels down:
And they call her their Queen that gets this Crown.
No Girles-play here; all is done that may allure
Cold PRIAM'S heart, or NESTORS Hernia cure.
Then lust grows rampant, she is pure woman then,
And the whole Vault cries, now let in the men;
Sleeps the old Adult'rer? bid the younger blood
Run nimbly hither, dressed up in my hood.
Comes none? she will meet her slaves; those out oth'way,
The Tankard-bearer for his pains she will pay:
He absent; no Man found; e're she will abide
Delay, she will let an Ass get up and ride.
Would public rites might this abuse eschew.
But Moors and Indians a she-Singer knew,
That could a more sufficient Roll have shown
Then CAESAR'S Anti-CATO'S both in one:
And brought it in, whence not a Mouse, that fears
His stones, but flies, where veils man's picture wears.
What saucy Athiest durst of old despise
NUMA'S black Boll, the Urn for sacrifice,
Or Vatican frail Plate that earthen was?
Now where is an Altar that no CLODIUS has?
Hang on a lock I hear old friends advise,
Appoint a guard: but who shall watch the spies?
Her art first draws them in. To one degree
Of lust all now are come; no chaster she
By whose rough hob-nails the black flints are worn,
Then she that is on tall Syrians shoulders born.
To see a prize OGULNIA hires a Man,
Gown, Clients, Nurse, a Cushion, a Sedan,
A red-haird Maid, on her commands to wait;
And all her Father's goods, with her last plate,
To active Wrestlers prodigally gives:
At home in great strait's many, but none lives
In moderation that befits the poor.
Yet Man sometimes weighs profit, looks before,
Provides for cold and hunger, fears to want,
Taught by the example of the frugall Ant:
Vain Woman sees not how the Stock consumes,
That Gold will grow in empty bags presumes,
And still to take from full heaps: never measures
At what excessive rates she buys her pleasures.
Some our soft Evnuch's still smooth kisses love,
And mere despair of beard; no fear to prove,
A need abortion: yet the pleasure's great,
Because the Surgeon in ripe youth and heat
Their dowcets cuts, the black Down newly grown:
These, when they come to weigh a pound a stone,
He takes off, leaves the remnant at full size,
And only the poor Barber damnifies.
Into the Bath this goodly Eunuch goes,
And there, no doubt, so huge a bawble shows,
As may with BACCHUS or PRIAPUS vie:
His Lady's Eunuch, with her let him lie;
But POSTHUMUS I would not wish you trust
Your Minion BROMIUS to this Evnuch's lust.
If she love Music, let no voice that is sold
To Praetors, hope to make his button hold:
Her hands are still on the Organs, her Lute stuck
With gems, the strings with a rich quill are struck:
The young HYDEMELE'S Lute takes her, this
She hugs, and gives the loved wood man'y a kiss.
One of the Lamian house and Appian name
With Cakes and Wine to VESTA 'and JANUS came,
To know if POLLIO'S Lyre would music breath,
To win him the Capitoline oaken Wreath.
Should her Lord sicken, what could she do more?
Or had the Doctors her young Son given ore?
She stood at the Altar, as the manner is,
And spoke the prompted words of sacrifice,
Nor for a Fiddler shamed her face to veil:
And when the Lamb was opened she turned pale.
Thou old God, Father JANUS, can Heaven hear
These prayers? I see y' have little business there;
She must for Buskins, she for Socks procure
Thy aid: the Aruspex will grow crooked sure.
But let her sing, e're ramble to invite
The Wits; and parley, in her Husbands sight,
With men of paludated Generals, face to beard,
And naked breasted: this is she that heard
All news, knows what is in Thrace and Scythia done,
The secret of the Stepmother and Son;
Can tell, who loves, what Wencher was beguiled,
And who 'twas got the Dowager with child,
What day oth' Month; knows every Ladies phrase
She sports in, and how many several ways:
She first the Comet saw, the Armenian State
And Parthian threatening: at the City-gate
She way-layes fame; NIPHATES she gives out
Has drowned the Men and Countries round about;
That the Earth shakes, Cities nod: in all our streets
She prattles this, to every one she meets.
Yet this is by a baser vice out-stript;
Poor Neighbors must entreat they may be whipped:
For if a barking Dog disturb her sleep,
She calls out to the Varlets she does keep,
Take your battoons along without demur,
Brain the Dogs Master first, and then the Cur.
She frowning goes into her Bath by night,
Pots, Pans; the Camp's removed by candlelight:
She loves to sweat in Crowds, till each arm falls,
Tired with the weight of her two leaden balls:
Then her Bath-keeper a Knaves trick has found,
To make his Lady's nointed thigh resound.
Mean time her Clients, sterv'd and hungry, droop:
At length she comes red-cheekt, and longs to swoop
A Rundlet off, laid at her feet, and poured
From a full Ewre; whence the other Pint devoured,
To force an appetite; she in her way
To supper, does oth' ground her stomach lay:
The Marble floor swift Rivers interline,
Or her broad Basin smells of Falerne wine:
Like a long Snake into a Wine-fat cast,
She sucks it in, and spues it out as fast;
A sight that makes her Husband's stomach rise,
Who to avoid the object shuts his eyes.
She Is worse, that VIRGIL at her board commends,
And DIDO'S killing of her self defends;
And then compares the Poets, VIRGIL lays
In one scale, in the other HOMER weighs:
Gramarians, Rhetoricians, the whole crowd
She drowns; Lawyer nor Crier speaks so loud,
Nor other Woman; words burst from her tongue,
Youl'd swear so many Bells and Basins rung:
Let none sound Trumpets, or brass Kettles grieve,
She can alone the laboring Moon relieve.
Her wisdom the End to honest acts sets down.
If she will show learned, let her girt her gown
Above her knee, to God SILVANUS slay
A hog, and for her bath a farthing pay.
Let not thy wife to speak high things affect,
Nor nimbly the short Enthymem project;
Nor know all Histories: she may have got
A little, so she understand it not.
I hate her that PALAEMON'S art revives,
That to discourse, by rule, or method strives:
That as an Antiquary Verses quotes
Unknown to me; and in her Gossip notes
A fault in Grammar, which Men scarce regard:
Pray let her Husband's solaesism be spared.
A woman thinks all is lawful, when she wears
Those mighty Pear-pearls that weigh-down her ears,
And the Emerald Neck-lace: nothing makes man's life
Unhappier, then a fortune with a wife.
Boiled flower like mortar's in her wrinkles laid,
Or that Pomatum which POPPAEA made.
Her poor fool's lips she bird-limes, but comes in
To her Adult'rer with a clean-washt skin.
When goes she neat at home? she meets her friend
In all perfumes that meager Indians send.
At last she is seen undaw'bd; then first she is known,
And nursed with Asses milk, whose breed's her own,
And still took with her, lest she be sent forth
An Exile, like POPPAEA, to the North.
But what is thus poultic'd, and thus plaster'd over,
Is it a face, or may't be called a sore?
It Is worth your knowledge what they do by day:
If in the night her Husband turned away,
Her chief Maid's dead: her Dresser ready stripped;
Too late comes her Chair-bearer, and is whipped,
Because another fell asleep: his head
Breaks her tough cane; him rods, him cords dye red.
There are that pay the Beadles by the year:
She beats, then paints; then does her Gossips hear,
Or her fair gold-embroider'd Garment views;
Beats on, and does the days accounts peruse;
Which took; and beating till the Beadles groan:
Be gone, she thunders in a horrid tone;
In the Sicilian Court a milder doom
Offenders had, then in her House at Rome.
For, if some neater dress she meditates,
Or hastes to the Religious Bawd, that waits
In ISIS Fane; or some in the walks expect:
Poor PSECAS still bare-breasted, naked-neckt,
Her hair torn, combs her Lady's; Why's this lock
So high? straight her Bull-pizle gives a knock.
What has your Woman done deserves these blows?
Is 't her fault Madam you dislike your nose?
Another oth' left hand unties the strings,
Opens her hair, and curles it into Rings.
The Matron of the Wheel in Council sits,
Whose needle now her Lady manumits;
She gives her vote in the first place, as most sage,
Then her inferiors in art and age.
As if that fame and life were both at stake:
So great a care they of their beauty take.
Her hair she does in that rare method tie,
And builds her head so many stories high,
You see ANDROMACHE before: behind
She Is less; you there another woman find;
It Is she; for, you by her short waste may see
A Virgin-Pigmey needs must taller be;
If her Chiopines her Lady-ship should miss,
She sure must stand a tip-toe for a kiss.
Mean time, she to her Husband's profit gives
Just no regard, but as his Neighbor lives;
In this more near, that she his friends will hate
And servants, and consume his fair estate.
Behold BELLONA'S CYBEL'S Priest, the tall
Grave half-man (with no obscene part at all;
A Fish-shell, long since, cut off that) comes in,
A Phrygian Myter tied beneath his chin.
Plebeian bells the hoarse Quire stilled; his mouth
Sounds loud, beware September and the South,
Unless she purge her with a hundred eggs:
With these her Fieulamort old Gowns he begs,
Which Cloths must all great sudden crosses bear,
And be an expiation for that year.
She wades in Winter through the broken ice,
And bathes in Tiber every morning thrice;
In that fierce stream her timorous head she steeps:
Over TARQUIN'S fields then naked and trembling creeps
On bloody knees: If It be white IO'S will,
She Will go to Egypt, and at Meroe fill
Warm drops to sprinkle ISIS-Temple, near
The old Sheep-coat built: the Goddess she dare swear
Speaks to her. See the spirit of a Saint,
Whom with their minds by night the Gods acquaint.
This then is her darling Priest, that is followed by
The linnen-cloath'd bald crew, that howl and cry
After his God ANUBIS, whom he jeers:
He prays for her that not the sport forbears
On solemn days: great punishment remains
Due to the Wife that her clean smock prophanes;
The silver Snake to move it is head appears,
Won with his studied murmurs and his tears
Her sin to pardon: a great Goose, no doubt,
Or a thin Wafer bribes OSYRIS to it.
He gone; her hay and basket left, with fear
The poor she-Jew begs in my Lady's ear:
This Grove's High-priestess, heaven's true Messenger,
Hierusalems old Laws expounds to her
That fills her hand but thinly, yet 'twill hire
Your Jew to sell what Dreams you can desire.
A Childless rich man's Legac'y, a young Love,
Found in the lights of a warm trembling Dove,
The Commagenian Aruspex views
A Chicken's breast: a trick the Armenians use,
Dog's entrails they dissect, and sometimes reach
To cut a Child up; do it, and then peach.
But the Caldaean's more believed; the things
The Astrologer speaks, flow from JOVE'S secret springs:
Since Delphian Oracles no more exist,
And man has lost the future in a mist.
But the oftest exile's chief, whose Scheme foretold
OTHO'S great Rival's death, for love and gold.
His Art finds faith, that has had both hands chained,
And in the Camp a Prisoner long remaind:
No Math'matician a rare man is thought,
But that is condemned, and even to ruin brought;
That scarce got to the Cyclads to be sent,
And not to be in closse Seriphus pent.
These she consults, when the slow jaundice will
Dispatch her Mother; but thy TANAQUIL
Asks if thou shall not die before her Mother?
And when her Sister? and her Fathers Brother?
And if her Servant shall her self out live?
For can the Gods a greater blessing give?
Yet knows not she what SATURN'S frowns portend,
Nor in what Aspect VENUS smiles befriend;
Nor is so much an Artist, as to say
When it is a lucky, when a dismal day.
But shun her, in whose hands thou see so soiled
An Ephemerides as if 'twere oil'd;
That asks not hers, but can thy fortune show;
That if into the field her Husband go,
Or, the wars ended, for his Country come,
THRASYLLUS figures keep her still at home;
Or if she move eight furlongs, the hour is took
For riding of that mile out of her book:
That will, if her rubbed eye but itch, endure,
Till her nativity be cast, no cure;
And though she lie sick, yet will take no meat
Till the hour that PETOSIRIS bids her eat;
If poor, she to the Fortune Tellers shows
Her hand and forehead, and a kiss bestows:
Casts lots, first hall'wing both ends of the lists.
The Phrygian Augurs and Gymnosophists,
In both the Globes verst, the Patricians hire:
Or those old Priests that watch heaven's winged fire.
Plebeian fate the Mount and Circus bounds;
Bare-neckt at the oval-Tow'r, before the rounds
Oth' Dolphine pillars, in her Gold-chain stands
A Prostitute, that answers the demands
Of Goody-Ale-wife, if she may forsake
Mine Host her Husband, and a Broker take.
Yet these the Childbed pangs and dangers know,
And all a Nurse's labors undergo:
But in a rich wrought-Bed scarce one lies in;
So prevalent have arts and medicines bin,
Which unborn Babes destroy. Rejoice thou wretch,
And for thy Wife thy self the potion fetch:
For should a Boy spring in her pregnant womb,
Thou Father to an Aethiop would become;
Straight this black thing pretends to all thou have:
Never to be seen before thou break'st thy fast.
Suppositious children, Bishops pulled
From the foul Lake, I mention not: Joy gulled,
Religion, Honor mocked, whilst false Heirs claim
The Salian Priesthood, and great Scauran name:
Sly fortune over sweet Babes does nightly stand,
Which in her bosom warmed, by slight of hand
She into great men's houses does convey,
Then laughs in secret at the parts they play:
She is the Mother of their second birth,
And brings them forth to be her scene of mirth.
This Charms, Thessalian Philters sells that Witch;
So powerful, she may clap her husband's breech
With his own slippers: thus thy soul grows blind,
And things, but now done, slide out of thy mind.
Yet, were this well, would she not scru thee up
To NERO'S Uncle's rage, into whose cup
CAESONIA did a Colt's whole front infuse:
And what the Prince his Wife does, who will not use?
All went to wrack in that disjoynted State,
As JUNO should her JOVE intoxicate.
Alas! AGRIPPINA'S gentler Mushrome sped
One old man, and but made his shaking head
And driv'ling mouth descend to heaven: this drench
Not vulgar, mixed with noble blood can quench:
Fire, steel, and whips this calls for. Could one foal
Thus much? then what could she that brewed the boll?
They do, they may, hate Bastards, none denies,
But now their Sons-in-law they sacrifice:
You richer Orphans stand upon your guard,
No dainties touch, pale poisons are prepared
By your own Mothers; get you Tasters; pray
Let your wise Guardians, ere you drink, take Say.
This sure we fain, no president appears.
Our newer Satyr lofty buskins wears;
We rant in Sophoclean lines, too high
For our Italian hills, and Latin sky?
Would we feigned, but hear PONTIA confess,
My Sons I would have poisoned: Viperess!
What two? at one meal two? had I to sev'n
Been Mother, I Would have sent them all to heaven.
MEDEA'S PROGNE'S tragic scenes we may
Believe and pardon; women durst essay
Things monstrous in those days, but not for gain:
It Is far less strange when in an angry vein
Their sex proves mischievous: when rage, once crossed,
Inflames their livers, they are headlong tossed
Like stones from Precipices, when the earth slides
And leaves to the rock-head no mountain-sides:
But I hate her that studies and commits
A foul crime, being in her perfect wits.
They look upon ALCESTIS on the Stage,
And see her for her Lord her life engage:
Were such a change now offered to a Wife,
She would prefer her little Bitche's life:
BELIDES ERIPHYLES you may meet,
And CLITEMNESTRA, daily, in each street,
But diff'renc'd thus, the old CLITEMNESTRA held
A foolish gouty Axe she scarce could weld:
Now with a red Toad's Lungs the feat they do;
Yet have their fine Steeletto's ready too,
Lest wary AGAMEMNON should have got,
The thrice-foil'd Monarch's Pontick Antidot.
The Comment UPON THE SIXTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Saturn,] Son to Coelum and Vesta. He married his Sister Ops, and cut
off his Father's generative parts, casting them into the Sea, where they begot
Venus, therefore called Aphrodite. His elder brother was Titan, that perceiving
his Mother and Sisters stood affected to Saturn, resigned his birthright,
conditioned that Saturn's male-issue should be destroyed, that so the Crown
might return to Titan's Children. In pursuance of these Articles Saturn
devoured his Sons. Now Ops, being delivered of Jupiter and Juno at one birth,
made the Midwife carry Juno to Saturn, but Jupiter she concealed, and had him
privately nursed in the house, sending for the Corybantes to play to her upon
their Cymbals, that the noise of their bells might drown the crying of the
Child. Then she brought forth Neptune and put him to Nurse: to her Husband
showing (wrapped up in swaddling clouts) a stone, which he devoured. In her third
Childbed she had Twins again, Pluto and Glauca, and, as before, concealing the
Boy, showed only the Girl to Saturn. All this being at last discovered to
Titan; when he saw that his Brother's Sons would come between him and the
Crown, he mustered his own Sons the Titans, defied his Brother Saturn, fought
him, had the victory; and pursuing his Brother and Sister, Saturn and Ops, took
them both, and imprisoned them till such time as Jupiter, being grown a man,
defeated the Titans, setting at liberty his Father and Mother. Afterward
Saturn (hearing from the Oracle that his Son should dispossess him of his
Kingdom) sought the life of Jupiter: whereof he had intelligence, and by way
of prevention, seized the government of Creet into his own hands. Saturn fled
into Italy, where in the Dominions of King Janus for some time he lurked; and
from his Latitat that part of Italy was called Latium. Under the Reign of
Saturn the Fabulists place the Golden Age, when the earth not forced by the
Plough and Harrow, afforded of it self all kinds of grain and fruit, the whole
terrestrial Globe being then a Common, not so much as one Acre enclosed. The
natural Philosophers reduce this Fable of Saturn and Coelum to the motion of
Time and the Heavens: the Astrologers apply it to the course of the Planets:
See Lucian. de Astrol. Ovid. Metam. The Mythology of it you may have from the
Chemists, and Not. Comes lib. 2. and 10.

Verse 3. Lar.] A Spirit or God to which the Romans ascribed the guarding of
their houses; painting him like a Dog, because they wished to have him like a
Dog that keeps the house, gentle to the household, fierce only toward
strangers. The Lar and the Dog are compared by Ovid. Fast. 5. Servat uterque
domum, domino quoque fidus uterque est:
Compita grata deo, compita grata cani.
Exagitant and Lar and turba Diania fures;
Pervigilantque Lares, pervigilantque Canes.
Both guard the house, to the owner both are right:
The Highway is the Lar's and Dog's delight.
The Lar and Dog from Thieves the house will keep:
The God and Dog wake when the household sleep.
The Temple of this God was the House, the smoke his incense, and his Altar the
Hearth, which was therefore accounted sacred, as appears by C. M. Coriolanus,
taking sanctuary in the Chimney of his Enemy Tullus Attius: Plutarch in Coriol.

Verse 5. Mountain-Wife.] before such time as men durst venture, for fear of
wild beasts, to carry their Wives down with them from the tops of the
Mountains.

Verse 7. Cynthia,] Mistress to the Poet Propertius, that confesses his
captivity in these words.

Cynthia sola suis miserum me coepit ocellis,
Et captum nullis ante cupidinibus.
Cynthia's eyes set my poor heart on fire,
Which till that instant never knew desire.
Verse 7. Nor her.] Lesbia, Mistress to Catullus, that writ upon the death of
her Sparrow: the Elegy begins thus: Passer, deliciae meae puellae,
The Sparrow, play-Mate to my Love,


Verse 10. Great Child.] Before the debaucheries of Parents had lessened the
Statures of their Children, cum robora Parentum Liberi magni referebant, when
goodly strong Children showed the strength of their Parents.

Verse 12. The Oak's rupture.] Men as they grew more civilized, lodged a-nights
in hollow trees, which made the wilder People believe that trees brought forth
men.

Verse 13. Had no Parents,] Whose evil manners they might inherit by example.

Verse 15. Ere Jove had a beard.] Jupiter or Jove was, as aforesaid, Son to
Saturn and Ops, delivered of him and Juno at one birth in the Isle of Creet,
where he was bred up by the Curetes or Corybantes, the Priests of Cybele, that
concealed him from his devouring Father. But after he had released Saturn from
imprisonment, and found that his Father had a plot upon his life, he outed him
of his Kingdoms which he divided with his Brethren by lot: Sat. 3. Heaven and
earth fell to himself, the Sea to Neptune, to Pluto Hell. Then he married his
Sister Juno, by whom he had Vulcan. There were four Jupiters, two Arcadians;
one Son to Ether and Father to Proserpine and Bacchus; the other Son to Coelum
and Father to Minerva, the Inventress of War: the third was Son to Saturn,
born in Creet, where his Tomb was to be seen: Cic. 3. de Natura Deor. The
Naturallists interpret Jove to be the Element of fire, and will have Jupiter to
signify adjutor, because nothing helps and cherishes nature so much as fire:
sometimes Jove is taken for the two superior Elements, when they act upon the
two inferior Elements for generation and corruption. The Ethnic Poets by the
several adulteries and thefts of Jove, under the shadow of a Fable, give us the
character of a Tyrant. The time of his reign they call the Silver Age, in
reference to the Golden Age under his Father Saturn; for as much as Silver
participates more of Earth, and consequently of rust and corruption, then Gold
does: Hierocl. The purest of the Silver Age was ere Jove had a beard; for when
Down once grew upon his chin, you see what reaks he played with Ladies in
Ovid's Metamorphosis, iron bars and locks could not hold out against his
golden key: Horace, Inclusiam Danaen turris ahenia,
Robustaeque fores, and vigilum canum
Tristes excubiae munierant satis
Nocturnis ab adulteris:
Si non Acrysium, virginis abditae
Custodem pavidum, Jupiter and Venus
Risissent; fore enim tutum iter and patens
Converso in pretium Deo.
Aurum per medios ire satellites,
Et perrumpere amat saxa, potentius
Ictu fulmineo.
The brazen Tower, gates strongly barred,
The Mastiffe Dogs fierce Court of guard,
From midnight-Ravishers immured,
Fair Danae had well secured:
Yet pale Acrysius, that locked
Her up, by amorous Jove was mocked:
Needs must the way be uncontrolled
And safe, the God being turned to Gold.
Gold passes Centries, batters Walls,
And with more force then thunder falls.


Verse 16. Ere Greeks by others heads swore.] The Grecians swore by the heads
of the Heroes, as the Egyptians did by the lives of their Kings, and the Irish
by their Governors hands.

Verse 19. Astraea,] Daughter to Astraeus, one of the Titans, who is said to
have begot her upon Aurora, by whom he had likewise all the Winds, which he
armed to fight for his Brothers in their war against heaven. She abhorring the
iniquity and falsehood of men, flew up to heaven, and was made one of the
twelve Signs, Libra: and there, as Justice ought to do, she weighes the
intents and actings of men in the celestial Scales. That her Sister Chastity
fled to heaven with her, is Juvenal's opinion.

Verse 26. In our Age.] Sat. 13.

-- Worse then the Iron times:
Nature no mettle breeds to name our crimes.
Verse 27. Thy Pledge.] It was the Roman mode for the Bridegroom upon his
Wedding day before he carried his Bride to the Temple, to present her with a
Ring as a Pledge of his endless affection: Macrob. lib. 7. A. Gell. This Ring
she wore upon her middle finger, because from it there passes an Artery to the
heart, and therefore the Ancients judged the middle finger only fit to be
crowned in Matrimony.

Verse 32. Aemilian Bridge,] A mile from Rome, built over the River Tiber by
Aemilius Scaurus, as in the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 39. Julian Law.] Now that Vrsidius Posthumus means to marry and live
honest, he would have Adultery punishable by death; and therefore magnifies the
Julian Law for making it a capital crime: See the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 40. Loose the Gifts.] How childless persons were courted with gifts out
of the Shambles: read Sat. 5.

Verse 46. Latinus Chest.] The Comedian Latinus mentioned Sat. 1. played upon
the Stage the Gallant to an Adultress, that upon the unexpected return of her
Husband, locked him up in her Chest: a part that had, as it seems, been really
acted by Vrsidius in his younger days.

Verse 49. Tarpeian Jove.] From Jupiter's Temple in the Tarpeian or Capitoline
Mount he was called Tarpeian Jove; the Mount had the name of Capitoline from
the head of one Tolus, found as they dug for the foundation of the Tower
built upon that hill formerly called Tarpeian, from Tarpeia the Vestal Virgin (
Virg. l. 9.) that betrayed the place (where her Father commanded in chief) to
the Sabines, upon their promise to gratify her with all they wore on their
left arms, she meant their Gold-Bracelets; but they gave her all indeed,
Bracelets and Shields; so the Traytress perished: Varr.

Verse 50. Juno,] Daughter of Saturn and Ops, Sister and Wife to Jupiter,
Goddess of Kingdoms and Riches, Patroness of Marriage, from whence she was
called Pronuba; the Helper of women in their labor, which gave her the title
of Lucina. Hebe was her Daughter, conceived, as Poets tell us, by eating of
wild letuce, of which she surfeited at a Treatment made her by Apollo. She had
Vulcan and Mars by Jove, though Ovid would have her to conceive Mars only by
the touch of a flower. The Naturalists make Juno to be the Air, and therefore
Sister and Wife to Jove: for that between the Air and the Sky there is the
nearest relation. The name of Juno is derived like to that of Jupiter, a
juvando, from helping: Cic. 2. de Natura deor. Vrsidius at his marriage might
very well afford to gild the horns of the Heifer which he sacrificed to Juno,
if she would help him to an honest Wife, and in that nick of time purge the
Town of Wenches for his sake.

Verse 52. Ceres,] Daughter to Saturn and Ops, inventress of Husbandry: Virg.
Georg. Prima Ceres ferro mortales vertere terram
Instituit. --
To break the Earth with Plough-shares Ceres first
Taught men. --
Rosin. Ant. lib. 2. cap. 11. She is pictured sometimes in a Matrons habit,
wearing a Garland of Corn with a handful of Poppy or a Sheaf in one hand, and
a Sickle in the other, as you may see upon the top of her Temple in the Design
before the twelfth Satyr: sometimes she is drawn with a sad look, as if she
were seeking her Daughter Proserpine, stolen away by Pluto as she gathered
flowers in the Vale of Aetna, where Ceres lighting a Lamp to search for her,
fired the Mountain, which is like to burn for ever. In her travel to find
Proserpine, Ceres came to the Court of King Eleusius in Attica, where she was
made Governesse to his Son Triptolemus, and tried to make the Child
immortal, suckling him in the day time, but all night long she put him in the
fire. Eleusius, wondering at the strange growth of his Son, set Spies upon the
Nurse, which bringing him no discovery of any extraordinary means used by her
in the day time, the King hid himself in her Chamber to watch her in the night,
where seeing her thrust his son into the fire, the sudden fright made him
call out to her to hold her hand. Ceres offended with the Kings curiosity,
punished it with death. To the Child she taught the art of sowing seed, and
put him into a Chariot drawn with flying Dragons, that he might ride through
the whole world and teach Husbandry to all Nations. The Nymph Arethusa giving
intelligence to Ceres that Proserpine was in Hell, Ceres went to Heaven and
expostulated with Jupiter of the injury done her by their Brother Pluto,
demanding restitution of her Daughter, which was granted in case that
Proserpine had eat nothing while she was in Hell. But Ascalaphus testifying
that he had seen her eat some of a Pomgranate which she plucked from the tree,
as she walked in Pluto's Gardens, her return was obstructed for ever. For this
testimony Ceres turned the Witness into an Owl. At last, to qualify the
grief of his Sister, Jupiter consented that her Daughter Proserpine should be
in Hell the one half of the year, and the other half-year upon the Earth. The
Roman Sacrifices to the Goddess Ceres were called sacra Graeca, Grecian
Sacrifices, and the chief Priestesse Sacerdos Graeca, because those Ceremonies
were brought to Rome out of Greece by Evander. The time of her Solemnities was
at daybreak, the Rites only performed by Women, that ran up and down with
Lamps in their hands, helping Ceres to seek her Daughter. They that officiated
in her Mysteries were enjoined silence; and therefore Wine was forbidden at
that time, which was upon the 27. of March, being the fifth of the Calends of
April. For this reason the Romans called a Feast without Wine Cereris
sacrificium, a Sacrifice to Ceres: Plaut. in Aulular. Into the Temple of Ceres
no person durst presume to come that knew him or her self guilty of the least
crime, much less they that had to answer for so great a sin as
lasciviousness, which is the sense of Juvenal in this place.

Verse 53. Crown thy doors.] On wedding days the common sort of people crowned
their doors and dore-posts with Ivy; the leaves, branches and berries covering
their very thresholds; but persons of honor instead of Ivy had Laurel, and
builded Scaffolds in the streets for the people to behold the Nuptial
Solemnity, as you will see in the following Verses, when Lentulus is named.

Verse 55. Iberina,] Vrsidius Posthumus his Bride that was to be.

Verse 65. Bathyllus,] A Pantomime, that acted with his hands the wanton Mien
of the Dancing-Mistress Laena, with whose postures, imitated by a man, the
Country Ladies, Thuscia, Appula, and Thymele were much taken.

Verse 70. The Courts of Law,] That sat in the Forum Romanum.

Verse 71. In Cybel's Games.] The Megalesian Games were Shows made in honor
of the Goddess Cybele, the magna Matter; they began upon the fourth day of
April, and were continued for six days after, during which time the common
Play Houses were shut up. M. Junius Brutus dedicated those sports to the Mother
of the Gods.

Verse 72. Thyrse.] The Thyrsus was a Spear wreathed about with Vine-leaves and
grapes, proper to Bacchus, which his Priests the Bacchanals carried in their
hands when they were possessed with their God; therefore in the seventh Satyr
Juvenal says -- soft aires to chant,
Or reach a Thyrsus, suits not with sad want.
that is, a poor man can never come to be possessed with a Poetical fury, as
high as a Bacchanalian rage, because he wants money to buy wine.

Verse 73. Autonoe's loose Jig.] Autonoe, Daughter to Cadmus King of Thebes by
his Wife Hermione: she was married to Aristaeus, and by him had Actaeon, called
the Autonoeian Heroes: Ovid Metam. l. 3. Hesiod. in Theog. It seems that some
Attelan or ridiculous jeering rimes were made upon Autonoe, that used to be
sung on the Stage after the acting of a Tragedy, to make the Spectators merry
again. For rehearsing of this Jigge the poor beggarly Aelia falls in love with
Vrbicus, the Fool in the Play.

Verse 78. Quintilian,] The grave Rhetorician born at Calaguris in Spain; he
therefore called the Spaniards his Countrymen. He came to Rome with Galba, and
was Governor to Domitian's Nephews. He first taught Rhetoric in Rome, was
Tutor to Juvenal, had a Pension out of the Exchequer, and writ Rhetorical
Institutions and Declamations.

Verse 87. Hippia,] The unworthy Wife to the great Lord of the Senate,
Frabricius Veiento.

Verse 89. Pharian Isle.] Pharos was a little oblong Isle of Egypt; a days
sail from the Continent, if we believe the authority of Homer; but now it is
joined by a Bridge to Alexandria: the change is ascribed to the River Nilus,
whose seven channels cast up an infinite quantity of mud upon the Foards
adjoining: Ovid Metam. lib. 15. Fluctibus ambitae fuerant Antissa Pharosque,
Et Phoenissa Tyros: quarum nunc insula nulla est.
Antissa, Tire and Pharos lay erewhile
Within the Sea: now none of them's an Isle.
See Plin. lib. 2. cap. 85. This Isle had a Tower of white Marble built upon a
Rock, which cost Ptolomey Philadelphus eight hundred talents, Sostratus Gnidius
being his Architect. The Tower bore the name of Pharos: and in the night hung
forth a Lantern, by which the Ships at Sea sailed into the Haven. In this Isle
Alexander the great resolved to build a City, but finding the place too narrow
for his Model, right against it he built the City of Alexandria, not far from
the Canopian mouth of Nilus: the ground was laid out by the rare Architect
Dinocrates fifteen miles in compass, cast into the fashion of a Macedonian
Cloak. Here Lagus lived that was Father of Ptolomey, successor to Alexander in
the Kingdom of Egypt; therefore Juvenal calls Alexandria the lewd walls of
Lagus.

Verse 90. Nile,] A great Egyptian River: some say the name of it was derived
from King Nilus, others from the new slime or mud which it works up
continually. It springs from a Mountain in the lower Mauritania, not far from
the Ocean, in a Lake, which is called Nilis; then for some days journeys it
runs underground; and again bursts forth within a greater Lake in Caesarian
Mauritania, and again, swallowed up in the sands, for twenty days journeys it
passes through the Deserts to the Aethiopians; at last spouts out of a
Fountain called Nigris: then dividing Africa from Aethiopia, it makes diverse
Islands, the noblest whereof is Meroe. After it has received all recruits from
confederate Rivers, it takes the name of Nilus, and discharges it self into
the Sea by seven mouths, viz. the Canopian, Bolbitic, Sebennitic, Pharmitic,
Mendesic, Tanic and Pelusiac. Nile embraces the lower parts of Egypt, divided
by her right and left arms: by the Canopian from Africa; from Asia by the
Pelusiac: Plin. lib. 5. cap. 9. so that some have set down Egypt in the list
of Islands, the River Nilus cutting it into a Triangle; and from that figure
many have called Egypt by the name of the Greek letter D Delta.

Verse 91 Dissolute Canopus,] Another City of Egypt, distant from Alexandria
120 furlongs, so named from Canobus Amyclaeus, Master of Menelaus his Ship,
that carried Hellen from Sparta, and by a storm was driven upon that coast,
where the Master dyed, bit by the Serpent Haemorrhoida. In memory of him
Menelaus built the City, wherein he left all his men that were unfit for any
further Sea-service. Who can enumerate the superstitious wickednesses of the
City of Canopus: Ruff. lib. 11. cap. 26. this of all Egyptian Towns was the
lewdest, as you may see here and Sat. 15.

Verse 96. Paris,] A handsome young Player, Favorite both to the Emperor
Domitian and to his Empress; but his Imperial Mistress lost him his Master and
his life: for upon that account Domitian put him to death. So long as he was in
favor he did many gallant things: Sat. 7. Many to honor in the wars he
brings;
With Summer-annulets and Winter-rings
He binds the Poets fingers: what there lives
No Lord that will bestow, a Player gives.
Why do thou court the Camerini then
And Bareae? a fig for Noblemen:
Write Tragedies; it is Pelopea takes,
She Praefects, Philomela Tribunes makes.
Though Paris was highly commended in these verses, yet the Satyr of them (that
touched his quality of a Player) so stung him, that he procured a command of
foot for the Author, and sent him with his Regiment as far as Egypt: See the
life of Juvenal, and the Design before Sat. 16.

Verse 101. Tyrrhene waves.] The Tyrrhene Sea is part of the Mediterranean,
lying beneath Italy (called therefore Mare inferum) between Corsica and Sicily:
the Ionian is part of the Mediterranean, above the Adriatic Straits, between
Sicily and Creet; through both which Seas they must needs pass that sail from
Rome to Egypt.

Verse 119. This makes Hyacinths.] Hyacinthus was Son to Amyclas, and beloved
at the same time by Apollo and Zephyrus; but Hyacinth inclining more to Apollo,
his Rival Zephyrus was so enraged, that his love turned to hatred, and watching
his time when Apollo played at Pallmall with his Mignion, Zephyrus blew the
Iron Ball (which Apollo struck) full upon the head of Hyacinth; so the fine Boy
was slain: and though sad Apollo had not power to quicken him again into a man,
yet he revived him into a purple flower, that still bears the name of
Hyacinth: Palaeph. in tract. de fabul. See the same story told, with some
alterations by Ovid. Metam. lib. 10.

Verse 125. Whose daring Wife.] Messalina, that taking her opportunity when her
Husband Claudius was asleep, went to the common Stews in a red Periwig, then in
fashion with common Prostitutes; which also wore Gold-chains about their necks.

Verse 131. Lycisca,] The most famous Courtesan of those times, whose name was
chalked over the Chamber-dore where Messalina entertained her Customers.

Verse 133. Highborn Britannicus.] Britannicus was Son to the Emperor Claudius
by Messalina, at least so reputed. He was first tituled Germanicus. When he was
an Infant his Father carried him into the Camp, and commended him to the Army:
yet notwithstanding all that care, by the contrivance of Nero he was poisoned:
Tacit. lib. 13.

Verse 162. Canusian Breed.] Canusium was a Town of the Apulian Daunia, upon
the River Aufidus: Ptol. Plin. Pompon. Canusium afforded the best Sheep of
Italy, and the finest wool, which nature had died with an Eye of red: they that
wore it in a Garment were called Canusinati: Martial. lib. 9.

Verse 159. Falerne Vine-yards.] Falernus was a part of Campania (yiedling
incomparable wine) anciently called Amineum. Aminean Vines: Virg.

Verse 166. Berenice,] That after the death of King Herod was the Concubine of
her first Husband's Brother, incestuous Agrippa: Joseph.

Verse 175. Peacemaking Sabines.] The Sabine Women; they came to Rome to see
the solemnity of the Consualia, Shows made in honor of Neptune, God of secret
Counsels: Tertul. de spect. cap. 5. as he was also the Inventer of
horsemanship. These Shows were the original of the Circensian Games, begun by
Evander, Dion. Hal. lib. and revived by Romulus purposely to entrap the Sabine
Maids, whose curiosity he knew would bring them to the Show; and then, he
resolved, that his new Plantation of Romans should not want Wives, which they
could have amongst their Neighbors by fair means; therefore he got these by
stratagem, and detained them by force. A war growing about it between Tatius
and Romulus, these late chaste Maids, now virtuous Wives, with their hair
scattered about their shoulders (as at a Funeral) came betwixt the two Armies,
bearing their young Children in their arms, and made a Peace between their
Fathers and their Husbands: Plutarc. in Romul. Live. Ovid Fast. 3.

Verse 178. Cornelia,] Mother to those two (formerly named) valiant but
mutinous Tribunes, Caius and Tiberius Gracchus; Daughter to Scipio Africanus
that conquered Hannibal, and Syphax King of Numidia, and subjected Carthage to
the power of Rome. She was not only noble by extraction, but exceeding handsome,
chaste, rich, and prolifick, glorying much in her Children; for, being entreated
by a Campanian Lady to honor her with the sight of her richest Ornaments, she
brought her out neither Gold, Jewels, nor glorious apparel, only showed her
Sons: Val. Max.

Verse 184. Amphion,] Son to Jupiter, by Antiope the Daughter of Nycteus, and
Wife to Lycus King of Thebes, that finding her to have lost her Maidenhead,
circumvented by K. Epaphus, or as others say, Epopeus, divorced himself from
her, and married Dirce. In the widowhood of Antiope Jupiter got her with Child;
but Dirce suspecting her Husband to have done it, clapped her up in prison.
Jupiter, pitying her sufferings for his sake, delivered her from imprisonment
when she was almost at down-lying. She fled to the Mountain Cithaeron, and
there at the crossing of two highways was brought to bed of Male-twins, which
the Shepherds took up, and called the one Zethus, the other Amphion. These two,
coming to be men, were called in by the Thebans; and when they knew how Dirce
had used their Mother, they tied her to the tail of a wild Bull that dragged
her through briers and bushes, miserably tearing her, till Bacchus put an end
to her torture, by turning her into a Fountain of her name. Amphion was so
great a Master of Music, that it was said Mercury gave him the Lute, which he
playing upon made the stones dance at the building of Thebes till they had
walled it about. Amphion married Niobe Sister to Pelops, and Daughter to
Tantalus King of Phrygia, Son to Jupiter by the Nymph Plore: She had by him
fourteen Sons and seven Daughters: but being proud of her great birth, her
marriage, and fruitfulness, Niobe scorned the Thebane Matrons for sacrificing
to Latona that had but two Children. But those two, Apollo and Diana, sensible
of this affront offered to their Mother, in one day shot to death all the
Children which Niobe had bragged of: not sparing Amphion, only because he was
her Husband. As for Niobe, she was taken up in a whirlwind that carried her
from Greece into Asia, and near to the Town of Sipylus, where she was born,
transformed into a Marble Statue: Ovid. Metamorph. 6. That Amphion with his
Lute made the stones dance after him, only signifies the music of his
Elocution, winning the hearts of rude ignorant people, that dwelt at distance,
to meet and live in a body, that they all might defend one City. This power of
persuasion was the Lute, which he received from Mercury the God of Eloquence:
See Alberic. Rocat. N. Com. Mythol. lib. 9. cap. 15. By the Marble Statue into
which Niobe wept her self, is understood the effects of immoderate grief,
which at last converts to stupidity, and makes us insensible of grief. Thus was
Niobe petrefied into Marble, the only Monument she could raise to her self,
after her Children were destroyed: Paleph.

Verse 197. Till she her Tuscan.] Till she changes her Tuscan or Italian
Mother Tongue into Greek, nay even the barbarous Latin of Sulmo into pure
Attick Greek.

Verse 209. Haemus,] A smooth-tongued Greek Comedian, mentioned Sat 3.
Carpophorus was another of the Company.

Verse 216. Dacian and German Caesar.] Domitian's Picture cut in Gold, or
rather the Sculpture of Trajan, a Prince that deserved the Inscription of
Dacian and German Caesar. Such Coins were usually by the Bridegroom presented
in a massy piece of Plate, as a gratification for his first nights lodging.

Verse 236. Her bright Veil.] The Bride's yellow Veil, or the Flammeum, in
which they brought her (with her face covered) to the Bridegroom: Plin. lib.
21. cap. 8. This Ceremony the Romans used, to put the Woman in remembrance that
she ought to preserve, what she then covered, the blushes of a Bride.

Verse 251. Manilia,] A subtle Curtesan, that being accused to the Senate by
Hostilius Mancinus, then the Aediles Curulis, for having by night wounded him
with a stone, appealed to the Tribunes, and pleaded that Mancinus would
violently have entered her house at an unseasonable hour, but was beat back with
stones: no marvail my Author uses her name for a she-wrangler in the Law: A.
Gel. lib. 4. cap. 4.

Verse 254. Celsus.] Junius Celsus, a great Orator that writ seven Books of
Rhetorical institutions.

Verse 255. Tyrian Cassocks.] The Roman Fencers always played their Prizes in
their Endromides or short Coats: this was the reason why the Retiarii were
called Tunicati: and no doubt but the Retiarius (described Sat. 2. and 8.)
fought in a purple Cassock of the right Tyrian die, he being a Nobleman,
descended from the Gracchi and Africani. This fashion was followed by the
wanton Roman Dames, that likewise imitated the poorer sort of Fencers, nointing
themselves with their Ceromatick composition of oil and clay, being exercised
and trained as Tyrones or young Soldiers in the Campus Martius.

Verse 259. Florall Trumpets.] The Florall Games were celebrated in honor of
Flora, Goddess of Gardens and Medows, upon the four last days of April, and
the first of May: Ovid. Fast. 5. Incipis Aprili, transis in tempora Maii,
Alter te fugiens, cum venit alter, abit.
In April thou begin'st and end'st in May:
As one comes toward thee, the other runs away.
The Institution of this Feast was, to pray that the earth might seasonably
bring forth flowers and fruits: but the Show was of impudent Strumpets, dancing
naked through the streets to the sound of the Trumpet. The Beasts hunted in
these Games, were Goats, Hares, and such mild creatures: Hosp. de Orig. Fest.
There also were showed tame Elephants taught to walk upon the ropes: Suet. in
Gal.

Verse 275. Great Lepidus.] M. Aemilius Lepidus the Censor, that upon his
deathbed enjoined his Sons to cast a linen Cloth over his body, and so to
carry it, upon the Bed he died in, to the Pile to be burned, without imbalming,
Purples, Trumpets, waxen Images, common Mourners, or any other Funeral pomp at
all.

Verse 276. Blind Metellus,] The Censor and Pontifex Maximus, that lost his
eyes with saving the Image of Minerva when her Temple was on fire: See the
Comment upon Sat. 13.

Verse 276. Spend-thrift Fabius,] Son to Fabius Maximus; in his youth he had
consumed his Estate, which surnamed him the Gulf or Spend-thrift: but
afterward he grew to be a staid man, and a great example of virtue, in
particular of Frugality and Abstinence

Verse 279. Assylus,] A Gladiator or common Fencer.

Verse 292. We are dumb] Juvenal would have his Tutor, that incomparable
Rhetorician Quintilian, out of all the colors, flowers, or fallacies of his
art, to say something in excuse of a woman taken in the manner; but all he can
answer is for himself, That he is dumb, and his Oratory nonplust: he cannot for
shame be of Counsel or open his mouth in so plain a Case. Then the Judge of
manners, the Censor Juvenal, turns to the Woman, and bids her speak in her own
Cause: She no sooner looks upon her Apron-strings, but she justifies the act,
as grounded upon a Contract parole, or Articles of Agreement before marriage,
wherein it was mutually covenanted, consented and agreed by and between her and
her Servant (now her Husband) that after the subsequent solemnization of their
marriage, it should be lawful for them, or either of them (as if no such
marriage had been solemnized) severally and respectively to do or act
whatsoever should best please them, or either of them; and this whereof she is
accused, is her several and respective pleasure: Can a Judge then have power to
call her to an account for doing what she had liberty and right to do?

Verse 299. Lerna.] Lerna, or Lernes, is a Lake near Argos, where Hercules
ended one of his twelve labors, by killing the Serpent Hydra, whose heads,
still as he cut them off, were multiplied. This many-headed Monster had laid
waste the whole Country of the Argives, insomuch as it grew to a Proverb with
the Greeks, when one mischief came upon the neck of another, to call their
present condition (...), a Lerna of evils.

Verse 309. Rhodes,] An Island in the Carpathian Sea, where Homer was born; so
named from Rhodia, one of Apollo's Mistresses: Diodor. lib. 5. In this Isle was
a Gymnasium or School of Asiatick eloquence, and the Mathematics; so that when
Aristippus, the great Socratick Philosopher, was shipwrackt upon the coast of
Rhodes, and found there some Geometrical Schemes, he cried, Cheerly my Mates,
I see the footsteps of men. Vitru. lib. 7. Here stood one of the Wonders of
the World, that huge Collossus 70 cubits high (built by the famous Statuary
Cares) from which some think the Inhabitants to have been called Colossians.
This Island held by the Knights of Rhodes, was taken by Solomon the Magnificent
in the year 1522.

Verse 309. Malta.] Malta, or Melita, is an Isle lying near to that part of
Sicily which looks toward Africa: Plin. lib. 3. cap 8. From hence came the
breed of fine little Dogs that so please the great Ladies: Strab. lib 6. This
Island afforded very precious Roses and delicate soft Vests: Cicer. and is now
inhabited by the Knights of Rhodes, called Knights of Malta.

Verse 309. Sybaris,] A Town of Magna Graecia, seated between the Rivers
Crathis and Sybaris: Steph. It was built by the Trojans, that after the sack of
their City, were driven upon the place by extremity of weather. This Town was
once so potent that it governed four great Countries, subdued 25. Cities, and
armed 300000. men in their war against the Crotonians: Strab. lib 6. But
prosperity made them wanton; no such Gluttons in the world, witness the
Proverb, A Sybaritick Sow.

Verse 309. Tarentum] A great City of Magna Graecia; the founder of it was
Tarentes Son to Neptune, after whose time it was enlarged by the Lacedaemonians,
that, led by their General Phalantus, took the place (almost impregnable, as
lying between two Seas in the form of an oblong Isle) and outed the
Inhabitants: Justin* lib. 3. From this Spartan Colony descended those
Tarentines that for a long time maintained a War with the Romans; at last,
finding themselves over-matcht, called in Pyrrhus K. of Epire to assist them.
Some say that Tarentum had the name from the Sabine word Tarentum, signifying
soft; and the Tarentines were a very soft and effeminate People, madly
debauched, and jeering all other Nations; but a sad just Judgment fell upon
them; for when, without any ground of quarrel, they had surprised a City from
their Neighbors the Japygians (now Calabrians) and for a whole day exposed the
young men and Maids, their Prisoners, to the libidinous fury of the Soldier,
it was revenged from heaven, their whole Army being instantly consumed with
lightning: Leonic. Thom. lib. 3. cap. 38. Near to this Town breeds the Snake
called Tarentula, that if he bites any one, makes the party bitten die
laughing: the cure for it is a present sweat, which they take in a dance,
physic proper for the constitutions of such Voluptuaries.

Verse 322. Chastitie's old Altar.] The Wantons of Rome in spite and contempt
of the Goddess of Chastity, profaned the ruins of her Image, at her
antiquated and neglected Altar.

Verse 329. Now the Good Goddess.] That which the Romans in Juvenal's time
called the Good Goddess, was by the Ancients named Fauna, Fatua, and Senta; she
was one of the 5. Daughters to Faunus, a Lady of that strict modesty, that
after she was married, no man but her Husband ever set eye upon her; therefore,
by her example, no man was admitted to her Sacrifices: See the Comment upon
Sat. 2. and Alexand. ab Alexandro, lib. 6. cap. 8.

Verse 332. Priapaean Maenades.] The Maenades, otherwise called Bacchae,
Bassarides and Thyades, sacrificed to Bacchus, every second year, upon the
Mountain Parnassus in the night time, with torches in their hands, and their
hair about their ears, crying Eu, Hoe, sounds that employed the wishes of good
fortune, for which they prayed in their Drink. These two sounds being joined in
one word, gave to Bacchus the name of Evoeus or Evan. This company of mad women
had likewise a tumultuous meeting, once in three years, upon the Mountain
Cithaeron, whether they came every one bearing in her hand a Thyrsus (being a
Spear wrapped about with Ivy) and there, with strange howling, celebrated the
Orgies of Bacchus. The Ceremonies of the Good Goddess had a great resemblance
to these Bacchanalian Rites, in dancing to Pipes, singing (which brought in the
Priapaean Singing-woman Clodius) and forbidding of men to be present at the
Sacrifice: See Plutarch in Caesare.

Verse 340. Priam,] King of Troy, who lived to be so old that nothing could put
outward heat into him, but such an accident as firing of his City by the
Greeks; nor could any thing inflame his spirit, unless it were such a sight as
this: See the Comment upon Sat. 10.

Verse 340. Hernia,] A rupture that spoiled the Courtship of Nestor: See
likewise the Comment upon Sat. 10.

Verse 352. Caesar's Anti-Cato's.] Caesar hearing that Cato Major was dead
(whose virtues Cicero had commended in his Dialogue titled Cato) to disparage
his life and manners, writ two Books which he called Anti-Cato's; and when they
were rolled up in the form of a Cylinder, as all Books then were (you may see
it in the figure of the Tragedy pawned by the Poet Lappa, in the Design before
Sat. 7.) no doubt but they made a pretty bulk; yet my Author conceives that
something of a larger size was brought in to Caesar's Wife, when she danced in
the private Feast of the Good Goddess, by Clodius, that came into the assembly
of Ladies like a Singing-woman, and was discovered by Caesar's Mother, Aurelia.

Verse 357. Earthen.] The earthen vessels used in the first Roman Sacrifices by
King Numa (the Inventer of their Ceremonies) were never so profaned as their
Vessels of Gold have been.

Verse 364. Tall Syrians shoulders.] These Syrians were Slaves of a gigantick
stature, which in Juvenal's time the Roman Ladies kept, as they now keep
Switzers, one to carry their Segetta's or Sedans.

Verse 365. Ogulnia,] A Wanton of a miserable poor fortune, but one that made a
show as if she were some great Lady.

Verse 389. With Bacchus or Priapus.] The naked Statues of Bacchus and Priapus,
Gods of the Vines and Orchards, which very much resembled the goodly Eunuch
when he came to his Lady in the Bath.

Verse 394. To Praetors.] Part of the Praetors office was to hire Music and
Voices at the setting forth of public Plays or Games.

Verse 399. The Lamian house and Appian name.] She must needs be a great person
by extraction and marriage, that was descended from Lamus, Father to Antiphates
King of the Laestrygons, by Horace called the ancient Lamu's, Ode 17. and
married to one of the noble Appian Family, which took that surname from the
Crown won by L. Appius in Achaia. Who would imagine this Lady could have a
passion for the poor mercenary Lutenist, Pollio? much less, that as a
Sacrificer she would stand veiled, repeat the Priests words: turn pale for fear
of some unlucky sign, when the Aruspex looked into the entrails of the
sacrificed beast; and bring to the Altar an Offering of barley-cakes and wine:
all this to make the Gods propitious to her Servant, that when the Musick-prize
was played in the Capitol, he might bear away that oaken Wreath given to the
best Musician Poet and Player by the Judges, which Domitian Caesar had
appointed in the Capitoline Games.

Verse 400. Vesta and Janus.] There were two Vesta's, Ops or Vesta Wife to
Coelum, and her Daughter the Virgin Vesta, in whose honor the vestall Virgins
were consecrated by Numa at Rome, her Rites anciently having been performed,
and her sacred fire kept in Alba, Sat. 4. Live. These two Vesta's are taken for
one another in the Poets, but when they are distinguished: by Vesta the Mother
is understood the Earth, by the Daughter the Fire.

Janus was the most ancient King of Italy, that, as I have formerly told you,
protected Saturn (when he fled out of Creet from his Son Jupiter:) and these
two Kings entered into so strict a league of friendship, that Saturn imparted to
Janus the secret of Agriculture, and in requital Janus admitted Saturn into a
partnership of government. They built two Towns which bore their names, one
called Saturnium, the other Janiculum. They first coined brass money: Macrob.
lib. 1. stamped on the one side with the beak of a Galley, on the other side
with the picture of Janus graved with two faces, because Janus was held to be
so prudent a Prince, that looking backward he remembered all things past, and
looking forward, foresaw and provided for the future. After his death Janus was
reputed a God; and King Numa built a Temple to him (as aforesaid) which stood
open when the Romans were in wars, and was shut in times of peace. This
Temple gave him the attributes of Patuleius and Clusius: Serve. Three times he
was Clusius; for his Temple was shut thrice; first, during the reign of Numa,
then at the end of the second Punick War, and lastly after the Battle of
Actium. Janus and Ogyges are the same. It is agreed, by the common consent of
ancient VVriters, that Janus, who is likewise Ogyges, came into Italy in the
Golden times, when men were just. He taught his Subjects to plant Vineyards, to
sow their grounds, and of their fruits first to make Offerings to the Divine
power; then to use the remainder with moderation: Munster, lib. 2. Cos. Janus
was a Priest, a religious man, a learned Philosopher, and a Theologue: He was,
I say, the Father of Gods and men, the first Head and Governor of mankind; of
whom depended the management of this vast World: Fab. Pict. Juvenal calls him
thou old God Father Janus* and so old a God his Children the Romans thought him
to be, that some of them conceived he was the Chaos: Ovid. in Fast.

Me Chaos antiqui, nam sum res prisca, vocabant.
The Ancients called me Chaos, I Am so old.
Verse 412. The Aruspex will grow crooked sure] With stooping to look into the
entrails of sacrifices made by great Ladies, for Fiddlers and Players.

Verse 425. Niphates,] A great River of Armenia the less, tumbling down from
the Mountain Niphates, that divides the lesser Armenia from Assyria, and gives
the name to the River: Strab. lib. 11. which name of Niphates comes a nivibus,
from snow: Stephan. and therefore upon a violent sudden Thaw, the gossiping
great Lady (that holds conference with Generals, palludated in their
imbroidered riding-Coats, as being ready to march into the field) might very
well report that Niphates had drowned all the Countries about it.

Verse 438. Two Leaden Balls.] They that sweat before they bathed* swung two
Leaden Balls, in each hand one, (and then were nointed:) Senec. Epist. 57.

Verse 462. The laboring Moon.] When the Moon was in eclipse, the simple
superstition of the Romans made them believe that she was bewitched with
charms and incantations, for which there was no Counter-spell but only a sound
of brass, from Trumpets, Basins, Kettles, and the like: Tibull. Eleg. 8.

Cantus and e cursu Lunam deducere tentat,
Et faceret, si non era repulsa sonent.
Songs would, and sure might make the Moon retreat:
Were not, for Counter-charms, Brass-kettles beat.
Verse 465. Sylvanus.] God of the Woods, Son to his Grandfather and Sister, in
this manner: Venus being offended with Valeria Tusculanaria, made her fall in
love with her own Father. She opened the wicked secret to her Nurse, and the
old Bawd trepand her Master into his Daughters Bed, telling him there was a
Neighbor's Daughter, a very pretty young Maid, that had a months mind to him,
but durst not speak for her self, no nor look upon so reverend a person. After
enjoyment, when the old man was tippled, he took a light in his hand, which the
Nurse seeing, prevented his fury, and casting her self out of the Window broke
her neck: a President shortly after followed by the old man; but Valeria,
trusting to her nimble feet, overran her Father Valerius, got into the VVoods,
and was delivered of Sylvanus, called by the Grecians Aegypanes, from his
figure, being a man with Goats feet. This Phantasm was by the Greeks and Romans
believed to be God of the VVoods and Cattle; also that he had the power to
transform Cyparissus, the Boy whom he doted upon, into a Cypress tree. To this
God men offered up a Hog; but women never sacrificed to Sylvanus, nor did any
of their sex pay a farthing to the Bath-keeper; as the Stoic did, that
imagined himself a King, for which Horace laughs at him: neither was it the
fashion for women to wear short Coats: all which my Author thinks fit they
should take upon them as well as the understanding of great Authors, which is
proper only to men.

Verse 468. Enthymem,] An imperfect Sylogisme, wanting one proposition.

Verse 471. Palaemon.] Remmius Palaemon, born at Vincentia, by Plin. and Ptol.
called Vicentia. He lived at Rome, in the reigns of Tiberius and Claudius
Caesar; he was an excellent Grammarian, and Tutor to M. Fabius Quintilian: but
such a pride his Art put into him, that he said, Learning was born and would
die with him; and used to call M. Varro a litterate Hog, whom Quintilian (not
learning to make a Judgment from his Tutor) called the most learned of the
Romans: and says, he writ many learned books, was a Master of the Latin
tongue, and skillful in all Antiquity both of the Romans and Greeks. One of
Palaemon's brags was, That Virgil in his Bucolicks prophesied of him, as the
only competent Judge of all Orators and Poets. He repoted, that when Thieves
had taken him, after he had named himself, they let him go: but Poverty proved
not so kind; for she never let go her hold when she had catched him; after
his expensive vanity of bathing many times a day, to which his fortunes were
not answerable: Suet.

Verse 482. Poppaea,] Nero's Empress: she invented a rare Pomatum: and was so
elegant, so careful to preserve her beauty, that when she was banished Rome,
she carried fifty she-Asses along with her, for their milk to wash her self in.
She died by a sudden rage of her Husband, kicking her when she was with child:
Tacit.

Verse 205. The Sicilian Court.] In the reigns of, the cruellest Tyrants of
Sicily, Phalaris and the Dionisii.

Verse 509. Isis.] Her first name was Io: she was Daughter to the River
Inachus, and one of Jove's Mistresses. For fear of Juno, Jupiter metamorphosed
her into a white Cow; but Juno's jealousy found her out in that shape, and
begged the Cow of her Husband, which he had not the courage to deny her. Then
she made Argos with his 100 eyes her Cowkeeper, whereat Jupiter was so enraged,
that he slew him by the hand of Mercury: Juno, to revenge her self upon his
Love, made her mad, and so grievously tormented her, that Jove was forced to
reconcile himself to his Wife; and then won her to consent that Io might be
restored to her former shape. Afterward she married Osiris, and changed her
name to Isis; and after her death the Egyptians, in memory of benefits
received from her, by whom they were taught the use of Letters, deified her,
and called her Priests Isaici: See Plutarc. in his Morals. Near to the Palace
of Romulus, by Juvenal here called the old Sheep-coat, stood her Roman Temple,
which was the meeting place for Wenches, Pimps and Bawds, as appears in this
and the ninth Satyr, where it is pictured in the Design: Ovid.

Multas Io facit quod fuit illa Jovi.
Io makes many what she was to Jove?
Verse 510. Psecas,] The Woman or Dresser to a tyrannical Lady.

Verse 517. The Matron of the Wheel,] That being very old, was in favor of her
eyesight, spared from needle work, set to spinning, and made one of her Lady's
Council.

Verse 525. Andromache,] Wife to Hector, Daughter to Eetion King of Thebes in
Cilicia: Hom. lib. 12. Iliad. and Mother to Astyanax. In her widowhood Pyrrhus
carried her into Greece, and had by her a Son called Molossus; afterward
(falling in love with Hermione, that was betroathed to Orestes) he gave her in
Dower part of his Kingdom, and married her to the Prophet Helenus, Son to
Priam, Volater. Her name imports a Virago or a masculine woman, and a tall one
she was; you may take Juvenal's word.

Verse 535. Bellona,] The Goddess Pallas, or Minerva formerly described, whose
fanatic Priests sacrificed to her their own blood, and were therefore highly
reverenced by the superstitious Roman Dames.

Verse 535. Cybele.] Vid. Sat. 2. where the Goddess Cybele and her Priests are
set out at large.

Verse 548. Tarquins Fields.] The Fields consecrated to Mars, called Campus
Martius and Tiberinus (in regard they lay near the River Tiber) were bestowed
upon the people of Rome by the Vestal Caja Tarratia. These Juvenal calls
Tarquin's Fields, because Tarquin the Proud converted all that ground to his
own use, sowing it with corn: but when Brutus had freed Rome from his Yoke, the
Fields were restored to their Martial use, and the sacrilegious crop of Corn
flung into the River; the Romans judging it to be impious for any man to make a
benefit of holy ground. The infinite number of Sheavs, clotted with the
River-mud, in time became firm ground, and was called the Isle of Aesculapius,
or the holy Island: Rosin. antiq. lib. 6. cap. 11. In the Campus Martius were
to be seen the Statues of many Roman Generals, and the rarities which the
Capitol had not room for. There the Tyrones or young Soldiers exercised their
arms, and the Romans ran Horse-races and Foot-races, Wrestled, Fenced, cast the
Bowl, Sledge and Dart, learned how to use the Sling and Bow, and to vault from
the back of one horse to another: Coel. Rhod. l. 21. cap. 29.30. Here was also
a Mount paved with Marble, tarressed about with Galleries, and in the midst of
it a Tribunal or Seat of Justice, about which the Assemblies of the people many
times gave their votes at the election of Magistrates: Serve. in Buc. Eclog. 1.

Verse 549. White Io.] See the preceding Comment upon Isis: yet I cannot but
take notice that Juvenal makes her only a white Cow, where Suidas tells us she
was sometimes white, sometimes black, and sometimes of a Violet color.

Verse 550. Meroe.] Of all the Islands made by the River Nilus, Meroe (as
aforesaid) is the greatest: it is in length 3000 furlongs and 1000 in breadth.
The Chief City bears the name of the Island, and was built by Cambyses, that
gave it the name of his deceased Sister Meroe. The Isle is inhabited by
Shepherds, good Huntsmen and Husbandmen; as also industrious Miners, digging
for Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, diverse sorts of Stones, and the precious
Ebone-tree: Herod.

Verse 555. Her darling Priest.] The Priest of Isis at Rome.

Verse 556. Bald Crew.] They that celebrated the mysteries of Isis, shaved all
the hair off their heads: Apulei. Plin.

Verse 557. Anubis,] Son to Osyris and Io or Isis: he was worshipped in the
form of a Dog, as his Brother Macedo was in the figure of a Wolf, because in
their Shields the one bore a Dog, the other a Wolf: Diodor. Coel. Rhod. lib. 3
ca. 12. After this Dog the Romans, in imitation of the Egyptians, went crying
and howling, as if they followed him in quest of his Father Osiris King of
Egypt, that was murdered privately by his Brother Typhon: and the body having
been long sought for by Queen Isis, was at last found cut in pieces near to
Syene: after his deification they still mourned for him with this Ceremony, and
adored him in the form of a Bull, by the name of Apis, which in the Egyptian
tongue signifies a Bull; accordingly his offering was Hay: and if he took it,
it betokened prosperous success; if he took it not, it was ominous: Strab. lib.
ult. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 16.

Verse 461. Silver Snake.] That Silver Snake, which in the Temple of Isis and
Osyris twined it self about the Images of the Dog and Wolf.

Verse 566. The poor she-Jew,] That durst not beg in public, because she was
an alien, but more especially, because she begged in the name of one God, not
of the many Gods of Rome.

Verse 573. Commagenian.] The Commagenian or Syrian Aruspex, and the Armenian
Sooth-sayer told fortunes to Ladies, by inspecting the entrails of Pigeons,
Chickens and Dogs; now and then they would steal a Child and dissect it;
afterward they would inform the Magistrate, and leave their good Dames to the
mercy of the Law.

Verse 576. Chaldaean] The Chaldaeans lived about Babylon, and had among them
an Oracle like that of Delphos in Greece. They were the most ancient
Babylonians, their office in the Commonwealth was to manage the government of
Religion, their study Philosophy and Astrology, wherein they were great
Masters: the reason was, they studied not all Arts and Sciences like the
Grecians; but laying aside the care of worldly business, only applied
themselves to Philosophy, whereby they came to be most learned: Diodor. Sicul.
lib. 3. Cicer.

Verse 578. Jove's secret Springs,] Spoken by my Author in scorn of
Astrologers; as if Jupiter should now whisper them in the ear, with knowledge
of future events, ever since Apollo had lost his voice at Delphos, where the
Oracle was silenced at the birth of our Savior Christ.

Verse 581. The oftest Exile's chief.] The Ladies of Rome had the highest
opinion of such an Astrologer as either by exile or imprisonment suffered most,
for predicting against great persons, and had been upon the accomplishment of
his prediction repealed or set at liberty; as he was, who foretold that Otho
should be Successor to his great Rival the Emperor Galba.

Verse 589. Seriphus,] A very little Island in the Aegean Sea; it is one of the
Cyclades, to which the Romans confined Informers, Astrologers, and great
offenders, whose sentence ran, In Insulam deportari, to be carried into an
Isle: See Plin. Panegyr.

Verse 590. Tanaquil.] Wife to Tarquinius Priscus King of Rome: Live. This Queen
was much given to the study of Astrology and Mathematics.

Verse 595. Saturn's frowns] Are here balanced, in antithesi, with the smiles
of Venus: he being the most sullen, cold, and malignant Planet; she the most
benign and fortunate, especially in conjunction.

Verse 604. Thrasyllus,] A Platonist, and a very great Mathematician, once in
high esteem with Tiberius Caesar, afterward by his command cast into the Sea
at Rhodes.

Verse 610. Petosyris,] A famous Egyptian Astrologer or Mathematician (for so
was an Astrologer called by the Romans) Plin. l. 7. c. 28. Suid.

Verse 614. Phrygian Augurs.] The Phrygians, Cilicians and Arabians were
marvelous skillful Augurs or Diviners by the flight of Birds.

Verse 614. Gymnosophists.] Indian Philosophers, so called because they were
wise and naked. From the rising to setting of the Sun they would look upon him
with fixed eyes; and stand in the hot boiling sands, first upon one leg, then
upon the other: Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2. some say they could endure heat and cold
without any sense of pain. When Alexander the great came among them, he bid
them ask of him whatsoever they had a mind to, and he would grant it: they
prayed him to bestow upon them what they infinitely thirsted for, immortality:
He replied, How can you expect immortality from me that am mortal? Do you know
your self to be mortal, said they; why are you not then contented with your
patrimonial Kingdom, but trouble mandkinde thus to bring the world into
subjection? Cic. Tusc. quaest. lib. 5. Augustinus lib. 5. de Civ. Dei.

Verse 615. Patricians,] The Roman Nobility.

Verse 116. Heavens winged-fire.] The lightning, watched by certain old Priests
appointed for that purpose; and where they imagined a thunderbolt to fall, a
hedge was made about the place, lest the people should come upon defiled
ground, which they purified by sacrificing their Bidentes, a pair of young
Heifers; and from them the place it self was called Bidental.

Verse. 617. Plebeian.] The Plebeians were the common people of Rome.

Verse 617. Circus,] the great Shew-place, described in the Comment upon Sat. 3.

Verse 618. The Ovall Tower.] A wooden Tower, of the form of an Egg, built by
Agrippa for the Judges of the Circensian Games, to view the course. This Tower
was supported with pillars carved like Dolphines; before them upon a Mount
stood a Courtesan, dressed up as Juvenal describes her, that told poor women
their fortunes.

Verse 632. Before thou break'st thy fast.] The Romans held it ominous, and
looked for a black day, if they saw a Negro next their hearts in a morning.

Verse 634. The foul Lake.] The Velabrian Lake, where fruitful poor women
exposed those children they were not able to maintain; and Midwives took them
up for rich barren Ladies, that counterfeited lying-in, and trepand their
Husbands with these Sons of the earth, that by this means inherited the
greatest honors and fortunes in Rome, viz. The Salian Priesthood and great
Scauran name. Of both which I have spoken in the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 643. Thessalian Philters.] Thessaly is a Country of Greece, having
Boeotia upon the one hand, on the other Macedonia: it lies to the Sea between
the River Peneus and the Mountains of Thermopylae: and was first called Aemonia
of King Aemon: Plin. lib. 4. cap. 7. There are in Thessaly 24 Mountains,
whereof the noblest is Olympus, Palace of the Gods; then Pierus, the Seat of
the Muses; Peleus and Ossa, memorable for the Giants war; Pindus and Othrys,
inhabited by the Lapiths: but neither the Mountains nor the many fair Rivers of
this Region rendered it so famous, as it was made by the rare Simples that grew
there, rare both for the use and destruction of men, for medicine and poison;
so that not only Physicians, but also Witches came thither to furnish
themselves of ingredients for Philters or Love-potions. It was in Thessaly
where Medea gathered all those herbs which restored old Aeson to his youth:
Apul. lib. 1. Flor.

Verse 649. Nero's Uncle.] Caesar Caligula, who had this surname a caligis,
from his military Boots, which he wore set full of Pretious-stones. His Wife
Caesonia wrought upon his affections with such powerful love-potions, that in
his dotage he would often (like to the Lydian King Candaules) show her naked to
his friends: yet still when he kissed her neck, he would say, This fair neck,
if I please, may be cut off. Once in a humor he professed that he would send
to be resolved, by what means he was brought to that excessive dotage: then
Caesonia, fearing to be discovered, put into her Philter more of her powder of
sympathy, which made Caligula stark mad, and turned him from a Prince to a
Tyrant.

Verse 650. A Colt's whole front.] The Hippomenes, a caruncula or bunch of
flesh growing upon the forehead of a Colt; some say the Mare eats it in her
very foaling time, as grudging so great a benefit to man, in regard it makes
him, that wears it, be beloved of all his acquaintance. This Hippomenes,
snatched from the teeth of the foaling Mare and infused in wine, makes the
drinker enamoured of the Cup Bearer; Caligula found it so.

Verse 653. Mushrome] Claudius Caesar, above all other Table-rarities, loved to
eat Mushromes: Sat. 5.

-- before
His Wife's came, after which he never eat more.
Verse 669. Pontia.] Juvenal supposes that his Readers may question the truth
of some crimes charged upon Ladies, and take them to be stories fained for
heightning of his Satyrs, in imitation of Sophocles when he writ his Greek
Tragedies. Now my Author, to clear himself, quotes the Case of Pontia Daughter
to P. Petronius, and Wife to Vectius Bolanus, that after her Husbands death,
poisoned the two Sons which she had by him, that she might come with a full
fortune to him, that was her Servant before Nero put her Husband to bleed his
last. Pontia, being arraigned, was convicted from her own mouth, confessing the
fact, and her inclination, not only to poison her two Sons, but many more, if
her first Husband had begot them; so the words import. -- hear Pontia confess,
My Sons I poisoned. Cruel Viperess,
What both? at one meal two? had I to sev'n
Been Mother, I had sent them all to heaven.
When sentence was passed upon her, after a great Supper and a Banquet, she
called for Music, danced a while, then made her veins be cut; and yet at the
same time took a draught of poison for expedition: See Jan. Parrasius Papin.
Stat. 5. Sylv.

Mart. O matter, qua nec Pontia deterior.
O mother, Pontia was not worse.
Verse 673. Medea,] Daughter to Aeta King of Colchos by Queen Ipsea, or, as
some call her, Ida. When Jason, with the rest of the Argonauts, arrived at
Colchos, Medea won her Father to give them a reception in his Court: Then for
fear of losing her beloved Jason (that attempted to carry her from many rival
Princes, which daily lost their lives upon the same account) she taught him how
to overcome all intervenient dangers, by taming and yoaking the brazen-footed
Bulls, by charming into a dead sleep the ever-waking Dragon; then killing him
and stealing the Golden Fleece, which he guarded. This done, Medea fled away
with Jason, carrying along her little Brother Absyrtus. King Aeta pursued them;
and when he drew so near, that Medea and Jason gave themselves for lost: to
retard his march, she cut in pieces the young Child her Brother; and whilst her
father gathered up his scattered limbs, she and her Servant saved themselves by
flight. At last, after a tedious voyage, they came to Thessaly, where Jason
(that could not move her in vain) made it his suit, now they were in the Worlds
great Physick-garden, that she would try her art upon his old decrepit Father;
whom she restored to his strength and youth. Diogenes said that Medea was no
Witch, but a wise woman, that by Gymnastick exercises, and sweating in Stoves,
brought effeminate persons, which had prejudiced their health by idleness, to
as good a habit of body as at first. This made the Poets invent their Fable of
her boiling of men till their old age was consumed. Trusting to this example of
Aeson, the Daughters of his Brother Peleas were cozened into the murder of
their Father, Medea making them believe she would restore their Father to his
youth, as she had restored her Husbands Father: Ov. Met. lib. 7. Lastly Jason
put her away, and married Creusa, Daughter to Creon King of Corinth. Medea (mad
to be thus used) by the hand of her Servant presented to Creusa a rich Cabinet
full of wildfire, which she opening, burned her self and fired the whole
Palace. Jason, resolving to kill Medea for this fact, broke open her
Chamber-dore: just as if she had bewitched him thither, only to be an eye
witness to the death of those Children which he had by her; for, as soon as
ever he came in, she caught them up and strangled them all, but saved her self
by the power of Magic. Her next appearance she made at Athens, where she
married Aegaeus: and though he was then very aged, she had a Son by him, called
after her own name, Medus, that gave name to the Country of the Medes: Justin.
lib. 42. After all this (no body knows how) Jason and she were reconciled;
probably it was for her own ends, because she forthwith carried him to Colchos,
where he reestablished her old banished Father in his Kingdom: See Diodor.
Sicul. and N. Comes that learnedly interprets the Fable of Medea.

Verse 673. Progne,] Daughter to Pandion King of Athens, Wife to Tereus King of
Thrace, of all Thracians the most barbarous: for, under pretense of waiting
upon Pandion's other Daughter, that made a visit to her Sister Progne at his
Court by the way he ravished Philomela, cutting out her tongue, that she might
not tell. But Philomela, being an excellent Work-woman, drew her sad story with
her needle in such lively colors, that her Sister Progne knew the whole
circumstance of the Rape: and to revenge her self of her cruel Husband, by the
advice of the Maenades, she feasted him with the limbs of his and her Son Itys,
which being known by the Child's head that was served-in for the second course;
Tereus in his fury would have killed his Wife; but whilst he was drawing out
his Sword he saw her turned into a Swallow: Philomela was transformed into a
Nightingale, Itys into a Pheasant: Tereus himself, admiring at their
metamorphosis, was turned into a Lapwing, that still bears upon his head the
creast of a fierce Thracian Soldier: See Ovid. Met. 6.

Verse 683. Alcestis,] Wife to Admetus King of Thessaly, whose Cattle-keeper
Jove himself had been; and therefore, as it seems, when his old Master was sick
to death, Jove was contented with an exchange; so that if any one would die for
Admetus, he might live. But this being an office distastefull to his whole
Court and Kingdom, all excused themselves, only Queen Alcestis cheerfully
embraced the offer, and served her Husband with her life. Her Tragedy you may
read in the works of Euripides.

Verse 687. Belides.] The Belides or Danaides were fifty Daughters of Danaus
Son to Belus. To these Ladies Aegyptus (Danaus his Brother) desired to marry
his fifty Sons; but Danaus would not give way to the Treaty of a marriage with
all or any of them, because the Oracle had foretold him that he should die by
the hand of a Son in Law: but Aegyptus moving it once again in the head of a
strong Army (brought to force the consent of Danaus and his Daughters) the
match was concluded. Upon the wedding night the Brides were instructed by their
Father to kill their Husbands when they saw their opportunity: In obedience to
him all these Ladies slew their Husbands, but only Hypermnestra, that preserved
the life of her Husband Lyceus: He afterward verified the Oracle, and to
secure himself slew his Father in Law Danaus, and succeeded him in the Kingdom
of Argos. The sentence pronounced against these Sisters by Minos, the just
Judge of Hell, was, to pour water into a Tub that was split, until they filled
it, which could never be, and therefore their punishment must be endless. Some
think this Fable signifies the Spring and Autumn, that every year pour out new
varieties of flowers and fruits, yet never satisfy our expectations: See
Lucret. lib. 5. Others take it to bear proportion to the whole life of man, and
of all things in the world: which as they come in, go out, not leaving any long
continued monument of what they were. There are that apply it to benefits
conferred upon ungrateful persons, which vanish in the doing. Plato compares
the split Tubs of the Beleides to the mind of an intemperate man, which is
insatiable. Terence has one that says he is very like them, plenus rimarum
sum, I am full of Leaks: But whosoever he was that writ the following Epigram,
he fixes Plato's sense, from an universal to a particular, exceeding well.

Belidas fingunt pertusa in dolia Vates
Mox effundendas fundere semper aquas.
Nomine mutato, narratur fabula de te
Ebrie, qui meias quae sine fine bibis.
Quinetiam hoc in te quadrat turba ebria; quod sint
Corpora quae fuerant, dolia facta tibi.
Tubs split, say Poets, the Belides fill
With water: which, still poured in, runs out still.
Change names, to thee the Fable comes about
Drunkard, that all thou pour'st in pissest out:
In this too it concerns your bousing Crew,
Those, that were Bodies, are made Tubs by you.
Verse 687. Eriphyle,] Daughter to Thelaon, Sister to Adrastus, and Wife to
Amphiaraus. She was bribed with a Ring by Polynices to make discovery of her
Husband, that lay hid for fear of being forced to march to the seige of Troy,
where he and she knew that it was his fate to die. For this treachery of his
Wife, Alcmaeon had in charge from his Father Amphiaraus, that as soon as ever
the breath was out of his body, she that betrayed him to death should not live
a minute: accordingly, when the news was brought, Alcmaeon slew his Mother.

Verse 689. Clytemnestra.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. Hom. lib. 11. Odyss.
Senec. in Agam. Eurip. in Orest. Sophocles in Elect.

Verse 695. The thrice foiled Monarch.] Mithridates King of Pontus, that by the
strength of his arm could rule six pair of horses in a Chariot: and by the
strength of his brain two and twenty Nations, every one of them speaking a
several tongue, and he all their languages. When the Romans were taken up with
their civil wars, he beat Nicomedes out of Bithinia, and Ariobarzanes out of
Cappadocia: possessing himself of Greece, and all the Greek Islands, only
Rhodes excepted. The Merchants of Rome that traffick't in Asia, by his
contrivance were slain in one night: the Proconsul Q. Oppius and his Legate
Apuleius were his Prisoners. But Mithridates was thrice defeated by the Romans:
First (as you have heard by Sylla at Dardanum: then by Lucullus at Cyzicum:
from whence he fled for refuge to Tigranes King of Armenia, that suffered him
to make new levies within his Dominions; but that vast Army was totally routed
by Pompey. Finally, Pharnaces besieged him in his Palace, and Mithridates
despairing, attempted to poison himself; but had brought his body to such a
habit by long and constant use of Antidots to prevent impoisoning, that when
poison should have done him service, it would not work: Nor had he then lost
the Majesty of his looks; for the man, sent to kill him, found Mithridates
unwillingly alive, yet still so undaunted and like himself, that the Murderer
shakt and trembled at his presence; nor was able to do his office, till
Mithridates guided the Executioners hand to his own heart. But first this King
slew all his Royal Family: Laodice his Wife, his Sister, Mother, Brother,
three young Sons, and as many Daughters.

Figura Septima.
PRimo praecipitem in vitium descripserat Author
Romam; dein rigidos aliena in crimina sontes;
Rus praelatum Vrbi; vitandam rectius Aulam;
Ad coenam and sannas simul, accubuisse Clientes;
Ducenti Vetulo qualisque futura sit Vxor.
Subjicit hic, doctos qualis fortuna sequatur.
Lappa 1 Poeta togam, mox libros pignorat Atreo.
Historicus 2 scriptor ruris nemorisque recessum
Eligit; attonitus mentem de pane parando,
Et, cum turgescat millesima pagina, chartis.
Causidico 3 macro and docto petasunculus and vas
Pelamidum dantur: ditiaureus affluit amnis
Indocto, 4 crassumque premit lectica Mathonem.
Rhetore 5, quis color and quae quaestio summa, magistro
Scire volunt omnes; mercedem solvere nemo:
Sed nostrum instituens, gallinae filius albae
Quintilianus 6, habet miro tot praedia fato.
Ars nihil Enceladi, clarique Palaemonis affert;
Grammaticus 7, cui tetra haeret fuligo lucernae,
In pueros oleum perdit: qui vimine Flaccum 8,
Et qui Virgilium 9 docuit trepidare minores,
Vapulat a magnis; unusque est pluribus impar.


The seventh Design.
VIce at the height in Rome: And that cried down
By Knaves: The Country better then the Town:
The Court far worse: The feasted Client jeered:
The City-Wanton whipped: these you have heard.
Now see the Virtuosi how they fare,
In what a sad condition Scholars are.
Lean Poverty is in the Poet's looks:
Lappa to 1 Atreus pawns his Cloak and Books:
The great 2 Historian, sheltered in the wood,
There meditates how he may compass food,
And Reams of Paper, to write Tomes upon.
The well-read 3 Lawyer gets, for fees, Poor John.
The 4 unlearned feeds so high, he hardly can
Crowd his fat sides into his large Sedan.
The 5 Rhetorician poures on flowery Theams,
Almost for nothing, all his golden streams:
Yet the Author's Rhet'rick-Master wealthy grows,
Quintilian's 6 one of Fortunes rare white Crows.
The 7 Schoolmaster (so often like to choke,
When Boys that con by Lamp-light smell of smoke;
He that made young besmutted 8 Horace sweat
And 9 Virgil shake) is by great School-boyes beat.
The Manners of Men. THE SEVENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The Arts are fed by empty praise.
The wanting Poet sells his Plays;
Less the Historian's profit is;
The Lawyer's gettings less then his;
The Rhetoritian's yet more small;
And the Grammarian's least of all.
Yet Learning, scorned and almost sterv'd,
By Caesar's bounty is preserved.
CAESAR is both our studies Cause and End,
For he alone is the sad Muses friend.
Now, when our famous Poets strive to hire
Poor Gabian baths, at Rome to make the fire:
Nor to turn Cryers some have held it base,
But left in AGANIPPE'S Vale, their place,
Whilst to large Courts the hungry CLIO goes;
For, if thy learned purse no money shows,
Get thee MACHAERA'S name and living, cry
At public sales, What will you please to buy?
Fine pots? three-footed stools? come choose your selves
Shelves for your Studies, Play-books for your shelves:
HALCIONE, PACCUS his tragic wit:
TEREUS and OEDIPUS by FAUSTUS writ:
It Is better far, the Judge then swearing thee,
To say I saw, what thou did never see:
Let them do so that come from the Asian coast;
Though Cappadocian Knights, Knights of the Post,
And our Bithinian Knights too, do the same,
Which thorough Gallo-Graecia barefoot came.
None shall hereafter stoop to sordid pains
That brouse on Laurel, and write lofty strains:
Youths study; CAESAR'S bounty spurs you on,
That seeks but matter it may work upon.
But if for help from others thou do look,
And therefore fill'st thy yellow Table Book,
Borrow a Faggot (THELESIN) blow blow,
And upon VULCAN what thou writ'st bestow;
Or let the moths thy locked up works devour;
Or break thy Pens, and thy Ink-bottle pour
Upon those wars that did thy sleep expel,
Those mighty lines writ in a little Cell;
Only because thou did for Ivy hope,
And a lean Image: that is thy utmost scope.
For rich Churls have learned only, in our days,
To commend Poets as Boys Peacocks praise:
Mean time Youth spends, that might with toil have made
A fortune from War, Traffic, or the Spade:
And eloquent poor Age begins too late
It self and it is Terpsicore to hate.
Now mark, to save his purse, what trick's devised,
Thy Prince (the Muses and their God despised)
Himself makes Verses, and admits no Peers
But HOMER, merely for a thousand years,
Caught with Fame's sweetness if thou wilt read, to lend
His House will MACULONUS condescend;
He will command his churlish iron grates
To open faster then the City gates:
His Freedmen he will marshall in the Pit,
His Clients and his Friends great voices fit:
But not a Prince thy Bench-hire will defray;
Nor for the Beam, that bears the Scaffolds, pay:
Nor so much as the Chairs return insure,
Set for great men, the Orchestra's furniture.
Yet still we ply the brittle sands, and through
The shore draw furrows with a barren plough:
Nor, would we take our hands off, can we do it;
Custom and vain Ambition ties us to 't.
The Writing Evil poisons many so,
That Years and their Disease together grow.
But he that merits Bays to crown his head,
That spins out nothing of a common thread;
That, as his great Art's Master, scorns to print
Poor trivial coins stamped at the public Mint:
One that I cannot show, but only can
Conceive, a mind untroubled makes that man,
That feels no care, loves silent Groves, and brings
A spirit fit to taste the Aonian Springs.
In the Pierian Caves soft aires to chant,
Or reach a Thyrsus, suits not with sad Want,
That pinches day and night: when HORACE writ
His Ohe, he was full of Wine and Wit.
What place for wit, but where a man with Verse
Is only troubled, and holds free commerce
With BACCHUS and APOLLO? it is in vain
To think one bosom can two cares contain.
It Is for great souls, not one that need besots
And mends his Mat, to model Chariots
For Gods, their Steeds and Looks: or how her Snakes
ALECTO, in confounding TURNUS, shakes.
Had VIRGIL had nor house-room, nor a Boy
Whom he about his business might employ:
The elfe-lockt Fury all her Snakes had shed,
His Pipe played nothing rare, but flat and dead.
We tragic Poets now would think it fair,
If that, which kept the old Buskins in repair,
Might not from RUBREN LAPPA be withdrawn,
Whose Cloak and Papers ATREUS has in pawn.
Poor NUMITOR has nothing for his Friend,
But can rich presents to his Mistress send:
Nor wants to buy a Lion, tamely bred,
And with much flesh accustomed to be fed;
Poets, belike, cost more then Lions do,
And are conceived to eat more garbage too.
In's Garden LUCAN pleased with fame may lie,
With Marble Nymphs and Fountains in his eye:
But BASSUS, poor SARRANUS, what to thee
Is any glory, if it bare glory be?
To their dear Thebais the People throng,
And to the sound of his enchanting tongue,
When STATIUS with the promise of a day
Over joys the Town; for in so sweet a way
He reads his Poem, that to hear it spoke
A lust affects the soul: yet when he broke
The benches with strong lines, he must for bread
To PARIS sell AGAVE'S Maidenhead.
Many to honor in the wars He brings;
Puts Summer Annulets and Winter Rings
On Tragic Poets fingers; what there lives
No Lord that will bestow, this Player gives.
Do thou attend the Camerini then,
And BAREA? a fig for Noblemen,
Write Tragedies; it is PELOPEA takes,
She praefects, PHILOMELA Tribunes makes.
Nor envy Stage-rais'd Poets; where have thou
A PROCULEIUS, or MAECENAS now?
A FABIUS, LENTULUS, or COTTA? Wit
Had then Munificence to balance it.
'Twas good for Poets then, pale faced to grow,
And, all December long, no wine to know.
But you Historians to more purpose toil,
Your Works requiring both more time and oil;
None short of the two thousandth page can fall,
And mere expense in Paper breaks you all.
The boundless matter upon which you go,
And Laws of History will have it so.
But what fruit reaps your labors? where is he
Will give the Historian an Attorney's fee?
No, you are lazy people, either laid
Upon your beds, or walking in the shade.
Then tell me what do active Lawyers gain
By Civil business, their great Books and Train?
They bawl loud ever, but then deaf our ears,
When the rich Creditor; that fees them, hears:
Or by the sleeve he pulls them, that lays claim
To some great fortune, by a dubious name;
Then the hollow Bellows breaths forth mighty lies,
And on their breasts their eager spettle flies.
To state their profits truly, set me here
A hundred Lawyers, and LACERTA there;
And that one Coach-mans land shall buy the estates
Of all those hundred learned Advocates.
They sit, that are the Grandees of the War,
And thou poor AJAX stand at the Bar:
And for litigious titles quot'st the Laws
To a dull Herdsman, that must judge the Cause.
Crack thy stretched lungs poor wretch, that when the art tired,
The Lawyer's Bays, green Palms, may be acquired.
What is the price at which thou set'st thy tongue?
A little Bacon-flitch, in the Chimney hung:
Or Tunny, barreld when it is mud not fish;
Or stinking Onions, Aegypt's monthly dish;
Or Wine our Tiber-Watermen transport,
Five bottles, if thou have pleaded four times for it?
And if one piece of Gold come, which is rare,
As your agreement was, the Judge must share.
AEMYLIUS shall have what he demands:
(Yet we plead better) for at's Gate there stands
A Chariot, and four goodly Steeds of brass:
And he, in's one-ey'd Statue, makes a pass,
On's fiery War-horse, with his bending spear,
Putting the Foe, at distance, in a fear.
Thus into debt has PEDO vainly run,
Thus MATHO breaks; TONGILLUS is undone,
That from his great Rhinoceros took oil,
And with his dirty train the Bath did soil;
And his young Medians shoulders pressed so sore,
When his Sedan they through the Forum bore,
As he was going to buy silver plate,
Fair Myrrhin bolls, fine boys, with an estate
And Country House; for all which, at the day,
His Tyrian Purple promises to pay.
And yet this gallantry with some does well:
Purple and Violet Robes a Lawyer sell,
A noise and face of wealth do him befriend;
But lavish Rome puts to expense no end.
Should our old Orators return and live,
No one would now two hundred drams give
To CICERO himself, unless there shone
Upon his finger a great pretious-stone:
He that begins a Suit, in the first place, marks
If thou have ten Companions, and eight Clarks;
Whether a Closse-chair does behind thee wait,
And men in Gowns before thee walk in state.
A Gemme, to plead with, PAULUS therefore hires,
And therefore PAULUS greater fees requires
Then are by GALLUS or by BASIL took:
For Eloquence in rags men seldom look.
When Is BASIL honored, after his Report,
To bring the weeping Mother into Court;
Or who hears BASIL, plead he never so well*
Away to France, or rather choose to dwell
In Africa, the Nursery of Law:
If from thy pleading thou would profit draw.
Thou teach Rhet'rick; O the iron breast
Of VETTUS, that can those hard Theams digest
Which murder Tyrants! who the self same things
He sitting reads, to others standing sings,
And in the same tone the same verse instills:
Poor Schoolmasters this twice boiled Cole-woort kills;
The trope, the kind of the plea, the questions sum,
What arrows from the adverse part may come
All men would know, none for their knowledge pay;
Pay would thou have? what do I know I pray?
The Master's taxed, that under the left breast
There Is nothing beats in's young Arcadian beast.
That, every sixth day, makes my poor head ache
With his dire HANNIBAL; what course he will take
After the fatal day at Cannae won;
If he directly should to Rome march on,
Or to get's weather-beaten forces out
Of storms and lightning, wisely wheel about.
Ask what thou will, I Will give it thee, it is there,
That his own Father him so often would hear.
But, with one mouth, at least six Lawyers plead
For Men, and not as you do for the Dead:
They from their pleadings HELLEN'S Rape exclude,
MEDEA'S Charms, the base Ingratitude
Of JASON, and what kind of medicine might
Bring old blind AESON to his youth and sight.
The Rhetorician shall (if ruled by me)
Take up his Rudis, and himself make free,
Declaim in Law-Courts, and descending from
The fained shadow, to the substance come.
Lest that small stock, which his one Loaf should buy,
Be spent, which teaching School will never supply.
Do but CHRISOGONUS and POLLIO weigh,
And for what miserable stipends they
To great men's Sons their Rhetoric impart,
Dissecting THEODORUS and his Art.
His Bath costs much, his Portico costs more,
Wherein he rides until the shower be over:
Is It fit his Lordship for fair weather stay,
And soil his handsome Beast with new-made clay?
No, here his Mule's neat hoof unsullied shines.
On that side he his Dining Room designs,
Which on Numidian Pillars round must run,
Where West and North cool the East and Southern Sun.
What ere his house cost, Artists he must take*
To marshall dishes, and rare sawces make;
And when all these Sestertia thus are spent,
Poor two, at most, QUINTILIAN must content.
Nothing costs Fathers less then Sons. How got
QUINTILIAN so much land then? Tell me not
Of presidents that are with fortune rare;
The Fortunate is valiant, and fair,
The Fortunate's wise, generous, well born,
On his black shoe a Silver-Cressent's worn;
The Fortunate speaks handsom'st, argues best;
Though hoarse, sings well: for here the ods will rest,
What Stars receive thee, when but newly come
Crying to light, and blushing from the womb.
If fortune will, poor Rhetorician, she
Can raise thee, and thou shall a Consul be:
And from a Consul, if she will, she can,
Make thee again a Rhetorician.
What was VENTIDIUS? What TULLY too,
But proofs of what the Stars and Fates could do?
That Crowns for Servants, Bays for Slaves prepare:
But Fortunate, white Crows are not so rare.
Many repented that they played the fool
In setting up a barren Rhet'rick-School;
As in THRASIMACUS may be observed,
And SECUNDUS CHARINAS almost sterv'd
In The midst of Athens, that to Scholars, now,
Except cold Hemlock, nothing dare allow.
Grant Heaven, that gentle weightlesse Earth may lie
On our forefathers bones, and sprout on high
In flowers, which to the Air perfumes may bring,
Clothing their Urns in a perpetual Spring:
Because a Tutor they did still repute
To be the sacred Parent's Substitute.
When Is Rod the Centaur singing-Master shook,
ACHILLES, though he was a great boy, quak't
In's Fathers Mountain: yet who, then, could fail
To laugh, that saw a Master with a tail.
By his own Scholars now is RUFFUS mall'd,
RUFFUS, that TULLY ALLOBROGIAN called.
Who to ENCELADUS, or to the learned
PALAEMON, tenders justly what is earned
By a Grammarian's pains? be what it may,
It Is less still then a Rhetorician's pay:
Yet thence, he that a Schoole-boy over-sees,
Defalks (as all Paymasters will) his fees.
PALAEMON yield, fall from thy highest rate,
Like Tradesmen in their Shops, a little bait:
So long as all is not lost, enticed wherewith,
Thou satest up till midnight; which no Smith,
None that cards wool with sloap-tooth'd wyre would do,
So long as all is not lost, that put thee to
The enduring what a Grammar School annoyes,
As many several smoaks as thou taught'st boys:
When HORACE with his Lamp was all besmeared,
And VIRGIL like a Blackamoor appeared.
Yet seldom that which is their due is paid,
Unless complaint be to the Tribune made.
But stricter laws on Tutors you impose,
For you must have one that all Grammars knows,
Rules, Authors, Histories: and these, as well
As he can his own nails or fingers tell;
That if perhaps you ask him, as you go
TO TYTAN'S or the Town-Bath, you may know
ANCHYSE'S Nurse, thy Mother in law's name
ARCHEMORUS, the Country whence she came:
How long ACESTE'S lived, how many a pot
Of his Sicilian wine the Trojans got.
You do expect he should a Schoolboy take,
And mould his manners, just as one would make
A face of wax: you do conceive that he
To all your Children must a Father be,
And look they should no filthy pastimes use:
Nor is it a little toil to him, that views
The hands of such a world of Boys, and pryes
Into the trembling corners of their eyes.
Do this they say; and for our whole years debt,
Thou shall have what a suit in Law can get.
The Comment UPON THE SEVENTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Caesar.] The Emperor Domitian; such a favourer of learned men, that
he sent many of the Virtuosi out of this world to perfect their knowledge in
the next: and to the rest he gave an opportunity of following their studies in
this life, by imprisoning or banishing of them: Yet some few Poets, and very
noble ones, tasted of his bounty, as Martial and Statius; both which he
favored, the first for his own sake, the other upon the score of his Minion
the Player Paris, for whom Statius writ the Tragedy of Agave, and was well paid
for his wit by Paris, that taught his great Master the art of encouraging some
Scholars. Therefore Juvenal in this Satyr commends both Domitian and Paris, but
you may see it is for fault of a better; the Satyr appears through the
Complement.

Verse 4. Gabian Baths.] Gabium was a beggarly Volscian Town (See the Comment
upon Sat. 3.) To be Master of a Bath there, was no better then a Fire-maker's
place in a Bath at Rome.

Verse 6. Aganippe's Vale.] Aganippe's Valley and Spring were in a solitary
part of Boeotia, consecrated to the Muses. But instead of withdrawing to such
privacie, as the old Poets used, want of Patrons and hunger forces the new
ones, as Cryers of goods to be sold, to come upon a Stage built for that
purpose, in large Courts where Chapmen might have room to flock about them.

Verse 7. Clio,] One of the Nine Muses; her name signifies Glory: Hesiod.
Theog. because glory is the aim of Poets. She was the Inventress of History,
transmitting to posterity the actions of gallant men: Virg. de 9. Mus. Was it
not pity that so noble a Muse for plain hunger should turn Crier?

Verse 9. Machaera,] A Crier of Goods set to sale, one that was in Juvenal's
time, as well known at Rome, as He is now about London that cries Stockins for
the whole Family.

Verse 13. Halcyone.] Halcyone was Daughter to Neptune and Wife to Ceyx. She
sailing to the Oracle was shipwrackt, and being impatient cast her self into
the Sea: but the Gods in pity would not suffer her to be drowned; and
therefore turned her into a Kings-fisher: Ovid. lib. 11.

Verse 14. Tereus] King of Thrace, Son to Mars by the Nymph Bistonis. He
married Progne, that (finding, by her Sister Philomel's needlework, who had cut
out her tongue, and why he did it) called a Council of her Gossips the
Maenades, that were met to celebrate the Orgies of Bacchus; where by a general
vote it was resolved, that she should treat her Husband, all the dishes at the
Table being made out of his young Son Itys, severally cooked; and that, for a
second course, one of the Gossips should bring in the head of his Son Itys, and
another the ravished Philomela. How all these four Princes were transformed, if
you remember not Ovid, you may turn to the end of the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 14. Oedipus,] Son to Laius and Jocasta King and Queen of Thebes. When
Jocasta was with child of him, the King sent to the Oracle to know the fortune
of his Offspring, it was answered, The Queen would be delivered of a Son that
should kill his Father. Laius, to preserve himself, when the Child was born,
gave him to a Shepherd, charging the man, upon pain of his own life, to destroy
the Infant. The Shepherd durst not obey the King, for accounting to the Gods;
neither durst he disobey him, for fear of his threatenings; therefore he chose a
middle way, and thrusting a Sword through the feet of the poor Babe, into the
holes he put twigs of VVicker, by which he hung him upon a tree, thinking that
want of sustenance would soon make an end of him. The Shepherd at his return to
Court showed the bloody sword to the King, confidently assuring his Majesty
that his pleasure was fulfilled. But Phorbas, Shepherd to Polybius King of
Corynth, going through the VVood (perhaps to make a visit to his Brother
Shepherd) heard the Child, ran in, and took it down. Returning with all speed
to Corynth, he presented the Babe, as a great rarity both of Fortune and
Nature, to the Queen his Mistress, that was Childless. The Infant so pleased
the Queen, that, as if the Gods had sent her a Child from Heaven, she bred him
up as her own; and from the tumor of his feet, which his wounds had swelled,
she called him Oedipus. When he grew to be a good big Youth, and understood he
was not Son to Polybius, he resolved to find out his own Father. To this end
he consulted the Oracle, that bid him go directly to Phocis, where he should
meet his Father: when he came thither, the Phocians were in an Uproar; which
Laius coming to suppress, in the tumult Oedipus, not knowing him to be his
Father, slew him. Then conceiving himself to be deluded by the Oracle, Oedipus,
being out of hope to find his Father, fell upon a new design, undertaking the
Sphinx, a Monster with a woman's face, birds wings, and a dog's body. This
Chimaera, from her fortification upon a Mountain in Thebes, plundered and
destroyed that Kingdom: nor would Apollo promise any end to their miseries,
till one came that could resolve the Monster's riddle. To such a knowing person
Creon King of Thebes (that succeeded his Son in Law Laius) offered in marriage
the new Widow, his Daughter Jocasta. Many gallant men had died in the attempt,
yet that was no discouragement to Oedipus, when a Kings Daughter was the prize
for which his life was to be ventured. To the fatal place came Oedipus, and by
the Sphinx was presently asked, What is it, That in the morning is a four-footed
creature, two-footed at noon, at night three-footed? he answered, a Man; that
in his infancy creeps upon hands and feet; in his full strength goes upright on
his legs; and in his decrepit age borrows one leg of the Carpenter, walking
with a staff. For grief to have her Aenigma thus unriddled, the Sphinx brake
her neck; a fortune that Oedipus might well envy: for his was far sadder, to be
rewarded with the marriage of his own mother Jocasta. But time at last unfolded
to Oedipus the Riddle of his own fortunes. And when he knew that he had killed
his Father, and married his Mother, in a rage he plucked out his own eyes: and
would have killed himself, but his hand was held by his Daughter Antigone, that
led her blind Father out of Thebes, when he was banished by Creon: Senec. in
Oedip. and after Seneca I doubt a Theban Tragedy writ by Faustus would hardly
sell, unless a rare Crier preferred it: See Stat. in Thebaid.

Verse 17 Asian.] Asian Slaves in the first edition: in the second, Roman
Knights.

Verse 19. Bithynian.] Bithynia is a Region of the lesser Asia, lying right
against Thrace along the Pontick Sea; for which reason Bithynia had once the
name of Pontus: Eusebius. Afterward a People of Thrace that were called Thynians,
passing over and possessing themselves of Pontus, it took from them the name of
Bithynia: Plin. lib. 1. ca. 31. Diverse other appellations this Country had, but
was famous by no name at all, but this which my Author seems to give it, viz. a
Nursery of Knights of the Post: it is only memorable for Hannibal, that was
buried at Libyssa.

Verse 20. Gallograecia.] Juvenal calls it new France; the ancient name was
Galatia. When the Galls grew to be so populous that France could not contain
them, first with sword and fire they overran Italy, took Rome, and straightly
besieged the Capitol; but Camillus routed them and freed his own Country: See
the Comment upon Sat. 2. Then the Galls, that like a Sea-breach had overflowed
all Italy, after the storm was over, continued rolling: and loosing on the
Roman side, got ground again in Greece and Macedon; from thence, led by their
General Leonorus the Grecians joining, they passed into Asia, where, by consent
of the King of Bithynia, they planted themselves in a part of his Dominions,
which was afterward called Gallograecia.

Verse 27. Thelesine,] A Poet, to whom (as some think) Juvenal writ this Satyr.

Verse 28. Vulcan,] God of fire: See the Comment upon Sat. 1.

Verse 33. Ivy.] Poets were crowned with Bays, Oak, Parsley and Ivy.

Verse 36. Boys Peacocks praise.] Children are much taken with the colors and
beauty of the Peacock's Plumes, them they commend, but they give him nothing:
if they can get a Peacock, they will pull his feathers, and take from him that
which they commended. In point of Vainglory the Poet much resembles the
Peacock, as he is described by Ovid. de Art. lib. 1.

Laudatas ostendit avis Junonia pennas:
Si tacitus spectes, illa recondit opes.
Praise but the Peacock, and he spreads his Train:
Say nothing, and he shuts it up again.
Verse 40. Terpsicore,] One of the Nine Muses, the Inventress of Music and
Dancing. In her the greatest part of man's life rejoices: Plutarch.

Verse 42. God.] Apollo.

Verse. 46. Maculonus,] One of the Peacock-praisers, that accomodated the
reading Poets with his house, and furnished them with voices to cry them up,
but bestowed nothing upon them.

Verse 49. Pit.] By the Pit and Scaffolds for the People, and the Orchestra for
the Nobility, you may clearly see, that Roman Poets read their Works upon a
Stage, as solemnly as our Plays are acted, and their audience was as great. An
Instance whereof my Author here gives you in the Poet Statius.

To their dear Thebais the People throng,
And to the sound of his enchanting tongue,
When Statius with the promise of a day
O're-joyes the Town; for in so sweet a way
He reads his Poem, that to hear it spoke
A lust affects the soul: yet when he broke
The Benches with strong lines --
Verse 68. Aonian.] In Aonia (which is the mountanous part of Boeotia) there is
a Spring consecrated to the Muses, from which Aonian Fountain they are called
Aonides.

Verse 69. Pierian Caves,] At the foot of the Mountain Parnassus were certain
Caves full of the Pierian Muses Deity, according to Poetical tradition.

Verse 70. Thyrsus,] The Spear or Javelin wrapped with Ivy, which every Priestess
of Bacchus carried in her hand, when she sacrificed to her God, crying Eu, hoe,
as you see in the Comment upon Sat. 6. In imitation of these Javelin-bearers,
Horace sacrifices one of his Odes to Bacchus, and begins the second Staff with
a cry like to theirs.

Ohe, recenti men's trepidat metu
Plenoque Bacchi pectore turbidum
Laetatur; Ohe, parce Liber,
Parce, gravi metuende thyrso.
Ohe, with fear my mind's possessed:
Filled with the God of Wine, my breast
Feels troubled joy; Ohe Iaccus
Drop thy feared Thyrsus, spare me Bacchus.
Verse 80. Alecto,] That with her Snakes hissed Turnus into distraction: Virg.
Aeneid. lib. 7. She is one of the Infernal Spirits that distract the minds of
guilty persons, therefore called Erinnes by the Greeks. The Furies are wicked
thoughts, frauds, and heinous crimes of vicious men, which day and night
torment their consciences: Cic. in Orat. pro Rosc.

Verse 87. Rubren Lappa,] A poor, but an excellent, Tragic Poet; therefore my
Author thinks it just, that he should have as considerable a Pension from the
State of Rome, as the Commonwealths of Greece allowed to the Ancients for
their Tragedies: Then should not Rubren be necessitated to pawn his Books and
Cloak to Atreus the Broker.

Verse 89. Numitor,] Another Maculonus, such a one as would not stick to call a
Poet friend; but yet not part with a penny to keep his friend from sterving,
though he could spare money enough to maintain a Wench and a Lion. That Juvenal
meant this by some great person is apparent in the very name. For, Numitor was
King of Alba, deposed by his younger Brother Amulius, who slew Lausus Son to
Numitor, and made his Daughter Rhea Sylvia a Vestall Nun; that under pretense
of a sacred Honor he might oblige her to Virginity. But she was got with Child
(as the Romans believed) by God Mars; a miracle that was no point of faith at
Alba. For Rhea suffered the rigor of the Law, being for breach of her vow
buried quick in the bank of Tiber: sentence passing upon her Twins, that they
should be drowned in the River; but they were cast ashore, and found (sucking
at the breasts of a Wolf) by the Shepherd Faustulus. When they came to be
men, they slew their Uncle Amulius, restoring the Kingdom to their Father
Numitor.

Verse 95. Lucan,] The rich and noble Poet that writ in Heroic verse the
Civil Wars between Caesar and Pompey,for which Poem Nero put him to death. He
was born at Corduba in Spain, and Nephew to Seneca that writ the Tragedies.

Verse 97. Bassus.] Saleius Bassus and Sarranus lived in Domitians time, and
were good Poets though poor men.

Verse 101. Statius.] Papinius Statius, a Neopolitan, born of noble Parents:
his Ancestors were Epirots: his Father Papinius for his erudition and integrity
was made a Citizen of Naples, where he begot this Poet, that writ the Tragedy
of Agave, the Poem called the Woods, began another of Achilles, and has left
us in twelve Books his Thebais here mentioned by my Author, that calls it the
Mistress of the people of Rome: they so courted it when Statius gave notice
that he would read.

Verse 111. Paris,] The handsome young Player; you read of him in the Comment
upon Sat. 6. in the Design before it, you see him acting to the Ladies; and
one of them, viz. Hippia, leaving him with more regret then all her other
relations. Regardless of her Husband's reputation,
The honor of her Sister, House and Nation,
She left her crying Babes: what may amaze
Thee yet more, she left Paris and the Plays.
He was, when Juvenal writ this Satyr, Favorite to Domitian Caesar: and
neither the Camerini nor the Bareae, nor any other Lord in Rome so liberal to
the Poets, his old Masters. To Statius he gave money; to others the Emperor's
Commissions to be Praefects, Governors of Provinces; or to be Tribunes,
Colonels of foot. Little thought Juvenal when he said this, that Paris would
make him one of the number of his Poet-Colonels: but you may see him in the
head of his Regiment, in the Design before Sat. 16.

Verse 106. Agave.] The Tragedy of Agave, Daughter to Cadmus and Hermione, and
Wife to Echion of Thebes, by whom she had Pentheus, that being no lover of
wine, and therefore a despiser of the Orgies of Bacchus: when he was King of
Thebes was cut in pieces by the Maenades, his own Mother Agave being one of the
Bacchanalian Murdresses: Hor. S. l. 1. Sat. 3.

Quid? caput abscissum demens cum portat Agave,
Gnati infoelicis, sibi tum furiosa videtur?
What? in her hand when wild Agave had
Her Sons head, did she think that she was mad?
Verse 113. Pelopea.] The Tragedy of Pelopea, the incestuous Daughter to
Thyestes. She had by her Father a very lovely Boy. Lest her abomination should
come to light, she left him to be devoured by wild beasts: but a Shepherd
prevented her, took home the Infant, and made it the nurse-Child to a Goat,
from which his name of Aegisthus was derived: the same Aegisthus, that like the
Son of such a Father, lived in Adultery with Clytemnestra, and assisted her in
the murder of his Cosen, her Husband Agamemnon, as you may see in the Comment
upon Sat. 1.

Verse 114. Philomela.] The Tragedy of Philomela and Progne: read the Comment
upon Sat. 6.

Verse 116. Proculeius,] A Roman Knight, very bountiful to his friends and
nearest kindred: Horace, Vivet extento Proculeius aevo,
Notus in fratres animi paterni.
May old Age Proculeius own,
That Is for his brothers father known.


Verse 116. Maecenas,] The Patron to Virgil and Horace. On the last he bestowed
whole Sabine Lordships, and would have given him more, if Horace had asked it:
which he records to all posterity in his Ode that begins Inclusam Danaen. The
first part of the Ode you have in the Comment upon Sat. 6. almost all the
remainder concerns the bounty of Maecenas, therefore I shall here join it to
the rest. -- concidit auguris
Argivi domus, ob lucrum
Demersa excidio. Diffidit urbium
Portas vir Macedo, and subruit aemulos
Reges muneribus; munera navium
Saevos illaqueant duces.
Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam,
Majorumque fames. Jure perhorrui
Late conspicuum tollere verticem,
Maecenas, equitum decus.
Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit,
A Diis plura feret. Nil cupientium
Nudus castra peto, and transfuga divitum
Parts linquere gestio:
Contemptae Dominus splendidior rei,
Quam si, quicquid arat non piger Appulus
Occultare meis dicerer horreis,
Magnas inter opes inops.
Purae rivus aquae, sylvaque jugerum
Paucorum, and segetis certa fides meae:
Fulgentem imperio fertilis Africae
Fallit sort beatior.
Quanquam nec Calabrae mella ferunt apes,
Nec Laestrigonia Bacchus in amphora
Languescit mihi, nec pinguia Gallicis
Crescunt vellera pascuis:
Importuna tamen pauperies abest;
Nec si plura velim, tu dare deneges.
Contracto melius parva cupidine
Vectigalia porrigam:
Quam si Mygdoniis regnum Alyattici
Campis continuem. Multa petentibus
Desunt multa. Been est cui deus obtulit
Parca, quod satis est, manu.
The Argive Augur's house never shrunk
Till bribes had shook it, then it sunk.
King Philip beat down City-gates,
And foiled with gifts his rivall-States.
Gifts Pirates tame; yet with our store
Our cares increase, and thirst of more.
Noblest Maecenas, to appear
Too great was justly still my fear.
The more we to our selves deny
The more the Gods give: naked I
With those that nothing covet join,
A Fugitive from men of coin;
Yet greater Lord of what I scorn,
Then if my Barnes held all the corn,
Reap't by the stiff Appulian Boor;
And I were midst those riches poor.
My seed's firm faith, a crystal Flood,
A little quantity of Wood,
Is happiness He never knows
That in rich Tyrian purple goes.
Calabrian Honey my poor Bees
Yield not, nor Wine on aged Lees
In Laestrigonian Casks I keep:
No fat French Pasture feeds my Sheep;
And yet I feel no begging Want,
Though should I beg, thou more would grant.
Desire restrained, my trouble's less
Then if what Midas did possess,
And Craesus too were mine: For such
As covet much, want ever much.
He Is blessed, to whom the Gods dispense
Enough, though but a competence.
The two things which Horace here labors to express, are, his own Modesty and
the Bounty of his Patron Maecenas: as for Juvenal you may please to take
notice, that although he never uses the name of Maecenas (I mean in a
metaphorical sense) but only for a voluptuary; yet when he mentions Maecenas as
himself, he ranks him with the noblest Patrons of the Learned.

Verse 117. Fabius, Lentulus, or Cotta.] For the munificence of Fabius Maximus,
I shall refer you to Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 3. and to Plinius Secundus de
Viris illustr. You see Cotta in the List with gallant Piso and Seneca Sat. 5.
The state of Lentulus at the birth of a Son you read in Sat. 6. and in this
place his liberality to the Poets.

Verse 140. Lacerta,] The Emperor Domitian's Coachman.

Verse 144. Ajax,] (Viz.) a Lawyer that pleads as fiercely as Ajax in Ovid.
lib. 13. Metam.

Verse 152. Monthly.] Every month from Egypt to Rome came Ships that brought
good store of Onions, as a Commodity vendible to the Romans, and not to be
eaten by the tender consciences of the Egyptians, that held Onions to be
things sacred, Sat. 15.

To strike a Leek or Onion with the edge
Of the presumptious teeth, is Sacrilege.
Verse 153. Tyber-Watermen,] That would not fail, when they carried wine sent
by a Client, to drink and fill up the bottles with water; so that a poor Lawyer
had his fees, viz. his Present of wine qualified with an allay from the River.

Verse 157. Aemylius,] A wealthy Lawyer; but his Statue on horseback in Brass
(with a Spear in his hand, as if he were charging the enemy) was as good a
Soldier as he was an Advocate.

Verse 163. Pedo.] Pedo and Tongillus were Advocates, that being poor men, had
an ambition to be thought rich, and spent so much, only to make a show, that it
broke them: the last-named being so curious, that he would not be nointed after
bathing with oil dropped out of common Distillatories, but from the precious
Horn of the Rhinoceros, a beast that has a deadly feud with the Elephant: what
a great eater he was Martial tells us. Omnes Tongillum medici jussere lavari
O stulti! febrim creditis esse, gula est.
All Doctors bid Tongillus use the Bath:
Not the Ague (fools!) the gluttony he has.
Now Matho was a Purchasor as Martial also tells us: yet it should seem he was
undone by his expenses in feeding his fat paunch, and maintaining the Ushers
and Train that attended his new Sedan: Sat. 1.

Verse 167. Medians,] Lusty Median Slaves, Chair-bearers to Tongillus.

Verse 170. Myrrhin.] What a high value the Romans put upon Bolls made of
Myrrh-tree, you see by the commands which the imperious Wife lays on her
Husband, to make a voyage in Winter (when Merchants durst not venture their
Ships) only to furnish her with rarities, Chrystalls, Myrrhin Bolls and
Diamonds: Sat. 6.

What neighbors have and she wants, he must buy;
In Winter, when ashore the Merchants lie:
When the Icy Tower the Pilot's art controlls,
Great Chrystalls he brings home, huge Myrrhin bolls;
And the rich Diamond. --
Verse 192. Away to France.] The French taught the art of Pleading to our
Countrymen: Sat. 15. We see the Greek and Roman Athens spread
Ore the Earth: by the eloquent French Nation bred,
Britains grow Lawyers. --
and well might the best French Orators practice at the Bar, when their
Neighbors delighted so much in going to Law one with another, that Juvenal
takes it for granted, a Lawyer poor at Rome would soon grow rich in France: no
part of the World being more litigious, but only Africa, where Beggars would
find money to commence a Suit.

Verse 196. Vettus,] Any Rhetorick-Master.

Verse 197. Tyrants.] The whole Context is -- O the Iron breast
Of Vettus! that can those hard Theams digest,
Which murder Tyrants. --
At first sight, this only seems to relate to common Rhetorical Theams,
wherein young Scholars encourage men to kill Tyrants: but if you look more
narrowly into the Author's meaning, you will find that he intends only to
describe the sad condition of a Rhetorick-Master, that must endure to hear,
over and over again, such declamations as have been inflicted for a divine
Judgment upon a Tyrant. Witness the Syracusian Tyrant Dionysius, that beaten
out of his Kingdom by Dion, taught School at Corinth, which is set forth by
Diogenes the Cynick in one of his Epistles thus, (...), I came from Megara to
Corinth, and passing through the Marketplace, I light into a School, where
the boys sat and did nothing. I asked them, Who is your Master? they
answered, Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant. I now, thinking they mocked me and
spoke this in jest, went on to a Bench, and sat me down in expectation of
their Schoolmasters: for they said, he was called out in haste to the
Marketplace. And Dionysius presently returning, I rose up and saluted him,
saying, This is not well Dionysius, that you should teach School. He,
conceiving that I condoled the loss of his Kingdom and bemoaned his present
Misery, made this Answer, I am glad that yet Diogenes pitties me. But I, that
had said this is not well, repeated my words again adding, Really this is not
well, and it very much afflicts me, not that you have lost your Kingdom and
the power of a Tyrant, but that we suffer thee Dionysius to live safe and free
in Greece, after so much mischief as thou have done by Sea and Land in Sicily.

Verse 208. Hannibal.] To the young Romans, that were Students in Rhetoric, no
Theme so familiar as that of Hannibal: Sat. 10. Go climb the horrid Alps,
vainglorious fool,
To please the boys, and be their Theme at School.
nor could you much blame the Rhetoricians for revenging themselves upon
Hannibal, that had like to have prevented Juvenal in his directions to the poor
Lawyer for a voyage into Africa: it being once a hundred to one that Hannibal
might have sent the Roman Rhetoricians (out of which the Lawyers were made) to
people Africa; as you will see in this Breviate of his life. Hannibal, General
of the Carthaginian Army, was Son to Amilcar, that carried him, when he was a
Child, to the Altar, and there made him swear, that he would as soon as he came
to be a man, take up arms against the Romans. He landed with his Fleet in
Spain, passing the Pyrenaean Mountains, he beat the French at the River of
Rosne: Eutr. lib. 3. He opened a passage into Italy over the Alps: He took the
City of Saguntum Live. lib. 1. Dec. 3. He overthrew the Consul T. Sempronius at
Trebia: He defeated the Consul Flaminius, and slew fifteen thousand of his men
at the Lake of Thrasimene. His Army was very much consumed by the protracting
policy of Fabius Maximus, that would not come to a battle: Live. lib. 4. Eutr.
lib. 3. after this, he recruited, and fought the Consuls Paulus Aemilius and
Terentius Varro at Cannae, where the Romans lost forty thousand foot and two
thousand seven hundred horse, in which number were so many men of quality, that
Hannibal sent to Carthage three bushels and a half of gold-Rings, worn upon
their fingers by noble Romans, to distinguish them from the Common People. All
these Rings were revenged by a poor Annulet (worn upon the finger of Hannibal)
which, in the Collet, had a private box, a very small one, but yet large enough
to hold preventive poison: Sat. 10. But the revenge of Cannae, for that spring
Of Roman blood, was a poor little Ring.
From Cannae Hannibal marched within three miles of the City: but the weather
proved tempestuous, lightning and thundering, as if the Artillery of Heaven had
been planted in defense of Rome. This suspended the resolution of Hannibal.
Many great Officers of his Army congratulated his victory, and wished him for a
day or two to rest himself and his forces. Maharbal, General of his horse, gave
his vote for a present march to Rome. You will (said he) see the consequence of
this battle five days hence, when you feast your victorious Commanders in the
Capitol: let the horse follow them: let them behold Hannibal himself before
they hear of his coming. No, says Hannibal, let the Enemy go before us: the
design is glorious, but the way more difficult then can be suddenly imagined.
He therefore commended the good intentions of Maharbal, but to act what he
advised time must be taken. Then said Maharbal, The Gods have not made one man
capable of all things; Hannibal, you know how to conquer, but you know not how
to use your Conquest: Live. lib. 22. After his Army had rested in Campania, and
feasted at Capua, Marcellus at Nola routed him: Live. Eutr. 3. Flo. 3. At Cannae
he lost the honor which he had formerly won upon the place, where he was
overthrown by Sempronius Gracchus. Now Hannibal, in the declination of his
fortune, having no better luck at Sea then at Land, was called home again to
Carthage, besieged by Scipio Africanus. Scipio hearing that Hannibal was
landed, met him at Zama, there fought him; slew twenty thousand Carthaginians,
and took very near as many Prisoners. Hannibal fled, first to King Antiochus,
then to Prusias King of Bithynia: But the Romans demanded him of both these
Kings, as Author of the breach of peace between Cartharge and Rome: so that
Hannibal seeing no hope of safety for himself, put an end to all his own and
the Romans fears and jealousies, by taking the poison which he always carried
about him in his Ring.

Verse 217. Hellen's Rape.] Hellen's Rape, Medea's Charms, and the Ingratitude
of Jason (that married Creusa, putting away Medea the preserver of his life,)
and his Father Aeson's Cure, these and the like were Cases argued in the
Schools by Rhetoricians, to prepare them for Moot-Cases of the Law, and
disputes at the Bar.

Verse 230. Theodorus.] Chrysogonus and Pollio were Theodorians, for so they
called those Rhetorick-Masters that read to their Pupils the works of Theodorus
Gadareus. He was an excellent Orator, born at Gadara a Syrian City not far
from Ascalon; yet he chose to write himself of Rhodes: Strab. Hermagorus, that
writ the Art of Rhetoric, was his Scholar, and Tiberius (afterward Caesar)
when he retired himself to Rhodes, was one of his studious Auditors.

Verse 235. Numidian.] In Rome the richest pillars were of Numidian Marble: and
it seems that some wealthy Voluptuaries had Dining-rooms which turned round
upon those Pillars, that they might command the Sun, have as much or as little
of his light and heat as they would, or if they pleased none at all.

Verse 241. Poor two.] Two Sestertia came but to five pound at most by Lubins
account: but sure the place is false printed; it should be fifteen pound at
least; which Juvenal thinks to be a mean annual Stipend for a Rhetorick-Master
to receive from his Pupil's Father; but he tells you Nothing costs Fathers less
then Sons. -- A Sentence that holds as true in our times, as it did when my
Author was living, or when Crates cried out of a Window to his fellow Citizens
the Thebans, O Countrymen, what madness has possessed you? you have a great
care of the goods you will leave to your Children, and no care at all of the
Children to whom you will leave those goods.

Verse 242. Quintilian.] See the Comment upon Sat. 6. He is often named, never
without honor, by his Scholar Juvenal: that in this Satyr prays Grant Heaven,
that gentle weightless Earth may lie
On our Forefathers bones, and sprout on high
In flowr's, which to the air perfumes may bring,
Clothing their Urns in a perpetual Spring;
Because a Tutor they did still repute
To be the sacred Parents Substitute.
This Prayer was made by Juvenal out of the Principles of his Tutor Quintilian,
that writes thus; In the mean time, of one thing I admonish Scholars, That they
love their Tutors no less then their Studies, and believe them to be the
Parents not of their boats, but of their minds: lib. de Discip. Officio.

Verse 257. Ventidius.] Ventidius Bassus, Son to an Ascalon Bondwoman. He was
taken and led through Rome by Cn. Pompeius Strabo (Father to Pompey the great)
when he triumphed for his victory over the Picenians. He was first a Car-man,
then a Muliteer: afterward he was in one year created Praetor and Consul. He
was made General against the Parthians, and returned to Rome triumphant. So
that he, who at first was Prisoner to a Roman General, and lay in a Dungeon, at
last, as General of the Roman forces, filled the Capitol with Parthian spoils.
See Val. Max. lib. 6. c. 10. A. Gell. lib. 15. c. 4.

Verse 257. Tully] M. Tullius Cicero was born among the Volscians at Arpinum,
now Abruzzo. He was Son to Helvia a poor, but a marvelous good, woman. Who his
Father was we know not; some think him a parallel to our good man Plantagenet;
for they say he derived himself from Tullius Attius, one of the old Volscian
Kings; but others report him to be a Fuller of Cloth: Plutarch in Cic. It seems
Cicero was of very mean Parentage: Sat 8. --
This new man Tully, this poor Arpinate,
Late made at Rome a Country-Gentleman.
Nor was he ashamed of the meanness of his birth; for when some friends moved
him to change his Plebeian name of Cicero, that smelt of pease: he told them,
he would keep it, and make it as noble as the Scauran or Catulan name.
Plutarch. And he was as good as his word; for, besides his first place in the
Catalogue of all the Roman Orators and Philosophers, he obliged his Country by
making many wholesome Laws, and by abrogating the Lex Agraria, the Law for
division of Lands, which had cost so much blood since it was passed by C. and
Tib. Gracchus, heads of the Levelling Party: but his highest honor, the title
of Pater Patriae, Father of his Country, was given him for delivering Rome from
the fire and sword of Catiline and his fellow Conspirators. In his old age he
was proscribed and slain by the tyranny of C. Octavius Caesar and Marc. Antony,
because he too much favored a Commonwealth.

Verse 259. Slaves,] Such as Servius Tullius and Ventidius, the Sons of
Bond-women, but raised by fortune; the first to wear a Crown: and the other,
victorious Laurel.

Verse 263. Thrasimachus,] A Carthaginian, Scholar to Plato and Isocrates,
public professor of Rhetoric; but his gettings so inconsiderable; that he
left teaching School, and (some say) hanged himself.

Verse 264. Secundus Charinus,] A Rhetorick-Reader in Athens, learned in Arts
not good: Tacit. Constrained by want he came and set up School at Rome, where
he made an Oration against Tyrants, for which he was banished by Caligula; some
say that he poisoned him.

Verse 266. Hemlock.] The cruel bounty by ungrateful Athens, bestowed upon the
great Philosopher Socrates: See the Comment upon the second Satyr.

Verse 273. Centaur.] Chiron the Centaur, Tutor to Aesculapius, Hercules, and
Achilles. The Centaurs (as their enemies the Lapiths described them) were only
men to the girdle, beneath it horses. In what awe this old Centaur had his
young Scholar Achilles, is described by Ovid lib. 1. de Art.

Qui toties socios, toties perterruit hosts:
Dicitur annosum pertinuiisse senem.
Quas Hector sensurus erat, poscente magistro,
Verberibus jussas praebuit ille manus.
He that so often scared friends and foes, is said
To have been of a poor old man afraid:
The hands, which Hector was to feel, he did
Hold to be struck, when is angry Master bid.
Verse 275. Mountain.] Pelion, a Mountain in Thessaly (hanging over the
Pelasgick Bay) crowned with Pine-trees, and downward to the foot covered with
Oaks. There Pelius lived that was Father to Achilles.

Verse 278. Ruffus,] Satrius Ruffus That looking upon the Rhetoric of Tully
with contempt, and as if that great Orator had not writ Latin but French, used
to call him Allobrogian, Savoyen or Dauphinois.

Verse 279. Enceladus,] A Grammar-Master: so was Palaemon: Vid. the comment
upon Sat. 6.

Verse 296. Tribune,] That upon the humble Petition of a Schoolmaster would
force Parents to pay his Salary for teaching of their Children.

Verse 303. Nurse.] She that nursed Anchises (Father to Aeneas) is named by no
Author. The Stepmother to Archemolus was called Casperia: what Country-woman
she was no body knows, nor no body cares; but she loved Archemolus so much,
that she let him make a Cuckold of her Husband, that had made her Queen of the
Marrubians in Italy: Virg. Aeneid. lib. 10. That Acestes the Trojan furnished
Aeneas and his Mates with wine we know, for which Virgil calls that King of
Sicily the good Acestes: but how many pots of wine were drunk off by his
Countrymen, I believe would puzzle all the Grammarian Critics, that take
great pains in studies, which are neither pleasing nor profitable: Senec.

The eighth Design.
NObility is Merit. Tell not me
Of this great Office, or that Pedigree;
Is 1 Marius noble for his Birth, or Sway
In his Proconsulship of Africa,
Which even in peace he plundered? I prefer
Before Him Marius the 2 Carpenter,
That from vast-body'd Cimbrians Rome releast,
And made his Country's 3 Vultures a huge feast.
With young Lord 4 Damasippus drinks, the old Knave
Cybel's 5 Chief-priest, a 6 Pirate, 7 Murderer, 8 Slave,
Thief 9, 10 Hangman, 11 Coffin-maker: and his Host
Cook- Syrophaenix 12, add, to his more cost,
His soft-lipt Hostess 13 Ciane. Who can
Compare this Lord to that No-Gentleman
The Consul 14 Tully? that lean Vigils kept,
Waked when the Senators securely slept,
And never dreamed that Rome was to be fired
At midnight, when fierce Catiline conspired?
Corvinus 15, 16 Galba, that in Marble stand,
Revived by some rare Statuaries hand;
Are monuments to gallant Sons: the base
Show them as Trophies of their own disgrace.


Figura Octaua.
NObilitas virtus est; quo mihi stemmata, longo
Sanguine censendus? Merito number Nobilis audit,
Legatus victis Marius 1 quod praesidet Afris,
Quos pace exspoliat? Marium 2 huic ego praefero fabru^,
Subjecit Romae qui grandia corpora, Cimbros;
Indigenas ad lauta vocans convivia 3 corvos.
Dic mihi, quis clari Damasippum 4 crederet ortus,
His cum collegis qui siccat pocula Consul?
Gallus 5 adest Cybeles, Pirata 6, Homicida 7, metallis
Damnatus 8, Latro 9, torvus mortisque 10 minister,
Sandapilaeque 11 faber; Syrophoenix 12 ultimus, hospes
Et coquus: interea Cyane 13 sua basia vendit
Hospita, nec parvo. Tam magni nominis umbrae
Quis non praetulerit long incunabula 14 Tulli,
Obscurique novique hominis? quo consule Roma
Evigilante stetit secura; Patresque supinos
Ne monuere quidem occultae vel somnia flammae,
Quam conjuranti vovit Catilina Cethego.
Familiae princeps Coruinus 15 Galba que 16 Caesar,
Quorum, post cineres, in marmore vivit imago;
Stant aeterna piis monimenta nepotibus: at qui
Degenerant, sua cum statuis opprobria figunt.
The Manners of Men. THE EIGHTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
Maimed Statues, cripled by times rage,
And Pictures now grown dim with age:
Our Ancestors deserts proclaim,
And if we live not well, our shame.
Honor consists in worth, not blood;
The Great weigh nothing, if not Good:
The Mean, whose virtue is their birth,
Have been the greatest men on Earth.
What Is Lineage? PONTICUS, what good can flow
From great blood? What is it Ancestors to show
In Paint and Statue? the Aemilii placed
Entire in Chariots, Curii to the waste:
CORVINUS, that by the shoulder less appears;
And GALBA wanting both his nose and ears?
What Is a Dictator drawn to life? or what
Dim Masters of the Horse, still pointed at?
If pictured Worthies see thy time spent ill?
Thy house why do so many Gen'ralls fill
Breathing in Marble? if thou, in the sight
Of armed Numantians, play'st at dice all night:
And go to bed about the break of day,
The time when they drew off and marched away?
Why glories FABIUS in his French Descent
And Altar, his HERCULEAN Monument?
If covetous, if vain his Greatness be;
If no Euganean Lamb more soft then he;
If with Sicilian pumice smooth he shave,
Slandring his Fathers, that were rough and grave:
Blasting whose Urns this poisoner's Image stands,
Fit to be broken by the Hang-man's hands.
Fill all thy Courts with old wax-Imagerie,
Virtue's the true and sole Nobility;
A PAULUS, COSSUS, or a DRUSUS live,
And let thy Predecessors Statues give
Place to thy Virtues: when the Fasces lead
Thee Consul, let thy Fame those Rods precede.
Pay me with thy minds treasure my first debt,
By deed and word the style of Virtuous get:
That thou art Noble shall need no Record;
Patrician or Plebeian, hail my Lord,
So I shall call thee, of what ever blood,
If thou art born to do thy Country good.
Rome, when thou come, shall make as loud a shout,
As Egypt when OSYRIS is found out.
But who will honor him that is Honors shame,
Noble in nothing, but a noble name?
We call a Lord's Dwarf, Giant; a Moor, Swan;
A crooked Maid whose height at thrice we span,
EUROPA; to Dogs, that lick dishes dry,
Mangy and lazy Dogs; we Lion cry,
Panther, or Tiger; if there be a brute
More fierce, we give those Curs his Attribute.
Take heed thou go not for a CRETICUS,
And bear the Camerini's title thus.
Whom do I counsel? it is to thee I speak,
RUBELLIUS PLAUTUS; swollen, as they would break,
With Drusian blood thy veins do proudly run:
As if thou had some thing of honor done,
For which the mighty Princess, born to shine
In all the splendour of the JULIAN line,
Must needs have teemed thee; and not she, that sits
On our bleak Mount, and for her living knits.
You are (says he) poor Rogues, Plebeian scumme,
Your Fathers no man knows from whence they come;
But I am a CECROPIAN; bless your Grace,
And give you joy of your illustrious race:
Yet in that scumme, your Lordship may find out
A poor Plebeian, that is employed about
Defending with his learned tongue or pen,
The Causes of unlearned Noblemen.
Out of the gowned People does he rise,
That reads Law-Riddles, and their knots unties.
In arms this poor Youth at Euphrates stands,
That with our Standard guards the Netherlands.
Thou merely a CECROPIAN art: and we,
Like MERCURY'S old Statue, worship thee;
For other difference no Optic gives,
But his head's marble; and thy Image lives.
Tell me, thou Trojan Progeny, who thinks
The Beast is generous, whose courage shrinks?
We praise the Horse that easy'st wins the course,
And makes the shouting Circus oftest hoarse.
He Is noble, let his breed be what it will,
Runs best, and casts the dirt up foremost still;
But they are sold, though HIRPIN were their Sire,
Or CORITHA their Damme, that basely tire,
And lose the match: what their forefathers won
Dies there; no honor is to shadows done.
Then bought at low rates, slow-feet, having got
New Masters, no more draw a Chariot,
But with galled necks at Wagons tug and gird,
Or are to NEPOS his Horse-Mill preferred.
That we may therefore you, not yours admire,
First Sir, some honor of your own acquire:
Which we may on their Monuments engrave,
To whom we pay, and you owe all you have.
Let it suffice, that we have said thus much
To that proud puff't up Youth, (Fame speaks him such)
Full of his Kinsman NERO; For it is rare
If mighty fortunes common sense can share.
But PONTICUS, I would not have thee go
Upon thy Ancestors past praises so,
As that to future praise thou should not rise:
He Is wretched that on others fame relies.
When once foundations shrink, the Pillars fall;
The Widdow'd Vine droops at the Elm's funeral.
Be a good Soldier, a good Guardian be,
A Judge from favor and corruption free;
And, if in Court thou shall a Witness stand,
Though PHALLERIS an untruth should command,
And dictating a perjury, bring in
His brazen Bull: think it the foulest sin,
Should thou to save thy breath thy honor spend:
And forfeit, for thy life, life's chiefest end.
Death such a man deserves, nor lives indeed,
Though him a hundred Gauran Oisters feed
At one meal: though the unguents COSMUS used
In's brazen Bath, be all on him diffused.
When Governor thy su'd-for Province has
At length received thee, bridle in thy wrath
Bound Avarice, pity our Associate's groans,
Behold (the marrow squeezed) Kings empty bones.
The Imperial Laws, the Senate's Justice note,
How worth's advanced, and how their thunder smote
TUTOR and CAPITO, for making prize
Even of Cilician Pirates; heavy lies
The doom on them, but poor man where is thy ease,
When PANSA all that NATTA left will seize.
Thy rags CHAERIPPUS let the Crier sell;
Go not to law, since thou art used so well:
It Is madness, after all, to cast away
The Ferry-money that should CHARON pay:
Not such the old losses, nor so deep the wound,
When our Allies in Riches did abound;
Each House had heaps of Coin, Storehouses full
Of Coan Silks, and Sparta's purple Wool;
PARRHASIUS his Pictures, Ivory brought
To life by PHIDIAS; Statues MIRON wrought,
Or POLYCLET did in each corner wait,
And scarce a Table but had MENTOR'S plate.
Thus the unjust Governor ANTONIUS here
Feathers his Nest, and DOLABELLA there.
Thus VERRES did by sacrilege increase,
And stole aboard his ships the spoils of Peace.
Now, friends to Rome a Yoke of Oxen feed,
Or some few Mares, which they reserve for breed:
Out of whose Pasture, even the Bull or Horse,
The Father of their Stock, Tax-masters force;
Their Lares, and whatsoever does handsome look,
If 't be their only Cottage God, it is took:
And such a toy, the Provinces do call
Their greatest wealth, and may, for it is their All.
Perhaps thou slightst, and may securely slight
Oild Corinth, Rhodes that was not framed to fight.
For, soft thigh'd men, if pressures should provoke,
How can smooth rosind Youth shake off the yoke?
'Ware Spanish foot, French horse, oppress not thus
Illyrian Seamen; Reapers feeding us
That at Circensian Races spend our time,
And Stage Plays. But what gains so base a crime,
When MARIUS late left Africa so bare?
However, let it be thy Master-care,
That poor and stout men no great wrong receive:
Though thou take Gold and Silver, thou will leave
Helmets and Javelins to revenge their harms,
And Swords and Shields; the plundered will find arms.
Not my own sense I speak, for truth I plead:
Believe it, Lords, a Sibyl's Leaf you read,
If virtuous Friends and Servants with thee dwell,
If no fair Minion thy tribunal sell;
If no insatiate Wife run up and down,
Through every Country, and to every Town,
Bending her crooked tallons, to lay hold,
Like a fierce Harpy, on a prey of Gold:
Then bring thy birth from PICUS, or do love
Great names? take all the Giants that fought JOVE.
PROMETHEUS himself thy Father make,
Progenitors from any Story take.
But if rash pride and lust thy soul provoke,
If in the Subjects blood thy Rods be broke;
If thou delight'st to see the Beadle tired,
The axe blunted; the Nobility acquired
By thy great Parents, stands against thy claim,
And holds a glorious Torch before thy shame.
Each crime is so conspiciously base,
As he that sins is great in birth or place.
To me thy Ancestors how can thou boast?
When to the Temples, which they built, thou go
To forge a Will, their spirits to affront,
While their triumphall Statues look upon it.
Or how? when nightly, thy adult'rous blood
Conceals it is blushes in a French fools-hood.
Where his forefathers bones and ashes ly,
In's Coach fat DAMASIPPUS hurries by:
And though now Consul, with huge iron Stays,
Strikes a Choach-wheel himself in down-hill ways:
By night indeed; but yet the Moon discryes,
And Stars bear witness, with ^ntentive eyes.
But when he comes out of his Consulship,
At noonday DAMASIPPUS cracks his whip:
Nor blushes, though his aged friends he meets,
But with his whip first his acquaintance greets:
And when his horses are unharnest, feasts
With barley, he pours out, the wearied beasts.
Nay, when in NUMA'S ceremonial ways,
He Sheep or Oxen at JOVE'S Altar slayes,
By EPONA he swears, and all that Crew,
Whose pictures we over nasty Mangers view.
But when his Tavern-Revels are begun,
Up stairs and down must SYROPHAENIX run;
Moist SYROPHAENIX, that sweats the Oils he sells
At the Idumaean Port, for there he dwells;
And with the courtship of an Host, the word
That he salutes with, is my Prince, my Lord.
The like does CYANE, bringing Flagons still
In a clean Apron, which inflames the Bill.
But thou say, pleading for him when he is chid,
That young we did the like; it is true, we did.
But art' reclaimed? thy error do retract?
Short let it be, which thou dare foully act.
Some crimes with our first beards are cut away:
Of course sue out their pardons Children may.
But DAMASIPPUS takes his bathing Cups,
And on the painted Tavern-linnen sups,
Ripe for the Armenian war; fit to make good
The Syrian streams, the Rhene or Istrian flood,
Of years that NERO'S person may defend;
Send to thy Fleet at Ostium, CAESAR; send:
But thy great Adm'rall in some Tavern seek,
There they will find him lying cheek by cheek
With Murd'rers, mixed with Pirates, and Purse-takers,
Runaway Slaves, Hangmen and Coffin-makers:
With CYBEL'S Priest on's back, his bells at rest.
Where equal freedom welcomes every Guest;
Where every man for the same cup may call:
One table, that too alike near to all.
Had thou a Slave like this Lord, what would thou
Do with him PONTICUS? send him to plough
Thy Land near Luca, or his pains employ
In Tuscan Quarries; but my Lords of Troy
You with your selves dispense: and things, held base
In Clowns, the VOLESI and BRUTI grace.
Who would have thought we could this lewdness find
In men of honor? but there is worse behind.
Thy fortunes spent, thou DAMASIPPUS let'st
Thy voice out, on the Stage a share thou get'st:
CATULLUS his shrill, Phantasm spends thy breath.
Swift LENTULUS plays LAUREOL, put to death;
Acts hanging well: and were to be decreed
By my vote, merits to be hanged indeed.
Nor can the People be excused in this,
The Peoples foreheads are more braz'd then his,
Which impudently sit and pleasure take,
To see the sport that our Patricians make:
That can our FABIAN Comedians hear,
And laugh at MAMERCAN'S box oth'ear.
No matter for how much their breath they sell;
Which now there is no NERO to compel.
Yet fail they not in the great Praetor's Shows,
To sell their blood: but here a Stage suppose,
And there a Scaffold, which would thou refuse?
Who so fears death, that he would rather choose
To watch fair THYMILE o'th Stage, where he
And CORINTH, the dull fool, must fellows be.
Nor is it a wonder, when the Prince shall love
A Fidler's name, if Lords do Players prove:
What could the Town be then, but Plays? And there
GRACCHUS, Rome's infamy, does armed appear;
A Retiarius: no Secutor's Shield,
No crooked Faucheon brings into the field;
Nor wears a Beaver down (no, he reproves,
Reproves and hates that habit) see he moves
His Trident, and (the Net poised in his hand
Lest he might throw it out of his command)
He holds up his bare face, and in the eyes
Of all Rome, round about the Lists he flies;
His Cassock speaks him, gold-strings hanging at
His chin, and glittering in his high-crown'd hat:
Who therefore was Secutor to this Lord,
Shame cut him deeper then he struck his sword.
What Rascal would not, were his vote now free,
Give it to SENECA, NERO e're to thee,
For whom we should not as one Patricide,
One Ape, one Serpent, and one Sack provide:
ORESTES had thy crime, but not thy guilt;
The Gods were Authors of the blood he spilt,
His Father to revenge, made drunk and slain:
Yet him his Sisters murder did not stain,
Nor, in a rage, his Spartan Wife he killed;
Nor Bolls of Poison for his Kindred filled.
ORESTES sung no Odes; no Troicks writ,
Books which of all crimes NERO did commit.
VINDEX, VIRGINIUS, GALBA should have first
Revenged, of all his cruelties the worst.
Works for a Prince are these? do these Arts suit
With Majesty, it self to prostitute,
On Stages, to put foreign Actors down,
And carry from the Greeks their Parsley Crown?
Thy voice's trophies let thy Fathers bear,
THYESTE'S long train let DOMITIUS wear,
ANTIGONE'S or MENALIPPE'S tire:
And on AUGUSTUS CAESAR hang thy lyre.
Who any thing finds higher then thy line
CETHEGUS reaches? CATILIN or thine?
Yet you took Arms, and did by night conspire
To set our Houses and our Gods on fire;
Like Sons of Galls, or Rogues at Lions born,
For which you ought pitched Cassocks to have worn.
But on your motion did the Consul wait;
This new-man, TULLY, this poor Arpinate,
Late made at ROME a Country-gentleman:
Set guards, where e're the line of danger ran,
Unmaz'd us, and took pains for all the Town:
And therefore, even within the walls, the Gown
A greater title upon him bestowed,
Then any name CAESAR to Actium owed,
To Thessaly, or to those weapons, kept
Moist with the blood which they so often wept.
For Rome, freed Rome, did call her self his Child,
And CICERO his Country's Father styled.
Another born at Arpin, MARIUS, tills
First as a Hireling, the rough Volscian hills:
The Vine then paid him, when the lazy Cramp
Took his hand Palizadoing the Camp.
Yet he at Cimbrian horrors never checked,
But did alone the trembling State protect.
And when slain Cimbrians did the Crows invite,
Which never could on goodlier bodies light,
A second Laurel was by MARIUS worn,
Colleague at that time to the nobly-born.
Plebeian souls and names the Decii were;
Yet, for our Youth, our Friends, and Armies, here
And every where, the infernal Gods, and the Earth,
The Mother to whom Mankind owes his birth,
Accepted them, and more the Decii prized
Then all, for whom their lives were sacrificed.
He had, that from a Bondwoman did spring,
Rome's Purple, Crown and Rods, our last good King.
A Gate of Rome, in banished TARQUIN'S aid,
The Consul's noble Sons would have betrayed;
Which for our doubtful liberty were tied
To act, what COCLES would have magnified,
Or MUTIUS, or the Maid that courage found
To swim over Tyber, then our Empire's bound.
Discovered by a Slave, whom Mothers tax,
They felt their Fathers Rods and our just Axe,
THERSITES I could wish thy Father were,
So thou, like to ACHILLES, might appear
In VULCAN'S Arms; ere my consent would let
ACHILLES like THERSITES thee beget.
Yet fetch how far thou can thy Pedigree,
The base Asylum thy first House must be:
The first, whose blood thy Ancestors can claim,
A Shepherd, or what I am loath to name.
The Comment UPON THE EIGHTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Ponticus,] The Noble Person to whom Juvenal directs this Satyr, writ
against such as degenerate from their illustrious Ancestors.

Verse 3. Aemilii,] Generals of the Aemilian Family, to whom the Lords of the
Senate had decreed the honor of triumph; such as P. Aemilius Macedonicus, that
was commanded to put on his triumphall Robe in the Senate House: and Scipio
Aemilianus, that destroyed Carthage and Numantia, as aforesaid. The Marble
Statues of these Aemilii (it should seem) were not broken or weather-beaten,
but whole and fresh, when this Satyr was writ.

Verse 4. Curii,] Statues of the Curii; which Time, beginning at the feet, had
eaten away with his iron teeth to the very waste.

Verse 5. Corvinus.] Valerius Corvinus, Military Tribune under the General
Camillus, when he pursued the routed Galls. In their flight they made a stand,
and one of the Galls challenged any of the Roman Army. Corvinus accepted the
Challenge. At daybreak, when they met, a Crow flew to Valerius, sat upon his
helmet, and in the Combat peck't at the face and eyes of the Gall. When
Valerius had killed his Enemy, besides the usual reward for such a service, he
was honored with the surname of Corvinus or Crow. He was six times Consul, and
in perfect strength of body and mind lived to be a hundred years of age: Live.
lib. 7. Dec. 1. but his Statue was not so long lived for marble as he was for a
man, otherwise it would not have wanted one shoulder in Juvenal's time.

Verse 6. Galba.] In his Court Galba had set forth his Pedigree, wherein he
derived himself, by his paternal Line, from Jove; by his maternal, from
Pasiphae. Was not Jove obliged in point of honor to keep on his Nephew Galba's
nose and ears? yes sure, and would have done it, if he had not wanted power:
But how could he preserve the Statue of a great-great-Grand-childe, when the
Gods were so much out of authority, that his Son, the God of War, was not
able to guard his Arms; for, my Author tells Sat. 13. that -- Mars fell asleep,
His helmet lost, nor could his own goods keep.


Verse 7. Dictator.] Among the Romans, their Dictators differed from their
Kings only in title and duration of their Offices: for, the King had his by
inheritance, the Dictator only for six months, unless the Senate continued it
for six months longer, upon the same sad necessity that made him be chosen,
viz. the misery of a War. He was called Dictator, or Speaker, because his Word
was Law, Quoniam dictis ejus parebat populus. There lay no appeal from his
Sentence to the People; therefore he was titled Populi Magister, Master of the
People: Pigh. His first Act after election, was to choose his Equitum Magister,
which Master (as I take it) we call General of the horse, that was
Vice-Dictator; for in the Dictators absence he had the same unlimited
authority: Stad. in Flor. lib. 1. cap. 11. To be descended from a Dictator, or
from a General of the horse, must needs be great honor to a Roman that had
personal worth: What follows? But who will honor him that is honor's shame,
Noble in nothing but a noble name.
Hear a divine Philosopher to this purpose. If there be any good in Philosophy
it is this, it looks not upon Pedegrees. Philosophy found not Plato Noble, but
left him so: Senec. Add to this the authority of a Philosophical Orator,
though in his own Case. It is enough for me to flourish in my own Actions,
rather then to rest in the fame and opinion of my Ancestors: let me live so,
that I may be to my Descendents the beginning of their Nobility: Cic. in
Sallust.

Verse 9. Pictured Worthies,] The Author names the Lepidi, which must needs be
a very great Family, coming from that Worthy the Pontifex Max. Aemilius
Lepidus, that in his Childhood slew an enemy in a battle, for which, by decree
of Senate, in the Capitol his Statue was set up in his Praetexta (or Gown
guarded with purple silk) to show that he was a Noble-man's Son; and in his
Bulla's (or golden Bubbles) to signify that he was a Child when he merited
that honor.

Verse 12. Numantians.] The Roman Commanders that served under Scipio at the
siege of Numantia in Spain, a Town that for twenty years maintained war against
the Romans: and after it was belegur'd for 14. years, did not only hold out
against 46000. Romans, but still worsted the Besiegers: at last, after a long
and hard Siege laid to the place by Scipio Minor; when hunger had conquered the
sterved Numantians, and that they wanted Soldiers to man the works, they fired
themselves and all they had, leaving nothing to the Besiegers but more
field-room.

Verse 15. Fabius.] Fabius Maximus (the noble Ancestor of this unworthy Fabius
Persicus,) from his conquest over the Allobrogians or Dauphinois, surnamed
Allobrogick. Fabius Maximus Gallica Victoria cognomen Allobrogici sibi and
posteris peperit: Fabius Maximus, for his French Victory, got the surname of
Allobrogick [ or French] to himself and his posterity: Val. Max. This Family
derived themselves from Hercules, to whom the Romans consecrated two Temples,
one at the Porta Trigemina, the other in the Roman Smithfield or Forum Boarium;
which Altar was hereditary to the Fabians: Live. This Fabius Persicus is called
the most filthy and the most obscene of all men living: Sen. lib. 4. c. 30. de
Benef.

Verse 18. Euganeans.] The Sheep that were bred upon the Euganean Downs and
Valleys had the finest and softest wool in Italy. Some say that Padua belonged
to the Euganeans; others affirm them to be the Tarentines, Calabrians and
Venetians: but Pliny is for the first opinion, he tells us Verona was a City of
the Euganeans, which is but a mile from Padua: Plin. lib. 3. cap. 20.

Verse 19. Sicilian.] The best Pumice-stones are gathered in Sicily, about the
Mountain Aetna. With these Pumices the Italians did smooth their skins, but now
they use for the same purpose a Specific earth.

Verse 23. Waxen Imagerie,] Heads of Wax were set up in all Wardrobes or
Galleries: Plin. lib. 35. A Court full of dusty Images makes not the owner
noble: no man lived for our honor: what was before us, is not ours. It is the
mind that nobilitates. Who is generous? He that is virtuously given: Senec.

Verse 25. Paulus.] Paulus Aemilius or Aemylius (that in his Consulship led
Perseus King of Macedon in triumph) drew his Pedigree, as aforesaid from
Mamercus, Pythagoras the Philosopher's Son, by the Grecians surnamed Aemylos
for his civility.

Verse 25. Cossus,] That in a battle slew the General of the Enemy, and so
brought into the Capitol the Spolia opima.

Verse 25. Drusus,] One that won more then the Spolia opima from a General of
the Enemy, slain by his hand in the field: for, the General's name was Drusus;
which name he carried away, and left to his Posterity.

Verse 27. Fasces,] The bundle of Rods with an Axe in it, carried before the
Consuls and Praetors by their Lictors, as aforesaid.

Verse 36. Osyris.] Why the Egyptians kept the Anniversary of Osyris, and
every year upon the day of his death sought for him with a general mourning and
howling, I have told you in the Comment upon Sat. 6. I shall in this place add
the opinion (not without probability) that Joseph was Osyris, and then you will
assign another cause for seeking him. Moses having carried away his bones, and
only left to the Egyptians a desire of Joseph and the memory of his virtues,
which they celebrated with this idolatrous Ceremony, howling till they found
him, and then shouting.

Verse 45. Creticus.] One of the House of Metellus surnamed Creticus, from his
Conquest of Creet. That the Camerini were very great Romans needs no other
evidence, but only the naming of them and the Bareae for all the cliented and
courted Lords of Rome in Sat. 7.

Verse 48. Rubellius Plautus.] All the Juvenals I have seen do write, as it is
printed in the Louvre-copy, Rubellius Blandus: but no Author takes notice of
any such kinsman to Julius Caesar and Drusus: therefore I follow Justus
Lipsius, that reads it Rubellius Plautus, he being in as near a degree of
relation to Augustus Caesar, by the Mothers side, as Nero was. All men cry up
Rubellius Plautus that by his Mother had the Nobility of the Julian Family:
Tacit. lib. 13.14.

Verse 49. Drusian.] Tiberius Caesar and his Brother Drusus were descended from
Tiberius Nero that conquered Asdrubal: Suet.

Verse 54. Bleak Mount.] Tarquin's Mount, where very poor women got a sad
livelihood, by weaving and knitting in the wind.

Verse 65. Euphrates,] A River of Mesopotamia. This River rises upon the
Mountain Niphates; and the fall from such a Precipice makes the stream large,
deep and swift: it runs into the red Sea, but first joining with the River
Tygris it makes Mesopotamia: Strab.

Verse 57. Cecropian.] Cecrops was the first King of Athens. Sure the Romans
were excellent Heralds, that could bring a Descent from this King who reigned
before Deucalion's Flood, Ante Deucalionis tempora regem habuere Cecropem,
Before Deucalion's time they had Cecrops for their King: Justin. lib. 2. He
founded Athens. They drew him in his Picture male and female; for that he first
joined man and woman in Matrimony: Justin. ibid. Eusebius. in praef. Chron. In his
Tower sprung up the Olive Tree, from which the City of Athens took its name:
the Athaenians from thenceforth honoring Minerva as their Patroness, and
refusing the Patronage of Neptune, that by bringing forth a horse for service,
promised them success in war. He first coined the name of Jupiter, built Altars
in Greece, and some say invented the Greek Alphabet. He was called Diphyes or
double-natured, some think either from the height of his body, or that, being
an Egyptian, he spoke both his own and the Greek tongue: but I rather believe
he had the attribute Diphyes as he had his Picture in two shapes, for joining
the nature of the male and female.

Verse 68. Mercury's old Statue.] The Hermae or Athenian Statues of Mercury had
Marble heads, but the other parts were of course stuff. It was the custom of
Athens, when the State would reward a deserving man, to send him two or three
of these Statues, which he placed over his Gates: Thucid.

Verse 71. Thou Progeny of Troy.] He means Rubellius Plautus, that being of the
Julian Family, derived himself from Aeneas of Troy.

Verse 77. Hirpin.] Hirpin and Coritha were the best-bred Horse and Mare of all
that ran Chariot-matches in the Circus.

Verse 90. Youth.] Rubellius Plautus, the proud young Lord to whom this
admonition is given.

Verse 102. Phalaris,] King of Agrigentum, the cruellest of all the Sicilian
Tyrants. To torment his Subjects he employed the whole strength of his wit,
which was very quick, as you may see in his Epistles, yet extant. To this
Prince Perillus the Athenian presented a brazen Bull, made with such Art, that
a man enclosed therein, and roasted, bellowed like a Bull. For this ingenious
invention, when the Artist expected his reward, he was more ingeniously paid,
being the first that was executed in his own instrument of cruelty: may all
Projectors of others miseries meet the like just recompense. The last that felt
the brazen Bull was Phalaris himself, that growing insufferable to the
Agrigentines, the whole City rose against him, and roasted him alive.

Verse 108. Gauran,] Lucrine Oisters, taken about the Baian Port, near the
Gauran Mountain.

Verse 109. Cosmus,] So great a Voluptuary, that the preparation of those
Unguents which he used in his Bath, was ever after called Vnguentum Cosmianum:
Petron.

Verse 117. Tutor.] Julius Tutor, that robbed his fellow Thieves the Cilicians,
those Dunkirks to the Romans; for which notwithstanding he was condemned by the
Senate.

Verse 117. Capito.] Capito Cossutianus, accused by the Cilicians upon the Law
de repetundis, that he might refund and make restitution for polling of their
Province when he was Legate: Tacit. lib. 5.

Verse 120. When Pansa.] When the new Governor Pansa, like the lean hungry
Fly, feared by the Leper in Josephus, will be sure to suck hard and glean from
the Country all the money and goods left by his Predecessor the old Governor
Natta, that reaped the full Harvest of the Province: which he ought to have
governed like a Roman, not pillaged like a Thief. Detrahere aliquid alteri,
and hominem hominis incommodo suum augere commodum, magis est contra naturam,
quam mors, quam paupertas, quam dolor: To take away any thing from another, and
for a man to raise himself upon the ruins of a man, is more against nature
then death, poverty, or pain: Cic. 3. Offic. Yet a Commander in chief will
hardly obey this Law of Nature, but compel Chaerippus, viz. the poor Plough-man
to pay Taxes, though commonly such Impositions end together with their Imposer
in a Mutiny. Nec vero ulla vis impii tanta est quae premente metu possit esse
diuturna. Testis Phalaris, cujus praeter caeteros nobilitata crudelitas, qui
non ex insidiis interiit, non a paucis, sed in quem universa Agrigentinorum
multitudo impetum fecit. Really, no force of a wicked man can be so great, as
to continue by the pressure of fear. I may instance in Phalaris, whose cruelty
is conspicuous above others, that perished, not by treachery, not by a few men's
hands, but assaulted by the whole multitude of the Agrigentines: Cic. 2. Offic.

Verse 128. Coan.] Cos is an Island in the Aegaean Sea, one of the Cyclades. It
was plundered by Hercules that slew Euripilus and Clytica, King and Queen of
the Island, because they impeded his landing there when he returned from the
sack of Troy, after he had slain King Laomedon, Father to Priam. To this Island
the world owes the Invention of Silk-weaving.

Verse 128. Sparta's purple wool.] Lacedaemonian purple was in great request
with Soldiers, as Julius Pollux affirms.

Verse 129. Parrhasius,] A great Master in the Art of Painting, born at
Ephesus. He was the first that drew with perfect lines the air of the face,
sweetning it with the hair, and by the confession of Artists, no Picture-drawer
ever came near him, for giving of the last hand to a Piece. Yet Timentes put
him down in the drawing of Ajax: but he had the better of Zeuxes: For, when
Zeuxes had drawn a bunch of grapes so to the life that Birds flew to peck them:
Parrhasius painted a linen Cloth so artificially, that Zeuxes, presuming no
man could match his grapes, proudly bid him, take away the Cloth and show him
his Picture; but when he found his error, he ingeniously gave Parrhasius the
honor of the day; for that he himself had only cozened the Birds, but
Parrasius had deceived an Artist: Plin. lib. 35. cap. 10. Fab. lib. 12.

Verse 130. Phidias,] A Statuary, never equalled for carving in Ivory: yet he
was far better at making of Gods then Men: Quintil. His Masterpiece was the
Ivory Statue of Minerva at Athens, 39 cubits high; in her Shield was the
Battle of the Amazons and the Giants War: in her Sandals the Fight between the
Centaurs and the Lapiths. The next to this was his Jupiter Olympius, carved in
one entire piece of Ivory; then his Venus, that stood at Rome in the Portico of
Octavia: Plin. l. 35. cap. 8. He made a Statue ten cubits high of Nemesis, the
Goddess of reward and punishment, at Rhamnus a Town in Attica. This Minerva (as
Antigonus describes her) occasioned the Proverb Rhamnusia Nemesis: she held in
her hand the bough of an Applle-tree, and in one of the folds Phidias ingraved
the name of his beloved Scholar Agoracritus Parius. Phidias was first a
Painter, and drew the Shield of Minerva at Athens.

Verse 130. Myron,] A famous Statuary, especially for his Heifer, a piece so
carved to life, that Poets have made it immortal: See the Greek Epigrams, and
Ausonius and Propert.

Verse 131. Polyclet.] A most incomparable Statuary: See the Comment upon Sat.
3.

Verse 132. Mentor,] An excellent Graver of Plate: Plin. l. 12. c. 11. Mart.
Vasaque Mentorea nobilitata manu.
And Vessels engraved by Mentor's noble hand.
Crassus the Orator had two Goblets of Mentor's workmanship, which cost him
about 2500 French Crowns: Plin. lib. 33. cap. 13.

Verse 133. Antonius] My Author, having described the riches of the East,
before those parts were made Roman Provinces, now names the Governors that
enriched themselves with the spoil of those Countries wherewith they were
entrusted by the State of Rome. C. Antonius was banished for six years by the
Censors; the reason upon record was, for that he had polled the Associates of
Rome: See Pedian and Strab.

Verse 134. Dolabella,] Proconsul of Asia, accused by M. Scaurus, and condemned
upon the Law de Repetundis: Tacit.

Verse 135. Verres,] Governor of Sicily accused by Cicero: part of his charge
was Dico te maximum pondus auri, argenti, etc. I say thou have exported an
infinite of Gold, Silver, Ivory and Purple, great store of Malta- Vests, great
store of Bedding, much Furniture of Delos, many Corinthian Vessels, a great
quantity of Corn, Wine and Honey. Cicero presses this against him as theft; but
Juvenal calls it sacrilege: because Verres in robbing the Associates of Rome,
robbed the Gods, to whom the Romans engaged for protection of their Friends and
Allies: See the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 141. Lares,] Household Gods. Vid. the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 146. Oild Corinth,] A City of Achaia (in the middle of the Peloponnesian
Istthmus) first called Ephire. It was the noblest Town of Greece, and standing
commodiously between the Ionian and Aegaean Seas, grew so potent, as to hold
competition with the City of Rome, and so proud as to affront the Roman
Ambassadors, and cast dirt upon them: Strab. Hereupon the Senate decreed a war
against the Corinthians as Violaters of the Law of Nations, and sent an Army
thither under the command of L. Mummius that besieged Corinth, which could not
prove a work of much difficulty, the Inhabitants being strangely effeminate.
Venus was their Patroness, in whose Temple two hundred Ladies of pleasure daily
stood at Livery: What men was this Town likely to train up? but such as Juvenal
describes, that perfumed themselves with rich Oiles and Essences, fitter to
wear garlands then arms: and to meet a Mistress in a bed, then an Enemy in the
field. When Corinth was burnt by Mummius, there was a confusion of rich metals
in the fire, to the high advance of the Brass, which ever after by way of
excellence was called Corinthian Brass.

Verse 146. Rhodes.] See the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 150. Illyrian Seamen.] All the coast of the Adriatic Sea, from
Tergestum to the Ceraunian Mountains in the Confines of Epire, are inhabited by
the Illyrians: Pomp. Mel. Dion. Alex. These had a fair opportunity to make
themselves good Seamen.

Verse 150. Reapers.] The Egyptians, a description of whose fruitful soil and
vain People I have given you at large in Pliny's Panegyric.

Verse 153. Marius.] Marius Priscus Proconsul of Africa; how he rifled the
wealth of that Province, and his Accusation and mock-Sentence, you read in the
Comment upon Sat. 1.

Verse 160. Sibyl's Leaf.] I know not whether Juvenal means the ordinary leaves
of the Sibyl's Books, or the extraordinary Palm Tree leaves wherein Sibylla
Cumaea writ down her predictions: but this I am sure of, he prophecies (as
truly as any of the Sibyls) of the revolt of the Africans from the Roman
Empire, for the Pressures and Taxes laid upon them by their covetous Governors.

Verse 166. Harpy.] The Harpyes were Daughters to the Earth and Sea: Serve. That
they may enjoy their Father and Mother, they dwell in Islands. These winged
creatures have the ears of a Bear, the body of a Vulture, the face of a Woman,
and hands with crooked tallons instead of fingers. Virgil names but three of
them, Aello, Ocypete and Caeleno, which last Homer calls Podarge, and says,
that of her Zephyrus begat Achilles his horses, Balius and Zanthus. Hesiod
takes notice only of two, Aello and Ocypete: Appollonius numbers them like
Hesiod: Erythraeus observes that no more but two Harpyes are carved in an
ancient Basis at Venice, and there at this day to be seen in Saint Martins
Church. Yet others reckon three, and Homer a fourth, viz. Thyella. In hell they
were called Dogs, in heaven Furies and Birds, in earth Harpyes. When Phineus
King of Arcadia, persuaded by his Wife Harpalice, had put out the eyes of his
Sons, he himself by a judgment from heaven was struck blind, and haunted by
the Harpyes, that with their dung spoiled all the rich dishes at his Table. In
the passage of the Argonauts to Colchos, Phineus treated Jason, that, moved
with indignation at the horrid sight, bestowed upon the King Zethus and Calais
Sons to Boreas, which having wings like the Harpyes, should beat them out of
his Dominions. They did so, and chased them into the Isles of Plotae not far
from Zacynthus, where they were admonished by Iris (in Hesiod called Sister to
the Harpyes) to leave their pursuit of Joves Dogs: this very word frighted the
Borean Brothers; and from their retreat the Isles of Plotae were afterward
called Strophades: Virg. The Harpyes were bloody Plunderers and Extorters of
money: Sidon. lib. 5. Epist. 7. They were evil women. Apulei. See their
mythology in Coel. lib. 27.

Verse 199. Bring thy birth from Picus] He would be of a very ancient House
that could bring down his Pedigree from Picus King of Latium, Son to Saturn,
Father to Faunus, and Grandfather to King Latinus. He was a mighty skillful
Augur. Circe fell in love with him; but he refused her marriage, and took to
wife the Nymph Carmentis, which so vexed the Goddess-witch, that she struck him
with her magical Rod, and turned him into a bird of his own name, a Magpie.
Some think this Fiction invented from his Augury, because he was the first
that, divining by the flight of birds, made use of the Magpie: Ovid. Metam. 14.

Verse 168. Giants,] The Sons of Titan that fought and beat Saturn, and were
defeated by Jove. See the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 6

Verse 161. Prometheus.] See the Comment upon Sat. 4.

Verse 184. French Fools-hood.] The Santons of Aquitane, near Toulouse in
France, wore hoods, that are by Martial called Bardocuculli, Fools-hoods. It
seems that which in the day time was the French Fashion, proved the Roman Mode
at night, when the young Lords, ashamed to be known, went to their first
Debauches.

Verse 186. Damasippus,] A profuse young Nobleman, that as my Author tells us,
was first Consul of Rome; then a Chariot-Jocky; afterward a common Drunkard;
and at last a Stage Player.

Verse 199. Epona,] Goddess of Stables: Damasippus swore by her, as long as he
was able to keep Race-horses; and so did the Grooms of his Stable; it being the
Roman Custom for Servants to swear by their Masters darling-Deity: Sat. 2.

And by his Master's Juno his man swears. Verse 201. Tavern-Revels.] Or
Cook-shop Revels: for, in Juvenal's time, Cooks Shops were the Roman Taverns.

Verse 202. Syrophoenix,] A Vintner or Cook, a Mungrel, born betwixt Syria and
Phoenicia, from whence he transports the Oils and Essences that serve his
Guests, when they anoint after bathing and perfume their Wines: Sat. 6.

When Falern Wine with foamy Essence sweats. Verse 207. Cyane,] Wife to
Syrophoenix.

Verse 216. Painted Tavern-linnen.] Stained Table-clothes brought out of
Syrophoenix his Country.

Verse 217. Armenian War] Nero made war in Armenia (that rebelled against him)
by his Lieutenant Domitius Corbulo: Tacit.

Verse 218. Rhene.] Damasippus had youth and strength (but that he wanted
honor) to have fought for defense of the Roman Empire, which extended to the
River Rhene and the Istrian Flood, now called the Rhiine and the Danow.

Verse 220. Ostium] Now Hostia; the next Seaport to Rome, where the Roman
Fleet lay at Anchor.

Verse 220. Cybel's Priest.] You cannot wonder that he should lie dead drunk,
when you read the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 231. Thy Land near Luca.] Luca is a City of Tuscia, so named from Lucumo
King of Hetruria: Strab. lib. 5. This City flourished anciently with men of
great worth and valor, from whom the Romans had their military Orders.

Verse 240. Swift Lentulus.] Celer or Swift was a surname of the noble house of
Lentulus.

Verse 240. Laureol,] A Slave, condemned to be hanged for running away from his
Master. This Slave was personated or acted upon the Theater by a Lord, one of
the Lentuli, fellow-Actor to the Lord Damasippus, that played a part in
Catullus his Comedy called the Phantasm* another of the Company was a Mamercus,
one of the Aemylian Family, descended, as aforesaid, from Mamercus Son to
Pythagoras. My Author observes, that it was the more base in these Noblemen to
be Stage Players, because they were Volunteers, not pressed men, as in Nero's
time; for then Lords durst not refuse to act upon a Stage, when the example was
showed them by their Emperor: but these young Noblemen (by their Prodigality
brought to Want) for a poor Salary offered themselves to act upon Theaters:
both as Players, to spend their lungs, and as Fencers, to put their lives in
the power of the People.

Verse 255. Thymele,] Latinus his pretty Wife: but though her Husband presented
her to Heliodorus the grand Informer, that old block of which Latinus himself
was a chip: yet when she was courted upon the Stage by the young Mamercan Lord,
that acted a Love-passion some thing too naturally, Latinus was so bold as to
give him a sound box of the ear, which would make the common people laugh more
then any jest made by Corynth the Clown, that is here called, Corynth the dull
Fool.

Verse 260. Gracchus,] The Gladiator mentioned Sat. 2. In the Design before
which Satyr you see him in the Circus as a Retiarius or Net-bearer, flying from
the Secutor or Pursuer, just as Juvenal describes them here

Verse 274. Seneca.] See the Comment upon Sat. 5.

Verse 274. Nero.] The Emperor Nero, Scholar to Seneca; but no follower of his
precepts: For, by his wicked actions, Nero changed his gallant Proper name into
a base Appellative, so that we call every cruel Tyrant Nero: but it seems he
fell back from his first course, as in his time the Rivers did from theirs:
Plin. lib. 2. cap. 203. He grew to such a height of villainy, that he spared not
his own family, but was to his Mother, brother, Wife, and all his nearest
relations, a bloody Parracide: Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 24. Hist. Eccl. For which my
Author intimates that Nero deserves a thousand deaths, and therefore it would
be too mild a Sentence that should condemn him as a single Parracide, to be
sowed up in a Sack with a Dog, Cock, Viper and Ape, and cast into the Sea;
perhaps lest his naked body should defile the Element of water, that washes out
the filth from other things: read Senec. lib. 5. Controv. Digest. lib. 48. ad
Leg. Pomp. de Parracid. Coel. Rhod. lib. 21* cap. 21. Cic. pro Sext. Rosc. In
the next place my Author aggravates Nero's murder of his Mother, comparing it
with the very same Crime committed by Orestes, but not with the same intention,
nor seconded with the like cruelties. For, first Orestes took himself to have a
Commission from the Gods to kill his Mother, in revenge of his Father, murdered
by her, when he had drunk hard at the Feast she made to welcome him home, after
his ten years absence at the siege of Troy. Homer agrees with Juvenal, that of
the Matricide committed by Orestes Jove was Author, and sent Mercury to bid
Aegysthus take heed of imbruing his hands in Agamemnon's blood; for if he did,
Orestes should revenge it upon his Mother and Aegysthus: Hom. Odyss. Then, Nero
slew his Sister in Law Antonia; but Orestes did not kill his Sister Electra,
nor his Wife Hermione, as Nero killed his Wife Poppaea; nor poisoned he his
nearest relations as Nero poisoned his Brother Britannicus. Nor did Orestes in
his frenzy commit a Crime equal to Nero, when he writ his Troicks, which
Juvenal urges as the greatest of his cruelties; for they put him into a humor
of setting Rome on fire, only that he might sing his verses of Troy burning, by
Rome in the like condition. Lastly, for the Imperial Crown of his impiety, he
charged the fact upon the Christians, condemning those poor Innocents, for that
which he himself had done, to be tortured in pitched Cassocks fit for Catiline
and Cethegus (as Juvenal here says) that would have fired Rome; and therefore
fittest of all for Nero, that did it. This torture is fully described in Sat. 1.

Verse 285. Vindex.] C. Julius Vindex Governor in France, the first mover in
the rebellion against Nero; not upon his own score, but upon the account of S.
Sulpitius Galba Lieutenant in Spain, for whom both Vindex and Virginius Rufus
Governor in Germany declared themselves: and Juvenal thinks all three had done
well, if they had declared against Nero for the burning of Rome, and revenged
in the first place his malice to his Country.

Verse 390. Parsley-Crown.] Nero in the Isthmian prizes had carried away the
Parsley-Crown from the Greek Musick-Masters.

Verse 292. Thyestes long train.] Thyestes was Son to Pelops and Hippodamia.
He, to spite his Brother Atreus, made him Cuckold; Atreus, to revenge himself,
first banished Thyestes, then repealed his banishment and feasted him with the
flesh of those Sons which he himself had begot upon the body of his Wife
Aetope. Thyestes, to out do his Brother, defloured his own Daughter Pelopea,
by whom he had Aegysthus that assisted in the murder of Agamemnon Son to
Atreus. In this Tragedy of Atreus (so horrid that Historians say the Sun could
not have patience to behold it, but went back into the East) Nero played the
part of Thyestes: and Juvenal thinks, that when the Play was done, Nero might
have hung the long Vest, which he acted in, upon the Statue of his Ancestor Cn.
Domitius, as well as he hanged upon the Statue of Augustus Caesar the Lute
decreed him by the Judges of the Musick-exercises, he having first kissed and
adored it: Suet.

Verse 293. Antigone's and Menalippe's Tire.] That we may know Nero acted upon
the Stage both Men's and Women's parts, my Author bids him put upon the head of
L. Domitius Nero the Tire in which he played Antigone, that led her blind
Father Oedipus, as aforesaid: and on the head of Domitius Aenobarbus to put the
dress in which he played the part of Menalippe, got with child by Neptune,
imprisoned by her Father, and in a Stable delivered of a boy, that was almost
stifled with the stink of the place, and therefore called Baeothus.

Verse 296. Cethegus,] One of the Conspirators with Catiline that covenanted to
fire Rome: the barbarous Galls did no more. Was this a design fit for Romans
and persons of honor, as they were?

Verse 300. Pitched Cassocks,] Made for poor Christians: See the end of the
Comment upon Sat. 1.

Verse 302. New man.] Cicero's Enemies, in scorn of his mean birth, called him
novus homo, new man; and the poor Arpinate, because he was born among the
Volscians at Arpinum, now Abruzzo; then a poor Town, yet enobled by two famous
Natives, M. Tullius Cicero and C. Marius.

Verse 306. The Gown.] Hail thou that were first styled Father of thy Country,
thou that in the Gown did first deserve a triumph and the laurel of the
tongue. Thus the spirit of Cicero is complemented by Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 2.
Father of his Country, was a title by Cato conferred upon Tully for preserving
Rome from Catiline, Cethegus, and the rest of their faction.

Verse 308. Caesar.] Augustus Caesar, second Emperor of the Romans, Consul with
Cicero in the year, from the foundation of Rome, 722. He overthrew Brutus and
Cassius at Philippi, and defeated Marc. Antony at the battle of Actium, where
he built a City, and named it from his victory Nicopolis: Plutarch. He reigned
fifty six years. In his time learning flourished: then in Rome lived Virgil,
Horace, Sallust. Hortensius, Athenodorus, Tarseus and Sitio Alexandrinus: Eutr.
lib. 7. But in Juvenal's opinion, neither his conquest at Land nor his
Sea-victory merited so much honor from his Country, as those services done in
the Gown by Cicero.

Verse 313. Marius,] Another poor Arpinate born in the same Town with Cicero.
His Father C. Marius and his Mother Fulcinia wrought for their living: Plut.
and so did he himself when he first came to the Army: Juv. The Vine that paid
him, when the lazy Cramp
Took his hand, pallizadoing the Camp.
After he was a Soldier, by degrees he rose from one office to another, till
at last the Consul Metellus made him his Lievtenant-Generall in Numidia, where
he took King Jugurth, and drive him into Rome before the wheels of his
triumphant Chariot: for which service the Romans looked upon him as the only
great Soldier, able to defend them when they trembled at the invasion of the
Cimbrians and Teutons. He was then chosen Consul five times together. In his
fifth Consulship, when he had Catulus for his Colleague, he overthrew the
Cimbrians and Teutons. He was defeated by Sylla, and hid himself in the
Minturnian Fens in Campania, where he was found, cast into a Dungeon by the
Minturnians, and a Cimbrian sent to murder him: But the Executioner fled from
the Prisoner, whose eyes (as he said) shot forth a flame of fire. Then the
Town, possessed with the like fear, suffered Marius to make an escape; and in a
small Pinnace he passed over into Africa, where Juvenal says Sat. 10. that he
begged his bread in conquered Carthage. When Cinna had seized into his hands
the government of Rome, he called-in Marius, that, destroying his enemies, was
the seventh time chosen Consul; and then dyed in Rome of a Pleurisy: Plut.

Ver. 317. Cimbrians.] The Cimbrians are the Danes and Holsatians, that, with
the rest of the Germans, are called Teutons, from their God Tuesco: Versteg.
These, bodying in a vast Army, were upon their march for Rome, in the year 640.
but Marius cut them off, as aforesaid: they were men of huge giantly bodies,
and horrid looks. The Cimbrians used to rejoice at a battle, where, if they
fell, they should die gloriously upon the bed of honor: but they lamented in
their sicknesses, as if they were to perish basely: Val. Max.

Verse 321. Second Laurel.] He wore the first when he led King Jugurth in
triumph.

Verse 322. Colleague.] Marius in his fifth Consulship was Colleague to Q.
Catulus, a person nobly born. Both, as equals in the service of preserving
their Country from the Cimbrians, were equalized in the honor of triumph.

Verse 323. Decii,] The Decii were Plebeians, but men of more then Patrician
courage; for they devoted their lives as voluntary Sacrifices for the benefit
of their Country; the Father in the war with the Latins: the Son in the
Hetrurian war: the Grandchild in the war that King Pyrrhus made for the
Tarentines. The first Decius, when he was General in the Latian war, dreamed
the victory would fall to them whose General should be slain. Taking this for
a Revelation from the Gods, he charged the enemy so far, till he got, that
which he came for, his death. Whilst the Roman Army fought to fetch off his
body, his dream proved true; for the Victory fell to them. The second Decius,
in the Hetrurian war, devoted his life in these words, Upon my head be all
the miseries that threaten my Country: presently he was slain, and the Romans
had the day. From the premises Juvenal concludes, that in the Estimate of the
Gods the Decii were equal to the State of Rome; because these two private
persons were, by commutation, accepted for the whole Republik.

Verse 329. He.] Servius Tullius, Son to Oericulana a bondwoman. After the
murder of Tarquinius Priscus by the Sons of Ancus Martius, S. Tullius was
crowned King of Rome: Val. He reigned 44 years.

Verse 331. Tarquin.] Tarquin the proud, the seventh and last King of Rome. He
succeeded Servius Tullius: but yet, as my Author says, Servius was the last
good King of Rome. If he had been as fortunate as good, he had never married
this Tarquin to his Daughter Tullia, that with his Pride joined her Cruelty,
and exercised it by his hand upon her Father, only that she might be Queen a
little before her time. But Tarquin was a great Soldier: He conquered the
Latins and the Sabines: He took Suessa from the Hetrusci: Gabii was delivered
to him by his Son Sextus, that fled into the Town, pretending himself an Enemy
to his Father. He first instituted the Latin Feriae. When he built the
Capitol, in diging for the foundation, the workmen found a man's head: the
Soothsayers being asked what it signified, answered, a Tower built upon that
foundation should be the head of the world. At last, when his Son Sextus had
ravished Lucrece, I. Brutus (that fearing his Tyranny had long counterfeited
madness) appeared like himself, headed the Romans against Tarquin. He fled to
Porsenna King of Hetruria. To reestablish him, Porsenna made war against the
Romans, but in vain, Live. Plut. Yet Tarquin once had almost recovered his
Crown: for Titus and Tiberius, the Sons of Junius Brutus, undertook to deliver
up a Gate of Rome to Sextus Tarquin: but they were discovered by Vindicius a
Slave; for which discovery he was made a Freeman: afterward the Rod laid upon
the head of a Slave, when they manumitted or made him free, was called
Vindicta. But Titus and Tiberius were for this offense put to death by their
Father like Slaves, being first whipped, and then beheaded. In the war made by
King Porsenna in favor of the Tarquins, Horatius Cocles stood him and his
whole Army, till the Bridge over Tiber was broken; then, although he had an
Arrow in his thigh, he took the River and swam safely to the Roman Host: Live.
lib 2. Afterward, at the election of Magistrates, one jeering him with his
lame leg, he answered, Every one remembers me of my honor. It was likewise in
this war that Mutius Scaevola having sworn to kill Porsenna (then lying with
his forces before the City of Rome) by mistake slew his Secretary; and being
brought before the King, when he saw his error, for anger that his Country was
not delivered of Porsenna by his hand, he cut it off: Live. ibid. Lastly, in
this very war, Claelia with diverse other Ladies, the greatest beauties of Rome,
were given to Porsenna for Hostages: but she freed her self and all her
Company. For Claelia, pretending some Religious Ceremonies were to be performed
by washing in the River Tiber, made the Keepers in modesty stand at distance,
till the Ladies, following her, swam to the Romans: whose Dominions, at that
time, reached no further then the River. That Claelia went not on foot to the
water side, may be collected from the Statue on horseback, which the Romans
set up in honor of her courage in the Via sacra.

Verse 239. Thersites.] Homer, with great reason, calls him of all the
besiegers of Troy the ugliest: he was so, both in body and mind: read his
description Iliad. lib. 2. For his foul mouth Achilles gave him a box on the
ear, which silenced the Rogue for ever.

Verse 340. Achilles.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1.

Verse 344. Asylum.] Rome was first an Asylum, or Sanctuary for all kinds of
Rogues; and the Founder of it, Romulus, was a Shepherd, or -- Juvenal is very
loath to go further, if he should, in reference to the murder of Remus, he
must call Romulus Parracide.

The ninth Design.
MAy 1 Juvenal believe his eyes? is this
A real or mock-Metomorphosis?
Spruce 2 Naevolus, her Ladiship's Gallant,
His Lordship's Droll, the Wit, come now to Want?
Where Is all thy jeasts? thy self thou might propose:
If thou could speak, which would be through the nose.
Where Is thy new Gown? where is the Jesemin
Which all that head of hair was buttered in?
I little thought to meet thee altered thus;
Thou look pale, like the Ghost of Naevolus:
And witther'd as a Witch, with such a beard
Upon thy chin; where not a hair appeared,
But with a plaster it was straight plucked off.
Thou have got likewise a consumptive cough.
Is all the strength, old women so cried up,
Shrunk into this small Vrn, thy Cawdle-cup?
There Is 3 Isis worshiped, at her Temple-Gate,
On their old Mistresses those 4 Beggars wait,
That once as high in Female favor stood,
As ever thou have done, their limbs as good:
And end in thy decrepitness they must;
A Cripple still speaks the Epilogue to Lust.
Figura Nona.
Number credes oculis, Juvenalis 1? vera figura est,
An metamorphosi quadam se lumina fallunt?
Deliciae ne mihi Dominarum Naevolus 2 olim
Obvius it, Procerumque sales, and Morio Romae?
Quam tristis vest, and vultu? si venajocandi
Aruerit, possis vel te proponere ludum,
Per nasi vitium nisi vox male mulceat aurem.
Quo toga, amice, nitens? tibi quo defluxit amomum,
Quod solet horrentem sylvam illinire comarum?
Non sic mutato sperabam occurrere? palles
Vmbra velut; spectrum, non Naevolus Ipse, videris;
Canidiam ruga mentiris, and indice barba,
Quam nuper suetus fuerat convellere dropax.
Vnde aegri veteris tibi facta domestica tussis?
An tot matronis jactata probataque virtus
Langueat, in juris misere conclusa patellam?
Isidis aspicias 3 Fanum, quo turpia pangunt
Foedera; truncatum 4 cernas ibi Cypridis agmen
Emeritumque; suis quondam hi placuere Puellis;
Quaeque tuo, par horum inerat quoque gratia nervo,
Nec diversa manent te certo, Naevole, fata:
Clauditur in Veneris Ludis scena ultima manco.


The Manners of Men. THE NINTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
A Dialogue the Poet frames;
Where poor lewd Naevolus declames,
That nothing now the Unchaste bestow,
But poison, when they jealous grow.
For fear whereof, he silence prays;
But stones will tell, the Poet says:
Gives him good counsel, but in vain;
So jeers, and leaves him to complain.
POet. Why NAEVOLUS, thou still come lowering so,
Like vanquished MARSIAS, I would gladly know?
What do thou do with RAVOLA'S strange look,
When, with his beard all froath, the Slave was took
Licking of RHODOPE, and stood in fear,
Of sauce for sweetmeats, a sound box of the ear?
CREPERIUS POLLIO made not such a face,
When, to seek fools, he went from place to place
Promising trebble use: and found not one,
In all the Town, that would be wrought upon.
How on a sudden did these wrinkles grow?
Late with a little thou made such a show
Thou seemd'st a kind of Slavish Knight; our feasts
Rung with thy sharp and those no Country-jests.
All Is altered; melancholy clouds thy brow,
Thy hair's a dry Wood; Thy skin shines not now
As when warm birdlime sleek't it; now thy thighs
Are rough, thy Coppice-haire neglected lies.
How came thou by the old sickman's jaundice, whom
A quartan fever has long kept at home?
Thy frail flesh joy and grief of spirit knows:
Both which thy face, in diverse habits, shows.
May be, thy former course thou do forsake,
And quite another way thy voyage make;
For, late (I take it) when our prayers were se'd
To ISIS, Peace and her fair GANYMED:
And at the Chapel built to entertain
The Mother of the Gods: and in the Fane
Of CERES (for what Temple may not we
Have Wenches at) none was cried up like thee:
The Wives did not AUFIDIUS so much woo;
And would thou tell, so did their husbands too.

Naevolus. Sir, it is a thriving Trade to many men;
But I got nothing by it: now and then
A greasy Cloak, or Gown the Dyers spoiled:
Course cloth, in dressing which French Fullers toiled;
Or some base silver of the second vein.
Fates govern men; Fates in parts secret reign;
For, if good Stars their influx countermand,
Thy unknown length shall for a Cipher stand:
Though VIRRO bathing tickle at thy sight,
Or though a thick-writ Letter thee invite,
Whereto he in a postscript may annex
Some Greek Caresses, to allure his sex.
No monster like a cov'tous Pathick whore;
I gave thee this, then thus much, and then more:
He counts and kisses; let us cast up the sums,
Boy bring the notes, you see in all it comes
To six Sestertia. Reckon now my pains:
Is It easy when a handsome -- one strains
Into a stinking --, and there shall greet
The Bowels, and the last night's supper meet?
I hold him to be more a Slave, that is bound
To dig his Master, then his Masters ground.
Yet you Sir, think your self composed for love,
Designed for heaven, fit to give wine to JOVE.
Poor Parasites must look for nothing sure,
When you will not pay us, that your itchings cure.
Lo here, to whom the green UMBRELLA went,
To whom the goodly Amber boll was sent
On his birthday, or when the humid Spring
Did with it self the female Calends bring:
When, Carpets laid beneath his feet, he sat
And viewed his Presents in a Chair of state.
Say Sparrow, who shall heir those mountain-heights,
All those Appulian Valleys: all those Kites
Wearied with flying over thy land? Rare Wines
Thy Cellars fill, from fruitful Trifoline Vines,
The Misene Precipice, bleak Gauran hills;
No man with long-lived Must more Hogs-heads fills.
What were, if thou to thy spent Client gave
Some acres? were not better he should have
The Country-Child, his Mother, and their Shed,
And Dog, that still their Play-fellow was bred?
Then that all these a Legacy should raise
For thy Comrade, that on the Cymbals plays?
Thou art not honest when thou ask'st, says he,
But ask, my Boy and House-rent cry to me:
My one Boy, like to POLYPHEM'S one eye,
For whose large Orb ULYSSES was too sly;
Another must be bought, one will not do
My business, and then I must diet two.
When Winter comes, what shall I do I pray?
What to my Boys bare Legs and Shoulders say,
When them cold-breath'd December shall benumb,
Have patience and the Grasshopper will come?
But to dissemble, and let pass the rest;
How rat'st thou it, and I was still thy pressed
Devoted Client, that but for my aid,
Thy Wife until this hour had been a Maid:
By what ways I was wrought upon, thou know,
And what upon thy Promises thou ow'st.
Often in my arms the flying Maid I caught,
When she to tear the new-seal'd Writings sought.
Whilst at the door thou whind'st, I wrought thy ends,
And scarce my whole night's labor made you friends.
Witness the pretty little bed, whose creak
Thou heard'st, and with it heard'st thy Lady squeak.
The marriage knot, cracked, ready to divide,
The Adult'rer has in many houses tied;
Now, first or last, what can thou count upon?
False and ungrateful, is it no merit? none,
That I for thee a Boy or Girl beget?
Which thou may breed, and in our Records set
Proofs that thou art a man: thy gates adorn
With Garlands, now to thee is issue born.
What I have given thee, stops the mouth of fame;
Besides the privileges Fathers claim,
That thou art made an Heir, thou ow'st to me:
The sweet Caducum too I purchase thee;
Nay, it is to thee much more advantage yet,
If three, the legal number, I beget.

Poet. Thou have, poor NAEVOLUS, just cause to griev.

Naev. And then, Sir, when he should my wants reliev,
As a neglected thing he lets me pass,
And seeks himself a new two-footed Ass.
Be sure you never do this trust reveal,
But in your bosom my complaints conceal.
For, your smooth CYNAED is the deadliest foe:
So jealous of his secret; what we know,
As if it were betrayed, inflames his ire:
He Will stab, or brain us, or our houses fire;
Nor doubt, where so much riches do abound,
That any want of poison will be found.
My Counsel therefore keep as closely hid,
As theirs the Court of MARS at Athens did.

Poet. O fool! fool! do imagine rich men can
Have any secret? though the Serving-man,
Prove silent, Truth from Beasts will speech compel:
The dogs, the posts, the marble stones will tell.
Thy window shut, over crannies hangings lay,
Lock double doors, and take the lights away;
Let all give charge that none lie near thee; yet,
What thou shall in thy Bedchamber commit,
Even when the Cock the second time shall crow,
E're it be day, shall the next Tavern know:
And hear crimes that were not committed; lies
That Spinners, Carders, Master-Cooks devise;
Who care not what they against their Lord compose,
When with their rumors they revenge his blows.
Some will way-lay thee, nay enforce thee hear,
And being drunk themselves, make drunk thy ear.
Entreat their secrecy, as thou do mine,
They Would rather tell it, than steal Falern Wine:
Or then out-quaffe those Cups LAUFELLA takes,
When for the People she her Offering makes.
We must for many causes live upright,
But chiefly that we Servants tongues may slight:
For of the will People that to us belong,
The part that is most evil is the Tongue.
And yet that Lord's condition is far worse
That fears the men which eat upon his Purse.

Naev. Good Counsel, to scorn Servants tongues, I Have learned:
But Gen'ralls, wherein all men are concerned;
What to my self, in my peculiar Trade,
Now time and hope are lost, will thou persuade?
For, this fair Flower goes swiftly to decay,
Poor wretched Life's short portion hasts away.
Whilst we drink, noynt, wench, and put Garlands on:
Old Age steals on us, never thought upon.

Poet. Fear not, thou wilt never want Pathick friends, so long
As these Hills stand and flourish; all will throng
To Rome, by Boat and Coach, to make this Match,
That their Heads neatly with one finger scratch,
Another hope may rise, and that more great,
Only do thou provoking Rocket eat.

Naev. You speak to happy men; my fates would joy,
If all my trading might my teeth employ:
O my poor Lars, I offer to your powers
A little incense, bran, and wreaths of Flowers.
When shall the fortune I attain be such,
Will keep me from the Hovell and the Crutch?
For Int'rest-money, when shall I receive
Thousands, for which the Rogues good pawns shall leave?
Have Silver-Vessels, pure illegal Plate,
Such as FABRICIUS censured for the weight?
And two young Hackney-Maesians at command,
Safe in the clamorous Circus me to land.
A crooked Graver, and another Knave
Paints Faces in a trice? these would be brave.
But I poor wretch must of such hopes despair;
For, when to fortune I do make my prayer,
Her ears against me with that wax she arms,
Which saved ULYSSES from the Sirens charms.

The Comment UPON THE NINTH SATYR.
VErse 2. Marsyas.] A rare Piper, born at Celaenae, once the chief City of
Phrygia: Lucan. Lugent damnatae Phoebo victore Celaenae.
Condemned Celaenae for Sol's Conquest mourns,
as if the very Town put on the looks of their fellow Citizen Marsyas, that
(having sawcily presumed to challenge Phoebus at the Pipe invented by Minerva)
was vanquished and condemed to be flead alive: Ovid. lib. 6. Fast. No marvel if
he looked scurvily, after such a Sentence passed upon him by victorious Apollo.

Verse 5. Rhodope.] Rhodope was a famous Curtezan of Thrace, fellow-Bondslave
to Aesop the Fable-maker. She was redeemed for a great sum of money by
Charaxus (Brother to Sapho the Poetess) that fell in love with Rhodope; and
after he had spent all the rest of his fortunes upon her, turned Pyrate: but
she, raising her self upon the ruins of him and other such fools, came to be so
infinite rich, that she built a Pyramid: Plin. lib. 30 cap. 12. Juvenal uses
her name for a Roman Curtezan.

Verse 7. Crepereius Pollio.] A broken Citizen of Rome, and one that all the
Town knew to be a Bankrupt.

Verse 16. Thy hair's a dry wood.] Debauched Naevolus wanted money to buy
unguents for his hair, so to put his head into the mode; for, the Romans
poudered not as we do, but anointed their heads; yet take notice, that he
lived before the siege of Naples, for his hair stuck on.

Verse 26. Isis,] That her Temple in Rome stood near to the old Palace of
Romulus, by my Author called the old Sheepcoat, you see in Sat. 6. a virtuous
place it was, the Mart for Bawds and Whores to drive their bargains: See the
figure of the Temple of Isis in the Design before this Satyr, and the history
of that Goddess in the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 26. Peace.] The Temple of Peace, wherein Vespasian Caesar had set up the
Statue of Ganymed.

Verse 28. The Mother of the Gods.] Cybele, that after she was brought out of
Phrygia to Rome, and there for some time had been a private Guest to Scipio
Nasica, the Republic built a Chapel to entertain her, which was now converted
to such pious uses as the Temple of Isis, and of Ceres, formerly a Goddess
dreadful to sinners: See the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 31. Aufidius,] A notorious lusty Grecian, gracious with most of the rich
and wanton Romans: Mart.

Acrior hoc Chius non erat Aufidius.
Chian Aufidius was no sharper Knave.
Verse 41. Virro] One of the Sect that worshipped the Good Goddess the contrary
way: See the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 62. Female Calends.] Upon the Calends or first day of March (being
according to the Roman account the birthday of Venus) they celebrated the
Matronalia, or female feasts: during which time the Beauties of Rome, dressed
up in all their splendor, sat in Chaires that stood upon Carpets, and
received rich presents from their Husbands or Servants. This Ceremony was
imitated by Pathick Virro: and his poor Idolator Naevolus must be at the charge
of modish Offerings, Umbrella's, Fannes, Amber-bolls and the like.

Verse 68. Trifoline.] The Trifoline Vineyards, and those upon the Gauran Hills
and the Misene Promontory, were all in Campania, and all their Vintages,
excellent Wine: Mart. Non sum de primo, fallor Trifolina, Lyaeo,
Inter Vina tamen septima vitis ego.
I Trifoline am cozened, the best wine
I have not, but I bring forth the sev'nth Vine.
Certant Massica aeque ex monte Gaurano Puteolos Baiasque prospectantia: The
Massick Vine is full as good that comes from the Gauran Hills, overlooking
Puteoli and Baiae: Plin. lib. 14. cap. 9.

Verse 79. Thy Comrade] Cybel's Priest, that plays upon the Cimbals till Sack
silence him and them: as in the Design before Sat. 8. but then he played to
the unthrift Damasippus, of whom there was nothing to be got but Sack. Now he
plays to wealthy Virro, in hope to cozen him out of his estate, as his
Predecessors the Corybantes cozened Saturn, that he should not hear the cry of
his own Child: much less shall Virro hear the bawling of his man Naevolus, but
bequeath all to his boon Companion the Archigallus or Priest of Cybel: See the
Comment upon Sat. 2. and 8.

Verse 79. Polypheme.] Polyphemus the Cyclops, Son to Neptune by Thoosa,
Daughter to Phorcys. He was a huge man-monster, and had but one eye, in the
midst of his forehead: but his Mother had not so much; for, she and her two
Sisters had but one eye amongst them all. He fell in love with the Nymph
Galatea: and from a steep rock broke the neck of his Favorite Acis, because he
was jealous that his Mistress loved the Youth better then himself. When Ulysses
by a storm was cast upon the coast of Sicily, he eat up six of his Mates, and
would have devoured the rest, if their Captain had not been too subtle for
him: but Ulysses foxed him with black wine, and when he was in a dead sleep,
got a fire-stick and burned out his one eye: Homer 10. Odyss. Virg. Aeneid. 3.
Many say Polyphemus had but one eye, some that he had two, others three; but
it is all fabulous. For he was a prudent man, and therefore said to have an eye
in his head near his brains. But Ulysses was wiser then he, by whom he was said
to be blinded, that is, overreached: Serve.

Verse 104. Our Records] The names of Fathers that had Children were recorded
in the Aerarium or Chequer-Office. The original of this Inrollment was from
Servius Tullius, that to ascertain the number of Births and Burials, ordered
that when a child was born, the kindred of the child should bring a piece of
money into the Aerarium of Juno Lucina; and so likewise into the Exchequer of
Venus Libitina when any died or came to age. This Custom, quite abolished, was
revived by Augustus Caesar at the birth of children: Lips. in Tacit.

Verse 109. Heir] A Roman could not be Heir to his Wife unless he had a Child
by her. And whereas Bachellors were fined for their contempt of Marriage:
Fathers had right to stand for civil Magistracy, to cast lots for Provinces,
and to be Heirs by Will. Tacit.

Verse 110. Caducum.] Caducum, by Cujacius out of Vlpian, is defined to be that
which is left to a person by Law capable to receive, but yet for some respects
devolves from him to the Exchequer after the Testators death. Of this there
were two sorts: The one, when the gift to an Heir or Legatee (that died before
the Testator, or opening of the Will) came to the Prince. This was enacted by
the Law Papia Popaea (made to supply Augustus Caesar with money, the public
Coffers being exhausted by the Civil Wars) and abrogated by Justinian: Lib. 6.
Cod. Justin. Tit. 1. The other sort was when the Prince had by the Law Julia
and Popaea that which was left by Will to such as were unmarried, if they did
not marry within ten days after the Testators death: And half that was so
conferred to such as was married, but had no Children, in case the man was 25
years of age, or the woman 20, except it was given by their Kindred, which
Cujacius thinks extended to the sixth degree. This Law was repealed by
Constantinus, Constantius and Constans: lib. 8. Cod. Justin. Tit. 58. And to
this the Poet here has reference. The Servant telling his Master, amongst
other good turns he had done him, that by him he was put in a condition to
receive.

-- Nec non and dulce Caducum.
The sweet Caducum too.
Verse 112. Three] Jus trium liberorum, The Law of three Children freed a man
from being Ward, gave him precedence in election to Offices in the
Commonwealth, trebbled his measure of Corn in the public allowance: this
Pliny the Consul obtained of the Emperor Trajan for his friend Tacitus: Plin.
Epist.

Verse 126. The Court of Mars.] The Areopagus; where those severest and most
just Judges the Areopagites gave sentence, and delivered their votes in
Characters and alphabeticall Letters, th theta signifying the Sentence of
death: and death it was to divulge the Votes by which that Sentence passed.
Some say it was called the Court of Mars, because Neptune in that Court accused
Mars for the murder of his Son: whereof he was acquitted by seven Votes of the
twelve Gods that were his Judges: Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 3 cap. 5. The first
Judgment of life and death was pronounced in the Areopagus: Plin. lib. 7. See
Jul. Pollux. lib. 8. de magist. Athen.

Verse 127. O fool! fool!] Juvenal's expression is, O Corydon! Corydon! so the
Romans called any dull Country-Lob.

Verse 145. Laufella.] The good Goddess was well served when the Offering was
made by Laufella, one of whose abominable drunken Pranks you hear of in Sat.
6. This Oblation was made for the People: Credat aliquis, etc. Some may believe
that bribes were given to the Judges before whom Clodius was arraigned, for the
Adultery which clearly he had committed with Caesar's wife, wherein he violated
the religion of that Sacrifice which they say is made for the People: At the
celebration whereof Men are so far from being admitted, that the very Pictures
of male creatures are covered. Senec. Epist. 98.

Verse 169. Lars.] See the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 176. Fabricius,] The Censor: Sat. 11. That to his own Colleague was so
severe: For he fined him because he found in his house illegal Plate, viz. a
silver-Vessel of ten pound weight: See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 177 Hackney-Maesians,] Chair bearers of Maesia, which the vanity of poor
Naevolus wishes for, that he might be carried in state to see the
Chariot-races, Stage Plays, and other recreations of the Circus.

Verse 184. Ulysses,] King of the Isles of Ithaca and Dulichium, Son to Laertes
and Anticlea; but some said his true Father was the Outlaw Sisyphus, that met
with his Mother as she went to be married with Laertes; or as others tell the
story, forced her after marriage, in her journey to the Oracle. Ajax in his
Plea objects this against Ulysses: Ovid. lib. 13. Met. jeering him with his
Sisyphian blood. Homer makes him a person of great prudence and experience. He
married Penelope Daughter to Icarus the Lacedaemonian. By her he had
Telemachus, and so doated on her, that when the Greek Princes engaged in the
war against Troy, he counterfeited madness, hoping they would leave him with
her, as useless for them. Therefore yoaking Beasts of different species, he
plowed the Sea-shoar, and sowed the sands with Salt. But Palamedes, to make
trial whether Ulysses were really mad or no, laid Telemachus in the furrow
before him, which he seeing, took off the Plough and balked his Child. Thus he
was drawn into the Association, where he served his Country with great
judgment and success. When Achilles passed for a Maid of honor in the Court
of King Lycomedes, Ulysses found him out; parted him and Princess Deidemia, and
brought him to a nobler Mistress, the War: many services he did of the like
nature, for without them the Oracle had pronounced, that Troy could not be
taken. He flattered Philoctetes to a disovery of the poisoned arrows of
Hercules, and brought him to the Leaguer before Troy. He stole away the ashes
of King Laomedon that were kept in the Town on the top of the Scaean-Port. He
with the help of Diomedes slew the Guard, and carried away the Palladium, the
Image of Pallas, being the Telesmaticall Safeguard of Troy. He was sent again
with Diomedes as a Spy into Thrace, where he killed the King, and brought away
his horses, before the Grooms watered them in the River Xanthus. About
victualling the Camp he had strange fallings out with Palamedes, and at last,
upon the credit of a false report raised by himself, he got his old discoverer
stoned to death. When Achilles was slain, in the Judgment for hearing and
determining the right to his Arms, both he and Ajax pleading their own Causes,
Sentence passed for Ulysses. When Troy was taken, he slew Orsilochus Son to the
King of Creet, that would have abridged him of his just share in the plunder of
the Town. He put to death Polyxena at the Tomb of Achilles; and when he took
shipping for Ithaca, made the Keepers of Astyanax (Son to Hector) break the
Child's neck from the top of a Tower. But a Voyage so bloodily begun must needs
be improsperous. After some crosses at Sea, he was cast by a storm upon the
coast of Sicily, where with twelve of his men he entered the Den of Polyphemus;
and when that Cyclops had devoured six of them, Ulysses burning out his eye as
aforesaid, he and the rest, wrapped in Ram-skins, escaped. Then landing in
Aeolia, Aeolus gave him a Wind in a bag: but when it had carried him within ken
of Ithaca; his Mates, taking it to be a bag of Gold, opened it, and the VVind
that came out drive him back again into Aeolia. From thence he passed to the
Laestrygons or Canibals that eat men, and so to Circe that transformed his men
into beasts: but Mercury gave him a counter-spell, and confiding in the virtue
of it, he boldly came up to Circe, drew his sword, and forced her to restore
his Mates to their own shapes. Then, captivated with Circe's beauty, he staid
with her a whole year, and had by her a Son named Telegonus. Hesiod affirms
that she brought him other two, Arius and Latinus. At last, with much
unwillingness, she dismissed him. After performance of certain ceremonies he
went down into Elysium, and there from the mouth of his Mother Anticlea, and
from Elpenor, and the blind Prophet Teresias, was instructed in future events.
Returning again into this world, and to his Mistress Circe, he gave the rites
of burial to the body of Elpenor, that in his drink had fallen from a Ladder
and broke his neck. Afterward he sailed by the Isle of the Sirens, and for
fear their sweet singing might inchant his men, he appointed them to stop their
ears with wax, and commanded that he himself should be tied to the main Mast:
So with much difficulty passing the Straights of Scylla and Charybdis, that set
their Barking Dogs upon him, he arrived in Sicily, where Phaethusa and
Lampetia, Daughters to Phoebus, kept their Fathers Flocks, which he charged his
men not to meddle with. But whilst he slept; his Mates, compelled by hunger and
persuaded by Eurylochus, killed a great sort of the sheep; for which they paid
their lives in a wrack at Sea, not a man in the Ship escaping but only Ulysses;
that, bestrid a Mast, and was by the wind and waves for nine days together
tossed to and fro: at length, being cast upon the Isle of Ogygia, the Nymph
Calypso gave him kind reception: seven years he staid with her, in which time
she had two Sons by him, Nausithous and Nausinous: Hesiod. Into Ogygia Jupiter
sent Mercury to tell the Goddess Calypso, that she must no longer detain
Ulysses. Once again he put to Sea, but when he was in sight of Corcyra,
inhabited by the Phaeacks, Neptune raised a storm that split his Ship; and he
had perished, if Leucothoe in pity had not helped him to a Plank, which he
held by, till he came safe to shore in one of the Phaeack Havens. There he hid
his nakedness amongst the bushes, but was found out and clothed by Nausica,
Daughter to Alcinous King of that Island; where, by the artifice of Pallas, he
was brought to Queen Arete that gave him a Ship manned for service. The Master
landed him in Ithaca, and not being able to wake him according, to his
Commission, laid a great deal of treasure by him, and left him in a dead sleep:
but Pallas quickly roused him, and put him into a beggars habit. In that pickle
he came to his Neat-herds, and found his Son Telemachus amongst them. In this
disguise he was brought to his house by his Hogherd Eumaeus, where, after many
affronts put upon him by his Wife's impudent Suitors, his Nurse Euriclea knew
him. Lastly, his Son Telemachus and two of his Neat-heards assisting, he fell
upon the pretenders to Penelope, slew them all, and then discovered himself to
her. But forewarned by the Oracle that his Son should kill him, he resolved to
leave his Court and lurk in the Woods: mean time Telegonus, his Son by Circe,
desirous to see his Father, made a voyage to Ithaca: but being a stranger to
the Servants of Ulysses, most uncivilly they would have shut the gates against
him and his followers, that disputed their entrance; in the tumult by mere
chance Telegonus shot his Father with a poisoned arrow, dipped in the blood of
the Fish Trygon.

The tenth Design.
HEar prayers returned, in the Pantheon made.
Wealth 1 Plutus 2 send me; for what have thou prayed?
Fool for thy death; with Gemmes thy 3 Golden-cup
Shall sparkle, but with poison be filled up.
O 4 Jove! I would be great: 5 Sejanus, thou
To awe the World shall bend the second brow:
Till Rome, that feared thy 6 Statues, laugh to see
Them dragged as Traitors through the Streets with thee.
I would be eloquent, sweet 7 Pallas; so
Thou shall, to admiration, 8 Cicero:
But dear this pray'd-for eloquence shall cost,
When, for thy tongue, thy hand 9 and head is lost.
For Conquest, Spoil and Triumph, 01 Mars, I kneel:
The arm of 11 Caesar the whole World shall feel;
And he, what every noble soul abhorres,
The bloody hands of base 12 Conspirators.
Of 13 Time I beg long life: Had Pompey died
A young man, how had he been glorified:
Now in perfidious Egypt he lies dead,
His aged 14 body severed from his head.
Make 15 this a Beauty, 16 Venus; Fair and Chaste
Shall 17 Lucrece be, but yet by Rape disgraced.


Figura Decima.
AUdi, vota Deos quam perniciosa fatigant!
O mihi fundat 1 opes Plutus 2; delire, quid optas?
Splendidius fatum: flammas imitante Pyropo
Aureus extra ardet Crater 3; intusque veneno.
Jupiter 4, esse velim magnus; Sejane 5, secundum
Far supercilium Te fassus contremit orbis:
Mox, cultae genibus, Statuae 6 calcantur, and uncis
Cum Domino lacerae, debent ludibria vulgo.
Fac me facundum Pallas 7; prece diva movetur;
Eloquio pleni moderatur frena theatri
Tullius 8: at magno venit Facundia; solam
Ob linguam, rostris affixa caputque 9 manusque.
Da spolia, and pompam rogo te, Gradive 10, triumphi;
Ad sua devictos deducit flagra Quirites
Caesar 11: at in medio (quod men's generosior horret)
In conjurantum medio cadit Ipse 12 senatu.
Da multos, Saturn 13, dies; juvenilibus annis
Pompeius salvos inter cecidisset honores:
Nunc jacet Aegypti pudor, and sine marmore Magnus;
Truncatus 14 collum Titulis Senioque verendum.
Nata 15 sit haec formosa, 16 Venus; Lucretia 17 pulcra es,
Castaque, at invitam Te laedit crimine Raptor.
The Manners of Men. THE TENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
For Wealth, Power, Eloquence, success
In War, Long-life and Handsomness
We pray; which if the Gods bestow,
Our ruin to our prayers we owe.
What then befits us to receive,
We to the Powers divine must leave;
And, shunning riot, wisely live:
This blessing we our selves may give.
IN all the earth; from Cales Westward, to the streams
Of Ganges, gilded with the morning beams,
To few men Good and Ill unmaskt appear.
For, what with reason do we hope or fear?
What have thou by thy happy'st project gained,
But thou repent'st thy pains, and wish obtained?
Whole houses the easy Gods have overthrown,
Granting their prayers that did those houses own.
In Peace and War that is sought, we should avoid:
How many have pure Eloquence destroyed?
He vainly shortened his life's hopeful length,
By trusting to his more then humane strength.
What multitudes have toiled to meet their fate,
Gathering vast sums: which now the best estate
Falls as far short of, as our Dolphins fail
To match the hugeness of the British Whale.
LONGINUS was girt therefore, by command
From NERO, with the whole Praetorian Band.
SENECA'S Gardens, like his riches, great:
And the fair Lat'ran buildings were beset
By all the Guards too; but in that sad time,
Seldom the Soldiers did poor Garrets clime.
If thou, in the night season, travell'st late,
And carry'st but a little silver plate,
Thou fear the sword and club; thy faint heart quakes
At every reed, whose shade by Moon-night shakes.
The poor wayfaring man, that does not bring
A charge along, before the thief will sing.
The first prayer, made to almost all the powers;
Is wealth, that our stock may increase, that our's
In all the Exchange may be the best filled Trunk:
But out of earthen pots no poyson's drunk;
Fear that when thou rich Setin Wine do hold
Sparkling midst Diamonds in a boll of Gold.
How like it now; that one of the Sages stepped
Ore's threshold laughing still; and the other wept.
But laughter's easy, any may deride:
It Is strange whence moisture the other's eyes supplied.
DEMOCRITUS, that laugh't his lungs sore, there
Where no Pretexta Trabeae; Fasces were,
Closs chair, high Throne, had burst sure, had he gazed
Upon our Praetor, in his Chariot raised,
Amid'st' the dusty Circus, in JOVE'S gown:
In his Robe Royal, wearing a great Crown,
An Orb which scarce one ATLAS can support:
Therefore a Crown-bearer sweats soundly for it;
And lest the Consul his high thoughts might wrong,
That Slave in the same Chariot rides along.
Then the Eagle must, from's Ivory Scepter, soar:
Here Cornets sound, there long troops ride before,
With him white Romans, in whose pockets lurks
The Almes-basket, which on their good natures works.
He then found matter to deride all those
He met withal; whose mighty judgment shows,
Brave men, Examples which the world adorn,
May in dull climes and grosser air be born.
The bus'nesses of men, their joys and fears
He laughed at, and sometimes their very tears:
A halter on proud Fortune he bestowed,
And when she frowned, his middle finger showed.
Whilst to the Gods wax't knees vain Man repairs,
With his superfluous or destructive Prayers.
Power, subject to great envy, ruins some;
Long rolls of glorious names, from whence they come:
Or those achieved, which did their triumphs crown.
Brass Statues follow Ropes that pulled them down;
Their Chariot-wheels groan under the Axes stroke,
And even their inn'cent horses legs are broke:
The fire to crackling flames the bellows turns;
The head, adored by the people, burns:
The great SEJANUS melts; and of that face,
Which in the whole world had the second place,
Basins and Ewres, Pots, Frying-pans are made.
Thy house, this day, let solemn Laurel shade,
Drag to the Capitol a milk-white Bull;
Behold SEJANUS through the streets they pull,
The people shout, to see him dragged with hooks:
What lips he has? how like a rogue he looks?
Trust me, I never could that man abide;
But what crime? who informed? who testified?
No such thing; a long-worded Letter came
From Capreae: good; I no more Queries frame.
What do the rabble all this while? they run
Along with fortune, as the ave ever done,
And hate condemned men. That very hour
Had NURTIA smiled upon her Tuscan's power,
And he surpised the old Prince, by trust beguiled,
Those Rascals had SEJANUS CAESAR styled.
E're since we left the selling of our voice,
We take no care; the rout, that once made choice
Of Consuls, Praetors, Tribunes, what it pleased,
Is long ago of all that trouble eased:
And only, with perplexed devotion, prays
For two things, Bread and the Circensian Plays.
Hark how they whisper, shall he die alone?
No sure, that great fire's made for more then one.
At MARS his altar (may the omen fail)
I met BRUTIDIUS, and my friend looked pale.
Pray heaven our mighty AJAX do not kill
Those that were for him, should his cause go ill:
Then, whilst he lies upon the brink, lets go
Full speed, and trample upon CAESAR'S foe:
But let our Men see it, lest on us they fall,
And to the Bar their pinioned Masters call.
News of SEJANUS thus went up and down;
These were the secret murmers of the Town.
Would be SEJANUS? courted at his rate?
A Consul this, a Tribune him create?
Be the Emp'ror's Tutor, that in Capreae sits
Throned on a Rock amongst his Chaldaean Wits?
Would have the horse and foot serve under thee,
And Captain of the Praetorian Lifeguard be?
Why should thou not desire it? those that would
Act no foul mischief, do yet wish they could.
Is there in Greatness so much Good as will
But only serve to counterpoise the Ill?
Would be with that dragged Traytor's Purple graced?
Or be at Gabii or Fidenae placed?
Break small pots, judgment of false measures give?
At poor Ulubrae a patcht Aedile live?
SEJANUS therefore never understood,
You must confess, true and essential Good,
But much too wealthy, much too potent grown,
Pil'd Tower on Tower, whence he was headlong thrown:
Whom fortune did to that strange height entice,
To make his fall more horrid by his rise.
What o'rethrew CRASSUS, conquered POMPEY caught?
And him, that to his whips slav'd Romans brought?
Even Supreme Power: got by arts strangely odd,
And Prayers heard by some malignant God.
To CERES Son in law but few go down
In peace that wear, none that usurp, a Crown.
At TULLY'S and DEMOSTHENES his fame:
Boys in MINERVA'S five days feast do aim.
And of their penny-PALLAS Rhet'rick crave,
Waited upon by the small Satchel's Slave.
Yet both these Orators their Tongues struck dead;
His wit cost CICERO his Hand and Head:
Such barbarous cruelty who ever saw
Done on a duller practicer at Law.
O happy Rome! when I was Consul born.
ANTONY'S sword he might have laughed to scorn,
If he had still thus Poetiz'd. I pray
The Lady-Muses, that I rather may
The Author of ridic'lous Poems be,
Second divine Philippick then of thee.
The Athenian wonder too was put to death,
That ruled the people with his powerful breath,
Got when the Fates were froward, Gods unkind:
Whom's Father, with the smoaky forge half blind,
From blows on sooty VULCAN'S Anvill spent
In ham'ring swords, to study Rhet'rick sent.
The man of Wood that spoils in triumph bears,
A Helmet broke, Breast battered, dangling Ears;
Horses that draw a Pole-lesse Chariot,
Streamers from Galleys in a Sea Fight got:
And a sad Captive set a-top of all;
These more than humane blessings Soldiers call.
These the Greek, Roman, Barbarous Generals sought,
And with so many wounds and dangers bought;
Virtue is so much less beloved then Fame:
For, bate reward, who will at Virtue aim?
Hence, have some few sunk Nations with their pride,
That glorious titles might there ashes hide,
Which the wild fig tree springing breaks away:
For tombs themselves the power of Fate obey.
Weigh HANNIBAL, how many pounds can find
In that great Gen'rall's body now? whose mind,
Not Africa washed with the Atlantic Main,
Nor where warm Nilus bounds it, could contain.
He to his Elephants and Aethiops
Joined Spain: passed over the Pyrene Mountain tops;
Though Nature the Alps and Snow, as bars, had laid:
Through Rocks with Vinegar his way he made.
Now Italy is his; he will yet march on:
There is, says his proud Soldier, nothing done,
Unless my Carthaginians storm the Town,
And in the Suburra set my Standard down.
O! how would the one-ey'd Gen'ral's picture, took,
Riding on his Getulian Monster, look.
What Is the end? O glory! he that so far spread
His conquests, vanquished, into exile fled,
Must (great strange Waiter) part of the Presence make,
Till the Bythinian Tyrant please to wake.
That life, which threatened the earth with change of States,
Nor sword, nor dart, nor rocky mountain dates,
But the revenge of Cannae, for that Spring
Of Roman blood, was a poor little Ring.
Go climb the horrid Alps vainglorious fool,
To please the boys, and be their Theme at School.
The Youth, that honored PELLA with his birth,
Vexed at one world, coop't up in the narrow earth,
As if the rocks of GYARUS walled him in,
Or as he had in closs Seriphus bin,
When he a Conqu'rours entrance had compelled
To brick-wall'd Babylon, one Coffin held.
Death does alone deal plainly, and declare
What things of nothing humane bodies are.
We may believe, what was believed of old,
That ships put in at Athos: and what bold
And lying Greece on history imposed,
XERXES that Mountain with his Fleet enclosed:
That over the sollid Sea by Coach he past;
Drank up whole Rivers, when he broke his fast:
And all that hovering with her drunken wings,
The Muse of SOSTRATUS the Poet sings.
But how from Salamin returned he shipped,
Whose barbarous pride the East and Northwest whipped,
Never in AEOLUS his jayle so paid?
That fetters on the Earth-shaker NEPTUNE laid,
And 'twas done gently that he spared his brand:
What God would not serve under his command?
But how returned he? in a bark he fled,
Sailing in blood: retarded by the dead,
Whose bodies to arrest his flight did swim;
Thus so much courted Glory punished him.
Grant health, O JUPITER, grant length of days;
Thus the fresh youth, thus the old and sickly prays.
But how great constant ills do old men brook,
How ugly, how unlike themselves they look?
Instead of skin, they have a nasty hide;
Sagg'd cheeks, wherein such wrinkles are descried,
As when through Tabraca's thick woods we shape
Our course, we see scratcht in an old she-Ape.
There Is something still that diff'rences the young;
This then that fairer, He then he more strong:
The old have one face; the same Palsy makes
Their voices tremble, which their body shakes:
Their Heads an aged fall o'th Leaf disclose,
And the infancy of a still-dropping Nose.
Disarmed of Teeth, this chawes with only Gums;
And to Wife, Children, and himself becomes
So loathsome; as the sight turns COSSUS blood,
That brings him presents of the rarest food.
Nor in his meat, or Wine, does the ancient gust,
Rejoice his duller Pallat: and for lust,
A long Oblivion cancells those Essays,
A Nerve lies couchant which no art can raise.
Indeed; what faith, a comfortable effect,
From weak gray-hair'd PRIAPUS, can expect?
Besides; though he may lust, he cannot love,
Shall VENUS, without strength to please her, move.
The suffering of another part now see,
In rarely well-set Airs what joy takes he:
Although SELEUCUS sing them to his Lute,
Or the fine Player in his golden Suit?
What matter where of the Stage he sits; whose ear
Can scarce the Cornets, or the trumpets hear;
Whose loud-tongu'd Boy the very house must rock,
To make him know who is come, or what is a Clock:
A Fever only warming the no blood
In his cold body: which has such a flood,
Of all kind of diseases, that to tell
Their very names, I might sum up as well
How many Youths got OPPIA'S good will,
What Patients THEMISON did one Autumn kill;
What friends to Rome by BASIL cheated were
Abroad, by HIRRUS what poor Orphans here:
What men long MAURA in one day enjoyes,
Or the base Schoolmaster HAMILLUS, boys.
Sooner might my Arithmetic avow,
How many Manors he is Lord of now,
That, when my youthful beard did trimming crave,
Correction with his nimble Sizzers gave.
This loses the use of shoulders, that of thighs,
He of his hips; and he of both his eyes,
Envy'ng the pur-blind: the fresh colour's fled
From's lips, and those with other's hands are fed.
He, at the sight of supper, wont to fall
A yawning, gapes and gapes, and that is all.
So gape young Swallows, to bring whose supplies,
With her mouth full, their fasting Mother flies.
But loss of all his members equals not
His loss of senses, that has quite forgot
His servants names, nor his friend's countenance knows,
Nor who 'twas supt with him last night, nor those
He got and bred, though now his Will declare
Them strangers, making PHIALE his heir;
For her warm breath, a trick that she did use,
For many years together, in the Stews.
But, if he have his senses, yet he must
Be forced to lay his Children in the dust,
With his fair Sister's ashes fill an Urn;
Give order for the fire too, that must burn
His Brother's body, and his dearest Wife:
This penance all must do that have long life;
They must new fun'rals of their house behold,
And in perpetual grief and blacks grow old.
King NESTOR did (if faith to thee we give,
Great HOMER) nearest to the Raven live;
Blessed sure, to be so many ages old
That he his years upon his right hand told;
And drank so often wine in the Must? but stay
A while before you judge, and mark, I pray,
How he complain's of Fates too kind decrees,
Of too much thread they spun him, when he sees
His son ANTILOCHUS his beard on fire;
He then, of all about him, did inquire,
What 'twas should him to so long life engage?
What he had ever done deserved that age?
So PELEUS raves for his ACHILLES slain:
He for ULYSSES wandering on the main.
PRIAM (Troy safe) had his last progress made
In state unto ASSARACUS his shade.
HECTOR, his subjects weeping and forlorn,
With all his brothers had the body born.
CASSANDRA first her funeral tears had spent,
And then POLIXENA her garments rent:
If he had died before his son's foul guilt,
Ere wanton Paris his bold ships had built.
What did long life confer? a sight oth' fall
Of Asia, fire and sword destroying all.
Then, for his Crown, the old trembling Soldier took
A helmet, and at great JOVE'S Altar struck,
Fell like an Ox, in his old age despised,
And by the ungrateful Plough-man sacrificed.
Yet PRIAM died a Man; but his old Wife
Survived a Bitch, and bark't away her life.
I come to our own stories: passing by
The Pontick King, and SOLON'S wise reply;
That would not CRAESUS should his fortune praise,
Until the close and evening of his days.
This caused the exile, and imprisonment
Of MARIUS: made him, in old age, content
In the Minturnian Fens to hide his head,
And even in conquered Carthage to beg bread.
What parallel in nature had there been?
What happier Roman had Rome ever seen?
If when, in all the pomp of war, he past
Our streets with crowds of Captives, and at last
Came from's Teutonick Chariot to alight:
Then his triumphant soul had took her flight.
To POMPEY provident Campania gave
A timely fever; but, his life to save,
In many Cities public Prayers were made,
The Conqueror preserved, to be betrayed
When conquered, by ROMES fortune and his own;
His Head cut off, a punishment unknown
To our most dangerous Delinquents: thus
CETHEGUS suff'red not, nor LENTULUS;
Even CATILIN, that to her fun'rall fire
Had destined Rome, came to his own entire.
To VENUS, in her Temple, for fine Boys
The zealous Mother prays, with lesser noise:
But prays aloud for Girls exactly fair,
Each nicetie remembered in her prayer.
Why laugh'st thou at her zeal; the Deifi'd
And fair DIANA was LATONA'S pride?
But the fair LUCRECE, and her fatal rape,
Incourages no one to wish her shape.
VIRGINIA RUTILA'S buncht back would show:
And her sweet Eyes on RUTILA bestow.
Fair Creatures are by trembling Parents watch't;
So seldom beauty is with virtue matched.
But if mean houses virtuous breeding give,
Where, like the old Sabines, poor and chaste they live:
If over rebelling blood a grave command
Be given to youth by nature's lib'rall hand:
And nature can do more then breeding can,
Or Tutors; the boy never shall be a man:
For even to tempt the Parents some are bold,
Such is their courage that come armed with gold.
The Tyrant NERO, to an Evnuch's place
Advanced no club-foot, nor ill favored face:
Nor worthy of that sad preferment held
Those, that had necks, or backs, or bellyes sweld.
Now in thy handsome sons and daughters joy;
Which, because handsome, greater woes annoy:
He shall be the Town-prostitute, and fear
What wives expect from husbands most severe:
Nor can his Stars for so good fortune look,
That he should never in MARS his nets be took:
Where VULCAN'S rage will reason more control
Then any passion that invades the soul.
Some GANYMEDS are stabbed, some whipped to death,
And the live-Mullet enters some beneath:
But thy ENDYMION shall have her he loves;
Straight, when with powerful gold SERVILIA moves,
He shall have her he hates: her gowns shall fly
To sale, she will nothing to her lust deny.
Rich OPPIA and poor CATULLA too,
When they do long for it, will like women do.
But how can beauty hurt the Chaste? What good
Came to BELLEROPHON by's governed blood?
HIPPOLITUS, by's Mistress was perplexed,
PHAEDRA no less then STENOBAEA vexed:
The edge of woman's wrath is then most keen,
When a repulse adds blushes to her spleen.
Would thou have him, whom CAESAR'S wife will choose
Co-husband, to accept, or to refuse?
This great Patrician, young and handsome; dies
For being such in MESSALINA'S eyes.
She long has sat in her bright veil; her bed
With nuptial purple (in a garden) spread:
Ten thousands told, the customary sum;
The public Notaries and the Auspex come.
She thinks this secret witnessed by too few,
She Will marry publicly; Sir, what say you?
Deny to do it, and HYMEN'S tapers burn,
That from her bed shall light thee to thy urne:
Consent, and thou shall gain a little time,
Till the news fill the City, till the crime
Arrive the People; and the Princ's ear,
Who, last, the blemish of his house shall hear.
If then a few days life thou so approv'st,
Obey; but whether thy own youth thou love,
Or on her beauty doat'st, not only thou,
But she her fair neck to the Axe must bow.
Shall man then pray for nothing? If I may
Advise thee, let the Gods thy wishes weigh;
Unto their Providence thy Will submit,
And for what is sweet, they will give thee what is fit:
And that which thy condition most behooves.
The Gods love Man more then himself he loves.
Transported with a blind self-love, we crave
That all of us may Wives and Children have:
But to the Omniscient Deity, alone,
What Wives, what Children we shall have, is known.
Yet, that for Sacrifice thou may prepare
Thy white hog, and for something make thy prayer.
Pray, that the Gods be graciously inclined,
To grant thee health of body, and of mind.
Ask a strong soul that may death's terror scorn,
And think, to die, as good as to be born:
As great a gift of nature. That no cross
Can daunt, that knows no passion, fears no loss:
That HERCULES his labors can digest
Far better then SARDANAPALUS feast,
His Wenches, or his Feather-beds. I show
What thou thy self may on thy self bestow.
Virtue's the path to Peace. If Prudence be,
There can be no Divinity in thee
Fortune: it is we, we to thy Power have given
The name of Goddess, and placed thee in heaven.
The Comment UPON THE TENTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Cales,] Anciently Erythia, afterward Gades, two Islands beyond the
Confines of the Boetick Province, the farthest West of any part of the World
discovered to the Romans. These lay without the Sraits of Gibraltar, that
divide Europe from Africa: Plin. lib. 4. cap. 22. They were called Erythia from
the Tyrians, bordering upon the Erythraean Sea, that built a City in these
Isles. The Romans named them Gades: both are now one Island, called Caliz by
the Spaniards; and Cales by the English, that had power within the memory of
man to have given it what name they pleased: for in the year 1596 this Isle was
taken, and the City sacked by the Earls of Essex and Nottingham, and Sir Walter
Rawleigh Knight, sent thither with a Fleet to revenge the Spaniards invasion of
England in 88. In this Isle the grass is so rank, that Cows milk will make no
Cheese, nor come to curds, unless it be diluted with a great deal of water. It
is likewise credibly reported, that Cattle which Graziers feed there, if they
bleed them not within 30 days, will be sure to die of fat. This was the reason
why the Poets invented their Fables of Geryon's Droves taken by Hercules, that
once had a Temple in this Isle; wherein are now two old Castles, called Torres
de Hercules. See Strab. lib. 3.

Verse 2. Ganges,] The greatest River in the East: it cuts through the Indies.
The Greeks by another name call it Phison. The holy Scripture numbers it
amongst the Rivers that issue out of Paradise. The Springs that contribute to
Ganges are not known, but 30 Rivers flow into it. It is 8000 paces over where
it is narrowest, where it is broadest 20000, and where it is shallowest 100
foot deep. It had the name from Ganges King of Aethiopia. Suid.

Verse 11. He.] Milo, a Champion born in Italy at Cr^ton, where so many
Champions were bred, that in one of the Olympic Games all the Conquerors were
Crotonians: so that 'twas a Proverb, The worst Crotonian is better then the
best Grecian. He was a man of more then humane strength; for in the Olympic
Exercises he carried a Bull a furlong and never stopped to breathe: When he set
the Bull down, with his hand he struck him stark dead, and the same day eat him
up. No man living could wrest an apple out of his hand; nor was able, when he
stood still, to remove his foot. Yet presuming too much upon his strength, he
would needs try if he could rend in sunder a tree, which age or accident had
cleft as it grew in the Forest: at first it yielded to his violence, but
presently closed again, and catching his hands in a trap, held him till the
Wolves devoured him. Cic. Val. Max.

Verse 17. Longinus.] C. Cassius Longinus, the great Civil Lawyer, to whom
Caligula married Drusilla. Nero commanded his eyes to be put out, and then gave
him but an hour to prepare for death. His pretended Crime was, for having in
his Bedchamber the Image of Cassius, one of Julius Caesar's Assassinates: but
that which really made him a Delinquent was his wealth.

Verse 19. Seneca.] See the Comment upon Sat. 5. This most learned and good
man, after the death of Burrhus, was criminated by Foenius Ruffus and
Tigillinus, for improving his fortunes beyond the limits of a private person:
and they likewise informed, that in the sweetness of his Gardens and
magnificence of his Villaes he exceeded the Prince himself. For this he was put
to death by his ungrateful Pupil Nero. vid. Tacit. lib. 14.

Verse 20. Lateran Buildings.] The house of Plautius Lateranus, designed
Consul, that by Nero's command was apprehended by the Praetorian Cohort for one
of Piso's Conspiracy, and his Children not so much as permitted to take their
leaves of him before his death. Tacit. lib 15.

Verse 22. Poor Garrets,] Where Beggars had their habitation: Sat. 3: But thou,
three stories high, unwarn'd art took.

Verse 33. Rich Setin Wine.] How precious a Wine it was, appears by the long
keeping of it in Virro's Cellar at Rome: Sat. 5.

From the Albane or the Setine hills, next day,
He something drinks, whose age has took away
The dusty Hogshead's Date and Climate. --
Verse 35. One of the Sages.] Democritus of Abdera, the laughing Philosopher,
that being asked why he did nothing but laugh, answered, he could not help it,
having for his Object Man, full of Ignorance; that does and does, and nothing
does he do: all his designs clearly proving, that he never comes to the years
of discretion; but growing a Child again, kills himself with superfluous care
and toil. But sorrow never came near his cheerful heart, otherwise he would
not have lived to be a hundred and nine years old. His opinion was, That all
things are composed of Atoms, and that there are many Worlds and all
corruptible. From the Magi, Chaldaeans and Gymnosophists he learned Astrology
and Theology. He was so great a Philosopher, that he was called Pentathlos,
viz. a Champion at five Exercises; Naturals, Morals, Mathematics, the liberal
Sciences, and all the Arts. To attain his knowledge he traveled, and so spent
all the wealth left him by his Father, a man so rich that he feasted Xerxes and
his whole Army. After his return to Abdera, he lived in very great poverty in a
Garden house, near the walls of the Town; where, resolving to spend the rest of
his life in Contemplation, he burned out his sight with the reflection of the
Sun from a brass Basin. Laert.

Verse 36. The other wept.] Heraclitus of Ephesus, the weeping Philosopher,
that is said never to have gone over his threshold into the street with dry
eyes. For, as Democritus always laughed, because he believed all our actions
to be folly: so Heraclitus ever wept, because he thought them to be misery. In
his old age he fell into a dropsy, and slighting the Physicians Art, which he
said could never make a moist part dry, he cased himself in Cows dung, but
whilst he lay drying in the Sun, he fell asleep, and Dogs tore out his throat.
Some say he was never taught, but came to all his learning by nature and
industry: others say he heard Zenocrates, and Hippasus the Pythagorian. He
flourished in the time of the last Darius. He left many Poems; and is often
quoted by Aristotle: his Philosophical Works were very obscure, which gave him
the title of the Dark Philosopher.

Verse 40. Praetexta.] Read the original and description of this Gown in the
Comment upon Sat. 5. I shall only add, that in the first institution the
Priests likewise wore it, with the same privilege wherewith some Christian
Orders wear their habits at this day: for, till it was pulled off, Sentence of
condemnation could not pass against the Priests.

Verse 40. Trabeae.] The Trabeae were of three sorts, the first a Gown woven
all of Purple, and consecrated to the Gods: such was the Robe before mentioned,
viz. Jove's Gown. The second was the Robe Royal here named, worn by Kings and
Consuls, made of Purple interwoven with White. The third was the Augure's
habit, Scarlet woven with Purple: Serve. Aen. lib. 7. Alexand. ab. Alex. Gen
Dier. lib. 5 cap. 18.

Verse 41. High Throne.] My Author here describes the Consul, and likewise
calls him Praetor, because in his absence the Praetor, that set forth the
Circensian Plays, sat mounted up as Lord of the Circus: Sat. 11. -- Great
Cybel's Towell is hung out;
And to her solemn Plays the Town's devout:
Where that great Horse-stealer, the Praetor, sits
As if he triumphed. --
But now the Consul takes his place, and comes into the Circus in the State and
Habiliments of a King, as appears by his Ushers with the Fasces or Ensigns of
death, and by his Trabea, Crown, and Scepter headed with the Roman Eagle carved
in Ivory. For the perfecting of this description, I place him in a Throne not a
Tribunal, because he could not use his Chariot-Chair in the Circus as a
Judgment Seat, but as a Chair of State, whereon he might sit to behold the
Gladiators, as you see him figured in the Design before Sat. 2.

Verse 45. Atlas.] When the Consul, in this Mock-triumph, was no longer able to
bear that Celestial Orb of his massy Crown, he had an Atlas to support it, a
Slave, that having taken the Crown, seemed to be as great a man as his Master.
Triumphanti, etc. when a Hetruscan Crown of Gold was held behind the back of
him that triumphed, and yet wore an Iron Ring upon his finger: the Conqueror
and the Slave that bore the Crown, were equals in their fortunes. Plin. lib.
33. In these sports it was the Slaves office to cry aloud to the Consul, Look
behind you Sir, Remember you are a man.

Verse 52. Almes-Basket.] The Consul's two Sportulaes, the meat and
Money-basket which obliged the attendance of his Clients in white Robes not as
Candidati (for 'twas long before this time that suitors to the People stood in
white) but as men of eminence and employment in the Empire, as if they were
principal Secretaries to a King. Fenest. de Mag. Romans cap. 3.

Verse 56. Dull climes.] Abdera, where Democritus was born, stood in the
Barbarous Country of Thrace.

Verse 60. Middle-finger] The infamous finger, which pointing at a Roman, gave
him the affront now ^^^red by (...) enemy that cries Cazzo.

Verse 61. Waxed knees.] The Heathens, (...) their Gods should not forget their
Prayers, they writ them down, and fastened them to the worshipped Images, which
had their Knees (the Seat of Mercy) waxed over, purposely to make the paper
stick.

Verse 66. Statues.] If a man were condemned for Tyranny, Treason, or any Crime
of the like nature, his name was crossed out of the Roman Calendar or Records,
and his Statues broken. This was done either by Decree of Senate, or by the
fury of the People. See Tacit. Annal. 6. and Plin. in his Panegyric.

Verse 71. Great Sejanus.] Aelius Sejanus, Son to Seius Strabo. In his youth he
followed C. Caesar, Nephew to Augustus. By many artifices he wrought upon
Tiberius, so as that subtle Prince, closs to all others, lay open to him. He
had a strong body and a confident spirit; secret in his own actings; an
Informer against others; equally proud and flattering; seemingly modest; really
ambitious; to which end he sometimes made use of bounty, but most commonly of
industry and circumspection, mediums alike dangerous, when a Crown is the
Design. At his first coming to be Captain of the Emperor's Lifeguard, the
Praetorian Cohort, his forces were not considerable; but he made them so, by
bringing his Praetorians (that were before quartered severally, and as he said
grew debosht) into a body, and fixing them in a standing Camp, that they might
be ready to act when they received his Orders; and that a view of their number
and strength, might beget confidence in them, fear in others. He had no sooner
entrenched, but he crept into the hearts of the Soldiers, with going to them,
calling them by their names, and giving them hopes of preferment, he being
commissioned to name his own Officers. He likewise omitted not, either to court
the Senate, or to advance his friends to honors and offices; which Tiberius
was so far from disliking, that in the Senate House he commended Sejanus as his
laborious Partner, gave him the second place in the Empire by making him his
own perpetual Colleague, and suffered his Images to be set up in the Theaters
and public Meeting-places, and to be carried in the Ensigns of the Legions.
But the Masterpiece of his policy was, to ingratiate himself with Livia, wife
to Drusus heir apparent to the Empire. This Lady, Sister to Germanicus, was
very ill favored when she was a Girl, afterward proved a beauty: nothing was
unhandsome in her but her heart, of which she robbed her husband, to bestow it
upon her servant; and left a noble certainty for a base hope, that is, to be
Empress to Sejanus; when the sky should fall, and he trample upon all Caesar's
numerous Relations. Yet Livia in some particulars like to Hippia. Sat. 6.
Regardless of her Husband's reputation.
The honor of her Brother, House and Nation,
Forsook her crying Babes. --
and prostituted, together with her self, the other Chamber-secrets of her
Lord, that in private often said, It seems Caesar has a Co-adjutor whilst his
Son is living: this was a dash upon the mouth with his tongue, whereof Sejanus
was more sensible, then of the other given him by Drusus with his hand, which
he returned with a speeding revenge. For he put away his wife Apicata, to make
way for Livia: and she to requite him, poisoned her husband Tacit. l. 4.
Tiberius being then at Capreae, had intelligence of all his practices, and by
his death prevented his own murder. Treason is like the Cockatrice's eyes:
For, seeing first it kills, first seen it dies.
From Capreae the Emperor writ to the Senate (...) the Letter was read, and it
was a long one. But the Lords made short work: for immeniately the Tribunes and
their Soldiers encompassed and bound him; then Sentence passing in the House,
they dragged him to the Gemoniae, where he was flung down. Dion. Cass. The
ignominious manner of his execution, how his Statues were pulled down, and
dragged through the Streets of Rome, I need not add; you have an exact
description of it in this Satyr.

Verse 74. Laurel.] Upon great feast days, the Romans dressed up their houses
with boughs and wreaths of Laurel: and what day should they keep more holy,
then Caesar's day of deliverance from Sejanus? therefore they encourage one
another to sacrifice unto Jupiter Capitoline a Bull, as white as he himself
was, when he carried Europa upon his back. And this Bull was to be haled with
ropes through the streets of Rome to the Capitol: as the body of Sejanus was
dragged, with hooks, thrust into his throat to the Scalae Gemoniae, the
Gemonian Stairs, where malefactors had their thigh-bones broken, and were then
burned to ashes. Coel. Rod. l. 10. c. 5.

Verse 82. Capreae,] An Isle about 8 miles beyond the City of Surrentum in
Campania. Nothing in this Isle could invite Tiberius Caesar but only Solitude,
or that he might the freelier enjoy Thrasillus and the rest of his Chaldaean
Astrologers; unless his Majesty had loved Quales, wherewith the place abounds.

Verse 86. Nurtia.] The Goddess of Thuscany, where Sejanus was born, at
Volscinium, now Bolsena.

Verse 89. Selling of our voice.] Before the Sovereign power was invested in
the Caesar's, when the Commonwealth of Rome was governed by the Senate and the
People: the poorer sort lived upon the sale of their Votes to such as were
Candidates, or Suitors to them for public Offices and employment.

Verse 98. Brutidius.] A Senator, that looked pale for fear some Spies, which
were in the Senate House at the condemnation of Sejanus, might criminate all
such as spoke not thundering words against that Traitor. For, my Author
conceives that upon such information Tiberius Caesar would not spare his own
Party, but misplace the execution of his fury, as Ajax did, that beat a heard
of Oxen, supposing them to be the Grecians that gave sentence against him, when
he pleaded his title to the arms of Achilles. Sophocl.

Verse 118. Gabii] Was once a City, built by the Kings of Alba. Virg. Aeneid.
7. It became subject to Rome, being delivered to King Tarquin by the fraud of
his Son Sextus, as aforesaid. At this time it was a Village, or some very poor
Town, as appears by the ranking of it with Fidenae and Vlubrae: that being a
Village of the Sabines. Plin. and this of the Volscians, only memorable,
because Augustus Caesar was there at Nurse. Phorphyr. in lib. 1. Epist. Horace.

Verse 127. Crassus.] M. Crassus, Son to P. Crassus. the wealthiest of all the
Romans. It was he that said, No man should be accounted rich, that could not
maintain an Army with his annual rents. He was sent General in the Slavish or
Servile war against Spartacus the Gladiator, that having raised a vast Army of
fugitive Slaves, had beaten Vatinius, Gellius and Lentulus, which commanded in
chief for the Romans. At Regium, near the Fens of Leucas, he fought and slew
twelve thousand of the Enemy, together with their Captain General. In his
Ovation for this victory, he made a new President, entering Rome with a Crown of
Bays upon his head: whereas, before him, no General for a conquest over Slaves
wore any thing but Myrtle. When Caesar, Pompey and Crassus made their
Association; Pompey was left to govern Rome, Caesar sent to the Gallick war:
and Crassus for his Province had Syria, where, in hope of infinite wealth, he
made war against the Parthians; in prosecution whereof he lost his Son P.
Crassus, that seeing no hope of safety, and wanting the use of his right hand,
that was shot with a Dart, commanded his Slave to kill him. His whole Army was
routed by Surena (Lieutenant General to King Orodes) that slew twenty thousand
of his men, took ten thousand prisoners, and gave no quarter to Crassus, but
having dispatched him, cut off his head and hand, which he carried into Armenia
to his Master. Plut. in Crass.

Verse 127. Pompey.] Cn. Pompey; from the greatness of his actions surnamed the
Great. He was one of Sylla's Party, and by him sent into Africa against his
Enemies. First he overthrew Domitius, then he took King Hiarbas prisoner, and
triumphed before he was at full age, viz. 25. Whereupon Sylla's Army gave him
the title of Great. He marched into Spain, and there joined his forces with old
Metellus against Sertorius, that said, If the young boy had not come, he should
have peppered the old woman. The Senate made him General in the Pyratick
war, which he dispatched in three months. He succeeded Lucullus, beat King
Mithridates and triumphed for that victory. He brought Tigranes King of Armenia
upon his knees, and from that humble posture, set him in his Throne again. In
Asia he conquered the Iberians, Albanians and Jews, taking prisoner their King
Aristobulus. After the death of his Lady, Julia Daughter to I. Caesar. he
married Cornelia, Daughter to Scipio, the Widow of P. Crassus. At Naples he
fell sick of a high accute fever, and was in all men's opinions past recovery:
but death proved not so kind as he made a show for, which is excellently
observed in this Satyr, To Pompey provident Campania gave
A timely fever: but, his life to save,
In many Cities public prayers were made:
The Conqueror preserved, to be betrayed
When Conquered by Rome's fortune and his own:
His head cut off, a punishment unknown
To our most dangerous Delinquents. --
For how seasonably would this fever have ended Pompey's life, in the meridian
of his glory, when he dedicated his spoils of the Ocean and the East in the
Temple of Minerva, with this inscription, Cn. Pompeius Magn. Imp. Bello, etc.
Cneius Pompey General, in the War brought to an end in thirty years: for
twelve millions a hundred fourscore and three thousand men defeated, put to
flight, and taken prisoners; for ships surprised or taken in fight, eight
hundred forty and six: Towns and Castles rendered, fifteen hundred thirty
eight: Countries conquered from the Lake of Maeotis to the Red Sea: A vow
deservedly paid to Minerva. His other triumph, M. Messalla and M. Piso being
Consuls, bore this title, This Triumph is. For clearing the Maritim parts of
Pirates, and restoring to the Romans the Dominion of the Sea, and for the
conquest of Asia, Pontus, Armenia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Syria, the
Scythians, Jews, Albanians, Iberia, the Isle of Creet, the Basternae; and
likewise of the Kings, Mithridates and Tigranes; more then all here written he
said to the People, That he found Asia the farthest Roman Province, and left it
the middle of his Country. Plin. l. 7. c. 28. Now see the folly of venturing
all in one bottom. The loss of one battle, fought at Pharsalia, lost Pompey
the name of Great, obscuring the splendor of his former victories: and Caesar,
that came into the field much inferior, both in the number and quality of his
men, came off Lord of the whole World. So that when Pompey fled as far as
Egypt, the fame of his overthrow (that came before him) had made way for his
destruction; which was ordered by the perfidious King Ptolomey, and executed by
Septimius and Salvius, two Romans that had been Soldiers under Pompey, but
were then commanded and assisted in this bloody business by Achillas the
Egyptian. He left two Sons, Cneius and Sextus Pompey; the first defeated in a
Land-battail, at Munda in Spain; The other in a Sea Fight, upon the coast of
Sicily.

Verse 128. Him that to his whips.] He means Julius Caesar, that subjected the
freeborn people of Rome, and brought that Commonwealth to a Monarchy. C.
Julius Caesar Consul, Colleague to M. Calphurnius Bibulus in the year of Rome
695. he had France for his Province, decreed by the Senate for five years:
Eutr. lib. 6. cap. 7. Suet. 11. In the year 706. he was Consul with P.
Servilius Isauricus. In the year 708* he and M. Aemilius Lepidus were Consuls.
In the year 709. he was Consul alone. In the year 710. he was Consul and
Colleague to Marc. Antony. He was the first Roman Emperor, and reigned from the
year 708. for three years. He conquered all France, bounded with the Pyrenaean
mountains the Alps, and Gebenne, now called Montaignes d' Avergne, or Montagnes
de Cevenne, and the Rivers of Rhosne and the Rhiine: which in 9 years space he
reduced to the form of a Province. He was the first Roman that ever invaded the
Germans beyond the River of Rhiine, passing over his Army by a Bridge of his
own contrivance. He discovered the Isle of Great Britan, before unknown to the
Romans, and had money and hostages given him by our Countrymen. When, being
absent from Rome, he could not carry his business in Senate as he pleased, he
turned his arms against his Country, and without resistance took Savoy, Pisa,
Vmbria, Hetruria, and forced Pompey to fly Italy. Then marching into Spain he
routed three strong Armies, commanded by three of Pompey's Lievtenant-Generalls
M. Petreius, L. Afranius and M. Varro. At Pharsalia he defeated Pompey, and
subdued Ptolomey in Egypt: in Africa he gave an overthrow to Scipio and King
Juba. In Spain he beat the Sons of Pompey. Five times he triumphed: for France,
for Alexandria, for Pontus, for Africa, and for Spain. Of all Generals he was
the most munificent, especially after these triumphs. He was murdered in the
Senate House with four and twenty wounds given him by Brutus Cassius, and the
rest of the Conspirators: innumerable Prodigies in the air and earth
portending his untimely end. Plut. in Caes. and Brut. Flor. Appian. lib. 20.
Oros. lib. 6. cap. 17. Eutr. lib. 6. His spirits were so vigorous, that he used
to write, read, dictate and hear, all at one time. Of his so great concerns he
would dictate to four Secretaries at once: if he had no other business, to
seven. He fought 50 battails, and was the only man that went beyond M.
Marcellus, that fought 39. Besides those slain in his civil victories, a
hundred fourscore and twelve thousand men fell by his sword. His mercy was
such, as that he conquered all men, even to repentance of their enmity. His
magnanimity is unparalleld: when he took Pompey's Cabinet of Letters at
Pharsalia, and Scipio's at Thapsus, he opened not any one Letter, but most
nobly, with the faith due to secrets, burned them all. Plin. lib. cap. 25.

Verse 131. Ceres Son in Law.] Pluto, Son to Saturn and Ops, Brother to Jupiter
and Neptune. In their division of Saturn's Kingdom; Pluto, that was the
youngest, and called Agesilaus, had the Western part, lying along the coast of
the Mare inferum, the low Sea: Jupiter had the Eastern Dominions: Neptune the
Islands. This to the Poets hinted their fabulous invention, that Jupiter was
Lord of the Heavens, Neptune of the Seas, and Pluto of the infernal Regions.
The name of Pluto is derived (...), from riches, because all our riches comes
from below, being dug out of the bowels of the earth. For the same reason
the Latins called him Dis. Cic. 2. de. Not. Deor. He stole away Proserpine
Daughter to Ceres. Claud. de Rap. Proserp.

Verse 133. Tully.] M. Tullius Cicero. Read the Comment upon Sat. 7. His
murder, as aforesaid, was comprehended in the agreement between the Triumviri,
C. Caesar, Antony and Lepidus: accordingly an Officer to Marc. Antony (against
whom Cicero writ his Philippicks) executed him, cutting off his head, and
nayling his hands to the Pulpit for Orations. O Antoni! rapuisti vitam, etc. O
Marc. Anthony! thou have ravished a Life, that would have been more unworthy of
Cicero, under thy reign; then Death could be, under thy Triumvirate. But the
glory of his Actions and Orations thou have been so far from taking away, as
thou have added to it: That lives, and shall live in the memory of all ages.
And whilst, or by Chance or Providence, or any way, this joynted frame of
Nature (which almost he alone, of all the Romans, penetrated with his spirit,
fathomed with his wit, and illuminated with his elocution) shall hold together:
it shall draw along his fame, as Time's inseparable companion. And all
posterity shall admire his writings against thee, and execrate thy cruelty to
him: and sooner shall Mankind perish from the earth, then his praise should
fall to the ground. Vell. Paterc.

Verse 135. Penny-Pallas.] At the celebration of the Quinquatrua, or five days
feast of Minerva, Goddess of Eloquence: the School-boyes, whose learning had
but cost a Penny, prayed, that Pallas would make them as eloquent as Tully or
Demosthenes, the two greatest Orators of the Greeks and Latins.

Verse 140 A Duller.] If Tyranny was never exercised upon a Dull Laweyr, a
heavy headed Poet will not be in danger of his life: therefore says Juvenal --
I Pray
The Lady Muses, that I rather may
The Author of ridic'lous Poems be,
Second divine Philippick then of thee.


Verse 147. Athenian wonder.] Demosthenes, Son to a Cutler of Athens. His
Father left him young and rich, but his Guardian cozened him almost of all; the
poor remainder would hardly pay for his schooling. The design of his Studies
was, to make himself an Orator; but by a natural infirmity he was not able to
pronounce the letter r, which he helped, as he walked upon the Sea coast, with
gathering Pebbles, held in his mouth whilst he repeated his Orations. Thus his
own and his Tutors Art made him the best Speaker that ever declamed in Athens.
But he spoke so much in defense of the liberty of Greece against King Philip of
Macedon, plotting their subjection: that for his Philippicks (in imitation
whereof the Orations writ against Marc. Antony, that invaded the Liberties of
Rome, were called Philippicks by Cicero) he was banished by the Athenians. But
after Philip's death, the Sentence was repealed. Alexander now dead, and Greece
being governed by Antipater, Demosthenes, that saw his Country could not
protect him, took sanctuary in the Isle of Calauria, sacred to Neptune.
Thither Archias, the Mimick, was sent by Antipater, to court him out of
Sanctuary, and to engage for Antipater, that he would not any way trouble him.
Demosthenes answered, That he never liked Archias when he was a Player, but
much worse since he played the Ambassador: then Archias in plain terms
threatened to pull him out by the ears. So, said Demosthenes, now thou have
unmasked the Macedonian Oracle; before thou were a Player in a Vizzard: stay
but a while, till I write a word or two to my friends, and I am for thee. Then,
as if he meant to dispatch his Letters, he laid his paper before him, and
putting a quill to his mouth, sucked up the poison, which, for that purpose, he
still carried about him. See Suid.

Verse 165. Wild-figtree.] Which growing under the strongest walls breaks them
asunder. Mart.

Marmora Messallae scindit caprificus.
Messalla's Marbles the wild-figtree cuts.
Verse 167. Hannibal.] See the Comment upon Sat. 7. Here Juvenal touches his
ambitious nature, not contented to have enlarged the Carthaginian Empire, as
far as the Atlantic Sea, that bounds Africa to the North: and likewise as far
as the River Nilus, where it terminates to the East; but that, to his Lybian
Elephants and Aethiopians, he added Spain; and designed the conquest of Italy,
which he had almost brought about, in despite of nature, that barricaded him
by land with the Pyrenaean Mountains, which divide Spain from France; and with
the Alps, that divide France from Italy. But over the Alps he marched, though
he lost one of his eyes in the Snow, and though he was forced to make his way
through the rocks with fire and vinegar: so Livie and Sil. Italicus affirm:
and for the Roman History I hold their authorities much better, then the
Judgment of Polybius, that says the fire and vinegar was a Fable.

Verse 178. Suburra.] See the beginning of the Comment upon Sat. 3.

Verse 179. One eyed.] To have seen Hannibal with his one eye in a march how he
looked, when he was upon the back of his Getulian Elephant (I believe) would
have startled the courage of a Roman.

Verse 191. The Youth.] Alexander the Great, Son to Philip King of Macedon by
his Queen Olympias; though she would not own so mean a Father for her Child,
but gave out that a God begot him, and that she conceived in thunder by a flash
of lightning, the night before King Philip married her. After marriage, Philip
dreamed, that he sealed up his Wife's womb with a Signet, wherein was ingraved
a Lion: which dream Aristander Telmisseus thus interpreted; No body sets a Seal
upon an empty Cabinet: the Queen is with Child of a Boy, that shall have the
courage of a Lion. This young Lion, Alexander, conquered Asia, Armenia, Iberia,
Albania, Cappadocia, Syria, Egypt, Taurus, and entered upon Caucasus. He
subdued the Bactrians, Medes and Persians; possessed himself of the East
Indies, as far as Bacchus or Hercules had ever marched; and (as they say) wept,
because there was no more worlds to conquer. He was infinitely handsome,
something in his face showing him to be more then a man. He had a long neck, a
little inclining to the left shoulder, spritely eyes, a lovely color in his
cheeks; and in every other part of his body a certain Majesty appeared. This
Conqueror of the World, overcome with wine and choler, died of a fever at
Babylon, in the 30th year of his age, and the 12th of his reign. See Solin. At
his death no body suspected him to be poisoned. Six years after, Queen Olympias
discovered the whole plot, executed many for it, and made the Executioner dig
up and scatter the relics of Iolaus, that gave him the poison: which, one
Agnothemius reported that he heard King Antiochus say, was done by the
directions of Aristotle. But others hold the story of Alexander's impoisoning
for a Fable. Plut. in Alex. Polyb. Q. Curtius Arrian and Plut.

Verse 193. Gyarus.] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. Seriphus is an other little
Isle of the Cyclades.

Verse 202. Xerxes,] King of Persia, Son to Darius, and Granchild to Cyrus by
his Daughter Acosa. To make preparations for a war upon Greece, in five years
he raised 700000 Persians, and joined with them 300000 Auxiliaries, his Fleet
consisting of 200000 sail. Behold a glorious Army, that wanted nothing but a
General. Justin. lib. 2. When he took a view of all his forces, the tears fell
from his eyes; and being asked why he wept, he answered, because a hundred
years hence not one of all these millions of men will be left alive. He joined
Asia to Europe, covering the Hellespont with Ships; and disjoined the Mountain
Athos from the firm Land, cutting it into an Island. Plin. lib 4. cap. 20. His
Army was beaten at Thermopyle, by 4000 Lacedaemonians; and his Fleet, by
Themistocles at Salamis; from whence advice was sent him (seriously by his
Lieutenant General Mardonius* and subtily from the Athenian Admiral
Themistocles) to fly out of Greece immediately: for there was a design to stop
his passage. Whereupon he rid post to the Hellespont, and finding his Bridge of
Ships scattered by a Tempest, took a Fisher-boat and escaped. 'Twas a spectacle
to be looked upon with wonder, in consideration of man's condition and change of
fortune, to see him sculk in a little Boat; whose Fleet, not long before, the
spacious Sea was scarce able to contain; not so much as a man to wait upon him,
that lately commanded an Army cumbersome to the earth. After his return to
Persia, he would never think of wars again, but wholly applied himself to ease
and idleness: proposing great rewards to any, that could invent new ways of
luxury. Val. Max. This brought him into contempt with his Subjects; and within
a short time he was slain, in his Palace, by the Captain of his Guard,
Artabanus, that was formerly a faithful Councellor to him, and gave his vote
against the war with Greece. He shot arrows against the Sun, and cast
fetters into the Sea. Laert. In his Army a Mare, that creature of undaunted
courage, brought forth the most timorous of all animals, a Hare: which
undoubtedly portended the cowardly flight of his vast Army, and the fall of his
high pride: that moved him, when his Bridge of Boats was first broken, to
command 300 lashes should be given to the Sea, and Irons cast in to fetter
Neptune, and these words to be spoken to the God by the Executioner. Thy Lord
inflicts this punishment upon thee, because thou have injured him, that never
deserved ill of thee; and yet King Xerxes shall pass in spite of thee; and to
thee shall no man at all sacrifice; thou art so deceitful and cruel a Flood.
And having thus punished the Sea, he repaired the Bridge. Herod. lib. 7.

Verse 206. Sostratus,] A Greek Poet, that writ the Persian expedition into
Greece. He foretold to the Athenians the coming of Xerxes into Greece. Herod.
But he foretold truer then he told, in this place quoted by Juvenal, where he
makes Xerxes drink up whole Rivers for his mornings draught: me thinks it
should have followed, that he meant to eat up all Greece for his supper.

Verse 209. Aeolus.] Son to Jupiter and Sergesta (or Acesta) Daughter to
Hippotes the Trojan. He reigned (as in the Comment upon Sat. 1.) in Strongyle,
the greatest of the 7. Lipparene Islands. Some speak of three Aeoli; one Son
to Hippotes and Granchild to Phylantes; the other Son to Helenus and Grandchild
to Jupiter; the third Son to Neptune and Arne. See Virg. Plin. Diod. Sic. and
Eustath Odyss. 10. They called him King of the Winds, because, by the clouds
and smoke of Aetna, he foretold the quarters where the Wind would hang.
According to Isacius, he was a man that studied Astronomy, especially that part
which appertains to the nature of the Winds, for the benefit of Navigation. He
therefore divined, when the Sun was coming into Taurus, if there would be a
Storm at Sea or a Calm, and what day or hour of the day, or how long, the West
wind should breathe, or what other wind should rise at the rising of the Dog
or any Celestial Sign, and blow again upon Critical days, viz. the fifth,
the seventh day, and the like. For this reason he was thought to be King of the
Winds. To which is added by Strab. lib. 1. that he guessed at the Winds by the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea; and Mariners finding it to be true, believed
the Winds to be his Subjects, and that he could at his pleasure imprison or
release them: an opinion more probable then that of some Lapland-Philosophers,
that tell us, if we have the skin of a Dolphin, ordered with certain
ceremonies, we shall have a wind to any place we are bound for, and no other
wind shall blow upon the water. Sure Homer's Age was poisoned with this natural
Philosophy, otherwise he would not have made Aeolus bestow a wind in a bag upon
Ulysses, as aforesaid. Aeolus, as to Morality, is a wise man, that moderates
his passions seasonably: and, according to the opportunity of time and
business, speaks angrily when he is pleased, and gently when he is offended:
such a one, at his pleasure, bridles and lets loose the wind. N. Comes Mythol.
lib. 10. cap. 10.

Verse 223. Tabraca,] A part of Lybia. Possidonius tells us in his voyage from
Cales to Rome, he was driven upon the Lybian Coast, where he saw a VVood full
of Apes, some sitting in trees, others upon the ground: some that had breasts
hanging down, and young ones sucking them; some again that were old, bald and
impotent.

Verse 233. Cossus,] One that laid out his money in the Shambles upon the best
Fish and Foul, which he presented to rich childless persons, in hope the
venture would bring him in a fortune when their Wills were proved: therefore
the older they were, the better for his purpose.

Verse 245. Seleucus,] The best Lutenist in Juvenal's time.

Verse 255. Oppia,] A notorious common Slut in my Authors days, but afterward
so unknown, that his Transcribers instead of Oppia put Hippia, an Adultress
often mentioned in his Satyrs, but never charged with multiplicity of Servants,
as Oppia is.

Verse 256. Themison,] A Greek Physician, whose authority is quoted by Galen.
He was Scholar to Empedocles. Plin. lib. 29. cap. 1. but that he was a bad
practicer, you may take my Author's word.

Verse 257. Basil,] A Governor of a Province; to be put upon the same thievish
File with M. Priscus, Verres, Tutor, Capito, Pansa, Natta, Antonius and
Dolabella.

Verse 258. Hirrus,] A Guardian, that by cheating of poor Orphans, came to a
great fortune, and lived in no little state, as you have him described without
a name Sat. 1.

What rage inflames me, when the People's pressed
With Crowds, attending him that dispossessed
The Orphane; now a Prostitute? --
Verse 259. Maura.] One of the beastly Prophaners of Chastities old Altar. Sat.
6.

Verse 260. Hamillus,] Really such a Tutor, as Socrates was falsely reported to
be by the Leather-dresser Anytus, Melitus the Orator, and Lycon the Poet.

Verse 272. Fasting.] A high expression of a Mother's love, that feeds her
young ones even when she her self is hungry.

Verse 278. Phiale,] A Curtezan, that was Mistress of her Art.

Verse 289. King Nestor,] Son to Neleus and Chloris. Hom. Odyss. lib. 2. born
at Pilos, a City standing upon the Laconick Sea. Strab. lib. 7. In his Fathers
life time he commanded in chief against the Epeans of Peloponnesus, afterward
called Elians. Plin. lib. 4. cap. 1. At the Wedding of Pirithous he fought on
his part against the Centaurs, that would have stole away the Bride. At the
Siege of Troy he was grown very old, yet with fifty sail of Ships he joined
himself to the rest of the Greek Princes, when he had lived to the third Age of
Man, as he himself tells us in Ovid Metamorph. lib. 12. How many years make
three Ages, is not agreed on by Interpreters. Xenophon says, the Egyptians
(and from them the East) reckoned an Age to be thirty years: then was Nestor
but ninty years of age, and had only counted thirty years upon a finger when he
began to tell upon his right hand. But if Juvenal had thought him but ninty,
which thousands were then, and are now, he would not have referred us to the
faith and authority of Homer; neither would he have added, that Nestor lived
nearest to the Crow or Raven, that lives nine ages of man at least, if we
believe Hesiod, quoted by Plin. lib. 7. cap. 48. Therefore I take it for
granted, that in my Authors account Nestor was 300 years old; and having told
280 upon his left hand by twenty years a joint, had begun the other twenty upon
his right hand. Nor had he lost any part of his long time, as appears by his
experience and wisdom, being so great, that Agamemnon said, he should quickly
take Troy, if he had but ten Nestors: to his prudence he had such a rare
elocution, that his words were said to flow sweeter then honey. He had seven
Sons and one Daughter by Eurydice Daughter to Clyminus.

Verse 297. Antilochus,] Eldest Son to Nestor and Eurydice. He attended his
Father to the Siege of Troy, and was there slain by Memnon, Son to Tython and
Aurora. Hom. When the body of this gallant Youth was burned, his Father could
not but complain that he had lived too long to see it.

Verse 302. He,] The Father of Ulysses; but who that was, whether Laertes or
Sysiphus, Juvenal had no mind to determine. See the Comment upon Sat. 9.

Verse 303. Priam,] Son to Laomedon. When Troy was taken, and slighted by
Hercules, he and his Sister Hesione were carried Prisoners into Greece: from
whence he was ransomed, and returning, built up Troy, made it a much fairer
City, and extended the limits of his Kingdom so far, that he was in a manner
Emperor of all Asia. He married Hecuba Daughter to Cisseus King of Thrace, and
had by her seventeen Sons, one of which number was Paris, that, to find out
his Sister Hesione, made a voyage into Greece; and there stole away Helen Wife
to Menelaus, which was cause of the League entered into by the Grecian Princes,
and of their ten years Siege of Troy; in which time he saw almost all these
Sons and 33 more slain by the Enemy: for he had in all 50 Sons. Cic. Tuscul. 1.
Lastly, after Troy was taken, he himself was slain by Pyrrhus, Son to
Achilles, at the Altar of Hircaean Jupiter, where Juvenal says that he Fell
like an Ox in his old age despised,
And by the ungrateful Plough-man sacrificed.


Verse 304. Assaracus,] Son to Tros King of Troy, Brother to Ganymed, Father to
Capys the Father of Anchises. Ovid. and great Uncle to Priam, as appears in
this Pedigree.

Jupiter the second. Dardanus. Erichthonius. Tros. Ganymed. Assaracus. Ilus.
Laomedon. Priam.






Verse 306. With all his Brothers,] That were 49. Hom. Virg. Cic. All these
Sons and base Sons to Priam, with their Brother and sovereign Lord Hector (in
case that Priam had died before the Trojan war) would have carried his Corpse to
the funeral Pile; according to the custom of the Ancients, and reckoned in
the number of human felicities: an instance whereof we have in Q. Metellus:
For, besides his high honors and surname of Macedonian: when his body was
carried to be burned, the Bearers were his four Sons, one being Praetor, and
the other three Consular persons: two of the three having triumphed, and the
third being then Censor. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 44.

Verse 307. Cassandra first.] Cassandra was one of Priam's 12. Daughters, a
Prophetess; and therefore Juvenal says her tears would have been shed first
for the funeral of her Father, which she might have foreseen, though no body
would have believed her, a fortune that attended her predictions. For, when she
foretold the danger of the Trojan Horse, and cried out against the receiving of
it within the walls, no credit at all was given to her words by her own
Countrymen; and therefore it was no marvel Agamemnon believed her not, when
she was his Prisoner, and bid him take heed of a plot upon him by his Wife: but
he then looked upon her as a mad-woman. Afterward both he and Cassandra
perished in the plot laid and executed by Clytemnestra and Aegisthus. See the
Comment upon Sat. 1. This slighting of Cassandra's Prophecies, made the old
Poets tell the story of Apollo, that had so high a passion for her, he bid her
ask whatsoever she would, and she should have it, for a nights lodging: she
asked the spirit of Prophecy, and had it, but he had no Cassandra. The God, in
a rage to be so mocked, though he had not power to recall his gift, yet made it
ineffectuall, taking away the credit of her words from all that heard them. In
his Aeneis Virgil says, that a little while before the Sack of Troy, she was
betroathed to young Choroebus, that seeing her (the very night the Town was
taken) carried away by a Grecian, endeavored to rescue her; but in the attempt
was slain by one Penelaus; and the Maid her self defloured in the Temple of
Minerva, by Ajax King of the Greek Locrians, that, for his sacrilegious Rape,
was struck with a thunderbolt by the incensed Goddess Pallas.

Verse 308. Polyxena,] the greatest beauty of all Priam's Daughters. At the
Siege of Troy; Achilles, seeing her upon the walls, fell in love with her, and
desired to be King Priam's Son in Law. The King consented to the match, and the
Temple of Apollo was the Place where the Marriage was to be solemnized, and the
peace ratified. Paris, knowing this, hid himself, as aforesaid, behind the
Image of Apollo, and with an arrow hit and slew Achilles. When Troy was taken,
and Polyxena made a captive, the Grecians dreamed Achilles appeared, and
charged them that Polyxena (under pretense of whose marriage he was slain)
should be sacrificed to his Ghost. This cruelty was acted by his Son Pyrrhus.
Ov. 23. Metam. When they brought her to the Tomb of Achilles, wanting a Garter,
she cut away the skirt of her Gown, and with it tied her Vest beneath her knee,
that she might fall modestly.

Verse 317. His old Wife.] Hecuba, Wife to King Priam, that after her Husband
was slain, lived till she was transformed into a Bitch. Ovid. Metam. lib. 13.
This fable was grounded upon her behavior when she was Prisoner to the Greeks:
for, seeing the floating body of her Son Polydorus, which they had cast into
the Sea, and having no other means of revenge, she scolded at them like a
Bitch, that barks against the Moon. Serve.

Verse 320. Pontick King.] Mithridates. See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 320. Solon,] One of the seven Sages of Greece. He was born in the Isle
of Salamis, and flourished at Athens in the time of Tarquinius Priscus, King of
Rome. Gell. lib. 17. cap 21. He gave to the Athenians Laws of such a
temperament, that both the Senate and the People (Contraries in point of
Interest, and Opinion) equally approved of them; nay after the Republic of
Athens came into the hands of a single person, Solon's Laws were confirmed by
Pisistratus, though he had altered the nature and quality of the Government.
Thus he writes to Solon. I have provided, that the State be still governed by
your Laws. He abrogated all the Laws of Draco, but only those against
Homicide. When he fled from the Tyranny of Pisistratus, first he went to
Egypt, then to the Isle of Cyprus; and lastly, invited by Croesus, King of
Lydia, he came to his Court at Sardys, where the King showed him his infinite
riches, and asked, if he had ever known a happier person: Solon answered, yes,
one Tellus, a very poor but a just man; that lived under a good Government, had
virtuous Children, lived to see their Children; and then died in the service of
his Country. Croesus, desirous to be thought happy in the second place, asked
him, who do you think the second happy? he replied Cleobis and Biton, Sons to
the Argive Priestess; that wanting a pair of Oxen (as the custom was) to draw
her Chariot to the Temple of Juno; when these young men could find no Oxen in
the field, they yoaked themselves, and drew their Mother forty five furlongs
to the Temple, where she prayed, that the Goddess would reward this piety of
her Sons, with the best thing that could be given them, which it appears was
death: for, Cleobis and Biton, after they had sacrificed and feasted, slept in
the Temple, and never waked again. Yet (said Solon) may Croesus be in the
number of the happiest hereafter. But no man can be justly called so before his
death: therefore Juvenal terms it -- Solon's just reply,
That would not Croesus should his fortune praise,
Until the Close and Evening of his days.
This Answer Croesus found to be true by a sad experiment: for he being
defeated and taken prisoner by Cyrus King of Persia, that condemned him to be
burned to death, for presuming to make a War in his Dominions: when he lay upon
the pile of wood ready to be fired, he cried out, O Solon Solon Solon! Cyrus,
that was present at the execution, sent to know what Solon was (perhaps
thinking him to be a God) that Croesus so called upon: who told the Messenger,
I should never have come to this ignominious death, if in the time of my
prosperity I had thus remembered Solon, that when I showed him all my wealth,
would not pronounce me happy, but said, No Judgment could be made of any man's
felicity till the hour of his death. This Answer struck a terror into the
great Persian King; having then before his eyes the truth of Solon's words in
the fortune of a mighty Prince, and not knowing how soon it might come to be
his own case; Cyrus therefore pardoned Croesus, and afterward used his advise
in the quality of a privy-Counsellor. Herod. lib. 1. He died in the eightith
year of his age in the Isle of Cyprus, leaving order that his body should be
transported to Salamis, there burned, and his ashes scattered about the Island:
lest the People of Athens should get any relic of him, and so think
themselves to be absolved from the Oath which they made, faithfully to observe
his Laws till his return to Athens. His burial in this place and manner,
though Plutarch thinks it fabulous, is confirmed by the inscription upon his
Monument. Mors mea ne careat fletu, linquamus amicis
Maerorem, ut celebrent funera cum lacrymis.
Lest with dry eyes friends should my Fun'ralls keep,
Grief I bequeath; they shall have cause to weep.
Cic. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1. See Val. Max. Suid. Diog. Laert.

Verse 324. Marius.] See the Comment upon Sat. 8.

Verse 333. Provident Campania.] Campania, a Country in Italy, so called,
because it was the Field, or Campania, where the constant battle was fought
between Ceres and Bacchus, that is, where Corn and the Vine strove which should
most enrich the soil. Plin. It is now, in relation to the Peasants that plough
the earth and dress the Vines, called Terra di Lavoro, the Land of Labor. Here
Pompey, in Capua, some say at Naples, fell sick of a burning Fever, by a great
Providence says my Author: For, if he had died, then he had not lost his own
honor and the freedom of his Country at Pharsalia; nor his life, at the
sixtith year of his age, in Egypt, ut supra.

Verse 348. Latona,] Daughter to Coeus the Titan, Mother to Diana and Apollo.
And to have two Deities by Jupiter, might well make her a proud Woman, and a
joyful Mother, as she is said to be, both in Homer and Virgil.

Verse 349. Lucrece,] Daughter to Tricipicinus Prefect of Rome, Wife to
Tarquinius Collatinus, the great Example of Roman Chastity. When Sextus Tarquin
could not prevail with her by Courtship, he resolved to force her; and entering
her Bedchamber with his sword drawn, threatened more then to kill her, if she
yielded not: for he said that, when he had murdered her, he would lay the dead
body of a Slave in her arms, to the end they might think her slain for an
Adultress. Terrified with these menaces, to avoid infamy, she suffered a Rape.
In the morning she sent for her Father, her Husband, and the rest of her
Friends* and breaking forth into tears, acquainted them with the Tyrant's Act,
and immediately, pulling out a knife, which privately she carried for that
purpose, she stabbed her self. Her Father, Husband and Friends moved with this
sad spectacle, opened the business to the People, which took arms against the
Tyrants, drive them out of Rome, and banished both their King and Kingship. T.
Collatine upon his VVife's Monument is said to have placed this Inscription,
yet extant at Rome in the Bishop of Viterbo's Palace. Collatinus Tarquinius
dulcissimae Conjugi, and incomparabili pudicitiae decori, mulierum gloriae:
Vixit annis XXII. mensibus II. diebus VI. proh dolor! quae fuit charissima.

Collatinus Tarquinius to his sweetest Wife, the most incomparable pattern of
Chastity, the glory of her Sex: she lived 22 years, 2 months, and 6 days. Woe
is me, she, that was my dearest.

This Epitaph is likewise to be seen amongst the Fabrician Antiquities. Quum
foderet ferro castum Lucretia pectus,
Sanguinis and torrens egrederetur; ait,
Procedant testes, me non placuisse Tyranno,
Ante virum Sanguis, Spiritus ante deos.
The wound in her chaste breast when Lucrece made,
The crimson torrent bursting out; she said,
Come forth you Witnesses, that Tarquin stole
No love, Blood to my lord, to heaven my Soul.
See Live. in the end of lib. 1.

Verse 351 Virginia,] A great Beauty, Daughter to L. Virginius a Plebeian. The
Decemvir, Appius Claudius, laid a plot to ravish her, and that he might do it
without danger of the Law, he suborned one of his Clients to take her for a
Slave, as being a supposititious Child to Virginius his Wife, and the real
Issue of a Slave to the said Client, for whom his Patron Appius gave Judgment,
that so he might have free access to her. Her Father not knowing any other way
to preserve his Daughter unstained, slew her with his own hands; and bid her,
Go Daughter, I send thee to the shades of our forefathers free and honest,
two titles which tyranny would not let thee enjoy living. Then, with his hands
reeking in his Daughter's blood, he fled to his fellow soldiers, and told them
what enforced him to murder her. For this, Claudius first suffered
imprisonment, and then death. Live.

Verse 351. Rutila] Lura Rutila, an ugly bunch-backt woman, that lived to be
above threescore and seventeen years old. Plin. lib. 7.

Verse 356. Sabines.] If they had not been chaste and loving Wives, they would
hardly have come to make a Peace between their Husbands and their Fathers,
ready to join battle; as you may see in the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 378. Servilia,] A Lady very deformed both in body and mind, that still
made her Gallants her Pentioners.

Verse 384. Bellerophon,] A Person infinitely handsome, Son to Glaucus King of
Ephyre. He being in the Argive Court, was looked upon with an eye of pleasure
by Sthenoboea, Wife to Praetus King of Argos; and she stuck not to invite him
to her embraces: but, beyond her expectation, suffering a flat denial. She was
so much enraged at this affront to her beauty, that she accused the innocent
stranger for attempting to ravish her. The King credited her testimony, but
when she pressed him to do her justice, he would not violate the Laws of
hospitality so as to kill him in his own Palace, but desired the favor that
Bellerophon, in his journey through Lycia, would deliver his and the Queen's
Letters (which you may be sure moved for his present execution) to her Father
Jobates: that being though not less cruel then his Daughter, yet more careful
of his honor, would not put him to death publicly, but employed him in a
desperate service against his enemies the Solymi, a barbarous and warlike
people, to which he with a small force gave a total rout. After this and many
other dangers, conquered by his valor, he was sent to kill that hidious
Monster the Chimaera, which he did by the favor of Neptune, that accommodated
him with the winged horse Pegasus. Jobates admiring the courage and fortune of
the Youth, gave him part of his Kingdom, with one of his Daughters, by whom he
had Isander, Hippolochus and Laodamia. Hom. Iliad. When Sthenoboea heard of
his marriage with her Sister, she killed her self. Bellerophon, proud of his
successes, attempted to fly up to heaven; but Jove sent a gad-flie, that made
his horse cast him and break his neck; the place where he fell being afterward
called the Alleian Field. But Pegasus performed his journey, and was made a
Star by Jupiter. Some say, that as Castor invented a Coach, and Erichton a
Chariot, so Bellerophon found out the use of Galleys, wherewith, in a
Sea Fight, he conquered that valiant people, the Solymi: and sailing he was
said to fly upon the back of a winged horse. Vid. Pindar. Interpr.

Verse 385. Hippolytus,] Son to Theseus by Hippolyta the Amazon (others say by
Antiope.) His whole delight was to be on horseback in the field a hunting.
When he returned to Court, he regarded not the Ladies, that were much taken
with his person, and in the first place, the Queen his Stepmother, Phoedra.
She found an opportunity, in her Husband's absence, to entice him to her Bed;
but he gave her a flat denial with much indignation; which so incensed her,
that she told his Father he intended to ravish her, and murder him. Hippolytus,
understanding his Step-mother's design upon his life, took Coach and fled. But
the Sea-calves, lying then upon the shore, frighted with the rattling of his
wheels and the neighing of his horses, tumbled into the Sea with such a hideous
noise, that the horses started, and ran away with Hippolytus, drawing the poor
Youth (tangled in the rains) through the craggy rocks, till they pulled him to
pieces. He was buried in the Aricine Grove consecrated to Diana. Ovid Fast.
lib. 3. Diana pitying her fellow-Huntsman, desired the great Physician
Aesculapius to use all his skill for recovery of the dead Prince; whose torn
limbs he set together, and by his Hermetick art brought him to life again.
Hippolytus, revived, left Attica, and came into Italy, where he called himself
Virbius, twice a man: there he married a Lady whose name was Aricia, and built
a City, to which he gave her name.

Verse 390. Co-husband.] C. Silius, the loveliest young Lord of Rome, married
to the noble Lady Junia Syllana: but Messalina (the insatiable Empress, of whom
in Sat. 6.) chose him for her Servant, and made him put away his Wife. Silius
very well knew the danger of having such a Mistress; but, if he refused, his
destruction would be immediate; therefore he thought it best to expect the
future, and enjoy the present. With a great train she frequented his house,
could not endure to have him out of her sight: but the infamy thereof was so
great, that she sought to cover it with the name of Matrimony. Her Husband,
Claudius Caesar, being gone to sacrifice at Ostia: with all the Rites and
Solemnities of Marriage, she took Silius for her Co-husband. This news made all
the Emperor's Court tremble, especially those of his Bedchamber, Calistus,
Pallas, and the great Favorite Narcissus, that, when the other two would have
gone to diswade her, stopped their journey: For, Narcissus feared nothing, but
that she should know he knew it, before he had made sure of the Emperor: one of
whose Mistresses he got to begin the story, which he so well seconded, that
Claudius gave him a Commission to execute Messalina, and for that day to be
Captain of his Praetorian Lifeguard. Silius had his trial, but refused to
plead, only desired that he might be speedily dispatched. Messalina (not
suffered to come to Claudius his presence, and prevented in her design of
sending her Children, Britannicus and Octavia, to beg for her) was persuaded by
her Mother Lepida to kill her self; which she offered at, yet had not a heart
to perform; but the Tribune (sent by Narcissus) did it for her, in the Lucilian
Garden. Tacit. lib. 11. cap. 9.10.11. Tacitus makes this Preface to the History
of their strange marriage. I am not ignorant, it will sound like a fable, that
any man should be such a Sot, especially a Consul elect, in a City where
nothing can be secret: The day appointed: an Assembly of Witnesses at sealing
of the Deeds of Contract with, and provision for Issue by, the Prince's Wife:
that he should hear the words of the Auspex; and she, in the Accoutrements of a
Bride, sit down among the Guests, kiss, and embrace, and lie all night with her
other Husband. But this is no fictitious relation, all the circumstances being
delivered by ancient Writers. Vide Suet. in Claud.

Verse 393. Bright Veil.] See the punctuality of Messalina, that omits no
Hymenaeal ceremony. She wears the Flammeum, or the Bride's flame-coloured Veil.
The purple Counterpoint is cast upon her Bed; a sum of money tendered for her
Portion: a public Notary draws the Deeds of Jointure for the Wife, and
Settlement for the Children: the Town is called in for witnesses. And lest they
should come together inauspicato, without some happy promise from the Auspex,
he by the flight of Birds divines of the future felicity of the marriage: but
the best Sooth-sayer at the Wedding was Vectius Valens; that, to show tricks,
got to the top of a tree, and being asked what he saw from thence, answered, A
Storm coming from Ostia. Tacit. lib. 11. cap. 10.

Verse 427. Hercules,] Son to Jupiter and Alcmena; for his valor and the glory
of his actions deified. Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 3. But he mentions many of that
name. First, he that contended with Apollo for the Tripos. The second, an
Egyptian, who they say invented Phrygian Letters. The third, one of the
Corybantes or Priests of Cybele. The fourth, Son to Jove by Asteria the Sister
of Latona: he is worshipped at Tire, and had a Daughter called Carthage. The
fifth, in the Indies, being likewise known by the name of Belus. The sixth, a
Theban, Son to Jupiter (as aforesaid) by (...) wife Alcmena: to him they
ascribe the Achievments of all the ^est. That Hercules was one of the twelve
Gods of Egypt, and that the Greeks borrowed this Deity of the Egyptians, and
conferred it upon the supposed Son of Amphitryo, we have the authority of
Herodot. Forty three which bore the name of Hercules, are enumerated by Varro;
that says, all that excelled in strength had this name, as a title of honor,
from Hercules, begot by Jupiter upon Alcmena. He had the fame of conquering
almost invincible Labors, put upon him by Juno, that sought to destroy all
Jove's Bastards: but he still came off victorious, which immortalised his name.
In regard that Juvenal here mentions his Labors, I shall give you an account
of them. The 1. in his Cradle, where he crushed the heads of two Serpents, sent
by Juno to strangle him. The 2. when he was a Youth, in getting with child the
fifty Daughters of Thespius in one night, which brought him fifty Boys. The 3.
when he came to his full growth, was the destruction of the many-headed Monster
Hydra, in the Lernean Fens, as aforesaid. The 4. his foot-race, upon the
Mountain Maenalus in Arcadia, with a Hind, that had brazen Feet and golden
antlers, which he caught and killed. The 5. in the Nemaean Forest, between
Cleonae and Phlius in Greece, he slew a huge Lion that was shot-free, neither
to be hurt by Iron, Wood, or Stone. The 6. he vanquished Diomedes King of
Thrace, that fed his Horses with man's flesh, and made them eat their Master.
The 7. A dreadful wild Boar (that was lodged in Erymanthus, an Arcadian
Mountain, and destroyed the Country) he took, and carried him alive to Juno's
Officer, his Task-master Euristheus. The 8. He killed the Stymphalick Birds
with his arrows, or, as some say, made them fly clear away, with the sound of
a brass rattle. The 9. A wild Bull, that had almost laid waste all the Isle of
Creet, he tamed and brought him in a halter to Euristheus, that let him loose
again in Attica, where he did a world of hurt: but was slain by Theseus at
Marathon. Ovid. Met. lib. 7. The 10. He vanquished his rival Achelous in a
combat for their Mistress Deianira, though he turned himself first into a
Serpent, then into a Bull: but Hercules cut off one of his horns, and got the
Cornucopia, the horn of plenty, which he exchanged with him for the Amalthaean,
or wishing horn. The 11. He slew Busiris King of Egypt, that used to kill all
the strangers in his Court. The 12. In Lybia he strangled the Giant Antaeus,
that wrestled with him, as in the Comment upon Sat 3. The 13. Calpe and Abyla,
when they were one Mountain, he pulled asunder. The 14. He slew the never
sleeping Dragon, Orchard-Keeper to the Hesperides; and carried away the golden
Apples. The 15. When Atlas was wearied with his burden, he eased him, and in
his stead supported Heaven. The 16. He conquered Geryon King of Spain, that had
three bodies, and carried off his herds of fat Cattle, as in the Comment upon
Sat. 5. The 17. He beat out the brains of that half-man Cacus, the grand
Thief, Son to Vulcan, and vomiting flames of fire like his Father, ibid. The
18. He slew another Outlaw, one Lacinius, that plundered the borders of Italy,
and upon the place built a Temple to Juno, called Juno Lacinia. Virg. Aeneid.
5. The 19. Albion and Bergion, Giants that stopped his passage not far from the
mouth of the River Rhosne, he overcame by the help of his Father Jove, that
assisted him with a shower of stones. The 20. He conquered and took prisoner
Tyrrhenus King of Eubaea, that made war upon the Baeotians, and tied him to
four wild Colts, that tore him into quarters. The 21. He tamed the Centaurs.
The 22. He cleansed the Ox-house of Augeas King of Elis, which held 3000 Oxen,
and was never touched before. The 23 He delivered Hesione from the Sea Monster;
her Father, King Laomedon, engaging to remunerate him with his best horses:
which promise being broken, Hercules in a fury stormed Troy, slew the King,
took Hesione prisoner, and bestowed her upon Telamon, that first scaled the
walls. The 24. He plundered the Isle of Cos, and put the King and Queen to the
sword, as in the Comment upon Sat. 10. The 25. He conquered the Amazons, and
gave their Queen Hippolyte to his friend and fellow Soldier Theseus. The 26.
He went down to Hell, and brought up their Porter, three-headed Cerberus in a
tripple chain. The 27. He brought back with him into the world Queen Alcestis,
that died for her Husband, as in the end of the Comment upon Sat. 6. The 28.
After his return from hell, he slew Lycus King of Thebes, that in his absence
would have ravished his wife Megara. The 29. with his arrows he shot the Eagle,
which upon the top of the Mountain Caucasus fed upon the still growing liver of
Prometheus. The 30. He killed Cygnus, Son to Mars, in a duel on horseback. The
31. For denying to give him food he slew Theodamas, Father to his Favorite
Hylas, as in the end of the Comment upon Sat. 1. The 32. He conquered the
Cercopes, when he served Omphale Queen of Lydia. The 33. He sacked Pilos, and
put to the sword King Neleus with all his Family but Nestor, wounding Juno her
self (that came to assist Neleus) with a three-forked Dart. The 34. In the Isle
of Tenos he slew Zetes and Calais, the winged Sons of Boreas; and upon their
Tomb erected two Pillars. The 35. He passed the torrid Zone, and the burning
Sands of Libya, not troubled with their scorching heat: and having lost his
Ship, waded through the quicksands of the Syrtes. The 36. He set up the
Pillars in the West, called Hercules Pillars. The 37. He slew Eurytus King of
Oechalia, and plundered the City, carrying into Eubaea the fair Princess Iole
promised to him, and afterward denied by her Father. When Deianira heard of
his love to Iole, she remembered the message delivered to her from the Centaur
Nessus, together with the Vest dipped in his blood, viz. That if ever she found
her Husband loved another, she should give him that Vest; and when he had it
on, he should be only hers. She therefore sent it to him by her servant Lychas,
which he putting on as he went to sacrifice, it set him in such a frenzy, that
he made himself the burnt-Offering. After his death he was held a God, and
believed to be the same with the Sun. Macrob. lib. 1. Saturn. cap. 2. In his
return from Spain, some think he brought the use of Letters into Italy, and was
therefore worshipped both in a Temple apart, and also with the Muses.

Verse 428. Sardanapalus.] The last King of Syria, from Ninus the thirtith. His
Lieutenant General Arbactus, being ambitious, after some great service, to see
his Master (a favor never before granted to any but meniall Servants) after
long suit was admitted, and in the first Model of a Seraglio he found the
King, not distinguishable from the Concubines, either in his habit or
employment; for he was spinning purple-silk: only his body seemed to be the
tenderest, his eyes and his garb the most lascivious. At sight hereof Arbactus,
with horrid indignation, stomacked that so many men should be governed by a
Woman; that so many men, which knew the use of arms, should be subject to a
Distaffe. At his return to the Army, Arbactus reported the strange spectacle,
professing, he would never serve a Prince that had rather be a Woman then a
Man. All are of his mind. They march against Sardanapalus, that in his last
scene was still the same; for he stood not upon his defense like a man, but hid
himself like a woman; not having in his thoughts the hope of keeping his
Kingdom, but the fear of loosing his life. At last, with some few disorderly
Servants he takes the field, is beaten, retreats to his Palace, lays himself
and all his treasure upon a pile of wood, and made it be fired; doing only this
act like a man. Justin lib. 1.

Figura Undecima.
AD coenam vocat indigenam 1 Juvenalis 2 Amicu^
Aemulus Evandri, qui frugi erat Herculis hospes:
Non mare, non pelagus lustrat; patrimonia mergi
In ventrem nolit: tener hic tibi ponitur hoedus 3,
Persice, nec minus est gratus, quia traxerit auram
Vulgarem Ausoniae; salicisque ignarus and herbae,
Solo lacte satur placet, arridetque palato.
Quam cernis 4 gallinam, ante horrea pinguis avena,
Haec ova 5 exclusit foeno modo sumpta calenti.
Hos tulit 6 asparagos, quae carpit villica lanam,
Fuso quos posito legit de vertice montis.
Nativum retinet, quo fulgeat, 7 uva colorem,
Autumnum ut dicas gemmis mutasse racemos.
Art pari 8 pyra cum 9 pomis servata furorem
Effugere hyemis, tutaque recondita cella,
Cruda emendato posuere pericula succo;
Et jam cardiacis prosunt, quibus ante venenum.
Nunc epulas, coenae caput, aspice, nempe legentes
Autorem Iliados pueros 10, nostrumque Maronem:
Vindicat haec fama violatos mensa poetas:
Prodiga enim licet his sit men's, his curta supellex,
Non omnes Iros, non omnes creed Nepotes.


The eleventh Design.
LIke an old Roman 1 Juvenal here treats
His 2 friend, invites him to no foreign meats,
No costly sawces; empties not his purse
To fill his Board: nor eats his 3 Kid the worse,
Nor is esteemed by Persicus less rare,
Because it only breathed Italian air:
Bred in rich grounds, it eat nor grass nor wood:
But sucked, which makes it such delicious food.
These Barn-doore 4 hens, an hour ere they were dressed,
Laid those great 5 Eggs, took warm out of the Nest.
This dish of 6 Sparagus the maid, that spun
The Napkins, left her housewifes work undone
To gather from the hills, where they grew wild.
The 7 grapes, that look as Autumn were with child
Of clustered Pearls and rubies, are preserved.
The 8 Pears and 9 Apples, when old winter sterv'd
Il-order'd fruit, so carefully were laid,
They from crude poisons, are rich cordialls made;
And for a Banquet, Scholars wait to read
Virgil 10 and Homer: here is a feast to plead
The Poets cause; though some are beggars, all
Must not be censured poor, or prodigal.
The Manners of Men. THE ELEVENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
To supper Persicus is bid,
To fare as the ancient Romans did;
Not newfound Rarities to eat,
Nor to see Wenches after meat:
But to hear Homer read, and then
Compared with Virgil's mighty Pen.
To this, all serious cares displac't,
His friend, the Poet, bids him haste.
IF ATTICUS sup nobly, he is esteemed
A Prince: if RUTILUS do so, he is deemed
A madman. For, what makes us laugh so loud,
As poor APICIUS? every table, crowd,
Bath, Stage, jeer RUTILUS: that when he might
Bear arms, and for his Country's honor fight:
Is brought by feasting of his youthful blood
(Not forced to 't by the Tribune, nor withstood)
To write what Fencers dictate to his hand,
Their Laws, and words of service and command.
Such you see store of, whom the Creditor,
Often failed with, at the Shambles watches for;
Whose Palate is their God: whose meanest sort
Fare like great Lords, or Officers at Court;
And through their broken stock, when ruin shines,
Their gust all the Elements for spoil designs.
No price for Rarities too great is thought;
Nay, mind it, they love most what is dearest bought:
These make it nothing, for a sum that straight
They mean to spend, to pawn their ancient Plate;
Or their dead Mothers Images to break;
And then for three pound sterling to bespeak
An Olio Podrido: whence they fall
To that which the poor Fencers hodge-podge call.
The difference therefore lies, who bids the Guest?
In RUTILUS it is luxury to feast;
But gains VENTIDIUS a noble name,
And his expense is waited on by fame.
Him I may justly scorn, that knows how far
All Lybian hills o're-topt by Atlas are,
Yet knows not where the disproportion rests,
'Twixt little purses, and great Iron Chests.
From heaven came KNOW THY SELF; and should be fixed
In every breast, with every counsel mixed:
Whether to take a Wife thou do intend,
Or to the sacred Senate would ascend,
(Nor at ACHILLE'S arms THERSITES aims,
Which with apology ULYSSES claims)
O do thou, as an Orator, affect
Some cause of great concernment to protect?
Consult thy self; ask thy self, who am I?
A TULLY, CURTIUS, or MATHO? try
Thy tongue's just measure, weigh things high and low:
Even if thou wilt money on a fish bestow;
Nor covet for a mullet to disburse,
When there is but a gudgion in thy purse.
For, what end can thou look for, when thy rents
Diminish, and thy gluttony augments:
Thy Fathers goods, thy own and others, drowned
In thy vast womb, which Cattle holds, and ground?
Such riotous Gallants sell their rings at last;
Then must bare-finger'd POLLIO beg, or fast.
Untimely fun'ralls Gluttons cannot have:
Old age is more their terror then the grave.
These are their usual steps; they have money lent
At Rome, and that their Creditors see spent.
Then something left, but what I do not know,
When the Usurer, to whom great sums they owe,
Looks pale upon it; their native soil they shun,
And to the Bath or Port of Ostia run:
Nor more to leave the Forum disapprove,
Then from the hot Suburra to remove,
And in the cool Mount Esquiline to live.
Only this galls, this grieves the Fugitive,
To want for one year the Circensian Plays.
But not one guilty blush his cheeks betrays;
Few with scorned Modesty have now to do;
She from the City is departing too.
Thou shall make trial, PERSICUS, this day,
If to the things, which I thus fairly say,
In life and manners real proof I give:
Or praise course food, and a closs glutton Live:
Or when I send my boy, that all may hear,
For brown Loaves, whisper junkets in his ear.
Since to come sup with me, the have promised now
Thy host EVANDER I will be; and thou
HERCULES; or AENEAS, less then he,
But JOVE'S Relation in the next Degree:
And for this Son and Granchild when he sent.
The first in fire, the last by water went.
Now hear your bill of fare, which never did
Adorn the shambles: A fat little kid,
The softest of the Herd; near Tibur 'twas
Bred in rich Grounds, yet neither eat the grass,
Nor brouz'd upon the willow's humble wood:
But more participates of milk then blood.
Then mountain-Sparagus; which, her distaffe laid
Aside, was gathered by the Village-maid.
Great eggs, took warm from their contorted hay,
Served with the mothers which those eggs did lay.
Grapes long preserved, such as the Vinyard bears.
Signine, and Syrian, that match Pisan Pears,
Served up, as they came over, in baskets full;
Apples that taste like those we newly pull,
Not to be feared, the ill humor being lost:
Autumne's crude juice concocted by the frost.
The old Senate this poor supper would have thought
A wanton feast; his sallets CURIOUS brought,
Which he himself in's little garden got,
And over a poor fire put them in the pot:
Now rogues, that dig in chains, disdain such meat:
Remembering how the Cooks fat paunches eat.
Broiled rashers, that on wide grid-irons lay,
Were then reserved for some great holy day.
They on their kindreds birthday adding lard,
And what more flesh the Sacrifice had spared.
Some kinsman, whom thrice Consul they had seen,
That had our General and Dictator been,
Came to these dainties early; with his spade,
Which tamed the mountain, over his shoulder laid:
Doubting the FABII, or stern CATO saw,
By SCAURI, or FABRICII, kept in awe;
The rigid Censor's manners they did fear,
That to his own Colleague was so severe.
None made it then their serious care, to note
Where in the Sea, Mother of Pearl did float,
That makes the rich backs to our Trojan Beds:
Plain their bed-sides were, with small brazen heads,
Which like a crowned Asse's-head were made,
Wherewith the wanton Country-children played.
The house and meat were then alike, all rude:
No Roman had Greek arts with wonder viewed;
But, when Towns rich in plunder, he did force;
He broke great work-mens bolls, to trap his horse;
And in his richest helmet only put,
Under a rock ingrav'd, the figure cut
Of that wild beast, tamed by the Empire's fate,
Sucked by those Twins, the Founders of our State:
And showed the naked God's bright spear and shield,
Hung over a Foe that was to die or yield.
No men then shined in silver, but when armed;
And the course meats they fed upon, were warmed
In a poor Tuscan earthen-pot; which thou,
Had thou a noble spleen, would envy now.
Then in our Temples Deities appeared,
And in our streets a voice, at midnight heard,
Cried to the City, from the Western shore,
THE GAULS COME; then our Gods the office bore
Of their own Prophets; thus they bid us look
Unto our selves; and thus the care was took
For us and Rome by JOVE, out of his mould
Of stone, in those days not profaned with Gold.
Tables made here at home those times beheld,
Of our own wood: old Walnut, that was felled
By some kind tempest when the wind lay East.
Now our rich Gluttons value not a feast,
The Turbut, and the Wild-goat taste not well,
The Unguents and the Roses vilely smell,
Unless the Table, their large Plate stands on,
Be Ivory: and that Ivory stand upon
A tall wide gaping Pard, of those teeth made
Which at Syene are a shipboard laid:
Such as swift Moors, or the tanned Indian sends;
Or, where the Nabathaean shade extends,
The Arabian Elephant is forced to shed,
Now grown too great, too heavy for his head.
It Is this creates the raven in the guts,
It Is this the stomach in such choler puts.
For, a poor silver foot is such a thing,
As when a finger wears an iron ring.
Proud Guests I therefore shun; that will compare
Me to themselves, and scorn my meaner fare.
Alas! I have not an ounce of Ivory, I,
No Table-men of that stuff, not a Die:
Even my knife-hafts are bone; nor cut nor eat
My Hens worse; I Have no Carver for your meat,
To whom the Pergula in duty ought
To bow, as one by Doctor TRYPHER taught:
That has a Hare and Boar of wood at home,
A fat-rumpt Pygarg, and a Sow's great womb:
Phesants and Turkies which Getes send to us,
And that huge red-wing'd Phaenicopterus;
And with his unedg'd mock-knife when he wounds
This sumptuous feast, the whole Suburra sounds.
To carve a Goat, a Capon's wing to cut,
My novice-Boy to school was never put,
But always rudely bred; his carving work
Was but to give his fellows bits of pork.
Plebeian glasses, for small prices sold,
Brings my rude boy, whose clothes defy the cold.
On me no Phrygian youth, no Lycian waits,
Bought of the Mango, at excessive rates:
All Romans mine; when any thing you would,
Pray call, but call for it as a Roman should.
All go alike, with short and upright hair,
Only this feast day combed with greater care.
This a blunt Shepherd, that a Herdsman's son,
Longing to see, what late he has not done,
His Mother and her Cottage; and would feign
Meet his old friends the Goats yet once again.
My boy's well-fac't, well-manner'd; such as he
That wears the glowing purple, ought to be.
No DRAUCUS, whose hair's are pulled off with gummes,
That when into the Bath he trembling comes,
With the distillatory covers over,
His fist-like dowcets, and huge wen before.
Wine he shall bring thee, in those mountains made,
Under whose brows he has so often played;
The Country being one and the self-same,
Both whence the Wine and the Cup Bearer came.
Perhaps thou do expect, that I should bring
The Spanish Courtezans to dance and sing,
Their quivering thighs descending to the ground,
For which they are with loud applauses crowned;
To rich men nettles, to dull VENUS spurs:
But more the female sex this pleasure stirs;
With them it works more strongly, moves the tears,
And growing water in their eyes and ears.
A poor house is not for these wanton toys,
Their obscene songs, and Castinetta's noise,
At which in the Stews the naked Slave would start.
To him leave bawdy songs, and all lust's art,
Whose slipping Guests are ready still to fall,
He does his Spartan marble so be-spall.
For, there with fortune we dispense. The Dice
Are foul in the poor, adultery a vice:
Let rich men do it, over, and over again,
They Are free-mein'd Gallants, and fine Gentlemen.
For this day's feast, shall other game be sprung;
Great HOMER with high-sounding VIRGIL sung,
Shall both dispute the doubtful Palm: such verse
No matter with what tone the boys rehearse.
But now out of thy breast all business turn,
Take thy sweet ease, this day all cares adjourn.
No mention what use-money thou do pay:
Suppose thy wife go forth by break of day,
And about midnight uses to return,
Let not thy bosom with closs choler burn;
Though her moist silks suspected wrinkles show,
Her hair be tows'd, her face and ears do glow.
Nor bring to my house what has thee annoyed,
But whatsoever thy servants have destroyed,
Or lost, what ever vexes thee exclude;
Especially thy friend's Ingratitude.
This while, great CYBEL'S Towell is hung out,
And to her solemn Plays the Town's devout,
Where that grand horse-stealer the Tribune sits,
As if he triumphed: and if it befits
This vast, this too great People; I may say
The Circus comprehends all Rome to day.
Hark what a noise they make? it may be guest,
By that loud shout, the Green-coats have the best.
Were these Sports silenced, you should see the Town
As fatally astonished and cast down,
As when the Consuls Cannae's battle lost.
Let Youths go thither, that will be at cost
Of spending lungs, and wagers boldly laid;
Or would sit nearest to the handsom'st Maid.
Let Husbands and their Wives those sights behold,
Which is a shame to be before them told.
But let us old men, with skins wrinkled, shun
The busy Gown, and drink the Spring's warm sun.
To bathe here at elev'n the art free to go;
Five days together 'twould not please thee so.
For, the easiest life would likewise tedious seem:
Less frequent Use gives Pleasures their esteem.
The Comment UPON THE ELEVENTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Atticus,] One of the Family of that infinite rich and noble person T.
Pomponius Atticus, eminent for his learning, and for the friendship between him
and Cicero. Mart. lib. 7.

Attice qui renovas foecundae nomina gentis.
Atticus, that thy fruitful Name reviv'st.
Verse 2. Rutilus,] A Descendent from the Rutili. A Gentleman of a small
fortune, that consumed it with feasting: and in the prime of his youth, when he
might have served in the wars, and have got honor and a fortune, as his
Ancestors did by the sword, shames himself with it, and disgraces their noble
memory, coming upon the Theater as a Gladiator or common Fencer.

Verse 4. Apicius.] The rich Glutton, that being sensible how ridiculous
poverty would make him, hanged himself. See the Comment upon Sat. 4.

Verse 4. Not forced to't] Like young Proculus, compelled by the Emperor
Calligula to fight with a Thracian Fencer: or like Domitius Glabrio, enforced
by the necessity of the times to make himself a Gladiator; but Rutilus was of
the same ging with Gracchus, that fought upon the Stage for money, when there
was no Nero to compel him. Sat. 8.

Verse 21. His dead mothers Images.] Medalls of Gold and Silver, wherein her
Figure was ingraved.

Verse 27. Ventidius.] A Gentleman of the house of Ventidius, that is quoted
for one of the rare presidents of good fortune. Sat. 7.

Verse 30. Atlas.] A Mountain in Africa, so high that by the inhabitants it was
called Columna Coeli, the Pillar of Heaven. Upon this Mountain, in comparison
whereof all other Lybian hills are mole-hills, the Astrologer Atlas used to
contemplate the Stars, which occasioned the Fable of his being turned into
that Mountain, to support Heaven, as he is rarely described by Virg. Aeneid.
lib. 4.

Verse 37. Thersites] The basest, ugliest, and boldest Knave amongst the
Greeks; yet he had not the impudence to stand in competition for the arms of
Achilles; so far he knew himself and his want of merit.

Verse 42. Tully.] Juvenal admonishes an Orator to consider his own abilities;
whether he be with the first-file of Speakers, a Cicero; or in the second rank,
a Curtius Montanus, that had a harsh kind of elocution, but proud and swelling.
Tacit. or of the third and lowest form, a Matho, whose wit was unweldy like
himself. See the Comment upon Sat. 1. and 7.

Verse 52. Pollio,] A Roman Knight, as appears by his Ring, the mark of his
honor; but it seems the Census Equestris his four hundred thousand Sesterces
were spent, in feasting, to the last Deneir; otherwise he would not in his life
time have suffered Poverty, like Hannibal, to plunder him of his Ring.

Verse 60. Ostia,] A haven Town, to which the Roman Prodigalls removed, that in
case their Creditors followed, they might slip aboard a Galley; which was the
design of Damasippus. Sat. 8.

Verse 61. Forum.] The Forum Romanum, the place of complement and business;
where the Romans had their Exchange, Courts of Justice, Pulpits for Orations:
and Saturn's Temple, or the Chamber of Rome. See the end of the Comment upon
Sat. 1.

Verse 62. Suburra,] A great street of Rome, described in the Comment upon Sat.
3.

Verse 63. Cool Mount Esquiline] Cool to the great persons that dwelt upon it;
but cold to their Clients, almost sterved with dancing attendance in the night.
Sat. 5.

Was It this for which I left, so many a time,
My Wife, the cold Mount Esquiline to climb.
Verse 69. Persicus,] The Friend invited to supper by Juvenal, as I have said
in my Argument to this Satyr.

Verse 76. Evander,] King of Arcadia, Son to the Prophetess Carmentis: for his
eloquence said to be the Son of Mercury by Nicostrata. He, having accidentally
slain his Father, left his Kingdom, and by the advice of his Mother sailed
into Italy, beat the Aborigines, and possessed himself of the place where
afterward Rome was built; built himself a little Town upon Mount Palatine, and
there entertained Hercules, but very frugally. He lived to give such another
treatment to Aeneas. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 8.

Verse 80. The first in fire.] Hercules, that was Evander's first Guest, went
his voyage to the Gods in fire; for he burned himself alive, as in the end of
the Comment upon Sat. 10.

Verse 80. The last by water.] Aeneas, treated by Evander along time after
Hercules was burned, went to heaven by water; for he got his death by a fall
into the Numician Well; some say he was drowned in it, and the Fountain it self
consecrated to his Deity. Tibull.

Verse 83. Tybur.] See the Comment upon Sat. 3.

Verse 92. Signine,] Pears that grew in Italy amongst the Signines, and were
the latest ripe. Plin. lib. 15. cap. 15.

Verse 92. Syrian.] Pliny and Martial commend the taste of the Syrian Pear; but
Horace cries up the Pisan Pear for the most delicious.

Verse 98. Curious.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 111. Fabii.] Q. Fabius Maximus and his Son, both temperate and frugall
persons.

Verse 112. Scauri.] Marcus Scaurus, Prince of the Senate. See the Comment upon
Sat. 2.

Verse 113. Censor.] Fabricius the Censor, that set a Fine upon the head of his
Colleague P. D^cius. See the Comment upon Sat. 2. and 9.

Verse 127. Wild-beast.] The Wolf that gave suck to Romulus and Rhemus, under
the rock at the foot of the Quirine Mount.

Verse 129. Naked God.] Mars, that naked begot Romulus and Rhemus, as
aforesaid; but afterward put on his arms to maintain the Empire, founded by
those royal Twins.

Verse 138. The Gauls come.] M. Caeditius heard these words in the air. Live.
lib. 5. Marcellus, when he had relieved the Capitol, and beat the Gauls, built
the Temple of Jupiter upon the place where Caeditius heard the voice. Plut. in
Marcel.

Verse 152. Syene.] A Maritim City upon the borders between Egypt and
Aethiopia, not far from the Isle of Elephantis; so named from the numerous
breed of Elephants. This City is directly under the Tropic of Cancer: so that
in the Summer-Solstice, at noon day, the bodies of the Inhabitants cast off no
shadow at all. Plin. lib. 1. cap. 73.

Verse 154. Nabathaea.] An Oriental Region, beginning at Arabia, and
containing all that tract on the right hand to the red Sea. On the left hand is
the Persian Sea, and at the furthest part the Indian: it had the name from
Nabaioth, the eldest Son to Ishmael. The people of this Country are called
Dacharenes. Eustat. and Steph.

Verse 168. Doctor Trypher,] Master of the carving Academy, whose Pergula or
Ground-tarras, opening to the Suburra, was furnished with wooden figures of
birds, beasts and fishes, for his Scholars to practice upon.

Verse 170. Pygarg.] Authors differ strangely about the Pygarg; some say it is
a Wild-goat or Hind, others a kind of Eagle. Suid. all I can do is to put to it
the Epithet fat-rumpt, which expresses my Authors meaning, and the sense of the
word Pygarg.

Verse 172. Phaenicopterus,] An African bird, a water-fowle, with red wings,
and a beak so long and crooked that it cannot drink, till the whole head be
under water.

Verse 182. Mango,] He that sold Slaves and fine Boys in the Market.

Verse 210. Castanettaes] Knackers, of the form of a Chestnut, used to this
very day by the Spanish women in their Dances.

Verse 221. Such verse] As Homer's and Virgil's, so excellently good that boys
cannot spoil it with reading, if Scholars sit to hear it.

Verse 235. Cybel's Towell.] At the Circensian or Megalesian Plays, instituted
in honor of Cybele Mother of the Gods, they hung out a Towell to give notice
to the Town, as our Players used to put forth a Flag. The original of their
custom was from Nero, that hearing as he sat at dinner, with how much
impatience the people waited at the Court gates, to know his pleasure about the
Circensian Plays: he threw them out of the window the Towell he wiped his
hands with, to give them notice that he had dined, and would be presently at
the Circus; where ever after a Towell was hung out. Suet. in Ner.

Verse 237. Horse-stealer,] The Consul or Praetor; one of them being still
present at the Megalesian or Circensian Plays, in his Robe royal, which the
Romans proverbially called the Megalesian purple. At these Shows the Praetor,
when they ran their Chariot-races, would take the horses he liked best without
paying for them, under pretense of service to the Public, but keep them for
his private use; therefore Juvenal calls him the grand Horse-stealer.

Verse 242. Green-coats.] The four parties that ran Coach-races in the Circus,
were divided into several Liveries, viz. the Green-coats, the Russet-coats,
the Blue-coats and the White-coats. Henr. Salm. in Pencirol. cap. de Circ. Max.
To these four Domitian Caesar added two Companies more, the Gold-coats and the
Purple-coats. Suet. in Domit. ca. 7.

Verse 245. The Consuls.] P. Aemilius and. T. Varro, overthrown by Hannibal at
the Battle of Cannae; where Aemilius slew himself; but his Colleague Varro fled
to Rome, and had the thanks of the House for not despairing of the
Commonwealth. Live.

Verse 253. To bathe here at elev'n.] An hour before meat the Romans bathed, at
the eighth hour, which is our two a clock in the afternoon: but Juvenal invites
his friend Persicus at their fifth hour, which is our eleven a clock in the
morning; by which it appears he went to dinner at twelve, according to the
present custom of England.

The twelfth Design.
COrvinus 1 come, see 2 Juvenal perform
His vow, made for Catullus in a storm.
This 3 Lamb to 3 Juno, 4 that to 4 Pallas I
Will sacrifice, to 5 Jove this 5 Calf shall die
Upon green Turfe, which I will kiss with tears
For joy that earth once more Catullus bears.
That 6 draught of his sad wrack to me he sent
To be hung up a votive Monument,
With more such woeful Pictures, in the Fane
Of 7 Ceres, Goddess of our watery Plain:
How low the Tempest makes his tall Ship dive!
Whilst fire and water, waves and lightning, strive
Which shall devour her; the Lavinian Key
Stretching its stony arms into the Sea,
Would rescue her: and to the Lee they steer her,
To meet the embracing Port, but Death is nearer.
Down goes the Mast, the Bark is laid at hull,
Still still she bulges, she is stowed too full:
Now her rich lading overboard they cast;
Plate, purple Wool, rare Baskets: all hope past,
The Sun breaks out, the Wind turns gentle air;
The day was dismal, but the evening fair.


Figura Duodecima.
HUC 1 Corvine, tuum 2 Juvenalem solvere testis,
Debita quae Divis, si parceret unda sodali.
Candida 3 Junoni mactabitur agna 3; Minervae 4
Par 4 vellus dabitur; vitulus 5 Iovis 5 imbuet aras
Cespite de vivo; cui figo basia cultor
Laetitia illacrymans, pelago reddente Catullum.
Tradidit incolumis votivas ecce tabellas 6,
Quas Heluina 7 Ceres missae monimenta salutis
In Fanum accipiet; quo multa ostendit imago
Huic similes casus: Navim ut detrudit in imum
Tempestas victrix! ut mox ferit aethera velis!
Aemulus interea certat cum fulgure fluctus,
Vtri praeda ratis cedat: sed saxea profert
Brachia in auxilium portus porrecta Lavinus:
Tenditur ad positas inclusa per aequora moles;
Jamque prope est Statio, at propior Mors instat Amico:
Trunca suo pinus malo, scatet alveus undis;
Coepit cum ventis jactu decidere Vector,
Projicit argentum, tinctas and ab aere lanas,
Bascaudasque, volens etiam pulcherrima mitti.
Spes vitae cum sole redit; componitur Auster;
Atra Dies, toto sed fulget Vesper olympo.
The Manners of Men. THE TWELFTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The Poet sacrifices now
Those Beasts, which he did lately vow,
For his Corvinus: safe come back
From Sea, where he escaped a Wrack:
Nor does He this in hope of gain,
Like men that such Devotion fain
For sordid avaritious ends:
And neither are, nor merit, friends.
CORVINUS, I above my birthday prize
This sweeter day, this day of Sacrifice,
Which green turf waits for, which to heaven I owe:
To JUNO an Ewe-lamb, as white as snow:
The like to her, that brings into the field
The Mauritanian Gorgon in her Shield:
But that, kept for Tarpeian JOVE, takes scope,
And brandishing his forehead, shakes his rope;
For, it is a fierce Calfe, ripe for the design
Of the Altar, Temple, and besprinkling wine:
So great, that now to suck his Damme he scorns,
And vexes young Oaks with his budding horns.
Had I a fortune like my Love, a Bull,
Fatter then plump HISPULLA, I would pull,
Whose weight should sink him; not bred hereabout,
But one, that when his blood did issue out,
Should the rich pastures of Clitumnus show,
And some Arch-flamen's hand should give the blow:
For my friend's landing, from despair late raised,
Yet trembling, and even at himself amazed.
For horrors of the Sea and lightning past;
When Heaven thick darkness in one cloud o're-cast,
And, in an instant, fire the Sail-yards caught;
Whilst each, astonished, himself stricken thought;
And no one could the fate of drowning fear,
That saw the Shrowds and Sails in flames appear.
All things fall out in such a hideous form,
When there arises a Poetic storm.
Another kind of misery behold,
Hear with new pity: though the case be old,
And known to all that have in Temples been,
And there like fate in Votive Pictures seen;
ISIS you know feeds Painters, to express
In tables modells of my friend's distress.
When half his Ship took water; larboard here
The reeling tree, there starboard, forced to steer;
And wave on wave did of his skill defeat
The hoary Pilot: with the winds to treat
CATULLUS falls, and for his pattern takes
The Castor, that himself an Eunuch makes,
And to redeem his life his stones bestows;
So med'cinable he his dowcets knows.
Cast o're-board all that is mine, CATULLUS cries,
Willing his richest goods to sacrifice:
Purple for soft MECAENASES to wear;
Robes of those climes, which grass so noble bear,
As dies the fleece by nature; helped with rare
And unknown fountains, and the Baetick air.
To NEPTUNE silver Chargers he gave up,
Made by PARTHENIUS, and a goodly Cup
Of near two gallons, worthy to be brought
To thirsty PHOLUS, FUSCUS his wife's draught.
Besides his Baskets from the British Mart;
He drowned a thousand bolls of Grecian art,
Such as that royal Merchant tippled in,
Whose money did rich plated Olynth win.
Where Is such another in the world? that dare,
To save himself, thus cast away his ware?
Some do not get a fortune for life's sake:
But, blind, live that they may a fortune make.
Most of his wealth is sunk, nor helps the loss:
They lastly are enforced, all goes so cross,
To hew the Mast down: in their sad distress,
This cure's applied, and the tall Ship made less.
Go now, and to the wind commit thy breath;
Trust planks, four fingers breadth, removed from death,
Or seav'n, in case it be the thickest Pine;
Yet, with thy netted Knapsack, Biscuit, Wine,
And bursten-bellied Flagons, be so wise
To carry Hatchets, lest a storm arise.
But when the Sea was smooth, the heavens grown kind,
My friend's fate conquering the Sea and Wind;
When the three Sisters, pleased, fair work begun,
And by their bounteous hands white thread was spun:
The wind for these poor wretches blowing fair,
And little stronger then a gentle air,
With miserable shifts their course they sped;
For, Gowns and Cloaks, in stead of Sails, were spread;
Only the fore-sprit Sail entire remained.
The South Wind laid, now hope of life they gained,
With the Sun's presence: Our white Landmark then,
The Alban Mountain, came within their ken,
The seat where young IULUS pleased his mind,
Lavinium to his Stepmother assigned:
By the o're-joy'd Trojans, from the white Sow named,
That for her thirty ne're-seen paps was famed.
At last, they come within our Sea enclosed,
Our Tyrrhene Pharos; a work so composed,
That, Italy forsook, the forked Key
Runs to embrace the middle of the Sea.
Nature never made a Port of equal mark:
Through it the Master steers his broken Bark,
And brings her to an anchor, in the Lee,
Where Baian Lighters lie, from tempests free;
Their voyage the shaved Saylors there relate,
And with much pleasure of past dangers prate.
Go then boys, speak, and think all good success:
With flowers the soft hearths, and grass-altars dress;
Cast bran upon your knives. I Will come anon:
And these our greater Ceremonies done,
We Will home again; where lesser wreaths of flowers
Shall crown some lesser Images of ours,
Of frail, but shining wax; there I will turn
My JOVE'S fierce wrath away: there incense burn
To my paternall Lars; and flourish there
As many colors as the Violets wear.
All Is neat and fine, green boughs our gates adorn,
And hallowed Tapers, lighted with the morn.
Nor think, CORVINUS, this zeal counterfeit;
CATULLUS, for whose safe return I set
So many Altars up, has three heirs male.
Who, on a friend so hopeless, would entaile
A sick Hen? it is too costly; none I know
That on a Father will a Quail bestow.
All court the Childless: if they PACCIUS find,
Or rich GALLITA, fev'rishly inclined,
They post up prayers, and to the Gods vow feasts;
There are that promise Hecatombes of Beasts,
Elephants, that for State, not sale we feed;
Not Italy, but Sunburned climates breed
Those Monsters, kept in our Rutilian Grove,
Or TURNUS his Mead-royall, CAESAR'S drove:
They scorn to be a private-man's; as they
That served our Gen'ralls, and did once obey
The Tyrian HANNIBAL: and Epire's King;
Whose Ancestors into the field did bring
Part of his force, and met the Roman power,
Each bearing on his back a moving Tower.
Which could PACCUVIUS or NOVIUS, buy,
These Ivory-Portents, should Victims die,
GALLITA'S Lars and Deity to please:
Worthy this Goddess, and such Knaves as these.
Whereof the last named, did the Law allow,
Would some of his great train of Servants vow,
The goodliest bodies his command imployes;
Veil-ore the foreheads of young Girls and Boys:
Or if he had a Daughter of his own,
An IPHIGINIA, marriageable grown,
She should to the Altar; though he hoped to find
No Tragic slight, to change her for a hind.
My Roman puts down the Greek plot; who dare
A thousand Ships to a last Will compare?
For if Death's neer-aym'd dart the sick-man miss,
He Will alter's Will, caught in a net with this,
This precious merit, and sole heir create
PACUVIUS; who, his Rivals foiled, takes state.
See how this Rascal grows a man of note,
By cutting of his IPHIGINIA'S throat!
But let PACUVIUS live to NESTOR'S age,
Get more by craft, then NERO by his rage:
Pile gold up mountain high; and when it is done,
Nor love, nor be beloved of any one.
The Comment UPON THE TWELFTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Corvinus,] The Friend to whom Juvenal writes this Satyr.

Verse 4. Juno.] In the Capitol was the Temple of Jupiter, to which joined the
Temples of Juno and Minerva under one roof, cast into the figure of an Eagle,
that with his body covered Jupiter's Temple, and spread his wings over Juno's
and Minerva's. To these, being the principal of the selected Gods, milk-white
beasts were sacrificed; Bulls to Jupiter, Cowes to Juno and Minerva. Juvenal,
bounding his devotions within the limits of his fortunes, goes not to the
Capitol to pay his vow (for his friend's safe arrival) to these three Tarpeian
Deities; but building Altars of green Turfe, offers milk-white Sacrifices to
them all; to Juno an Ewe-lamb, another to Minerva, to Jupiter a young Bullock,
wishing him a Bull; as fat as Madam Hispulla, that fell in love with the
Tragedian. Sat. 6.

Verse 6. The Mauritanian Gorgon*] The Gorgons; Medusa, Sthenio, and Euryale,
were Daughters to Phorcus and Cete. They had the Isles of the Dorcades in the
Aethiopick Ocean, right against the Orchard of the Hesperides. They were
Martial Ladies (near the Mountain Atlas upon the borders of Mauritania)
conquered by Minerva, or Perseus, that slew their Queen Medusa. Xenoph. Herod.
Minerva is fabled to bear in her Shield Medusa's head, that turns men into
stones, because wisdom petrefies the hearts of men, making them constant and
immovable as Rocks.

Verse 10. Besprinkling Wine.] The grand Sacrifices are imitated by Juvenal
both in color and ceremony, for he sprinkles wine between the Bullocks horns:
Queen Dido did no more, when she offered a white Cow to Juno, as you may see
Aeneid. lib. 4.

Verse 17. Clitumnus,] A River that divides Vmbria and Tuscany. Philargyr.
whose water gives such virtue to the rich pastures adjoining, that all the Cows
grazing there have white Calves. Therefore the Capitoline Sacrifices came from
thence. Plin. lib. 2. Propert.

Verse 18. Arch-flamen.] The ordinary Minister that struck down the beast
sacrificed, was called Popa: but Juvenal, upon his Thanksgiving day, would have
had an Officer of better quality, some Flamen or Arch-flamen, in case his
fortunes had been no less then his friend-ship to Catullus, the Merchant.

Verse 33. Isis.] The Temple of Isis notorious, first for superstition, as
appears by the penance which the great Lady is ready to perform, if it be
white Io's pleasure. Sat. 6. secondly for lust. Sat. 9. is famous in the third
place, for pictures of wracks at Sea, vowed and dedicated to the Goddess Isis.
One would have thought the Romans had choice of Gods enough of their own: yet, it
seems, they thought not so; when in their dangers at Sea, they made so many
vows to the Egyptian Goddess Isis, as employed a whole company of
Picture-drawers only to draw votive Tables, that were to be hung up in her
Temple.

Verse 48. Baetick air.] In Baetick Spain (now Granada) is a pasture where the
air and water give a natural tincture to the sheeps Fleeces, dying the wool
upon their backs of a color between black and red.

Verse 50. Parthenius,] A Grecian, a great Master in the art of graving.

Verse 52. Pholus,] A notorius drunken Centaur. Theocr. When he treated
Hercules, he brought out a tun of wine, which he had buried in the sand; and
being pierced, it cast a perfume upon the air, which his neighbor- Centaurs
presently sented; and would have stormed the place, if it had not been defended
by Hercules, that killed many of the Assailants, and made the rest take their
heels. Diod. lib. 5.

Verse 52. Fuscus his Wife.] She might have been Pholus his Wife, if she could
drink between 2 and 3 gallons at once.

Verse 53. Baskets.] All the merchandise Great Britain afforded in my Author's
time; and so great a rarity the Romans thought them, that they made our British
word Latin, calling them Bascaudae; nay, they were angry that any but
themselves should be said to have found out the Art of making Baskets. Mart.
lib. 14.

Barbara de Pictis veni Bascauda Britannis,
Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam.
From British Picts the barbarous Baskets came,
But now Rome would gladly the invention claim.
Verse 55. Royal Merchant.] Philip, King of Macedon, that in the above
mentioned words of Horace, -- beat down City gates,
And foiled with gifts his rival-States.
The particular, here instanced by my Author, is the bargain which King Philip
made with Lasthenes and Eurycrates for the rendition of Olynth; a City of
Thrace near to Athos, then under the Command of the Athenians; not to be taken
either by a storm or siege, but only by that which K. Philip said would enter
the strongest Fortification, an Ass loaded with Gold. At this time his Gold
was laid out upon Merchandise, for it brought him in thrice as much in Plate.

Verse 73. Three Sisters.] Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos; of which in Sat. 3.
Juvenal here calls them Spinsters, that, according to the belief of the Romans,
in times of safty and prosperity spun white thread; and black, in times of
adversity and mortal danger.

Verse 82. Alban Mountain,] Where Ascanius built the City of Alba Longa,
leaving the Town of Lavinium to his Stepmother Lavinia. That Alba was so named
from the white Sow with thirty Pigs sucking her, vid. Sat. 4. and the Prophecy
in Virgil. Aeneid.

Verse 88. Tyrrhene Pharos,] The Port of Hostia (anciently Ostia) where Tiber
disburdens it self into the Tyrrhene Sea. Claudius Caesar, in imitation of
Pharos in Egypt, built the stony Arms of this Port: and for eleven years
together kept 30000 men at work upon it. Sueton. It was designed by Augustus,
and repaired by Trajan. See Pliny's Panegyric.

Verse 94. Baian Lighters,] Boats that came from Baiae, described in the
beginning of Sat. 3.

Verse 95. Shaved Saylors.] It was the custom for Roman Slaves, when they
received their freedom, to shave their heads before they put on their Hats:
those which, at the trial for their lives, were acquitted did the like,
showing themselves to Jupiter with their crowns shaved: and it is probable,
that Saylors, after they had escaped a shipwreck, used the same ceremony.

Verse 97. Speak and think.] The Romans thought that any man's good Omen
consisted in other men's words and wishes: Omen being only the conjunction of Os
and Men's, tongue and heart. Of the solemn form of Sacrifices used for good
Omens sake. See Brisson.

Verse 104. My Jove.] Juvenal's domestic Jove, molded in wax, as his Lars
were: to both which he sacrificed, abroad and at home: for though the Lar was
the household God, yet King Servius Tullius appointed him public; as well as
private, worship; and good reason he had, if the Lar begot him; as his Subjects
believed, by the apparition which his Mother, sitting by the fire side, saw
upon the hearth. Plut.

Verse 108. Hallowed tapers.] As well in domestic as public Thanksgivings,
the Sacrificers doors were stuck full of waxen tapers, bays, and flowers.

Verse 115. Paccius.] A rich childless man, presented by all the Roman
Heredipetae or Legacy-mongers. He is named by Tacitus, that calls him African.
lib. 20.

Verse 116. Gallita] Cruspilina; made great by wealth and barrenness, which;
both in good and bad times, are alike powerful. Tacit. lib. 17.

Verse 118. Promise Hecatombes.] For the recovery of sick men (provided they
were rich and childless) flattering knaves, that hoped for great Legacies,
would not stick to vow to the Gods Hecatombes of Elephants, if they were to be
had; which was impossible: for they were beasts never seen by the Romans, till
invaded by those dreadful enemies, Pyrrhus King of the Molossian Epirots
(whose Soldiers rid upon their backs in wooden Towers) and Hannibal, General
of the Carthaginians; here called Tyrian, because Queen Dido, the Foundress of
Carthage came from Tire. Nor in my Author's time were any Elephants fed or kept
in Italy, but only in the Meadows about Lavinium, conquered from Turnus by
Aeneas: both the Meads and Elephants now belonging to his successors, the
Caesar's.

Verse 129. Novius and Pacuvius,] Visiters of the sick Gallita, or Paccius;
both which they plied with warm gifts, in hope of large returns when their
Wills were proved.

Verse 138. Iphiginia.] In the beginning of Sat. 1. tit. Orestes you have the
story of Iphiginia brought to be sacrificed, for releasing the Trojan Fleet
that lay wind-bound at Aulis; and how Diana left a Hind in her place, and
carried the Princess into Taurica. Now, the bitter Satyrist says, that if his
fellow-Citizen Pacuvius should sacrifice an only Daughter for the recovery of
Gallita, he should not think the act of Agamemnon to be so commendable: for
alas! what is the freedom of 1000 Ships, to the glorious expectation of a
Legacy?

Verse 143. Death.] Libitina (so Juvenal) was the Goddess, in whose Temple all
things appertaining to funeral pomp and ceremony were bought and sold. Some
think, the Romans by Libitina meant Proserpine, Queen of the Infernal Regions.
Others think her to be Venus, and give this reason why all things belonging to
Funerals should be kept in her Temple; thereby to admonish us of humane
frailty; how near our End is to our Beginning, since the same Goddess is
Patroness both of life and death. Plut.

Verse 150. Nero by his rage,] That spared neither private persons, nor
public, nor the very Temples: and gave no office without this charge: Thou
know what I want, let us make it our business, that no body may have any
thing. Sueton.

The thirteenth Design.
FJe 1 Calvin; will thou shame thy self? a man
Of years, and sense, take on for a Trepan?
Because a seeming Friend * forswears a Trust?
The Gods, whose Altars he prophanes, are just;
And at this instant pour upon him all
The plagues, that on his head he wished might fall.
Were but his breast transparent, thou would see
His face is counterfeit, as false as he:
He smiles when thousand Furies tear his heart,
And even divinest objects make him start.
The God that shows like 2 Jupiter to us,
To 3 him looks like three-headed 3 Cerberus.
He hears his sentence from the 4 Flamen's breath,
Takes him to be a 5 Judge of life and death:
He thinks thy hand is heaved at whips and racks,
And that 6 rods circle-in the Popa's 7 axe.
If thou should study Ages for a curse,
Thou could not render his condition worse.
Yet lest Knaves should presume, upon his score,
To slight the Gods, which honest men adore:
He shall run on in mischief, till he meet
Deserved death, and thou shall live to see it.


Figura Decima Tertia.
NOnne pudet Te ridiculi, Calvine 1, doloris?
Nullus hebescenti seris venit usus ab annis?
Vsqueadeo mirum est, quod non Tibi reddat * Amicus
Depositum? justi, quorum violaverit aras
Perjurus, Dii sunt; ad dignas numina poenas
Deposcunt; sentit toties quas vovit Erinnys:
Ficta fenestrato simulatam pectore culpam
Frons male celaret; facies non consona menti:
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum,
Tu ridere putas; trepidat simulacra Deorum
Conscius inspiciens; nosterque est Jupiter 2 illi
Cerberus 3, and triplici rictu oblatrare videtur;
Terribilis dicat quod jus in Flamine 4 Praetor 5
Credit, and esse aram vitaeque necisque Tribunal;
Numina laesa putat flagro fidibusque litari,
Lictorem virgisque 6 Popae circundare ferrum:
Poena illum vehemens and multo saevior urget,
Quam si Te diris juvet auxiliaribus Orcus:
Sed ne successu crescat fiducia fraudis;
Justitiam ut discant moniti, and non temnere Divos;
Perfidus antiquis addit perjuria culpis,
Extinctum ut videas tota cum prole, superstes.
The Manners of Men. THE THIRTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
Old Calvin, of a Trust beguiled,
Is chid for vexing like a Child;
When by experience he has known
How base the cheating World is grown.
But this firm hope his heart may cheer;
Though such Rogues pass unsentenc'd here,
Yet conscience will their Hangman prove:
Nor can they escape the Judge above.
THe Crime committed presently torments
The Author; it is the first of punishments,
That no offender can himself acquit,
Though the bribed Praetor his just doom remit.
What sense, CALVINUS, think thou each man has
Of this Trepan? thy Trustee's broken faith?
Nor is thy stock so poor, that such a loss
Should sink thee: nor is it an unheard of cross;
The cheat is common, daily brought about,
A Lot from fortune's middle heap drawn out.
We must not let our grief be too profound:
Man's Pain should be no greater then his Wound.
Thou bear not a slight hurt; a scratch, a turn
Off fortune's wheel: thy bowels rage and burn,
That a pretended friend is so unjust,
Not to restore to thee a sacred Trust:
Is this news to one born, when CAPITO
Was Consul, above threescore years ago?
Gain'st thou by long experience nothing then?
It Is true; that Science makes the happy men,
Which conquers Fortune with celestial Books:
But yet, we call him happy too, that brooks
Life's discommodities: and never shakes
The yoke, but life for his directress takes.
What day so holy, but some Thief we find;
Perfidiousness, deceit of every kind?
Vice being grown a beneficial Trade,
By poison, and the sword, great fortunes made.
For, good men are grown scarce, the number small;
If It be summed up, you will not find in all
So many true deservers of that style,
As there are gates to Thebes, or mouths to Nile.
It Is the ninth Age, worse then the iron Times;
Nature no Mettle has, to name our crimes.
Yet, O the faith of Men and Gods, we cry,
In furious passion; with a voice as high
As theirs the Vocal Sportula do raise,
When they FAESIDIUS in his pleading praise.
Tell me Old Man, that should Child's bubbles wear:
Know not how many VENUSES appear
In others gold? nor how they laugh at thee,
That, simply, look no man should perjured be:
But would the world to a belief compel,
That Gods in Temples and red Altars dwell?
Thus lived the earth's honest Natives, e're his Crown
Old SATURN, flying for his life, laid down,
And took his Country-Sithe up: JUNO then
A little Girl, JOVE hid in IDA'S den:
No heavenly feasts above the clouds, no Boy
To wait Cup Bearer, was fetched up from Troy:
Nor wine fair HEBE filled; but VULCAN poured
Nectar himself, and his own fingers scoured,
Fould in his Lip'rene Workhouse: Then alone
Dined Gods, their crowd was not so numerous grown.
The Stars had not took in so great a freight,
But pressed poor ATLAS with a gentler weight.
The infernal regions no one's Lot had been,
No grim-fac'd DIS, and his Sicilian Queen:
No Wheel, Stone, Furies, no black Vultur's pain;
But Hell was free, and every Ghost did reign.
Fraud rare, and capital the crime was then,
If youths would not rise up to aged men;
A boy to any beard: although the Lad
More strawberries, more heaps of acrons had.
Four years precedence was so much esteemed:
Part of old age the chin's first down then seemed.
Now, if a man his friend's Depositum
Deny not, but returns the bag and sum,
With all the rust; the faith prodigious looks:
Worthy to be in Tuscan Soothsay'rs books
Recorded; even the place where it was found
Ought to be purged too, with a Lamb that is crowned.
To me an honest man more Monster seems
Then nature shakes at, when a woman teems
A Child with two heads; then Mules foaling found:
Or wondrous Fishes plowed out of the ground.
It mazes me as much, as if a shower
Of stones the clouds upon my head should pour;
Or as a swarm of Bees, of the Temple-top,
Hung like a bunch of grapes, as if'twould drop;
Or as a River, with a violent stream,
Flowed headlong to the Sea, that ran pure cream.
Thou cry'st out, that of ten Sestertia he,
By sacrilegious fraud, has cheated thee.
What if another has two hundred lost
By such a trust? if it a third has cost
As many as a spacious Chest could hold?
So easily men with the Gods make bold,
When they alone behold the sin we act:
No mortal being witness to the fact.
Mark's loud denial; how unmoved he bears
His juggling countenance: by SOL'S beams he swears:
JOVE'S Thunder; MARS his Spear; APOLLO'S Darts;
Her Shafts and Quiver that shoots Hindes and Hearts,
His Virgin-Sister: by, the Father to
AEGAEUS, NEPTUNE'S Trident: adds the bow
Of HERCULES, MINERVA'S Pike puts in:
With all the Arms stored in Heavens Magazin:
Wishes his Son's head boiled may be his meat,
Which he with Pharian Vinegar would eat.
There are that hold, all things by chance were made,
And that the world's by no first mover swayed,
Nature returning us the day and year;
And so touch any altars, void of fear.
To suffer for his crimes, another fears;
Thinks there are Gods, and yet himself forswears.
Forecasting thus, let ISIS punish me;
Upon my body, what she please, decree,
Beat with her timbrells my eyes out; so I,
Though blind, may keep the money I deny.
What is the ptisick, or the rotten cough
Of The lungs, or half a thigh, to gold enough?
So that ARCHIGENES be kept away
And Hellebor, brought from Anticyra,
Wherewith he gives his gouty Patients ease:
Poor nimble LADAS the rich gout would please.
For, what is the glory crowns a Foot-man's brows,
Those hunger-sterv'd Pisaean Olive-boughs?
But say the wrath of Heaven be great, it is slow;
And if the Gods destroy each guilty foe,
When will they come to me? Besides, I may,
As some do, get a pardon if I pray:
Men's fates are diverse, though their crimes be one;
A Cross exalts that Villain, this a Throne.
Thus their souls, trembling at foul sin, they cheer:
Then, if thou bid'st them at the altar swear,
They run before thee; nay pull thee along,
And vex thy spirits with a railing tongue:
For, in all causes, the impudent defense
Most men believe to be just confidence.
He, as 'twere in CATULLUS his fine Play,
Acts in thy ear the Mimick Runaway:
Louder then STENTOR thou cry'st out, poor wretch,
As loud as HOMER'S MARS his voice could stretch:
Hear'st JOVE? nor speak thou? now when words should pass
Whether thou were of Marble, or of Brass?
Else why our papers open we so fast,
And on thy coals religious incense cast?
The liver of a Calf why do we cut,
And Swine's white cauls upon thy altar put?
For ought I see in Statues; as divine
That of BATHYLLUS is, as this of thine.
Against this disease, take what he can prescribe
That never read Cynicks, nor the Stoic Tribe,
Differing from them but in a Cloak: nor cares
How on poor roots pleased EPICURUS fares.
Great Doctors must do desperate Patients good,
But thee even PHILIP'S Prentice may let blood.
If thou on earth no crime so foul can find,
I Am silent; beat thy breast, if the have a mind:
Or with thy open palm afflict thy face;
Thy doors may well be shut in such a case:
With much more tumult and a deeper groan,
Our moneys then our fun'ralls we bemoan.
Here no man counterfeits, and is content
His upper garment should in jest be rent,
And his eyes troubled with a humor strained:
Lost money is bewailed, with tears unfain'd.
But if thou see each Court of Justice spread
With such complaints; if in Deeds, ten times read,
The hand's forsworn, whose characters reveal
The writer, known by his Sardonix Seal;
That stone, which for a Paragon was set,
And still locked up in's Ivory Cabinet.
Do thou conceive thy self so fortune-free,
That common accidents should pass by thee,
As Son of a white Hen, poor we the Dregs
And baser Chickens of unlucky Eggs?
Thy little loss can move but little spleen,
If by thy eyes the earth's greater crimes be seen.
Compare hired Thieves; fires treacherously raised
By sulphur, which have at our gates first blazed;
Compare those that from Temples steal old bouls,
Whose very rust strikes reverence in our souls.
Gifts, dedicated by some foreign State,
Or Crowns, our ancient Kings did consecrate.
Have you not these? you have a lesser Knave,
Who sacrilegiously the gold will shave
From HERCULES his thigh, or NEPTUNE'S chin,
Or that thin Plate, which CASTOR'S clothed in:
And that no scruple in his conscience felt,
When he the Thunderer himself did melt.
Compare them that buy poisons, or compound;
And them, that in the Sea are to be drowned
In an Oxe-hide: sowed up with a poor Ape,
Whose fortune is, though guiltless, not to escape.
Yet these are peccadillo's, if conferred
With those enormous wickednesses, heard
By GALLICUS, the Praetor of the Town.
From the Sun's rising to his going down:
If thou would know the nature of Mankind,
In that one house thou may their Manners find:
Spend there some time, and, when thou home repair'st,
Call thy self miserable if thou dare.
In the Alps, who think swollen throats strange? or a teat
In Meroe, then the Nurse-child more great?
Who wonders at the Germans watchet eyes,
And yellow locks, that like Rams horns do rise,
Which unguents make not from the Curle to fall?
The reasons's plain, it is nature in them all.
When from their cloud the Cranes do give alarms,
The valiant Pygmey stands unto his arms:
But, too weak for the Thracian bird, he is snapt:
And through the air in crooked tallons rapt.
Thould'st die with laughing, should thou see this here;
But though such battails are fought daily there,
It is ridiculous in no ones eye:
Where the whole Regiment's but one foot high.
But, shall thy perjured Cheat unpunish't escape?
No sure, his soul's in chains; we could not shape
A torment greater; what would fury more?
But still thou loosest; he will never restore
The sum in's hands, deposited by thee.
O 'twould be envied comfort, might thou see
Him dying for it, and dropping his last blood:
Revenge then life it self's a greater good.
Thus fools at no cause, or at toys, take fire;
The least occasion serves to blow up ire.
CHRISIPPUS his opinion was not such,
Mild natured THALES would not say thus much.
The good old man, that did a neighbor live
To sweet HYMETTUS; would not, fettered, give
Part of that hemlock in his cup infused,
Even to the Rogue by whom he was accused.
Happy Philosophy! that by degrees
Kills vices first, then souls from error frees.
For, to rejoice when those we hate do smart,
Argues a feeble and a narrow heart;
Which instantly you may from hence collect,
That women most of all revenge affect.
But think thou he escapes, whose conscience makes
Whips that, unheard, his guilty soul still shakes?
The Judge CAEDITIUS cannot here invent,
Nor RHADAMANTH in Hell, a punishment
To equal his, that is day and night oppressed,
Bearing about his Witness in his breast.
A Spartan, by the Pythia, answered was,
That he should, not one day, unpunisht pass;
Because to break a trust he did but doubt,
And if his legal oath might bear him out:
What the God thought on it, he inquiry made,
And if APOLLO would the fact persuade.
Fear then, not conscience, made him render it.
Yet, all the Prophecy did well befit
The approachless Oracle: he found it true,
Extinguished with his issue; with the crew
Of his whole family, and numerous kin:
So was he plagued but for a will to sin.
The Intent of fraud is taken for the Act;
What is it then if one commit the fact?
Perpetual anguish; at his meat no pause,
Which sticks, and swells betwixt his sickly jaws.
The wretch spits out the cordial of the Vine,
Dislikes the precious age of Alban wine.
Bring better: in thick pleits his brows are shrunk,
As if he Falern vinegar had drunk.
If night his cares with some short slumber ease,
And rest, in's tumbled bed, his body seize;
The Temple, the Altar, the injured God, (and what
His soul in's agony most trembles at)
He sees thy sacred Shape: then man more tall,
That frights his sleep, and makes him utter all.
This is the man that, when it lightens, quakes;
And when it thunders, heavens first murmur shakes
His soul out: not the wind's, not fortune's ire,
Falls down, but angry and revenging fire.
That storm past, greater is the next believed:
As if he were by the clear sky reprieved.
Then, with a sleep-less Fever, if he get
A Plurisie; he thinks the Gods have set
(By whom he cannot hope to be forgiven)
These plagues upon him: stones and darts of heaven.
To promise to his Lars the bleating flock,
He dares not, nor the comb of a poor Cock.
For, to sick guilty men, what hope survives?
No victim but more worthy then their lives.
Nature, in evil men, is wavering still,
And timorous; only bold in doing ill:
But when it is once committed, to their sight
Then come the lively forms of wrong and right.
Yet, to those crimes their consci'nces cashiere
Nature relapses, fixed and constant there.
Who bounds his vices? when did banished grace
Return, if once but wiped out of the face?
Who e're saw man contented to have done
One villainy? the perjured Knave will run
Upon this quest, till he at last be took,
And sent to the black Dungeon and the Hook;
Or to the Aegaean Rocks, that entertain
Great Exiles; thou shall glory in his pain,
And odious name: and once, with comfort, find
No God is deaf, nor, like TIRESIAS, blind.
The Comment UPON THE THIRTEENTH SATYR.
VErse 2. The first of punishments] Is the Malefactors Conscience. Magna est
vis, etc. Great is the power of Conscience on both parts; that neither the
innocent can fear, and yet guilty men ever have their punishments before their
eyes. Cic.

Verse 4. Praetor.] The Praetors, in their institution, were Deputies to the
Consuls, when the Wars impeded their administration of Justice to the people.
At first there was but one sworn Praetor: afterward, Causes multiplying, the
Praetor Peregrinus, or Country Praetor, was added, and the number at last
increased to 18. The two first Praetors (Presidents of the Centumvirall Ballot.
Plin.) were they that ought to have done justice to Calvinus: for to their
Jurisdiction it belonged, to give judgment in Cases of equity, and to decree
restitution for money or goods unlawfully detained. Rosin. Ant. Romans lib. 7.
cap. 11.

Verse 6. Thy Trustee's broken faith.] Perditissimi hominis est, etc. It is the
part of a Villain, at once both to break friendship, and to deceive him that
had not been damnified, if he had not trusted. idem.

Verse 11. We must not let our grief.] Neve tam graviter, etc. We must not take
those misfortunes so grievously which by no council we can avoid: and by
calling to mind the like fortunes of others, we may know that ours is no new
accident. Cic.

Verse 16. A sacred Trust.] Aristotle in his Problems queries, Why there is
more injustice in denying a Trust, then a Debt? He answers, Either because it
is base to wrong a Friend: or because a greater injury is committed; For,
besides the Loss, Faith is violated.

Verse 17. Capito.] L. Fonteius Capito, when Nero Caesar reigned, was Colleague
in the Consulship with C. Vipsanius. From hence may be computed the time when
Juvenal lived and writ this Satyr, viz. in the second year of the Emperor
Hadrian. in the year of Rome 872. See Lips. lib. 4. Epist. Quaest. Epistola 20.

Verse 20. That Science.] Philosophy; especially in the Stoics books, that bid
every man look for all manner of evils and adversities. If they happen, things
foreseen will be suffered with more ease: if they happen not, that which is
beyond Hope should be accounted Benefit. Read Seneca and Epictetus.
Magnitudinis animi proprium est, etc. It is proper to great spirits, to fear
nothing, to despise all humane things, and to think nothing that can happen to
man insufferable. Cic.

Verse 32. Thebes,] That had as many Gates as Nile had Mouths, viz. 7. But then
you must understand Thebes in Boeotia; for Thebes in Egypt had a hundred. Sat.
15. And Thebes lies with her hundred Gates interred. The seven Mouths of Nile
are named in the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 33. Ninth Age.] Juvenal reckons one Age more then the Tuscan
Soothsayers: yet they were thought great men, as appears in this Satyr. -- the
Faith prodigious looks,
Worthy to be in Tuscan Soothsay'rs books
Recorded --
The Question was, What the shrill and mournful sound of the trumpet
signified, which in a clear sky and hot day the Romans heard in the air?
Resolved by the Tuscan Soothsayers, That it portended the End of that Age of
the World, and the Beginning of another Age. For, the World was to have eight
Ages, different in lives and manners: to every one of these God had limited a
certain time, within the compass of the great year. Now, at the going out of
one Age, and the coming in of another, the Earth or Heaven produces some
Prodigy whereby the Masters in this knowledge presently discern, that men will
alter in their lives and manners; and accordingly be more or less favored by
the Gods, then those of the former Age. Plut. in Syll. But their eight Ages
might be named by several Metalls: Gold, Silver, Electrum, Brass, Copper, Tin,
Lead, and Iron: therefore Juvenal adds a ninth, -- worse then the Iron times;
Nature no mettle has to name our crimes.


Verse 37. Vocal Sportula.] The Men (or rather Voices) that feed upon the
meat-Sportula of Faesidius the Lawyer, which obliges them to cry him up when he
pleads his Clients Causes.

Verse 39. Child's bubbles.] The bullaes or bubbles, worn by the Children of the
Romans, vid Sat. 5.

Verse 46. Old Saturn,] Called (...), Time, and still painted with a Sithe. In
his reign the Poets (supposing it to be the beginning of Time) fancied the
Golden Age, or the purest World, men being then ignorant of vices; which
ignorance of vice (as Justin says of the Thracians) brought the Barbarians to
more perfection, then ever the Philosophers attained by the Knowledge of
Virtue. See the beginning of the Com. upon Sat. 6.

Verse 48. Ida,] A Mountain, near Troy, famous for the concealment of Jupiter
from, his devouring Father, Saturn: as also for Paris; there he was bred
amongst the Shepherds, and gave the golden Ball from Juno and Pallas to Venus:
lastly for Ganymede, Son to the King of Troy, taken up from thence by the Eagle
(as in the Comment upon Sat. 5.) and carried to Heaven, to be Cupbearer to
Jupiter in place of Hebe, the Goddess of Youth; afterward married to Hercules.
This remove of Hebe incensed her Mother Juno against the Trojans, almost as
much as the judgment of Paris in contempt of her beauty.

Verse 53. Liparene Workhouse,] One of the 7. Liparene Islands; called Ephesian
by the Greeks, Vulcanian by the Latins. See the beginning of the Comment upon
Sat. 1.

Verse 56. Atlas.] Juvenal thinks it great injustice to poor Atlas, that so
many new Gods should come into Heaven to oppress him with their weight: one of
the number being Hercules, that once eased him of his load.

Verse 65. Four years precedence.] Apud antiquissimos Romanorum, etc. Among the
most ancient Romans, neither to the greatness of birth or wealth was more
honor done; then by the younger to the elder persons, which they reverenced,
and worshipped, almost as much as their Parents, and the Gell. lib. 2. cap. 15.

Verse 67. Depositum,] Any thing entrusted by a man to the faith of another man.

Verse 70. Tuscan Soothsayers.] The Romans had the art of Divination from the
Tuscan Soothsayers, that presaged of future events by Prodigies: which they
still put upon record. See the former part of the Comment upon this Satyr. Tit.
Ninth Age.

Verse 73. A Lamb that is crowned) With flowers, as all beasts sacrificed were.

Verse 96. Aegaeus,] Father to Theseus the Founder of Athens.

Verse 99. Wishes his Son's head boiled.] The Rogue, when he denies a sum of
money deposited in his hands; after he has sworn by all the Artillery of
Heaven, will not stick to make Imprecations against himself; and wish, that he
may fare like Thyestes, that eat the head of his own Son. See the end of the
Comment upon Sat. 8. Only this perjured Villain would have worse sauce then
Thyestes had: for, his story mentions no vinegar made in the Isle of Pharos,
which is the sharpest in the world.

Verse 101. All things by chance were made] An opinion detested by Seneca, that
says, Nature, Fate, Fortune, Chance, are all names of one and the same God.

Verse 102. No first Mover.] A Villain would gladly make himself believe there
is no God, if he could: but, as my Lord of St. Albons observed, though the fool
in his heart has said there is no God, yet he has not thought so. A vicen
affirms; He that sees not God in nature, wants not only reason, but even sense.

Verse 104. Touch any Altars.] When a man would put a Trustee to his oath, he
brought him into the Temple, and there made him swear, laying his hand upon the
Altar. A great example of this custom, with the punishment of the perjured
Rogue, we have in the history of Herodotus One Archetimus, in his journey,
deposited a great sum of gold in the hands of his Host Cydias. When he
returned, he asked for his gold: Cydias absolutely denied it. After a long
contest, the Plaintiff referred himself to the Oath of the Defendant. Cydias
scrupling at Perjury, resolved to swear by Equivocation; and for that purpose
put all the Gold into a great Cane. Upon his day, he appears in a sickly
posture, leaning upon this Cane, walks with it to the Temple, and when he
kneeled down at the Altar, gave it Archetimus, to hold till the ceremony should
be ended. Then, lifting up his hands, he confessed upon Oath, that he had
received the Gold wherewith he was charged, but withal he swore, that he had
again delivered the same individual Gold to the Defendant. Archetimus hearing
this, in a fury threw upon the Marble floor the Cane, which with the outward
violence, and weight within it broke to pieces, and out came all the Gold. Thus
providence righted him: and Cydias, by report, dyed miserably.

Verse 109. Timbrels.] Gold, Silver, or Brass Timbrells, used in their
ceremonies by the Priests of Isis, in whose Temple was the Image of Harpocrates
with his finger cross his lips, and that Goddess, together with this God of
Silence, were believed to send diseases into humane bodies.

Verse 113. Archigenes,] The greatest Physician of Rome, the Roman Mayhern.

Verse 114. Anticira.] An Island, near to the Maliack Gulf and the Mountain
Oeta, mentioned as part of Thessaly by Strab. lib. 9. In this Isle grows the
black Hellebore, which cures an old Gout. Plin.

Verse 116. Nimble Ladas,] Footman to Alexander the great. He ran so nimbly,
that the print of his foot was not seen upon the gravel. His Statue was set up
at Argos, in the Temple of Venus, after he had won the foot-race in the
Olympic Games. These sacred Games were instituted by Hercules in honor of his
Father Jove, near to the City of Olympia in Elis. These consisted of five
Exercises; casting the Javelin, flinging the Iron-ball, leaping, wrestling, and
running foot-matches and Chariot-races: they began every five years, and ended
in five days. The Conqueror was crowned with an Olive-wreath, got in a Grove
of Olives near the City of Pisa in Elis; and therefore by Juvenal called
Pisaean Olive boughs: and such honor was done him, that his Chariot came not
in by the City gates, but the walls were pulled down, for him to enter at the
breach. From these Games the Grecians had their Era, or account of years,
beginning with the first Olympiad, in the year of the Julian Period 3938.

Verse 119. Say the wrath of Heaven be great, it is slow.] Yet as slow as it is,
sure it will be. Divine wrath by slow degrees proceeds to vengeance; but the
long sufferance is paid for by the greatness of the punishment. Val. Max.
Caesar says gravely, The Gods are accustomed, that men may be more afflicted
with the change of their condition, sometimes to give wicked men prosperous
success, and longer impunity.

Verse 131. Catullus,] The Author of the Comedy called Phasma, or the Phantasm,
mentioned Sat. 8. wherein, it should seem, there was a spirit or echo, that
answered and mocked some poor man, till it made him call as loud as Calvin cried
out upon his perjured Trustee, that is, says my Author, as loud as Homer's
Stentor, that was able to drown the cries of fifty shouting together: or indeed
as loud as Homer's Mars, that when he was wounded by Pallas, or Diomedes,
roared louder then the cries of an Army, when ten thousand men join battle.
Hom. Iliad. lib. 5.

Verse 142. Bathyllus,] A rare Lutenist, and an excellent Mimick, to whom a
Statue was set up at Samos in Juno's Temple, by the Tyrant Polycrates.

Verse 143. He,] That is Juvenal himself.

Verse 145. A Cloak.] The Cynicks wore two upper garments: the Stoics only a
thin Cloak. This is all the difference Juvenal puts between them; for their
Doctrine was the same. They both contemned riches, and agreed in this Maxim,
That Virtue needs no addition, but of it self is sufficient to make life happy.

Verse 146. Epicurus,] Father of the Epicurean Sect. He placed the Summum
bonum, or felicity of Man, in Pleasure: not as Aristippus did, in the pleasure
of the Body, but of the Mind; and in the absence of Pain. He condemned the
Dialecticks, because he affirmed, that Philosophy might be taught in plain and
easy words. He denied the providence of the Gods in humane affairs. So much
is ascribed to him by Lucretius, that he confidently avouches, Epicurus
obscured the light of all the other Philosophers, no less then all other
heavenly bodies are darkened by the Sun. And though (from his opinion, that
felicity consists in pleasure) all Voluptuaries, by a common mistake, are
called Epicureans: yet we have, besides this place of Juvenal, good authority,
that Epicurus was a most temperate man: contenting himself with a little
Garden, and feeding upon Herbs; not to provoke hunger, but to satisfy it.
Senec.

Verse 148. Philip,] A Country Surgeon, yet his Apprentice had skill enough
to bleed Calvin: therefore Juvenal, as somewhat a better Artist, undertakes his
cure.

Verse 152. Thy doors may well be shut] It was the Roman custom, and is ours
at Funerals and in the time of mouring, to shut up the doors, and darken the
Rooms. Which the Satyrist wishes men would do, that have lost their money;
because they look upon it as a sadder calamity then the loss of friends or
nearest relations: therefore, the grief being greater, why should the signs of
grief be less?

Verse 162. Sardonix Seal.] A coat of Arms cut in a Sardonix; which precious
stone being laid up in a Lord's Cabinet, whereof he himself kept the key; there
could be little probability that the impression should be counterfeited.

Verse 167. A white Hen.] Albae Gallinae filius, Son of a white Hen, was a
Proverb with the Romans: amounting to as much, in point of good luck, as our
English Proverb, Wrapped in's Mothers Smock.

Verse 180. Castor.] Castor and Pollux, Sons to Jupiter by Laeda, Tyndarus the
King of Sparta's Wife, deceived by Jupiter in the shape of a Swan, by whom she
had two eggs, and Twins in both: in the first, Helen and Pollux: in the other,
Castor and Clytemnestra. These Brothers cleared the Laconick Sea of Pirates,
and for that action were accounted Gods of the Sea, and prayed unto by
Mariners in a Tempest. They went with the Argonauts to Colchos: in which
voyage, Pollux killed Amycus King of the Bebrycians, that would have
intercepted him. At their return to their Country, they recovered their Sister
Helen, stolen by Theseus: and in his absence took a City from him. When Castor
died, the Grecians (as true historians as Lucian) say that Pollux (who, as
aforesaid, was hatched out of the same immortal Egg with Helen) prayed to his
Father Jupiter, that he might divide his immortality with his Brother: which
suit being granted, they both died, and both revived. This Fable was invented
from those Stars, the celestial Twins, called Castor and Pollux by the Greeks,
both rising and setting together. Castor had a Temple in Rome, where the great
money-Masters kept their iron-barred Trunks, when they durst no longer trust
Mars with them. Sat. 14. And what Chests, lined with gold, with iron bound
Castor now watches, --
some of this gold Castor had for guarding it, though not very much, as may be
gathered by his coat of Plate, beaten very thin.

Verse 185. In an Oxe-hide.] For many hundreds of years, from the foundation of
Rome, there was no Law made against a Child for killing of his Father or
Mother: nor on the other part, against Fathers and Mothers for murdering their
Children. Both Romulus and Solon forbore to make any such Law, because they
thought it impossible that such impiety should be committed; and likewise
because the prohibition might prove a provocation to the crime. Cic. pro Sext.
Rosc. The wickedness of after Ages enforced the legislative power to punish
those unnatural Offenders in this manner; The Murderer was sowed up in a
leathern Sack with a Viper, and so cast into the Sea. Senec. lib. 5. Controv.
4. in fine. But in Juvenal's time the Viper had the company of an Ape. Sat. 8.
For whom we should, not as one Parracide,
One Ape, One Serpent, and One Sack provide.
Afterward the circumstances of the punishment are thus described, The
Parricide, having been whipped till he was cased in blood, was sowed up in the
Sack called Culeus, together with a Dog, a Cock, a Serpent and an Ape. Hern.
Modest. Digest. lib. 48. ad leg. Pomp. de parric. See Coel. Rhod. lib. 11. cap.
21.

Verse 189. Gallicus.] Rutilius Gallicus the Praetor Vrbanus, so favored by
Domitian Caesar, that no Judge but he had any power at Court, and all the
business of the Forum and the Town was brought before him in his private house.

Verse 196. Meroe.] You may add to the description of Meroe in the Comment upon
Sat. 6. That the Island-Nurses had breasts bigger then the Children that sucked
them; for which you have Juvenal's authority, that lived in Egypt.

Verse 102. The valiant Pygmey.] The Pygmeys are a People in the farthest parts
of India. Plin. l. 7. living in a healthful air, and a Country where the
whole Year is Spring time. The tallest Pygmey is but three spans in height, the
ordinary sort only a cubit high; from whence they derive their name of Pygmey,
(...) signifying a cubit. Their Wives child every fifth year; and at eight are
old women. Some say, they ride upon Goats with darts in their hands. In the
Spring of the year, the whole Nation marches to the Sea shore, where, in three
months time, they destroy the Eggs and Chickens of their enemies the Cranes,
which otherwise would oppress them with multitude. They build their houses of
clay, birds dung and feathers. In Thrace they held the City of Getania, till
the Cranes took it, and forced them to seek out a new Plantation. Plin. lib. 4.
cap. 11. So Stephan; that says, the Pygmeys had their name from Pygmaeus the
Son of Dorus, Nephew to Epaphus. Olaus Magnus tells us, they are found in the
Northern parts of the world, and by the Germans called Serelinger, that is, a
pace long. They are properly called Pumiliones or Dwarfs by Stat. lib. 1. Sylv.
I should hardly have believed there could be such a People, but that my Author
sets not his mark upon them, as part of an old Nurses tale; which neither he
would, nor any learned or rational man will do, when he finds them cleared
from that scruple by Aristotle lib. 8. Animal. where he calls them Troglodytes,
because they live in Caverns under ground, placing them in Aethiopia. Upon the
River Ganges in the East Indies, they have the City Catuzza. Philost. See
Homer. Pompon. Gell. Their ridiculous shape you may find in Ctes.

Verse 219. Chrysippus,] The Stoic: whose Sect would not allow a man to have
any passion, as not agreeable to his rationality. See the beginning of the
Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 220. Thales,] One of the seven Sages of Greece. He was the first that
taught his Countrymen Geometry. Apulei. By his constant study of nature, he
is said to have found out the distinctions of time: the quarters of the wind:
the diameter of the Sun to be the 720th part of his Circle: the motions of the
Stars: the cause of Eclipses, and of the dreadful sound of Thunder: the
obliquity of the Zodiac: the five Circles or Zones of the Celestial Sphere,
and the Suns annual return. His profession was Merchandise. Plut. He departed
this life in the first year of the 58 Olympiad, Pausanias Erxyclides being
Archon, dying as he sat at the Olympic Games, quite spent with heat and
thirst, which at 87 or 90 years of age, might easily overcome his weak spirits.

Verse 221. The good old man.] Socrates, Neighbor to sweet Hymettus, a
Mountain in Attica, abounding with Bees, and excellent sweet honey. Stephan.
Suid. He being falsely condemned (as in the beginning of the Comment upon Sat.
2.) was so far from desiring to be revenged of his Accusers, or Judges, that he
would not suffer Lysias the Orator to plead in his defense. Cic. in Cat. Major.
Socrates professed, no man could hurt him, because no man can be hurt by any
but himself: and in Plato, he proves the doer of an injury to be more miserable
then the sufferer. No change of fortune could make him change his contenance,
which was the same, even when he drank his poison.

Verse 225. Happy Philosophy,] Which armed Chrysippus, Thales and Socrates
against the injury of man, and power of fortune.

Verse 233. Caeditius,] A Judge, under the Emperor Vitellius, so cruel that he
is compared to Rhadamanth, one of the Judges of Hell.

Verse 237. A Spartan.] Glaucus, Son to Epicidides of Lacedaemon; He had so
great a name for a just dealer, that a Milesian told him, he was desirous to
enjoy the benefit of his justice; and therefore having sold half his Estate, he
came to deposite the money in his hands. After the Milesian's death, his Sons
demanded the money deposited: Glaucus denied the receipt, and turned them out
of Town. They went to Milesium; he to Delphos, where he put this Case to the
Oracle; What if a man forswear himself? The Pythia (or Apollo's Prophetic
Priestess) answered, He that swears false may gain by it, but shall dye: so
shall he that swears the truth; but the perjured man shall leave no issue: by
degrees his perjury shall eat out his House, Name, and Family. Glaucus,
terrified with this answer, humbly begged pardon of Apollo, whereunto the
Pythia replied, To tempt the God, and to commit the fact, is one and the same
crime. Glaucus sent for the Milesians, and restored to them the money deposited
by their Father: Yet, a while after he died an untimely death; and his Family
was extirpated root and branch. Herodot. lib. 7.

Verse 274. The comb of a poor Cock] For the recovery of a sick person at Rome,
Sheep and Lambs were sacrificed to his Lars or household Gods, and a Cock to
Aesculapius; which had been the ancient custom of the Greeks, as you see in
the last words of Socrates; O Crito, I owe Aesculapius a Cock, be sure to pay
my debt.

Verse 289. Aegaean rocks.] This answers to the place in Plinius Secundus (as
I have observed in my Notes upon his Panegyric, page 22.) his words are these:
How much diversity of times could do, is now specially known; when to the same
Rocks, where formerly every innocent person, now only the guilty are confined:
and all those desert-Islands which late were filled with Senators, are now
planted with Informers.

Verse 292. Tiresias,] A Theban Prophet, Son to Everus. His Countrymen the
Grecians, that instead of writing Histories tell tales, do say, That in
Cythaeron he saw two Dragons in the act of generation, and taking notice which
was the female, killed her: immediately he himself was turned into a woman.
After seven years, he met with the like sight again, slew the male Dragon, and
was restored to his first shape and sex. Then, a dispute happening between Juno
and Jove, Whether male or female had more sense of pleasure, Tiresias was made
Umpire, and gave judgment for Jove, that the pleasure is greater in the
female. For this, Juno took away his sight: others say he was struck blind when
he saw Pallas naked. Jove, to recompense the loss of his sight, gave him the
spirit of foresight, making him a Prophet. Ulysses questioned his soul in
Elyzium, as in the Comment upon Sat. 9. The Monument of Tiresias was erected at
the foot of the Mountain Tilphossus in Boeotia, near to the Fountain Tilphossa,
where, in the time of his banishment, he ended his life by a draught of cold
water, which in extreme old age oppressed his spirits in a moment. After his
death, the Thebans gave him divine honors. Of his transformation read Ovid.
Metam. lib. 3.

Figura Decima Quarta.
VIrtutis ratio est vitioso magna parenti,
In sobolem si restet amor, si viscera tantum.
Talos profusus 1 pater odit, parvulus haeres
Cum ludit, mimusque eadem movet arma fritillo.
Fastidit lautae senior Gulo fercula coenae,
Insignem bulla puerum 2 erudiente Magiro
Fictile condire, and, plumas ubi detrahat, ollae
Indere ficedulas, in eodem jure natantes,
Quo spes merguntur, quas concepere Propinqui.
Musica nulla sonat vernaeque Laris que Tyranno 3
Tortorum in strepitu, cum filius esse Procrustes
Coepit, sopitosque breves extendere servos.
Lena 4 parens (vafram quae docta Cupidinis Artem,
Filiolae dictat, qua sit lactandus Adulter)
Dispumat quoties vinum, se sobria damnat,
Pupam maternae quod traxerit orbita culpae.
Gibbosus 5, majusque animo quam corpore monstrum
Instituit similem and qualem generaverat offam,
Per quodvis augere jubens patrimonia crimen:
Ast ubi, quem docuit, geniti cadet ense Magister
Victima Avaritiae, superis si redditus auris,
In melius prolem teneris effingeret annis*


The fourteenth Design.
IF vicious Parents did but love their blood,
Even for their Childrens sake, they would be good.
What 1 Gamester hates not play, that sees his Son,
New-coated, trying how the Dice will run?
Who loathes not feasts, that has in's Kitchen took
His 2 Heir, instructed by his Master-Cook,
Pulling of wild foul, in the Bisk to swim:
Thus sinking all his Kindred's hopes of him?
A 3 Tyrant in his house: will not be mild
To his whipped Slaves: when he beholds his Child,
His young Procrustes, stretch a sleeping boy
To help his growth? The 4 Bawd, that (to employ
Her long experience) her Daughter schools,
When she writes letters to her amorous fools:
If Sack would suffer her, must curse the time
That e're she used the Girl in her like Crime.
The 5 Wretch, that makes his Son a truer Ape
Of his ill nature, then his ugly shape:
Advising him his fortunes to improve;
By all means, all obstructions to remove;
When his apt Scholar kills him, might he live,
Would to his next Child better Precepts give.
The Manners of Men. THE FOURTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
By Parents ill examples led,
Their Children are to Gaming bred,
To gluttony, to rage, to lust,
To getting wealth by ways unjust;
When Creatures merely sensitive
To their seed generous breeding give.
And Man for shame should teach to His,
What Nature, and Right Reason is.
TThere are, FUSCINUS, certain stains that spoil
A handsome Breeding, and fame's beauty soil
In many things, which in a blood do run:
Derived from the lewd Father to the Son.
If the Old Man dice, the Heir in long-coats will do
The like, and flings out of small boxes too.
What better hope can any kinsman have
Of Boys, that Mushromes for the Olio shave,
And drown the Beccafico's swimming in it:
Taught by the knave their father; taking hint
From gray-hair'd gluttony? In their sev'nth year,
E're all their black teeth cast, the white appear:
A thousand Tutors with grave beards provide
On this, as many on the other side,
He will love costly suppers still, and hate
From a great Kitchen to degenerate
Mild temper, that will pardon small mistakes:
That servants souls and ours one matter makes:
Like Elements our bodies: is this taught:
Or Cruelty by RUTILUS? That Is caught
With a delight to hear whips crack their strings,
And thinks no Siren half so sweetly sings:
The ANTIPHATES, and POLIPHEME, to fright
His House; pleased when is Tormentor, in his sight,
Into's slave's forehead a hot Iron runs,
For two course napkins lost; what learn his Sons
Of him; that loves chains clinking, and to stand
Spelling the letters Country Hang-men brand?
Could thou think LARGA'S daughter would not prove
A wench? whose lips so fast can never move,
Reckoning the partners in her mothers crimes,
But that she must, at least, breath thirty times?
She, a young child, knew when the Adulterer
Came to her mother, that is now Bawd to her:
By the old-one, are her little letters penned,
And she has the same messenger to send.
Thus nature works us; swiftly, in a trice,
We are corrupted with domestic vice,
When Presidents of sin great Authors give;
Perhaps one Youth or two, untainted live,
Born to despise it, whose hearts TYTAN may
Have framed with more art, and of better clay.
But others in their Parents footsteps run,
And track that beaten path they ought to shun.
Let us abstain from any thing amiss;
For which one reason, and a main one, is,
Lest us our Children follow: for, to fall
Into foul vices we are docill all.
There is a CATILINE on every ground;
A BRUTUS or a CATO no where found.
Every uncivil word, or action, bar
From houses where there is Children: far, oh far.
From thence be Wenches; and that bawdy song
The Parasite will sing you, all night long.
There Is due unto a Child, a great respect:
If thou do any wickedness affect,
Slight not thy tender Infant coming in,
But let them stand betwixt thee and thy sin.
For, should thy Child do any thing that moves
The Censor's wrath, since he not only proves
In face and body like thee, but the Son
Even of thy Manners: since all he has done
Is walking in thy steps; can thou chastise
And persecute him for it with thy cries,
Then disinherit him? thee what can give
A Father's forehead, or Prerogative?
That old, art worse; thy giddy head designed
For cupping-glasses, to let out the wind.
When there is a Guest to come within thy doors,
Thy Slaves are set to work; rub thou the floors,
Wash spots out which the Pillars beauty drown:
Dry Spiders, with their Cobwebs, sweep thou down;
This scoures smooth plate, that rough imbost work dryes
And all with his rod the threatening Master plyes.
Wretch, do thou fear foul Gall'ries should offend,
Or Rooms, that dogs have spoild, distaste thy friend:
Though e're he come, thou might help every Room
With pin-dust half a bushel, and one Groom?
And would thou not thy Child thy house should see
Holy and spotless, from all vices free?
It Is by thy Friends and Country kindly took,
That thou have got a Roman: if thou wilt look,
That he be fit for's Country, for the increase
Of the Republic, both in War and Peace.
The Commonwealth minds to what arts he is brought
By thy instruction, and what Manners taught.
The Stork with desert-Snakes and Lizards breeds
Her young one, on like poison (fledged) it feeds.
From horseflesh, Dogs, and Gibbets, Vultures spring,
And to their young a piece of carrion bring:
Which is their food, when they, great Vultures grown,
Choose preys and trees to build in of their own.
But the Eagle, and the Hawk of nobler name,
Flies in the open champain at his game:
The Hare or Goat he in his Airy lays;
Thence, when his progeny strong feathers raise,
They have to tire, when hunger shall provoke,
On what they fed, when first the shell was broke.
CENTRONIUS was a builder; now, upon
Cajeta's winding shore: on Rocks, anon,
At Tibur: in Praeneste's Mountain now,
He Greek and far-fetcht Marble did allow,
His Villa's lofty Battlements to crown:
Which HERCULES his Temple quite put down,
And Fortune's (as POSIDES SPADO late
Put down the Capitol) whilst in this state
CENTRONIUS dwelt, he gave his wealth a strain,
And broke; yet did a fair estate remain:
All which his mad Son spent, whilst he essays
New Villa's, of far richer stone, to raise.
Some one, whose Father kept the Sabbath, given
To worship nothing but one Power of Heaven:
One that thinks man's flesh differs not a jot
From Hogs flesh, which his Father tasted not;
That cuts his Prepuce, scorns the Roman Law,
And learns the Jewish, therewith kept in awe,
And with precisest care observing it,
By MOSES in's mysterious Volume writ:
That will not, even the way that he should go,
Unless to one of his Religion, show;
And of the thirsty Travellors, will bring
Only the Circumcised to the Spring:
His Father caused all this, whose seav'nth day still
Was vacant, nor did his life's number fill.
Yet willingly Youths follow other Ills,
To Avarice enjoined against their wills.
For, under Virtue's shadow and praetext
This Vice deceiv's; a habit much perplexed,
Sad looks, sad clothes it has; and then, who can
But think the Covetous a Frugall man?
Praise him as sparing; of his wealth as sure,
As if the Hesperian Dragon did secure
His golden fruit? add to's description this,
That such a one a man of Credit is;
For so the people term him; minds his Trade:
By careful Workmen are great fortunes made;
Although, indeed, great fortunes, by base ways,
The constant Anvill and hot Furnace raise.
The Fathers then, esteem those children best,
That worship wealth, and think no poor man blessed;
Encouraging their issue to affect
Their humor, and be Zelots of their Sect.
Some Elements of vice they teach them; first
Poor little Sparings: then, the insatiate thirst
Of Getting; with false measure he defeats
His stomach, and his servants bellies cheats,
Nor ever will permit them to be fed
With all the moldy crusts of his blue bread.
Yesterday's Minc'd-meat, whereon he did sup,
He keeps in mid-September: and lays up
Parcht Beans for his next meal, sealed in a dish:
Wherein are scraps of tainted Summer-fish,
And counted blades of Leeks; to which feast some,
Invited from the Bridge, would scorn to come.
But, with these torments why do go about
To scrape up wealth? it is madness without doubt:
Plain phrenzie does thy senseless soul bewitch,
To live poor, only hoping to die rich.
Mean time, down full mouthed bags whilst money flows:
Like money's self, the love of money grows;
Nay, he least covets it that has it not;
So that another Manor must be got,
When thou art straightned in one Lordship's grounds,
And it is thy pleasure to enlarge thy bounds.
Thy Neighbor's harvest thou do more esteem,
For that does greater, yea, and better seem:
That must be purchased first; and by degrees
These woods; those mountains, hoar with Olive Trees.
If the owner, loath to sell, thy patience vex,
By night lean Oxen, with their wearied necks,
And thy sterv'd Droves, thou send'st into his Corn:
Nor come they home, till his first crop be shorn,
And all his Harvest in their bellies heapt,
That one would think, it were with Sickles reapt.
What numbers suffer thus? it is not to tell,
How many such wrongs force their land to sell.
But what is said? what Trumpet sounds foul fame?
What hurt, says he, is in an evil name?
Give me a bean-hull, e're the praise of all
The neighboring Village, and my Harvest small.
As if thou should want sickness, grief, and strife,
And better fates would lengthen out thy life;
Were as much land to thee, alone, alow'd,
As under TATIUS all Rome's People plowed.
In old times, when a Soldier, broke with age,
Had stood the Carthaginian War; the rage
Of fiery PYRRHUS, and Molossian swords:
At length the State, with much ado, affords
For many wounds too acres, pay for blood
And sweat: no man upon his merit stood
As greater, nor his Country's faith accused,
As if he had ingratefully been used.
This glebe, the good man, the good wife that lies
In Childbed, all the Cottage did suffice:
Four Infants, one Slave, and young Masters three;
The ablest of which Brothers used to be
Most feasted; pulse was for their supper got,
Which on the fire smoak't in the greatest Pot,
When they came home from digging, or the plow:
So much land scarce serves for a Garden now.
Hence almost springs all evil; no one sin,
That to the mind of mankind enters in,
Poisons or kills more then wealth's cruel thirst?
For, all men would be rich, and rich at first.
But what regard of Law, what fear, what shame
In greedy rich men, flying to their aim?
Live pleased, that you these Sheds, those Hillocks have;
The Marsian, Hernick, Vestine Old-men gave
This counsel to their Youth: to serve your board,
The followed Plough will bread enough afford.
This pleases best the Country-Gods, that found,
And taught us, the Art of plowing up the ground;
The sweets whereof when once we understood,
We scorned the Oak, that bore our ancient food.
They are not given to any kind of vice,
That shame not to wade through the broken Ice
In Fishermens great Boots; and wear Coats lined
With our own furs, to keep away the wind.
All the evil, all the wickedness we do,
The foreign unknown Purple bring us to.
These Precepts the Ancients gave. Now, Autumn past,
The balling Father, to's Son snoaring fast
At midnight, cries, Wake boy, take paper, draw,
(And look you sleep not ore't) a Case in Law;
Read the old Law Rubricks; keep the Vine in chase,
Petitioning for a Centurion's place:
Broad shoulders, hairy nostrills, uncomb'd hair,
In LAELIUS the Gen'rall's Eye, show fair:
The Moorish Huts, or British Towers destroy,
At threescore a rich Eagle to enjoy.
If the long labor of the Camp displease,
If Fifes and Cornets bring the loose disease,
Buy what for as much more will sell again;
Nor do thou any Merchandise disdain,
Though not on this side Tiber to be brought;
Without distinction let all ware be bought:
Whether perfumes or hides thy Chapmen sell;
From whence soever it rises, Gain smells well.
Repeat this Sentence, by the old Poet writ,
Worthy the strain of a Celestial wit:
Which JOVE himself might utter, it is so just:
No matter whence it comes, but come it must.
When Boys beg pence, old Wives this Lesson set:
Girls learn it e're they learn their Alphabet.
To any, who shall thus his Children school,
This I reply. Tell me, thou vainest fool,
Why spurr'st thou him? go, make a sure account:
Thy Boy his Tutor shall as far surmount,
As TELEMON by AJAX his brave Son,
Or PELEUS by ACHILLES was outdone.
Spare thy Child, native Evil has not feared
His conscience yet; but when he combs his beard,
And shaves, he then will a false witness come,
Sell perjury for any little sum,
Touch CERE'S Altar, nay her foot: For dead
Give thy poor Daught'r in Law, even when she is led,
Into thy fatal house, a wealthy Bride;
Death, in her sleep, by thy Son's touch applied.
Thou bid'st him gather wealth by land and seas:
He finds short ways, Great crimes are done with ease.
But thou will say, when it is too late, I laid
No such commands, did no such thing persuade;
Yet, of his wicked mind art thou the cause,
From thee his damned Principles he draws:
For, they that getting of great sums enjoin,
And make their ill-taught Children dote on coin,
Bidding them, where advantage serves, deceive,
Do the whole rains unto the Chariot leave,
Which would thou stop, it knows not how to stay,
But all bounds broke, despite thee, runs away.
None sins just so far as he has in charge,
But at his pleasure will his vice enlarge.
When to thy Son thou say, Fools only grant
A Friends suit, or relieve a Kinsman's want;
Thou teach him to spoil, to circumvent,
And by all mischiefs Riches to augment:
Which with as great a zeal thou do adore,
As e're the DECII to their Country bore;
To Thebes MENAECEUS; if Greece say true:
In whose land, sown with Dragons teeth, there grew
Legions with swords and shields, that forthwith fought,
As they along their Trumpeter had brought.
That fire, by thy spark kindled, thou shall see
Flaming, devouring all: not sparing thee.
The fierce young Lion, in his furious rage,
Will tear's old trembling Keeper in his cage.
Although Astrologers do thy Scheme erect,
It Is tedious the slow distaffe to expect:
He breaks thy thread, that hinders his intents,
The Youth thy long and Hart-like age torments.
Send quickly, let ARCHIGENES be found,
And buy what MITHRIDATES did compound:
If thou will smell another Rose, or eat
Another Fig; e're thou sitt'st down to meat,
An Antidote let some, that loves, thee bring;
A Father as much needs it as a King.
It Is Sport, the like upon no Stage has been,
Nor in the Praetor's Show was ever seen,
To note what lives are lost, a house to found:
And what Chests, lined with gold, with iron bound,
CASTOR now watches; since MARS fell asleep,
His Helmet stolen, nor could his own Goods keep.
Scorn CERE'S, FLORA'S CYBEL'S Pastimes then;
No Plays, no Shows, like Bus'nesses of Men.
Can it so take, to see one backward stoop,
And cast his flexive body through a hoop,
Or from the stretcht-out Rope appear to slip?
As to see thee, in thy Corycian Ship
Dwelling for South, and South-east winds to wrack,
Selling thy life to buy a stinking sack?
That from old Creet to fetch fat wine do love,
And their great Flaggons, neighbours-born to JOVE.
Yet he that so his slippery footing sets,
Eats by it; and the Rope his pardon gets
From cold, and hunger: thou do undertake
Thy dangers, for a thousand tallents sake,
A hundred Villa's; View the Ports, survey
Seas filled with wracks: man's major-part at Sea:
And Seamen sail where there is most hope of gain,
Through the Carpathian and Getulian Main;
Nay, beyond Calpe, hear the setting Sun
Into the Herculean Ocean hissing run.
For what? to bring home bags, with money swelled;
To brag of wealth, and that thou have beheld
Mermaids and Monsters; it must be confessed,
These more then with one Fury are possessed:
As mad as he, that in his Sisters hands,
The Furies haunted, with their Snakes, and brands:
Or he, that when a Bull or Ox he goard,
Thought AGAMEMNON, or ULYSSES roared.
Though such their cloaks and coats from tearing spare;
Yet they are madmen, that so heap their ware,
As to the upper Deck they cast a bank,
Distinguished from the billows by one plank:
Vent'ring for Bullion thus, whereon they print
Small faces and inscriptions at the Mint.
Lightning and Clouds oppose, weigh Anchors, cries
The Corn and Pepper-Merchant; let no skies,
With their black wens, your manly hearts affright,
It Is Summur-thunder: The poor wretch, that night,
Perhaps is cast away; and in's left hand,
Or teeth, his purse and girdle bears to land.
He, late, unsatisfi'd with all the Gold
Down Tagus, or the bright Pactolus, rol'd;
Now, glad to feed on any meat, about
His nakedness puts a cold crupper-clout:
Whilst for a shipwrackt man he begs an alms;
And hunger with his pictured storm becalmes.
Goods got thus hardly, with more fear and care
Are kept; so wretched Money-hoarders are.
Rich LICINUS in's house still sets the watch,
Trembling for fear Thieves should his Amber catch,
Statues, and Pillars, which the Phrygians smooth;
Broad Tortois; Elephants pure snow-white tooth:
The Cynicks Tub burns not; or if it break,
Yet he, against to morrow, may bespeak
Another; or the same may serve again
Plated with lead: 'twas this, which made it plain
To ALEXANDER (when in that poor seat
He visited DIOGENES the Great)
That he, who nothing covets, happier is
Then he, that seeks to make the whole World his,
His Acts and Dangers great. If Prudence be,
There can be no Divinity in thee
Fortune; it is we, we to thy Power have given
The name of Goddess. Yet how I would even
The accounts of wealth, if any ask, I tell.
Get what cold, thirst, and hunger, may repel;
What the earth to EPICURUS did afford,
Or long since served at SOCRATES his board.
Nature never asks this thing, and Wisdom that.
But these sharp rules I see thee startle at:
Mix therefore something of our manners; get
The sum, that is for the fourteen Benches set,
By OTHO'S Law; and if this make thee frown,
And pouch thy lips out; to thy self set down
Two Knight's fees: thrice four hundred, the just rates,
Proportioned for three Roman Knights Estates.
Is It not a lap-full? is a space yet void?
Then, all the treasure CROESUS e're enjoyed,
Nay even the Persian Kingdom will not do:
Nor all the wealth NARCISSUS rose unto,
That governed CLAUDIUS CAESAR all his life,
By him obeyed, when bid to kill his Wife.
The Comment UPON THE FOURTEENTH SATYR.
Verse 1. Fuscinus*] This Satyr was writ to him, but who he was we know not.

Verse 9. Beccafico,] The Fig-pecker, or Ficedula, which the Italians call
Beccafico: and is at this day esteemed the principal ingredient in the
composition of a Bisk or Olio.

Verse 10. Taught by the Knave their Father.] Men do more hurt by example,
then by transgression. Cic. especially Parents. Utinam liberorum, etc. would we
our selves did not corrupt the manners of our children. Wanton education, which
we call indulgence, in a moment spoils Infancy, and breaks all the nerves of
the mind and body. What can satisfy the appetite of a Youth, that first
learned to go alone in purple? now he knows what the purple Dye, what the
Conchylium is. We are hugely pleased, if he talk rudely. Words, not allowable
among Alexandrian Voluptuaries, we laugh at: and kiss the Child for speaking of
them. No marvail. We taught them; they had them of us: they see our Mistresses,
or Wenches. Every Feast rings with obscene songs, and sights, which it is a
shame to mention. This first makes it custom, then nature. The poor Children
learn Vice, before they know it to be so. F. Quintil.

Verse 17. Small mistakes.] No man is without faults. Our Virtue is nothing,
but a lesser proportion of Vice. Herm. Trismeg.

Verse 20 Rutilus,] A Tyrant, not a Master of a Family: such another for a man,
as the Mistress of Psecas was for a woman: just as she beats her Maids, he
torments his men: and as Juvenal compares that Lady to the Dyonisii, the
Tyrants of Sicily: so he parallels this Gentleman with Polyphemus the Cyclops;
and the Laestrigonian King, Antiphates, both eaters of man's flesh; Rutilus
being the Raw-head and Bloody-bones of his house.

Verse 28. Country Hangmen.] The Overseers of the Slaves at work in the
Country; that bastinaded, tortured, or branded them with letters burned into
their foreheads, when they transgressed, or when their cruel Masters were
offended. Vincti pedes, etc. fettered feet, manicled hands, branded forheads,
are all usual in the Country. Plin.

Verse 29. Larga,] A most infamous Adultress grown to be an abominable Bawd.

Verse 37. Thus nature works us.] It is natural for Children to imitate their
Parents. One example of luxury or avarice does a world of harm. Senec. Epist. 7.

Verse 48. Catiline,] A wicked debaucht man, that would have ruined his
Country. See the Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 50. Brutus,] Nephew to Cato Vtican; A just sober man, like his Uncle:
both ruining themselves to preserve their Country.

Verse 60. Censor,] The Judge of manners. See the Com. upon Sat. 2.

Verse 68. Cupping-glasses.] The ancient Cupping-glasses were of brass, and
horn. They were applied to madmen. It is not amiss in a phrenzie (in case the
party be not let blood before, nor come to himself, nor be able to sleep) to
trepan such a Patient, or open the forepart of his skull, and set on
Cupping-glasses: which, because they lessen his fever, may bring him to sleep.
Cel^ lib. 3. cap. 18.

Verse 87. The Stork with desert-Snakes.] The Stork does so good service for
the Thessalians, in killing up their Snakes, that by their Laws he that kills
one of those Birds, suffers the same punishment with him that murders a man.
Plin. lib. 10.

Verse 89. Vulture.] The most harmless of all creatures; that eats nothing
which men sow or plant, only feeds upon carcases. Destroys no living thing;
but, for affinity, forbears the very carcases of birds. Plin. It is of that
strange sagacity, that, three days before any cattle dies, it will fly about
the place where the carrion is to be. idem.

Verse 93. The Eagle,] The Prince of birds; he is said to be Thunder-bearer to
Jove, because of all creatures he is never struck with Thunder, though in his
flight he soars a pitch nearest to the clouds. Plin.

Verse 100. Cajeta,] A Port-town in Campania, not far from Baiae, built in
memory of Cajeta Nurse to Aeneas. Virg. Aeneid. lib. 7. But Strab. lib. 5
says, it was named Cajeta from the crookedness of the shore; all crooked
things being called in the Laconick Dialect (...).

Verse 101. Tibur.] See the Comment upon Sat. 3.

Verse 101. Praeneste.] See the same Comment.

Verse 105. Posides Spado] Freed-man to Claudius Caesar; so gracious with his
Master, that, in his triumph for Britain, he bestowed upon him the Hasta pura,
a Spear without a Pike; one of the greatest honors which a Soldier could
receive for service; adding the government of Judeae, where his Master made him
his Lievtenant-generall; and likewise gave him the privilege to be carried in
a Closse-chair, and to set forth public Shows. He built at Baiae that princely
Fabric, called the Possidonian Bath. I suppose he built another at Rome, that
showed like an Imperial Palace; because my Author says, that as Centronius
put down the Temple of Hercules at Tibur, with the House which he there built,
and likewise the Temple of Fortune at Praeneste, with another Building in that
Town: so Posides Spado outvied the Capitol, with the House which he built not
far from it.

Verse 118. Moses.] Qui docebat, etc. That taught, how the Egyptians were not
in the right, that worshipped God in the Images of beasts: nor the Graecians,
that gave to their Gods the figures of men; and that Power only to be God,
which comprehends us, the Earth, and Sea: which Power we call the Heaven, the
World, and universal Nature. To make whose Image like to one of us, really
none but a madman would presume. Strab. lib. 16.

Verse 120. Unless to one of his Religion.] To this very day, the Jews will
do no real civility unto any but of their own Nation and Religion: which they
love so much as to lend them money gratis; all others must pay interest.

Verse 123. His Father caused all this,] Whose Jewish Tenets are hereditary to
the Son. Aegyptii, etc. The Egyptians worship many Animals and Images made by
hands. The Jews worship only in spirit, and conceive one God, holding them to
be profane that make Images of perishing matter, in the form of Men for God,
the supreme and eternal Power, neither mutable nor mortal: Therefore they
have no Images in their Cities, nor in their Temples. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5.

Verse 132. Hesperian Dragon.] See the Comment upon Sat. 5.

Verse 154. The Bridge.] Where Beggars waited for the charity of Passengers.
Sat. 5.

Is there no Hole? no Bridge? -- Verse 184. Tatius,] General of the Sabines,
that, by the treachery of the Vestall Virgin Tarpeia (as in the Comment upon
Sat 6.) took the Capitol. After he had got that advantage of the Romans, and
often fought them with various successes, upon the intercession of the Sabine
women, as aforesaid, he made a Peace, and put it in his Conditions, That the
Sabines should be free of the City, and he himself Partner with Romulus in the
government of Rome; whose Territory extended not then to any great quantity of
Acres, as appears Sat. 8. by the adventure of Claelia. -- the Maid, that
courage found
To swim over Tiber, then our Empire's bound.
But, the Kinsmen of Tatius having affronted the Laurentine Ambassadors, and
Tatius not righting them, according to the Law of Nations, the punishment due
to his Kinsmen fell upon himself. For, he Sacrificing at Lavinium, the whole
City were insurrectors, and killed him. Live.

Verse 187. Pyrrhus,] King of Epire: descended, by the Mother, from Achilles:
by the Father, from Hercules. He was strangely preserved in his infancy, and
bred in Macedon by Glaucias of Megara, by him restored to his Fathers Kingdom
at seventeen years of age. Whilst he returned from Epire into Macedon, to marry
his beloved Mistress, Daughter to Glaucias; his Subjects, the Molossians, again
rebelled, and set up another Family in his Throne. Having lost his Crown, and
with it his Friends, he fled to his Sister Deidamia's Husband, Demetrius, Son
to Antigonus: and commanded under him, at the great battle where all the
Kings, that divided Alexander's conquests, were engaged. There he, though a
young man, had the honor, where he fought, to worst the Enemy. In Egypt he
grew so great a Courtier, that Queen Berenice's Daughter, Antigona, loved and
married him, and won her Mother to move the King her Step-father, for money and
forces, to reestablish her Husband in his Kingdom. Entering Epire with an Army,
he found his People weary of their present Governor, Neoptolemus, all came in
to their King. But Pyrrhus, fearing that Neoptolemus would follow his example,
and get some foreign Prince to espouse his quarrel, divided the Crown with
him. Soon after, discovering that his Brother-King had a plot upon his life,
Pyrrhus invited him to Supper, and there killed him. In memory of his Patron
and Patroness, the King and Queen of Egypt, he called his Son by Antigona,
Ptolemey: and the City he built in Epire, Berenice. Lysimachus, hearing of this
signal Gratitude, made use of Ptolemey's name to cajoll, or put a trick upon
Pyrrhus, having then undertaken the quarrel of Alexander, Brother to
Antipater, both Sons to Cassander. The contents of the Letter were, That
Antipater desired Pyrrhus to receive therewith three hundred talents, to
forbear all acts of hostility against him. But the direction was, King Ptolemey
to King Pyrrhus: whereas he ever used to write, The Father to his Son,
greeting. By this means, the cheat of the counterfeit Letter and Token was
found out. He was ready not only to intress himself in this difference between
the Sons of Cassander, but embraced any opportunity of war, being ambitious
to make himself the universal Monarch. The Successors of Alexander used him,
to balance the power of Demetrius, whom he beat out of Macedon. The Tarentines
called him into Italy; where he turned the effeminate Tarentines into good
Soldiers, and almost brought the warlike Romans upon their knees: for, twice
he fought the Consul Dentatus, and at those two battails slew threescore
thousand Romans. After his restless ambition had carried him from the East to
the West, and back again by Sicily to Macedon, from thence to Sparta, and at
last to Argos: A poor Argive woman, seeing her Son's life at the mercy of his
sword, with both her hands flung a tyle at him, which hitting between the
helmet and the head, broke his skull, and killed him. He was, in the opinion of
great Soldiers, the greatest, next to Alexander, that ever the world had.
Antigonus being asked whom he held to be the best General? answered, Pyrrhus;
if he had lived to be old. But, for conduct and policy, Hannibal gave the first
place to Pyrrhus, the second to Scipio, the third to himself. The Officers of
his Army, when he fought a battle, observing his looks, celerity and motion,
said, Other Kings were like Alexander in their State and Courts, but Pyrrhus in
his arms and in the field. And when they gave him the surname of the Eagle, he
said, that I am so; I owe you for it: how can I be less then an Eagle, that
have your Swords for Wings He was bountiful to his friends, moderate in his
anger toward his enemies; and when obligations were laid upon him, extremely
grateful. Calumny he slighted: for, when some moved him to banish from
Ambracia one that had railed against him: no said he, It is better that he
should tarry here, and slander me in one Town, then all the world over. Upon
the same account another being under examination, he asked him, Were these your
words? the Examinant said, Yes Sir, and I should have spoke more bitterly, if
we had drank more wine. Pyrrhus was satisfied with this answer, and discharged
the man. Indeed he held himself concerned in nothing but war and victory:
for, even when he had taken a cup or two extraordinary, a friend asking,
whether he thought Pytho or Caphisias the best Musician? he answered,
Polysperchon is a good General. Plut in Pyrrh.

Verse 189. For many wounds two Acres.] The Consul Dentatus himself, after
Pyrrhus was beaten out of Italy, accepted seven Acres, given him by the State.
Columel.

Verse 203. Wealth's cruel thirst,] That, like Death, spares no body.
Intelligi, etc. It may be easily conceived, that no obligation can be so holy,
or solemn, which avarice will not dispense with. Cic.

Verse 208. The Marsian, etc.] To be contented with their poor Cottages and
Hillocks: not to build Palaces, and purchase Appulian Mountains: was counsel,
given to their Children, by the ancient Country people of Italy; the Marsians
near to Alba: their neighbors, the poor Hernicks, between Alba and Lavinium:
and the Vestines, between the Sabines and the Marsians.

Verse 211. Country-Gods.] Tellus and Ceres, that taught Husbandry, and how to
force out of the Earth a better food, then was known in the golden age. Sat. 6.

Whilst man acrons belcht -- Verse 225. Law Rubricks,] Titles of old Laws
writ in red letters.

Verse 225. Vine.] The Vine-battoon, wherewith the Centurions belabored the
sides of their lazy Soldiers; as my Author instances in C. Marius, beaten with
the Vine, when he was the Camp-Carpenter. Sat. 8.

Verse 230. At threescore a rich Eagle] The covetous Father tells his Son, that
if he will endure the hardship of the war, till he be threescore years of
age, he may then get to be Standart-bearer, a place of little danger and great
profit.

Verse 235. On this side Tiber.] Beyond Tiber, or at the Roman bankside (would
it were so in all great Cities) dwelt the men of sordid or noisome Trades, as
Tanners, Fish-mongers, Diers, Bruers, etc. Mart. lib. 6.

Non detracta cani Transtiberina cutis.
Not a Transtib'rine skin flead from a Dog.
Verse 238. Gain smells well.] He alludes to the answer of Vespasian Caesar,
made to his Son Titus, that moved against the raising of money by Taxes or
Excise laid upon Urine. Vespasian, pulling out of his pocket a new minted piece
of gold, asked, How smells it Titus? he replied, very well Sir: yet, said
Vespasian, this came out the Pis-pot. Suet.

Verse 242. No matter whence it comes.] The whole verse is quoted out of the
old Poet Ennius.

Verse 249. As Telamon by Ajax.] My Author says, A Child that receives base
precepts of thrift from his Father, will, when he comes to be a man, go as
far beyond his Instructor in villainy, as Ajax or Achilles transcended their
Fathers in gallantry and honor. Thus they were derived.

Jupiter. Aeacus. Telamon. Ajax.
Peleus. Achilles.



Verse 255. Touch Ceres Altar.] Whereunto no Wanton durst (once) approach, much
less a perjured person. See the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 258. By thy Son's touch.] A crime charged by M. Caecilius upon
Calphurnius Bestia. Plin.

Verse 279. Menaeceus,] Son to Creon King of Thebes. When the City was besieged
by the Argives, the Oracle promised, that Thebes should not be taken, if the
last of the Family of Cadmus would voluntarily die. Menaeceus, thinking himself
concerned, fell upon his own sword. Cic. 2. Tuscul. Others say, the Prophet
Tiresius told Menaeceus that Thebes should be impregnable, never to be
conquered, if he would go to the Dragon's Den, and there sacrifice his own
life: whereupon, unknown to his Father, he stole thither and slew himself.
Juvenal puts a dubious mark upon this History, because the Grecians write, That
Cadmus, the killer of the Dragon, sowed his teeth in ploughed lands, where they
presently sprung up in squadrons of armed men, that fought, and killed one
another. Ovid. Metam. lib. 3.

Verse 290. Hart-like.] The Heart lives nine hundred years, as some say: but all
know, he is very long lived. Vita cervi etc. the longavity of Hearts is evident,
some having been taken, after a hundred years, with Gold Collars about their
necks, put on by Alexander the great, and covered over with mere fat. Plin.
lib. 8. cap. 32. where you may read an excellent description of the Heart.

Verse 291. Archigines,] A greek Physician, as aforesaid, in high esteem with
the Romans, that like us (and almost all nations whatsoever) value Strangers
more then Natives: but Gallen often inveighs against him: perhaps he might have
a Peek to Archigenes, and hate him, upon the same reason that made his
Countrymen admire him, viz. because he was a stranger, only with this
addition, that the stranger entrenched upon his practice:

Verse 292. Mithridates.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 301. Castor.] See the Comment upon Sat. 13. To his Temple in Rome, great
monyed men removed their iron-barred Chests; from the Temple in the Forum
Augusti, dedicated to Mars the Revenger: where Thieves had broke in, that
robbed the Merchants, and spared not Mars himself: for they stole away his
Helmet.

Verse 303. Ceres.] See the Comment upon Sat. 6. The Pastimes, or Pageants,
carried about the Circus in honor of Ceres, were showed in this manner. The
stealing away of Proserpine, and the lamentation of Ceres was acted by Roman
Ladies, habited all in white. The Pomp of this solemn Show is thus set down in
all particulars by Tertul. de Spect. cap. 7. Simulachrorum series, etc. 1. The
Gods Images. 2. The Effigies of great persons. 3. Chariots of State, empty. 4.
Chariots filled with the Gods Images. 5. VVaggon-Chariots, wherein were placed
the figures of riding Gods. Alex ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 30. 6. Chairs of State.
7. Crowns. The last, Spoils taken from the Enemy. Ovum in Cerealis Pompae, etc.
The principal ingredient that made up the Cereall Pomp was an Egg. Hesp. de
orig. fest. Rosin. lib. 5. cap. 14. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 6. cap. 19. The reason
of providing an Egg, as I conceive, was that which made them set up the Ovall
Tower in the Circus. Sat. 6. -- at the Ovall Tower, before the rounds
Of The Dolphin-pillars --
viz. in memory of Castor and Pollux, hatched out of Eggs: The Dolphin-Pillars
were erected in honor of Neptune.

Verse 303. Flora's.] Of the Florall Shows we have spoke in the Comment upon
Sat. 6. and likewise of Cybel's or the Ludi Megalenses.

Verse 308. Corycian Ship,] Bound for Corycium, a Promontory in Creet, where
Jupiter was born: there to be laded with Jupiter's neighbors, great Flaggons,
and wine to fill to them, called by the Romans Passum; made of withered grapes,
dried in the Sun: which insolation brought the liquor to be sweet and fatning.

Verse 320. Carpathian.] The Carpathian Sea goes beyond Rhodes, Creet, and
Cyprus; and is so named from the Island Carpathus, lying between Rhodes and
Creet.

Verse 320. Getulian.] The Straits of Gibraltar, where the two Herculean
Pillars stand, Calpe on the Spanish side, and Abila on the Libyan Coast. These
Pillars in my Authors time (as in the beginning of Sat. 10.) were believed to
be the farthest west, by the vulgar; which sailing beyond the Straits, would
conceive themselves to hear the Sun's burning Chariot set hissing in the
Herculean Ocean.

Verse 327. He.] Orestes, that imagined himself haunted with his Mother's
Ghost, and her guard of Furies, shaking their snaky locks, and flourishing
their Torches: as in the beginning Comment upon Sat. 1.

Verse 329. Or he.] Ajax, that (being evicted by the Sentence of Agamemnon, in
the Suit between him and Ulysses, for the Arms of Achilles) ran mad, routing
the Cattle, doing execution upon Oxen, which he called Agamemnon and Ulysses:
recovering his wits, it was his fate, ratione insanire, to fall into a sober
madness, and for shame to kill himself. See the Coment upon Sat. 7.

Verse 342. Purse and Girdle.] The Merchants best Purse was his Girdle; wherein
he sowed up his gold; and if he were shipwrackt, he held his Girdle in his
teeth or with his left hand, and with his right swam to land.

Verse 344. Tagus and the bright Pactolus] For Tagus, see the Comment upon Sat.
3. Pactolus in Lydia is such another golden River, springing upon the Mountain
Tmolus, and falling into the River Hermus. Strab. and Dionys. it runs by
Sardes. Dion. Prus. It was formerly called Chrysoras, because it runs with
golden sands. Solin.

Verse 348. Pictured storm.] The rich Merchant had the landtscap of his
shipwreck limn'd to be hung up in some Temple, as you may see in the Design
before Sat. 12. The poor man had his drawn by some poor Painter; and holding it
before his breast (as Beggars here hold their Certificates) he moved the
charitable people, so Juvenal here tells us: a mock figure of it you have in
the Frontispice, before the breast of the twelvth Satyr.

Verse 351. Rich Licinus.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 1.

Verse 355. The Cynick.] Diogenes, Scholar to Antisthenes, and institutor of
the Cynicall Sect. He was born in Pontus, at the City of Sinopis, about the
third year of the ninty first Olympiad. His own name was Cleon. Suid. His
Fathers name was Icesius or Icetes, an Exchanger of money. In his youth, by his
Father's example, he was so ambitious of getting money, that he put the
question to the Oracle, How he might come to be a great monyed man? it was
answered, by coining; at least he understood it so. He obeyed the direction,
was taken in the manner, and banished: or else suspected, and forced to fly
his Country. Only one Slave attended him, called Manes, that soon after ran
away from him. And when some advised, that he should lay the County for his
Slave, No, said he, If Manes want not Diogenes, it is a shame for Diogenes to
want Manes. When he came to Athens no Beggar could be poorer, all his Wardrobe
was a double Cloak, which he wore in the day time, and used for a Bed at night;
lying upon it, either in Jove's Portico, or in the Pompaeum; both which he said
the Athenians built for his Dormitories. All day he stood at the gates of some
of the Poets, or at the door of his Master Antisthenes, that, having commanded
none of his Scholars should trouble him at present, bid Diogenes be gone, or he
would beat him away: In stead of going back, Diogenes put his head in a doors,
and said, You have no cudgel hard enough, to beat Diogenes from your house.
This answer made him welcome to Antisthenes ever after. Being bound for Aegina
in his old age (when he had a Staff to his Wallet) he was taken by the Pirate
Scirpalus, that carried him to sell in Creet: and when the Crier made his Oyez,
If any man want a Slave -- you rogue, said Diogenes, cry, If any man want a
Master. As soon as Xeniades the Corinthian had bought him, he said, Now Sir,
look you do as I command you: What? said Xeniades, Would rivers run upward?
why (answered Diogenes) If you had bought a Physician, would you not follow his
advice? For these and such like words he had his freedom given him, together
with the tuition of his Master's Children. His dwelling was a Tub, that could
not be in danger of fire, because it was made of clay baked by the Potter, like
the pleasure-boat of an Egyptian. Sat. 15. -- that floats,
Rowed with short Oars, in painted earthen boats.
In Winter he turned the mouth of his Tub to the South, in Summer to the North;
as the Roman Volupuarie turned his Dining-roome. Sat. 7. Which on Numidian
Pillars round must run,
Where North and West cool the East and Southern Sun.
Alexander the Great found Diogenes in this posture at Cranium in Corinth,
sunning of himself. Alexander, being then upon his expedition against the
Persian, was so taken with his manner of life and way of beging, that he bid
him, Ask something of Alexander; Diogenes said, I have but one suit to make,
that you would not stand between me and the Sun. Alas poor man, said Alexander.
Poor, replied Diogenes; Which of us two is poorrer, I, that am content with my
Tub, Staff, and Wallet; or you, that covet the possession of the whole Earth?
This answer makes Juvenal give him Alexander's title, calling him Diogenes the
Great: for which he had Alexander's own authority, that departing from the
Cynick, said to his Followers, If I were not Alexander, I would be Diogenes.
Plut. When his Friends saw he could not live, they asked him, Where will you be
buried? he said, I care not for being buried at all. Will you then, said they,
be devoured by the Dogs and Crows? By no means, he replied: Set my staff by
me, I will beat away the Dogs and the Crows. They told him, he could not do
that, when no sense was in his body. No sense, said he, then what need I care
where it be laid? He died in the nintith year of his Age, the very same day
that Alexander died at Babylon. His opinion was, That good habits both of body
and mind were acquirable by Corporal and Philosophical exercises.

Verse 363. If Prudence be.] These verses conclude the tenth Satyr; and had not
been repeated here, but to make a better impression of them in the erroneous
minds of men, that prefer Fortune before Wisdom.

Verse 369. Epicurus,] That lived upon roots and herbs. See the Comment upon
Sat. 11.

Verse 370 Socrates.] In a great plague at Athens, only Socrates escaped the
infection, by his temperance and frugality. Laert. See the beginning of the
Comment upon Sat. 2.

Verse 375. Otho's Law.] See the Comment upon Sat. 3.

Verse 380. Croesus,] That expected, Solon should have fallen down and
worshipped him for his wealth. See the Comment upon Sat. 10. tit. Solon.

Verse 381. Persian Kingdom.] How rich it was before the Macedonians plundered
it, you may read in Justin.

Verse 382. Narcissus.] See the end of the Comment upon Sat. 10.

The fifteenth Design.
THe zeal of Egypt sets at mortal odds
Two Towns, that quarrel which are truest Gods,
The 1 Crocodile, a Serpent Nilus breeds:
Or flying 2 Ibis, that on Serpents feeds?
Snake-worshippers 3 of Ombus dare not think
Of touching water, it is their Gods own drink;
Wine, in his Temple's Portico, they quaffe:
Are merry, but, they have not long to laugh.
Their dancing days were seav'n, but done they are:
To pay the 4 Piper, the Enemy takes care.
The meager 5 Tentyrites, that fast and watch,
Shoot arrows the fat Ombites to dispatch,
That on their painted beds carousing lie;
Not being now in case to fight, or fly:
Yet they do both, for, stones at first they cast,
And (quickn'd by their danger) run at last,
Saving themselves from the Massacre; all
But 6 one that, reeling, gets a fatal fall.
For, like his Serpent, when their Birds want meat,
He Is by his zealous Neighbors killed and eat.
Why thus Men, worse then Beasts, destroy their kind:
Hear the No-Cause, He is not of my mind.


Figura Decima Quinta.
RElligiosa Phari committit rixa colonos;
Certatum est binis, de vero Numine, pagis,
Niliacae serpens de te, Crocodile 1, paludis
Incola; and oppressis satura serpentibus Ibi. 2
Ombiacus 3 cultor, genius cui praesidet Anguis,
Nullam gustat aquam (Deus, ut bibat, eligit undas)
Sancta popina, adhibet genialia vina, sacelli
Porticus; at non longa hilari sunt gaudia Festo,
Saltantes vidit sol tantum septimus Ombos;
Currit, ut hostis adest, pacta sine stipe Choraules. 4
Tentyra 5 lethiferis feriunt jejuna sagittis
Ombicolas, madidis recipit quos culcita lectis:
Nulla fugae, aut pugnae, superest vis; utraque fractis
Tentatur tamen, and per humum quaesita lacertis
Saxa fatigatis primum mittuntur in hostem:
Tandem Ombi fugiunt; celeres timor adjicit alas,
Vt vitent pernice sequacia fata volatu:
Labitur hic quidam 6, temeti viribus actus
In praeceps, captusque minutim roditur; Ibis
Vt solet hostilem morsu lacerare Colubrum.
Cur homo sic hominem mactet, crudelior ursis,
Quam nulla est, aut causa levis! sententia dispar.
The Manners of Men. THE FIFTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The Tentyrites and Ombites fight,
These drunk with wine, and those with spite.
Whose Gods are true, that is to say
Whose Bird or Serpent, makes the Fray;
Where they, that fast from lawful food,
Eat up a Man, and drink his Blood.
Thus violating Nature's Laws,
For that they call the Holy-Cause.
BITHYNICUS, who knows not what Portents
Mad Egypt deifies? this part presents
Devotion to the Crocodile, in that
Ibis, with Serpents gorged, is trembled at.
Where from half-MEMNON Magic Lutes are heard,
And Thebes lies, with her hundred Gates interred:
The Long-tail'd Monkey's golden form shines there:
There Seafish; River-fish is worshiped here,
Whole Cities to the Hound their prayers address,
None to DIANA, the Hound's Patroness.
To strike a Leek, or Onion, with the edge
Of the presumptuous teeth, is sacrilege.
O blessed People, in whose Gardens spring
Your Gods! that hold it an unlawful thing,
The fleecy Sheep, or little Kid, to eat;
But lawful to make humane flesh your meat.
When grave ULYSSES, telling the like crime,
Amazed ALCINOUS, at supper time;
No doubt, in some it laughter moved, or spleen,
As he a lying Traveller had been:
Will none this Fellow cast into the Main,
Worthy a true Charybdis, thus to feign
Cyclops and Laestrigons, that man's flesh eat?
That Cyan rocks meet, the lye's not so great:
That Scylla barks, that bladders, to his hand,
Were filled with wind; that struck with CIRCE'S wand,
ELPENOR grunted; with his Mates, turned Swine:
To fool us sure is this old man's design.
Thus some stayed Phaeack, who at meal would drink
Less Corcyraean wine, might justly think;
Because ULYSSES had no Witness there.
I sing, indeed, things monstrous, but that were
In the late Consulship of JUNIUS done:
Near Coptus, scorcht by the almost vertick Sun;
A crime no Tragedy can parallel.
For, search all stories Buskined Poets tell,
From PYRRHA'S time; no fact, like what the rage
Of this wild People acted, in our Age.
An old grudge, to immortal hatred turned,
Betwixt the Tentyrites and Ombites burned;
A wound, in these two Neighbor-towns, past cure:
Because that neither People will endure
Their neighbors Deities; nor will have more
Held to be Gods, then they themselves adore.
When at their Feast, the Ombites set their beds
And boards in Temples and Highways: the Heads.
And Leaders of the Enemy (that meant
To make a sad Feast) labored to prevent
The rising from their cups, which, day and night,
Those men had set at, till the Sun's seav'nth light.
Egypt is all debauched; this truth know I,
Each poor Town may with lewd Canopus vie.
Add, that a victory comes easy, when
The foes are tippled, lisping, reeling men.
With flowers crowned, nointed with poor unguents, they
Of Ombus dance: here Negro-Pipers play,
And there comes malice fasting; first they fall
To words, zeal sounds the Trumpet to the Brawl.
With equal clamours then begins the fight,
Bare hands, in stead of darts, on faces light:
Scarce any cheek escaped without a wound,
In all the scuffle no one nose was sound.
Half faces, or changed looks, have all the rout,
And gaping bones through broken cheeks stick out.
Fists full of blood, drawn from the eye, they caught;
Yet they themselves all this but boyes-play thought:
Because as yet no carcass trampled lies,
But many, thousands fighting, no one dies.
Their fury therefore sharper grows; and now,
With stretched out arms, down to the ground they bow
To seek for stones, which sudden tumults arm:
Nor are these, stones that can do equal harm
With those which AJAX or strong TURNUS threw;
Or weights, such as from DIOMEDES flew,
And, hitting of his thigh, AENEAS feld:
But such as less and weaker hands can weld,
Hands of our time: In HOMER'S days that birth
Decreased in stature; but, upon the Earth
The little fighting fools, that now are born,
No God can look on, but must laugh to scorn.
But to my story; Now supplies come in,
To draw their swords the Tentyrites begin,
Keen arrows shoot, the Ombites run apace;
As fast the shady Palm-tree's neighbors chase.
An Ombite falls, pusht headlong by his fear:
Him, seized, the Tentyrites to pieces tear,
That many may on one dead body sup;
Nor call for pots, or spits; to eat him up
Or boiled or roasted: the victorious throng,
To stay for fire, do think the time too long.
They gobbet down his flesh, his bones they gnaw,
And are most highly pleased to eat him raw.
It glads me, that the fire escaped unprophan'd;
That Element, which slye PROMETHEUS gained,
And, stole from Heaven, did on the earth bestow;
I joy it, and I think it self does so.
But he that of the carcass got a bit,
Never tasted any flesh so sweet as it.
For, it is not to be questioned, if the prime
Of pleasure were the gust, in such a crime:
Nay who, to eat his share, too far off stood,
Scraped with his fingers from the earth some blood.
The Biscainers, it is said, to man's flesh owed
Their life; but how? when war and fortune showed
Their utmost spleen: theirs was the worst of fate,
'Twas famine in a siege, of longest date;
Their miserable food should pitti'd be;
The very people named, draws tears from me.
After all herbs, all animalls, the sting
Of hunger, makes them snatch at any thing;
The foe even pitying their morphew'd skin,
Pale looks, and joints for want of meat grown thin.
They famisht fed on others, when they were,
For hunger, ready their own flesh to tear.
What Man, what God, but such might hold excused,
As this sad weight of wretched fortune bruised?
To whom their very Ghosts might pardon give,
On whose dead bodies they were forced to live.
We better precepts have from ZENO won,
He does not hold all must for life be done.
This doctrine whence should Biscain Stoics raise,
Besieged by old METELLUS: in our days,
We see the Greek and Roman Athens spread
Through the Earth; by the eloquent French Nation bred
Britains grow Lawyers: so will Thule do,
They talk of hiring Rhetoricians too.
But this brave people; and the Saguntine,
They that alike in faith and honor shine,
But greater in the number of their dead;
Their just excuse necessity may plead.
Maeotis with less rage the world affrights,
Then Egypt: for, the bloody Taurick rites.
She that ordained (now trust a Poets Pen)
Only required a sacrifice of Men;
But the poor wretch, that was to loose his life,
Feared nothing there more barbarous then the knife.
What accident, what siege or famine held,
That Egypt to such monstrous things compelled?
For which, me thinks their Memphian Nile should grow
Into a rage, and cease to overflow.
The horrid Cimbrian, Briton, Agathyrse,
Nor wild Sarmatian knows a rage so fierce,
As this effeminate useless rout; that floats,
Rowed with short oars, in painted earthen boats.
To suit their crime you can no penance frame,
In whose minds wrath and hunger are the same.
The softest hearts kind Nature, it appears,
Gave to us men; because she gave us tears.
Our senses noblest part our grief commands,
For our sad friend; or when a Prisoner stands
In mournings at the Bar: for cosening sleights
When to the Court his Guardians the Orphane cites,
Whose tresse-like hair, and eyes still dropping pearl,
Makes us doubt whether he is a Boy or Girl.
Nature commands our tears, when in the street,
A marriageable Virgin's corpse we meet;
Or when a Child, his death annexed to 's birth,
Too little for the fire, is closed in earth.
What good man, that mysterious lights may use
Such as you would the Priest of CERES choose,
But thinks another's miseries are his?
From the dumb Herd we diff'renc'd are by this.
Profounder knowledge therefore only springs
In us, made capable of heavenly things.
To learn and practice Arts, it is we have power,
Deriving sense from the Celestial Tower:
Which creatures that to earth look downward want;
To them the world's great Architect did grant
Life only; life and soul to us he gave:
That mutual love might succor give, and crave;
Collect into a People men dispersed,
Leave hollow trees, where mankind first conversed;
Build houses, join to ours another Lares,
Sleep safe, confiding in our neighbors cares:
Protect our brother, stagg'ring with his wound,
Or fallen; charge at the trumpet's common sound,
Defend our selves with the same Works and Forts,
And be with one key locked within the Ports.
But now, at far more concord Serpents are;
The Panther yet his spotted kind will spare:
A Lion's blood what stronger Lion spills?
A Boar what Boar, whose tusks are sharper, kills?
The Indian Tigresses firm peace enjoy,
No cursed Bears one another will destroy;
But Man, when on the wicked Anvill laid,
He fatal Iron malleable made;
Rakes, Hooks and Plowshares, would not him content,
Till the more skillful Smith did Swords invent.
We see men that unsatisfied remain
With killing men, unless they eat the slain.
To these foul Monsters what would he not say,
Or to what place would he not fly away,
If now PYTHAGORAS their diet viewed?
That of all creatures heaven with life endu'd;
Even as a man, did th'eating disavow:
Nor to his belly would all pulls allow.
The Comment UPON THE FIFTEENTH SATYR.
VErse 1. Bithynicus.] Volusius Bithynicus, to whom Juvenal addresses this
Divine Satyr.

Verse 3. Crocodile,] A Serpent of the River Nilus, that, from an egg no
bigger then a Goose-egge, grows to be above two and twenty cubits long; which
no other creature does, that is at first so little. The Egyptians know, how
high the River Nilus will rise that year, by the place where this egg is
hatched. He is armed with impenetrable scales. In the day time he lives upon the
land; in the night, upon the water. When his belly is full of fish, he lies
down upon the shore, with his mouth open: a little bird (there called
Trochilos, in Italy the King of birds) first picks his teeth, then tickles his
gummes, in which pleasure he falls a sleep: And the Ichneumon, a kind of Rat,
running down his throat like an arrow shot into his Bowels, gnawes asunder his
womb, which is the only tender part about him. Upon the River of Nilus there is
a People called Tentyrites, which mortally hate this Serpent, that is terrible
to those that fly from him, but flies from those that pursue him: which only
these men dare do. He is said to be purblind in the water, and quick-sighted
on the land. Some affirm that of all creatures he only grows as long as he
lives; and lives to be very old. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 25.

Verse 4. Ibis,] The Egyptians pray to the Ibes against the coming of
Serpents. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 28. The Ibis is a filthy bird. See Ovid. in Ib.
It is somewhat like a Stork, but those of Pelusium are all black, in other
places they are all white. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 30. Ipsi qui irridentur
Aegyptii, etc. Even the ridiculous Egyptians worship no Monster, but for some
good it does them: as the Ibes, that kills a vast number of Serpents, being a
strong great bird with stiff thighs, and a horney beak. They preserve Egypt
from the plague, by watching and killing the flying Serpents, which the
Southwest wind brings out of the Libyan Deserts: whereby they neither do hurt,
when alive, by biting: nor by their stink, when they are dead. Cic. de Not.
Deor.

Verse 5. Half-Memnon.] In the Temple of Serapis, at Thebes in Egypt, some
think the Colossus or Statue of Memnon to have been dedicated; which at the
rising of the Sun, touched with his beams, is said to sound like music. Plin
lib. 36. cap. 7. Germanicus saw the Statue of Memnon, which being struck with
the rays of the Sun, sounded like the voice of a man. Tac. Ann. lib. 2. cap.
15. This vocal Statue was erected about the year of the Julian Period,
3106.1080 years after, when Cambyses ruined the hundred gated City of Thebes,
he caused the Statue to be broken about the middle of the breast, imagining the
sound to be a product of the Mechanics, effected by springs and wheels within:
but none were found. From this time the Music was thought to be magical; for
neither cause nor Author appeared, yet still the Colossus yielded the same
sound. The remaining part of this wonder of the world was seen by Strabo, that
says, both he and others heard the vocal marble about one in the afternoon.
See Strab. lib. 7. Pausan Attic. Philostrat. in vit. Apol.

Verse 6. Thebes.] The most ancient City of Egypt; built as some say by
Bacchus; as others affirm by Busyris, and once so called. Diodor. and Cic. and
Herodot. that says, it was in compass a hundred and forty furlongs, and
therefore named Hecatompylos.

Verse 7. Long-tail'd Monkey.] A kind of Monkey which the Egyptians worshipped
for a God. This Monkey, the Cercopithecus, had a black head, and hair upon all
the rest of the body like Asses hair. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 21.

Verse 9. The Hound.] Anubis, Son to Isis and Osiris. He gave the Hound for his
Arms, or the impress of his Shield: and therefore was adored in the shape of a
Hound. This made Egypt so superstitious, that if a Dog dyed in any house, the
whole family shaved themselves; which was their greatest expression of
mourning. But Juvenal derides them, that worship the Hound, and not the Goddess
of hunting, Diana. Of terrestrial creatures the Egyptians in general only
worshipped three, the Bull or Cow, the Dog, and Cat. Of water-animals two, the
Lepidot. and Oxyrinth. Strab. Some particular places, as the Saitae and
Thebans, adored Sheep, the Latopolitanes the broad Fish, the Lycopolitanes the
Wolf, Kid, and Goat; the Mendesians the Mouse, and the Athribites the Spider.
Strab. lib. 17.

Verse 11. A Leek or Onion,] Wherein, they conceived, there must needs be a
Divinity; because they crossed the influences of the Moon, decreasing when she
increased, and growing when she wained. Plin.

Verse 15. Sheep.] The Egyptian Priests eat only Veal and Goose; but
altogether abstained from Lamb and Mutton. Diodor. lib. 2.

Verse 18. Alcinous,] King of the Phaeacks, whose Daughter Nausicae found
Ulysses amongst the bushes (as in the end of the Comment upon Sat. 9.) and
brought him to her father: where at Supper he discoursed his voyage, and told
how Polyphemus and Antiphates eat up his Mates: which inhumane cruelty, in my
Author's opinion, must needs be thought so incredible and ridiculous a lie, to
the soberer sort of Phaeacks, that he wonders some of them killed him not, for
abusing them with impossibilities, viz. that men should eat men: all the rest
of his Mandevilian adventures, as that Scylla and Carybdis set their Dogs at
him, That the Cyan rocks, on either side of the Thracian Bosphorus, met and
joined together, That Neptune gave him bladders filled with wind, that Circe
turned his men into Hogs, he thinks might be easier believed, or past by, as
pardonable fictions: But that one man should kill and eat another, what sober
man can credit?

Verse 30. Corcyraean wine,] The excellent strong wine of Corcyra, anciently
Phaeacia. Plin. now Corfu, and so called by Cicero. Famil. Epist. 9.

Verse 33. Junius.] To prove the matter of fact in this sad relation, as if he
were to prove a Law, he names the Consul, Junius Sabinus, Colleague with
Domitian Caesar, at the time when his Minion, Paris the Player, got a
Commission for Juvenal to have a Regiment of Foot at Pentapolis in Egypt,
where that barbarous cruelty was acted.

Verse 34. Coptus.] A Metropolitan City of Egypt. Ptol. Plut. Strab. a Haven
common to the Egyptians and Arabians, inclining toward the red Sea, near to
the Emerald-Mines. Over this Town the Sun at noon day is almost in his
vertical point.

Verse 37. Pyrrha,] Wife to Deucalion. See the Comment upon Sat. 1. From her
time, Juvenal bids us sum up all Tragic Examples, as that of Atreus,
feasting his brother Thyestes with his own Sons; Medea killing her Children;
Orestes his Mother, as aforesaid: and we shall find no parallel to this bloody
banquet. For, those horrid crimes were only committed by single persons, this
by the joint consent of a multitude.

Verse 39. Immortal hatred.] Religion is, a religando, from binding the minds
of men in the strictest of all bonds: and undoubtedly diversity of Religion
makes the saddest difference between man and man. Upon this maxim, the wisest
of the Kings of Egypt grounded his policy, for assigning several Gods to the
several People of his Kingdom; that so they might never agree amongst
themselves to rebel against their Prince. Diodor.

Verse 40. Tentyrites,] The Inhabitants of the City of Tentyris or Tentyra in
Egypt. Plin. Ptol. Strab. Steph. They hate the Crocodile, and are terrible to
him, as in his precedent description. The Deity they worship is the Ibis, a
bird that kills the Crocodile, as aforesaid.

Verse 40. Ombites.] Ombus or Ombri, a Town in Egypt. Ptol. that adored the
Crocodile. By the description of John Leo. it seems to be that which is now
Chana. Undoubtedly, the Transcriber of Juvenal when he should have writ adhuc
Ombos, writ the c twice over, and made it adhuc Combos. Abra. Ortel. which
mistake, together with an infinite number of grosser errors, is rectified in
the Louvre-copie, followed by me in this Edition.

Verse 51. Know I.] This knowledge of the Author, makes very much for the
Argument of his next and last Satyr, writ when he was banished into Egypt,
under the name of an honorable Commander, a Colonel of Foot.

Verse 52. Lewd Canopus.] Of the infinite Lewdness, of this Town, See the
Comment upon Sat. 6.

Verse 55. Poor unguents.] So their wine were generous, the Ombites cared not
what poor unguents they made use of, which in other parts of Egypt were most
precious. Plin.

Verse 56. Negro-Pipers.] The Towns of Ombus and Tentyris were upon the borders
of Arabia, and common to the Arabian Aethiops: some of which were the Pipers at
this lamentable feast of the Ombites.

Verse 73. Ajax or Turnus,] Men of more strength then any were in Juvenal's
time, as appears by the weight of the stones which they lifted and threw at
their enemies. Ajax in his combat with Hector. Iliad. 6. and 7. Diomedes in his
combat with Aeneas. Iliad. lib. 6. that had the luck on it; for, Turnus likewise
struck him down with a stone. Aeneid. lib. 12. Nec plura effatus, saxum
circumspicit ingens,
Without more words, he spies a mighty stone,
Hom. ibid. says that Diomedes took up such a weight, as in his time fourteen
young men could hardly wag.

Verse 77. Homer,] The most incomparable Greek Poet. He flourished eightscore
years before Rome was built. Cor. Nep. He was blind, and therefore surnamed
Homer (for so the Ionians call a blind man that wants a guide) being formerly
known by the name of Melesigenes, as born near to the River Meles, which runs
by the walls of Smyrna. Philost. and Strab. The place of his nativity is made
doubtful, by many Cities, every one of them claiming him for a Native, after
his death; whereas, in his life time, none of all these Towns would relieve his
wants, or own him. The Colophonians say he was a Citizen of theirs; the Chians
challenge him: the Salaminians will have him: the Smyrnians so far avow him,
that in their City they have dedicated a Temple to him: many other Cities clash
and contend about him. Cic. in his Orat. pro Poet. Archia. He writ two Works;
one of the Trojan war, which he calls his Ilias; the other of the voyage of
Ulysses, which he calls his Odysses; as likewise many other little Pieces. From
him came the illustrious Family of the Homerides, in Chios. Hellan. Ingeniorum
gloriae, etc. Amongst so many kinds of learning, and such variety of matter
and form, who can fix the glory of wit upon any one particular person? unless
it be agreed by general consent, that no man went beyond the Greek Poet Homer,
whether the fortune of his work, or the subject be considered. Therefore
Alexander the great (and in the best judgments such a censure raises him,
above envy, to the highest pitch) amongst the spoils of Darius King of Persia,
having taken his Cabinet of unguents or essences, whose outside was all
precious stones: His friends showing him to what use he might put it (rich
unguents and perfumes being improper for a rough Soldier) No, I profess to
Hercules, said Alexander, Homers works shall be kept in it: the most precious
Book for the mind of man, shall have the richest Cover. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 29.
The Greek letters, invented at several times by others, he reduced to that
form wherein we now have them. vid. Herodot. and Plutar. and Plin. lib. 3. cap.
2. where he tells of the conjuring up the Ghost of Homer, from the mouth of
Appian the Grammarian, an eye witness of the fact.

Verse 80. Must laugh.] The Gods (that once assisted Hector and Aeneas in their
Combats, because they had great courages, and were goodly persons) now cannot
choose but laugh, says the Satyrist, to see the Pygmeys of his time, Dwarfs
both in mind and body, fight and kill one another. Very Pygmeys they would have
been, if their stature and strength had lessened proportionable to their
decrease between the time of the Trojan war and the age of Homer, as appears
by the weight lifted by Diomedes, if we credit Homer's testimony, in the last
note but one.

Verse 84. Palme-trees.] The Palm Tree Grove, near to the City of Tentyris.

Verse 94. Prometheus.] See the manner of his stealing fire from Heaven in the
Comment upon Sat. 8.

Verse 103. The Biscainers.] The Vascones, a People of Spain. Ptol. Plin. and
Tacit. They were besieged by Metellus and Pompey, and reduced to such extreme
necessity, that the living were enforced to eat the dead. Flor. lib. 30. cap.
22. Val* Max. lib. 7. cap. 6. Oros. lib. 5. cap. 23. The Vascones sent a
Plantation into France, which are now called Gascons.

Verse 119. Zeno,] Father of the Stoics, Son to Mnaseas of Cittium in the Isle
of Cyprus. The Oracle told him, if he would be a good man, he must converse
with the dead; whereupon he presently fell to the reading of old Authors.
Laert. He first came to Athens as a Merchant, yet with some inclination to the
study of Philosophy: for, hearing his Ship was cast away, he said Fortune
commands me to study Philosophy more intentively. Senec. Or as Plutarch has
it, I thank thee Fortune, thou will thrust me into a Gown. He was Scholar to
Crates, Stilpo and Xenocrates: and so well satisfied with his two last Masters,
that he said, his best Voyage was his Shipwreck. His Hearers were at first
called Zenonians, from their Reader: afterward, from the place where he
taught, they had the name of Stoics. He was so honored by the Athenians, that
they entrusted him with the keys of the City. After he had been a Reader eight
and fifty years, and had lived ninty and eight, he broke his finger (and as it
seems, to prevent the sense of further pain) strangled himself. King Antigonus
(that eighteen years before had writ for Zeno to come to him into Macedon, and
still had a hope to get him thither) when he heard of his death, said, What a
sight have I lost: one asking him why he was so great an admirer of Zeno, he
answered, because in all my intercourse with and favors to him, I never knew
Zeno either exalted or dejected. The King's respects to Zeno died not with him:
For, he sent his Ambassador to Athens, that moved in his Master's name for the
erecting of a Monument to Zeno in the Ceramick. It was done by Decree of the
People, attested by Arrhenides, then Archon, and writ upon two Pillars; one
erected in the Academy, the other in the Lyceum. The Statue they set up for him
was of brass, crowned with a crown of gold. The reason of the Decree was, That
the world might know how much the people of Athens honored good men alive and
dead. The Sect of the Stoics sprung out of the Cynicks; and their principles,
as in the Comment upon Sat. 13. were the same, viz. That virtue wants nothing,
but comprehends within it what is sufficient for the happiness of life; which
they held to be governed by fatal necessity.

Verse 121. Biscain Stoics.] My Author says, It would have been no great
wonder, if the Biscainers had eat man's flesh, without necessity, when they were
besieged by Metellus; because, in his days, Spain never heard of Zeno's
Precept, that enjoined his Sect, Upon no terms whatsoever to violate the Law
of Nature. But in Juvenal's time, so long after Metellus, when the Greek and
Roman Philosophy was dispersed through the world (even the Britains being
taught by the French to argue the Law: and Thule or Tilemarck in Norwey talking
of a Salary for Rhetors, to initiate their Nation in moot Cases) that now the
Egyptians (from whom all learning was derived) should be so barbarously
inhumane, as to eat one another, is an amazement to my Author; and may be so to
all that know not Quantum Relligio poterit suadere malorum.

Verse 127. Saguntine.] The people of Saguntum (now Morvedre) in Spain,
besieged by Hannibal, against the Articles of peace between Rome and Carthage.
Their fidelity to the Romans encouraged them to hold out, till hunger forced
them to eat the bodies of the Dead. When they had no more Dead men to preserve
the Living, they raised a pile of wood in the Marketplace, where they burned
themselves, and all they had. This siege, against the conditions of peace,
brought in the second Punick war, and consequently the ruin of perfidious
Carthage.

Verse 131 Moeotis,] Where every tenth stranger was sacrificed to Diana, the
bloody Ceremony continuing till the coming of Orestes and Pylades. See the
Comment upon Sat. 1. tit. Orestes.

Verse 139. Nile.] This River (of which in the Comment upon Sat. 6.) was the
Egyptians heaven. Read my Translation of Pliny's Panegyric p. 19. Egypt so
gloried in cherishing and multiplying seed, as if it were not at all indebted
to the Rain and heaven, being always watered with her own River; nor fatned
with any other kind of water, but what was poured forth by the Earth it self;
yet was it clothed with so much corn, that it might (as it were eternally) vie
harvests with the fruitfullest parts of the whole world.

Verse 141. The horrid Cimbrian] The Danes and Holsatians, horrid indeed and
terrible to the Romans overthrown in three battails by these German Outlawes
(for so the word Cimbrian imported in High Dutch according to Plutar. but Fest.
says, in French) which had been Masters of the Romans, but that Marius rose,
as in Sat. 8. from a Ploughman, and a camp-Carpenter, to be a victorious
General: and though the man was meanly born, Yet he at Cimbrian horrors never
checked,
But did, alone, the trembling State protect.


Verse 141. Agathyrse.] The Agathyrsi (now Alanorsi) were a People of Scythia.
Ptolom. so named from Agathyrsus, Son to Hercules by Echidne.

Verse 144. Earthen boats.] In the Isle of Della, embraced by the Sea and two
arms of Nilus, there is such an easy passage by water, that some have earthen
boats. Strab. lib. 17.

Verse 147. Softest hearts.] Dum hominem, etc. when Nature commanded Man to
weep, she gave him pity, humanity, and mercy. Senec.

Verse 159. Mysterious lights.] In the Ceremonies of Ceres, such a person was
thought fittest to officiate at the Altar, as could keep a torch lighted when
he ran at full speed.

Verse 179. At far more concord Serpents are.] Caetera animantia, etc. other
creatures hold fair quarter with their own kind. We see them assemble and join,
against those of another species. The fury of Lions makes them not fight
amongst themselves: no Serpent bites another Serpent: No Sea Monsters, or
fishes, to their Kind are cruel: But really many mischiefs are done by man to
man. Plin. lib. 7. in Praem. Ab homine, etc. Man by man is daily endangered.
The world has not more frequent villainy, more obstinate, more flattering. A
storm threatens before it rises; houses crack before they fall; smoke ushers
fire: but destruction from the hand of man to man is sudden: and the nearer it
approaches, it is the more industriously disguised. You are deceived, if you
trust their faces that complement you: they have the shapes of men, the souls
of wild beasts. Senec. Epist. 104. Nulla est tam, etc. there is no plague so
detestable, as that which one man brings upon another. Cicer.

Verse 193. Pythagoras.] Son to Mnesarchus of Samos a Diamond-cutter. He was
Scholar to Phericydes the Syrian, and the first that taught Philosophy to the
Italians. When Phericydes dyed, he heard Hermodamantus, then a very old man,
Nephew to Creophilos. Then he made a voyage to Egypt, to sound the mysteries
of their Theology, sacred ceremonies, and Morality. Afterward, desirous to
learn Astrology and the discipline of the Chaldaeans, he went to Babylon; where
he was taught the course of the Stars, and their influence in relation to the
nativities of men. It is said that he had no less then six hundred Scholars
that came to him by night; whereof the most famous were these four, Architas
the Tarentine, Hippasus the Metapontine, Alcmaeon and Philolaus Crotonians. He
was the first Assertor (...) of the transmigration of Souls into other bodies:
whereof Ovid writes the History, and meant not (as I conceive) to trouble
Grammarians, with making out his sense with a figure, but understood form as
Pythagoras did, for soul (...): beginning thus In nova, fert animus, mutatas
dicere formas
Corpora: dii ceptis (nam Vos mutastis, and Illas)
Aspirate meis --
Souls, changed into new bodies, I record:
You Gods (that changed Your selves, and Them) afford
Your help --
Pythagoras, the easier to persuade his Auditors, affirmed that he himself was
first Son to Mercury, his name Aethalides: and that his Father bid him choose
his suit, and it should be granted, excepting immortality: He asked, that no
change of his soul might deprive him of the memory of things past. After he
dyed as Aethalides, he lived again as Euphorbus, then as Hermotimus; then he
was a Delian Fisherman, called Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus dying, he revived as
Pythagoras. This opinion of the Souls migration, he learned from the
Egyptians; and from their Priests (undoubtedly) he had his abstinence from
flesh and herbs, not allowing himself all kinds of pulls: for, he abstained from
beans. What a ridiculous appearance we see in the story of his Egyptian
Philosophy? Can any body then blame Lucian for jeering at him, and bringing the
soul of Pythagoras into a Cobblers Cock, that was interrogated, Why he would eat
no beans when he was Pythagoras? whereunto he answered, If I had not in some
things been extraordinary, I should not have been so followed. Lucian in
Mycill. Truly I am thus far of Lucian's opinion, That Pythagoras, and his
Pattern, King Numa, would never have brought the Common People to submit to
their Authority and Laws, If they had not first won them to a belief, that
their Lawgivers were more then men. This made the Crotonians and Metapontines
reverence his Laws; and suffer him to reduce them, by his doctrine, from their
luxurious vanity: insomuch as the women, wrought upon by his integrity and
strictness of life, hung up their wanton Ornaments and Vests of cloth of gold,
in the Temple of Juno. After he had lived long amongst the Crotonians, he went
to Metapontus, and there dyed. About the manner of his death tradition differs
very much. But in how great esteem he lived with the Metapontines, they
manifested after his decease, by consecrating his house into a Temple, and
giving him divine honors. He was the first that named Philosophy, and himself
Philosopher, a lover of wisdom: the reason for it I have given you in the
Comment upon Sat. 3. tit. Pythagoras. He thought, that in heavenly and earthly
things there is a harmony: for how can the universe consist but in certain
proportions and definite numbers. Polyd. Virgil. lib. 1. cap. 9. de rerum
invent. He held the world to be increated and incorruptible, and that Mankind
was from eternity. Censorin. He defined God to be a spirit, intent and moving
about the nature of all things; of whom all things have their being, all
animals their life. Polyd. Virg. lib. 1. cap. 1. vid. B. Jamblic. and Politian
in Lam. He writ two Commentaries, one treating of a Commonwealth, the other of
a Kingdom; which Plato by his Letter to Archytas the Tarentine (Scholar to
Pythagoras) earnestly desired a sight of; and when he had received a Copy,
expressed much thankfulness and satisfaction.

Figura Decima Sexta.
ROmulidae 1, noti Juvenalis 2 ad ora stupetis?
Nil in front novi est, radiet nisi Cassidis aurum;
Si dicar Soli praefulgens, mira videtur
Res expendenti? Sol non est Ipse Tribunus.
Sexcenti similes 3 his, me duce, signa sequuntur:
Quin positum vestras graphium spes fallit, Amici;
Nec tamen obtusum est nostru^, sed cuspide pungit,
Si meministis, at hic stimulus multo acrius urit;
Hac 4 virga, vitis de stipite, corrigo lentos
Castrorum comites, and frango in vertice nodos;
Qua si vos feriam, prosint patienter ocello
Lacrymulae expressae, tremulaque quiescere calva:
Aut si Praetorem pergant vexare querelae,
Fidendum est Causae; sunt justi Centuriones.
Sed vitate meos pedites, vos calcibus actos
Memphi proscribent: Libertas est rata Campo;
Immotusque metu Miles, succumbit amori.
Nunc, palpans Genitor, scribetur languidus haeres;
At si non captet, Ceras Paris impleat unus,
Qui mihi militiae sub Caesare donat honorem;
Vnde Clientis opes, queis (nam venalia Romae
Omnia) ab officio moveatur forte Patronus.


The sixteenth Design.
NOt know me friends 1? look better, it is the old face
Of 2 Juvenal, but in a rich new case:
More glorious then the Sun I may be well;
The Sun, I take it, is no Colonel.
Six hundred of these 3 Fellows I command:
You look a Pen should still be in my hand?
Mine was no soft Pen, you have heard so much:
But where this falls, it gives a harder touch:
This, Neighbors, is the 4 Vine; with this I do
Battoon my Raskalls; should I beat you too,
Your best were to put finger in the eye,
Or shake your empty heads; yet, if you cry
For Justice to the Tribune, you may trust
To your good Cause, our Officers are just:
But 'ware my Regiment of foot, you will be
Kicked out of Egypt. Soldiers, and not Free,
Our Charter bars: For love, not fear, we bow.
My bedridden Father, if he please me now,
Shall be my heir; but if he please me not,
The Favorite, that my Commission got:
Which brings me in, you may at Rome report,
Money enough to buy his Place at Court.
The Manners of Men. THE SIXTEENTH SATYR OF JUVENAL.
The ARGUMENT.
The great Court-Minion, Paris, sells
The Major's place, and Colonel's,
Whose parts upon the Stage He played:
For touching this, the Author's made
A Colonel in spite; and sent
To Egypt with his Regiment:
Where he the difference records
Of People wearing Gowns and Swords.
A Soldier's privileges who can tell?
For, GALLUS, in the Camp if all go well,
Young valor's enterd by a happy Star.
There is an hour in fate, more powerful far,
Then if to MARS her letter VENUS write:
Or's Mother, pleased to see her SAMIANS fight.
The common-benefits let us first repeat;
It Is something, that no Gown-man dare thee beat;
Nay, if thou beat'st him, he puts up the blow,
Nor struck out Teeth dare to the Praetor show,
Nor that black lump in his swollen face reveal,
Or's one eye: which no Surgeon hopes to heal.
The armed Judge, that must thy wrongs repair,
With shoes and great boots hanging at his chair;
Observes CAMILLUS his old martial Laws:
And lets no Soldier, to defend his Cause,
Pass over the trenches, or his colors leave.
A Soldiers wrong the Captains soon perceive;
And give me satisfaction too he must,
In case the ground of my Complaint be just:
But the whole Regiment will malice me,
My foes each private company will be.
The right they do me, they are sure to make
More grievous, then the wrong I would not take.
It were to be as desperate an ass,
As the Orator VAGELLUS ever was,
Against two thighs, thousands to move to wrath
With Boots and spurrs; who so ill breeding has?
Then who so much a PYLADES to lend
Assistance, in an army, to his friend?
Let Us wipe our eyes, nor go about to use
Men, that we know will but themselves excuse.
The Judge interrogating, who was by
When thou were hurt? the Witness that says, I:
Be what he will; his hair, in my esteem,
And beard, might our great Ancestors beseem.
A Souldier'gainst no soldier, if he please,
May a false witness bring, with much more ease,
Then a poor Countryman, if he pursue
A guilty Soldier, can produce a true.
The grand Prerogatives observe we now,
Appendent to the Military vow.
If shamlesly my neighbour-Souldier claim
A piece of ground, that bears my Fathers name:
Or shall the sacred Bounder-stone dig out,
To which all my Forefathers were devout;
I likewise yearly offering, to the Soil,
My first fruits of Pulls, Honey, Meal, and Oil.
If, being my debtor, he not only stand
Dallying to pay me, but forswear his hand:
We wait, till all the people be called in;
It Is a whole year before our Suit begin;
And then a thousand stops, a thousand stays;
Sometimes the Usher but the cushion lays:
His cloak off smooth CAEDITIUS having got:
And old Judge FUSCUS used the Chamber Pot,
The Court's up, when we should to pleading go;
Within the Lawyers lists the fight is slow.
But he that wears a sword and belt, may use
His pleasure, and his day of hearing choose:
Nor is his Suit in danger to be stopped,
Or with demurrers as with triggers propt.
Then, Law the freedom to a Soldier gives,
To make his Will, whilst yet his Father lives;
For, what his service in the Wars has got,
Unto the Stock of wealth belongs not,
Of which his Father wholly may dispose.
CORANUS therefore, that so wealthy grows
By husbanding his pay, his dying Father
Sends presents to; just industry did gather
His wealth, and that is his own which he has earned.
A General in honor is concerned,
That he that wants not worth, no gold should want,
That all may march out trapt, and all clinquant.
The Comment UPON THE SIXTEENTH SATYR.
VErse 1, Gallus,] The person honored with this Satyr.

Verse 6. Or's Mother,] Juno, whose principal Temple stood in the Ionian-Isle
of Samos.

Verse 10. Praetor,] That would hear no complaint against a Soldier; whose
proper Judges were the great-Officers of the Army. See the Comment upon Sat. 1.
tit. Praetor.

Verse 15. Camillus,] The Dictator formerly mentioned: He made a Law at the
Siege of Veiae, That a Soldier should not be compelled to leave his Colors
for any suit in Law; the reason of the Law was, That no Soldier might be
absent from the public service, upon a private man's Complaint.

Verse 26. Vagellus,] An Orator that, without any consideration of other men's
interest or his own danger, would undertake any Cause, though he were
bastinadoed for it, by some concerned great person: Therefore I call him an
Ass, according to our dialect; but my Author styles him, A Man with the heart
of a Mule, Mulino cord, which his old transcribers mistaking, changed mulino
into Mutinensi, and so made him a foolish Orator of Mutina (now Modena) in
Italy, but that City is vindicated, by the noble French-copy, from being Mother
to such a Dunce.

Verse 21. Cohort,] The Roman Cohort, or Regiment of Foot, was the tenth part
of their ordinary Legion, or the Legio justa. A Cohort contained three
Maniples; every Maniple two Centuries; every Century a hundred Soldiers, Alex.
Genesis Dier. lib. 1. So you see, that Juvenal, in his Cohort, commanded six
hundred Men.

Verse 29. Pylades,] See the Comment upon Sat. 1. tit. Orestes.

Verse 36. Great Ancestors,] The old Romans; that feared not death, in their
Countrie's, their own, or their friend's just-Cause.

Verse 42. Vow,] The military sacrament or Oath, the form whereof was this:
Obtemperaturus sum, etc. I am to obey and do whatsoever is commanded me by my
Generals, to my power. Polyb. See Lyps. de milit. Romans lib. 1. dial. 6 and 4.

Verse 45. Bounderstone,] Set up for a Mark between Neighbors Lands: Upon
this stone (not to be defiled with blood, by Numa's constitution) the Romans
yearly sacrificed Pulls, Honey, Meal and Oil, as their First Fruits to the God
Terminus or Limit: of which they used to say; The God Terminus was not to give
place to Jove himself. And they held a crime committed against this Deity, by
removing a Bounderstone, to be the greatest of all Sacriledges.

Verse 55. Caeditius,] Mentioned here as a Pleader: as a Judge Sat. 13.

The Judge Caeditius cannot here invent,
Nor Rhadamanth in hell, a punishment
Verse 56. Fuscus,] Aurelius Fuscus; Martial sets his mark upon him for a
drunkard, and Juvenal does as much for his wife, Sat. 12. and little less for
her husband, by making him turn to the wall before he sits down in the Court.

Verse 71. That Is his own which he has earned,] All that a Roman earned, by
his labor and patience in the Wars, was clearly his own; not of the essence
of his Patrimony, which appertained to his Father by survivorship, in case that
during his Son's life he had not emancipated, or made him free; for, a Son,
being in potestate Patris, could give away nothing by Will, unless he were a
Soldier, whose military Oath gave him his freedom; and enabled him to dispose
of whatsoever he had got in the service of his Country. Knowing this privilege,
Coranus (though he was old, and had one foot in the Grave) courted his young
Son, that was a Soldier, and might therefore die before him, without leaving a
Legacy, out of the Profits and Proceeds of his Pay, to his Father, unless the
old man (like a common Captator) pleased him with Presents.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
FOlio 76. verse 81. for there is, read theirs. fol. 86. ver. 311. for note,
read, note yet. fol. 171. v. 415. for, with men of paludated, read, with
paludated. fol. 227. v. 20. for the Judge then, read, then the Judge. fol. 310.
for in thy decrepitness they must, read, in their decrepitness thou must. fol.
403. v. 237. for the Tribune sits, read, the Praetor sits. fol. 479. v. 340.
for Sommnr, read, Summer.

READERS.
IF I should have printed all the places wherein the Louvre-copie (which I
follow) differs from other Juvenals, it would have been a little book of it
self: I have therefore put down only the most material alterations, that, if
you please, you may here correct the words of your Latin Juvenal, by the French
Edition: and the commaes, by my English. Yet, let me advertise you of one most
excellent reading that is not in the K. of France's copy, for which (I take
it) we are obliged to Dr. Hammond's observation, out of an old Manuscript, viz.
Sat. 13. verse. 1.

Extemplo, quodcunque malum committitur, Variae Lectiones JUVENALIS, PARISIIS
editi, 1644.
Sat. 3.
VErse 36. -- and verso pollice vulgus Quum libet occidunt V. 112. -- aviam
resupinat amici
Sat. 6.
V. 142* -- vidua est, locuples quae nupsit avaro
Sat. 8.
V. 4. -- humeroque minorem Corvinum V. 157. Eponam
Sat. 9.
V. 26. Quodque taces, ipsos
Sat. 10.
V. 24. -- notissima templis Divitiae; crescant ut opes, V. 74. -- si Nurtia
Tusco V. 93. -- augusta Caprearum V. 150. -- aliosque elephantos, Additur
imperiis Hispania V. 220. -- Oppia maechos V. 222. -- circumscripserit Hirrus
V. 224. -- inclinet Hamillus V. 322. -- sive est haec Oppia V. 365. Nullum
numen habes, si sit prudentia; nos te Nos facimus Fortuna Deam,
Sat. 13.
V. 32. Faesidium.
Sat. 14.
V. 2 Et nitidis maculam haesuram, V. 62. Hic leve argentum; vasa aspera
tergeat alter,
Sat. 15.
V. 35. Ardet adhuc Ombos,
Sat. 16.
V. 13. Atque oculum, medico nil promittente, relictum, V. 21. Consensu magno
efficient, curabilis ut sit Vindicta, and gravior quam injuria V. 23.
Declamatoris mulino cord
THE TABLE: OR An ALPHABETICALL ACCOUNT of the principal and most memorable
Words, Matter, History, Descriptions, Characters, and Sentences contained in
this Volume.
A.
AEACVS, one of the three infernal Judges, folio 17. his office, ibid.
Aediles, of three sorts, 102 Aegeus, 445 Aegistthus, begot in Incest, 350 lives
in Adultery, ibid. marries Clytemnestra, 15. designs the murder of Orestes,
ibid. is slain by him, ibid. Aelius Sejanus, his beginning, 357. his policies,
ibid. and 358. discovered, ibid. his execution, 359 Aemilius Lepidus, Pont.
Max. 289. why his Statue was set up with a Child's Bulla about his neck, 290
Aemilius Paulus, leads Perseus K. of Macedon in triumph, 291 Aemilius Scaurus,
58. his birth, poverty and advancement, ibid. he breaks his Sonn's heart, ibid.
his Character, ibid. his Embassage to K. Jugurth. ibid. Aemilius, a rich
Lawyer, 254 Aeneas, Son to Anchises, 33. his piety, ibid. his fortune, ib.
drowned, 407. Julius Caesar descended from him, ibid. Aeolus, K. of Strongyle,
370. why called K. of the Winds, ibid. what his dominion signifies, in a moral
sense, 371 Aeta, King of Colchis, 18 Acestes, why called the good, 263
Achilles, Son to Peleus, 34. his life summed up, ibid. Acilius Glabrio, a
Prudent Man, 123. Consul with Vlp. Trajan, ibid. accused for Designs of
Innovation, ibid. banished with more cruelty then his Son was executed, ibid.
Actor's spoils, 61 Adriatic, now Golfo di Venetia, 120 Africa, and France,
litigious Countries, the Lawyers best Patrimony, 25^ Aganippe's Valey, 241
Agathyrse, 511 Agave, kills her Son, 249 Age Ninth, 44.443. Eight Ages, ibid.
Agrippina, chosn for her Uncle Claudius Caesar's second Wife, by her dear
Servant Narcissus, 149. hr confidence before marriage, ibid. she gets her Son
Domitius adopted by her husband, ibid. then poisons the old Man with a
Mushrome, ibid. Alaband, a City n Caria, 97 Alba, built by As^nius, 121. robbed
by K. Tullus, ibid. from whence it had the name, ibid. Albane Wine, now called
Vino Albano, 142 Albina, 99 Alcestis, dies to sa^ her Husband's life, 221
Alcinous, K. of the haeacks, 504. feasts Ulysses, ibid. Alcmaeon, why he (...)
his Mother, 223 Alecto, one of the tree Furies, 247. what the Furies are, ibid.
Alexander the Great 68. his Mother's pride, ibid. his Father dream interpreted,
ibid. his conquests, ^d. his description, ibid. dies at thirty yrs of age,
ibid. the truth of his impoisong doubtful, ibid. Alexandria, 195. (...) called
the Walls of Lagus, ibid. Alledius, a Glutton, 14^ Althaea, Queen of Calidonia,
147 Amphiaraus, ^03. foreknew that he must die at thy Siege of Thebes, 223. a
secret his Wife made use of, ibid. his last Charge to his Son, ibid. Amphion,
199. his Fable, ib* mythologised, 200 Amydon, a Paeonian City, 97 Ancient
Romans described, 59 Ancile, a brazen Shield, 63. of what fashion, ibid. how it
dropped from the Clouds, ibid. eleven more made, ibid. Ancona, a City built by
the Grecians, 120 Ancus Martius, fourth K. of Rome, 144. conquers the Latins,
ibid. inlarges the City and Territories, ibid. builds the City of Ostia, ih.
makes the first Roman Prison, ibid. Andromache, 212. brings a Son to Pyrrhus,
ibid. is married to Helenus, ibid. Andros, an Aegaean Isle, 97 Antaeus, 98. why
Hercules held him from touching the earth, ibid. his Sepulcre and body found,
ibid. Anti-Catoes, writ by Caesar, 206 Anticyra, an Isle, 446 Antigonus, 508.
his love to Zeno, and the reason of it, 509 Antilochus, eldest Son to Nesor,
374. slain by Memnon, ibid. Antonius. vid. C. Antonius Anubis, 213. worshipped
in the Form of a Dog, 214. the reason, 503 Apicius, the most memor^le Glutton,
119. writes the Art of Cokery, ibid. upon what account he hang^ himself, ibid.
Apicius Galba, a Droll, 140 Apollo's Temple-Statue, 31 why he is called the
learned in the Law ibid. Appion, affirms that he sa Homer's spirit raised, 507
Appius, vid. L. Appius. Appius Claudius, 381. his ot upon Virginia, ib. he dies
for it, 382 Aquinum, now Aquino, 5. famous for the birth of Juvenal and ^omas
Aquinas, 106 Arabarch, inscribed in e Pedestall of Crispinus his Statue, 31.
w^t it signifies, ibid. Arachne, Idmon's Daugh^, 59. her Fable, ibid.
Inventress of Lines and Nets, ibid. Arc, a triumphall Monument, 91 Archetimus,
intrusts his Gold, 445. is trepand, ibid. how he came by his own, 446
Archigallus, the Title of Cybel's Chief Priest, 53. why no Roman could be of
that Order, ib. how they came to be castrated, 54. the manner of their
procession, ibid. Archigenes, a great Physician, 446. censured by Galen, 483
Areopagus, 324. how the Judges, there sitting, gave sentence, ibid. to divulge
the secrets of the Court was death, ib. why called the Court of Mars, ib.
Arete, Queen of Corcyra, 328 Aristotle, a Stagyrite, 49. his parentage and
description, ibid. Tutor and Secretary to Alexander the Great, ibid. his
Scholars named Peripateticks, ibid. he made the first Library, ibid. Armenia,
rebels against Nero, 300 Arpinum, 305. there Tully and Marius were born, ibid.
Artaxata, a City built by K. Hannibal, 70 Arturius, an Ingrosser of beneficial
Places, 95 Arviragus, K. of South Wales, 126. said to marry Claudius Caesar's
Daughter, ibid. Aruspex, 63. how he made his presage, ibid. his purifying
Ceremony, 70 Asius, 144 Astraea, Justice, 189 Assaracus, 374 Asylum, 309
Asylus, the Fencer, 202 Atalanta, Princess of Argos, 147 Atellan Jigge, 193
Athamas, K. of Thebes, 18 Atlas, the Mountain 405. why called the pillar of
Heaven, ibid. why K. Atlas was said to be transformed into that Mountain, ib.
Atreus, 248 Atropos* the Destiny that cuts off the Thread of life, 95 Atticus,
404 Auction, public sale of Goods, 95. the manner of it, ibid. Aufidius, 321
Auge, Daughter of Alaeus, 13 Augurs, 216 Augustus Caesar, 305. his Victories
over Brutus and Cassius at Philippi, over M. Antony at Actium, ibid. Aurelia,
146* Aurelius Cotta, 147 Automedon, Coachman to Achilles, 27 Autonoe, 193
Sentences in A.
Fol. 153. verse 23. The Iron Age brought forth all other Crimes:
Adultery was in the Silver times.


Fol. 73. verse 25. -- for our pains;
In honest Arts, the City yields no gains.


B.
BAcchanals, Celebraters of the libidinous Feasts of Bacchus, 48 Bacchae, vid.
Maenades. Baetick Spain, now Granada, 421. famous for rare-coloured wool, ibid.
Baiae, why so named, 9. what a sweet and Princely Town it was, ibid. Baius,
Mate to Ulysses, 90 Balneatick, the Bath-farthing, 68 Baptists, Dippers of
Athens, 60 Barbers, came first to Rome from Sicily 124 Bardocuculli, 300 Bareas
So^anus, impeached, 99 Basil. 3^2 Baskets, first made in Great Britain, 422.
their invention falsely boasted by the Romans, ib. Bathyllus, a Lutenist, 447,
his Statue consecrated, ibid. Beccafico, 474 Bedriack-field, where Otho lost
the Empire, 61 Belides, 221. their Story, 222. the Sentence pronounced against
them in Hell, ibid. what it is thought to signify, ibid. and 224. Bellerophon,
382. courted by Q. Sthenoboea, ibid. denies her, ibid. is accused for an
attempt upon her Honor, ibid. carries Letters writ against himself, ibid. his
fortunate Valor, ibid. he marries Sthenoboea's Sister, 383. his flying up to
Heaven interpeted to be his invention of Galleys, ibid. Bellona, Goddess of
War, 125. her Priests sacrifice their own blood, and then prophecy, ibid.
Beneventine Cobbler, an ill favored drinking-Glasse, 143 Berenice, 198 Beryll,
143 Biscainers (the Cantabri in Spain) anciently Vascones, 508. besieged by
Metellus, ibid. Planters of Gascony, ibid. Bithynia, 245 Bithynicus, vid.
Volusius Bithynicus. Boars served up whole to the Table, 32. who first did it,
ibid. Boccar, K. of Numidia, 145 Bounder-stone, the Altar of God Terminus, 522.
not to be blodied, ibid. Bridge Aemilian, 189 Britannicus, 197. poisoned, ibid.
Brutidius, 360
Sencences in B.
Fol. 80. verse 181. In wretched Beggary nothing's harder, then
To see what laughing Stocks it makes of Men.


Fol. 82. verse 213. Our Common Crimes proud Beggary.

Fol. 109. verse 9. No bad Man is blessed.

Fol. 114. verse 117. Let me be rather then a Man of Birth.
The Giants Brother, the Offspring of the earth.


Fol. 331. verse 7. The Belly's cheaply fed.

Fol. 347. verse 354. Seldom Beauty is with Virtue matched.

Fol. 470. verse 304. No Plays no Shows like Businesses of Men.

Fol. 317. verse 134. What thou shall in thy Bedchamber commit,
Even when the Cock the second time shall crow,
E're it be day, shall the next Tavern know.


C.
CAcus, the Outlaw. 148. robbes Hercules, ib. how he was caught and killed,
ibid. Caducum, a term of the Civil Law, explaned, 323, 324 Caeditius, a Judge,
452. a Pleader, ibid. Caesonia, 218 Cajeta, 476 C. Antonius, banished by the
Censors, 296. the reason, 297 C. Caesar Caligula, 218. how he had his surname,
ibid. his dotage on his Wife, ibid. what he said when he kissed her neck, ib.
why she philtered him into madness, ibid. C. Cassius Longinus, 353. his eyes
put out, ib. the color for his death, ib. the true cause, ibid. C. Julius
Caesar, 363. France decreed him for his Province, ib. his five Consulships, ib.
his three years absolute Reign, ib. his victories, ib. and 364. his
munificence, ib. his murder foreshewed, ib. his strange dexterity in dispatch
of business, ib. the number of his Battails, ib. his mercy and bravery, ibid.
C. Julius Vindex, the first that declared against Nero, 303 C. Marcellus his
Charge against C. Scantinius, 59 C. Marius, 305. his poor beginning, ibid. his
high Achievements against K. Jugurth, and the Cymbrians and Teutons, 306.
overthrown by Sylla, ib. his imprisonment and strange escape, ib. begs his
bread at Carthage, ib. is the seventh time Consul, ib. dies of a Pleurisy, ib.
C. Piso Calphurnius, adopted by Galba, 147. how munificent, ib. C. Scantinius,
cause of the Scantinian Law, 59. C. Silius, 384. Gallant to the Empress
Messalina, ib. forced to sue a divorce from his Wife, ib. and to marry his
Mistress in her Husbands life time, ib. refuses to plead at his trial, ib.
Cales, anciently Gades, its situation, 351. sacked by the English, 359. how rich
the soil about it, ib. Calliope, the Muse, 120 Calphurnius Bestia, accused by
M. Caecilius, 483. Calvina, 100 Camillus, called a second Romulus, 68. why
condemned, ib. chosen Dictator, ib. relieves the Capitol, ib. peswades the
Romans not to desert the City, ib. his second Victory against the Gauls, ib.
his Law at the Siege of Veiae, 521. his death, 68 Campania, 379. why called
Terradi Lavoro, ib. there Pompey the Great falls sick, 380 Campus Martius, 212.
why called Tarquin's fields, ib. described, ib. how the men were there
exercised, ib. how the women, 201 Camurius, murderer of Galba, 61 Canopus, 195
Canusium, 197 Capito Cossutianus, accused by his Province, 294 Capito, vid. L.
Fonteius Capito. Capitol, named from a man's head, dug out of its
foundation, 308. an Augury from thence taken, that Rome should be the head of
the World, ib. Capitoline, surname to the Family of Manlius, 67 Capreae, 359
Cares, builds the Colossus at Rhodes, 203 Carfinia, a Strumpet, 59 Carus,
Intelligencer to Domitian, 25. informs against Pliny. ib. Cassandra, Daughter
to K. Priam, 375. a Prophetess, never believed, 376. the ground of the Fable,
that Apollo made love to her, ib. her Ravisher thunderstruck ibid.
Castanetta's, 409 Castor and Pollux, 449. their fabulous hatching, ib. why
esteemed Gods by Mariners, ib. their actions, ib. the Fable of their death and
revivall derived from the Stars that bear their names, ib. Castor's Temple in
Rome, ibid. Castor, Inventer of Coaches, 383 Catiena, 100 Catiline, a
Conspirator, made famous by the Pen of Cicero, 57 Catillus, 103 Catti, 128
Catulus, a Monopolizer, 95 Catullus, Author of the Comedy called the Phantasm,
447 Catullus Messalinus, a blind Beggar, 125. raised to be one of the Lords of
the Council, ib. Catuzza, 451 Cecrops, K. of Athens, before Deucalion's Flood,
292. why pictured Male and Female, ib. his Olive Tree names the City, ib. what
he taught the Grecians, ibid. Celsus, vid. Junius Celsus. Censor, 63. the
manner of his election, ibid. his Office, ibid. Ceparius, fellow-Traitor with
Catiline, 57 Cercopithecus, described 503 Ceres, Goddess of Husbandry, 191. how
represented, ib. her Fable, ib. her sacrifices, 192. why so little frequented,
ib. her Pageants described, 484. why an Egg was presented in her Pomp, ibid.
Cethegus, engaged with Catiline, 57 Chaldaeans, 214. their employment in the
Babilonian State, ib. their study, ib. why greater Philosophers then the
Grecians, 215 Chalky-feet, the mark of a Slave sold in open Market, 30.
Character of a Greek Mountebanck, 76.77.78.79. Charon, 105 Chief Bishop, vid.
Pontifex Maximus Chio, 100 Chiron, 262 Chorax, 10^ Christians inhumanely
martyred by Nero, 33. Their torture described, 11. verse. 188 Chrysippus, the
Stoic, 48. an incomparable Logician, ibid. Cilicians 125 Cimb^ians, 306. why
they rejoiced at a battle, and lamented in a sickness, ib. Cinna, calls-in
Marius 306 Circe's Rocks, 127 Circus, the great Shew-place, described 97. why a
Towell was there hung out for a Flag, 409 Claelia, 309 Claudius Caesar, marries
his own Brother's Daughter, 57. a sottish Prince, 149. puts his Empress to
death, in obedience to his Freed-man Narcissus, and marries again by
appointment, ib. adopts Nero, Son to his his second Wife, ib. is poisoned by
her, ib. Cleanthes, the Stoic, 51. his poverty when he studied Philosophy, ib.
the manner of his death, ib. Cleopatra, Daughter to Ptolemey Auletes, 62. she
puts Marc. Antony upon a battle at Sea, ib. why and how she poisoned her self,
ib. Clients, what they were in their first institution, ib. Clio, 242
Clitumnus, 421 Clodius, Cicero's Enemy, 56. why he degraded himself of his
nobility, ib. his profanation of the Good Goddesse's Ceremonies occasions the
Julian Law, ib. his incest and debauchery, ib. his discovery by Caesar's
Mother, 206 Closter, Son to Arachne, 59. he invents wheels and spindles for
wool, ib. Clotho, the Destiny that holds the Distaffe, 94 Cluvienus, a
pitiful Poet, 28 Clytemnestra, 15. why she murdered her Husband, ib. she
marries Aegisthus, ib. is slain by her Son, ib. her ghost haunts him, ib.
Cneius Pompey, his rise, 361. why surnamed the Great, ib. the success of his
arms, ib. his Wives, ib. the Inscriptions upon his spoils and triumphs, 362.
his folly of loosing all at one battle, ib. his sad end, 363. his Sons
defeated, ib. Cocks, offered to Aesculapius for recovery of sick Persons, 453
Cod^us, 2. Author of the Poem titled Theseis, 12. the Inventory of his Goods,
ib. his miserable poverty, ib Coena Pontificia, 122 Cohort, 522 Collatinus
Tarquinius, Husband to Lucretia, 380 his Inscription upon her Monument, ib.
Columna Bellica, 125 Concord's Temple, where the Stork built her nest 30
Consul, by Juvenal called Praetor, as he was first named by the People, 355 his
mock-state described, 356 Coptus, 504 Corbulo, 105 Corcyra, 504 Corinth, first
called Ephyre, 297. how situated, ib. the Citizens affront the Roman
Ambassadors, ib. a War decreed against them, ib the Town easily stormed, ib.
how Corinthian brass came to be the best, ib. Cornelia, 198. her Jewels, ib.
Cornelius Fuscus, Student in Arms, 125. General against the Dacians, ib. he
and his Army lost, ib. his Wifes draught, ib. he himself noted for a Tipler,
522 Corsica, described, 146 Corvinus, Juvenal's friend, 420. Corvinus, a Roman
Knight, 30. glad to be a Shepherd's man, ib. Corvinus, vid. Val. Corvinus. Cos,
an Island, 295 Cosmus, Inventer of the Vnguentum Cosmianum, 294 Cossus, a Lord,
103 Cossus, a Legacy-monger, 371 Cossus, his Spolia Opima, 291 Cotta, vid.
Aurelius Cotta. Cotyto, Goddess of the Baptists or Dippers, 60 Crassus, vid. M.
and P. Crassus Crates, cries out upon his Countrymen, 259 Crepereius Pollio,
321 Creticus, surname to the house of Metellus, 292 Crispinus, Freedman to
Nero, 23. born at Canopus, in Egypt, ib. Martial's Epigram upon his Cloak, ib.
his pride, 4. his character, 108.109. what he paid for a Mullet, ib. the sum
reduced to our money, 119. Master of the Horse, and Councellor to the Emperor,
117 Crispus, vid. Vibius Crispus. Crocodile, described, 501 Craesus, King of
Lydia, 378. his questions answered by Solon, ib. condemned to be burned, ib.
his life pardoned 379. made a Privy-Councellor to K. Cyrus, ib. Crowns, given
to Poets 245 Cumae, a City built by a People of Asia, 90. it gave the
denomination to a Sibyl, ib. Cupping-glasses, 476 Curian Temperance, 47 Curtius
Montanus, a huge fat Glutton, 124 Cyane, 300 Cybele, why so called, 53. her
invention of the Taber, Pipe and Cymball, ib. styled Mother of the Gods, Rhea
Pessinuntia ib. Magna Matter, 193. Berecynthia, ib. her love to Atis, ib.
Cydias, a Trustee, 445. put to his oath, ib. equivocates, but gains nothing by
it, ib. dies miserably, ib. Cynnamus, the Barber, 22. Martial's Epigram upon
him, ib. Barber to Juvenal, 4.343 Cynthia, Mistress to Propertius, 186 Cyrus,
K. of Persia, takes Croesus prisoner, 378. comes to see his execution, ib. why
he saved him, 379. how he preferred him, ib.
Sentences in C.
Fol. 12. verse. 204. The plumed Combatant repents too late.

Fol. 41. verse 74. Censure acquits the Crow, condemns the Dove.

Fol. 79. verse 150, A Client's the least Loss in all the World.

Fol. 230. verse 75. -- it is in vain
To think one bosom can to Cares contain.


Fol. 279. verse 177. Each Crime is so conspicuously base,
As he that sins is great in birth, or place.


Fol. 337. verse 131. -- but few go down
In peace that wear, none that usurp, a Crown.


Fol. 438. verse 231. -- think thou he escapes, whose Conscience makes
Whips that, unheard, his guilty soul still shakes?


Fol. 459. verse 47. There is a Catiline on every ground:
A Brutus or a Cato no where found.


Fol. 459. verse 55. There Is due unto a Child a great respect.
If thou do any wickedness affect:
Slight not thy tender Infant coming in,
But let him stand betwixt thee and thy sin.


Fol. 468. ver. 259. Thou bid'st him gather wealth by land and Seas:
He finds short ways, great Crimes are done with ease.


Fol. 473. ver. 361. -- he, who nothing covets, happier is,
Then he that seeks to make the whole World his.


Fol. 498. ver. 145. To suit their Crime you can no penance frame,
In whose minds wrath and hunger are the same.


Fol. 166. ver. 297. If once surpised, the earth has not bolder things,
Even from their Crimes their spleen and courage springs.


Fol. 183. verse 681. -- I hate her, that studies, and commits
A foul Crime being in her perfect wits.


D.
DAedalus, an Athenian Artist, 94. a Mathematician, ib. imprisoned in his own
Labyrinth, 26. how he escaped, ib. what we owe to his Invention, 94. where he
laid down his wings, 74 Damasippus, 300 Danow, 301 Decii, sacrifice their lives
for their Country, 307 Demetrius, the Cynick, 142 Democritus, the Abderite, 354
the reason of his continual laughing, ib. his opinions, ib. how and why he
burned out his sight, ib. Demosthenes, Son to a Cutler, 366. his Orations
against K. Philip the cause of his banishment from Athens, ib. he takes
sanctuary, ib. Antipater's plot to draw him out, ib. prevented (by his
voluntary death, 367 Dentatus, the Consul, 481. accepts seven acres of land
for his service to the State, ib. Depositum, 444 Destines, vid Parcae.
Deucalion, after the Flood, lands at Parnassus, 28. consults the Oracle of
Themis, ib. Dictator, his Office Kingly, differing only in name, 289. limited
in point of time, ib. absolute in power, ib. why so called, ibid. Diogenes, the
first Cynick, 486. his own name, ib. his Father's profession, ib. cozened by
the Oracle, ib. forced to fly his Country, ibid. how poorly he lived at
Athens, 487. taken by a Pyrate, that sold him for a Slave, ib. his answer to
him that cried him, ib. his words to him that bought him, ib. why infranchised,
ib. what stuff his Tub was made of, and how he used it, ib. his Letter
concerning Dionysius the second, 256. Alexander the Great gives him a visit,
488. their conference, ibid. why Juvenal calls him Diogenes the Great, ib. his
answers touching his burial, ib. his age and the remarkable day of his death,
ibid. his opinion, ibid. Diomedes, wounds Venus, 26 Dionysius, deposed, keeps a
School, 256. his Parley with Diogenes, ibid. Diphilus, 99 Dolabella, Proconsul,
297. accused and condemned, ibid. Domitian Caesar, marries Julia, Daughter to
his Brother Titus, 57.58 Domitius, counterfeits madness, 124 Doris, 98 Drusus,
105 Drusus, kills the General of an Army, and bears his name, 291 Drusus,
Brother to Tiberius Caesar, 292. derived from Tib. Nero, that conquered
Asdrubal, ib.
Sencences in D.
Fol. 340. ver. 197. Death does alone deal plainly, and declare
What things of nothing humane bodies are.


Fol. 433. ver. 129. -- in all Causes, the impudent Defense
Most men believe to be just confidence.


Fol. 434. verse. 147. Great Doctors must do desperate Patients good.

E.
EAgle, 476 Egeria, a Goddess, or Nymph, 92. Wife and Counceller to K. Numa,
ib. her Fountain, Grove, and Temple let to the Jews by the People of Rome,
ibid. Elephants, first brought into Italy by K. Pyrrhus, 424. then by Hannibal,
ibid. Enceladus, 262 Endromides, Fencers Cassocks, 201 Enthymem, 210
Ephemerides, an Astrologicall Diary, 180 Epicurus, 448. places felicity in the
pleasure of the mind, and absence of pain, ib. why he condemned the
Dialecticks, ib. he denies providence, ib. how Lucretius magnifies him, ib.
Voluptuaries erroneously called Epicureans, ib. his abstinence, ibid. Epona,
Goddess of Stables, 300 Erichthon, Inventer of Chariots, 383 Erimantus, 99
Eriphyle, 223. betrays her Husband Amphiaraus, ib. her death left in Legacy to
his Son by her, ibid. Esquiline Mount, one of Rome's seven Hills, 98. the names
of the rest, ibid. Evander, K. of Arcadia, 406. why he came into Italy, 407. he
defeats the Aborigines, ibid. takes the place that was afterward Rome, ib.
builds upon Mount Palatine, ib. treats Hercules, and Aeneas, ib. Euganeans, 290
Euphranor, Picture-drawer, and Statuary, 104. writes of Symetry and Colors,
ib. when he flourished, ibid. Euphrates, a River springing from the steep
Mountain Niphates, 292. joins with the River Tigris, and makes Mesopotamia, ib.
Euristheus, task-Master to Hercules, 388
Sentences in E.
Fol. 235. verse 183. For Eloquence in rags men seldom look.

Fol. 334. verse 55. Brave Men Examples, which the world adorn,
May in dull climes, and grosser air, be born.


Fol. 394. verse 47. -- what end can thou look for, when thy rents
Diminish, and thy gluttony augments?


F.
FAbii, 67. the Family of the Fabii undertakes a War, ib. three hundred and six
of them slain, by a stratagem, at Cremera, ibid. Fabius Maximus, descended from
the Fabii lost at Cremera, 67. why his Son was called the Gulf, 202. why he
was titled Maximus, 290. his descent from Hercules, ib. Fabius Persicus, 290
Fabrateria, 104 Fabricius Max. the Censor, 69. fines and degrades Pub. Corn.
Ruffinus, and likewise his own Colleague, ib. Fabricius Veiento, a Senator, 103.
his flattery to Claudius Caesar, 115. ver. 147. his unhappiness in his Wife,
ib. Fabulla, a common Prostitute, 59 Falern Wine, 127 Falernus, 197 Faesidius,
443 Fasces, 291 Fascilides, the Image of Diana, 16. the reason of the name, ib.
Fathers privileged, 323 Fauna, the Good Goddess, 205. the strict modesty of
her life, imitated in her Sacrifices, ibid. Flaminian Way, a Highway from
Rome, full of Monuments of the Dead, 35 Flammeum, the Bride's Veil, 200. why
worn, ibid. Flora, 201. her Games described, ib. Flower of Asia, 143 Flying
Posts, 128 Faecialis, the Herald at arms, 125. his Ceremony in denouncing
War, ib. Fortunius Licetas, writes de Lucernis absconditis, 53 Forum, the
great Roman Piazza, 31. described with four other Forums, 117.118 Forum
Boarium, 290 Freedman, an infranchised Slave, 29 Fronto, a Friend to Poets, 19.
honored by Martial, ibid. Frusino, 104 Fuscina, the Retiarius his Trident, 66
Fuscinus, 474 Fuscus, vid. Cornelius Fuscus.
Sentences in F.
Fol. 38. verse 11. No trust to Faces,

Fol. 75. verse 68. Thy great Friend the Faith he hires suspects.

Fol. 80. verse 171. As much Coin as in's Cofers each man has,
So much is the estimation of his Faith.


Fol. 138. verse 165. A barren Wife makes a Friend sweet and dear.

Fol. 157. ver. 100. Fame's loss upon a Bed of Down weighs light.

Fol. 157. ver. 106. They bring strong souls to things they foully dare.

Fol. 269. ver. 91. -- it is rare,
If mighty Fortunes common sense can share.


Fol. 270. ver. 96. He Is wretched that on others Fame relies.

Fol. 313. verse 38. Fates govern Men.

Fol. 415. verse 59. Some do not get a Fortune for life's sake;
But, blind, live that they may a Fortune make.


Fol. 439. v. 249. The intent of fraud is taken for the Act;
What is it then if one commit the fact?


Fol. 5. verse 4. There is an hour in Fate more powerful far,
Then if to Mars her Letter Venus write.


Fol. 238. verse 231. If Fortune will, poor Rhetorician, she
Can raise thee, and thou shall a Consul be:
And from a Consul, if she will, she can
Make thee again a Rhetorician.


Fol. 433. verse 123. Men's Fates are diverse, though their crimes be one:
A Cross exalts that Villain, this a Throne.


G.
GAbii, 241. betrayed by Sext. Tarquin. 360 Gabinius, an Insurrector with
Catiline, 57 Galba, vid. Apicius Galba. Galba, vid. Servius Sulpitius Galba.
Gallicus, the Praetor Vrb. 450 Galline Wood, 105 Gallita Cruspilina, 424
Gallograecia, 245 Gauls conquer Italy, 245. beat by Camillus, ib. run away into
Greece, ib. planted in Gallograecia, ibid. Gallus, 521 Games Olympic,
instituted, 446. consisting of five exercises, ib. ending in five days, ib.
the Victor crowned with an Olive-wreath, ib. why called Pisaean Olive, ib.
Ganges, described, 352 Ganymed, Son to the K. of Troy, 145. his Fable, ib. the
mythologicall sense of it, ibid. Genius, taken for God, 122. for a Tutelar
Spirit, ib. for a Spirit within us, ibid. Getania, 451 Getulian Boore, 143
Gillo, a weak Gallant, 4 Glaucus, 453. money deposited in his hand, ib. he
denies the receipt of it, ib. puts his case to the Oracle, ib. the several
answers made him, ib. the money restored, ib. he and his whole Family
extirpated, ibid. Glaucus, Father to Bellerophon, 382 Golden Fleece, 18. hung
up in the Temple, ib. stolen from thence, ibid. Golden Ram, 18. carries Phryxus
and Hell, ib. is made a Star, ibid. Good Goddess, why thought to be Ceres, 60.
vid. Fauna Gorgons, conquered, 420 Gracchi, Caius and Tiberius Gracchus, Sons
to Cornelia, 55. too popular, ib* why they passed the Lex Agraria, and with
what success, ib. how they were slain, ibid. Gracchus, a Fencer, 66 Gracchus, a
Salian Priest, 63. married to a Trumpeter with a Portion of 3125 l. sterling,
ib. Green-coats, 409 Grief ends in stupidity, 200 Grotto of Vulcan, 16 Grove of
Mars, 16 Gyarus, the least Isle of the Cyclades, 28. Malefactors banished
thither, ibid. Gymnasium, 99 Gymnosophists, why so called, 216. insensible of
heat or cold, ib. their reply to Alexander the Great, ibid.
Sentences in G.
Fol. 331. verse 3. To few men good and ill unmask't appear,
For, what with reason do we hope or fear?


Fol. 337. verse 115. Is there in Greatness so much Good, as will
But only serve to counterpoise the ill.


Fol. 348. verse 361. -- even to tempt the Parents some are bold,
Such is their courage that come armed with Gold.


Fol. 350. verse 421. Pray, that the Gods be graciously inclined
to grant thee health of body, and of mind.


Fol. 400. ver. 161. Proud Guests I -- shun that will compare
Me to themselves, and scorn my meaner fare.


Fol. 429. verse 29. -- good men are grown scarce the number small;
If It be summed up, you will not find in all
So many true deservers of that style,
As there are gates to Thebes, or mouths to Nile.


Fol. 431. verse 88. -- easily men with the Gods make bold,
When they alone behold the sin we act,
No mortal being Witness to the fact.


Fol. 440. verse 283. Who bounds his vices? when did banished Grace
Return, if once but wiped out of the face?


Fol. 467. ver. 238. From whence soever it rises, Gain smells well.

Fol. 350. ver. 410. -- let the Gods thy wishes weigh:
Unto their providence thy will submit,
And for what is sweet, they will give thee what is fit,
And that which thy condition most behooves:
The Gods love Man, more then himself he loves.


Fol. 429. verse 40. Know not how many Venus'es appear
In others Gold? --


Fol. 52. verse 72. That he that wants not worth, no Gold should want:
A General in honor is concernd.


Fol. 395. verse 53. Untimely fun'rals Gluttons cannot have,
Old age is more their terror then the grave.


H.
HAemus, 200 Halcyone, 242 Hamillus, 372 Hannibal, lands in Spain, 257. passes
the Pyrenaean Mountains, ib. marches over the Alps, ib. gives overthrows to
four Consuls, ib. Maharbal's judgment of him* 258. he is beaten by Scipio, ib.
poisons himself, ibid. Harpocrates, God of silence, 446. the posture of his
Image, ib. believed to be a concurrent cause of men's diseases, ibid. Harpyes,
298. why said to dwell in Islands, ib. what they were in Fable, ib. and 299.
what in reality, ibid. Hearts, live nine hundred years, 483. Alexanders
Gold-Collar, ibid. Hebe, 444. why removed from her Cup-bearers place, ibid.
Hecuba, 377. why the Greeks said she was turned into a Bitch, ibid.
Hedge-Priest, or House-Priest, contradistinct from Temple-Priest* 6 Heliodorus,
Nero's Informer-General 24. how courted by the petty Intelligencers, 4
Hellebore cures the Gout, 446 Helvidius Priscus, banished, 143. repealed, ib.
Heraclea, written by Panyasis, 26 Heraclitus, the Ephesian, 354. why he still
wept, ib. his scorn of Physicians, 355. his sad end, occasioned by his own
experiment, ibid. Herculean language, to what it referres, 55 Hercules, Son to
Jupiter and Al^mena, 26 his seven and thirty labors, 385.386.387.388.389. he
burns himself, ib. deified, ibid. Hermes, Mercury's Statue, 293 Hernia, 206
Hernick, 481 Hesione, carried prisoner into Greece, 374 Hesperides, 149. the
Fable of their Golden-Apples and their Dragon, 150. the mythology of both,
ibid. Hetrurian Bubbles, 150 Hippia, 194 Hippocles, General of the Asiatick
Cumaeans, 90 Hippodame, Wife to Pirithous, 18 Hippolytus, a great Huntsman,
383. beloved by his wanton Stepmother, ib. gives her a repulse, ib. his life
endangered by his virtue, ib. lost by misfortune, ib. his torn limbs peeced
again, 384. he comes into Italy, where he calls himself Virbius, ib. marries
Aricia, ib. is buried in the Aricine Grove, 383 Hippomanes, 219 Hirpin and
Corytha, 293 Hirrus, 372 Homer, 506. when he flourished, ibid. his own name,
ib. why surnamed Homer, ib. owned and deified after his death by Cities, that
slighted him in his life time, ib. and 507. his works, ib. his noble posterity,
ib. esteemed the Prince of Poets by Pliny, from the judgment of Alexander the
Great, ibid. composer of the present Greek Alphabet, ib. Horatius Cocles, his
Heroical valor, 308. his handsome Answer, ibid. Hortensius, the Augur, or
Diviner by Birds, 23. what Birds he loved best, ib. Hyacinthus, 196. his Fable,
197 Hylas, a delicate Boy, Favorite to Hercules, 35. drowned in his service,
ibid. Hymettus, 452
Sentences in H.
Fol. 267. verse 57. -- who will honor him that is Honor's shame,
Noble in nothing, but a noble name?


Fol. 270. ver. 104. -- think it the foulest sin,
Should thou, to save thy breath, thy honor spend,
And forfeit for thy life, life's chiefest end.


Fol. 498. v. 147. The softest hearts kind Nature, it appears,
Gave to us Men, because she gave us tears.


I.
JAnus, 207. why he shared the Government with Saturn, ib. he builds Janiculum,
ib. coins money, ib. why his Figure had two faces 208. a Temple dedicated to
him, ib. why called Patuleius and Clusius, ib. Janus Ogyges and Chaos are the
same, ib. Jasius, K. of Argos, 147 Jason, steals the Golden-Fleece, 18 Jasper,
143 Iberina, 193 Ibis described, 502 Icarus, Son to Daedalus, 26. his
imprisonment, ib. drowned in the Sea, 27. which was a Sea of Astrologicall
Notions, 94 Ida, a Mountain, 444. memorable for Jove's concealment, ib. for the
Golden Ball, ib. for the taking up of Ganymede to Heaven, ibid. Illyrians, good
Seamen, 298 Inclusam Danaen, an Ode of Horace, 188.250.251 Ingenuus, 141 Ino,
Wife to Athamas, 18 Io, vid. Isis. Iobates, Father to Sthenoboea, 382
Iphigenia, Sister to Orestes, 16. why she was brought to be sacrificed, ib. how
she escaped, ib. Priestess of Diana's bloody Rites in Taurica, ib. knows her
Brother at the Altar, and saves his life, ibid. Isaeus, a smooth-tongued
Orator, 98 Tutor to Demosthenes, ibid. Isis, conceived to be a cause of
diseases, 446. her Fable, 211. her marriage to Osiris, and the change of her
name from Io, ib. her deification and the reason of it, ib. where her Temple
stood in Rome, ib. what use it was put to, ib. why it maintained a Company of
Picture-drawers, 421 Istrian-Flood, vid. Danow. Julian Law, vid. Law. Julius
Caesar's Wife met by Clodius, habited like a Singing-woman, 57 Julius Caesar,
vid. C. Julius Caesar. Julius Tutor robs the Cilicians, 294 Junius Celsus, 20^
Junius Sabinus, 504 Juno, 190. what her intermarriage with her brother
signifies ib. why her Sacrifices were milk-white, 420 Jupiter, 187. his fable
ib. moralized ib. the power of his Gold, 188. why Jove was called Tarpeian, 190
Ivy, used at common weddings, 192 Ixion, Father to Pirithous, by his Wife, 18.
Father to the Centaurs, by the Cloud, ibid.
Sentences in I.
Fol. 5. verse 60. What Is the hurt rich Infamy can do?

Fol. 11. verse 194. The Informer catches the least word that slips.

K.
KNight, a Roman dignity, 30. how made, ibid.
Sentences in K.
Fol. 394. verse 33. From Heaven came Know thy self,

Fol. 236. ver. 203. All men would know, none for their Knowledge pay.

L
LAbyrinth, contrived by Daedalus, 26 Lacerta, Domitian Caesar's Coachman, 253
Lachesis, the Destiny that spinns the thread of life, 94 Ladas, footman to
Alexander the Great, 440 how nimble, ibid. his Statue erected, for his victory
in the Olympic games, ib. Lake Velabrian, 217 Lamus, 207 Lar, the household
God, 185 his Temple, Incense, and Altar, ib. paralleld with the Dog, by Ovid,
ib. Larga, 475 Laronia, a witty wanton, 58 Lateranus, vid. Plautius Lateranus
Latin way, full of dead men's monuments, 35. why so called, and how formerly,
ib. Latinus, an informing Player, 24. presents his wife to the grand-Informer,
4. put to death for a Pander, 25. his Chest, 190 Latona, 380 Laurel, used at
marriages of great persons, 193 Laureol, 301 Law against Adulteresses, 27 Law
Julian, 57 Law against Parricide, how executed, 450 Law Scantinian, 59 Law
Theatrall, 101 Law of three Children, 324 Leeks, and Onions, worshipped by the
Egyptians, 503. the reason, ibid. Lenas, a Legacy-monger, 146 Lentulus, one of
Catiline's conspiracy. 57. his Family surnamed the Swift, 301 Lepida, persuades
her Daughter Messalina to kill herself, 385 Lepidus, vid. M. Aemilius Lepidus,
Lerna, 203. why the Greek Proverb, A Lerna of evils, ibid. Lesbia, Mistress to
Catullus, 186 Libertine, 181 Libitina, the funeral Goddess, 425. why some
think her to be Venus, ib. Licinus, a Freedman, 30. Governor of Gaul, ib.
where he gets a mass of treasure, ib. Lictor, the Officer of death attending
the Consul and Praetor, 29. his rods and axe, ib. Ligurian Stones, 105 Liparen
Islands seven, 17. their names, ib. called Ephesian and Vulcanian Isles, 444
Locusta, poisons Britanicus, 28 Longinus, vid. C. Cassius Longinus, Luca, 301
Lucan, 248 Lucilius, the first Latin Satyrist, 21. his Country, ib. where he
dyed, and who was at the charge of his funeral, ib. L. Appius, 207 L. Fonteius
Capito, Consul with C. Vipsanius, 442. the time when the thirteenth Satyr was
writ, ib. L. Metellus, Pontifex Max. 101. how he lost his eyes, ib. his
triumph, ib. L. Roscius Otho, 101 L. Virginus, Father to Virginia, 381. his
expression when he slew his Daughter, ib. Lucrece, 380. the manner of her Rape,
ib. she kills her self, ib. her revenge, ib. her Husbands Inscription upon her
Monument, ib. and 381. her Epitaph, ib. Lucrine Rocks, 127 Lupercalia, Games in
honor of God Pan, 65. why so called, ib. the time and manner of the solemnity,
ib. Luperci, 65 Lura Rutila, an ugly old woman, 382 Lycisca, 197 Lyde's
salve-box, 64 Lysias, the Orator, 452
Sentences in L.
Fol. 40. verse 56. -- Loose livers are fast friends.

Fol. 163. ver. 232. On man's life never was too long delay.

Fol. 234. ver. 174. Purple and Violet Robes a Lawyer sell.

Fol. 318. ver. 157. -- this fair flower goes swiftly to decay,
Poor wretched short Life's short portion hasts away,
Whilst we drink, anoint, wench, and put Garlands on,
Old age steals on us never thought upon.


Fol. 333. verse 37. -- laughter's easy, any may deride.

Fol. 519. verse 58. Within the Lawyers lists the fight is slow.

Fol. 166. ver. 305. Long peace undoes us, lust, then war more fierce,
Revenges now the conquered Universe.


M.
MAcedo, adored in the figure of a Wolf, 214 Machaera, 242 Moecenas, a great
Patron to Poets, 28. a Voluptuary, ib. his bounty to Horace, 250.251.252.253.
Maenades, the Priestesses of Bacchus, 205. the time, place, and manner of their
Sacrifice, ib. Bacchus named Evoeus, from their cries, ibid. Maenades Priapean,
the Ladies that sacrificed to the Good-Goddess, when Clodius met Caesar's Wife,
205 Maeotis, 120. sacrifices every tenth stranger, 510 Maevia (a Gladiatress)
fights with a wild Boar, 21 Maculonus, 246 Malta, 203. what commodities it
affords, ib. held by the expulsed Knights of Rhodes, now called Knights of
Malta, ibid. Mamurius, the Workman, that made the eleven Shields, 64 Mango, 409
Manilia, 200. her Plea to her Accusation, 201 Marcellus, kills the General of
the Gauls, 67. takes the City of Syracusa, ib. his honors, ib. why he built
the Temple of Jupiter Capitoline, 408. his death, 67 M. Crassus, proud of his
wealth, 360. his victory over the servile Army, ib. For which he wears
Laurel, instead of Myrtle, ib. his third part in the triumvirate, 361. why he
made war upon the Parthians, ib. his miserable death, with the loss of his
whole Army, ibid. M. Aemilius Lepidus, forbids his funeral pomp, 202 M. Fabius
Quintilian, a Spaniard, 194. Governor to Domitian's Nephews, ib. Tutor to
Juvenal, ib. his judgment of M. Varro, 210 M. Tullius Cicero, meanly born, 261.
his high merits, ib. his unworthy end, ib. styled Father of his Country, 305.
his fame, and his murderer's infamy recorded, 365 Marius Priscus, Proconsul of
Africa, 25. fined, and banished, ibid. Mars, how he roared, 447. his Court in
Athens, vid. Areopagus, Marsians, from whence derived, 102. where their Country
lay, 481 Marsus, Son to Circe, 102 Marsyas, flead alive, 320 Massa, a
Court-spie 24.25 Matho, 254 Matronalia, the female feasts, 321 Maura, 372
Medea, 219. her Romance, ib. and 220. Diogenes his judgment of her, ibid.
Medusa, 420. why it was said that her head turned men into stones, 421
Megasthenes, General of the Chalcidians, 90 Meleager, P. of Calydonia, 147. his
story, ibid. what his brand signified, 148 Melita, vid. Malta. Memnon's
Colossus, or vocal Statue, 502. touched with the Sun's beams, sounded like
Music, ib. like the voice of a man, ibid. when built, ib. when, why, and by
whom broken, ibid. Menelaus, builds the City of Canopus, 195 Menaec^us, 483.
why he slew himself, ibid. Mentor, an excellent Graver, 296. what two Bolls of
his work cost, ib. Meroe, the Isle, described, 213. the City Meroe, built, ib.
how the Islanders spend their time, ib. their Nurses breasts bigger then the
Children that suck them, 450 Messalina, 197. her Night-walk, ib. her second
marriage in her Husband's life time, 384. her design, to make her peace,
prevented, ib. she wants courage to kill her self, 385. a Tribune executes her,
ibid. Metella, debauched by Clodius, 57 Metellus, vid. L. and Q. Metellus.
Micipsa, 145 Milo, adopted by T. Annius, 55. kills Clodius, ib. why Cicero
meant to speak for him, 56. what he said, when Tully's Oration came to his
hand, ibid. Milo, the Crotonian, his incredible strength, 352. ruined by
trusting to it, ibid. Minerva, Enyo, and Pallas, vid. Bellona. Minturnians, 306
Mirmillo, vid. Secutor. Mithridates, K. of Pontus, 223. his strength of body
and brain, how many several languages he spoke, ib. his success against the
Romans, ib. and 224. his three Overthrows, why he would have poisoned himself,
but could not, ib. he assists his murderer, ibid. his nearest relations slain
by him, ibid. Modia, 99 Montanus, vid. Curtius Montanus. Moses, 477 Mucius, a
great Knave, but a poor man, 32. baited by Lucilius in his Satyrs, ibid.
Mushromes, best in Libya, 148. when gathered for use. ibid. Mutius Scaevola,
vows to kill K. Porsenna, 309. mistakes, ibid. burns off his own hand, ib.
Myron, a Statuary, 296. his Heifer, ib. Myrtle, why forbidden at the feast of
the Good Goddess, 60
Sentences in M.
Fol. 277. verse 123. It Is madness, after all, to cast away
The ferry- Money, that should Charon pay.


Fol. 336. verse 113. -- those that would
Act no foul Mischief, do yet wish they could.


Fol. 434. verse 153. With much more tumult, and a deeper groan,
Our Moneys then our fun'rals we bemoan.


Fol. 424. ver. 158. Lost Money is bewailed with tears unfain'd.

Fol. 464. verse 155. -- down full mouthed bags whilst money flows,
Like money's self, the love of Money grows;
Nay, he less covets it, that has it not.


Fol. 472. verse 349. Goods got hardly, with more fear and care
Are kept, so wretched Money-hoorders are.


Fol. 164. verse 248. -- can a Mother of the Trade
Chaste thoughts, or other then her own imprint?


N.
NAbathaea, why so called, 408 Narcissus, Freedman and Favorite to Claudius
Caesar, 149. how Messalina frighted him with her two Husbands, 384. he makes
the Emperor be told of it, ib. is created Captain of the Lifeguard for a day,
ib. sends a Tribune to take off Messalina's head, 385. he and his brother
Freedmen hold a Council about a second Wife for Claudius, 149. he carries it
for Agrippina, ib. Nausicae, finds Ulysses naked, 328 Negro-Pipers, 506
Mephele, Stepmother to Phryxus, and Hell, 18 Nero, Scholar to Seneca, 302. his
cruelty to his nearest Relations, ib. and 303. his burning of Rome, ib. his
malice to the Public, 425 Nero's Uncle, vid. C. Caesar Caligula. Nestor, his
parentage and birth, 373. his actings in his youth, ib. joins with the Greeks
against the Trojans, when he had lived to the third age of man, ib. what three
ages were in Juvenal's account, ib. Agamemnon's opinion of Nestor's wisdom,
ib. his elocution, ib. his Wife and Children, ibid. Nile, described, 195
Niphates, 208. why so named, 209 Nobility, what it is in the judgments of
Seneca and Cicero, 289 Novius, 424 Numa Pompilius, second King of Rome, 92. a
short view of his reign and Acts, ib. how he disposed of his body by his last
Will, ib. ordered that his books should be burned, ib. Numantia, holds out a
Siege bravely, 290. perishes nobly, ibid. Numantians, Roman Commanders at the
Siege of Numantia. ibid. Numitor, a complementall Friend to Poets, 248 Numitor,
King of Alba, 248. deposed by his Brother, ib. restored by his Grand Children,
Romulus and Remus, ibid. Nurtia* Goddess of Tuscany, 359
Sentences in N.
Fol. 42. verse 100. None ever was stark naught at first.

Fol. 348. verse 359. -- Nature can do more then breeding can,
Or Tutors, --


Fol. 473. ver. 371. Nature never asks this thing, and Wisdom that.

O.
OEdipus, 243. his History, ib. and 244 Oeneus, K. of Calidonia, 147 Oenomaus,
K. of Elis, Father to Hippodame, 18 Oericulana, Mother to K. Serve. Tullius, 307
Old Age, described, 341.342.343.344 Olympiads, the Greek Era, or account of
years, 447. in what year of the Julian Period they began, ibid. Olympic Games,
vid. Games. Ombites, adore the Crocodile, 505. Ombus, why written Combus in
other copies of Juvenal, ibid. Omen, from whence derived, 423 Oppia, 372
Oracles, silenced, 215 Orcades, taken by Claudius Caesar, 70 Orestes, a
Tragedy, 15. his Parents, ibid. his Life and death, 15.16 Orodes, 361 Orontes,
a Caelesyrian River, 96 Osiris, marries Io by the name of Isis, 211. is
murdered by his Brother, 214. his body found, ib. they worship him in the shape
of a Bull, which they call Apis, ibid. his Offering, ib. he is supposed to be
Joseph, 291 Ostia, now Hostia, 301 Otho, his princely descent, 60. how he came
to be Emperor, ib. Otho, vid. L. Roscius Otho,
P.
PAccius, 424 Pacuvius, 424 Palaemon, vid. Remmius Palaemon Pallas, a rich
Freed-man 30. how he got his estate and honors, ib. Pansa, 294 Papinius
Statius, nobly born 248. his works ibid. reads his Poem with great applause
331. yet was miserable poor, ib. Parcae, the Destinies 95. their ternary number
explaned, ib. Paris, son to Priam 374. his business in Greece ibid. his
stealing of Helen, cause of the engagement against Troy, ibid. Paris, the
Player 196. why put to death ibid. his Satyrick commendations by Juvenal ib.
how he returned the Satyr. ib. his bounty to his old Masters, the Poets 249.
his Mistresses. ibid. Parrhasius, incomparable for giving the last hand to a
Picture, 295. why Zeuxes yielded to him, ibid. Parthenius, a rare Graver, 422
Patricians, 216 Paulus Aemilius, Consul, 68. slain at Cannae, ib. derived from
Mamercus, Son to Pythagoras, 291 Pausanias Erxyclides, 452 Peacocks flesh never
putrefies, 32. who brought it in request at feasts, ib. Peacocks compared to
Poets, 245.246 Pedo, 254 Pegasus, Prefect of Rome, 122 Peleus, Father to
Achilles, 482 Pelion, 262 Pelopea, Mother to Aegisthus, 250 Penelope, constant
to her Lord, 59. her artifice to stave off Suitors, ib. Pentheus, why killed by
his Mother 249 Peribonius, a professed Rogue, Chief Priest of Cybele, 53
Persicus, 406 Petosiris, 215 Phalaris, the Tyrant, 293. his brazen Bull, ib. he
tortures the Artist, that made it to torment others, ib. he himself is roasted
alive in it, 294 Pharos, 194 Phericydes, Tutor to Pythagoras, 512 Phiale, 373
Phidias, the greatest Master for carving in Ivory, 295. his stupendous Statue
of Minerva, 296. his Jupiter Olympius, ib. his Venus, ib. his Nemesis, ib.
Philip, a Surgeon, 448 Philip, King of Macedon, 422. why called the royal
Merchant, ibid. Philters, 217 Phoenicopterus, 408 Pholus, 422. how he treated
Hercules, ib. Phrygian Razor, 62 Phrygian talk, 62 Phryxus, a Prince of Thebes,
18 Picus, King of Latium, 299. Diviner by the flight of Birds, ib. turned into
a Magpie, ibid. why that Fable was put upon him, ibid. Pierian Girls, the Nine
Muses, 120 Pirithous, Prince of the Lapiths, 18 Piso, vid. C. Piso Calphurnius.
Pittacus, one of the seven Sages, 50. kills the Tyrant Melancrus, ib. chosen
General for his Country, ib. challenges and kills the General of the Enemy,
ib. this Duel the original of the Retiarius and Secutor, ib. he resignes his
Principality, ib. the time of his death, ib. Plautius Lateranus, 353. why and
how put to death, ibid. Plebeians, 216 Plexippus, 147 Pluto, first Agesilaus,
364. why called Lord of the infernal Region, 365. why Pluto, and Dis, ib. he
steals away Proserpine, ibid. Pollinea, a Wench, 59 Pollio, 406 Pollux, vid.
Castor. Polycletus, a Statuary, 104 Polyphemus, the Cyclop, described, 322. his
love and jealousy, 323. his meat, man's flesh, his one eye put out by Ulysses,
ib. his Fable interpreted, ibid. Polyxena, Daughter to K. Priam, a great
beauty, 376. Achilles taken with her ibid. the match concluded, ib. her
Bridegroom slain, 377. why she was murdered at his Tomb, ib. her modesty in
dying, ibid. Pompeius Ruffus, a Whisperer of Accusations, 125 Pompey, vid.
Cneius Pompey. Pontia, 218. why she poisons her two Sons, 219. her impudent
confession, ibid. she dies like a Ranter, ibid. Ponticus, 287 Pontifex Maximus,
an Imperial Title, 121. the College of Pontifices, or Bishops, id. Pontine
Fenns, drained, 105 Popa, 421 Poppaea, 211. invents Pomatum, ib. washes with
Asses milk, ib. the manner of her death, ibid. Port of Ostia, 423. why called
the Tyrrhene Pharos, ibid. Porta Trigemina, 290 Porticoes, 117 Posides Spado,
476.477 Praeneste, a City built by the Grecians, 103. the Praenestine Temple of
Fortune, ib. Praetexta, a Gown worn by Noblemens Sons, 28. originally it was
the Priests habit, ib. Praetextati, the young Noblemen of Rome. 28 Praetor
Vrbanus, the Lord Chief Justice of Rome, 29. why called the grand
horse-stealer, 409 Praetors, eighteen, 29. at first the Consuls Deputies, 441
Praetus, Husband to Sthenoboe^, 382 Priam, taken prisoner, when Troy was sacked
by Hercules, 374. carried into Greece, ibid. ransomed, ib. rebuilds the City of
Troy, ib. makes himself Lord of almost all Asia, ib. marries Hecuba, by whom he
had seventeen Sons, which made up the number of his male issue fifty: for he
had thirty three Sons by the by, ib. slain at Jove's Altar, ibid. Prochyta, a
little Island, 90. why so called, 91 Procue, 221. her Fable, ibid. Procula, a
Roman Courtezan, 59 Proculeius, an old Ladies Favorite, 4 Proculeius, a man of
Honor, 250 Proculus, compelled by the Emperor to fight upon a Theater, 405
Prometheus, 126. his Fable, ib. the mythologie of it, 127 Proseuca, the Jews
Place of Prayer, 88 Protogenes, 99 Provinces, 119 Psecas, 212 P. Aemilius
Macedonicus, puts on his triumphal Robe in the Senate House, 287 P. Crassus,
commands his Slave to kill him, 361 P. Egnatius, informs against his Pupil,
49. condemned and executed, ibid. Pygarg, 408 Pygmeys, in India, 451. their
healthful Country, ib. their height, ib. the derivation of their name, ibid.
the intervalls of their Wives childing, ib. they destroy the breed of Cranes,
ib. how they build, ib. called Troglodytes by Aristotle, ib. Pylades, Son to
Strophius, Prince of the Phocians, 15. his friendship to Orestes, 16 Pyrrha,
Wife to Deucalion, 28 Pyrrhus, King of Epire, 478. his parentage, ib. his life,
479.480. his Character, ibid. Pythagoras, 512. travells to Egypt, ib. to
Babylon, ib. his Scholars ib. his opinion of transmigration of souls, ib.
Ovid's Metamorphosis probably conceived to be a Pythagorean History, ib.
Pythag. avouches his own metamorphosis, ib. and 513. Lucian, in his Satyr upon
Pythag. gives true reason of that strange, but well-meant, imposture, ib. he
dies at Metapontus, where his house was made his Temple, ib. why he called
himself Philosopher, 105. the rest of his opinions, 14. his Treatices of a
Commonwealth and a Kingdom, ibid. Pythia, 453
Sentences in P.
Fol. 112. verse 85. Nothing so gross but will belief incline,
When that Powers praised, equals the powers divine.


Fol. 278. ver. 158. -- the plundered will find arms.

Fol. 337. ver. 127. What o'rethrew Crassus? conquered Pompey caught*
And bim that to his whips slav'd Romans brought?
Even supreme Power, --


Fol. 351. ver. 431. -- If Prudence be,
There can be no Divinity in thee
Fortune? it is we, we to thy power have given
The name of Goddess, and placed thee in Heaven.


Fol. 404. ver. 256. Less frequent use gives Pleasures their esteem.

Fol. 427. verse 1. The crime committed presently torments
The Author; it is the first of Punishments,
That no Offender can himself acquit.


Fol. 428. verse 12. Man's Pain should be no greater then his Wound.

Fol. 438. ver. 225. Happy Philosophy, that, by degrees,
Kills vices first, then souls from error frees.


Fol. 466. ver. 219. All the evil, all the wickedness we do,
The foreign unknown Purple brings us to.


Fol. 137. ver. 156. -- many words may not be spoke
By a poor fellow in a tattered Cloak*


Fol. 159. verse 148. -- the Portion casts the Dart,
Her freedom's bought --


Fol. 231. verse 97. Poor man what to thee --
Is any glory, if it bare glory be?


Fol. 332. verse 5. What have thou by thy happy'st Project gained,
But thou repent'st thy pains and wish obtained?


Fol. 166. ver. 307. When Poverty left Rome, no horrid sin
But entered --


Fol. 333. verse 32. -- out of earthen pots no poison's drunk,
Fear that when thou rich Setine Wine do hold
Sparkling 'midst Diamonds, in a Boll of Gold.


Q.
QVinquatrua, 365 Quintilian, vid. M. Fabius Quintilian. Q. Luctatius Catulus,
puts an end to the first Punick war, 67. his articles of peace with the
Carthaginians, ibid. Q. Metellus Macedonicus, 375. the noble bearers of his
Corpse, ibid. Quirinus, Mars, 64. why so called, ibid.
R.
REgisters of births and burialls, how ancient, 323 Religion, from whence
derived, as to the word, 505. why several Religions were invented in Egypt,
ibid. Remmius Palaemon, 210. Tutor to Quintilian, ib. how he called Varro, ib.
his brag, ib. his poverty, and the cause of it, 211 Retiarius, the Net-bearer,
a Gladiator, 66. his manner of fight, ib. Rhadamanthus, a Judge of Souls, 17.
his commission, ibid. Rhea Sylvia, forced to be a Vestall Virgin, 248. got with
child, ib. buried alive, ib. Rhene, 301 Rhetors, speak for their lives, 25
Rhodes, why so called, 203. Aristippus his judgment of this Isle, ib. the
Rhodian Colossus, ibid. Rhodes taken by Solomon the Magnificent, ib. Rhodope,
the rich Courtezan, 320. builds a Pyramid, ibid. Richborough, in Kent, 128
Ring, in Matrimony, how ancient, 189. why put upon the middle finger, ib.
Rubellius Plautus, 292. descended from Augustus Caesar, ib. why he is writ
Plautus, not Blandus, as in the Louvre-copy, ib. Rubren Lappa, 247 Rubricks,
481 Rubrius, 124 Rudis, a Rod, or Wand given to a Gladiator at his discharge,
95 Rufus, vid. Satrius. Rutila, vid. Lura Rutila. Rutilus, 475
Sentences in R.
Fol. 393. ver. 17. No price for Rarities too great is thought:
Nay, mind it, they love most what is dearest bought.


Fol. 463. ver. 155. -- with these torments why do go about
To scrape up wealth? it is madness without doubt;
Plain frenzy does thy senseless soul bewitch,
To live poor, only hoping to die rich.


Fol. 335. verse 83. What do the Rabble all this while? they run
Along with fortune, as they have ever done,
And hate condemned men --


S.
SAbellians, conquered by M. Curious, 102 Sabines, 198. their stolen Maids prove
excellent Wives, ib. where their Country lay, 98 Saguntum, 142. now Morvedre,
510. besieged by Hannibal against the Articles of peace, ibid. the Inhabitants
eat the dead, ibid. they fire the Town and themselves, ibid. the ruin of
Carthage revengeth Saguntum, ibid. Samos, an Isle opposite to Ionia, 97
Samothracia, 101 Samothracian Gods, ibid. Sardanapalus, King of Syria, 389. his
effeminacy, ib. his womanish defense of himself, 390. his manly death, ibid.
Sardonyx, 449 Sarmatia, described, 147 Sarmentus, a Buffoon 140 Satrius Rufus,
262 Saturn, 443. why he is said to have reigned in the Golden Age, ib. his
Fable, 184.185. mythologised, ib. he builds Saturnium, 207. the Stamp of his
Coin, ibid. Scauran Counterfeits, 58 Scipio Africanus, rescues his Father, 69.
defeats Hannibal, ibid. Scipio Aemilianus, Son to L. Aemilius Paulus, and
adopted by Scipio Africanus, 70. ruins Carthage, ib. is murdered, ibid. Scipio
Nasica, voted the best man, 100. pulls down the Consulls Statues, ib. refuses
the title of Imperator, and the honor of triumph, ib. his funeral expenses
defraied by the People, ibid. Secundus Charinas, 261 Secutor, the Follower, a
Gladiator, 66. the nature of his sword-play, ibid. Sejanus, vid. Aelius
Sejanus. Seleucus, a Lutenist, 372 Semiramis, 61. why she took upon her the
person of a man, ib. she walled Babylon, ib. her success and courage, ib. she
is killed by her Son, ibid. Seneca, the Stoic, 146. Tutor to Nero, ib. his
vast wealth, ib. the cause of his ruin, 353. why, and how, he was put to
death, 146. the subject of his works, ib. his vindication from the aspersion of
Avarice, ibid. Seriphus, 215 Servilia, 382 Servius Sulpitius Galba Caesar,
barbarously murdered, 61. by a Common Soldier, ibid. his descent, 288 Servius
Tullius, his Father thought to be the God Lar, 424. Son to a bond woman, ib.
Crowned King of Rome, 307. how long he reigned, ib. why called the last good
King, ibid. Setine Wine, 142 Sextus, a wicked great man, 55 Shaving the head,
upon what account it was used by the Romans, 423. Why the Egyptians shaved,
503 Sheep, never eaten by the Priests of Egypt, 503 Sica, the Secutor's
Fauchion, 66 Sicambri, 128 Sicyon, an Isle in the Aegean Sea, 98 Socrates, 51.
his Parents and Wives, ib. the first reducer of Philosophy from Speculation to
Practice, 52. preserved in the plague-time by his abstinence, 489. his
Impeachers, 52. his answer at the Bar, ib. he would not have Counsel to
plead, 452. his Sentence and Death, 52 Socratick Catamite, how to be
understood, 52 Solon, 377. the place of his birth, ib. the time when he
flourished, ib. the equal temper of his Laws, ib. he repeals Draco's bloody
Decrees, ibid. flies from Athens, ibid. his conference with Croesus, 378. the
success of his words, 379. his death in Cyprus, ibid. his ashes, by his own
appointment, scattered about the Isle, ib. his Epitaph, ibid. Soothsayers
Tuscan, 442.443.444 Sora, 104 Sostratus, 370 Sportula, a basket of money, or of
meat, 29 Sportula Vocal, 443 Statius, vid. Papinius Statius. Stentor, how loud
he cried, 447 Sthenoboea, 382. charges Bellerophon, with her own crime, ib.
hears the news of his Marriage, and kills her self, 383 Stork, 476 Stygian
Sound, 68 Suburra, one of the fairest Streets in Rome, 91. why so named, ibid.
Supper, to be made for Clients, 32. in lieu of the money-Sportula, ibid. how
distinguished from the Patrons Supper, ib. Supper for the Dead, 145 Surena, 361
Sybaris, built by the Trojans, 204. how potent a Town it grew to be, ib. how
gluttonous, even to a Proverb, ibid. Sylla, or Sulla, the Dictator, 19. lays
down his Commission, ib. is a theme in the Rhetoric Schools, ib. the summary
of his life, ibid. Sylla's three Scholars, 57 Sylvanus, 209. how begot, ibid.
his strange shape, 210. why God of the Woods, ib. his Sacrifice, ibid.
Syrophoenix, 300
Sentences in S.
Fol. 4. verse 35. It Is hard, not to write Satyrs.

Fol. 39. verse 31. The Straight may Cripples, White-Men Negroes jeer.

Fol. 41. verse 72. Secrets bring jewels,

Fol. 42. verse 95. -- The Scab but got
By one Sheep, the whole Flock will have the Ro^.


Fol. 75. verse 61. He owes thee nothing, Nothing will bestow,
That lets thee but an honest Secret know,


Fol. 78. verse 135. They will know Chamber- Secrets and be feared.

Fol. 134. verse 79. Great Houses with proud Servants swarm.

Fol. 237. ver. 243. Nothing costs Fathers less then Sons,

Fol. 281. verse 212. Short let it be, which thou dare foully act.

Fol. 318. verse 139. Slaves care not what they against their Lord compose,
When with their rumors they revenge his blows.


Fol. 318. verse 147. We must, for many causes, live upright,

Fol. 333. verse 21. But, chiefly, That we Servants tongues may slight.
Seldom the Soldiers did poor Garrets clime.


Fol. 347. ver. 349. Fair Lucrece, and her fatal Rape,
Incourages no one to wish her Shape.


Fol. 428. verse. 20. That Science makes the happy men,
Which conquers Fortune with celestial Books.


T.
TAbraca, 371 Tagus, now Taio, a River in Spain, whose sands have a mixture of
Gold, 96 Tanaquill, 215 Tarentines, descended from the Spartans, 204 they call
in King Pyrrhus against the Romans, ib. the cause of their destruction by
lightning, ib. Tarentula, a Spider, 204. the effect of its poison, ib. the
cure, ibid. Tarentum built, 204. taken by the Lacedaemonians, ib. from whence
it derives the name, ibid. Tarquin, the Proud, 307. his conquests, 308.
appoints the Feriae, or Holidays, ibid. builds the Capitol, ib. flies to K.
Porsenna, ib. Tarsus, 99 Tatius, General of the Sabines, 478. takes the
Capitol by compact, ib. is Partner in the Government with Romulus, ib. why he
was slain, ib. Tauromenian Rocks, 146 Tauromenium, ib. Telamon, Father to Ajax,
482 Telephus, a Tragecomedy, 13. his parentage, ibid. his fortunes, wound, and
cure, 13.14 Telesine, 245 Temples, of Isis, Cybele, and Ceres, impudently
profaned, 321 Tentyrites, 505. hate the Crocodile, ib. adore the Ibis, ib.
Tereus, 242 Terminus, his offering, 522. his violation, the greatest
sacrilege, ibid. Terpsichore, Inventress of Music, and Dancing 246 Teutons,
Germans, so named from their God Tuisco, 306 Thais, 99 Thales, one of the
seven Sages, 452. taught Geometry to the Grecians, ib. found out the intervals
of time, ib. quarters of the Wind, ib. diameter of the Sun, ibid. the cause of
eclipses, and thunder, ibid. obliquity of the Zodiac, ibid. the celestial
Zones, and the Sun's annual course, ibid. when and how he dyed, ib. Thebes, in
Boeotia, 442 Thebes, in Egypt, ib. and 503. Themison, Scholar to Empedocles,
372. quoted by Galen, ib. a bad Practicer in Physic, ibid. Theodorus Gadareus,
259 Thersites, 309 Theseis, a Heroic Poem, 12. of the Knight-Errantry of
Theseus, ibid. Thessaly, described, 217. there Medea gathered the simples that
made Aeson young again, ibid. Theutrantes, K. of Caria, 13 Thomas, Earl of
Arundel and Surrey, 53. his Princely Collection of ancient Greek and Roman
Statues, writ upon by Mr. Seldom, ibid. Thraseas Paetus, a Stoic, 142. his
last words, 143 Thrasyllus, 215. his death, ibid. Thrasymachus, 261 Thumbs,
bent downward, signified favor to the sword-Players, 95. reversed, or turned
upward, that they must fight it out and dye (though misprinted in the Comment)
ibid. Thyrsus described, 193 Tibur, a City, and Castle, 103. by whom built,
ibid. Tiburnus, 103 Tigellinus, poisoned three of his Father's Brothers, 33.
forged their Wills, ibid. Tilphossa, 454 Tilpbossus, ib. Timbrells, of gold,
silver, or brass, 446 Tiresias, a Prophet, 454. his Fable, ibid. his Monument,
ib. his deification, ib. Titius, and Seius, 119 Titus, and Tiberius, Sons to
the Consul Junius Brutus, promise to deliver a Gate of Rome to K. Tarquin,
308. the plot discovered by a Slave, ib. their Fathers cruel sentence of death
upon them, ib. Tongillus, 254 Tower Ovall, 216 Toxeus, 147 Trabeae, 355
Trallis, a Carian Town, 97 Trebius, a base-minded Client, 130 Trechedipna, a
Gown to run in, 97 Tribune, Protector of the Commonalty, 29. his legal and
usurped power, ib. Tribune Military, 100 Tricipitinus, Father to Lucraece, 380
Triclinium, the Dining-Roome, described, 141 Trochilos, how he deceives the
Crocodile, 501 Trojan Lords, great persons of Rome, 29 Trypher, a
Carving-Master, 408 Tullia, Daughter to King Serve. Tullius, and Wife to Tarquin
the Proud, 308. puts her Husband upon the murder of her Father, ibid. Tullus
Hostilius, third King of Rome, sacks and slights the City of Alba, 144. puts
the Romans into action, ib. ascertains the rates of Coin, ibid. brings in the
Chariot-Chaire, the Office of Lictor, the Toga Picta, and Praetexta, ibid. and
the golden Bullaes, ibid. Turnus, General of the Rutilians, 34. fights a
single combat with Aeneas, ibid. Tutor, vid. Julius Tutor. Tutors, how to be
valued, 260 Tyrrhene Sea, 196
Sentences in T.
Fol. 75. verse 59. Who Is now beloved, but he that can reveal
Foul Trusts? --


Fol. 103. ver. 104. What Is more violent then a Tyrant's ear?

Fol. 333. verse 27. The poor wayfaring man, that does not bring
A charge along, before the Thief will sing.


V.
VAgellus, 521 Valerius Corvinus, Tribune to Camillus, 288. accepts the
challenge of a Gaul, ib. assisted in that Combat by a Crow, from which he had
his surname, ib. six times Consul, ibid. Varillus, a poor Knave, 55 Vatinius,
the drunken Cobbler of Beneventum, 143 Vcalegon, a poor Roman, 103 Vectius
Valens, his ominous words at the adult'rous Wedding of Messalina and Silius,
385 Veiento, vid. Fabricius Veiento. Veil, vid. Flammeum, Velabrian, vid. Lake.
Venafrian Oil, 145 Venafrum, ib. Ventidius, a Slave, 260. made General against
the Parthians, ib. triumphs, ib. Verres, his Offices in the Republic, 56. his
treachery, lust, etc. ibid. a Suit commenced against him by the Sicilians, ibid.
his Charge managed by Cicero, 297. Juvenal's Aggravation of his crime, ib. he
flies his Country, 56. is proscribed, and slain, ib. the cause of his
Proscription, ibid. Verses defamatory, prohibited by Law, 32 Vespasian's answer
to his Son Titus, 482 Vesta, the Mother, 207. the Daughter, ibid. what they
both signify, ibid. Vestall Nunns, superintend the Ceremonies of the
Good-Goddess, 60. their Cloister, 118. their number, ib. their Charge, ibid.
their punishment for negligence, ib. the time of their admission, and stay, ib.
the manner and reason of their execution for breach of vow, ib. their Founder,
207 Vestines, 481 Vettus, 255 Vibius Crispus, a smooth-tongu'd Orator, 123. how
he kept himself in favor at Court, ibid. the pleasantness of his replies, ib.
his honors, ib. Vindex, vid. Caius Julius Vindex. Vindicius, the Slave that
discovered the Sons of the Consul Brutus, 308. made free, ib. the Rod used in
manumissions, ever after, called Vindicta, ib. Vine-battoon, 481 Virginia, 381.
the plot laid to ravish her, ibid. her Father, to save her honor, kills her,
ib. the revenge of her death, 382 Virginius Rufus, 303 Virro, a Proud Patron,
130 Vivaries, Imperial Fish Ponds, 121 Ulysses, his disputable Parents, 325.
his policy to avoid the war and enjoy his Wife, 326. how discovered, ib. his
services for his Country, ibid. Achilles his Arms adjudged to him, 327. his
cruelty before he went aboard, ib. his unfortunate voyage, ib. his death
foretold by the Oracle, but inavoidable, 329 Vmbricius, an Aruspex, 93. why he
removes, with his Family from Rome, ib. Volscians, 103 Volusius Bithynicus, 501
Vow, or Sacrament, Military, 522 Vulture, 476
Sentences in V.
Fol. 6. verse 90. Virtue's praised, but sterves.

Fol. 10. verse 179. Posterity can no new Vices frame.

Fol. 266. ver. 24. Virtue's the true and sole Nobility.

Fol. 339. verse 161. Virtue is so much less beloved then Fame,
For, bate reward, who will at Virtue aim?


Fol. 351. ver. 431. Virtu's the path to Peace,

Fol. 469. ver. 271. None sins just so far as he has in charge,
But at his pleasure will his Vice enlarge.


Fol. 404. ver. 53. -- a Victory comes, easy when
The foes are tippled, lisping, reeling men.


W.
WIlls, made by Military privilege, 523
Sentences in W.
Fol. 166. ver. 312. Wealth to the weakened World foul riot taught.

Fol. 174. ver. 479. -- Nothing makes man's life
Vnhappier, then a fortune with a Wife.


Fol. 465. ver. 201. -- no one sin,
That to the mind of mankind enters in,
Poisons or kills more then Wealth's cruel thirst;
For all men would be rich, and rich at first.


Fol. 174. ver. 477. A Woman thinks all is lawful, when she wears
Those mighty Pear-pearls, that weigh down her ears.


Fol. 81. ver. 193. Men seldom rise where Want keeps Virtue down.

Fol. 349. ver. 387. The edge of VVomans wrath is then most ke^,
When a repulse adds blushes to her spleen.


X.
XErxes, K. of Persia, 369. his two vast Armies, by Sea and Land, ibid. both
overthrown, ibid. why he fled out of Greece, ibid. his humor of fighting
changed into feasting, ibid. his Subjects despise him, ibid. slain by the
Captain of his Guard, 370. the madness of his pride, ibid.
Z.
ZAlates, an Armenian Hostage, 70 Zeno, the first Stoic, 508. understands the
Oracle, ibid. comes to traffic at Athens, ibid. looses his Ship, and takes a
Gown, ibid. why his Scholars were called Stoics, ibid. how the Athenians
honored him in his life time, ibid. how after his Death, 509
A Sentence in Z.
Fol. 494. verse 58. Zeal sounds the Trumpet to the Brawl.

FINIS.

