KING JAMES HIS LETTER AND DIRECTIONS TO THE LORD ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY;
Concerning Preaching and Preachers; With the Bishop of Canterburies Letter to
the Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper, desiring him to put in practice the Kings
desires, that none should preach but in a Religious form.

And not that every young man should take to himself an exorbitant Liberty, to
preach what he lists, to the offense of his Majesty, and the disturbance and
disquiet of the Church and Commonwealth.

Printed for Thomas Walkeley, 1642.

KING JAMES HIS LETTER And Directions to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
concerning Preaching and Preachers.
MOst reverend Father in God, right trusty, and right entirely beloved
Counselor, we greet you well;
for as much, as the abuses and extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit, have
been at all times redressed in this Realm by some act of Council, or State,
with the advice, and resolution of Grave and learned Prelates, insomuch, as the
very licensing of Preachers had a beginning by an order of Starchamber, the 8.
day of July, in the 19 year of the Reign of King Henry the eight our Noble
Predecessor. And whereas at this present diverse young Students, by reading of
late Writers and ungrounded Divines, do broach many times unprofitable,
unsound, seditious and dangerous Doctrines to the scandal of this Church, and
disquieting of the State, and present Government. We upon the humble
representation unto us of these inconveniences, by sundry Grave, and reverend,
Prelates of this Church, as also of our Princely care and zeal for the
extirpation of Schism, and discension, growing from these Seeds, and for the
settling of a Religious and peaceable Government, both of the Church and State;
do by these our special Letters straightly charge and command you to use all
possible care and diligence, that these limitations and cautions herewith sent
unto you, concerning Preachers, be duly and strictly from henceforth
observed, and put in practice by the several Bishops, of their several
Diocesses within your Jurisdiction. And to this end our pleasure is, that you
send them forth Coppies of these directions; to be by them speedily sent and
communicated to every Parson, Vicar, Curate, and Lecturer in every Cathedral
and Parish Church, within their several Diocesses, and that you earnestly
require them to employ their uttermost endeavors in the performance of this so
important a business, letting them know, that we have a special eye to their
proceedings, and expect a strict account both of you, and every of them. And
these our Letters shall be your sufficient warrant in this behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor the 4. day of August, in the
20. year of our Reign, of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland, the
six and fiftieth, 1622.
His Majesty's Orders and Directions, concerning Preaching and Preachers.
1 THat no Preacher under the degree and calling of a Bishop, or Deane of a
Cathedral or Collegiate Church, (and they upon the Kings days only, and set
Festivals,) do take occasion by the expounding of any Text of Scripture
whatsoever, to fall into any set course or Common place, otherwise then by
opening the coherence and division of his Text, which shall not be
comprehended and warranted in essence, substance, effect, or natural
inference, within some one of the Articles of Religion set forth, 1562. Or in
some, one of the Homilies set forth by authority in the Church of England, not
only for a help of none preaching, but withal for a Pattern, as it were, for
the preaching Ministers, and for their further instruction for the performance
thereof: that they forthwith read over and peruse diligently the said Book of
Articles, and the two Books of Homilies.

2 THat no Person, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer shall preach any Sermon or
collation hereafter upon Sun-dayes and Holy Days in the after noones in any
Cathedral or Parish Church throughout the Kingdom. But upon some part of the
Catechism, or some Text taken out of the Creed and Commandments, or the Lords
prayer, (Funeral Sermons only excepted,) and that those Preachers be most
encouraged, and approved off, who spend their afternones exercise in the
examination of Children in their Catechismes, and in the expounding of the
several points and heads of the Catechism, which is the most ancient and
laudable custom of teaching in the Church of England.

3 THat no Preacher of what title soever, under the Degree of a Bishop or
Deane, at the least, do from hence forth presume to preach in any popular
auditory, the deep points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the
universality, efficacity, restibility or irrestibility of Gods grace, but
rather leave those theames to be handled by learned men, and that modestly and
moderately by use and application, rather then by way of positive Doctrine, as
being fitter for Schools and Universities then for simple auditories.

4 THat no Preacher, of what title or denomination soever shall presume from
henceforth in any auditory within this Kingdom to declare limit or bound out
by way of positive Doctrine in any Lecture or Sermon, the Power, Prerogative,
Jurisdiction, Authority, or Duty of Sovereign Princes, or therein meddle with
these matters of State and the reference between Princes and the People; then
as they are instructed in the Homily of obedience, and in the rest of the
Homilies and articles of Religion set forth, as before is mentioned by public
authority; but rather confine themselves wholly to these two heads of faith and
good life, which are all the Subject of the ancient Sermons and Homilies.

5 THat no Preacher, of what title or denomination soever shall causelessly, and
without any invitation from the Text, fall into any bitter invective and
undecent railing speeches against the Papists or Puritans, but wisely and
gravely, when they are occasioned thereunto by the Text of Scripture, free both
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England from the aspersions of
either adversary, especially, where the auditory is suspected to be tainted
with the one or the other infection.

6 LAstly, that the Archbishop and Bishops of the Kingdom, (whom his Majesty
has good cause to blame for their former remissness) be more wary, and chose
in licensing of Preachers; and revoke all grants, made to any Chancellor,
Official, or Commissary, to pass licenses in this kind: and that all the
Lectures throughout the Kingdom; (a new body severed from the ancient Clergy
of England, as being neither Parson, Vicar, nor Curate,) be licensed hence
forward in the Court of Faculties, only upon recommendation of the party from
the Bishop of the Diocese under his Hand and Seal, with a fiat from the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and a Confirmation under the great Seal of England,
and that such, as transgress any one of these directions be suspended by the
Bishop of the Diocese, or in his default by the Lord Archbishop of the
Province, Ab officio and beneficio, for a year and a day, until his Majesty
by the advice of the next convocation prescribe some further punishment.

The Archbishop of Canterburies Letter, to the Archbishop of York.
MY very good Lord,
I doubt not, but before this time, you have received from me the Directions
of his most excellent Majesty, concerning Preaching and Preachers, which are so
graciously set down, that no godly or discreet man can otherwise then
acknowledge, that they do much tend to edification, if he do not take them
up upon report, but do punctually consider the tenure of the words as they
lie, and do not give an ill construction to that, which may receive a fair
interpretation. Notwithstanding, because some few Churchmen, and many of the
people, have sinisterly conceived as we here find, that those instructions do
tend to the restraint of the exercise of preaching, and do in some sort abate
the number of Sermons and so consequently, by degrees do make a breach to
ignorance and superstition; His Majesty in his Princely wisdom, has thought
fit, that I should advertise your Lordship of the grave and weighty reasons,
which induced his Highness to prescribe that which is done.

You are therefore to know, that his Majesty being much troubled and grieved at
the heart, to hear every day of so many defections from our Religion, both to
Popery and Anabaptisme, or other points of Separation in some parts of this
Kingdom; and considering with much admiration; what might be the cause
thereof, especially in the Reign of such a King, who does so constantly
profess himself an open Adversary to the Superstition of the one, and
madness of the other; his Princely wisdom could fall upon no one greater
probability, then the lightness, affectednesse, and unprofitablenesse of that
kind of preaching, which has been of late years too much taken up in Court,
University, City, and Country.

The usual scope of very many Preachers, is noted to be soringe up in points
of Divinty, too deep for the cap^city of the people, or a mustring up of much
reading, or a displaying of their own wit, or an ignorant meddling with civil
matters, as well in the private of several Parishes and Corporations, as in
the public of the Kingdom; or a venting of their own distaste, or a smoothing
up of those idle fancies, which in this blessed time of so long a peace, do
boil in the brains of an unadvised people, or lastly, a rude or undecent
railing not against the Doctrines (which when the Text shall occasion the same,
is not only improved, but much commended by his Royal Majesty;) but against
the Persons of Papists and Puritans. Now the people bred up with this kind of
teaching, and never instructed in the Catechism and fundamental grounds of
Religion, are for all this Ayry nourishment, no better then (abrajae tabulae;)
new table books ready to be filled up, either with the Manuals and
Catechismes of the Popish Priests, or the Papers and Pamphlets of Anabaptists,
Brownists, and Puritans.

His Majesty therefore calling to mind the saying of Tertullian, (Id verum quod
primum;) and remembering, with what Doctrine the Church of England in her first
and most happy Reformation, did drive out the one, and keep out the other from
poisoning and infecting the people of this Kingdom: does find that the whole
scope of this Doctrine, is contained in the articles of Religion, the two
books of Homilies, the lesser and the greater Catechism, which his Majesty
does recommend again in these Directions as the Theames and proper Subjects of
all sound and edifying preaching.

And so far are these Directions from abating, that his Majesty does expect
at our hands, that it should increase the number of Sermons by renewing upon
every Sunday in the afternone in all Parish Churches throughout the Kingdom,
that Primitive, and most profitable exposition of the Catechism, where with
the people, (yea) very Children may be timely seasoned and instructed in all
the heads of Christian Religion, the which kind of teaching (to our amendment
be it spoken,) is more diligently observed in all the reformed Churches of
Europe, then of late it has been here in England. I find his Majesty much
moved with this neglect, and resolved; (if we that are his Bishops, do not
see a Reformation hereof, which I trust we shall) to recommend it to care of
the Civil Magistrate. So far is his Highness from giving the least
discouragement to sollide preaching, or discreet, or religious Preachers.

To all this, I am to add, that it is his Majesty's Princely pleasure, that
both the former Directions, and those reasons of the same, be fairly written
in every Registers office; to the end, that every Preacher of what denomination
soever, may if he be so pleased take out Coppies of either of them with his
own hand (gratis;) paying nothing in the name of fee and expedition. But if
he do use the pains of the Register, or his Clerks, then to pay some
moderate fee, to be pronounced in open Court by the Chancellours and
Commissaries of the place, taking the direction and approbation of my Lords,
the Bishops. Lastly, that from hence forward a course may be taken, that every
Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, do make exhibit of these his Majesty's
Directions, and the reasons for the same at the ensuing visitation of the
Bishops and Archdeacons, paying to the Register by way of fee, but two pence
at the time of the exhibit; and so wishing, but withal, in his Majesty's
name, requiring your Lordship to have a special and extraordinary care of the
premises. I leave you to the Almighty.

From Croyden, Sept. 4. 1622. Your Lordships very loving Brother, G. CANT.

The Lord Archbishops Letter, to the Lord Keeper.
BY this you see, his Majesty's Princely care, That none should preach CHRIST
crucified, obedience to the Higher Powers, and Honest, and Christian
conversation of life, but in a Religious form; and not, that every young man
shall take unto himself an exorbitant liberty to teach what he lists, to the
offense of his Majesty, and the disturbance and disquiet of the Church and
Commonwealth. I can give your Lordship no better directions for the pursuance
hereof, then are prescribed to you in his Majesty's Letter, and the Schedule
herewith sent unto you, whereof I pray your Lordship to be very careful,
since it is the Princely pleasure of his Highness to require an account both
of you and me for the same. And so not doubting, but by your Register, or
otherwise, you will cause these instructions to be communicated to your
Clergy. I leave you to the Almighty and remain.

Your loving Brother, G. CANT.

FINI^.

