A Modern Essay On the Thirteenth SATYR OF JUVENAL

By HENRY HIGDEN.

-- Ridiculum acri
Fortius and melius magnas plerunque secat res.
Licensed November 11th. 1685. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson, at the Judge's Head in Chancery Lane, near
Fleet Street. 1686.

To the Right Honorable, GEORGE, EARL OF DARTMOUTH, etc.
My Lord,
THE high Station Your Lordships Virtues have plac^d You in, have signally
marked You out for Addresses and Dedications, (a troublesome Persecution that
must always attend the Great and Fortunate) and possess me (among the Crowd)
with assurance enough to think, that being warranted by ancient Custom, I may
even venture to play the bold Britain, and pin a Dedication upon Your Lordship.
Since no teeming Heroic Muse, though (after hard Labor) it produce but a
Mouse; Or Puny Scribler, that makes a shift to grunt out a Souterkin of a Farce
or Novel, but strait some Noble Person must be picked out, and an Illustrious
Name prefixed: So that the Pillars of the Nation, like those of the Exchange,
are daily hung round with Advertisements of [ Outward and Homeward bound, etc.]
by every Skipper that hoists Sail for Parnassus, though but in a Dogger or
Cock-boat. And truly, though so poor a Trifle is altogether unworthy of your
Lordships Acceptance, or Patronage, yet that must not bar our Plea to your
Protection: For by a certain sort of Right, which we Scriblers, with the rest
of the Liberty and Property Men, call Prescription, Your Lordship is as liable
to suffer in this kind, as the Gravest and most Gouty Judge is obliged to
hobble the Measures about the Temple fire.

It Is under this claim I presume to give your Lordship this trouble, especially
in this Censorious and Captious Age, when the undoubted Worth of the Patron is
absolutely necessary to give it an Authentic Passport in the World, where not
only the Book, but the Author's Principles and Practice must fall under the
Censure of the severest Observators. And therefore I could not beg Protection
under a more secure and glorious Umbrage than Your Lordship: A Person whose
unshaken Loyalty has been so eminently signal, and whose Courage and Conduct
both by Sea and Land, have been so highly Serviceable to His Majesty, and the
Defense and Honor of our Nation. So that Your Lordships many accumulated
Preferments are but the Meede of that rising Virtue, which was ever the Darling
of your ROYAL MASTER; who besides being worthily styled the GREATEST, has
gained the high Attribute of being the JUSTEST of Princes. But one yet farther
Encouragement to Dedicate this slight Essay, upon so famed an Author as
Juvenal, more particularly to Your Lordship, is, That I tender it into His
hands who is so able to judge of the Original.

But now having laid so inconsiderable an Offering at Your Lordships Feet,
though I must own my self that puny Brother of the Quill, as not to be Rich
enough to adorn your Triumphs with Flowers, and Garlands, however my Zeal and
Veneration for Your Lordship is no less, though I strew your way but with
Rushes and Daisies: which at present is the highest Tribute can be rendered You
by,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obedient, Humble Servant, HENRY HIGDEN.

TO THE READER.
I Was once minded to have dropped this Brat in the wide World without further
Consideration; till the Stationer plainly told me, That without a Customary
Preface it would never pass Muster, and so prove his damage. And faith I was
easily persuaded that such an ill rigged Companion would hardly meet with a
tolerable Reception, without a civil Introduction and Recommendation.

Therefore bethinking my self to say something to humor him, turning to the
Title Page, I found I had Christened it, A Modern Essay: And how, thought I,
can it be Modern, without so much as one Recommendatory Copy of Verses before
it, though written perhaps by the Author in praise of himself and his Poem, and
fathered upon some unknowing Friend: Nor huffing Picture in the front,
With Bays and wicked Rhyme upon it.


Without which necessary Ornaments and Imbellishments, a Poem will no more be
valued, than a Quack without his Velvet Jump, and the Silver-headed Cane to put
off his Gravity; or Holy Day Artillery-man without a new-scoured Headpiece,
and a tawdry Plume waving in his Crest. Which most alluring recommendations
being at present wanting, I have thought it fitting to bespeak the gentle
Readers kindness in a few lines, which if obtained, may encourage us to mend
all in a Second Edition, if the Fates permit.

And here again I was more at a loss than ever: For should I run division in
praise of my Author, or the excellence of his Satyrick Vein, some captions
Brother-Paper-stainer would strait have a sting at me, with a Who disputed the
one, or doubted the other? Should I, to show my pretended Reading, or Judgment,
go about to give a Character of our Poet, and make Comparisons betwixt him and
his other Rivals in Satyr, I might draw an unnecessary Quarrel upon my own
Head: Therefore I have waved that point, and thought good to squander the
little Paper I have allowed me, in defense of my self; which I hope the
severest Judges will allow me in my own Cause, since scarce one in a hundred;
were he to re print Tom Thumb, but would find something to say on so fair an
occasion; Pro dignitate suscepti.

Well then, A Modern Essay let it be; for as a Transsation I could not, and as
a Paraphrase I would not own it: If I have ventured at something between both,
I hope I may be the less censured, since the Vices here taxed by our Satyrist,
are not so antiquated, but a slight Inquisition may discover them amongst our
selves, though perhaps something altered in Dress and Fashion. As near
therefore as I could, I have equipped them Al-a-mode; though nevertheless
you will find little other than the Old Shock new Trimmed, and that our present
Age comes not much behind our Author's, in all sorts of Genteel Vice and
Debauchery. But as to the particular Argument of this Satyr, viz. Breach of
Trust, and Perjury, we need not the aid of SALAMANCA, since our own and our
Neighboring Island have in that long Bow out-shot all the World beside.

Some Critics cavil our Author's Humor is too stiff, morose, and over-serious
in downright lashing and chastising Crimes: Whereas a jocular and facetious
Jeer and Reproof, laughs Vice out of Countenance, and often works a perfect
Cure and Conversion; and merrily discovering the odious deformity of Vice,
shames ingenious spirits into Virtue. Another sort of Well-willers to our
Author have concluded with themselves, his Verse being altogether stately, he
ought, Spaniard-like, to maintain his Gate and Gravity; nor must descend from
his lofty Buskins, to Act the least part of the Comic Droll; which point I
will not here discuss. But if I have aimed to abate something of his serious
Rigor, and expressed his sense in a sort of Verse more apt for Raillery,
without debasing the dignity of the Author, I hope the first will not be
offended, and the latter will be entreated for a Pardon. As for the Notes, I
have composed them as short and plain as I could, to point out and illustrate
the meaning of our Author; and though abler Readers may despise their help, yet
I doubt not but they will be assisting to the weaker Brethren.

To conclude, shall any of Calvinus's fraternity think to rally off his Crime
with a depositum custodi; Or to excuse the matter, as having been so from the
beginning: And if it were not for credulous Fools, how should wiser men live? I
shall desire him to place this Satyr as a Mirror before him in a clear light,
and it is odds 'twill reflect his own likeness, and possibly make him see his
own dear self at full length, where I will leave him in Contemplation, and
conclude,

That brevity is very good
When w' are, or are not understood.

JUVENAL's THIRTEENTH SATYR.
THE ARGUMENT.
Our Author comforts his Friend Calvinus, who afflicts himself overmuch for
the loss of a Sum of Money, committed to the secret Trust of a supposed Friend,
who denies and forswears it; showing such Deceipts and Losses are frequent in
this Corrupt Age, and familiar at Rome. That though the cunning Knave may avoid
the Censure and Punishment of the Laws, yet he shall not escape the Scourge and
Terror of his own Conscience.

NOne can a Crime in secret act,
But Conscience first condemns the Fact;
From whose dumb Checks Offenders find
A lasting Torment in their Mind.
And though a well-brib'd (1) Sh'riff ensure ye
A biased IGNORAMUS Jury;
Who, for the purpose, culled and packed,
Regard their Interest, not the Fact.
How ere absolved, yet still, the stains
On Memory's Record remains;
And though they may the Guilt outface,
Good Men detest an Act so base.
Thy Loss, thank Heaven, is not so great,
Scarce to be felt in thy Estate;
And since the Fraud by which you smart,
Is usual, take it not to Heart:
Both Law and Equity afford
A Thousand Precedents on Record;
Demonstrating, That Breach of Trust is
So frequent, it is scarce thought Injustice.
Let Fools torment themselves, and grieve
For each slight Loss which they receive;
It cannot be the part of Wisdom,
Vainly to mourn, when Mischief is done:
For Trifles, Grief should not abound,
But bear proportion with the Wound.
Thou, like a Bedlamite, do rage,
Because in so debauched an Age,
A confident and ancient Crony,
Sunk, and forswore a Bag of Money.
And this a Miracle appears
To a gray Fopp of Threescore years.
Shall Lessons by Experience taught,
Be thrown away, and go for naught?
Cannot thy dull Genius edify
By Precepts of Philosophy?
Whose saving Truths the wise advance,
To vanquish all the Attacks of Chance;
Custom even the unlearned convincing,
To bear the Yoke, and without wincing;
Since vain Reluctaney and Strife,
Increase the irksom load of Life.
When was there yet a Holy Day,
Did not new Frauds and Tricks betray?
Money's by Murder, Treason, got,
Cheats, Poison, Padding, and the Plot:
Bullies, Buffoons, Knights of the Post,
Roar, domineer, and rule the Roast;
And Dagger, Pistol, Poyson's made
The Implements of gainful Trade;
Since Good Men are so rare, that even
In Rome it self you will scarce find seven:
Why should we fondly dream, a dozen
Of Jurors may not bribe and cozen,
When Sodom might (in times of Yore)
Have been preserved for Half-a-score?
With Iron, Brass, Silver, and Gold,
Past (2) Ages did resemblance hold;
To name this last degenerate Race,
Nature no Metal yields so base.
Yet we for want of Faith, in vain
Aloud of God and Man complain;
Loud, as a Pleader in the Hall,
Resolved to out-noise, and brazen all.
Thou, Grandsire, that for nothing grieves,
Deserve a Bibb and Hanging-sleeves:
Know not, that others hoarded Riches
With Tantalizing Charms bewitches;
And powerful Lechery allure 'em,
That Locks and Bars cannot secure 'em?
Who can but laugh at Sot so idle,
That swears an Atheist on a Bible,
Flattering himself he will be just,
Because an Oath secures his Trust?
Think he believes a Power Divine
Inhabits every Church and Shrine?
Thy Folly makes the sly Rogue laugh,
To see old Birds so caught with Chaff:
Such Rules the Infant World obeyed,
When (3) Saturn first the Scepter swayed;
Ere fore'd he laid his Kingship down,
And for a Scythe exchanged a Crown.
When (4) Juno was a Tomring Lass,
And (5) Jove without a hair on's Face,
Played at Bo-peep in Ida's Cave,
Before plain Heaven turned Courtly brave:
Ere Foreign Tricks, old Rights invading,
Brought in Balls, Treats, and Masquerading,
(6) No handsome Boy or (7) Wench did Skink
To add a Gusto to their Drink.
Or Clownish (8) Vulcan, all besmeared
With Soot, wiped Nectar from his Beard.
Then frugal Gods and eke Goddesses,
Dined privately on homely Messes;
Scant Bills of Fare served moderate wishes,
Plain wholesome, no Luxurious Dishes.
There Godships in the Upper House
Were not as now so numerous,
When for good Husbandry the Skies
Were managed by few Deities.
Nor did their Number, Pomp, and State
Make (9) Atlas groan beneath the weight;
None ruled the (10) Ocean, or did keep
His Court and Revels in the Deep,
Or surly Tyrant Ruled in Holl
Ghosts, that in gloomy Minsions dwell:
Nor tortured Souls as yet did feel
Whips, Futies, Vulture, or the Wheel.
The jolly shades, frolic and free,
Found no restraint of Liberty.
Virtue was then at such a height,
Dishonesty was wondered at,
Had then a Boy not capp'd a Beard,
Or, That not risen when Age appeared,
Though his own happier home afforded
More Nuts and Acorns larger hoarded,
It was so Capital a Crime,
Deserved no Clergy at that time
For Beards then swept pre-eminence
From Valor, Beauty, Birth, and Sense.
Now find a Friend so firm and just;
Who never broke his Faith, or Trust;
So to a secret promise true,
He never concealed one penny due:
Let Fame such an Example tell,
We'll register't in Chronicle;
And who but him, the Town shall ring,
And for the News, Te Deum sing;
Him, him, I Will like a Moon-calf view,
Or Monster shown at Barthol' mew;
And wonder more, than if it had rained
Milstones an hour, and no one brained;
Than Sea of Milk, fresh water Oyster,
Mule pregnant, or Bees swarmed in Cloister;
Or what has been devised by Fiction,
When bantring Drolls the World put tricks on;
This Man our Wonder shall engage,
As the sole Phoenix of the Age.
And is it so? -- why then is it wondered,
If you are bilkt of paltry hundred?
By Chamber, and Bankers of London,
Orphans, and herds of Fools are undone,
Which like a Deluge, in a day
Their whole Estates have swept away.
If slight of Hand, and queint Disguise
Conceal our Cheats from Mortal Eyes,
What matter is it, what Heaven 'spies?
Such Witnesses we'll never dispute,
That seeing all things will be mute;
The point resolved, with demure look
The formal Knave salutes the Book;
With Canting tone, and turn'd-up Eyes,
The brazen Rogue vents Perjuries;
Varnishing Tales Apochryphal,
With colors most Canonical.
Avouching (Verbo Sacerdotis)
Slight matters that occur to's notice;
Confirms untruths he does depose,
With Vollies of the deepest Oaths;
And can with confidence desie
Jove, and his whole Artillery:
By two-edged Sword of Bully Mars,
Apollo's Bow and Shafts he swears;
By chaste Diana's Murdring Quiver,
And Trident of the Sea's Lawgiver;
By Pallas Spear, and by the Club
Wherewith Alcides used to drub;
And all the dreadful Weapons seen
In Heaven's warlike Magazine;
And wishes (if he Married be)
The Devil take's Wife, and Family.
Some do believe the World's advance
From Club of Atoms, jumped by chance,
Which jumbled in a Chaos lay,
Struggling to hit this lucky way;
Then Order from Confusion rose,
And Matter, fitly did dispose,
Which has subsisted ever since,
By Nature, not by Providence;
That no God steers the course of things,
Event from wild Chance-medly springs;
The Sun by his own virtue burns,
Whose crooked course the Year returns,
Dispensing influence to all,
Makes Summer, Winter, Spring, and Fall;
To the dull mass fresh life does give,
Makes Plants and Trees shoot forth and live;
Wholly cashiering Providence,
Religion, as a sham pretense,
Devised to prop weak Humane Law,
And Superstitious Fools to aw;
Whence unconcerned, they will swear upon
Both Testaments, or Alchoran;
And turning serious things to Jest,
Swear, swallow, or take any Test.
Another Mungrel sort revere
A God, and Vengeance, yet forswear;
Thus arguing with themselves; For me
Let Heaven, what it please decree;
Strike me with every Malady,
Stone, Palsy, Gout, or Leprosy;
Content I Will live deaf, dumb, and blind,
So I may keep what I purloyn'd;
I Would rather grope my envied store,
Than live without it, scorned and poor:
What starving wretch did ever doubt
To swop his Health for the Rich Gout?
Or Footman having won the Race,
To Sup high, would not pawn his Bays?
In vain you humm haranging Vicar,
If he want Coin to purchase Liquor;
What can reward his pains, and studying,
But Money, Sunday's Beef, and Pudding?
Or what damned Poet ere would write,
That did not hope a good third Night?
It is not Zeal for a good Cause,
But Fees stir up the Man of the Laws;
Nor thirst of Fame, but hope of Plunder,
Makes Heroes charge through Pikes and Thunder.
Heaven's Vengeance heavy is we know,
But heavy things move always slow;
And if to punish all they doom,
When will my day of rec'ning come?
If courteous Heaven he as we find,
Still to repenting sinners kind,
Who knows but I may find a place
In some free general Act of Grace?
Besides, Jove's more a (11) Gentleman,
Than for each petty fault to damn;
And will for frailties pardon grant,
Which in our Nature they did plant;
Men pushing the same Game of sin,
With differing Fates, some lose, some win;
While one in Cart meets with Reproaches,
The other Lords it in gilt Coaches;
A Traitor once successful grown,
Heaven his prevailing Cause does own;
Else why should Providence permit
Usurpers on the Throne to sit?
With Arguments like these they keep,
And lull their Consciences asleep;
Till by degrees they lose all sense
Of shame, and every act dispense;
As Women having broke the Ice
Of Honor, plunge in every Vice:
From paths of Vertne newly strayed,
Outdo Professors of the Trade;
By their old Tempter once drawn in,
They boggle at no sort of sin:
These Qualms once over, 'twill be sport
To see him dare thee to the Court,
Proffer ye Answer, Affidavit,
Speak which you please, Sir, you shall have it.
Perhaps the matter so he will handle,
He Will bring an Action for the Scandal,
Where, Confidence will Guilt outface,
And for mere Innocence will pass;
The Cause by a right Jury tried,
Get a fat Verdict on his side;
Or if you chance to guard that blot,
Perhaps he will swear you into the Plot;
While you roar our like a whipped Strumpet
At Bridewell, loud as speaking Trumpet,
And in Blasphemous terms in vain
Of God and Man alike complain.
Can there be Gods above, and bear
Audacious Perjury to hear?
So unresenting, tame, and base,
TO endure Affronts done to their Face:
'Twould move a perfect stone or stock,
To see a Villain thus to mock;
Why offer we vain Sacrifice,
Or court regardless Deities?
What need we either Church or Steeple,
Or Priests to sponge upon the People,
If blindly no regard be had
To Men, or Actions good or bad?
If in Truth's Quarre (they')l not arm,
Or do us either good or harm?
Why should they baulk us or encourage,
If they are no more than Chips in Porridge?
Or why allow their Pictures room,
Or Reverence then each Common Tomb?
Or pay respect to Heavenly Madams,
More than the Statue of (12) Jack Adams?
Cease thus to rave and calmly try,
What Comforts Reason can apply:
Stiff Precepts from the Stoics brought,
Or Books by rigid Cynicks wrought,
Or the Calm Epicure, content
With Herbs and Roots weak Nourishment,
Are useless here: This easy Cure
Is done without the help of Lower.
If the Misfortune which you tell,
Want in the World a Parallel,
Then I Will not hinder you to maul,
Your Rev'rent Head against the wall,
Or Grief extravagant to show;
Let Tears as from a Fountain flow:
For desperate Debts we seldom look,
But write them on the back o'th Book:
In vain with Locks, after the Deed,
We would secure the pilfer'd Steed.
The Funerals of our Friends with State,
And mournful Pomp, we celebrate,
Condoling their Deceased Souls,
With Bellowings loud, as Irish howls;
Content to grieve in outward show,
And squeeze a feigned Tear or two;
With real Sorrow truer hearted,
We mourn our Money that is departed;
While all agree in this belief,
We do not Counterfeit our Grief.
If Law and Equity produces
Each Day fresh instance of Abuses,
It Is each Defendants usual practice,
For to disown their Bond their Act is;
Proceed to Juries when they have packed em,
Find Money paid, or non est factum,
A Counterfeit Bill of Exchange
No Man does now admire as strange:
When for to make the Cheat pass better,
Post brings advice in feigned letter.
To those Intrigues who is a Stranger
That ever heard the name of (12) Granger?
And all this vouched by witnesses,
That make a trade of Perjuries,
And daily are at Change-time found,
In Temple-Walks, or the Church-round;
Though Fortune sometimes vilely nicks 'em,
And in the Wooden-ruff fast sticks 'em.
Why then are you too delicate
To share with us the common Fate?
Why you so great a Favorite,
That no Mischance on you must light?
While we predestined Reprobates,
Are persecuted by the Fates.
Like Slaves must drudge and carry double,
Tugging the laboring Oar of Trouble:
Thy wrongs are scarcely worth regard,
If with known Villainies compared,
The effects of Rapine, Lust, and Rage,
Which every day amaze the Age:
Murder is to each hectoring Blade,
A gainful, fashionable Trade;
While Bravoes let themselves to hire,
As hackney Seconds, to each Squire.
For drunken Brawls, notorious Misses,
(13) Gilt makes them Combat like the Swisses.
Examples of all Crimes appear
In every (14) Newgate-Calendar:
Rape, Incest, Murder, Sodomy,
Theft, Sacrilege, and Burglary;
Here Papists set the Town on Fire;
Or else the (15) Monument's a Liar;
But who will Credit Patience Ward,
A Knight o'th Post upon Record?
Villains the Sacrament receive,
Only with a Design to thieve;
And after Service staying late,
Both watch and pray to steal the Plate.
Presented as I well remember,
To bribe the Town, to choose a Member:
These make no more to strip a Shrine,
Then Buccaneers beyond the Line;
A Saint or Demy-God melt down,
Remorseless as Blood stole the Crown.
For which and other famous Pranks,
Some purchase Punishment, some Thanks.
These are but slight and trivial Crimes,
Mere Peccadillios of our times,
Did you your private Wrongs compare
With Poys'ners, Treason, Massacre;
All which, with far more useful Lessons,
From Dawn till Night you will hear at Sessions,
Consider well Men's manners, then
Say you're ill treated if you can.
Why should you grumble if you meet
Fowl play, where every Man's a Cheat?
Who wonders at a crafty Scot?
Or Dutchman given to the Pot?
Who would admire a Black in Guiny?
Or Church land should produce a Nynny?
Or Daughter bred by Mother lewd,
That has the self same Course pursued?
Or fulsom Bawd with half a Nose,
Confirm her wheedling Shamms with Oaths?
All this unto a Man of Sense,
Being but natural Consequence.
(18) When Hostil Cranes, with clamors loud,
In Squadrons make a noisy cloud,
The Pygmy-land Militia rise
TO oppose their common Enemies;
With force united Puny-Nation,
Join to resist threatening Invasion;
If from the Body any stray,
Pickeering Crane sweepes him away,
And does in gripeing Tallons bear,
The sprawling Warrior through the Air.
Doubtless so Comical a sight,
Would with the Novelty delight;
But in that numerous dwarfish Host,
Where none's but a foot high at most,
And such Incounters happen daily,
None on the accident will rally.
But shall so base a Perjury,
Pass unrewarded, and shot-free?
Shall Not Vengance dog him at the Heel,
And he divine resentment feel?
Suppose the Wretch this very hour,
Wholly consigned into your Power;
And suffered for his punishment
The sharpest Pains you could invent;
Impaled, gashook'd, wrackt or strappado'd,
Or on live Coals were Carbonado'd,
In some unthought of manner dies,
That Malice yet is to devise;
All this will not retrieve your loss,
Or make you richer by a Cross:
But then Revenge in these Intrigues
Sweeter than Muskadine and Eggs;
Is by fond Mortals understood,
Above all sublunary good:
So do the Mad cap, hare-brain'd crow'd
Of Dam-me-Boys, roar out aloud,
Who for a frolic, or but flight
Occasions, will lug out and fight;
And when the Brutes are mad or drunk,
Swagger for nothing, or a Punk;
Huff, Bully, Bounce Rhodomontadoes,
And quarrel with their very Shadows.
Such Practice has been in all Ages,
Condemned by sober Men and Sages:
Passions in narrow Compass pent,
Like winds, will strugle for a vent;
While Souls enlarged, do seldom find
Such Storms in their serener mind;
Who can with ease and scorn surmount,
All sense of Wrong, and an Affront:
For so the wise (19) Crysippus thought,
And (20) Thales mild Example taught:
(21) Socrates suffered without strife,
Sworn and trappan'd out of his life;
Undaunted, drank the Poison up,
Nor wished his Foes might pledge the Cup:
Wisdom apt Remedies can find,
To cure each Sickness of the Mind,
With weeding Errors from the Ground,
Plants in their Room, what is true and sound:
Revenge by Nature growing wild,
By care is rooted out, and killed:
But if the Soil Indulgence give;
No Plants of Justice there will live;
O'er-run, and choked, thrive there no longer,
Where Reason's weak, Passions grow stronger,
The certain cause that still we find,
It domineers in Womankind,
And leads their easy Minds astray,
Like Will in the Wisp, out of the way;
Hood-winked they rove the crooked Path,
Of Head strong Lust, Pride, Fraud and Wrath,
Till tired, and torn, with Bush and Bryer,
In Bogs of Infamy they mire.
Can you then fondly think, because
Crimes escape the Censure of the Laws,
They pass unpunished? No: within,
Conscience afflicts them for their sin;
While sharper pains their Souls torment,
Than Judge, or Tyrant can invent:
No sense of Torture can compare
With Pangs of Sinner in despair:
That Is sharp, but momentary Grief;
This knows no End, nor hopes Relief;
While in their Breasts condemned, they feel,
And antedate the Pains of Hell.
A Story just pat to this Case
I Have read, but cannot quote the place,
Tho in Authentic writ, I Am certain;
That once upon a time, a Spartan
Unto whose trust, a friend like you,
Had left a bag of Coin or two,
Of which possessed, the Rascal grutches
To part with his Booty out of's Clutches;
To be resolved of what he doubted,
Consults the Oracle about it,
If he might use Equivocation,
Or else forswear it on occasion;
And so might bite his Friend confiding:
Which made the enraged Priestess chide him,
And plainly told him from Apollo,
Due punishment such Crimes should follow.
Worthy the God was the Prediction
Which proved a true one, and no Fiction;
With Thunder of the Sentence stunned,
He hasts his Purchase to refund:
Now 'twas not Honesty, but Fright,
Which made the Knave at last do Right;
Nor did Compliance save his Bacon,
That would have Virtues Paths forsaken;
Himself with his whole Fireside,
At once for an example died,
Together with Remote Relations,
Unto the Third, Fourth Generations.
If Perjury although but meant;
Met with so Tragical Event:
What dreadful Vengeance must impend,
So base, and treacherous a Friend?
Whoever but designs a Crime,
Is guilty, at the self same time,
Although perhaps he never proceeds
To ripen his intent to Deeds;
If the foul Crime he perpetrate,
Perpetual horrors on him wait;
The Effects of black Despair he feels
That haunt and dog him at the heels;
Grief, Sorrow, each unwelcom Guest,
Take Lodgings in his anxious Breast:
If to divert his Pangs he try
Choice Music, Mirth or Company,
Like Bancoe's Ghost, his ugly Sin,
To mar his Jollity, stalks-in;
At Costly Banquet, 'twill not cease
To haunt, and to disturb his peace;
And tho the chief Guest at the Treat
He nauseats all, and cannot eat,
The Morsel chewed he cannot swallow,
As if his Teeth were clogged with Tallow:
To rowse him from his Dumps, they try
A Glass of noble Burgundy;
That friendly God's a sure relief,
From every Soul to banish Grief.
His vitiated Taste (alas!)
Receives no pleasure from the Glass;
And at old Hock makes as severe
A face, as if 'twere Vinegar.
At night in Bed tosses and turns
Restless, while watchful Taper burns;
Or if by chance, slumber allows
His harassed Limbs a short repose,
His working fancy represents
Fresh Argument for discontents
Dreams he the abused Temple fees
And the affronted Dieties,
You his wronged friend before his Eyes,
Stalking in a Gygantick size,
Ready upon his Corpse to fieze
To revenge Theft and Perjuries.
Bathed in cold Sweats he frighted Shreiks
At Visions bloodier than (24) King Dick's.
These are the trembling Cowards start
At every chance with akeing Heart,
Look pale and are of Wits bereaven
To hear the Artillery of Heaven.
Not guessing Chance can make so loud
A Crack, when Winds break through a Cloud,
And flash, when each the other shocks,
Like Flint and Steel in Tinder-box:
The Wretches, in a sad Condition,
Fancy each Bolt brings its (25) Commission,
From Heavens avenging Arm being sent,
And aimed at them for punishment;
Which if they escape, then they believe
That respit's, but a short reprieve
From an inevitable Doom,
That with surprise will surely come;
If Pulse uneven restless night,
With Symptoms of a Fever fright,
They think the dreadful Summon's come
To hurry 'em to eternal Doom;
To Heaven they dare not send a Prayer,
Least they wake fleeping Vengeance there;
And to their own destruction raise
Anger, they know not to appease.
Sin's of unconstant fickle Nature,
Varying its Object, shape and Matter;
To start fresh Game is always ranging:
Like Proteus makes no end of changing;
Cameleon Trimmer shifting dye,
By turns, wears every Livery.
Set the Door open to one Sin
All sorts of Crimes will strait rush in;
Decoyed to swallow by the Devil
Quickly distinguish Good from Evil;
Fruits of Apostasy we find
Too soon in the debauched mind;
And though perhaps, sometimes within
Pangs of Remorse are felt for Sin;
When with like appetite we burn,
To our old haunts again, return;
Nature and Custom draws us in,
For who can bound or stint his Sin?
Reproofs, are Arguments for laughter,
To those have eat Shame, and drank after;
Grown resolute, like Man of Mettle,
They burnish face with brazen Kettle.
For Men, in the Career of Vice,
Like those that slide upon the Ice,
Cannot on the sudden stop, but run
Push't by their Passions Headlong on;
Nor on the Precipice can stay,
For Hell is down hill all the way:
Who ever yet made stop at Sin,
When with Success, his hand is in?
A lucky Entrance makes him flush,
And at all Games his Fortune push,
Till he the Gentle Habit get,
Of Vice, and dance into the Net,
With Irons cramped in Dungeon close,
The (26) Devil brings him his old shoes:
There jilting Fortune will deceive him,
Feigned Friends, the World and Pleasure leave him;
Then lying pensive and forlorn,
Exposed to Miseries and Scorn,
Must in base humble suppliant fashion,
The favor beg of Transportation.
Or to teach others useful Lesson,
Must to the Gallows make procession,
Where the poor Wretch, on sad Triangle,
A public Spectacle shall dangle,
Doubtless so long a wished for sight,
Cannot but ravish with delight;
And then at last with joyful mind
You Will own, Heaven's neither deaf nor blind.
EXEMPLO. Vel facinore, cujus malum exemplum nocet, alios peccare docens.
Exemplo quodcunque malo committitur, ipsi
Displicet ductori, prima est baec ultio, quod se
Judice, nemo nooens absolvitur. IMPROBA. Quamvia gratia, fallacis and corrupti
Praetoris, vel Judicis, Urnam, and Judicium, (i. e.) jus, and equitatem,
viceric, and superaverit: Qua nocentes saepissime absolvuntur.
Improba quamvis
Gratia fallacis praetoris vicerit urnam.
QUID SENTIRE. Secundum argumentum, quod omnes factum islud tanquam
sceleratissimum damnent, and detestentur.
Quid sentire put a omnes, Calvine, recenti
De scelere, and fidei violatae crimine? Sed SED NEC. Tertium argumentum quod
Calvinus satis dive^, and in re adeo tenui natus non sit, ut levi^ jactur^,
december nimirum H. S. quae valent 250 Anglicanas Coronas aut circiter, obruat
illum, and ad desperationem adigat.
nec
Tam tenuis census tibi contigit, ut mediocris
Jacturae te mergat onus: Nec NEC RARA. Quarta consolatio, ab exemplis aliorum,
quod hujusmodi damnum non ipse solus expertus sit, sed quod idem multi alii
perpessi sunt.
rara videmus
Quae pateris: casus multis hic cognitus, and jam
Tritus, and e medio fortunae ductus acervo.
Ponamus nimios gemitus, flagrantior FLAGRANTIOR. Vehementior.
aequo
Non debet dolor esse VIRI. Prudentis, magnanimi.
viri, nec vulnere major.
Tu quamvis levium minimam, exiguamque malorum
Particulam vix far potes, spumantibus SPUMANTIBUS. Aestuantibus visceribus,
quasi bili, ira etc fervore spument.
ardens
Visceribus, sacrum tibi quod non reddat amicus
Depositum, stupet STUPET HAEC. Objurgat admirationem Calvini cum
interrogatione. An Calvinus qui Fonteio Consule natus est, and jam Sexaginta
annos vixit, haec and corsin^lia, quae passim and ubique sunt, cum stupore
deminatur?
haec, qui jam post terga reliquit.
Sexaginoa annos Fonteio consule Natus?
AN NIHIL. Profecisti artevitae humanae, tot rerum usu, and tanta aetate.
An nihil in melius tot rerum proficis usu?
Magna quidem, sacris quae dat praecepta LIBELLIS. Ethici docentes
Philosophiam, moralem humanitatem and sapientiam, exultare fortunae, and valida
esse contra omnia adversa fortunae tela.
libellis,
Victrix fortunae sapientia. DUCIMUS. Id est, illos etiam merito felices and
sapientes dicimus, qui sine libris Philosophorum, per vitae humanae usum and
experientiam, omnia vitae incommoda far didicerunt, and necessitatis jugo non
reluctari.
Ducimus autem
Hos quoque felices, qui far incommoda vitae,
Nec jactare jugum vita didicere Magistra.
Quae FESTA DIES. Id est quae dies adeo sacra and festa est quae non prodat
furem, aut manifestat aliquod sceleraturn fecinus cujusedam furis vel perfidi,
aut nummos gladio vel veneno in pixide parata partos.
tam festa dies, quae cesset prodere furem,
Perfidiam, frauds, atque omni ex crimine lucrum
Quaesitum; and gladio GLADIO. Notat latrones and sicarios.
p^rtos, and PIXIDE. Intelligit, venificas and venenum in pixide clausum and
paratum.
Pixide nummos?
Rari RARI. Dicit, autem vix in tota urbe Roma septem bonos inveniri, alludens
ad Graeciae sapientes, qui numero septem fuerunt.
quippe boni numero vix sunt totidem, quot
Thebarum THEBAE. In Boeotia septem portae fuerunt.
portae, vel NILI. Septem ostia.
divitis DIVITIS. Nam inundans agros Aegypti sao limo feraces and fertiles
reddie.
ostia Nili.
Nunc NUNC AETAS. Id est, nunc aguntur a nobis pejora saecula etc deterioria
quam fuit ferreum, quorum sceleri and vitio ipsa Natura nullum nomen invenit,
nec metallum adeo vile habeat, ut pravitatem hujus saeculi torrupti satis apt
possit exprimere. Quemadmodum priora saecula ab auro, argento, etc. denominata
fuerunt.
aetas agitur, pejoraque saecula ferri
Temporibus, quorum sceleri non invenit ipsa
Nomen, and a nullo posuit natura metallo.
Nos NOS. Inepti sceleraturn facinus videntes clamore implorare deorum atque
hominum fidem incipimus, tanquam novum and inusitatum aliquod spectantes, cum
hujusmodi crimina passim and ubique obvia habeamus.
hominum divumque fidem clamore ciemus.
Quanto Fessidium FESSIDIUM. Ostendic clyentes habuisse conductos, qui eum
causas agentem alta voce collaudarent, non causidicis solum, verum and Poetis
usitatum.
laudat vocalis agentem
Sportula, die senior DIC SENIOR. Acriter objurgat and vexat Calvinum, qui tot
annos vixerit, and sui saeculi mores non dedicerit, ideoque dignus habitu
puerili, cum animum puerilem habet.
bulla BULLA. Fuit insigne puerorum ingenuorum quod e collo ad pectus
porrigibatur, habens figuram cordis, ut quidam arbitrantur: alii Priapi.
dignissime, nescis
Quas NESCIS QUAS. Id est, nescis in quantis delitiis sit aliens pecunia per
fraudem occupata.
habeat Veneres aliena pecunia? --
Quem tua simplicitas risum vulgo moveat, cum
Exigis EXIGIS. Fidem and pietatem ab illo, qui Deum non credit, nec ultorem
fore perjurii, and ob id stolida tua simplicitas merito irridetur.
a quoquam ne pejeret, and putet ullis
Esse aliquod numen Templis, aereque rubenti?
Quondam hoc indiginae INDIGINAE. Latini ab origines antiquissimi Italiae
populi, ex nullo parente, ex nulla patria orti, quasi indegeniti, vivebant hoc
more (i. e.) simpliciter.
vivebant more, --
PRIUSQUAM. Imperante adhuc Saturno, quo aureum saeculum fuit, cum Satur^us
nondum a filio love regno esset pulsus, qui profugus a Creta in Iraliam
pervenis, ibi que a Jano lio spitio exceptus est.
-- priusquam
Sumeret agrestem posito diademate falcem
Saturnus fugiens, tunc cum virguncula JUNO. Nondum adulta, and Jovi fratri suo
nupta.
Juno,
Et privatus adhuc Idaeis JUPITER. Cum Jupiter nondum Rex esset, sed privatus
in Idaeis antris a Rhea matre abscondebatur, ne a patre Saturno devoraretur.
Jupiter antris.
Nulla super nubes convivia coelicolarum,
Nec PUER ILIACUS. Ganymedes Filius Trois Regis Ilii nondum in Coelum raptus
Cinoedus and Pincerna Jovis.
puer Iliacus, formosa nec Herculis UXOR. Heben juventutis Deam intelligit,
quae ante Ganymedem Jovi Cyaethos ministrabat, crat filia Junonis qu^^ postea
in Coelum recepts Herculi nupsit.
uxor,
Ad Cyathos, and jam siccato nectare tergens
Brachia VOLCANUS. Cum non esser Volcanus deorum faber.
Volcanus Lyparaea nigra taberna.
Prandebat sibi quisquis Deus, nec turba deorum
Talis, ut est hodie, contentaque sidera paucis
Numinibus, miserum urgebant ATLANTA. Quia fingunt Atlanta coelum sustinere.
Atlanta minori
Pondere: nondum aliquis sortitus triste PROFUNDI. Nepunum intelligit quimari
imperat.
profundi
Imperium, --
-- Aut Sicula torvus cum conjuge PLUTON. Cum nondum esser Pluto deus ille
inferni immitis horrendusque cum conjuge Proserpina, Ceteris, filia in Aerna
Sie^^^e monte rupia.
Pluton,
Nec NEC RO^A. Que exion (...) volume and Jutions to (...) inferece
Rota, nec NEC FURIAE. (...) sce^^^^^, Alecto, Tisiphona and Megaera, quae
variis cruciatibus nocentes persequuntur.
furiae, nec NEC SAXUM. Sisyphi ob furta and frauds.
saxum, aut VULTURIS. Qui jecur Tytii lancinat, co quod Latonam de stupro
sollicitasset.
vulturis atri
Poena, sed infernis HILARES. Sui jutis laetae sine Plutone, sine Judicibus,
viz. Aeaco, Rhadamantho, Triptolemo.
bilares sine regibus umbrae.
Improbitas illo fuit admirabilis aevo.
Credebant hoc grands nefas, and morte piandum,
Si juvenis vetulo non assurrexerat, and si
Barbato cuicunque puer, licet ipse videret
Plura domi fraga, and majores GLANDIS ACERVOS. Priscorum censim.
glandis acervos.
Tam venerabile erat praecedere quatuor annis,
Primaque par adeo sacrae lanugo senectae.
Nunc si depositum non inficietur amicus,
Si reddat veterem cum tota aerugine FOLLEM. Cruinenam and sa^^ilum e corio
^^nquam follem.
follem,
Prodigiosa fides, and THUSCIS. Quae digna sit cum reliquis portentis and
prodigiis, ob inusitatam novitatem scriptis Aruspicum Thuscorum inserari.
Thuscis digna libellis,
Quaeque coronata lustrari debeat agna.
EGREGIUM. Innuit ulterius virum integrum and inculpatum, Romae monstro biformi
etc prodigioso partim esse similem.
Egregium, sanctumque virum si cerno, BIMEMBRI PUERO. Veluri si puer natus
esset semibos, ut Minotaurus; vel semiequus, ut Centauri.
bimembri
Hoc monstrum puero, vel mirandis sub aratro
Piscibus inventis; and foetae comparo MULAE. Gravidae and praegnantis, quia
mulae nunquam concipiunt. Ratio est qui^ mula gignitu^ and constat ex
animalibus specie differentibus, viz. Equo and Asina.
mulae?
Sollicitus tanquam lapides effuderit imber,
Examenque apium longa consederet uva
Culmine delubri, tanquam in mare fluxerit amnis
Gurgitibus miris, and lactis vortice torrens.
Intercepta december quereris sestertia fraud
Sacrilega. Quid si bis centum perdidit alter
Hoc arcana modo? majo^em tertius illa
Summam, quam patulae caperet vix angulus arcae?
Tam TAM FACILE. Egregia haec sententia notat, homines pronos and proclives
esse ad fallendum, deos qui omnia vident ut testes facile contemnentes, modo
homines ignorent.
facile and pronum est superos contemnere testes,
Si mortalis idem nemo sciet. ADSPICE. Accurate and graphice depingit talium
hominum constantem malitiam, audaciam and impudentiam, qui alta voce, and
constantia ficti and simulati vultus, audacter and pertinaciter pejerare audent.
Adspice quanta
Voce neget, and quae sit ficti constantia vultus!
Per solis radios, Tarpeiaque fulmina jurat,
Et Martis frameam, and Cirrhaei spicula vatis:
Per calamos venutricis pharetramque puellae,
Perque tuum pater Aegei Neptune tridentem:
Addit and Herculeos arcus, hastamque Minervae,
Quidquid habent telorum armamentaria coeli.
Si vero and pater est, comedam, inquit, flebile nati
Sinciput elixi, Pharioque madentis aceto.
SUNT. Impii homines omnia casu, nihil autem providentia dei fieri censeant,
(juxta Epicurum qui deum and providentiam sustulit.) ignorantes, naturam,
fatum, fortunam, casum esse ejusdam dei nomina; quae falsa and impia opinio,
causa est tantorum scelerum and perjuriorum.
Sunt in fortunae qui cafibus omnia ponunt,
Et nullo credunt mundum Rectore moveri,
NATURA. Quasi natura bruta and irrationalis sit causa rerum naturalium; and
omnium rerum vicissitudinem, ortum, and interirum producat. Cum tamen vere
loquendo Natura nihil aliud est quam Deus.
Natura volvente VICES. Diei, anni, temporum, motuum.
vices, and lucis, and anni,
Atque ideo INTREPIDI. Sine ullo metu and timore pejerant.
intrepidi quaecunqne ALTARIA. Nam v^tres a^^ ^^ngentes solebant in templis
conceptis verbi^ jurare.
altaria tangunt.
Est alius, metuens ne crimen poena sequatur:
Hic putat esse Dees, and pejerat, atque ita secum:
Decernat quodcunque volet de corpore nostro
ISIS. Haec Dea cum Harpocrate corporibus morbos immittere credebatur.
Isis, and IRATO. Infenso and infesto.
irato FERIAT. Oculis me privet, and coecum reddat.
feriat when lumina SISTRO. Instrumentum aereum vel etiam aureum and argenteum,
quo in sacris Isidis arguto strepitu resonabant, Isi^ enim, sistrum gerebat in
dextra manu. Anglice a Tymbrel.
sistro^.
Dummodo vel coecus teneam quos abnego nummos.
Et phthisis, and vomicae putres, and dimidium crus
Sunt TANTI. Judicand^ scilicet and estimanda: Innuit enim long satius
aegrotare cum divitiis quam sanum esse and p^uperem.
tanti? PAUPER LADAS. Licet velocissimus cursor, non dubiter optare locupletem
podagram; si non eget helleboro ex insula Anticyra proveniente; nec nobilissimo
aliquo medico, qualis fuit Archiginal.
Pauper locupletem optare podagram
Nec dubitat Ladas, si non eget Anticyra, nec
Archigine. Quid enim velocis gloria plantae
PRAESTAT. Id est, inanis gloria and corona ex ramo olen victoribus data, nihil
prosunt pauperi and esurienti cursoti.
Praestat, and esuriens Piseae ramus olivae?
UT SIT. Verba sunt perjuri cum concessione conjuncta, (l. e.) licet Dei ira
sit vehemens and gravis, tamen consolatur me quod lenta and tarda sit; interea
nos genio and voluptati indulgebimus.
Ut sit magna, tamen certe lenta ira deorum est.
Si curant igitur cunctos punire nocentes,
QUANDO. Post longum tempus ad me veniat, ridicule cogitans deum more hominum
per temporum intervalls agere.
Quando ad me venient? Sed and exorabile numen
Fortasse experiar: solet his ignoscere. --
MULTI. Homines cadem scelera saepe committupt, sed diversa sort, eventu and
successu.
Multi
Committunt cadem diverso crimina faro:
ILLE CRUCEM. Supplicium crucis, furcae, vel mortis atrocis pretiumand mercedem
sceleris tulit.
Ille crucem sceleris pretium tulit, hic HIC DIADEMA. Coronam, lauds and
honores.
diadema.
SIC. Id est, talibus and similibus consolationibus se in scelere adversus
poenam impii confirmant.
Sic animum dirae trepidans formidine culpae
Confirmant, --
TUNC TE. Id est, postquam animum ita obfirmavit, ultro te ad aram cum
alacritate praecedit, and ibi se jummen^o purget.
-- Tunc te ad delubra voeantem
Praecedit, TRAHERE. Immo vero cunctanrem te trahit, and fi ire recuse^, tibi
molestus est, and interim coram alii^ te ludibrio babet.
trahere immo ultra, ac vexare paratus.
NAM. Id est, ubi cum mala causa seeleratiff^ni homlrtis saepe audacia
conjungitur, illa audacia apod multos speciem innocenti^e and integrit obsence,
putant enim tan^^m aud^^m and sid^^am ex recta conseremia prosi^^sci.
Nam cum magna malae superest audacia causae,
Creditur a multis fiducia. MIMUM. Pe^ju^us (...) calumniatur, non secus ut
dominum suum vexat servus ille fugitivus and confidens, quem mimus repres^^at
in fabu^^ mimographi Catulli urbani and faceti.
Mimum agit ille,
Urbani qualem fugitivus scurra Catulli.
TU MISER. Tu innocens a perjuro vexatus deo inclamas voce Stentorea.
Tu miser exclamas, ut STENTORA. Hic in exercitu Graecorum ad Trojam, tantam
vocis altitudinem habuit ut solus clamaret quantum alii quinquaginta. Hinc
prover bium, Stentore clamofior.
Stentora vincere possis,
Vel potius quantum GRADIVUS. Mars, apud eundem Homerum a Diomede vulneratus,
exclamavit quantum december mill'a virorum.
Gradivus Homericus: --
JUPITER HAEC. Jovem ipsum ut socordem increpat, qui videt, and audit tam
manifesta perjuria, and non punit; and hominum stuporem arguit qui simulacris
aeneis and marmoceis numen inesse aliquod sibi persuaserunt.
Jupiter haec? nec labra moves, cum mittere vocem
Debueras, vel marmoreus, vel aheneus? AUTCUR. Id est, siperjuris non vis
punire, and nos non audire, non etiam dignus es cui sacrificemur.
Aut cur
In carbone tuo charta pia thura soluta
Ponimus, and sectum vituli jecur albaque porci
Omenta?
-- Vt video, nullum discrimen habendum est
Effigies inter vestras, statuamque VAGELLI. Hominis stolidissimi.
Vagelli.
Accipe quae contra valeat solatia far,
Et qui nec CYNICI. Duplici pallio, STOICI. fimplici utebantur, caeteturn in
doctrina ni^il erat discriminis.
Cymicos, nec Stoica dogmata legit
A Cynicis tunica distantia; --
-- Non NON EPICURUM. Epicurum non admicatin, quisummum bonum in volupeate and
tranquillirate ponit, fuit tamen Epicurus (test Seneca) sobrius admodum parvo
horto and oleribus contentus.
Epicurum
Suspicit exigui LAETUM. Non sine voluptate contentum.
laetum PLANTARIBUS. Olusculis.
plantaribus horti.
CURENTUR. Aflicti gravibus aerumnis, gravem poscunt Philosophum, qui
consoletur and cuter.
Curentur dubii medicis majoribus agri:
TU. cujus damnum levis est non ita gravi consolatori opus habe^.
Tu venam vel DISCIPULO. Medico mediocri.
discipulo commit Philippi.
Si nullum interris TAM Quam ejus qui ae fefellit.
tam detestabile factum
Ostendis, taceo, nec pugnis cedere pectus
Te veto, nec plana faciem contundere palma:
Quandoquidem accepto CLAUDENDA EST JANUA. Irridet eo^ qui juxta Proverbium
equo amisso stabulum clauduat.
claudenda est janua damno,
Et majore domus gemitu, majore tumultu
Planguntur nummi, quam funera. Nemo dolorent
Fingit in hoc IN HOC CASU. In amission^ bonorum.
casu, vestem DIDUCERE. Dil^cerare.
diducere summam
Contentus, VEXARE. Lachrymis misere (...) rendo oculos vix viexpressis.
vexare oculos, humore coacto.
Ploratur lachrymis amissa pecunia veris.
Sed si cuncta vides simili for a plena querela,
Si SI DECIES. Si ^^sitatissimum Romae est, ut instrumenta obligatoria ceratis
tabulis inscripta vel decies legantur obsignenturque, suam tamen chirographam
debitores negant se unquam scripsisse, and dicunt adulterinam vanam and
supervacuam esse.
decies lectis diversa part tabellis
Vana supervacui dicunt chirographa ligni,
Arguit ipsorum quos littera, gemmaque princeps
SARDONICHUM. Sigilium in gemma preciosa soulp^^^.
Sardonychum, loculis quae custoditur eburnis:
Tenunc delicias EXTRA-Comminem and vulgarem sortem.
extra communia censes
Ponendum, quia tu TU GALLINAE FILIUS ALBAE. Proverbium in illos qui aliquid
peculiare esse volunt: vel sibi videantur egregii and super alios feliciter
nati.
gallinae filius albae,
NOS VILES. In allegoria persererat. Tu singularis and nobilis communem hominum
sortem detrectas, quam nos e vili turba nullius pretii homunculi sustincre
cog^mur.
Nos vile pulli nati infelicibus ovis.
Rem pateris modicam, and mediocri bile ferendam,
Si flectas oculos majora ad crimina: confer
Conductum LATRONEM. Sicarium ad occidendum conductum notat.
latronem,
INCENDIA. O^^m sulfure nunc pulvere ^^rmentario facta.
Incendia sulfure coepta
Atque dolo, primos cum janua colligit ignes:
CONFER. Compara spoliationem templorum cum dene^^tion^ depositi tui.
Confer and hos verteris qui rollunt grandia templi
Pocula adorandae rubiginis, and populorum
Dona, vel antiquo posit as a Rege coronas.
Haec ibi si non sunt, minor extat sacrilegus, qui
Radat inaurati femur Herculis, and faciem ipsam
Neptuni, qui bracteolam de Castore ducat.
An dubitat solitus totum conflare TONANTEM. Jovis Statuam.
Tonantem?
Confer and ARTIFICES. Veneficos qui venennum parant.
artifices, MERCATOREMQUE. Venditorem simul and emptorem.
mercatoremque veneni;
Et DEDUCENDUM. Parricidam intelligit includendum cull^o, cum gallo, cane,
fimia, and serpente.
deducendum corio bovis in mare, cum quo
Clauditur adversis innoxia SIMIA. Innoxia adversis fatis, in sociam poenam
destinat^, cum ^^ps^ non occiderit parentem.
sinia fatis.
Haec QUOTA. Minima s^ilicet.
quota pars scelerum, quae CUSTOS. Rutillium Gallicum intelligit qui sub
Domitiano praefectus fuit Rome and Custos urbis.
custos Gallicus urbis
Vsque a Lucifero, donec lux occidat, audit?
Humani generis mores tibi nosse volenti
Sufficit una UNA DOMUS. Illius Rutillii.
domus, paucos consume dies, et
Dicere te miserum, postquam illinc veneris, AUDE. Si potes just.
aude.
QUIS TUMIDUM. Quis ea quae vulgo accidunt, and quae quotidiana, and quasi e
loci natura sunt, miranda putet; Romae videre omnes scelere profligatos, non
magis mirum est quam in Alpibus omnes strumosos vitio aquae quam ibi potant,
tanquam mammosas in Meroe Aegypti civitate: Germanos cum Or coerulis oculis and
flava caesarie.
Quis tumidum guttur miratur in Alpibus? aut quis
It Meroe crasso majorem infant mamillam?
Coerula quis stupuit Germani lumina? flavam
Caesariem, and madido torquentem cornua cirro?
Nempe quod hic illis NATURA. Uthaec illis Natura and more, ita and nobis
Romany. ^^elera.
Natura est omnibus una.
Ad subitas Thracum volucres, nubemque sonoram
Pygmaeus parvis currit bellat or in armis:
Mox impar hosti, raptusque per era curvis
Vnguibus a saeva fertur grue, si videas hoc
Gentibus in Nostris, risu quatiere; --
-- sed illic,
Quanquam eadem assidue spectentur praelia, ridet
Nemo, ubi tot a cohors pede non est altior uno.
NULLANE. Objectio; Ita ne ille perjurus impune evader?
Nullane perjuri capitis fraudisque nefandae
Poena erit? --
-- ABREPTUM. Puta majoribus poenis afficitur, quam animus tuus exposcit, quid
tibi prodest, nec damnum ex hac re refarciari potest.
Abreptum creed hunc graviore catena
Protinus, and nostro (quod plus velit ira?) necari
Arbitrio; manet illa tamen jactura, nec unquam
Depositum tibi sospes erit, sed corpore trunco
Invidiosa dabit minimus solatia sanguis.
AT VINDICTA. Per objectionem, id est vindicta quae in oculos incur^it, vel per
carnificem vel per nosmet ipsos gratissima est.
At vindicta bonum vita jucundius ipsa.
NEMPE. Respondet Poeta ad objectionem; and dicit homines stultos, indoctos,
imperitos, rudes, and imbecilles, iracundos esse, and vindictae cupides, etiam
ob nullas causas irascentes, non viros sapientes.
Nempe hoc indocti, QUORUM. Cor s^^pe praeterrem, ob nullam causam vel nullius
momenti, videas incandescere, and ira flagrari.
quorum praecordia nullis
Interdum, aut levibus videas flagrantia causis,
Quantulacunque adeo est occasio, sufficit irae.
Crysippus non dicit idem, nec mite Thaletis
Ingenium, dulcique senex VICINUS HYMETTO. Socrates.
vicinus Hymetto,
Qui partem acceptae saeva inter vincla cicutae
Accusatori nollet dare. --
-- plurima felix
Paulatim vitia, atque errores exuit omnes,
Prima docens rectum SAPIENTIA. Philosophia mor^lis, quae imprimis irae and
reliquis affectibus froema inji^i; and vindictam docet obedire, and morigerare,
docens otiam quod justum and Naturae conveniens est.
sapientia: quippe minuti
Semper, and infirmi est animi, exiguique voluptas
Vltio, continuo sic COLLIGE. Argue, conclude, mulieres sunt Vindictae
cupidissimae, at mulieres sunt infirmi animi, Ergo etc. Quo enim minor est
animus, eo affectibus magis percellitur and superatur.
collige, Quod vindictae
Nemo magis gaudet, quam foemina --
-- CUR TAMEN. Probat jam sequentibus neminem sceleratorum imp^^^^tem habere.
Cur tamen hos tu
Evasisse putes, QUOS. Certe illi impune non evaserunt, qui suam poenam, and
vindictam, semper comitem habent.
quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and SURDO. (i. e.) tacito and latenti tormento, quod
animum and interiora affligit, quod nominant occultum flagellum; hae sunt
furiae illae infernales, quibus Oreftes, Alcmeon and alii fuerunt agitati.
surdo verbere caedit
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum?
Poena autem vehemens, and multo saevior illis,
Quas and CAEDITIUS. Index illius temporis apud Vitellium crudelissimus; qui
semper graviotibus suppliciis delectabatur.
Caeditius gravis invenit, and RHADAMANTUS. Inferorum index justissimus, and
maxim severus Jovis and Europae filius, Rex Lyciae.
Rhadamantus.
NOCTE. Conscientiam Testem quae nunquam cessat accusare and reum convincere,
and de illo supplicium sumere. Quo nulla poer^, nullus cruciatus, gravior and
truculentior excogitari potest, quam est ipsa revera poena infernalis.
Nocte, dieque suum gestare in pectore testem:
SPARTANO, etc. Glauco per hanc historiam oftendit, fieri non posse, ut qui
depo^^^um abnegarit poenam effugiat. Hanc histociam recitat Herodotus Lib. 60.
Spartano cuidam respondit PYTHIA VATES. Apollinis sacerdos fatidica, qui
Pythius dictu^, a Serpente Pythone o^cis^^.
Pythia vates:
HAUD. Illam malam mentem and quod deum tentaret.
Haud impunitum quondam foret, quod dubitaret
DEPOSITUM. Fidci commissum non reddere.
Depositum retinere, and fraudem JURE. (i. e.) suum scelus ac dolum Jure
jurando tueri, ac conformare vel palliare, and excusare.
jure tueri
Jurando: QUAEREBAT explorabat and tentabat ec quid etiam deus hanc frandem
esset approbaturus.
quaerebat enim quae numinis esset
Men's, and an hoc illi facinus suaderet Apollo.
Reddidit ergo METU. Poenarum quai Ora^lum minitabatur.
metu, NON MORIBUS. Non amore virtutis and Justitiae, quia timuit, non quia
sponte voluit.
non moribus, and tamen omnem
VOCEM. Oraculi veram esse ostendit.
Vocem ADITI. Vatis ex adito (i.e.) loco Templi intimo and ab al^^s inaccesso.
aditi dignam templo, veramque probavit:
Extinctus tota pariter cum prole, domoque,
Et quamvis longo deductis gente propinquis.
Has partitur poenas peccandi sola VOLUNTAS. Si in Spartano voluntas sola
peccandi, (facto non commisso) tem severe puniatur, quanto magis sceleratum
factum sui perfidi amici puniendum sit?
voluntas.
NAM SCELUS. Egregia sententia cum sacris literis conspirans; (i. e.) qui apud
se cogitavit and deliberavit scelus committere, reus est aeque arque si
cogitatum feelus perpetrasset.
Nam scelus intra se tacitum qui cogitat ullum
FACTI. apud deum revera qui animum respicit, scelera and mala facta, non ex
se, vel per se, adeo mala sunt, quam quod ex malo animo profisciscuntur.
Facti crimen habet, CEDO. Concedo quanto magis si sceleratus, suas impias
meditationes in actum produxit punietur.
cedo si conata peregit?
PERPETUA ANXIETAS. Ostendit Conscientiam illius qui crimen admisit, continua,
and pe^petua tormenta persentire.
Perpetua anxietas, --
-- nec Mensae tempore cessa^t
Faucibus ut morbo siccis, interque molares
Difficili cresente cibo. --
-- Sed vina miselhis
Expuit, Albani veteris pretiosa senectus
Displicet. Ostendas melius, densissima ruga
Cogitur in frontem, VELUT. Non'secus ao si acetum ex falerno vino acerrimum
bibisset.
velut acri ducta Falerno.
NOCTE (i. est) si sollicitudo cor urens ex mala Conscientia, postquam diu
multumque in lecto versavit, brevem somnum quod rectum non est vel saltem
rarissimum, ipsi indulsit, paulo post Conscientia exitatus rursus evigilat.
Nocte brevem si forte indulsit cur a soporem,
Et toto versata toro jam membra quiescunt,
Continuo templum, and violati numinis aras,
Et quod praeciquis mentem sudoribus urget,
Te videt in somnis: tua sacra, and major imago
Humana turbat pavidum, cogitque FATERI. Se scelus summum admisisse, and summa
etiam poena dignum esse.
fateri:
Hi HI SUNT. Mali semper pevidi sant, and timent quoties fulgura audiunt,
quae-a Jove irato mitti gutant sceleratis puniendis.
sunt qui trepidant and ad omnia fulgura pallent,
Cum tonat, exanimes primo quoque murmr coeli,
Non quasi FORTUITU. Casuex opinione Epicuri.
fortuitu, NEC VENTORUM RABIE. Cum illi violenter inter se confligunt, Physici
scribunt, quod ex collisione ventorum and nubium, non secus ut lapidum ignis
eliciatur.
nec ventorum rabie, sed
IRATUS. Sceleribus hominum tanquam vindex eorundem.
Iratus cadat in terras, and ET JUDICET. Alii vindicet, ut supplicium de
sceleratis sumat.
judicet ignis.
ILLANIHIL. Tempestas praeterita nihil nocuit, proxima quae sequitur
sollicitudine majori timetur; hujus exemplum habuimus in Caligula.
Illa nihil nocuit, curae graviore timetur
Proxima tempestas: velut hoe dilata sereno.
PRAETEREA. Praeterea si in Pleuritida incidant, cujus calor somnum adimit,
censent illum vindictae loco a deo immissum.
Praeterea lateris vigili cum febre dolorem
Si coepere pati, missum ad s^^^ corporae morbum
Infesto credunt a Numine: Saxa deorum
Haec, and rela putant: Pecudem spondere Sacello
BALANTEM. Pro sanitate recupetanda Ovem vel Agnum offerre on audent.
Balantem, and laribus CRISTAM. Gallorum diis gratissi^ae 'credebatur' qua
Lares, and penates praecipoe plac^ti. Et Gallum ^^sculapio solvebat, qui
convaluerat.
cristam promitters Galli
Non audent. Quid enim SPERARE. Nocentes aegri miserri^^i sunt, quibu^spes
negata^^^, quae omnibus hominibus relicta credebatur.
sperare nocentibus aegris
Concessum? vel quae non dignior HOSTIA. Quae hostia adeo vilis est, quae pro
sceleratorum vita mactari debeat, quae potius vivere debeat, quam homines impii
and scelerati.
hostia vitae?
Mobilis, and varia est firm naturae malorum.
CUM. ^^d perp^^^^^d^^ sc^^us venerins, in calem ^^^^stamis perstant, abundat
in illi^ cons^^^^nem.
Cum scelus admittunt superest constantia: quod fas,
Atque nefas; tandem incipiunt sentire peractis
Criminibus. TAMEN. Sibi sceleris ma^e ^o^iscie ^^fipi^ese Volunt, non ra^^^^
abstinere n^q^ui^^^, ad vicis pro^^i^ d^icedine ^^m (...) con^^^^^^ine capti
and p^^pediti.
Tamen ad mores naturae recurrit
Damnatos, fixa and mutari nescia: Nam quis
Peccandi finem posuit sibi? --
-- QUANDO Ille (...) perfidus qui semes vercum^^^ (...) li^^tes praeter^^
(...) recipiet, queim ^^met de per^^^^^ ^^on^e dejecit.
Quando recepit,
Ejectum semel attrirae de snome rubor^^^?
QUISNAM. Qui^ est (...) qui semel cum per^^^e^^^ (...) non hoc fromeiter
de^^derat (...) sum vitlum deficit (...).
Quisnam hominibus est, quem tu (...) videris ^^^^slagitio? --
-- DABIT Pedibus vincietur olim (...) signbitur qui te perside decepit.
Dabit in laqueum vestigia noster
Perfidus, and nigri patietur carceris UNCUM. (i. e) in renebricoso carcere
unco ferreo constringetur; vel potius sub unco carnificis ad s^alas Gemonias.
uncum.
AUT. In insulum eju^ Maris ex^io deportabitur, intelligit Gyaram (...)
Cyc^^lus.
Aut Maris Aegaei rupem, scopulosque fraequentes
Exulibus magnis. --
-- POENA. Crudeli et (...) quam sceletatus dabit.
Poena gamies is amarae
Numinis invist, TANDENQUEL. La^^^eris perjorum sui pe^cati deum plenrem
semisse.
tandemque Iute^ere ^eth,
Nec NEC SURDUM. Qui^^on an^liat peri^ria hominum, and preces oppre^^ore^^ via
(...) ^^i^ina^^ (...).
surdum, nec NEC TIRESIAM. Nec (...) Tire^^^^.
Tiresiam quemquam esse deorum.
FINIS.
ANNOTATIONS.
(1) SHeriff. Our Author observes, That Offenders often escape the Censure of
the Laws, by corrupting the Prator or Judge, and swaying his Vrn or Judgment,
which I have been bold to change into a more Modem way of Corruption, by
bribeing Sheriffs and packing Juries, a very parallel Practice. But for the
better explanation of our Author, I have thought it convenient, to say
something here of the Manner of the Roman Trials at Law. The Praetor sat as
Judge or President of the Court, to whom by the drawing of Lotts was added a
certain Number of Assistants, who were upon their Oaths to give a true Judgment
or Verdict: Which after the hearing the Cause they signified by casting certain
Balls or Tables of Wax into the Prator's Vrn; who collecting their Votes
according to the majority pronounced the Opinion or Sentence of the Court, as
the Lord High Steward does among our Peers. If the Majority of the Votes were
marked with the letter A. the Defendant was Acquitted, if with C. he was
Condemned: If with N. L. (i. e.) N^^ Lia^et, it betokened they were not
satisfied with the fullness of the Proof. And then the Cause was deferred to a
further hearing, which many Turns in the transacting the Business by the
Praetor, might give opportunity for a Bribe to slip in upon occasion.

(2) Past Ages. The common Copies of our Author in this place have it, Nona
aetas. To make out which the Commentators have been put upon several Fancies
and Shiffs, of which Number Lubin seems the plainest, affirming, That the Poet
reckons here not after the Roman, but the Grecian manner; The Greeks counting
eight Ages viz. Gold, Silver, Electrum (or a mixture of Gold and Silver) Brass,
Copper, Lead, Tin and Iron, and so by consequence the Age worse than Iron, must
be the Ninth; in which reckoning, he is forced to strain hard to make the
Metals reach to eight, making the Iron which, is the fourth in the Roman, the
eight in the Grecian account, which is very liable to suspicion, since it is
apparent in our Authors, 6th. Satyr Verse the 24th. our Author counting the
Ages by the Metals, makes no such distance between the Silver and the Iron Age,
saying, Omne alind crimen Mox ferrea protulit Aetas. where the word Mox implies
the Iron was not long after the Silver Age. And therefore I have followed Nunc
aetas, according to the Roman account. Page 7th.

(3) Saturn. Here our Poet takes an occasion to lash out into a large
description of the Golden Age, for the largeness of which Digression, he has
been censured, and might well have deserved it, if he had had no other design
in it, than a bare description. But his satyrick Vein lays hold on so fair an
occasion, to rally and deride the folly of the Roman Theology, and multiplicity
of Deities, and to expose their Vanity to the derision of sevener Judgments;
the wiser Heads, even in those Dark Times, concluding it most absurd to imagine
there could be more or other than one immense and incomprehensible Being. Our
Author says the World lived simply and honestly in the Golden Age, before
Saturn was expelled from his Kingdom of Co^et, and forced to fly into Italy,
where he was kindly received and harbored by Janus. Page 8th.

(4) Juno. Before Juno was grown into her Teens, and Married to her Brother
Jupiter. Page 9th.

(5) Jove. When Jupiter skulked in the Caves of Mount Ida, where he was
concealed by his Mother from his Father Saturn, who had bound himself by
Contract with his elder Brother Titan, to devour all his Male Children. That
after him Titan or his Children might inherit their Birthright in the Kingdom.
Page 9th.

(6) No handsome Boy. Before Ganymede was perferr'd to be Page and something
else to Jupiter, and to fill Nectar in the place of Hebe. Page 9th.

(7) Or Wench. Hebe the Goddess of Youth and Daughter of Juno, she was removed
from her Office of filling Nectar for the Gods, to make room for Ganymede Son
to the King of Troy, which made Juno have a perfect Aversion for that City, and
to plague Aeneas in his Travails, she was married to Hercules after his
deification. Page 9th.

(8) Vulcan. Before Vulcan was made the Smith of Heaven, and kept his Forge in
the Island of Lypary, whence coming all besmeared with Smoke, they made Smug
wash, before he was admitted to the Table. Page 9th.

(9) Atlas. A high Mountain in Mauritania, whose Top is invisible, being
obscured with Clouds, and covered with constant Snow, which made the ignorant
Inhabitants conjecture the Mountain prop'd up Heaven. And might give occasion
to the Poets to fancy the Heavens were supported by a Giant of that Name, who
might well be sensible, and sink under the oppression of so many new created
Godheads. Page 10th.

(10) Ocean and Hell. When Jupiter with the help of his Brothers, Neptune and
Pluto, had deposed their old Father Saturn, they divided the Dominion amongst
them in this manner. Jupiter obtained Heaven for the Seat of his Government,
Neptune ruled the Ocean, and Pluto the Souls in Hell: which fabulous division
might fall out real in this manner: Jupiter the eldest had the Crown, Neptune
was Admiral, and Pluto High Priest and Chief Justice, governing their Souls and
Bodies, with Terrors of Laws and Conscience. Page 10th.

(11) Gentleman. Captain Vrats his Opinion in the Case, doubtless of great
consolation at the Gallows. Page 20th.

(12) Graunger. A Person very notorious for his prodigious Science and
dexterity in Counterfeiting all manner of Hands and Writing, who being at last
detected, performed the Exercises usual in those Cases, and through the Pillory
over-saw several Markets according to his Sentence in the Court of King's
Bench, where he lately dyed.

(13) Gelt. The German Word for Money, often and clamorously repeated by the
Mercenary Switzers when they mutiny for Pay; to which demand, if they have not
present satisfaction, they have often in the face of their Enemy thrown down
their Arms, rather chooseing to expose their Lives to the Enemy, than fight for
ill Pay-Masters. Page 30.

(14) Newgate Calendar. The Judges at the Old Bailey and all Assizes, have a
Calendar or Writing given them wherein the Names and Orimes of every particular
Prisoner is set down. Page 31.

(15) Monument. The Pillar erected by the City of London in Memory of the great
and dreadful Fire 1666, whereon Sir Patient Ward in his Majoralty caused an
Inscription to be engraven, charging the Fire of London to have been procured
by the Contrivance and Treachery of the Papists. Which Inscription has been
since expunged by Authority. Page 31.

(16) Buccaneirs. The Jamaica Rovers or Free-booters so called, famous and
terrible in the West, Judges for their many and desperate Exploits, whose
Custom is, when they surprise and sack a Town, first to plunder the Church, and
then make it a Prison for the Spaniards. Page 32.

(17) Blood. Famous for his attempt to steal the Crown, and sieze the Person of
the Duke of Ormond.

(18) The Pygmy-land. Here our Author to divert his Friend, describes the
ridiculous War between the Cranes and the Pygmies, a dwarfish Nation inhabiting
the remote Mountains of India, at continual Wars with their Mortal Foes the
Cranes, who infest their Country. They make a yearly expedition to the Sea
side, armed with Bows and Arrows, and riding on Rams and Goats, about the
Spring time, when the Cranes hatch, where they destroy their Eggs and Young
ones, least growing too numerous they might overpower them and force them from
their Country, as they once drove a Colony of their Nation out of Thrane. Page
34.

(19) Crysippus. A Stoic of a meek Temper, a subtle Logician. He dyed
laughing. Page 38.

(20) Thales. One of the Seven wise Men of Greece. Page. 38.

(21) Socrates. A most excellent Philosopher, of a mild and pleasant Humor, he
was falsely accused by Anitus, Lycon and Melitus, for holding some wrong Opinion
of the Gods: Being brought before the Judges, and by them asked what in his own
Opinion he deserved; He answered, to be maintained at the public Charge, which
free Answer so distasted the Bench, That they Condemned him to die by Poison,
which he drank without Concern. Page 38.

(22) Whoever. A worthy Opinion of a Heathen Poet, agreeing with the Principles
of Christian in Holy Writ. Page 44.

(23) Bancoes Ghost. In the Tragedy of Mackbeth, where the coming-in of the
Ghost disturbs and interrupts the Entertainment. Page 45.

(24) Vision Dicks. In the Tragedy of Richard the 3d.

(25) Commission. A fort of Turkish Opinion held amongst the Seamen, that every
Bullet has his Commission to hit the person predestined, and no other, which
stroke of Fate is inevitable.

(26) The Devil. Alluding to a Fable in Aesop, where the Malefactor in Prison
summons his Famillar to his Assistance according to their Contract, the Spirit
appearing with a Bundle of old Shoes, which he pretended he had worn out on
his Errands; and told him without a Recruit he could not budge one foot
further; not quite so treacherous a trick as he served the Conjurer in the
Tragedy of the Duke of Guise. Page the last.

FINIS.

