HIS MAJESTY'S MOST GRACIOUS AND FREE-PARDON, TO Several Prisoners in Newgate,
at an Adjournment of the Sessions of the Peace, and Oyer and Terminer, Held for
the City of London and County of Middlesex, on Saturday the 21 th. Day of
March, 1684/5;. And in the First Year of His Majesty's Reign.
WHereas at several Sessions, last past, held for the City of London, and
County of Middlesex, diverse Felons and other Criminals had received Sentence of
Death and Transportation, it pleased His Most Sacred Majesty out of His
Inherent Clemency peculiarly Resident in his Royal Line, in Imitation of His
Mercifully Famous, and ever to be Remembered Ancestors, to extend the favor of
His Free and Gracious Pardon to the several Prisoners here under Named. In
order whereunto, at the late Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, Held for the County
aforesaid, on the 25 th 26 th, and 27 th, Days of February last past, an
Adjournment was there made till Friday the 6 th of March Instant, and from
thence to the 21 th. of the same Month; where the Right Honorable Sir James
Smith, Knight. Lord Mayor, of the City of London, Sir Thomas Jenner Knight. one of his
Majesty's Sergeants at Law, and Recorder of the said City, together with others
of the Worshipful the Aldermen of the said City, the same Day about three of
the Clock in the Afternoon, did call over the several Prisoners here under
Named, for whom a General Pardon was there Read, which they severally on their
respective Knees pleaded: which the Court was pleased to Allow of; and
accordingly the said Malefactors were thereby Pardoned: which being over, the
Court was pleased to Adjourn the next General Sessions for the Peace at
Guild Hall, to the 27 th of April, and for London and Middlesex at the
Old-Bayly, to the 29 th. of the said Month.

GOD SAVE the KING.

29 Free Pardoned, Viz.
THomas Potts, Joseph Curtis, John Den, Edward Hubbard, John Mole, John Smith,
Edward Pain, John Leneve, Thomas Benson, Dorothy Waller, Christopher Redmain,
Richard Scott, James Walden, James Rothwell, Roger Mercy, Thomas Brown. Charles
Cartmore, Mary Shelton, John Richardson, Anne Smith, Henry White, Mary Cale,
Joane Johnson, George Casky, Francis Pevinson, Daniel Valentine, Joshua
Bludworth, John Davis, Jonathan Parson, in the King's Bench, and made an Escape.
47 To be Transported, Viz.
RIchard Enos, Captain of the Pickpockets. Elizabeth Ratcliffe, Christian
Bromfield, Robert Tod, Mary Voss, John Pell, John Fuller, Sarah Carter, Barbara
Williams, John Thorougood, John Morgan, Dorcas Morgan, John Harwood, William
Fincham, Mary Rives, John Walker, Edward Perkins, John Holmes, Thomas Smith,
John Walbanck, Henry Curley, William Temple, William Buttler, Thomas Viccars,
William Pierce, Jane Bourn, Jane Arnox, Joseph Key, William Thomas, Silvan
Morris, John Harrab, Roger Adams, Katherine Cotterel, Philemon Adams, Richard
Scarlet, Francis Abraham, John Holton, George Clark, Henry List, Ralph
Harrison, Charles Buckler, Thomas Stevenson, John Hayes, William Williams, John
Clutton, William Clark, Elizabeth Townesend,
I Do Appoint George Croom to Print His Majesty's Most Gracious and
FREE-PARDON, and that no other Person or Persons presume to Print the same.

James Smith, Mayor.

London, Printed by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's-Castle. 1685.


