Decimus Junius Juvenalis, AND Aulus Persius Flaccus TRANSLATED AND
ILLUSTRATED, As well with Sculpture as Notes.

By BARTEN HOLYDAY, D. D. and late Archdeacon of Oxon.

OXFORD, Printed by W. Downing, for F. Oxlad Senior, J. Adams, and F. Oxlad
Junior. Anno Dom. 1673.

TO THE REVEREND AND LEARNED The DEAN and CANONS of Christ-Church in Oxon.
Reverend Sirs,
THe Great Esteem the Author of this Translation had of Christ-Church, and
especially of your Worthy Persons, emboldens me to prefix your Honored names
to this Posthumous Work, not without (I am confident) the approbation of his
Ashes, and I hope not without a favorable Acceptance in that Place, where his
Parts and Abilities were so well known, which I shall not in the least endeavor
to blazen to the World, because my best Performance will be but a diminution of
his Worth; when as the Works of Eminent Men are wont to carry (as I conceive
this will) their own Certificats and Letters Commendatory with them. There is
nothing, I presume, can obstruct or blurre the present Impression of this Book,
but that it may be thought, only actum agere; To which I reply (not mentioning
what light the other Translation already extant borrowed from this Taper) that
it was long since promised by the Author to the World, and so became due
thereto, and I his Executor cannot with safe Conscience plead Plene
Administravi as long as any Debt of his remains unsatisfied, having wherewithal
to discharge it. Worthy Sirs, If you will vouchsafe this Orphan your Fatherly
Protection, I have my desired end in the assurance of its safety under your
Patronage, and I shall thereby do Justice to the Author and the World in the
discharge of my Trust: What others say of it or me, I shall not value, if so be
the Book may enjoy your Favors, and I be honored with the Badge and Character
of

Honored Sirs, Your most Faithful and Humble Servant W. Dewy.


The PREFACE to the READER, CONCERNING JUVENAL and the INTERPRETATION.
DEcimus Junius Juvenalis was born of wealthy Parents at Aquinum, a City of the
Volsci. Till his middle age he used, according to the custom of those times,
to Declame, though more for his own Content, then for any intention to prepare
himself either for Schools or Law-Courts. Afterward applying his mind to
Poetry, particularly Satyrs, though at the first he feared to commit himself
to any great Auditory, yet he quickly found great increase of Auditors and
Fame. Upon which encouragement, inserting into his later Compositions some of
his first sharp lines, as namely that, Sat. 7. Praefectos Pelopaea facit,
Philomela tribunos, wherein he seemed to touch one Paris a Player, so strangely
potent with the Emperor Domitian, that he could procure for his Friends
Military Offices; his jest was in his old Age made his punishment, he being
sent into Egypt by way of an honorary Service with a Military Command, the
Virtue and Fame of the Man awing his adversaries from farther Revenge. But this
disfavour he long outlived, reaching into part of Adrians reign. That he lived
to be an old Man, he himself implies, Sat. 11. where he says of himself and of
Persius, to whom he writes, Nostra bibat vernum contracia cuticula solemn,
Effugiatque togam --. For his Person, some describe him to have been of a large
Stature; and Antiquity has left unto us this Portraiture of him.

Iuv. pref.
portrait of Decimus Junius Juvenalis (Juvenal)

For the Ability and Manner of his Life, though he reckons not himself among
the Wealthy, saying of himself, Sat. 12. Si res ampla domi similisque
affectibus esset: yet Sat. 11. he describes his Country House, his Cheer, his
Attendants, which argue a sufficient Plenty to so wise a Mind. There is no
mention that he was ever Married, nor is it probable; if we consider his belief
of the Women of that Age! For his acquaintance, besides Vmbritius a famous
Aruspex (mentioned, Sat. 3.) and others, he was singularly beloved and
respected by Martial the Poet, as his Epigrams testify: praised also by
Quintilian, in his Oratory Institutions, lib. 10. as the chief of Satyrists.
Ammianus Marcellinus ( lib. 28. Histor.) Says, that some who did detest
Learning, did notwithstanding in their most profound retiredness, diligently
employ themselves in his Works. To omit Suidas and some other of the Ancients
which mention him, Porphyrio the Commentator on Horace, confesses that Horace
had excelled, had not Juvenal written. And this has been the judgment, also of
the famous Scaligers, Rigaltius and others: but the learned Heinsius has in
this comparison opposed his Fame. Whose chief ground is in effect this, that
according to the ancient art and law of Satyr, it should be nearer the Comedy,
then the Tragedy, not declaiming against Vice, but jeering at it. Which though
he proves with much Learning, yet this reaches but to the ancient Satyr: which
way, it is apparent Juvenal understood, and in part left. Satyr was for a time
a jeer, but it was but for a time: and what Poems have not with time much
altered their fashion? which alteration is to aftertimes as good warrant as the
first. Besides, Juvenal and Persius were not of Horace his judgment, for their
choice: for though they had seen his Satyrs, yet they chose this form, not so
much like a Flout, as a Declamation. Persius acknowledges that Horace jeered,
saying Circum praecordia ludit, and -- vitium -- ridenti amico Tangit, and
terming him Vafer Flaccus; but speaking of Lucilius he says, secuit -- urbem,
and genuinum fregit in illis: which was plainly to take notice of different
forms of Satyr before him. And does not Juvenal the like? Does he not profess,
that he was provoked to this way of writing, saying, -- quis tam ferreus, ut
teneat se? Does he not profess the Cause and Degree of the Provocation, whiles
he says, Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit --? Does he not also defend his way,
his Zeal of style, by some precedents of former times, asking -- ^nde illa
priorum Scribendi quodcunque animo flagrante liceret Simplicitas --? Does he
not more particularly defend himself by Lucilius his example, his fierce
example, as he expresses it saying, Ense velut stricto quoties Lucilius ardens
Infremuit --? We may not confine free Spirits to one form: the Body not
admitting such servitude from Apparel. As for such particular exceptions,
against our Author, as seemed more considerable, I have in their own places
delivered my own Opinion without the prejudice of Truth and Liberty. But for
the general defense and comparison of our Author, the praises, shall I say, yea
the Reasons alleged by some will be found weighty. The Elder Scaliger calls
Horace a Scoffer, his Speech vulgar, his Verse negligent, only his Latin pure.
But Juvenal, says he, ardet, instat, aperte jugulat; his Purity is Roman, his
Composure happy, his Verse better, his Sentences sharper, his Phrase more open,
his Satyr more accurate. Horace did not more exceed Lucilius, then Juvenal
Horace; whether we respect the variety of Arguments, the dexterity of handling,
the plenty of invention, the frequency of sentences, the sharpness of
reprehension, or the urbanity of the quippe. In the same Arguments Juvenal
never came short of him, often out-went him; Juvenal's eighth Satyr of true
Nobility is far more excellent, then, of the same argument, Horace his Sixth.
Compare Juvenal's Tenth with Horace his First, of the Desires of Men, (let
Julius Scaliger speak the close in his own words) sane ille tibi Juvenalis
poeta videbitur, hic Horatius jejunae cujuspiam theseos tenuis tentator; surely
thou will acknowledge Juvenal to be a Poet, but Horace to be some poor
Theme-maker. The quick Lipsius readily approves this approbation, saying of
Scaliger, Ille me judice inter multa certi and elegantis judicii nihil verius
protulit; preferring him before Horace, for his Ardor, his Loftiness, his
Liberty. And for my own part, though I willingly admire his felicity in his
Lyricks, yet certainly I believe he injuriously untuned himself in his fall
from the Ode to the Satyr. Besides, Juvenal's change of the ancient Satyr
was, methinks, not only a Change, but a Perfection. For, what is the End of
Satyr, but to Reform? whereas a perpetual Grin does rather Anger then Mend.
Wherefore the Old Satyr and the New, and so Horace and Juvenal, may seem to
differ as the Jester and the Orator, the Face of an Ape and of a Man, or as the
Fiddle and Thunder. We willingly allow unto Horace the nature of Satyr, as it
was in his own time, gentle, according to that of Lipsius of him, monet saepius
quam castigat: nor conceal the Elogy which he adds, Sed ita praeclare tamen hoc
ipsum: ut in ea part and art nihil possit supra eum. Yet this amounts but to
an art of admonition, not the bravery of Chastisement; for which, in his Heat
and Height, and Freedom, id est, suo quodam genere (says the same Author) supra
Horatium est: quod ipsum maxim Satyrae proprium videtur. Wherefore I judge
the Learned Rigaltius his Judgment and Distinction to be accurate: who says
that Horace is jeering, and so fit for Augustus his times; Persius grave, and
so more fit for lewd Nero's days; and Juvenal Terrible, and so most fit for
Domitian's desperate Age. He denies also any (supposed) excess of words in his
13th Satyr, making his enumeration of the Gods but a needful expression of the
absurd fictions of their several Gods, whom he every where flouts-at, seeming
to make Exact Nature his God! A happy man, had he ascended to the right
understanding of the God of Nature! Naevolus likewise ( Sat. 9.) he accounts
here no fouler, then in Arnobius ( Disput. 5.) the description of the Grecian
Ithyphallica: besides, that by shame men are naturally driven from acts of
shame. Yet what openness of Speech has in this kind been used by Juvenal, I
have in my rendering of him, endeavored rather to correct, then excuse: both
commending the wisdom of Rader and some others, and fixing it for a Rule unto
my self, that Better it is a Book should be lost, then a Man. Nor do I approve
the unhappy Industry of some Interpreters of our Author, Britannicus and Lubin
(to omit others) who think they expound nothing at all, if they expound not
All: but I shall always think it an unhappy praise, to be accounted a better
Grammarian, then a Christian. The example of Petrus Colvius (as Fame informs
us) is not to be forgotten; whose excellent wit did learnedly expound Apuleius
his Ass: but having been too diligent in expounding as much his Beastliness,
as his Sport, a very Ass gave him his reward. For as on a time he was in a
Journey, coming into an Inn, an Ass which was there taking some casual
offense, unhappily striking at him, killed him in the place. But (if we set
aside this License) and look upon the Invention of our Poet, though a Natural
man, O how admirable are his Instructions? His Passions how Devout? What are
his Satyrs, but the Great Commentary of Nature upon the Law of Nature? The
Multitude of Gods does he not count a Multitude ( Sat. 13.) making them as
destitute of Wisdom, as of Power? A God in Statue does he not confess to be the
Artificers Creature, and Mighty Mars ( Sat. 13.) to be so silly, or weak, as to
be robbed of his own weapons? The variety of their Oaths, does he not describe
and detest, as the variety of their Gods ( Sat. 13.) showing how they would
excuse themselves out of one guilt by another? Set days of divine worship to
the Author of them, does he not acknowledge, whiles he reprehends the
superstition in the performance of it ( Sat. 6.) Indeed a Beast is but an
Offering from the Earth; but Time is a present from Heaven it self: That is a
part of our Goods; This of our Life. The Duty to a Father, yea but to a Beard,
does not his Gravity Deserve, whiles he Describes it? The Duty from a Father
does he not so excellently set-out ( Sat. 14.) that by the Art of Instruction,
he makes himself the honest Father of other men's Children? Bloody Outrage does
he not detest with such wounding compassion ( Sat. 15.) as if he would make the
Murderer execute himself with Remorse? Against the foul flames of Lust are not
the pure flames of his Zeal opposed, to shame them by Dissimilitude ( Sat. 6.)
and with a more happy separation, then once were those of the Theban Brothers?
Against Barren Lust ( Sat. 9.) is not his Wit Fruitful? Oppression, Rapine,
Cousenage, ( Sat. 1.8.13.) are they not as far from his Bosom, as their Booty
from his Hand? As if unjust Increase were not Wealth, but Accusation, and a sad
exchange of Innocence for Gold. Against the cowardly silencing of true Witness,
( Sat. 16.) is he not stoutly Eloquent? And would he not rather burn in
Perillus his Bull, ( Sat. 8.) then have the guilt of Perjury burn in his
Breast, ( Sat. 13.)? The very Purpose, nay the Deliberating Desire of Sin, (
Sat. 13.) before it is grown up to the Age of Act, does he not Condemn, and by
endeavor Prevent? And like an exact Casuist ( Sat. 13.) does he not make
Conscience Man's Keeper and Judge? O that we could Argue him into a Christian!
And yet if Friendship can make it probable, we may please our selves with a
hope at the endeavor of such, as would prove that Martial, our Poets intimate
Friend, in his later age Revived into Christianity. And could their Loves
communicate less joys, and stand at distance in the Greatest? But howsoever
seeing that among the Heathen God raised-up so excellent an Instructor, was it
not pity, the Instruction should be either not understood, or misunderstood?
Especially when some disdainful sinners, that are unhappily less sensible of
Christian motives, may peradventure startle at the spur of a Heathen. Wherefore
in Hope and Zeal I ventured on this work, not doubting but that a man may, not
without success, though without custom, Preach in Verse. Which purpose being
understood by some worthy friends, was not condemned but encouraged by a free
and happy supply of diverse excellent Manuscripts of our Author. My honored
friend Mr. John Seldom (of such eminency in the Studies of Antiquities and
Languages) and Mr. Fanaby (whose learned Industry speaks much for him in a
little) procured me a fair Manuscript Copy from the famous Library at St.
James's, and a Manuscript Commentary from our Herald of Learning, Mr. Cambden.
My dear friend, the Patriarch of our Poets, Ben. Johnson sent-in also an
ancient Manuscript partly written in the Saxon Character. My learned friend Dr.
Merick Causabon afforded likewise an elegant Manuscript from the Study of his
exact Father. The ready and singular courtesy of Dr. Anyan sometime President,
and the Fellows, of Corpus-Christi-Colledge, lent me from their public Library
a large and excellent Manuscript. My ancient friend Mr. Thomas Allen, the
perpetual Monument of Glocester-Hall, yielded me also a parcel of a Manuscript,
the first three Satyrs. Nor may I omit my ingenuous and learned friend Dr.
John Price, who imparted to me diverse foreign Critics, whose Labors, though
published, are but rarely brought into these parts, but collected by his
diligent choice, in his Travels into France, Italy, and Greece: to which I
added mine own store, and what choice ones my youth had observed in our
Oxford-Library. With this preparation I entered on this task; studying to make
my Translation first True, next as free from Annotations, as the Argument would
permit. But the work implying such plenty of Antiquities, I had wronged both
the Work and the Reader had I left them in darkness. Illustrations therefore
grew necessary: wherein, besides the Manuscripts, I perused the most judicious
Commentaries, chiefly of the Scholiast, Britannicus, Lubin, and Autumnus: to
whom I added the chief Antiquaries and Critics, (which in my search I had
lighted on) who in other labors had occasionally touched upon our Author.
Concerning whose opinions I have delivered mine own with such ingenuous
liberty, as I suppose they used; leaving it to the like judge, the Readers
Judgment. As for publishing Poetry, it needs no defense; there being a Divine
rapture in it, if my Lord of Verulam's judgment shall be admitted. To which I
may add, that Majesty has not despised it, witness David, and our good Edward
the Sixth, whose Royal wit writ a Comedy, as our Bate tells us, witness
Nazianzen and the Learned Prosper: whose Compositions are their own Praise and
our Delight. Witness Petrarch, Archdeacon of Parma, and (one of mine one
Predecessors) Walter Mapes sometime Archdeacon of Oxford; a witty Satyrist,
and a Favorite to our great Henry the Second: nay, witness the profound wit of
Macchiavel, who has left unto us his pleasant Plots, as well in (Italian)
Comedy, as in Discourse. And for the study of Antiquities in the expression of
human Authors, witness the labors of Torrentius, Antonius Augustinus, and of
Euslathius in former times; men of high honor in the Christian Church. And now
after all my labor I would not delude my self with more Joy, then Success: nor
with Egyptian vanity take up a (...), for the finding of a quick Idol instead
of a Deity; and had rather not be, then be a Suffenus. I acknowledge then our
Author to be of more difficulties, then any other, which Greece or Rome can
show; of greater difficulties then they can show: nor will I, whiles I say so,
fear to remember Lycophron's Prophetess, nor Tertullian's Mantle. Some passages
will prove this, being liable to a manifold, a ten-fold Exposition; yet every
one to a Reader not very Intentive very probable; that we may say, the Delphick
Oracle was less Riddle. Yet I think the difficulties in Persius and Juvenal to
have a difference: the trouble in Persius being to Find a meaning; in Juvenal
to Choose it. If therefore we sometimes miss, (Error being as possible, as a
Hair in the Pen) we will yet sustain our selves (but after just industry) with
the frailty of some great ones, who in their search of the Quadrature of the
Circle have been eminent for Wit and Mistake. Yet have I not over-leap'd the
hardest places: not presumed to place in my Translation an opinion, though the
best, without giving a reason in the Illustrations, least otherwise with
Justice and Suspicion it might be asked, Sir, how came you by this Choice? In
equity therefore I give an Account, and endeavor not to fail in the
Arithmetic. To which circumspection I am the rather moved from that severe
Caution of our admirable Instructor in the Laws (in his Preface to the sixth
part of his Reports) Every man that writes ought to be so careful of setting
down truth, as if the credit of his whole work consisted upon the certainty of
every particular period. So that had not an ancient Promise, a Love of Truth,
and a Self-justice to transmit a right Copy of my endeavors to aftertimes
prevailed with me, I had not only delayed them, but suppressed them. But upon
these motives, intending about ten years since to have published them, a new
inconvenience befell them, my translation of the first Five Satyrs being at
that time borrowed of me by an especial Friend, and accidentally passing
farther into other hands, then by me intended; a Translation of these Satyrs
by another, some few months after, appeared in Print. Yet having seen diverse
parts of this Author formerly rendered and published by diverse, as other
Authors in the like kind, as Ovid, and Lucan by others, and anciently David's
Devotions, by Eobanus, Beza, Buchanan, every one having the choice of his own
studies: in a like freedom, after diverse and necessary delays, though
perchance, Reader, without thy loss, I have at last been persuaded to be so
hardy, as to present youth in age. Indeed Horace injoyns the suppression of a
Poem thrice three years, as if he would, methinks, have every one of the Muses
to pass her judgment on it. The judicious Scriverius having written learned
Notes upon Martial, suppressed them, as he himself tells us, thrice five years.
The famous Italian Fable-weaver Ariosto, was by the rude discourtesie of
Law-suites disturbed in the pleasure of his Fancy twice seven years: all
which, with the overwhelming Calamities of late times, may sufficiently excuse
either the Necessity or the Choice of my Delay. Not will I now seek to eternize
my work by the way and fancy of Old Ennius, who ended his Poem with
Acrosticks, which said, as Cicero tells us, Q. Ennius fecit: or with the like
device of Gulielmus Canterus, in the close of his Translation of Lycophron: or
with a like Crochet to that of the voluminous Spanish Musician, Cerone, who
closes his work with several sentences beginning with the Musical Notes, Ut,
Re, Mi, Fa, Sol, La. They that like such Music, may for me endure their
pleasure: for my part, I had rather excuse, then Triumph (though I think both
but vain, yet both in use); and in the modesty of the old Romans in somewhat a
like case, deliver my opinion in some passages of the work, by a Lot inscribed
with NL.

And so I rest Thine BARTEN HOLYDAY.

To my most Worthy friend Mr. Barten Holyday in Christ-Church in Oxon.
Good Sir,
NOt ignorant of your purpose and advancement in Juvenal, which by some of your
House, and your Letter to a Stationer in London, I know you had long since gone
through with, neither out of any immodest, unhonest desire by your prejudice to
gratify any man; much less undervaluing your worth, did I send you with a
Letter of mine, another request and not mine: but that you might therein see
Os hominis and mentem, who on so small acquaintance, as but having heard my
place of abode, boarded me with a Crispinian affront, and now the second time
with that Letter: whose Author being Master of no better style, flatters his
confidence with ability to Master Juvenal. But leaving him answered with yours
sent him this Morning, I return to your self, now my friend, for so I see you
give me leave, And as you have deserved with the World the esteem of Learning;
so now my Learned friend, give me leave among the number of your far more
worthy friends to wish you a fair issue of your intendment. In Persius I
admired not, with the many, your tempering and working of so harsh and affected
obscure style to so fi^ent and smooth English, but the riches of your
understanding and Judgment, which made your expression so powerful and
renditions so happy; And conferring some passages, I began to please my self,
that I had been of the same mind with him, who had sounded the depth so well.
Yet of (...) other whom I ever heard deliver their judgments or opinions of
your pains therein, praising and generally thanking you, I must acknowledge my
self in a deeper bond of thankfulness engaged to you, for that honor done me
by your mention of me ranked with your Expositors. And I would there had been
or were in me to deserve it. The unfortunate mispending of my younger and
better years in Sea affairs, as one hoping and laboring never to be beholding
to Scholarship, may not pretend any claim to learning, out of which courses,
when it pleased the high directing hand to cast me upon this Anchor, I thus
condemned to this Horse-mill, content my self with my round course, from the
top of my studies to come about again to In Speech. Where having at request of
a Stationer, in have broken the Ice in Juvenal and Persius, though I might say
with him, Imposui vulgo and eruditus visus sum; yet I never hoped to satisfy
the more learned, or please my self. Now what I long desired, I hope to see,
light of those places, which I have in vain sought in all my reading. A loose
Manuscript I sent this morning for, to Mr. Seldom; his answer I send you here
enclosed. What office I may do you else command me; and for your judgment of me
worthy any such employment; as for your kind approbation of my late pains on
Lucan, which I would to God it were as your love styles it, I shall ever rest
thankful to you, and desire to approve my self

Your deserved friend THOMAS FARNABY.
March 13. 1618.

To my Honored Friend Mr. Thomas Farnaby.
Worthy Sir,
I Will think farther for Manuscripts of Juvenal, especially because I see (or
conjecture) that Mr. Holyday means to turn him. That which I sent you, is of a
Text good enough; at least ancient enough. But if I meet with any other, I
shall be ready, and with speed, to impart it. What Mr. Camden has, I suppose
you shall receive now; if not, you shall have it by my personal procuring it. I
confess, I think not that Mr. Holyday wants any thing to the fullness of happy
translation, if he want not exact old Copies and helps to make them so, or Old
Scholiasts, which are such helps, as the best must use. I have by me the first
and second Satyr lately brought me to look on, translated by a Londoner. I
give him no other name, though he were sometimes of some University. It is not
bad, but yet I make no question but it is largely beneath what the
Christ-Church Gentleman will do, if he but equal his first. Sir,

I bid you farewell, and rest yours J. SELDOM.
March 13. 1672.

To his very good Friend Mr. Barten Holyday Master of Arts and Student of
Christ-Church in Oxom.
I Will not raise up Ghosts, nor pitch the time,
When Juvenal's Genius from his unknown clime,
Came to thy Study, to impart his sense:
I will not in thee muster Monuments,
Or make Old Rome envy her New high Crimes,
For being famed thus to succeeding Times,
By two such Authors, Juvenal and Thee.
I cannot wind up an Hyperbole
To the full height of Wit. I dare not, I
Make my Muse wings, but gaze at them that fly.
My Ambitions not a Poet, but a Friend:
Plain Innocent Truth I Will speak, and that defend,
The art thine own still, and more, if more may be,
This Age will Praise, the next shall Honor thee.
William White.

To his dear Friend Mr. Barten Holyday, upon his English Juvenal.
MAny choice Wits are posed, when they debate,
Which has most Man, to Invent, or to Translate.
Let them Dispute, and wear away their sloth;
Which does the best, I care not: Thou do both;
Whilst Thou Translat'st, what is best Penned, and then
All covet to Translate, if thou do Pen.
Robert Gomersal.

Decimus [1] Junius Juvenalis HIS SATYRS.
SATYR. I.
ARGUMENT.
Fables our Author scorns, the Times
Being so fruitful of great Crimes.
When Information, Pride, Unjust
Indulgence, Dice, Oppression, Lust,
Riot and Poison, grow Too-bold,
Our Poet says he cannot hold.
Yet since the Living he does dread,
He points his Style against the Dead;
And Acts, even on the Stygian Coasts,
The Zealous Tyrant over foul Ghosts.
He makes their Graves with opening Jaws,
To teach the Living, Virtue's Laws.
When Goodness cannot, dangerous Fame
Curbs-in wild Crimes, and makes them tame.
Satyr is Story. He begins
The blushing Annals of Rome's Sins.
SHall I be still an Auditor? and never
Repay, that have so often had mine ear
Vexed with hoarse Codrus (a) Theseads? Shall one sweat
Whiles his gown'd Comique [2] Scene he does repeat?
Another, whiles his Elegies (b) soft strain
He reads? and shall not I vex them again?
Shall mighty Telephus be unrequited,
That spends a Day in being All recited?
Or Volume-swolne Orestes, that does fill
The Margin of an ample Book, yet still
(As if the Book were mad too) is extended
Upon the very back, [3] nor yet is ended?
No Man knows better his own house, then I
The Grove of Mars, [4] and Vulcan's Aetna (c) nigh
The Aeolian Rocks; what the winds do; what Ghost
Aeacus does Torment; and from what Coast
Another stole the golden Fleece; what vast
Ash-trees the Centaure Monychus did cast;
Fronto's [5] Plane-trees and shaken Marbles (d) cry
Allways, that this their daily Poetry
Has cleft the trembling Pillars; and look what
The Best wits choose, [6] the Worst dare write of That.
Our hand then from the ferula [7] we have
Withdrawn. Advice we once to Sylla gave [8]
To sleep retired and safe. But since we meet
Poets (such is the store) in every street;
'Twere silly Clemency to spare the cost
Of paper; [9] though ('it is likely) 'twil be lost.
Yet wherefore in this field [10] I rather run,
In which happy Aurunca's worthy Son [11]
With Art did turn his Horses; if you are
At leisure, and will hear, I will declare.
When a soft Eunuch Weds, [12] and Mevia strikes
A Tuscan (e) Boar, [13] nor with bare breasts dislikes
To shake a Hunting-spear; when one dares vie
For vast Wealth (f) with our whole Nobility,
One whose officious Sizzers went snip, snip,
As he my troublesome young Beard did clip:
When one of Nilus's Rout, a servile pate,
Crispinus a Canopian (whiles in state
His Shoulder does his purple Cloak [14] recall)
Upon his sweating fingers fannes his small
Summer-rings, [15] and a larger Jewels weight
Shunnes as a burden: who but needs must straight
Breath Satyr? Who can toward lewd Rome remain
So Tame? Who Is so stark Ir'n, as to contain?
When pleading Matho comes ye in his New
Litter filled with himself, and next we view
One that betrays [16] his great Friend, then does wait
To snatch what is left of his consumed Estate;
Whom Massa fears, [17] whom Carus bribes, a fair
Thymele too, [18] sent closely, that he would spare
Trembling Latinus: when they Thee remove, [19]
Who become Heirs for Night-work, and now prove
That the best way of mounting to the skies,
Is by an old rich Widows Lust to rise;
A Twelfth part Proculeius [20] does inherit,
Gillo Elev'n: they are Sized by Chamber-merit.
And let them take it, the price of Blood, (g) and be
As pale, as one that with bare heels too free
Has crushed a Snake, or one prepared for Fame
At the Lugdunian Altar [21] to Declame.
What should I tell, how my dried liver burns
With wrath, when a young Ward a Pathique turns,
Made Needy by his Guardian, whose vast train
Throngs-up the People; and condemned in vain [22]
(For, What Is Disgrace where Wealth is safe?) now quaffs,
In Exile, from the Eighth hour; [23] Thus Marius laughs,
TO Enjoy his Angry Gods: but Thou, Prevailing
Province, find^st for thy wrongs no help but wailing!
Claim not these Crimes Flaccus's Venusian light?
And shall not I vex them? shall I rather write
Of Hercules or Diomedes luck, (h)
Of the loud Minotaure, or the Sea struck
By falling Icarus, or the happier wing
Of Daedalus, that flew from his fierce King?
When One, his own wifes pandar, becomes heir
To her Adult'rer, whiles the Law takes care [24]
She shall not; when to the seeling he looks-up,
Or with a watchful Nose snortes by a Cup.
When He dares hope for a Praetorian Band,
Who has on Stables spent with a vain hand
His ancient Means, whiles with swift Axle-tree
Over the Flaminian way he flies: for He [25]
Like young Automedon the Rains did guide [26]
When by his Warlike Mistress [27] he would be Eyed.
Should not then Satyr in the Crosse-ways fill
Large Table-books? [28] when less then six necks will
Not serve, to bear one in his gazing Chair,
[After Mecaenas's garb] who has by rare
Forgery got a brave Estate; by small
Wills and a moistn'd Ring, that sealed them all?
Lo, a rich Dame mild Calene wine as due,
To' her Husbands thirst brings, but brings toads juice too.
Her Neeces this Locusta [29] shows the way,
In spite of Fame and People, to conveigh
Stained Husbands to their fun'ralls. Something dare
Worthy the narrow Gyarus, [30] or the air
Of a loathed Jaile, if some body thou would be:
Honesty's Praised, and Quakes with cold, we see.
Unto their Crimes they owe their whole Estate,
Palaces, Gardens, Tables, Ancient Plate,
The Goat too, [31] which from their proud bouls juts-out.
Who can take rest for one that beyond doubt
Bribes his Son's wife to Lust! For Male-brides and
Adult'rous (i) Boys! [32] If Nature wont command
Verse, Indignation shall at least indite
Such lines, as I or Cluvienus write.
From That time, that Deucalion's Ship ascended
Parnassus's top [show'rs to the Sea extended]
When he his Lot inquired, and soft stones grew
VVarm with a soul; when Maids, that vail never knew,
Pyrrha to Men did bring; whats'ere men do,
Their Vows, Fear, Wrath, Delight, Joy, Visits too,
Is our Book's Mixture. And when e're did Vice
More flow? When open lay to Avarice
A larger Haven? When did Dice Intrance
Our minds Thus? For they go to the Tables chance
Not with a Purse; the Chest's at stake! There see
Their Battles with their Stewards, such as be
Squires of their Dice and Coin! To castaway
A hundred Sesterces, (33) and then not pay
A coat to' a Quaking Servant, is it a small
Madness? So many brave Piles [34] which of all
The Ancients built in the Country? Who alone [35]
Supped with seven dishes? Now there is only known
A Basket-doal [36] at the outmost door to wait,
Which will by the gown'd rout be snatch'd-up straight.
Yet first the Steward sees one's face, and quakes
Fearing one by some forged name craves and takes,
When known, the art served. He bids the Crier next
Call our Prime Trojans; for the thresholds vexed
By these too. Serve the Praetor; then dispatch
The Tribune. But a Libertine [37] lies at the catch
As First; I Am First, says he; nor may I fear
Or doubt to prove my Place, although born near
Euphrates, as the dainty windows [38] show
In my freed ear, though I deny't. But know
Five Burses, which I let, add to my store
Four hundred Sesterces. [39] And, pray, what more
Can Purple give? If your Corvinus keep
In the Laurentine fields another Sheep?
Pallas and the Licinii [40] in estate
I far surpass; let then your Tribunes wait.
Let Wealth take place; and let not him, that come
But the other day with his chalked feet [41] to Rome
Once yield to sacred Honor; (k) since we hold
As most Divine the Majesty of Gold!
Though, woeful Money, Temple none thou have, [42]
VVhiles Peace, Faith, Virtue, Victory thus are graced,
And Concord, whose old Temple, [43] which yields store
Of Storks, sounds when with Beak their Nest the adore.
But when your Great Ones at the years end account;
To what the Doal does make their gains amount;
What shall poor Clients do, who hence must buy
Gown, Shoes, Bread, Fire? A throng of Litters cry-
Out for the Hundred Farthings: (l) their Wives jumble
After, though Sick, or Great as they can tumble.
One craves for's Absent wife by a trick now known:
A litter closed [44] he shows; but wife there is none.
My Galla it is, says he; Quick order keep:
Galla appear. No noise, Sir; she is asleep.
The Day does the Order of their Business follow.
The Doal's First; Next, the Law-court and Apollo (m)
Grown Lawyer; the Triumphal Statues too:
Amongst which a vile Egyptian, one that drew
Gain from the Arabian Custom, [45] has not feared
To have his Titles; but at this high-rear'd
Image not only leak you may. Then the old
Tired Clients leave the Porches, and their bold
Appetite, a short Meals Long, Long Desire!
And now, poor men, they must buy Herbs and Fire!
Mean whiles what choice, Forests or Seas afford,
Their Lord (n) devours at's Ghuestless Couch and Board.
For of so many large Round-tables, neat
And ancient, they at one their whole state Eat.
Now not a Parasite finds room! But who
Loathes not such Niggard-Gluttons? O throat New
And Vast, to which a Boar's a Dish! a Beast
Which never was purpos'd-out but for a Feast.
But Judgments Instant, when thy Panch divested
Bears to the Bathes thy Peacock undigested. (o)
Hence sudden deaths are; hence Intestate age!
The News not sad is Table-talke. With Rage
His friends dispatch the funeral. So Bad
And near a one being gone, they should be glad.
Our Crimes for aftertimes have left no Fact:
Our Nephews must the same things Love and Act.
All Vice is at the Pitch-pole? Then set sail;
Spread all thy Canvase. But where is now the gale
Of wit, thou wilt say, fit for the attempt? Now where
The old Liberty of writing what so e're
A mind inflamed did dictate? Where the same
Simplicity, which now I dare not name?
Who cared for Mutius's pardon? [46] Tigelline
But touch, thou shall in that dire taper shine [47]
Wherein they stand and burn, whose own foul smoke
And a sharp gag under their throats half-choak.
Shall He then, that has drenched three Uncles, be
Mounted in Down, and thence slight our degree?
And, from the sand, and shows when carry'd-out
Make a large furrow [48] through the trampled rout?
Yes, meeting Him lay finger on thy lip:
It Is slander, [49] if but the Words, That Is He, slip.
Of Turnus and Aeneas's furious steel
Write freely. Who Achilles's wound does feel?
Or greives, that long-sought Hylas fetching water
Let fall his Pitcher, and himself fell after?
Yet when inflamed Lucilius did with dread
Shake his drawn blade, the hearer straight grew red,
Whose secret crimes drove from his Breast all heat,
And cast his Guilt into a quaking sweat.
Revenge and Tears burst hence. Weigh all then right [50]
E're Trumpets sound. When Armed for single-fight,
Too late it is to Repent. I then will try
What I may speak against Those, whose ashes [51] lie
Under proud Tombs erect to their bold praise
In the Flaminian and Latin [52] ways.
NOTES on JUVENAL, Sat. 1.
(a) HE had nothing of a Poet, but his Poverty; of which, if we do but suppose
that his Inventory Sat. 3. verse. 203. or Himself the occasion of the Proverb,
Codro Pauperior, his proportion was enough, had he really been so good a Poet
as he thought himself; or his Theseis as excellent as the Aeneis of Virgil. Yet
this he made his Pattern in his Heroic Poem of Theseus's Feats of Chivalry;
But came so infinitely short of it, that the like Names only of the Poems, made
his Theseis seem an imitation of the Aeneis.

(b) This sort of Verse being Womanish and unmanly, heightens the Poets
Indignation at their recital. For they either contained the little fooleries of
Love, especially if that was unsuccesful, as in 3. De Art etc. Eleg. 1.
Flendus amor meus est, Elegeia flebile Carmen; Or some impertinent
commendations men give (and perhaps never till then) the deceased. For Proclus
in Photius says, (...). The Ancients called Mourning, Elegy, and with it
commended their Dead. And thence according to some, Elegia quasi (...). But the
true deduction of the word is from (...), that being by Aristoph^nes frequently
used as a Note of Mourning. Yet the Verses themselves were not only so; Isaac
Causabon telling us, that in them young Poets began first to breath their
Muses, and that before they themselves were fully inspired. So that their
Productions, being cheap and of little esteem, gave too just occasion of
calling any ordinary and trite piece of Poetry by the same Name of Elegies.
Hence Persius, -- Nam si qua Elegidia Crudi Dictarunt Proceres. -- He shows the
Raw Authors, and Horace calls the pitiful Work Exiguos Elegos in his Art Poet.
Dio Chrysostom lib. 4. de Regno, calls the common Epitaph on Sardanapalus
(...), although Heroic Verses. So that our angry Poet here, in the Name of the
Verse, shows the reason of his Passion.

(c) Antrum Vulcani] It Is the Hollow on the top of Mount Aetna, now Monte
Gibello, where because of the constant Eruptions of Fire, the Poets supposed
Vulcan did forge Joves Thunderbolts, and therefore in Strongyle, the nearest
of the Liparaean or Aeolian Islands, placed Aeolus the God of Winds, as if on
purpose the more conveniently to blow the God of Fire's Bellows. When in truth
these Islands became the Signorie of Aeolus, from the good Prognostics of
Winds the Inhabitants of them could make. For they could by the smoke three
days before, certainly tell what Winds would blow.

(d) By Convulsa Marmora, most understand the Pillars that sustained, when they
might as well have interpreted them the Statues that adorned their Portico's.
For that was the Roman fashion. Sat. 6. v. 164. -- Vetu^ios Porticibus disponit
Avos. -- And then the Ruptae Column in the next verse is significative, and
not superfluous, as well as the sense clearly thus. Well might our Author be
offended at the Recitations of those Poetasters, at whose hideous yellings,
even these Statues, as in strong Convulsions, shrunk up together, and shreiked
for fear.

(e) And therefore the fiercest of any in Italy. But not so fierce as Mevia or
other Women, one of which on the Amphitheater slew a Lion, Mart. Epigr. 6.
Spectac. And the Custom grew so common for Women to turn Gladiators, that in
Xiphilines Severus we find it forbidden, by a Decree of the Senate: (...).

(f) Single Romans have had vast Estates, such as would persuade one, did not
our Author contradict it, that the wealth of a whole Order of Men amongst them,
their Nobility, would as soon exceed Arithmetic, as it is self be exceeded
especially by one man. For we find one Crispus a Freeman of Vercelli, to be
worth Bis Millies, or 1562500 l. and Caesar once needed a greater sum then
this, Bis Millies quingenties 1953125. l. that by this much (as he wittily
expressed the paying his Debts) he might be worth nothing. M. Crassus and
Seneca had Ter Millies a piece, of our Money 2343750. l. and of this the
Philosopher had in England alone Quadringenties, or 312500 l. at Use. Cn.
Lentulus the Augur in Augustus's time had Quater Millies, or 3125000 l. Yet all
this, and a great deal more, comes short of the Estate here mentioned. The
Master of which, as at first he rose from nothing, so at last came to nothing;
for upon some ill success at Law he fled into Sicilie, and left his Riches: And
by Mart. lib. 7. ep. 63. as unfit for any other employment, is remanded to his
primitive one of a Barber. Quod superest, itecum Cinname Tonsor eris. There you
have his Name; and his former felicities are intimated, besides in this place
before us, in Sat. 10. v. 225.

(g) Sanguis, as in that of Plautus, Apage a me iftas sorores qui hominum
sorbent sanguinem, is here put pro Semine. An easy Metonymie will show us the
Reason. For in Nature the Semen is but a perfecter concoction and preparation
of the Blood. Yet this, by that Preparation, is so much enspirited, that to
lose one dram of Semen, weakens as much as the loss of 60 ounces of Blood, if
the observation of some Physicians in Dr. Browns Pseud. Epid. lib. 3. cap. 9.
may be credited. And this supposed, the Poet very well adds of a venereous
person, -- Et sic

Palieat, ut nudis pressit qui calcibus Anguem.

(b) The old Stories of Hercules are so numerous amongst the Trivial Poets,
that their Labors seem well nigh as troublesome (at lest to the Readers) as
his they commended. The Luck of Diomedes King of Aetolia (not the Thracian
Tyrant) so often commended by Homer especially Il. 5. was; that at his return
from Troy, unwilling again to live with his Whorish wife, and wandering in
several places of Italy, at last he settled in Apulia: There he found Divinity;
and a Temple in those small Islands of the Adriatic that bear his Name.
Worshippers he had in other places along that shore, and in Venice it self. His
Companions in Travel, bore him company to Heaven no farther then Birds could
fly, into which they being turned, were called Aves Diomedeae. Vno in loco
totius terrarum Orbis visuntur, in Insula, quam diximus Nobilem Diomedis tumulo
atque Delubro, contra Apuliae Oram, fulicarum similes. Advenas Barbaros
claugore infestant, Graecis tantum adulantur; miro discrimine velut Generi
Diomedis hoc tribuentes; Aedemque illam quotidie pleno gutture, madentibus
pennis perluunt, atque purificant. Vnde Origo fabulae, Diomedis Socios in earum
Effigies mutatos. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 44. D. August. de C. D. lib. 18. cap. 16.

(i) Fraetextatus Adulter is rendered by Adulterous boys, because they were
the young Nobility of Rome, that wore the Praetexta or Gown bordered with
Purple. Not but that Praetextati are sometimes put for Magistrates, who first
wore this Gown, though it is here, and commonly understood of Children, and
Praetextata aetas is Childhood. For to the end of they, namely till 16 years of
Age they did not leave off this Gown; And they could not by Law be arraigned
before they were divested of it; though they could, I perceive by our Poet,
commit enormous crimes that deserved it.

(k) The Honor of the Tribunes is here called Sacred, either because 'twas
great, as (...), is the great strength, etc. Or, as now the Majesty of Kings is
Sacred, that is inviolable, according to Festus. Quod sacrum est, idem lege aut
instituto Majorum Sanctum esse, ait, ut violari id sine paena non possit. And
Erasmus in the Proverb, Sacer Piscis, says Sacer dicebatur. Cui nemo nocebat,
sed sui juris erat. Which was in a special manner allowed to the Tribunes of
the People at their first Creation; they only among the Romans being
Magistratus Sacrosancti. They only were created per Legem Sacratam. Live. lib.
2. Dec. 1. which Law Sanctum jubet esse alicui Deorum, devotes the family and
the goods of the Offender against it to some one of the Gods, Godelevaeus on
Livy, page 38. so that the difference of Sacrum and Sanctum we find in Pop^na,
is not constantly observed. For, as there are Sancti Legati, so there are Sacri
Tribuni, and upon the same Account, and for the same Reason. In Livy lib. 3.
there are Sacri Dii, in Ovid. 3. Amor. Sacrivates. From this Reverence their
Laws allowed the Tribunes, the sauciness of these Clients that here slighted
them, must needs be as much, as could be expected in the loosest times.

(l) Which was the sum of money the Patrons gave their Clients instead of the
Sportula or doal of meat they usually gave. Illust. 36. and Mart. Ep 60. lib.
1. and Ep. 7. l. 3.

[m] That is Apollo Palatinus, so called from the Temple Augustus built him in
the Palace. Suet. Aug. cap. 29. And the Scholiast on our Author assures us,
that by (or in) this Temple the Lawyers usually met and discoursed the doubtful
cases in the Law.

[n] The Peacock and his Train, as at ours a Pheasant and his, was a fine sight
at a Roman Table. Horace. -- Quia veniat au^o, Rara Avis; and picta pand at
Spectacula Cauda. The whole Reason of it I think he has given us, for from
necessity there can be none. Nun Esuriens fastidis omnia praeter Pavonem,
Rhombunque? Ambitiosa non est Fames, contentae desinece est: quo desinat non
nimis curat. Hortensius the Augur at his Installation Feast first brought this
Fowl to dinner, as Varro. And but small thanks are due to his Invention if St.
Augustus's Experiment be true, that the flesh of it will never putrify. De
Civ. l. 21. c. 4. For it must needs be of a very hard Concoction, as our Poet
here observes, and as full of inconveniences as in the next verse we read.

[o] Proverbially before the sight begin, which was usually signified by the
sound of Trumpets. Thence the Proverb of a Coward, Ante tubam timidus; one
that is afraid when there is no appearance of Danger. Other signals of Battle
were in use among the Romans, as the hanging a red Banner in form of a coat
over the Generals Pavillion, and this in Caesar is called Proponere Vexillum.
See Lips. ad Lib. 1. Annal. Tac. Our Poet in Sat. 2. v. 101. calls it Tollere
Vexilla.

ILLUSTRATIONS Of the Obscurer Passages in the SATYRS OF D. Junius Juvenalis.
SATYR. I.
The Mistake of some about Juvenal's Praenomen. Togatae and Palliatae. Pallium,
Lacerna, Penula. (...). Lucus Martis. The Ancient Custom of Poets to Read in
Public their Compositions. Ara Lugdunensis. The Roman Division and Employment
of the Day. The Number and Distinction of the Roman Meals. Prandium, used
amongst the Ancients. Merenda. Pugillares. Stylus, the Fashion and Matter of
it. Praetextatum. Sestertius and Sestertium Distinguished and Valew'd. Atrium.
The Ancient Custom of Supping with their Doors open; and the Reason. The
Number anciently of their Dishes at Supper. Coena Recta. (...), Sportula;
Centum quadrantes. A Roman Knight's necessary Revenue by Law. Pecunia, a
Goddess. Sella and Lectica. Arabarches; the Name, Office, and Person here
intended. Tunica Molesta. Lipsius his conjecture alleged about that verse, Et
latum media sulcum deducit arena: Ptolemaeus Flavius his Opinion about the
same. The Roman custom of Burning the Bodies of the Dead: The different
Custom of the Persians and Egyptians; and in some cases amongst the Romans.
Suggrundaria. The Custom of Burving in Caves, Groves, Gardens, at the foot of
a Hill; before the Gate of a City; in private Houses. Diverse Names of a
Sepulcher. Burial in Cities, Forbidden. Different places for the People and
the Nobility. Tombs in Fields, by the Sides of the Highways. Burial, by the
Lacedaemonians, permitted in Cities ( and in some places, near the Forum,) to
some also amongst the Romans; and at last in Temples.

1. DEcimus Iunius Iuvenalis. Those that have hitherto in publishing this
Author, bestowed three names upon him, have for the first, either with a
secure ambiguity, prefixed only the letter D. or with a liberality of Pen and
error, written at large Decius Junius Juvenalis: amongst which last is Petrus
Crinitus (who is therefore justly taxed by Ludovicus Carrio, in his
Emendations, lib. 1. cap. 1.) and also Cerutus before his Paraphrase upon this
Author, alleging Crinitus his words without correcting them. But, to stay
the farther propagation of this error, amongst the three sorts of Names which
the Romans had, the first whereof was called Praenomen, the second Nomen, the
third Cognomen (under which last, with Onuphri^s Panvinius, I comprehend
Agnomen) it is to be noted that Decius was a Nomen; as also may appear by the
Catalogue of the natural Roman Praenomina, which were about thirty, as they are
reckoned up by S^gonius, de Nom. Roman amongst which Decius is not mentioned.
This D. therefore is Decimus, as it is written in all those Manuscripts in
which it is written at large; and this agrees with Antiquity, for Decimus was
a Praenomen amongst the Romans. This may be also confirmed by those, who wrote
the Roman story in Greek, as by Polybins, Diodorus, Dionysius, Plutarch, Di^n:
who always when they found the letter D. used in Latin Historians for a
Praenomen, as it is here, expounded it at large by Decimus. Yet Lubine, in his
annotation upon that in his fourth Satyr, verse. 103. -- Quis priscum illud
miratur acumen, Brute, tuum? -- Makes Decius a Pranomen, calling him that
expelled Tarquin, Decius Junius Brutus. But herein he multiplies an error: for
first, he that expelled Tarquin, and which is there meant by Juvenal, was
called Lucius Junius Brutus, as is manifest by the Roman Fasti. Secondly, he
that was called D. Junius Brutus, was one of them that conspired against
Caesar; and thirdly, that conspirator was not called Decius, but Decimus Junius
Brutus, as it is manifest by the Grecian writers of the Roman story; And
therefore in the exacter Editions of Dio, published by Xylander, and
Leuncl^vius, when this Brutus is in the Text called Decius, it is corrected
with a variety of Reading in the Margin, by Decimus; and in one place, where he
is said to be named in Caesar's Testament, he is absolutely called Decimus,
without the mentioning of his other names, and on this place is no diverse
Reading, or correction in the Margin. So likewise he is by Appian absolutely
called Decimus, without the mentioning of his other names. I think the more
plainly to distinguish him from the other Brutus, who was the chief in the same
conspiracy, and was called Marcus Junius Brutus. It is an error therefore in
the Author of the Prosaical part of our Grammar, called Lily's Grammar, p. 2.
where he says, that when D. stands for a Praenomen, it signifies Decius. But it
will be needful to remove one scruple. In Lucilius his Fragments, P. 13. Numb.
101. we find this verse, Persium non curo legere, haec: Laelium Decimum volo:
which words are so recited also in Tully, de Oratore, lib. 2. and by Pliny,
Not. Hist. lib. 1. Epist. ad Vespas. Haec doctissimum Persium legere nole,
Laelium Decimum volo. The sense is, Lucilius would not have the learned Persius
(not the Poet, but) one, who in Tully's judgment was, as he says, Omnium fere
nostrorum doctissimus: but he would have a less learned Reader, such a one as
Laelius Decimus. By which order of the names, Decimus seems not to be a
Praenomen. It is therefore to be known, that all the common Copies of Pliny
(and so consequently of Tully and Lucilius) are corrupted. For all the ancient
Printed and Manuscript Copies of Pliny, as Hermolaus Barbarus observes, and
after him Fr. Dousa, on Lucilius, page 105. read, not Laelium Decimum, but
Junium Congium, or Laelium Congrum. But by a licentious transposition, the
cognomen was sometimes set before the Praenomen, as in that Maluginensis M.
Scipio; (see Robertellus, and Sigonius de Nom. Romans cap. 24. and 52.) which
seems to have been the first occasion of the vulgar error.

2. Whiles his gown'd Comic Scene. The Roman Comedy, so called from the Habit,
which by propriety of Country the Romans wore, as the Graecians did Cloaks. So
the Scholiast on this place, according to Pithaeus his Edition, Togatae sunt
Comoediae Latinae, Palliatae Graecae, quales Afranius scribit. Yet because
Afranius does not write Greek Comedies, correct the Reading, as Rutgersius does
very well, in his Var. Lection. lib. 6. cap. 18. reading it thus, Togatae sunt
Comoe diae Latinae, quales Afranius scripsit, Palliatae Graecae. And here note,
that although Toga and Pallium are opposed as the Roman and Grecian garments,
the Gown and the Cloak, yet some garments used by the Romans, neither have
been, nor in our Tongue can be more properly rendered then by the name of
Cloaks, a^ Lacerna and Penu^ae; yea Pallium does not only signify the Grecian
Cloak, but also a garment which the Roman Women work over their stola or their
long coat down to the heel. Sometimes also it is taken for bedcloaths, as
Antonius Augustinus de Legib. 12. Tab. p. 267. observes out of Juvenal, Sat. 6.
in that verse, Advocat Archigenen onerosaque pallia jactat; and as Passeratius
notes in his Prelections upon Propertius, lib. 4. p. 589. The Lacerna and
Penula are both in the Old Gloss upon Persius, Sat. 1. verse. 68. called pallia:
which identitie of name doubtless arose from the near similitude which they had
each with other, and both with the Grecian Cloak: nay the Roman Gown too was
almost of the same form, as Lazius shows in his Commentaries, lib. 8. cap. 3.
The Lacerna by the descriptions of the ancients was a kind of Cloak first used
in the Camp, but afterward through civil wars it got into the City, and was
worn upon their gowns to defend them from Cold and Rain. The penula was used
for the like defense; yet this by Larius his description, lib. 16. cap. 11. was
shorter and fitter for expedition, and therefore chiefly used in travel. And
yet according to diversity of times it was more or less frequently used, as
Lipsius shows, Elect. lib. 1. cap. 13. I judged it necessary here to show the
diverse acceptions of the word pallium and Cloak, because here it seems to be
appropriated to the Grecian, when notwithstanding we shall frequently hereafter
in this Author render those Roman garments lacerna and penula by our word
Cloak: which without the prevention of a note might peradventure have been to
some the occasion of some error.

3. Upon the very back. The custom of the Romans was to write but on one side
of the leaf, leaving the other for any after-thoughts, or brief remembrances.
But in a continued course to fill the second side, the accounted extreme folly
or extreme industry; and such writings the Latins called a tergo scripta, the
Graecians (...). See Catanaeus on Pliny, lib. 3. epist. 5. and Claudius Minos.
Rader on Martial. lib. 8. epig. 62. Alexander Neapot. in his Genial. Dier. lib.
2. cap. 30. and Tiraquet on that place.

4. The Grove of Mars. The common Reading is Lucus Martis; but Ptolemaeus
Flaevius in his Conjectan-cap. 29. tells us of another Reading, which Johannen
Baptista Blautius has, and that is Luctus Martis: but whether this be grounded
upon copy or conjecture I know not. The sense they make diverse, and so
uncertain, understanding one while the adultery of Mars and Venus, another
while the fight between Mars and Diomedes in the Trojan war, and so they would
obscurely have Nero. touched, who set Rome on fire, that he might write his
Troica. But all this being rather wit then truth, and a stranger to all the
Manuscripts, which I have seen, the old Reading is to be retained, which also
is subject to as much variety of interpretation. Some travel as far as Athens
to find Lucus Martis there, others as far as Colchos to find it there; where
they are both as far from the Poet's intent, as Athens or Colchos are from
Rome. The Lucus Martis, which some would have at Athens, was, as they say, the
Athenian Areopagus: but Britannicus his exception will stand against this, who
says, That was not Lucus but Villa Martis, though the margin of one manuscript
(but without any proof) says that there was also Lucus Martis. Calderinus
thinks it might be understood of a place at Colchos, where the golden fleece
was; but I approve not this conjecture: for then, methinks, we should scarce
quit our Author of a tautologie; seeing that by and by after he reckons-up that
of the golden fleece, as a distinct argument, which the cheap versifiers of
those times did trade in. Others not taking the pains to go out of Rome, make
Lucus Martis there, and so take it for a place, wherein the Poets did use to
read their poems. But this opinion Lubine, wittily derides, urging that by
consequence the Poet should say, that he had not been likewise in Vulcan's
Aetna, for this immediately follows in the like sense. Yet this jest of Lubine
may be answered in earnest; for Baptista Egnatius in his Racemations, cap. 6.
urges out of P. Victor, de Vrbis regionibus, that Antrum Vulcani was a place in
Rome, in the fourth region of the City, but the copies which we now have of
Victor, have in that place not antrum but area Vulcani; which how it can be
made to signify antrum, I see not. There is besides in Victor, in the ninth
region, Aedes Vulcani, and this peradventure may with a less violent abuse be
called Antrum Vulcani. Now Egnatius thinks that this was a place where Poets
did use to recite their poems; indeed the Old Scholiast says so of Lucus
Martis; but as the Scholiast has some singular remembrances of less-obvious
antiquities, so has he likewise some uncertainties. For if we view the
contexture of the place, we shall find, that he does not here speak of Lucus
Martis, as of a place wherein poets did read, but as of a vain argument, which
they handled. The learned Parrhasius, Epist. 2. besides all these brings
another exposition, saying that by Lucus Martis, Valerius Flaccus is touched,
whom, as he says our Poet did emulate, they living at the same time together
under the Vespasians, whom Flaccus flattered, and Juvenal hated; and therefore
flouts at many passages of his Argonautica, as Parrhasius by a diligent
parallel of diverse places shows at large. Which conceit some highly approve,
and so do I, yet with some abatement from so full an approbation; and that for
these reasons. First, I dislike that he assigns as a partial motive of
Juvenal's anger, Emulation: for, which of the learned is so young, as to
compare the labors of young Flaccus, at the best unperfect and but an
imitation of Apollonius (though a commendable Essay for a young wit) with the
masculine and subact judgment of Juvenal, to whom, for the admirable mixture
of advanced Passion and equal wit, old Rome from all her monuments cannot
casily produce a parallel. The orher motive which Parrhasius assigne^, we ought
to believe; that is, the just indignation, which Juvenal's zeal conceived
against the impotent disingenuitie of Flaccus, who for outward respects would
flatter a vile Prince. Secondly though Parrhasius his conjecture on this place
be true, yet it is but an allusive, not an absolute exposition; so that it may
be admitted but in a second place. To find out then the true interpretation we
will neither travel to Colchos nor stay at Rome, but with a moderate and
neighbor journey to Alba, and find there the grove where Rhea brought forth
Romulus and Remus; which place was called Lucus Martis, as Merula in his
Commentary on this place, shows out of Justine and Plutarch. To deliver then
the absolute and best meaning of our Author, which I would choose; We may
understand Lucus Martis either Metonymically for the story of Rhea done there,
or Synechdochically for any grove, according to the sense of that in Persius,
Sat. 1. -- Nec ponere lucum Artifices -- such stories and such descriptions
being the first tria's of slight wits. This interpretation I take to be most
natural, as being upon examination true, and not far fetched: which conditions
I think to be safe rules for all interpretation. After an absolute expofition
allusions take place, and so in the next place we may embrace Parrhasius his
apt conjecture.

5. Fronto's Plane-trees. A noble Roman famous for learning and bounty, who
used to lend his stately house encompassed with shady trees, to the Poets of
his time, wherein they did read their Poems. This is at large described by
Persius in his first Satyr, and by Juvenal in his seventh. Of the^delightful
shade and spreading branches of the Plane-tree, see Claudius Minos on Pliny,
lib. 1. epist. 3. Bisciola in his Hor. Subseciv. lib. 9. cap. 21. and Wowerus
de Vmbra, cap. 26. The imitation of this Roman custom of public and
Voluntary Reading, though not in such a manner of place, has been heretofore
amongst Us; as Mr. Camden notes in his Epistle before his Anglica, Normannica,
etc. For when Giraldus Cambrensis was returned out of Ireland with John, King
Henry the second's Son, to whom he was Tutour, he read publicly in Oxford, in
the year 1200, his Topographie of Ireland.

6. And look what the best wits choose. Expepectes eadem a summo minimoque
poeta. Amongst the diverse conjectures which are delivered upon this verse,
this which I here use seems to me the most consonant to the nature of the
place. For the Poet here intending to express first why he writ, secondly why
he writ Satyrs, gives the reason of the first in this verse; which was because
Every one writ, both Good and Bad, nay the worst durst writ of the highest
arguments, when as our Poet knew himself furnished with as much School-learning
either in Grammar or Rhetorique, as many of them: and therefore as he passes
from this verse, he marks it with the particle or sign of a reason thus, Et
nos Ergo manum Ferulae, etc. We therefore Now, etc. The reason of the second he
makes to be the crimes of Rome, as the text it self clearly shows.

7. From the Ferula. The virtuous indignation of the Poet^^^who having in the
Schools learned the grounds of Grammar, and practiced himself in the Rhetorique
of a Declamation, would not any longer endure to be an Auditor of others, and
as it were suffer the ferula again, but would now after his declamation upon
Sylla, or the like argument, performed by him in the Shools, attempt the
writing of a Satyr, especially the Ignorant with the confidence of the learned
daily publishing the fruits of their wits.

8. We Once to Sylla gave. There is an especial Emphasis to be put in the
Praeterperfect tenses Subduximus and Dedimus, as Turnebus acutely observes in
his Advers. lib. 28. cap. 24. For though our Author had performed these younger
exercises Heretofore, yet Now, he says, he will venture upon a more manly task.

9. To spare the cost of paper. Scing that others spoil paper, he will spoil
some too, though (in the modest apprehension of his own worth) he thinks that
what he shall write will quikly perish.

10. Yet wherefore in this field. The Field of writing Satyrs.

11. In which happy Aurunca's worthy Son. Lucilius born at Aurunca a City of
the Rutilians, as some say; others would have him only educated there, but born
at Suessa a City of the Aurunci; a Mediterranean City in Campania, says
Ptolemie. Suessa Pometia, says Florus, was the chief City of the Volsci in
Campania; which, as Livy relates, the Aurunci forsaking their own through fear,
came into, and called it Aurunca. Livy, lib. 32. makes mention of Suessa
Aurunca. Add what Ortelius in his Thesaurus says from Sylburgius, etc. Caius
Lucilius (to speak of the man) being about the age of 16. was a soldier under
P. Scipio Africanus Minor in the Numantian war, as Fr. Dousa, notes on
Lucilius, p. 98. He was a Roman Knight, and great Uncle to Pomp^y the Great. He
was a soldier in Spain, 18. years. At Rome he dwelt in the house that was
built for King Antiochus his Son, when he was a hostage at Rome. Lucilius died
at Naples, and had there a public funeral. Eusebius says he died in the 46.
year of his age: but Horace implies, that he was an old man; -- quo fit, ut
omnis Votiva pateat veluti descripta tabella vita Senis. He did save diverse of
the Roman Nobility, and the most famous Poets though dead, as Euripides,
Ennius, Caecilius, Pacuvius, Aetius and Others: nay, he is said to have written
his own life, and not to have spared himself. Se his Reliquias, p. 20. He was
of most familiar acquaintance with Scipio Africanus and Laelius.

12. Weds. The wit of Lust! to marry an Eunuch, so to enjoy marriage without
Childbearing.

13. And Maeviae strikes a Tuscan boar. A familiar but strange impudence of
Women (yea Noble ones) in Domitian's time, to combat with wild beasts (not upon
a stage, but) in the Amphitheater. See Onuphrius de Ludis Circ. lib. 2. cap. 1.
and Marcellus Donatus on Sueton's Domitian. cap. 4.

14. His Purple cloak recall. The slipping of his cloak implies the impatient
delicacy of Crispinus in wearing his cloak loose; it being the custom of the
Romans to fasten their Lacerna about their neck; as appears by that of Am.
Marcellinus, lib. 14. Sudant sub ponderibus lacernarum, quas in colli exerta
singulis ipsis adnentant: which place Marcellus Donatus upon Sueton's Augustus,
cap. 40. rightly amends by reading, for singulis, fibulis.

15. His small Summer-rings. The dainty pride of the Romans had great rings for
winter and smaller for Summer.

16. One that betrays. Heliodorus a Stoic Philosopher greatly favored by the
Emperor of Domitian.

17. Whom Massa fears. One flatterer flattered another if greater then himself.

18. A fair Thymele. The received story and interpretation of this place has
commonly been this; Latis and Thymele his wife were Mimiques very grateful to
the Emperor: but Latinus being by Heliodorus taken in adultery with Messalina
the wife of Claudius, as the manuscript commentary has it, or the wife of
Nero, as the Scholiast, or the wife of Domitian, as one Manuscript has it in
the margin, to prevent accusation and ruin which he feared, sent his wife
Thymele to winn Heliodorus to a silence, either by delighting him which some
mimique, sports, or, as some would have it, by the prostitution of her self to
his desires; for submissa bears either of those senses. But Calderinus dislikes
the last; for, says he, what beauty could there be in a Mimique to move desire
in the great Heliodorus? But this may be easily answered; for why may we not
justly think, that the wife though a Mimique had beauty enough to content a
favorite, when as her husband of the same profession had enough to be desired
by an Empress? Hereupon, says the manuscript Commentator, the matter was
concealed; yet afterward, as the Scholiast tells us, it was known and he was put
to death by Nero. This narration if it were true, were a sufficient
interpretation of the place: but to bring it to a brief examination. That
Latinus and Thymele were mimiques greatly favored by the Emperor, it is
manifest by many testimonies; but that Thymele was his wife, Politian. lib. 7.
epist. 33. eagerly denies: yet herein may be used some moderation; for as there
are not any authorities alleged to prove them married, so neither are there
absolutely to deny it. And seeing that the explication of the place depends not
upon any necessity of such relation between them, as it will appear, we may
leave it as a point not more uncertain then impertinent. But for the rest of
the story it may be thus opposed; first, Latinus was not put to death by Nero,
as Sueton testifies in his Domitian: Secondly, he was guilty of no such crime,
but died in the great love of the Emperor; for Martial writing his Epitaph,
lib. 9. epig. 29. expresses the innocence of his mirth, and the Emperor 's
love toward him. The Epitaph is made in the person of Latinus speaking of
himself: wherein after that he has expressed the sports he showed in his parts,
he adds,

Sed nihil a nostro sumpsit mea vita theatro,
Et sola tantum Scenicus art feror.
Non poteram gratus Domino sine moribus esse,
Interius mentes inspicit ille Deus.
The stage did not express my Life, but skill: (In effect this)
I did but Personate, not Practice Ill.
I had not else pleased my great Lord, that weighed
With what a mind I lived, with what I played.
Leaving therefore this opinion too much hitherto received, I most willingly
embrace the interpretation of Turnebus, who in his Adversar. lib. 20. cap. 8.
gives this exposition; Latinus and Thymele famous mimicks had often on the
stage as an adulterer and an adulteress performed their parts: in which
personated work the adulterer had either been taken, or at least been suspected
by the husband of the adulteress; whereupon she by the instruction of her lover
went to her husband with much flattery, like some love, to smooth-up the matter
and clear the adulterer, which stage device was generally known in Rome; and
the like is imitated in the sixth Satyr in that verse, Quem toties texit
perituri cista Latini: for this Latinus had played the adulterer, and upon the
apprehension of the Husbands coming, was suddenly clapped into a chest. The poet
then says, that as Latinus upon the stage did send his adulteress to make
peace for him, so do many now adays that offend, use the mediation of others to
bribe great informers to a silence. Therefore I understand it not by way of
story but of allusion; it being false in the person, but in the allusion true:
because Thymele did not bribe him: but as Thymele excused her adulterer to her
husband, so some she-intercedents did obtain pardon of great informers for some
offenders.

19. When they thee remove. An Apostrophe of the Poet, to any true heir
disinherited by an adulterer.

20. Proculeius and Gillo. Famous adulterers.

21. At the Lugdunian Altar. A contention of Orators was instituted by
Caligula, as Sueton in his Life, cap. 20. relates, at Lions in France: where
was a famous Altar (mentioned by Strabo) and where he that was overcome was to
write the praises of his Conqueror, and bestow a reward upon him. If he did
extremely displease the Auditory, he wiped out his own lines with a sponge or
with his Tongue, unless he chose rather to be punished with a ferula and (not
drowned, but) ducked over head and ears in the next River; as Sueton's learned
Interpreter renders it in English.

22. Condemned in vain. Marius Priscus Proconsul of Africa, for spoiling the
Country of great sums of money, was forced, upon the complaint of the Africans,
to pay a fine to the Roman Treasury, and was banished Italy. Yet reserving the
greater part of his former spoils, he lived in a wanton exile; whiles the
distressed Africans had the sentence of Law passed on their side, but no
restitution. The sum, in which he was condemned, was, as some tell us 7000.
Sester^ii, herein following Lubin, who says, 7000. nummum; but the sum it self
might show the error, this being not so many two-pences, and in exact reckoning
but 54 l. 13 s. 9 d. but if they had consulted with Britannicus, he would have
told them, it was Septingenta millia, that is, if deduced to our coin, 5468 l.
15 s. though this also was but a trifling Fine for such an Offender.

23. The eighth hour. The Romans greatly differed from our times in the
division of the day: for we use a Civil day, that is the space of day and
night, which we divide into 24. parts, or Equinoctial hours, which are always
constantly equal. They used a Natural day, which is the space, from the
Sunrising to the Sunsetting; as Censorinus shows, De Die Natali, cap. 23. so
that their own hours varied according to the season of the year; an hour at
Mid-sommer being a twelfth part of their longest day, and an hour at the deep
of Winter, being but a twelfth part of their shortest day. The like was the
division of the night. Thus they had only one six'd hour both of day and night,
when the Sun was at the Meridian in either Hemisphere. So that when would
render their hours by ours, we must not make the comparison absolutely, but
consider the time of the year. Yet for the aptest and general equation, we may
consider the Roman hours when they are the same with the Equinoctial, which is
when the Sun is in the first points of Aries and Libra; and then the sixth hour,
both Roman and Equinoctial, being at 12. of the clock, their eighth hour was at
our two of the clock; And so consequently their hours at all seasons of the
year, may be easily reduced by allowance or abatement. Now their custom was to
allow the first part of the day for business, and at the ninth hour to Sup;
according to that of Martial, Imperat extructos frangere nona thoros. To bath
and Sup sooner was accounted Luxury, except on Festival days, for then they
might prevent this time; as is implied in that of the eleventh Satyr, --
Quanquam Solida hora supersit Ad Sextam --. See Achilles Statius in his
Observations, cap. 9. and Parrhasius in his 63. Epist. touching some part of
this argument, and Lipsius in his Excursions on Tacitus, Annal. 14. de
Conviviis tempestivis. Concerning the hour of Bathing, read Bisciola, in his
Hor. Subseciv. lib. 9. cap. 20. Alexand. Neapol. Genial. Dior. lib. 4. cap. 20.
And Tiraquel's Annotations on him. For the division of the day, according to
the Ancients, see Rader on Martial, lib. 4. epig. 7. and the more diligent
Expositors of St. Mark, cap. 15. verse. 25. as also Beroald. Chron. lib. 1. cap.
3. and Aldus de Dierum generibus and horis, by way of Commentary upon Palladius
de Re Rustica. Concerning the Number and Distinction of the Roman Meals, or
times of repast, as Jentatio, Frandiculum, Prandium Merenda, Coena, Vesperna,
and Commessatio, there is diversity of opinions. Servius denies Prandium to
have been in use amongst the Ancients: but Philip Beroald, in his Annotations
on Servius, does abundantly prove this to be an error; as likewise Stuckius in
his Antiquitat. Convivial. lib. 1 cap. 11. to which we may add that of our own
Poet, Sat. 13. Prandebat sibi quisque Dens --. See also Marsilius Cagnatus in
his Var. Observation, lib. 1. cap. 17. Some have held, that the Romans did use
to eat but once in a day: but this likewise is refuted by Muret. in his Var.
Lection. lib. 4. cap. 12. The truth of their custom was this; There were in
all Five times of repast in a day: which before we reckon and parallel with
ours, one difference is to be observed concerning Prandium and Merenda.
Prandium is by Festus made the same with Merenda; but Nonius distinguishes
them, making Merenda to be in the Afternoon: which controversy between these
two, Aldus Manutius de Quaesitis per Epistol. lib. 1. Epist. 4. endeavors to
compose, saying that Merenda (a word in use before Prandium, and derived a
meridie, the time of the day wherein it was) did at the first signify that,
which was afterward called Prandium; which thus came to pass. The Romans at
the first, called their repast at Noon, Merenda; and used to fast from that
time till Supper: but afterward Luxury increasing amongst them, they thought
it too much to fast so long, and therefore made another meal between; then
calling that meal Prandium, which before was called Merenda, and bestowing this
name Merenda on the new repast, which their delicacy invented. Yet Andreas
Baccius, de Conviviis Antiquorum, lib. 4. has a conceit, though he denies not
the former Etymology of Merenda; thinking that it may be equally called so a
Merendo, and so that it properly signified the repast of Laborers; which for
conceit we may commend, whiles we approve Manutius his Opinion for Truth. This
doubt then being removed, the times of their repast were these; First, their
Jentaculum (which was the same with Prandiculum) answered to our Breakfast.
Their second, Prandium, in an ordinary acception, answered to our Dinner; but
in an accurate, it agreed neither in time nor quantity of food; theirs being
about Noon, or our twelve of the clock, and but a light repast. Their third,
Merenda, bears apt proportion to our Afternoon Bever, or drinking. Their
fourth, Coena, (called also Vesperna) answered to our Supper. Their fifth,
Commessatio, was a Drinking about two or three hours after Supper. All these
were used by the luxurious; but the temperate were content with few.
Break-fasts were scarce used by any but Children: Dinners likewise were made a
full meal only by Them, as too tender to endure hunger, and by Laborers, in
whom the repair of strength makes food more necessary. The better sort, if they
dined at al, did it but slightly. The Merenda was required by the merit of
Laborers, and the tenderness of Children. Their Coena was the only meal which
the better sort usually made; and unto This were their most respected
Invitations. Their Commessatio was by the Riotous often abused: but the learned
made it the occasion of enjoying each others virtue and learning by discourse.
This light diet amongst the Romans may be understood to have been caused by the
heat of their Climate; whiles by experience we see that they which dwell far
Northward, when they come into the heat of Southern Countries, have an
abatement of appetite.

23. Whiles the Law takes care. Adulterers used to bequeath their whole Estates
to their Adulteresses: which enormity Domitian endeavored to prevent by a Law,
by which he made all such infamous Women incapable of Legacies; who did
notwithstanding delude the Law, by making their own Husbands Pandars to their
Lust, and so causing the Legacies to be given to Them.

25. For He. Even in his Youth, like another Automedon, Achilles his Chariotier.

26. The rains did guide. It was a humor in the Roman dames to fall in love
with such Gallants, as could drive a Chariot bravely: and therefore your young
Nobles did use to show themselves in the pride of their Art, to their admiring
Mistresses. Which vanity is partly taxed in the eighth Satyr, in that verse on
Damasippus, Ipse rotam stringit multo sufflamine Consul, Nocte quidem --, and
in that other, -- Clara Damasippus Luce flagellum sumet --.

27. His Warlike Mistress. Britannicus in this place by Lacernata amica,
understands Nero's Sporus, being the rather induced to believe thus, as we may
conceive, because by Lacerna, we may Metonymically understand the Sex, (it
being the Man's Garment) and, by amica, vilely understood, the abuse of the
Sex. But by the precedent Annotation (which is the Exposition of Turnebus,
Advers. lib. 28. cap. 24.) it is manifest, that in this place is taxed the
humor of Women. Here therefore he speaks of a Woman; so that amica expresses
the Sex, and lacerna an abuse or impropriety, it being properly the Soldiers
Garment; and therefore, as Isidore tells us, Lacernatus was used absolutely for
Miles, as Togatus for Vrbanus: which the Scholiast well understood; and
therefore on this place sets this note, Saryrice, habitu virili foeminam
describit. So that according to the natural meaning of this place, he calls a
Woman thus stoutly affected with the hurrying of Chariots, a Warlike Mistress.
To have followed the letter, I should have rendered it, His Cloak'd Mistress, or
his Mistress using the Soldiers Cloak: but because it is spoken by a metonymie
of the Adjunct, which more agrees with the sense, I chose rather to render it
by the aptness, then the severe propriety of the word.

28. Large Table-books. Tables of wood covered with wax, on which they writ
with an Instrument of Iron or Brass; and therefore they were called Pugillares,
a pungendo, as Aldus Manutius observes, De quaesitis per Epist. lib. 2. Epist.
1. Of these Tables, see Lud. Carrio. Emendations, lib. 2. cap. 6. Meursius upon
Lycophron. p. 340. Victorius his Variar. Lection. lib. 16. cap. 5. and
Laurentius Pignorius de Servis, page 116. and 117. In the first of which he
says, Pugillarium forma fuit oblonga and quadrata, eminenti quadam margin
circumcirca conclusa, ut vidimus Romae in veteri arca sepulchral^ in hortis
Cyriaci Matheii. Which I note, because Georgius Longus, de Annulis Signatoriis,
cap. 8. describes them to have been of a triangular form. In the last cited
page of Pignorius, is expressed the form of the Roman Graphium, or Stylus,
which was sharp at the one end to write with, and flat at the other to smooth
out what they had written. It was commonly carried in a little case, called
Graphiarium, as Philip Beroald notes in his Commentary upon Sueton, lib. 1.
cap. 82. and Pignorius, page 119. And because it was too apt and dangerous to
stab with, and too frequently abused in that practice, it was sometime at Rome
publicly prohibited to be worn, if made of Iron; such only being permitted as
were made of bone, as Casaubon notes on the forecited place of Sueton. Before
the invention of paper, they did use to write on Palm leaves, (as some tell
us; yet see Sat. 8. Illustrat. 9.) on the barks also of trees, (strictly, the
inward rind of them) as also on lead, on linen, and on waxen tables: which
last remained in use after the invention of Paper and Ink, being portable and
convenient. See Aldus Manutius, de Quaesitis per Epistol. lib. 2. Epist. 1. and
Cornelius Witellius in his Annet. in Georg. Merulam, cap. 3.

29. Locusta. A notorious wretch of this name there was in the time of Nero;
whom she helped by her execrable experience in poisons, to dispatch
Britannicus,. See Sueton's Nero, cap. 33.

30. The narrow Gyarus. A place in the Aegean Sea, of most uncomfortable
banishment.

31. The Goat too. The Images on the sides or foot of their stately bouls. One
Manuscript (not to omit the mirth) would teach us, that Caper here mentioned
was a Philosopher; and so tell us, that by stantem extra pocula, we must
understand, that he was a Sober one!

32. Adultrous Boys. An elegant contradiction, praetextatus adulter; for as
Pompeius tells us in his Fragments, some used pratextatum for pudicum. And yet
it was sometime used in a contrary sense, for obscoenum, as in that place of
Agellius, lib. 9. c. 10. Non praetextatis sed puris honestisque verbis; and in
that of Juvenal Sat. 2. verse the last, -- Praetextates referunt Artaxata
mores. See Meursius in his Exercit. Critic. Part. 1. ad Plauti Capteivos cap. 1.

33. A hundred Sesterces. The Romans amongst their Coins had two, which almost
agreed in Name, but in value greatly differed; Sestertium and Sestertius, the
first containing a thousand of the latter. In this place the first is meant, as
it is manifest by the words Sestertia centum. The value of them is to be
reduced to our coins by this account; The Denarius or Roman penny is by the
most judicious, and particularly by the last and accurate Translators of our
English Bible in the Marginal notes upon Matthew 18.28. and the 20, 2. and 22,
19. valew'd at 7 d. ob. which Denarius according to the Roman writers,
contained 4 Sestertios; so that Sestertius is 1 d. ob. qa. q. which being
multiplied by a thousand, arises to 7 l. 16 s. 3. which was the value of a
Sestertium; which being again multiplied by a hundred, arises to 781 l. 5 s.
which is the sum, which our gamester here looses. And whiles we are now
reducing this coin, let us again multiply these hundred Sestertia, that is
these 781 l. 5 s. by 4. and they will amount to 3125 l. or quadringenta
sestertia, which was the value of a Roman Knights yearly Revenue. Our English
yields not diversitic of termination to express the difference between
Sestertium and Sestertius; therefore rendering it Sesterces, it was necessary
to point out, and clear the ambiguity. Concerning the Denarius I may farther
note, that Gabriel Simeoni (an Italian Antiquary, in his Illustratione de al'
Epitaffi Antichi) tells us, that the Head (expressed in it) armed signifies
Rome; the Wings its Diligence; the Vessel (used in Sacrifice) their reverence
in Religion; X. the Value Denarius, implying thus, that by Arms, Diligence,
and Religion, Rome got the Empire of the World.

34. So many brave Piles. Summer houses in the Country for pleasure.

35. Who alone. Three things are here reprehended, as being against the Roman
custom. The first, that now they supped Alone; which, if we weigh the
etymology of the word coena, implies a Satirical contradiction; it being so
called, because it was common. For it was the manner of the Romans (though they
might lightly Dine alone) to Sup with their Friends. The second thing was, that
now they supped privately, whereas before they used to Sup in the Porches of
their houses; which Porches (or Halls, for so atria are sometimes rendered) were
covered over head, and built fair and large, wherein they did keep the Statues
of their Ancesters, and used to make fire; for which cause Servi^s derives
atrium, ab atrore. See Cland. Minos, on Pliny, lib. 2. Epist. 17. and this
expounds that in the 8th Satyr, verse. 8. Fumosos equitum cum dictatore
magistros, in which he calls the Statues smoaky, because they stood in their
Porches, where they made fire. Of the Romans supping with their doors open,
that the peoples eye might be a witness of their temperate diet, see Marcellus
Donatus on Sueton's Angustus, cap. 35. A third thing here reprehended, was the
number of their dishes; for so with Britannicus by fercula we understand
patinas, according to that of Horace, lib. 2. Satyr. 6. Maltaq, de magna
saperessent fercula coena. The temperance of former times was far from the riot
here mentioned by our Poet; see Casaubon and Torrentius on Sueton's Angustus,
cap. 74. where it is noted of that Emperor, that he had but commonly three
dishes, and when more plentifully, not above six. Our Poet in his 11th Satyr,
where he invites Perstens to Supper, and names to him what he should expect,
reckons up but two dishes of meat, Kidde and Hen, and some Fruit. The Romans
indeed when they feasted, had sometimes strange variety; and with more state
and solemnity divided the Feast into three parts or courses; of which see Sat.
5. Illustrat. 3.

36. A Basket-doal. It was at first the custom of the Romans, after their
Clients had graced them with their attendance, to have them home with them, and
give them a good Supper, which was called coena recta, that is legitimum
convivium, or a just and full meal. But afterward they changed their bounty
into a lighter and cheaper doal, which one distributed to them at the outward
threshold, and commonly they received it in a little Basket; and therefore the
Grecians called it (...), the Latins Sportula from Spartum (as some think)
which signifies a kind of Broom, of which the Basket was made; and so by a
Metonymie from the matter, it was called by that name; see Sat. 3. Illustrat.
38. They gave also sometimes, instead of coena recta, centum quadrantes, which
in a round account we call a hundred farthings; though in an exacter reckoning
they were much less, then a hundred of our farthings, which make two
shillings and a penny. To reduce then these centum quandrantes to our coin;
we may take notice, that the Denarius or penny valewing 7 d. ob. contained ten
Roman Asses, each of these by consequence valewing ob. qa. As likewise
contained three trientes, each being a farthing; but 4 quadrantes: so that
quadrans is as much with us as q. c. which quadrans or q. c. being multiplied
by a hundred arises to eighteen pence halfpenny farthing, which is the sum
that was given them instead of their coena recta. The word Sportula in after
times came to have other signifieations; for in the civil Law there were
Sportulae Judiciales, which were the Fees for Counselors at the Law; and by
the Grecians called (...). There were also Sportulae sponsoriae, called by the
Grecians (...), which were pavvns for assurance. For when two were about to
go to Law, before the Plaintiff put in his Declaration, or the Defendant his
Answer, they laid down a sum of money by way of Caution or Surety, which
he that was cast in the Suit was to loose. It did also in the Primitive
Church signify the Ministers maintenance.

37. A Libertine. A Libertine is one that is ma^^^issed from servitude. Of the
exact acceptions of Libertinus and Libertus; see Aldus Manutius de Quaesitis
per Epist. lib. 1. epist. 7. and Josephus Castalie, in his Var. Lect. cap. 13.

38. The dainty Windows. The Eastern People were commonly of servile condition;
yet by the common vanity of their country they much delighted to were pendents
in their ears, and for that purpose did use to make holes in them.

39. Four hundred Sesterces. A Roman Knights just wealth, or yearly revenue
according to the Law. Yet note by the way that a Roman Knight's estate was once
raised to 500. Sestertia, as it may be collected from Sucton's Julias, cap. 39.
by those wo^ds, Ludis Decius Laberius eques Romanus mimum suum egit, quingentis
sestert^^^ and annulo, etc. though afterward it was reduced by Tiberius to the
former custom. See Medius, in his Nov. Antiq. Lection. epist. 33. p. 154. Yet
we may observe the fault of the copy which Modius used, the name of Laberius
being not Decius but Deci^^^s, as it is corrected in the best editions
published by the latest Critics.

40. Pallas and the Licinii. Fellows that were raised from servile estate to
exceeding great wealth; Pallas being accounted richer then Crassus, as Capellus
in his Miscellanies, cap. 11. proves out of Tacitus.

41. With his chalked seer. Slaves that were brought from other countries,
when they were exposed to sale, were wont to be marked on their feet with
chalk; as Brissonius (to omit others) observes, lib. 6. de Formulie.

42. Temple none thou have. Money was adored as a Deity, though it had not a
temple, as the other Gods and Goddesses had: yet some (as Fulbeck in his
learned Pandects of the Law of Nations and before him Coelius secundus Curio)
think our Poet deceived when he writ this; and urge for the contrary, 81.
August. lib. 4. De Civitat. cap. 21. Arnobius indeed seems likewise to imply as
much, lib. 3. saying, Quis ad extremum Deam pecuniam esse eredat, quam velut
maximum numen vestrae indicant Literae? which implies, I grant, that money had
a Temple; yet is being under the name of the God Aes, or Aesoul^^^s, it shows
not the structure to have been of same or continuance enough to convince
Juvenal here, of much mistake, or of any, for his own Time.

43. Whose old Temple. On the top of the Temple of Concord were many storks
nests; into which when the storks flevv-up they made a noise with their
beaks, which noise of the stork is noted also by O^id in his Metamorph.
saying, Ipsa sibi plandat crepitante ciconia rostro. Some more intimately tell
us that the Goddess Concord was worshipped sub Imagine Ciconiae: but the
Scholiast understands it more plainly of the stork and her nest, saying,
Satytice, salutato nido, non templo. Templum Concordiae vetur, in qua ciconia
m^^ia est.

44. A litter closed. The reason, which caused the servant to take a careful
view of those that came to receive the Sportula, was because it was given
only to such as in the nature of clients (as they called them) honored their
Lord with their attendance. In which passage though I render according to
Britannicus, Sella (as if like the Lectica) a Litter (our language not so
exactly expressing the difference) yet they differd in this, that Sella was
properly to fit-in, and Lectica, to ly-in; partly such difference we may see
between our Litters and Coacher, or our late Seda^^^.

45. Gain from the Arabian: custom. Some read here (...), some (...) others
Arabarches; their interpretations and proofs are these. Turnehus in his Advers.
lib. 27. cap. 25. inclining to the first Reading, (...), confirms it from a
Greek Epigramme and the Authority of Josephus, yet thinks it to be the same
with Arabarches; and that the softning of the R into an L might peradventure
arise from the nature of the Alexandrian Idiom; and that, because the Jews were
near the Arabians, the Egyptians called them Alabians. So he would have it
signify the magistrate of Alexandria, who was prefect over the Jews, which
dwelt there; and almost half the Inhabitants were Jews, as Philo witnesses.
Others read after the same manner, Alabarches, but in a different sense: for
they would have it come from (...), ink; and that thus here is meant magister
Scripturae, a Customer, which kept a Reckoning book of revenews which he
farmed. And this opinion, though not in Reading, yet in sense, will prove good.
Others supposing the Copy false, propose another sense, reading. (...), and so
make it to signify the Prefect of the Salt. Indeed Lazius in his Commentaries,
de Repub. Romans lib. 2. cap. 13. shows the Offices of Halasarches and Alabarches
to have been distinct employments: but being here impertinent, the Manuscripts
having generally Arabarches, this I retain; there being also as just a liberty
for the composition of this word, as for Lyciarches, or Syriarches, or
Ethnatches, which are usual. Some would have it to signify one extremely
effeminate; as Baptista Pius, in his Annot. Poster. cap. 93. labors to prove,
alleging Tully in an epistle to Atticus, where he calls Antonie by way of
disgrace, Arabarches; to express, says Pius, his extreme luxury; the Arabians
being exceeding luxurious, and Arabarches, according to the force of the word,
being the chief amongst them, and so one most notorious amongst others very
notorious. But this is but opinion and an imagined signification of the word.
Tully indeed does by that word disgrace Antonie, yet not by that express his
riot, but his base oppression, to which his riot, whiles he was in those parts,
did drive him. For he being a Noble Roman, did notwithstanding to maintain his
luxury, as it were perform the office of the Arabarches, or Egyptian Publican,
which was too vile a practice for his Nobility. To express then the nature of
the office and the reason of the name, it may be observed, that in the
Provinces subject to the Romans there were Officers, which received the custom
and paid it to the Roman treasury; and that particularly in Egypt there was a
great custom paid for the cattle, which were yearly brought into that country
from Arabia; and that this Customer for this respect was properly called
Arabarches; as may be collected from Rhodigin. Lection. Antiq. lib. 18. cap.
35. Consent of Copies having it thus, it is not lighty to be rejected. The
Office then of a Publican and Customer, though at the first it was of good
credit, yet as at the first it had the Occasion, so at the last the Opinion of
Baseness. See Waserus de antiquis numis Hebraorum, lib. 1. cap. 18. But now it
is to be enquired, who is to be understood by this Arabarches. The common
opinion hitherto has been, that Crispinus was the man; but Prolemaeus Flavius
(in his conjectan. cap. 49.) seems to have observed, (for he positively
affirms) that He had not a statue: and he being cut-out, he says, that the
man here understood is Josephus the Jew, who for his worth, says he, had a
statue erected to him, which, as he adds, our Poet took in great indignation,
and therefore satyrically describes him saying, that he knew not whether he
were a base Egyptian, or an effeminate Arabian, meaning by an exclusive scorn,
a third thing as vile, a Jew. But against this witty opinion we may suppose
these reasons; First, the ingenuity of our Poet: for although Josephus was a
Jew and so by country odious, yet being eminent for learning and wisdom, our
Author probably would be far from jeering at such worth. Secondly, Josephus
never had the office of the Arabarches. Thirdly, this interpretation cannot
stand without a manifest corruption of the text: for then it should be read
with the particle of division, Aegyptius aut Arabarches; which is false, as, in
the reason following, it appears. Fourthly the Poet does not say, he knows not
whether he were an Egyptian or an Arabian; but not what Egyptian, or an
uncertain one, the text being not An Aegyptius, but Quis. The person then here
understood was one Tiberius Alexander by birth an Egyptian, who for embracing
at that time the religion of the Romans, was highly honored and made Prefect
of Egypt, as Tacitus affirms in his Hist. lib. 1. and was afterward a prime
agent to help Vespasian to the Empire, as Tacitus shows, Hist. lib. 2. and he
had a statue, as Bisciola observes in his Hor. subseciv. lib. 14. cap. 22. So
that by this double mark Aegyptius atque Arabarches (for that is true reading,
atque not aut, according to the Manuscripts which I use) our Poet
rightsaryrically points him out. Where this caution may be taken by the way;
that seeing that Tiberius Alexander was the Arabarches, it is not without a slip
expounded by some by Arabiae Praefectus: for at what time Tiberius Alexander
had this prefecture of Egypt, there was no Prefect of Arabia: Arabia being not
conquered to the quiet obedience of the Roman Empire till Trajan's time (as it
is manifest by Lazius de Rep. Romans lib. 1. cap. 4. and by Lipsius de
Magnitudine Romana, lib. 1. cap. 3.) when as Tiberius Alexander had this
prefecture of Egypt long before under the Empire of Galba. Wherefore he was
called Arabarches not from any residence in Arabia, or a dominion over it; but
only from Collecting the custom, which was yearly paid for the cattle, which
were brought from Arabia into Egypt.

46. Who cared for Mutius's Pardon? some give as a reason of Lucilius his
boldness the Poverty of Mutius: but this is probably an untruth, Mutius being
a Noble Roman, as may clearly appear from Lubin, on Persius, Sat. 1. and this
sense being beside the intent of the Poet, who raises the cause not from the
difference of Persons, but of Times; Satyrists in former times usurping a
tyrannical license over any man's fame, were he never so great, if liable to
reprehension. Besides the Poet here signifies, that it is ever secure enough to
write against such when they be dead, but not whiles they yet live.

47. In that dire taper shine. The story to which this place alludes is this.
It was an usual cruelty practiced by the Romans against the Christians, to put
upon them a shirt anointed on the inside with matter apt to take fire (called
by our Poet, Sat. 8. Tunica molesta) and then tying them to a stake, to make
them serve for Lights by night. See Meursius his Exerc. Critic. part. 2. lib.
3. cap. 4. Schot. Observat. lib, 5. cap. 4. Turnebus, in his Advers. lib. 13.
cap. 9. and Lipsius on Tacitus, Annal. 15. Thus the story of this place seems
easy enough: but the construction is very perverse and almost incorrigible;
Pithaus professing, that there is no place in all Juvenal, which he less
Grammatically understands, and, as the text has been hitherto, we may think so
too. The common Reading is -- tada lucebis in illa, Qua stantes ardent qui fixo
guttere fumant. Et latum mediasulcum deducit arena, in which there is an
inconvenient perturbation of Numbers, in the words fumant and deducit.
Wherefore Lipfius in his Commentar. on Seneca de Ira, lib. 3. cap. 3. ventures
upon a conjectural emendation (for he mentions no Manuscript for the proof of
it) and reads it thus, Et latus mediam sulcus diducit arenam; by which, I
grant, he makes it Grammatical, and according to that Exposition I may render
it thus, And where an ample furrow parts the sand.

Making a pit, wherein their feet may stand; so that sulcus shall be the
furrow, pit or hollow place, which as Lipsius thinks, they made for the feet of
the condemned person, that so the fire might be kept-in the closer to him. For
this pit being made somewhat large and descending toward the middle, (as we
see in the form of a basin) when the fire sunk, it fell toward him and
increased the flame. The Scholiast also implies this conceit, attributing it to
the thrift of the executioner, who thus would burn the body with less fuel.
Scaliger also Ie Emetidat, lib. 5. p. 471. corrects this verse as Lipsius does,
but expounds it somewhat differently concerning latus sulcus, saying, stantibus
ad palum destinatis unco (ne motatione capitis picem cadentem declinarent)
gutturi suffixo e lamina ardente ((...) vocat Imper. M. Aurelius) pix aut
unguen in caput liquifiebat, ita ut rivi pinguedinis humanae per arenam
Amphitheatri sulcum facerent. According to which exposition it may be thus
rendered, And where an ample furrow, as they stand, Made with their melting fat,
divides the Sand. Yet this being without the warrant of copy, and so but
conjecture here, though otherwise probably truth, I rather approve of the apt
conceit of Prolemaeus Flavius in his Conject. cap. 48. who retaining the
ancient Reading, thinks here is only a dislocation or transposition of this
troublesome verse; and that it should be placed two verses lower, reading the
place thus, Qui dedit ergo tribus patruis aconita, vehatur Penfilibus plumis,
at que illine despiciat nos, Et latum media sulcum deducat arena? And this
order of these verses I keep in my translation. The sense is as this verse is
here placed, that Tigellinus his train of followers made a large lane through
the people. The like is spoken of Marius in the first part of this Satyr.

48. Make a large furrow. Et latum media sulcum deducat arena; Pithaeus out of
one manuscript reads diducis arena, and so some placing this verse two verses
higher, expound the whole place thus; speak against Tigellinus and thou shall
be burnt alive, and thus thou do but speak in vain, thou do but plow the
shore. But none of the manuscripts, which I use, having this Reading, I rather
like Flavius his conjecture as ascending nearer to the advanced passion of a
Satyrist; it seeming also somewhat a ridiculous fall, after he has said, Thou
shall be burnt alive, to add, and shall loose thy labor.

49. It Is slander, if but the words, That Is he, slip. I^bin reads this place
thus, Accusator erit qui verbum dixerit, Hic 'st; but I know not what copy he
follows; those which I use, have Accusator erit qui verbum dixerit, Hic est,
which some expound thus, He shall not want an accuser, whosoever he be, that
points with the finger and says, This is that vile Tigelline. But this is
harsh; for it being clear that accusator and qui express the same person, the
exposition in the margins of the manuscripts, which I here use, is to be
preferred: which is, that accusator is here to be taken in the worst sense, as
opposite to veridicus. According to which the sense here is, that he which
shall speak against Tigelline, though most truly, shall yet be esteemed but as
a false accuser or slanderer.

50. Weigh all then right. The common copies have this place thus, -- ^ecum
prius ergo voluta Hac animo, ante tubas, galeatum sero duelli Paenitet. -- and
some read -- voluta haec, anime, ante tubas: but some manuscripts (though
without any material diversity of the sense) have this elegant variety of
reading, -- tecum prius ergo voluta Hac; animante tuba galeatum sero duelli
Paenitet --.

51. Whose ashes lie. Concerning the original of this custom of the Romans to
burn the bodies of the dead, see Hieronymus Magius in his Miscellan. lib. 3.
cap. 10. disputing against Pliny. Quintilian ( Declam. 10.) gives the reason of
this custom; which was from an opinion of the Romans, that the soul was first
to be purged in fire, before it could ascend unto the stars. Yet this use was
not general among the Ancients; for the Persians did not burn their bodies, as
Herodotus testifies, lib. 3. giving the reason for it, (...), etc. because they
held the fire to be a God, and so thought it abominable for a God to feed upon
the carcass of a man. Our poet also seems to attribute somevvhat to the fire,
in his 15. Satyr; where telling the tale of the fellovv, that was torn in
pieces and eaten raw at the feast and quarrel in Egypt, he does vvittily
rejoice that the Fire was not profaned in boiling or roasting any of him --
Hinc gaudere libet quod nou: violaverit ignem, Quem summa caeli raptum de part
Pronetheus Denavit terris. Elemento gratulor. Yet tha^ they, esteemed it not as
a God, it is plain enough by that in the third Satyr, verse 214. Tum gemimus
casus urbis, tune Odimus ignem; to apply which word (Odimus) to a Deity had
been a boldness more then Satyric^l. The Aegyptian^ likewise did not burn
their bodies, as Herodotus vvitnesses in the same place; and he gives the
reason, because they thought fire a devouring beast, and it was not their
custom to cast the bodies of men to beasts. So Cyrus in Xenophon from the
custom of the Persians, giving order at his death, that they should not put
his body in gold or silver or the like, concludes, (...), but that they should
with all speed commit it to the earth. Besides, the Romans themselves did not
burn the bodies of Traitors, or of Tyrants, or of such as killed, their masters
or themselves, holding it profane. See Jacobus Durantius Casellius in his
Variatum lib. 2. cap. 3. Neither did they burn the bodies of infants, which
died before they were 40. days old, or, as some say, before the seventh. See
Satyr 15. ^^lustrat. 12. And therefore the sepulchers in which infants were
buried, were not called Busta, their bodies being not burnt; but suggrundaria,
from suggero, as some derive it, an infant, as they say, being carried into a
subterraneous place, or, as others, from suggredior, which is as much as
latenter gradior, the place where infants were buried not rising to any
apparent height; for which respect they were not called tumuli. Plutarch in his
consolatory epistle to his wife gives the reason of this custom, which was
because that infants dying so young were thought to need no purging, as having
never been infected with the world. Our Poet expresses this custom in his 15.
Satyr, in those words, -- vel terra clauditur infans, Et minor igne rogi --.
See Meursius upon Lycoph. p. 114. Philip Beroalds Annotations upon Martial, and
Heraldus his Animadvers. on Jamblicus, cap. 8.

52. Flaminian and Latin ways. The ancient Fathers in the first times did use
to bury in Caves; so Abraham buried Sarah in a cave, Genesis 23. and this we may
see also in the latter times of the Jews, as from that place of St. John, cap.
11. verse. 38. where speaking of our Savior coming to Lazarus his grave, he
says, (...), etc. It was a cave and a stone lay upon it. their use of burying
without the City may be aptly collected from St. Math. cap. 27, verse. 53. where
speaking of those that rose after the resurrection of our Savior, it is said,
(...), they went into the holy City. Saul was buried under an Oak in Jab^s^.
1. Chron. 10.12. which in the first of Samuel, cap. 31.13. is only in general
called a Tree; as our English Translatours have it: but St. Hierome and
Tre^elius render it by Nemus, a Grove; which may very well stand both with the
word and sense, the word in the Original being (...), which according to the
Masters in the language ( Pagine, Ma^in^s, and Schindler) signifies ne^^^, the
word as some derive it, coming from (...) which signified to be Quiet, and so
may aptly agree to a grove, a place of retirement: and so our latest
translatours render the word, in Genesis 21. verse. 33. showing only in the margin,
that it signifies a tree. The varieties are easily reconciled, if we suppose it
to have been under an Oak at the grove of Jabesh; and so some conveniently
render it an Oak-grove. The Septuagint less accurately say, (...). Our Savior
was buried in a Garden, which was in the place where he suffered, John, 19, 41,
which place was mount Calvary, called by the Jews in the Sy^l^^ Tongue (which
at that time they used) Gag^t^^^ as Tremellius notes; in the Greek it is (...),
verse. 17. which was the common place of execution for the City of Jerusalem,
and without the City, at the North-West part thereof. See A^^io^o^ius his
description of Jerusalem, Numb. 235. and also Numb. 204, in the explication of
Vallis Jos^phat. Meunsi^s (upon Lycophron. p. 289. and in his Spitideg. p. 6.)
observes an Order of the Ancients to bury their Famous men at the foot of a
^illo. The supposititious Dares Phrygius (de Excidia, Troja^) writes, that
Priamus buried Hector, according to the custom, before the Gates of Troy. The
Romans at the first did use to bury in their private houses; as Heraldus notes
in his Adversar^^b^^^ cap. 6. and Meursius in his Exerc. Crit. part. 2. lib. 3.
cap. 20. and hence came the worshipping of their domestic L^^es, as Servius
notes on the 6. of the ^^neads, A Sepulcher is in diverse Authors called by
diverse names, as Requietorium, Locus, Ossuarium, Ci^erarium, Locus communis
(as Meursius notes in his last-cited place) and Seeds (as Petrus Burgius
observes, in Elect. lib. 1. cap. 4.) likewise Do^^^s ^ternalis (as Mr. Cambden
notes, in Glamorganshire) or domus aterna (as in two Inscriptions in O^tavi^
Rossi his Memory Bresciane. page 277. and 297.) To bury among the Romans in
the City, was forbidden by a Law. HOMINEM. MORTUOM. EN. DO. URBE. NEI.
SEPELITO. NEI. VE. URITO. For they held the burial profane, in not
distinguishing the place of the Living and the Dead; besides, they held the
Burning dangerous to the City. See Antonius Augustin^s de Leg. 12. Tab. cap.
44. and Fulvius Vrsinus his Notes on that Law. See also Marcellus Donatus upon
Sueton's Tiberius, cap. 1. who cites out of Dion a Roman Edict, whereby it was
prohibited to burn the bodies of the Dead within two miles of the City. Thus
then the Roman custom was to bury without the City; yet were there distinct
places for the Nobles and the People. The common sort were buried at Puticula,
a place so called from the little Pits or Graves, in which their bones were
buried, But the Rich had stately Monuments on the sides of the public ways in
their own suburbane fields; and therefore, as Burgius (in the forecited place)
well observes, our Saryrist by these intimated in this verse, Quorum Flaminia
tegitur cinis atque Latin^. understands the Great Ones. There are even yet to
be seen in the Flaminian way the vast ruins of Sepulchers, as Marlianus
reports in his Topographie of Rome, lib. 7. cap. 13. and such monuments were
erected by the sides of the fields, unless the places were barren and stony;
for then they were raised in the midst of the field; as Meursius shows in his
last-cited place. Upon such monuments was inscribed, how many feer of ground
about them was consecrated; as is commonly still to be seen throughout Italy;
as Victorius relates, lib. 14. Var. Lect. cap. 21. Among the Lace damonians it
was lawful to bury in the City, that so they might continually remember the
famous deeds of Worthy men; and to bury near their Temples (much like our
custom now in these times) that so the Sepulchers might be the more secure
from violation, as Cragius de Repub. Lacedem. lib. 3. p. 110. and 111. delivers
the observation and the reason. Heraldus also in the forecited place observes,
that in some Cities of Greece they did for honor bury some in the midst of the
City, near their Forum. And in latter times the use of burying in the City was
admitted among the Romans; see Burgius in the forecited place, and Plutarch,
problem. 79. who says, that it was permitted to such as had Triumphed.
Eutropius de Gest. Roman. tells us, that it was granted unto Trajan; and
Rhodigine, lib. 17. cap. 20. observes, that it was also permitted to the Vestal
virgins. Lastly, Burial was admitted in the Temples themselves, as Heraldus, in
the place before-alleadged, shows out of Arnobius, lib. 7. Adversus Gentes.

SATYR. II.
ARGUMENT.
Our Poet with a peircing sight
Looks through the Reverend Hypocrite:
Whom here he venters to unmaske;
(He venters on a mighty task!)
The Stoic, Judge and Priest are first,
The Stoic, Judge and Priest are worst.
The Emperor then scapes not his quill;
Not any Greatness that dares ill.
Nor thinks be it enough to show
Their Crimes, but whence their Crimes do flow.
Atheism therefore be does touch,
And vile Commerce: These make them such.
BEyond the Tartars [1] and the frozen Ocean
I could fly hence, when such pretend devotion,
Who seem to be the Curii (a) of the Times,
Yet act the foulest Bacchanalian Crimes.
Chiefly the Unlearned: [2] though their studies be
Filled with Chrysippus's (b) Images. For, He
Is of all these the most profound, that buys
The best carved Aristotle, or the wise
Pittacus, and (whiles He on leaf never looks)
Bids a first-form'd Cleanthes [3] keep his Books.
Never trust a Face. What street bears not the stain
Of Grave Obscenity? Thou would restrain
Another's Lust, when Thou the noted sink
Among Socratick Pathicks (c) do most stink.
Indeed thy rugged Limbs, (d) and Arms as much
Harnessed with stubborn brisles, promise such
A virtue, and stern Soul: but thy back-part
Needs thy deriding Surgeon's Lancing art.
These men affect Mute Gravity, and pare
Their locks [4] far shotter than the hair
Upon the Eye-brow. Wherefore unto Me
Plain Peribonius's ingenuitie
Is better pleasing. Him unto his Fate
I do impute, who in his Face and Gate
Shows his disease. Simplicity does win
For such a Mercy; and th^i^ Fury of sin,
Which makes them Guilty, Pardons them. More vile
Are they, who dare with a Herculean style [5]
Invade such Crimes, and say Virtue's most dear;
Yet shake the tail. Why Sextus should I fear
Thy Passive Lust? I pray thee, show thou me,
Says vile Varillus, how I Am worse than thee?
Let Him deride the Lame, that goes Upright,
And Him an Ethiopian, that is white,
Who could endure to hear the Gracchi blame
Sedition? Who could not justly exclame
In one mixed Outcry, O ye Heavens, Earth, Seas,
If an oppressing Robber do displease
Verres? If Milo once hate Murderers,
If Clodius accuse Adulterers,
If Catiline Cethegus? If the three
Scholars of Sylla [6] blame the cruelty
Of his Proscription? (e) Yet in this our Age
How wild a Lust worthy a Tragic Stage
Stained a severe Adulterer, [7] at what time
He had restored sharp Laws against that Crime;
Laws so extremely dreadful, as would make
Stout Mars himself, and conquering Venus quake;
Even at that time, when Julia's womb enlarged
Of so many Abortives was discharged,
Such Lumps like her rude Uncle? May not then
The last of Vices, (f) and the Lost of Men
Scorn these False Scauri, and if struck disdain
Their unfit Punisher, and strike again?
Laxonis feared not one of these rough-brow'd
Dissemblers the other day that cried aloud,
Where does the Julian Law now sleeping lie?
To whom she smilingly did thus reply.
The blessings of the Heavens! O happy times,
That have opposed Thee thus against the Crimes
Of this our Age! Let Rome turn Modest Now!
A Third Cato (g) is dropped from Heaven! But how,
I pray you, was it your good luck to meet
With the Balme-gumme so delicately sweet,
That sents about your rugged neck? Pray, where
Bought you it? Nay, be not ashamed, or fear
To name the Master of the Shop? If then
Laws must be Vexed from rest, First against Men
Cite the Scantinian Law: [8] for they act more
And viler Crimes: Yet They remain secure
By their thick Squadrons, [9] which do so combine,
As if their boss'd sheilds over their heads did join.
O, there is a Monstrous League between these soft
And slack-ham'd Pathicks. But I Would know how often
Nay, whether any yet, could ever find
So horrid an Example in our kind?
With Cluvia Taedia's Chaste: Flora's never vile
With a Catulla; Hispo Youths defile!
He Is pale with both Diseases! Is a Cause
Pleaded by Us? know We your Civil Laws?
Do we disturb your Courts? Some few are fed,
To make strong wrastlers with the wrastlers bread. [10]
You can card wool; you can your wages ask,
When in your Baskets you return your task.
The strutting-belly'd spindle, that does swell
With slender yarn, you whirle-about, as well,
Nay better then Penelope could, and
Then fine Arachne with her nimble hand;
Or then a trembling Harlot [11] whose wronged dame
Makes her sit spinning on a clogge with shame.
It Is now well known, why Hister left his fair
Freed-man, in his last Will, for his Sole Heir; [12]
Heir of his wealth and Crimes: yet in his life
Paid Tribute-brides to his own Conscious wife!
She shall be rich, that seemingly can sleep
A third in a large bed, and Counsel keep.
Wed and be Mute. Thy Silence and his Fear
With rich Cylinders [13] then shall grace thine ear.
Yet falls the heavy Censure on our necks.
And, pard'ning Crows, [14] the harmless Doves does ve^.
The feigned Stoics fled. They durst nor hear
Their true and known Crimes with a guilty ear.
For did Laronia slander them? But now
What shall not others venter-on, when Thou
Cretian Metellus, [15] go in clothes so thin,
We see, through thy transparent gown, thy sin, (h)
The People at the sight are struck with shame,
Instead of Reverence: yet do Thou declame
Against a Procula or Polinea!
Fabula's an Adult'ress and Carsmia;
Condemn her, if thou will: yet lost to Fame
She Will never wear such a gown, [16] for very shame
Of Nature. But July is Fire! I Boil! [17]
Go Naked then; the Madness were less vile,
When our good Mountain-people left the Plow
In ancient times, to make our Enemies bow;
And after from the field victorious came
Adorned with happy wounds fresh as their fame;
O this had been a brave attire for thee
To' have sat in Then, their Judge! what may not we
Proclaim then, when such Dress the Judge does wear?
I ask, were it fit a witness should Thus Swear;
Yet Thou fierce Cretian, the stout Patron too
Of Freedom, art Transparent! Thee this n^w
Contagion has thus touched: and this Thy stain
Shall, as Example, be diffused again!
Thus one foul Hogg infects a Heard of Swine:
And one stained Grape does farther stain the Vine.
Hereafter thou will dare some fouler Crime.
No man at First is Monstrous. They, with Time,
Will win thee; who at Home, like the Shee-Sex, (i)
With tires (a) their brows, with Jewels (b) dress their Necks.
A Sows soft belly piece (l) and large bold of Wine (m)
They bring to the Good Goddess's (ch) Chaste shrine: [18]
But their thwart Custom lets no Female (n) venture
To' approach their Altar; only Males must enter.
Profane Women begone; with a loud scorn
It Is Cried. No She-Priest here lows in a horn. (^)
Such Orgia by night the Baptae kept
VVhiles tired Cecropian Cotytto slept.
One, with his crisping pine, (d) his eyebrows dies (g)
With black: Paint too prides-up his Lustful eyes (i)
This in a Glass Priapus drinks: His Call (z)
Of gold his huge locks fill: his gown is all
Shield-work on Azure, (^) or white Silk (th) he wears
Most sleek: His Servant too by Juno (i) swears. [19]
The Pathick Otho's shield (a Looking-glass) [20]
A third does hold; A Spoil that does surpass
Actor Aruncus's Spear. Before the Fight,
In this he viewed, if he were Harnessed Right.
New Annalls and fresh Story this Glass claims;
This Baggage quite All Civil War out-shames.
O, to kill Galba was a Generall's Art;
To smooth his Skin too, a Great Citizens part:
In Bebraick field to aim at Royal Spoil;
And with sopp'd Bread (k) his Face to Trim, and Soil.
Quiver'd Semiramis the Assyrian never
Did Thus; nor Cleopatra's Actian Fear,
At Sea. Their Talk and Table's Foul: they (l) speak
With Cybel's License; with loud voice they screak.
Their Hoary inspired Priests of throat so ample
They well may hire him for their grand Example. (m)
But what is the stay? They should with Phrygian art
E're this, have cut off their superfluous part.
Four hundred, as his Portion, Gracchus gave
To a dear Cornet-winder, or a brave
Trumpeter! Deeds they Seal. Heaven bless the Pair,
All Cry! Vastly they Feast. Nay, this so Rare
A Bride [21] enjoys his Husband! Need our Times
A Censor, or the Aruspex [22] for These Crimes?
Could Fear or VVonder more exceed a Mean,
To see a Woman calve, or a Cow yean?
The fring, (n) long gown, [23] and flamy vail He wears,
Who Mars his Shields (staid with close thong often beats
With jolts and sweat! Father of Rome, what clime
Brought to thy Latian Shepherds this wild crime?
What nettle thus, Great Marcher, [24] does inflame
Thy Nephews? Lo, a very Male, of Fame
And wealth, does wed a Male! yet do not shake
Thy crest? Nor with Spean p^irce the Farth! Nor make
Complaint to Jove? Go then, leave thy severe
Acres, thy Field, which thou neglectest. E're
The Sun's scarce up to morrow, I must tend
In our Quirinus's valley on a friend.
The Business? Asks the other. Oh, He Is Married
To' a Male; says This, And't must be closely carried.
Let these men Live, hereaster men will do
The like in Public: they would record it too! (o)
Yet this sore grief does to these Brides adhere;
Children, the Husbands Bonds, they can not bear.
It Is well, that over the Body, yet the Mind
This power has Not; No Babes they leave behind.
Big Lyde's Physick-Box can This never gain, [25]
Pan's running Priest their palms does touch in vain.
The coated Gracchus's Trident this surpassed! [26]
About the Sand this Fencer ran aghast,
Though Nobler than the Manlii, Catuli,
Marcelli, Fabii, Aemilii;
Then the First Rank at Shows; [27] or He that set
Them forth, when this Great Gracchus cast the Net!
That there are Ghosts and Subterraneous caves,
A ferry-poal, and Frogs in Stygian waves,
That one boat wafts-o're thousands, is now made
Fable by Boys, if they have the Bath-fee paid. [28]
But believe Thou they are True. Could we disclose
The thoughts of Curious now, the Sciplo's,
Fabricius and Camillus, or the bold
Legion of Cremera; [29] or the Youth behold,
That fell at Cannae; Spirits of War! when we
Send a Foul Ghost to Them, They fain would be
New-purg'd, if Sulphur and the Pine Tree were
With Them, [30] and if they had wet Laurel there.
Thither, alas, we all are wafred! though
Our Arms we stretch beyond the Irish foe, [31]
The late tamed Orcades, the Britans too,
Content with their short night. But what we do
In our Victorious Rome, even They do hate,
Whom we have conquered! Fame does yet relate
That one Armenian, Zalates, worse kind
Then all our Smooth-ones, foully was inclined
To a fired Tribune! See what commerce can!
He came an Hostage: Here he is made a Man! [32]
For if these Guests long in the City dwell,
They cannot want a Tempter then farcwell
Slops, knives, whips, bridles, Thus they trade-away
Rome's Noble Crimes to Rude Arta^ata.
NOTES on JUVENAL, Sat. II.
(a) HE was a most acute Stoic, and so good at Logic, that he could sooner
find proofs, then other men Opinions for him to prove. This was a Quality the
grave sinners of these times thought worth pretending to; as they did
Aristotle's Learning, Pittacus's Wisdom, and Cleanthes's Industry. Yet could
justify their Pretensions only by keeping these Worthies Pictures. Though
perhaps they expected even from these Pictures some Infusion of Learning; as,
he that in Lucians days bought Epictetus's Lamp, tribus drachmarum millibus,
hoped it would in a Dream inspire him with Epictetus's Wisdom. The story is in
his Dialogue (...)
Thus the Turks looked for Valor in Scanderbegs bones, and the Papists do
still for Miracles in the Relics of their Saints. There Is a Parity of Reason
for these Unorthodox Philosophers.

(b) M. Curious Dentatus, for his wooden dish, and his Rapes; and his refusal of
a Present, made him by his vanquished Samnites; became, Exactissima Norma
Roman^ frugalitatis. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 3. And his Name is here an Expression
of Temperance. V. Sat. 11. v. 78.

(c) Such, as like Socrates disputed severely, of Virtue and Honesty, Cinoedi
interim erant and Pa^hici. The Practice of Socrates's abusing himself with
Boys, being as infamous as his Precepts of Virtue are renowned. This allusion
of the Poet is justified by the fossanotissima, illa sc. Corporis posterior and
non nominanda, which regards Socratic^s Cinoedos.

(d) This some men among the Athenians industriously affected, especially rough
Armholes, and would in their voteing at Elections, which they call's (...),
endeavor to discover as they stretched out their Hands. For as Casaubon
observes, Laudi ducebant habere illam partem fructicante pilo neglectam, and
totum Latus horridum: which is but the Latin of Theophrastus in his Char.
(...). And the Schol. on Aristoph. Concion. confirms it saying, (...). They
nourished hair on purpose to seem the more men. And I nothing doubt but these
Hispida membra, Durae setae, and Hirsutum Collum v. 41. were Imitations of the
others Gravity, I may add slovinglyness.

(e) Two Tables or Rolls of Proscription Sylla proposed in the Forum at Rome,
presently on his victory at the Colline Gate, of which and his other Cruelties
see Florus. L. 3. c. 21. Plut. in Syll. c. 21. The first of these was a list of
80000, the 2 d of if 5000, all whose lives any one that met them might take
from them, and their Goods were at Syllas's disposal; which was generally the
Condition a Proscription left men in.

(f) Here by the abstract we must understand the Concrete, and Render Vitia
ultima the debauchest persons. Which in Nouns of the Neuter Gender especially,
is an elegant use of the Romans Authors. So Adulteria in Suet. is Adulteri, and
Servitia and Ergastala in Florus, signify Slaves and Gaol-Birds. Even these
might justly return a reproach upon the ficti Scau^i; Men who in show were
Virtuous, but abounded with secret vices, which is the Character of Aemilius
Scaurus, in Salust. Bell. Jug. 1.

(g) Cato Major or Censorinus, and Cato Vticensis his Nephew, with the Grave
reprehender of Vice in our Author are the three. This last is Ironically
supposed sent down from Heaven to War against the Sins of the times, which in
seriousness they a^firm'd of the two first; who by their Gravity and severity,
gave Occasion to a Proverbial calling, any rigid Censurer of another man's Life,
Tertius Cato. Erasm. Chil.

Add to Must. 8. after but from Scantinius] who being accused by C. Marcellus
for offering to force his Son, a Law passed in Senat^ that seta Fine of 10000
H.S. upon the like attempt. And the foul Offender was either to pay the whole
sum, of our Money 78 l. 2 s. 6 d. or his Life. This manner of giving Laws, etc.
as in the Illustrat.

(h) Multicia; quasi Multilicia. For the thread of the Woof or Licium being fine
in thin silks, must necessarily be the oftener doubled to fill the piece. Upon
this depends another Reason of the word from Multumicere, because the Pecten or
stay of the weavers Loom (having teeth like a comb) must the oftener strike and
drive this Woof, the oftener it is doubled. Whence Multicia is called by Franc.
Jun. on Terrull. Vestis (...). And an old unprinted Scoliast with Vossius says
it is mulia and inena^rabili textura expressa. But this is not all that grounds
the Reprehension of our Poet (though even this delicacy of Apparel might justly
be noted in a Crave Judge, or the Noble Mitellus) for the same Unprinted Schol.
tells us that the Multici^ was only used, innuptis puellis, out viduis
Matronis: which as to the first part is confirmed by the printed Old Schol. who
says Multicia, est vestis Molli intexta Substamine, qua^nti solent. puelle.
This Woman's Garment on Metullus's back mightily warms our Poet. In his times
perhaps this garment began to be, but not without a reproof, what usually 'twas
in latter, the common wear of both sexes. Whence in Vopiscus's Aurel. we read
Tunicas Multici^ viriles december cap. 12. Whence Salmas. Notes that Multicia is
in the neuter Gender put substantively. For otherwise there is Multicia Vestis,
and Multicium Vestimentum.

(i) Here begins a description of men, though one would scarce think it by
their Garb, or their Religion. For first their Habits were the same that Women
wore, viz. (a) their Redimicula, Fillets, that is, on their foreheads (b)
Monilia, Necklaces. (g) Supercilium suligine tactum, black'd Eyebrows; and
crisped too (d) obliqua Acu. (e) Nay the balls of their very Eyes were
colored, Pingitque trementes Oculos; which St. Hierome call's Orbs Stibio
fuliginatos, and Pliny makes it a Beauty, calling it Decoris affectatio. L. 11.
c. 37. Arnobius notes the Custom L. 2. Adv. Gent. Vt imminuerent frontes
Limbia (the same as Redimicula here) fuligine Oculos obumbrarent.(z) Next they
wore the Woman's Reticulum Auratum or Caul. (k) Their Caerulea Scutulata, Net
work Garments, so thin that the mashes of them represented distinctly the form
of the Roman Scutum or (...), something very like is seen in the spiders Web;
the Invention may be paralleled in our Ladies new net hoods, which one might
well call Scutulata. Of the same nature, though the name expresses the
roundness of the Mashes, I take the Tenuis Cyclas to be, Sat. 6. v. 26. Then
(th) their Galbanarasa, white smooth sarcenet without hair or shag, fine pilis
out villis extantibus, of this our Women now wear hoods. Galbamum, as Isidor.
L. 19. c. 9. was a kind of white paint crescens in monte Amano Syriae: alias
succus est ferulae. But Salmas. Thinks Galbamun derived from Galba, and thence
by the Analogy of the Latin its Penultima should be long, and so unfit for this
verse. Wherefore on Vopisc. Aurel. he reads it Galbina rasa, and derives it
from Galbus, which Philoxenus renders by (...), a grass-green, such as Mart.
Calls Herbarum colores Ep. 24. L. 5. And that this was a Womanish wear may be
seen by the same Authors 97. Ep. of his 1. L.

-- Habeat and licet semper
Fuscos colores, Galbinos habet mores.
Secondly, their Religion was the same with Women's; For their Servants (i) as
if they were Women as well as their Masters, swore by the Juno of their
Masters, which was a Womanish Oath. (k) Their Mrs. also sacrificed to the Bona
Dea as Women did; (l) with the paunches of fat sows Abdomine Porcae, and (m)
Magno Cratere, large vessels of Wine, which they called Amphora's of honey
Alex. Genesis Dier. L. 6. c. 8. or as Plutarch. Qu. Romans 20. of Milk. Other
Ceremonies were more sinistro perverted, as (n) the excluding of Women, and
admitting only Males, when not so much as a Picture of them should by right be
there. And the (o) usual signification of these Solemnities by a Woman's winding
a horn was not observed. Nulla gemit Tibicina, etc. v. 90. This effeminacy, and
Religion of Ranters, the Athenian Cotytto was as much troubled with as the
Roman Bona Dea. Who she was see in Alex. ut sup.

(k) This bread according to Pliny was made of Rice and bean flower, tempered
(perhaps) with Asses milk. Which Poppaea Sabina was to fond of, that she
carried with her in her travels 50. Asses for this only purpose.

-- Atque illo lacte fovetur
Propter quod Comites secum deduxit Asellas.
Sat. 6. v. 470. This milk, and the distilled water of Bean-flowers, still keep
the Reputation of Excellent Cosmeticks. Extendere, in our Author, is dilatare,
for spreading this Bread on the face, Rugas in facie eximit, ipsamque teneram
reddit. Pliny.

(l) The Reverence that sober Romans gave their Tables, was much; because they
thought them holy, so Synesius Ep. 57. (...), Sacras facitis Mensas Salinorum
appositu, and Simulachris Deorum. Arnob. 2. Adv. Gent. P. 87. Whether or no
they thought salt because Preventive of Putrefaction, near of kin to the
Incorruptible Gods, I will not determine; though I am certain they gave a
degree of Purity to it, as Salillo purior in Catullus, is so pure as nothing
more. The use of salt in Sacrifices is showed amongst the Jews. Lev. 2.13. Mar.
9.49. which might perhaps heighten the Esteem of it among the Romans: For much
superstition these Heathens borrowed thence. Other Religious Table-Actions, as
the (...) they cut to their Gods from the first dish, and the Attendance feasts
commonly had on Sacrifices, may be seen in Casaub. on Theoph. Char. p. 259.

(m) -- Conducendusque Magister] such a Proficient, that is, in Vice, that he
might have been to Tiberius a Voluptatibus, an office of his own Institution.
Suet. Tib. c. 43. Nero's Elegantiae Arbiter, or Magister, though of a finer
Name, was of the same Nature. For Petronius that bore it as a Qualification for
the Place, is said to be Revolutus ad vitia, seu vitiorum Imitationem; and
Tigellinus (a Gentleman for his Debaucheries thought worth a Note of our
Author, Sat. 1. v. 155.) envies him ut Aemulum, and scientia Voluptatis
Potiorem. Tac. An. 16.

(n) This Verse contains several Ornaments of Women these Voluptuaries had
usurped, as the Veil, and Stole or Gown; the Segmenta, or Laces, as according
to our wear we may conveniently render the word. It comes from Seco, and they
were small strips cut out of some rich stuffs, or cloth of Gold (for there were
Segmenta Aurea) and sowed as Ornaments to their Women's Garments.

-- Purpureus late qui splendeat Vnns and alter
Adsuitur Pannus. -- Hor.
Where Pannus is the same with Segmentum, Fascia, Zona, or Lorum; For all these
Names it had. And from the Number of these Lora, the Garments were Monolores,
Dilores, and usque ad Pentelores. Two of these Laces were usual, as by that of
Horace, but five were the height of Vanity. Now because none of these anciently
were used but by Women, our Author inveighs against it in one of these
Voluptuous Salii. Salmas ad Hist. Aug.

(o) -- Cupient and in Acta referri. These Acta were Registers that contained
Res, Rationesque populi, Judicia publica, Comitia, Aedificia, Nativitates,
Illustres Mortes, Matrimonia, Divortiae, A place therefore in these Registers
was undoubtedly due to the present Marriage, as well as to the Nativity of a
Child, Sat. 9. v. 84.

-- Tu libris Actorum spargere gaudes
Argiunenta Viri.
Vid. Lips. in An. Tac. p. 233. Such Registers as these every Parish now keeps
though not with exactness enough.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Second Satyr.
Saurom tae. Pluteus. The diverse sorts, Matter and places of statues among the
Ancients. Lararium. Pinacotheca and Bibliotheca distinguished. The custom of
the Stoics in the wearing of their Hair. Verba Herculis. The Military Testudo.
Coliphia. Codex. Ima Cera. The ancient form of Subscribing to Wills. The
Colors of Apparel. Toga and Stola. Bona Dea. Oaths proper to Men, others to
Women. Ancilia, their form. Gradivus. The Retiarius, his furniture deseribed;
likew se Myrmillo, with the reason of the name. Sequutor. Podium. Children's
Bathing. Legio. The manner of purging persons polluted.

1.BEyond the Tartars. Vhra Sauromator. Sauromatae were those, which did
inhabit Sarmatia, which was twofold, Europaea containing Polonia with Russia,
and Asiatica called Cumania: which in Mercator's, and likewife in Ho^dius his
Edition of Ptolemie's Geographie, lib. 5. cap. 9. is by Petrus Montanus (on
that place) in his marginal exposition of old names by less ancient, called
Tartaria. But we may observe, that Petrus Bertius (in his latter and more exact
Edition of the same Work published, 1618) retains Montanus his annotation, yet
leaves-out the word Tartaria. Whose reason, as I conceive, is because in a
strict acception, Tartaria is a word too general. For, Sarmaria Asiatica was
but a part of Tart^ria, which contained in it That and Both the Scythia's (as
Ortelius shows in his description of Tartaria) and likewise Cathay, as Maginus
has it: so that the Saurematae inhabited all that, which is now called
Polonia, Russia and Moscovia. Yet seeing that a part of Tartaria also was
inhabited by the Sauromatae (according to Ortelius) and was the Farthest part
of their habitation, by One I express Synechdochically the Rest, and rather by
This, then by the rest; this part being farthest from Rome, and so nearest to
the sense of the Poet.

2. Chiefly the Unlearned. Indocti primum. This place is diversely expounded,
because the word primum may be taken several ways; First, as implying Order,
and so might be rendered, First the unlearned; but that the Poet in the rest of
the Satyr passing to the descriptions of other hypocrites, does not use
particles answerable to this: Secondly by way of Aggravation, as if those he
reprehended were exceedingly ignorant; but this were untrue in respect of the
Judges, and as Improper in respect of the Nobles, here reprehended: lastly by
way of Comparison, according to which sense I render it, the Poet saying, that
he had rather fly to the frozen North and live there with Virtue, then at Rome
with Hypocrites; of all sorts of which they are chiefly to be detested, which
pretend the Love and knowledge of Virtue, but are destitute of both.

3. Bids a first-form'd Cleanthes. Et jubet archetypos plutenm servare
Cleanthas, the antique images of Cleanthes: such pictures and statues being
called ^^chetype, as are first formed, and those ectype, which are made by the
first. The first as most ancient and true were held in great estimation, and
therefore with the more curiosity sought-after by these hypocrites. But this
passage is not without some difficulties arising from the diverse
fignifications of pluteus, and the ambiguous order of the construction. Pluteus
is properly taken for a Desk, figuratively for a study or the books in it. The
Manuscript Commentary takes it in the first sense, telling us, that they used
anciently to draw the pictures of learned men upon their desks, whereon they
writ. The Scholiast takes it according to the second, for a study; so likewise
Britannicus: who, though the opinion be in a sort true, illustrates it ill from
that of Persius, Nec pluteum caedit; as if the Poet had there implied, that
Poets, when their compositions were not easy but with violence, used to knock
their knuckles against their studie-walls. But the whole difficulty may be best
removed, by taking notice of the custom of the Romans, who orderd several
sorts of Images into several places. The first of which was before their Gates;
where they placed the Images of their Ancestors expressed in brass, or such
solid matter. The second was in their Halls, as in a conspicuous part of their
house: and here they set the like statues but curiously wrought in wax. The
third was in their Chamber, where they placed their Lares (for the careful
keeping of which a servant was appointed) then the Images of those friends,
whom they loved most dearly; as also the Deities, which had the care of the
Marriage bed. The Roman Emperors in latter times kept here also a golden Image
of Fortune: yet Domitian had not an Image of Fortune, but of Minerva; as,
before him, Tully also had. The fourth place was their pinacotheca; by
comparison of the use we may call it a gallerie of pictures: and in this they
placed the representations of their Gods and their Heroes, and likewise painted
fables and histories. The fifth and last was their study, wherein they kept the
Images of Learned men. Of which two last that place of Lampridius may seem
properly to be understood in his Alexand. where he speaks of the Emperor's
twofold Lararium: in the one of which, he says, he had the Images of
Apollonius, Abraham and Orpheus; and this agrees with the use of their
pinacotheca: in the other he says, he had the Images of Virgil and Tully; and
this agrees with the property of their bibliatheca, or study. By this then we
may avoid the error of Calderine, who says, that pluteus here signifies
pinacotheca; for proof alleging that of Pliny, Pinacothecas veteribus tabulis
consumunt, as he reads it, or consnu^t, as the common copies have it as ill; or
rather, as Dino^sius Peravius (in his Notes upon Synes. Ca^^it. Encom. p 27.)
better conjectures, construunt. Lubin likewise, though he delivers and chooses
the true opinion, says this also may stand which cannot be. For since the
Images of learned men were kept only in their studies, not in their galleries;
and that pluteus, according to themselves, signifies the place, where such
Images were kept; it follows, that pluteus here cannot fignifie pinacotheca,
but bibliotheca. That place of Pliny shows only, that in their pinacotheca they
kept Images: but that they were not of learned men, appears from the
distinction of places. See also Beroald upon Sucron's Augustus, cap. 7. and
Casaubon on the same place. To apply this; Pluteus may be taken conveniently
in the second or third sense, for a study or the books in it; the figure and
sense bearing both. As for the Order of the construction some would have it,
that the study should keep the Images: but this is cold and without life; the
contrary order more happily expressing the vigor of Ironie. According to which
way of interpretation our Poet then says, That this ignorant hypocrite never
applying himself to his book, bids his Images take care that his study and
Books run not away.

4. Their locks. Supercilio brevior coma. By this passage it is commonly
conceived, that the Severe Philosophers cut the hair of their head, as short as
that upon their eye brow. But with what truth then could Seneca have said,
Epist. 5. describing the form of the severe Philosopher, Asperum and incultum
and intonsum caput, and negligetiorem barbam devita. For the removing therefore
of this scruple, we may take notice of the Scholiast upon Aristophanes his
N^^^^. Act. 1. sc. 1. writing thus, (...). Which last words implie, as Heraldus
observes in his Adversar. lib. 2. cap. 16. that the Stoics were close-cut only
in the lower part of the head, where locks were by others nourished: but that
upon the upper part of their head their hair was negligently rough. The sense
then of this place lies in the special acception of Coma, which is not here in
a general acception the same with cupi^^us (the hair of the head) but rather as
much as compta caesaries, the ornament of locks; which the negligent Roughness
of these Stoics avoided.

5. With a Herculean style. Verbis Herculis. Some make this an allusion to a
passage in Xenophon, in which Hercules is described severely checking the
Woman, that offered him Pleasure, and following her, that represented Virtue:
according to which this may be expounded; and the rather because it follows --
Et de virtute loqunti; which seems aptly to express that story of Hercules.
Yet, to speak with liberty, I think this not to be the Poets intent, and that
this verse does only casually agree with that description. For we must suppose
that the Poet's meaning was in his own time commonly understood, and that
therefore probably it had not a special reference to a private story with which
few were acquainted. More likely therefore it is, that he alludes to the famous
labors of Hercules: whose hand, known to be dreadful in the taining of
Monsters, these false Stoics (whom Juvonal detested) would seem to emulate,
using as terrible language against the monsters of Vice; and so striving, in a
diverse kind, to be as fierce as Hercules himself; and thus Hercules his words,
(or style) are such as might seem suitable to Hercules his Courage.

6. The three Scholars of Sylla. These by the Scholiast are said to be Caesar,
Pompey and Crassus: yet by way of probability he changes them into Angustus,
Lepius and Antonie. Indeed though the instance in the three first be a truth,
yet we may say, that the three last, not so nere to Sylla in Time, were nearer
to him in Imitation.

7. A serve Adulterer. Nuper pollutus adulter. Inverpreters differ much in
defining the person here intended. Diverse think it to be Caligula, whose
shameless incestes and adulteries are largely related by Sueton, in his Life,
cap. 24, 25, and 36. His horrible countenance also is noted by the same Author,
cap. 50. in these words, Vultum ver^ nature horridum ac tetrum etiam ex
industria efferabat, componens ad speculum in o^nem terrorem ac formidinem.
Which I may grant to be marks of the adulterer here described; yet they are but
some of them: and to pronounce a judgment on the whole person for some few
signs, were but to imitate an unskilful Physiognomer. There are then three
more delivered in this place; The first, that he did at the same time put in
execution Laws against Adultery, when he himself committed the same; The
Second, that a Chief Adulteress with whom he offended, was called Julia; The
Third, that she had Abortives, or untimely Births: none of which are by these
Interpreters proved to be recorded of Him. There is indeed, cap. 25. mention
made of one, whom he adulterously abused and quickly dismissing, commanded her
to abstain from the bed of any man for ever after: but there is no mention of
putting en execution Laws against Adultery. (...) sides the word nuper, which
notes the season of this fact, must be drawn back very much, from Juvenal's
time (who writ partly in the reign of Domirian) to Caligula's; and so be
understood of crimes committed about 40. years before, which will but
inconveniently be carried by the property of the word naper: and therefore we
may nor yield to this first opinion. A second is of them, that appli^ this to
Claudi^s the Emperor: who after the execution of his lewd wife Moffa^^na,
married the daughter of his brother Germa^^icus, Julia Agrippius the mother of
Nero, and by a decree of the Senate made such incestuous marriages lawful for
any man; as Tacitus notes in his Annals, lib. 12. nere the beginning. By which
we find him guilty of incest, but not of adultery; Agrippina being a widow when
he married her, as Tacitus there testifies. Besides, that he revived Laws
against adultery, the Interpreters take not the pains to prove. Moreover,
whereas some Expositers make Claudius very ill-favored, Sucton (accurate in
the description of his Emperors) bestows a better visage on him, cap. 30.
saying, Authoritas dignitasque forma non defuit stanti, velsedenti, ac
praecipue quiescenti, and adding, that he was specie canitieque putchra. Indeed
he describes his Laughter and his Anger to have been very unseemly: but Now we
speak of his Own face, not of the face of his Passions. But the word naper will
not so readily admit likewise this opinion, there being 27. years between
Claudius his End and Domitian's Beginning. Wherefore, (in a third Opinion) we
may rather look upon Domitian, to whom the Time agrees and the Fact: he having
not only corrupted many men's wives, but also more particularly taken away
Domitia Longina from her husb^md Aelius Lamia, and made her his own wife; as
Sueton relates in this Domitian, cap. 1. Yet he made Laws against dishonest
women; revived the Scantinian Law against unnatural lust, and another against
the profane pollution of the Vestal Virgins; and put a Roman Knight out of the
number of the Judges, because, after that he had accused and dismissed his wife
for adultery, he took her again; as Sueton relates, cap. 8. He desil'd also his
brother Thus his daughter, Julia, who was at that time another man's wife: and
when her father and husband were both dead, he shamed not to love her openly;
yet was he the cause of her death, by forcing her to abortion; as Sutton cap.
22. testifies saying, Vt etiam cause morris extiterit, coact ae conceptum a se
abigere. This therefore we must conclude to be the person here intended. Only
there is yet one doubt to be removed; Juvenal seeming here to implie his ill
visage, in those words abortivas patrue similes off^^, whereas Sueton, cap. 18.
says that he was vultu modesto, and afterward -- praterea pulcher ac decens.
Indeed after the first words, vultu modesto, he adds ruborisque pleno; which,
if they be taken only as an interpretation of the former, then must they
fignifie only, that he was much subject to blushing, which is also employed in
that chapter: but if they be expounded of his constant color, as the words do
aptly bear it, then they will most literally and exactly expound these words
of our Poet and Domitian's complexion, partrus similes offas. But Juvenal's
sense may be made more easy and appliable, if we understand this, not of
Domitian's complexion, but of his conditions, in respect of which he might
figuratively be called an Abortive, and so like the fruit which he got and
destroyed.

depiction of Roman soldiers in tortoise formation attacking a barbarian fort

8. The Scantinian Law. When a Stoic objected to Laronia a bold harlot the
Julian Law against Adultery, she requited him by objecting the Scantinian Law
against Unnatural Lust; a Law so named not from him that made it, but from
Scantinius, who was the occasion of it by his crime. Which manner of giving
names to Laws (it being less usual) some have denied: but you may see it
justified by Janus Parrhasius. Epi^^. 23. by the like among the Graecians: who
made the La^an Law (mentioned by Plate) of the same nature with the Scantinian,
upon occasion of the like crime committed by Laius.

9. By their thick Squadrons. Junctaque umbone phalanges. An expression of
companions in Vice, desending themselves like soldiers, when for fifty they
join their targets so, that one touches another boss, as when, according to
some, they cast themselves as, an the assaulting of a fort, into the military
figure of the testad^, or the torteiseshell: which in Gu^ll^^^e du Choul, in
his Discourse sur la Castra^etation des Romans, fol. 41. b. is thus represented.

10. The wrastlers bread. Coliphia. Some take Colophia to be a strong kind of
meat made of cheese and flower: but Rigaltius on this place takes it to be the
same with the Athenian (...), which were pernae, gammons of bacon; which we may
grant to be a strong meat, yet there is no prooffor such derivation of the
word. Junius would have it in an unclean sense to signify the form of the loaf
(not unlike the glass- priapus, Sat. 2.) from (...), membrum; though there is
no necessity of such unseemly signification from the word it self. Wherefore
the usual derivation from (...), seems best: as if, only transposing the words,
the food had been called strong-limbs, metonymically from the effect of it.
Which variety of expositions may be drawn from the note, which the Scholiast
gives on this place; Pulmentum sive membrum -- aut potius athletarum cibum
dicit. The last part of which annotation I think to be the best: so that it
shall in general signify the wrastlers diet, as Bu^^aeus thinks. Yet because
the coliphia seem to have been some special part of that diet and most probably
loaves, as we may conjecture from the Numbering of them by that in Martial,
lib. 7. Epig. 67. Cum coliphiasexdecim comedit; as also from their Making,
according to that of Plautus in Persa, Coliphia mibi ne incocta detis: we may
with the most interpreters render them, the Wrastlers bread. Which also in
probability was some special Diet bread, to advantage them at once in breath
and strength.

11. A trembling harlot, etc. In codice pellex. Mistresses that perceived any
suspicious familiarity of their husbands with their maids, did in the absence,
or after the death of their husbands use such servants according to their
deserts, with shame and labor. So the Scholiast and after him Joseph Scaliger
and Turnebus; as also Janus Parthasius, Epist. 22. But Autunmus on this place
says, that such a servant was made to sit thus before the door (for so he adds)
horrida and inculta, ne habeatur uxor, that she might not be mistaken for the
wife, or mistress of the house; and this interpretation he thinks to be most
agreeable to the mind of Juvenal. Both which reasons may be admitted, the one
implying the Revenge, the other the pride of the Mistress. Codex may be
interpreted either by a Clog or a Cage, or a like place of restraint made of
timber; both acceptions being frequent, and the latter also used by Propertius
in this particular business, lib. 4. Eleg. 7. Codicis immundi vincula sentit
anus; she induces the narrow limits or restraint of an unclean cage. In which
passage it is figuratively used by a metonymie of the matter; but in this of
Juvenal it is commonly understood with more plainness, only for a clog, as here
I render it.

12. In his last Will for his sole heir. -- Cur solo tabulae impleverit Hister
Liberto. Wills being written in waxen tables, primae cerae is taken for the
first table, as ^mae for the last; which is sometimes called also extrema cer^,
and ultima tabula, as Tiraquel notes on Alex. Ne^pol. lib. 1. cap. 1. In which
last table the second heirs were named, and legacies with other burdens imposed
upon the first heirs; as among others L^^gus shows, de Annulis Signatoriis,
cap. 10. p. 95, alleging also the last part of a Will made by one Grunnius
Corocotta: which partly for the humor of the testator and partly for the track
of Antiquity in it, (showing their Plenty of Witnesses and Manner of
testifying) may be observed. It is thus in him, as also in Brissonius de
Formulis, lib. 7. Optim. amatores mei, vel consimiles vitae, rogo vos ut
corpori meo benefaciatis, been condiatis bonis condimentis, nuclei, piperis and
mellis, ut ^^men meum in sempiternum nominetur. Mei Domini, and consobrini mei,
qui buic meo testamento interfuistis, jubete signari. Septem testes. Lucanicus
signavit. Tergillus signavit. Nuptialicus signavit. Celsanus signavit. Lardio
signavit. Cymatus signavit. Offellicus signa^vit. It may be farther observed,
that ima cera scribere, does sometimes signify (as in Sueton, in vita
Caesaris) to write so deep in the waxen tables, that it can hardly be blotted
out. So St. Jerome takes it in epist. ad Chrysog. saying, Ita nostrae es
necessitudinis penitus oblitus, ut illam epistolam, quam in cord Christianorum
Apostolus scriptam refert, non parva litura, se^ imis, ut aiunt, ceris
eraseris. After which explication of Antiquity and Phrase, we may more easily
understand the rare bounty of Hister's Lust, that troubled his Freed-man with
no coheirs; but made him alone take-up all the room, as in his Affections, so
in his Will.

13. With rich cylinders. These precius stones (worn as jewels) were called so
from their figure: which (to speak exactly) was not ovall, but long and round,
like a small pillar, of the same circumference from one end to the other.

14. And pard'ning crows. Pedro Cerone a Spaniard in a large work, which he
has written de la Musica, touching upon this passage expounds it thus;
Entendiendo por el cuervo al noble y rico que suele yr vestido de negro: y por
la columba o paloma al pobre labrador, por quanto suele vestir de pannos
blancos. So that by Crows he understands Great men, because, says he, they
usually go in black; and by Doves the Poorer sort, because they use to go
clothed in White. Which reasons we need not refute in earnest; yet to give
satisfaction to some, it may be known, that the Lacerna, or Soldier's Cloak,
was Black, according to Manutius (but in this part is a mistake) and the upper
garment which was usually worn at home is by some thought to have been black:
but to wear black publicly was not the custom. Nay, if any came so attired
into the Theater, he was forbidden by a Law, to sit among the better sort,
media cavea, as Sueton speaks in August. cap. 44. yet we grant that it was
permitted in Mourning. In like manner, for the apparel, of the poorer sort,
that they went in white, perchance Cerone might imagine, by misapprehending
that in the 10th Satyr, verse. 45. -- Et nive^s ad fraen^ Quirites, such as
went by the Consul's Chariot in his triumph being so attired. But this was not
to express poverty, but state, it being an extraordinary matter and proper to
an Assembly, or a time of Triumph, that those Clients which went by the
Consul's horses, should go thus dressed. Yet was it permitted to Paulus
Aemilius going to Iberia with Command: who rode all in white and on a white
horse, all his followers likewise were in white; but this was by the special
favor of the Senate. It was indeed a special color in the time of the
Emperors, and the meaner sort were so far from wearing of it, that the
contrary, Black, was an expression of Poverty; as Rosinus shows, lib. 5. cap.
32. from that of Calpurnius, O utinam nobis non rustica vestis inesset Pullaque
paupert^^ --: and it was grown a distinction of the Citizens, that some were
candidati, not such as anciently were suitors for Offices, but only the better
sort; others, pullati. On the contrary, that the better sort, except in
mourning, woar not black, as also that the color of the lacerna was not always
black, see Sat. 3. Illustrat. 25. See also Sat. 10. Illustrat. 9. So that it
seems, whiles Cerone thought upon the use of black in our times, wherein it is
often a Wear of Gravitie, he mistook the property of the Times Here intended.

15. Cretian Metellus. Cretice. One Manuscript has here Critice, as if the
sense were, Critic or Judge of manners: which for the purpose might be very
agreeable, but that the word seems a noveltie in Juvenal, as being against all
the other copies. Besides, there is no end of alteration; and therefore we
retain the common Reading, Cretice: which some would have to allude to those
severe Judges of Creet, Minos and Rhadamanthus. But we need not search so low
for an interpretation: Juvenal's conversation was with Men, though their crimes
were hellish; and in the language of Rome he speaks unto them. Creticus
therefore in this place most probably signifies, as it does in another place of
Juvenal: who in Sat. 8. verse. 90. says to a Moble Roman, by way of advise, and
under this name, -- ne sic tu Creticus aut Camerinus; deserve not thou to be
ironically called Creticus or Camerinus; and thus he uses these two words in a
like kind, that is, as the names of Noble persons. By some here is understood
Julius Creticus, a great Lawier in the time of the Caesar's: but we may more
safely and generally take it for any, that were descended of this family, the
family of Metellus, noble as much by Virtue, as by blood: who for his conquest
of Creet had the honor in his name, and was called Creticus, as Scipio was
called Africanus. Thus a few verses before in the same 8th Satyr, Juvenal
calls another Nobleman, for a like reason, Getulicus (in those words, -- salve
Getulice) he being of the famous family of Him, that had gotten that name from
his conquest of the Getulians. So here he speaks of Creticus, as of Metellus;
aggravating the levitie and filthiness of wearing transparent, and so immodest,
apparel, from the Nobleness of his Person; as if he should say, Will Thou do
this, that should remember, that thy Ancestor was a noble warrior severely
detesting such effeminacy? This seems the least constrained exposition, and for
advantage I add the Name (Metellus) to enlighten the epithet and the sense.

16. She Will never wear such a gown. -- Talent Non sumet damnata togam --. Toga
(the Gown) was properly the Man's garment, as stola was the Woman's, especially
in the latter time of the Roman Commonwealth. Yet the obscurer sort of Women,
also, and maidservants, and dishonest Women, chiefly those that were convicted
of adultery, were enjoined publicly to wear the gown; as Manutius de Quaesitis
per Epist. lib. 3. Epist. 1. shows out of Porphyrio upon that of Horace, Sat.
2. lib. 1. -- quid inter Est in matrona, ancilla peccesve togata? opposing
Matrona and Togata. He brings this also of Juvenal, as an allusion to that;
marvailing at Servius and Nonius Marcellus for delivering the contrary, and
thinking that they speak only of the most ancient times of the Roman
Commonwealth. Indeed Tully implies as much for His times (as Manutius notes)
Philip. 2. Sumpsisti virilem togam, quam stati^^ mullebrem reddidisti, primo
vulgar scortum: certa flagitii ^^erces; nec ea parva.

17. But July's Fire! I Boil. Sed Julius ardet, Aestu^. These words are an
objection supposed and presently answered by the Poet.

18. The Good Goddesse's chaste shrine. Atque bonam tenera placant, etc. As the
Goddess Cotytto was worshipped at Athens (the first King whereof was Cecrops)
by her Priests the Baptae, so called because they were washed in (hot) water,
before they were admitted to her filthy Sacrifices called Orgia, from the
furious raptures wherewith her priests were thought to be inspired; and as, to
add opportunity to leudness, these Rites were celebrated by night, a time
fitter for sleep, then for service: so at Rome the Goddess Bona, or the Good
Goddess, was worshipped by Women, who were usually summoned to such service by
the noise of a horn or the like instrument, men being excluded. In imitation
whereof, some filthy Men performed by night and stealth such sacrifices to the
same Goddess, excluding Women, but not pleasure. To these Juvenal here alludes,
saying that they which first would not blush to wear wanton Apparel, would at
the next degree be partakers of those odious Rites, and wear Women's apparel;
and not only be thus unmanly in their Attire, but worse in their Behavior.

19. By Juno swears. The Poet here, says Politian in his Observations,
reprehends Men for Swearing after the manner of Women, by Juno; whereas they
should more properly have sworn per Genium. Seneca implies the reason of this,
Epist. 110. speaking of former times, Singulis enim and Genium and Junonem
dede^unt. Which words Dempster de Juramento, lib. 1. cap. 8. p. 145. mends
thus, lege aut Genium, scilicet viris, aut Junonem, foeminis: but before Him,
Lipsius on that Epistle mended them so. Where we may farther note, that some
Oaths were observed to have been peculiar to Men, as to swear by Jupiter,
Hercules, Fides, Genius; Others to Women, as Aedepol, Mecastor, and by Juno;
for so Lubin delivers out of Politian. Yet I find Valentinus Acidalius, an
accurate Critic, in his Annotations on Plautus his Asinaria, cap. 10. making
Aedepol a common Oath to Men and Women.

20. Otho's shield (a Looking-glass). Some have seemed to doubt of the truth of
this Disgrace, which Juvenal here lays upon Otho; being moved by the elogies,
which Historians bestow upon his death. Yet that is not enough to clear his
Life; if but according to History we remember his vile commerce with Nero, his
effeminate periwig to hide his baldness, and especially his impudent coin
circumscribed with His Name and Title; wherein he is expressed with such a
curious method of wreaths, that it will suppose Otho's hand, or his
mistresse's, rather then the engravers, to have dressed it. It is thus
preserved and published by Antoine le Poix a learned French Antiquary, at the
end of his Discourse sur les Medalles Antiques, p. 1. figur. 8. The Poet then
faith depiction of a coin bearing the likeness and title of Otho M. OTHO CAESAR
AVG. TR. P. IMP.

that these base sinners as much esteemed of Otho's looking-glass, as Turnus
did of the mighty spear, which he bravely wonn from Actor Aruncus; as it is in
Virgil. Aeneid. 12.

21. Vastly they feast. Nay, This so Rare a Bride, etc. The Poet having
expressed the portion which this execrable Gracchus brought to his dear
Cornet-winder, namely 400. sestertia (3125 l.) proceeds saying, as the common
copies here have it, Ingens coena sedet; gremio jacuit, etc. In which passage
Lubin takes coena sedet for convivae sedent; which is but a hard acception: and
whereas he once thought with Lipsius (as he says) in his Epist. Quast. p. 133.
that it should be read, Sed and gremio, in English as much as, Nay even to bed
went this bride, and so to be an aggravation: yet he tells us that now he likes
of the other Reading, Coena sedet, expounding sedet by posita and parata est;
making this phrase or manner of speech peculiar to Juvenal: who, as he alleges,
speaks on this fashion also in that of the first Satyr, -- nunc sportula primo
Limine parva seder. He might have taken that other instance also from our
Author, Sat. 8. verse. 63. -- Rara ju^o victoria sedit. But I approve not of his
change of opinion for these reasons; first, it is a new expression to say coena
sedet for coenantes; and Lubin is fain to say, that it is peculiar to Juvenal.
Secondly, his proof out of Juvenal, and the other of the like form, which I
allege, do not advantage his exposition of coena by coenantes; nay, they rather
make it the more harsh; because then it should be, coenantes sedent mensa:
which, if expounded like the other (juga victoria sedit) the guests would be
placed as well upon the table, as at it. Thirdly, though the learned Pithaeus
in the text of Juvenal reads coena sedet; yet in his Var. Lection. on this
place, he gives this note, An potius distinguendum fuit -- ingens Coena, sedet:
gremio jacuit, etc. and then adds out of A^uleius, Accumbit ad summum thorum
maritus, Psychen gre^io suo complexus, intending it as a like sense. whereby it
appears, that he disliked the insolency of the phrase coena sedet, and sought
to avoid it by the variety of Reading: according to which, coena cannot be the
word that must agree with sedet; but either the Bridegroom, or Gracchus the
new Bride, or both of them; that so it may answer to accumbit maritus, etc. But
then gre^^io jacuit should only signify that she lay in his bosom, after the
Roman fashion, at Supper; which were to take away the greatest aggravation of
the crime, and according to this sense, sedet might have been spared in this
concise expression, being imp^^ed, if it did signify accumbit, in the next
words jacuit, wherefore I cannot here approve his conceit. Besides the Poet in
this place uses most judicious and accurate brevitie in the distinctions and
parts of his speech, as Signatae tabulae; dictum feliciter; ingen^ coena: after
all which, to come dropping in ^ith no news; but to say, that the meat was let
on the table, and then that they Sat down, were but a filling speech, being
that which every man must suppose, especially at a wedding, though Juvenal had
held his tongue. But let us take Lipsius his Reading, Sed and gremio (which I
here use,) and it is an elegant advancement of expression, an admiration
suitable to the crime.

22. A Cen^or or the Aruspex. The One purged the the City from Offenses by
Punishment, the other by Sacrifice; or upon occasion when Monsters were
produced.

23. The frindge, long gown, etc. The Poet here describes the singular pravitie
of Gracchus, who had been even a Priest of Mars, and therefore should have been
far from filthy esseminacy: yet so far did degenerate from Nobility and
Manhood, that as a bride he was married and attired. But in the Poet's
description of the Salii or Priests of Mars, there seems to be some ambiguity,
whiles he says of Gracchus, as of one of them, Arcano qui sacra serens nu^antia
loto, Sudavit clypei^ ancilibus --. The Dress of the Salii in number twelve
(though afterward twice so many) and all of the Nobility, was chiefly this; A
cap like a helmet, for the head; for the body the tunica picta or a coat
embroidered; on this a brazen breast plate with a little shield fastened with a
thong on the inside (as some describe it) and small daggers in their hands,
wherewith they struck upon their shields; and in this Dress yearly in March
they solemnly danced about the Forum and the Capitol. In which passage it may
seem doubtful, though the doubt be not proposed by the Interpreters, what is
meant by Sacra. In brief, they take it generally, I grant, for the same with
clypels ancilibus, and, as I think, rightly; making the sense to be, as I have
rendered it, that they carried the shields and danced with them so long, that
they sweat. But this I thought necessary to be mentioned for two reasons; the
one whereof is, because Lubin says here, upon arcano loro -- lorn^ e c^r^^
intrinsecus statuis appositum erat: which to what purpose he adds here I know
not, unless he would have us suppose, that every one of the Salii carried some
statue of Mars fastened to him; but, that any such thing was here used, it
appears not. The other reason is, because the poet varying the appellation of
the same thing in the very next verse, it might justly seem obscure, as I think
it is, and therefore fit to be observed: though I think it also justly
warrantable; the first (sacra) being but a general expression, the latter
(ancilia) more especial. And here we may observe, that though ancile be
according to some rendered by Scutum, it is more accurately here by the Poet
called clypeus (...) the difference being, that the Scutum was a larger
defense, being somewhat like a door, more long then broad, and therefore by the
Greeks called (...); whereas the clypeus was less and round, and therefore the
eye of the Cyclops is compared unto it by Virgii (yet to a large one, an
Argolick shield) saying, Argolici clypei and Phoebeae lampadis instar; as
Godelevaus observes out of Livy, lib. 8. where the Historian says, that to some
soldiers was appointed the clypeus, but to others pro clype^ Scutum. Yet the
form of the Ancile (or the shield, as the fable has it, that fell from Heaven
with a voice foretelling, that, That City should bear rule, in which that
should be kept) is described not without variety; some saying that it was cut
on each side like a half Moon, as Manutius de Quaesitis per Epist. lib. 3.
Epist. 6. others, that it was rounder, according to that of Ovid, Atque ancile
vocan^, quod ab omni part recisum est: Quaeque oculis spectes, angulus omnis
abest. Both expressions are presented by Du Choul de la Religion des Ancien^
Romans. p. 239. the one from a friver-coin, in Augustus his time, which by
some is taken for the form of the Ancile; the other from a brazen coin, in the
time of Antoniaus Pius, which last has the flame expressed upon it.

b
depiction of a coin from Augustus' reign showing ancilia shields IMPERATORII.

ANCILIA

S C



a. Juv. Sat. II. Illust: 23.
depiction of a coin from Antoninus Pius' reign PSTOLO

III. VIR



24. Great Marcher. Thus I choose to render, Gradive. Gradivus here signifies
Mars: but Autumnu^ against the common exposition takes it here for Romulus, the
Son of Mars; but gives no reason of his dissent. Yet I suppose it to be from
the former words of Juvenal saying, O pater Vrbis; which likewise Autumnus
expounds by Romulus. But I think that Gradivus ought here to be taken for Mars;
it being the safest way to expound any Author by himself, and so Juvenal by
Juvenal: who Satyr, 13. verse. 113. call, Mars by this name, Gradivus
Homericus, Mars mentioned in Homer, as it is there justly and necessarily
expounded. We may add that of Livy, Decad. 1. lib. 2. Jovem patrem Gradivumque
Martem aliosque iratos deos invoco; and thus it was usually taken by others.
For so when Juvenal says, Sat. 13. Et Martis frameam --, it is borrowed and
altered by Martianus Capella into Gradivi frameam. And whereas Autumnus takes
pater Vrbis to be Romulus, there also it more fitly signifies Mars: who, being
the father of Romulus, may with more honor to Rome, as being accounted in
their fond religion the greater deity, be called the father of it. But to show
beyond just reply, that Gradivus must here signify not Romulus, but Mars, it
is apparent from the continuation of this Apostrophe, in which, a little after,
the Poet says unto him -- Go then, no more respect Thy warlike field --: by
which, Autumnus (as the rest of the Interpreters) understands Campus Martius,
an ample place, where military exercises were used. Which manner of speech, thy
field, makes it clear, that he speaks to Mars, whose field it was. Thus even
according to Autumnus himself it must be expounded, though he observed not the
inconvenient truth of his own exposition, against himself. Now, for the word
Gradivus, some (as particularly Servius) would bring it from (...), and so it
might with small addition be rendered, Shakespeare; which in effect is the sense
also of the name Pallas, from (...), vibro; but that this is a near and easy
derivation, the other somewhat remote; as also is theirs, who would dravv it
from gramen, because a Grass-coronet was in Honor amongst Martial men, being
the revvard of those, that raised the enemie's Siege. Others make it quasi
Grandis divus: but this were no name of distinction from some other gods; nay,
even in this sense it might seem fit to be given to Jupiter himself by way of
excellency. Festus the Grammarian derives it from gradior, a gradiendo in bello
ultro citroque from bestirring himself in Battles: but Britannicus though he
sets this derivation in the first place, yet expounds it in a different sense,
saying, quia gradatim, and per ordines eatur in bellum; implying that the word
does seem to express the stately and leasurely March of the God of War;
according to which apt sense I choose to render it.

25. Bigg Lyde's Physick-box can This never gain. There are two Readings of
this passage; the one, Turgida non prodest in pixide condita Lyde; and this is
renewed and approved by Fortunatus Scaccbus in his Myrothecium, lib. 1. cap:
44. where he says, that Lyde signifies a spider, so called from Arachne a
Lydian turned into a spider; and that condita in pixide turgida, implies that
it was closed in a swelling box, so called either, because it was full of
Ointments, or else somevvhat round sided, of this form, as Schacchus presents
in Myrothecuim, p. 431. and lastly that this was thought to be of depiction of
a round-sided physick-box special virtue to make Women fruitful. Upon this
persuasion, says he, they carried a spider about with them in a box; which that
it might not corrupt and so by the smell offend, they added ointments to it.
Which belief was occasioned by a kind of spider called Phalangium, which as
Pliny relates, lib. 11. cap. 24. brings forth 300. young ones at one time. Thus
we must first suppose that Women generally took notice of this obscure fable of
the spider Phalangium; and secondly we must make turgida, which is here a
dactyle, to be of the ablative case and agree with pixide. Indeed the
interpretation is as excusable as the poetry; yet I mention it, because he does
more fully then others, set down this Opinion, or rather fancy. Junius also
did deliver this conceit about a spider, out of an old Manuscript, and so it
came into the more estimation, and seems to please Autumnus, as the best: but
let him believe the trifle, whiles we believe it to be but a triflle; this
Reading and Interpretation being in effect long since rejected by Philip
Beroald in his Annotations as an exposition too remote and an affectation
grounded upon no sufficient authority. The other Reading is Turgida non prodest
condita pixide Lyde; and this most Manuscripts agree upon: according to which,
Beroald and Politian make Lyde turgida (that is, ventricosa) to signify a
corpulent Woman called Lyde from her country (the Lydian Women commonly of such
a size, as Statius seems to emplie in those words, Hoc plaudunt grege Lydiae
tumentes); adding, that such went with boxes of Ointments to sell, pretending
them to be effectual for Women's fruitfulness, and that they were intertain'd
with a common and foolish belief; which exposition as the most probable I
receive. To the like effect indeed the Luperci the priests of Pan did use in
February to run naked about the City (yet Plutarch mentions a little covering)
the Women that desired to be fruitful holding our their hands unto them not
without impudent folly, and the priests striking them with a goat skin, or, as
the Scholiast has it, with a ferula.

26. The Coated Gracchus's trident This surpassed. Tunicati fuscina Gracchi.
Under the name of Gracchus, the Poet here and before declames against some of
the chief Nobility; before for their execrable marriages, and here for hiring
their lives to the Prator (who set forth shows to the people) and, as infamous
persons, for fighting publicly in the Amphitheater strewn with sand, to drink
up the blood that was shed. For they that were put to the worst were according
to the custom usually killed: yet to this base madness did some of the vicious
and bank-rupt Nobility descend. Where it is worth the noting, that the Poet,
in passing to the description of this other Gracchus, says Vicit etc hoc
monstrum tunicati fuscina Gracchi, as if this fault had been more monstrous
then the other crime. Which sense may seem unworthy of Juvenal's judgment,
namely that he should make a fault against Honor to be greater then a sin
against Nature; and I marvail that this inconvenience has almost escaped all
Interpreters. Indeed Lubin seems to take notice of it, saying that the Poet
calls this the worse fault, because unto the former, some of the Nobilitic had
been forced by Nero, but unto This baseness they did voluntarily descend. This
were somewhat, if it were all true; but he proves none of it. I remember that
Sulpitius Severus in his Eccles. Histor. lib. 2. relates that the monster Nero
was, as a Woman, married to one Pythagoras, and that Xiphiline says the same
and also, that as a Male he was as monstrously married to one Sporus! Orosius
says the same; only whereas some call the former infamous person, Pythagoras,
Sueton calls him Doryphorus, Nero's freed-man: yet in this as there is no
mention of Nobility, so neither of compulsion. Wherefore unless we saw better
ground for this assertion, we may rather seek some other reason; and I propose
this. The Poet does not here compare the two faults for the Hainousness, but
for the impudence in the committing of them: in which respect, this though the
less sin in it self, did exceed the former. For in the committing of that, they
had some shame, as the Poet implied saying, -- Nubit amicus, Nec multos adhibet
--, it must be closely carried; and Fiert istapalam --, hereafter they will
commit this openly, so that as yet it was a secret villainy: but as for This
Baseness, though extreme, they run into it open faced; as may appear from the
nature of the fault now to be set forth. Of the two that are here described for
the combat, the one was called Retiarius, as this Gracchus here was; the other
Myrmillo and Sequutor. The first is (in effect) used a little after this
passage, when the Poet says, -- retia misit: the two latter are used in Sat. 8.
where the Poet falls again more largly and vehemently upon this argument. Yet
because the Antiquity and Form of these exercises is very necessary to be here
declared, the exposition of that in the eighth Sat. may be here delivered. The
Retiarius then was so called from the principal part of his furniture, which
was diverse. For first he was dressed in a short Coat, which beseem'd not the
state of a Noble Person. Secondly he had a three-pointed Mace or iron in his
left hand; and thirdly a Net in his right; with which, if he could by his skill
(which was commonly practiced) he did enwrap his adversary by suddenly casting
of it over his head and as suddenly drawing it together, and then with his
trident usually slew him. In which mad exercises, the net was counted such an
advantage, that they allowed the Retiarius no other fence. For on his head he
woar only a hat or long cap tied under his chin with a broad string or ribband,
as this Gracchus is described, Sat. 8. And thus he fought in part barefaced,
which farther argued the unworthiness of such a person, thus to engage his life
and honor with a hireling. The other combatant was called Myrmillo, who,
besides a hooked sword (falx supina) and a buckler, was allowed also a helmet,
whereon was the picture of a fish: which gave occasion to the Retiarius to say
usually to the Myrmillo that strived to avoid the casting of the net, Non te
peto, piscem peto, quid me fugis Galle? not that the Myrmillo was always a Gaul
or Frenchmen, but because his Armor or furniture was after the Gallique
fashion. The reason of the name Myrmillo is by some mentioned, as by Marcellus
Donatus on Sueton's Caligula, cap. 32 where Myrmillones are said to be so
called, quasi Myrmidones, as if it were from their singular valor, the
Myrmidons having in their time been the flower of the Greek soldiery. But not
to abuse our selves with such derivations, the learned Johannes Isacius
Pontanus in his Glossarium Prisco-Gallicum, in the word Myrmillo, p. 254. tells
us, that the Myrmillo is a fish by the Frenchmen anciently called Mormyron, or
Mormilon, which will so subtly shoot himself into the mud, that the Fishermen
are scarce able to take him with a drag. And because he that fought with the
Retiarius did sometimes use great bendings or windings of his body to avoid the
net, and as it were to hide himself from the art of the Retiarius; therefore by
similitude he was called Myrmillo, and wore the picture of the fish upon his
helmet. Thus Pontanus, chiefly out of Gillius, partly out of Gesner; though the
Scholiast indeed gave the light to them all: who on this word, Sat. 8. v. 199.
gives this note, Mirmillo armaturae Gallicae nomen, ex pisce inditum, cuius
imago in galea fingitur. The Myrmillo is also upon occasion, Sat. 8. v. 210.
called Sequutor, as much as the Pursuer; because if the Retiarius did not
cunningly poise his arm in the casting of his net, but cast either to short or
to far, so that he missed his purpose, instantly he betook himself to his
heels, running about the Amphitheater for his life, with all possible agilitie,
that he might happily recollect his net for a second cast; the myrmillo in the
mean time as swiftly pursuing him (whence he was called Sequutor) to deprive
him, if he could, of his purpose and life. This kind of fighting (with the Net)
came from Pittacus the wife Grecian, who (as Diogenes Laertius relates)
fighting a single combat with Phrynon, did with a net which he hid under his
buckler suddenly entangle him and then slew him.

27. Then the first Rank at Shows. Ad Podium spectantibus. (...) was the chief
place at Shows, and called so because, as some think, it did jut-out like a
foot, or as others, because it was at the foot or lower part of the building,
and so being the foremost and nearest place of Seats for the advantage of sight
and hearing, was appointed for the Nobility. Servius alleges this to expound
that of Virgil, Aeneid, (...). Mox totum caveae ^^^cessum ingentis, and (...)
Prima p^trum --. So that our Poet says that Gracchus, who thus disgraced
himself, was by birth more noble, then the best of his Spectators, or the
Prator himself, who set forth these Shows.

28. If they 've the Bath-see paid. The Scholiast tells us that the children
did not pay the Balneatic^m, or see for being Bathed; seeming to implie that
they were bathed. The Author of the Manuscript Commentary would be too
impurely subtle, saying that the Poet here speaks against little children, who
that they might be bathed without paying the fee, permitted themselves to the
Bath-keepers worst desire. Lubin first says that children were not bathed at
all: but afterward he prefers another opinion before this, saying that though
they were bathed, yet they paid not the farthing, or fee. But he might have
better kept himself to his first opinion; children being not bathed at all in
the public baths, as C^lde^ine shows out of Tully de Oratore; and the time
that they thus abstained being till they were four years old. One Manuscript
well expresses the sense of this passage, the Author of it saying that none but
infants believe a hell, that is, such as not coming yet to the public Baths,
are by this means as yet not corrupted in their lives. Thus does he implie the
epidemical impiety of those times, wherein hell was counted rather a fable,
then a place of justice, and only such satyrically supposed to believe it, as
could not understand it.

29. Or the bold Legion of Cremera --. It may peradventure give occasion of
doubt to some, that Juvenal here calls those, that were slain at the river
Cremera in Tuscanie, a Legion; it being expounded of the Fabii, who were in all
but 306. whereas a Legion, according to Vegetius, and Modestus, contained 6000.
foot and 700. horse; not to examine farther the exact overplus of these
numbers. And though the number of a Legion did sometimes vary, yet this number
of the Fabii may not presume to swell to that extent. Britannicus indeed says
that they were aided by their Servants and Clients, yet Florus, calls them
Patricius exercitus; and Livy, lib. 2. cap. 49. says of them, Nunquam
exercitus, neque minor numero, neque clarior fama and admiratione hominum per
urbem incessit. wherefore the word Legio seems here not to be used in an exact
sense, but rather by way of wit: such brave Romans, though but few, being
termed a Legion for their equivalent worth.

30. If Sulphur and the pine tree were With them --. The Ancient manner of
purging those that were polluted was with Sulphur and fire made with the wood
of the unctuous pine tree, and such like; they used also to wet a laurel branch
and sprinkled them with it. See Turnebus, lib. 23. cap. 21. Meursius in his
Spicileg. p. 144. and Marcellus Donatus on Sueton's Nero. cap. 6.

31. Beyond the Irish foe. Juverna here used is by the Scholiast taken for
Britany; and Ortelius shows out of Isacius upon Lycophron, that Juverna was
called West-Britany. Yet both by Orielius and Mr. Cambden it is taken for
Ireland, and otherwise, methinks the Poets expression would seem disjointed,
first mentioning Britany, then the Orcades, and then the Britans (for so the
Poet orders them, saying -- ultra Littora Juvernae -- and -- Orcadas -- ac --
Britannos): besides to name both Britanie and the Britans were superfluous. But
the chief doubt here is, whether, as Juvenal here says, the Romans had extended
their victories beyond Ireland; seeing that it is thought by our accurate
Cambden, that the Romans did not conquer Ireland. Wherefore, this passage of
Juvenal seeming to imply the contrary, we may conclude that the Poet speaks
here at large, as a stranger to there parts, and but according to the report of
the triumphing Romans, who sometimes took discoveries for conquests, and
thought those overcome, who were but neighbors to those, whom they overcame.
And here we may observe, that the Poet notes the Britans for their short
nights; which is to be understood of the Summer-solstice, when the night, in
the extremest part of the Isle is scarce six hours long; as Lipsius notes on
Tacitus his Agricola, on those words, Dierum spatia ultra nostri orbis mensuram.

32. He came a hostage; here he is made a Man! Venerat obses; hic fiunt homines;
That is, He came innocent, from his own country, and rather into a sorrowful
stare, to be but a pawn for the loyalty of his countrymen, and therefore
indeed but as an honorable prisoner: but here by commerce, he is made a Man no
doubt! which last words are usually understood as an Ironie; the meaning being,
that he was rather turned a Woman. Indeed the word Homo will bear either sense;
and peradventure, though against some interpreters, the later will prove the
truer, if we take notice of the significations of the word, Which sometimes by
way of excellency signify the First of men, as (according to the Latin copy)
in that of Genesis 2.25. Homo and uxor ejus: where not only the word Homo is used
by way of distinction for the Man, but also necessarily Homo and not Vir, and
that according to the strictness of the Original; wherein the word is not (...)
but (...). Johannes Drusius in his Notes upon Sulpitius Severus his
Ecclesiastical History, lib. 1. p. 8. shows also that sometimes homo is taken
only for the Woman; see there also his Epistle to Baudartius of the acceptions
of Homo. But for the sense of the word in this place, I think it ought to be
rendered here, as it is on a like occasion used again in Juvenal himself: who,
in the sixth Satyr bringing-in an impudent Woman not able to deny her
dishonesty, makes her confess her shame, in a kind of excuse, by crying-out
Homo sum; which I there render, -- I me Woman. And I think it might as truly be
rendered here in that feminine sense; Hither he came a hostage, an innocent
Male, as Pledges (to prevent dishonorable inconveniences) use commonly to be
(though not always, as Lipsius observes on Tacitus his Germania) but now we may
say, he is of one sex more; though not mere Woman, yet of the Common gender.
And this the Poet implies by his effeminacy, saying that the change and
corruption of his manners appears in the change of his attire: for now
mittentur braccae, etc. not (as some would have it) He shall have such things
sent as gifts to corrupt him; but, as the Scholiast well expounds it by
showing an (...), Mittentur, that is, Dimittentur; the sense being this, Now he
will bid farewell to his former simplicity, he will lay aside his own Country
Ornaments, such as were the (braccae) Slops, and the ruder knives of His
country fashion; likewise the whips and bridles used by him in his homebred,
honest, manly and hunting exercises; And will carry home to his Armenian City
Artaxata, the brave sins of Rome. Whence we may farther see, that Mittentur
cannot signify, that such things should be sent as gifts unto him, this being
to preserve him in his innocent attire and exercises; but it must signify a
chang of his Armenian manners into R^man. It were a truth, though but a sport,
to remember that in one Manuscript the word Artaxata is expounded by a kind of
strange garment; but we must add that such exposition is more strange.

SATYR. III.
ARGUMENT.
To Witty Rome the Greeks such Wit
Did Add, they could each humor fit.
They could a Great Man's Crimes Explore;
And those Crimes Publish, or Adore
And Act too, if Need Bid them! Rare
Merchants, that made men's Sins their Ware!
Nay, in mere Rome, besides these drifts,
Through Pois'ning, Treachery and Gifts,
Fires, Ruins, Throngs, Noise, Scorn and Theft,
No place for Honest men is left.
Umbritius then from Rome departs,
Because he wants the Roman Arts.
THough my old Friends departure makes me sad,
Yet I commend him, that he means to add
To good Sibylla one inhabitant more
At private Cumae. [1] It Is the Romans door
Into fair Baiae, and does yield the sight
Of a most grateful shoar's retired delight.
I Prochyta prefer, though counted base,
Before our brave Suburra (a). For what place
Is so forsaken, that thou should forsake,
Even There, sweet Peace? and madly choose to quake
At daily Fires, and falling houses, and
A thousand such disasters still at hand
In dreadful Rome? Nay, and in August's heat,
When Poets read, [2] to throng into a sweat?
But whiles his goods were in one Wagon laid,
By the Capenian Conduit-gate he staid,
At the Old Arches. Here did Numa use
To meet his night-Nymph: but here now some Jews,
Whose Hay and Basket is their wealth, [3] do dwell
Hiring the Muses Chapel, Grove and Well. (b)
For every Tree must pay the People rent:
Our Groves now Beg: Out are the Muses sent
To seek a Roof! Hence to Aegeria's Vale
We did descend; whose sacred Caves now fail
To yield the eye the first delight. For sure
The water's Deity were far more pure,
If a Grass-margin graced the Spring, and none
Of our vain Marbles graced the native stone.
Here then says my Vmbritius, since no gains
Or place Rome yields to Honest Arts and Pains;
Since my stock daily wastes, and less will grow
Tomorrow; I resolve thither to go,
Where Daedalus put-off his weary wings:
Whiles Hoariness in straight Old Age (c) first springs,
Whiles Lachesis has yet not Finished, and
Whiles my Feet bears Me, not a staff my Hand.
Let Us leave Rome; it is for Arturius Here,
Or cunning Catulus to domineere:
Such can turn black to white, hire Temples, Ports,
Rivers, Sink-cleansing, Business of all sorts,
And Gain by it; bear to their last fire the Dead,
And sell under the Spear a Servile head.
These were but Cornet-winders, whose base Crew
And Cheeks (d) each Country Theater well knew.
Now these set forth the Shows, and with ease can,
The Peoples Thumb being turned, [5] kill any man;
And thence returned [6] they hire for gain (never grutch)
Jakes-farming. Why not all things? Since they are such,
As from a low Estate are strangely Blessed
By Fortune, when she is disposed to jest.
What should I do at Rome? I cannot fain,
Not praise a Dull Book, or crave to obtain
A Copy: The Stars Motions pass my skill:
To promise a Rich Father's Death, my Will
And Art detest: Toads entrails (e) I never viewed:
What with one's Bride a sly Knave does conclude,
What Guists, what Letters pass, let others know:
I Will be no Theife's Receiver. Thus I go
From Rome as fit for no man, like one maimed.
Whose right hand, Life already has disclaimed.
For who is now loved but he, whose burning breast
Great Men's great Crimes does Hide, though not detest?
He neither Gives, nor Owes thee any fee,
That tells thee but some Honest Secrecy.
Dear shall he be to Verres, that knows How
And when, to Accuse Verres. But slight Thou
The shadowed Tagus's sands, though sands of gold,
Which with his waves into the Sea are rolled;
Rather then wake through Guilt and Bribes, and tend
With a sad Heart on a Great jealous friend.
Whom now our Rich ones Love, and I most Hate,
Since They blush not, I Will blush not, to relate.
I loath, Quiritians, Rome turned Greek; [7] although
Not much Achaian dreggs we have. But lo,
Syrian Orontes into Tyber flowed
Long since, and brought with it more than it owed;
Tongue, Manners, strings as straight, the Minstrel too,
The Syrian Drum, and the soft Girls that woe
For Gain, at the known Circus (f). Thither go
You, that their painted Miters [8] love to know.
The haunt-doal gown, [9] Quirinus, Thy Clown wears,
And his oil'd neck rewards of Mast'ry bears.
But one from Amydon, high Sicyon, and
Samos, from Andros, Tralles, Alaband,
On the Esquiline or Viminal Hill's Adored,
First the Entrals of some Great House, Then the Lord!
Such are of swift wit, of Brow strangely bold,
And Tongue most quick: Isaeus is less rolled.
Riddle me this, what is He, that to Rome came,
And with him brought what Man or Trade you will name,
Grammarian, Orator, Geometrician,
Painter, Anointer, Quacksalver, Magician,
Diviner, Rope-dancer! All things he knows,
A hungry Greek, if bid, to Heaven straight goes.
In brief, no Moor he was, Tartar or Thracian,
That Flew once; but in Athens born. Bold nation!
Shall I not shun their Purple (g)? Or must I
Let Him Seal first, and on the chief Couch lie [10]
At Feasts? Whom to our Rome the same wind brought,
That brought us Prunes and Figgs? Goes it for naught,
That we Aventine air first breathed, and bred
In Rome, were with the Sabine olive fed?
But, O, these Greeks cunning, to fawn, can grace
A Sott's discourse, and a Friends ugly face:
His slender neck to Hercules they dare
Equal, that held Antaeus in the Air:
They praise his small voice, though no better then
The noise, the Husband-Cock makes with his Hen.
We could praise these things too, thus lie; but They,
(There Is the luck!) are believed too! who does play
A Thais, better? or, a Wife? or, fair
Doris? You Would think it were the Nymph, no Player.
Though no short Cloak does hide her, yet ones eye
(Through their even skill) no difference can descry.
Antiochus, Demetrius, Stratocles,
Soft Haemus too, where these come, cannot please.
The Nation's Born to Comedy. Smile you?
He shakes with laughter: weeps, give but the cue,
And Grieves Not. Call for fire against winters threats,
On goes His Rugg (h): say but, I Am hot, He Sweats.
We are not Even then: he it is has the start,
That still can wear another Face and Art;
Cast up the hands before the brow [11]; commend
His Lord, if he belch well; if his bigg Friend
Leak on his Couch [12]; if, when the wine's quaff'd up,
His lips but smack against the golden cup [13].
Besides, what is holy? from their Lust what is free?
Matrone and Daughter in a Family,
Nay Bridegroom too, yet smooth, and the dear Son,
Modest till now, are now by these undone!
If this pray fail, till even the Bottome's cleared,
They Will ransack House and Heart, [14] and thence be feared!
And now we talk of Greeks, their Schools go view. [15]
And the Grave habit. (i) 'Twas a Stoic slew
Bareas, a whispeuer his Friend, an old
Master his Scholar; born where the too bold
Gorgonean Horse a feather lost. [16] No place
Is for a Romam left at Rome; where base
Protogenes, where Diphilus, or where
An Erimanthus once gets head, who never
(That Is the Greek trick) Divides a friend; but will
Engross him. For, can he but once instill,
Into an easy ear, his subtle hate,
A drop of his Greek venom, I am straight
Thrust out. Thus my long service is rewarded!
A Clients loss is no where less regarded!
Indeed, what is Here a Poor man's Toil or Pay!
Though his gowns on, to Visit, before Day! (k)
When as the Praetor to his Lictor sends
Headlong, least that even Then his Childless friends
Be up, and some Colleague in the pursuit,
Should Modia or Albina first salute.
Here thou may sometimes see a Freeborn Son,
Upon a Rich man's Servant's Left Hand run: [17]
For even this Servant gives from his strange store
To Catiena or Calvina more
For a faint night or two, then the whole pay
Our Tribunes have, that in a Legion sway.
But Thou, glad of a Veiled face, do not dare
To hand down Chione from her high Chair [18]
Bring here a VVitness too, though just, as he
That lodged the Idaean Cybel, or as free
As Numa, or our Priests, that to his fame
Saved trembling Pallas from the Temple's flame:
Straight ask they, Is he rich? But, Is he just?
Is the Last question, and least cause of trust!
How many Servants feeds he? What Is his Land?
How furnished is his Table? When all is scann^d,
Thy Chest's thy Rule: for, How much Treasure's there,
Just so much credit have thou. Should thou swear
By the great Samothracian Gods and ours [19]
They think, the Poor slight thunder and the powers
Divine, and are forgiven. What jests are spent
On a poor man, if his cloak's foul or rent!
If his Gown's soiled, his Shoe ripped, or ill sowed,
That the brown thread, like scars in wounds, is showed.
Unhappy Povertie's worst Plague is, that
It makes a man, alas, be flouted at!
Away cries one, and let him not here claim
A seat on the Knight's cushion'd bench [20] for shame,
Whose state's below the Law; sit you here, which
(Though Pandars sons born in some Stews) are rich.
Let some neat Crier's son clap here, among
Trim yonkers from some goodly Fathers sprung,
Sons of some Catch-Fish, or chief Fencer [21]. Thus
It pleased vain Otho, who distinguished us!
Who gets a Rich wench Here, If his Means are
Less then Her bags? What Poor man's made an Heir?
When asks an Aedile his advise [22]? The Poor
Should have lest Rome e're this, by troops, once more.
They scarce e're get their heads above the flood,
Whose virtue's, by short means at home, withstood!
Chiefly at Rome; where every thing is dear,
Poor Lodging, Servants Bellies, and short cheer,
And yet an Earthen dish These scorn, though He
Well liked it, that by sudden change did see
The Marsians and Sabellians thrifty food, [23]
And that wore There the course Venetian hood [24]
Indeed, not in a few Italian Towns
There are not any, till they are dead, wear Gowns [25]
Even when to their grass-Theaters they throng
At their great Feasts, when the known Parting-song
Returns unto their Stages, [26] and the sight
Of a pale gaping Actour [27] does half-fright
The country Babe in's Mother's lap; you may
See there one Dress, nor the first seats more gay, [28]
Then are the People's: where the Roab of Note
In their chief Aediles is but a white Coat [29]
Here without Means too bravely we go dressed,
And sometimes borrow from another's Chest.
This is our fault! We all, in Pride controlled
By want, live Here. In brief at Rome All Is Sold!
What will ye give, Great Cossus to Salute?
Or for Vejento's glance, though He Will be Mute?
One barbes his Man, another trims his Page
Enriched with their fine cakes [30]. But add just rage,
As leaven; Swell at This; poor Client's pay
Mere Tribute to proud Slaves, which thus bear sway!
At cold Praeneste or Volsinium placed
Amongst shady Hills, at Gabii truly graced
With innocence, or at steep Tibur's Tower,
Who fears a Ruin? When as, much of our
Proud Rome does trust to a weak prop. For so
The Country workman stays it; and, although
He hides but some old chinks, when we are half sure
Of instant death, he says, Now sleep secure.
I Will live where are no fires, no fears by night:
Vcalegon my neighbout does half-fright
The street; now cries-out, water; bears-out now
His small goods; now thy third floor smoaks whilst thou
Know nothing. Soon comes the til'd cock-lofts [m] turn,
(Where soft Doves breed) let once the bottom burn.
Codrus's Wife Procula was short; his bed
Shorter: six Pitchers graced his Cupbord's head.
His little Can in lower place did stay,
And under the same marble Cheiron lay:
A Chest, though old, did his Greek Poets shrine,
And barbarous mice gnawed Poems though Divine! [31]
Codrus had nothing; Who denies't? Yet what
So e're that Nothing was, he lost All That;
Nay, to heap grief, when naked he begged bread,
No man vouchsafed him food, or house, or bed!
But if Arturius his house fall, Rome quakes,
The Nobles put on black, the Praetor makes
The Law-days wait; then we accuse the dire
Mischances of the City, then hate fire.
Whiles yet it burns, some run, and marble give,
The expense too: Some send statues that even live,
So naked they are, so pure: Some send a neat
Peace, by Euphranor wrought, or Polyclete;
Which once graced the Phaecasian Gods. [32] One brings him
Books, Desks, a half Pallas (n): Another flings him
Silver, almost a peck. [33] A richer store
This childless Persian gets, [34] then e're before;
And now men fear, 'twas but an acted part,
And that his house was fired by his own art.
Could thou but leave the Circus, [35] and would go
To Fabrateria, Sora, Frusino;
Thou might a good house Buy, for that which here
Thou giv'st for a dark hole hired for one year.
Some Gardens There; A shallow well, that needs
No rope, but the young Plants willingly feeds,
There love thy fork, be there thy Garden dressed;
Then ten times ten Pythagoreans Feast. (o)
It Is somewhat to be Lord of some small ground,
Though but a Lizard can therein turn round.
Here want of sleep the sick does often kill:
But undigested meat begot this ill,
Clogging the burning stomach. For, who can
Sleep, for the noise of shops, but the Rich man,
That bribes for it? Thus they sicken; when Carts (p) meet
Or stand, in narrow turnings of a street,
The railing Carriers sore perplexed do make
Even Drusus, (q) and our heavy Sea-calves wake,
If business calls a rich one, the rout shuns
His train, above their heads his large couch runs,
VVhiles he within reads, writes, or sleeps: for keep
His litter-window shut, [36] and he can sleep;
Yet makes more speed then we. Run we? Before,
A wave resists: Behind, a Troop does goat
Our loins: an Elbow here, or poal does rub
My side; my head feels There a beam or tub.
Dirt fats my thighs: a clown treads on me, and
A Soldier leaves his Boot-nail in my hand [37].
See not with what a Smo^k we celebrate
Our Doal? [38] A Hundred ghuests! On each does wait
His Kitchen! Gorbulo would be half dead,
Should he so many huge pans bear on's head,
As a small wretch sustains, nor yet must tire,
But upright go, nay run, to fan the fire;
His patched coat's torn for have. A long Fur quakes
Sometimes, as the Cart joggs; or a Pine shakes
Aloft, whose nodding threats the whole street fears,
For if an axle cracks, that hither bears
Ligurian stones, and casts upon the rout
His mountain-load, what then can be found out
Of their crushed bodies? where a Limb? a Bone?
Their Corpse Invisible, as their soul, is gone!
Mean while the house, which none of this does know,
The dishes wash, and with a filled cheek blow
The small fire, the oil'd Cleansers sound, [39] with skill
They sold the Bath-cloaths, and the oile-horn [40] fill.
Thus do the Servants order every thing
At home; when he that should the Supper bring,
Poor Novice, on the Stygian bank does quake
At ugly Charon, not account does make
To pass the foul gulf, since in's mouth he can
Not find the farthing for the ferriman! [41]
Now view Night-dangers, and the dreadful height
Of our house-tops, whence on one's brain does light
Some earthen ware that leaks, some pot-sheard thrown
Out at a window. It Is weight marks the stone;
It breaks the flinty pavement. 'Twere the worst
Neglect of Chance, to sup abroad, and first
Not make thy Will. So many Deaths thee meet,
As there are watchful windows in each street.
With this Base prayer then, this only, go;
That on thy Pate they only urine throw.
Besides, your drunken gallant, if he fight
With no body, [42] with torment wakes all night;
Nay, like Achilles for Patroclus, cries,
And now upon his face, now upwards lies.
Some only in this method sleep; a fray
Makes them rest well; or else they watch till day.
Yet such a Knave, though hot with Youth and Wine*
Has so much drunken wit, as to decline
The Purple Roab, which a long tram defends,
And with broad lights and brazen Lamps attends.
Me, whom the Moon leads, or a Candle's end,
Whose wick I temper, least too fast it spend,
He slights. The Proems of a fight I Will show;
If that is Fight, where Thou Giv'st, I Bear the blow.
One meets thee, bids thee stand: thou must obey;
What help? His rage and strength will make thee stay.
Wheace come ye? Cries he. With whose Vinegar
And unshal'd bean d' ye swell? What Cobblers were
At the bo^ld Sheep's lips, and cut Leeks? [43] unfold
Your mind, or with your guts my heel grows bold.
Where is your station? At what Temple-door
May a man find you begging? [44] Now if more
Or less thou would Reply, or if Depart
Silent, all is one. They Will beat thee; then with Art
Complain, and bind thee over to answer's. [45] All
A poor man's Liberty is but to fall
Prostrate, though buffered; and to entreat
They Will leave him a few teeth to eat his meat.
Nor may thou fear This danger only; but
A Their may spoil thee too, when doors are shut;
When shops are barred and chained, and all is grown still.
Sometimes a Villane's sudden blade does Kill,
To make Dispatch; when once the Pontine Moor [46]
And Gallinarian Pines take, to secure
Those parts strong guard: for then those parts they shun,
And all like Deer to a Park, do hither run.
What Forge, what Anvil makes not heavy Chains?
What Ir'n we spend in shackels! The whole veins,
You Would fear, would fail, and none be left to make
A needful Plow-share, Martock, or a Rake.
Happy were our great Grandsires, Grandsires Times,
When under Kings and Tribunes, for all Crimes,
One Jail served Rome.
More Reasons could I show,
But my Teem waits me, and the Sun grows low; [47]
I must begone: the Carter calls away,
And jerk'd his whip to signify my stay,
Wherefore fatewel, and not forgetful be,
When Rome to thy sweet Aquine hastens thee,
From Cumae to draw me to your Divine
Helvinian Ceres, [48] and Diana's shrine.
And if thy Satyrs blush not to give room,
To your cold fields a Booted Aid [49] I Will come.
NOTES on JUVENAL, Sat. III.
(a) THat Suburra was the Cheapside of Rome, the Comparison makes out. For
Vmbritius now choosing a retirement, prefers the most private one such as was
Prochyta, a little Island, before the most populous Suburra. Though perhaps not
the Number only, but the Quality of its Inhabitants, offended the good man: For
a Multitude of Whores lived there. Fame non nimium bonae puella, Quales in
media sedent Suburra. Mart. with whom and Herace, Suburrana signifies a whore.
The Learned, out of Festus derive it a Succurrendo, because the Court of Guards
was their kept, which relieved the watch, when the Gabines beseiged that part
of the Town, Whose Inhabitant; Unto Festus's time were called Tribus
Succurrana, and not Suburrana, and this Justifies the Etymology against Varro.
L. 4. L. L.

(b) Lucus, and Fons Aricinus, which Numa Consecrated to the Muses, without the
Porta Capena the Triumphal or South-Gate of the City; through which from this
Fountain water was conveyed to Rome, and therefore it is well called Madida
Capena, and fitly rendered Conduit-Gate. It Is of it Ovid speaks in his Fasti;

Egeria est quae praebet Aquas, Dea grata Camoenae,
Illa Numae Conjux, Consiliumque fuit.
Where Camoenae is the same with Capena. Scribit, enim Asconius extra hanc
Portam, Lucum and Aedem Camoenaruu^ esse: Propterea Camoena a nonnullis est
appellata, nunc vero Porta Sti Sebastiani. Marl. Ant. Romans Topogr. L. 1. c. 8.
And Egeria is said to be grata Camoenae, because it requited it is kindness, in
letting out her Votaries, by sending in at it the supply's of fresh water. Or
else Grata, by Reason of the Pleasures it afforded the Capena by it is Springs.

(c) Philosopher's divide the time of Man's Life, according to the several
changes, which at certain stages happen to it. And first PVERITIA they
stretched to 25. years of Age, and made it include. 1. Infantia, from ones
birth to three or four years of Age, within which time all children speak. 2.
Pueritia, strictly so called, thence to 10. All this space of Time they were
puri, i. e. impubes. Censide Die Not. Isid. L. 11. c. 2.3. From 10. to 18. was
the time Pubem Emittendi, thence called Pubertas. 4. And thence to 25. is
Adolescentia, for then they are full grown. Secondly INVENTVS, which was
properly from 25 to 35 or 40. Quod tunc aetatis Beneficio ad juvandum Rempub.
apti erant: Or else Virilis Aetas, thence to 50, so called Quod Viri tunc sunt.
h. e. viribus pollentes. Thirdly SENECIVS, which was either Prima and Recta as
our Poet calls it from 50 to 65. or Vltima and Decrepita till death. Hence the
meaning of the Poet is clear. Only note that Servius Tullius in A. Gell. L. 10.
c. 28. upon another Consideration made another Division of the Ages of Men.

(d) These Cornicines (as if they were nothing else) are prettily here
described by their Cheeks; which in such kind of People are often much swollen
and Protuberant. Or Buccae, may signify as Buccones, when it is put for
Parasites and Buffoons. Sat. 11. Curtius, and Matho Buccae. And even these here
Nigra in Candida vertunt, v. 30. Et, Librum si malus est Laudant; v. 42. which
were agreeable employments to Arturius, and Catulus; Persons that in ancient
times (with the rest of their Gang) had not the Honor of Attendants on that
Theater, which now at their costs they filled; But were per Oppida, in the
Country Towns, content to act on an Herbosum Theatrum, v. 163.

(e) Ranarum viscera, i. e. Rubetarum, which were a strong Poison; and Locusta
could well use it. -- Viro miscet sitiente Rubetam. Nay she was Communicative
too, and did not bury the secret, Instituitque Rudes melior Locusta Propinquas.
This Honest Aruspex never veiwed such entrails.

(f) Under the seats of the Circus Max. There were Cells or Vaults, wherein
women did make the most gainful use of what they had: Particularly near the
Aedificium Menianum, whence Spectators beheld the sports of the Circus, there
were plenty of immodest women, thence called Menianae, and Summenianae. Mart.
L. 3. Epig. 61. And here observe that this vile Custom was begun by strangers,
who are seldom of good report. This forces a Thracian in Theoph. Char. (...).
to speak thus of his mother. (...), obscurely intimating says Casaubon; That at
Athens, Thracian Women were thought, ignoble or whores. Et certum est
peregrinarum mulierum ubique fere Locorum, olim suspectam fuisse Pudicitiam:
Quamobrem in S. Scriptura, mulier peregrina idem sonat ac Scortum. The women we
speak of were strangers, as well as whores.

(g) Conchylia is tranlated Purple, Because the Purpura and Murex, ex quibus
piscibus eliciebatur liquor ille pretiosus ad tingendas vestes, was Conchyle,
or a shellfish. Now this, the wear of the chief Romans only, Vinbritius cannot
endure these Graeculi should wear. For the Promiscuous use of it was forbidden
by Aug. Suet. c. 43. The reason of it Tas. An. 2. shows and commands,
Praeclare vero prudenterque Caesar Ordines Civium vesre discriminavit, ut sc.
qui locis, Ordinibus, dignationibus antestant, Cultu quoque discernerentur. Yet
at length Liberty prevailing at Rome they lived (if the money of the poorer sort
could reach it) as in a Spartan Common wealth. where ex Institute Lycurgi Nemo
altero cultior incessis.

(h) Endromis, quod illa (...), i. e. cursu utebatur. For after running at
justs and Tournaments, and other Exercises of the Roman Gymnasia, they put on
these shaggy and thick Garments (in this like Rugs) to prevent taking cold. By
this the fawning Greek signifies his concurrence in that persons Opinion of the
weather, who to warn him desired a little fire to be made 'Twas a French
Manufacture as Mart. assures us Ep. 19. L. 4. where at large he shows the use
of it.

(i) That Abolla, was a grave habit, I nothing doubt from Pegasus's taking it
with him to the great Council of Sat. 4. v. 75. Erat species majoris Vestis,
ant P^ll^i Philosopbici, says Parrhas. who allows the Minor Abolla to be a
military Garment. Yet Voss. in his Etymol. L. Lat. because by Varro and Mart.
Ep. 48. l. 8. it is opposed to Toga will have it be nothing but a Military Gown,
and says our Poet here gives it the Stoic (...), and cum irrisione quadam,
that is, satyrically. So that the sense is: Hear what he has done who is no
soldier, but of far greater Dignity, and therefore ought to be of much greater
sanctity. Yet he falsely accuses Bareas Soranus, his friend and Scholar. P.
Egnatius is the man Tacitus lays this fault to. An. 16. Heliodorus the Stoic
is suspected for the same fault, by some Interpreters of, Magni Delator amici.
Sat. 1. v. 31.

(k) The same Mart. Promises, and more too; L. 10. ad Gall. Mane, vel a media
nocte togatus ero. And all this, first to bid his Patron Cood Morrow, and the
better deserve his Favor, and the Sportula. Great men we find at the Foolery,
the Praetor himself running upon this pitiful Errand to the childless and rich
Matrons Albina and Modia. When notwithstanding this first salute was granted to
the Client as a great favor. Est proprium superbiae magno aestimare Introitum,
ac tactum sui liminis; pro honor dare ut Ostio suo propius assideas, ut gradum
prior intra domum ponas Sen. de Ben. L. 6. c. 33. This quickn'd their pace, but
never so much, as to make them forget their Gown. For such an Omission would
have quite spoiled their Complement.

(l) The Romans used great vanity (for certainly 'twas unnecessary) in their
great numbers of Servants, Pedacius Costa kept 400. Another had 2000. Caecilius
Isidorus had 5000. some 10 Others had 20 thousand, as Athenaeus affirms. L. 6.
p. 272. And that, (...), not to make Advantage of them; but that they might
have (...), very many Attendants, as Ushers, and footboys. Now such as they,
though not for their honesty, yet for their riches should be believed. The
Custom Pliny blames, and disapproves these Mancipiorum Legiones, and in d^mo
turbam externam, and servorum quoque causa Nomenclatorem adhibendum. Sen. ubi
supra, speaks of the same assistance they needed, for the number, and the
orderly digesting of their friends in primas and secundas Admissiones. But this
I suppose may include their Clients too, and such as served them as
intelligencers or spies. Which every Cardinal now at Rome keeps in such plenty,
that a Notary can hardly remember for him, their Names and Employments. This
trouble Augustus once saved the Ancient Romans, and forbade any of them to have
Servos aut Libertos supra viginti, aut Plus quingentis millibus mummum. But
Luxury, which knows no Laws, even in this broke them.

(m) The poor man that lived in them though last, yet should infallibly burn;
so that the slats his only cover (for being in the Garrats of the house, he had
no floor above him) would not in this dysaster be his defense. This Tegula sola
here, is the same with Coenaculum elsewhere. Which was inhabited by none but
poor Poets, as Mart. Scalis habito trilnes sed (...), poor Philosophers, poor
Laborers, and in the beginning of the Gospel poor Christians or their Inm^^es,
as well as Embl^me, the poor Doves. Whose laying their eggs in these rooms,
perhaps gave Occasion to the Greeks, to call Coenaculum, (...): St. Mark in his
last Chap. calls it (...).

(n) A Minerva drawn to the wast, according to the mode of those times. Hence
the jest Cicero past on his Brother Q. who, being but a little man, yet his
Effigies ingentibus lineamentis usque ad Pectus ducta, made the Orator
pleasantly say, Frater meus dimidi^ate major est quam Totus. Macrob. L. 2. c.
3. Satur.

(o) Who never did eat any thing but herbs.

(p) Mandra according to the Old Scholiast signifies a hog-sty, according to
Mart. Ep. lib. 5. it is the Stals of Mules, and Generally any stable. So that as
we Metonymically say a person lost his stable, for the horses in it; here also
Mandra is put for the Mules it entertained; who standing in the Cart, and being
cursed by their driver make up what is meant by Stantis Convitia Mandrae. St.
Bafil calls the stable in which Christ was born (...). Vt item Ovile dicitur
pro Ecclesia Christi, sic and Mandra ponitur pro Coenobio, tanquam in quo sint
Oves Christi. And thence (...) an Abbot, and Archimandritis an Abbess.

(q) Claudius Drusus Caesar, and the Seal or Sea-Calf were equally drowsy.
Stornunt se somno diverso in littore Phocae. Virg. Georg. lib. 4. Pliny.

(r) A Tall-Chair-man; for this at Rome (with some other as servile) was the
usual employment of the People of Liburnia, a part of Illyria between Istria
and Dalmatia; it is now called Croatia. -- Tarde venisse Liburnos.

(s) He means Authepsa; a vessel of the same use with a Kitchen. 'Twas divided
into two Cells, in the uppermost of which they could put their Sportula or doal
of meat, in the lower one, fire to dress the Raw, or keep the dressed flesh
warm. This was portable and the faster they went with it, the better the fire
burned in it. -- Et cursu ventilat ignem, v. 259. Cicero pro Roscio Amer. tells
us as much was paid for one of these, as would pay for a farm. The name is
deduced ab (...) and (...), quod sua sponte coquit. Vid. Cic. sub sin. Orat.

(t) This Town of the Latins was Juvenal's Birth place and that great
Schoolman's Thonias Aquinas, called by our Countrymen St. Thom. of Watering. A
moist place the Temple of the Elvin Ceres proves it to be; which is as much as
Ceres of the Washes, or Marshes. Hence the spring and River of Elvis took their
Names.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Third Satyr.
Cophinus. Premere pollices and vertere pollicem, how they differed. Foricari^.
Mitra. Trechedipna, Niceteria. A facie jactare manus. Cottabus; Manes, (...),
latage, (...), an acclamation in Drinking. Trulla. Claudere latus. Alta sella.
Tribuni Stipendium. Samothtacum Arae and Dii Patrii, according to Macrobius.
Equestria and Popularia. Pinnirapus. Lanista. Cucullus Venetus. Toga. Exodium.
The consecration of Hair and the First Beard; Cakes presented at such
Solennities. Great Men's Register-books of their Clients; and their
Nomenclators. Opici mures. Dii Phaecasiani. Modius. Coena recta. (...) and
(...). Strigil, the matter, use and form of it. Sectile porrum. (...). Ceres
Helvina. Adjutor Caligatus.

1. AT private Cumae. Vacuis Cumis. Vmbritius a skilful Aruspex and a friend of
Juvenal is wittily brought-in giving the causes of his departure from the City,
and telling whither he would go to dwell, namely to Cumae, where Sibylla had a
Chapel and where, as Vmbritius afterward speaks, Daedalus put-off his wings,
or rested after his flight from Minos. But the Poet calling it here Empty
Cumae, and yet little after, Janua Baiarum, and so greatly frequented, being a
thorough-fare to those frequented Bathes; to prevent the seeming inconvenience
of some contradiction, I render it private Cumae, it being so, according to the
Poet's intent, it compared with Rome. And as he thus preferred Cumae before
Rome, so likewise Prochyta a small Island near Baia and the Campanian shore,
before Suburra a most delightful street in Rome. *

Juv. Sat. 3. Illustr. 1
map of the Bay of Naples, Italy (orientated with the south to the top),
showing fortifications, plantations and ruins

The Baian prospect and delight is thus presented by the courtesy of
Bertellius in his Theater of the Italian Cities, p. 84. by which, Caligula's
bridge of ships may be the better understood; of which, see, Sat. 10. Illustr.
31.

2. And in August's heat, When Poets read. He notes the importunate ambition of
Poets; who not content to read at other times of the year, would trouble men
even in August also, when men usually sought the shady relief of the Country.
This Custom is partly touched, Sat. 1. Illust. 5.

3. Some Jews, Whose hay and basket is their wealth. Judais, quorum cophinus
foenumque supellex. The Poet in this difficult passage inveighing against the
base coveteousness of his times, says that for Gain they did rent-out sacred
places, as Groves, and that to the poor Jews: whose poverty he describes by
their Basket and Hay, which, as he says, was all their householdstuffe. And if
we ask, why by such marks their necessity should be expressed, Lubin makes
answer, -- Supellex erat cophinus, in quo victum and cibum gerebant, and foenum
adjumenti alimentum. But why should we suppose a poor Jew to be able to keep a
beast, when as he was fain to beg to keep himself? as Lubin acknowledges,
whiles he expounds mendicat silva by the poor Jews, who hiring obscure
habitations in Groves, went begging about from door to door. Besides, if their
hay was for their beast, why did they carry it about with them? Or how will
this agree with that in Sat. 6. -- Cophino foenoque velicto Arcanam Judaea
trement mendient in aurem? implying rather that they left them at their poor
home, when they went forth to beg. Some think that the Hay was for the their
Bed; so Britannicus on Sat. 6. v. 540. saying, foenum ubi cubitavent: but this
seems but vain, it we confider either how they could carry enough, or rather
why they should carry any at all. Lyranus on that in Psalm, 81. v. 6. -- His
hands were delivered from the Pots, or Baskets, (...)( ab aheno, according to
the Latin) thinks that these were the marks, not of their Poverty, but (by an
ancient custom) of their servitude in Egypt, where in baskets they carried
straw, hay, mortar and such things for the making of brick, and in such like
labors. Which opinion I think to be the best exposition of this passage, and
for these reasons. First, it is as probable, that the Jews might by way of
thankfulness glory in the marks of their Servitude, but in effect of their
deliverance and deliverer, as the Christians once in the use of the Cross,
making that the badge of their glory, which the Enemy accounted their Shame.
Secondly, because it is said, that the Jewish Women also carried the basket and
the wisp. Thirdly, because it is said, that the Jewest, when she went forth to
beg, left these things behind her. Cophino foenoque relicto, says the Poet; but
not as A^^umnus expounds it, Negotiis omissis and supellectile relicta: it
being a chief part of her Business to Leave them at home, that by concealing
her religion from public notice, she might not endanger such Roman dames, as
she endeavored to draw to her devotion; and so the

Poet adds, mendicat in aurem. By which also it farther appears, that they
could carry their provision without a basket. Fourthly, though the Poet might
with some sharpness describe their poverty by their basket and wisp; yet it
follows not, but that these things might have a farther signification. So may
we collect from Sidonius Apollinaris, lib. 7. epist. 6. where writing to one
Basilius a Bishop, concerning the pressures of the Christians under the
Gothique King Evarix an Arrian, he says, Ordinis res est, ut (dum in hac
allegorica versamur Aegypto) Pharao incedat cum diademate, Israelita cum
cophino. 1. It is suitable to the divine order or appointment of humain affairs
(whiles we are in this figurative Egypt of the world) that Pharao (or the
wicked) should have the mark of Dominion, and the Israelite (or, Jew) his
Basket, or bag of servitude. Where also the word incedat may be observed,
implying these things as properties, or marks of distinction. According to
which sense the learned Savaro expounds the place, saying Allegorice Catholicus
servituti addicitur, Evarix dominatur and imperat. And here we may farther
observe for the understanding of the next verse, Omnis enim populo mercedem
pendere jussa est Arbor; that although it be commonly understood, by the Rent
exacted from the poor Jews for every tree, that could yield them but a shelter;
some more particularly expound mercedem by (...), a tribute which was exacted
of the Jews (capitatim) by the pole, after the destruction of the Temple, as
the Provincial Census was Before the destruction of it; and that thus what was
formerly paid to the Sanctuary was afterward brought to the Capitol; as
Josephus and Xiphilin testify. Lastly I think, that we may farther and
probably guess, that the occasion, for which the Jews left-off to carry the
basket and hay, was the greeveous disadvantage in discovering by Them their
Religion. For as Sueton notes in his Domitian, cap. 12. Judaicus fiscus
acerbissime actus est; telling us, that They were made to pay, who lived after
the Jewish manner, vel dissimulata origin, as he adds, imposita genti tributa
non pependissent. Where he makes mention also of filthy rigor; saying that he
remembers, that when he himself was a youth, he saw a man of 90. years of age
publicly searched in a great assembly by the command of the Overseer of the
Jewish tribute, to know if he were not circumcised. Concerning some other
passages about this argument (the Jews) see farther in the explication of this
Satyr, Illustrat. 44. and also Sat. 6. Illustrat. 65.

4. The Water's Deity. Numen aquae. This estimation of Fountains among the
Heathen may appear as well by their ancient inscriptions (one of which extant
in Orravio Rossi his Memory Bresciane, p. 279. begins thus, Fontibus Divinis
Sacr.) as also by their Fontinalia, Festivals so called a font, says Varro, de
Lingua Lat. lib. 5. at which feasts they used by way of Reverence to cast
garlands into Fountains. But that Fountain from which this honor was derived
to others was, as Joseph Scaliger thinks, by Porta Capena. Yet Dempster, de
Juramentis, lib. 1. cap. 5. citing him dislikes his Opinion, saying that such
honor was done unto Fountains in honor of Fontus sometime a King in Hetruria
(he cites T^^^ebus, lib. 16. Advers. cap. 11.) and in honor of whom were the
Fontinalia sacra mentioned by Varro and Festus. There was also Fontua the
Goddess of Fountains, as he shows out of Saxo Grammaticus, lib. 1. Histor.
Danica.

5. The People's thumb being turned. Verso pollice vulgi. The Poet here sets
forth the vile conditions of such, as thrived most in Rome, namely flatterers
and impudent undertakers, as in Repairing of decayed Temples, or in Farming the
revenues of them or of Customs in Port-Towns, or of the carriage of goods by
Rivers, of Cleansing of Sinks, of performing the Office of the Libitinarii (who
sold all things fit for Funerals) or of the Pollinctores (who were employed in
the Burial of the dead) or of Selling Servants under the Spear stuck-up to
signify such sale according to the Roman Custom. Which employments though
tolerable, if performed severally and by suitable persons, were an argument of
base greediness, if performed all by the same person. Yet such there were and
they grew rich, though formerly they had been but cornet-winders, and that but
in petty Towns. Nor were they only grown rich, but also impudent; for, having
in former time basely hazarded their lives in Shows set forth by the Wealthy
Romans to please the People, and so might have lost their lives, if overcome,
had but the People but pleased to turn their thumb; now they themselves, though
once such vile persons, set forth such costly Shows, wherein others at their
wanton charge were familiarly killed. But here the manner of the Custom of
Turning the thumb seems to be a point rather controverted, then expounded.
Premere pollices was a sign of Applause; Vertere pollicem, of Dislike: but the
doubt is, what these Gestures were. Horace implies the first, lib. 1. Epist.
18. in that verse, Fautor utroque tuum laudabit pollice ludum: in which words,
says Porphyrio the Commentator, there is a Synecdoche, pollex being taken for
manus; so that both thumbs, according to him, ^signifly both hands. For which
interpretation he is reprehended by Politian, in his Miscell. cap. 42. who by
this seems to implie, that it was an expression not of the hand, but only of
the thumb; proving it from that of Pliny, Not. Histor. lib. 82. Pollices, cum
favemus, premere, etiam proverbio jubemur: but I see not how this authority
refutes Porphyrio; who proceeding in his exposition says, though with some
obscurity, that quilaudat vehementius manus jungens jungit pollicem cum
proximo. Acron would have premere pollices to be the listing up of the hands
and the moving of them often. Cruquius speaking of this phrase mentions only
pollicem in the singular number, with no small alteration of the matter; and
adds, that this is done, when the thumb pressing upon the top of the middle
finger falls back toward the the forefinger making a noise; and that, if it
were done on both hands, it was the greatest approbation. So convertere
pollicem, according to him, was to open the hand, and so consequently not to
make such noise, or give such notice. But Ferrarius, de Veter. Acclamation.
lib. 2. cap. 13. justly objects against this, that this were not pollicis
pressus, but crepitus digitorum, not a gesture of the thumb, but a noise of the
fingers. He therefore rejecting all this exposition as uncertain, if not false,
thus decides the point. First, at the Sword-plays or publicly Fencing it was
usual for him that overcame, to kill the other; yet the matter was altered
according to the sign, which the people were pleased to make, so great was
their power at these shows: and accordingly, sometimes they made a sign, to
have the person, that was overcome, slain; and sometimes they made a sign to
have him saved. Secondly, these signs were very easy to de discerned, being of
such sudden importance, and were instantly understood; the sign of favor being
made with both hands, the sign of death only with one; the first of which was
called premere pollices, the second vertere pollicem. Thirdly, he thinks the
manner to have been this; Premere pollices was to lift-up both hands and clinch
them as a fist, pollices ipsos intra pugnum arcte vehementerque comprimere,
that is, to clinch the thumbs strongly and vehemently within the fist. Which
expression, in this last point seems somewhat unnecessary: for, what did it
avail to the making of the sign manifest, to clinch their thumbs either
vehemently or gently? Vertere pollicem, says he, was to lift-up one hand
clinch'd like a fist, the thumb appearing above the fist, and either to point
it backward toward himself that held it up, or to move it about circularly. But
this might more strictly have been anciently rendered, supposing this to have
been the sense, by elevare pollicem, or invertere pollicem: though this be
likewise liable to his own censure, being but probable. Yet I think his
expression comes near the custom: notwithstanding with a like liberty I think
I may reasonably vary and enlarge the conjecture. The natural actions of all
people are generally much alike, and therefore the outward expressions of
approbation and dislike; and no more was intended by these signs. When
therefore the people saw a brave fencer sometimes unhappily put to the worst,
we may probably suppose, that they did instantly, to save his life, lift up
both their fists, their thumbs being clinch'd or pressed on each fist, yet not
both their hands put together, but each being at liberty, as men that are
ready to strike, the left arm being stretched out and the right somewhat drawn
back. So that the immediate or first signification of this sign seems to have
been a threatening of the conqueror, if he spared not the life of him, whom he
overcame; a second and but a consequent sense was an applause of his valor and
skill: and this we ghuess to have been the sign, which they called premere
pollices, to clinch the fists at one. But if they saw that he which was
overcome, had behaved himself but like a coward, without courage or art, we may
suppose they did clinch one hand, the thumb standing upwards, and so cast their
hand moderately over their shoulder, in a kind of contempt, as if one would
have said Away with him, meaning that he was not worth their mercy. And this
they might call vertere pollicem, that is, reirojicere, to cast back the thumb,
or to turn it over the shoulder. But I leave everyman here to the liberty of
his own fancy, contentingmy self in these conjectural arguments to propose
that, which to me seems most natural, and so most easy to be admitted.

6. Inde reversi Conducunt foricos. Fovicae are by some taken for common shops
near the forum, belonging to the City; and so rented out to such as let them
again to others for a greater rent. But others think that this alludes to the
farmers of some homely rents in Juvenal's time; such as in some degree that
was, which was raised by Vespasian, from Urine (mentioned by Sueton in his
life, cap. 23.) for the receipt whereof there were vessels purposely set in
public, and, as some think, for the use of fullers. And this unto some seems
to have been that grievous chrysargyrum famous in histories, and taken away by
the Emperor Anastasius. Which pension was (as Lipsius, Adm. lib. 2. cap. 6.
out of Cedrenus) ut quisque mendicus aut pauper, meretriis sive jam emerita,
omnis servus itemque libertus, inferrent in aerarium pro Vrina and stercore,
jumentorum etiam and Canum; sive in agris, sive in oppidis habitarent: and
hamines quidem utriusque sexus, nomisma argenteum; equns, mulus, bos,
tantundem; asinus and canis follex sex (follox was a small piece of money.) Yet
even these profits the Chief of the Roman Nobility basely sought to farm, and
by the Lawiers were called Foricarii. Caligula also (as Sueton in his lise,
cap. 40.) Ex captivis prostitut arum vectigal instituit, quantum quaeque uno
concubitu mereret, and afterward under Heliogabalus, Lenonum vectigal and
mererricum, and exoletorum fuit; as Lansius observes, in Orat. contra Italiam,
p. 1005. But the most received interpretation, is that disgraceful one, by
which I render it; and Forirarii in the law signifies such vile Officers.
According to which sense if we more sharply view the words, Inde reversi, they
may be understood not of their returning home from proud shows to base offices;
but a falling back through vain prodigality to base necessity. For, the
inference upon this seems to implie some such thing, whiles the Poet says that
Fortune makes a Sport of them: which were not so properly by raising one from
Poverty to Wealth, which is not very rare; or, by casting one down from Wealth
to Poverty, which is very common; but by making the same person the subject of
both these fortunes, which is a Rarity, and by the Poet here called the Sport
of Fortune.

7. Rome turned Greek. Gracam Vrbem. He shows the pestilent manners of the
Graecians; who though they were not many at Rome, had so corrupted the Romans
both in Manners and Language, that the Romans in a ridiculous affectation of
the Greek tongue, delighted in it more, then in their Own Latin. Which sense of
this passage is employed by Pignorius, in his Symbol. Epist. 41. Where he says,
that this affectation continued from the time of Augustus to Alexander Severus.
Yet by his leave we may remember, that Sueton says, Tiberius to show the
Majesty of the Roman Empire abstained from Greek: though we may grant that
this fashion was ancient, Tully writing a Commentary of his Consulship in
Greek, as he himself testifies at large, lib. 2. ad Atticum, epist. 1. But a
worse custom was brought in by the Asiatick People, particularly by the
Syrians; whose manners, as the Poet notes, were as crooked, as their Musical
instruments, infecting the City with their outlandish harlors, which at the
Circus, where Shows were presented, did set up Stews.

8. Their painted Miters. The Miter was properly a Trojan attire, and not only
of that form which is usually with a divided top; as Pignorius a Paduan
Antiquary shows in his treatise entitled, Le Origini di Padua: in which ( cap.
12.) upon occasion of that in Virgil. Aeneid. 9. -- habent redimicula mitra, he
presents this form of a miter, following, expressed according to an ancient
head in the Vatican; which for difference may be observed, not varying much
from an ordinary cap.

depiction of a Trojan mitre or cap

9. The Haunt-Doal Gown, Quirinus, Thy Clown wears. Rusticus ille tuns sumit
trechedipna, Quirine. The Poet here in an Apostrophe to Romulus says, that the
Roman, who was once rustical, or simple, is now come to the familiar and
artificial servilitie of the Greeks, namely in parasitical Haunting after
Patrons and, according to some, in Gymnastick exercises; though by these last
also they were rather corrupted then enabled: yet that for vain and vile
abilities the Greeks did still far exceed them; witness their rolling
Eloquence, (in which they surpassed Isaeus the Orator) and their pretended Art
of Flying. witness Daedalus. But a difficulty there is in these words, Rusticus
ille tuns sumit trechedipnae; the last of which the Scholiast expounds by
Parasiticall garments, which he calls caligulos Graias, or as some mend it,
Galliculas, Shoes used by the Gauls, which according to some others were
called also (...) and (...). But this seems too narrow a sense, unless we
should fancy, that they wore a special fashion of shoes only to feasts. Some
copy have, rechedipna, some taking it for a garment used at feasts, and
uneasily drawing the name from recinium or rejicinum, it being, as they
suppose, usually in the manner of wearing it, cast backward, and from (...),
coena: others, as the Scholiast, taking it for the Master of a feast;
implying, that the Romans once plain and thrifty were now become Feasters. But
this implies an unseemly superfluity of speech; for then the construction
should be, trechedipna tuns sunait and fert niceteria, in which manner of
expression, sumit were a vain overplus: others (and they the greatest part)
read trechedipna, deriving it from (...), curro, and (...), cana; because in
these garments they haunted after their patrons, for the sportula. Yet some
understand by it, the person, in whose hasting to feasts some note a Pride to
take place, others an appetite to good cheer; though this stands not with the
exception before alleged, nor with the certainty of the word: seeing that, as
the Scholiast told us of rechedipna, it is sometimes taken for the feast-maker,
and not in a jeering, but in an innocent sense; as, according to most
reasonable conjecture, it is to be taken in that ancient inscription cited by
Rigaltius, FILIO. BENEMERENTI. FECIT. PATER. TRECEDIPNUS. ET MATTER. ATTICE. But
the most take it for a garment, though with some difference; Turnebus and
others thinking it to signify expedite garments used in gymnastis, in which
exercises they were but in part covered, and as the word implies rather Naked,
then apparelled. Yet the excess in those exercises seeming to be touched as a
distinct foult in those words following, fert niceteria; it may seem somewhat
more suitable to the Poets variety of reprehensions, to expound this passage,
as some do, of several corruptions, which had prevailed upon the Romans.
Scaliger, de Emendat. Temp. lib. 5. De primo Agone Actiaco, says, that they,
which were conquerors in the sacred Games among the Graecians, had a Supper
provided at the public charge; unto which such as ran betime to get place,
were by way of a common jest called (...), supper haunters; yet that they were
not rashly admitted, but first known by their niceteria, or signs of mastery
hanged at their neck. But Rutgersius, in his Var Lect. lib. 6. cap. 13. thinks
that trechedipna were Liveries (as we now adays call them) or garments
distinguished by the color, that so a parasite being known might have a ready
admittance to his Patron's table. To which sense he thinks our Poet alludes in
that passage, Sat. 5. -- viridemque thoraca jubebit Afferri, -- Ad mensam
quoties Parasitus venerit infans: which he would have to be understood of
Virro's Livery: and thus thinks the Romans to be here taxed for descending to
servile Flattery and the Gymnastick fears, to both which they had been
especially corrupted by the Greeks. Lubin more plainly and nearer to the Roman
custom understands here by trechedipna, the Roman Gown in which they did visit
and attend their Patrons, whether in hope of the Sportula or an Entertainment;
and by niceteria the trisling rewards, which as encouragements, they wore at
their neck in token of their mastery in Fencing; and that in both these
respects the Romans had received some addition of corruption from the
Graecians. This I choose as the most moderate opinion including in it in effect
the Gracian customs; the Roman Gowns being for their similltude of employment
jeeringly called trechedipna, and the use of the niceteria being by the Romans
vainly learned of the vain Graecians. Thus the Satyrist briefly tells the
Romans, that whiles other nations are exquisite in Flattery and Thriving; the
dull Roman (though he imitates the Greeks and others in Trivial Vanities) is
good for nothing but to trudge about for his hungry sportula, or to seek a
perverse fame from infamous Sword-playing.

10. -- Must I Let Him seal first, and on the chief Couch lie, etc. The Roman
custom was, says the Author of the manuscript Commentary, to have seven
witnesses at the making of a Will; which was but according to the strict
provision of the Civil Law, but now corrected by the Ecclesiastical; it
seeming unreasonable that Two should not be accounted sufficient, when as they
are allowed by the Divine Law. Our Lawiers therefore now call those ancient
ones, Solemn Testaments, as the latter sort, Unsolemn. Now the manner was among
the Romans, that all the witnesses should set their seals unto a Testament and
in Order, as the Poet here implies, according to their dignity; which custom
and form may partly be seen, Sat. 2. Illustrat. 12. A Multitude of witnesses
has likewise been used in ancient time here in our own country, not only to
Wills, but also to other Deeds, as among others may appear from that grant of
certain manors here in England made by William the Conqueror unto the Abbess
of Caen in Normandy, which is alleged by the accurate Mr. Augustine Vincent in
his Discovery of Errors in a Catalogue of Nobility, published by R. Brook, p.
119. The Deed is thus testified, Signum Willelmi Anglorum regis. Signum Comitis
Roberti Moritanii. Signum Lanfranci Archiepiscopi. Signum Matildis Reginae.
Signum Roberli Comitis filii regis. Signum Henrici filii regis. Signum Willelmi
Comitis filii regis. There follow nine witnesses more; but these may serve for
the illustration of this custom, not only for Number, but also for Order,
which is somewhat remarkable. And, the better to know some of the witnesses,
the reads may understand, that Robert mentioned in the second place was Earl
of Mortaigne (in Normandy) and of Cornwall, and brother to the Conqueror by his
Mother Herlot; as also that Matildis mentioned in the fourth place was the
Conqueror's Wife. Farther, it may suffice in this place briefly to take notice,
that the Romans did anciently use to ly^on Couches at their Supper: the manner
whereof, as also which was the chief place, shall more fitly and largly be
declared, Sat. 5. Illust. 3. on that verse, Tertia ne vacuo cessaret culcitra
lecto.

11. Cast up the hands before the brow. A facie jact are manus. Britannicus
tells us, that flarterers did use with both hands to stroke the face of their
friend, as imitating the ancient manner of the Greeks, who, as he urges out of
Pliny, did use in their supplications to take their Gods by the chin. Which
interpretation seems more learned, then apposite; and to suppose such applause
to be used by flatterers toward their Patrons, may sooner, I think, win the
reader to a smile, then to a belief. The interpreters usually take the phrase,
A facie jactare manus, only for a sudden expression of applause and admiration:
but Ferrarius de Vet. Acclam. lib. 3. cap. 22. peirces farther into it, and
tells us that it is, manibus oscula jactare, to kiss the hands and then cast
them up before the face, according to that of Martial, (as Scriverius reads it)
Audieris cum grande sophos, cum basia jacta (1. audieris) when thou hear the
great acclamation, sophos, (or, as Persius speaks, Sat. 1. euge and belle) when
thou hear the kisses cast up into the air. Thus he implies, that they used
by way of Applause to kiss their hands, which in parting from their lips made a
gentle noise, and so cast them up before their face, or brow. For, not only the
casting up of the hands and the kiss is expressed in basia jacta, but also the
noise in audieris basia. Which we do grant to be a true interpretation of
Martial, and that it may in this place also have a like sense, yet not a like
necessity of such acceptance; admitted it may be, but not hence enforced.

12. Leak on his couch. The common copies have here, Si rectum minxit amicus,
they praise him, if he performs but the offices of nature well. For so we may
vail the sense of it, as also Johannes Sarithuriensis does in his Polycrat.
lib. 3. cap. 4. who avoiding this plainness of our Poet varies it thus, S^^bene
ractavit, aut si quid fecit amicus, Quod proserre palam non possit lingua
modeste. But far better is that Reading, which Parrhasius uses, Si lectum
minxit, agreeable to that of Horace, Comminxit lectum potus: which is to be
understood of the beds or couches, on which they used to lie at their tables.
Thus the Poet intends, that some great ones drinking so hard, that they even
leak'd on their supper couches, were yet even for this applauded by
unconscionable flatterers.

13. His lips but smack against the golden cup Si trulla inverso crepitum dedit
aurea fundo. Some make this a flattering applause at the rich men's performance
even of the homely offices of nature; but they force the words, methinks, from
their proper sense, and seem as far from truth, as from cleanliness. Others
take it for an applause given to one that excelled at the Cottabus, a kind of
sport, which they used in their immoderate Drinkings, to omit some other less
pertinent acceptions of the word. But the Manner of this sport is not without
great uncertainty and variety delivered by diverse; some telling us that before
them which drank or played thus, if we shall so speak, there were set empty
vessels swimming in water, into which they used to cast the snuffs of their
draughts so violently, that commonly they sunk them, and that he, which thus
sunk the vessels lowest, won. Some make it to have been but the placing of a
brazen ewer filled with wine before the company, and the pouring of it from
a-loft into a basin with a loud noise. Some say that they cast their snuffs
thus violently upon the pavement. Others more cutiously describing the
performance of this Sicilian invention (for, such they account it) yet used
also by the Athenians, tell us, that they pitched a staff into the ground
laying another on the upper end of it on cross, at each and of which cross
flasse hung a scale, and that under each scale was placed a ^tulla or broad
vessel filled with water; each of which vessels was set upon a brazen statue
gilded, the head of which was called Manes, Then one of them which played, say
they, arose taking a pot full of wine, and from a lost pout'd out the wine
into the scale with, a sudden and violent fall, that so he might strike the
scale under water* In which sport he had the foolish victory, who so threw the
Wine, as that he shed none, yet made the greatest noise; this being counted
good luck in the success of their Love. At which vanity they that conquered
were called (...) 1. ex cottabo temulenti; the snuff of the wine, which was
cast forth, was called Latags, and the noise or clap in the casting of it,
(...) and crepitus cottabi. See for the parcels of these antiquities, Athenaus,
Sutdes, Pollux, the Etymologicon, Plautus, and of late time Pathasius, epist.
36. where he writes of it more largly then clearly. In which variety to resolve
what to depend on, we may take all these descriptions for truth, they being
probably the expressions of the various forms of the same sport; seeing that in
the main they agree, that is, in the noise, and so in the cause of the
applause. Yet I see no necessity to make this custom to be the intent of the
Poet in this place, although I grant it probable, it being a Greek vanity, and
so likely enough to have crept in among the Romans; and therefore surable
enough to the precedent passages and purposes of Juvenal. But with far less
straining we may expound it of a Greek custom of applauding a man, when he
drank off a large vessel at a draught (such as the trulla, used, not without
excess, in drinking) which clear carousing it non seldom expressed by a smack
or kissing of the bottom of the cup. After which carousing, the Greeks were
wont to cry, Zho^^es, (1. vivas, or Long may thou live) as Ferrarius de
Veter. Acclam. lib. 7. cap. 13. shows out of Dion. lib. 12. and Suidas in the
word (...). The form of the Trulla (or (...), catinus, properly too large to
drink in, yet used by drunkards) is by Scatchus in his Myrothecium, lib. 1.
cap. 43. P. 418. thus presented. * depiction of a trulla or over-sized drinking
vessel

14. They 'll ransack house and heart, etc. Aulam resupinat amici; he will turn
his friends house and all in it, as it were, upside down, so to discover his
secrets and keep him in awe. But the Scholiast here reads aviam, very aptly and
satyrically; meaning, that if there were neither a young Son nor Daughter, nor
a young master nor mistress in a house to be corrupted, the impudent and vile
Greeks would complie even with their friends grandame though never so aged and
deformed, and by corrupting her, though themselves with her, to explore the
secrets of a family. An acute exposition if warranted by copy, which therefore
I rather propose, then approve.

15. Their Schools go view. Transi gymofia. Parthasius, epist. 24. (and, after
him, others.) does justly reprehend those, who think that here the Poet in
effect says, Let us now pass from their gymnasia (their Schools); seeing that
he speak not any thing of these before: but expounds transi gymnasia by transi
ad gymnasia; transire signifying not only praeterire, to passe-by, but also
demigrare, to pass from one place to another. So Ti^. Donaetus in vit^ Maronis,
A Cremona Mediolanum, and inde paulo p^st Neap^lim transit; and thus the sense
here will be, Let us pass now from the faults of the People to the Philosophers
themselves. Yet here we observe, that when Parrhasius says, that the Poet made
no former mention of the gymnasiae, the word must not here extend to the Places
of their bodily Exercises; these being, according to some interpreters,
intended before, when he speak of niceteria.

16. Born where the too bold Gorgonean horse a feather lost. -- Ripa nutritus
in illa Ad quam Gorgonei delapsa est penna Caballi. Lipsius on Tacitus expounds
this of one Aeguatius: but because some doubt (as Autumnus notes) whither or no
he was a Greek, others expound it of one Heliodorus. But whosoever it was, the
Poet here aggravates his crime from his country, as Parrhasius says, Epist. 24.
and 25. First, because this person, says he, was born at the famous Tars^^;
Secondly and rather because Alexander, de Successionibus, (mentioned by
Diogenes Laertius) says that Chrysippus also, the most famous of the Stoics,
was from thence. The last of which two may seem like a reason: yet peradventure
Juvenal intends this description of the place of his birth only as an odd scoff
at a vile conditioned fellow. Vid. Tacit. Annal. 16.

17. Upon a rich man's servant's left hand run. It will be somewhat necessary
to set down more largely this passage of our Author, whose words are these;

Divi^is hic servi claudit latus ingenuorum
Filius: alter enim, quantum in legione Tribuni
Accipiunt, donat Calvinae, vel Catienae,
Vt semel. -- At tu
Cum tibi vestiti facies scorti placet, haeres,
Et dubitas alta Chi^nen dedu^ere sella.
To prevent mistake the reader may observe, that these words contain not three
equally opposite parts, as to some they might seem by occasion of the three
particles, Hic, Alter and Tu; but that the first of them, Hic, fignifies
adverbially, Here, that is, at Rome; and that only the other two are opposite,
expressing two sorts of persons, the Servant and the Freeman pointed out,
though by different construction, in those words, Divitis hic servi claudit
latus ingenu^^^^^ Fi^ins --; some making it filius divitis servi, others filius
ingenuorum. Autumnus takes, the first, expounding it thus, Hic filius servi
div^tis occupat locum ingenuorum; and adds; claudit. i. e. Tegit. Which though
it be a truth, yet is not a true interpretation, being not the truth here
intended. The Poet indeed complains, that servants took the place of freemen:
but this reaches not to the phrase and sharpness of the Satyrist: who says not
only that Freemen gave place to rich servants, but so expresses it, that the
phrase, claudit latus, which is acknowledged to fignify, to go on the worse
hand of one, must by this order he spoild of its proper sense, or else the
construction must be, filius ingenuorum claudit latus divitis servi, which is
contrary to Autum^^s. Besides in the two subsequent parts, by Alter, according
to some, is understood filius ingenui, and by Tu, servus divitis: which
likewise, methinks, is contrary to natural construction and the Poet's intent.
For first, seeing that the construction (as is showed) ought to be filius
ingenuorum; alter cannot so naturally be referred to the nearest in place,
namely to ingenuorum filius immediately precedent, as to that which was more
remote, namely divitis servus: alter being as it were a calling back of a thing
formerly named. Secondly, seeing that by alter, the Poet, as the description
shows, expresses one more wastful and Luxurious, and by tu one more thrifty and
coursely wanton; it were not suitable to his indignation to make the Freeman in
a better or more plentiful fortune, then the servant: and therefore he must by
Alter rather intend the Servant, and by tu, the Freeman. But here though L^bin
tells us, that as far as he knows, never any man before him rightly understood
this place; yet methinks he does not rightly expound it, whiles he understands
both by Alter and Tu, only the Rich: when as the diversity of their condition
is a chief part of the Poet's intent, and explains the reason of his speech.
The Poet in effect says, that such is the baseness now in Rome, that the Son of
a Freeman gives the better hand to a rich man's servant, or (as the Scholiast
says) to one now grown in wealth, who notwithstanding was but a servant, and as
it were, smells still of his servitude. Yet is it not fit? seeing that the one
(alter) the servant is grown so rich, that he can give as much to his gallant
harlot, as the Tribune has for his military Pay; but that the other, the
Freeman, as Poor, is afraid to deal with such a costly piece of pleasure. Thus
the sway of the speech and reason seems to be, that it is but surable that they
differ in their precedence, as they differ in the curiosity and courseness of
their lust. This point then being excepted, I grant the rest of Lubin's
interpretation to be good; as that the Poet here inveighs against the baseness
both of the Freeman and the servant grown rich, that they both ran obsequiously
for the doal or Sportula, and then as vilely spent it. Likewise, that in their
running, the Poet notes the baseness of the Freeman, who not only made himself
the companion of a servant, or of one lately a servant, but also went on the
lower hand. For to that sense claudere latus is usually extended, it signifying
to guard ones side, as an attendant does, that protects a man, and so
consequently one that goes on the inferior side. And such attendants were
anciently called stipatores and laterones, or latrones; though now this word be
degenerated. And here it may be farther observed, that, in Going, the Better
man was said, if there were but two, ire interior, and his companion (the
worse) ire ex^erior; and that, if there were three, the Best went in the
middle; according to that of Ovid speaking of an aged man, ( Fast. lib. 5.) Et
medius juvenum^^non indignantibus ipsis That, and interior, si comes ^^us (...).

18. But thou glad of a Gown'd Wench, do not care
To hand-down Chione from her high Chair
-- A^ Tu,
Cum tibi vestiti facies scorti placet, hares,
El dubitas alta Chionen deducere ^^ella.


Vmbritius having set-forth with indignation the wealth and wantoness of proud
Servants, shows now the Beggarly and ridiculous thrift of such as were
freeborn. He speaks to Juvenal, and in him to other freeborn Romans, as if he
should say, But you alas, for all your freedom, being of petty fortunes if
compared with lucky and guilty servants, must be glad of a poor harlot. For
this is the sense of Scortum vestitum, that is, togatum; the gown being
properly the Man's garment, and therefore when applied unto a woman it
signifies the viler sort: it being enjoined as a Punishment and shame to lewd
women; as is showed, Sat. (...). Illustrat. 16. But as for a Chione (says
Vmbritius.) that is, for a curious and dainty harlot, in a necessary thrift,
thou (though freeborn) hae^es, do stick through fear, and doubtest to attend
such a costly one, or complementally to help her down in the street from her
high Chair, in which she is wantonly carried. Such Chairs were called Sellae,
and from thence such women (as Britannicus says) were called Sellariae. But
Pignorius, de Servis, p. 143. thinks that it should rather be cella (meaning
meretricia) and so alta cella should according to him be fornix (the slews) so
called from the fashion of the building, it being raised high and with an
arched roof. Which conjecture he contirmes from that in Sat. 6. -- Et cellam
vacnam, and -- ultima cellam clausit. But methinks here is no need of mending
this place, and that the truth which he delivers is not here to be applied. For
does not Juvenal, Sat. 6. reckon the Sella among the wanton women's provisions,
when he says, -- conducit Ogulnia vestem, Conducit Comites, Sellam, cervical,
amicas? So also Seneca in his book entitied, In Sap. n^n cadit injuria, cap.
14. Quid refers quot habet lecticarios, quam oneratas aures, quam laxam sellam?
Which testimonies Pignorius himself takes notice of, in another place, de
servis, p. 217. and might more fitly have applied them here. Besides, this
interpretation seems more suitable to Juvenal's purpose; who intending to
express the free born Roman's Poverty, Thrift and Fear in attending on a costly
harlor, might fitly express it, by showing how he withdrew himself from the
greatest charge; it being probably more chargable and vain to wait upon his
mistresses humors abroad also, then only at home. And here on the contrary we
may take notice of the expense of the rich man's riotous servant, who is said
to bestow upon his lust, as much as the stipend of a Military Tribune, of which
there were diverse in one Legion, every thousand footmen being usually under a
several Tribune: whose stipend, as Britanni^us (on those words, Aenea lampas,
v. 285. of this Satyr) alleges out of Strab^, lib. 11. was a talent. Which, to
omit Britannicus his reducing of it, is according to the common rule, when
absolutely named, to be understood of the lesser Attick talent, which was as
much as 24. Sesterria, or 1871. 10 s. the sum of the riotous Servants expense
here inveighed at by Vmbritius.

19. By the Great Samothracian Gods and Ours. -- Jures licet and Samothracum Et
nostro^um aras -- The Poet sets forth the desperate estate of Home, where
neither Honesty nor Oaths were sufficient in a witness, but only wealth. For
though he were as honest as Scipio Nasica, in whose house the mother of the
Gods, Cyb^l^ the Phrygian Goddess, when she was brought to Rome, was
entertained, till a Temple was provided for her; or as N^m^ the founder of the
Roman Religion; or as Me^ell^^ who, when the Temple of Miker^a was on fire, r^n
in though to the loss of his own fight and brought out her statue, the
Pulladium, which was kept there a yet so great honesty, whiles but honesty,
would not serve. Besides, though one should swear by all the Gods either of the
B^^barians or Romans, it were all one. For th^^ the margin of one manuscript
does expound the intent of Sam^sb^^^^am a^as, taking them pro q^ib^scunque
barbaris (...) according to which interpretation it should be a Syneed^che of
one particular for the general. But the accurate Mac^obi^s discussing this last
point, what the Sam^thr^cian Gods were, makes them Proper to the Romans and the
same with Penates and Magni ^ii; and though some held them to be Apollo and
Neptune, he after cutio^s search affirms them to be Jupiter, Juno and Minerva:
and makes Vesta also either to have been of their number, or without doubt
their companion. He shows also out of Varro, that they were brought by D^^dan^s
out of Sam^^h^raci^, an Island in the Aegaean Sea, into ^^^ygi^, and by Aene^^
from Troy into Italy, and that by Virgil they are called Di^ Patri^. Which
being so clear from the learned Macr^bius, we need not repeat the p^tty
varieties and errors of some Interpreters: only we may add, that some with more
convenien^y then others, by Nostror^m ar^s would understand Mars and Romulus;
which I believe to be a part of truth, yet an imperfect one in respect of this
place, the entire sense whereof I take to be brei^ly this. Be a man here at
Rome never so honest and brought for a witness, yet if he be hot rich, he shall
not be believed, though he swears both by the Gods of our Ancestors the
Tro^^ns, brought from Samothracia into Phrygia and thence by Aeneas into Italy,
as also by all those other Gods, which in the many ages since Aeneas his time
we have added to them, and which we may therefore rightly call, not the
Sam^^hracian Gods or the Gods of our Ancesters, but more properly Our Own.
Which sense, methinks, relishes of some sharpness against the multitude of the
Roman Gods; which argument he far^^^er and vehemently prosecutes, Sa^. 13.

20. -- Let him not here claim A fea^ on the Knights cushion'd bench --. De
p^l^n^ surga^ Equestri^. There were distinct sea^s in the Theater for the Roman
Knights and the People; the first were called Equestria, mention (...) that of
Senec^ (...) Be^^f. ^^b. 7. cap. 12. Equestria omn^um Equi^um Roma^or^m su^ ^
the last were called P^p^^^^a. So Sue^on in Domitian; Omne ^enus return (...),
^^arsit, and quia pa^^ major inter popular^a decider a^, quinquagenas ^essa^as
in ^ingulos cuneos Equestris at Senato^ii ordinis pronun^i^v^t; as Marcell^^
Donatus notes on Sueton's Augustus, cap. 4^, p. 401. Now whereas this
difference was almost wot^ out, Domi^^an in contempt of the people ^enew'd this
distinction, which had been brought in by a Law made by Lucius Roscius Otho
Tribune, of the People; and for the pre^^^^ing of which difference there were
in Domiti^^'s (...) Overseers in the Theater. Such a one was Lecti^s mentioned
by Mar^ial. lib. 4. in that epigramm of Ch^restra^us, Qu^aringenta tibi no^
sunt Ch^res^^^^^, s^rge, Lec^^^^ e^ce ^enit. --.

21. Son^ of some Catch fis^ or chei^ Fencer. ^inni^apus (notwithstanding other
opinions) signifies here according to Bri^a^^^^us, Turnebus and the most, the
Re^^arius d^scrib'd^ Sa^. 2. Illustr^t. 2^. who has ^er^ this name bestowed on
him from his catching with his not his adversaries he^me^, whereon was pa^^ed a
fish. In the ^eyer^ty of the most li^^eral expression the word (...) ^apus may
be rendered, a finne ^a^cher. Some tell us, that the Retiarius wore a feather in
his Orest; and so it might be rendered a Catch-(...): but I think the first
interpretation the more, accurate. L^^^^^a which is here added, signifies one,
who tram'd up sword prayers in the art of fencing, and t^e^ hired them out. The
name, as some think, comes a laniandis hominibus, from his Art of killing men:
which we may take rather for truth then fancy, if we consider the inhuman
practice of those times. Britamicus illustrates it also from that of Sueton in
his Caesar, Tyrones neque in ludo, neque per lanistas, sed in domibus per
Equites Romanos a^ etiam Sena^o^es armorum peri^or erudieb^t. The Poet's intent
then is, that poor yet worthy men were excluded from the chief seats, but rich
ones were admitted, though their fathers were of the vilest sort of people; so
that knighted Wealth, not Virtue, was respected.

22. When asks an Aedile Their advise? Even a mean Magistrate scorns to consult
with a poor man, though never so wise. Wherefore, says he, the poor should
indeed long e're this have made one departure more from proud Rome, and have
left it desolate, as once they did; though they suffered themselves to be
persuaded back again by Menenius Agrippa. He indeed wittily expressing the
quarrel between the Nobility and People by the fable of the Parts of the Body
quarrelling with the belly for devouring all, till by withdrawing their aid to
fill the belly, not only that, but all the other parts were like to perish, won
them to a reconciliation, which was made by creating Tribunes of the People to
defend them from the insolency of the Rich.

23. Though he Well liked it, that by sudden change did see The Marsians and
Sabellians thrifty ^ood. Some Interpreters undestand this generally, that he
who shall be suddenly taken from the Roman plenty and wantonness, and be but
practiced to the more homely fare and thrift of the Marsians or Sabellians,
will well like an earthen dish. Which, though a good sense seems not to be the
sense of this place; for then it had been proper and as casy to have expressed
it by the future tense, nega^is: but the generality of copies having negavit,
in the time past, it does more aptly implie story. Wherefore I think the old
exposition to be best, according to which it is understood of C^rius Dentatus,
who used such simplicity of earthen vessels, when the enemies brought him
gold; saying, he had rather eat in vessels of earth, and be Lord of such as eat
in vessels of gold: besides making war against these people, be became as
famous by victory, as before by Thrift. Some few understand here P. Cornelius
Scip^^; but the variety of the instance varies not the manner of the
interpretation.

24. The course Venetian hood. There were diverse people called Veneti, as
Ortelius shows in his Thesaur. Geograph, there being of that name in France,
others in Italy: which latter are here in fittest probability to be
understood, that so more su^eably may be laid together homely and innocent
Italians, such as the Marsians, Sabellians and the Veneti. Where we may note,
that although Venice, which now flourishes, were not built till the year of our
Lord, 429. yet the whole province, which belongs to it, was long before that
called Veneti^, as amongst others Machi^vel notes in his ^lore^ine History,
lib. 1. and as the Scholiast implies in his annotation on this place, saying
that these were course hoods, such as the Perusini wore, vel a color out
provinci^ Venetos; whose name by a little change was made from the Haneti, who
are said to have come thither to inhabit after the destruction of Troy. We may
farther take notice of what A^tu^nnus says on this place, Venetum carule^^^
temperate Alexandrid reperit: whence we may collect, that though this kind, of
hood was not for the invention of the color called the Venetian hood, ye^ that
it was so called for the frequent use of it in that part of Italy. The color
is by Britannicus called bla^us, which is a blew; by others it is commonly
rendered by caerule^s; and so is taken for skie-colour, or Sea color: of which
see Sat. 11. Illustrat. 16. The hood it self, though a course one, was worn not
only by the meaner, but also the better sort^ which custom is partly touched
by Columella, lib. 2. cap. 8. who advises Masters to provide hoods for their
family against rain and cold. Julius Capi^olinus, in his Pertina^, mentions
tuculli Bardiaci (or, as some read, Bardaici) which, it seems, the French
Bardes did anciently use; and thence it is, as Marc^llus D^natus (on Jul.
Capitolin. in Pertin.) thinks, that Poets in latter times were painted with
hoods, as, according to his instances, Petrach and Dan^e: but I leave his
opinion to the Reader's Judgment.

25. Not any, till they are dead, wear Gowns. The Roman Gown was a garment
without sleeves, of a semicircular form, different in largness according to
men's wealth or poverty, though the just size of it were six else, according to
that of Horace, Epod. 4. Videsne sacram metiente (...) viam, cum bis ter
ulnarum toga. In the time of the ancient Commonwealth they wore it down to the
shoo^, as the Graecians, did the pallium; as Aldus Manutius, de Quaesitis per
Epistol. lib. 3. Epist. 1. shows cut of Quintilian. Lubin on this place
render's it a mantle; the form of it R^sinus sets out, Antiquit. Roman. lib. 5.
cap. 32. The color of it is said to have been white; yet we may not forget
what Pancirollus an exquisite observer tells us concerning this, lib. 1. Tit.
43. Toga^ communiter portabant caruleam an^ alterius coloris: nunquam vero
atram vel pullam; nisi in funeribus? Abam, autem tum imprimis, cum ad
spectacula accederent; qu^ color and Senatores ^^ebantur. Vnde and Ordo
C^ndid^tus dicitur. Ru^gerfius also; as is showed, Illustrat. 9. of this
Satyr, ventures upon a conjecture of Livery-gowns voluntarily, though
flatteringly, worn by Clients: which being for distinction of attendance and
Patrons, argues some liberty and variety of colors. Under this they wore a
short garment, the tunica or coat. By this then it appears that the Gown a
garment of such largeness was indeed a burden, and more for Solemnity then
other use. Wherefore the S^cii or Confederates of the Romans in diverse parts
of Italy living plainly and without pomp did all their life forbear the use of
it; yet when dead, they were carried to their funerals in the solemnity of the
Gown, as Manutius shows in the place before cited. Who also thinks that the
^oga was a garment, which was worn only in Public, but that their usual
domestic garment was the L^cern^, which, as he says, was black. Yet, if he
took this to be the only color of the l^ce^^^, he erred; our Poet mentioning
Tyrias l^^er^^s (purple) Sat. 1. and likewise a^rata lacerna, Sat, 10. Martial
also makes the Lacernae Betiea to speak thus, Non est lana mihi mendax; nec
m^tor aheno: Sic p^^ceant Tyriae, me me a tin^it ovis; implying that some were
of the natural color of the wool; of the Betick wool, which was, as
Britan^icus thinks, rutilous, of a bright of fiery color. The form of the
Orator's Gown i^ thus by Rubenius (in his Elect.) set forth from an ancient
Monument (...) though concerning some father expression of a Closing of the
Roman Gown upon the shoulder, see Persius, Sat. 5. Illust. 2.

Juv. Sat. III. Illust. 25.
depiction of a Roman statue of a man dressed in a toga

26. When the known Parting-song Returns unto their stages --. They had yearly
shows, as Tragedies or Comedies: at the end of which, it was the Custom, as
the Poet here implies, to have a concluding Song at the People's departure or
Going forth of the Theater, and therefore called Exodium, after the nature of a
jigge after a play, the more cheerfully to dismiss the spectators. Where it may
be observed that the Scholiast and after him others would have the Exodium to
be proper in a sort only to Tragedies, to put the heaviness out of the
Spectators minds; yet Pollux makes it belong to Comedies: which uncertainty may
make it probable that it was used at both.

27. At the sight of a pale gaping Actour. Personae pallentis hiatum. At the
A^ellan plays they did anciently bring in terrible, or rather ridiculous
goblins with great jaws, and gnashing their teeth. Manducus is taken for such a
one in Plautus, and signifies the same with (...), and so they feigned Lamia to
be a devourer of children: and therefore Pomponius an A^ellan Poet entitled an
Ex^dium which he made, Python Gorgoneus; the Gorgons also being painted with
great teeth. See Joseph. Scaliger on Varro de Linguae Latina, lib. 6. p. 150.
and 151. and Pignorius de Servis, p. 99. aptly thus presenting this from an
ancient brazen expression by him applied to this passage of Juvenal. * Juv.
Sat. III. Illust. 27.
depiction of an actor with grotesque mask

28. -- No^ the First seats more gay. Orchestra (from (...), to dance) was
properly the place where the Players usually danced: but here figuratively it
signifies the seats next the stage. Of this see Marcellus Donatus more largely,
on Sueton's Caesar. cap. 76. p. 265. It was the place in the Theater, where the
Senators sat at Shows, as Vitruvius tells us, lib. 5. cap. 6.

29. -- But a white Coat. In Municipal Towns, only the Aediles, to whom
belonged the oversight of the Plays, wore a White coat; whereas at Rome the
people used it at their public Shows, as appears by that of Martial, Et plebs
and minor ordo maximusque Sancto cum duce candidus sederer. Thus Britannicus on
this place; yet we must farther remember, that in places out of Rome, as the
Poet says, the Aediles wore only a Coat.

30. -- Another trimms his page, Enriched with their fine caks. Crinem hic
deponit amati, Plena domus libis venalibus. The Poet here shows the misery of
poor clients, who ^o continue their Patrons favor are forced to take all
flattering courses in their several professions; as to barb their Patron's
servants of riper age, and, if he had any younger and wanton attendant, to
trim his locks; or rather, when his hair was cut off and dedicated to some
God (which time was accounted Festival) they were glad to send bribing-cakes,
as presents to the young favorite, which being many and costly he sold again
(as men over-fill'd with New year's gifts) and so grew rich. This is the most
received interpretation, as implying the fond custom in the dedication of
their Hair and First Beard, as also the Offering it self in a manner holy; Liba
properly, as Britannicus notes, being offerings to the Gods. Concerning the
Custom of offering their first beard to some God, Sueton mentions it of Nero:
whose beard being cut off was put in a box, and being adorned with pearls was
dedicated. Of the Dedication likewise of their Hair, Martial speaks, lib. 1.
epig. 31. in those words, Hos tibi Phoebe vovet totos a vertice crines Encolpus
Domini Centurionis opus. But we must take notice that some latter critics do
according to some copies read here, Plena domus libris venalibus, understanding
it of a custom in Great men's houses to keep books containing a vainglorious
catalogue of all their clients: which books say they (among whom is Pignorius)
were sold unto Great men's Clients at dear rates. For the first of which, that
they had such books, I grant that Seneca, de Benef. lib. 6. cap. 33. (cited by
Pignorius, de Servis, p. 218.) implies it: but as for the copying of them out
for sale, and so for any great gain, it seems but a supposition: the use of
these books being not for the clients, but for the Patrons, or rather for their
Nomenclator, or Prompter, who readily was to tell them the name of any client
that came to salute them; as Lipsius shows on that passage of Seneca. Wherefore
we may probably suspect those few manuscripts, which have this last Reading, as
being but ignorantly transcribed, and the occasion of more fancy, then truth.
Besides methinks that if these Critics had but observed the connection of the
Poets discourse, they could not easily have interjected this impertinent
argument. For with what propriety should the Poet have immediately added,
accipe, and illud Fermentum tibi habe, (take also this Leaven with you,) if he
had not spoken of Liba before? What propriety of inference from Libri to
Fermentum! But having spoken of dainty cakes, which are usually made light and
easy of digestion, to show notwithstanding, if they were truly considered, that
they were heavy to a poor client, what could more naturally and aptly be said,
then that these cakes though fine did notwithstanding not want their leaven,
which might justly make a poor client Swell with anger at the charge. Where it
may be observed that the Poet (in the person of Vmbritius) bids the client,
though he gives away his cake, yet to keep the Leaven to himself; fermentum
tibi habe, says he; implying that the rich favorite had the gift, and the
poor client the grief.

31. And Barbarous mice gnawed Poems though Divine. Et divina Opici rodebant
carmina mures. The Poet proceeding to describe the misery of the poorer sort,
shows that they were forced to hire the cock-losts of mean men's houses, to
which they usually ascended by a ladder, according to that of Martial. lib. 1.
epig. 117. Et scalis habito tribus; sed altis, and there dwelt in a place next
the slats, fitter for pigeons then men, and which if a fire happened below, was
unhappily ready for instant ruin (yet even in a storm without all fear of
drowning) Orbilius the rigid Schoolmaster, as Sueton describes him, had such a
habitation in his old age; and here Codrus a poor Poet, by Juvenal called
raucus, Sat. I. seems to be dressed in the like poverty, as may appear by the
small furniture of his house, in which he had yet forsooth a statue or two;
particularly one of Cheiron, which underpropp'd his table. Yet some would here
understand the Works of Cheiron, who was Physician to the Argonautick fleet;
and that poor Codrus not thriving by his Poetry turned Physician. But this
last they speak without proof; and the Poet seems only to imply that this
Codrus was not accommodated either with the ordinary ornaments of a house, or
with so much, as a convenient place for his few books; which, it seems, were so
coursly layd-up, that the mice gnawed them. Concerning the explication of which
last and chief passage we may know, that some would have Opici come from Ops,
(terra) and so it should signify earthly or base mice; others rather from
(...), which, say they, signifies to imitate the noise of mice when they gnaw,
and so it might nibbling mice. Which interpretations are recited in the
manuscript commentary, and the last is perferr'd; and so in the margin of one
manuscript, opici is expounded by rosores: which is a tautologie, being but to
say, rosores rodebant. The Scholiast brings it from (...), but makes it to
signify those that speak unskilfully, or, according to others, those that have
an unpleasant ^^^ce. Mancinellus an ancient Interpreter of Juve^al (and since
him others) derived it from (...), c^verna, or foramen: which we may grant to
be an ingenious conjecture, according to which it might be rendered, lurking
mice. Some take Opicus for one that is ignorant of the Greek language, and
prove it from Agellius, lib. 11. cap. 16. where he says, Per^unctant^ cuipiam,
qui literarum and vocum Graecarum expers fuit, cujusnam liber and qua de re
scriptus esset, adds, tunc ille opicus verbis meis inchoatis and inconditis
adductus: and that this should be the sense, they the rather think, because he
speaks of Greek books, which Codrus had, and which are here said to be gnawed,
Yet Brita^^jcus, though he alleges this, thinks that opicus signifies one
ignorant of the Latin, and so expounds Opici by Rudes and barbari, nec qui
Latin sciant. But the word and sense he draws from Opici a People of Campania,
the same with the Osci a rude people, of whom that of Titinius an old Poet is
spoken, Osce and Volsce fabulantur, nam Latin nesciunt. Which derivation is
very agreeable to the sense of this place. But whereas some out of Agellius
would have it signify one ignorant in the Greek, we may admit that it
signifies so there, yet only by accident, and that in the like manner it may
signify one ignorant in the Latin; but properly it signifies one ignorant or
rude in Speech, and of the two in This place rather rude in the Latin, then in
the Greek. And this way of interpretation will most aptly agree with the sense
of this passage, and likewise show why we receive not the derivation frem
(...), foramen. For first it were but an impertinent epithet in this place, to
say Lurking mice gnawed Divine Poems, without any sharpness of opposition; and
secondly the word being used again by Juvenal is of a far different
signification. For when he says in the sixth Satyr, -- atque opicae castigat
amicae Verba --, he intends, according to the received exposition of that
place, that a proud Roman dame reprehends her she-friend (though but less
skilful) as one Rude of Speech, particularly there of the Roman Speech. Whence
it may be inferred, seeing that in Agellius one ignorant of the Greek and in
Juvenal one ignorant of the Latin is reprehended by the same word Opicus, that
the word generally implies one Rude in Speech. And in this sense it is
expounded by Britannicus, who renders Opici by Rudes and Barbari; nor had he
erred, had he not straightened the sense to an Imperfection or Rudeness in One
only language. The Poet then says Ironically, that the Poems, which were gnawed
were Divine, that is here, most Eloquent, and the mice that gnawed them were
most Barbarous.

32. Which once graced the Phacasian Gods. The Poet in this next place shows
the contrary condition of the Rich, by the grief and help that was afforded
them, if any distress, as sudden fire or the like, befell them: for then were
the Lawdays stayed as in a public mourning, and other rich ones instantly
furnished them not only with necessaries, but even with ornaments. The reason
of which flatteries, notwithstanding the loss of their houses and movables, we
may ghuess to have been the greatness of their estate in land and their want of
children. In the description of the ornaments sent unto them the Poet mentions
the pictures and statues of the Gods of other nations, from whose Temples they
were brought as spoils by the conquering Romans, and employed in the adorning
of their stately houses. But in the explication of this point there is some
variety; one copy, alleged by Lubin, having here Hic Asianorum, in effect
agreeable with Pithaus his manuscript, wherein it was Hac Asianorum: which
Reading is preferred by Lipsius upon Seneca, de Beneficiis, lib. 7. cap. 22.
the intent being, that the Romans brought their spoils from the Asiatick
Temples. Yet the Reading now generally here received and taken notice of by
Pithaeus also, is, according to the truest writing, Phacasianorum. But both
Readings being warranted by copy, though I approve the last as best, it seems
but equity to allege the motive of my choice. It may be observed then, that
the Poet mentioning those things, which were sent to the Rich ones in their
distress, reckons-up Pieces performed by Euphranor an excellent Painter and by
Polyclete a curious statuary, both Athenians. Now because the Dii Phaecasiani
were Athenian Gods (though Alexandrian also, as some say) this verse is a fit
exposition of the former, showing with good coherence, that their Gifts were
not from the Asiatick conquests, but from the Grecian, as most congruously
appears by the Workmen and the Gods, both Athenian and so both Grecian. Now for
the name, Phaecasiani, it is from the shoes called Phacasia, with which their
Gods were pictured: their Priests likewise were thus dressed; and Appian. de
Bello Civili, lib. 5. speaking of M. Antonie, says that he wore white shoes,
such as the Priests of the Athenians and Alexandrians use. We may only add,
that these shoes were remarkable rather for the persons that wore them, then
for their value; the price of a pair mentioned by Seneca, de Beneficiis, lib.
7. cap. 21. being but three denarii, or, two and twenty pence halfpenny: which
is agreeable to Hesychius, who calls the Phaecasium, a Country-shooe.

33. Silver, almost a peck. Modium argenti. Modius is commonly rendered a
bushel; but by the learned it is as commonly acknowleg'd to be an error: though
what it is, may seem as hard, as it is useful, to be determined. But not to vex
the Reader instead of informing him, we need not discuss the doubt from the
learned and large discourses of Georgius Agricola, Budaus, or Mariana, who have
with singular diligence tried the ancient measures: but with a more speedy,
success we may positively be instructed by our last Translators of the Bible;
who on Mat. 5.15. upon the word Bushel in the text, (...) in the original, say
in the margin, that The word in the Original signifies a measure containing
about a pint less then a peck. The peck then containing sixteen pints, and the
modius as much, wanting but about one such sixteenth part, I render it in the
nearest generality of expression, almost a peck.

34. This Childless Persian. Some would have Persicus here to signify a
Perstan, and so they think that Arturius a little before spoken against was a
Persian, and that as a stranger grown rich by base courses he is pointed at by
the Poet. Others take it for the proper name of some rich and flattered Roman:
indeed it is the name of Juvenal's friend to whom he writes his 11. Satyr, as
appears from the 57th. verse of it. Seneca likewise de Beneficiis, lib. 4. cap.
30. mentions Fabius Persicus; on which place Lipsius alleges that of Juvenal,
Sat. 8. v. 14. Natus in Herculeo Fabius lare: which Fabius he makes to be him,
of whom Seneca speaks. Yet I think that this acception of the word ought not to
take place here, but that it only expresses Arturius by his Country, and so
shows with congruity the success of his devise. I approve therefore the first
opinion, which is the opinion also of the Scholiast, who expressing his reason
says this, Persicum, quasi divites posuit: eo quod Persae divites. I will only
add, that if I would venture upon conjecture, I might say it is a name purposely
here used by Juvenal to signify a witty fellow, that was able to put such a
trick upon the covetous and cunning Romans, as by firing his own house, to get
more then he lost. For Varro de Lingua Lat. lib. 16. p. 82. says, Perficus a
perito. Itaque sub hoc glossema Callide subscribunt. Upon which passage of
Varro, the accurate Antonius Augustinus in his Emendations, p. 46. (according
to Scaliger's Edition) places this note, Persicus fortasse scribendum ex Sext.
Pompeio, qui per acatum interpretatur; and baec Naevii verba refert, Et qui
fucrit Perficus, carpenti adest ratio. So that Persicus may thus signify as
much as peritus, callidus and acutus, a cunning fellow; nor may the word,
though seeming obsolete, be any hindrance, seeing that Juvenal but a little
before, did for his purpose use the word Opicus, which strictly was not of much
use: yet I propose this only in a liberty of conjecture.

35. The Circus. It may suffice in this place only by the way to take notice,
that the Circus was a large place in Rome encompassed with seats, where pompous
Shows, as running with Chariots and the like, were with wonderful delight
presented to the People. The description whereof may more conveniently be
referred to Sat. 6. Illustrat. 71. and Sat. 11.

36. Clausa lectica senestra. Of the Lectica carried by six (called Hexaphorum)
or by eight (octophorum) permitted but to certain persons, see Marcellus
Donatus on Sueton's Augustus, cap. 76. and Lipsius, Elect. 1. p. 105.

37. A soldier leaves his boot-nail in my hand. He implies the rude thronging
of some on foot, some on horseback, as they strive to pass the streets. For
this must be supposed, to understand these miserable and continual vexations.
Of the soldier's Caliga and clavus, (the boot- nail, not the rowel of the
spur, which was called stimulus) see upon more fit occasion the last Satyr,
Illustrat. 3.

38. With what a smoke we celebrate our Doal? He shows the custom of the
Romans, which, for their attendance on their Patrons, receiving at night the
Sportula or Coena recta, had fire-pans (or chafing dishes) placed in their
baskets, which were speedily carried home by their Servants, (that the meat
might not grow cold) though sometimes the burden of such trumperie was able to
weary even Corbulo, one of great strength and stature. This trouble about the
Sportula is mentioned by Seneca to Lucilius; but is to be understood, not as
Sportula is sometimes taken, for centum quadrantes, but as for coena recta. And
here it may be observed, that though the Poet says, centum convivae, he does
not intend that they all supped with their sportulae together, as the word
convivae might seem to implie; for the Poet implies afterward that they
departed to their houses with their sportulae, as Pignorius also observes ( de
Servis, p. 106.): but it shows that many came to the same Great man for such
Doal. Wherefore we may take notice here, to prevent error, that (...) in
Athenaeus ( lib. 8.) is taken in a sense far different from this. For as
Roberius Tuius, Locor. Controvers. lib. 8. cap. 20. shows out of Athenaeus,
there were two kinds of feasts or meetings upon agreement; the one (...), when
diverse gave their rings or other pledges, to make a meeting or feast, and so
paid though they came not, or though too late; the other, (...), when every one
brought his provision in kind. Concerning which distinction see Suidas de
Brumalibus: but this of Juvenal is different from both these, though by some it
might have been mistaken for the latter of the two. Of Chasing dishes see
Seneca epist. 85. and Casaubon, (out of Aristophanes) in his Athenaean
Animadversions, lib. 1. cap. 6. And to prevent mistake, we may further know,
that the Sportula being a little basket, was not a pannier containing meat for
a hundred Clients, but being provision brought out by lesser portions
successively to the great man's Gate, was by degrees distributed, and the
Clients accordingly dismissed: and took the name from the small baskets, in
which the Clients servants usually received it. See, Sat. 1. Illustrat. 36.

39. The oil'd Cleansers sound. -- Domus -- sonat unctis Strigilibus. He shows
the trimness and diligence of servants at home preparing for their master
against his coming home, all things fit for his bathing before supper as the
cleansers and napkins handsomely folded (not foul ones already used): but though
the master return, the servant that is expected with the supper from the rich!
Patron, is sometimes unexpected and unhappily slain by carts in the street. The
strigil was an instrument of Iron, says Brita^nicus; wherewith in the Bathes
they scrap'd-off the sweat from their bodies, and called it so a stringendo, 1.
radendo, and therefore he thinks that they were oil'd, that they might be the
more gentle: which Sueton scorn^s to implie, whiles he notes of Octavius, that
he hurt his body with the too much use of the strigil. Yet we may farther
observe with Du Choul ( des Baines and Antiques Exercitations, sol. 3.) that
there was great difference in their matter according to the delicacy of some
rich ones; diverse making them of brass, silver, gold, ebony; others more
tender using sp^^ages not only white, but some died in scarlet: though I
believe that the common sort was of Metal, as may seem to be implied here by
Juvenal, in the word sonat. The form of the strigil is thus presented by
Fortunatus Scacchus in his Myr^thecium, lib. 1. cap. 35. (as also in effect by
Piguorius de Servis, p. 46.) * depiction of a strigil And here it will not be
unpleasant to remember concerning the strigil, what Plutarch (de vitio Pud.)
tells of Theocritus: who being in a Bath, where two fellows desired to borrow
his strigil or Cleanser of him, the one of which was a stranger, the other a
noted theif, answered the first thus, I will not lend it you, because I do not
know you; and the second thus, I will not lend it you, because I do know you.

40. The Oile-horn. Guttus. It was so called from Gutta, because the oil
leasurely dropped out. It may be observed, that there was also a vessel of the
same name mentioned by Varr^, used for wine, and in their sacrifices, and
called so for the like reason, the manner of dropping forth. The guttus is from
Antiquity thus fashioned. depiction of a strigil and oil horn

41. The farthing for the ferry-man. Trientem. The Poet here implies the vain
opinion of the Heathen, who held that if a body lay unburied, the Soul remained
on the bank of Acheron, and might not be permitted by Charon to pass over till
it had wandered an hundred years between Heaven and Earth, as Virgil implies,
Aeneid. 6. They believed likewise that they which were to pass, were to have
their ferry-mony in their mouths: for which cause the Athenians were wont to
put such money into the mouths of the dead. Now the Poet seems to implie, that
he which is here said to be killed, could not have passage, because the person
was so crushed, that the money could not be disposed of according to the
custom; or because, as some and, the servants cruel master would not bestow
upon him so much as the ferry-man's pay, though but a triens, or farthing, it
being but the third part of As (so called from Aes, the least brazen coin)
which was ob. qa. as is showed, Sat. 1. Illustrat. 36.

42. If he fight With no body. He expresses the disorders of the City; and thus
Sueton particularly relates of Otho, that he used to walk by night, to beat
those that he met, and with his companions spreading his Sagum or soldier's
cloak, to toss men up with it. The like night-wandrings are reported of Nero,
who would sometimes cast those that he met, into the common jakes.

43. And cut leeks. Sectile porrum. The Authors of some of the manuscript
annotations expound sectile by Great, because, say they, it was big enough to
be cut into many pieces; or because, say others, this implies a niggardliness
in the owner, in spending but a piece of it at a time. But without such
niceness, better is Britannicus his observation out of P^^y, lib. 29. cap. 6.
who divides porrum into sectile and capitatum, according to the different
ordering of leeks in the garden: one so^^ being let to run to a head, the other
being ^^ually cut for the service of the kitchen. (...) like manner there seems
to be no special matt^^ intended in the word vervecis, when the ^^^et speaks of
a sheep's head, though there is (...) apparent Ironie in labra for caput. But
Autu^^^s his exposition here is somewhat different, who makes Cujus conche
^umes? to signify Cuj^^ favore ^umes? as thinking the poor man here ^erided,
as being grown proud, for having sup^ed, though but basely, with his Patron.
But the drunken gallant here mentioned, asking the poor man what cobblers were
with him (...) the great cheer, seems to implie that it ^as the entertainment,
which one poor man bestowed upon another, and seems to flout rather at their
misery, then their pride.

44. At what Temple door May a man find you begging? The Romans had son houses
of sacred use distinct names, as Templum, Aedes, Phanum, and Proseucha, which
last though we render, by the most known word a Temple, yet we may strictly
call it an Oratory, from (...), to Pray. Which kind of places the Scholiast
says were proper to the Jews, but others prove them to have belonged also to
the Romans: which seems the more probable, it being incongruous, that the poor
Romans should beg at the Oratories of the Jews, who are throughout our Poet
described generally as very poor; or that they should beg rather of Jews then
Romans, charity being commonly extended only to persons of a like devotion.

45. And bind thee over to answer't. Vadimonia -- faciunt. This expression is
in effect as suitable to the Romans, as to us, though the manner and season of
the appearance be not the same, yet among them he that committed a misdemeanor
was compelled to put in Surety, that he would answer the accuser: and this was
called vadimonium, from vadere; because as some have it, the surety did vadere
in discrimen, go into danger for another, or, as some, because after the Surety
was put-in, the party bound to appear might go at liberty till the Hearing.

46. -- When the Pontine Moore, And Gallinarian Pines. Aet Pontina palus and
Gallinaria Pinus. The Pontine fen and the Gallinarian Wood of pine-trees were
places in Campania notorious for robberies, mentioned by Strabo and Sueton.
Jovianus Pontanus, lib. 2. de Magnificentia, and since him Lubin says, that
Julius Caesar layddrie this moore: but Marcellus Donatus, p. 239. on Sueton's
Caesar, cap. 44. did heretofore note, that Caesar only intended it, being
prevented in the performance by death; but that it was afterward performed by
Trajan. Strabo says, that it was called Pontina palus from a City called
Pontia; and Pliny tells us, ( lib. 3 cap. 5.) that anciently there were 23.
Cities about it.

47. And the Sun grows low. Aet Sol inclinat. Our Poet not mentioning at what
time of the day his friend Vmbritius began to speak to him, concludes more
warily then the Poet Nemesianus (by birth a Carthaginian, flourishing at Rome
in the time of Dioclesian) who in his Bucolicks, Eclog. 1. bringing-in Timet^s
and Tityrus talking together i^ the Morrning, whiles, as Timet^s there says. Et
ros and primi suadet clementia Solis, does aft^^ a few verses interchang'd,
(which could ^ot take-up the fourth part of an hour, as Hug^^^us Martellius on
that place, Annot. 1. sharp^^ o^^erves) make Tityrus conclude after this
^^ma^^er, Sed jam Sol demitti^ equos de culmine (...), Flumineos suadens
gregibus praebere liquores

48. Helvinian (...). Me quoque ad Helvinam Cererem. Some ^^ad, as Britannicus
says, Me quoque Eleusina^ ^ererem, making Ceres to be so called from ^^er
Temple which she had at Eleusis, (betw^^^ Athens and Megara) whence by Virgil
(in ^is Georgicks) she is called Eleusina matter. B^^ this epither seems not so
proper here; it being no such apt expression to say, Call me to Eleusian Ceres
near Aquinum. Scoppa and Brodaus take Helvinam for a title given to Ceres from
the color of ripe corn (of which she was the Goddess) and to signify yellow.
Yet methinks to express so common a notion so obscurely were a choice of words
as far from Art, as from Necessity. Some deri^^ the word ab eluendo, making it
to signify ^urifying Ceres, because they that were initiated ^n Her Rites,
were Washed, or Purified. Whi^^ opinion seems very apt and may be includ^^^ in
that which follows. For some think her so called from a Fountain nere Aquinum,
called Helvinus fons, which as Ortelius relates (in his Thesaur. Geograph.) is
now called Elvino, by which, as Scoppa acknowledges, there are still the ruins
of Temples which are thought to have belonged to Ceres and Diana; and this
opinion Britannicus also mentions. And this I think to be most agreeable to the
intent of Vmbritius, who bids his friend Juvenal call him from Cumae to
Aquinum, unto His Ceres and His Diana; seeming to design by Helvinam and
Vestram as well the Place, as the Deities.

49. A Booted aid ^le come. Caligatus. Caliga was properly the soldier's Boot;
and Aquinum ( Juvenal's Country, was by reason of the waters there, a place of
a cold air: upon which occasion Vmbritius tells Juvenal, that if he will admit
him as an Helper, he will come to his cold Aquinum well booted like a soldier
against the injurle of weather, and if Fear chill his courage to proceed in
Satyr, he will assist him like a prepared soldier, that dares go on in his
attempts.

SATYR. IV.
ARGUMENT.
Crispinus first for Lust and Cheer
Is here exposed: next does appear
Caesar himself, whose Vast Expense
Exceeds Belief, at well as Sense.
The Poet then calls on his Muse
For help, to tell True and strange News.
The Lords by the Emp'rours Will and Wit,
About a Fish in Council sit:
They all are censured with concise
Truth, in their Manners and Advise.
ONce more behold Crispinus! Often I shall
Make Him act here: a Monster, whom from all
Vice, not one Virtue rescues! Sick, yet strong
In Lust: Only the Adult'rer scorns to long
After your Widow's Dainties! What is it then
In long arched Walks [1] to tire Mules, or by men
Be carried in Vast shades of Groves; or nigh
The Forum, [2] Houses, nay whole Acres, buy?
No Bad man's Happy. Least of all a vile
Tempter, with Incest stained, who did defile
But lately a veiled Vestal, [3] which by right
Was to be buried quick. But now of slight
Faults we complain, and yet for faults as small
Under the Censor's Judgment others fall.
For, what did good Titius and Saius stain,
Became Crispinus! But complaint is Vain!
The man's more Ugly then all Crime! He paid
Six thousand for a Barbel, which being weighed
Cost a Sestertium a Pound, [4] as they
Report, who of great things do greater say.
Yet I Would commend his Wit, if by his rare
Gift, he became some Childless old man's Heir:
Or had it on some wealthy Widow been
Bestowed, that rides in her glas'd Cave unseen.
Away with Plots; 'twas for himself: we see
What our Niggard Apicius [5] durst not! Free
Crispinus, thou dare This; though once, you know it,
Your Country Paper made you a girt coat. [6]
Was this a price for Fish-scales? I durst ghuess,
One might have bought the Fisherman for less.
Our Provinces for This much sell some store
Of A^res, and Apuli^ affords more
What Feasts did the Emperor swallow then? when all
These Sesterces (which were but as a small
Mess taken from the Margin of his Cheer
When Least) were by a Court-rook belched out here,
Now Chief of all our Knights: Though time was, when
He cried but broken Fish to's Countrymen! [7]
Begin Calliope, I Am Fixed; I will
Not Sing; It Is very Story. Lend your skill
Ye young Pierian Maids: help ye my tongue;
And help the sooner, since I call you young.
When the last Flavius the half-dead world did tear,
And Rome to bald-pate Nero [8] crouch'd with fear,
Before Venus's Shrine, Dorique [9] Ancona's grace,
An Adriatic Turbet of vast space
Plunged in, choked up the Net [10] and stuck no less
Then those, which the Maeotick waves oppress,
Till thawed at the dull Pontick Gates they throw
Them out, first with long cold made fat and slow.
The Boat and Nets glad Master does ordain
This Monster for the High Priest. [11] Who so vain
Indeed, that such a Fish or Sells or Buys;
When no shore wants Informers, prowling Spies,
VVho'd strive for Sea-weed! and to the Boatman say,
This Fish unworthyly had stolen away;
And first being fed in Caesar's Ponds, he ought
Though escaped, to his first Master to be brought.
For if Palphurius lies not, if we dare
Trust Armillatus, what so e're is rare,
Swim where it will, it is Caesar's. If I can,
I Will Give't, not loose't then, quoth the Fisherman.
Now sickly Autumn was by Frosts displaced:
The Sick feared Quartans; [12] winter all defaced
VVhistling in Cold, and kept the prey still New;
Yet hastens He, as if a South Wind blew.
And when the Lakes they would past, where Alba, though
Half-down, keeps the Ilian Fire, and with less show
Serves Vesta still, the wondering Rout did stay
His Entrance, till removed, the Gates gave way
With easy hinge. The excluded Fathers wait
To see the admission of these (a) Dainties: straight
He to Atrides goes; to whom thus spoke
This poor Picenian. Daigne, Great Lord, to take
This that exceeds all private fires. This day
Spend on thy Genius: cleanse without delay
Thy Stomach; and this Turbet, kept not sought,
For Thy Reign, Eat. The Fish would needs be caught,
Greedy of happy ruin! This to Eyes
Half-blind was open Flattery. Yet his Comb did rise!
Once equal men with Gods, [13] their Rule shall be,
In such men's Praise there is no Hyperbole.
But now there lacked a size of Pot: in all
Have then the Lords he does to Council call,
Men whom he hated, in whose visage sat
A paleness of Dread Favor. Loudly straight
A large Liburnian baules ye out, Run, Run,
Caesar is set. Pegasus then begun
To stir, caught up his Roab, and first does come:
He was of late Bailiff of frightened Rome.
Were Prefects then ought else? He was the best
Indeed, and Law with exact truth expressed:
Yet saw, in those dire Times things so did stand,
They might be touched but with an half-just hand.
Then came (b) old pleasant Crispus, of a sweet
Temper and Eloquence, and none more meet
To have advised Him, that ruled Sea and Land,
Might he but have condemned foul Actions; And
Had not That Plague of Mankind loathed to hear
Truth. But what is fiercer then a Tyrant's ear?
With whom to talk of Heat, Cold, Spring-show'rs, straight
(As if you would in the weather search his Fate)
Was Death! He Would never then swim against the flood:
No man for Truth durst spend words, much less Blood.
Armed with these Arts of Proof, This man, in fears
And such a Court, did live safe fourscore years!
Next came Acilius [14] of the like Great Age;
His Son too, whom the Tyrants bloody Rage
Mark't-out and seiz'd-on. But mere Prodigy
Long since, Great Age was in Nobility.
So that I Would be, though not for size, for birth
A brother [15] of the Giants (born of the Earth).
He escaped not then, though in the Alban Sand
This naked Hunter killed with desperate hand
Numidian Bears. [16] For such Patrician Art
Who knows not now? Who now admires the Part
Once acted by Thee, (c) Brutus? No hard thing
'Twas then, to Impose on a rude, Bearded King. [17]
Rubrius [18] too, though of no Noble race,
Went thither with as lad a heart and face.
He did a Court-fault, which to name's no wit,
Yet, then the Pathick that a Satyr writ,
Was worse. Montanus came too, and his slow
Paunch; and Crispinus, who did rankly flow
With sweat of Morning-ointments: [19] they scarce wast
So much upon two Fun'rals! Then did have
Pompey more cruel: He could, with a fine
Whisper, cut throats. Fuscus did likewise join
In Speed and Council; on whose entrails fed
The Dacian Vulturs, He to the Wars was bred
In his brave Marble Summer House. Then went
The shrewd Vejento, [20] and Catullus bent
To bloody Plots. He used to be enflamed
With Beauties, which he saw not, but heard named;
A Grand, conspicuous Monster in these worst
Times, a Blind, flattering, cruel Statesman, first
Brought from some Bridge, [21] fit still to beg, and throw
His flattering kisses toward those, that go [22]
By Wagon down to Aricia. None stood more
Astonished at the Turbet; words good store
He used, but did toward the left side stand,
When as the Beast did lie at his Right hand.
He Would Praise Cilician Fencers; Cry, Well hit;
Commend a Stage [23] and Play-boys thence, by fit
Devise, catch'd-up to a feigned Cloud. Yet came
Vejento short of him? struck with thy flame,
Bellona, he Divines: and, here, says he,
A wondrous Omen of Great Triumph see!
Some King thou shall lead Captive, or at last
Arviragus [24] from British (d) Chariot cast.
The Beast is Foreign: On his back behold,
Upright thy Darts stand! [25] Yet Fabricius told
Them not the Turbet's Age and Country. But,
Quoth Caesar, What d' ye think? Must he be cut?
Montanus cries, The Fish Disfigure not!
But make a large, round, deep, thin-sided Pot
Of Earth: straight some Prometheus of rare worth
With Clay and Wheel bring quickly. But hence forth,
Caesar, some Potters on your Court should wait.
This Counsel worthy of the Author straight
Took place. The Caesar's Riots He long knew,
And Nero's Mid-night-suppers, and his New
Hunger, when Falerne draughts his Lungs had fired.
No man to Rarer Trencher-Art aspired
In my Time! If from the Circaean shore
Or Lucrine Rocks came Oysters, or from more
Remote Rhutupian depths, [26] He Would tell aright
At the First Taste: nay more, at the first sight
Tell from what shore a Crabb came. They Rise, and
The Lords (the Counsel ended) by command
Depart. These to his Alban Court our Great
Leader had drawn frightened to Have and Sweat;
As if he would have said somewhat about
The (e) Catti, or the stern (f) Sicambrian Rout:
As if from diverse Parts some News had come
With rushing wing, [27] which might have startled Rome!
And would he had in these toys spent his Reign;
Wherein without Revenge brave men were Slain.
But when his rage did against Cobblers swell,
Imbrued in Lamian blood [28] He likewise fell.
NOTES on JUVENAL, Sat. IV.
(a) DAinties -- Obsonium. (...) proprie vocatur edulium quod additur pani
praesertim coctum: and obsonare signifies sometimes lautius vesci, and (...),
obsonatores did of old, male andire, as Erasmus observes. But though this word
is taken in this large signification, yet we find it in good Authors, in a more
restrained sense, and by way of eminency put for Fish, as here in our Poet
obsonia is put for the Rhombus: So paulum obsonii for paulum piscis in Terent.
And. A. 2. sc. 2. and in Adelph. etc. so likewise in Scripture (...) are two
fishes, Job. 6.9. and in many other places, as Grotius and other Commentators
ad locum do show. The reason of this Antonomasia is no other then the delicacy
and excellency of Fish above Flesh. The Roman and Greek Gluttons (the best
Judges of such matters) had Fish, especially the Muraena, in very great esteem,
as may every where be observed in Martial. Sueton. Tacit. Plin. etc. and hence
Athen. calls the famous Glutton Philoxenus (...), Deipnos. lib. 1. cap. 6. and
more concerning the delicacy of Fish may be learned ibid. cap. 8. (...), etc.
some hence are of opinion that Tiberius styled the instruments of his Lust
Pisciculos. Suet. in vita, and that the Poets fancied Venus to be born of the
froth of the Sea; and that the Fish was made the Hieroglyphick of Luxury, as
Pierius Hierogl. lib. 31. cap. 1. Upon this account many of the Romans were not
ashamed to owe their Sir-names to Fishes, as Sergius Orata and L. Muraena. But
though degenerate Rome valued Fish at so high a rate that Cato once complained
Romae pluris piscem venire quam bovem: yet the old Romans in testimony of their
temperance worshipped the Goddess of Flesh called Carna, as Ovid informs us,
lib. 6. Fast. Prisca Dea est, aliturque cibis quibus ante solebat,
Nee petit adscitas Luxuriosa dapes.
Upon the same score it is observed that Homer, who every where commends the
temperance of his Heroes, never serves up at their Tables Fish, and there are
not wanting amongst the Critics, who think that God himself for this reason
forbad Fish to be offered upon his Altars. All this will serve to justify the
expression of our Poet, and the translating Obsonia dainties.

(b) Old pleasant Crispus, Crispi Jucunda senectus, this periphrafis is usual
with Authors, especially Poers: So (...), for Hercules, and (...), or (...),
cirrus Polypodis, for Polypus, see Casaub. in Athen. Deipnos. lib. 1. cap. 5.
So Sententia Catonis for Cato. Horat. and for Scipio and Laelius Virtus
Scipiadae and mitis Sapientia Laeli. ib. This Vibius Crispus was born at
Placentia, and lived to be fourscore years old in several Courts of Evil
Emperors, by deporting himself so us our Poet says afterward, -- Nunquam
direxit brachia contra
Torrentem. --
Which is the reason of the Epithet Jucunda, and of the Character Statius gives
him, Lumina Nestorei mitis prudentia Crispi. Who desires to know more of this
politic Courtier, may read Quintil. lib. 10. cap. 1. Sueton. lib. 6. cap. 2.
He was twice Consul, twice Married, and left at his Death an Estate of CCI H.
S. as Lubin: and for his cautious and cunning behavior, or rather compliance
with the Roman Emperors, is thought worthy of no other Character by Tacitus
then this, Inter potentes potius quam bonos fuit.

(c) Who now admires thee, Brutus? This D. Junius Brutus is well known to have
been one of the two first Consuls of Rome. In the reign of Tarquinius Superbus,
upon the appearance of a prodigious Snake, he was sent with two of Tarquins
Sons to consult the Delphick Oracle. The young men being desirous to learn of
the Oracle, which of them should succeed their Father in the Kingdom, the
Oracle answered, he that kissed his Mother first; Brutus hearing this, and
being of quicker apprehension then the rest, pretended to stumble, and so took
occasion to kiss the Earth, the common Mother of all Men, and that which was
intended by Apollo. But least Brutus should be suspected to aim at the
Kingdom, Stultus videri volebat, and inde Bruti cognementum accepit, as Livy
tells us at large, and the Commentators upon him in Vita Tarq. Superbi; this is
that which is alluded to by our Poet in these words, Quis priscum illud miretur
acumen Brute tuum? Where the elegant Antithesis betwixt acumen and Brute, is to
be observed, for though his Surname was Brutus, yet he discovered this acumen
abundantly, in making good the saying, Sapieutis est desipore in loco.

(d) British Chariot, aut de temone Britanno. This place will receive no small
light from that famous place of Tacitus in his Agricola, where he thus writes
of the old Britains way of fighting, Quaedam nationes curru praeliantur,
honestior est auriga, clientes propugnant; from whence we may learn, that it
was the custom of the Britains to fight in Chariots, and the noblest of them
to fight in that part which we call the Box; for honestior in the forecited
place, signifies the noblest, or most honorable. And to this custom, without
doubt, our Poet alludes in these words, aut de temone, for temo is well
defined, lignum illud currus, quod inter equos currum trahentes, excurrit,
currum regens, and it is well known that the Box of the Coach, where the Auriga
sits, is fastn'd to this long beam.

(e) Catti. Strabo lib. 7. and others call them Chatti, they inhabited that
part of Germany which is now subject to the Land-grave of Hessen, and are now
called Hassi. How terrible these people were to the Romans, is sufficiently
hinted by our Poet; and that there was cause for their fear, we learn from
Virgils character of them.

Mortem contemnunt laudato vuluere Catti. (f) Stern Sicambrian rout. Strabo
lib. 7. places these Sicambri in Germany too, near the Catti. Geographers place
them in that part of Germany which is now called Westphalia and Gelderland.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Fourth Satyr.
Porticus; the Pleasure and Largness of them. Forum. The Punishment of
Incestuous Vestals. The monstrous Weight and Price of Barbels. Diverse Apicii,
Gluttons. Papyrus, the places where it grew, and the several uses of it.
Succinctus papyto. The form of the paper-reed. Pithaeus his variety of reading
the place, Fracta de merce. Sperare for Timere; against the opinion of
Ptolemaeus Flavius and others. Boulduc his Phansies concernning Giants.
Numidici Ursi. Barbers, when first used by the Romans. Matutinum Amomum.
Bridges, hounted by Beggars. Jactare basia. Arviragus. Erectae in terga sudes.
Rhombus. Rutupiae. Ostrea; their variety among the Romans. Praeceps pinna.

1.WHat it is then In Long Arch't Walks. Quantis jumenta fatiget Porticibus. The
more wealthy Romans had anciently stately Walks both for Fair and for Rainy
Weather; the first in the shade of Trees and sometimes more particularly
planted with Box or Rosemary, as Pliny implies in an Epistle to Gallus; the
second under magnificent roofs born upon pillars, where they might enjoy the
air, yet escape the rain: and in these they were sometimes carried in their
coaches, as for the likeness of the use we may call them, sometimes in their
Chairs on men's shoulders; and sometimes for health or pleasure they walked on
foot. For which several respects these places were called Gestationes,
Viridaria, Deambulationes and Porticus; which last signifies sometimes Upper
Galleries, but in this place Walks somewhat like cloisters, and of great
extent. In these they used a set number of Paces, as Plutarch (in Cicerone)
reports of Tullie. Which use may appear from this Ancient Inscription in
Pignorius ( de Servis, p. 141.) by which they knew when they had been carried,
or walked a Mise.

IN HOC POMARIO GESTATIONIS PER CIRCUITUM ITUM ET REDITUM QUIN QUIENS EFFICIT
PASSUS MILL

The covered Walks Juvenal mentions again, Satyr, 7. in that passage, -- Et
pluris porticus in quo Gestetur Dominus --: which large places of recreation
were but suitable to their other magnificence; their Houses being for Largness
like Cities, as Seneca shows, epist. 90. and 114. so that, according to several
seasons, they would sometimes use One part of their houses, sometimes another.
In these were their Cunationes, Vestibula, Atria, Peristylia, Bibliotheca,
Pinacotheca Basilica and such structures, according to the state of Public
Works.

2. Nigh the Forum. Jugera quot vicina foro. The Forum signified among the
Romans their Marketplaces and their Law-Courts, being derived as Varro says, a
frerendo; because to those several places were Brought Wares and Causes. In the
first or common acception, (as in this place) there were Three Fora: the first
was called the Roman, the Latin, the Old forum; and absolutely Forum; the
second was Caesar's, called afterward, Palladium, by Domitian; and the third
Augustus his. There were in aftertimes two more added; the one begun by
Domitian and finished by Nerva; the other built by Trajan. I omit the increase
of them, which was to no less then, 19. as Rosinus shows from Onuphrius
Panvinius. In this place the Chief or first, as being absolutely called Forum,
seems to be understood. And this was situated, to omit the exacter bounds of
it, nigh unto Mount Capitoline, and Mount Palatine, in the heart of the City,
where was an ample space of ground compassed about with stately buildings.
Wherefore Britannicus thinking that it looked like an inconvenience, to affirm
that One man, though Rich, should have many acres in such a place, thinks that
Forum Here signifies Rome it self; and so that hereby may be meant the Rich
men's Suburbane Places of delight. He adds, that the Forum signifies so both in
Other Authors and in Juvenal himself; Sat. 11. in that passage, Cedere namque
foro; where he speaks of Bank-rupts, that lest Rome. Yet by his leave in that
place strictly and properly it signifies the Forum, and but by consequence the
City. Such debtors indeed lest both, and fled ^o other places, ^^^cheifly they
left the Forum, aplace of pleasant resorr, like ^n Exchange or Bur^e. BUt
methinks he ne^ded not have suspected this inconvenience; since he might have
thought, that either jugera was used, by a poetical hyperbole, or that such
large possessions might have been in many houses there, peradventure rented-out
to the use of diverse others. For in the first Satyr there is a description of
an other Rich one (much like this Crispinus) who though at first he was but a
poor stranger (born at Euphrates) had even by the Forum five lesser Burses,
which yearly yielded him a Knight's revenue, as the Poet says in those words,
-- Sed quinque tabernae Quadringenta parent. Besides since Crispinus is here
expressed as an example of singular wealth, what great matter had it been, to
have said, he had good store of acres, if they had been Without the City,
though near unto it; especially if we consider what Senecoe says, Epist. 89.
where he reprehends those, that think a man (truly) Rich, quia Suburbani agri
tantum possider, quantum invidiose in desertis Apuliae possideret; implying
that there were some so wealthy. Indeed, though with some uncertainty,
Britannicus of his own accord straight adds, Aut revera hortos intelligis, quos
ad amoenifates habebant ^otentiores in onedio fere urbis, and vicinos Foro. The
which he might at the first with less ambiguitie and enough safely have
delivered, and clearly agreeable to that of Seneca alleged in the precedent 11.
Illustration.

3. -- Who did defile But larely a veiled Vestal. Cum quo nuper Vittata
jucebat. Upon this says the Scholiast, Vltimum Filou^^ Gentis Pa^^tianum
dicit; which, as the exposition of this place, is alleged out of him by
Anturnus. But they might have pernei^'d their mistake by that which follows;
that not Domitain, but Crispinus is here ta^ed, according to that neason given
two or three verses after, Nam quod turpe bonis T^io Seioque decebat Crispinum
--. Indeed Domitian, who is a little after called calvus Nero, is here
implicitly taxed for winking at that fault in his favorite, which he punished
in another. Concerning the veiled Vestal, it may he known, that the vitta,
sometimes renderd a coronet or chaplet, was strictly (from vincta) some special
Binding for the Head, rather then a Veil, and a Dress for Priests, Sacrifices,
Vestal Virgins and Marrons; and farther, that if the Vestals became
incontinent, Vivae in parietibus struebantur (as some express it) out terra
obruehantur; that they were immured alive, or buried alive in the ground; which
last, a little more largely to describe the solemnity, was thus performed. At
Porta Collina (on the North-East side of old Rome) within the City, as Plutarch
describes it, in a room under ground there was prepared a Bed, a burning
Light, and (as the chief parts of food) a little bread, water and milk. The
Vestal was bound alive and laid on a biere, and so carried through the Forum
with great Silence and Horror. When they came to the cave, the biece being set
down, deposito feretro ( not let down into the Vault) and she unbound, the
Priest praying somewhat secretly, brought her and sether on a ladder, by which
she descended, and presently turning back from her, the ladder being drawn up,
they threw-in earth, and filled up the Cave's mouth. The reason of which
punishment, according to Plutarch in his Problems, was either because they
would not honor such an Offender with Burning, which was the Rite at innocent
funerals, she having so ill attended on the holy fire; on because they would
not offer violence by forced death to a ^^nse^rated virgin they thinking that
after this manner they suffered ^er to die, as it were, of her own accord.

4. He paid six thousand for a Barbel, which being weighed, cost a Sestertium a
pound. Mullum sen millibus emit, Aequantem sane paribus sestertia libris. Id
est, says Merula, pendentem libras sex pro numero sestertiorum. Nam
mille-nummos sestertius valebat. But this last clause is an error in him, and
reprehended by B^d^us for which, see Satyr, 11. Illustrat. 2. Briefly then,
Merula should have said, sestertium valebat; which was as much as 1000.
sestertii: so that the weight of this Barbel being six pounds, and he paying
six thousand sestertios or six sestertia (the sestertium being 7 l. 16 s. 3 d.)
this Barbel cost Crispinus, 46 l. 17 s. 6 d. Autumnus on this place says,
Asinius Celer septem millibus nummum mercatus est piscem mullum, Sestertiis
octo, ut tradit Macrobius, ad quem videtur alludere poeta. But this being such
an error, as Macrobius could not commit (and but Autumnus his own addition, to
expound 7000. sesterties by eight sestertia) against the known valews of the
Roman Coins, he might more congruously have cited him, as Britannicus does,
who reads octo millibus nummum. And so is the story related out of Pliny by
Lipsius on Seneca's Epist. 95. An-40. Asinius Celer, in the reign of Caius
Caligula, Mullum unum octo millibus nummum emit: though Johannes Isacius
Pontanus on that passage of Macrobius ( Saturnal. 2. cap. 12.) observes that
Franciscus Junius likes rather to read there, according to Juvenal, Sex
millibus; and then this of our Poet would seem a satyricall allusion to the
story of Asinius. But as for Barbels they were not dear among the Romans
themselves, except only extraordinary ones, Macrobius saying in the place above
alleged, At ^^nc and majoris ponderis passion videmus, and precia boec insan^
nescimus: though, for the weight, Pliny says ( lib. 8. cap. 17.) Maxima est
copia mullis, sicut magnitudo modica, ut hic piscis raro duarum librarum pondo
excedat. So then the Barbel being commonly but small, and seldom above two
pounds in weight, it was the bigness only made the price. How may we then
admire that Barbel, which Pliny tells of, lib. 9. cap. 18. in those words,
Licinius Mutianus prodidit mullum octoginta librarum in Mari Rubro tum; see
Marcellus Donatus on Flavius Vopiscus in Aureliano. Which Barbel caught in the
Red Sea weighing fourscore pounds (supposing Fliny's copy to be free from
corruption) if it met with as frank a Chapman, as Crispinus or Asinius, must
have been sold (at a sestertium the pound) for no less of our money, then 625 l.
Apretty price for a Barbel! Then we might justly cry-out with our Poet, Hoc,
precio squammae? (Are fish at this rate?) for so some copies have it, not as
the common ones, Hoc precium squammae? Is this the price of a fish. And here
the reader may observe, that Sestertium in this passage is the price of every
pound of the fish, not the weight of a pound, as some would have it: a thousand
sestertii, which were Silver-coins, being in value (as is said) 7 l. 16 s. 3 d.
(a sestertium) but in weight properly, 2 pound and a half, and the weight of 16
s. 3 d. one pound weight of silver being in value, 3 l.. 2 s. As for Mullus
here, which we render a Barbel ( not a mullet, which in Latin, is called
Mugilis) let the learned Hippolitus Salvianus a Roman Physician be, as most
^^kilful in this argument, the firrest judge: who in his Historia Aquatilium
Animalium, Histor. 89. says, that mullus is by the Venetians called Barbone;
and by the French, among other names, Barbels (and Barbon) see Salvianus ( fol.
135. and 75.) his large and exquisite work in folio (printed at Rome, 1554. and
dedicated to the Pope) when he presents the lively forms of the several kinds
of Fishes.

5. What our Niggard Apicius. Thus the Poet ironically calls the gluttonous
spend-thrist Apicius; of which name there were three, as Lipsius probably shows
(on Tacitus his Annal. lib. 4.) the first of which lived in the time of the
Roman Commonwealth; the second under Augustus, and the third under Trajan. The
second was the most famous, and called by Pliny, nepotum omnium altissimus
gurges; and seems to be here intended, as Lipsius thinks, on Seneca in his
Consol. ad Helviam, annotat. 137. and this by the Scholiast is thought to be
that Apicius, who writ the Books of Cookery; for he gives here this note,
Author praecipiendarum caenarum, qui scripsit de Juscellis. But I suspect that
he mistakes; the Author of that Work (yet extant, a copy of which I have,
Printed at Venice, 1503.) making mention (in his Trophetes, or sixth Book) of
Jus frigidum Apicianum, which we may most probably think to have been some taste
of this most famous Apicius his Palate-art, and so cited by some later Apicius.
The end of the notorious Glutton was like his Riot, desperate; for having
almost wasted his Estate, to prevent Want he disparch'd himself. Where we may
note, that Autumnus on this place citing Seneca (de Consol. ad Matrem)
concludes in these words, aere alieno oppressus, laqueo vitam finivit: but his
Diligence or Memory in transcribing the last words failed him, it being in
Seneca, Veneno vitam finivit.

6. Your Country Paper made you a girt coat. Succinctus patria quondam Crispine
papyro. The word Papyrus is like the Plant, Egyptian; it is called also Biblos
Nilotica; from whence, as from the matter, the Grecians drew their name for a
Book. According to Pliny, it grew in the more fenny places of their Rivers, and
is mentioned by the Prophet Isay, cap. 19. verse. 9. according to our last
Interpreters. For whereas in that place Pagnine and Arias Montanus render the
word (...) by Gramineta, and one of our former translations had it, The Grass;
the last Interpreters render it there, The Paper-reeds by the Brooks, by the
mouth of the Brooks. The use of it was various; for they made of it, sails,
ropes, mars, coverlets, garments, shoes worn only by their Priests, and paper
of the stalk shaved into sheets with a broad thin instrument of Iron; and the
root they used for food. The Poet then saying here of Crispinus, that he was
succinctus papyro, not only implies the use of it in garments, but also that it
was but a coat which Crispinus formerly had, as is signified in the word
succinctus, which is not only Clad, but Girt, intimating thereby his servile
condition; it being the form of a servant to wait in a girt coat. (See Sat. 5.
Illust. 8.) The Scholiast would have succinctus Papyro to signify, that
Crispinus had been in his own Country a seller of paper: but this is not
likely, because he says presently after, that he was a petty Fish-monger. I
will not here transcribe, concerning paper, the learned observations of the
accurate Melchior Guilandinus, or Pliny's description of it, lib. 13. cap. 11.
Only since it so much concerns the Scholar, it will not be unpleasant to
present the form of the Reed. depiction of a papyrus plant or paper reed

7. When he cried but broken Fish to his Country men. Magna qui voce solebat
Vendere Municipes fracta de merce Siluros. The Poet here describes Crispinus,
as he now was, Purpureus scuri a palati, a Court-rook, or one that by playing
the Cogging jester, and so humouring a lewd Emperor, was become a Noble man;
more particularly, princeps equitum, as the Poet here calls him: which with the
Interpreters is made the same with magister equitum: but this was an Officer in
the time of the Common wealth, and more especially in the time of a Dictator.
Some take it for the General of the Horse: but that was an Officer in time of
War, which was none of Crispinus his employment. Some render it, Master of the
Horse; an Officer indeed of Honor: but Equitum will not yield that Exposition.
It may be observed then, that he, who by the Censors in the cloze of their
Offices, when the Senators were all recited by name, was in the Catalogue first
named, was called Princeps Senatus, The Chief or First of the Senate; in like
manner the first named of the Knights, was called Princeps Equitum. Such was
the Dignity of this unworthy Knight Crispinus; but if any proved unworthy of
his Order, and were omitted by the Censor in the recital, such a one was
deprived of his Dignity; though upon better behavior he might be readmitted.
See Rosin. l. 7. c. 10. therefore render it, Now chief of all our Knights, (Jam
princeps Equitum) Even such was Crispinus become; though at first, in Egypt
his own Country, he sold but Fish, and that but some base and broken ware; the
Silurus being a vile Fish, and usually bought by the poorer sort. It is
sufficient in this place to render it only in general, Fish; though, Sat. 14.
where it is reckoned with others as a several sort, I render it, for defect of
a proper name for it with us, a Nimble-tail, according to the Etymology from
the excessive motion of that part. The Poet calls them here municipes Siluros,
or his own Country Fish, by way of jeer, implying that they were alike base:
but the other words; fractae de merce are variously interpreted, some
expounding them by fracto vase, as if the Vessels or Panniers in which they
were carried, were broken (but this seems a week Exposition); others laying the
sense on fracta, and supposing that it was sold by small penny-worths, and so
was fracta or diminished, as in a Hucksters utterance; others thinking it to
signify impaired by stealth, as if Crispinus an under-huckster had stolen it.
But the most easy sense is, that he bought the refuse of other men's ware, the
Fish of a broken parcel, tumbled and refused by other chapmen. We may here add,
that some copies have, facta de merce, but with little sense; and that Pithans
in his Var. Lection. on the Scholiast, says that most copies have fracta; but
none, for ought he knows, have faria, which says he, were very witty; he means
Fharia de merce, from his Egyptian ware. This, I grant, were apposite enough,
but then it were but a tautologie, to say municipes and Fharia, they bearing
both, in this place, but the same sense.

8. Bald-pate Nero. Domitian; who was extremely offended with the mention of
baldness, and writ a Book De Cura Capillorum, as Sueton relates in his Life,
cap. 18. This was also the blemish of Julius Caesar, who to hide it wore a
chaplet of Bays. Tiberius likewise was bald, in disgrace of whom, Sejanus
therein more presumptuous then wise, caused all things in a public Show to be
performed only by bald men; as Dion reports. And here I may remember, that in
after times in the favor of Carolus Caluns, the Son of Ludovicus Pius, one
Hugbaldus a Monk (cunning it seems, in his degree of wit) writ verses in the
praise of Baldness, every Word of them (suitable to the word Calvus) beginning
with the letter C. Which Monastic Fancy, omitting the verses themselves, I
the rather mention, because they came in my way, being prefixed to the
Manuscript Juvenal in the famous Library at St. James's.

9. Dorique Ancona. It was a Greek City built by the Grecians in Italy, says
the Scholiast: Lubin more partiuclarly says, a Doricis condita. But Franciscus
Schottus in his Itinetar. Italia, part. 1. page 237. says, that they mistake in
this place of Juvenal, who from hence would conclude, that it was built by the
Dorians. It was then, according to Him, a Colony of the Syracusians, who spoke
the Dorique tongue, as the Sicilians generally, which their Poets writings
testify. Yet this was in part observed before by Britannicus. It was called
Ancona from (...), an Elbow, if we liken Italy to an Arm: but it is more
commonly, as in Leander and others, compared to the thigh and leg; according
to which similitude, Ancona must be placed in the Calf, as Otranto in the heel,
and Rhezzo about the toe. But some there tell us, that Ancona is the chief City
of Pisa, now Marchia d' Ancona, say they, when as Pisa is not a Country, but a
City; and the Italian City of that name, (for there was one in Greece also of
the same name) is in Tiscany: but the Country of the Fisherman, who is here
called Picens, was called Picenum, now taken for the Marquisate of Ancona;
which Country is on the East Side of Italy, as Pisa is on the West Side: and
thus the Fisherman may here be called a Picene, (or, Picenian) not a Pisan.
The Poet makes mention also of the Picene Pears, Sat. 11. verse. 74. which some
there also not without mistake call Pisan Pears.

10. Choak'd-up the Net. Implevitque sinus. Retia, say the Interpreters; more
particularly Lubin, and concava retia, and rightly, The bosom of the Net. But
he adds, vel per sinus intelligit angulos and curvaturas ejusdem portus; and
then it was a monstrous Turbet indeed: but he forgot to leave room in the Haven
for the Fisherman's Boat, that caught him, or, by admitting such an Exposition,
to make room in the Boat for the Fish being caught. For though the Beast be
called monstrum; yet he that mastered him is but cymba linique magister.

11. This Monster for the High Priest. Pontifici Sammo; so he calls Domitian
the Emperor, by an Ironie; since to glorify his reign with rare examples, when
Cornelia Maximilla, a Vested Virgin, had by her offense deserved to be buried
quick. He himself took upon him the office of the chief Priest, whom that cause
properly concerned (the care of the Vestals belonging to Him, as of the Fire to
Them) and calling the rest of the Priests to Alba condemned her, as Pliny
relates in an Epistle to Cornelius Minutianus, lib. 4. cap. 11. The Poet calls
him also a little after, Atrides; which some expound by Agamemnon (the son of
Atreua) the brave Leader of the Greeks: others by Orestes ( Agamemnon's son)
who killed his Mother Clytemnestra. Which last being not appliable to Domitian,
his Mother Flavia Domitilla dying in his Fathers life time, and before his
Fathers Empire, and without a Tragedy, (as appears by Sueton, in his Vespasian
cap. 2.) the first is to be here understood, it being aptly Satirical, to call
him ironically Agamemnon, to whom he was like in Power, but not in Virtue;
Agamemnons worth being to lend Domitian rather a Shame, then a Patrern.

12. The Sick feared Quartans. Jam quartanam sperantibus agris. The Poet by way
of jeer expresses the Time, wherein Fear, not Heat, hastened the Fisherman,
namely the end of Autumn, or beginning of Winter, toward the midst of
December: which he describes, by saying it was the time, wherein the sick
feared Quattans. For so Sperantibus is here (as Sperare is by Virgil also taken
for timere) commonly, and, as I think, rightly interpreted; by reason of the
craziness usual at that time of the year, not only proceeding from old and
inward causes, but also from the various temper of the air. For though it
somewhat agrees with the nature of the Spring for heat and cold, yet is there
this especial difference; that in the Spring the heat and cold are broken into
one temper, but in Autuma they are both preserved distinct, and too suddenly
successive, it being cold in the morning, hot at noon, and cold again at
evening. And as in the Autumn Melancholy is predominant, so also Quartan
agues, of which Melancholy is the cause. Yet Prolemaus Flavius in his
Conjectan. cap. 17. takes sperantibus in this place properly, saying that the
sick now hope for Quartans, which kill no man, as He seeks to prove, and into
which at this season other Fevers turn. Which opinion some other like; and
Bernardus Reatinus, Annotat. 6. says, that after a Quartan, health increases,
the length of the disease having spent the Phlegmatic and Melancholy humors.
Yet this opinion (though including some truth) prevails not, the Quartan being
not commonly thought to be so courteous. Besides it would hence follow, that
the Quartan, whose matter is Melancholy, and so most proper to the temper of
the year, the Autumn, should be placed in the Winter-quarter, the matter of
whose diseases are properly the Phlegmatic humor. So that to say, the Sick
now hope for a Quartan were improper, the time of that disease being properly
past in the beginning of Winter: but to say they now fear it, stands with the
season of the disease; which having tormented men the most of the Autumn, may
well be feared at the approach of Winter. Moreover it is but an uncomfortable
way of cure to hope to be delivered from one shrewd disease, by falling into
another shrewd disease. But the Interpreters having left this doubt,
concerning the danger of Quartans, undecided; it will not be unacceptable to
clear it by the judgment of Physitias: who describe two sorts of Quartans; one
arising from the Melancholy humor properly so called, and this they make not
of any great danger; the other from atra bilis, which is likewise generally and
fudely called Melancholy, but properly it is flave bilis vehementer adusta, as
amongst others the accurate Massarias and Sennertus teach; and this they hold
to be very dangerous, and unto both ateribute properly the same season, the
Autumn; not that they are not in other seasons, but then: most, and most
properly. This last kind then is to be here understood; so that flava bilis
being corrupted in the Summer and grown vehemently adust or turned into atra
bilis by the Autumn, vexing the sick with a Quartan all the Autumn, may justly
make the sick afraid when Winter comes on, and Nature has been already so much
oast down. We may a little farther take notice, that some of late would have
it, jam quartanam spirantibus agris; that now the fields breathed infectious
Air, the cause of this disease. But this, for ought I find, is but in part
confirmed, only one copy having spirantibus agris: besides, it dashes against
the former reason; since, by this interpretation the Quartan should be a
disease appropriated (by the disposition of the Air) to the beginning of
winter, at which season the end of it, rather then the beginning, is expected.

13. Once equal Men with Gods. He speaks this historically of Domitian, who
commanded that men should instyle him, Dominus and Deus noster, Our Lord and
God! Yet (omitting his pride as horrible as his end!) though this he a truth,
it may seem contrary to That in Statius ( Sylv. lib. 1. on the Kal. Decembres
Saturnales)

Tollunt innumer as ad astra voces,
Saturnalia Principis sonantes,
Et dulci Dominum favore clamant:
Hocsolum vetnit licers Caefar.
For this implies, that he did forbid men to call him Lord, it being a Title
Odions among the Romans, and therefore refused by sundry Emperors. But this
doubt is rightly solved by the learned Gevartius in his Papinian Lections, lib.
1. cap. 47. where he shows that this prohibition of such title was only during
the time of the Saturnals, the time of Liberty, wherein servants feasted with
their Masters, as Macrobius mentions, in his Saturnal. lib. 1. cap. 7. which
resolution is also implied by Statius himself in that verse alleged, Saturnalia
Principis sonantes.

14. Acilius. Dempster, lib. 1. de Juramento, cap. 2. says that Acilius was put
to death by Nero, and is mentioned by Juvenal in his fourth: which may be
allowed for truth, if by Nero we understand Domitian, who indeed in this Satyr
is ironically called Calvus Nero. Some say, that Domitian having first put to
death Domitius the Son of Acilius, did afterward spare the Father, the more to
grieve him with his Son's death. And the Interpreters tell us that this Acilius
Glabrio (for so Sueton calls him) was at last put to death for some intended
treason with others. Sueton in his Domitian, cap. 10. relates it thus,
Complures senatores, in his aliquor Consulares, interemit: ex quibus, Civicum
Cerealem in ipso Asiae Proconsulatae, Salvidienum Orfitum, Acilium Glabrionem
in exilio quasi molit^es novarum rerum.

15. Fraterculus esse Giganium. According to the Fable Giants were born of the
Earth, (as the word implies) and so base-born. Yet the Poet whiles he
acknowledges the advantage of their mean birth, desires to be but fraterculus,
rather then frater ( as Politian notes, in his Miscell. Observat. cap. 18.)
least he should seem to wish for their gigantick vastness of body, as well as
for their Ignobleness, so to escape destruction by his obscuritle of condition.
I will not here delay the Reader with any discourse of Giants, especially after
the labor of Cassanion and others, who have with much learning and delight
examined this argument: only I will add, that whereas the Anclent Heathens
profanely drew the occasion of their fables oftentimes from the Mosaical
story, the copy of which they had, and which as in other points, so in this,
they did wretchedly and childishly deprave by their fictions; yet a late French
Capuccine, one Boulduc ( De Ecelesia ante Legem. lib. 1. cap. 9.) tells us,
that the names, Raphaim, Emim, Zuzim, and others, as he says, commonly in
Scripture taken for Giants, are not so to be expounded. Then he affirms that
the Title of Giant was anciently a name of honor, fignifying such persons, as
in those times were restorers of Piety; and that their assemblies were as
Colleges of instruction in that Age of the world. Thus he endeavors to prove
that Nimrod was in that sense a Giant, a man instructed by God; which he would
prove out of Methodius. But these his New Assertions and curious proofs from
their Hebrew Titles with many other his ventrous exploits of phanfie I leave to
the leisure of thy Judgment.

16. Numidian Bears. Vrsos Figebat Numidas Alband nudus Arena. The Poet here
shows, that Acilius his Son did strive to escape the Emperor's fury, by fighting
with wild beasts, so to seem mad (and therefore to be neglected, rather then
feared) like Brutus, that so escaped the rage of Tarquin. This is apparently
Juvenal's intent; though some seem to implie, that he did it in right carnest
to please the Emperor, who was so delighted with such sights, that sometimes he
himself slew beasts in that manner of combat, according to that of Sueton, --
ut centenas aliquando prostraverit. But this cause seems not agreeable to
Juvenal's instance in Brutus, who used Art under the form of Madness; besides,
the word nudus may probably seem to distinguish His manner of fighting with
beasts, from the Emperors. But here it must be noted concerning the beasts here
mentioned (Numidici ursi,) that though Britannicus (as before him the
Schotiast) takes ursi properly, for Bears, urging Solinus his authority in
these words, Numidici ursi forma caeteris prastant; yet Numidia yields no Bears
(they delighting in Cold Countries) as Pliny testifies, lib. 8. cap. 36.
besides, that the Romans, at the first but ignorant, when they saw Lions
brought from Africa, called them, in usual speech, Bears, as it is proved by
some out of Virgil. See Lips. 2. Elect. cap. 4. so that Numidici ursi are
expounded by Leones. As for the Place, where Acilius his Son did thus behave
himself, the Poet says, that it was at Alba: for there did Domitian use to
celebrate yearly the feast of Minerva called the Quinquatria (as Sueton says in
his Domitian, cap. 4.) at which such Shows used to be presented. And here it
may be observed, that Albana Arena is by Britannicus and Lubin rendered by
Albano Theatro; and that not only here, but commonly through his Commentary,
Lubin renders Arena by Theatrum: which may be the more warily observed, to
prevent error; the Theaters being for stage plays (as also for ropedancers,
tumblers, and such like, as some think) but the Amphitheaters for Fights of Men
with men, and of men with beasts. Which places, that the abundance of blood
which was there usually shed, might not be offensive, were strewn with Sand
(to drink it up) whence it was called, Arena. Besides, the Theater differed
from the Amphitheater in the form; the Theater being but an Half Circle, the
Amphitheater a Whole Circle; according to its name, it being as much as a
Circuiting or Compassing Theater, in substance as much as two Theaters. And
sometimes Theaters were so contrived, that by engines they might be turned
about and joined into an Amphitheater. See for the distinction of their forms
the learned Ansonius Popma, de Differentiis verborum, in the word, Theatrum;
and Salmuth on Pancitollus, de Amphitheatris and Theatris; where he says, that
though at first the Theaters were used for the Exercises of strength and
Running, they were afterward employed for the use of stage plays, See Rosinus
in his Antiquit. Romans lib. 5. cap. 4. where most distinctly he says, ut
Circenses Ludi in Circo, ita Scenici in Theater peragebantur (to which point I
speak also, to prevent error, Sat. 8. Illust. 7.) And therefore when Julian in
his Epist. 35. (pro Argivis) speaks of hunting wild beasts, as Bears and
Panthers in Theaters, Petavius well adds on that place this note,
Amphitheatrales venationes intelligit, implying, that he spak not accurately.
The form of a famous Theater at Verona, though in part decayed, may not be
unpleasant to be beheld, and by Munster is thus presented; and before him
described. by Torellus Saraynos a Native of that City. * Juven. Sat. IV. Ill.
XVI.
Athesis. fl.
depiction of the Roman theater at Verona

17. Bearded King. Facile est barbato imponere regi; So Sat. 5. he says,
Capillato Consule, and Sat-ult. -- dignum barba, dignumque capillis Majorum;
whereby he intends the first or most ancient times of Rome, in which they wore
long hair: for they had no Barbers in Rome, till after the building of it, 444.
years, says Calderine citing Pliny; though not without some error in the Time.
The Authority is out of Varro (from whom Pliny has it) in whom it is 454
(according to Scaliger's Edition) and then they were brought over from Sicilia,
by P. Ticinius Mena. See Varro, de Re Rustica, lib. 2. cap. ult. who alleges,
that the statues of the Ancients were formed with long hair and great beards:
which may here be observed for the illustration of those places in the other
Satyrs above cited. The Poet then intends, that in that simple age of Rome it
was easy to deceive a King, as Brutus did; but that the present Age was grown
more cunning.

18. Rubrius. This Rubrius, says the Poet, was worse then Nero, who writ a
Satyr against Quintianus his effeminacy, he himself being worse. The fault of
Rubrius here concealed was, as some think his speaking against Cecinna in the
behalf of Flavius Gabinius. But why should the Poet then say, that this fault
ought to be concealed, as those words implie -- offensae veteris reus atque
tacendae? Yet it is thus expressed by the Scholiast, Rubrius iste aliquando
Tibiam in pueritia corruperat ( Autumnus in the reciting of it says, Tibiam
Domitiani) and verebatur ne pro ba^ mercede poenas ab ipso reposceret. Whether
this Tibia (if there be not some mistake in transcribing the name, Pithaeus, in
his Notes on the Scholiast, doubting that it should be Livia) were some Beauty
affected by Domitian, or no, it appears not: but Lubin from a Commentary on an
ancient Copy, gives this nearer reason, quod cum Domitiani conjuge concubuerit,
for being too familiar with the Empress. And this opinion I think most
probable; first because Domitia Longina ( Domitian's wife) was guilty in the
like kind with another, and of as low a tank, namely Paris the Player, as
Sueton reports in Domitian. cap. 3. for which he divorced her; though extremely
doting on her he took her again, pretending it to be the desire of the People.
Secondly, this fault is the more probable by comparison; because not long
after, Sueron himself, the Historian, being Secretary to Adrian the Emperor,
was deptiv'd of that honor for being in the like kind too familiar with the
Empress Sabina. Lastly, this was most probably the crime for the hainousness of
it, which, as he says, was to be concealed: which could not in probability be
either for fear of Tibia, or (when Juvenal writ this) for fear of Domitian now
dead; but most likely for fear of Domitia's kindred; since he speaks, as if
wisdom made him silent; though, it seems, Sueton did, not long after Juvenal,
show more holdness in relating her like lendness with Paris.

19. Morning-Ointments. Matutino Amomo. Some take it for Eastern Ointments;
some both ways. Both are true, yet the first intended, as I think; since he
speaks according to the custom of the Romans, who bathed in the Morning, and
so in the Morning used ointments.

20. The shrewd Vejento. Prudens. It is doubted in what sense the Poet here
uses this word: but since he describes him afterward as a rank flatterer, and
not worthy therefore of so solid a name, I conceive, that it here signifies in
an allayed sense, not truly Wise, but the conning or shrewd Vejento; who is
afterward in this Satyr called also Fabricius, his name being Fabricius
Vejento.

21. Brought from some Bridge; There Beggars usually sat for Alms, and
thence, he says, Catullus at first came, and that he was still worthy to beg of
the richer Passengers that went by Wagon between Rome and Aricia, which was
seated on a sleep ascent. The cause of this concourse of people to Aricia was
twofold, according to the diversity of the persons, the rich and the poor.
There was at Aricia (in the Appian way beyond Alba) a Grove consecrated to
Diana, called Artemisium, greatly frequented for devotion sake; as Britannicus
says. For this cause it was also haunted by Beggars, and much the more, when
the Jews, as says the Scholiast, as the Christians, as Lubin says, were
expelled Rome; who in necessity and wit resorted thither. Lubin thinks it is
said at Aricia, to signify that he was not worthy to beg at any bridge in Rome
it self; but this seems somewhat strained.

22. And throw his flatt'ering kisses toward those that go, etc. Blandaque
devexa jactaret basia thedae. The margin of one Manuscript says, that the poor
did kiss the hands of Passengers, for alms; but this is silly. Another
Manuscript has not Basia, but Brachia, implying the stretching out of their
arms, for alms; but this reaches not the sense of the epithet blanda, more
suitable to the condition of Beggars. The most easy sense will be, that they
did most obsequiously kiss their fingers, and then stretch them out unto the
Passengers. See Sat. 3. Illustrat. 11. The Poet says, Rheda devexae; so that by
the delay of the Wagon for safety, they had the more leisure, and so the more
advantage, to beg. Lubin would here pick out this opposition; that he, who
being blind (as Catullus is here said to have been) would yet fall in Love with
Beauty, was fit to bestow his kisses at distance on the Wagon wheels. This
seeming to imply, that there were Women in the Wagon, he might the rather have
said it, if he urged the Scholiast, who says indeed, Rheda ferenti ^nulieves;
implying, that in their way of devotion, That Sex was most forward.

23. A Stage. Pegma. A pageant by art so contrived, that of it self did rise
aloft; an (...), upon which was seated a Boy representing, as is probably
conjectured, Ganymede snatched up to the Velaria, the purple converings of the
Theater sheilding from Sun and Rain, and, as occasion required, shaped into a
Scenical Heaven. Such youths St. Augustine lib. de Civit. Dei^^^ speaking of
this argument, calls arreptitos.

24. Arviragus. Not far from Caerloyl, Malmes buriensis says, a stone was found
with this inscription, Marii victoria: which Humphrey LLuyd, in his Fragment.
Eritan. descript. fol. (in 8 vo) 26. thinks, was a Trophie erected by Macurigus
(who by some of the Latins, says LLuyd, is called Arviragus, by Others more
aptly Marius) In remembrance of a victory in that place over the Picts, whose
King was then called Roderic, who, like the Saxons, practiced piracy upon our
Seas. Arviragus is by the Scholiast (according to the copy now extant) called
Rex Arbila; the interpreters tell us, that he was in that Age a King of the
Britans, whose manner was to fight in Chariots: Lubin says that he fiercely
Rebelled against the Romans. But more particularly the story, at least the
Legend, of this Arviragus, as it may be collected from our own Historians, is
this; he was the younger Son of King Cymbeline; the elder was called Guiderius.
Arviragus began his reign Ann. Dom. 44. which was in the 4th. year of the
Emperor Claudius: whose daughter Gemissa he married at Gloucester, she being
given him by her Father for his singular valor. But denying to continue the
payment of a tribute to Rome, Vespasian was sent hither, won the I Will of
Wight, and thus by force compelled him to the payment; others say he did it at
the entreaty of his Queen. He reigned 30. years. Marius, his Son, succeeded
him. Ann. Dom. 74. which was in the sixth of Vespasian's Reign; see Matthew of
Westminster and so about 6. years before Domitian's Reign. Both Arviragus, for
valor, and his Son Marius for Wisdom, are highly praised by our Historians.
Marius won a battle against Roderic and his mighty army of Ficts and Stythians
(called, by some, Goths and Hunnes) and at Staimemore in Westmoreland, where
the battle was fought, he caused a pillar to be erected, with this inscription,
Marii victoria. Marius was buried at Carsiel, leaving a Son called Coilus, who
began his Reign, Ann. Dom. 126. (in the 10th. year of Adrian.) So Juvenal lived
in the time of Arviragus; and outlived him many years. The flatterer then is
made here to say to Domitian, that she shall overcome an Arviragus; not
properly, he being dead before Domitian's reign, but some such stout foreign
foe, as he was, yet overcome by Vespasian, Domitian's Father.

25. Upright thy Darts stand! Erectas in terga sudes? Lubin gives this place
this sense; As the sins did rise on the back of the Turber, so should
Domitian's darts on the back of Arviragus: which, I grant, may, as sufficiently
expressive, be admitted; yet strictly it is less proper, the finnes being
natural to the fish, and so not as weapons oftending him. But I acknowledge,
that Timilitudes claim some pardon. But if any less take his opinion, as an
inconvenient exposition, I would then render it thus, -- On his back behold
His: rebel fin arise! implying, that as the foreign beast did with the
spreading fins look like) an armed rebel, yet, for all his terror, was caught
so though Arviragus were never so stout and rebellious, yet he should become at
last a Captive. The connection will be briefly this; The beast is foreign and
behaves himself rebelliously; Lo, how he seems armed for resistance, rebel
like! The view of the Turbot it self will somewhat improve the reason; Behold
then the Rhombus with loss trouble, then Domitian's Nobles did. * Juv. Sat. IV.
Illust. 25.
depiction of a turbot

26. Rhutupian depths. Rhutupinove edita fundo: Rhutupiae according to Ptolemy,
Rutupis portus according to Antoninus (now Richborough in the North-East of
Kent) had its name, as our learned Camden happily conjectures, from Rhye Tufith
in the British, that is, vadum Sabulosum. There was, in the flourishing times
of the Romans, a populous City, where they took ship for foreign parts; and
though the City be now become arable, yet Mr. Cambden notes, that where the
streets were, the corn even at this time comes-up but thin; and that, in
plowing, Roman Coins are often found. By the decay of this place arose Sondwyc,
according to the Saxons, now Sandwich, a sabulo. Britannicus renders it more
largly, yet truly enough, ex Mari Britannico; indeed the Roman Luxury did
search all Seas for satisfaction. Which wantonness may partly be discerned here
by the variety of their Oisters, namely Circaean, Lucrine and Rhutupian; and
partly from the eigth Satyr, where he mentions also the Gauran. I will only
add, that Licinius Mutianus alleged by Hieronymus Columna upon the Fragments of
Ennius his Phagetica, p. 252. prefers the Cyzicen Oisters thus, Cyzicena majora
Lucrinis, dulciora Britannicis, suaviora Edulis, acriora Lepticis, pleniora
Lucensibus, sicciora Coryphantenis, teneriora Istricis, candidiora
Circeiensibus. See Columna who speaks more largely.

27. With rushing wing. Praecipiti pinna, or penna. Some think this an allusion
to a custom of sending letters by pigeons, mentioned by Pliny, lib. 10. others
to the manner of posts (as Dion relates) who woar a feather on their heads to
give notice of their have. The Scholiost thinks it to implie the Consul's
manner of sending news to Rome: the Good as he says, being expressed on the
letter by a Bay; the bad by a feather. His words are, Si^^ict^riae
nunciabanour, lauru^ in ^pisteta fiebat^^y: Si^^em aliqu^d advers^, pin^^
fie^^^. For which last word Autumnus has, adhibebatur; and Pithaus guesses it
should be sereba^ur; but Dempster (on Rosinus, lib. 10. cap. 29.) more easily
mends it. thinking it should be sigeb^tar. Indeed concerning the bay-brand^
Salmath (on Pa^cirellus, lib. 1. Tit. 42.) speaks more plainly, Solebant
Imperatives Romant, re been g^sta, literas la^ro revincte^ mittere, adding the
reason out of Pliny, at ips^ aspect^ earun^ bo^^^ ^^^ien ^^^tenderetur. But the
least constrained sense in this which I use, taking epistola practpit^ pe^^^d,
by an ordinary figure, for a letter of ill news; which usually is swift-wingd.
Of Laureate letters see also Persius. Sar. 6. Illustrat. 5.

28. Imbrued in Lamian blood. Lamiarum cade madenti. The Lamian family was
most noble being sprung from Kings, which by the testimony of Hour (in his
Odyss.) reigned at Caj^ta. Of which family was Aelius Lamia, whose wife,
Domitia Longina, Domitian took away; as Sueton relates in his life, cap. 1. and
afterward put him to death; as also diverse other eminent persons, Sueton
shows in the 20th. chapter of the life of the said Domitian. And here we may
note, that when the Poet speaks of the death fo Domitian, saying, Sed periit,
postquam cerdonibus esse timendus Coperat --; (that he was slain, when he began
to be terrible to the meaner sort, even to Coblens) some understand by
Cerdo^^s, the Christians, thinking the poet, after the manner of the Gentiles,
to call them so by way fo contempt. But methinks this exposition shows more
sagacitie, then certainty, and therefore I rather follow the Scholiast and
others, understanding the word according to the common acception; as most
probably it is used again by Juvenal, Sat. 8. in that passage, -- qua Turpia
cerdoni Volusos Brutosque decabant.

SATYR. V.
ARGUMENT.
The Poet here strives to diswade
Vile Trebius from his Table-trade:
Shows, that though Povertie's some Curse,
To be a Parasite is worse:
Presents his Patron Virro's Cheer,
Which, bought with Liberty, is Dear.
Yet with Great Virro he does join
Rather in Table, then in Wine,
Or Cups, or Water, Servants, Bread,
Fish, Oil, Flesh, Mushrooms, Fruit: But fed
With couz'ning Hope, or Grief at least,
Injoys a Famine at a Feast.
IF [1] at thy Resolution thou do yet
Not blush, but on another's trencher set
Thy heart and bliss: if tamely thou do that
Digest, which nor (a) Sarmentus suffered [2] at
Gaesars's proud Table, nor vile (a) Galba e're
Endured; I Would scarce believe thee, should thou Swear.
(b) Mere Hunger's wondrous Thristy. But yet grant,
Thy empty belly needful food did want:
Is no Shore, Bridge, or more then half-fall'n shed,
Void? Do so prize another's Flout and Bread?
His starving Table? With more Honest Need
Thou might quake there, and on (c) base Dog-bran^fecd.
Besides, Count thus; when once he thee invites,
All former Service fully he requites.
The fruit of his Grand Favour's Vi't'alls: which
Though rare, he reckons; reckons though he is (d) Rich.
If then after two Months neglect, we will grace
A Client (though to fill [3] a third void place)
Saying, Let Us sup together; straight thou do
Enjoy thy Wishes! What seek'st more? Now must
Trebius break his sleep, now [4] half-dress'd run,
Least the Saluting Rout their Round have don,
When dayspring dimmes the Stars, [5] or bout the Pole
The slow Boots his cold Wain does roll.
Yet see the Cheer! Thy wine-dregs moist Wool cannot
Endure; they make a Guest turn (e) Corybant.
Ill words begin; then Cups fly, when a slash
Mads thee, and a stained Napkin wipes the gash.
For when your Lords Freed-men and you fall-out,
With Saguntine stone-pots a Battle's fought.
His Wine was in some [6] long-hair'd Consul's days
Laid in, and a choice grape His cup does praise,
Trod-out in our Confed'rates War: to's Friend,
Though heart-sick, not a cup of This he will send.
Tomorrow from the Albane or Setine hills
His bowl with wanton choice and wine he fills,
Whose Country and Inscription are defaced
With Age: the Wine by the hoary Vessels graced.
Such Thraseas and Helvidius with (f) flowers crowned
Drank on the Birth-dayes of the two renowned
Bruti and Cassius. Bowls to Virro come
Of Amber (such the Heliades wept) and some
All rough with pointed Berylls. Gold they do
Not set by Thee; or set a keeper too
To tell the Gems, and see, sharp nails forbear;
Blame him not; A fair Jasper glisters there.
For Virro (as now many) from his rings
Unto his Goblets sparkling Jewels brings:
The youth yet, who Iarbas fierce out-sway'd,
With such instarr'd the hilts of his stour Blade.
The Beneventane Cobler's glass to Thee
They bring, fow'r-nos'd and cracked, [7] that begs to be
Exchanged for Brimstone-matches. If much meat
Or wine thy Patron's stomach over-heat,
Water decoct they fetch, more cold then e're
Was Scythian Frost. Did I complain you were
Not served with the same wine? why see, you have
Not the same Water. Some Getulian slave,
A Footboy, or some Black- Moor's bony hand
Brings Thee Thy Cup; whom so ungently tanned
Thou would not meet at midnight, should thou ride
In the steep Latin way, by a Tomb's side.
On Him does wait the Flower of Asia, who
Cost more then stout Tullus and Ancus too
Were worth, in brief then the Utensils of all
Our Kings. Look back then, when for wine thou would call,
On a Getulian Ganymede. To fill
To beggars, a Boy bought so dear wants skill.
Yet such a Face and Age do well agree
With such disdain. When comes he then to Thee
Though called, [8] with his hot water, and his cold?
Indeed he scorns to wait upon an old
Client; that Thou should call for things, and lie
At ease as 'twere in state, and He stand by.
Every great house is full of such proud slaves.
See too, how one that sets the bread behaves
Himself with growling; bread, which hardly can
Be broken, musty crusts, the which a man
May with his jaw-tooth rather gnaw, then cat:
But for thy Lord's set snow-white, tender wheat,
Keep back your fingets, pray; [9] and in awe stand
Of the dread Butler. Yet suppose thy hand
More saucy, such thy sawciness were vain;
There Is one, will make thee lay it down again.
From your own Basket will you not be fed,
Bold guest, and learn the color of your bread?
The art pierced and groan'st thus, Wast for this (poor Man!)
I Have left my Wife so often and up-hill ran
On the cold Esquiline (g) in Spring when main
Hail ratled down, and my Cloak dropped with rain?
Lo, with what depth of breast thy Patrone's Fish
Decked round with Sperage-buds extends a Dish?
With what a Tail he sleights a Feast? Inhaunc'd
He comes, by a tall Servant's Arms advanced.
Thou some shrunk Crab-fish and half-egge do get:
A [10] Funeral Supper in like dish they set.
His Fish swims in Venafrian oil: but Thy
Half-wither'd Herbs (poor wretch) in Lamp-oile lie.
For, what his wooden dish yields for thy lips,
Came [11] in Misipsian canes by sharp-beak'd Ships.
For which our Bathes rank Boccher shun; He Is Hot:
Against Africa Serpents this Stink's Antidote.
Thy Lord a Corsick Barbel has, or one
The Taurominian rocks did yield; for none
In our own Seas are left. The Roman Throat
Devours so fast; and Markets all so note,
So search our Seas with daily nets, the exceed:
They respite not the Tyrrhens fish to breed.
The Provinces our Kitchins help, and That
Comes Thence, which progging Lenas buys, and what
Aurelia sells. A goodly Lamprey caught
In the Sicilian Gulf, to Virro's brought.
For whiles the South Wind in his Dungeon sits
Pruning his rainy wings, and so admits
A little calm, the hardy nets dare view
The midst of fierce Carybdis. Now on You
There waits an Eele, half-Snake, or some Fish bred
In our own Tiber, whom the Ice spots, one fed
Fat with the rolling City-sink; his fault
Was, he swom fat-up [12] the Suburra vault.
VVe'd speak a word t'him, if mild ear he will lend:
We ask not what was sent to a poor friend
By Seneca, good Piso, Cotta; when
Bounty, not Names and Consul's Rods, made men.
We say but This, Sup Civilly; Like more
Be then, Rich to thy self, to thy Friend Poor.
Thy Lord his [13] Great Goose-liver has; as fair
A Hen; a smoking Boar worthy of rare
Golden-lock'd Meleager's Spear; In Spring
Scraped Mushroomes too, which welcome Thunder bring.
Corn, says Aledius, do Thou, (h) Lybia, spend:
Unyoak thy Oxen, so thou Mushrooms send.
In the mean time, that thou may want no grief,
Thou see a Carver Dancing, whiles with chief
Motions and Laws of Hand, his flying knife
Acts all his Master's Dictates to the Life.
It Is no small difference, with what gesture men
Of Art Unlace a Hare and Spoil a Hen.
Now if thou should once mutter, [14] as too free,
As if a Three-nam'd Man, straight thou should be
Dragged out of the doors by the heels; So entertained
Was Cacus, who by Hercules was brained.
Besides, does Virro drink to Thee? or take
The cup thy lips have touched? Yet dare thou make
So bold, to say, Sir Drink to Me? They dare
Not utter much, whose cloaks are grown threadbare.
But yet [15] fow'r hundred Sesterces if straight
Some God or Heroes, kinder then thy Fate,
Threw thee: from wretch, from nothing, O how grown
Thou Would be? How dear to Virro then? Then none
But Thou! Carve Trebius of this dish; that other
Reach Trebius. Will you of these entrails, Brother?
O Money, Thee he dreads, his Brother Thee
He makes. But now if thy Lord's Lord thou would be,
No young Aeneas in thy Hall must toy.
About, not Daughter sweeter then the Boy.
A barren Wife makes Friends esteemed. Yet, though
Thy Mygale into thy bosom throw
Three Children, with thy chatt'ring nest he fine
Sport makes; [16] gives a green coat, nuts and small coin,
If asked; when as thy Infant-Parasite
Unto his Table comes; Thou can requite.
Dangerous Mushromes to Poor friends they set;
To thy Lord choice ones, such as Claudius eat:
Yet such I mean, as he did eat before
His wife's came, after which he eat no more.
For Virro and his Virros with choice skill
Apples they bring, whose very smell does fill.
Such the Phaeacian's endless Autumn brought:
You Would think them from the Africa Sisters caught.
A Scurvy one Thou have, yet must be glad:
Such [17] at the Mount the Ape gnaws, which, with shield clad
And Helmet, fearing the shrewd scourge to know,
Learns from the Goat's rough Back the dart to throw.
Perchance thou think Virro does this in Thrift:
He does't to Vex thee. For, what Comic drift,
What Mimick's better, then a murmuring Throat?
All this is done, if yet thou do not know it,
To make thee Cry, Rave and thy Jaw-teeth dash,
And, though long time suppressed, Now loudly gnash.
Yet Thou as Free and thy Lord's Guest do swell:
He thinks the Nose-led by his Kitchin's smell.
Nor does he guess amiss. For who is so poor,
So stripped, that such a Lord he would twice endure?
Who, that young wore [18] the Etrurian golden boss,
Or but the Knot, the Leathern Sign more gross?
The Hope of Supping-well starves thee. Sure, some
Of that half hare, or that Boar's haunch will come
To Us, to Us that fat Hen. Thus at last,
Even the hard bread untouched, you are Mute and Fast.
He Is wise that serves thee thus. All which, if bean
Thou 'Canst, thou Ought. A [19] shaven crown thou wilt wear
In time, then be well knocked, and scourged in the End,
Worthy of such a Feast and such a Friend.
NOTES on JUVENAL, Sat. V.
(a) NOr Sarmentus nor Galba. Sarmentus was a famous Droll in Augustus Caesar's
Reign, and by such Arts insinuated himself at last into the Emperors favor so
far, as to have the privilege of coming frequently to his Table, where he
(being a Roman Knight) to the dishonor of his quality, endured all manner of
affronts, while he endeavored to sauce their dishes with his scurrility upon
others and himself. See a famous Duel of Wit fought by this Sarmen^us, and one
Messius Cicerrus, pleasantly described by a more innocent Droll, Horat. lib. 1.
Sat. 5. -- Nunc mihi paucis
Sarmenti scurre pugnam, Messique Cicerri
Musa velim memores.
Apiclus Galba exercised the same illiberal Apt^in the ruign of Tiberius, and
is often mentioned by Martial. Aristotle's making (...) a virtue in his Nicom.
and the ancient Romans worshipping the Goddess Vacuna (i. e. Dea quae praeficit
vacantibus and otiosis, ut in ipsis recreationibus religionem colere
viderentur, vide Hospin. de Fe^t. December.) show there is an innocent kind of
Drollery to be allowed of: But when men shall have no regard of honesty or
Religion, and spend the little wit they have in abusing themselves and others
only to gratify their Patrons, and get a Dinner, this is that which our Poet
Quarrels at. These Parasites are called by way of contempt Mures by Plaut. in
P^rsa; quod semper alienum edunt cibum: They are also in the Proverb compared
to Muscae; see Erasmus Adag. Impudentior Musca, for these Muscae used to
trouble the Heathens in their Sacrifices to Beelzebub (a God of Flies, as the
word signifies) and so did these Drolls, which occasioned Aristotle's elegant
term, by which he expresses this vice of scurrility in his Nicom. (...) from
(...) an Altar, and (...), because these Drolls lay behind the Altars till the
Sacrifice was over, and then pleased the Sacrificers with some jests, till
their bellies were filled with the relicts of the Sacrifices. This likewise
they did at Great men's Tables, all which will do more then justify the
indignation of our Satyrist.

(b) Mere hunger is wondrous thrifty. Ventre nihil frugalius. That nature is
content with a very little, has been the constant observation of the soberer
Heathens. Plato observes, that Man of all other creatures, spends the most time
in digesting his meat: to denote that nature would not have those nobler
employments (for which man was created) interrupted by too frequent eating, and
as this is a good Moral reason, so the Physical reason (which Anatomists afford
us) is not to be contemned, for they observe that the Ileon, one of the guts
through which our meat must pass, is 6 times longer than our whole body, and so
folded in and out, (hence its Etymology from (...) involvo) and withal so
small, that the meat cannot presently pass through it.

(c) Base dog-Bran. Farris Canini. Far is well known to signify Barley when
taken properly, it has its name a frangendo, apud antiquos enim molarum usus
nondum erat, sed frumentum in pila missum frangebant. Vid. Isid. in voce Zea.
populum Romans far tantum e frumento 300 annis usum, Verrius tradidit Plin.
lib. 18. cap. 7. and cap. 2.3. he says, Romani (uti and Graeci) existimantes
omnium frugum antiquissimn^ and pretiosissimum, ab hoc in omni sacrificio, in
quo victima crematur igne, inition sumunt; and hence they called your Sacras
nuptias, confarreationem a farris communicatione; this being their best sort of
grain they then had. But afterward Wheat was invented, and Barley was accounted
a courser Grain, and fit to be eaten only by the poorer sort: The Epither
Canini makes it yet courser, such as was fit only to be thrown to dogs.
Frandium Caninum is put for a poor ordinary dinner in Agell. lib. 13. cap. 30.
ubi plura.

(d) Rich. Rex. i.e. potens and dives amicus, in the same sense Horace, saepe
veresundum laudasti, rexque paterque audisti coram, etc. Horat. Epist. 7. lib.
1. and Plant. Asin. Act. 5. ni impetro, regem perdidi, etc. and our Poet below,
verse. 129. ut dicat regi, bibe, etc.

(e) Corybant. Corybanta. The mad Priests of Cybele, amongst many other names,
were called Corybantes, either from one Corybantus, one of her first
attendants, or from (...) occultare, because they concealed Jupiter by the
great noise they made with their Cymbals called therefore era Corybantia, or
rather as Strabo lib. 10. will have it (...), quod in armis cum saltatione
incederent: These Priests were infamous for their drunken and frantic
performance of the rites of their Goddess, which is the Ground of our Poets
expression.

(f) With flowers Crowned. Quale Coronati, etc. The Antiquity of celebrating
Birth days, may sufficiently be proved out of Scripture, as Mark 6. and Genesis
40. and 42. The manner of their celebration is more largly set down by our Poet
in the beginning of the 12 Sat. and by Persius in the beginning of his 2 Sat.
and because at such times they did indulgere Genio, they used to wear Crowns
sometimes made of Apium, as is proved at large by Lambinus on that of Horace
Ode the 11. lib. 4. Est in horto Phylli nectendis apium Coronis, etc. but most
commonly of Hedera, which is therefore so often mentioned by Poets as a Tree
sacred to Bacchus, and that such who drunk hard, wore such Crowns, appears from
Plantus Amphit. Act. 3. where Mercury is brought in speaking thus, Capiam
Coronam mi in caput assimulabo me esse ebrium: and Cicero describing the
debauchoes of his time Catil. 2. says they were Vino languidi, conferti cibo,
^ertis redimiti, and Pliny gives us the reason of this custom, by telling us,
that Ivy had a virtue in it of expelling the vapors arising from Wine, and in
his 16 lib. cap. 35. adds this experiment, si vinum mixtum aqua immittatur in
vasculum ex materia hederacea confictum vinum effluet, aqua remanebit. Besides
these Arts, they used sometimes to eat the leaves of Laurel as Martial hints,
Foetere multo myrtale solet vino, sed fallat ut nos folia devorat Lauri, our
drunkards may learn many other Medicines to cure the Headache used of old by
the merry Greeks from Athen. Deipnos. lib. 4. cap. 2. tot. The Poet therefore
uses this expression, to show with what jollity these Stoics Thraseas and
Helvidius-celebrated the birth days of the Bruti, one of which expelled
Tarquinius Superbus, the other was amongst the Murderers of J. Caesar, both
accounted Patriots of their Country of this Thraseas and Helvidius. See Tacit.
Annal. 16. and Suet. in Neron.

(g) In Spring, etc. Jupiter Vernus. Jupiter is put for air, the seat of such
Meteors, and the Epithet of Vernus has a great deal of Philosophy in it, for in
the Spring and Autumn the greatest hail usually falls, as may be learned from
Aristoile, in his Meteors, and Commentators on him.

(h) O Libye disjunge boves, etc. Libya when strictly taken, signifies only
that part of Africa which lies betwixt the River Nilus and Cyrene: It had its
name either from Libya the Daughter of Epaphus, or from (...) an old Greek word
for black, and so agrees with the complexion of the Inhabitants: or (as the
learned Bochart) from the Arabic word Lub sitire, hence Lucan. lib. 1. Libyae
sitientis arenas. And Virg. Hinc deserta siti regio: and because this Country
is so sandy, and barren, that according to the Proverb, Aegypti sulcus Libyae
non curat arenas. It cannot be the Libya here mentioned by Juvenal: we must
therefore note that the Greeks did by an usual Synecdoche by Libya understand
all that part of the world which was called Africa by the Latins: and hence
Libs the South wind is by the Latin Poet called Africus, creberque procellis
Africus; and hence Dionysius in his (...). divides the world into these three
parts, Libya, Europe, and Asia, see verse. 9. (...) And Libya took in this large
sense for all Africa may well be understood here; for Africa is well known to
have abounded with Corn, and hence Bochart derives it from Pherik an Arabian
word, signifying an ear of Corn. And Ovid de Ponto, lib. 4. Africa quot
Segetes? and Egypt a part of Africa, was always acknowledged -- Horreum populi
Romani, because it did annually furnish Rome with four Months Provision:
insomuch that it was said by Pliny, that the greatness of the Roman Empire
could not long continue without the Corn and Wealth of Egypt. And this the
Romans were so sensible of, that they allowed the Ships of Alexandria, which
brought this Corn, the honor and privilege of having Suppara or topsails, as
Lips. ad Sen. Epist. 77. and Cas^ub. ad Sueton. Aug. c. 98. This makes our Poet
so angry with the glutton Aledius, because he preferred his tubera before all
the Corn of Libya.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Fifth Satyr.
Iniquae Mensae. The Roman Fashion of Lying on Beds at their Meals. Triclinium.
(...). Caput Lecti. The chief place at the Table (...). Mensae secundae. Boni
Eventus Poculum. The Number of Ghuests and Beds, Various. Sigma. Antisigma. The
Ancients Storing-up of Wines. (...). Water Heated and Drunk with Wine. Snow
mixed with Wine. Canna and Gandeia. Altilis. Different Opinions about the Right
of Tria Nomina. Heroes. Hirsuta Capella; the diverse interpretations of it,
examined. Bulla aurea. (...). Britannicus his opinion about Vertice raso.
Shaving, a mark of Servitude.

1.IF at thy resolution, etc. Si te propositi nondum pudet, etc. Lubin will
here have not si, but sic, making it signify as much as siccine; and so reads
it with an interrogation, acknowledging that it is different from all Copies,
but thinking that otherwise the place yields no convenient sense. But such
alterations (without copy) being rather to make, then expound a work, I retain
the usual Reading: nor seems there any inconvenience, the Poet's meaning being
this, If thou art troubled neither with Shame nor Grief at worse disgraces,
then the Parasites Sarmentus and Galba suffered at other men's, I should scarce
believe thee, though thou should'sh swear that thou had such patience; it
being indeed a Baseness never to be found in the nature of man, unless
extremely degenerated.

2. At Caesar's pround table, etc. -- Iniquas Caesaris ad mensas. Johannes
Brod^us in his Miscell. lib. 9. cap. 1. expounds iniquas by unequal; because
there was worse cheer provided for the ghuests, then for Caesar. This I grant
to be witty; yet the common exposition made by Briannicus and others seems more
natural; who, interpret it by the scornful and jeering table of Great men,
according to that which follows, Tantine Injuria coenae? implying that they
were intertain'd rather with a Flout, then a Feast. Besides, there might be
some difference of provision at Caesar's table for himself and a Sarmentus; and
yet no injury done to such a ghuest.

3. Though to fill a third void place. Tertia ne vacuo cessaret culcitra lecto.
That the Ancient Romans lay on Beds, or Couches, at their meals is commonly
known; yet in the first or most ancient times, they did use to sit, as Varro
tells us: but their conquests over Asia, Greece, and Hannibal, taught them this
wantonness. Thus Syphax the Numidian King (at Livie notes, Decad. 3. lib. 8.)
supped lying on a Couch, when he entertained Scipio and Hasdrubal. Virgil also
imples the like of Dido, when he says of Aeneas, Inde thoro pater Aeneas sic
orsus ab alto: yet after the men were grown to this fashion, it was Long e're
Women came unto such boldness. Besides, Cato Vticensis, when Civil war was once
begun in his Country, in sign of sorrow and severitie supped always sitting, as
Plutarch notes of him. See Aldus Manutius de Quaesitis per Epist. lib. 1. ep.
4. The Place wherein they supped was metonymically called Triclinium from the
usual number of the beds, which were placed about the table: but more properly
it signified the beds themselves. Plautus in Bacchid. mentions Biclinium; but
triclinium was most usual. The Table at first was of a plain form, foursquare,
and thence called (...), at it is usually derived from (...), and accordingly
had four feet. But afterward they used Round tables, and some semicircular;
the meaner sort standing on three feet, the more stately on One. Cameratius
therefore to avoid the inconvenience of the first derivation brings it (...),
from moving the foot of it, The figure of the beds compassing the usual table,
like three sides of a square about a circle (the fourth being left open for the
waiters and the ordering of the Table) is thus set down by Camerarius. Decur.
9. Problem. 6. * schematic of the layout of a Roman dining room The manner was
after they had washed and put off their gowns, as also their shoes (least they
should soil the couches, which were fairly adorned to put-on a garment
convenient for the purpose; and then upon each of the beds usually lay Three,
sometimes Four. Each did lean on his Left elbow, the Second with his head in
the bosom of the first, and the third with his head in the bosom of the
Second; yet so, that their heads were somewhat erect, with cushions (or
pillows) behind their backs to bear them up. After which manner they lay,
whiles they did eat: but at times of intermission they leaned their backs and
heads toward their pillow, somewhat erecting the upper part of their body, as
if they sat. Which posture of the lower part at a table with one couch (more
the fancy may supply) is by Mercurialis, ( lib. 1. Gymnaslic, p. 55.) thus
aptly portray'd. * ACCVBITVS
Juv. Sat. V. Illust. 3. 6.
depiction of a Roman dinner with diners reclining and waiting staff carrying
dishes Which being supposed, the dignity of place at the table may be thus
conceived. Of three beds the Middlemost was the Chief; and on each bed he that
lay without any body behind him, the First, ad Caput lecti, was called summus:
yet of three (on the same bed) the Middlemost person was the Chief, and summus
in order was the Second in Dignity. If four lay on one bed, the Second in
Order, that is, He which was Next unto Summus, was the Chief; and Summus, or
the first in Order, was likewise but the Second in Dignity. If there lay but
Two on a bed, summus, or the first in Order, was the Chief; as Lipsius,
Rosinus, and Others determine it; yet with this remembrance, that the Wife's
proper place was in the bosom of the husband. Besides, it must be observed,
that this number of 12. or 9. or fewer ghuests, was but the convenient rule at
private feasts: for at public, as at Marriages or the like, these rules could
not be observed. The master of the feast was called (...). A feast in the
latter and luxurious times of the Romans was divided into three parts, or
courses; as Lipsius notes, lib. 3. Antiqu. Lection. the first of which was
called Ante^^^a; the second Coena, and the third Mensae secundae. The first was
not used in the thrifty times of the Romans; the second was the Chief, and at
this the chief Dish was called Caput coenae: The ^uird consisted of Fruit and
Junkets. You may see in Macrobius his Saturnal. lib. 2. cap. 9. (according to
Pontanus his correction) the particulars of the two first parts of such a
feast; and of the last part, in cap. 14, 15. and 16. When their mensae secundae
were brought-in, they had their boni eventus (1. (...)) poculum; and then they
began their Drinking for the consummation of their meeting and mirth; as
Caemerarius notes in the forecited place. And here it will be necessary, for
the preventing of an inconvenience, to add, what the learned Petrus Ciacconius
(de Triclinio) says concerning our Saviors last supper with his Disciples. He
first determines, that for them all, though thirteen, there were but three
couches about the table; and his reason is, because at farther distance, they
could not all have reached to the same dish: which possibility must be granted
from that in the text ( Matt. 26, 23.) He that dippeth his hand with me in the
dish, the same shall betray me. This may be confirmed also from the name,
triclinium; as the accurate Fulvius Vrsinus notes upon this passage of Juvenal,
in his Appendix to that work of Ciacconius, p. 104. saying, that the Romans did
place only three beds about a table, nisi cum coena publica daretur, aut
convivium exhiberetur ab Imperatoribus. Ciacconius then disposes them thus; He
places five of the Disciples on each of the lower or side beds; and on the
Middlemost (or, uppermost) three, namely our Savior, St. John (who is said to
have lain in his bosom) and thirdly ( si divinare permittitur, as He speaks)
St. Peter: and his reason is, Is enim veluti proximus Johanni innuit, ut ex
Domino auctorem tanti facinoris quaereret. Yet according to the former doctrine
we must grant our Savior to have been between these two disciples, because
otherwise we cannot attribute unto him the chief place (which was the
middlemost) on the same bed; and therefore veluti must a little temper
proximus; and St. Peter will notwithstanding be near enough for the purpose he
intends, and have the summus, or first place in Order, but the second in
dignity; and St. John will have the third, or last place, and so be in the
bosom of our Savior. We may farther take notice, that Fulvius Vrsinus, p.
102. shows from Martial and Athenaeus, that sometimes six, nay seven lay on one
couch; and that, p. 126, and 128. he shows, that sometimes they had one
semicircular bed, which they called Sigma, from an ancient form of that Greek
letter, like the Roman C; and that sometimes they added another semicircular
bed on the other side, which they called antisigma, and so of both made a
complete circle of couches about a round table. This Truth may discover many
errors, that may be met with; and the Reader may observe, that when the Table
was in the fashion of a Hemicycle, the fore part only left for the waiters
cannot properly be called the Hemicycle, though by some it be so called, that
being but the less part of the figure.

4. Now half-dress'd run. Et ligulas dimittere; to let the strings (for have)
hang loose, wherewith his garments, or shoes should have been tied together:
which I render therefore according to the more general sense of the word;
though Festus Pompeius makes it a part of the shoe, like a tongue thrustforth.
He means, it seems, the buckle of the shoe; though the word be of a larger
signification, being sometimes taken also for a measure, and sometimes for a
kind of sword.

5. Or 'bout the Pole The slow Boots his cold wain does roll. Quo se Frigida
circumaguni pigri Sarraca Bootae. The Poet describing here the early speed of
Clients in visiting their Patrons, so to indear themselves unto them, says that
they came by daybreak or more early, when Charles-wain rowles about in the
North part of Heaven: not that he means it stands still at any time; but that
they came even before daybreak, or by night when yet the motion of the waine
was Apparent. Janus Parrhasius ( epist. 1.) speaking of this passage of
Juvenal, does more particularly describe the time of Boots his appearing to be
circiter secundam vigiliam, nocte videlicet intempesta, adding afterward,
Boots autem-sub easdem noct is hor as incipit apparere, and ante crepusculum
matutinum desinit. Now the Second Watch of the night being from nine till
twelve, it were absurd to ascribe that time for Clients. It must be then
understood by what he adds, that then it Begins to appear, and disappears
before Daybreak; so that the meaning is, They came not only at daybreak, but
some sooner, whiles yet Charles-wain was to be seen.

6. His wine was in some Long-hair'd Consul's days Layd-in. Ipse capillato
diffusum consule potat. He means in the Ancient times of Rome; And here I
render diffusum not according to the Action intended by it, but the Purpose; it
signifying here not wine fill'd-out as to be presently drunk (though that be
Lubin's first exposition, (...) dolio in craterem, and e cratere in pateram
fusum, not suitable to the sense of the place) but wine poured out from one
vessel into another, and so stored up; according to that of Eudaeus, de ass, (
lib. 5. p. 235.) Vina autem in doliis inveterascere non sinebant antiqui, sed
in amphoras and ca^os dissundebant. Thus Pliny, lib. 4. cap. 4. relates of wine
that was kept 200. years, and that it looked like honey. And on such vessels
plastered up they inscribed the Country of the Wine, and the names of the
Consuls, in whose year they laid it in. And such brave wine, says the Poet, was
drank by the lovers of the Roman Liberty, on the birth-days of the Bruti, that
is, say some, D. Junius Brutus, that expelled Tarquin, and M. Brutus, that
helped to destroy Caesar. But the Reader may know that both these Bruti lived
at the same time, and conspired against Caesar: but he that expelled Tarquin,
was called Lucius Junius Brutus. See Sat. 1. Illust. 1.

7. That begs to be exchanged for brimstone-matches, Et rupto poseentem
sulphura vitro. Upon the word Sulphura, the Scholiast says, Quia hoc solent
vitrum solidare, id est, maltare; which word seems to come from (...), a kind
of soder, as it is commonly expounded, made with lime, sand, water, pitch and
wax, and named (...)(from the softness of it.) So that He implies, that Trebius
had as base a cup or glass (for calix and vitrum ruptum are here the same) as
the Beneventane cobbler had; and that being broken, it required to be soder'd.
But Britannicus and others reject this exposition; expounding it with more
probability, as I render it; it being the manner even in those times to
change-away broken ware for other trifles, as here broken glass for
brimstone-matches, according to the probable sense of that in Martial ( lib. 1.
epig. 42.) Qui pallentia sulphurata fractis permutat vitreis: where saying not
sulphura, but Sulphurata, he implies them to have been somewhat besides
brimstone.

8. With his hot water and his cold. -- calida Celidaeque minister. Amongst
many differences between the proud Virro and his wretched Guest, he says, the
guest is attended at the table by some Negro, but the Lord by some curious
waiter, such an one as this * Juv. Sat. V. Illust. 8.
depiction of a serving boy carrying a drinking horn presented from an ancient
expression. And as for the curiosity of the Rich man's wine and water, he
mentions The Custom of the Ancients to drink Cold or Hot water alone, as some,
or mixed with their wines, as others, is generally known: yet this difference
may be observed, that the mixture of hot water was counted the worse
wantonness, as Philo (de vita Theoretica) and Others note. The use of this was
chiefly in Winter. The vessel, wherein they prepared their hot water, was
called miliarium, as Salmuth (on Panciroll, lib. 1. Tit. 51.) shows out of
Vlpian; and from Seneca, in his Not. Quaest. lib. 3. cap. 24. Muret also noted
the same on that place of Seneca. The name is by some derived from it is
capacity of many measures. Yet concerning their aqua frigida they were
likewise grown to singular wantonness, keeping snow under ground, for such
uses, till Summer and as Seneca implies, ( epist. 78.) they did mix snow with
their wine.

9. And in awe stand of the dread butler. Salva sit artoptae reverentia.
Britannicus reads, Artocopi, deriving it from (...), bread, and (...), labor;
and thinking it to signify, Elaborate bread. Others take (...) (and (...))
according to the Oraecians, for the Baker himself. The Scholiast reads,
Artoptae; yet takes it either for the Baker, or the Pan in which the bread was
baked; and so some derive it from (...) and (...), asso; but Lubin better (as I
think) from (...) and (...) ( video) alleging in the like kind, (...), vini
inspector. So that artopta shall here in general signify the butler, or
overseer of the bread, in a great family perchance a distinct officer.

10. A funeral supper, Feralis coena. They did place in the sepulchers of the
dead, to appease their ghosts (such was the Heathens folly) a little milk,
honey, water, wine and olives; and strewn flowers. It was called feralis, from
fera; which, as Britannicus notes, did with the Ancients signify Death
(probably deriving it from ferio.) But some more accurately take Caena feralis,
as I show on Persius. Sat. 6. Illust. 4.

11. Came in Micipsian canes by sharp-beak'd ships. Canna Micipsarum prora
subvexit acuta. Micipsian, that is, Africane, from Micipsa King of Numidia in
Africa. But this verse is diversely expounded; The Scholiast taking Canna for a
kind of ship (by some rendered a Canao;) and Britannicus making canna prora
acuta to be the same thing, a sharp-beak'd ship, saying Hoc autem dicit, quia
ut scribit Plinius, lib. 7. cap. 56. naves fiunt utiles ex papyro, and scirpo
and arundine, simulqne ad id respexit, quod in India arundines sint tantae
proceritaris, ut ex singulis internodiis naviculae fiant, qua alveo navigabili
ternos interdum homines ferant. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 2. But this methinks does
not satisfy: for though they might of such weak materials make a vessel that
might serve on Nilus, yet it would prove too weak for the Mediterranean wave;
and according to his own allegation it was but of capacity for two or three,
as being made but of the spaces between the knots or joints of the cane. And
though it were possible for such a boat to cross that Sea, yet these ships here
intended were of usual passage between Africa and Italy. Lubin, though he
alleges not any reason for the rejecting of the former opinion, prefers, and as
I think, rightly the interpretation of some, that expound canna by doliolum,
making it probable from Strabo, who says that the African canes are of a
mervallous thickness; and therefore he thinks, that the parts of them served
for vessels, wherein they put their oil, and so shipped it over for Italy.
This I think the most congruous, and so, as distinct things, render canna by
the cane, or oile-vessel, and prora by the ship. As concerning the two next
verses (propter quod Romae cum Boccare nemo lavatur. Quod tutos etiam facit a
serpentibus Afris) some would transpose them, others leave-out the latter: but
the difference being not much material, we may retain the order and number in
the common copies; and the rather; because the particle etiam in the last
verse, if it were placed in the second, were less needful; but if left to the
third, is an apt addition of a farther aggravation. According to which the
sense is briefly this; African ships bring over for thee, poor Trebius, African
oil, for whose rankness no man will endure the same Bath with a Bocchor, an
African (some make him the same with Bocchus, sometime a King of the Moors)
since it out-stinks, nay drives-away African, or the most rank, Serpents.

12. Pinguis torrente cloaca. Rutgersins (Var. Lection. lib. 2. cap. 17.) would
have it, torpente, sluggish; which is a witty varietic, but without copy;
besides, whether it be right, let Britannicus judge, who says here, Nam tota
urbs pensili^ erat cloacis, corrivatis septem amnibus a M. Agrippa sordes urbis
in Tyberim deferentibus. Lege Livium. But as for the fish, which is in the
former words said thus to grow fat, -- glacie aspersus maculis Tyberinus, and
was thought to be spotted with the ice, it is the Lupus or Wolf-fish, praised
by Varro. Yet Columella noted, that by the luxury of the times, it begun to be
slighted; much more then, in aftertimes, as in Juvenal's age. There were two
sorts of them, as Brodaus (Miscell. lib. 7. cap. 27.) notes out of columella;
of one of which kinds he says, -- quorum dorsum ex albo caruleum est, venture
candidus nigris maculis conspersus; and this was noted as the worse sort.

13. Thy Lord his Great goose-liver has; as fair A hen; a smoking boar.
Anseris ante ipsum magni jecur, anseribus par Altilis, and flavi dignus ferro
Meleagri Spumat aper. Thus it is most commonly pointed and expounded. But
Marsilius Cagnatus (in his Var. Observation, lib. 2. cap. 14.) places the point
after anseribus par, referring altilis to aper; and then expounding the first
part thus, that the liver was as big as the goose, according to that of Martial
( lib. 13.) Aspice quam magno tumeat jecur ansere maju^. Yet there is no
necessitic to draw Juvenal's words to the like sense; Altilis may, I grant, be
truly, rather then aptly, applied to aper, it seeming superfluous when the boar
is come to the table; as is supposed in this place. Besides it is used in the
end of this Satyr, for a hen, which because it was fatted is there called
minor altilis (as Britannicus expounds it) which I grant was spoken by way of
difference from aper, of which the Poet spoke in the former verse. And in this
place to take it for gallina is a very fit and Satirical aggravation of the
sense in this passage, signifying the gluttonous excess of Virro and such like,
in fatting a hen to the size of a large goose.

14. -- As too free, As if a Three-nam'd man. Tanquam babeas tria nomina; Thus
the Manuscripts have it: and by the Scholiast and Britannicus it is expounded
De nobili; so that they make the right of three names to have been the
property of a Noble man; and so the sense of the Poet to be this, Thou poor
Trebius must not talk boldly, as if thou were a Noble man and great Virro's
equal. For the proof of which exposition Britannicus alleges that of Ausonius
(Edyll. 11.) Tres equitum turme, tria nomina nobiliorum. Yet Lylins Gyraldus,
Lubin and the most expound it more largely De ingenuo and libero, making the
right of three names the property of every Freeman; and so the sense to be
this, Thou poor Trebius may not be so bold, as to talk like a Freeman. To
judge of which two so different opinions, it may be observed that at the first
even the most noble person had but two names, as Valerius Maximus testifies (
lib. 10.) though in aftertimes such eminent persons for some special cause had
a third name added; and at last custom bestowed this credit upon every
Freeman. So witnesses Quintilian (who lived in Juvenal's time) lib. 7. cap. 3.
in these words, Propria liberi, quae nemo habet nisi liber, praenomen, nomen,
cognomen, tribum: haber haec addictus. Where he add^ that they which were made
free were admitted into some tribe (and, as some say, called also by the name
of the tribe) and that this right of three names a Freeman retained, although
he were in debt ad ( addictus) deliver'd-up to his creditours, till he could
redeem himself. Which being so clear a truth, there is one doubt fit to be
observed, and the rather because not observed by the Interpreters that expound
this passage De ingenuo and libero; and that is, how the Poet could say of
Trebius, Tanquam habeas tria nomina; for this were plainly to deny him to be a
Freeman. But Trebius, though poor, was one of Virro's Clients, now Clients
though they performed much honourarious attendance upon their patrons, yet were
not properly servants, but sometimes guests, and so Freemen. Let Juvenal be
judge, who describing Clients hasting for the sportula, says it was Turbae
rapiend a togetae; now the toga was proper to the Citizen, as the tunica
without the toga, to Servants. Trebius then being a Freeman, we must (unless we
will reject Copy) expound it with Britannicus, De Nobili, and understand
Juvenal (as also Ausonius) to speak of the right of three names as it was
bestowed for some samous cause at the first. So that Juvenal may seem here
satyrically (though he himself also enjoyed the privilege of three names) to
check the vain custom of bestowing three names upon every one that was made
free; such empty names being but the guist of their masters, and as well marks
of their old servitude, as of their new liberties. But if any would understand
this passage De ingenuo according to the latter custom of the Romans, they
must fly to Conjecture for some new Reading. In which way of exposition the
learned Rigaltius very wittily thinks that Juvenal writ, Quanquam habeas tria
nomina: this indeed avoids the alleged inconvenience concerning Trebius, and
according to this the sense will be this, Thou Trebius, must not talk Freely,
though thou art a Freeman: for Though thou art a Freeman, thou art but a poor
man. But the Critical rule of interpretation prefers not Guess before Copy,
where this does yield a tolerable sense; wherefore I retain in my
interpretation the first exposition; to this sense, Thou may not (though
free) talk like a Nobleman, like a three-nam'd man of the first institution,
before the privilege became ordinary. And thus the ancient Reading, Tanquam,
will be preserved.

15. But yet four hundred Sesterces if straight some God or Heroes, etc.
Quadringenta tibi si quis Deus, aut similis Diis, etc. He means quadringenta
sesterti^^. (3125 l.) a Roman Knight's yearly revenue according to the Law.
Thus much, as the Poet says, if some God, aut similis Diis, some Heroes, as
Lubin renders it, or some Man by his Bounty not unlike the Gods, should bestow
on thee, Virro would then esteem thee. Where it may be observed, that the
Heroes according to the doctrine of the Pythagoreans were Good Angels, as they
sometimes call them, being of a middle nature between the Gods and their
Daemones terreni, that is, Learned and Wise Men: for unto these three sorts of
excellent natures they held a reverence to be due. So Hierocles an Alexandrian
Philosopher of that Sect, in his Commentary In aurea Pythagoreorum carmina
(published by Curterius) p. 18. distinguishes them: and p. 41. describes them
saying, (...). And these Heroes of a more excellent nature then Man, they held
to be Rational: according to which doctrine, he describes a Heroes, p. 290.
thus; (...), (...), Every Heroes is a Rational Soul joined with a Lucide, or
enlightened, body; and p. 46. he says, (...). KATAXTHONIOYS DAIONAS (...), that
deservedly he joined them together and called Wise Men Terrene Angels,
according to those golden verses, which he expounds,

(...),
(...),
The Immortal Gods First honor, as they are placed.
Esteem thy Oath: the Heroes Next, so graced:
Wise Mortals too. What Is Law, be That embraced.
16. Gives a green coat. Viridem thoraca. The Poet says, that a man, though
formerly poor, if he become rich, shall he flattered by the rich, especially if
he be childless; if, as he speaks, he have no young Aeneas sporting in his
house, in auld; which some render, in his Court, in respect of the allusion to
Dido and Aeneas in Virgil. But the word not only signifying the Court of a
Prince, but also the Court or Hall (for so diversely it is taken) of a privace,
though a great house, I choose to render it according to this latter acception.
First because the first opinion would yield this strange sense, that the way
for a Frince to be flattered, were to be childless: Secondly, because the Poet
speaks but of a private person, of Trebius his possible advancement to the
estate of a Knight (I mean a Roman Knight; that was to have above 3000 l. a
year) And such a rich one, that was able to requite, even the rich would
flatter; and though he had some Little-ones, they would be at some trifling
charge with them. They would give a green coat (or the like) sometimes, as he
speaks. In a nearer expression it might be rendered, a green stomacher, but
that he speaks of boys; and the Scholiast takes it in the sense in which I
render it, saying, Armilausiam prasinam, ut simiae. Yet thorax was a garment
for Men, and is mentioned by Sueton in his Augustus; and armelausa is by
Isidore described to be a garment open before and behind, but closed at the
shoulders or arms, and therefore called so, as he thinks, quasi armiclausa. As
for the Color, Statius mentions the like in Epiced. Glauciae, saying, -- modo
puniceo velabat amictu Nunc herbas imitante sinu, and Martial, lib. 5. Epig.
24, in those words, Herbarum fueras indutus Basse colores. Rutgersius (Var.
Lect. lib. 6. cap. 13.) thinks that this green color was the Livery color of
Virro's parasites; as I have partly mentioned, Sat. 3. Illustrat. 9.

17. The Poet having expressed the curious fruit provided for Virro, describes
on the contrary the Apples set before poor Trebius, saying to him, Tu frueris
scabie mali, quod in aggere redit. Qui tegitur parma and galea, metuensque
flagelli Discit ab hirsuta jaculum torquere Capella. This is one of the
^nigmatical places of our Author; which most expound of a young Soldier fed in
the Camp with hungry fare, as with the worst sort of Apples and the like, but
singularly varying in the exposition of hirsuta capella. Georgius Merula takes
it for a thong of Goatskin, unto which a dart being fast'ned, might at pleasure
be hurled and recalled: so that according to him, the sense should be, But thou
eatest such apples, as the young Soldier in the Camp; who being Armed with
Shield and Helmet, does for fear of the scourge learn to through the dart from
the Goatskin-thong, which helps to cast or recall it. Mancinellus takes hirsuta
capella for sagum cilicium, or his Cloak made of Goat Skins; adding, that it
may be taken for an engine of War made of Goat's hair. Others take it for a
Quiver covered with Goat- skins. Curio thinks it to be a Cretian bow trimmed
with Goat-skin; Brodaeus (Miscell. lib. 9. cap. 1.) takes it for the Bow it
self made of Goat's horns. Titius thinks it an allusion to an ancient custom
of setting Kings children upon the back of a Ram, so to reach them to ride,
citing this passage in Hesychius, Of (...)(...). But this explication as
nothing tending to the sense of this place, is rightly rejected by Scaliger and
Rutgersius. Indeed, what did scurvy apples and scourge concern Them? Lubin
mentions some, who taking birsuta capella properly, think that a Goat was tied
for a mark, at which they hurled their darts: but he expresses not his own
opinion. Britannicus reciting that of Persius, Hic aliquis de gente bircosa
centurionum, and that of Juvenal, Sed caput intactum buxo naresque pilosas,
Adnotes, and grandes miretur Laelius alas, takes birsuta capella for a
Centurion called Capella Figuratively, for his rank hariness; Autumnus adds,
aut a vestibus, because his garments were made of Goat's hair. The learned
Josephus Scaliger, under the name of Yvo Villiomarus writing against Titius,
says that Capella was the name of a known Centurion, which practiced the young
Soldiers in the Military discipline, and that it was a cognomen among the
Romans, which last assertion needs not much proof, Stailius Capella being a
Roman Knight mentioned by Sueton in his Vespasian, cap. 2. Rigaltius also does
confirm it, adding on these words, In veteri inscription^ reperitur nomen C.
Albutii Capellae. The name is mentioned likewise by the Scholiast, in those
words, Capella, Campidoctore: which, though but interlin'd, as Pithaus observes
in his Notes on him; yet shows the exposition to be ancient; and the Scholiast
expounding it by a seen Magistro, excepting only the name Capella, does in
effect say the same. Yet this interpretation using violence to the Text, may
not be admitted, the Manuscripts generally having here, hirsuta capella,
whereas Scaliger for his purpose would have it hirsuto. Yet this Reading seems
to be approved by Dempster, who on Rosinus (lib. 5. cap. 25.) speaking of this
place of Juvenal, says, -- sed potior indubie lectio, quam admittit vetus
Scholiastes and Yvo Villiomarus in Robertum Titium. But Lipsius approved not
this interpretation, and for these reasons; First, why should a young Soldier
he an example of one that had such vile fare? Then, how can he be said to be
armed with the parma, this being in Juvenals time, out of use? Thirdly, why
should apples be mentioned for Soldiers diet, which are so seldom seen in a
Camp? Lastly, how can a Soldier be said to be metuens flagelli, from which
every Freeman, much more a Soldier, was safe? The vine-rod and cudgel, vitis
and fustis, not flagrum, were the instruments of his lesser punishments. Yet
the second of these reasons might, methinks, be conveniently avoided; for, what
though the parma were out of use in Juvenal's time? Does he not profess in the
end of the first Satyr, that he writes against the vices of the Dead? and
therefore we may say, that he writes of those times, wherein the parma was in
use. But may we not doubt of Lipsius his assertion, whereas Sueton tells us, in
the life of Domitian, cap. 10. of a Parmularius, that was put to death by that
Emperors cruelty? Can it imply-less, then the use of the parma, even in
Juvenal's time? His sourth reason likewise, that flagellum belonged not to a
Soldier, Dempster seems to confute from that of Claudian (in his Pancgyrick in
sextum Honorii consulatum, toward the end) -- Insonuit cum verbere signa
magister, speaking of the monitor tironu^r Romanorum, who, as Dempster (in the
place above cited) says, -- in segnius officia abeuntes animadvertebat, -- non
voce modo, sed and verbere; and makes verber in Claudian and flagellum here in
Juvenal, to be the same. Yet he wavers much in his assertion; for by and by he
adds, Nisidicamus and verber and virgam and flagellum, tessera instar fuisse,
non vero plectendo tironi dicatam; which he thinks may be, according to that of
Virgil Aeneid. 5. -- signum clamore paratis. Epytides long petit,
insonuit-flagello. Notwithstanding he presently falls again on his first
assertion, saying, Sed expeditius est, ut ad poenae usum flagellum istud
pertrahamus. Thus with him it served both for a token or sign at some of their
Games to direct the Actors (as when to begin their exercise) and also for a
scourge: but his testimonies reach not to the proof of this second. Lipsius
then not choosing Scaligers opinion, understands this passage of the venator,
and bestiarius, qui fer^^ jaculari condiscit in capella, such a one as fought
with Beasts, a fellow of the vilest condition, and subject to the scourge;
armed also with the parma and the galea; and such, says he, did practice upon a
Goat. But autumnus has censured this opinion only as recited by Lubin, saying
of it thus, Quod est mag^^ falsum, quam quod est falsissimum. As for the Agger,
Lipsius takes it to be a public place, where such fellows did practice: but
this practice and exposition of capella for a mark, is without proof. Besides,
to press his own reason, why should apples be the diet of the bestiarii? and
why should such diet be proverbially vile? Dempster changing his opinion which
I before mentioned, does in his Additions to Rosinus lib. 10. cap. 10. expound
this place of Juvenal thus, according to Claverius, -- simiam intelligit
insidentem caprae and edoctam tironis instar jacula inde vibrare; and takes
agger for some eminent place in the triclinium, or supper-room. And that this
passage is to be understood de Simia, he proves it from that of the Scholiast,
on verse. 143. viridem thoraca, armilausiam prasinam, ut gestare solent simia;
and from that on the 154. (as he orders the words) Tu scabie frueris mali,
quale simia manducat; and then adds, Ita censer vir literatissimus Stephanus
Claverius, and cessent tandem aliquando Critici turbare, aut aliam expositionem
quaerere. Rutgersius likewise prefers this exposition (in his Var. Lection.
lib. 3. cap. 15.) urging the Authority of the Scholiast, and that of Martial
(lib. 14. epig. 202.) concerning apes taught to throw the dart, Callidus
emissas eludere simius hastas. Of this opinion then the Scholiast was the
Author, yea (in substance) of the three last Interpretations; for in this place
he is too uncertain, his expositions of the several parts of this passage being
inconsistent. For by metuens flagelli he understands simia, yet by Qui tegitur
parma, he understands a young Soldier, tiro, and by ab hirsuta capella, he
understands a seen magistro, capella campidoctore. In the explication of which
last opinion de Simia, that agger should be some place in the triclinium seems
improbable: we may more safely then take Lipsius his exposition, and take
notice, that a part of old Rome was senced with a ditch or trench a hundred
feet in breadth, and that by it was raised a Mount, or rampire of great height
and breadth, between the Esquiline and the Colline gates (about six furlongs in
length, as some describe it) the top whereof was contrived into pleasant walks,
and the like delights; employed in that of Horace, Nunc licet Esquiliis habitare
salubribus, at que Aggere in aprico Spatiari -- as also mentioned again by our
Poet, Sat. 6. and as some think in the eighth also, as in those places is
observed; see Sat. 6. Illust. 71. toward the end; and Sat. 8. Illust. 4. which
Agger Tarquinii is omitted in the Maps of old Rome, both by Bertellius and
Boissard; but by the accurate Martian is thus excellently set forth in the
North part of Rome in this his Map; and may save all future search and trouble
to Interpreters, and give clear light in the knowledge of old Rome, to the
Authors. * ^^v. Sat. V. Ill. 17.
map showing the northern part of the city of ancient Rome with its walls and
hills, orientated with the north-east to the top

Now this Mount was greatly frequented by the meaner sort; and many sports, as
tricks with Apes, and the like, were here performed. The substance then of this
last exposition is this; For Virro is provided the most choice fruit; but thou,
poor Trebius, have such as they feed Apes with, at the Rampire, or as Juvenal
amplifies it, such as he, that is, the Ape mumps upon at the Mount, where being
ridiculously clad with Helmet and Shield, and quaking at his Masters lash,
learns to cast the dart Soldier like, from the back of a Goat, on which he is
ridiculously placed. This I prefer before any of the rest; first, because it is
without any alteration of the Copy, and is in the ancient interlinear Gloss of
the Scholiast, as also in the Margin of one Manuscript (namely in that in
Corpus-Christi Library), which, though in a interlinear exposition it has
Campidoctore Capella, has yet amongst other interpretations this also, Alii
dicunt simiam fuisse, quam exculta and armata capella flagello co^ebatur
imitari certamina; varying only in taking C^^^clla for a proper name. Secondly,
I prefer it, because it is free from any of those inconveniences, which follow
the other opinions; Thirdly, because it supposes nothing, but what, according
to the ordinary custom of such sports, will be easily granted; and lastly,
because it is far more quick and Satirical, to this sense; Virro has his
curious fruit; but Thou such as they feed Apes with.

18. The Etrurian golden Boss. The golden Boss (brought in among the Romans by
the Etrurians) permitted first only to Noblemens Children, afterward to all
freeborn, was made in the fashion of a heart, and worn before their breast, to
prompt their young age to the study of wisdom; as Macrobius (Saturnal. lib. 1.
cap. 6.) observes: but Libertinorum filii (whose Parents were first Servants)
wore them of Leather. The Scholiast upon the words, Puero si contigit aurum,
says, Antiquitus nobilium pueri bullas aureas babebant: upon which place
Pithaeus in his Notes adds, (...), citing the 1. Machab. 11. The quotation is
at the 58. verse, where it is said, that young Antiochus, amongst other homours
done to Jonathan, gave him leave to be clothed in Purple, and to wear a golden
Buckle; so our last Translators render it. This, we may grant, might admit some
Comparison with the Bulla, rather then likeness. It was indeed a sign of
honor; but the person Jonathan, to whom it was permitted, was High Priest, as
is expressed verse. 57. The aurea bulla was left off by children in the 16 year
of their age; and yet it was worn by them that Triumphed.

19. A shaven Crown thou wilt ware in time, etc. Pulsandum vertice raso Praebebis
quandoque caput. Britannicus takes this for an admonition given by the Poet to
Trebius, that he should at last vindicate himself to Liberty from very
servitude for a moals meat; and so supposes it an allusion to the manner of
servants Manumission; who, when they were to be set free, had their heads
shaved; then going to the Praetor, were struck by Him, or at his appointment,
by the Lictor, twice or thrice upon the head with a wand, and then being turned
round became free. But this seems not to be here intended, according to the
most received interpretation of this place, which is commonly expounded, as I
render it, not for an admonition, but a flout; implying that he, who was
already thus base, would become yet baser; it being an inference from the
precedent words, Omnia serre si pote^, and debes; after which he descended to
particularize the chief of those infamies, namely to have his head shaved, to
be struck on the pate, and at last to be scourged, as they used Slaves. Lubin
to this effect parallels it to that of Plautus in his Captiv. -- nisi qui
colaphes perpeti potest parasirus, frangique aulas in caput; implying the
baseness of Parasites, that could endure to have pots broken on their heads.
And this exposition I rather choose, because the Poet seeming positively to
express, what course Trebius would next take, does yet with more art of Satyr
conclude rather with a sharp Irony, then a flat Exhortation.

SATYR. VI.
ARGUMENT.
The Roman Dames are set-forth here,
As the' Are, but not as they would Appear;
And in Revenge exactly just,
With Zeal as fierce, as their own Lust:
Which they with Art and Boldness strive
As well to excuse, as to Contrive.
Their Copes-mates follow them, a Crew
Of Players, Harpers, Fiddlers too.
Hippia with one to Egypt ran:
Outrun the shame she never can.
Now Messalina's Lust is Story,
And strives to outvie the Roman Glory.
Some are called Chaste, yet some suspect,
The are called so, for some by-Respect.
Watchful they are, Imperious, Fierce,
Critics; The affect Greek Phrase, and Verse.
The are Pleaders, Fencers; Learn all News:
They are Tongue-Rampant, and Abuse
Neighbors and Servants; Mercyless,
Mere Sluts at Home. Rich dress
Abroad they wear. They deal with Jews,
Diviners, Fortune Tellers; Lewd arts use
To prevent Childbirth: yet dare show
Supposititious Babes. They grow
Cunning to kill a Son-in-Law; they do
So use their Own; their Husbands too.
Long Peace and Powerful Wealth used ill
Rais'd-up these Crimes; These Crimes this Quill.
The Rage of Zeal! Sure, we but find
The Exception Here of Womankind!
I Can believe, that Chastity has been
On Earth, in Saturne's Reign, and long was seen,
When a cold Cave a narrow shelter made,
Which did Fire, House-God, Sheep and Shepherds shade:
When the rude VVood-mans Mountain-House-wife spread
Leaves, Reeds and neighbour-beast-skins for a bed;
Not one like Thee, Cynthia; or Thee, whose wise
Tears, for thy Sparrows death, vexed thy fair Eyes.
But one of breasts for large Babes large enough,
Whose Acorn-belching Husband was less rough
Sometimes. For when the world and Heaven was New
And Fresh, men did not live as now they do;
When [1] they were born of the opening Oak; they say,
Or without Parents were composed of Clay.
Then many footsteps one perchance might show
Of ancient Chastity, at least some few
Even under Jove, till Jove was bearded; when [2]
The (a) Greeks swore not by another's Head, nor Men
Feared lest their Herbs and Fruits should be a Prey
To Theives, and Gardens all unmounded lay.
Then by degrees to Heaven Astraea led
The way with Her; thus these two Sisters fled.
He Acts no new sin, Posthumus, that sleights
The Genius of another's Marriage-Rites.
Other Crimes not till the Iron-Age stained Man:
Adult'ry in the Silver-Age began.
A meeting yet, Cov'nants and Spousals Thou
In these our Dales prepar'st, and art trimmed now
By some chief Barber, [3] and already have
Perchance a Ring bestowed. Sure, once thou wast
No Crack-brain. Yet a Wife in these Times takes
Posthumus? what Tisiphone, what Snakes
With twining Curles thus made thee? Can endure
The Empire of a wife? when yet there is cure
From so many spare-halters; daz'ling-high
Windows, [4] and from the Aemilian Bridge so nigh?
Or if these scapes less please, p^rchance in deep
Art of Crime, by thy page thou would rather sleep,
And so escape Night-brawls, by no guists thy wealth
Impair, and as Thou will, preserve thy health.
But it is the Julian Law, so Chaste, so grave,
Vrsidius likes: Now a sweet Heir he would have.
Now the fair Trout and larg-fin'd Barbel are
B^low him, and such cogging Market-ware.
But what is unlikely, if Vrsidius get
A wife? If an old known Adulterer let
His fond Head with the Marriage-nooze be dressed
Whom quivering Latinus his Stage-Chest
So often has hid? Nay, a Chaste wife he would fain
Find! [5] O Physicians, strike his middle-vein!
Choice Sir! See, the (b) Tarpeian threshold thou
Prostrate adore, and (c) kill to Juno now
A Heifer with her gilded horns, if blessed
Thou art, with one of a Chaste Brow and Breast.
Ceres pure Veils so few deserve to wear
Or touch, whose lips their Fathers need not fear!
With Garlands dress thy Gates: on thresholds strew
Thick-berry'd Ivy-boughs. Let all men know,
Thy Iberina will but one mate [6] try!
Content she will be sooner with one E e
A Country Damsel yet great Fan e has wone:
Well, let her live at Gabu, as Sh' has done
At Home; or at Fidenae not grow warm;
We Will grant her Chaste too at her Father's farm.
Yet who will say the Hills and Caves, though cold,
Are Chaste? Are Jupiter and Mars so old?
But in our Arched walks, think thou, thou can spy
A woman worthy of thy Trust and Eye?
Or can the (d) seats at Shows yield to thy sense,
What thou with Love and Safety may choose thence?
VVhiles soft Bathyllus does the Leda dance,
With rare hand-gesture, Turcia in mere trance
Of Love, forgets recention; Appula
Breaths rapture too; [7] The start and Well-a-day
With long attention Thymele does note;
Thymele, rude till now, now learns to dote.
When the empty Theater stands shut, and all
Stage-dress lies-by, only the Law-Courts baul;
When [8] from these shows the Megalesian too
Are far-off; in sad hope some Dames [9] yet view
Accius his Visard, Dart and Truss. A strong
Laughter [10] at an Atellan Parting-Song
Some City-Mimick raises; with each limme
Acting the mad Autonoe. On Him
Poor Aelia doats. At dear rates some, as vile,
Unbutton [11] a Comoedian; Others spoil
Chrysogonus his Voice. Your Tragic throats
Hispula loves. Who on (e) Quintilian doats?
Thou VVedd'st: Ambrosius the Piper's thus
A Sire, Echion the Harper, or Glaphyrus.
Scaffolds for the view in the narrow Streets erect;
With large Bays let thy Posts and Gates be decked:
Lentulus, thy arched Canopy must grace
Euryalus the Fencer's Babe and Face!
(f) Hippia [12] a Lord's wife with a Fencer fled
To Pharos, Nilus and the walls far spread
By a bad Fame, where Lagus reigned: whiles base
Canopus did prodigious Rome disgrace.
Her Husband, House and Sister she forgot:
Slighted her Country: She regarded not
(Lewd wretch) her howling Children, and (O strange!)
For Him She did our Plays, nay Paris change!
At home, when young, she slept in Down and Ease,
And bordered Cradles; yet now scorned the Seas,
But First her Fame: for which She little cares
That still is carried in our dainty Chairs.
The Tyrrhene waves then, and the Ionian so
Loud-roaring, with firm breast Sh' endured although
So often She shifted Seas. This no devise
Works in just danger; Then their breast is Ice.
Then trembling down they sink, so faint they are:
Stout minds they bring to what they leudly dare.
But let her Husband bid, O, then it is strange
To take Ship! the Pump stinks: the Sky does change!
This, with her Fencer, never Casts, nor whines:
The other bespue^ her Husband's breast. This dines
Among the Sailors, gads about the Stern,
Handles stiff roaps, as if Sea-Art She Would learn.
What Beauty yet thus fired her? what young face
Caught Hippia thus? for which, she chose disgrace,
To be instil'd The Fenceress! For dear
Sergiolus had shaved his throat, and, e'r^
Long, his maimed Arm hoped for release. No small
Blemish his Face had too, as a shrewd gaul
Made by his Helmet; A huge Bunch o'recop'd
The midst of's Nose; from's eye sharp rheum still dropped.
A Fencer yet he was; This makes them seem
Mere Hyacinths: This She did more esteem
Then Children, Country, Sister, Husband too.
It Is Metal sure they Love. For had but you
Freed Sergius from the Sword, [13] The Rod, like Hate,
Had Sergius made a mere Vejento straight.
But what is a private House? what is Hippin's Fame?
See now the Rivals of the Gods! The Shame
Claudius endured! From whose side, whiles he slept
Secure, his watchful Wife ignobly crept!
Before His bed She chose a Mat that stunk,
And wore a Night-hood too, an Empress-Punk!
She went but with one girl, such was Lust's Care,
A [14] yellow Veil hiding her Sadder hair.
Thus entered she the Stews, whose quilt well known
Reak'd yet; She took a Cell void, and her Own.
Under [15] Lycisca's name with Breasts adorned
She stood: to shame thy womb She should have scorned,
Noble Britannicus! Kind words she gave
To them that came, and the Reward did crave!
But when the Girls were all dismissed, no have
She made, she left her Cell both Sad and Last.
Depart she did, not 'cause she would, but must,
Still burning with the wildfire of fierce Lust!
And though to her self no License she denied,
Weary she did retire, not satisfied!
Then with [16] cheeks soiled with Lamp-smoak, back she went
Bearing to Caesar's Couch the Stews rank scent.
Their Love-cups shall I name, Charms, Poisons too
Tempered to drench a Son-in-Law? They do
Worse things, when the Empire of their Sex does win
Upon them; that their Lust seems their least sin.
But why's Cesennia by her Husband praised?
She [17] brought her Thousand: This the chaste name raised!
Lov's Shaft or Flame nor Pines nor Burns his heart:
Thence took he Fire; The Dowry threw the Dart!
Her Freedoms Bought. She dares Nod, write-back; see,
Who will. Niggards Rich wives are widows, Free.
Why does Sertorius Bibula so grace?
Would know? The wife he loves not, but the Face,
Let but three wrinkles come, her withered skin
Slaken, her teeth grow black, her eyes shrink in;
Pack-up, his Freed-man says, Begone, you grow
A burden, and your Nose too often ye blow;
Hence straight, there is one to come with a Dry nose.
Till then she is Fire and Tyrant: does impose
Laws on her Lord! Shepherds, (g) Canusian Sheep,
And Elm-prop'd Falerne-vines she will have; Nay, [18] keep
Whole Workhouses of Slaves. And, if there is ought
She wants at home, if near it is, straight it is bought.
When in short [19] days Jason the Merchant lies
Shut-up, and his house bright with Snow denies
The ready Seaman's wish, fetch they must great
Vessels of Crystal, nay more large and neat
Of Myrrh, and the known Diamond more rich
By Berenice's finger; This 'twas, which
The Barbarus Agrippa did bestow
On his incestuous Sister; where, you know,
Kings [20] on their Sabbaths barefoot go, though cold;
And where kind Custom lets their Hogs grow old.
Does none of these Herds please? Suppose then one
Fair, Modest, Rich, Fruitful, and of long known
Ancestors ranked in Porches, and more Maid,
Then loose-lock'd Sabines, who a battle stayed:
Be she Earth's Rare bird, rare as a black Swan,
Who Will endure Her, that does her Virtues skan
And prize them to thee? Sure, give me, give me
A poor Venusian wench rather then Thee,
Cornelia Mother of the Gracchi. Vain
It Is with great Virtue to bring great Disdain,
And as part of thy Dowry reckon All
Thy Triumphs. Prithee take thy Hannibal
Thy Syphax take in his Camp overthrown,
With all thy Carthage too pr'y thee begone.
Spare [21] Paean, Goddess spare your shafts sure flight:
Guiltless the Children are; the Mother smite;
Amphion cries. Paean his bow bends still;
The shaft the children smites: Him grief does kill;
Whiles Niobe does slight Latona's Race,
And the white Sow that pigg'd thrice ten, disgrace.
What Gravity's so dear, what Shape, that still
If should upbraid thee with its worth? what fill
Of pleasure in this Bliss, which spoiled by Pride
More Aloes has, then Honey? who will abide
VVorth and Scorn? who is so wife-sick, but he may
Praise, and loath such a one seven hours a day?
They Have more small faults, at which yet who could wink?
For what is more stinking; then that one should think
Her-self not fair, till of a Tuscan, she
Turn petty Greek, of a Sulmonian be
A mere [22] she Cecrops. All Is done in Greek; though
We should blush more out Latin less to know.
In Greek they show Fear, Wrath, Joy, Care, and pour
Forth all the secrets of their Breasts. What more?
Their Lust is Greek. Which in Girls y'admit,
In Thee, whom the Eighty-sixt year strikes, is it fit?
Smatter'st thou Greek still? This tongue does ill grace
An old Trot, who her talk does interlace
With her My Life, my Soul.
(...) phrase but now
Under thy blanket lest, shamelesly Thou
Bring'st to the common Ear. For sure a Light
And tempting word whom does it not excite?
It Is a Lusts Rankest Motive. But, [23] although
Thy sinking wings invite, and that there is no
Haemus or soft Carpophorus appears
More wooing-voic'd, Thy Face numbers Thy years.
If one by Cov'nants and just writings joined
Thou love not, why to wife thy self do bind?
Why loose thy [24] feast and wine-cakes, when thy friends
Half-clog'd depart? To what, the first night, tends
Thy Guist? Thy Charger full of golden Coin,
Where Dacian and Germanick Titles shine?
But if thou would simply Marry, and one bed
Intend, with ready neck bow then thy head
To bear the yoke. Not one pitties a kind
Husband, though she affects him; but, his mind
Delights to Vex, and Robs him. Thus the Best
Husband is by a wife still most Distressed.
Thou shall not Give, Sell, Buy, if she conspires
Not with thy will. Sh' Appoints thee thy Desires.
An Old Friend thus, whom [25] thy Gate heretofore
Knew bearded, must be now shut out of door.
When Pandars. Fencers, Sword-players do make
A Will, Thou art Compelled for heir to take
Whom thy wife names, thy Rivals too! A [26] Cross
Raise for thy Slave. Why? was his Crime so gross?
Who's witness? who is the Accuser? Do no wrong
Dear wife; to a man's Death no Delay's long.
Fool! Is a Slave a Man? Suppose his hands
Guiltless; It Is my will: Will for Reason stands.
Thus she is her Husbands Empress! yet ('it is strange!)
Soon leaves this Power, and House for House does change;
VVears out new Crimson Marriage Veils: Thence flies
Again, to the bed which first she did Despise.
The Gates she leaves, which dressed but late had been;
The Hangings too, and threshold-boughs yet green.
Thus grows the Number: She [28] Eight husbands takes
In Autumnes Five. Her Epitaph she makes.
Whiles thy wife's Mother lives, of Peace despair,
She Will teach her still to keep her husband bare:
She Will teach her to write back with no rude quill
To her Adult'rer's letters: by [28] mere skill
Or Bribe she will came the keepers; and then call
Archigenes, though she be well, and all
The heavier bed-cloths cast aside: Mean while
The Adult'rer lurks; and by Delay's more vile!
Indeed, can think, that when the Mother's Bad,
She can teach Virtues, which she never had!
Besides, for an old, filthy trot to train
A daughter up, as lewd, is no small gain.
Scarce comes a Cause, but y' have a woman chooses
One side: Manilia's Guilty, or Accuses.
They draw ye Bills, teach Celsus to dispose
His Heads of Speech, how to Begin or Close.
Their Purple Rugs and Wrastlers Ointments who
Now knows not? and the [29] hollow wounds so true
With daily spears made on a Post, which still
Their Shield provokes, whiles They All Art fulfill.
Such Matrones Flora's trumpet should command,
If their stout breast intends not the True Sand.
She Is past a blush, that once a helmet wears;
That has renounced her Sex, and, sleighting fears,
Admires the Sword-fights so. Her Lust yet can
Not suffer her to wish to be a Man.
A brave sight 'twere, should thy wife's Goods be sold,
Her Belt, her Gauntlets, Plumed Crest, and the bold
Left thigh's half-armour, or if she be dressed
For more fights, when her Greaves are sold you are Blessed!
Yet in a round Thin Dress These Sweat! So pure
Their lims, that the Silk-gown they scarce endure!
See, with what roar strokes, if fore-warned, she bears!
Under what weight of helmet she scarce rears
Her head! How poised she on her hamms does sit!
[30] The Band of her thick-volum'd Coats! The fit
Jeer is, when she is disarmed, a spightful pott
Betrays the Champion. Speak, you, whom such spot
Never staind, ye Neeces of great Lepidus,
Of blind Metellus, wastful Fabius; Thus
Was Fenceress e're dressed? Did e're the most
Bold-fac'd Asjlus's wife fence with a Post?
The Bed, in which a wife lies, still does keep
Retorted braulings. That Is no place for Sleep.
When Grief she faighns, with secret guilt First stung,
The Tiger's less fierce, that has lost her young.
She Is then thy Load: she does thy Children hate:
Complains of a (faign'd) harlot. Fresh tears wait,
And always in such readiness do stand,
They but expect Her Order and Command.
Thou think this Love, fond [31] Spirrow, and art glad:
Thy Lips drink-up her tears, thy Eyes more Add.
If yet this jealous Dame's Casket one; threw
But Open, Oh what letters might thou view!
But when with Slave or Knight, she is caught in the Act,
Some Color show, Quintilian, for This fact.
You Pose us, cries the Orator; Speak then
Thou Woman: Why, says she, Ag^eed 'twas, when
We married, Thou should do, what Thee should please,
I what liked Me. Crie-out then; Heaven and Seas
Mix, if thou will. I 'me Woman [32] They dare Flout,
When taken; and from Crimes grow fierce and stour.
But do thou ask, whence all these Monsters flow?
Chaste were our Dames, when their estate was low.
Small roofs from Vice's touch were saved by tough
Labor, short sleeps, by hardened hands made rough
With Tuscan fleece, by Hannibal's near Power,
By their armed Husbands at Collinus's Tower.
Long Peace confounds us: Riot worse spoil makes
Then War; Revenge the Conquered World Thus Takes.
No Crime, no bolder Act of Lust is strange,
Since our old Thrift for Riot we did change.
Since, to [33] These Hills have flowed the sins more wild
Of Sybaris, Mile^us, Rhodes; Defiled
We are with bold Tarentum, where still crowned
They quaffe, and with rich Ointments are half-drown'd.
'Twas filthy Money, which brought these strange Crimes:
Soft Wealth with Riot did corrupt the Times.
For, what does drunken Lust regard Chaste Fame?
She for the Face mistakes what is Nature's shame,
Who her great Oisters does at Midnight eat;
When [34] Falern wine with Ointments dashed does sweat
Perfume: when in large shells carouse they do:
When round the house turns, and each light seems two.
Go now, and scarce believe with what rank flout
Of nostril Tullia draw's-up air; Go doubt
What 't is Collatia tells known Maura nigh
Chastitie's Old Altar, as they pass by.
Here stand by night their Litters: here they stain
The Goddess, whiles her statue they profane.
Here mutually they 're vile; and yet although
It Is night, the Moon sees all. Thence home they go.
Thou visiting Great Friends the place do tred,
When Day returns, where stood thy wife's lewd Bed.
The Rites of the Good Goddess now to light
Are brought: where Pipe and Horn and Wine incite:
Where these astonished Maenades ^e're shame,
To run with rolling hair. O inward flame
The Lewd Lawfella makes a Game of Sin:
Rewards proposes, and [35] rewards does win.
She to worse Medullina yet gives place:
The Worse the Nobler! Thus they mount to grace!
Here Is nothing feigned; All Is True: Enough to fire
Old Priamus, and Nestor's maimed desire.
But when these very Women have all done,
Impatiently from these Deceits they run.
A Lover they 'll not want; though Some do blind
Nature's broad Light and Sin below their Kind!
Yet would at least our Old and Public Rites
Were not profaned with these impure delights:
But Moors and Indians now have learned by Fame
What singing Wench of no mean Manhood came
Thither, whence but a bolder Mouse, if Male,
Must fly; where a He-Picture has a Veil.
Who scorned the Gods Then? who did Fear so lack,
To flour at Numa's Chalice, and his Black
Vatican Earthen Dishes? But Oh see,
What [36] Altar from a Clodius is now free?
I know what you my friends advise me to,
Bar her, restrain her with a Guard. But [37] who
Shall keep the Keepers? Them her wit First winnes;
The Rich and Poor A like are in These sins:
She whose bare foot the durtie flint does vex;
And She that is carried on tall Syrians necks.
To see the Plays Ogulnia brave Attire,
Servants, Chair, Pillow, and Shee-friends does hire,
A Nurse and Waiting Maid with golden hair.
Yet though her Portion she does thus impair.
She wastes on smooth-chinn'd wrastlers, her sweet friends,
What Is Left: Her House-hold-stuffe at last she spends.
Many at home are of Small Means, But No
Modesty in Such want, nor Measure know,
To which their Need has sized them. Yet to Thrive
Sometimes their Husbands late Foresee, and strive
Taught by the Learned Pismire, to escape cold
And Hunger: whiles the wife wastfully bold
Observes not their decrease; but as if still
Money revived and the emptied chest would fill,
And still be taken from the full heap, they
Never reckon What for these delights they Pay.
Some of More Art have [38] Eunuchs for Despair
Of Beard: Such for Abortive Cups never care.
If Song she loves, his [39] Button will not hold,
Whose Voice the Praetor buys. Her hand's still bold
With Instruments: Her Lute all-radiant swells
With thick-set gemms: the strings her rough quill tells.
Once soft Hedymelos used. This; She still:
With joy she sweetly kisses his sweet Quill.
One of the Highborn Lamian Race with wine
And cake at Janus and at Vesta's shrine.
Asked, if that Pollio to his strings renown
Should win the (i) Capitolian Oaken Crown.
Sick had her Husband been, could more be done?
More, had Physicians Left her Dying Son?
She stood before the Altat and never failed
Through Shame, for a base Harper [40] to be veiled.
The prompted words (as Custom bids) she spoke,
And, at the Opened Lamb, struck pale did quake.
Speak, I thee pray, speak now most Ancient God,
Great Father Janus, Lend'st thou These a Nodd?
In Heaven ye 've wondrous Leisure then! It Is true;
Ye Gods (for ought I see) just Nothing do.
This a Comoedian, a Tragoedian She
Prays for: the Aruspex needs must Crook-leg'd be.
Yet better she thus Sing, then haunt each street
Boldly, and even the places where Men meet,
Talking before her Husband with your stout
Armed Captains face to face with breast Layd-out.
What Is done in the whole World She knows: what now
The Scythian or the Thracian's doing: How
A step-dame secretly deals with her Son:
Who's Lovesick: what Adulterer begun
A hope, but Missed: who did a VVidow woo
And worse: the Month she knows; and more Arts too!
'Twas she First saw [41] the Comet, that did bring
Fear to the Armenian and the Parthian King:
Fresh News she catches at the Gates: faigns Ground
And People by Niphates to be drowned:
That Cities nodd with Earthquake, Hills sink down,
She tells to all she meets throughout the town.
This is not yet so vile, as she that strips
Poor neighbors, whom she drags and wounds with whips,
When she Forgives them. For if a loud curre
Breaks her deep sleeps, Your Cudgels straight bestirre,
She cries; The Master's First banged, the Dog Next.
She Is dreadful Met, or Viewed: The Baths are vexed
With her, by [42] Night: Then Move, with tumult great,
Her Bathing-Shells, her Camp; Thus she will Sweat;
When with the massy ball of lead o'retoyl'd
Her arms fall down; and her lewd limms are Oil'd.
Meanwhile the Ghuests, whom Sleep and Hunger tame,
Do wait: at last comes-in this ruddy Dame.
Thirsting for a whole Flaggon: at her foot
A full Urne 's placed. A double draught must do it
Three Pints, to [43] raise fierce stomach; which being washed,
The [44] Draught returns, and on the floor is dashed.
The Marble flows, or, of her Falerne strong
The brave guilt basin smells; as when a long.
Snake does into a deep tun fall, she drinks
And vomits: Her vex't Husband's sick and winks.
She Is yet more Irksome, at her Board that uses
Virgil to Praise; Eliza's death Excuses;
Compares your Poets: making Maro swaye,
One Scale [45] and does in the other, Homer weigh.
Grammarians yield, and Rhetoricians: [46] All
Stand Mute: Lawier, nor Crier does so baul;
No, nor another Woman! Power of Tongue!
You Would say, [47] so many Bells and Basins rung.
Your pans and Trumpets now weary no more:
This can alone [48] the Laboring Moon restore.
In Just Acts too New Aim [49] she gives. For, she
That pretends Art and Tongue, should Coated be.
But to the Mid-Leg; should to Sylvanus slay
A hog, and at the Bath the Farthing pay.
Let not the Dame that lies by Thee, have Taught
Forms of speech, or with winding words and thought.
Hurl a short Enthymeme: nor at command
All stories know; nor some Books Understand.
Her do I hate, that in [50] Palaemon's art
Is quick, has Laws of speech, and Rules each part;
Verses (Great Antiquar^e!) does repeat
To ^e unknown: corrects a friend less neat,
Or rude in words, which Men neglect: yet such
Soloecisme in a Husband think not much.
All faults a woman grants her self; no check
She feels when stately Em'ralds grace her neck;
When great [51] Eye-checking Pearls stretch her soft cars:
Then a Rich wife, worse Burden No man bears!
Her loathed face yet, worthy of Laughter, [52] swells
With paste, or of Poppaean ointment smells;
It bird-limes her poor husbands lips. With care
She Is washed for her Lewd friend: when looks she fair
At Home? your choice Leaf-Ointments for her Friend
She gets, and what you, slender Indians, send.
At last she is seen; her Crust of Paint Lies-by:
She Is known: she is smoothed with asse's milk still nigh.
For, Asses still she will keep, though she should be
Banished to the Hyperborean Axle-tree.
But, with changed Medicines, what she so daubs-o're,
And clots of flower, A Face is 't, or a soar?
It Is worth the knowing how they spend the Day.
If in the night Averse her husband lay,
VVoe to the [53] wool-waigh-maid! The Chambermaid
Is stripped! Her Litter-man has too long stayed,
He too, for his dull Master's sleep, must needs
Suffer. On This the canes are broak: He bleeds
With whips; a Third with Thongs: by some there is spent
Upon your Torturers a yearly rent.
He whips, whiles she at ease her p^int renews;
Talks with shee-friends, or gold-embroyd'ry views;
He whips; she the long bills of the day past
Reads twice. He whips, with whipping tired. At last,
Begone, she thunders-out; but all is done first:
The Old Sicilian Court was not more Cursed.
For if she would be dressed rarely, and haste straight
To some fair Garden, where a friend does wait,
Or rather to the [54] haunted Brothel-shrine
Of Isis; wretched Psechas does with fine
Order Dispose her hair, Her self with hair
All torn, with shoulders too and breasts all-bare.
Why [55] stands this Curle so high? with Thong she is pay^d
Straight, for the Crime of a few hairs mislay'd.
What has poor Psecas done? wherein does lie
The w^nches fault? If thy Nose stands awry.
And Anger's thee? Another combs as fast
Her left-side-locks; which into Curles are cast.
Some Matrone Counsails, who now wool does spin,
Yet [56] once was cunning at the Crisp^ng-pin.
Her judgment is asked first; then They impa^t
Their mind, that are yet Less in Age and Art.
As if it were for Fame or Life, so great
Her study is to know how to be Neat!
With stor^e upon story she so rears
The structure of her head, that she appears
Before [57] like tall Andromache; behind
She Is Less, Nay, scarce the same, if she is short loin'd.
Then a Girle-pygmie she is more Dwarf without
High heels; and tiptoes for a kiss and flout.
Meanwhile she slights Husband and Thrift: her Life
Makes her more like a Neighbor, then a wife.
She Is nearer yet in This, that she does hate
His Friends, his Servants; and wast's his estate.
Lo, fierce Bellona 's and great Cybel's Quire
Enters, and an huge Eunuch, [58] whom the admire
As less Obscene: long since he did neglect
Pleasure; with pot-sheard to himself dissect.
Him the hourse-rout and petty drummers fear,
Who on his head the Phrygian cap does wear.
September's Southern blasts approaching nigh
Loud'y he bids them Fear, or Purify
Themselves, Each with her hundred eggs, [59] and then
Give him their Old Cloths brown like vine-leaves, when
They 're dried: so shall there pass the worst of fear
Into the Coats, and expiate the whole year.
She Will break the frozen River sink, through the Ice,
In a cold morning dive in Tiber thrice.
And in it is whitle-pooles wash her trembling head:
Then over all proud Tarquin's field half-dead.
With cold and Quivering, if White Io shall
So bid, on bloodied knees she will naked crawl.
She Will go as far as Aegypts Confines stretch;
And [60] from Hot Meroe she will water fetch.
To sprinkle Isis Temple, which stands reared
By the Old Sheepfold. She believes she heard.
The Goddess bid her So. Lo here, a right
Pure Soul, with whom the Gods may talk by night.
He then with These does the chief honor gain,
That [61] acts (k) Anubis midst his bald-pate train.
In linen dress, yet closely does but flout
The howling People, whiles he runs-about.
He pard^n begs, when from the Marriage-Rights.
A wife abstaines not upon Holy Nights;
When [62] the injured bed deserves no gentle tod,
Gently [63] the silver Serpent seems to nod.
This to His Tears and studied Prayers the ascribe:
Their great Goose and thin Cake Osyris bribe.
A quaking She- Jew next [64] leaving elsewhere
Her Hey and Basket, begs close in their ear.
She the Jewe's Law expounds, is [65] in some grove
Chief Priest, and a sure post 'tween Them and Jove.
Her hand she fills too with some petty coin:
The Jews will sell ye what dreams you will enjoine.
Next some Armenian or some Commagene
Southsayer does assure One, the Gods mean,
She shall enjoy a Lover young and fair
Or be some childless Rich One's Mighty Heir.
A hot dove's Lungs did show it. He does view
The entrails of Chicken, whelps, and Children too
sometimes, [66] His Crime then on Another thrust;
But in Chaldoaans they more firmly trust.
What e're an Astrologian says, they count
As sure, as if 'twere fetched from Ammon's Fount;
Since the Oracles at Delphi cease, Deep Night
Shading the times to come from Humane sight.
He yet is Chief, that often has been Exiled,
By whose [67] kind scheme worth all price, a high-stil'd
Citizen fell, once Otho's dreadful foe.
When their [68] arms sound with chains, and once they grow
Tired prisoners in the Camp, Men trust their skill;
Your Figure-flinger has no Genius, till
Condemned and even Lost; when he hardly shall
Be, sent to Cyclas, or call'd-back from small.
Seriphus. Thy dear Tanaquil would know
Of such, thy Mothers funeral so slow,
Though hast'ned by the Jaundice, but Thy Date
First, Then her Sisters and her Uncle's Fate.
She Would know if her Adult'rer shall Outlive her:
Indeed, what greater bliss can the Gods give her!
She knows not yet what woe Saturn implies.
With what [69] star Venus does success-ful rise:
What Month's unlucky, what Times good for Gain.
But even to Meet Her, see thou shun amain,
That has her Ephemerides like gum
Or fat, worn-out with her perpetual thumb;
That now Asks not Advise, but Gives it; who
Lets her dear Husband go to the wars, or to
His Home return, but still Her Comfort lack;
If that Thrasyllus's Figures call her back.
When [70] she is carried but a mile to look
Abroad, the How'r is taken from her Book.
If Rubbing makes the corner of her Eye
But itch, her Birth-scheme viewed, Cure she does try.
Sick though she be, no how'r for food she will use,
But that, which Petosytis's skill does choose.
If Poor she be, [71] she will at the Race-bounds stand;
There draw her Lot, then show her brow and hand
Unto a Fortune Tellers, who does crave
Often to clap her palm. But Rich Dames have
Phrygian Diviners; or some Indian hire
In Heaven and Nature skilled; or some Grave Sire,
Whose Art [72] does public Lightnings Expiate.
The Mount and Circus know the People's Fate.
She whose long neck no Gold or Jewels wears,
Before the Tow'ers and Dolphin's pillars dares
Enquire, if in new marriage she shall take
A Cloak-seller, and the Inne-keeper forsake.
Yet These from Child-birth-pangs are not secure;
And pressed by need the Nurse's toil endure.
But Gold-work-Beds a Lying-in scarce know;
Her hideous Arts and Medicines prevail So,
Who barren makes, and undertakes to kill
Man scarce conceived! wretch, be thou glad, and fill
Thy wife what drench she likes. For if that quick
She Would be, and feel the lively infant kick;
Some Black-Moore's brat perchance Thy Heir should be,
Whom in a Morning thou 'dst never gladly see.
I name not Now supposititious Heirs,
False joys, or, at the [73] Bastard's Pools, vain Prayr's;
Nor our High Priests, not Mars-priests, that Thence came,
Nor Persons Forged to bear the Scauran Name.
Fortune in waggish sport and secret night
Smiles on the naked babes: they 're her delight.
She hugs them: Mounts them to brave houses: then
Makes them her secret Mimicks to act men.
These she does Love; these to her self indears;
Leads-forth these Darlings, and the world Thus jeers!
One brings them Magic Charms: Another sells
Thessalian Love-oups, whose wild force expells
A Husband's wits. Their pantosse with scorn
May clap him. Thence it is, thou growst Fool, forlorn
In Brain! Thy understanding is struck blind!
Not can thou, through a Dullness, call to mind
What thou did last. Yet thou might be but Sad
At this, if that it makes thee not stark Mad,
Like Nero's Uncle; into whose drenched bowl
Caesonia squeezed the whole brow of a foale.
And who will not imitate an Empress? All
Took fire, and the world's frame quite cracked did fall;
As if Juno had made Jove mad. Less Ill
Did Agrippina's Mushrome. That did kill
But one: It made but One Old Palsie-pate
Descend [74] to Heaven, with drivling lips. This straight
Snatched Fire and Sword; This Potion tortured so,
That slaughtered Lord's and Knight's blood mixed did flow!
All this One colt did work: What then, think you,
Can She, that has the Art of Poisons, do?
These hate their husband's bastards; nor is 't spite:
But Now to Kill a Sonne-in-Law 's held Right.
Take heed, ye Orphans, to whom Riches must
Descend; guard your dear lives, no Table Trust.
With staining poison brought by On's Own Mother
Fat dainties are Too Hot. Let then some Other
Bite First: though she her self bring wine never sip,
Till it has first touched [75] thy Guide's trembling lip.
But sure we faign: Our Satyr has put-on
The lofty Buskin, And Old bounds out-gone.
Our Sophoclean throat yawnes out a Crime
News to Rutilian Hills and Latian Clime.
Would we did Fable now: but [76] Pontia cries,
Guilty, I do confess, I did devise
My Children's death by poison. This my fact
Was known and published: yet I this did act.
VVorst viper! At one Supper did kill two?
Two! Yes, Seav'n, if the had been Seav'n, had seemed Few.
We now believe what is e're Tragaedians Wit
Of stern Medaea and of Progne writ.
I Will not Oppose their Stories: though those times
Durst Monstrous Acts: yet not for Wealth, Such Crimes!
Less wonder's due to wondrous sins, if done
When This sex fired with Rage does headlong run,
Like [77] stones cleft from a rock, when the under-part
Sinks, and the Side from the hanging brow does start.
Her do I hate, that a vast Crime Contrives
And Acts in sober blood. The stage to wives
Presents Alceste, who did undertake
The worst of Fate, for her dear husband's sake.
But could such change be now, and such change help,
They Would wish their Husbands dead, to save their Whelp.
We Belides and Eriphylae meet
Betimes, and Clytemnestras in each streeet.
Yet with this odds; This Tyndaris did choose
Abungling Axe, which both her hands did use.
Now with a red toad's subtle lungs they do
The feat; yet they would use the sure Axe too,
Should wise Atrides the Antidote once take,
Which [78] the thrice-conquer'd Pontick King did make.
NOTES on JUVENAL, Sat. VI.
(a) SWore not by another head. nondum Graecis jurare paratis per caput
alterius. According to the appointment of Solon the Grecian men were to swear
by Jupiter alone, who was therefore called (...), and jusjurandum quasi Jovis
jurandum, as some are of opinion; Euripid. Med. assures us of this custom in
these words (...). But afterward they learned to swear by all the Gods and by
creatures too. Pausanias tells us Corinth. 74. that afterward they had such a
superstitious opinion, that they ought out of greater reverence not so much as
mention the name of their Gods in their oaths, which he signifies in these
words (...). Socrates is recorded by the Scholiast upon Aristoph. In Avib. for
the Author of this opinion, and he pretended to have had it from Rhadamanthus,
who expressly forbad them to swear by the Gods, but allowed them to swear by
the creatures; and hence sprang the custom of swearing by the head as he did
in Virg. Per caput hoc juro, per quod pater ante solebat. And this was one
reason why they accounted the head holy and Sacred as Athenaeus tells us
Deipnosop. lib. 2. cap. 25. (where he gives more reasons) and why they
accounted Sneezing a Diety, and why they expressed a profane fellow by this
proverb cerebra sine fine comedet, see the learned Casaub. upon the place. This
was also the reason why Pythagoras commanded his disciples to abstain from
beans: for Lucian gives this reason in his Dialogues, and Eustathius likewise
in these words (...). For beans have the signature of the brains and so
occasioned that symbol. This kind of swearing we find particularly forbid by
our Savior Mat. 5. v. 36. where Grotius gives more instances of this way of
swearing out of Synesius and others, and makes some difference betwixt swearing
by our own head, and the head of others which is here chiefly intended by our
Poet.

(b) Tarpeian threshold. Tarpeium limen adora. Jupiter is here understood,
called Tarpeius from the Mountain on which his Temple stood; both had their
names from the Vestal Virgin Tarpeia who betrayed the place to the Sabines.
Virgil. lib. 9.

(c) Kill to Juno now, etc. auratam Junoni caede Juvencam. Juno was one of
those Dietyes, cui vincla jugalia curae. As patroness of marriage she is
called pronuba and had therefore at such Solemnityes beasts Sacrificed with
gilded horns as Plin. lib. 33. cap. 4 see more of these Sacrifices afterward
on Sat. 12.

(d) Or can the Seats. Cuneis. Cunei has many significations, sometimes it is
put for the worst place of the Theater, whose remotest part resembled a wedge
and hence inter cuneos residere is to be a base ignoble fellow. Sometimes it is
put for the jointings of the seats together and so signifyes by a Synecdoche
any seat; hence we read of cuneus Equestris mentioned by Tacit. in his Annal.
in this General sense it must be taken here viz. pro sedilibus.

(e) Who on Quintilian dotes? Fabius Quinctilianus who wrote the Rhetorical
Institutions and Declamations, and was Tutour to our Poet, was too good a man
to please the lewd Ladies of Rome, who were more delighted with Stage Players,
etc.

(f) Hippia a Lords wife. This Hippia was wife to one of the Senators Fabritius
Vejento, and is thought to have this fictitious name from the excess of her
Lasciviousness, for (...) in Greek signifyes a strumpet; the reason of the
metaphor learn from Virgil, 3. Georg. Scilicet ante omnes furor est insignis
equarum, and Aelian. lib. 4. cap. 6.

(g) Canusinian sheep. Ovem Canusinam. Canusium was a Town of Apulia Daunia in
Italy upon the River Aufidus; it was famous for sheep which they used to cloth
to preserve the wool from dirt and briars: these were called oves pellitae.
Those that wore garments made of this wool were called Canusmati Mart. lib. 9.

(h) Flora's trumpet. Florali matrona tuba. The Poet here alludes to the
Floralia instituted in honor of Flora called by Lactautius de falls. Rel. lib.
1. Faula for which Vossius reads Flaura there. She was Scortum Herculis as
Verrius cited by the same Lactautius. She was made the Goddess of Gardens and
Meadows by the Senate, ut pudendae rei quaedam dignitas adderetur as the same
Lactantius. Which is likewise told us by Ovid. lib. 5. Fast. Convenere patres
and si been floreat annus,
Numinibus nostris annua festa vovent.
The same Poet acquaints us that these solemnities were performed in April
toward the latter end. Incipis Aprili, transis in tempora Maii
Alter te fugiens, cum venit alter, obit.
This festival therefore was instituted ut fruges^cion arboribus, aut vitibus
been prospereque florescerent as Lactant. ib. and vile impudent strumpets were
wont to dance naked through the streets to the sound of a trumpet to which our
Poet here alludes more particularly.

(i) Capitolian Oaken crown. Capitolinam Quercum. Domitian instituted sports in
honor of Jupiter Capitolinus which were celebrated every fifth year: and he
that came of victor was rewarded with an Oaken crown. See Martial. Ep. 54. lib.
4.

(k) Acts Anubis. Anubis was an Egyptian diety the Son of Osiris according to
Lubin; of Typhon and Nephthys according to Vossius. Servius on Virg. Aen. 8. v.
698. omnigenumque Deum monsira and latrator Anubis, says he is called latrator
quia capite canino pingitur, but gives no reason why he should be pictured in
that shape: but Lubin tells us this was the reason quod in insigni canem
gessit, ut Macedo frater lupum. But Vossius gives this reason out of Plut. de
Isid. and Osirid. to Nephthys the Egyptians assigned the presidency of that
Hemisphere which is below our Horizon, to Isis what is above it, and the
Horizon it self to Anubis: and therefore they dedicated a dog to him, quia ut
canis din noctuque videt and domi custodit, itae Anubis and nostrum and
oppositum videat hemispherium, and quasi custos sit utrinsque. Voss. de Idol.
lib. 2. cap. 75. After this dog Anubis the Romans in imitation of the
Egyptians, went crying and howling, as if they followed him in quest of his
father Osiris King of Egypt, that was murdered privately by his brother
Typhon; his body was at last found cut in pieces near to Syene. After his
Deification they still mourned for him with this ceremony, and adored him in
the form of a Bull; accordingly his offering was hay: and if he took it, it
betokened prosperous success, if he took it not, it was ominous; Strab. lib.
ult. Plin. lib 8. cap. 16.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Sixth Satyr.
Sundry phansies of the Heathen about Man's Original. A Custom of Swearing by
Another's Head. Rings; the use of them in Marriage; and the Finger on which
they were worn. A doubt about Medla vena, which is to be opened in a Frenzy.
Subitum, miserablle, longum, not rightly expounded by Britannicus. Megalesia
and Ludi Plebeii distinguished. Visards worn by Actors in Plays. Altars in
Theaters. Thyrsus. Fabulae Atellanae. The Fibula, for the preserving of the
voice, described, Rudis. Lanistae. Whether the Hair of Matrons were
distinguished from Harlots by the Color. Cells and I^scrip^ions over them in
the Stews, and Lamps hang'd-up there, as also in Temples. Ergastula. Mensis
Brumae. (...). Scrofa. Subsidant pennae, expounded differently from the ancient
Interpreters. Mustacea, distributed to Guests at Marriages, and Money to the
Bride. Barbers, when first in Rome. Quintana, a Military exercise. Books
anciently rowl'd-up; The greatest breadth of a Page. The Reading, flu^i^ad
Istros, disproved against Britannicus, from himself. Ointments drank in Wine.
(...). The form of the ancient Harp. The Antiquity of Bells. Sylvanus his
Sacrifices and Sacrificers. The Bath-fee. Elenchi. The form of the Tu^ulus, or
High-Priest's Cap. Foliata. Xerampelinae. The Color of Matro^s garments
Feigned Sacrifices sometimes offered for true. Cadurous. A Silver Serpent in
the Temple of ^sis. Miles in the Public Ways from Rome Mark'd-out by Stones.
Circus, the Form, Capacity and use of it. Phalae. Delphinorum columnae.
Poppysma. Publica fulgura. Spurci lacus. Philtra. A difficulty, about Saxa
jugis abrupta, exd^^n'd. Mithridates his Antidote.

WHen they were born of the Opening Oak. Rupto robore nati. The Poet intending
to set-forth the corruptions of the Roman Dames, describes the innocence of the
golden Age, in the beginning of the world, when there were not such quaint
mistresses, as a near Cynthia, or Carullus his Lesbia, that bewailed the death
of her Sparrow: but rude and hardy people born of Trees or formed out of Clay;
and that thus they continued till mankind, growing worse, the two heavenly
sisters, Astraa (or, Justice) and Chasti^ie sled to heaven. In which expression
he touches two ways concerning the Original of Mankind, the one from trees, the
other from the Earth. Concerning the first, Britannicus, says, Quum prima illa
atate homines in speluncis sy^^sque, more ferarum, habitarent, quumque ex
arboribus v^^ rustare cavatis, tanquam ex domicilio exirent, putaban^ tur ex
arboribus ess^^nati; then all^ging that of Vir^gil, Geosque, vitum truncis, and
duro robbra nas^^ls In which words-he ap^ly shows (...) probable cause of the
fictions that as they dwelt in woods, so they seemed to be born of the trees^^.
Hutl whiles he says, ex arboribus ve^us^are cau^^i^ (^^u^ of trees grown hollow
with age) methinks he does a little for get himself, having said but a little
before; primai^^^ aetate, so (that there was, Then no time past in which they
could he as yet grown hollow with age; yet Autumnus commits the same oversight.
The second way, of Man's Original, from Glay, shows that though many of the more
learned Heathen had read the M^^ical hist any, they undervalued, or corrupted,
or oppo^^^ he instruction. (...) which last fort was Julian the (...), and
particularly in this argument. Who in a Fragment of an Epistle (published with
his other works h^^ Pet^^^ vius) p. 534, etc. delivers (...) the Theology of
the Aneient (Heathen) that Mankind inot^^^'d not from two persons, as Al^se^
taught; but that when Jupiter made the World, drops of Sacred blood fell down,
out of which arose mankind; (...); impiously ^rging, that otherwise the world
could not have been so soon increased, though Women (as he leudly adds) had in
their travail been as fruitful as Swine. The like vain Original the Heathen
believed of some of their Gods, as appears by Varro in his Fragments
(Antiquitatum reram Divinarum, lib. 1. p. 31. etc. according to Scaliger's
Edition) where reprehending their fabulous Divinity (Mythicon ge^us;
Theologia) he says, -- in hoc enim est, ut Dens alius ex capite, alius ex
femore, alius ex guttis sanguinis natus. To which I may add that vanity of
some Ancient Philosophers concerning the Reparation 0652 0200 V 3 of Mankind.
For whereas there are in the joints of the fingers little bones, commonly
called Seed bones, of which one about the bigness of half a pease, and placed
in the first joint of the thumb, is call's by the Arabians Albadara (as
Bartholinus observes in his Anatomical Institutions, lib. 4. cap. ult.) some
fondly held, that out of that, tanquam ex semine, Man should at last be
propagated again. See other opinisons also of the Ancients, concerning Man's
Original, in the accurate Censerin^^, De Die Natali, cap. 4. at large. See also
Vitranius, lib. 2. cap. 1. where he says, that in the beginning men inhabiting
together, by custom of conversation began words: and how that the houghs of
trees dashing-together with the winds struck fire; and that so men came to the
use of it. See Lucretius also, lib. 3.

2. When the Greats swore not by Another's Head. Per caput abertus. So Ascanius
in Virgil swears, Per caput hoc juto, per quod pater ante solebat. By Alterius
sotle understand Parents, others the Gods, which (say they) as yet were not:
which exposition though it be true, according to the Theology of the Heathen,
concerning Parents, whom they denit to have been in the beginning, yet must it
be false concerning their Gods; Julian (as is showed in the precedent
Illustration) mentioning Jupiter at the Making of the world. The Manuscript
Commentary expounds alterius by anici, adding, quasi cum loco numinis haberent.
Lubin notes on the word alterius, that the poet thought their Gods to be but
men, because men swore by their heads. But in brief the Poet only implies, that
in that ^^cocent age of the world men used not the trick, which now was so
familiarly practin'd by the Greeks, to swear when they told an untruth, so to
win belief.

3. And already have Perchance a ring bestowed. Es di^^i to pi^rum fort ass
de^^isti. Concerning Rings, the use of which was frequent among the Ancients,
we may with Georgius Longus an Italian (who has written a weatise purposely De
Annulis) observe, that An with the Oldest Latins was as much as circum; so
anbire the same with circu^mtive; so annus as much as circuirne^^ and in like
mannet annulus was so called from the Circuit of it. It was used when Persons
were bethroath'd together, as not only Juvenal here implies, but also Pliny,
lib. 33. cap. 1. in those words, -- ad spensiones annulo exilicute. Sadinus
likewise speaking of the Thratian wives says, Qua pra cateris specie valent,
subarrbari volent. It was used also anciently by the Christians; though I will
not with Longus move you to believe that Mary and Joseph were thus betroath'd,
and that the very Ring is at this day in Italy kept in St. Laurence's Church
at Perusium: indeed, he says it is very hard to judge of what matter it is
made, and we may be ^^ntent, as I think, to think so too. But for after times,
St. Je^^me speaks of Sponsalitius annulus, upon Job, cap. 8. and on Isay. 3.
Beda likewise on Luc. cap. 15. hom. 40. says, Sincera fidei Signaculum, quo
promissa certa impressione signantur. Clemens Alexandrinus ( pad. lib. 3. cap.
11.) touches also another use of it, which is pointedout likewise by Macrobius
( Saturn. lib. 7. cap. 13.) in those words, Ve^^res non ornatus, sed fignandi
causa annusum secury circum ferebant. In which place he shows a twofold cause,
why the Ring was worn on the left hand, and on the finger next the little
finger: one whereof is, Because, according to the doctrine of the Egyptians, a
Nerve passes from the Heart to that finger (or according to the common opinion,
a Vein passes from the Heart chiefly to that finger; which yet Bartholinus in
his Anatomy, lib. 4. cap. 1. censures as an error) the other, because at the
first, as the Hetrurians taught, Rings were worn on the Right hand, till they
began in Pride to be made of precious stones, and that then for sear of
breaking by the continual use of that hand, men transferred them to the left;
yet not to the thumb, as being much in use; nor to the forefinger as not
sufficiently guarded by reason of the shortness of the thumb, nor to the
middle-finger, as being too great; nor to the little finger, as being too
short, but to the next to it, as being of less use, and so of more safety,
Pliny ( lib. 33.) says that the Ring, which was sent to the Bride, was of Iron,
and without any gemme in it; yet Tertullian says, that it was of Gold; aurum
nulla norat praterquam unico digito, quem sponsus oppigner asset pronubo
annulo. See also Marcellus Donatus on Julius Capitolinus in Maximino Junniore,
showing the manner of bettroathing with a Ring, out Terence in Hecyra-Act. 3.
Scen. 3. and stom others. Of Rings see also Fersius. Sat. 6. Illust. 3.

4. And from the AEmilian bridge so nigh^ Because, says the Scholiast, There
were Stews. But the usual reason I think to be better, namely, because it was
an high place, from which he might cast himself into Tiber. Besides, for the
first lend purpose, he needed not to have gone so far, or at all to the
AEmilian bridge; which being that farthest Southward in the City, was fitter
for a Melancholy and Desperate resolution, them for a wanton one; as being a
place where with more convenience he might have stole a drowning.

5. O Physicians, strike his middle vein. O medici, mediam pertundite venam.
The Poet here seering at Vrsidius Posthumus for his intent to marry, undertakes
(satyrically) to show the cause of his resolution, namely his Fear of the
Julian Law, which punished Aduterers, and his Desire of having a lawful Issue
of his own; and likewise the ^^sequence of his resolution which was, that now
he would no longer accept of rich and cunning bribes from the market, brought
by such as aimed at his estate, when he should die, being childless. But then
he sharply sect-upon him saying, But think thou that any will marty Thee,
who have so often, to escape a taking in ar^olfety, been clapped into a chest, as
Latinus the Mimick has been upon the stage? (Of whom, see Sat. 1. Illustrat.
18.) But especially docst think to have a Chaste wise too? O ye Physicians, says
he, Let him blood in the middle vein; for he but a frenzy. But here arises a
doubt about media vena; Georgius Meruls and his Scholat Britannicus taking it
for the middle vein in the arm (between the veins Basilica and Cephalica) but
Galeottus Narnensis, citing this verse of Juvenal, interprets it of the middle
vein in the Furehead, which, says he, is to be opened in Phremetick persons.
And this opinion is defended and Merula derided by Jacobus Nicolaus Loensis (in
his Miscell. Epiphyll. lib. 3. cap. 23.) proving it by the authority of
AEgincla lib. 3. cap. de Phrenstilis.) who does indeed warrent what Locusis
says, but also conveniently decides the quarrel; which the Interpreters might
have prevented, had they rightly consulted him. For he says, that if the sick
be strong enough, they should presently be let blood in the arm, and somewhat
plentifully: but if they refuse to hold sorth their arm or if in doing it
there be danger afterward, through their unruly tossings in their disease, of
loosing much blood, then, says he, let them blood in the forehead, and take
enough away at once. Whence it is clear, that the armevein is to be opened in
the ordinary course, the other in a more special case. AEtius likewise lib. 6.
cap. 80. prescribes letting-blood in this case, in the Forehead. Some prescribe
both, if there be need, for the perfecting of the cure; and as for the order,
the fore-head-vein to be opened last.

6. Thy Iberius. The Poet tells him, that if he gets an honest wise, as chaste
as the shee-priests of Cetes, he had need to give thanks to Jupiter, and bring
to Juns a sacrifice with gilded borns (for so they dressed their larger
sacrifices, as Pliny, lib. 33. cap. 4.) and that he might well rejoice as they
do at Weddings, decking their gates will garlands and Ivy-boughe^, or (as he
speaks afterward, which may be here taken notice of) with Bays and skaffolds
erected in the street for Nuptial Joys. But says he, thou shall not find thy
Iberina, whom thou have chosen, to be such a pure piece: but that, though shoe
might be chaste at her obscure and country home, if brought to the temptations
of places of more resort, as Gabii and Fidena (though exceedingly, inferior to
Rome) she may prove as honest as Thou have been. In which place some take
Iberina generally for a Wise, at least for any City dame, which were, methinks,
to make the Poet's invective too large and ad^ous: others with more decency,
and indeed property, make is a jeer at Posthamus only, meaning thus he, who had
been so faulty himself, was for all his experience in that for mistaken in his
choice; and so take Iberina strictly for Posthumus his intended wise; whose
arus name pe^^drenture was Iberina, and she but of a suspected same, as he may
seem to implie of Her singularly, by the emphasis, bac, in those words
following, -- ^^ius illud ext^^ ^^hid, ut Ha^ could contents sit no^^.

7. The St^^t and Well a day! The Poet here expresses the loud manners of the
City, and how they are corrupted, whiles delighted with the sight of wanton
action, particularly by seeing the Lods denced by the Pantomime Bathyllus,
Which effeminate danes requird a special are and motion of the hands; and
therefore the Poet cells in ^heironomon London; and so Jean Baptista Suarez in
his Antiquedades Gaditanos ( lib. 4. cap. 3. p. 285.) speaking of the Mimick
and this dance describes it, telling us that such names were given by way of
difference, being dances fitted to songs in the praise of famous Women.
According to such gestures the Greeks were likewise said (...), to dance the
Medea or the Canace; which was by Motion to express the stories of those
Persons. The Leda is sufficiently known as Brod^us notes ( Miseell lib. 9. cap.
1.) from Lucian (...). It was by the Minical motions of the hand an expression
of Leda seaz'd on by Jupiter; which motions are here by Britannieus and others
thought to be called, Subitum, Miserabille, Longum; but by their learn methinks
these three signify not so many several motions; as may! parthy appear from
the conjunction and, which, if that sense had been intended, should for the
construction's sake have been left-out, and been only understood before longum,
but being expressed before the second thus, subitum and miserabile, apparently
makes only the two first of a like nature. Wherefore I think longum to be used
adverbially (as in that of virgil, longum vale and to be referred to attendi^,
and so to signify a long time, patiently, diligiently or without weariness:
and thus only the two first shall implie mimical actions. Indred, those only
were sufficient, signifying the chief lessions in her rage, her Fear, expressed
by Subi^am, her Stars, through sodian amazdment, to see so strange a swan; and
her Sorrow signified by ^^sserdbile, her Bewailing her self, or as we may term
it, he Well a day! to see her self so unavoidably surprised: which passion of
Leda, Bathyllus expressed by action; so that the construction will stand thus,
Thymele longum attendir Subitum and Misorubile Ledae; according to which sense
I render it, -- The Start and Well a day, With long attention Thy^nele does
note.

8. Argue a Plebeiis long Megalesin. The Poet here to shaw the caget
wantonness of the Romas dames says, that when the Theaters were at certain
^iman shut-up, and that it was yet a good while e're the like delights were to
be presented again, they would, to supply such defect, instead of enjoying the
Actours and such Plays, at least view and handle the dress and fur^^^ure, which
the Players used, as for instance, the visard, dart and truss of Astius a
Player. In which expression there are some things either not as all, or
erroniously, or darkly mentioned by the Commentators; the chief difficulty
being in these words -- atque a Plebeis long Megalesia. Upon which passage
Britannicus says (a plebetis) suband^, s^^^, id est, quoties ludi Carceuses,
qui in gratium plebeis manima exhibebantur, sum long a Plebeis, in est,
perfecti sunt, and plebei a Ludis discesseruns; that is, when the Cireensian
shows, (which) are celebrated chiefly in favor of the People, are far from
the People, that is, are onded, and the people far from these Shewi: But this
is far from the sense of the Poet, whiles Plebei is taken for Persons, the
people.) That the Megalesia, as he says before, were Ludi Circenses, is a (...)
Lubin on the word plebers gives this nore, (...) unt forte vulgares Ludi, post
quea (he mean. perchance spectacula, which word he uses a little before) bongo
tempare celebrata sint Megalesia, quorum^ilia tenebantun desiderio. In which
words he snapes Britamnians his mistake, who thought that Plebeis signified the
People: but he takes them for games, yet not without forte, implying the
uncertainty of his assertion: and indeed he showed it in the name, rendering it
by Ludi vulgares. Some more positively say post plebeios ludos; which being a
truth, it may be farther known that the Megalesia were Games dedicated to the
honor of Cybele, the great mother of Gods (from which title they had their
name) and that there were also special Games called expressly Ludi Plebeir,
Instituted as Asconius Pedianus observes (in 1. Action. Cie. in Verrem) either
in remembrance of the people's Liberty after the expulsion of their Kings, or
else for the reconciliation of the people after the secession to Mount
Aventine. Next it may be observed that the Megalesia were performed in the
Circus, and that so were also the Ludi plebeil; besides, that the Megalesia
were celebrated in the Spring, per dies sex, a pridie Nonas April, as Rosinus
notes, lib. 5. cap. 13. so that they begun on the fourth day of April; but the
Ludi Plebeii in Autumn, and continued for three days, yet not as it is in
Rosinus, lib. 5. cap. 20. a. d. xvii. calendas Novembris, at testantur veteres
Fasti; for that were about The middle of October: but instead of Novembris, it
should have been said Decembris, seeing they were performed on the 15th. 16th.
and 17th. days of November, as his own witness, the old Roman Calendar,
testifies. Yet I believe, considering his learned diligence, that it was but a
slip at the Press (though I find it in several editions) notwithstanding
necessary to be observed; because it agrees not with that which he delivers,
lib. 4. cap. 15. where he rightly says, XVII. Kalend. Decembreis, and duobus
sequentibus, Ludi Plebei erant in Circo, uti Kalendarium docet. Lastly it may
be remembered, that the delay intimated here in our Author, from the Ludi
Plebeii in November till the Megalesia in April, implied in those words -- a
plebeis long Megalesia, being about 4. months and an half, may clear the sense
of the Poet jeering at the Roman dames, which so tediously longed for the
delight of these Shows, This agrees (serting aside the unwarrantable assertions
of some, on this place) with that of Beroald, Annotat. 8. upon this passage;
Came Ludi magnae Deum Matris Cybeles Long absunt a Plebeis Ludis, vel long
tempore intermitrum^ur: and longissima post illos ludos tempore exhibentur:
interea illa lasciva mulieres tristes ob intermissos ludos, ipsa aguat inter se
illas ludos, and mimorum vestes and ornamenta tractant.

9. Yet view Actius his visard, dart and truss. Personam thyrsumque tenent and
subligar Acci. Among the many impurities In their Shows, they had some seeming
degree of modesty, the Actors wearing a visard, mask or disguise on their face
5 though indeed it was but that they might act the more licentiously, as
Britamicus notes on that of the third Satyr ( v. 25.). -- mulier nempe ipsa
videtur, Non persona loqui, saying, nam mini, quo liberlus omnia peragerent,
personas induebant. Yet strictly the Mini, whose part it was to express all
things by action, and whose entrances were between the Acts, were not persenati
(says Rosinus, lib. 5. cap. 6. toward the end) but suligine obliti and agninis
amicti pellibus, wore not a visard, but only sullied their faces and were
dressed in lamb-skins. Which difference though neglected by many, yet may seem
to be implied by Rodolphus Agricola, who in the explication of this verse, in
the 17th of the Philological Episties published by Goldastus, more warily says,
Histriones (he says not mimi) saciem ^uam in seena regebant alienamque
praferedant. Which may be confirmed, by that of Sueton in Nerone, Tragadius
quoque tantavir personatus Heroum Deorumque; item Hereidum ac Dearum; personis
effictis ad similitudinem oris sai. They were likewise a truss, without which
they might not act, the rest of their body being naked. The Thyrsus also was
used by them in honor of Barchus; there being in ev'ty Theater (which was
formed like in Half Moon) at the two horns or Ends of it, Altars; one
consecrated to Bacehus, the other to that God, to whom the Shows were
dedicated; as Rosinus has it, lib. 3. cap. 4. The Thyrsus was a dart or javelin
wrapped about with by; and this according to some was attributed to Bacchus?
because In India his armle carried such to decieve the Indians then unskilful
in war, by a devise probably not unlike that which the Kentish-men put upon the
Norman Invader. But Macrobius ( Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 19.) though he makes the
same description of the thyrsus, yet gives a more intimate reason. For,
speaking of Liber Pater, he says, Sed and cum thyrsum tenet, quid alind quam
latens telum gerit, cujus mucro hedera lambente proregitur? quod ostendir
vinculo quodam patientia obligandos impetus belli, habet enim hedera vinciendi
obligandique naturam. The Ivy has also a power to Raise Fury and Lust, and so
in Greek is called (...) from (...); as Vives notes on St. Austin, de Civ. Dei.
lib. 6. cap. 9. alleging also Plutarch in his Problems. And from the Ivy,
Bacchus was called Hedereus, as Dempster observes on Rosinus, ( lib. 2. cap.
11.) out of Pansanias his Attica: and farther tells us, that Bacchus his Statue
was adorned with a coronet of vine branches. Britannicut says that the Javelin
was wrapt-about with vine-branches; and Vives in the forecited place says, it
was wrapped about both with Ivy and the vine-branch.

10. At an Atellun parting song. Extodio -- Atellana. Fab^le Arellana were so
called from Atella, a City of the Osci, where they were first used. Fabius
Dossennus was a writer in this kind, as Lipslus notes on Seneca epist. 89.
These Plays were ridiculous and obscene; yet to please some corrupt Emperors,
acted sometimes by the Roman Nobility. They were afterward changed into
Mimick Fables. See. Jacobus Nicolous' ^^ensts-Miscell. Epiphyll. l. 2. c. 12.
Concerning the Exodlum or Parting song, see Sat. 3. Illust. 26. and 27.

11. Unbutton a Cemadian. Fibula signifies not strictly a button, but also a
buckle, clasp or such like stay. In this place the Poet-expresses by it the
instrument of servilitie applied to those, that were employed to sing upon the
stage; the Fraetor, who set-forth Plays for the delight of the People, buying
youths for that purpose. And that such might not by lust spoil their voice,
their overseers closed their shame with a case of metal, having a sharp pike
of the same matter passing by the side of it, and sometimes used one of another
form: or by a nearer cruelty they thrust a brazen of silver wier through that
part, which the Jew did loose in Circumcision. The form of the first, and also
another fashion the curious reader may here see (being without any immodestie)
as they are presented by Pigarius de Servis, p. 82. * Juv. Sat. VI. Illust: 11.
b.
depiction of two forms of male chastity devices But whatsoever the fashion or
invention was, the trust was but fond, which was committed to them, as the Poet
implies: seeing that the art of lust and gold could make them as vain, as the
Italian engines of jealousy at this day. On such companions then the Roman
dames doated, but never on a Quintilian, an honest man. Thus, O Lentulus, says
the Poet speaking figuratively to some Nobleman, it is thou that art married,
but it is some Musitian's or Fencer's bastard, that is born under thy Lordly
Canopie.

12. Hippia. The Satyrist here describes a Roman Lady, one Hippia; which some
think to be her true name; though Jac: Nicol. Loensis (in his Miscell.
Epiphyll. lib. 2. cap. 15) thinks, that the Poet gives it to her for her Lust,
according to that of Vrigil, Scilicet ante omnes furor est iusignis equarum,
and cites Aelian de Animalibus, lib. 4. cap. 6. which may be admitted as a
fancy, though perchance the Poet never thought on it. She was the wife of
Fabricius Vejento a Nobleman (mentioned, Sat. 4.) in the Time of Domitian; and
with a Fencer, one Sergius, whom the Poet jeeringly calls Sergiolus, she fled
to Alexandria in Egypt, where Prolemaus Lagus once reigned, even the
Canopians, though luxurious Egyptians, condemning such more shameless
filthiness. Besides, the Poet makes it yet more strange; in that, for his sake,
she left the pleasures of Rome, even Paris the pleasing Pantomime (put to
death afterward by Domitian for his adultery with the Empress Domitia) Nay,
says the Poet, she sailed with him through variety of Seas, as the Tyrrhene,
the Adriatic, the Aegean; in which, through the variety of tides, she could
not but meet with uncourteous waves. But should a Husband desire her to go to
Sea with him, she would then cry, that vertitur act, the sky seems to
change, or all things seem to run round, and she straight grows giddy.
Besides, her sweetheart Sergius was grown deformed, and, as one maimed, hoped
shortly to be released from fencing; and then, says the Poet, he also would
seem as deformed, as her husband Vejento. In which words, he implies the manner
of discharging fencers; which was by giving them rudis, a rod or cudgel, a
waster, the sign of such freedom. But till then, the Roman dames doated as
much on such kind of creatures, as ever Apollo did on Hiacynthus.

13. The Rod, etc. Accepta rude. Here I render rudis, according to common use
(as it is expounded by (...), virga, as by Britannicus) a rod (or wand) when as
according to strict truth (which may be observed for prevention of an easy
mistake) it was a cudgel, and so by some is called baculus gladiatorius, the
fencer's staff or waster; and was called rudis, as some think, because with
such cudgels they practiced the rudiments of fencing, before they came in
public to fight at sharp. Hence is the phrase in Sueton's Caligula, cap. 32.
rudthus batuere, to play at cudgels, and in the Author of the Dialogue de
Oratoribus, rudibus dimicare. For, that the rudis was not such a trifle, as a
rod or wand, it may appear from the weight of it, the cudgels or wasters, which
they did practice with, being more weighty, then the true weapons, with which
they did fight in public; according to L. Seneca, lib. 5. Controvers. 4.
Gladiatores gravioribus armis discunt, quam pugnant. And with such a staff or
cudgel in testimony of freedom from Sword-playing, some of the chief
gladiators were after long service and danger freed and graced, and were
afterward called rudiarii. The ancient Sword-fights were called Munera, that
is, Officia, duties performed to their Gods, or to some great persons dead;
though some would have them called so, because the cost of presenting them was
as a gift bestowed by great Ones to please the People. But though we grant
this for a truth, that they were grown into such corruptions, such pieces of
flattery; yet this reason seems too young for the Original of the name. the
first being more ancient, then this corruption. Those that fought were called
Gladiatores, and more particularly, if the Shows were for the dead, bustuarii:
those that train'd-up such, were termed lanistae, and all the Gladiatores that
belonged to one Lanista, were called Familia, Nero made 400. Senators and 600.
Roman Knights fight thus shamefully, Domitian made Women fight thus by night.
But the bloody use of fighting at Sharp was prohibited by M. Antoninus; and the
whole use of these Shows taken away by Theodorick King of the Goths.

14. A yellow veil hiding her sadder hair, -- nigrum flavo crinem abscondente
galero. Galerus is by some taken here for a periwig, as in Sueton's Nero,
galericulo capiti propter raritatem capillorum adaptato and annexo; so
Ptolemaus Flavius in his Conjectan. c. 44. So likewise Adrianus Junius expounds
it in his Commentary de Coma, cap. 1. As for the Color of it Servius notes,
that yellow was the color of the harlot's hair, but black of Matrones:
according to which rule, Junius, cap. 9. says that in Terence the name Birria,
should be amended into Pyrrhia, from the yellowness or fiery color of her
hair. Which conjectures we may grant to be witty: but there is no necessity to
take galerus for a periwig, nor yet for pileus, as Lubin renders it; but in a
more easy and general expression, for a veil: the Pileus being unproper for a
Woman, and the periwig not necessary for this purpose, seeing that a veil would
as easily serve the turn. And as for Servius his rule, though we admit it to be
commonly true, yet Ptolemaus Flavins in the forecited place does a little
weaken it, showing that even Ovid a master in the art of beauties observed not
that rule, speaking in his Fasti of Lucretia, Forma placet, nivensque color
flavique capilli; indeed in whom they were natural, it is not likely that they
would veil them by art.

15. Under Lycisca's name -- titulum mentita Lyciscae. The several Cells in
those impure places had the names of their hirelings inscribed over them, and
Messalina took Lycisca's room. Where we may note that, for Ostenditque in the
next verse in Juvenal, Barthius reads Offenditque, which, for a Conjecture is
apt, and noted by Lipsius also, in his Elect. p. 27.

16. With cheeks soiled with Lamp-smoak. Fumoque lucernae foeda. In the Stews
they had Lamps hang'd-up, on the back part of which was expressed
hieroglyphically, to whom they were dedicated. Fortunatus Schaccus (in his
Myrothecium, lib. 1. p. 55.) presents such a one, which in the Circle of it had
a Venus: but not to trespass upon modesty, and yet to show the state of those
times in such furniture, I chose rather to present here, from the same author (
cap. 7 P. 53.) another Lamp, * Juv. Sat. VI. Illust. 16.
depiction of a Roman lamp in the time of the Christians, dedicated to sacred
uses, having in the slope-circle of it X P for our Savior's name, as Schacchus
expounds it. But these letters were used long before our Savior's time, as
Longus shows de Annulis Signatoriis (cap. 6. p. 42, 43.) and where expressed in
coins of the Heathen, some taking it for a Star, a note of immortality; ohers
(to omit many other conjectures) thinking it to signify (...), clemens,
benignus, implying the clemency of the Prince, whose coin it was: which might
indeed be afterward applied to our blessed Savior, in the highest sense.
Concerning which letters see also Pignorius his Symbol. Epist. 14. The two
Lamps cited here from Schacens were expressed from two brazen Lamps at Rome. A
double light was hang'd-up with two chains, as in this pattern; and Lamps were
hang'd-up on beams, and to the roof of the Temples to illustrate the faces of
their Idols. Such lights seem to be intended in the Apocryphal Epistle
attributed to Jeremie, and written to those that were to be led captive unto
Babylon; it is the sixth chapter of the book of Baruch, where it is rendered
verse, 19. They light them candles, yea more then for themselves, whereof they
cannot see one. In the Greek it is, (...); and verse. 21. it is said, Their
faces are blacked, through the smoke that comes out of the Temple; or, a fumo,
qui ex demo, as Aria Montanus from the Greek, -- (...).

17. She brought her Thousand. Bis quingenta dedit, that is, Sestertia vel
talenta, says Britannicus, and after him Lubin: which last exposition by
talenta is without use or proof. But the first by Sestertia is allowed; and by
Turnebus (lib. 18. cap. 30.) expressed by decies centena millia, meaning
Sestertium, as it is in the genitive of Sestertius, and so is the same with
mill sestertia. Of which, the Sestertia, Joan. Baptista Suarez in his
Antiquedades Gaditanas, lib. 1. cap 16 page 131. having occasion to speak,
calls them Sestercios mayores, the greater Sesterces, discovering a like
scarcity in the Spanish to distinguish them from the Sestertii. The Sestertium
then here understood being 7 l. 16 s. 3 d. arises, if multiplied by a thousand,
to 7812 l. 10 s. the portion, which Casennia here brought to her Husband. See
Sat. 10. Islustrat. 41. whereas then some here express his quingenta by ten
thousand, it is not without mistake: for if they reckon by Sestertii, it should
be rendered ten hundred thousand (or, a million); and if by Sestertia, it
should be rendered only one thousand; which sums are the same (a thousand
Sestertia being a million of Sestertii.)

18. Nay keep whole workhouses of flaves. Pueros omnes, ergastula tota; troops
of servants, and whole work houses. It is almost superfluous to note, that
servants were by the Ancients frequently called pueri, according to that of St.
Ambrose, lib. 1. de Abraham, cap. 9. Pueros dicimus cumservos significamus, non
aetatem exprimentes,, sed condicionem. Ergaslula were properly not Jailes, nor
Bridewells, yet in somewhat like both, the slaves being setter'd in them, and
kept to hard labor. See of these more largely, Sat. 14. Illustrat. 2.

19. When in short days. Mense quidem Brumae; that is, in December the wanton
dames of Rome would make their Husbands put to Sea to ferch rarities. Dicta
Bruma, says Varro (de Lingua Latind lib. 5. cap. 45.) quod brevissimus dies
est; and Macrobius (in his Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 21.) according to the same
sense derives it from (...). Yet some copies anciently had, Mense quidem Numae,
meaning February instituted by Numa, as one Manuscript tells us in the margin:
which being a less aggravation of the wifes unreasonable insolence, (the first
implying the depth of winter) is not methinks to be equaled with the first.
Besides, though the time of putring to Sea, be usually in the Spring, according
to that of Pliny, lib. 11. cap. 47. Ver aperit navigantibus maria, and that of
Vegetius, lib. 4. cap. 39. ex die III. EID. NOVF.MB. usque in diem VI. EID.
MART. maria clauduntur, as Titius notes, Locor. Controvers. lib. 10. cap. 6.
Yet in the Calendar set down by Dempster upon Rofinus lib. 4. cap. 4. on the
sixth of the Ides of February, that is, the ninth day, it is said, Veris
initium. The first and common Reading I think therefore to be both more
effectual and safe. But it may be observed, that in after times it was expressly
forbidden by the Emperors, Gratian, Theodosius and Valentinian to venture to
Sea, from November till April; as also by the Kings of Scotland, from St.
Jude's day till Candlemas; As Wellwod observes in his learned Abridgment of Sea
Laws. Tit. 7.

20. Kings on their Sabbaths barefoot go, etc. Observant ubi festa mero pede
Sabbata reges, Lilius Giraldus (Dialogism. 10.) shows out of Josephus, lib. 2.
de Bello Judaico, cap. 15. that it was among the Jews a custom for those that
were Sick, or in other extremities, after their escape to pay their row; namely
by praying certain days before they offered their sacrafice, by abstaining from
wine, by shaving off their hair, and performing the sacred rites barefooted, as
Berenice King Agrippa's Sister did, when she came to Jerusalem. Which story
feems to be here implied both by the word reges and the mention of Agrippa
here. Yet it was a general rite among both the Greeks, the Romans and
Barbarians, also to celebrate a feast called (...), or nudipedalia, as De la
Cerda in his Adversar. cap. 97. shows out of Tertullian, Florus, Ovid, and from
this of Juvenal. Dempster on Rosinus, lib. 5. cap. 36. thinks these rites were
instituted in time of a great drought to obtain rain; as may seem to be implied
in that of Tertullian. Apologet. cap. 40. Denique cum ab imbribus aestiva,
hiberna suspendunt, and annus in cura est, Aqualicia Jovi immolatis,
nudipedalia populo denunciatis, caelum apud Capitolium quaeritis, nubila de
laquearibus expectatis, aversi ab ipso Deo and Caelo. Concerning this Feast the
reader may see Cerda on Virgil, and Scaliger de Emendat. Tempor. lib. 3. page
223. de Anno Priscorum Heb ^orum Abrahameo.

21. Spare Paean, Goddess spare, etc. Parce precor Paean, and Tu depone
sagitras, etc. The Poet here inveighing against the pride of Women, and
particularly of Cornelia the mother of the Gracchi, though otherwise a woman of
excellent endowments, boasting of the Victories and Triumphs of her Ancestors,
adds also the example of Niobe (the wife of Amphion the Theban): who being
singularly fruitful (some saying, to omit other reports, that she had 14,
others 21 sons and daughters) grew so proud, that as the Poets tell us, she
reprehended the Theban women for offering sacrisice to La^ona, though the
Mother of Apollo and Diana, saying it was fitter they should offer it to her.
For which contempt, as the fable has it, these Deities slew with darts all her
children, as they were playing before the gate of Thebes: at which sight
Amphion is here brought in by the Poet, crying out to Apollo and Diana, that
they would spare his innocent children, and strike his wife, that had offended
them; but, as the fable goos on, she was turned into a stone, and He died of
grief. But for the farther aggravation of her pride, the Poet adds, that she
scorned not only Latona, as less fruitful, but even the white Sow, Can^t^^
Scrofa made famous by Virgil, which at Lavinium brought a litter of 30. white
Piggs, thereby portending to Aeneat, that after 30, years, the Lavintans should
build a town called Alba; which afterward Ascanius built, and called it A^^a
longa, propter colorem suis and loci naturam, says Varro, de Ling. Lat. lib. 4.
These parceis of fable, though indifferently known, seemed necessary to be
touched, in respect of the less skilful reader. As for the word Scrofa, it is
by many thought to be fictitous, formed from the sound or noise of Swine.

22. A mere She- Cecrops, Mera Cecropis. This also to the ordinary reader may
seem a little dark, though otherwise clear enough, signifying here but a very
Athenian; from Cecrop's King of Athens.

23. -- Vt tamen omnes subsidant penna; or pinnae, as some copies have it. This
passage has much troubled the Interpreters (except some few that indeed never
touch it): concerning which the Sc^^^liast being imperfect and somewhat
unclean, ^omit him. Britannicus points it thus (according to the Paris Edition)
-- Digitor habet, ut camen omnes subfidant pennae; expounding it that such
words were excessive tempration; adding also, Est aute^ metaphora sumpta ab
avibus, quae compositis alis and pennis sedent: which intimation though
obscure, may yet, as in the conclusion may appear, give occasion of farther
conjecture. But the ordinary pointing is this, Digitos habet. Vt tamen omnes
subsidant pennae, dicas bac mollius Haemo, Quanquam and Carpophoro, facies tua
computar annos. One Manuscript in the Margin expounds subsidant pennae by
subjacent pili, adding culpat turpitudinem anuum, quae jam asperis and duris
pilis adhuc pruriant, and two other Manuscripts likewise by pennae understand
pili. The Manuscript Commentary has, licet pili laterent (so it expounds
subsidant) facies tamen atatem proderet. The one implies, that he should say,
Though her aged hair were not grown brisly (according to that expression in the
second Satyr, Hispida membra quidem and durae per brachia setae) the other,
Though her aged or gray hair were not seen, yet her wrinkled face would betray
her old age. This exposition were indifferent good, if the Poet did not imply
by subsidant pennae an excessive temptation, increased also in the next words,
Dicos bac mollius Hamo, etc. which aggravation were lost, if the place were
expounded thus, that only her hair was not yet grown brisly. Lubin says here,
Haec ita explico (nam interpretes vix Oedipus intellexerit) Qua^^vis -- omnes
libidinis prurigines subsidant, and inferius -- dilabantur: -- vel irridet
irritum conatum vetularum, quae ut vel maxim omnes ingenii nervos adhibeant
and graecum sermonem mollissime pronuncient, etc. In which words though he
gives a double exposition of subsidant pennae by libidinis prurigines and
ingenii nervos; yet for farther satisfaction he adds, Metaephora ab avibus,
Ingenii nervi vel pinnae quasi ex superiori loco deorsum vocentur. Possumus
etiam pinnas hoc loco intelligere in cacumine turrium rotundos apices. i. e.
Quamvis illa quae suprema sunt sermon two quasi deorsum voces, videtur esse
proverbialis quadam figura. which last expositions seem more to need an
Oedipus, then those which he rejects. With like liberty to add farther
conjecture, Britannicus his words, Est autem metaphora ab avibus, quae
compositis alis and pennis sedent, may methinks yield a sufficient and easy
exposition. For though they are generally, and so somewhat obscurely,
delivered, yet it may be remembered from the third Satyr, that our Poet uses
there a metaphore from the noise of the Cock, quo mordetur gallina marito
(verse. 91.) and here in like liberty he seems on the like occasion to borrow
an expression from the nature of the ben, saying that though this old trot
behaved her self as it were subsidentibus pennis, with sinking or yiedling
wings, that is proportionally with aptest invitation, whereby she might seem
young, yet her wrinkles betray her; yea though she should use all art of voice,
like the most skilful and impure Mimicks Haemus and Carpophorus.

24. Why loose thy Feast and Wine-cakes, when thy friends half-cloy'd depart?
-- Nec est, quare c^^nam and mustacea perdas, Labente officio, crudis dora^da.
The Poet mentions here some less obvious rites at Marriages, as giving the
ghuests Winecakes at their departure, and giving the bride golden coin in a
charger; which he expresses by the Emperor Domitians Inscriptions or Titles
stamped upon it for his victories over the Dacians, and Germans; the Catti,
(now called the Hassians) mentioned by Sueton, in his Life, cap. 6. being
Germans: And here we may not omit what Dempster on Rosinus, lib. 5. cap. 37.
observes out of Symmachus (lib. 4. epist. 4. and lib. 9. epist. 96.) non e^dem
tamen facilitate purgabis, quod silii nostri Minervii nuptias aliorum potius
relatu, quam literis tuis comperi? an veritus es ne are numisma cusum desider
arem? potui jacturam sportulae facere. Whence he collects, that at Marriages
they made not only a Feast, but also bestowed on the guests coins purposely
stamped with the resemblances of the Bridegroom or Bride, or both; which he
points-out with this close, Quod nescis an ex alio cujusquam scriptoris loco
probari po^^it. But for the farther illustration of the Poet in this place we
must add, that whereas some expound labente officio by officio stomachi,
because here follows crudis donanda, (all which words some leave out
unexpounded) it is quite beside the received use of the word officium, as may
appear from Britannicus; who having expounded it de officio amicorum Shows the
use of the word in this sense, for the attendance of friends at a wedding, from
Sueton (in his Caligula, cap. 25.) saying, Liviam Orestillam C. Pisoni
nubentem, qu^m ad officium and ipse venisset, ad se deduci imperavit; and from
that of Juvenal, (Sat. 2.)

-- Officium cross
Primo sole mibi peragendum in valle Quirini:
Quae causa officii? quid quaeris? nubit amicus.
25. Whom thy gate heretofore Knew bearded. -- Cujus barbam tu^ janua vidit;
that is, whom thou knew'st, when he was young; it being a custom of the Romans
(excepting Philosophers, and others in time of mourning and in some like cases)
to shave-off their beards (and as some more especially determine it) at one and
twenty. Thus all the Roman Emperors were shaved until Adrian, who brought-in
the custom of wearing beards; as Pancirollus (lib. 1. de Fibula, tit. 44.)
notes out of Xiphiline the Epitomizer of Dion. Of the custom of Shaving,
Agellius makes mention, lib. 3. cap. 4. where having in this argument spoken of
Scipio, that conquen'd Carthage, he adds, Comperimus autem cateros quoque in.
iisdem temporibus nobiles viros barbam in ejusmodi aetate rasitavisse:
idcircoque plerasque imagines veterum non admodum senum, sed in medio atatis
ita factas videmus. Yet Sat. 4. Illustrat. 17. I having observed the contrary
out of Varro (de Re Rustica lib. 2. cap. ult.) it will be needful here to
allege his words. Speaking then of the year of Rome CCCCLIIII. Wherein Barbers
were first brought to the City, he says, Olim tonsores non fuisse adsignificant
anriquorum statuae, quod pleraque habent capillum and barbam magnam. Which
seeming contratietie between them (the one saying that the statues of the
ancients were without beards, the other denying it) being not taken notice of,
by their resiners ( Scaliger and Stephanus) seeing likewise that Pancirollus,
Salmuth and Dempster deliver Agellius his observation for a truth without
taking notice of Varro's different assertion, and lastly that Agellius his rule
sorts best with this passage of Juvenal, it is but necessary to find a
reconcilement. First then, though they seem contrary, I hold them both to be
true, and that the truth of each appears from Juvenal; a passage in his 4. Sat.
agreeing with Varro, and this with Agellius. Secondly they must be understood
of sundry Ages of the Roman state; Olim in Varro must have reference to the
times before the year of Rome, 454. in which Barbets were brought thither; and
and not reach to the time wherein Varro himself flourished, who was Consul in
the year of Rome 680. and so Agellius his assertion must take place after the
year 454. and continue in statue and custom to his own time, that is, till the
year of Rome, 864. in which he flourished; which year reaches within five years
of Adrian's time. Yet this caution may be observed, that neither Varro nor
Agellius make the wearing of beards or Shaving to be Universal Customs: and
therefore it is less warily said by Pancirollus, Romani Omnes radebantur. And
this, methinks, appears from the word pleraque in Varro speaking of statuae,
and likewise by plerasque imagines in Agellius. Which caution is necessary in
respect of Juvenals statue which is expressed with a beard: which though we
might in part defend by his Philosophical life; yet seeing that he never
assumed that profession to himself, nay rather seems to decline it in his
discourse to Calvinus, Sat. 13. v. 121. we may leave the cause of it to his
Liberty and choice, or rather to his old age, which Agellius in some sort
seems to exempt from the custom of Shaving, whiles he says, non admodumsenum.

26. A Cross raise straight, etc. Fone crucem servo. These are the words of a
cruel wife brought-in here by the Poet speaking against a faulty servant, upon
occasion of the power of life and death, which, among the Romans, masters had
over their servants. Then follow the words of the husband mitigating the
business; Meruit quo crimine, etc. The next is the reply of the wife, O
demens! Ita servus homo est? Fool, is a slave a man? which interlocutory
passage was somewhat needful to be pointed out. In the matter it self two
things may be observed; First her Cruelty in the punishment, which she calls
for against the servant; namely Extreme and Shameful, the Cross, which strictly
they were said ponere, to set, because the foot of it was fastened in the
ground; the form of which punishment (commonly servile) needs no description,
it being so commonly known, and purposely written-on by Lipsius, Gretser and
Bosius; by whom the reader may be voluminously satisfied: Secondly her Scorn of
her servant and husband; This being in her account but a Madman, and That not
a Man, according to those words, O demens! Ita servus homo est? Fool, or
Madman! Is a Slave a Man? strange contempt! Yet scarce more strange, then that
of Florus (if we consider it delivered by such a writer) who in his History,
lib. 3. cap. 20. speaking of Servants says, nam and ipsi per fortunam in omnia
obnoxii tamen secundum hominum genus sunt. Yet less strange is this speech,
then the practice of the Spaniards (as Mr. Purchase relates in his Pilgrimage,
lib. 8. cap. 15. upon the testimony of Bartholomeus de las Casas a Spanish
friar and afterward a Bishop in America) who, if a West- Indian employed by
them fainted under his burden, least they should loose time in opening the
chain wherein he was tied, smote-off the head and so let the body fall-out; and
sometimes laid wagers, who could with most dexterity strike-off an Indian's
head, or smite him a sunder in the middle. But concerning the sweet moderation
to be used toward Servants, see the excellent discourse of Macrobius, Saturn.
lib. 1. cap. 11. And here concerning the use of the word Homo it may be
observed, that whereas in this place servus and homo seem to be used by way of
opposition, Homo notwithstanding is sometimes used for servus, as Pignorius, de
servis, p. 28. observes out of Catullus, carm. 10. Aere comparati Ad lecticam
homines. So St. Austin, Epist. 56. homo tu^s, your Man, or Servant; so (...)
was used by the later Graecians; see De la Cerda in his Advers-Sacr. cap. 146.
number. 12. For other acceptions of the word homo, see Sat. 2. Ill^strat. 32.

27. She eight husbands takes, etc. The Poet hare implies the great abuse of
divorces among the Romans, which were grown so common, that some wanton dames,
as he says, were no sooner married, but straight, whiles yet the wedding
ornaments did dress the house, they would leave their husbands and take new,
and thus in five years eight husbands, as he says. Which number he does not
mention carlesly, but purposely, that being the bound of divorces permitted by
Law. Beyond that number was accounted adultery, according to that of Martial,
lib. 6. epig. 7. Aut minus, aut certe non plus, tricesima lux est,
Et nubit decimo jam Telesina viro.
Quae nubit toties, non nubit: adultera lege est.
But Lipsius citing this passage upon Seneca, de Benef. lib. 3. cap. 16. annot.
97. makes it far more odious, reading the verse thus, (differently from the
common copies) Aut minus, aut certe ^ix jam vigesima lux est. Seneca in that
place is very bitter, saying Numquid jam ulla repudio erubescit, postquam
illustres quaedam ac nobiles saeminae non consulum numero, sed maritorum, anno^
suos computant? Divorces indeed were somewhat restrained in Augustus his time,
as Sueton notes: yet lust and licentiousness overruled the Law, as may appear
by that above cited from Martial. Now such a number of husbands, says Juvenal
ironically, would be a fine Epitaph for a Roman dame, -- titul^ res digna
sepulchri; implying a custom, as Britannicus notes, of writing upon the Wife's
tomb the mumber of her husbands, according to that of Marital. Inscripsit
tumulo septem celebrata virorum,
Se fecisse Chloe, quid pote simplicius.
And here may be remembered what Valla (cited by Lubin) relates of a married
couple in Italy, whereof the Man had buried 20. wives, and the Woman had buried
21. husbands; that the conclusion of the business and expectation was, that the
Man at last buried the wife, and so became even with her.

28 -- By mere skill Or bribe, she will tame the keepers; and then call
Archigenes, though she be well, and all
The heavier bed-cloths cast aside --
-- Decipit illa
Custodes, aut aere domat: tunc corpore sano
Advocat Archigenem onerosaque pallia jactat.
The Interpreters differ in the exposition of this passage; which therefore it
will be fit briefly to clear. The Poet sets-forth here the arts of one's wife's
mother leudly for gain teaching her daughter to entertain adulterers; so that
by Illa, which is three several times used by the Poet in this place, must be
understood socrus, the Wife's mother, who is here said, by art or bribe to
master the keepers, which jealous husbands used to set over their wives. In
which description, Lubin and some others would have those words corpore sano to
be understood of the wife, and those Advacat Archigenem onerosaque pallia
jactat to be underflood of the mother; who faigning her daughter to be sick,
would send for an Archigenes a Physician (one famous in Domitian's time) and
subtly remove the bedding from her faint daughter; but under this pretense
instead of a Phyfitian admit an adulterer. But I think the Scholiast's
interpretation (followed also by Britannicus) to be bettor, who expounds it
only of the wife's mother; and indeed the construction of the words does
necessarily carry it. So that the sense cannot naturally be, corpore sano the
daughter being well the mother sends for the Physician; but the mother her self
being well pretends sickness, that so under a color of a necessary attendance
on the mother supposed to be ill, the daughter might subtly meet with an
adulterer under the shape of a Physician. Which sense, methinks, may not
inconveniently seem to be intimated in the last words ^nerosaque pallia jactas;
not that the mother casts them off from the daughter, but from her self
faignedly ill, being indeed corpore sano, as may appear from the weight of the
cloths which were onerosa, and from her strength in tossing them aside, employed
in the word jactat. It may be farther noted concerning the word pallia, that
some take it here for bed-cloths, as I have showed, Sat. 1. Illustrat. 2.
though properly it signifies mantles; and so Britannicus takes it for the many
and thicker garments, which sick folk usually endure for fear of cold. In which
smaller doubt, there being no necessary circumstance in the Poet to determine
it, it may be indifferently here interpreted; though I choose the first
acception, according to Antonius Augustinus and Passeratius. And peradventure I
may confirm my choice (and so their interpretation) from this conjecture, that
(to me) it seems more satirical to apply it to the mother, implying her
greater hypocrisy, that did not only faign her self sick, but even so sick,
that she must take her bed.

29. -- And the hollow wounds so true, with daily spears, made on a post. --
Aut quis non vidit vulnera pali, Quem cavat assiduis sudibus, etc. The Poet
having showed the impudence of Women in the person of one Manilia, in pleading
of Causes, and in their undertaking to teach Rhetoricians themselves, even such
as Celsus; likewise in the imitation of wrastlers, wearing, like them, rugs
after their exercise for fear of catching cold (but purple ones in a wanton
pride) in the next place shows their wanton impudence in practicing the
Palaria, an exercise used by the soldiers at their Camp: which, besides the
four ways that crossewise led into it, had a sift (as Pa^cirollus, lib. 2.
Titul. 21. delivers it) which therefore was called Quintana, at which they
practiced the Palaria, and from whence that exercise was called the Quintan, in
these times with difference corrupted into a sport. That exercise anciently was
a fencing at a stake or post fixed in the ground, but appearing above ground the
height of a man, 6 foot, (as Vegetius describes it) at which they performed all
the points of the fencer's art as with an enemy, by way of preparation to a
true fight. Such Women then, says the Poet, as are before described, are fitter
to act in the Floralian sports; where harlots acted with naked impudence. Then
sports he with the husband of such a wife, telling him, it would be a fine
sight, to see all his wife's armor setforth to sale; among which he mentions
Cruris sinistri dimidium tegmen: for, the left leg being in fight more
set-forward, they wore harness upon it; yet he calls it but dimidium tegmen,
because it reached from the foot but to the mid-thigh, the upper part of the
thigh being covered with the Shield. He farther jeers at him for his wife's
greaves, or leg-harness (properly used by the Retiarii, or Pursuers, as the
Scholiast notes) which when his puella, his damsel should set to sale, Were not
he then (says the Poet) a happy man?

30. The band of her thick-volum'd coats! Quam denso fascia libro! I might
render it, though not so literally, The bundle of her thick-rowl'd coats! He
excellently expresses a Roman virago repining to have sailed by receiving a
stroke, which she had been taught to avoid^ he describes the windings and
bendings-back of her body upon her hamms to avoid it, and expresses what a
roll or bundle of coats she had behind her hamms, tied-up for her better
activitie, with some ribband, or band, according to that of Martial, Harpasto
quoque subligat a ludit. In which exprestion he compares the bundle of her
coats tied-up behind her, to a great book or volume; their books anciently
being rowl'd-up, as one rowles-up a sheer of paper, beginning at one side or
edge of it. Which fashion is to be seen in the copies in the Vatican Library,
and is still the custom of the Jews, as Schaccus says in his Myrothec. lib. 1.
cap. 38. -- ut ad haec usque tempora, sacram legem non nisi in volumine
servent: atque non nisi explicato volumine legant: though now they have
manuscript Bibles [for private use] and bound-up as our ordinary books; moved
to such change, it seems, from the convenience of the use. It may be farther
remembered for the help of the ordinary reader, that to one side of the roll
was fastened a smooth and round piece of wood, horn, or bone (like a small
staff) about which the leaves were rolled; which being in the middle of the
book, when rowl'd-up, was by similitude called umbilicus, or the Navel; the
ends whereof were called cornua, or the horns. This may be seen also in our
public Library at Oxford; where there is the book of Esther so written in
Hebrew in a roll consisting of eighteen pages in a Quarto-form, all set [like
wainscot pannels] in a row, from the right hand to the left; and so the staff
is fastened to the edge on the left side, which is the end of the roll. Those
are also Latin rolls, but different from the former in this; that these begin
and so are unroll'd downwards and in that manner are read, the staff being
fastened to the bottome-edge. Yet we may especially observe with the learned
Aldus Manutius, [ de Quaesitis per Epist. lib. 2. Epist. De Epistolis, p. 237.]
that Letters (Epistles] which sometimes consisted of one, sometimes more pages
were foulded-up; whence they were said involvere libros, and complicate
Epistoles; though when they would preserve or Lay-up letters, they rowl'd-up
Them also. The greatest breadth of a page did not exceed 13. fingers in
breadth, as Pliny notes, lib. 13 cap. 13. Whereas then, some conversant in
Antiquities, think that the roll was sometimes 20. cubits long, and 10. broad
[which would implie a proportional excess of every page] urging for it,
Zachary, 5, 2. I think it to be a misinterpretation: that expression in the
prophet being extraordinary, and so a figurative speech; 20. common cubits
being ten yards in length, and so 10. cubits being 5 yards for the breadth,
which dimensions figuratively imply the amplitude of the punishments due to the
sins of Jerusalem, nay, of mankind, as St. Jerome enlarges it saying, volumen
autem volans oftenditur in quo ^^nium peccata descripta sunt: ut unusquisque
recipiat secundum opera sua, sive bonum, sive malum. To proceed then with our
Author; after this description of an impudent dame the Poet jeers at her for
using the scaphium: which impudence in a public use of it, and at feasts, came
from the infamous Sybarites, as Isaac Casaubon notes on Athenaeus, lib. 1. cap.
14. Then with exclamation he disdains that such things should be done by Women
of good rank, which even the wife of impudent Asylus the Fencer would blush to
do.

31. Fond Sparrow, that is, Hed^e-sparrow. Curruca. He means, Fond cuckold; the
curruca, (...)(as Aristotle reports, lib. 6. de Natura Animalium*) being a bird
in whose nest the cuckoo lays eggs, which the silly curruca hatches. Upon which
word Lubin rightly says, similis es avi currucae, quae alienae cuculi ^va pro
propriis fovet and excludit, ita tu alienos liberos pro ^ui^^; yet in his
annotation immediately precedent, on those words, Tu tibi tune curruca, he
said, Tu O miserrime cucule gaudes and tibi places, quod uxorem consequutus
si^, quae tahto tui amore teneatur. In which words not without a mistake,
because contrary to the intent of the Poet, he calls the husband, cuculus: when
as cuculus implies the crafty bird, and so the adulterer, but curruca the silly
bird, and so the abused husband.

32. I Am Woman. Homo sum. Of this see largely, Sat. 2. Illustrat. 32. and on
this Satyr, Illustrat. 26. See also Cerda, Advers. Sacr. cap. 110. number. 6.
alleging Genesis 1. in the Latin, Creavit dens hominem, etc. Marem and feminam
creavit cos; according to which more general acception, Homo sum might be
rendered, I Am flesh and blood; but he seems rather to aim at the frailty of
the female sex, according to the purpose of the whole Satyr; and therefore
here I choose to render it, I Am Woman.

33. -- Since to These Hills have flowed, etc. Hinc fluxit ad istos Et Sybaris
colles: hinc and Rhodos and Miletos, etc. I might render it more literally,
Hence to These Hills have flowed, etc. But because that way of expression is
somewhat more ambiguous in the Latin, and that he speaks of Time in the
immediately precedent words, -- Ex quo Paupertos Romana perit, I rather
rendered it by the Time. The intent of the Poet is to show, that since the
Roman Dames have been free from the fear of an Hannibal (at whose being within
three miles of Rome, their husbands were fain to stand in arms on the Colline
Hill for the defense of the City) Thrift has been expelled, and all riot has
broken-in. Since, says he, or Hence, (that is, from Plenty and the expulsion of
Thrift) the vices of the lewd Sybarites, Miletians, Rhodians, Tarentines, and
such like have followed to these hills, on which Rome is built. For this is the
best Reading (as Parthasius has it) Fluxit ad istos -- colles; not as some, ad
Istros, or as others, ad Indos, without any congruous sense, as the word colles
may sufficiently implie. But I marvail that Britannicus chooses that Reading,
ad Istros; for he himself making the sense to be, that the vices of Rome had
corrupted the Istrians (whereby he must implie the Romans to be the worse, as
being the Corrupters of others) he does by his instance in this place prove the
Contrary; namely, that the Istrians corrupted the Romans. For he says, speaking
upon the authority of Festus Pompeius, that from the Histri, Players were
first called Histriones (though I know that some make Hister an old Tuscan word
of the same sense) adding, quod primum illinc venerint, ut inde appareat c^s
molliter vixisse. So that this mollities, as He makes it, flowed from the
Istrians to the Romans; whereas the Poet's purpose (as he farther enlarges
himself) was to show, that though the Romans had overcome others by the sword,
yet they themselves were overcome; by the Vices of those, whom they had
overcome; Savior armis luxuria incubuit, victumque vlciscitur orbem; that Riot
did revenge the cause of the poor conquered world and now as fiercely wasted
the conquering Romans. And here the Reader may farther observe, to preserve
himself from mistake, that Miletos here mentioned does not, as Lubin and after
him some others tell us, signify Malta an Island in the Sicilian Sea [call'd
Melite, Act. 28.1.] but a City called Miletus, the Metropolis of Caria in Asia
the less, as Mercator, and others better instruct us.

34. When Falerne Wine with Ointments dashed does sweat Perfume. Cum perfusa
mero spumant unguenta Falerno. The Poet taxes here the excess of his times,
wherein they had not only plenty of wine and sweet ointments, but also a
mixture; and so not only were anointed with such rich ointments, but also drank
them, as Pliny ( lib. 31.) observes with some indignation, saying, At Hercules
jam quidam etiam in poin addunt (speaking of ointments) tantique a^naritudo
est, ut odore prodigo fruantur ex utraque part corpor is exteriore scilicet
and interiore. Yet to speak strictly, the fault was rather in the abundance,
then in the mixture; such kind of wine being allowed by the compassion of the
Law to such as were condemned to die, so to abate (as some think) the too
accurate apprehension of death. And such, it is thought, was that wine, which
was given to our Savior at his Passion, and called by St. Mark ( cap. 15.
verse. 23.) (...), vinum myrrhatum; which as De la Cerda (in his Adversar. cap.
177. number 6.) thinks was allowed also to the two theives, that suffered with our
Savior. And though some have affirmed that Wine mixed with myrrh is unpleasant
by reason of the bitterness; Pliny lib. 14. cap. 13. reckons it not only among
Wines, but also among sweet Wines, and for the smell admirable. Indeed
Turnebus, Adversar. lib. 28. cap. 6. notes that the Graecians Nectar was called
myrrhina potio, and myrrhiola. St. Jerome also affirms that Wine mingled with
Myrrh was in it self excellent and comfortable, and so allowed our Savior
according to the Custom; but that in a scornful malice and against the
Custom, it was by his Enemies mixed with Vinegar and Gall. properly then not
the mixture of Wine and Myrrh, but the luxurious and common use of such a
precious draught is the vice here chiefly aimed at by our Poet.

35. -- And rewards does win. -- tollit pendentis praemia coxae. The Poet
having intimated the impurity of some Roman Dames under the names of Tullia,
Collatia and Maura, in their secret vileness, yet also in their impudence in
jeering at the Goddess Chastity even as they passed by her Altar [whereas
they should according to Custom on such occasion have put their hand to their
lips by way of Adoration, as Apuleius implies in his Apology, whiles he
accuses Aemilianus for the constant neglect of he enlarges the complaint by
instancing in Laufella and Medullina: of the first of which he says, tollit
pendentis praemia coxae, that she won in an impure contention the reward or
prize of her Vice. But some expound pendentis praemia coxae by pernae pendentis
it is in carnario, citing for an inducement to this Exposition that in Sat. 11.
Sicci terga suis rara pendentia crate; and so make the reward to be a Gammon of
Bacon. But had that sense been intended by the Poet, he might with more
clearness have said pernae, rather then coxa. Besides, to omit other
exceptions, though the Scholiast mentions that interpretation, yet as
dis-esteeming it he puts it but in the second place; the more received and more
natural expression being this which I use, though sparingly I render it,
somewhat avoiding the other interpretation also of the Scholiast, it being
enough to say, that she carried away the prize of her foully weakened, or
disjointed hip. And here I cannot but leave my Author, about this place, to an
overplus Zeal of speech, choosing to contract some things, and leave out some;
as particularly, after a few verses, that witty Irony in the word Anticatones,
the formality of the wit being in the obscenity. Wherefore seeing that they
would not be parted, I thought it best to part with them.

36. What Altar from a Clodius is now free? Sed nunc ad quas non Clodius aros?
An allusion to the story of Clodius [as, amongst others, Plutarch relates it in
the life of Caesar] who for the love of Caesar's wife Pompeia, disguised himself
like a woman, and so went to the Sacra or Rites of Bona dea [to which none
might be admitted but women]: at which, though performed in Caesar's own house,
[he being then Summus Pontifex] he venterously obtained his adulterous purpose.

37. But who shall keep the Keepers? Eunuchs that attended on their Ladies
chamber, called Custodes. Which kind of service intended for the preservation
of the Wifes chastity, did belong sometimes to the Papas, who was the
instructor of their children, as Pignorius observes, de Servi^, page 188.

38. Some of more art have Eunuchs. Yet some even of the Heathen have been so
chastely severe, as to teach that the society of man and woman should not be for
pleasure but issue. So taught Ocellus Lucanus the Scholar of Pythagoras, in his
Book (...). published with Annotations by Nogarola. Some verses following I
omit, so might my Author: but the boldness of their Vice added boldness to his
Indignation.

39. His button will not hold. Nullius sibula durat Vocem vendentis
Praetoribus. See the 11th Illustrat. of this Satyr.

40. For a base Harper to be veiled. Pro Cithara velare caput. The Poet here
sets forth the singular impudence of some Roman Ladies, that shamed not to
consult the Gods and solemnly perform all the Rites requisite in such cases,
for a base paramour, even a Harper; for so is Cithara here taken for
Citharadus, the instrument for the Person. Concerning the Instrument it self it
may be observed, that (...) cinnor in the Hebrew, Genesis 4.21. as also Psalm.
150.3. Is in the Latin Bible rendered by Cithara (or, as Arias Montanus, 1 Samuel
16.16. has it, by Cinnara) and in the English by a Harp. Which I urge not only
for the justifying of the translation; but also occasionally to show, that the
Instrument, which we commonly call a Citherne, is most probably, a little
before, called testudo, (though I render it according to the vulgar acception,
a Lute) in that passage of our Author, -- densi radiant testudine tota
Sardonyches --. Which name testudo used most commonly, yet but figuratively,
for the Lute, from the arched form of it like a Torteise-shell, is indeed
appliable to any such vaulted instrument, and by some I find it expressly
rendered, a Citherne, which acception, as in this Author it is expressed, may
seem according to the Music of these times, most aptly to claim this
translation, it being said of the testudo, -- Crispo numerantur pectine
chordae, and afterward, grato plectro: the plectrum (whether made of a quil,
or hair, as some tell us) seeming not so convenient, as the fingers themselves,
for the playing upon an instrument of so many strings as the Lute has, in
respect of the Expedition of the Touch and the Distinction of the strings, with
which endeavor of preventing ambiguity in this argument we may the rather rest
satisfied; there being in the distinction of the ancient Musical instruments,
even amongst the most inquisitive Antiquaries, great perplexity. In the form of
the Harp, it may be farther observed, that there was diversity; some saying
that it was anciently of a triangular fashion, like the Greek letter D, as St.
Jerome testifies, Epist. 28. (if that Epistle be his) an inverted D being indeed
somewhat like the modern Harp; Others affirming that it resembled the head of a
Goat, the two sides being like the horns, and the bottom like the head it
self, with a flat basis on which conveniently it might be set. Toward the
upper part of the horns there passed from the one to the other a piece of wood,
which they called jugum, unto which the stringes were fastened. This form of the
Harp does appear in some of the Coins published by Goltzius; and these Harps
had at the first but four strings, though afterward seven or eight, but not
above, in the ancient coins of Nero and others. According to which paucity of
strings that of Ovid speaking of a woman ( De Art Amandi, lib. 3.) Nec
plectrum dextra, cytharam tennisse sinistra Nesciat, may be conveniently
understood, implying the manner of playing upon the Harp with a quil. But at
last the Harp had sometimes 24 strings, or more, which is more suitable to our
modern harps. Besides, some mention it as a thing not material, whether the
strings were of wier or not; for so indifferently speaks Mersennus ( in Genes.
Quast. 56. column. 1524.) of the Cithara; Suppono 24 chordis, sive aneis, sive
alterius materiae parum resert, instructam fuisse; where he expresses in
picture both the ancient flat-bottom'd Harp, and also the modern, Column. 1527.
To omit the fashion of the modern Harp as sufficiently known, I have here
represented the ancient fashion as it is in Pignorius ( de Servis, page 86.)
and likewise with small difference, in Titius his Assertion, lib. 1. cap. 2. p.
10. * Juv. Sat. VI. Illust. 40.
depiction of two sorts of harp See also Persius, Sat. 6. Illustrat. 1. That
which is farther implied by our Author in the words velare caput, is from the
custom of the Ancients in their consulting their Gods; before whom they stood
veild, as the Poet here says: of which custom see Alexander Neapol. lib. 2.
cap. 22. and lib. 4. c. 17. and Dempster on Rosinus, lib. 3. c. 33. who,
concerning their standing, shows in some case an exception. The Aruspex also
that made enquiry for them did stand: whereupon the Poet pleasantly says, that
if so many of them trouble him, they will surely make him crook-legg'd, that
is, with too much standing. They repeated also certain words after the Aruspex:
and by the way we may take notice of Juvenals estimation of the Ethnic
Deities, whiles he says, Ye Gods for ought I see just nothing do.

41. The Comet that did bring Fear to the Armenian and the Parthian King; that
is, to the enemies of the Roman Empire, says Britannicus rightly, yet but
generally. Lubin refers it more particularly to the reign of Trajan, who
undertook an expedition against the Armenians and Parthians: yet this his
opinion may seem less probable, because Juvenal was about the fixtieth year of
his age in the beginning of Trajan's reign; but the vigor of this Satyr seems
more agreeable to the younger vigor of his life and wit. Secondly, though such
a War was in Trajan's time, yet there is no Comet then pointed at. Wherefore it
may most conveniently be referred to a Comet in Vespasians time: of which, when
it was showed to him, he jestingly said, This prodigy belongs to the Parthian,
that wears long hair; but Vespasian died shortly after. The Poet here farther
inveighs against some Roman dames, that were impudent News-makers, as he
implies in the word facit in that passage, -- quosdam facit isse Niphatem in
populos -- (one faigns, that the great Armenian River Niphates has rushed upon
or overwhelmed much people); adding that their Fancy and Tongue committed
more such outrage of News.

42. By night. Baluea nocte subit. In the description of a rich disorderly
woman, the Poet implies diverse Roman Customs and their Order; as, their
repairing to the Bath before Supper (but by this Dame deferred till late in the
night, as he intimates by the Guests staying for her return, till they were as
much oppressed with sleep, as with hunger); Then their Exercising themselves
there with an heavy mass of lead in their hands, to procure swearing (such
weights they called (...) from (...), because they used them in leaping; Seneca
mentions them, Epist. 57.) Next, their being Anointed, (as this dame was here,
but by a Male attendant; in which passage I a little veil my Author); After
which preparations, the Use of the Bath it self; and lastly (after their
Bathing and before Supper) their emptying of their stomachs. Which last custom
was called (...) being a soul practice of pouring down liquor without
breathing, and then vomiting it up again; a thing hurtful to the eyes, and
making the body costive; and justly here reprehended in the Roman dames, as
Parrhasius notes, Epist. 26. Yet whereas the Poet says, that this dame had an
aliptes, or an anointer which was a man; this was the vileness but of some few:
this office being performed to modest matrons by maidens.

44. -- Which being washed the draught Returns; and on the floor is dashed. Dum
redit, and loto tertam ferit intestino. The Poet expressing that this ruddy
Dame thirsted for a flaggon full of Wine ( oeuopherum, as it is commonly
expounded) and drank before Supper, for the cleansing of her stomach, a double
draught of Wine, each (Je^tarius) about a pint and a half, prosecutes it
saying, the draught through offense of stomach returned, or was cast up again,
and washed the marble pavement; thus aggravating the excess, (as some heighten
it) as if she had cast up not only the Wine, with such fierce provocation. But
whereas Britannicus observes from the words admotum pedibus, that it was bad
Wine, and so such as she intended to vomit, because it was set at her foot; it
seems rather to have been placed so only in a scornful state, (as the quantity
of the Vessel implies, it being an Urne of Wine, four gallons and an half;) and
such a luxurious Dame no, doubt disdaining to drink bad wine, especially she
loving Wine, (as the Poet expresses it) as eagerly as the Serpent is said to do.

43. To raise fierce stomach. Rabidam facturus orexin. Such a greedy appetite,
as the Cretians are taxed for, according to some, in that of their Countryman
Epimenides cited by St. Paul, ( Tit. 1.12.) (...). Which last words though they
are commonly rendered, slow bellies, and though (...) often signifies ig^avus
and albus, yet as Gulielmus Canterus (Novar. Lection. lib. 1. cap. 15.)
observes, it signifies also not seldom, velox and avidus, implying such an
orexis as is here mentioned. And so (...) in the Poets, as he notes, may
signify not white dogs, but eager and swift, as (...), suddenly or quickly
forgetful. Thus in this of St. Paul (according to him) it shall signify eager
and devou^ing bellies, which otherwise are called (...). And therefore Canterus
thinks, that Epimenides used the word (...) instead of (...), only for the
necessity of his verse: and Phavorinus interpreting this verse, expounds (...),
(for so he reads it, and more Attickly, not (...), but (...)) by (...).
Canterus the rather dislikes the common exposition, there being no great
reprehension, as he says, in the term slow bellies: but when the belly, says
he, is taken in an ill sense, nothing that is disgraceful is usually added to
it. Yet then by his leave, what needed Aepimenides to have added (...) or
(...)? or else his expression is unusual.

45. And in the other Homer weigh. Atque alia part in trutind suspendit
Homerum. Some think that in Juvenals judgment Homer was esteemed the lighter,
because of the word suspendit, as implying, that Homer hanged in the Scale, and
so that the other, as more weighty, funk. Which, though it has been granted by
some eminent Critics, and happily is not disagreeable from our Poets judgment,
yet I think it not sufficiently proved from the word suspendit here used:
seeing that in a double testimony of Persius, It is used in so different a
sense, that not only it does not, but in those places it can not signify so; as
namely in that of Sat. 4. -- gemina suspendere lance Antipit^ libtae --. And in
that of Sat. 5. Aequali suspend^ tempora librae; where Ancipitis and Aequali
urterly make void any such acception of the word suspendit in these places. But
as for the controversy, it has indeed more generally been carried for Maro;
though if the question be respectively proposed for the age in which they writ,
the glory may be Homers, who was not only without peer, but without pattern.
And though some have pointed out some blemishes in his work, are they more
visible, then Virgils anachronism in laying together the stories of Aeneas and
Dido; whereas he came into Italy, according to the best Chronologers, above
three hundred years before Carthage was built? But Juvenal seems, as some
understand him, to flour at them both in diverse passages of his Satyrs; as at
Homer, Sat. 13. verse. 112. and 113. in those words, -- Vr Sten^bra vincere
poss^s, vel potius quantum Gradivus Homericus; because Homer Iliad. 5. makes
Stentor to outcry 50. men; and Mars being wounded to roar louder then 9. or
10. thousand; In like manner at Maro, Sat. 9. verse. 63. and 64. in those words,
-- sed appellat pues ^nicus, ut Polyphemi Aeato acies, per quam solets evafit
Ulysses; as if the Giants eye, had been so broad, that Olysses had escaped
through it; but of this in its place. But apparently and vehemently he inveighs
in his first Satyr against all writers of elegant and uprofitable fictions.

46. All stand mute. Omnis turba silet. Totum convivium, says Lubin, illa
loquente silet. It may more generally be understood of any company met
together, and rather by chance, then as at a Feast, to which the word turba
seems not so well to agree. Nor yet may we think, that it ought to be strained
to signify a rout or uproare, as if he would implie, that she outshouted them;
for this were not suitable to the degrees of aggravation which follow, when he
says by way of increase, that neither Lawier, Crier, nor another woman
out-spake her. More generally therefore it may be rendered, of many met
together, All stand mute.

47. So many bells. Tot tintinnabula. Pancirollus, lib. 2. tit. 9. refers the
invention of Bells to Paulinus Bishop of Nola, about the year of Christ, 400;
but He rather changed the use of them to religious purposes. For, their great
Antiquity is well showed by Adrian Junius in his Adversorum. Lib. 3. cap. 11.
who shows out of the ancient Scholiast upon Theocritus, that they used to be
rung when men died. Strabo likewise ( lib. 15.) says, that the Persians did
call an assembly before daylight by the sound of a bell, (...). We may
remember also Aaron's bells, and see farther in Coel. Rhodigin. Lection.
Antiquar. lib. 19. cap. 11. at large; and in Salmuth, on Pancirollus.
Concerning the Matter or Substance of which they were made, we may take notice,
that Durantus (de ^itih. Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1. cap. 22.) says of the Citizens
of Caesarea, that upon an occasion of joy, they went ligna sacra pulsantes,
whereby he means, that they had some hollow vessels of wood, which they used
instead of bells; for upon this occasion Durantus mentions them. Salmuth
amongst others, tells us that in Prester John's Country they use bells of stone.

48. This can alone the laboring Moon restore. Vna laboranti poterit succurrere
Luna; that is, with her greater noise. The vain Heathen had an opinion, that
the Moon, when she was eclipsed, did labor, as if in an agony, and suffer a
kind of death by the Incantations of witches; of which opinion even Stesichorus
and Pindarus were, as Pliny relates, lib. 2. cap. 12. Besides, it was generally
believed, that by such means the Moon might be brought down from Heaven, and so
at such times they feared the loss of that heavenly light: which yet they
thought might be prevented by making a loud and Panick noise with brazen
Vessels, as pans, kettles, bells and the like, that the Moon might not hear the
Enchantments, and so not suffer any hurt. Live. 7. decad. 3. speaks of it, as of
an Ordinary custom, in those words, -- qualis in defectu Lunae silenti nocte
fieri solet, edidit clamorem, which absurdity was so inbred in the Heathen,
that after that diverse of them were become Christians, it was not quite
expelled, it being reprehended in them by some of the Fathers, as by St.
Ambrose, and by Maximus in a Homily De defectu Lunae. Of the supposed fainting
of the Moon, Wowerus also makes mention in his Paegnion de Vinbr. a cap. 8.
toward the end. But we may farther observe, that the Arabians did believe the
Moon to be in such an agony, when she eclipsed the Sun, as may appear from
their custom at their New Moon. For they keeping the day of their Neomenia, or
New Moon, Holy, and counting it unlucky to have the Moon suffer any hurt on
that day, did use, because on that day she might eclipse the Sun (the Solar
eclipse being in Novilunio) to defer the celebration of their Neomenia till the
next day, at least for 16. hours, till the Sun were past the Eclipse. And hence
it is that the Astronomers do distinguish the Arabian's Neomenia into
Caelestis, which was the first and natural time, and Civilis, which was not the
true time, but the next day, celebrated to avoid the ill luck, which their
superstition feared. See Nicolaus Mulerius in his Diarribe de Anno Arabico, in
the Explication of the Arabian Epoch or Hegyra; it is inserted by Vbbo Emmius
in his Chronology, between his fourth and fifth, books.

49.
In just Acts too, New Aim she gives. For she
That pretends Art and Tongue, should coated be
But to the Mid. Leg; should to Sylvanus slay
A Hog, and at the Baths the farthing pay.
Imponit finem sapiens and rebus honestis.
Nam quae docta nimis cupit and facunda videri,
Crure tenus medio tunicas succingere debet,
Caedere Sylvano porcum, quadrante lavari.
The Poet Satyrically describing his Learned Dame, says that she has her proper
opinion de Summo Bono, which is the End or Aim of virtuous Actions, Then adds
he, Nam quae docta nimis cupit and facunda videri, etc. Which Reason of the
former speech seems not so fully cleared by the Interpreters. But I conceive
the mind of the Poet in this place to be briefly this; It needs not seem
strange, that she has also her several opinion of the Summum Bonum: for she
that so mainly pretends to Learning and Eloquence, should not only, as a Leader
of a Sect, have This Novelty; but should do many things besides, as
Philosophers do, namely, have her coat descend but to the mid-leg, Sacrifice to
Sylvanus, and pay the farthing for the Bath-fee; implying, that these things
she did not, either through shame or pride, as may appear from the more
particular view of the three things he mentions. For first, she was ashamed to
wear her coat like the Philosophers, Orators and such learned men; whose
fashion is described, as Britannicus rightly notes, in that of Quintilian,
Tunicae prioribus oris infrae genna paulum, posterioribus ad medios poplites
usque perveniant. Nam infra mulierum est, supra centurionum. Which teaches us
that the coat of the Orator, and such as professed learning, as Britannicus
implies, teached on the fore-edge a little below the knee; on the hinder edge
to the middle of the hamme; that Lower was the wear of Women, Higher of
Centurions. In which passage I render Crus, the Leg (not the thigh), anatomy
giving us the liberty; which gives that name to that whole part of the body,
from the heel to the hip, as Bartholinus tells us. Anat. lib. 4. cap. 10.
according to which acception Juvenal and Quintilian will agree in their
expressions. But from this fashion, though of the Learned, this Dame was
deterred by shame; as likewise from the second, which was the sacrificing to
Sylvanus; it being unlawful for Women; and more affected by. Learned men, as
the Scholiast tells us. Which in part is proved by Joseph Scaliger; who on
Varro, de lingua Latina, lib. 4. p. 48. cites that of Cato speaking of the
Rites of Sylvanus; Mulier ad came rem divinam ne adsit, nive videat, quomodo
fiat; and afterward Scaliger cites this of our Poet. The latter part also may
likewise appear by what Britannicus says from the Authority of Cato, de re
Rustica; to wit, the Poets and learned men (the patterns of this learned Dame)
who for, study often resorted to the delight of groves, did use to sacrifice
there to Mars Sylvanus. Yet we may observe, that Scaliter in the place alleged
says, that the Rites to Sylvanus, were performed by some Countryman, whether
he were Ingenuous, or a Servant. Which difference may probably be reconciled,
conciled, by allowing the Ordinary performance of that sacrifice to have been
the business of the Husbandman, and the Learned to have been afterward
Voluntary and Superadded Sacrificers. Besides, it may be here observed, that
when it is said of this dame by the Poet, that she should sacrifice a hog to
Sylvanus, the Noveltie was not in the kind of the sacrifice, but of the person,
a Woman. For though at first they offered milk unto him, yet afterward a hog;
which was a sacrifice also to Tellus, (as Horace testifies in his Epistles,)
and to many other Deities, as to Ceres, the Lares, and Venus, of Livie, lib. 1.
part. 4. The third thing which our Poet says this Dame should do, whereby to
show her self like a Philosopher, is the payment of the mean and usual Bath-fee
(strictly not a farthing, but q. c. as appears, Sat. 1. Illust. 36.) But here
we may ask, though the Interpreters press not the business to this doubt, how
the payment of the usual Bath-fee could make her like a Philosopher, when as it
was not proper to Them, but the Common-see; which is therefore by Seneca.
Epist. 86. called res quadrantaria. In answer to this doubt (which I but justly
raise) I might allege what I find in the Manuscript Commentary, which on this
passage has this note, Pro balneis nihil solvebant mulieres: which, if
admitted, would partly clear the business; but that I find this assertion only
in this Commentary; and cannot but allege those words of Tullie, pro Coelio
(cited here by Curio, though not to this purpose) Nisi forte mulier potens
quadrantaria illa permutatione familiaris facla fuit Balneatori; which seems to
imply, that Women also paid the Bath-fee. To express then mine own opinion, I
think, that the Ironie here used against this learned dame, which could not be
in reference to her sex, was in respect of her Wealth and Pride, which made her
like the Philosophers rather in their vanity, then in their seeming humility
of conversation. Like them she would seem to be in the invention of a new
opinion, rather then in a homely life; that she thought glorious, this
contemptible. She seems to be such a one for Plenty, as that other proud and
dissolute Dame mentioned before ( Illust. 42. and 43.) that scornd the common
and petty provisions of the Baths; but to these also, she should descend, as
with the people even Philosophers likewise did.

50. -- That in Palaemon's Art is quick. -- Quae repetit volvitque Palaemonis
artem. The Poet enveighing against such Women as studied the exactness of
Grammar-art taught by Remmius Palaemon (Quintilian's master) whose life is
written by Sueton, de Illustribus Grammaticis, cap. 23. says, that they had
their Laws of speech, or spoke by rule, servata lege loquendi. Upon which words
Eubin says, Idem nostro tempore curiost quidam scioli in Cicerone feceruns, us
Longolius, Sadoletus, Bembus, Sigonius. It is a large instance, and makes me
remember this Palaemon (who disesteem'd the learned Varro, terming him a Hog)
and the Schoolmaster Ruffus (mentioned Sat. 7.) that called Tully a fellow of
Allobrogian, or ruder, Eloquence; and lastly such another Hypercritick,
Nogarola, a learned Iralian, who in an Epistle at the End of Ocellus Lucanus
(whom he published) does in the conclusion of it, p. 48. censure at once the
whole Italian tongue, even the Tufean purity, terming it but peregrinitas
Latini sermonrs, and verborum colluvies; and as for the three most famous of
the ancient poetical wits in that language, Dante, Petrarch and Boccace, he
requires in the first, more elegant words; in the second, matter and Sentences
for his words; and in the third; Discretion (very magisterially). But setting
aside there Censurers, our Poet does here a little farther reprehend his
learned Dame, for affectin, as he says, to be Antiquaria; the acceptions
whereof, Marcellus Donatus notes, on Sueton's Augustus, cap. 86. as first, that
it signifies one that does refine, or preserve, ancient books from corruption:
secondly one studious of the old Poets and Historians (...) thirdly, one that
studies ancient Coins, statues and inscribed stones: fourthly, such as use
obsolete and antiquated words. All which though they might be counted an
overplus and curiosity in a Woman, yet only the last is absolutely a fault:
and though in this Dame he expressly reprehends partly the second, yet chiefly
the last, as a mere fault intended in those words, Opicae castigat amica verba
-- concerning the sense of the first of which words, see at large, Sat. 3.
Illustrat. 31.

51. When great Eye- checking pearls stretch her soft cars. Et cum Auribus
extensis magnos commifit Elenchos; upon which says the Scholiast, uniones,
margaritas oblongos; and -- Elenchos, quos and Titul atos appellant; because
they were (as Pignorius, de Servus says, page 207.) somewhat like the Tutulus
Pontificalis (the Highpriests Cap) qui fuit metali figura, as Festus speaks;
seeming to imply them to be somewhat like the form of the Meta in the Circus.
But the fashion of that Cap is more clearly thus expressed * by Du Choul de la
Religion des Anciens Romans, page 243. And to prevent mistake, we b. Jupiters
Priests Capp
depiction of a cap worn by priests of Jupiter the High Priests Capp
a. Juv. Sat. VI. Illust. 53.
depiction of a cap worn by the high priest may take farther notice of the form
of Jupiters Priests Cap, called Albo^alerus, figured with winged thunder, and
of a rounder form, as du Choul, p. 239. represents it, from an ancient Marble
at Rome: without which Cap the Flameh Dialis might not go our of his house.
Pliny describing these jewels, [ lib. 9. cap. 35.] says, that they did descend
in a fuller bottom, which is agreeable to Festus his description, who said,
they sharpened toward the top; and so the Scholiast calls them tutulatos;
tutulus, besides that it signifies the Highpriests Cap, signifying also
sometimes a top of hair laced up on the Crown of the head of the Highpriests
wise, for distinction and Honor. When Lubin then had called these jewels
titulatos (though as the Scholiast does) he less warily adds, Cylindros alias
appellamus; the Cylinder being of an equal compass from top to bottom; and
calling them presently margaritas ablong as, he ventrously adds, evali
magnitudine; for though we should in a possibility admit the size in respect of
the Pearl, we may scarce admit the weight in respect of the ear; yet, in that
they were worn, as the Poet says; and though he says, auribus extensis, he
intends not that they were torn, though stretched. But now, though the
Interpreters tell us, that Elenchi signify such Jewels, yet they do not so
much as intimate, why they were called so; no, nor the more curious Cerda,
though in his Adversar. [ cap. 175. number. 2.] he purposely describes them. Two
of the Manuscripts indeed would have us believe that Elenchus is properly
titulus libri; they might rather have said, Index libri. They would have it
come from (...), the Sun; because, say they, the title does illustrate the
Book: and so, say they, the jewels called Elenchi, were conspicuously placed,
that all might see them. But we need not go farther for a derivation, then to
(...), and then it will signify a reprehension and conviction: in which sense,
the name is aptly appliable to such jewels, which figuratirely may be said to
reprehend, or check the infirmity of the eye in beholding them, and to convince
it to an acknowledgment of their sustre. So that in accurate from of speech,
Elenchi might be rendered, Convictions: but respecting the convenience of the
expression, with a little addition I render it, Eye- checking Pearls.

52. Her face swells with paste, or of Poppaean Ointments smells. -- pane tumet
facies, aut pinguia poppaean^ Spirat --. Sueton and Juvenal [Sat. a.] relate in
part the like of Otho. The Poet here shows the art of Women's paint, in steeping
white-breadcrums in Asses milk, to preserve the face from wrinkles; and in the
use of Poppaean Ointments, anciently held singular for the beautifying and
smoothing of the face, and called so from Poppaea, the Wife of Nero, who
invented, or chiefly used them. Some yet think them to be of no very good
smell, but rather a medicine: which we may partly admit for truth; because the
Poet having said, that she uses these for her Husband, whom she did disrespect,
adds, that she prepares leaf-ointments, which were excellent for her
Adulterer. Indeed these foliata were ointments made of Nard-leaf; so Martial,
Tinge caput Nardi folio, cervical olebit; and such was that precious ointment,
which Mary used on our Saviors feet, as Fortunatus Schaccus thinks, in his
Myrothecium, lib. 1. cap. 22. And here to imitate the zeal of our Satyrist, I
may but necessarily condemn the painting of the Face: which is so common, that
a witty Painter being asked, whether it were harder to paint by a pattern, or
by the life, answered, He knew not; and being moved to show his reason,
replied, he thought he had scarce ever drawn any by the Life, because he never
came time enough, but that some other Painter had been upon the face before he
came at it. Yet were it but vain to send self-Painters to the Divine, his
advice being more offensive, then their paint should be. But we may charitably
present to them the more powerful motives from the Physician: who will assure
them, that their paint is the Enemy of their Life; nay, of their Beauty.
Sublimate makes black the teeth; Cerusse makes gray the hair. Plume-Alume burns
the skin: Lemmon-juice disloves the hardest stones. Oil of Tartar takes stains
out of cloth, and schorches flesh. Rock-Alume dissolves metals, shrivels the
skin, loosens the teeth. Salnitrum mortifies the natural moisture; spoils the
hearing, the complexion, and the stomach. Camphire vehemently sealds the face,
and stupifies the brain, who then will choose to be so stupid, as to bestow
Life and Soul upon a Face? But to proceed with our Author, one doubt may here
arise; that seeing these Poppaeana were used by an Empress, how may we
conveniently suppose, that they were not excellent? In which point we may
believe, at least guess from the ingredients mentioned, that they had not in
them the mineral danger of new inventions; yet were effectual for the
beautifying and smoothing of the face, though of a less pleasant smell; which
was no great inconvenience in Poppaea's use of them; she cleansing her face
from the grossness of them, before she went unto the Emperor: but the lewd
Dames here intended by our Poet, let them discourteously stick on (as
preparatives) at home, and washed them off only when they went to their
paramours. Where we may farther observe, that Poppea had 50. she-Asses, for
such purpose, as Pliny relates ( lib. 2. cap. 4.) and carried so many with her,
when she was banished; and the same Pliny ( lib. 28.) reports that some kept
700. for the like use. Yet says the Poet, Tandem aperit vultum, and tectoria
prima repo^it, incipit agnosci, at que illo lacte fovetur, etc. which,
methinks, is a passage of some difficulty; especially as it is expounded by
Lubin; who alone insists upon it; saying, quod tandem, post quam multum diuque
faciem illeverunt, vultum aperias, fucum removet, agnosci incipit, quod prior
vetula sit deformis. But to what season of her behavior shall this tandem be
applied? For if she appeared with her own face, that is with her wrinkled face,
after that she was washed; why does he then say, or how with reason can he say,
that she went to her Adulterer, lot a cute, after that she was multum diuque
very much or thoroughly washed? for that had been to go to him with her
deformity discovered. Or if it be not meant, at least in part of the washing of
her face, then must it follow, that she went to her Adulterer, with her
plastrings not washed off, and so as coursely to Him, as to her Husband. Again,
whereas, he says, upon the word Tecloria, ubi prima operimenta and
incructationes panis and lactis asinini a facie removet, after that she has
taken off the Plaistering of steeped bread and Asses milk; how can it agree
with the Poet, who says, Tectoria prima reponit, incipit agnosci, atque illo
lacte fovetur, etc. That after she had laid afide her daubings, and that again
her own face appeared, she yet used Asses milk? These things then seeming
inconsistent, I think the place may with best convenience, be ordered thus.
First he says, that she used bread steeped in Asses milk, or else poppaean
ointments, which she suffered to stick rudely upon her face, till she went
abroad to her Adulterer; but that then washed off all the undecency of them,
that is, all but what necessarily filled the wrinkles; yet that she singularly
supplied all defects with advantage, by her leaf ointments. Then, says he,
Tandem aperit, etc. After she is returned, and has been a little while at home,
she wears again her own face, lays aside her paintings, and appears aged. Yet,
that she may not be stark ugly, though she uses not her plaisterings, she uses
Asses milk; and this is the best face, which she bestows upon her Husband,
though rather for shame, then Love; but at her times of preparing for
out-a-dores visits, he is glad to be content again with her plastered face.

53. Woe to the Wool-weigh-maide. Periit libraria. Here the Poet enters on the
description of a cruel mistress; in which arises a doubt first from the sense
of the word Libraria, which does sometimes (from Liber) signify a woman-
amanuenfis, or writer out of Books. For, that anciently they had persons of
either sex for such employment, it is manifest by Vespasian, who had Antonia a
freed-woman, who usually writ for him, and whom he extremely loved, as Sueton
relates of him, cap. 3. Eusebius likewise (in his Hist. lib. 6. cap. 17.) makes
mention of Origin in this kind, saying, that he had not only men for the
writing out of Books, but also maids, which writ very nearly: Upon which proof,
Pignorius, de Servis, page 120. disesteems the exposition of Libraria here for
a Spinster, or literally a weigher of what was to be spun, as vain. Yet it is
as known, that the word may intimately and conveniently be taken in this latter
sense; and is by the Scholiaft expounded so, by Lani-pendia (a wool-weigher);
which was the chief Maidservant, that weighed out the several ta^ks to others;
and peradventure thus more properly. For though, I grant, the Poet did before
describe a learned Dame, one studious of ancient Books; yet now he is upon the
description of another, and as I conceive of another temper, namely one
employed in Cruelty and Lust. And though she were indeed wastful and
destructive, as the Poet says afterward; yet we may observe in her some
pretended and dissembled house-wifery, not only in this particular of punishing
her spinning Maid, but afterward in viewing of embroydered works, and the
accounts of the day, transacta diei, or as some have it, transversa; implying
that the accounts were so long, that they were written even thwart the Paper
(as for want of room) or on the other side, which was upon extremity.
Wherefore, though I deny not the use of the word Libraria in Pignorius his
sense; yet upon these convenient inducements (though not touched by the
Scholiast) [incline to the Scholiasts opinion, and accordingly render it. The
Poet Proceeds, Ponunt cosmetae tunicas, her tiring-Maids, (those that dress
her) are fain to undress themselves to receive punishment; in the liberty of
interpretation I express it, The Chambermaid is stripped. So, Tarde venisse
Liburnus Dicitur -- (Her Liburnian is accused to her of laziness in not coming
speedily) I render, Her Litter man too long has stayed. The Poet names him from
his Country, Liburnia, whence they had tall and lusty slaves, whom they
employed like our Sedan men, in carrying of them in their Litters: but the more
strict expression being insolent to an English ear, I choose to render it, by
implying his office, Her Litter-man, etc. The Poet then jeers at her cruelty,
saying, that at last with a pretended dislike, she loudly bids the Tormentor Be
gone; but not till she has been as cruel, as the Sicilian Phalaris, or the
Dionysii. Whereby we may observe the severity of that age, wherein they used
Lor arit, which were sometimes of the number of their Servants, sometimes hired
occasionally for the punishing of them; the whips they used for such purposes,
being usually sold in the Suburra, as Martial implies; Tonstrix Suburrae
fancibus sedet primis, Craentae pendent qua flagra tortorum.

54. The haunted Brothel shrine of Isis. Aut apud Isiacae potius sacraria
lenae; A strange, and yet a common place for opportunity of Adulterers. But a
larger accusation is that, Sat. 9. -- In quo non prostat faemina templo? Yet
such impurity was amongst the Graecians too, as Rhodigin observes, ( lib. 13.
Antiq. Lection. cap. 24. out of Pausanias in his Achaica). Near the Temple of
Isis were also public Gardens, which occasions the Scholiast to say, In hortis
templorum adulteria committuntur upon the precedent words of the Poet, --
jamque expectatur in hortis. I may lightly touch a story in Josephus (Antiquit.
lib. 18. cap. 4.) of Mundus a young Roman (and whom Britannicus thinks to be
here intended; for he alleges the story to this purpose) who extremely loving
one Paulina a matron of especial birth and modesty, corrupted the Priests of
Isis; who under a pretense of Religion called the woman into the Temple,
telling her, that Osyris had by night talked with them, and persuaded her that
their God was in love with her; by which means Mundus, even in the Temple, had
his desire; for which fact the Priests were crucified and Mundus banished;
Tiberius (in whose reign it was) using Him so gently, because forsooth it was
done in the impatience of Love! A gentle name, and a false one, for Adultery!

55. Why stands this Curle so high? With thong she is paid straight --. Altior
hic quare cincinnus? taurea punit Continuc --. The first are the words of the
curious Mistress reprehending her poor Chambermaid Psecas, ironically here so
called; it being a name in Ovid, given to an attendant of Diana. The Poet adds,
that she was punished with the taurea, which Britannicus mistakes for the name
of a Matron, so called (if we may thence frame a harsh Epithet) from her
taurine fierceness. Johannes Baptista Pius, (in his Annotat. Posterior. cap.
124.) erroneously thinks it to be Vincula, a kind of fetters. Indeed they are
names sometimes found together, as particularly in Eutropius, but signifying
different things, and invented by Tarquin the proud; and therefore by Curio and
others, it is rather taken for a thong of a Bulls hide (to silence a less
seemly expression of some) wherewith condemned persons were punished. So it is
used 2 Macchab. 7.1. where the Author describes the seven brethren, and the
Mother to have been flagris and taureis cruciatos; where the word for taureis
is in the Greek (...), whips, as the English modestly chooses to render it,
rather according to the Latin, then the strict sense of the Greek.

56. Yet once cunning at the Crisping pin. Emerita quae cessat acu. Some
understand this of one past needle work, through an aged and weak sight; but
the Scholiast, of one that had formerly been expert at the curling of the hair
with the crisping pin; for so he upon the word emerita; Quae non ornatrix eft,
sed jam quasi emerita cessat; her Hand being past the work, but not her
Judgment.

57. Like tall Andromache. The Poet expresses the height of this proud dame, by
her dress, and by comparison. It was anciently the custom of Matrons to form
their hair into a high roll toward the crown of the head; which rowles were
called tutuli, as Varrs says, whether it were tuendi capilli causa, or that
they called that tutissimum, which in a City is altissimum, that is, Arx, as
Janus Parrhasius questions it, Epist. 58. Statius has an expression of such a
dress, in those words, -- Celsae procul aspice frontis Suggestumque comae --.
The height of this dame is next set-out by comparing her with Andromache
Hector's wise, whom Dares Phrygius and Ovid relate to have been very tall:
Wherefore I marvall, that so eminent a mark in her stature is omitted in her
description by Isaacus Porphyrogenitus in his Characters of the Greeks and
Romans which were at Troy. In which, (published by Rutgersius in his Var. Lect.
lib. 5. cap. 20.) he calls Andromache, (...), long visag'd, but says nothing of
her stature; only he says, she was (...), slender; but so she might be, and yet
not tall. Besides, in his character of Polyxena, though he call her (...),
slender-faced, yet when he describes her to be tall, he calls her not (...),
but (...). As for the latter part of the Poet's expression of this dame, he
says, that behind she was shorter then a Fygmie, speaking so according to the
received fable (of which see more conveniently, Sat. 13. Illust. 10. on those
words, Pymaeus bellator) but implies that her true stature was more easily and
rightly discerned behind, then before: her hair before seeming a continuation
of stature, but behind rather a distinct superaddition.

58. -- Whom the admire As less obscene --. -- Obscoeno facies reverenda
minori. I choose to vary a little from the strict sense of these words, in
which he expresses the Eunuch-priest with his inferior attendants, Eunuchs
also (who therefore are here called, rauca cohors) beating their drums
according to their custom, their chief Priest attired with a Phrygian tiara,
which was a silken cap, much like a calot, but fastened behind with broad
ribbands coming down by the jaws, and so tied under the chin; and therefore he
says, -- Et phrygia u^stitur bucca tiara. See the fashion of it in picture,
Sat. 3. Illust. 8. see also Sat. 10. Illustrat. 38.

59. -- And then Give him their old clothes brown like vine-leaves when The
are dried --. Et xerampelinas veteres donaverit ipsi. In the farther
description of these Priests the Poet shows their cunning and superstition;
partly in this, that against September these artists would threaten silly
superstitious women, that they should be struck in that month by the Southern
winds (which usually then blow) with Agues and other diseases, unless they
purified themselves according to Their prescription, which was with brimstone,
eggs, and a lighted taper or torch made of the unctuous Pine Tree; as
Britannicus shows partly out of Ovid, fully out of Apuleius ( lib. 11. de Asin.
aur.) which lustration the Greeks called (...). See Coel. Rhodigin. and Sat. 2.
Illustrat. 30. Besides, the cunning Priests told such Women, that they must
give unto Them their old clothes; which were to be hang'd-up, till the
lustration were ended: persuading them then that all misfortunes went into the
coats, and that thereby they themselves were for that year safe. They hung-up
also at their Compitalia (which were feasts celebrated in crosseways unto the
Lares, who were viarum prasides, or, as some, viales Dii) woollen Images of men
and Women, that the Manes might be satisfied by Them, and spare the persons, as
Lubin in part observes. But the effect of this direction was, that the
purification being ended, the Priests should have the benefit of the garments;
which here the Poet calls xerampelinas, from (...), aridus, and (...), a vine,
they being of the color of a dried vine-leaf, that is, of a sad-russet; which,
as the Scholiast informs us, was the usual color of Matrons garments.
Britannicus adds, that in may be read Xylampelinas, from Xylon, cotton, and so
signify russet cotton garments; but also beyond the force of the word, which
can but signify a garment of cotton like a vine-leaf; which without (...) must
be understood according do propertic, and to green, not russet. Now to affirm
that green was the color of the Matrons garments is not only without proof,
but also probabilitic: and though I believe, he intended not this, yet it would
follow from his assertion; to omit one inconvenience more, which he himself
conceals not, namely that the first syllable of Xylampelinas is short, and so
not agreeable here to the nature of the verse. It may be here farther observed,
that some read vestes for veteres; but that is employed in this, and this is the
more expressive, as s^gnifying, that at once they conveniently parted with
their old clothes and their old faults, being thus quitted from the punishment
due unto them.

60. And from hot Meroe she will water fetch to sprinkle Isis Temple --. A Meroe
portabit ap^as, at spargat in Aede Isidis --. After a clear recial of diverse
severe follies, which superstitious da^es undertook on the direction of the
Priest, he mentions their more irksome voyages even to the utmost confines of
Egypt, to setch water to sprinkle in Isis Temple, which stood by the old
Sheepfold. Which things that they may be more sensibly laid together, it may
be observed that Tiber was on the West Side of Campus Martius, the place
wherein the Martial exercises were performed. Besides. there was the Temple of
Isis and the old sheepfold; a place so called, says Britannicus, because
T^^quins flocks were kept there; or as the Sch^liest says, because Romulus and
the old sheep-herds kept their flocks there. Yet Servius on Virgil (Eclog. 1.)
taking it for the septa, a place enclosed in the Campus Martius, in which the
Roman people stood and gave their voices, adds, -- sed quoniam hac septa
similia sunt ovilibus, duo hac invicem prose pou^^^^^: so that he thinks it to
be called a sheepfold, from the figure and similitude of it. But the chief
difficulty here is, that these superstitious dames should make such strange
voyages, as beyond the utmost parts of Egypt, if commanded by Io, worshipped
as a Deity by the name of Isis. Brit^^^icus therefore to help the matter, says
that he speaks here hyperbolically, the water of Nilus being said to be
sprinkled, quamvis simulata foret. Nam quae exhiberi non poterant simulabantur,
and habebantur pro veris; unde Virgil. Sparserat and latices simulatos fo^tis
Averni, Erodaus (in his Miscellan. lib. 4. cap. 2.) shows the same out of
Servius, and that they formed such living creatures, as were hard to be gotten,
in dough or wax. Fortunius Licetus, and Italian Critic, does likewise show the
same at large (in his Encyclopaedia ad Aram Nonarii Terrigena, cap. 9. page
100. etc.) partly from Gyraldus, in his De^^^ut Syntagus. 17. and partly from
his own observations; and more particularly this custom, or ordinary supply
of the water of Nilus thus offered to Isis. The generality of which custom,
to offer a feigned sacrifice for a true one, is by him made clear by sundry
instances, amongst others by that of the Cyzicens, who by custom were to offer
yearly a black Cow: but being once at the set time of the sacrifice besieged,
and so not able to provide one, they made one in dough, and with that performed
the sacrifice. Farther he relates (p. 102. out of Julius Pollux his
Onomasticon, cap. 1.) that about Baeotia they offered unto Hercules (...), not
sheep but apples (for the word signifies both) on this occasion. The custom
was to offer a ram, and the time of the solemnity of the sacrifice being
come, they that were to bring it were against their wills delayed, the river
Asotus having suddenly over-flow'd its banks, so that they could not pass.
Whereupon, the young men, that were at the place of the sacrifice, did by way
of sport perform it, by taking a ripe apple, undersetting it with four sticks
instead of feet, and adding a couple more instead of horns. Which fictitious
ram was then offered, and being not an unacceptable sacrifice, afterward
this Rite continued amongst them. Yet Brodaeus (in the forecited place) though
he touches upon another kind of exposition (as I showed) thinks that this water
was by Merchants brought in ships to Rome, and so sold to superstitious Women.
Which last we may probably admit for a truth, though we have no proof alleged
for it; but the first indeed is proved truth. Yet with leave of them all, I
think it not the truth here intended; nay, that it cannot be here intended:
first in respect of the express testimony of the Poet, who more especially
says, Ibit and aquas portabit; so that he plainly says, that she her self did
thus. And though he adds, si jusserit, If Io bids, yet the form of the speech
implies, that she did sometimes did so. Secondly and more pressingly, (as I
think) because of the absurd consequence, if this were not the sense: for what
great matter had it been worthy to be inveighed against by a Satyrist, if their
superstition had been so wise and Lazy, as either to offer a feigned sacrifice,
or a true one so easily provided? And how had this been suitable to have been
joined with the other cruel follies before recited, which their superstitious
fear imposed upon themselves? Which necessary considerations those learned
Critics might have used. Wherefore to speak clearly, I think, that, according
to Brodaus (if his opinion be proved true) these worshippers might sometimes
offer such water: secondly, that according to Servius, sometimes they did offer
simulata pro veris; and that sometimes they did, as our Poet here with
indignation wonders-at, fetch it themselves from the confines of Egypt; even
from Meroe in Aethiopia, such Aegypto (as the Geographers call it) an Island in
Nilus (now called Gueguere) and in which was a City of the same name (Meroe);
the most Northern part of which Island being about 16. degrees of
North-latitude, well might the Poet say, that the waters of it were hot.

61. That acts Anubis, etc. Qui -- plangentis populi currit derisor Anubis.
Anubis was the Son of Osyris and Isis: all which were by the Egyptians, whom
they taught such useful knowledge, worshipped as Deities; Osyris (under the
name of Apis and Serapis) in the form of an One with some special marks; but by
custom drowning the beast after a certain number of years, in a sacred
fountain (as the fable has it) they went howling about, till they found
another, crying-out in their joy as mad as their sorrow, (...), to which the
Poet alludes, Sat. 8. in those words, Exclamare libet populus quod clamat Osyri
Invento --. Now at these fooleries the Priest did carry about the Image of
Anubis, whom they worshipped in the form of a Dog, because as Diodorus Siculus
says, he gave the Dog for his Arms: which Anubis, (as the Poet adds) or the
Priest that carried him, did but jeer at the people, which went about with him.
So that I take derisor Anubis, not as Autumnus does, saying derisor Antistes,
quia irrider deum, so making Anubis the genitive case; as if the Priest did
jeer at the God; but by an Apposition I take derisor Anubis for the same
person. And this is clear from the other words, populi plangentis; so that the
order is, Anubis derisor populi plangentis. Where likewise I cannot approve
Britannicus expounding populi plangentis, thus, id est, reliquorum sacerdotum,
as if the chief Priest floured at the inferior priests; it being likely that
they understood the profitable imposture, as well as himself. But the most
easy sense, as I conceive it, is that the Priest, which carried the god
(amongst the other shaved Priests in linnen-dress) jeered at the people. And
here I may mention Pignorius his conceit, who (in his Mensae Isiacae exposit.)
Thinks that it were far more happy, if the old Copies had it so, to read
dersor, instead of derisor; for so in another place he is called Latrator
Anubis, alluding to the form in which he was worshipped. Which for a fancy
(being without copy) seems very pretty; though if admitted without the
courtesy of a figure, and that he were indeed, popul^ derosor, the people
might well howl, but rather for themselves, then for Osyris. But to check this
fancy in earnest, Anubis was not represented as a dog for any quality of
biting the people, but from his supposed vigilance; more particularly in
guarding the bodies of Osyris and Isis. Retaining then the copies, which have
derisor, amongst the causes of such derision, that which follows, is by some
reckoned for one; that the Priests persuaded these dames, they had need of a
pardon, if during the feast of Isis, which lasted nine days (as Britannicus
notes out of Propertius) they abstained not even from the Marriage-Right.

62. When the injured bed. Violato Cadarco. Some copies have Caduceo, and so
understand it of Mercury, the same with Anubis and here supposed to be
offended; thus (with others) Isacius Pontanus on Macrobius his Saturn. lib. 1.
cap. 20. upon this passage of Juvenal. Yet this reading is against the
generality of Copies, and the nature of the word Caduceus, the first syllable
whereof is long; and so not suitable in this place, as Britannicus heretofore
observed. Besides, the word cadurcus is not only in this place used by Juvenal,
but also in the next Satyr, in that verse, Institor hibernae tegetis niveique
cadurci; and (to omit some unclean interpretations) signifies a tent, and as
some have it, a bedsteed, as others the covering, in effect the bed, but
figuratively the persons, that are said profane it, and which therefore feared
punishment; and therefore does most aptly in this sense follow the precedent
verse. The word it self, cadurcus, is thought to come from Cadurci, a people in
France, where Cahors now is, and where anciently they made the finest and
whitest bed-ticks.

63. Gently the silver-Sernent seems to nod. Et movisse caput visa est argentea
serpens. In the Temple of Isis there was placed a silver-Serpent, as Pignorius
(in his Mensae Isiacae Expos. fol. 14.) and others observe. Concerning which
point of Egyptian Theology, Macrohius ( Saturn. lib. 1. cap. 20.) says, that
in the Temple of Serapis there was an Image with three heads, the middlemost
like a Lion, the right side head like a fawning dog, and the left-side head
like a ravenous Wolf, about all which a Serpent wrapped himself, bringing his
head under the right hand of the god. By which three heads, says he, Time was
signified; by the Middlemost like a Lion Time Present, as being full of vigor
and business; by the left-side head, the devouring wolf, Time Past, in which
the remembrance of things is swallow'd-up; by the right-side head like a
fawning Dog Time to come, which flatters us with Hope. To which pleasing
exposition unhappily he adds nothing concerning the Serpent, though mentioned
by himself; only in general he says, Tempora autem cui nisi proprio
famularentur anctori? Which may be appliable to the Serpent, which by his
incompassing of all times, may signify Eternity, compared with which, Time is
but as a short parenthesis in a long line. Or we may not unfitly understand
Providence by it, which with a quick and strong eye beholds all times, past,
present and to come; which is but suitable to the proverbial excellency of the
Serpent's sight; (...)(the Serpents eye) being a received expression of a Man
of clear understanding. Lastly the Serpent's Laying of his head under the right
hand of the god may not unfitly implie the sublimitie and truth of its guide.
Concerning movisse caput, some expound it, as if it employed the Anger of the
god, as that he shook his head at their offenses, in a sense not unlike that in
the second Satyr, where it is said to Mars, Nec galeam quassas? But methinks
there needs no such fierceness here in the word movisse; only it shows the
power in the success of the Priest: who for offenses, though great, according
to their belief, did notwithstanding procure the deity to give a sign of
reconciliation. So that the brief contexture is, Ille petit veniam, Et movisse
caput visa est serpens; He asks pardon, and the deity signifies it granted. The
Cause of which success he presses farther in the verses following, saying
Illius lachrymae meditataque murmura prastant, etc. that the Priests tears with
the goose and cake, bribe Osyris (as the Poet flouts) ut veniam culpae non
abnuat, to nod a pardon; which does in part expound and confirm the exposition
of movisse caput.

64. -- Leaving elsewhere Her hay and basket, etc. -- Cophino foenoque relicto,
Arcanam Judaea tremens mendicat in aurem. The Scholiast says here, speaking of
their cophini, or baskets, His pulmentaria sua and calidam aquam die Sabbati
servare consuerunt: and Britannicus adds, Judaei ergo ut mendici and pauperes
cophinum gestabant, quo stipem reliquaque Corrogata exciperent, eodem modo and
foenum, ubi cubitarent. But about Cophinus and foenum, see at large, Sat. 3.
Illustrat. 3. The Poet here farther implies, that the needly Jews, who had poor
and hired habitations in groves and such solitary places, repaired to the City;
but leaving their ensigns, we may say, their hay and basket, at home, that they
might not be known (as seems most probable) being expelled Rome by Domitian,
begged not as others publicly, but softly and in the ear of such Women, as
they suspected to be (superstitiously) devout, and if opportunity served them,
instilled their religion into them. For many Roman Women and Men did secretly
embrace the Jewish religion, by which means the Jews began to grow rich: yet
such gifts were secret for fear of punishment; the Jews being generally hated
by the Romans, as Parrhasius notes, Epist. 18.

65. Is in some Grove Chief. Priest --. -- Magna Sacerdos Arboris --. For this
Heathenish Custom the Jews are often taxed by the Prophets, as some of the
Manuscripts note in the Margin; and the Poet more particularly here intends the
Grove of Oaks by Dodona in Chaonia, which was consecrated to Jupiter, and in
which he had a Temple. That arbor may signify nemus, see Sat. 1. Illustrat.
52. And thus in a jeer the Poet calls such a Woman, though a Jew, the Priest of
Jupiter, then adding, Implet and illa manum, that the superstitious Dame gives
somewhat to the She- Jew also, though of a different Religion. For, with some,
to interpret, and illa of the Jewesse, seems not so agreeable to the word
Parcius, which rather expresses the quality of a distributer, then of a
receiver. So that the parts of the sentence, methinks, thus answer one the
other; Judaea mendicat --. Et illa, Romana, implet manum; the Jewesse begs, and
the Roman Dame gives, though sparingly.

66. His crimes then on another thrust. Facies quod deferat ipse, He speaks
here historically, intending one Egnatius, a Philosopher (as the Scholiast
tells us) who first persuaded the daughter of one Bareas Silanus to the
practice of Magic, and then accused her for it unto Nero; by whose command
both the Father and the Daughter were put to Death. He touched upon this
argument before, Sat. 3. in that verse, Stoicus occidit Baream --.

67. By whose kind Scheme worth all price, a high-stiled Citizen fell --. Cujus
amicitia conducendaque tabella magnus civis obit -- Here also a story is
intimated (and to be briefly touched) of one Seleucus a famous Astrologer, by
whose instigation and prediction Otho (with whom he was intimate) failing to be
adopted by Galba ( Piso being preferred) caused Galba to be killed. The time of
which Fact sooner intended was by the special appointment of this man deferred:
In which expression there is nothing of any difficulty, but conducenda tabella,
which briefly, was the Table or Scheme of the Heavens, which the Astrologer
drew by his art, and which the Poet ironically says, was well worth the hiring
or procuring; implying rather that it was to be condemned; and that the
pernicious fellow had been often banished. Where by the way we may observe,
that Juvenal calls Galba, magnus Civis; dealing more respectfully with him,
then the soldier did, who, finding his dead body, cut off the head, which
being bald, and so not yielding the advantage of hair to carry it by, thrust
his thumb into the mouth of it, and so contemptuously carried it to Otho; as
Sueton in his Galba, cap. 20.

68. When their Arms sound with chains. -- Sonuit si dextera ferro Laevaque
--. Such dangerous and cunning men (as they call them) which foretold things in
a time of War, they carried as Prisoners with them in the Camp, in expectation
of the event: in which condition they had a Soldier to keep them, and for more
furety they were tied together with a chain of some length for convenience; the
one end whereof was fast'ned to the Soldiers left arm, the other to the
Prisoners right arm. But if such a Prisoner were thought to be over-dangerous,
then (as Seneca shows, de Tranquillitate, lib. 1. cap. 10.) he was double
guarded and chained; as we read of St. Paul, Act. 12. who slept between two
Soldiers, bound with two chains. The Prisoner chained was usually called,
Custodia; So Seneca speaks, Epist. 5. So Opera is taken for operarius. See
Lipsius on Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. The Poet then says, that such Artists were of
no account, whiles they were esteemed worthy of pardon, by being called back
from Banishment, or whiles they were but condemned into Banishment (into the
Cyclades) as if now one should say, that a cunning man has no skill, till he is
ready to be hanged. But such men of Art, says the Poet to his friend Vrsidius,
thy Tanaquil [jeeringly] that is, thy modest and chaste Wife, such a one as
Tanaquil the Wife of Tarquin the proud was, does consult with concerning thy
death. So Britannicus; and indeed her honesty and housewisery are much praised
by the Ancient. Yet the Scholiast says, that she was very cunning in the
Astrological Art, and that she foretold her Husband, that he should be King; as
Livy relates, Decad. 1. lib. 1. But this difference I think may be easily
composed, by observing that the Poet picks out such a comparison for Vrsidius
his Wife, that should be artificially applyable both for the truth and the
jeer, for her skill in Houswifery and the Stars.

69. With what Star, etc. Que lata Venus se proserat astro. If Venus were in
Conjunction with the Moon at the birth of a Child, they held that the Child
should be singularly beloved; as Tully notes, lib. 1. de Divinatione.

70. When she is carried but a Mile, etc. Ad primum lapidem vectari cum pla^et,
etc. C. Gracchus (as Plutarch says in his life) did in the public ways from
Rome, at every miles end erect a pillar of Stone for the direction of
Travelers, and likewise many other on the sides of the way at less distance,
serving for steps for the help of Horsemen; the use of stirrops being then
unknown, as Salmuth notes on Pancirollus, lib. 2. Tit. 16. page 276. The Poet
here points out the singular superstition of these Dames: who if they went but
to take the air, or for so triffing a cause, consulted with some great Artist,
such as was Thrasyllus in the time of Tiberius; or as Petosyris a famous
Egyptian Astrologer mentioned by Pliny, lib. 7. and so if but her eye did
itch, she would not use the help of Physic, without the view of the Scheme of
her Nativity.

71. She Will at the Race-bounds stand, etc. Spatium lustrabit utrinque Metarum,
etc. It will be useful here to express diverse obscurities concerning the Circus
Maximus, which is in this place intended, there being many others. It was then
a large plat of ground, about three furlongs in length, and one in breadth,
according to Pliny, lib. 36. capable of many thousands of persons; some mention
1500000, some 2600000, who might there behold Races performed with Horses and
Chariots, as also other stately Shows. The whole Plot of ground being in a
valley, and never a River between the Palatine and Aventine Mounts, was
encompassed with high buildings, and on the two larger sides, and on one of the
less, was an Euripus, a Moar or Trench for the receipt of water, ten foot deep,
and as many in breadth, for the occasional presenting of a Naumachia, or
Sea Fight, the protectress of which water was Magna Matter, (that is, Cybele) as
Tertullian says, De Spectaculis, which Euripus in the ordinary descriptions of
the Circus being not mentioned, may from Marlian's accurate description be thus
presented. * Juven. Sat. VI. Ill^st. 53.
plan of the Circus Maximus In the high buildings the people sat to view the
shows: and through them, as Pancirollus shows, there were twelve Gates. Under
these buildings were Cells, where Harlots sound employments. One eminent part
of which structures was called Phal^, a phalando, says Festus; the word in the
Hetrurian tongue signifying Heaven. These, says Nonius, were wooden Towers for
the Spectators, and from their height called Phalae: their form was Oval
(whence they were called (...)) in honor of Castor and Pollux, as Parrhasius
notes, Epist. 28. They were erected not only for the Spectators, but also for
the better direction of the Chariotiers in making their turn about the Meta,
with least error; to prevent also any mistake (as Lubin notes) in peragendis
Missilibus, in distributing or scattering of guists, which by way of bounty and
honor the Consuls, and afterward the Emperors bestowed upon the people; and
likewise to know how often one had performed the course about the Circus, by
compassing the Meta. Here were also stately pillars, upon which were expressed
Dolphins in statue: whence they were usually called the Dolphins pillars,
erected for ornament by Agrippa. Some finding in the twelfth region of the City
mention of Signum Delphini, note it on this place: but I think it not here
appliable; because the Circus Maximus, where these are said to have been
erected, was in the eleventh Region. Britannicus places those Dolphins pillars
in Circo Flaminii, where indeed were the warry Deities, as Neptane, Thetis, and
the Nereides placed on Dolphins in statue: but Circus Flaminii was in the ninth
Region; these erected by Agrippa being in the Circus Maximus, and so in the
eleventh Region, and were placed here in honor of Neptune, who according to
some had here an Altar. Here were also the Carceres (or Barriers) a place of
stately arched work, whence they begun the course, called so, as Varro says, (
de ling. Lat. hib. 4.) a currendo; because the horses were stayed there, till
the Magistrate gave the sign of leave to run: which at the first was by the
voice of a Crier, as Dempster notes on Rosinus ( l. 5. e. 5.) but afterward by
the sound of a Trumpet; as the Scholiast observes. The Carceres are by the
Greeks called (...), (...) and (...); the Meta (mark) or place whither they did
run, the end of the course, they called (...), (...) and (...). The custom was
to run seven Courses, but reduced by Domitian to five, fetching a compass
about the Meta. Near the Circus, says Dionysius Halicarnasseus, was an Altar
under ground, dedicated to Consus, the God of Counsel, whom some make the same
with Neptune: but Tertullian (de Spectaculis) does with a little difference
place this Altar within the Circus (under ground) at the Meta, saying, Consus
apud metas sub terra delitescit. About the Meta was carried at shows the Pompa
Circensis, which was the Images of their Gods, and of Noble persons. The Circus
was in some respect intended as a representation of Heaven; the 12 Gates being
conveniently answerable to the twelve Signs of the Zodiac; a huge Obelisk
rising in the middle of the Circus, in honor of the Sun; and, toward the
ends, fix radii, as some term them, intimating the number of the other Planets.
Now to the Circus, as to places of such concourse, there did resort
Astrologers, Cheaters, Fortune Tellers, and such fellows; which there before
the Phala and the Dolphins pillars, as the Poet says, did practice their Arts.
There likewise the People drew their lots; the manner being for the Mountcbanks
to put into some vessel, or between his hands closed, either writings, or
stones, or straws; and to let the people draw them thence. Britannicus
instances in one way more, out of Plautus: which was to cast wooden lots into a
Pitcher filled with water, and to account him to win, whose lot sunk to the
bottom. The Fortune Tellers likewise undertook to satisfy all demands of the
people: as whether such a petty Dame (for in such a one the Poet ironically
instances) should be divorced from her present Husband, an Inne-keeper, and
marry a cloak seller (properly one that sold Soldiers cloaks) whom she more
affected. The Sagum was the cloak or garment, which occasionally the Soldiers
wore upon their armor. Moreover, when such couzeners told the poorer sort of
superstitious Women their fortune, they used to crave of them (as the Poet
speaks) crebrum poppysma; which needs not be interpreted, as by some it is, in
an unclean sense (by the abuse of the women) the word being formed only from
the sound of the action, which it signified, namely a hollow clap with the
hand. For so it expressed the noise or clap, which at Baths the Aliptes (he
that anointed them that were bathed) made with the palm of the hand, wherewith
he clapped the shoulder or other part of the person, whom he anointed. Thus
likewise I think it here to signify, that when the Fortune Tellers was to look
upon the Woman's brow or hand, he would often view them; and craving a review of
the hand, under a pretense of giving a surer judgment, wantonly please to clap
it with his hand. No worse a construction needs be made of it: and so
Britannicus expounds (...), by manu pertractare, yet not beyond the wantonness
mentioned. The Poet then says, that the wealthy Dame has her special Artist,
who comes to her house; but the poor House-wife is fain to go to the Circus to
a poor knave: where, says he, Spatium lustrabit utrinque Metarum, which words
the Scholiast understands of such circulatores, as chose two places, as he
says, which they did lustrare, that is, circuire, compass about, and so
purisie, casting lots there, and thence telling the people their fortune. But
this seeming doubtful; it may more easily be understood, not of a cheater, but
of a woman; since he says in a continued speech (as of the same person) si
mediocris erit (if she be a mean Dame) spatium lustrabit utrinque Metarum --.
Wherefore I think lustrare does here signify to view, as it does Sat. 2. in
that passage, Lustravitque fuga mediam gladiator arenam; he ran about the
Amphitheater (to save his life) he took a reasonable view of it. Thus may it
likewise here signify, that a poor Dame gads about the circus, viewing it from
the one end to the other, and at the Meta, or radii, which were toward the
ends (though strictly that was termed Meta, which was farthest from the
barriers) she deals with Astrologers. For that such persons haunted the Circus,
Hieronymus Columna notes on that of Ennius (in his Fragments, page 350.) Non de
Circo Astrologos; Pignorius also on the same words, in his Symbol. Epist. 31.
According to which sense, the Poet adds, Plebeium in Circo positum est, and in
Aggere fatum; the Rout must be content to have their fortunes told them, in the
Circus, and at the Agger, or Mount. In which public places, says the Poet, she
asks her fortune, Quae nudis longum oftendit cervicibus aurum, as the common
Copies have it, expounding it by such a one, as being poor, yet impudent and
proud, dresses her self beyond her ability with jewels, though borrowed, or
gotten by some worse practice, as by adultory; then with as shameless vanity,
wears them upon her naked neck and shoulders. But some, as the learned
Salmasius (in his Plinian Exercitations) more happily reads, Quae nullis
longum, etc. meaning a poor one, that wears no jewels about her neck, (as
indeed having none) In which passage to take longum aurum, as some do, for a
chain of gold, seems but an odd expression; and may more reasonably imply some
broach, or the like ornament. But if we shall go by guess, I would read, Quae
nullum oftendit longis cervicibus aurum; and so imply, that though she had a
long and slender neck, which gave advantage to the displaying of rich dress,
yet she had nothing to adorn it with; And this helps the manner of the
expression. For, that he means here some poor Dame, it appears from the
following words, Consulit ante Phalas; which was the place at the Circus for
such poor ones. And here I choose to expound Consulit, by she Asks advice,
rather then by she Gives advice, [though Lubin takes it otherwise] because the
Poet does not here make the Fortune Tellers to be the Women, but says, that
they were haunted by the women. Besides, whereas Lubin expounds Quae nudis
longum, etc. by meretrix, I think, he mistakes; the Poet seeming to speak not
of Harlots [if we take the word for single persons, though unchast] but of
Dames or Wives [though peradventure Adulteresses] because straight-ways he
adds, Hae tamen and partus subeunt discrimen: showing plainly, that though he
reprehends them for superstition and pride, yet he acknowledges, that they did
usually with more honesty then the rich ones, endure the pains of Childbirth,
without seeking any lewd means to hinder it. Which degree of commendations is
not appliable to common Harlots, whose continual excess does usually without
drenches disable, and so disappoint nature of the trouble of Childbirth: but
the wealthy ones (as our Poet says) wanted not their Shee-Druggist; arts
hujus: -- Quae steriles facit [her skill that makes barren] atque homines in
vemre necando^ conducit -- [and undertakes, for a reward, so grand a villany]
speaking in the like manner here, at in that passage of Satyr 3. Conducunt
foricas --; or if they used not execrable prevention, the births they had, were
like their Servants, of an ominous Visage, Aethiopians or Black-Moors; whom
they abhorred, as ill luck, to see in a morning. One thing more here mentioned
by the Poet concerning the Circus, as some would have it, is the Agger on
Mount, concerning which Lubin uses these words, -- Quo se Plebeiae ad
divinatores suos se conferunt, farther adding, Qui erat ad Circum, ubi
prostabant meretrices, quae responsa dabant. The parts of which exposition are
inconsistent; for whereas he says, that this Mount was at the place in the
Circus, where the meaner sort consulted with Diviners, it should follow that it
was at the Phalae; for there were the Diviners, as the Poet himself says, ante
Phalas, and so in the public view: but Lubin adds, Vbi prostabant meretrices;
which was (as it is generally acknowledged) under ground (in Vaults). Besides,
what he adds of the meretrices, saying, quae responsa dabant, it is without
warrant of the Poet: who makes not the Harlots, but the Astrologers to give the
Answers. But Britannicus understands here by Agger, Agger Tarquinii, of which
see Sat. 5. Illust. 17. and so implies that thither also resorted
Fortune Tellers and other base people: which exposition seems agreeable to
Juvenal's expression, In Circa -- and in aggere, as if he spoke of distinct
places; though this resort was chiefly at the Circus; which he therefore
prosecutes in the words following, Consulit ante Phalas. A description of Agger
Tarquinii, see in Juvenal, Sat. 5. Illust. 17. according to Marlian; and behold
here the forth of the Circus, both outside and inside, as it is expressed by
Gabriel Simeoni a Florentine, in his Illustratione de gli Epitaffi Antichi, p.
148. as also in Claude Guichard de Funerailles ( lib. 1. cap. 14. p. 199. and
200.) in which much of the former description may be seen presented. * the
Outside
Juv. Sat. VI. Illust. 71. b.
depiction of the exterior of a circus The Inside
depiction of the interior of a circus See also other observations concerning
the Circus, upon farther occasion, Sat. 11. Illust. 16.

72. Whose Art does public lightnings expiate. Qui publica fulgura condit.
Amongst the Romans, if any place or person were struck with Lightning, they
were presently expiated by a Priest in this manner; If a place were struck, the
Priest was said, dispersos ignes in unum colligere and condere: which was, as
may be conjectured, to gather what was scorched by the lightning, and with a
low voice praying, to bury it in the Earth. If a Man were struck, omitting the
custom of burning the body, he was buried in the same place: then was the
place mounded in, an Altar also was erected in it, and expiatory sacrifices
offered by a Priest. Yet some persons so struck were not buried, but only
covered with a White garment, both because they might be gazed at by the People
(yet at distance, none being to come within the bounds but the Priest) and
because they believed, that such bodies did not putrify; and as foolishly
thought such persons to be honored by Jupiter. And these fulgura or
Lightnings, they did, according to the Masters in that Discipline, distinguish
into Public and Private: which division, I suppose, was taken from the
things which were struck; some Places and Persons being Public, as Temple^,
Magistrates, and the like; other Private. Concerning the parts of which
distinction they had different rules; holding that private lightnings did
fore-bode things but for ten years to come, except they happened on one's
Birthday or Marriage-day; but public lightnings for 30 years, and no more,
unless they fell at the rendering up of a Town. See for the sundry parcels of
these Antiquities, Sen. Not. Quaest. lib. 2. cap. 48. etc. Plin. lib. 2. cap
54. Plutarch. Sympos. Probl. 2. lib. 4. Artemidorus, lib. 2. cap. 8.
Britannicus also on this place; Alexand. ab Alexandro, Genesis Die. lib. 5. cap.
13. at large, with Tiraquel; and Theodorus Marcilius on that of Persius,
triste bidental; Sat. 2. and what I have noted there. Illust. 2.

73. -- And at the Bastard's pooles, vain prayers. -- Votaque saepe Adspurios
(al. spurcos) decepta lacus. The Poet here vehemently flours at the Great ones
in his times; showing that their true parentage was but uncertain; it being
very likely, that even the best of them were but of unknown parents. This he
endeavors to make probable from the inhuman custom, which they had in Rome:
it being an usual practice of lend Women, as also of Parents if poor, or if
their Children were born deformed, to carry them secretly (by night) to Lakes
or pooles, (of which there was a very great number in the City, as may be seen
in the description of the several regions of it) and there by the banks
inhumanly leave the Infants. This was called the Exposing of Infants: after
which manner Romulus and Remus are said to have been exposed by the banks of
Tiber, and thus in part, if we look upon the action, not the cause, Moses in
the sacred story. Which custom was so frequent amongst the Romans, though it
were barbarous, that exponere in the Civil Law is taken for necare. See
Dempster on Rosinus, lib. 1. cap. 1. Yet it was sometimes forbidden by a Law,
though such Children so exposed were sometimes relieved by mercy or subtilty:
whiles some lewd and wealthy dames to escape by wicked means the pains of
Childbirth and notwithstanding preserve their Husbands affections, would
pretend a birth, and present false ones unto them, as their own, being indeed
but unknown births, and sometimes bastards exposed at such Lakes. Which babes
afterward, according to the Degree of their supposed parents, the Great ones
that brought them up, enjoyed the names and estates of great families, such as
the Sc^^ti and the like: and so sometimes were preferred to the
High Priesthood, or to be Mars his Priests, who were always of the Nobility.
The Poet then says, that the desires and prayers of Husbands for Issue, are
often made vain and mocked ad spurios, or as some without any great difference,
ad spurcos lacus, by occasion of the Counterfeits at the filthy Lakes. Upon
which words says Britannicus ingenuously, Locum esse oftendit poeta in urbe,
ubi pueri incertis nati parentibus exponerentur. Vbi autem fuerint, and quare
spurci lacus appellarentur, nusquam meminimus nos legisse. Parrhasius in his
28. Epist. says, In urbe lacus erant ad excipiendas undique sordes: but Lubin
more particularly, though he urges no authority for it, says that it was the
Velabrian Lake; and after him Autumnus likewise, adding, that it was nere the
Aventine Mount; which particular the description of Rome easily shows. This
interpretation, I grant, may be a part of truth, though I think it may be more
probably expounded, if more generally, the Poet speaking in the plural number,
and it seeming more consonant to the sense intended. For it cannot be conceived
without inconvenience, and the danger of the night, (as is employed in the third
Satyr) that all such infants should be carried to one place, sometimes
perchance from the most remore part of the City: but that rather they made use
of any such ab^^es; though peradventure (yet without proof) we may admit the
Velabrian to have been most haunted.

74. Descend to Heaven. -- Descendere jussit In coelum --. Here is set forth
the tyranny and wicked practices of wives over their Husbands by the example
of Caesomia the wife of Caligula, Nero's uncle ( Agrippina Nero's Mother being
Sister to Caligula) whom she drenched with the Love-cup made of the Hippomanes,
a tender piece of flesh taken from the brow of a young foal, which is said to
have driven him even to a madness of Love; like the outrageous love of Jupiter
to Juno, effected by the caestus, or girdle of Venus, as it is in Homer. Iliad.
18. Besides, Caesonia by Caligula's madness did far more mischief in the
destruction of many, then Agrippina by poisning Claudius, who perished alone;
or as the Poet ironically says, whose shaking head descended to Heaven; though
some misapplie this infirmity and story to Caligula, who is not here intended
in the latter part of this speech, which concerns Agrippina. But Hieronymus
Groslotius on this passage (in an Epistle to Jacobus Lectius, the 88th. of the
Philological Epistles published by Goldastus) though he confesses, that all
Manuscripts and printed Copies have descendere, yet avouches that it should be
escendere (a word anciently used for ascendere) and laughs at other
interpreters as absurd; saying that the Libra^ius (or transcriber of the Copy)
was afraid to write escendere, for the insolency of the word; and likewise that
being ignorant of the Caesura, thought that the verse would have been false,
had it been -- tremulumque caput escendere jussit. But these exceptions are but
weak; for though we grant the word escendere to be ancient, as finding it (to
omit other proofs) in the ancient Critic Agellius (according to Stephanus his
edition of him) citing it, lib. 2. cap. 7. out of an Oration (but now not
extant) of Tully (contra concionem Q. Metelli) Escendi in conci^nem, concursus
est populi factus: yet to argue, that because it may be so, therefore it must
be so, is no right Logic: and to oppose all Manuscripts, is rather to make,
then expound books. Likewise, to suppose the Librarius to be afraid to write
the word escendere, is no more just an exception here, then to suppose it in
the transcription of other books, wherein the word is still remaining; seeing
that, by the like reason (the fear of the transcriber) it should have been
left-out of all books, and so there should be no testimony left of such a
word. Again, to imagine the Librarius ignorant of a caesura, were to suppose
others as ignorant of it in other places; and so, where possibly they might be
avoided, we should have no example of them. Besides, why should the Poet use
the word escendere, rather in this place, then in Sat. 1. v. 82. where speaking
of Deucalion, he says, Navigio montem ascendit? so that a laughter at others
interpretations, for no better reason, may deserve a laughter. But lastly and
chiefly his reading, Escendere in caelum, were without all Satirical wit:
whereas descendere in caelum, is suitable not only to the like expressions in
Juvenal, as to that in Sat. 2. Socraticos cinaedos, and that in Statius his
Sylv. Nondum stelligerum senior demissus in axem: but also to the supposed
fable of Claudius; before Juvenal's time. For Seneca in his merriment of the
death of Claudius, s^igns him first to ascend to Heaven, and afterward to be
thrust down to hell: both which are wittily included in our Poet's expression.
And here it will not be unpleasant to say somewhat about Love-cups (philtra)
which were frequently used by the Thessalians, amongst which the Hippomanes was
an especial one. It is described (to omit some unclean opinions) to have been a
piece of flesh, or, as some, a little skin like a cap, taken from the forehead
of a colt new foal'd ( Juvenal afterward calls it partus equae) said to be of
strange power in this kind. But to say that this or any other can procure Love,
is a mere vanity. The old saying was plain and true, (...), Love is begotten by
Sight; neither is affection won by Physic. True it is that potions may inflame
the body, and so consequently the mind, to outrageous Lusts, but cannot
Determine the Affections to a particular person; though it may be granted, that
the person, which would be Loved, may by the continual importunity of wanton
conversation accidentally so determine them; when the person wrought-upon is
violently and sometimes madly inflamed. Which may be seen in the story of
Caesonia and Caligula, who was sometimes so mad in Love with her (who was
luxuriae ac lasciviae perditae) that as Sueton says (in his Calig. cap. 25.) he
would sometimes show her to his Soldiers dressed like a Soldier, -- amicis
v^r e etiam nudam; like the Lydian wittol, King Candaules. And that this is the
judgment of the wisest Physicians, I refer the reader to the testimony only of
Sennertus; who in his Institut. Medicin. ( lib. 2. part. 3. Sect. 2. cap. 4.)
judiciously adds, that the devil is sometimes farther permitted in such lewd
persons to immix himself in such actions, by corrupting their impure
imaginations and in firing their desires. And here likewise we may take notice
of one inference, which the Poet uses in those words, Tanti partus equae!
Quanti una verefica constat? For that is the best pointing of them, and yields
the best sense (to avoid farther dispute) implying, that if one drench could do
so much harm; how much more could a Sorceress do, which both unhappily Taught
This and had store of as bad.

75. Thy Guid's trembling lip. -- Timidus praegustet pocula papas. Eunuchus
Paedogogus. Isidor. Papas, paedagogus qui sequitur students; as Pignorius, de
Servis, p. 188. observes. Sometimes it is taken for a Father, as Cerda shows,
Adversar. cap. 146. number. 7. which is indeed the true Signification of it, as he
likewise shows, cap. 72. number. 5. where he adds, that it was at first a name
given to all Clergymen; afterward to Bishops only, and at last only to the
Pope, in the time of Gregory the 7th. who forbad any other to be called by that
name. Amongst the Bythinians it was the surname of Jupiter, who was called
Jupiter Papas, that is, pater. The word is from the Hebrew, (...); and thence
came the word Abbas, an Abbat; a title sometime given to Hugh Capet afterward
King of France: nay the Nobles of France (as Paradinus testifies of his own
view, in his Anual. Burgund. lib. 2. sub anno. 1103.) are in many ancient
writings frequently called, Dux and Abbas, Comes and Abbas; either from the
Honorable sense of the word, or peradventure because many of them were
maintained with the revenues of Abbeys. But some would here understand by
timidus Papas, the Child; so that he should taste of it, but with fear and
wariness. But this seems not so well to agree with the word praegustet: which
being here applied to Papas, cannot yield any just sense, unless papas be taken
for the guide, who should taste first. But Britannicus, though he rightly
expounds the word Pappas (as he reads it) for the Overseer; yet he adds, that
it may be taken also for the meat, which the child shall eat: and so thinks,
that pocula pappas may signify his drink and meat. But if he would here take
it for pappe, the food of babes, (as by his proof from those words of Persius,
pappare minutum, he implies) he must grant, that the Poet writes these
monitions to babes incapable of them. For of such tender young ones Persius
speaks, whiles he flouts at one of riper age, -- pappare minutum poscis, and
iratus mammae lallare recuso^? and so Britannicus himself expounds that place
of Persius, saying -- ut fit papare minutum, id est, cibum minutum and
confractum, qualem pueri poscunt. Besides, what he there adds, makes it more
forcible against himself, whiles he says, Nec illis assentio, qui minutal hoc
loco pro minutum legunt. Nam is cibus infantibus haudquaquam convenit; and the
reason was good, because such meat required chewing. Wherefore upon
examination, such uncertainty and license of Interpretation is not to be
admitted.

76. -- But Pontia cries Guilty --. -- Sed pontia clamat Feci --. Some
understand this of Pontia the daughter of Publius Petronius and wife (as they
say) of Vectius Bolanus mentioned by Tacitus in the life of Agricola: which
Pontia is said, for the love of an adulterer, to have poisned two Sons, which
she had by Bolanus, and to have been punished for it. See Statius in his Sylv.
lib. 5. in his Protrepticon ad Crispinum. Parrhasius, Epist. 8. seems to make
it but an intent in her; and Lubin says -- suos duos filios veneno absumere
voluisse confitetur, yet straight he adds, Quae itidem, quod defuncto marito
filios duos, ut adultero nuberes and obsequeretur, veneno Necarit, and
convicta, cum largis se epulls onerasset, sumpto veneno and venis incisis
saltans expiravit; he speaks in part out of the Old Scholiast. Yet afterward
upon the words, facinus peregi, he says, ad Voluntatem refer; which is,
methinks, a strange expression of peregi. Besides, the place of the Scholiast
is not well recited by him; it being not so likely, that she did both, namely
drink poison and cut her veins. Pithaeus here out of Valla reads it thus, --
Cum largis se epulis onerasset, and vino (the ordinary copies of the Scholiast
have and veneno, yet not as Lubin, sumpto veneno, which is farther from being
mended) venis incifis saltans, quo maxim studio oblectabatur, extincta est.
But Pithaeus, in his Notes on the Scholiast, recites this most apposite
Inscription on an ancient Roman stone, PONTIA TITI PONTII FILIA HIC SITA SUM
QUAE DUOBUS NATIS A ME VENENO CONSUMPTIS AVARITIAE OPUS MISERAE. MORTEM. MIHI
CONSCIVI. TU QUISQUIS ES QUI HAC TRANSIS, SI PIUS ES, QUAESO A ME OCULOS AVERTE.

This instance of Pontia the daughter of Titus Pontius, not of Publius
Petronius, Pithaeus prefers for the illustration of this place; and surely it
is the more certain story, and singularly here appliable. Yet because he gives
no reason of his choice, and that the other example has been generally
received, as the story here intended, and that I also notwithstanding prefer
his instance, I think it necessary to show mine own reason, for the
confirmation of his and mine own choice. The Poet then speaking of Pontia
aggravates her crime beyond those of Medea and Progne; theirs being facts of
revengeful passions, but not of coveteousness; for so the Poet expresses it, --
Sed non propter nummos. According to which diversity of cause, if we examine
this instance, we shall find, that Pontia (the Daughter of Petronius and wife
of Bolanus) mentioned by the Scholiast, offended as he says, ut adultero
nuberet, and so in a Lustful passion: but the offense of this Pontia (the
daughter of Pontius) in the Inscription, is termed Avaritiae opus; and
therefore I judge this to be the Person here intended, and farther described by
the Poet (as one offending rather in the sobriety of coveteousness, then in the
rage of Lust) whiles afterward he says of her, -- quae computat and Scelus
ingens Sana facit; the judgment being to be made not from the similitude of
their facts, but from the dissimilitude of the motives. And here the ordinary
reader may note, that after the words here spoken by Pontia, the Poet speaks
the next, Worst viper! at one supper did kill Two? Pontia then again adding
the next, -- Yea Seav'n, if the had been Seav'n, had seemed Few.

77. Like stones cleft from a rock, etc.

-- Feruntur
Praecipites, ut saxa jugis abrupta, quibus mons
Subtrahitur, clivoque latus pendente recedit.
This passage, if considered, has a little difficulty; some taking clivus for
pars radicis montis: but that cannot agree with clivo pendente; seeing that it
will appear to be, not the bottom, but rather the top of the Mountain. Lubin
well expounds mons substrahitur, by inferior, cui saxa incumbebant; not the
lowest or bottome-part of the hill, (for that could not fall a way) yet a low
part, a part toward the bottom; low, and so a basis to upper parts; yet not so
low, but that it self might fall. To make all then a little clearer, Juga must
here signify the v rockie Mountain with a long ridge and a promontory: Mons
must express a Lower part, not the lowest, toward the outside (whose
falling-away causes the rest of the ruin); Latus is the upper part (yet not the
uppermost) of the main-side; which rested upon the lower, Mons: saxa abrupta
are a part of the latus, some parcels of stones usually breaking from the main
lump that falls; and clivus must signify the uppermost part of all, or the
over-hanging peak, the under-parts being gone. Thus then the Poet says that
Lustful Women are as furiously headlong, as loose stones that fall from a Rock
whose outside underpart (Mons) being sunk away (subtrahitur) the main side
(latus) falls after; leaving only an overshooting peak (clivus) ready also to
fall. According to which examination I render it, as nearly as the sense and
words seem to admit.

Like stones cleft from a rock; when the under-part
Sinks, and the side from the hanging brow does start.
78. Which the thrice-conquer'd Pontick King did make. -- Si praegustaret
Atrides Pontica ter victi cautus medicamina regis. The Poet here declares, that
Women had good patterns presented to them oftentimes upon the stage; such as
was the example of Alceste; who when the Oracle had answered, that her sick
Husband Admetus (King of Thessalie) should presently die, if he was not
redeemed, by the death of some of his friends, when all others refused,
voluntarily (as the fable has it) died in his steed: yet the Poet avouches that
Women were not amended by such brave example. Nay, says he, one may every where
find amongst them, such as were the Belides (the neices of Belus) the Daughters
of Danaus; who being fifty in all, and all married to so many Sons of their
Uncle Aegystus, did all except two ( Hypermnestra and Bebryce) murder their
husbands, by their Fathers appointment, upon the Marriage-night. Or we may
find, says the Poet, such as was Eriphyle, who for a bracelet of gold betrayed
her husband Amphiaraus, causing him against His will to go to the Theban war,
where he fore-knew that he should die, as, according to the story, he did. The
Scholiast mentions such another kind story of another Eriphyle; both which may
be here aim'd-at by the Poet, for he speaks in the plural number, Occurrent
multae tibi Belides atque Eriphylae. Then goes he on saying, that one may meet
betimes with a Tyndaris, a Clitemnestra (the daughter of Tyndarus) who by the
help of her paramour Aegystus, slew her husband Atrides ( Agamemnon, the Son of
Atreus) at a feast, after his return from Troy: though, says he, they are now
indeed grown more cunning, performing such deeds with more art, by poison. Yet
he adds, that they would fall to rude work and the very axe, that is, more
grossly and surely dispatch them, if their husbands should against their
poisons use but the Antidote of Mithridates the Pontick King, who was thrice
overthrown, namely by Sylla, Lucullus and Pompey. For he indeed had an
admirable receipt against all poisons; of which Pliny ( lib. 23. cap. 9.) says,
that when Pompey overthrew him, he found in his cabinet, the composition of
this Antidote, written with his own hand; the Ingredients whereof were Two
dried nuts, as many figs, and twenty leaves of rue bruised all together with
one grain of salt; which if taken fasting, was a protection from all poison.
Yet Lenaeas Pompey's freed-man (as Agellius tells us, lib. 17. cap. 16.) says,
that Mithridates mixed with other medicines against poison the blood [anatis
ponticae) of a Pontick duck which fed upon poison, as some tell us; imo. and
ejusdem remedio [says Britannicus after the recital of these things] nomen
dedit, ut appelletur Mithridaticum. Upon which words Caelius Secundus Curio by
way of correction adds, Antidotum Mithridatis quid sit and quomodo conficiatur,
praestat Galenum and Cornelium Celsum consulere, qui aliquanto melius rem totam
explicant, and aliter quam hic fiat. Yet if we follow his advice and see Galen,
who writes of it, in his first book, de Antidotis, cap. 1. and 2. [it is in the
fist Classis of his works] as also Celsus, lib. 5. cap. 23. We shall find them
to differ not a little; as is observed by the learned Physician, Baldvinus
Ronsseus in his Enarrations, on the book and chapter of Celsus now cited; where
he says, Multum differt haec Mithridatis antidotus, ab ea quam descripsit
Galenus libro de Antidotis: cujus descriptionem si quis desideret, aut Galenum
(citato loco) aut Scribonium Largum.. 170. consulat. By the way we may note,
that as some mention among the ingredients, the Pontick Duck, [as was said
before] so in Celsus there is also mentioned, radix pontica. But some
acknowledge a singular power in the more plain receipt mentioned by Pliny^;
although, I grant, that the knowledge of that inquisitive King Mithridates, was
of a larger circuit, then to be bounded within so narrow a search. For, being a
man singularly skilled in Nature, he gathered his Antipharmaca from the
variety of flowers, seeds, herbs, roots, gummes and other things, whence arose
his great Composition called Mithridatium. This in after-time was corrected and
amended, and one ingredient more, namely Vipers, added by an exquisite Greek
Physician Andromachus the Elder, (for he had a Son, famous also in the same
profession) Physician unto Nero; to whom he made a description of his
Composition, in Greek verse, extant in the force-cited book of Galen. cap. 6.
as in the 7. chapter there is extant the younger Andromachus his Theriaca
descriptio, in Prose. The Father's composition was called (...), that is,
Tranquilla (because it brought ease unto the Patient) not Galeni; Galen not
being the Inventer of it, though afterward he in part did alter and perfect
it. Yet it is still called Theriaca magna Andromachi, and by that name is
Commented-on, and the several Ingredients (which are above threescore) that
have any difficulty, expounded in a set tract by the Learned Rondeletius, and
revised by the accurate Lobelius: wherein are set down also all the (...), or
Succedanea, to be used instead of such ingredients, as are either not at all,
or hardly in these parts to be procured; to which treatise I refer the more
inquisitive reader.

SATYR. VII.
ARGUMENT.
Caesar on Poets much bestows:
Caesar to Poets his Fame Owes.
From other Rich ones comes no Gift:
Poets by Wit, not Bounty, shift.
Historians too, that take great Pains,
No Story tell of their small Gains.
Lawyers, that vaunt most, much do get:
Yet some by vaunting run in debt.
Your Rhetoricians Tongues more Free,
Then ever his Reward will be.
Vain Parents think no Cost a wast,
But what is Best, on Tutors, placed.
Grammarians Pay is made so Vile,
It Is the worst Plague in all their Toil.
Wonder, how Wit in Rome could flourish,
When Rome brave Wits no more did nourish!
THe Hope and Motive now of Studies rest
Only in (1) Caesar, who the late distressed
Muses releiv'd, when some brave Poets sought
To rent (2) at Gabii a small Bath, or thought
To take at Rome some Bake-house; nay, not base
They held it, to turn Criers; since no Grace
From Aganippe's Valleys came, but poor (3)
Clio crept for releif to a Rich door.
For if there is not in thy Pierian Chest
One farthing, thou may well, methinks, digest (4)
Machaera's Name and Trade, and to the Rout
Sell what the Entrusted (5) public sale sets out,
Pots, Trivets, Presses, Chests, Bacchus his true
Halcyon, Faustus his Thebes, and Tereus too.
It Is better, then to Swear, I saw't, when no
Such thing thou saw. Let Asian Knights do so;
Your Cappadocian and Bythinian Knight,
From (6) poor Galatia brought in barefoot plight.
But no man shall hereafter he compelled
To servile task, if that he e're excelled
For smooth composure of sweet-Number'd Lays,
And bit Apollo's Verse-infusing bays.
Ply it brave Sparks, the Imperial bounty sits
Looking about to Invite and Crown your Wits.
But if from any else for help thou would look,
And therefore fill'st thy (7) Saffron-Vellumn-Book;
Get fuel quickly, and the work the have writ,
To Vulcan, Telesinus, straight commit:
Else closed lay't up, and to the Moath allow't;
Break thy vain Quil, thy labored lines blot-out;
Who would in thy small Cell by lofty strain
An Ivy-Crown and a lean Image gain.
That Is all thy Hope: Rich Niggards have learned how
Only to Admire and Praise brave Poets now,
As Boys the Peacock. But thus fails thy strength
Fit for Seas, Helmet, Plow; till tired at length
Thy Eloquent and Naked Age does see
And Hate it self and its Terpsicore.
Know now thy Patton's Arts to save his Coin:
Leaving the Muses and Apollo's shrine,
Verses He writes, and would slight Homers Art,
But that a Thousand years have got the start.
But, for sweet Fame, if Verse and Voice thou would spend,
Rich Maculonus then his house will lend;
His strong-barr'd House on thy Command shall wait,
Whose Door is like a City's watchful Gate.
He Will place his Freed-men in the farthest part,
And rank his loud-voic'd Clients with much art.
No Patron does (8) the Seats or Stairs bestow,
That hang at the hired Scaffold-beam; or know
What the Orchestra cost, raised for chief friends,
And Chairs recarried when the Reading ends.
Yet this we do, though vainly do no more,
Then Furrow-up the Dust, and Plow the Shore.
For, though thou leave, yet this ambitious Ill,
By Custom now grown strong halters thee still.
The desperate Scribbling Sickness fast does hold
Many, and does in their Sick breast grow old.
But an Egregious Poet, whose rare vein
Scorns to bring forth an obvious vulgar strain,
Whose Verse bears not one trivial stamp like coin,
One, whom I cannot show, but do Design
In purer Fancy, He must have a mind
Not vexed, or by sow'r thoughts of Thrift confined;
Your Groves he Loves, Drinks of the Aonian springs,
For in Pierian Caves He never sings,
Nor with an Ivy-dart divinely raves,
Whose sober poverty night and day craves
For money, which the Bodies wants supplies:
Horace (9) is full, when once he Obe cries.
Who displays Wit, whom ought but verse perplexes?
When Bacchus Cyrrha's Lord our full breasts vexes;
When Nysa's Lord Apollo drives our Wit,
Which never can at once two Cares admit.
It Is for an Ample Mind, not one half-dead
With Care to get a blanket to his bed,
To fancy Chariots, Horses, the Gods fair
Shapes, and the dire Erynnis, that did stare
On the amazed Rutilian King. For grant
That Virgil does a needful Servant want,
And a convenient Lodging, quickly all
The Snakes from his Alecto's Curles would fall:
Dull would his Trumpet sound without all State
Of Grief. VVe'd have (10) Rubrenus Lappa's Fate
Be like his Muse; The Ancient Buskin he
Shall match; though his small dishes and Cloak be
At pawn to Atreus. Numitor the wretch
For's Friend has nothing: but a Gift he will fetch
For his Quintilla; and without all need
Bought a tamed Lion, which on Flesh does feed.
The Beast's kept Cheaper, sure: I, that is it; Pie on's!
A Poets guts will hold more then a Lions!
Lucan may in his Marble Gardens lie
Content with Fame: but how will this supplio
Sarranus and Saleius's wants? what is Fame?
What Is Glory, if it is but an Empty Name?
They run with joy to the sweet voice and verse
Of Thebais, when Statius does rehearse,
And sets a Day; they are caught with such delight;
The People hear with such an Appetite.
But (11) when his verse has cracked the Seats, he may
Be starved, if Paris buy not his new Play,
Agave. Military Honors He
Gives: He (12) Knights Poets, whom adorned we see
With their Gold-half-years-rings for witness; So
What Lords give not, a Player does bestow.
Yet do still after Camerinus run,
And Bareas? Do not your Lords Porches shun?
A Pelopea it is can Praefects make:
Some Tribunes are for Philomela's sake.
Yet Envy not the Poet, that (13) is fed
By his Stage Labors. For, should thou want bread,
Who's a Metaenas Now; A Fabius,
A Proculeius, Cotta, Lentulus?
Wit then had just reward: Now some must pine,
Look pale, and all December know no wine.
But now, Historians, your more fruitful task
A great deal more of Time and Oil does ask.
For, beyond mean, the Thousandth Page does rise;
It grows with loss of Paper: yet such size
Numbers of Facts, and Laws of Story yield.
What Is yet the Crop. the Fruits of this Plowed field?
Does not a Notary gain more by's trade?
They Are Sluggs, you will say, and love the Roof and shade.
Show then, that Lawyers Pleadings be less vain,
And what the bundled Books they bring, do gain.
They Mouth it much: but chiefly when they see
The Creditor they Plead for; or when He,
Whom fear makes fiercer, jogs them, so (14) to get
By proof from his Great Book a doubtful Debt.
Their hollow bellows then vast Lies do blow:
Their breasts bespaul'd! But if their Crop you would know,
An Hundred Lawyers equal scarce by weight
The (15) Red-coat Chariotier Lacerta's state.
The Leaders sit: pale Ajax thou do rise
To save one's Questioned state: Thy (16) Judge is wise
Bubulcus. Fool, thy entrals crack, that Tird,
Green (17) Palms may make thy stairs, and thee admired.
What Is thy Tongues Hire? Some shrunk Gammon, a Dish
Of Tunnies, or your (18) Moor's state Monthly-Fish;
Or Wine brought down by Tiber: Thou shall have
Five Flaggons for four Pleadings; and that is Brave.
But if some Gold thou get'sts for some hard Cause,
By compact he will have part, that showed the Laws.
They Will give Aemilius what he will ask; yet we
Plead better: but in his large Porch they see
A brazen Chariot, four brave Horses, and
Himself on a fierce Warlike Steed, his hand
With bended Spear threatening aloft does fright:
His one eyed Statue Meditates a Fight.
Thus (19) Pedo breaks, Matho, Tongillus too;
That makes with his great Oil-horn much a do,
Vexing the Baths with his dagg'd rout: and often
His long-pol'd Litter Maesian slaves aloft
Bear through the Forum. You would think he would buy
Boys, Plate, Myrrhe-vessels, Farms: The Purple die
Of his broad-studded Coat and Tyrian thread
Promise no less. Yet many a crafty head
Gains thus. Your Purple and Violet be
Colors of Art: They Mount your Lawyers Fee.
Yet, they must Ruffle't, and more wealth pretend:
But Rome to such expense Now sets no End.
Lived the Ancients Now, Cicero (20) never should see
Two hundred Sesterces for his best Fee,
Wore he not a huge glist'ring Ring. Who will
Go Now to Law, makes This his first Note still;
If thou have eight Litter-men, half a score
Foll'wers, a Chair behind, (21) Gown'd Friends before.
Paulus did therefore still plead with a hired
Sardonix: got more, 'cause thus admired,
Then Cossus could, or Basilus. It Is Rare,
If Eloquence be found in Gown threadbare.
When brings in Basilus a weeping Mother?
VVho'll hear him plead, though well? Seek then some other
Law-Courts, in France, or Africa the Nurse
Of Lawyers; Tongue-work there may fill thy purse.
Thou, Iron-breasted Vectius, teach Boys
How to Declame: (22) though their full Forms with noise
Have killed fierce Tyrants. For, what on his Seat
He read even now, standing he does repeat,
Tuning the same things in the same words still:
Such oft-dress'd (23) Colewort does poor Masters kill.
The Reasons of a Cause, the kind, the main
Point, and what Darts may be returned again,
All fain would learn; Reward none does bestow:
Reward? says one; why, pray y', what do I know?
The Masters blamed, when in a heart unfit
The Arcadian block-head has no spark of wit.
Each (24) Sixth day his dire Hannibal my pate
Does fill, in doubt from Cannae to march straight
To Rome, or after storms and thunder stay,
And lead his well-wash'd Troops some other way.
I Will give straight what thou wilt ask, if thou can make
A Father hear his Son so often. Some take
A better course yet: for, some six or more
Sophisters in the Courts with like throat roar;
They plead True Causes, and leave-off to speak
Of Poisons, Feigned Rapes, Husbands that break
Their Vow, and Mortars, that strange Medicines hold
Tempered by Art to Cure the Blind, though old.
The Rod of Freedom then he should bestow
Upon Himself, could I prevail, and go
In a New way of Life, who should descend
From Rhet'rick Shade to Law-fight; least he spend
His little Coin, which must get him a small
Corn-mark; That Is his Best pay. Learn, what is All
Chrysogonus and Pollio get, t'impart
To Great men's sons near Theodorus's Art
Their (25) Baths shall cost six Hundred; their walks more:
Where they may ride when it rains: should they endure
Till the Skie's fair, or soil their Mules so fine?
Here rather: here their neat Mule's hoof may Shine.
Yonder (26) a Feasting-room shall mount on high
Numidian Pillars, breasting the Eastern Sky.
VVhats'ere This costs, a Carver shall beside
Order each Dish; a Cook rare sauce provide.
Amidst which wastes, Quintilian they will allow
Hardly two Sesterces. A Son is now
His Fathers least Expense. How (27) then abounds
Quintilian with such Forests and large grounds?
Examples here of such New Fates omit:
He that has Luck is Fair, and of sharp wit.
He that has Luck is wise and Highborn too;
And wears (28) the bright Half Moon on his black Shoe.
He that has Luck Figures and Reasons flings,
And, though with cold he is Hoarse, right sweetly sings.
Oh, there is strange difference, what Stars guard thy head,
When first thou criest, and from fresh birth look Red.
Poor Rhetoricians Fortune can make strange
Consuls; or These to Rhetoricians change!
What was Ventidius, what was Tullies State
But Stars, and the strange Power of hidden Fate?
The Fates Crown Slaves; on Captives Triumphs throw.
He Is Lucky, yet more Rare, then a white Crow.
Many for Grief have left the barren Chair:
Thrasymachus proved This by his Despair.
Poor Secundus Carinas Athens taught;
Which never durst give, save a cold Hemlock-draught.
May the Ancients Ghosts under soft Earth find rest:
With flowers and Endless Spring be their Urnes blessed.
A Tutor, as a Parent, They esteemed:
The Rod to Achilles grown-big Awe-full seemed,
VVhiles on his Country Hills he sung; Although (29)
His Masters Tail might make one Laugh, ye know.
Ruffus his Boys now beat; Ruffus; who often
At Tullie's Allobrogian Rhet'rick scoft.
Who brings to Enceladus his Lap, or learned
Palaemons, what their Grammer-toil has earned?
Of This yet (less then Rhetoricians pay)
Acoenitus the Lad's Guide Bites-away
Part, part the Steward breaks off too: Yet 'bate
Palaemon, somewhat of the utmost rate;
As they that thick Blankets and white Ticks sell:
So that thy Mid-night-rising, to teach well,
Thou loose not quite. What Smith then toils so hard?
Or who, that wool with snag-tooth'd wire does card!
So some gain comes from the Oil, whose stink annoys,
Of so many rank Lamps, as there stood boys;
When all their Horace was quite soiled; when thick,
When fat smoke did to their daubed Virgil stick.
Yet, (30) without suit before the Tribune, pay
They seldom do; but see, dire Laws ye lay
Upon the Master. He each Rule must show,
Each word; read stories, and all Authors know,
As his own Nails and Fingers. As (31) he goes
To the Hot Baths or Phoebus his, propose
your doubts; who was Anchises's Nurse; The Name
And Country of Archemorus's step-dame;
How long Acestes lived; with what store
Of wine the Phrygians left Sicilia's shore;
He straight must tell. Make him with thumb, that lacks
No skill, shape soft youths like a face in wax.
Make him the Father of his School, and sure
To watch, least they be mutually impure.
Not easy it is to note so many hands
And leudly trembling eyes. Tend these commands,
Says he. At (32) the years end, so much gold thoult have,
As for a Conqueror at the Shows, They crave.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Seventh Satyr.
A Doubt about the Emperor here praised as the Patron of Learning, discussed.
Conducere furnos, not used in This place Proverbially; against Curio. Turnebus
his Exposition of Migrate in atria not admitted. Machaerophori. Auctio. The
Reading and Exposition of traducit Gallica talo, examined. Auditors anciently
invited to hear Poems. Coena diserta, and Comites; why so called. Ferratius his
Exposition of Ohe, not here appliable. Autumnus his interpretation of Hydri and
Atreus; likewise Britannicus and Pulmannus his Exposition of pignotat Atreus.
Fregit subsellia, how expounded by Scaliger, the Scholiast, Lubin, and some
others; best by Britannicus. Aurum Semestre, differen^ly expounded from the
Scholiast. Autumnus his Exposition of vinum nescire Decembri. Plays anciently
sold, for the use of the Stage. The Price of Terence's Eunuchus at the second
presenting. Pragmaticus. Dubium Nomen. Codex, expounded against Beroaldus.
Britannicus his Exposition and others, of Russati pone Lacertae, not admitted;
the Scholiasts and Marcellus Donatus his, approved. Different acceptions of
Bubulco Judice. Scalarum palmae, ill expounded by Britannicus and Lubin;
rightly by Brodaeus, Casaubon and Dempster. The Custom of fixing Palm-boughs
to the doors of Lawyers, which obtained the Victory in a Cause. Epimenia,
Bulbi. The mistakes of some about Vinum Tiberi devectum Conturbate. The low
rate of Lawyers Fees. Antepedes and Circumpedes how distinguished by Agraetius.
Mothers and Kinsfolk brought weeping before the Judges, by Lawyers, to move
compassion toward their offending Children and Kinsfolk. Crambe; the fancies
of Scoppa, Pulmannus, Ponticus Virunnius, the Scholiast, and partly of Pithaeus
and some others about it, proposed; Politian's approved. Balnea sexcentis,
rightly interpreted by Britannicus; ill, by Lubin. The vast expense on Baths;
Their Magnificence and Form showed from Du Choul; with the Furnace and distinct
vessels for variety of waters. Popma's error about Caenatio. (...) Outward
Darkness; according to Maldonate and Pignorius. The Antiquity of Forests.
Quintilians wealth and supposed Honor. Palaemon the Grammarians yearly Revenue.
The Figure of the Moon worn on the shoe of the Roman Nobility; and by some
amongst the Jews. The Reason of the Roman Custom best expressed by Isidore.
Some differences about the Place and Matter of it; whether it be rightly termed
fibula by Rhodigin. Britannicus his error about the Office of Tribuni Plebis,
learnedly observed by Alexander ab Alexandro. Tribuni aerarii; their inferior
form of Indicature. Thermae; Phaebi Balnea; Daphnes. Balineum Daphnidis; the
great price of it. Bays usually planted at the Baths. The Reward of the
Conqueror at the Show.

1. ONly in Caesar. In Caesare tantum. It is a great doubt here amongst the
Interpreters, which of the Caesar's is here intended. The Scholiast takes it for
Nero; but without proof or probability, as may appear from the confirmation of
a better opinion. Some understand it of Nerva; some of Trajan; who, as
Britannicus shows out of Pliny, and Autumnus out of Tacitus, was a favourer of
Learning. But there being in this Satyr, mention of Statius Contemporary with
our Poet, as of a person then flourishing, and likewise of Paris the Pantomime
potent at the time, wherein our Poet writ this Satyr, and who was also put to
death by Domitian, these praises cannot extend to Trajan's time. Lubin
therefore understands it of Domitian; saying, that though he were a cruel
Tyrant, yet in the beginning of his reign he had some show of Virtue,
particularly of bounty, alleging Sueton for it, but chiefly that of
Quintilian (in Prolog. lib. 4.) saying of Domitian, -- quo nec praesentius
aliquid, nec studiis magis propitium numen est. Yet Lubin observing Juvenal to
inveigh here against the avarice of Great men neglecting the wretched estate of
learned men in those times, confesses him to be in this Satyr very inconstant:
and some have thought this written only to move Domitian to be such a Patron,
as he is here described to be, rather then to Testify, that he was such a one.
Others suppose, that seeing he writ so fiercely against Domitian in the fourth
Satyr, he writes here only Ironically: which reason I think not sufficient,
though there be some truth in it; it being evident to the observing Reader,
that Juvenals Satyrs were not written according to the order, in which they
now are placed; this seventh Satyr (for instance) being written in the life
time of Domitian, but the fourth after his death, which is mentioned in the end
of that Satyr. Wherefore amongst these diversities, I think these praises to
be here ascribed to Domitian, not for a general patronage showed toward
learned men, as may plainly appear from the whole course of this Satyr (except
in the beginning) in the misery of learned men of diverse professions; yet for
the special favor toward some eminent wits in his Reign, as Valerius Flaccus,
Statius, Martial, and Quintilian, who egregiously magnified even Domitian. Here
then may be observed Juvenals reasons, both for the praise and dispraise of the
same person; likewise his Satirical wit, implying the sorry condition, which
some of these might have fallen into, had they not been sustained by special
favor; and lastly our Poets ingenuity, that concealed not the Beft of a Bad
man.

2. To rent at Gabii a small Bath, or thought to take at Rome some Bake-house.
Balneolum Gabiis, Romae conducere furnos Tentarent --. Caelius Secundus Curio
on this place thinks that it was an ancient proverb against poor men, which
quaked with cold, that they must think of taking upon a rent a Bath or a
Bake-house, alleging that of Horace, Qui frigus collegit, furnos and balnea
laudat. Which witty conjecture, I grant, may be admitted by way of allusion:
but to speak in the strict fidelity of an Interpreter, I think the Poet to
speak here rather historically: which is the more probable, because he adds
such things, as were not suitable with that proverb, as that some Poets became
Criers: in which employment, according to the season of the year, whiles in
open places they waited for Chapmen, they might quake through cold, as well by
their Office, as by their Poverty. I retain therefore the ordinary exposition
of Britannicus and others.

3. -- But poor Clio crept for releif to a Rich door. Esuriens migraret in
atria Clio. Some expound this of some Poets, who, as they think, became Porters
to Great men; others more tolerably think, that they went as mean Clients to
Rich men's doors for the Sportula, or Basket-doal. The learned Turnebus thinks,
because there is immediately before, mention of praecones, that therefore by
atria are here understood atria Licinia (and such like) in which large and
public places, public sales of goods were usually made. That there were such
places, I acknowledge for a truth, yet I think them not to be here intended by
the Poet: who being to give a reason, why some Poets turned Criers, says,
Cumesuriens migraret in atria, Cli^ that is, as I think, turn Parasites to
Great men. Which exposition I may strengthen from these two reasons, the one
drawn from a like expression in another place of this same Satyr, where he
says, -- tu Nobilium magna atria curas? when as thou art neglected by the great
ones, will thou yet be so base, as to haunt their Porches, and continue their
Parasite? The other from the coherence of this place; where the Poet says, that
some thought it not vile to become Criers, when as they saw others become
Parasites; this condition being simply base, but that, though mean, being yet
honest. But if it were expounded according to Turnebus, that some turned
Criers, when they saw others do so, that is, when they saw others go into the
places of public sales, it were, methinks, a very weak expression; whereas the
other is very Satirical, and suitable to what immediately follows, Nam si, etc.
for well might they, says he, turn Criers, like Machaera, when they had not a
farthing in purse. Thus then Praecones fieri and migrare in atria, is not the
same; the latter signifying, to turn Parasite. Where by the way the Poets
Satirical wit may be observed, who in the recital of the wares set to public
sale, claps in amongst Cup-boards, Chests, and such trumpery, the Poems of some
silly Artists in his time, such as were Bacchus (or as others read it, Paccius)
and Faustus; whose fabulous compositions he names and flouts at.

4. Machaera's name and trade. Some think that Machaera here signifies a
footman with a weapon by his side, (meaning that needy Poets might become
such) many such usually in travail attending their Lord. But, to call such a
one by the name Machaera, is harsh, they being commonly and rightly called
Machaerophori; see Tully ad Q. Fratrem, lib. 2. epist. 8. This exposition then
savouring of affectation, I take Machaera, as most Interpreters do, for a
proper name.

5. Sell what the entrusted public sale sets-our. Et vendas potius commissa
quod auctio vendit. I render Auclio, by a public Sale committed to the criers
diligence and art; though strictly the word auclio might be rend'red, the
Raise-price, it being an increasing of the price according to the offers of
several Chapmen.

6. From poor Galatia brought in barefoot plight. Altera quos nudo traduxit
Gallia talo. I might literally have rendered altera Gallia, the other France;
but commonly it is called Gallo-graecia or Galatia, a Country in Asia the less:
diverse of which Country coming poor, and even barefooted to Rome, were started
up to Knighthood. And here, whiles the Poet says, -- quos traduxit, brought
over Sea from Asia to Rome, some understand a scoff in the word traduxit, as if
he said, whom it traduced or jeer'd-over hither, because they came barefooted:
which sense, I grant, the word bears, and may be here so understood; yet only
in a second place, not necessarily, the word often signifying in a more simple
sense, Rigaltius reads, -- traducit gallica talo, adding, Gl^^e veteres
Gallicula, (...). I suppose his learned diligence rather cites it, then
approves it for an Exposition. Gallicula, (which some make the same with
Caligula) was the Gaulish shoe worn by Soldiers, and so it should signify,
according to this Exposition, they came rude to Rome with their Gaulish shoes;
which sense, that they came with their galliculae, and yet nude talo, seems a
little incongruous; the gallicula being though a patten, a soal without an
upper leather, yet so much shoot as came above the talus or ankle. See Sat. 16.
Illust. 3. Besides, in what sense altera shall be here applied to Gallicula, I
discern not.

7. Saffron-Vellume-Book. Croceae membrana tabellae. The Poet calls it so from
the color of it, which was yellow, or like Saffron. Persius, Sat. 3. calls it
bicolor membrana; the hairy side being of one color, the other side of another.

8. No Patron does the Seats or Stairs bestow,
That hang at the hired Scaffold-beam; or know
What the Orchestra cost, raised for chief friends,
And Chairs recarried, when the Reading-ends.
Nemo dabit regum, quanti subsellia constent,
Et quae conduclo pendent anabathra tigillo,
Quaeque reportandis posita est Orchestra cathedris.
The Poet here expresses the custom of the Roman Poets, who, when for glory
they would read their compositions, usually horrow'd some Great Man's house;
erected about the room (subsellia) Seats for the Spectators [that is, Scaffolds
for the meaner Auditors] at the supporting Timbers, or Beam (tigillum) of which
seats, hung (anabathra) stairs. They prepared one special place, the Orchestra,
which they furnished with hired Chairs, and there placed their chiefest
friends. Besides, some most wretchedly hired applauders, whom they cunningly
dispersed amongst the other auditors, to raise the rest to applause by their
applause; and the rich man, who lent his house, would sometimes place his own
freed-men to the like purpose; thus affording praise, but no money. See
Marcellus Donatus on Sueton's Nero, cap. 17. page 706. to which we may add
that of the Author de Claris Oratoribus (vulgarly taken to be Tacitus) spoken
of Poets; Nam and domum mutuatur, and auditorium extruit, and subsellia
conducit, and libellot dispergit. See also Sat. 1. Illust. 5. Moreover the
manner was to invite their auditors and applauders sometimes a day, sometimes a
month before; sometimes by going in person to every one's house, sometimes by
messenger, sometimes by letter. These Libelli or Condicilli, Ferrarius, lib. 3.
cap. 3. de Acclam. Vet. thinks to have been vel argumenta vel exemplaria,
either the arguments or copies of their Poems. Pliny, lib. 3. Epist. 18.
mentions them; a way more troublesome then the pasting up of bills. Nay, they
entreated men to hear them, as Arrian tells us in the Commentary on Epictetus,
l. 3. c. 23. and some of more wealth Poetically given, bribed them with
Suppers, or money [sportula] in stead of it. So Horate lib. 1. Ep. 19. Non ego
ventosae plebis suffragia venor Impensis Caenarum --; and Persius, Sat. 1.
Calidum scis ponere sumen; and Juvenal touches the other, Sat. 13. in those
words, Fessidium laudat vocalis agentem sportula; according to which sense it
is called by Martial, lib. 6. epig. 48. diserta caena. Sometimes they gave
their poorer auditors a cast cloak, as Persius says, Sat. 1. Scis comitem
horridulum trita donare lacernct; or forgave them a debt, or gave their words
for them. Some kept men in their houses for this purpose, and had them to
attend upon them to the Reading-place; for which they were called Comites. See
Ferrarius, lib. 3. cap. 5.6, 7, 8. and of the bringing of seats to such places,
see cap. 9.

9. Horace is full, when once he Ohe cries. Satur est cum dicit Horatius, Ohe.
Ferrarus (de Acclam. Vet. lib. 3. cap. 18.) says, that Ohe is a note of satiety
or weariness in hearing; an assertion in this place not appliable: Juvenal not
speaking here of a Poet filled with applause at the recitation of his Poems,
but rather with Wine and plenty before he writ. Some with a little variation
read Euhoe; It seems to be an allusion to that of Horace. Carm. lib. 2. Od. 19.
upon Bacchus,

Euae, recenti men's trepidat meta,
Plenoque Bacchi pectore turbidum
Laetatur. Euoe, parce Liber,
Parce gravi meruende Thyrso.
10. -- We'd have Ru^^enus Lappa's Fate Be like his Muse; The Ancient Buskin he
Should march; though his small dishes and cloak be At pawn to Atreus. --
poscimus, ut sit
Non minor antiquo Rubrenus Lappa corhurno,
Cujus and alveolos and lanam pignorat Atreus.
The Poet shows, that singular Poverty and singular Poetry are commonly
inconsistent; and that therefore when Horace called upon Bacchus, (as 2 Curm.
Od. 19.) he was full of him; and that on the contrary, had Virgil been extreme
poor, he could not have made his stately descriptions of Furies, such as Electo
with her Curles of Snakes about her ears, instead of hair, as the Poets usually
feign. Then he instances in Rubrenus Lappa, an excellent Poet at that time, who
had he had a Patron to have encouraged him, would have equaled Sophocles, and
some few such like: but his wit was obscured by his poverty, which made him
pawn hisplatters, though small ones, and his cloak to Atrens the Usurer. And
here I may note two passages of Autumnus; who upon those words spoken of
Virgil, Caderent omnes a crinibus hydri, understands figuratively by hydri, his
Bucoliques, in quibus, says he, agit de hydris Serpentibus, noxiis herbis, and
anlmalibus nocentibus frugibus: so that according to Him, the meaning should
be, that had Virgil been poor, he could never have written his Bucolicks; when
as the Interpreters commonly understand it rather (and, I think, berter) of his
Aeneads; in which lib. 7. he himself says, -- tor Erynnis sibilat hydris, which
is apparently more suitable to the meaning of Juvenal; that in extreme poverty
Virgil himself could never have written his lofty Aeneads. Again, Autumnus
takes Atrens here not for a Usurer, as most Interpreters do, but for a poor
Tragic Poet; who as he says, alveolos and lanam (for so he reads, not ^^nam)
pignorat, lays to pawn, not as the most here take it, takes to pawn. But the
construction of this place does not conveniently admit this exposition: for, to
omit the petty vanities of reading, albi^los, as some, (taking it for the Poets
Table Book; a sorry pawn for a Usurer) or alveolos, as the most (and
understanding it of the Poets poor housholdstuff, his small platters, as
Turnebus takes it, and as it is used in the fifth Satyr, in those words, illud
enim vestris datur alveolis) Atrens cannot here signify one that lays these
things to pawn, seeing that it is the poverty of Lappa, which is here
described; and the things, which are said to be pawned being His, as is clear
by the relative cujus, it stands with reason, to conceive Him, to be the
person, that pawns the Goods. Yet Britannicus thinking it neither sense, nor
Latin, to expound pignorare to take to pawn, takes Atreus here, not as
Autumnus, for the name of a Tragic Poet, but of a Tragedy written by Lappa.
Which exposition pleases Pulmannus also on this place: and so the sense, which
they conceive, must be this, that Lappa's Tragedy of Atreus made him pawn his
small goods: they mean, by neglecting his time, whiles he intended his Play.
But methinks, this is but a weak exposition: for, having employed himself
always in such studies, he would probubly have been busied, if not thus, as
unprofitably. Besides, if his wit were so good, as Juvenal implies, his Poem
would rather have been some help unto him, as Agave was to statius, as is
testified in this Satyr. Lastly the Latin acception of pignorari and pignorare
to take, as well as to give a pledge, is sufficiently known; as from that of
Tully, Mars ipse ex acie fortissimum quemque pignorari solet; where it
signifies clearly, to take to himself.

11. But when his verse has cracked the seats, he may Be starved; if Paris buy
not his new Play

Agave. -- Sed, cumfregit subsellia versu, Esurit, etc. Joseph Scaliger (in his
Ausonian Lections, lib. 1. cap. 10.) discoursing of this passage of our Author,
thinks that here is an intended reference to the Agones Capitolini, which were
games first instituted by Domitian in imitation of the Olympic Games, in
which, amongst other Artists, Poets also contended for the Victory; and that in
such trials, Statius, after the incredible expectation of the whole City, did
recite his Thebais, but pleased not, whereby others obtained the garland
against him. Of this, says Scaliger, he complains in his Sylvae, especially in
the Epicede on his Father: for which cause Scaliger reprehends the ordinary
exposition of this place, saying, that fregit subsellia is as much as recitans
non stetit, sed excidit, hoc est, non placuit; in brief, that he was overcome.
Which Censure of Scaliger is recited by Rosinus, lib. 5. cap. 18. and by
Salmuth on Panciroll. lib 1. Tit. 42. and Scaliger himself falling upon the
same agrument again in his Emendation of Times (p. 483, 484.) shows from
Statius himself, how that he greiv'd, that he could not add the Capitolian
Oaken garland to the Alban Olive garland, but that he was overcome by ancient
Poets, who had formerly overcome. But the ancient and common exposition of this
place is, that Statius in the reciting of his Thebais did singularly please:
and therefore some expound fregit subsellia, of the loud and wonderful
applause, which was bestowed upon him. In this vast distance of Opinions, there
is room to stand between them: and therefore to interpose mine own opinion, I
think thus; first, with Scaliger, that Statius had the worst in reciting his
Thebais at the Capitolian Agones; as is unanswerable clear from Scaligers
allegations; Secondly and differently from Scaliger, that in this place our
Poet intends not that overthrow of Statius in these famous games; but only his
recital of some part of his Thebais, in some Great man's house (according to
the fashion mentioned in the 8th. Illustration of this Satyr); and that in
such recital (probably after his overthrow) he recovered his credit, admirably
pleased, and thereby was encouraged to publish his Poem. For, that he thus
pleased, it is invincibly evident from the whole scope of this place: wherein
our Poet expresses, that though he so singularly pleased, yet if he had not
sold a new play of Agave to Paris the famous Actour, he might have been
starved; Thirdly, that fregit subsellia, as it cannot be here expounded, with
Scaliger, of his Overthrow, so neither, with the Scholiast and some others, be
understood of the Applause; though I acknowledge that custom and the
marvailous excess of it. But I think that it ought to be more plainly
understood of his own laborious and exalted recital, or pronunciation; and
therefore Britannicus expounds versu by recitatione versuum; according to his
exposition of that in the first Satyr -- assiduo ruptae lectore columnae;
where he likewise adds, assiduo lectoris and recitatoris clamore; and columnae
ruptae he expresses by this fregis subsellia; but first by that of Virgils Et
cantu querulae rumpunt arbusta cicada: where rumpunt cannot be applied to any
returned applause, but to the insensive noise of the grasle-hoppers themselves.
And in a like, but a worse sense, the Poet in the beginning of the first Satyr
calls Codrus for his tedious recitation, raucus. Lubin does not mention
Scaliger's opinion, perchance to conceal his dislike: but understands fregit
subsellia of the wondrous multitude of Auditors, which by occasion of Statius
his Reading, flocking thither break the seats. Yet he presently adds, vel
potius est byperbolica locutio de ipso Statio recitante, who with the vehemence
of his recitation might be said to break the seats. It may by the way be
farther observed, that Juvenal in speaking of the great concourse to hear
Statius, says, tantaque libidine vulgi; where he may seem to discover some
frailty of emulation; libido implying an excess to what it is applied, and
vulgus diminishing the glory of the Poet, by the mean quality of the Auditory.
In which point, it being not necessary for me to undertake an absolute defense
of our Poet, I may considerably allege; first that our Poet generally in his
first Satyr does in some degree jeer at all Heroical Poems, as at unprofitable
fictions: Secondly, that Statius his work, by the swelling of proper names of
Persons and places, is somewhat unhappily darkened; though it cannot be denied
to be a Composition full of delight, and for height of wit Admirable.

12. -- He Knights Poets, whom adorned we see With their gold-half year's Rings
--. Ille and militiae muhis largitur honorem, Semestri vatum digitos
circumligat auro. The Poet speaking, here against the undeserved favor of
Paris a Player, says that he was so potent with the Emperor, that he bestowed
Knighthood, military honors and the like, upon Poets: which he expresses by
saying, that he adorned their singers auto semestri, that is, with the gold
ring. But why Semestre should make aurum signify a ring, different reasons are
given. The Scholiaest on these words, Semestri vatum digitos, says, Id est, in
modum lunaeplenae, equitum de numero, id est, annulo Semestri aut luna dicitur,
cum mensis medium permensa est spatium, aut Xymam dicit, hoc est, cui ut plena
sit, parum admodum deest; cum velut anulus in orbem collecta est. In which
passage we may correct those words, ant Xymam dicit, at Rutgersius aptly does
(in his Var. Lection. lib. 6. cap. 18.) and read aut Xvtam, (that is, decimam
quintam) dicit. The meaning then will be, that the Moon at a fortnight old,
(or, at the 15th day) is at the full, and may be called Semestris Luna (as it
is by Apuleius in his Asin.) an half-month Moon; at which age she being round
like a ring, aurum semestre may fignifie circular gold, or like the Moon at the
full, and so a ring; but this methinks seems far ferch'd. Others without such
affectation take the word semestre not for the space of half a month, but of
six months (for the word will bear either sense) and so they conveniently
think, that the Poet here speaks of such rings, as he does in the first Satyr,
where he speaks of their six-months rings, namely heavy winter-rings, and
lighter summer-rings: so that the Poet means, that even Paris, though a a
Player, did if he pleased, so enrich Poets, that like Knights and other wealthy
ones, they could at pleasure wear their variety of gold-rings. And this
exposition is very warrantable; only in a farther and more especial sense this
may be added, that he at his pleasure gave them military honors, making whom
he pleased, Frefects, and Military Tribunes, Officers that continued for six
months: whence Pliny in an Epistle pro Calvisio calls it Semestris Tribunatus,
and by their place woar gold-rings, as Appian. Alexandrinus testifies, lib. de
Bello Lybico, cap. 11. and Pliny, lib. 33. Which sense is very suitable both to
the precedent verse, Ille and militiae multis largitur honorem, and to the
third verse following, Praefectos Pelopaea facit, Philomela Tribunos; meaning
that Tragedies of such Persons and Arguments, as Pelopaea and Philomela, caused
Poets to be advanced to Military honors. And this jeering verse, as the
Scholiast tells us, cost Juvenal a banishment.

13. -- That is fed By his Stage labors. -- Quem pulpita pascunt. Autumnus
expounds it of his recitations of his Poems: but it is apparent, that by that
means he could get nothing, except praise; but by providing stage-ware he got
indifferent maintenance; whereas commonly Poets were so poor, that they were
fain to want wine even all December (as the Poet speaks) though that were a
time, which might most require it, both for the extremity of the weather, and
the common jollity of the season, being the Month in which were kept their
Saturnals, wherein even Servants triumphed in wine and licentiousness. Autumnus
on the word Decembri, gives here this note, Quo mense solet lugubrari and
abstineri a commessationibus and compotationibus: but how can this sense be
agreeable to this of our Author! for then, what greater misery had this been to
Poets, then to others? Of the custom of Poets selling their Plays for the use
of the Stage, see Brodaus in his Miscellan. lib. 9. cap. 17. showing it out of
Terence: who had for his Eunuchus, when it was presented the second time, octo
millia sestertium (he speaks of Sestertii) that is 8 sestertia; which reduced
make 62 l. 10^. Donatus tells us the same; that he sold it octo millibus
sestertium.

14. -- So to get By proof from his great book a Doubtful Debt. Qui venit ad
dubium grandi cum codice nomen. The Poet speaking here of the vehemence of
Lawyers in their pleadings, says that they plead hard, when the Creditor hears
them, but especially when they are jogged by one more eager, then an ordinary
Creditor, acrior illo: which more fierce plaintiff he farther describes by
saying, Qui venit, etc. Who comes with his great book ad dubium nomen, to prove
a doubtful debt. But some understand by -- acrior illo, Qui venit -- the
Debter's Proctour, or else his Pragmaticus, he that, according to the custom
of these times, turned the books for him; and by Codice, the book of the Laws,
or as others, the book of the Debter's Receipts and Expenses; or, as some, the
book or bundle of papers containing the whole proceedings of the cause; and so
they expound ad dubium nomen, that he came on the debter's behalf to disprove
the debt, by showing it to be Doubtful. Yet these expositions, if considered,
will not stand. For, (to refute it by parts) to understand it of the Debter's
Proctor striving to deny and disprove the debt, is not so congruous; since the
Poet might then more clearly have expressed it, by saying In dubium nomen,
rather then ad dubium; the first signifying rather to disprove, the latter to
prove the debt. Besides, to take Codex as Philip Beroald does (in his Annotat.
p. 208.) for the Debter's book of reckonings is most improbable; for of what
force should that be, to avoid the Creditor? Wherefore it is most probable,
that by acrior here is understood the Creditor himself, as most solicitous in
his own business; yet not every Creditor, but such a one, as in some especial
case, wanting unhappily so full a proof of his debt, as he could wish, strives
to make-up the sufficiency of his witness, by his book of reckonings and the
Clamor of his Lawier. And so Codex may be understood of the Creditor's Debt
book alleged happily ad dubium nomen, for the proof of a questioned debt,
according to which sense and choice I render it.

15. The Red-coat Chariotier Lacerta's state. -- Russati pone Lacertae. I may
not omit, for the singularity, the various readings of this place. Philip
Beroald reads, Sisapone Lacertae (as some in the like sense, Satipone) Sisapone
being a Town in Spain mentioned by Pliny lib. 33. where the Romans had their
miniaria, mines of red lead; and thus the Poet should mean, that a little land
though a great way off, and so the less worth, was yet more then the estate of
a hundred Lawiers; rus Lacertae signifying a little land, according to that of
the Poet before, unius sese dominum fecisse lacertae, to be master of as much
land, as a Lizard can turn himself in; though to speak strictly, this were
rather false, then witty. Others read, rus Sati lacertae, making Satus Lacerta
a rich Roman, whose One estate exceeded the estates of a hundred Lawiers.
Marcellus Donatus on Julius Capitolinus (in Clodio Albino) upon occasion of
this place says, Apud Plinium mentio est Russae, sen Russatae aurigae. De quo
forte Juvenalis, Sat. 7. and non de milite, ur alii credidere: forte aliae
solum Russati pone Lacertae: wherein he rejects (and rightly) the exposition of
Britannicus, who interprets it of some Soldier, the color of whose garments,
as he alleges, was reddish, to dissemble the color of his blood, when shed.
But M. Donatus his exposition is better, being in effect the most received, and
indeed the most probable opinion; Lacerta (or as some read, Lacerna) being a
Chariotier in the time of Domitian, as the Scholiast tells us; on those words,
Pone Lacernae.] Nomen auriga abjecti, ex color Russatus. Lacerna sub Domitian^
auriga fuit. Thus, there being diverse factions of Chariotiers distinguished by
the colors of their garments, and one called the Reddish faction (as more
largely may be seen, Sat. 11. Illu-Illustrat. 16. the Poet to show the singular
vanity of the Emperor, says that one such vain fellow, as Lacerta, was by the
favor of the Emperor, richer then an hundred Lawiers. Briefly then, the Poet
says, Put the estates of an hundred Lawiers in one scale, and solum rus only
the land of one Chariotier, Lacerta, of the Reddish faction in the other scale,
and this one shall outweigh them all.

16. Thy judge is wise Bubulcus --. Bubulco Judice. The Poet here ironically
describes their solemn and fruitless pleadings, borrowing that piece of Ovid,
Consedere Duces --. The Judges, says he, take their places, then thou a Lawier
rifest-up pale like Ajax, when with fear he pleaded for Achilles his armor:
even pale with fear, says he, art thou, being to plead before the Judge
Bubulcus, in defense of one's Liberty, or Free state of Birth, which some call
in question. For so it was put to the question, whether he were to be accounted
a free man, whose mother was free at the time of his birth, but a Servant at
the time of her conception; or one whose mother being with child was set free,
yet was afterward made a Servant again before her childbirth. Such causes, as
the Poet implies, Lawiers did use to plead with much care and small profit. In
which passage some take Bubulcus for the proper name of some Judge, others for
some ignorant Judge purposely described by such a name. It may be taken, I
grant, either way; for we find, says Brittanncus, Bubulcus to have been the
name of one, that was twice Consul, A. V. 508. and 518. namely C. Atilius
Bubulcus; and so it may be plainly here used, as the name of Gallicus the
City-Judge, Sat. 13. But the best Copies of the Fasti Consulares have it now in
each place, C. Attilius Bulbus. Yet I deny it not to be probable, that our
Poet according to his Satirical way, might choose here such a name, as might in
a second sense implie a jeer also against the Judge, alluding more
particularly, as Britannicus thinks, to the practice of Caesar, who admitted
diverse Gauls to the number and honor of Senators; a thing afterward amended
by Augustus, as Sueton reports: yet if the like fault had not been continued in
the times of our Poet, to what purpose had he touched upon it? A like jeer is
used by the witty Cervantes, who calls his Knight errant, Don Quixote, or Don
Kneearmour; and his Squire, Sancho Panca, or Sancho Gorbelly.

17. Green Palms may make thy Stairs and Thee admired. Figantur virides
scalarum gloria palmae. The Poet says, that all that which the Lawiers commonly
got, was either a little vain glory, or a little profit. Some understand by
Scalarum gloria, the scalae Gemoniae, saying, that then the Lawier was
honored, when he caused the person, against whom he pleaded, to be condemned
to that execution; so Britannicus. But we may lay aside this remote exposition,
as of a thing, which happened but sometimes, this passage intending something
more frequent. Lubin says, that he, which conquered in Pleading, had a
Palme-branch fix'd-up in his House (in Domo ejus) which was, says he, scalarum
vel pulpiti gloria, ex quibus dixisset; the honor of the Pew or advanced Seat,
to which by stairs he went-up, and from whence he pleaded. More natural is
Brodaeus his exposition (in his Miscellan. lib. 9. cap. 1.) who understands it
of Palme-branches usually fixed at such men's doors, to which they ascended by
steps; expounding scalarum by domus tuae graduum, vestibuli ac januae, adding
that of Claudian. 2. de Rapt. Proserpt. -- alii praetexere ramis Limina --. And
here we may remember that of Lucian (in Rhet. Praecept.) (...). But the best
expression of this place is (as I think) that of Isaac Casaubon (cited by
Autumnus) who by Scalae understands the many stairs by which Poets, Lawiers and
other such poor men ascended to their houses or rather chambers being indeed
but the cock-lofts of other men's houses; adding, that the manner was for those
that had the better in their Court-Pleadings to fix-up a Palme-branch before
their poor door in a vaunt of their success, alleging that of Lucan in his
Panegyr. ad Pisonem, -- licet exercere togatae Munera militae --; and
afterward, Hinc quoque servati contingit gloria civis, Altaque victrices
intexunt limina palmae. And thus our Poet, by the description of such
professors habitations, does not without a jeer implie their neediness, as if
he should say, that all the glory of such cock-loft-men is but to adorn their
stairs with a palme-bough: to which we may only add this little difference,
that their Clients fastened them up at their Lawiers doors, as Dempster says on
Rosinus, lib. 5. cap. 28. p. 514. col. 2.

18. -- Or your Moore's stale Monthly fish; Or wine brought down by Tiber --.
-- aut veteres Afrorum epimenia bulbi; Aut vinum Tiberi devectum. Amongst the
poor rewards here said to be brought to the Lawiers, are reckoned the bulbi,
which some take for onions or such coated roots; Others for a kind of fish,
brought Monthly from Africa. The word indeed signifies both, yet of the two I
rather choose the last, the Poet having immediately before mentioned in like
manner another kind of fish, namely the Pelamides, or Tunnies. Besides, to
suppose that Italy needed to be supplied with Onions from Africa (though
thence, I grant, it had the choicest mushromes) seems improbable, though Lubin
intimates some to have been of that opinion. Besides, the word veteres by way
of disgrace, is more appliable to fish, then to onions, especially if those be
but of one months keeping: which short time does not usually make these the
worse, but the other without the better ordering, odious; yet such stale bulbi,
were the monthly provisions of the Africans, or which the Moors sent to Rome.
We may here take notice likewise of the wine suitable to such fish, bestowed
upon them, namely not the rich and foreign wines of Greece, nor the good ones
of their own Italy, but such as came down by Tiber. The Scholiast speaks a part
of this truth, whiles he says, Non transmarinum, id est, cibarium, that is, not
Beyond Sea wine, but ordinary, or good enough at meals. But Britannicus on this
place says, quasi dicat Transmarinum, non Romanum aut Campanum, quod optimum
erat; that it was Foreign wine, not brave wine, such as the Roman or
Campanian. The last and negative part of which speech is true; the first and
affirmative being false, in which he says, it was foreign wine. Nor is Lubin
free from the like mixture of truth and error, who expounds it thus, vile and
ingratum vinum de Campano agro per Tiberim Romam deorsum vectum, non
transmarinum; in which whiles he says it was vile wine, and yet Campanian, he
couples contraries, the Campanian being excellent wine. Again whiles he says,
that it was Campanian and yet brought down by Tiber, he speaks clean contrary
to the way of conveighance; Campania being the Country now called Terra di
Lavoro, lying from Rome toward the South East; the main body of the Country
called the Territory of Rome (now Campagna di Roma in the North-West part
whereof Rome it self is seated) lying between the City of Rome and Campania:
whereas the Poet says, that the wine was devectum, brought down he Tiber; and
therefore from the North Southward, to Rome. To amend therefore such errors, we
may take notice of Brodaeus his exposition of this passage: who in his
Miscellanies, lib. 9. cap. 17. calls the wine here understood, Vinum
Vejentanum, and adds, Tiberis autem Vejentem agrum a Crustumino dividit; vile
omnino ac tenue, non exoticum, aut transmarinum, utpote Chium, etc. So that he
understands here Vejentane wine. Which though I believe to be a truth, yet it
is necessary to quit one difficulty, before we may admit it; and that is, to
show the Country of this wine, that so it might be devectum, such as might be
brought down the Tiber: which point, though it be intimated by Brodaeus, yet it
may seem contrary to the learned Ortelius, who in his Thesaurus Geograph.
places Vejentum in Campania, as he notes out of Acron upon Horace, 2. Sermon.
which peradventure was the reason of Lubin's assertion and mistake, that this
wine was de Agro Campano: but according to Brodaeus his intimation, it grew
Northward from Rome, and so sutably to the Poets description. The solution of
which doubt may briefly be obtained, if we observe the variety of Places in
names often times not much various. Though then we grant with Ortelius a Town in
Campania called Vejentum, yet we must also grant another called Veii in
Hetruria, where the wine called the Vejentan wine grew, as Lubin himself on
Persius, Sat. 5. on those words, Vejentanumque rubellum, observes; though
unhappily in this place, he thought not on it. And this acknowledgment agrees
both with Brodaeus his exposition and the sense of this place; which implies
that this wine grew not far from Tiber, and Northward from Rome, which is
agreeable to a part of Hetruria, whence by opportunity of the River, it was
conveniently brought to the City. And such Vejentan wine of a dark-red color,
being neither very good, nor far fetched, was made the sorry reward for a poor
Lawier, and such, according to Persius, as the niggardly Seaman afforded
himself.

19. Thus Pedo breaks, Matho, Tongillus too,
That makes with his great Oil-horn much ado.
Sic Pedo conturbat, Matho deficit, exitus hic est
Tongilli, magno cum Rhinocerote lavari
Qui solet --.
The Poet here suddenly turns his speech, expressing that though some crafty
and vaunting Lawier got more then the meaner and simpler sort of that
profession, by a pretense of wealth, yet it was but facie majoris vivere
census, pretense of riches, and that at last they did by such means break, as
is implied in the word sic and conturbat; conturbare fortunas, being to turn
bank-rupt. I need not here refute Lubin's first opinion, who once did read,
Matho dejicit, that he supplanted poorer Lawiers, he himself being rich, and
having his new Litter, as is expressed in the first Satyr in those words,
Causidici nova cum veniat Lectica Mathonis; both because Lubin did rerract his
opinion, and that indeed it was but a pretense of wealth, as Martial intimates
in that passage, Non tu propterea, sed Matho pauper crit. But here in the
description of Tongillus his vanity, we may observe, that the Poet mentioning
his bringing to the Bath on Oile-horn not of the ordinary sort, of a Bull's
horn, but in pride the horn of a Rhinoceros (by Britannicus here called,
Alicornus) does, by a figure, put the beast for the horn.

20. Cicero never should see Two hundred Sesterces for his best see. --
Ciceroni nemo ducentos Nunc dederit nummos. Some would have nummus the same
with dram, which in ordinary acception (and the lowest of diverse) being in
value, 4 d. 200. would amount unto 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. But the nummus being by the
general consent of the learned the same with Sestertius, and so but 1 d. ob.
qa. q. if it be multiplied by 200. comes but to 1 l. 11 s. 3 d. which is the
sum here intended. See more largely of this, (Nummus) Sat. 11. Illust. 2.

21. Gown'd friends before. -- Togati Ante pedes --. The Poet describes the
Pomp of the thriving, at least of the pretending Lawiers, who had their eight
Servants to carry them in their Litter, half a score Attendants, with a Chair
brought after them for their change at pleasure, and other Citizens their
friends, who went before them in their gowns to grace such their Patrons:
antepedes being as much as anteambulones; and as Agraetius the old Grammarian
(in his book de proprietate and differentia sermonis) tells us, Circumpedes
sunt obsequia servorum, antepedes amicorum. To which sense Martial says, Sum
comes ipse tuns, tumidique anteambulo regis. Thus only the rich and vaunting
Lawiers were employed, especially in the weightiest causes, how small so ever
their skill was: whiles the poor ones, though able and eloquent, such as
Basilus, were neglected, especially if the cause were of moment; as, by
pleading, to preserve the life of an offending Son, in danger of death by the
Law. In which case the Lawiers did use to bring-in a weeping Mother, brothers
and kindred, to move compassion by tears; in which case, says the Poet, they
never employ a poor, though eloquent Basilus; but your ruffling pretenders.

22. -- Though their full forms with noise Have killed fierce Tyrants --. Cum
perimit savos classis numerosa tyrannot. Some make the sense to be, Thou O
iron-breasted Vectius teach Shool-boys, by thy art of Rhetoric, to declame;
who in their Declamations kill fierce Tyrants, that is, persuade others to kill
them. But this exposition Lubin justly rejects, thinking it an allusion to
Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant; who was fain to teach a School at Corinth, and,
as the Poet by an aggravation says, was even killed with the continual hearing
of Shool-boy's repetitions: for so he adds, Occidit miseros, etc. so that he
speaks not of a fictitious killing of Tyrants in declamations; but the very
killing of the wretched Rhetoricians, that continually taught and heard such
declamations.

23. Such oft-dress'd Colewort does poor Masters kill. Occidit miseros Crambe
repetita magistros. The reading and interpretation which here I use, as it was
long since preserr'd by Politian, so is it now the most received, and as I
think, the most natural, and so the best, being an allusion to the Greek
proverb, (...): so that as Colewort twice or more often serv'd-up was esteemed
so loathsome, that it was accounted as a deadly dish; so loathsome likewise, so
deadly were such declamations. This were enough for the exposition of this
place, but that for delight I may add the fancies of others. Scoppa then in his
Collect. lib. 2. cap. 2. reads Cambre, and alleges a book concerning the
mirabilia Puteolorum, wherein it is said that Cambre was a Town destroyed by
the Cumani; in remembrance whereof a story was written and called Cambre, which
as the author says, was read in Schools and understood in this verse by
Juvenal, and this story upon no other hearsay Scoppa likes; and it is alleged
also by Pulmannus, but from Scoppa. Ponticus Virunnius (cited by Ortelius in
his Thesaur. Geograph. in the words, Britaniae Insulae) thinks that by Cambre
(for so he also reads) Juvenal in this Satyr means Wales, Cambria. If I may
guess at the occasion of his mistake and appetite so to expound it, I should
think it was to please the Bodoerian family famous in His time (about the year
1490) in Venice, but of British race, in favor of whom (to show the British
Antiquities) he did epitomize the first six books of Jeffry of Monmouth's ten
books: but I leave it to the reader to judge, if his opinion here be not as
wide from the truth, as Wales from Venice? One fancy more I may allege, and
that is of the old Scholiast, who upon Crambe repetita says, Proverbium de
Cramba and Anatho omnibus tritum, cum nihil sibi tam fuisse cognitum
significare voluerint. Tractum a nimis frequenti relatione historiae sive
fabulae ab aliquo tum scripiae. Whereby he would seem to implie, that there was
some known fable or story of that name grown irksome by the familiarity. Which
exposition I had not alleged, as being derided by Politian, but that the
learned Pithaeus gives this note here on the old Scholiast, Scio haec a
Politiano derisa quondam, nec tamen contemnenda putavi. But if I should use the
like license of fancy as others do, I might say, that some ignorant ^^^nuensis
finding in the Scholiast the Greek proverb written in Latin Letters, did
instead of proverbium, dis crambe thanatos, omnibus tritum, read, to make it
seem more easy, Proverbium de Cramba and Anatho, omnibus tritum; and that the
rest which follows in the Scholiast is but the addition and fancy of some such
like reader. Or if we would make sense of the rest which follows in the
Scholiast, we may fancy that some known book commonly read to children in the
Schools was by a jeer for the frequency of it, ironically termed Crambe, or
Colewort. Or if we shall farther venture upon conjecture and somewhat like
Scoppa read Cambra, we may suppose it to have been some doleful Poem composed
of Cambra, who is said to have been the unhappy Mother of unhappy Priamus; but
unlikely to have been so old, as to have seen the death of her old Son. Whefore
he that will be content with easy and sober sense, may rest in the
interpretation of Politian.

24. Each sixth day his dire Hannibal my pate Does fill --. Cujus mihi sexta
Quaque die miserum dirus caput Hannibal implet. The Poet here accuses the
Parents for accusing the Schoolmaster that their Son did not profit, whom the
Poet merrily calls an Arcadian sad, and Ass; the Asses of Arcadia being
proverbially notorious. He expresses then the Master's pains, who to
irkesomness hears his declamation of Hannibal every sixth day repeated, and that
so whiles he strives to perfect the boy, he stark tires himself.

25. Their Baths shall cost six Hundred; Their Walks more. Balnea sexcentis,
and pluris porticus. The Poet here comparing the expenses of parents in the
instruction of their children with their expenses upon their Pleasure, shows
that even the chiefest masters of Rhetoric, such as Pollio and Chrysogonus,
which taught Great Men's Sons that Art out of the Books of Theodorus the
Gadaraean, got but a small reward: whereas rich parents cared not how much they
spent upon their Baths, their Arched walks, and such other delights. In which
passage, in exposition of the words Balnea sexcentis, (which some passover in
a hudling manner) the Scholiast and Britannicus think the Poet to speak of the
Building of costly Baths: but Lubin takes it to be understood of their yearly
expenses in the Bath-fees and other such appurtenances. In which diversity of
Opinions, though none of them give any reasons for the proof of their own, yet
I think the first opinion to be true, and Lubins not to be admitted, as may
appear by the sum here mentioned, if examined. For the Poet speaking before
of an ordinary Lawier's fee, nay, even of Cicero's, said it would not rise to
200. Sestertii, or 1 l. 11 s. 3 d. unless he made a great show of wealth; and
speaking afterward of Quintilian's pay, he makes it but two Sestertia, that
is, 15 l. 12 s. 6 d. but the expense on either Pleasure must vastly surmount
these unwilling charges. According to which sure ground and the clear intention
of the Poet in this place, the examination of the sums shall quit the doubt.
If then we understand Sexcentis (their expense on their Baths) to be spoken
here, as Lubin does, of the nummus or Sestertius 1 d. ob. qa. q. it arises
being multiplied by 600: to 4 l. 13 s. 9 d. and so is far less, then the reward
of Quintilian, though but a Rhetorician. But if Sexcentis be understood of the
Sestertium (which was 7 l. 16 s. 3 d.) it arises being multiplied by 600; to no
less then 4687 l. 10 s. a sum proudly surmounting the triflle of a
Schoolmasters reward, or the yearly expenses in Bathing. Yet as the Poet says
thus vast was their charge of Building for their Glory or Pleasure in their
Baths, which though stately, were of a less extent then their Porticus or
Arched walks (like Cloisters). Yet because the Sum of 600. Sestertia, or 4687
l. 10 s. is very great, which their less expense, that is of their Baths,
amounted to, (for, the charge of their Walks was greater, as the Poet says) it
will not be either unnecessary or unpleasant, to see the fashion of one of them
(and in that the probable expense) according to the magnificence of that Age
and Empire. See then this magnificent Bath, as it is expressed by Du Choul, a
learned French Antiquarie, in his work Des Bains and Antiques Exerc. page 5. *
Jvu. Sat: VII: Illust. 25
depiction of part of a Roman bath Wherein for the better understanding of this
point of Antiquity and diverse passages of this and other Authors, may be
observed the several vessels or places, and conveyances for the diversities of
their waters. The inward roof of the Edifice does much resemble the inward roof
of a stately Church if viewed to advantage of stateliness, as commonly from the
West door upward. Within it was the Hypocaust, which was the place, where the
fire was kept to heat the vessels in the Bath, which were made after the
fashion of furnaces. Over which Hypocaust were set three brazen vessels one
above another, as Vitruvius has it, lib. 5. cap. 10. the Lowest of which
(signified by the letter. C.) was Caldarium, in which was Hot water: the
Middlemost (expressed by the letter. B.) was called Tepidarium, in which was
warm water: the uppermost (at the Letter. A.) was called Frigidarium, in which
was Cold water; under all which, the Fire was kept: the Mouth of which
Fireplace was called Praefurnium (at the Letter D.) The water in which brazen
vessels was so ordered, that cold water being conveyed into the Frigidarium
descended thence into the Tepidarium, and thence consequently into the
Caldarium: (the upper vessel still supplying the under-vessel, as the
undervessel emptied.) So that the nearest above the Fire was the Hot water; the
next removed was the Warm water, and the most removed or uppermost was the Cold
water. Briefly to prove their wonderful cost on their Baths, I may only refer
the reader to Seneca. Epist. 86.

26. Yonder a Feasting Room shall mount on high Numidian pillars, breasting the
Eastern sky. Part alia longis Numidarum fulta columnis Surgat, and algentem
rapiat Caenatio solemn. Surgat, literally, Let there arise, as if it were spoken
by some Rich one appointing in the proud vanity of his wealth, some new and
stately Edifice? Caenatio is the same with Caenaculum, which was the room,
wherein they supped, in the upper part of the house, as is commonly noted, more
particularly here by Britannicus, and likewise by Dempster on Rosinus, lib. 5.
cap. 28. where he expounds Caenaculum by Caenatio, alleging that of Sidon.
Apollinar. Carm. 22. v. 207. Alia volubilibus patet hinc Caenatio valvis. And
as for the situation of the Caenaculum, Varro, 4. de Ling. Lat. says, --
superioris domus universa caenacula dicta; that at last all upper rooms were
called caenacula. Which I the rather note, because Ausonius Popma in his
learned and curious labor de Differentiis verborum, lib. 1. in the word
caenaculum, though he makes caenaculum to be a room in superiore part aedium
(and rightly) in which they supped, makes Caenatio (by way of difference) to be
a supper-room in imo domus; in the lower part of the house. Wherein I believe
he is mistaken, as may appear, both from the judgment of others, taking them
for the same thing, and the invalidity of his own allegations, as also from
Sidonius his epither alia, and this expression of Juvenal, longis fulta
columnis; which seems to be understood of the whole room, not of the roof only:
and lastly from the convenient use of such height, which purposely was for the
taking of the fresh air. Some would understand here, by algentem solemn, solemn
hybernum; the sun in winter: but would not such a room entertain it also in
Summer? and then prove as inconvenient, as convenient in winter? Some would
have this room of pleasure here intended to open to the North, because the Poet
says, algentem solemn: by as much reason we may say, it cannot intend the North,
the North being not at all the Sun's quarter; and for the South and West they
are rather places of heat, even the West toward night, to a Room supposed by
any to lie open toward the West, especially near the evening, which was the
season of supper and feasting, with the Romans. I rather therefore understand
this, as the most considerate interpreters do, (though they mention not these
motives) of the Eastern quarter, which being left by the Sun in the morning
yields a cool-air in the Evening unto a high room opening toward it. And here
the better to express the state of such Feasting rooms (which is the thing here
implied by the Poet) I may add, that some according to this custom, think that
our Savior figuratively used those words, Enter into thy Master's Joy, Mat.
25. (...), as if it had been into a Room, aptly called the Joy. Indeed the
word (...) is used concerning a feast, Esther, 9. (...): and it was one kind of
Manumission, for the Master to invite the Servant to sit down with him. Caius,
Instirut. l. 1. c. 1. According to which supposed custom Maldonate also
expounds the casting-out of the men into outward darkness, (...), the man being
disgracefully put-out of the Feasting room adorned with stately lights (their
feasts being usually extended into a part of the night) into the street, where
was darkness and cold. See Pignorius de Servis, p. 242.

27. -- How then abounds Quintilian with such forests and large grounds* Vnde
igitur tot Quintilianus habet saltus? -- It may justly seem strange (if Juvenal
here speaks properly) that a Schoolmaster, such as Quintilian was (brought out
of Spain by Galba) should attain to such an estate, that he should be said to
be the owner of Forests: ^^ich are, as some call them, Penetralia regum (the
retiring places of Princes) as our learned Manwood notes in his Treatise of
Forest Laws. In which work ( fol. 32.) for the more choice instruction of the
reader, in such an argument, he cites for their Antiquity, Budaus both de
Philolog. lib. 2. and his French Treatise Of Hunting; he mentions also the
Forests of Philip of Macedonia, and of Canutus, whose Forest-Laws he prefixes
before his treatise; and ascending higher ( chap. 2. (...).9.) shows the
Antiquity of them in King David's time, from that of the 131. Psalm, v. 6. Lo,
we heard of it at Euphrates, and found it in the fields of the Forests. For in
those words he alleages the place, though not without a mistake justly to be
obser^'d; the place there spoken of being not Euphrates (a river, a branch
whereof passed through Babylon) but Ephrata, the Country of Ephraim [in the
Holy land] mentioned, Judge. 18, 1. the passage indeed, which he mentions, is
Psalm. 132. v. 6. and is thus rendered, We heard of it at Ephrata; we found it
in the fields of the wood: where the prophet speaks [as it appears, v. 10.]
concerning the Ark, which, as David had heard, was placed by Joshua at Shiloh,
a City in Ephrata; but he found it in the fields of the wood, that is, at
Kiriath-jearim, or, the City of the woods, where it had continued for the space
of 20 years, after it had been brought home by the Philistines, 1 Samuel 7, 2.
But this only by the way, yet necessarily for the rectifying of the allegation.
Yet this prosperity of Quintilian though but a Rhetorician, may in part seem
less strange, if we consider the long time of his profession, above 20. years;
as likewise, that he had a public maintenance from two Emperos, Galba and
Domitian. Though, as Britannicus notes, this was but one example, and seems to
be attributed rather to Fortune, then to the worth of the man [though very
worthy]: which he thinks to be secretly intimated in the word felix used thrice
in this passage. Indeed the Poet plainly artributes it to the Constellation at
ones birth, the Stars, as he speaks, which entertain one new come into the
world, -- and adhuc a matre rubentem; for so they counted Jupiter and Venus
Luckie, and Saturn unluckie. Yet I may here observe farther, that Remmius
Palaemon, a Grammarian mentioned by Sueton, de Illustrib. Grammaticis, cap. 23.
was very rich: for the Author speaking there of his Luxury, says that his
estate should not equal his expenses; nee sufficeret sumptibus, quanquam ex
schola quadragena annua caperet, ac non multo minus ex re familiaris cujus
diligentissimus erat: cum and officinas promer calium vestium exerceret: and
agros adeo coleret, ut vitem manu ejus institutam satis constet trecenta
sexaginta quinque vasa edidisse. Where to omit the value of his vintage, which
alone yielded him 363. vessels of wine, and to estimate his estate the nearest
way, he says, that by his School he had quadragena annua, forty Sestertia,
that is, if reduced, 312 l. 10 s. and but little less from his estate [his
trading, as a sale's man, and his husbandrie]; so that if we double it, it
being not less, then 625 l. we may by an indifferent estimate, judge that he
had about 600 l. of yearly revenue, though but a Schoolmaster. But some think
that Juvenal here by Si fortuna volet, etc. implies, that Quintilian was
Consul; as Autumnus here notes on those words; alleging also that passage of
Ausonius to Gratian, Quintilianus consularia per Clementem ornamenia sortitus
honestamenta nominis, potius videtur, quam insignia potestatis habuisse. Elias
Vinetus thinks he was not consul ordinarius, but suffectus, for a part of a
year upon occasion of the death of some Consul, or the like accident; and that
Quintilian obtained such honor by the favor probably of one Clemens an
unhappy favorite of Domitian; of whom see Sueton, in his Domitian, cap. 11.

28. And wears the bright Half Moon on his black shoe. Apposit am nigrae Lunam
subtexit alutae. The black shoe was proper to the Roman Nobility, as some
affirm others think, black was the ordinary color of Men's shoes; of which
see Demister on Rosinus, l. 6. c. 36. and concerning the custom of wearing the
figure of the Moon upon it, some make the Authors of it to be Evander and the
Arcadians that came with him into Italy; who boasted that their Original was
more ancient then the Moon, as Eustathius mentions, and therefore figured it on
their shoes: and so affirm, that from them the fashion descended to the Noble
Romans, who derived themselves from Evander. The Hebrew women also used it;
but, it seems, only in wantonness; see Isay. 3. v. 18. as Arias has it. On
which place Lyranus says, that Women Sotularibus curiosis vtebantur, [that is,
subtalaribus] woar curious ornaments below the ankle; and farther says,
Incisiones ad modum Lunae fact a in sotularibus, ut dicunt aliqui: but adds,
that some take these Moons for parva bullae aureae dependentes circa collum.
Some say, they anciently woar the Moon below the shoe, to show that after
death they should dwell above the Moon. But these and some other philosophical
and conceited reasons alleged by Plutarch, Jacobus Nicolaus Loensis (in his
Miscellan. Epiphyll. l. 4. c. 25.) rejects, as too fine for the Romans at their
first rudeness: and therefore alleges and rather approves Isidore's reason, l.
20, speaking de Calceamentorum generibus; who says, that the Moon on the shoe
did not intend the fashion of the Moon, but of the letter C, which signifies an
hundred, and so the first and ancient number of the Roman Senators: and this
Loensis thinks Isidore had out of some ancient and approved Author. For the
Matter, and place in wearing of it, there is a little difference; Johannes
Brodaeus (Miscell. l. 8. c. 16.) saying, Calcem vero inferne plerunque muniehat
ferrum lunat a figura, whereby he affirms it to have been of Iron, and worn, as
he seems to speak, about the heel of the soal. But Loensis (in his Miscell.
Epiphyll. l. 5. c. 2.) out of Philostratus, de vitis Sophistarum, in the life
of Herodes Atticus, shows this Moon was of Ivory; Herod there calling it (...)
though with more peaceable probability it may be allowed to have been of
either matter. As for the form, Coelius Rhodiginus calls it fibulam
corniculantem; but Loensis says, he sees not, why he should call it so: for,
says he, Fibula id calceamenti non suit, sed extrinsecus ad malleum utriusque
pedis ornamenti gratia and velut patritiae nobilitatis insigne appositum: that
it was not a tie, nor clasp of the shoe, but worn on the outsides of both the
ankles. But peradventure the learned Rhodigine called it so from the similitude
of fibula Comoedi, which, was the straight-lin'd side being taken away, like an
Half Moon. See before, Sat. 6. Illustrat. 11.

29. -- Although His Master's tail might make one laugh, ye know. -- Et cui non
tunc Eliceret risum citharaeds causa magistri. The Poet showing here the
misery of some Rhetwick. Professors, as of Thrasymachus a Carthaginian, that
through the smalness of the reward left the Profession, and of Secundus
Carinas, that was banished by Caligula, ( as Dion relates) for making by way of
exercise an Oration against Tyrants, affirms the former times to have been
better; and that in Old time Achilles, though grown great, stood in awe of his
Master, though his tail might have made him more ridiculous, then dreadful. In
which expression he secretly jeers at the fiction of his supposed Musick-Master
Chiron the Centaure, whose upper part was like a man, the lower part like a
Horse; and therefore he is called by him, Candatus magister: though by the way,
I may remember for the singularity of it, that Bartholinus in his Anatomy (
l. 4. c. 15.) relates such a story of a Danish child, making it only an
extraordinary excrescency of bones below the os coccygis, the rump bone (called
so from the resemblance of the cuckoe's bill, as he describes it) saying,
majorem vero ossium and cartilaginum numerum adfuisse puto in puero illo
Danico, cui cauda excreverat. But, says our Poet proceeding in his expression
of His times, Now-adays even boys will strike their masters, though such as
Satrius Ruffus a proud and stout one; Ruffus, that slighted Tully himself, as
but a fellow of an Allobrogian (Gaulish) or grosser eloquence; or rather, as
some think, that accused Tully (as Salust likewise does] of complying secretly
with the Allobrogians.

30. -- Yet, without suit before the Tribune, pay They seldom do --. Rara
tamen merces, quae cognitione Tribuni Non egeat --.The Poet here shows the
misery of Grammarians, such as were Enceladus and Palamon (though this latter
were unhappy chiefly by his intemperance) telling them that they must deal like
other tradesmen, that is, abate somewhat of their first set price; though
seldom they got their pay without complaint to the Tribune, so to compel the
parents to the payment of their stipend;for, says Lubin, Hoc inter alia
Tribunorum munus erat. He speaks warily and aloof off:but Britannicus is more
particular in his last annotation on this Satyr, saying, Sed finito anno
pramium tuum promeritum non accipies nisi per litem, and quod populus, id est,
ipse Tribunus magistratus populi jusserit tibi victori dari, ut sic refer as ad
illud, Rara tamen merces quae cognitione Tribuni Non egeat --;so that by
Tribunus he, as some others since him, understands the Tribune of the People.
Unto which interpretation Coelius Secundus Curio adds another, and showing
first his dislike of Britannicus his exposition, he uses these words, -- suam
taemen illi interpretationem reliquimus, and nostram in fine, scholi^ vice,
subjunximus hot modo, etc. The substance of his addition is this, that to say
that Tribunus plebis did decide such controversies, as whether a Schoolmaster
should have his Pay which was agreed-for, is a vain untruth, and against all
Antiquity; such causes belonging to the Tribuni eararii, whom he calls leves
and nummarios judices, who did distribute justice with far less solemnity:
for, as he says, In subselliis, non pro Tribunali jus dicehans; so that they
sat not in state on the Tribunal, as the Praetor did. Which reprehension is
accurate, yet deserves a reprehension, seeing he sets it down as his own
observation, which he first published but in anno 1551. whereas indeed it is
the correction of Alexand. ab Alexandro, about threescore years before, in his
Genesis Die. l. 2. c. 24. out of which place Curio transcribes hither above
twenty lines verbatim, without acknowledging either here or in his preface,
that he tenderd but Collections, which yet might have yielded him credit enough
for his own understanding, Censure and Disposal; but expressly he calls it his
own interpretation. See more of these Tribuni aerarii, in Alexand. ab
Alexandro. l. 5. c. 2. who shows, that they sat in Fortiae Basilica, a place
built by Cato, and more particularly to our present purpose says of them, --
quorum cognitio in pecuniariis and minoribus causis plerunque fuit.

31. -- As he goes To the Hot Baths, or Phoebus his, propose your doubts-.- Vt
forte rogatus Dum petit aut Thermas, aut Phoebi balnea, dicat, etc. The Poet
shows here the small reward bestowed by parents on a Schoolmaster, and yet the
great, the rare skill, which they require in him, as that he be able to answer
to all questions proposed, nay, and that on the sudden, as he is occasionally
going to the Baths, or about other business: for, this I think to be the true
scope of this place, though some things are necessarily to be examined for the
just proof and clearing of it. Some then understand by rogatus, the Son or lad
examined thus by his Father; by pe^it [inte^rogat] and apply it to the Father
asking his Son this question, what are Thermea or Balnea Phoebi? and by dicat
understand again the Son making answer. But this methinks, is very incongruous;
because then the Father should make the question concerning one thing (Phoebi
balnea) and the Son should answer concerning another (nutricem Anchisae, etc.)
where we may take notice, that whereas some tell us, that the nurse to Anchises
is not named by any Author, if they had but consulted with the Scholiast, they
might have found her: to be called Tisiphone. Some understand petit [de
profectione] of the Fathers going to the Baths, and so, in his jouroy, of his
proposing of diverse and curious questions. But the exact purpose of the place
seems to be concerning the Schoolmaster and the exquisite ability they expect
in him, in Grammar, in Histories, in Authors: namely, us forte rogatus, that if
he be asked, though but by Chance, and on the By, as he is going to the Baths
or as otherwise employed, dicat, he resolve instantly any the most curious, and
frivolons questions: so that the person implied both in rogatus, petit, and
dicat, it the same, the Schoolmaster. Only it remains, that we expound in this
passage, [Dum petit out Thermas out Phoebi balnea], why the Poet says, aut
Thermas, aut balnea, by way of division; and secondly, what Phoebi balnea are?
Concerning the first, the Interpreters say nothing; except Britan^icus, who
says on Thermae, that they are loca ca^ida (from (...), calidum) Hot-houses to
sweat-in: and, in reciting an opinion of some others, Lubin confounds them with
Balnea, saying, dum quarit -- quanam sint balnea and Thermae Apollinis, apud
p^^scos Historicos and poetas. But this were but to make the Poet speak
absurdly, in saying aut Thermae aut Balnea. Difference then there was, all
Thermae being balnea; but all balnea being not Therma. Balnea were baths in
general; and properly at the first, only of cold water: Thermae were baths of
hot water, and the first of them in Rome, was built by Mecaenas, as Dion
testifies in his Augustus. See Alex. ab Alexand. Genesis Die. l. 4. c. 20. and
though I think this distinction was not perpetually observed, yet this is
sufficient to clear our Poet's manner of speech from absurdity and confusion,
in saying aut Thermas aut Balnea. Besides, Thermae were the more stately works
of Emperors or Great persons; balnea (though a general name) being more usually
the term for inferior places. Many and most magnificent were the Thermae built
by diverse of the Emperors, as Alexand ab Alexand. shows in the place before
cited; and it was a part of the Aedile's Office to take care, that they were
kept cleanly, and that they were not too hot; as the same Alexand. ab Alexand.
shows, l. 4. c. 4. Concerning the doubt, what were Phoebi balnea and where they
were, Lubin seems to make them Hot baths, and place them out of the City; for
he says, dum pater in itinere est, and Phoebi calida balnea petit; though he
adds, that some hold, that these Baths were at Rome. The Scholiaft upon Phoebi
balnea says, Privata balnea qua Daphnes appellantur. There were indeed Public
and private baths: of the first sort P. victor writes, that there were in Rome,
856. The cause of which multitude Pancirollus ( lib. 1. Tit. 27.] ascribes to
the Dustiness of the ways, and their Custom of not wearing tibialia,
[stockings] For their private Baths, there is in the 4th. Region of the City,
this note, Balnea privata LXXV. before which in order is mention, as of a
distinct thing, of Balineum Daphnidis; the one showing the number of the
private Baths in that One Region, the other by way of some difference from the
Scholiast, that Balineum Daphnidis was not a Private bath: which truth may
preserve us from the mistakes of some Interpreters; But for what cause the Bath
was called so, neither Victor nor the Scholiast show. Some take Phoebus for the
Bath-keeper; which seems not so probable, that a public bath (as this seems to
have been) should be denominated from such a person, either in respect of his
mean Condition, or his not-long Continuance. Wherefore we may here prefer
Dempster's learned diligence (on Rosinus, l. 1. c. 13. in Region. 4.) who by
way of quaere, guesses, if it were not called so from Daphnis a wealthy
servant, who may be supposed to have built it; -- cujus ingens pretium Cn.
Pisaurensi vendente, and M. Scauro licitante refertur fuisse trium millium
septingentorum sestertium (as Pliny relates, l. 7. c. 39.) a great sum to be
offered, 3700. Sesterria! which if reduced, (the Sestertium being 7 l. 16 s. 3
d.) arise to no less then, 28906 l. 5 s. Which edisice Martial is thought to
mention, l. 3. epig. 5. Protenus bune adeas, primique in limine tecti, Quos
tenuit Daphnis, nunc tenet ille Lares. Dempster thinks at a second guess (if
his first please not) that it might be called Phoebi balnea, because sacred to
Apollo, in whose protection the Bath was; Bays, says he, frequently growing
circa balnea, aut in ipsis balneis, the Bay being called Daphne: to which he
adds that of Mart. l. 12. epig. 50. Daphnonos, platanos, ac aereos Cyparissos,
E^ non unius balnea solus habes. Which last containing but a description
agreeable to Baths in general, seems not sufficiently pregnant for the
explication of this place, some particular and eminent place seeming probably
to be here pointed-out. Besides, by this conjecture it might be inferred from
the particle of division aut. that the Bays grew at the Balnea and not at the
Thermae, which were too weak and uncertain a fancy. Wherefore his first guess
may be the more reasonably admitted, if we like the congruity of Daph^is and
Phoebus; and so in defect of other evidence from antiquity, understand it of
Balineum Daphnidi^: and thus make the difference between Thermae and This, not
as between Public and private Baths, not only the Thermae, but This also,
seeming to be public Baths; but rather as between Royal Baths and others
(though such as these also were sometimes sufficiently magnificent) the first
Thermae being properly used for Sweating, the other Balnea for washing; though
in These there was in alteration of time and custom, not only Cold, but also
Hot water, as is before expressed on this Satyr, Illustrat. 25.

32. -- At the year's end so much gold thou 'lt have, As for a Conqueror at the
Shows They crave. -- Et cum se verterit annus, Accipe victori populus quod
postulat aurum. Britannicus here thinks the sense to be, that a Schoolmaster
at the year's end shall be fain to complain for his wages, and be glad to get
what the Tribune, (the protector) of the Feople, and the People should allow
him. This exposition much esteemed by some is by C. Secundus Curio as much
disliked. For though it be said before, Rara tamen merces, quae cognitione
Tribuni non egeat --, yet he affirms it to be against all antiquity to say
that petty and pecuniary business between man and man belonged to the Tribune
of the People, such things being below his cognizance, and proper to lesser
Magistrates, who were called Tribuni ararii, whereas the Tribune of the people
was their protector in a more noble way, that is, against the Greater
Magistrates and the Nobility; as in part is showed before, on this Satyr,
Illustrat. 30. besides this grievance being mentioned before by the Poet, the
repetition may seem an overplus. To view then other opinions, Alex. ab
Alexandro ( Genesis Die. l. 2. c. 24.) interprets this of the Custom of those,
which set-forth Shows, as he speaks, in the Theater (not strictly understood)
bestowing on them, which got the better, rewards, though small ones: according
to which sense he afterward adds, -- vilem assem, and nimis tenuem mercedem,
qualis est stips exigua, quae a populo in ludis postulatur, cum are exiguo
victor a plebe donatur, consequeris. The Scholiast more particularly expounds
aurum here by quinque aureos, saying, Vt in Theatro solemn petere quinque
aureos. Nam non licebat amplius dare. According to which sum, if any would
understand it, the aureus must be reduced, which was twofold, the more ancient
called Consularis, the other Imperatorius: yet before the translation of the
Empire to Bizantium the first is by some valew'd at 17 s. 1 d. obqa. the last
at 15 s. But some make this to have been a (golden) coin valewing 25. denarios,
sive centum sestertios nummos; and so make it a little more, namely, 15 s. 7 d.
ob. Which being the value of the aureus imperatorius, and so in probable
congruitie with Juvenal's time, the aureus here intended; quinque aure^ will be
in value, 3 l. 18 s. 1 d. ob. If any would see more largely, concerning the
rewards, which according to the custom, the People called for in the Circus,
for the Chariotier that got the better, he may see Bulenger de Circo, cap. 54.
and according to this last acception, the place may yield us this quick sense,
as the Poet's meaning, that a Schoolmaster shall have as much for a year's
labor, as a vain Chariotier for a few Hours work.

SATYR. VIII.
ARGUMENT.
What is it to boast of Ancient Blood?
He only's Truly Great, that is Good.
If Vice shoots-up with Noble Rate,
High Birth proves but Advanced Disgrace.
If Nature's Law thou will not keep;
But Gam'st by Night; by Day do Sleep:
Draw thy proud birth from Heavenly wights
Thou do yet but Eclipse their Lights.
Our Poet thus does Plancus chide,
Whom High Blood feaver'd into Pride.
Then, Ponticus, he Rules does set,
If thou a Prefecture do get:
But if what is forged thy Signet sign,
The Arms and Cosenage too are Thine.
Next, Damasippus does appear,
A Consul and a Chariotier!
Who, when his Lust his State had cracked,
Hired to the Common Stage does Act:
In Others parts he may excel,
His Own part sure he Acts not well.
The Sword-fight does not Gracchus shame:
Who, though he scapes, yet wounds his Fame.
Nero is good to Kill and Sing;
The Poet then to view does bring
Catiline and Cethegus's Plot:
Fair was their Birth, their Fact a Blot;
Whiles Tully, Marius, and the brave
Decii by worth made Fame their Grave.
What is it to boast of Ancient Blood?
He only's Truly Great, that is Good.
WHat avail Pedegrees? what is it to owe
Fame, Ponticus, to Ancient Blood? and show
Ancestors Painted; How the Aemilii stand
In Chariots; The Now half-fall'n Curii, and
Corvinus his diminished Nose, or Old
Galba without Nose or Ear? Times so Bold!
In a large Genealogy what good
Is it to boast of Great Corvinus Blood?
Then branch-out (1) smoked Progenitors, though true,
Some Generals of the Horse, Dictators too;
If now the Lepidi live ill? we slight
Their Warlike Statues, if Thou Dice all night,
Before thy portray'd valiant Numantines,
And ^oes^ to sleep, when Venus's Star first shines,
When they ^ov'd Camp and Ensigns? Shall Hig^ Race,
Shall (2) the Allobrogians and Great Altar grace
Herculean Fabius, Greedy, Vain, of Ham
VVeak, and more soft then an Euganean Lamb?
If that a Catanaean Pumice-stone
Smooth his lewd loins, that now a shame he is grown
To's rough-hair'd Grandsires? If he poison buys,
For which (3) his Statue's broke, and's Kindred cries?
Though in thy Hall wax-Images we see,
Virtue's the only true Nobility.
Live like good Paulus, Cossus, Drusus; and
Before thy Statues let these Worthies stand.
Let These before thy Consul's Rods still go:
To me the Riches of the Mind first owe.
Deserve to be held pure, and Just toward Men
In word and Deed? I Will grant thee Noble then.
Hail Great Getulian, or Silanus: be
Noble, whats'ere thou art by Pedigree.
The art a Rare Citizen: with a full voice
Of Fame thy Country does for Thee Rejoice.
I Will cry aloud what the Egyptian Rout,
When they had found Osyr^^, bellow'd-out.
Will any call him Noble, that defames
His Stock, and only brags of Noble Names?
So we some Great Men's Dwarf an Atlas call:
A Black-Moor so a Swan: a wench that is small
And crooked, an Europa: Hounds, not quick,
Grown bare with an old Scurf, and that still lick
The sides of wasted Lamps, the names do bear
Of Libard, Tiger, Lion, or whats'ere
Earth knows more fierce. Take heed then least thou grow
A Creticus or Camerinus So.
Whom warn I thus? Rubellius Plaulus, Thee,
That swell'st with thy high Drusian Pedigree.
As if Thou somewhat had performed, which might
Deserve a Noble Mother of the bright
High Julian Race; (4) not one that for hire sits
In the bleak wind, and some poor Loom-work fits.
You under-men, say Thou, are our base rout,
Whose Parents Country no man can find-out;
But I from Cecrops sprung. Live then, and much
Joy take in This thy Birth: yet know, that such
A Gown'd rout often to the Law-Courts sends
An Eloquent Quiritian, who defends
A Noble Block-head; Opens all his Cause
Solving the knots and Riddles of the Laws.
The youthful Rout has at Euphrates warred,
And tamed Batavia, which our Eagles guard.
They toiled in Arms. Thou only mak'sh thy boast,
The art a Cecropian. The art (5) a Hermes-Post;
Only this odds to thee His Statue gives;
That has a Matble Head; Thy Image Lives.
Tell me, Great Trojan, who did ever hold
Beasts of good race, unless they are strong and bold?
A race-horse so we praise, whose fiery pace
And Conquest the hoarse Circus often does grace.
He Is Right, wheresoever bred, who clearly best
In flight, raises the dust before the rest.
Hirpinus and Corytha's breed we sell
If on their Neck Triumph does seldom dwell.
There Is no respect of Sires and Ghosts: They Are scorc'd.
Away at Low rates, to new Masters: Forced
In wagons with gaul'd necks they draw, when slow,
When fit to turn Nepos his Mill, they grow.
That then we may not Titles praise, but Thee,
Do somewhat, which may on Thy Statue be
Inscribed, beside those Honors, which, thou know,
Were Theirs, to whom, what yet thou have, thou ow'st.
Thus much be spoken to the Youth, whom Fame
Says, Nero's kindred does too much inflame.
For, almost common sense is hardly found
In such Great State. But be not Thou renowned,
Ponticus, by thy Titles. Get a Name
Thy self; It Is poor to build on others Fame:
Least, when the Pillars fail, the roof does fall;
Weak Vines to Widdow-Elmes for Help do call.
Be a good Soldier, Guardian, Umpire; and
When in a doubtful Cause thou needs must stand
A Witness, should Phalaris bid thee be
False, show his Bull, and Dictate Perjury;
Life before Virtue count it lewd to choose;
Do not, to Save Life, the Ends we live for, loose.
He that deserves death dies Alive: although
His Lust an hundred Gaurane Oysters throw
Down his vast throat, and in choice Ointments swim
In Cosmus's Brass-Bath swelling to the brim.
When Thou some Province do at last obtain,
Bridle thy Wrath, thy Avarice restrain
Pity our poor Associates heavy groans;
Some have left Kings no Marrow in their bones.
Mark what the Laws admonish, what the State:
What good rewards upon the Good do wait;
And with how just a thunder Capito
And Tutor fell, who spoiled Cilicia; though
The Senate's sentence saves not from such theft,
When Pansa robs thee of what Natta left.
Sell thy Clothes straight, Chaerippus, by some Crier:
Complain (6) not: Loose not too the Ship-mans Hire;
'Twere Madness. Gentler sighs and wounds insu'd
From loss to our Associates, when subdued
At First; when yet they flourished. Then appeared
Plenty in every house: Money stood reared
In heaps, with Spartan cloaks, Purples from Co,
Parrbasian pieces, Myro's Statues. Lo,
Phidias his Ivory did Live: no place,
But borrowed from Polyclete's Art some grace:
Few tables without Mentor's bowls. These drew
Antonie, Dolobella, Verres too,
To Sacrilege. Their deep Ships close Increase
Of Spoils did bring; more Triumphs from a Peace!
The Oxen now and Mares, though few, they will take;
The Bull and little Field a Prey they will make:
The House-Gods next, if Statue worth their theft
They find; if some small shrine has one God left.
These now are All; sure, These are Chief. Thou Wilt slight
Perchance weak Rhodes, and 'nointed Corinth's might
Justly, what (7) dares Their gumm'd youth Interprize
Like War? what dares that Nation of smooth thighs?
But shun rough Spain, the Gaulish Chariots, and
The Illyrian Coast, and keep thy bolder hand
From the Africa Mowers, who our plenty send,
Whiles we the Circus, and the Stage, intend.
What yet shall such Crime gain, (8) when even to the shirt
Marius of late has the Africans ungirt?
Look, thou no gross wrong do to such as are
Valiant and poor: for make them never so bare
Of gold and Silver, shield and Sword they will get,
Helmet and Darts: The Spoiled have weapons yet.
Nor speak I now (9) Opinion: but deterred
Believe, one of Sibylla's leaves you have heard.
Are thy Men pure? Sells not (10) some long-lock'd Boy
Justice? Is thy wife clear? Is It not her joy
At Towns and Meetings with bowed claws to watch
And there Celaeno-like All Moneys snatch?
From Picus then be branched: or if High Name
Please thee, place all the Titans Fight and Fame
Amongst thy Ancestors, Prometheus too;
Take thy Great Grandsire from what Book's least New.
But if Ambition does thee headlong draw,
And if thou make thy willful Lust thy Law,
Breaking thy Rods on our Associats backs,
Tiring the Lictor, and make dull his Axe:
Thy Noble Parentage does straight disclaim
Thy Acts, and holds a Torch before thy shame.
Vice still is more conspicuous, as he
That Is Guilty, is advanced in High Degree.
Why brag'st thou, who (11) forged Deeds seal'st at the Shrines
Thy Grandsire built, and where in Statue shines
Thy Fathers Triumph? when by Night thy head
VVears (12) a Santonian hood to a false bed.
By his Forefathers Dust and Bones, with free
Chariot, fat Damasippus hurries; He,
He, even the Consul triggs the wheel: by Night
It is: but the Moon sees: the Stars so bright
Dart their pure eyes. But when his Consul-ship
Is done, at Noonday he will take the whip:
Nor will he fear though some grave friend comes by;
Nay, jerk his whip for notice: Heel untie
Bottles, the Hay and Provender He Will throw
Unto his weary horses. A brave show!
Then when as, Numa-like, a Sheep he will,
Or stubborn Bullock at Jove's Altar kill,
Only (13) by Epona he swears, whose face,
With more such, does the stinking Stables grace.
But when to watchful Taverns he does get
Again, straight (14) some Syrophaenician wet
With daily Ointments, one of those that dwell
At the Idumaean Gate, greets him right well,
Host-like saluting him, my Lord, my King:
Tucked Cyane the wine and price does bring.
Some Patron of his fault will tell me, We
Did so, when young: Be It so: The have left; though art free
From hugging Vice. Be brief, when boldly Vile.
Some faults there are, which must not long defile;
But (15) be cut off with the First beard. Admit
Pardon to youth. But can such things be fit
In Damasippus? He even Now to those (16)
Large Hot-Bath-Draughts, and Titled Curtains goes,
More fit for the Armenian Warlike ranks;
For the Rhene, Ister and the Syrian banks;
To keep great Nero's careful breast secure.
To Ostia (17) Caesar, send, send: but be sure
In some large Tipling-house thou seek thy High
Deputy; There it is, thou shall find him lie
With Cutthroats, Sailers, Fugitives, Purse-takers,
With Executioners, and base Biere-makers; (18)
Amongst Great Cybel's silent Drums, which lack
Their Phrygian Priest, who lies drunk on his back.
Where there is equal freedom, the same cup:
Where all at the same Couch and Table sup.
Had such Slaves, Ponticus, were not their Fate
Some Tuscan or Lucanian VVork-house straight?
Trojans, you will escape! Thus what is in the Cobbler Base,
Shall the Great Volusi and Bruti Grace!
Oh, that we cannot Acts of such foul stain
Rehearse, but that there will still worse remain!
Cracked Damasippus, to the Scene the art Hired;
There, bauling-out Catullus's Vision, tired.
Lentulus Velox played Laureolus
Well; He deserved, I think, a True Cross thus.
The people's guilty too, of brow more bold,
That Sits, and Dares (19) Thrice-scurrile Lords behold.
They hear the barefoot Fabii Act, and jeer
At the Mamerci clapped. Their Lives how dear
They sell, who cares? No Nero does compel 'em:
Yet at the high-plac'd Praetor's shows they sell 'em.
Suppose yet (20) There were Swords, and the Stage here,
Which would thou? who so base, Death so to fear,
That he would be Thymeles jealous mate,
Or dull Corinthus his Colleague? In State
It Is yet not strange, if Lords be Mimicks, when
The Prince turns Harper: All will turn Play Then.
One City-shame more, Gracchus does afford,
Not close-Arm'd, without shield or crooked Sword
He fights; (such Dress he does dislike, nay hate)
No Helmet vails his brow. A Trident straight
He shakes: but when his aiming hand at last
Has with his waving Net erred in his cast,
He lifts up his bare face to all with moan;
About the Sand he flies glad to be known.
It Is He, though coated: A Gold-ribband ties
His high Cap, from his throat then loosely flies:
That the Pursuer, which with Gracchus fought,
Endures what is worse then any wound, a Flout.
What wretch but would be, might he speak his mind,
To Seneca, then to Nero, more inclined?
Whose dismal Deeds deserved some Fate as black,
More then one Ape (21), one Serpent, and one Sack.
Orestes killed his Mother too, with odds
Yet, in the Cause: for he was by the Gods
Made the Revenger of his Father slain
Amid'st free Cups: but knife he never did stain
In his Sister Electra's throat; nor spilt
The blood of his dear Spartan wife: no guilt
Of pois'ning Kinsmen touched him: His Mad wit
Never sung on Stage, nor Trojan Poem writ.
What could Virginius, Vindex, Galba's hand
Revenge more justly? View the fierce command,
The bloody rage of Nero, what rare parts
Find we? Lo, These are a Great Princes Arts,
Upon a Foreign Stage for false renown
To sing, and win (22) the Grecian Parsly-Crown.
Thy Grandsires Statues with Song-Ensigns grace:
Before Domitius's feet the long robe place,
In which thou did Antigone express,
Thyestes too; or Menalippe's Dress:
And on a high Marble Colossus claim
Renown, by hanging up a Harp to Fame.
What, Catiline, is found of Nobler Height
Then Thy Birth or Cethegus his? By night
Arms yet you took: to ashes you would have turned
Houses and Temples, as when Rome was burned
By short-slop'd Gauls and the Senoni^n brood;
For which in fiery coat you should have stood.
But Lo, the Consul watches, and checks straight
Your Troops: This New, Ignoble Arpinate,
This Country-Knight-upstart at Rome does guard
Astonished Rome, and (23) toils in every Ward.
And thus within our walls the Civil Gown
And Peace bestowed upon him more renown
The e're Octavius's bloody Sword could yield
From the Actian Sea Fight, or Thessaltan field.
But Cicero, Rome, Rome did, when saved from spoil,
Her Founder, and his Country's Father, style.
Another Arpinate on Volscan hill
Other men's land, for hire, half-tir'd did Till.
His (24) pate did next the knotty Vine often crack,
If in the Camp and Trench his Axe were slack.
He yet received the Cimbrians and the doom
They threatened: He alone saved trembling Rome.
And when the Crows to the slain Cimbrians fl^d,
Having on larger Carcasses never fed,
His (25) Nobly-born Colleague of equal sway
Was yet adorned but with the second Bay.
Vulgar the Decii's Souls were, their Names too:
For All our Legions yet, the Aides we drew
From Others, and our Latin youth, (26) suffice
They did the Infernal Gods: A Sacrifice
TO our Mother Earth they were, all that she craved;
More worth the Decii were, then All they saved.
The Robe, Rods, Diadem, Desert did fling
On a poor Handmaids Son, our (27) last Good King.
The Consuls Sons our Gates thought to unbar
To banished Tyrants; when they should in War
Have done for our then doubtful State and Right,
Some (28) brave Act, which Cocles and Mutius might
Have wondered at, and that Maid so renowned,
That swom over Tiber then our Empire's Bound.
To the Fathers (29) with these News a Servant runs,
A sad one to the Mothers of those Sons:
From whom disloyal blood the Rod first draws,
And then the first Axe of the Consul's Laws.
Better thy Father some Thersites were,
So thou were an Achilles, and could bear
Vulcanian Arms, then that thou be the Sot
Thersites, though Achilles thee begot.
But, grant thou do from far derive thy Line,
All yet is drawn from the infamous Shrine.
Thy First great Grandsire, whenceso'ere he came,
Some Shepherd was, or (30) what I Will spare to name.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Eight Satyr.
Atria; the Reason of the Name, and the Use of them. Ara Maxima. Euganei.
Pumices; their abuse. The Breaking of the Statues of Noble Ossendors upon their
Condemnation. The Atria not open at the top; against Ptolemaeus Flavius.
Mercurie's Statues; their Fashion and Frequency at Athens. Hirpinus and
Corytha. Naulum; the various interpretations of it. Resina; the abuse of it
anciently. Discinxerit Afros, expounded by Marcellus Donatus; better by
Britannicus. (...) and Discinctus. Zona. Sententia; the acception of it here,
against the Opinions of some Interpreters. Sibyllae folium. Acersecomes.
Tabellae Testamentariae; the usual Place and Time of their Sealing. Witnesses,
sworn Fasting. (...), why so called; showed from Balsamon. Cucullus Santonicus.
Sufflamen, Epona; her Name and Dress. Manna foeni. (...), a Spartan Curse.
Potta Idumaea. Thermarum calices and Inscripta lintea; the various
interpretations of them discussed. Lintea Cabsaricia. Linum Catagraphon. Mitte
Ostia; d^versly expounded, Sandapilae. Triscurria retained, against the
variety of Reading tendered by some. The Manner, Degrees and Reason of the
strange Punishment of Parricides, showed from Modestinus, Dositheus, Hieronymus
Magius and Alexander ab Alexandro. Culeus, (...); the matter of it diversely
expressed by Juvenal and Isidore: the Capacity of it reduced. Coronets of
Parsley used at the Nemaean Games; the Cause of the Custom. The various Reading
of that passage, In omni part laborat. The Military punishment with the
Vine-rod. Laurus Secunda, diversely expounded. Devovere se. Trabea. Diadema,
described by Pancirol from St. Jerome; otherwise by Britannicus, and probably
with such difference by Marcellinus. Regum ultimus. unwarily here expounded by
Autumnus. That Passage, Quod mitaretur cum Coclite Mutius, too remotely
expounded by Lubin; aptly by Britannicus. Servus Matronis lugendus, differently
interpreted. The Rodds and Axe carried before the Consuls; the form of them
expressed from Antoine le Pois: why they were boundup together. Autumnus his
curiosity about, Illud quod dicere nolo, not admitted. Asyla, the Antiquity
of them.

1.
Then branch-out smoked Progenitors though true,
Some Generals of the Horse; Dictators too;
If now the Lepidi live ill?
-- Et posthac multa deducere virga
Fumosos Equitum cum Dictatore Magistros
Si coram Lepidis male vivitur?
THE Poet showing ^he vanity of old Genealogies. and decayed statues of one's
Ancestors speaks in the figurative description of a tree and branches, and so
uses the words, stemmata and multa virga; after which fashion Genealogies use
to be described. In which passage some expound multa virga by fasces virgarum,
the Bundles of Rods, which by way of Terror were usually carried before the
Dictators, the Consuls, and the Magistri Equitum (to omit some others): which
exposition though some choose not, they show no reason, why they refuse it. In
which point I think, that though the word be used in such a sense a little
after in Juvenal himself, in that verse, Praecedant ipsas illite Consule
virgas, yet such an acception seems not to be here; the Poet speaking here of
such great Officers, only as they were in statue. Again, some Copies have
famosos, which though it be most commonly used in the worse part, and so could
not be intended here, he applying it to their virtuous Ancestors; yet if it
were taken here in better part, it were nothing so suitable to the Poets present
intent, as fumosos: which is aptly spoken, as according to the custom of
placing of waxen statues of their Ancestors in atriis, in the Hall of the
Palaces, and according to that of Seneca, de Benesic. lib. 3. Qui imagines in
atrio exponunt, and afterward, in prima part adium collocant. Now in their
Atria they made fire, as Britannicus notes, citing St. Luke for it; and
alludes, I suppose, to his 22. cap. v. 55. where it is said, they made a fire
in the High Priest's Hall, it being in the Original, (...), in the vulgar, in
medio atrii; according to which use, some (amongst other Opinions) think them
to have been called Atria (as Britannicus farther observes) quod atra essent ex
fumo. In their atria they also supped, as Pancirollus notes, lib. 1. Tit. 51.
that so the Censors, as they passed-by, might see whether any exceeded the Laws
of expense in diet. There is also a little difference here about the exposition
of the word coram, which joined with Lepidis, as some will have it, signifies,
If thou live ill before the Images of thy Noble predecessors the Lepidi, as
presently it follows in the like sense, Ante Numantinos; but expounded alone,
as it is by Lubin, signifies Now, or at this present; and then Lepidis vivitur
is by him taken for a Lepidis vivitur; as if the Poet should say, If Now the
Lepidi live ill, what is it to show the statues of Ancestors which did well?
Either of which expositions may be without inconvenience admitted; but Lubins
yields more variety and aptness of sense. I may add what Britannieus notes,
that it is said, Equitum cum Dictatore Magistros; because always, when they
made a Dictator, there was likewise made a Magister Equitum, who in the absence
of the Dictator had absolute authority. One less doubt I may not omit, in
defense of my rendering Dimidios Curios, by the Half-fal'n Curii: for whereas
some take it in opposition to Whole statues, for statues formed to the Wast it
cannot be here so understood; in respect that such half-statues are so made on
purpose, and by Art: but these Dimidii Curii were such as were made so by
Decay; and so, though half-statues, yet not the half from the head to the wast,
but rather from the wast to the foot; the upper part, as more exposed to
injury, being first decayed, as the Poet here expresses by the perishing of the
nose and ears of the statues he here speaks-of; implying likewise as much,
whiles he says, Et Curios Jam dimidios; that Now they were become half-statues.

2.
Shall the Allobrogians and Great Altar grace
Hercule an Fabius? --
Soster then the Euganean lamb?
Cur Allobrogicis and Magna gaudeat ara
Natus in Herculeo Fabius Lare --
Euganea quamtumvis mollior agna?
The family of the Fabii was very famous, and derived it self from Hercules,
whose Rites, and so his Altar (which was called Ara Maxima, as Solinus says,
and here for the verse sake Magna, as Britannicus notes, and placed in Foro
Boario, in the Beast-market) was counted hereditary to that family, which also
was made famous by Q. Fabius Maximus, who was called Allobrogicus for his
victoric over the Allobrogians. Yet even the Son of that Conqueror was most
effeminate, or, as the Poet speaks, softer then an Euganean Lamb. But here in
some Interpreters is some variety and much mistake. Lubin on this place say^,
Euganea] Ahina, vel Patavina, vel ut alii, Tarentina, Calabra and Veneta, (Illi
enim Populi Euganei dicebantur) His autem ^vibus nihil erat mollius, and lanae
valde laudabantur. Plin. lib. 3. cap. 20. Scribit Euganeorum oppidum esse
Veronam, and quae quidem urbs distat Patavio millibus Passuum. Lubin's
annotation has led others into error: into which he also partly fell, by not
carefully observing what he read. I guess the occasion of his mistake to have
been from the Old Scholiast, who here on the word Euganea gives this note,
Calabra, Tarentina au^ Veneta, which in it self bad, is in the recital made
worse by Lubin, whiles he turns it into and Veneta, the Scholiast, at the best,
implying it to be one of the three, but Lubin making Euganea to contain those
three; but with great error, the two first being in the South-East of Italy,
the last in the North-East. The occasion of which affertion was as I think a
mistaken truth; to wit, that of Martial, writing of the finest fleeces of
Italy, Velleribus primis Apulia, Parma secundis Nobilis, Altinum tertia laudat
ovis; which some seem to have mistaken, thinking them to have been as near in
situation, as in condition of the fleece; when as Tarentine and Calabrian were
to the South, the rest to the North. Livins dicit (says Autumnus on this place)
Enganeos esse inter Alps and Mare. to determine it more nearly, the Euganean
Hills are by Ortelius placed in the Territory of Venice, particularly in Marca
Travisana, adjoining to that place, (as he guesses) which is now called, with
small difference, Vallis Sugana. The Poet adds, that degenerate Fabius did
ignobly Smooth his skin with pumice stones, such as the wanton Sicilians used,
who had plenty of them, at their Catana, thrown-up by their ill neighbor
Aetna, and abused by them to such purposes.

3. For which his statue's broke. What is it, says the Poet, for great persons,
but lewd ones, to brag of the Images of their Ancestors, such as the Aemilii,
Curii, Corvini, Lepidi, Numantini (or, Scipio's) and the like, when as by their
own ignoble actions they traduce, that is, digrace their Ancestors, and deserve
to have their own statues broken, as was Sejanus his. See Sat. 10. and here may
be remembered that of Tacitus, Annal. 2. Tune Cotta Messalinus, ne imago Libonis
exquias posterorum comitaretur, censuit; it is spoken of Libo, that slew
himself being accused of treason against Tiberius, On which, see Lipsius.

4. -- Not one that for hire fits In the bleak Wind, and some poor Loom-work
fits. Non quae ventose conducta sub nere texit. The Poet having showed, that he
first requires in a man bona animi, virtues, upon which terms he will allow him
to be a Getulicus, such as Cossus was that conquered the Getulians; or a
Silanus, that slew Mago the Carthaginian General, and took Hanno another of
their Generals Prisoner; that he will crie-out for joy, (...), as the
Egyptians at the finding of Apis: warns him that he be not called by a great
name, such as Creticus or Camerinus by contraries, he being neither like
Metellus, that over came the Cretians, nor like the latter, that fetched the
Laws of Solon from Athens. Which speech on the by, he confesses he directs to
Rubellius Plautus, of as great Pride as Nobility; though, says he, thou no
more deserve such a mother, then to have a poor woman, that for small wages
works all day in the open air. In which passage some copies have, sub aggere,
understanding it of a rampire or mount raised by Tarquin, where they say, Women
did use to sit at work; so Lubin: and the Scholiast says, in castris; but they
allege not any authority. The common copies have, sub a^re, and expound it by,
sub dio; which is the most casie and natural exposition; and so the most
received. But Ptolemans Flavins in his Conjectan. cap. 14. expounds it by, in
atrio: which though it were true (that Women wrought there) yet it could not be
the exposition of sub aere; the atrium being roofed-over, as may appear from
the uses of it. Illustrat. 1. namely, their supping in it; their making Fire in
it, and their placing of Waxen Images in it; which uses cannot agree to a place
subject to rain.

5. -- The art a Hermes-Post. He alludes to the Statues of Mercury, which were
commonly at Athens placed by way of Religion over the Gates of their houses, to
one of which the Poet here compares this boaster; telling him, that he will
allow him to be a Cecropian, that is, an Athenian, yet not sprung from Cecrops,
the Athenian King. Now the Statue of Mercury at Athens, was a Marble Head set
upon a shape-less Post; whereupon the Poet says, Thou art like a Mercury's
Head, only His is of Marble, and thine Lives; or rather, says he, thou art like
the Post, on which it stands; for that is not only without life, but also
without lively form. Next he presses him with a witty reason, and jeer drawn
from very Beasts; saying, that there is no more reason why unprofitable men
should be estem'd, then why unprofitable Cattle: but, says he, the breed even
of Hirpinus and Corytha, (the most famous Horse and Mare for breed, as being
commonly excellent at the Race) if it prove bad, (if their Colts prove but
jades) is usually turn'd-off to the Cart or Mill. The name Hirpinus (used also
by Martial) was drawn from the place of his breed, it being a Hill in the
Country of the Sabines, says the Scholiast; but Pithaeus sets a doubtful mark
upon the word Sabinis, and Ortelius more expressly censures it, saying, sides
sit penes Grammaticum. Corytha or (Corife) as the Scholiast has it, is by the
Scholiast likewise brought from an excellent race of that name in Achaia, but
Autumnus says, Corythus est oppidum Tusciae. Indeed Coritus (not Corythus) as
Ortelius notes out of Servius, was a City and Hill in Tuscia: who tells us
also, out of Blondus, of Hirpinum a Town in Italy; from which, place thus
described by Ortelius, it is probable, that Hirpinus here mentioned did come:
but I think it not probable to guess with Autumnus, that Corytha came from
Coritus; this City of Hetruria being by Virg. Aen. 9. made short in the two
first syllables, in that verse, Nec satis extremas Coriti penetravit ad urbes,
whereas Juvenal makes here the two first syllables long; sed venale pecus
Corithae posteritas and Hirpini --.

6. Complain not; loose not too the Ship-man's hire. 'Twere Madness --. Jamque
race. Furor est post omnia perdere naulum. Some take naulum here for the triens
(the third part of the As) a farthing, due to Charon for wasting over the Soul
departed: but this seems a little to our-run the just sense of the place. The M
S. Commentary makes the party here wronged to be a young Merchant, and takes
naulum for the Ship it self; and so this Speech for an Admonishment to him,
that he trouble not himself to come to Rome with his Complaint, least having
nothing left but his Ship his only means to live, by carriage of people and
wares over Sea, he be utterly undone. But this acception of naulum being
without warrant, this exposition, as too weak, is not to be admitted. According
to others then, the sense of this place, if we collect it, will stand thus; The
Poet having said, that it is no true life to abound in wanton diet, and costly
ointments, instructs one, if happily he should get the government of some
Province, to deal justly with the poor Subjects; and not by oppression to undo
subdued Princes (as Plutarch relates of M. Antonie) that is, as our Poet
speaks, to leave no marrow in their bones. Unto this course he moves him by two
reasons, the first is drawn from the Law and the injunction of the Curia, the
Senate, which require this of him at his departure to his charge: the second is
from the punishment of such as in this kind have offended; such as were Capito
and Tutor [mention'd by Tacitus] who instead of ruling, robbed the Cilicians
[though these whom they robbed were very pirates) but by the sentence of the
Senate, as by a thunder, were justly struck. Yet the Poet bewailes it as a soul
fault in the Senate, that, though they punish the former Governor, suffer the
Succeslour to be as bad: in which case says the Poet to any such poor
Provincial, Thy way is, O injured Chaerippus, even to seek out a Crier to set
thy clothes to sale, and other such small goods, which perchance are yet left,
before the successor does come with a new hunger, and devour the little that is
left unto the: intending that if thus he turned his small goods into money, he
might happily the better conceal the remainder. For, says he, never complain,
never hire thy passage by Ship from the Province of Cilicia (for of that he
speaks) unto Rome, least thou spend, the little thou have, in vain upon thy
wastage, and so be as destitute of money, as of remedy. This, as the most
received, I think the best interpretation derived from the Scholiast, and
enlarged by Lubin. The Poet adds by way of a jeer against such Oppressors, that
if honesly cannot keep them from Oppression, yet now necessity must, there
being little or nothing left in the Greek and Asiatick Cities, specially if
compared with the spoils they yielded, when first conquered.

7. -- What dares their gumm'd youth enterprise like War? -- Quid enim resinata
juventus, etc. There was a wanton custom in those times [especially amongst
the Corinthians] complained of by Pliny lib. 14. which was to dissolve gum in
Oil, and therewith keep their skin smooth from hair. In which passage Lubin
notes that enim should be left our, the two first syllables in resina being
long; which is observed before him by Joan. Baptista Pius, in his Annot. Prior.
where accordingly he mends that of Martial, as some copies have it, Cessatis
pueri nihilque nostis, Veterno resinaque pigriores, reading the last verse
thus, Veterno remoraque pigriores; showing that Martial not much after, says,
Quid faciant ungues? nam certe non potes illos Resina veneto nec reserare luto.
And though some late copies have enim, yet I find it not in four the best MSS.
which I use. The Poet here, prosecuting his just invective, tells the Romans,
that though they dare unjust acts against some wanton People, such as Rhodians
and Corinthians, yet must beware of slout Nations, such as the Spanish, the
Gaulish, the Illyrian; and the African also, which bring Provisions to Rome,
whiles the Romans idly spend their time in the shows at the Circus, and at
Stage Plays: where some unwarily say, in the Circus at Stage Plays; when as the
Circus was for Races with Chariots, and fighting with wild Beasts, and the
like. See Rosinus lib. 5. c. 5. But the place for Stage Plays was the Theater,
properly so called; as I have showed, Sat. 4. Illust. 16.

8. -- When even to the shirt Marius of late has the Africans ungirt? Cum
tenues nuper Marius discinxerit Afros? He speaks of Marius Prisens mentioned in
the first Satyr in those words, Exul ab octava Marius bibit. --. Discinxerit
Afros, that is, subegerit, says Marcellus Donatus, page 311. on Suetons
Augustus, cap. 24. whence, says he, the Greeks also called (...), not one that
had a good girdle, but a good courage, that was valiant or well girt: and so it
was a disgrace for a soldier to be ungirt [discinctus] This I grant to be a
good observation, yet the common opinion I think to be more full, which renders
it by spoliaverit; so that he did not only overcome them, but also make a prey
of them, which is but agreeable to Juvenals own words, which a little after
follow, Spoliatis arma supersunt. Yet Lubin more nearly expounds it by, Vsque
ad zonam depraedatus sit. Quasi etiam cingulum illis abstulerit: but before him
Britannicus, and as I think, best interprets it by spoliaverit, with this
addition, Tractum ab his qui veftimenta alicui ablaturi zonam dissolvunt. Which
opinion, though I grant to be the best, and accordingly render it, that he
stripped them to their shirt, and so took away not only the Girdle, but also the
clothes; yet the Critics might have thought on one sense more, to which the
word discinxerit might have prompred them; namely, that he did not only
overcome them, and take away the main of their Estate, but even their girdle,
that is, their purse, which usually they wore in their girdles; and thus make
the Poet point out the rigor of their Avarice.

9. Nor speak I now Opinion? but deterred Believe, one of the Sybylla's Leaves
you have heard. Quod modo proposui non est sententia: verum Credit me vobis
folium recitare Sibylla. Many are the Interpretations of this passage
occasioned by the ambiguity of the word Sententia; which some think here to
signify propositum, as if the Poet should acknowledge this, which he spoke
last, to be a digression from his purpose, his intended description of a
Nobleman, yet that it was a truth. But this is not the acception of the word
in any other place of Juvenal, though he often uses it: besides that here seems
no digression at all. For, the Poet showing first, that Birth without Virtue is
no true Honor, does in the freedom of a Satyrist reprehend Rubellius Plautus
for his vain pride conceived from his high-birth; then instructs Ponticus how
he should behave himself, if he got the Government of a Province, aptly showing
the disservice he would do unto his Country by Oppression, in raising
Rebellion: then dehorts him from forgery; from luxury also and other vices by
the vile examples of Damasippus, Gracchus, Nero, Catiline: lastly, showing the
worth of men meanly born, as of Tully, Marius, and the Decii, he draws to a
conclusion; so that, how the Poet should have here need to excuse himself for a
digression, I see not. Lubin thinks the word here fignifies voluntas; as if the
Poet should say, What I have said, I wish not: but this acception is not
agreeable to the proper use of the word, which has reference rather to the
understanding, then to the will; besides that it were a superfluous simplicity
of Love, for a man to say, that he did not wish a Rebellion, it being his duty
to detest it. Some take it for a Decree; as if the Poet should [vainly] say, he
did not indeed decree this evil against his Country, whereas it neither could
be in his loyalty, neither was it in his power. The Scholiast takes it for nuda
verba, saying, that in a sentence there may be somewhat that is false: which
last clause, though we grant to be a truth, yet why senrentia should therefore
be rendered by nuda verba, I see no reason. Pithaeus on those words of the
Scholiast, non sunt nuda verba, notes here from Petronius, those words,
Sententiarum vani^^^mus strepitus, and Audirem sententios, id est, vitream
fractam, and somniorum interpretamenta, and fabulosum sententiarum commentum;
by which he may seem to imply, that sententia signifies here a witty saying,
according to which sense the Poet should imply, that he speaks not here a
quaint sentence, but a very Oracle, meaning it by those words, as I guess,
Spoliatis arma supersunt. But this methinks, were some levity in the Poet, to
tell us, that what he says, might be taken for a witty speech; besides that
such a sense were indeed an untruth, the words which he spoke, being an Apt
saying. Britannicus renders the place those, Non est quod tantummodo e^o ita
sentiam: but this would confess it to be an opinion, though not only His; and
so the Poet might rather have said, Quod modo proposui Mea non sententia verum,
etc. but he says more absolutely, -- Non est sententia; as if he should say,
you may think this to be but opinion, but it is not opinion at all; it is nor
opinion, but (a Oracle, or) a Leaf of Sibyl. And therefore I render it not, nor
speak I my opinion, (for that might have been an absolute truth in it self,
though he had modestly called it but Opinion) but according to the purpose of
the Poet, Nor speak I now Opinion; which is clearly the sense of the word,
sententia, frequently used by our own Poet, as Sat. 4. concerning Montanus his
Opinion of the Fish, Vicit digna viro sententia, verse. 136. and Sat. 6. verse.
498. concerning the Matron's Opinion about the Lady's Dress, -- sententia prima
hujus erit --; Her Opinion must first be given. And as he thus denies it to be
Opinion, which includes only Probability, and so but incertainty; so he says,
in opposition to it, that it is a leaf of Sibyl, implying that it was Divine
testimony, or the testimony of the Gods speaking in her by instinct of a
Prophetess; and calls it a leaf, because she writ her Answers (before the
invention of Paper) in Palm-leaves, as some tell us, out of Pliny (lib. 13.
cap. 11.) See Sat. 1. Illust. 28. But we may not omit, that Guilandinus (de
Papyro) says, that Pliny's text is corrupr, and that instead of Palmarum, it
should be Malvarum; the Palme-leaf being too rough for such use, but the
Mallow-leaf being soft, and so, very fit. See Salmuth on Pancirol. lib. 2. Tit.
45.

10. -- Sells not some long-lock'd boy Justice? -- Si nemo tribunal Vendit
Acersecomes --. Acersecomes is one of the names of Apollo, and here applied to
the Favorite of some Prefect of a Province. Aurelius Haurechus, de
Cognominibus Deorum, lib. 1. cap. 4. p. 114. calls him, according to Pindarus,
(...) (intonsus) from (...) and (...); and so with a little difference from
this writing: but Philostratus Junior, in Heroicis, cited by Hieronymus Columna
on Ennius his Fragments, p. 436. calls him (...), as Juvenal does Here. The
sense is, if thou have no Favorite, nor a Wife, that like Celeno one of the
Harpies, goes about with thee through the Province taking bribes, then call thy
self as Noble as thou will; draw thy line from Picus the first King of the
Aborigines, the son of Saturn; or from the Titans, that gave buttle to the
Gods; or from Prometheus (the Father of Deucalion) that is seigned to have made
man of moistened Clay.

11. -- That forged Deeds seal'st at the shrine Thy Grandsire built --. --
falsus signare tabellas, in templis quae fecit a^us. It was usual, as
Britannicus notes, to dispatch the sealing of men's last Wills (which required
fideliry in the witnesses) in the Temples; so to put men in mind, that Religion
bound them to be faithful. And this they performed only in the morning, as
Georgius Longus, de Annulis Signatoriis, page 98. observes out of Martial, lib.
10. Epig. 70. Nune ad Luciferam signat mea gemma Dianam. The like care (in
after times) is observed in the Canon Law. C. Honestum. 22. q. 5. where it is
ordered, -- Vt qui in Sanctis auder jurate, baec jejunus faciat cum omni
honestate and timore Dei; that he which is received for a witness ought to be
fasting; to make the business, it seems, the more solemn, and so the person the
more honest. The like caution is in the Decretals. lib. 2. de Testibus. C.
placuit. -- nullus restimonium dicat nisi jejunus. The Oath which the witness
took (as we may a little farther observe with Dempster (de juramento lib. 3.
cap. 1.) Balsamon calls (...), a Corporal Oath, because the hand in the taking
of it, touched the Gospels, the Altars, or according to the Ceremonies of those
times, the Relics of the Saints. Cap. ult. Jur. Calum.

12. Wears a Santonian hood --. This was a hood worn usually by Soldiers, of a
course wool and a dark color, called here by the Poet, a Santonian-hood,
because it was usually worn, as Lubin says, or, other made, as the Scholiast
tells us, by the Santones, the People of that Country, which is now called
Xantoigne. This hood is thought to be called by Martial, Bardocucullus; such a
hood as the French Bards wore, who as Strabo lib. 3. notes, were addicted to
Peotry. And such a hood the Poet here implies, some lewd Great-ones did usually
put on, going thus disguised to lewd places for their foul purposes, according
to that in the like kind, Sat. 6. verse. 327. -- dormitat adulter? Illa jubet
sumpto juvenem properare cucullo. See Savaro, on Sidonius Apollinaris his
Epist. 16. Lib. 7.

13. Only by Epona he swears --. -- Jurat Solam Eponam --. The Poet having here
showed the odious behavior of some Great one, under the feigned name of
Damasippus, (or as Pithaeus his copy has it, Lateranus) who being Consul,
shamed not to play the Chariotier, he himself applying the trigger to the
Chariot. by which instrument it is saved from running dangerously in steep
places; shows next, that he did swear only by Epona, the Goddess of Stables; a
supposed Deity, which the lamentable Devotion of the Heathen raised to it self.
Which Goddess is by some called Hippona (the middle syllable being long) by
some Hippo, and in some of the MSS, which I use, Ypona (the middle syllable
being short): but Lubin, or rather before him Turnebus lib. 24. cap. 4. has
clearly showed, that it is Epona, both from Plutarch in his Parallels, and also
from that of Prudentius [in Apotheost] Ne^^ Cl^acinae aut Eponae super astra
Deabus; and so, though some copies have here -- Jurat Hipponam and facies olida
ad praesepia pictas, yet four of the best MSS. which I use, have -- Jurat
Yponam, and facies olida, etc. clearly agreeing, excepting but the difference
of a letter, with Turnebus his Observation. To which I may add, that Pithaeus
also in his Notes on the Scholiast, confirms Epona from an ancient Inscription
of a stone, which testimony I the rather note, because it has occasioned such
discourse amongst the Interpreters. Apuleius in his Metamorphosis, (lib. 3.
toward the end; where also, according to the best editions, it in read,
Epona,) describes the Image of this Deity, as placed in the middle of the upper
part of the Stable, and curiously bedecked with Coronets of fresh Roses, [as
Juvenal here implies] with the Images of other Deities also. The Poet
aggravates the unseemliness of this Stable- Consul, in that he swears by this
rank Shee-deity, as by that which he most esteemed, like him that swore by
Juno; as you may see, Sat. 2. Illustrat. 19. The Poet adds, that this
Damasippus played the groom of his own Stable, he himself giving his horses
their meat, breaking the bottles unto them, as these words imply, -- maniplos
Solvet --; that is, says the Scholiast, mannas faeni, meaning handfulls of
bottles of Hay. Which I note for the singularity of the acception of the word
manna used here by the Scholiast; and leave it to the Readers fancy, whether he
will derive it from the Hebrew, (...) praepara, and so may be taken for any
thing that is food; or rather, as I think, in this place by a barbarous
derivation from manipulus. And thus this Damasippus was sick of that disease,
which by the Spartans was called (...) or horse-seeding; and used for a Curse;
as if one should say, the (...) take thee; they accounting a man sufficiently
plagued, that was infected with that humor, it being a chargeable and sure
confusion. See Alexand. ab Alexand. Genesis Die. lib. 3. cap. 22.

14. -- Some Syrophaenician -- One of those that dwell at the Idum^a^ Gate --.
Idumae^ Syrophaenix incola portae -- The Poet shows another leudness of
Damasippus, who falls from one humor to another, as to the haunting of
Tipling-houses, such as were at the Idumaean Gate, so called because Vespasian
and Titus entered it at their return from the conquest of Juda^ and Idumaea (the
Country of Edom) at which kind of houses there was wine, good cheat, a
flattering host (that called his guests according to the fawning custom of
those times, His Lord and King) choicest Ointments (such as are brought from
Syrophaenicia, the Hosts own Country) and a Wench tucked or girt ready for
attendance with her Winepots. But here Britannicus vainly seems to make Portae
Idumaea to be the Country it self; for so he expounds Incola portae Idumaea,
hac est, says he, Qui domi suae incolit portas Syrias. Nam Idumaea pars est
Syriae. The Scholiast likewise speaks from the purpose, when he tells us, that
Idume is a City in the East, adding, ide^ currit, or rather (as Eutgersius
mends it, Var. Lect. lib. 6. cap. 18.) inde occurri^ Damasippo taber^arius, qui
prope portam manet, tabernam volenti i^trare. Iduma indeed is said by
Philargyrus, (on the 3. of Virgils Georg.) to the a Town in Lydia (which ^yet
Ortelius in his Thesaurus doubts of): but the Poet here speaks of some Vintner
in Rome. And whereas he would have him called incola portae, for his supposed
standing at the City-Gate to take up guests, it seems but vain: seeing that by
the like reason, others of the same condition might do the like, and so
consequently to small purpose. Besides, it is likely that such customers needed
not to be prompted whether to go for their pleasure. See Alexand^ ab Alex. lib.
4. cap. 16. and Tiraquel in the description of Porta Triumphalis, which was the
ancient name of it, and Godeleraeus on Livie, on the same title, Lib. 2. though
they take not notice of this name, Idumaea. Where we may farther note, that the
diligent Tiraquel in the place above cited, has in effect the liek also
concerning Porta Vaticana, which he mentions the next save one after this,
saying Vaticana, Trans Tiberim, nun^ Porta Ripae, vel Vinaria, quod extrae came
vina externae, maxim tamen Campana and Tusca, vendantur.

15. But be cut off with the first beard -- Quaedam cum prima resecentur
crimina barba. Of this Rite, and the Season of it, see at large, Sat. 6.
Illust. 25.

16. -- He even Now to those large Hot-Bath-draughts, and Titled Curtains goes,
etc. -- Damasippus ad illos Therma^^^ colices inscriptaque lintea vadit, etc.
This passage does much trouble the Interpreters; Britannious saying of this
Damasippus, Non erubescit se in popinas, and therm^s ad potandum demittere, ubi
homines ta^^um stagi^iesi vilis^^^mique versabantur; whcih exposition, if he
had left out and thermas, had been tolerable: the popinae being usually places
of riot, but not the thermae. Next he expounds inscripta lintea, by sudaria
thermarum. which will probably apppear to be a mistake. Lubin expounds
thermarum calices, by quibus in thermis bibunt. Indeed in the Baths Plutarch
says in his Sympofiac. lib. 8. cap. 9. they did in ancient time sleep, eat, and
drink, without overheating their bodies, but complains, that in his time the
Baths were kept so excessively hot [though, as I showed before, Sat. 7.
Illustrat. 31. the Aedile's office was to prevent such inconvenience] that they
were almost intolerable, and that through the vehemence of the heat men seemed
to draw-in as well fire as air; in which extremity we may conceive some desire
of large draughts. This I add to show the quality of the Thermae, but not to
approve his exposition; the Thermae being here not properly intended. Next he
expounds inscripta lintea by sudaria thermarum, the figured or
wrought-work-towels at the Baths, wherewith they wiped away the sweat,
according to that of Catullus, Sudariumque Setabum Catagraphonque linum; and so
he agrees with Britannicus: but he likewise expounds it by picta popinae vela,
and so partly agrees with the Scholiast, who upon inscripta lintea says, hoc
est, pictis velis popinae succedit, aut linteis cabsariciis ^ergit, vel ubi
esculenta public venduntur; taking lintea either for the hangings or curtains
used in the Taverns probably for the distinction of rooms and companies, or for
the towels they used there against sweat, or for the supposed inscriptions
there, showing what aprovisions were there to be had. In which passage for
linteis carbsariciis perchance it should be carbaseis, or Carbasineis [the
first of which is used by Virgil, the last by Varro] signifying a more special
kind of fine linen called so from the Carians mentioned by Pliny, lib. 19.
cap. 1. Lastly some say, that popinae, thermae and lupanaria are often taken
promiscuously: and so by inscripta lintea they here understand the Inscriptions
in the Stews over the Cells of harlots, or perchance wrought upon Curtains
before their cells; but in this expression they say nothing of thermarum
calices. Wherefore to collect the sense and contexture of this place, I think
thus; That Thermae do not here signify properly, the Hot Baths, but
figuratively, the popinae; as I collect from the word illos, implying that what
is here spoken of, was touched before: now he spoke before of Damasippus his
haunting the Taverns, pervigiles popinos; and here he aptly calls his tipplings
and those his excessive draughts there, though in popinis, by the name of
Thermarum calices; meaning they were as large, thouth many, as the
Hot-Bath-draughts, which by unreasonable heat were often unreasonable. Secondly
by inscripta lintea, I think according to the last Opinion, that they may most
fitly here signify the Inscriptions over the Cells of Harlots, yet not as They
think, in the Stews, but in Popinis: where though they were not by a public
allowance, yet by secret and corrupt practice they were frequent; and this
exposition I the rather make, as being more agreeable to a Satirical sharpness
and aggravation. For, to make it a fault to go to the Thermae, is improper, it
being the Pulick, the Civil Custom: Secondly, to make it a fault in him to go
to the inscripta lintea, if we take it for the Bath-linnen, is as absurd, this
also being consequently lawful: or if we take it for linen (as towels) used in
popinis, it is but a faint expression; so likewise to take it for the hangings
of a Tavern-room; or for the inscriptions of the provisions, the victuals, to
be sold there. But to take it for the inscription of an impure Curtain or Cell,
is suitable to a Satyrist, first accusing him of Drunkenness, and then of Lust.
I therefore render inscripta lintea, by Titled Curtains, the last word being
probably most fit to express lintea; and the first being agreeable to that in
the sixth Satyr, -- titulum mentita Lyciscae. In the rendering Thermarum
calices, though it be meant de popinis, yet I render it, Hot-Bath draughts, so
to retain the figure and so the expression of the Poet, his strict meaning
being not calices Thermarum, but quasi thermarum, or like unto them; as if he
should say, Damasippus goes to such Tavern-draughts, or rather
Hot-bath-draughts and his harlots, being now past a Youth; being now grown as
much beyond Excuse, as beyond Measure.

17. To Ostia, Caesar, send, send: but be sure In some large tippling-house
thou seek thy High Deputy --. -- Mitte Ostia, Caesar, Mitte; sed in magna
Legatum quaere popina. There are four several expositions of this place, the
two first of which take the word, Mitte, for Omit, and the first of them
takes Ostia for the Nobleman's Gate; whence they would make this apt sense (if
the words would as aptly bear it) If thou would send a Nobleman O Caesar,
on an Employment, pass-by his own Gate, and seek him in a Tavern. The second
takes Ostia for the Haven in the Mouth of Tiber, where the shi^s lay; and then
they would make this apt sense (if some inconvenience did not withstand it) If
thou would send some Noble Deputy, Caesar, send not to Ostia for him, where
men of Spirit and Employment are; but seek him in a Tavern. The Third opinion
takes Mitte properly, but Ostia for Ostia Istri out Rheni, or the like: whence
the sense would be (if some inconvenience did not attend this also) send,
Caesar, send a Nobleman in warlike employment to the Mouth of Danubius or of
the Rhene; but seek him in a Tavern. The fourth and last takes Mitte properly,
but Ostia as in second Opinion, for the Mouth of Tiber: according to which
acception the sense is, as I have chosen to render it. The reasons of my choice
are from the exceptions against the other three, though they all seem apt. In
the two first opinions, where Mitte is taken for Omit, the expression and
coherence is too obscure; for I have readred them rather according to the
Desire of the Authors, then the efficacy of the words; rather as they would
have them import, then as they do import. For, according to either of these
expositions it is disorderly expressed, that Caesar should take care where to
find a Deputy to Employ, before we are told, that he means to employ any.
Secondly, to take Ostia for the Noblemans Gate, as in the first opinion, is
silly; as in the third, for ostia Rheni or the like, and yet to say only Ostia,
is ridiculous. But the last and most received exposition first moves Caesar to
the resolution or purpose of employing some Nobleman, and Then to the Search
for him, for the performance of his purpose.

18. -- And base Biere-makers. -- Et fabros Sandapilarum. He reckons-up here
the wretched companions, with whom Noblemen shamed not to associate themselves.
Amongst others, which are mentioned by him, are fabri sandapilarum, though the
Scholiast mentions other Readings, as fabros Sandaliorum^ taking them for
Shooe-makers; likewise Sardanafalli (as he has it) and lastly Sandapilarum,
which is most received, and expounds it by the carpenters, that made biers (not
coffins) on which they carried forth of the Amphitheater the bodies of the
Gladiatores, when they were killed. Some more generally (as Britannicus out of
Fulgentius) take it for the biers on which they carried to their funeral, not
only the bodies of the sword-players that were killed and of persons condemned,
but also of any of the meaner sort; which acceptions of it may be confirmed,
from that also of Sueton, speaking of Domitian slain, Cadaver ejus populari
sandapila per vespillones exportatum. Some derive the word from Sandalium, the
pall or covering cast upon the dead body. The Poet adds here a just indignation
against such ignoble Nobles, saying unto them, If your slaves were thus lewd,
you would punish them with the sorest Restraint and Task: but vainly boasting
your selves to be descended from the Noble Trojans, you would make your
Greatness the protection of your vileness; and whiles you are indeed nothing
but Vice and Title, you would have that which even in the basest people is
accounted a Shame, to be in your selves esteemed a Grace.

19. And dares thrice scurrile Lords behold. -- Et spectat triscurria
Patriciorum. The Poet describes another vileness of Noble Damasippus, who
having spent his estate upon Horses, Taverns, and harlots, was saign to turn
player, hiring himself to the stage, to the Siparium (properly the hangings,
which conceal the Actors from the stage till their entrance) and acting in
Catullus his play, called Phasma, or, The vision. Then he mentions another
Lord, one Lentulus Velox, who acted Laureolus a servant, who for a Crime was
Crucified: which part this Lentulus performed very skilfully! These
performances the Poet honestly protests to be odious, and that the very people
are impudent, which dare sit and behold these most scurrile behaviors of Lords
(triscurria Patriciorum) and to hear also (Planipedes Fabios) the Noble Fabii
act barefooted, as the Players used to do in one sort of Comedy, which from
the meanness of the persons was the vilest of all, as Diomedes the Grammarian
tells us; as also to see the Noble Mamerci (derived from Mamercus one of Numa's
Sons, as Alexand. ab Alexand. lib. 1. cap. 9. notes) basely box'd about the
ears, in such plays, according to the nature of the servile part, which they
undertook. In which passage there is no great difficulty; only about
triscurria, Joseph Scaliger (de Emendatione Temporum) makes a doubt; and would
have it transcurria, because the Nobles did transire ad Orchestram: but his
friend Lubin does not so much as mention it; it being indeed without copy or
good composition. Rigaltius takes notice of it, and adds another conjecture of
some, which think it should be triscuria, as much as ingens cura digna
Patriciis. But we may better keep our selves to the ancient copies, which have
triscurria made from tris and scurra expressing [in sense] a superlative; as
Britannicus sufficiently shows by trisurciser and trivenefice, in Plautus: with
which Antiquities and the unchanged consent of Interpreters we may without
farther fancy rest satisfied.

20. Suppose yet There were Swords, and the Stage Here; Which would thou? --
Finge tamen gladios inde, atque hinc pulpit a ponas: Quid satius? -- Having
showed that the Nobles did unworthily act on the common stage, he farther
disdains that they became Gladiators, and without any compulsion from a Nero,
and at the Shows which were set-forth by the Praetor, one far inferior in
honor unto Them: who yet sat there advanced in stately manner beholding Them
ventring their Lives like Rascals. Yet of the two, says the Poet, the stage is
a worse shame to them, then the Sword-fight: for who, says he, would not detest
to act the cuokold Latinus, Thymele's jealous husband? or to be a fellow-actour
with the logger-head Corinthus? Then showing Caesar's vile example in a like
kind to be the cause, he says, that though the sword-fight is of the two the
Less shameful, yet these Nobles choose the worst degree of leudness in that
lewd practice. For whereas one sort of the Gladiators, the Myrmillo, fights so
armed that he cannot be known, the Noble Gracchus performs the part of the
Retiarius, who with his net acted barefaced, as one quite shameless, hating the
close dress, which might come near but to the lest modesty. Neither doubt it,
says the Poet, that it is Gracchus; Credamus tunicae: for though he wore not a
Nobleman's habit, but basely after the manner of the Retiarius, wore a short
coat for the more activitie, yet believe it, it is he. For, being put to the
worst, as he flies about for his life, he shows his face, so to move the
Spectators to save him. See Sat. 3. Illustrat. 5. Besides, you may observe his
golden ribband, which might be occasion of some guess, that he is no common
person. Indeed, says the Poet, when it is generally known what he is, the
Myrmillo that fights with him, is floured-at, as having showed no such skill,
as he thought he had against some practiced gladiator. Thus much was necessary
to rectify the diverse contextures of this passage: but for the many
Antiquities here employed, see them largely discussed. Sat. 2. Illustrat. 26.
Some read here, Cedanus tunicae, let us give way to a Noble person; showing out
of Herodian, that Commodus the Emperor in like manner most shamefully acting
the Gladiator, had favor (if one may call it so) showed him by those he
fought-with, they respecting him not as a Gladiator, but as Emperor. But such
favor could not with such ease and confidence be hoped-for by a Nobleman: for
by his fight it appears, that he sought time to be thoroughly known, so to be
rescued by the People's judgment, who in case of favor used a sign for
deliverance: and therefore I think credamus to be, as it is the most received,
so also the safer Reading.

21. More then One Ape, One Serpent, and One Sack. Cujus supplicio non debuit
una parari Simia, non serpens unus, nec culeus unus. He speaks this, because
Nero was guilty of many unnatural murders. The kinds and degrees of punishments
for parricides, such as killed their Father, or others very near of blood,
differed in diverse places and Ages; but amongst the Romans, a Parricide being
condemned was presently hooded to deprive him of the sight of the Sun and
Heaven: then whipped with rods, virgis sanguineis, says Modestinus, Digestor.
lib. 48. Tit. 9. L. 9. which some seem to interpret, by saying that he was
whipped till he was bloody: which, though probably true, I think not to be the
meaning of the Law; virgae sanguineae signifying rods of the Sanguen-tree
called so from the blood-red color of it, as Gothofredus notes on that Law;
and Io. Isacius on Macrobius his Saturn. lib. 2. cap. 16. The Parricide was
afterward sow'd-up in a sack or bag; and in aftertimes there was sow'd-in
with him, an Ape, a Cock, a Serpent (or, as some more particularly, a viper)
and a dog. Lastly, he was thrown into the Sea, or, in inland places, into the
next lake or river. But Dositheus the old Grammarian adds more especially, that
the Culeus being sow'd-up was put into a cart, and drawn to the Sea, or Lake,
or River, by a yoke of black Oxen. Hieronymus Magius in his Miscellan. lib. 4.
cap. 8. probably conjectures, that at the first there was nothing sowed up with
the parricide, but that afterward such company was added; as likewise that
there was more then one Serpent sow'd-up ordinarily, from those words of
Constantine the Emperor, Serpentum contuberniis misceatur; unless as he says,
the plural number be put for the singular. Yet he thinks that Conftantine
reviving the Law fallen to disuse might peradventure increase it. Indeed
Quintilian in his Declamations, did long before speak so, Culeo and serpentibus
expianda feritas: yet we must add, that Juvenal and Quintilian lived at the
same time; and that it were ridiculous to think that either of them could write
ignorantly or would write falsely of his own time. Wherefore seeing that Juvenal
implies the many crimes of Nero, even of this kind, by the many deserved
punishments for such crimes; It appears that in Juvenal's time there was but
one serpent sow'd-up with the parricide; for otherwise he must have said, that
he deserved more then two serpents, (even four) or else he had not expressed
what he intended, which also would have spoiled the uniformitie of his speech,
If he had said, More then One Ape, Two serpents, and one sack, if Magius his
Conjecture took place. Wherefore I believe that Quintilian used the plural
number for the singular. But whether Constantine also did so in the Reviving of
the Law, it concerns not this doubt, being in aftertimes, and so no way
contrary to what Juvenal implies of his own times. The reason why these
creatures were added to the parricide, is by some said to have been, because
they likewise, as we may say, are parricides: which reason I confess I
understand not, excepting only of the viper; for as concerning the Ape, it is
rather expressly against Juvenal: who in this very argument, speaking again,
Sat. 13. says, -- cum quo Clauditur adversis innoxia simia fatis, implying, the
Ape to be of a less guilty disposition. Oliverius Arzeganensis (an Interpreter
of Valerius maximus, and cited by G^throfredus in the place before alleged)
makes the reason, why these creatures were added to the parricide, to be this;
quod Gallus serpentem, serpens simiam, simia hominem insequatur: which, if
considered, seems to make less the combat (and so the punishment) of the
Parricide, by dividing the combt^ants, the serpent being employed in his own
defense against the Cock, and the Parricide being left properly, according to
Him, only to the fierceness of the Ape. But Alexander ab Alex. ( Genesis Lier.
lib. 3. cap. 5.) does-well express the reason of this addition, in these words,
-- ut in rixa infensorum animalium, and foeda laceratione corporis, ob tanti
sceleris immanitatem diro cruciatus vulnere interimatur: utque ab omni elemento
repudiatum cadaver, irrequieto labor and perpetuis fluctibus agitetur,
implying the parts of the punishments, that they might be tormented with such
troublesome creatures, and that their carcasses might want both burial and
rest. See also Rhodigine. Yet Isidorus Hispalensis (in Glossis) said as much
before them both, speaking of a Parricide, mittebatur in mare, and
contendentibus inter se animantibus homo majoribus poenis afficiebatur. As for
the Culeus (called by Dositheus, (...), by Suidas, (...)) which in the most
usual and vulgar expression we render, a Sack, Isidore in the place before
cited, says, it was tunica ex sparto in modum crumenae facta, a coat made of
broom in fashion of a purse, which the executioner daubed on the inside with
pitch and bitumen. Of which basket-stuffe though some perchance might in some
latter time be made, yet Juvenal describes it to be exocori b^vis, Sat. 13. and
so it is commonly taken, to have been properly of leather, made of a Bull's or
Oxe's hide, or rather of more, sowed together; if we consider the capacity of
it: which we may reduce (to omit diversity of opinions) upon this ground, that
the Sexiarius contains according to our last Interpreters of the Bible, about a
pint and a half; which being granted (of wine-measure) the Culeus containing
20. Amphoras, and the Amphora containing 48. Sextarios, it follows, that the
Culeus contains 180. gallons. To conceive this by our English measures, the
Hogs-head being 63. gallons, the Pipe 126, and the Tun, 252. gallons; it is
plain, that the Culeus (the greatest vessel for Liquors, amongst the Romans)
was as much as a Pipe and a Hogs-head, that is of a Tun, wanting only one
Amphora, or, nine gallons: whereby may be understood the capacity of the
vessel for the Parricide and his Company. I may here add, what Alexander ab
Alexand. in the place before cited notes, that the first which suffered the
punishment of the Culeus (but without the addition of those creatures) was one
P. Maleolus (for the murder of his mother) mentioned by Florus, the Epitomiser
of Livie, lib. 68. and by Orosius, lib. 5. cap. 16.

22. -- And win the Grecian Parslie-Crown. -- Graiaeque apium incruisse
coronae. Apium is usually taken for Parsley; though some take it for Smallage,
or Marsh parsley (in Latin, Palud-apium) otherwise by some, [as by Mr. Guillim
in his Display of Heraldrie, sect. 4. cap. 16.] called Merche, which is an
herb, as Theophrastus notes, that is always green: of which a coronet or
chaplet was made for the Conqueror at the Nemaean Games [as Pliny tells us,
lib. 19.] celebrated to the Memory of Archemorus, the young Son of Lycurgus,
but indeed for the comfort of his Father, by overcomming his sorrow with a
perpetual honor. But why the Garland was of Parsley, the Interpreters tell us
not: in which point the diligence of Alexander ab Alexand. may help; who tells
us [in his Genesis Dier. lib. 5. cap. 18.] that it was because the child
Archemorus was unhappily killed by a Serpent as he was playing upon a
Parsly-bed; though some say [which by the way we may note] that the mischance
came by a riverside, where his nurse laid him, which would not so well sort
with the reason of the Nemaean Custom, unless peradventure it might possibly
be a little helped, by being understood of Marsh parsley. And here it were but
an overplus to fill the Reader with the base and scenical behavior of Nero
[here enveigh'd-at] both in Italy and Greece; the dishonor being as known, as
the Empire, which he dishonored. Wherefore I leave him to the jeere of our
Satyrist, who tells him, that he may do well to place the Rewards, the Ensigns
of his Arts, at the feet of the statues of his Ancestors, his Father, or Great
Grandfather, each of which was called by the name, Domitius.

23. -- And toils in every ward. -- Et in omniparte laborat. Having showed that
Cataline and Cethegus, though Noble, behaved themselves most ignobly against
their Country (like the fierce French, that inhabited about Narbon and Lions)
for which they deserved to have burned by night in the troublesome Coat, as he
calls it (of which see Sat. 1. Illustrat. 47.) he shows next, that on the
contrary, Tully, though slighted as a Country-Knight, brought-up but in some
Municipium, some City or Town priviledg'd, or made capable of Roman Offices,
(and so a fellow but of a disdained size, compared with your Native Roman) did
yet save Rome, toiling, as he says, in omni part, as the most copies have it,
in every Ward, or Part of the City. Some Copies have -- in ommi Monte: so
Rigaltius reads, expounding it of the Hills, on which Rome was built; and some
Copies have (as the Scholiast says) -- in omni Ponte, alluding to the Mulvian,
where some of Catiline's Confederates and the Allobroges were apprehended. Both
which last seem pretty varieties; but the first (in omni part) is, methinks,
the more plain and full expression, implying his general care, which employed
it self not only on the Hills and Bridges of Rome, but in every part; though
figuratively, I grant, the other Readings may be admitted. And here we may take
notice that the Poet says, that Rome when freed from the danger of Catiline,
called Cicero Parentem and patrem patria; which may seem at the first an
overplus; if it implied no more, then to call Rome the child, and Cicero the
Father: but it more largely shows his merits, not only in respect of the City
of Rome; but of all his Country: whiles he is equaled to Romulus; of whom
Livie says in the same word, Parens Vrbis, Romulus; which I therefore here
render, Her Founder, as patrem patria his Country's father, ascribing thus unto
him both the Original and Preservation of the City and the Dominions belonging
to it.

24. His pate did next the kno^^y Vine often crack. Nodosam post hac frangebat
vertice vitem. Describing Marius another Arpinate (as Tully was) he shows how
famous he became, saving Rome from the Cimbrians (the Holsatians) and winning
in a manner all the glory of a Trumph from his Nobly-born College Q. Luctatius
Catulus [in Marius his fourth Consulship:] though this Marius at the first did
but plow other men's land for wages, and afterward was but a Common Soldier,
and had many a vine-rod broken upon his pate, in case at any time he loyter'd
at his Military task. Wherein he implies the manner of punishing some defaults
of Soldiers, the Centurion correcting such as offended, with a knotty
vine-branch or cudgel, as Pliny shows, lib. 14. cap. 1. Guillaume du Choul
observes [in his Discourse sur la Castrametation des Romans. fol. 34. a.
treating of the punishment of Souldiers] that if a Soldier being punished
staid the Centurion's hand, or the Vine-Branches, les sermens [I think, in
exacter writing it should be sarmens; this signifying vine-rods, the Other,
Oaths] he was casse, casseer'd, or put-out of Office, if he had any; or, if by
force he defended himself, he was punished, as for a capital crime. And for
this use of the vine-rod grew that jeere mentioned by Tacitus, [ Annal. lib.
1.] upon one Lucilius a Centurion, who being very severe, and upon a time
breaking a vinerod upon a Soldier, he cried Cedo alteram, Give me another, and
after that again, Cedo alteram: whereupon the Soldiers in a flout called him,
Cedo alteram.

25. His Nobly-born College of equal Sway, Was yet adorned but with the second
Bay. Nobilis ornatur lauro collega secunda. There are diverse Interpretations
of this place; three of which make Nobilis to be the Genitive Case, and so
Nobilis Collega to implie, that Marius, though of mean birth, was yet a
Nobleman's College. But on lauro secunda, the Scholiast says, Secundo, per
Marium familia nova. Nam primo per Ciceronem nobilitati, hoc est ut
triumpharet; I suppose it should be nobilitata; meaning that a new or upstart
family from amongst the people was first ennobled with a triumphant fame in
the person of Cicero, and a Second time in Marius. Which is some mistake in
respect of the order of their times: for, whereas he makes Cicero's glory to
have been the former of the two, it was the latter by almost forty years. Some
understand it only by Marius; that though he were but of mean birth, yet he
obtained two triumphs, one over Jugurth, another over the Cimbrians. A third
sort expounding it of Marius and his College, say, that he obtained to triumph
at least in the Second place, post collegam suum, as the Scholiast speaks, who
recites also this third exposition. A fourth sort taking Nobilis for the
Nominative case, understand by Nobilis Collega, Q. Luctatius Catulus, who was
put to flight by the Cimbrians, who afterward by Marius and Catulus were
overthrown with a mighty slaughter. Yet the victory was ascribed generally in a
manner only to Marius, which made the Poet say of him -- Et solus trepidantem
protegit urbem: which was not literally true, Catulus being joined with him;
but in the main of the business it was true, his Prowess being such, that by
the common consent, if he would, he might have triumphed alone; but to decline
envy, he was content, that his College should triumph with him. The most apt
sense therefore is this which I choose; that his College, though Nobly-born,
was yet adorned but with the Second bay; or, as it may be varied, had not at
all triumphed but for the valor of his mean-born Colleague Marius.

26. -- Suffice They did the Infernal Gods: A Sacrifice TO our Mother Earth
were --. Sufficient Diis Infernis Terraeque Parenti. Amongst other wretched
persuasions of the Old Romans in their mistaken Religion, one was that it was
most acceptable to their Dii Inferi and Tellus in case of great danger foretold
to the Commonwealth by their Aruspices, for one by way of atonement or
pacification, devovere se, to vow, promise or solemnly bequeath himself, as a
sacrifice for all the rest; as is commonly known by the example of the Decii.
See the form of such devoting of themselves set down by Rosinus ( lib. 10. cap.
15.) out of Livie. lib. 8.

27. -- Our last good King. -- Regum ultimus ille bonorum. The Poet describing
Servius Tullius, whose Mother was but a handmaid, says, that his Merit
bestowed upon him the Trabea, the Fasces, and the Diadem. The Trabea was a
Royal roab of purple woven upon white; or to speak nearer to the Etymology,
beamed with white; or, as some describe it, having gold woven upon it like
glistring beams. Of the Fasces, see Illustrat. 29. of this Satyr. The Diadem,
as Pancirellus tells us, ( lib. 1. Tit. 47.) was a little cap, like half a
football, bound about with a white fascia, or wreath, as he describes it from
St. Jerome to Fabiola. It is the 128. Epist. De vestitu Sacerdotum; where he
speaks of rotundum pileolum, such a one, says he, as Ulysses was presented-in,
in an Arched walk called by His name. He says it was by the Graecians called
(...), by some Galerus. This pileolum, as he afterward says, Ita in occipitio
vitta constrictum est, ut non facile labatur ex capite. Yet it should seem,
that rather the fascia (or, vitta) it self, then the bonnet, was properly the
Diadem, if we consider the story of Pompey (as Marcellinus describes it, lib.
17.) who was suspected of treason for wearing the fasciola candida about his
leg to hide a soar; that being generally interpreted for a Diadem, and he
accordingly suspected for aiming at the Empire; it being, as was said, not
material on what part of the body it was worn. (See Alexander ab Alex. Genesis
Dier. lib. 1. cap. 28.) And this may appear from the name framed from (...),
circumligo; it being a band of white cloth (as some describe it) round about
the head. Rightly therefore does Britannicus note, that it was not Corona, but
fuscia. But here I marvail, that Autumnus rightly expounding the words ancilla
natus, of Servius Tullius, does notwithstanding on the words, Regum ultimus,
say Tarquinius Superbus: which though it were a truth of Regum ultimus
absolutely taken, he indeed being the last Roman King; yet it being here
expressly said with an addition, regum ultimus ille bonorum, it does
apparently exclude Tarquinius Superbus.

28. Some brave act, which Mutius and Cocles might have wonder'd-at --. Quos
Magnum aliquid dubia pro liberate deceret, Quod miratetur cum Coclite Mutius,
etc. The Poet here expressing, that the Consuls Sons sought to betray the
Liberty of their Country, by seeking to bring back Tarquinius Superbus, adds,
Quos magnum aliquid, etc. Quod miraretur, etc: which last word Lubin applies to
their Act, which here the Poet enveigh^-against; implying that honest persons,
which loved the liberty of their Country, wonder at those that would betray
it; especially their own Father being of another mind. Which though it may be
admitted, yet not with any great Grammatical convenience in the construction,
if we consider the remoteness of the Relative from the thing, to which he would
thus apply it. But Britannicus, methinks, far berter applies quod miraretur,
to that famous act, which, as he says, had more beseem'd them, such a one, says
the Poet, Quod miraretur cum Coclite Mutius, etc. that is, says Britannicus,
quod posset mirari and imitari: which singularly advances the sense of the
place, implying that they should rather, being the Sons of such a Father, have
done some famous act, which even the most famous Cocles, Scevala and Cloelia
(who immediately grew famous after Them) might have wondered at, though
themselves did things, that were justly wonder'd-at; according to which sense I
choose to render it.

29.
To the Fathers with these News a Servant runs,
A Sad one to the Mothers of those Sons.
Occulta ad Patres produxit Crimina Servus
Matronis lugendus --
This passage is expounded with a little variety. The story is, that Vindex,
or, as some call him, Vindicius, a Servant of the Aquilii, did derect the
conspiracy of the Consuls Sons unto the Fathers; for which he was first
manumitted, as a preserver of his Country, as afterward crucified, as a
betrayer of his Master: therefore as some say, lugengendus matronis, in regard
he was put to death, though he had kept-out a domineering ravisher; and so as a
friend of the Matrons, might be justly bewayl'd by them. This sense we deny
not to be congruous; but it is somewhat far ferch'd; and the rather, methinks,
to be disliked, because it makes the Mothers more compassionate for the loss of
a good Servant, then of a bad Son: whereas in a case of so rear a sorrow, we
must give them leave to show more tenderness, then wisdom. Wherefore I implie,
and according to the more received exposition, that their sorrow was, though
occasioned by their Servant, yet for their Sons; who as the Poet presently
infers, were whipped and put to death, suffering so both the Rods and Axe, which
were carried before the New Consuls. And here we may note with Britannicus,
that the Poet says, legum prima securis, because the government under their
Kings, that is, before the time of their Consuls, was arbitrary or, without set
Laws. Here also, because the Fasces and the Securis are so frequently mentioned
in this and other Authors, it will not be unpleasant to behold them in picture,
as they are bound-up together and represented by Antoine le Pois (a French
Antiquary) in his Discourse sur les Medalles Antiques, at the end of his work,
on p. L. figure 3. * a fasces, rods bound together with an axe The reason of
which binding of them up, as Plutarch guesses (in Romans Quast. 82.) was to show
a slowness in the magistrate in the use of them, employed by the neceslarie
delay in the untying of them. The binding-up the axe with them (not in them, as
some have mistaken, but cross them) did likewise show, that what the ^ods could
not sufficiently correct, the axe must: as also that he, who was to suffer
death by the Axe, was before such execution punished with the Rods. The use of
which among the Romans was brought in by Tullus Hostilius, King of the Romans,
being anciently carried so before the Etrutian Kings, and by some the Fasces
were adorned with Bays, as Lipsius notes on Tacitus. Annal. 2.

30. -- Or what I Will spare to name. Aut illud quod dicere nolo. The Poet
concludes, that it were better to be the Son of an unworthy Thesires, so that
one's self were an Achilles (the nephew of Aeacus) bravely behaving himself in
the armor, which Vulcan made for him, then to be a Toersites, though one were
the Son of an Achilles. But, says he, by way of jeer, to the Noblest Roman,
thou can not properly derive thy self, better, then from the Company, which
assembled at Romulus his Asylum, his Sanctuary or place of refuge (so called
from and (...), d^ripio, because no man might be drawn thence); and then thou will prove but a shepherd, like such as he gathered together; or what is
worse, such as those desperate persons (as he intimates) which in desperate
fortunes and consciences fled unto him. Thus the common exposition takes illud,
quod dicere nolo, for latro, or the like; making all, whom Romulus entertained
there, either Shepherds, or Cutthroats, either Mean or Lewd Persons. But
Au^umnus somewhat acutely excepts against this last part; saying, that the Poet
in the former verses understood all these, when he mentioned Asylum (the
infamous shrine), and therefore would not presently again implie the same
thing: wherefore he thinks this to be an allusion to the next story of Romulus
and his Company, about their particular exploit in Ravishing the Saline
virgins. Thus he would briefly have Rastores and Latrones to be understood
before; and here, by Illud quod dicere nolo, only Rap^^es virgi^^^; implying
that the best of their Ancestors were either such as were glad to take
Sanctuary, or but Ravishes. This, I grant, is witty, if it prove as sound: but
I think this last verse to contain but the parts by way of explication, of what
was said before in general; that is, they all came from the Asylum, and so were
either Shepherds or worse; for these Ravishers must be in the parts of that
division, All being derived from the Asylum. Concerning the Asylum or place of
refuge it self, I need only intimate, that this fact of Romulus in the erecting
of it, was but an imitation of many ancient examples, as of Cadmus at the
building of Thebes; of the Posterity of Hercules at Athens, and diverse
others; for which see at large, Alexand. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 3. c. 20.

SATYR. IX. A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Iuvenal and Naevolus.
ARGUMENT.
Lust and Poverty ill joined
In Monstrous Naevolus we find:
But here strange Virro Great and Vile
Both Lust and Avarice defile.
Dark Crimes, though hid, escape not our sight:
By Night we see not, yet see Night.
Over their Lords from guilt not clear
Base Servants Tongues do Domineer.
JUV: Why, Naevolus, so often meet I thy brow
All Cloud, like Marsyas quite put down? why now
Look thou like Ravola caught with his sweet
Rhodope? With just blows indeed we greet
Our sweet-mouth'd Servants. A more wretched Face
Does Crepereius Pollio never disgrace,
When he goes Offering Treble Use, and lights
Upon no Fools, What sudden care thus frights
Thy brow to wrinkles? Sure, thou liv'dst of late,
A Slave? rather mere Knight, though small in stare.
A Guest thou wast, that bad'st thy quips most witty,
Veh'mently tart, pure Natives of the City.
Now all is inverted: A sad Face, dry Hair
Like a shagg'd Copp'ce: Thy Skin knows no neat care:
A hot glew'd-swath did once smooth thee with art;
Now every where rough hairs, like sprigs, do start.
What means thy meager shape, like one half-tir'd,
Whom a Domestic Quartane long has fired?
Thou may discern the Sick man's mind's Distress,
Or Sound man's Joys: The Face does both express.
Methinks then thou seem changed, and have begun
In a new diverse Course of life to run.
For I remember thou did haunt of late
Isis shrine, (1) Peace's Ganymede, and wait
On Cybel's Palace-Rites which hither came,
And Ceres (For, what Shrine don't women shame?)
The Adulteter Aufidius was less known:
I could say, Did thou please the Wives alone:
Naev. Yet that is a thriving way to some: but small
Gain I have thence: A greasy Cloak is all,
(To save my Gown) course, of some gross die, which some
French weaver drove but ill, with a slight comb;
Or some small Silver of the second vein.
The Fates Rule men: Fate does in those parts reign,
Which the Lap hides. For, if thy Stars thee fail,
Thy strength of Lust shall nothing then avail,
For all rich Virro's tank desire. And yet
No Monster's like Avarice and Lust met!
I gave you This, then That, then More: He Counts,
And leudly Moves! Lets see to what it mounts:
Ho, (2) bring the Counting-board. Suppose your Gains
Were Five Sestertia: Reckon then your Pains.
Do slight my Toil? Shall he find less vile Fates,
That tends thy Plow, then He that on Thee waits?
But sure thou thoughts thy self soft, young, fair, fit,
Whom Jove might to his Cup and Heaven admit.
To a poor Client will you bounty show,
Who Nothing on your sweet Disease bestow?
Lo, may's^ not Thou fitly to such a Friend
Large Amber-bowls, and a green Shadow send
Upon Her Birthday, or when the fresh spring
Does (3) gentle showers and the Shee-Calends bring?
Nay when to Thee placed in a stately Chair,
Virro, some thus with secret gifts repair?
Sparrow! For whom keep'st thou such Hills, vast Grounds,
Apulian Farms, Kites tit'd within thy bounds?
Trifoline fields, the dread Cumaean knowl
And hollow Gaurus's Vintage fill thy bowl.
Whose Pitch more Vessels keeps? More lasting wines?
What were to help then a spent Clients loins
With a few Acres? will thou to some other
Rather bequeath a Country House, a Mother
With Babe and whelp his Play-fellow? to some (4)
Slack Priest of Cybel, that can vainly drum?
Beggar, (5) you're Bold, says he. But Rent does cry
Beg: So does my own man, like the broad eye
Of Polyphemus, for all which, the wise
Vlysles escaped. But one does not suffice:
Another must be bought; both fed. And when
December blows, what course shall I take then?
To their cold Heels and Shoulders wilt be some
Releif, to say, The Grass-hoppers will come.
But, though thou will not my Desert set forth,
To omit other things, was it nothing worth,
That I thy most addicted and devout
Client in thy behalf all means sought out?
When as thy Wife the Marriage-bonds had broke,
And now was sealing new, back to thy yoke
I won her, and did always make her stay,
Who, but for me, had often gone away?
Whether can turn? what can say first or last?
Deserve I nothing for my Labors past,
Thankless, false wretch? Is It nothing, that thou art now
Upon Record a Man? The Laurel-bough
May now adorn thy Gates: A Father's Name
Thou have: thou have, what to oppose to shame.
A Father's Rights thou have: now thou may be
An Heir, (6) now receive any Legacy;
Sweet wind-falls too. More Privileges add,
If once three Children make thy heart right glad.
Juv. Sure, Naevolus, thy sorrow's just, as I
By this should judge: yet, what does he reply?
Naev. Why, he neglects me, and now seeks some other
Two-footed, sturdy Ass. But these things smother
Revealed thus only to your self; and rest
With my Complaints hid in your secret breast.
For, whom the Pumice smooths, He Is a dire foe!
Who shows a Secret, Burns and Hates, as though
All that I knew, I had betrayed. He Will take
A Sword, or Clubb my brains out; or else make
His candle fire my doors: nor think him vain;
These (7) Rich ones never count Poison a dear grain.
This then, like Mars his Court at Athens, hide.
Juv. Dull Corydon, think Rich men undiscried
When Vile in private? what their Servants spare
To speak, Beasts, Dogs, Posts, Marbles will declare.
Shut doors and windows, stop the chinks; Defy
All light, let Neighbors bawl, let none lie nigh:
What yet he acts (8) at the Cocks second Crow,
E're break of day the next Vintner shall know;
Nay, hear (9) whats'ere his Scribe and chief Cooks fain,
His Carvers too. For, what care they to stain
Their Lords? when by such lies, revenge they take,
For the shrewd Belts they have felt? Nay, some will make
Search for thee in the ways, and thou must hear:
They Are drunk, and they will make drunk thy wretched ear.
Pray them then, as thou did pray me, to say
Nothing: but secrets sooner they will betray,
Then drink as much Falerne, though got by stealth,
As did Laufella for the People's Health.
As Duty binds us not to live amiss,
And many Causes more, so chiefly this:
That Conscious Servants Tongues make us not start;
For, a vile Servant's Tongue is his worst part.
Who yet will not live free from Crimes, He Is worse
Then They, that live upon his Bread and Purse.
Naev. How to despise a Servants Tongue, if lewd,
Good Counsel, yet but Common, thou have showed.
But now what is thy Advise after lost Time
And Hope? For Lo, how swiftly hasts the Prime
Flower of our Age? Lo, how the fatal Knife
Hasts to cut off our short and wretched Life?
Amid'st (10) Cups, Flowers, Ointments and Lovers toys,
Old Age does unperceived arrest our Joys.
Juv. Fear not; I warrant thee, whiles these Hills stand,
Thou can not want a Pathick never at hand:
They Are brought by Ship and VVagon; Here they are sped:
They, they, (11) that with one finger scratch their head.
Besides, thy Hope and Gain may yet Increase;
Only eat Rocket hard, and hold thy peace.
Naev. These Rules are for your lucky ones; but my
Clotho and Lachesis are glad, when I
By lust my Hunger stanch. But, (12) Oh my small
House-Gods, on whom with some incense I call,
Or with a Cake and Garland: when (13) some Vow
Shall I so fix, that old I may know how
To escape a Crutch and Cabin. Nay, (14) that I
May twenty thousand have for use, with tie
Of Pledges for the Payment? Besides such (15)
Plate, that Fabricius might judge it too much?
And two strong (16) Maesians, whose hired necks might grace me
To the loud Circus, and there safely place me?
Then a stooping Ingraver, and (17) a speedy
Painter? These would suffice; seeing that Needy
I still shall be! Yet Vain's my wish! nor may
I hope This! For, when I to Fortune pray,
Her ears she stops with wax, from that Ship brought,
On whose deaf Row'rs the Sirens Songs never wrought.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Nineth Satyr.
Marsyas his overthrow by Apollo, How and where Memoriz'd. Crustula.
Verna-Eques. Psilothrum and Dropax. Bruscus. Brucia. Ptolemaeus Flavius his
opinion about Ganymedem Pacis, not approved. Diptycae. Amanuenses, and their
Overseer, probably showed from some of the Manuscripts. Calculi and Abacus, the
ancient form of it presented. Faemineae Calendae. Juno Calendaris. Matronalia.
Saturnalia. New Years Gifts, their Antiquity, first Matter, and Abuse. Arbores
felices. Strenia. Cymbala, the fashion of them expressed. Gallantes. Sundry
expositions of that passage, -- sed appellat puer unicus, ut Polyphaemi Lata
acies, per quam solers evasit Ulysses. Register-books of the Birth of all
persons, used anciently amongst the Romans. When Children received their Name.
Caducum. Jus trium liberorum; the strictness and License about it, in several
ages of the Romans. Annona. Areopagus; the secrecy of that Court. Lubin's
Error about Galli cantus secundus, showed from Censorinus Gallicinium; the
different Seasons of it. Librarius. Carptores. Serta and Unguenta; their
ancient Abuse derived, according to some, from the Hebrews. Unguentarius.
Several sorts of Ointments for several parts of the Body. Oleum Susinum.
(...)and (...). Eruca, where usually sowed. The Lares adorned with Chaplets of
Flowers. Lemures and Larvae. The Custom of fixing Vows with wax to the knees
of their Gods. Argentum purum; the different acceptions of it, showed from
Marcellus Donatus, and Franciscus Luisinus. Cervix locata, expounded somewhat
differently from Lubin. Pithaeus and Scaliger's conjecture about Maltha,
proposed.

1.PEace's Ganymede. -- Et Ganymedem Facis --. The Poet in this Satyr
discovering in a dangerous Zeal the execrable impurities of some Roman sinners;
sets out one Naevolus, as a Monster; telling, that for all his leudness he did
not thrive, but looked as wretchedly as Marsyas, Ravala or Creprereius Pollio.
The first of which the Scholiast says, was either some Lawyer in Juvenals time,
or more probably (that being but an obscure supposition) that bold Mufitian,
who daring to contend with Apollo, was overcome and flayed; hi^ skin being
hanged up for a Monument, not in the forum of Celaenae, (a City of Phrygia) as
Alexander ab Alexand. says, Genesis Dier. lib. 2. cap. 12. but in a Cave, at the
Head or Springs of the River (named since from Him) Marsyas, but formerly,
Midae fons, which ran indeed through Celaenae, where the contention was: but
the Monument was placed at the Head of the River, as Tiraquel proves, on that
place of Alexander ab Alex. The Second, to whom he likens him, was one Ravola
an impure Villan, who being taken with his Rhodope, was confounded with a just
shame at the discovery, deserving (as the Poet flouts) many a clap for his
Liquorishness, like an unmannerly servant over-bold with sweetmeats, crustula,
properly frusta panis been cocti, leviter melliti (some render them, wasers)
which were sometimes by men's last Wills appointed to be yearly distributed on
their Birth-days; as Lipsius shows on Seneca, Epist. 56. from an ancient
Inscription: The last he compares him to, was one Pollio, mentioned elsewhere
by our Author, and noted for a mad spend-thrift, who though he desperately
offered for money three times as much, as the ordinary Interest, could yet find
no such foolish Creditour. The Poet then gauls Naevolus with the remembrance of
his former prosperity, telling him, that he once lived like Verna-Eques,
literally a Knight-slave, that is, one by birth a Servant, born of a Handmaid,
yer so gently brought up in his Masters house, that he was admitted to great
Liberty, living more like a Knight then a Servant: which sort of persons were
commonly called by way of jeer Vernae-Equites, as particularly by Martial. Next
he tells him, that his hair was now dry, (without ointment) and stubbed,
whereas formerly he was wont to wear afascia, a fillet spread with a composition
of hot glue, gum and wa^, as Pliny ( lib. 24.) observes; which they called
Psilothrum and dropax; the first from making naked the skin from hair, the
last in the like sense from fetching off the hair: which art of smoothing the
skin was practiced amongst the leudest Romans. Lastly he tells him, that he
haunted the most notorious places for Adulterers, such as were the profaned
Temples of Isis, of Peace (wherein was the Statue of Ganymede) of Cybel (on
Mount Palatine) and of chaste Ceres. What other Impurities he implies, I
purposely silence, both here and in some other dark passages of this Satyr,
leaving them in that darkness, which they deserve, without either Illustration
or Translation; and choosing, if offense must be given, rather to displease my
Reader, then my Conscience. The few passages, which I have layd-together, I
enlightened chiefly for the advantage of the less accurate Reader, only two
difficulties I may point-out, as occasioning difference between some. The one
is concerning that verse; Prastabat calidi circumlita fascia visci; for so it
is commonly read; but Pithaus, in his Var. Lection. on this place alleadges a
Copy wherein it is, Bruscida, as in another, Brustia praestabat calidi tibi
fascia visci; where he thinks it should be written either Bruccia, or Bruscia:
of the first of which he gives no exposition; but the latter he thinks may come
from Bruscus (called by some ruscus from the ruddly, color of it) a prickled
shrub, a kind of Broom (mentioned by Pliny. lib. 16. cap. 16. because, as he
guesses, the fascia might be ex brusco; but this he does not affirm. Some read
Bruttia, the Bruttian pitch, being anciently used for the fetching-off the
hair; and so indeed (with a small variety in the Reading) Brucia signifies in
Columella a kind of pitch, and so probably was, if not alone, yet, an
ingredient of the psilothrum; and so the word may be used here, according to
such Copies, either Adjectively, or by way of Apposition with fascia. Yet this
being without the farther warrant of Copies, I accept the common Reading and
exposition. The other, and the chief doubt is, concerning the statue of
Ganymede in the Temple of Peace, one of Navolus his haunts. The general
exposition is, that Vespasian built a Temple to Peace, and as others more
particularly affirm, erected a Statue there to Ganymede: part of which
assertion the Scholiast has, saying on the words, Fanum Isidis and Ganimedem]
statuae ad quas conveniebant cin^di. Britannicus more largely says, Templum
pacis Vespasianus extruxit juxta forum, in quo aut pictam imaginem, aut statuam
Ganymedis fuisse ostendit poeta. See also Marlian. p. 39.6. But Prolemaeus
Flavius in his Conjectan. cap. 1^. rejects this as incongruous, that Ganymede
should have a Statue in the Temple of Peace; and therefore takes Ganymedem
simply for some Statue of him somewhere else, without reference to Pacis. But
this exception being but fancy, may methinks by the same way be answered, if
we say it is congruous; that when Jupiter gave Them Peace, which is the delight
of Men, They should, to express their Gratitude and the Occasion of it, in the
Temple of Peace place Ganymede, the Delight of Jupiter.

2. Hoe, bring the Counting-board. Suppose your gains were five Sestertia. --
panatur calculus, adsint cum tabula pueri, numera sestertia quinque Omnibus in
rebus --, Poor and vile Naevolus reciting here his base gains, mentions first
pingues lacernas, which may be rendered either course or greasy (as through
frequent wearing); in which last sense I express it, though it does as well
signify the first, according to that of Martial, -- me pinguis Gallia vestit,
the French garments at that time being of a course making. But because the
Courseness is expressed in those words also which follow, -- textoris pectine
Galli, I thought it convenient thus to prevent, by a lawful variety, a sudden
tautologie. Next he mentions tenue argentum venaeque secundae a small piece of
base silver; for both these are here implied; vena secunda having reference to
the metal, implying that it was of a meaner sort, or drossy: the other, tenue,
necessarily being referered to the quantity, and signifying, that it was a
small, thin or light pelce of coin; for coin it was which Naevolus received;
and so another tautologie is avoided in making them expressions of several
things. Thirdly he says, that such lewd Great-Ones, as Virro bear spoken-of,
are strangely covetous in the expense that concerns their own pleasures; nay,
pleasures, says he, which they eargerly prosequute, as may appear by their
frequent and soliciting letters, which are here, by the Poet, called densae
tabellae. Which words the Scholiast expounding says, quamvis in blandis ^e
epistolis and clypticis sollicitet: in which passage Rutgersius (in his Var.
Lection. lib. 6. cap. 18.) says, that it should be diptychis; but before him
Pithaeus observed it in his Notes on the Scholiast; only Rutgersius does
illustrate it a little from that of Isidore in his Gloss, Diptycha, tabellae
quas ferimus. We may add, that such pugillares or writing-tables were sometimes
of Ivory; for so Symmachus (in Auctorio Epist. cap. 7.) says, Offero igitur
vobis eburneum diptychum --; and sometimes they were adorned with gold, as the
same Symmachus says, Lib. 2. Epist. 81. auro circumdatum diptychum misi. More
particularly and nearest to the present purpose, Dipticae in some old
Glossaries are said to be tabellae, quibus corruptores puellis suis inscribunt
amorem. And here not to infist upon the Ecclesiastical acception of the word
diptycha (well known to the learned) signifying two tables containing the names
of especial persons, some alive and some dead, some famous for their virtues,
and some (as some note) notorious for their vices, and read publicly in the
Ancient Church, in the time of Divine Service, for the exciting of the Good and
deterring of the Bad; I may only add that acception of the word diptychum in
St. Ambrose, in his Hexamer. lib. 5. cap. 8. where it signifies claustrum
ostreorum, an oister's shell; it seems, from the apt closing of them, like two
leaves. But Navolus using it here for love letters of the worst sort, adds what
I omit in the tranflation -- (...), as some Reading has it; or as the most
recev'd, (...)(understanding (...), expedit) which in two of the Manuscripts
(namely, Corpus Christi and Ben. Jonson's) is thus corruptly written, (...);
which I thus express in their Ignorance and Characters, there being on this
passage this note in both of them, unus pes deest versui Graeco, que^^ Magister
Heinricus scire non potnit. Which I point-out to note the Custom and Endeavor
of those times here implied; that is, that the Amanuenses in their
transcription of Manuscripts had some Overseer to compare and correct the
Copies, with whom the Amanuenses or Scribes did consult in doubtful passages.
For so here, it seems, the Scribe consulting with Magister Heinricus the
Overseer, for the rectifying of this piece of a Greek verse, finding it
unperfect, and not receiving satisfaction, added of himself, this note in the
Margin: for, though it had been truly written, yet (...) was left-out, which
particle was notwithstanding in some MSS. particularly in the Manuscript
Commentary. Lastly Naevolus makes his foul Patron Virro to reckon-up the
parcels of his false bounty, and grudgingly to suppose them to amount to Five
Sestertia, that is, 39 l. 1 s. 3 d. In which passage (to blot-out the
impurities which follow) we may observe that he calls to his Servants for the
calculi and tabula: which last is, by Persius, Sat. 1. called Abacus; the form
and some description whereof I have here presented as a less obvious point of
Antiquity from the curious Pignorius, in his book de Servis, p. 172. and 173.
* Juv. Sat. IX Illustrat. 2.
depiction of an abacus or calculating table Upon which he says, usum ejus
indicant calculi ductiles and reductiles capitati, undeviginti, oblongis
alveolis inserti. Calculi quatuor inferiores, unitatis vim singuli obtinent,
appliciti tamen numero intercaelato. Superior ille singularis and unicus, item
admotus quinque unitates notat. Alveoli unciarii extra ordinem, sex calculos
continent, quinque infra, unum supra, qui omnes xi colligunt pro recepta uncia
divisione in xii solennes parts. Semuncia, sicilicus, and semisicilicus
seorsim comparent. In hac tabella novenarius eminet, cujus ca laus est, authore
Marciano ( lib. 7.) ut primi versus finem teneat. Which explication before we
farther consider, it may be observed, that the Mathematical Table was by the
Ancients called the Delphick Table, as Britannicus notes on Juvenal, Sat. 3. in
the exposition of those words, Ornamenta abaci. It was likewise called by way
of honor, Pythagoras his Table, as C. Secund. Curio notes on Persius, Sat. 1.
(though the Invention of Arithmetic it self be attributed to the Phoenicians)
and he tells us that it was sprinkled-over with hyaline (or glass-colour'd)
dust, as he urges from Marcianus Capella, to the end that in their
multiplications, partitions and podismes, (as he speaks) or, measuring-out of
ground by the feet, they might easily amend an error. And this Geometrical
dust, says he, is by Cicero called by the learned title of The Philosopher's
dust. Asceaesius on Persius, Sat. 1. toward the end, understands by -- qui
abaco numeros -- scit risisse vafer --, one by whom the Arithmetical calculi
were derided, which calculi he calls denarios projectiles, coins or counters
to be placed or removed; and by metas risisse, (as it is in Persius) he
understands one that flouted at Geometricians figures, taking meta for termini
(as Nebrissensis notes on that place) that is, for the bounds of their figures
or descriptions, which they made, says he, with a radius (or rod) moved in the
dust, that if the measure were not true, it might be blotted-out. Johan.
Baptista Plautius (on Persius, Sat. 1.) calls this Table palimpseston, i. e.
deletilem, saying, qua nunc passim calculatores utuntur. Which two expressions
cannot yet exactly considered stand together, unless we take calculatores in a
general sense for accountants, but not for those, that did account by the
calculi; because on the Table, which they sprinkled with dust, there was no use
of them: Nebrissensis therefore more warily understands by metas the schemes of
the Geometricians, which they made with the radius in the Dust. Theodorus
Marcilius on Persius, Sat. 1. on the words, Abaco, -- and secto in pulvere
metas, says, Abacus communi usu and numerarits and Geometris: ut pulvis and
radius proprius Geometrarum; making the Abacus common to Arithmiticians and
Geometricians; but the radius and pulvis proper to Geometricians. The first
part of which assertion is a Truth; the last an Error: as in the same
annotation, toward the end of it, plainly appears from his own words. For
afterward he says, At illud Marciano communiter dictum, abaci circumfusum
pulverem movere. Contra, pulverem solvere. (The one was, as I conceive, to make
the figures in the dust, the other to put them out.) Seneca. Epist. 24. Which
allegations are good, and what he adds is accurate, whiles he says, Neque non
tamen etiam numerarii pulvere interdum usi. Itaque Tertullianus, c. ult. de
Pallio dixit, numerorum arenarios. Geometrae semper pulvere: Numerarii aliqui
sine pulvere, ut calculatores. This well expresses the ancient differences:
which may with some other remembrances clear this point. The Calculi then were
not at all used by Geometricians in Their work, that is in the drawing of
schemes (though They also, but as Arithmeticians, might use them in
Arithmetical Operations) but only the radius and pulvis belonged to Them, (yet
not only to Them); yet were they not always used properly upon an Abacus; but
sometimes the radius was used on the Ground: as appears by the story of
Aristippus (mentioned by Baptista Plautius, on Persius, Sat. 1.) who having
escaped from a Tempest and got to the Rhodian shore, and perceived some making
Geometrical schemes on the Sand; bid his fellows be of good courage, telling
them, that they had found Men (meaning Mathematicians) and therefore probably
Civilitie of Entertainment. They did sometimes likewise draw their schemes in
the Dust, as is known from the story of Archimedes, and the multitude of
Geometrians, who by such practice made the Court of Dionysius Dusty, as
Plutarch relates. Sometimes likewise they used the Abacus, sprinkling it with
fine dust, such as pinne-dust, or the like (and which by some is called Green
dust) which they divided into figures with a radius, or stylus, with one end of
which they might write, with the other put-out. But such a Table or Abacus we
must suppose to have been plain and level, and used not only by Geometricians,
but also Arithmeticians; yet on such a one the Calculi were not used at all;
the Arithmetician also performing his work with the stylus in the fine Dust.
But besides this plain Table, there was an Abacus, such a one as Juvenal here
intends, and Pignorius presents, which was not to be sprinkled with dust, nor
required the radius, but only the calculi. Which Table, as I guess at the
meaning of Pignorius, who seems somewhat obscure, was of this manner. There
were carved in it certain alveoli, depths or channels, as we may call them, in
which the calculi were placed; which calculi appear in the Table like so many
black, round spots, which are but the upper parts of them above the plain of
the Table, by which they were placed and displaced in those hollow rows at
pleasure. These expressed on the Table are 44, and were of a like use as with
us, Counters. The alveoli are expressed by the spaces enclosed between two
lines, and closed at each end; in which the calculi, as is said, were placed.
These alveoli or depths in the Table (in number 19.) were made that the calculi
might lie the furer, for the preventing any occasional disturbance of the work.
Of these alveoli, as appears in the Table, there are two rows divided, or
separated, by a row of Figures, in each of the lower alveoli are placed 4
calculi, in each of the uppermost, one; each calculus in the lower row being in
value once so much as the figure above it signifies; each in the upper row
being five times as much as the figure under it signifies. A third thing
considerable in the Table is, the Numbers, which are disposed into eleven
places; And if we place them according to the modern manner of Arithmetical
Operation, that is, the Least in value toward the Right hand, and so proceed
toward the Left; we may most readily expound them by our latter kind of
(Barbarous) Figures set against those that are whole Numbers or Pounds in the
seven last places, that is, toward the left hand thus; IXI. CCCI. CCI. CI. C.
X. I. 1000000. 100000. 10000. 1000. 100. 10. 1. The next in the Table, toward
the Right hand, I take to be but the parts of the first of these; this Figure
TH standing for Vncia, or the place of Ounces, as this, I, for Libra, or the
pound, which contained 12. ounces. The other Three toward the right hand, do
likewise express the chief and most convenient parts in the division of the
ounce; namely, Semuncia (or, the Half-ounce) expressed, I think, by the figure,
2. implying it to be or one part of two in the division, as 6. to 12. The
second expressed by the figure, 3, I take to signify the ourth part of the
uncia, f and so, 3. of 12. [though some divide it into more parts] which
quarter of the uncia, was by the Romans called, Sicilicus, from Sicilie, the
place, as some think, where it was invented, or first brought into use. The
last was called Semisicilicus, or half-quarter of the uncia, thus expressed in
figure, C. in value as much as one 12. part and an half of the pound. The
exposition of which three last figures, as parts of the uncia, I do not assert,
but only for want of an Interpreter, propose: making in yet in this obscure and
conjectural argument at least so useful, that from these chief parts of the
ounce, [the half-ounce, the quarter and the half-quarter] here supposed to be
expressed the other parts also of the ounce may be conveniently expressed. To
express now the use of the Calculi, though they be set-out in the Table, as if
upon occasion they were already placed, we must notwithstanding suppose the
Table free from them all, only the Figures and the Alveoli constantly to
remain. If then we would express One Pound, we must place one calculus in the
alveolus under the Figure, I. If two pounds, Two calculi,; and so to 4. If we
would express 5 l. we must place One calculus in the upper alveolus, and none
in the lower. If we would express 6 l. we must place one in the upper, and one
in the lower; and so to 9. as is expressed in the Table. If we would set-down
Ten pounds, we must place One calculus in the alveolus Under X. and so forward
in like manner, as in the first; and thus may we number on this Table unto a
Thousand Thousand. If we would express Ounces unto a Pound, we must place one
calculus in the alveolus under the Figure, TH, and so to 4. If we would
set-down five ounces, we must place only One in the upper alveolus. If we would
express 9. we must place One in the upper and 4 in the lower; if Ten, Two in
the upper, but none in the lower; if Eleven, Two in the upper and One also in
the Lower. But, one ounce more making the pound, the Pound must be expressed by
One Calculus placed in the next lower alveolus under the Figure, I. If the
Half-ounce, Quarter or Half-quarter [ Semuncia, Sicilicus, or Semisicilicus] is
to be expressed, the calculus is to be placed in the alveoli at the Right hand,
according to the figure adjoin'd to them. And having thus expressed the Table
according to the best sense and use, that I can collect from it, it is
convenient that I show how far I agree with Pignorius his difficult
explication, and in what I differ from it. He tells us then, that there are two
examples of the ancient Abacus extant, one published by the excellent
Antiquarie, M. Velserus of Auspurg; and another, which he calls the Roman [and,
the Italian] sometime in the custody of the learned F. Visinus, and mentioned
by the two excellently learned Spaniards, P. Ciacconius, [in explicatione
Inscriptionis Duillianae, and in libro de Nummis] and by Ant. Augustinus [
Numism. Dial. 9.] He farther tells us, that he published this latter form of
the Abacus, both because the former was not then at hand, and likewise because
the Numeral Notes in this latter came nearer to the Ancient, and were more
elegantly formed; adding, Quod ut ut verum sit, illud utique certum est,
public interesse, vulgari and hunc nostrum Italicum, ut insigne antiquitatis
monumentum, hac iterata editione, in oculos hominum incurrat, ut eruditorum
manibus teratur. Now for his explication of this Table, I have before, in this
Illustration, recited his own words which may by parts be farther considered.
For, whereas first he says, usus sane is est, quem satis superque indicant
calculi ductiles and reductiles, capitati, undeviginti, oblongis alveolis
inserti; the comma between undeviginti and oblongis, must needs be struck-out,
else it corrupts the whole passage: in which, as it is now pointed, undeviginti
must relate to calculi, which word goes before; and so it would implie, that
the whole number of the calculi used upon the Table, were but 19. whereas there
are 44. expressed upon it: but taking away this comma, it must relate to
alveolis, that follows; and be read, undeviginti oblongis alveolis inserti,
clearly agreeing with the Table, in which the whole number of the alveoli is
19. Another part of his description he sets-down in these words, Alveoli
unciarii extra ordinem sex calculos continent, quinque infra, unum supra, qui
omnes XI colligunt, pro recepta unciae divisione in XII solennes parts;
adding, that the other three alveoli toward the right hand express the chief
parts of the Ounce. But what congruitie there is in this expression, I confess,
I apprehend not. For whiles he says Alveoli unciarii, he seems to speak of the
two alveoli, the one of which is above, the other below this figure TH
expressing the place of the whole Ounces; there being, besides this, no other
place, on the Table, left for the Numbering of them. But why he calls them,
extra ordinem, is not, as I suppose, for any extraordinary Local position of
them, they being placed in the like manner, as the calculi librales, as I may
term them; which follow toward the Left hand; but for their extraordinary or
different manner of numbering; the other whole Numbers being reckoned unto 9.
but the Ounces being reckoned to XI. Again, in the Numbering of these, why he
should say of these alveoli, sex calculos continent, quinque infra, unum supra,
qui omnes XI colligunt, and, pro recepta Vncia divisione in XII solennes
parts, I perceive not. As I guess, in this Obscurity, at the sense and use of
the Table, it might rather have been said, either Septem calculos continent,
sex infra, unum supra [for, those, by the value of their places, would have
made XI; the lower standing for six, the One in the upper place standing for
5.] but then the calculi had without necessity been increased to 46; Or
rather, to avoid such inconvenience, it might have been said, Tres calculos
continent, unum infra, duos supra, which by their places would have made XI.
the lowermost standing for One, and the Two, in the uppermost, for Ten; and
then it should have been said, pro recepta Librae divisione in XII sollennes
parts, seu uncias. For, whereas by his description, this figure TH and the two
alveoli above and below it, express the Division [as he says] of the Ounce, it
seems to me not to agree with what he himself says, whiles he adds presently
after, that the other three alveoli toward the right hand contain the Parts
[and so the Division] of the Ounce. This place therefore must express not the
Division of the Ounce; but the Numeration of Ounces unto XI. inclusively, the
addition of one more making the Libra containing XII. Ounces, and expressed in
the next place at the figure, I. According to which sense the Arithmetical
operations will be fitly performed and orderly; The Parts [or division] of the
Ounce as the first and least being expressed in the three alveoli to the Right
hand; then the whole Ounces or Parts of the Pound being expressed in the next
place toward the Left hand; and lastly the Libra in the last 7. places and
figures toward the left hand also: without which contrivance, I see no place
for the setting-down of the whole Ounces. And whereas Marcianus Capella ( lib.
7.) cited by Pignorius, says, that in this Table Novenarius numerus eminet,
cujus ea laus est, ut primi versus finem teneat, that the number of 9. is
eminent or uppermost in the upper alveolus (for so, I suppose, he means by
Versus, which anciently signified a line, order or row from the turning at the
end of it toward the next place, as here having numbered unto 9.) it is to be
understood of the last 7. places of Numbers in the Table, that is, in the
Numbering of whole pounds; it being not appliable to the rest; this of the
Ounces containing a Numbering unto XI. and the three first containing ten parts
and an half (or, 10/12 and 1/34 part) of the Ounce. Pignorius adds somewhat
concerning the Calculi Athletici, or the White stones given to the Conquerers
among the Ancient Heathen, alluded-to Revel. 2.17. (in those words, (...)) and
touched by Aretas on that place, and more fully written of by the learned Faber
in his Agonistic. lib. 2. cap. 9. and 33. but being not to the explication of
this place, I omit; leaving my conjecture and endeavor in these obscurities to
the judgment and ingenuity of the Reader.

3. -- Or when the fresh spring does gentle showers, and the she. Calends
bring? Diverse things are here said by the Interpreters, some of which being
confused, uncertain, or false, that they may be the more clearly discerned, it
will be convenient to set down this whole passage, which is this; En cui tu
viridem umbellam, cui succina mitt as
Grandia, Natalis quoties redit, aut madidum ver
Incipit, and strata positus longaque cathedra
Muner a foemineis tractas secreta Calendis.
From which words, Naevolus having in the former expressed the baseness of
Virro even toward the servants of his Lust, arises a double doubt: one
concerning the Persons by whom, and to whom they are spoken; the other
concerning the Time here intended. For the first, Lubin expounds these words as
spoken by Naevolus unto himself, but against Virro in derision; as if by way of
expostulation with himself he should say, O Naevolus, is not this niggardly
wretch a trim creature, whom thou may complement with gifts at the usual
time of the Women's Calends? En tibi formosulum illum -- Virronem cui tanquam
amicae mittas munera -- festis Matronalibus! and thus by Tu understands
Naevolus speaking to himself. But by this interpretation of this difficult
passage (which some pass-by) there were no congruity in the word tractas, which
follows: seeing that they cannot be applied to Naevolus bringing or sending the
presents, but to Virro, who degenerately receives them, as is here said, after
the solemn manner and Ceremony of Women. Which last though Lubin rightly
applies to Virro, yet incongruously by Tu understands Naevolus speaking to
himself: Britannicus thinks that these words may be spoken either by Naevolus
or the Poet unto Virro, and instead of tractas thinks that it should be
tractas, expounding it thus, Et ipse positus in cathedra tractas munera. But to
attribute these words to the Poet, is without necessity or congruity; both the
precedent and subsequent words, and these as conveniently, being the continued
speech of Naevolus to Virro: as likewise to read tractas is both unnecessary
and incongruous with the precedent Tu. Naevolus then speaks this, with
indignation to Virro, as if he would make even Him judge of his words, and
using the word Tu by way of comparison, should say, Lo, art not Thou (meaning,
were not such a one as Thou, that art nigardly toward the instruments of thy
pleasure, and by whom a man gains nothing) a trim creature, to whom thou
might send guists forsooth, such as at the she-Calends they send to women,
(and such as thou thy self also do unseemlily receive at the same times) a
veil or bon-grace against the Sun, (which veil or shadow the Poet says was
green, to express the person that wore it, to be affected to the Green faction
or party of the Charioters; as Lipsius thinks. De Amphitheatro c. 18.) or send
grandia succina ( gemmata dextrocheria, bracelets, says the Scholiast, or as
others) large bowls of Amber? Thus then briefly it is Naevolus that speaks, and
in the continuance of the Speech does in the words Vos, Tu, and tractas intend
Virro. For the second doubt, which concerns the Time, when these guists were
usually sent, it is described in those words -- natalis quoties redit, aut
madidum ver Incipit -- and Foemineis Calendis: all which, as some think express
but the same time; understanding by Natalis, natalis Veneris; which was, say
they, at the beginning of the Spring, on the Calends or First of March. Indeed
Famineae Calendae were the first of March, as the Scholiast rightly notes;
Calendis Martii quibus Junonis Sacra celebrantur a Romany: quia and tum Ilia
compressa est a Marie. Tum nam Matronalia sunt. But the same Scholiast on the
words Madidum ver incipit, says, Matronalibus scilicet, quae sunt Calendis
Aprilibut, quibus est natalis Veneris; which though they thwart the former, and
so show this last clause to be but a corrupt addition to the true copy of the
Scholiast (though Autumnus alleadges this without taking notice of the error)
yet they clearly make these two reasons different, and come one point nearer to
the Roman Calendar, in which indeed is a Feast appointed to be celebrated to
Venus on the Calends of April. Besides, the Poet does not here say, natalis
quoties redit and madidum ver incipit, but aut madidum ver, by way of
distinction, as making them two several seasons. Not then the Birthday of
Venus seems here intended by natalis; but the Birthday of the woman [here,
Satyrically, of Virro] to whom gifts were then by custom sent: and so it is
rightly understood by Britannicus, and after him by Lubin; but that Lubin does
also place the birthday of Venus on the Calends of March, though without
alleging any authority. Again, on the words -- aut madidum ver, Lubin says,
nam tempore veris, quod plerunque madidum est, Calenda Martiae sunt, and this
he says truly and warily enough, that the Calends of March are in the Spring:
but on the next word Incipit, he says, Nam principium veris incipiebat Calendis
Martiis. Where (to pass by the casual impropriety in saying, Principium
incipiebat, the Poet speaking exactly, ver incipit) he affirms the beginning of
the Spring to be on the first of March; which though I grant Juvenal here says
speaking in the liberty and latitude of a Poet, yet Lubin should have spoken
according to the Roman Calendar: in which this note, veris initium, is placed
on the fifth of the Ides (that is, the 9. day) of February. But with an equal
license to our Author we will grant, that the beginning of the Spring, and the
first of March design here the same Time and the Season of sending guists to
women, and to be called Faemineae Calendae. Yet the reason of the name was not
as some have thought, because the Calends of every month were sacred to Juno;
though this was true, as Ovid says [ Fast. lib. 1.] vendicat Aasonias Junonis
cura Calendas; for which cause she was called by the Laurentes, Calendaris, as
Macrobius says* But the Calends of March [which now we call St. David's day]
more particularly were called Faemineae Calendae, being the day whereon
anciently the Sabine Dames decided the Battle between their Parents and
Husbands; and the time of their Feast called Matronalia; and the day whereon
the more stately and dainty women did yearly sit at home in great Solemnity,
longa Cathedra (the Scholiast renders it by scamnum; on a bench or form, or
rather) in a high and large chair richly adorned, receiving guists of those
that honored them which being proper to women, Naevolus here imputes
disgracefully to Virro, as his secret and degenerate practice. And here we may
take notice that the Romans had by ancient custom other seasons also of
sending guists besides on Birth-days and the women's Calends, namely
New-years-day; and also the Saturnals, which were in December, and proper to
Men; and from which Martial pleasantly calls the Calends of March the Women's
Saturnals. For writing to one Galla, lib. 5. epig. 84. (though Autumnus by
mistake cites these verses following, out of Horace his Carm. lib. 5.) he says,
Saturnalia transiere tota
Nec munuscula parva, nec minora
Misisti mihi Galla, quae solebas.
Sane sic abeat meus December.
Scis certe puto vestra jam venire
Saturnalia Martias Calendas,
Tunc reddam tibi Galla quod dedisti.
In English thus, Our Saturnals are now quite gone;
Yet guists from Galla see I none:
She used to send some of small cost.
Be thus then my December lost.
E're long your Saturnals [a thing,
I think, you know] March Calends bring.
My thankful mind you shall not lack:
What you have sent, I Will then send back.
And as for their New years-day we may take notice, to prev^^^ the error of
some, that it was on the Calends of January by Numa's appointment. Indeed in
Romulus his time the year began on the first of March, there being then but ten
months, of which this was the first: but Numa adding January and February,
appointed the first of these two for the first of the year. On which day for
the custom of sending guists, Symmachus says, [ lib. 10. epist. 28.] that it
began almost as soon as Rome, by the authority of King Tatius, qui verbenas
felicis arboris ex luco streniae, anni novi auspices, primus accepit. Of which
felix arbor, see Festus; Pliny lib. 16. cap. 26. and Macrobius his Saturnals,
lib. 2. cap. 16. who shows out of Veranius and Tarquinius Priscus, that
according to the Roman Theology, some Trees were counted lucky, as the Oak, the
Hasle, the Apple Tree, the Pear Tree, the Vine, and others; some unlucky, which
were in the protection of the Dii Inferi, as the Sanguen-tree, of which they
made rods for Parricides, as is noted Sat. 8. Illust. 21. Thorn also, Fearn,
and others there mentioned. Some derive strena from (...), Luxus; implying the
wish of them that gave it; to wit, that they to whom they gave it, might the
rather live plentifully, and in delight. St. Austin. de Civit. Dei, lib. 4.
cap. 11. and cap. 16. mentions strenua, [or strena, as some] a Goddess, quae
faceret strenuum; the Goddess of Industry, as Vives notes on the last cited
chapter of St. Austin. Marcellus Donatus on Suetons Tiberius, cap. 34. shows
that Augustus and Tiberius were far from Covetousness in the receipt of
New-years-guifts, but that Caligula was basely impudent, he himself using to
stand ready, whiles all sort of persons brought their gifts to him; as
particularly Sueton relat^^, in his Caligula, cap. 42. At this season they had
anciently feasts and dancing and filthy Songs, as Antonius Augustinus shows,
lib. poster. de Emendat. Gratiani. Dialog. 1. Sueton calls this, strenarum
commercium; for the mutual sending of gifts. [ In Tiberio, cap. 34.] Diverse
of the Fathers of the Christian Church and also Councels have disliked the
Custom of sending New-years-guifts; as particularly Tertullian. lib. de
Idololatria. And St. Jerome [apud Gratianum can. 5.37. d.] complains that what
anciently the Virgin or Widow, or the poor gave to the Corband [the holy
Treasury] was now bestowed upon a New-years-guift, aut sportulam Saturnalitiam;
as Laurentias Pignorius notes in his Symbol. Epist. 47. By all which we may
discern the condition of this Custom anciently; that it was infected with
superstition, covetousness, impurity, flattery and superfluity: amongst
Christians it is to be hoped, that it is purified into a renewing testimony of
Love or Thanks. These many customs then being thus taken notice of without
varying from the letter of my Author, more then for the enlightening of his
sense, I render the whole passage thus, as the scoff of Naevolus to Virro, Lo,
may not Thou fitly to such a friend Large Amber-bowls and a green Shadow send
Upon her Birthday, or when the fresh Spring Does gentle showers and
She-Calends bring? Nay, when to Thee placed in a starely Chair, Virro, some
thus with secret gifts repair? Wherein it is not properly intended that Virro
should be praised as fair, or a she-friend, being rather foul, yet execrably
effeminate: and therefore when I render it, upon Her Birthday, it is but to
continue the Satirical expression, meaning his Birthday; which was to be
spoken covertly, that the intimation might be, not unlike his practice, da^^.

4. -- To some slack Priest of Cybel, that can only drum? Tympana pulsantis
legatum fiet amici? Naevolus continuing his Speech to Virro, says unto him,
Thou lustful Sparrow; who art nevertheless so niggardly; for whom do thou
keep such vast possessions, and so many Kites tired within the circuit of them?
The fruitful Trifoline field in Campania, the huge promontory over Cumae,
looking as if it would fall upon the City, as likewise the Gauran hill full of
Caverns, provide Thee wine, which thou pitchest up (of which custom see, Sat.
5. Illust. 6.) Now were it such a matter for thee to bestow upon me, after all
my service, one of thy Country-farms and thy woman servant, which looks to thy
house there, with her child and the dog his play-fellow, for a releif to my old
age? Or will thou rather bequeath these to one of Cybels lewd Priests, that
vainly drum? In which last passage (to reject the incongruous exposition of
rusticus infans made by the Scholiast and Britannicus) some read not tympana,
but cymbala, as Pithaeus his copy and the Scholiaft have it. But Britannicus on
that of the eight Satyr ( verse. 176) Er resupinati cessantia tympana galli,
makes both kinds, the Cymbal and the Drum to have been by custom used by the
Priests of Cybel; and that rightly. The Indians likewise used them both, when
they went to War, being taught so by Bacchus, as Tiraquel thinks; see him on
Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 2. The last kind of which instruments, the Cymbal
(which was of Brass) has its name from (...), cavus recessus; from the hollow
form of it; and so Lucretius lib. 2. expresses it; Tympana tenta tonant palmis,
and cymbala circum Concava --. To which agrees that of Turnebus in his
Adversar. lib. 26. cap. 33. where, out of Scribonius Largus, he describes the
Cymbal to be like the leaves of the herb Cotyledon (penny-wort, as some; as
others Venus Navel) the form of whose leaf is hollow like a Cup. Pignorius, de
Servis, page 91. thus presents it, * Juv. Sat: IX Illust. 4.
depiction of three forms of cymbal and from Amalarius Fortunatus, lib. 3. cap.
3. in these words, cymbala invicem tanguntur ut sonent: ideo, a quibusdam,
labiis comparata sunt. In which expression we see that some had handles; which
things I lay together, because some describe them as if they were to be played
on, or struck with a. radius or rod of metal; for so speaks the Scholiast here,
Archigalli cymbala percutientis; which is not a just expression of the striking
of one against the other; but according to Amalarius his description, he might
rather have said, concutientis. More agreeable is that of Ausonius, Ep. 2.
Cymbala dant flictu sonitum; and that of Virgil with a little difference (
Georg. lib. 4. ver. 64) matris quate cymbala circum. Which descriptions I the
rather allege, because if anciently the Music on the Cymbal were only by
hitting the two parts of it together, and that their handles did in their use
employ both hands, cymbala pulsantis here offered by some copies, were
peradventure a less proper expression, and so not the Right Reading; and the
ordinary copies, which I choose to follow, have here tympana pulsantis. The
reason of the different sounds of Drums and Cymbals is expressed by Seneca,
Natural. Quast. lib. 2. cap. 29. in these words, Ita tympana and Cymbala
sonant, quiailla repugnantem ex ulteriore part spiritum pulsant, haec ad ipsum
aerem acta, nisi concavo non tinniunt. And here we may note, that some make the
difference between Loud [or as some render it, the well-sounding] cymbals, and
the high sounding cymbals mentioned, Psalm. 105. v. 5. to be this, that the
first were composed according to Musical Art; the other were those, which, if
struck, retained the sound longer (si diutius tunsa sonum retineant) as
Mersennus notes on Genes. cap. 4. q. 56. col. 1520. (out of Turnebus). We may
only add, that the Corybants, the Priests of Cybel the Phrygian Goddess were
called Galli (as it is commonly delivered, and showed by Britannicus on Sat. 8.
v. 176. on those words tympana Galli) from the river Gallus in Phrygia, whose
waters are said to have made those mad, that drank of them. These Priests are
mentioned also by Varro [apud Nonium, in Castum] in these words, Nam quae
venustas hic adest Gallantibus. Quae casta vestis? On which words says Dempster
on Rosinus, lib. 2. cap. 4. Gallantes sunt insani, a Gallis matris Deum: from
which Galli the word Gallant is most probably for the like sense derived into
ours and other languages, though by use improved to a better acception.

5.
Improbus es cum poseis, ait. Sed pensio clamar
Posce: Sed appellat puer unicus, ut Polyphemi
Lata acies, per quam sollers evasit Ulysses.
This passage which I have here set-down, does in the exposition of the latter
part of it, much disturb the Interpreters, the ordinary exposition, according
to Britannicus, being this; Virro tells Naevolus that he is a bold beggar; but
he replies, that h^^ rent which he is to pay, and such other expenses (called
here pensio, because they anciently weighed their money) calls upon him, or
urges him to such bold importunity: nor only such expenses, but also his one
servant. For, he has but one servant, as Polyphemus had but One eye, a broad
one, by which subtle Ulysses escaped; and therefore adds, Alier emendus erit,
etc. he must needs provide himself another, and both of them must be fed and
clothed. In which speech, the comparing of his One servant to Polyphemus his
One eye, seems to many but affected, if not very absurd and sortish; and
likewise to say, that he escaped by his eye. Lubin therefore, who thinks thus of
this passage, labors to salve it by these two ways; First, by making the sense
to be this; That as one eye did not serve Polyphemus his turn, but that by the
loss of that only, having not another to help, he was quite blind; so he having
but one servant, had need of another to supply the possible loss of him which
he had, so to prevent the misery, into which he might otherwise fall: Secondly
by saying, that the Poet purposely here makes Naevolus speak thus sottishly,
that he might show him to be not only corrupted desperately in his Moralls, but
as much perished in his Intellectuals. The learned Rigaltius (de Satyra
Juvenalis) says on this passage, dixit -- adeo latam fuisse illius oculi aciem,
ut per eam Ulysses evaserit: whereby, it seems, he means that Naevolus says,
Polyphemus his eye was so broad, that Ulysses escaped through it, as through a
passage. For he makes the breadth of the eye the means of the escape: and then
wittily thinks, that the Poet here flouts at Virgil's wild hyperbole (Aeneid.
3.) in his description of Polyphemus his eye; which he there says was Argolici
clypei etc Phaebaeae lampadis instar, large as an Argolick shield, nay, as the
Sun. Indeed Juvenal flours so at Homer's hyperbole, in making Mars cry as loud
as ten thousand men: for if by That, he intended to express him to be a God,
why did he in another place make him a frail man; as when wounded by Diomades?
But the learned Heinsius (de Satyra Horatiana. p. 106. and 107.) having
diligently showed against the Interpreters, that unicus ought here to signify
as much as (...), his dear, only or beloved servant, presses this passage as an
absurd, nay an intolerable expression, upon our Author. For, who says he would
say, that Ulysses escaped per Cyclopis oculum? especially when his eye was
put-out, and that his blindness was the occasion of the escape? yet to speak in
an ingenuous liberty, though it be granted, that unicus is to be allowed that
sense, which he proves it to be used in; yet I likewise think that in this
place it ought also to signify in that sense, in which the Interpreters here
take it, both his beloved servant and his one servant; but literally and
chiefly this: as is manifest by the word alter which follows, and answers to
it. Alter emendus erit, supposing unus (though in the word unicus) spoken of
before. And for the other exceptions, I think them to be very acute and
rigorous: for, to confine a Poet to a Logical, exactness of expression, is to
take away not only Poetical License, but also Liberty. Nay, even Logic it
self, the severe Art of Reason permits aequivocal expressions, and so an eye,
though put-out, to be termed an eye. Besides, may it not relish of a Satirical
jeere, to call that an eye, which but lately had its sight, and was by a
subtilty so soon deprived of it? But what if in a conjectural liberty, per be
in this place taken as in that passage of Persius, Per me sint omnia protenus
alba? that is, me permittente or non obstante, and so per quam interpreted by
qua tamen lata acie non impediente (intimating the scoff, that it was put-out)
sollers evasit Ulysses? The drift of the speech, though not in express terms,
yet implied in the sense, will be in the comparison of lata and sollers: the
meaning being, that though his One, his only and dear eye were very great, yet
Ulysses his wit was as great, yea greater, that could notwithstanding, or for
all that, escape so broad an instrument of circumspection. For the word
improbus I take it here to signify not dishonest (though that were true
applied to Naevolus) but as in that saying, labor improbus omnia vincit; where
it signifies not wicked labor, but persevering, importunate, that will prevail.

6. -- Now receive any Legacy; Sweet windfals too --. Legatum omne capis, nec
non and dulce caducum --. Naevolus here upbraiding Virro with the many
services, which he had done for him, [to silence the impurities of this
passage] says, that he reconciled his wife unto him, when according to the
Roman liberty of divorce, she had broken the marriage-bonds, and was scaling
new, making some other heir to the estate she had. Secondly he says, that
Virro, as a Father, was upon the public Records; according to that Custom
mentioned by Capitolinus [in vita Marci Aurelii Philosop -- apud praefectos
aerarii in Aede Saturni unumquemque civium natos profiteri, intra diem tertium
nomine imposito, etc. as Marcellus Donatus notes on Sueton's Tiberius, cap. 5.
But Ph. Rubenius in his Elect. lib. 1. cap. 5. for tertium reads tricesimum [in
Capitolinus] for so, says he, it seems that Marcus Aurelius Antoninus changed
the ancient custom. So the Father was to give notice of the birth of his
child, and the child received his name within thirty days after the birth. For
before this Emperor's time, the dies lustricus [for the purifying of the
infant, and for imposing of the Name] was the ninth for the Male, the eight for
the Famale; as appears from Tertullian, de Idololatria; Macrobius. 1. Saturn.
16. and likewise from Festus in voce, Lustrici Dies; for the causes of which
custom see Plutarch^ in Quaestion. Romans quaest. 102. The supposed Goddess for
this day was called Nundina, and the day it self, Nominalia. Till the 7th. day
was past, they held that the child was in danger. But Torrentius on Sueton
observes our of Suidus, that names were not imposed till the tenth day. But
that was properly the Gracian, more particularly the Athenian, custom, as
Rubenius notes from the Scholiast upon Aristophanes de Avibus, and from
Euripides in Electra. Thirdly to proceed the Poet bids Virro adorn his door,
according to the custom and joy of childbirth, with garlands. Fourthly he
recites his privileges, as of a Father; for whereas in the estates of those
that were married, but died childless, the tenth part of that which the one
bequeathed unto the other, did by the Papian Law fall to the Exchequer; Virro
was capable of the whole legacy; omne being here taken for integram; which in
the Law they called Solidum; as Jacobus Nicolaus Loensis notes in his Miscell.
Epiphyll. lib. 9. cap. 9. whereas also diverse Testaments ran condicionally, as
that such things should descend (or fall) to such a one, if he had children,
Virro was capable of such caduca, such fallings, or as the use and metaphore in
our language allows it, such wind-falls: which because unexpected, and so more
grateful, makes Navolus say, Dulce caducum. Lastly he adds his Benefit in Hope,
that if he should have three children, then he should have many more
privileges, as freedom from the trouble of being a Guardian, priority in
bearing offices, and a treble proportion of corn. Concerning Caduca, see the
Code. lib. 6. Tit. 50. and of the jus trium liberorum, see the Code. lib. 8.
Tit. 59. and Gothofreds notes on it; and that it privileged from Guardianship,
see Institut. lib. 1. Tit. 25. De excusationibus Tutorum and Curatorum; where
the first excuse is polypaedia; as the argument of the Title shows. And more
particularly concerning Jus trium liberorum may be observed, first that the
privilege was not granted to any, unless the Parents dwelt in Rome: but if
they dwelt in any other part of Italy, they were to have five children; and if
in the Roman Provinces, Seven; otherwise, they enjoyed not the privilege:
Secondly, that contrary to this ancient strictness, the Right was by some of
the Emperors granted to some (as Britannicus here notes) not only that had not
three children, but that had neither wife nor child.

7. The rich ones nere count poison a dear grain. His opibus nunquam cara est
annona veneni. Naevolus here shows, that such as leudly use the smoothing
Pumice-stone, are as monstrous in their Revenge, as in their lust; and withal,
that being rich, they never count poison (the instrument of their revenge)
dear, by the Poet called here annona veneni: or, annona being the yearly
provision of a family, we may render it, They never count the provision, or
yearly provision of poison, dear: as if he would implie their lewd care in
providing yearly poison for their wicked purposes, as other men did Corn, or
other necessaries, for their families. Wherefore he desires Juvenal not to
discover, what he has discovered to him; but to be as secret, as the Athenian
Court of the Areopagites, wherein the Judges gave their suffrages by night and
in silence, by Characters, The place where the Court was kept, was called
Areopagus, or Mars-hill; because Mars being accused of a Murder by Neptune, was
there by six of the twelve Gods, by whom he was tried, acquitted; as the Fable
assures us.

8. -- At the Cock's second Crow. Quod tamen ad cantum galli facit ille
secundi. The Poet here earnestly flouts at Naevolus, as at a rude and ignorant
Corydon (like Him in Virgil) who fondly thinks, that a Great Man's crimes can
be concealed: no, says he; what he does in the dark, in the night, ad cantum
galli secundi, is made known before day by his own servants. Where, by ad
cantum galli secundi, he means ad secundu^ cantu^ galli, as Britannicus
expounds it; or as Lubin, ubi gallus secundo canere incipit. Which exposition,
though it be very short, is very necessary: for, the cock naturally crowing at
several seasons of the night, and at every season one answering another, it
must not be undestood of the crowing of the second cock, which is quickly after
the first, and so in effect at the same season. But concerning the second
Cock-crowing, or season here intended, Lubin expounds it, by adding to what he
said before, sub medium noctem. The other Interpreters express it not at all;
and he but ill; it containing more difficulty, then he took notice of, if
examined. The Romans then who began their natural day. (of 24. hours) at
Midnight, did thus name and distinguish the first parts of it; The first of all
was called Media nox (which was indeed principium and postremum diet Romani, as
Cersorinus calls it); the second, De medi^^nocte; the third, Gallicinium (when
the Cocks began to Crow); the fourth, Conticinium (when they ceased); the fist,
ante lucem; the fixed, diluculum (for this must be distinguished from the
former, as it is by Censorinus in these words, tune ante^lucem: and sic
Diluculum, cum sole nondum or to jam lucet) when it was light, but the Sun not
risen; the seventh, Mane, when the Sun was up; as Censorinus (de Die Narali.
cap. ult.) reckons them up; for, I need nor recite more for the discussing of
this point. But by this little it presently appears (against Lubin) that the
Roman Gallicinium was nor the same season with media nox; no, nor the next
after it. Besides, by the Roman reckoning it self how can we know what time is
spoken of there being in it but one Cock-crowing in all mentioned, and by
Censorinus called Gallicinium; (the Conticinium being the season when they
ceased) but Juvenal mentions different seasons of the Cock-crowing. Wherefore
this difficulty may be examined by a more absolute way; not that of the Romans,
but of Nature: which teaches us, that the Cocks naturally crow at three
especial seasons in the night; as they are distinguished and pointed-out unto
us, by our English Varro (for Rural knowledge) our Authenck Tusser in his
Poetical Husbandry (p. 123. in his note of Cock-crowing where he thus delivers
it, Cock croweth at Midnight, times few above six,
With pause to his fellow to answer betwixt;
At three a clock thicker, and then as you know,
Like all into Mattins, nere day they do crow.
At Midnight, at three, and an hour yer day
They utter their language, as well as they may.
By which natural way of trial, the first season of the Cock-crowing being at
Midnight, and the third an hour before day, the second must be at Three in the
Morning, the season here intended, suitable to Juvenal's expression, admitting a
supposal of sufficient time between Virro's fact and his servants discovery. A
like expression of this season is that in St. Mark (Chap. 14. v. 13.) before
the Cock crow twice; a speech without the ambiguity of the Roman Gallicinium,
and according to Nature.

9. What fe're his Scribe and Cheif-Cooks faign, His Carvers too. Et quae
sinxerunt pariter Librarius, Archimagiri, Carptores. In the exposition of the
servants, which discover their Lord's guilt, there is some difficulty;
Librarius not only signifying one that weighs-out the task to under-servants in
great families, in the nature of an overseer, but also a Scribe, or amanuensis,
employed in his Lords Library: both which senses Lubin notes, but leaves us at
random for our choice. Britannicus more definitively takes it in the latter
sense, for a Scribe; and so in this place I choose to rake it: though, I grant,
that in Sat. 6. I take Libraria in the first sense, for a woman-servant, that
weighed out and oversaw others work. For though there were shee-Scribes also,
as I show, Sat. 6. Illustrat. 53. yet there the person spoken-of had relation
to a Woman, a Lady more employed in housewifery, then in study: but here it
being the expression of a servant to wealthy Virro, it seems more convenient to
render it in the latter sense. So likewise Carptores signifies carvers; but
also, as Lubin says, carminatores. i. e. carptores lanarum carders of wool.
But it seems somewhat incongruous to take it here for such work-folks, if we
consider the more proud condition of wealthy Virro's family. But for the
inward conditions of Virro's servants the Poet says, that they were more eager
to discover secrets, even of their Lord, then to drink wine, nay though stolen
wine (which seems sweetest) and though as Much, as Laufella, (or, as some
copies have it, Saufeia) did use to drink, pro populo faciens, when she
sacrificed to Bona Dea for the safety of the people: at which Rites celebrated
in the house of the summus pontifex the women did familiarly drink themselves
drunk; as the Poet in his 6. Satyr shows with just indignation.

10. Amidst Cups, Flou'rs, Ointments and Lovers toys. -- Dum bibimus, dum
serta, unguenta, puellas poscimus. -- The luxury of the Ancients was marvailous
in their manner and excess of drinking; as is often implied both in this and
other Authors: the use being Then to adorn their heads with chaplets of
flowers, to anoint themselves with fragant ointments, and so sit and frolic it
at the wine. Which use of such floury crowns some think to have come from the
Hebrews; and conjecture so from Ezechiel, chap. 23. where Samaria and Jerusalem
are described under the metaphore of whores; incense and oil are mentioned, v.
41; and so it is said, v. 42. that their lovers put beautiful ointments upon
their heads; which Fortunatus Schacchus in his Myrothecium, l. 1. c. 26.
understands in this sense. Who also in the same book, cap. 20. makes a
difference (though neitheir received nor acknowledged) between Vnguentarius and
ungentarius; this being (according to him) he that composes the ointments, the
Other he that sells them: and shows that the composers were men of better
quality, then the Other; which last though we may admit, yet the distinction
of the names remains to be proved. But for the ointments themselves, we may
know, that the excess of them anciently was marvailous, even to Curiosity: for
as Abaenaus shows, l. 15. c. 11. out of an old Poet, to the accurate anointing
of a man, they used variety of ointments; namely, Egyptian for the feet and
thighs; Phaenician for the cheeks and Breast; Sisymbrian for the Arms;
Amaracine, for the eie-brow and hair; and Serpylline for the neck and knees.
But above all we may here take notice of one kind of Oil among the Ancients of
singular excellency, called Oleum-Susinum, made of Lillies, but more
particularly of that sort, which was called (...), and to which, it seems, is
that allusion, Cant. 5.13. where the Church says of Christ, His lips like
Lillies: which might seem a strange comparison in the common apprehension, if
any should there understand the white lilly, the beauty of the lip consisting
rathes in red; according to which clear congruity Our Savior describes his
spouse the Church, Cant. 4.3. saying, Thy lips are like a thread of searlet;
which was most proper and comely. Wherefore we must take notice, that there
were diverse sorts of Lillies; of which that which is called (...), was of
areddish color, as Pliny describes it, l. 21. c. 5. Est and rubens lilium,
quod Graeci (...) vocant: and this, as Athenaus says, l 12. c. 2. was the same
with (...), (called so as is conjectured, from the Hebrew, (...), lilium) of
which was made that admirable cleum susinum, mentioned by Pliny, l. 13. c. 1.
And this is that, as Schacchus thinks (in the forecited book, c. 27.) which
the Prophet calls, the Oil of Gladness, he had better have called it the figure
of This, and which signifies, as he says, the high grace of the hypostatical
union. I may only note by the way, that this Oil is not mentioned by the
learned Cordus in his Dispensatorium, though he describes Oleum Lilinum (p.
301.) but his is the Oil only of the white Lilly.

11. They, they, that with one singer scratch their head. Qui digito scalpunt
caput uno --. The Poet here in the description of the Roman Leud-Ones, makes
this a part of his expression, that they scratch the head with one finger,
meaning thereby persons filthily effeminate: because, says the Scholiast, they
behave themselves like women, who in the ordering of their hair, scratch their
head with one finger, to prevent the disturbing of it. But with more
probability Britannicus and other Interpreters generally take it for an
allusion to a most known jere expressed in a piece of a verst, by Calvus a
Poet, written upon Pompey; who in his time was noted for such a lewd one, and
likewise for scratching his head in an affected manner with one finger; and so
he was taxed by Clodius, as Plutarch relates in his Pompey, and Ammianus
Marcellinus in his 17. book. And here the Poet by way of Ironie, bids Naevolus
not despair of thriving yet, saying to him, -- altera major Spes superest --,
that there may yet be hope of new gain, seeing that for ever there will be new
sinners; and therefore bids him only to eat enough Rocket, an herb in the Roman
Climate anciently in great request, as may appear by Columella, who tells us,
that they did use to sow it near their Garden-God. It was an impure diligence,
that took care for their lust.

12. -- But O My-small House-Gods on whom with Some incense I call, or with a
cake and garland --. O parvi nostrique Lares, quos thure minuto, aut far --
tenui soleo exorare corona. The Scholiast here on the last words exorare
corona, says, id est, coronatus floribus precari: but the construction in the
Poet yields it not; and the things he uses are to be applied not to the
Sacrificer, but to the Lares; and therefore the chaplet or Garland of Flowers,
did as well as the frank-incense and cake, concern Them. So does our Poet
himself also express it, Sat. 12. in those words (which I marvail the
Interpreters did not here allege, seeing that they so much illustrate this
passage concerning the sacrifice to the Lares.) Inde domum repetam, graciles
ubi parva coronas
Accipiunt frugili simulachra nitentia cera.
Hic nostrum placabo Jovem, Laribusque paternis
Thura dabo, at que omnes violae jactabo colores.
On which passage Britannicus shows, that the Lares were adorned with chaplets
of flowers; and more particularly out of Pliny (lib. 21.) that when in winter
there were no flowers, they supplied the defect by making coronets exramento e
cornibustincto, of the shavings of horn died with coloring (such as are
sometimes nowadays used for the dressing of windows) and these, as he says,
were called winter-chaplets and therefore by the Poet, as he thinks, graciles
coronas. But this his last guess I think nor to be right, because they were
there used by Juvenal for his friends escape from a thunderstorme at Sea, and
so most probably in Summer, both in respect of the thunder and the Season of
sailing; and therefore very flowers might then have been had: wherefore I think
they might there be called graciles coronae, in the like sense, as there also
he says, simulachra parva Some copies have here, soleo exornare corona; which
though, I grant, it aptly agrees with corona, yet it does not so agree with
thure and far: unless we should take Lares in part of the construction
plainly, and in part figuratively, which were too harsh, if not absurd. For,
adornare Lares corona, must signify the Lares properly, that is, themselves,
or statues; but adornare Lares thure and far, must not fignifie properly, the
Lares themselves, but figuratively, that is, their Altars. Wherefore I retain
the more received Reading, exorare, as better agreeing to all the things here
mentioned, and used by his Devotion. And here we may observe concerning the
Lares themselves, that according to the doctrine of the Heathen (particularly
of Plato) they were taken to be the Souls of their predecessors, who at the
first were usually buried in their houses, and so there worshipped. But they
were thought to be the Souls only of such as lived well, with a worthy
providence for their posterity: but on the contrary those that lived ill, were
thought to wander after death in a wretched banishment, and that they were the
Goblings, which frightened People; and these were called Lemures and Larvae; as
Tiraquel on Alex. ab Alex. in his Genial. Dier. lib. 6. cap. 4. shows out of
Apuleius and Others. Lastly, whereas the Poet here elegantly says, O parvi
nostrique Lares, making His and Small (or, poor) to be all one, I knew not how
more concisely and effectually to render it, then by an apposition, My-small;
that as they concerned but one thing, so they might be expressed by One word.

13. Quando ego figam aliquid, quo sit mibi tuta senenectus A tegete and
baculo? Some Copies have here (as Pithaeus notes in his Var. Lection. on this
place) Quando ego fiam aliquid, quo sit, etc. When shall I become some body, or
be made of some moment, that I may be secure in my old age? But the most and
the best Copies have figam; by reason of the ambiguity of which word, there are
two expositions of this place The one according to the use of the word,
according to which it signifies as much as constituam, or componam, to get, or
settle; and then the sense would be, When shall I get some sure stay, to shield
me in my old age from uncomfortable beggary? The other is according to the use
of the word, whereby it signifies to six, and so implies a relation to an
ancient custom of fixing their vows with wax to the knees of the Gods, which
the Poet in the 10th. Satyr calls, genua incerare Deorum; and then the sense
will be, when shall I so fasten a vow to the knees of the Gods, that I may
obtain in my old age Plenty and convenience? And thus Rutgersius (Var. Lection.
lib. 5. cap. 5.) expounds these words, Quando ego figam aliquid, etc. and then
adds, quem locum vulgo tidicule explicant. Yet this exposition which he gives,
is before set-down by the learned Scholiast, who on the words figam aliquid,
says, Constituam, Componam, aut cerre quia in ceris vota figuntur apud templa:
aut habeam ubi maneam, aut supra quod incumbam senex. Wherein though he
proposes both opinions, and mentions the other both first and last, yet he
mentions this with a certe so that though he implies some doubt in his
judgment, yet he intimates his inclination to be more toward this, which
includes the custom. And to this exposition, I confess, I incline, not that I
think because figam may so signify, therefore it must: but (to express mine
own reason) because all that which follows will better agree with figam taken
in this sense, then in the other. For Naevolus making here this figam aliquid
quo sit etc. the cause of the many and great benefits which he desires, should
then pray somewhat incongruously: for if figam aliquid signified but some small
stay (as in that sense it must) it could not though he obtained it, afford him
those parcels of plenty, which he mentions, as the consequence of this desire
obtained. But if by figam aliquid we understand a vow; we then must grant, that
all the plenty which follows here, may safely and properly flow from it. For
this reason (which I leave to the judgment of the Reader) I choose the latter
exposition, and accordingly render it, -- When some Vow
Shall I so six, that old I may know how
To escape a Crutch and cabin? --


14. -- Nay, that I may twenty thousand have for use --. -- Viginti millia
foenus; that is (by an apposition) that I may have Use, Twenty thousand, or
twenty thousand for use. But here it is necessary to observe the construction;
the many parcels of Naevolus his desire depending upon the first words, Quando
ego figam aliquid. When, says he, shall I so happily six a vow, Quo sit mihi
tuta senectus, etc. Which quo sit must in effect (because only with the
allowance of a little Grammatical variety) be often repeated; as [quo sint mi
viginti millia foenus; and [quo sint mi argenti vascula puri; and duo fortes,
etc. and [quo] sit mihi-calator and alter Qui-cito pingat: for, thus he
discontentedly asks, when he shall be so happy by fixing a vow, as [therby] to
be able not only to escape stark beggary, but also to attain some good
sufficiency. For when he has expressed these his desires, he confesses that
these things would serve his turn; especially seeing it is His Lot (as he
repiningly speaks] to be always but poor. Yet again he condemns this his
desire, confessing it to be but votum miserabile, a vain desire [or to be
pitied) and therefore that it is but a folly to entertain the hope and
expectation but of this much. For, says he, when I pray to Fortune, she stops
her ears with some of the wax, with which Ulysses (taught so by Circe) stopped
the ears of his Mariners (he himself by his own appointment being bound fast to
the mast of his ship) whiles they pass-by the Sirens, which dwelt nere Sicily,
that so they might not be enchanted with their alluring songs, as it is in
Homer. Odyss. 12. So that when as some point part of this passage thus,
Sufficient haec. Quando ego pauper ero? It will yield no congruous sense:
wherefore it may better thus be pointed, Sufficient haec; Quando ego pauper
ero. Votum miserabile, nec spes His saltem --. Thus taking quando for quoniam
(as some do) seeing that I must be poor. The construction of which place being
thus observed, we may take notice of the Use here mentioned, Viginti millia,
that is, Sestertiorum, as it comes from Sestertius, and so is the same with
viginti sestertia; which make (multiplying 7 l. 16 s. 3 d. by 20.) 156 l. 5 s.
the sum, which this lewd and foolish Naevolus does here wish for the Monthly
Interest of Money; the Ancients renting it out not by the year, but by the
Month, according to that of Horace, Epod. Od. 2. Omnem relegit Idibus pecuniam,
Quarit Calendis ponere. See Gothofred on the Code. lib. 4. Tit. 32.

15. -- Besides such Plate, that Fabricius might judge it Too much. -- Argenti
vascula puri, Sed quae Fabricius Censor notet --: The story here intimated is,
that Cajus Fabricius being Censor adjudged Cornelius Ruffinus a Senator, who
had been twice Consul, unworthy of the place of a Serator, because he had
gotten silver vessels, which weighed ten pounds a piece, and so were in value
31 l. a piece; esteeming this as a notorious example of luxury. And here we may
take notice, that though the most, particularly Gellius [lib. 6. cap. 5.]
likewise Marcellus Donatus on Sueton's Nero, cap. 44. and Budaus on the
Pandects, expound argentum purum by defaecatum, purified silver; yet Franciscus
Luisinus [in his Parergus. lib. 1. cap. 26.] shows out of Tully [Act. 6. in
Verrem] that argentum purum is opposed to caelatum. So likewise Festus takes
it, for plain plate, without any ^mblems or work, and therefore without
addition I render it, Plate; which the reader may only take notice of [both
here and Sat. 10. v. 19. where these words, argenti vascula puri are repeated)
as of a more refined exposition.

16. And two strong Maesians, whose hired necks might grace me To the loud
Circus, and there safely place me. -- Et duo fortes
De grege Maesorum, qui me cervice locata
Securum jubeant clamoso insistere Circo?
Naevolus in reckoning-up the parts of his desire, mentions slaves from Maesia,
which as Pliny describes it ( lib 3.) runs along the Danubius unto Pontus^
Euxinus from which country came strong slaves, which were accordingly employed
as porters. A couple of such, Naevolus wishes for, who, as he says might carry
him to the Circus. Upon their shoulders, in lectica says the Scholiast; but
Britannicus reprehends him: because the lectica required six or sometimes eight
to carry it, being thence called Hexaphorum and Octophorum. See Sat. 3.
Illustrat. 37. Here then we may understand the sella or chair, which a Couple
might carry. But whereas Lubin on the words -- Et duo fortes -- Qui me cervice
locata, etc. expounds locata by sub me locata, vel accommodata; I rather think
it should be expounded by elocata, meaning their hired necks; or, which he
could buy for his money; were he but as rich, as he wishes to be: in which his
desire and the employment of it, if fulfilled, the Poet jeers at the rich and
poor in doting on the pleasures of the Circus.

17. -- And a speedy Painter --. -- Et alter Qui multas facies pingat cito --.
Pithaeus in his Var. Lection. on this place says, that the best copy which he
used, had here Qui multa facies --, not multas; and therefore says, that one
may supect it should be maltha; and so, says he, Scaliger thought. Whereby, it
seems, that here should be understood, the matter or coloring which Painters
used. But if we consider the Ingredients of it, as it is commonly described,
which were as is showed ( Sat. 5. Illustrat. 6.) a kind of lime mortar, sand,
water, pitch and wax; we may probably suspect, that they would be loath to have
their Conjecture thought to be as unseemly.

SATYR. X.
ARGUMENT.
Lo here men's Prayers turned to Curse,
The most being always vain, or worse!
Some Wealth desire, by which they are.
But the more filled with Vice or Care.
Some on the Gods for Honor call:
Though thus they but Renown their Fall.
One has sought Eloquence, and sped:
Yet has the Tongue, chopp'd off the Head.
By War another would win Fame:
Much some have won, and won more shame.
Some desire Length of Life, though vain;
But length of Torments too they Gain.
Some Beauty wish, on which often wait
Sweet Admiration, and sow'r Fate!
Lo, the wrong Prayers of Men too blind!
To Pray Right, Pray for a Right Mind.
IN all the World, which between Cadiz lies
And Eastern Ganges, few there are so wise
To know true Good from feigned without all mist
Of Error. For, by Reasons Rule what is it
We fear or wish? what is it (1) we e're begun
With foot so right, but we disliked it done?
Whole houses the Easy Gods have overthrown
At their fond Prayers, that did the Houses own.
What hurts in Peace, in War what hurts we crave:
By flood of Speech, by Eloquence some have
Procured their Ruin. One was spoiled at length
By trusting to his wondrous Arms tried strength.
But more are choked by Gold with too much speed
And care stored up, which does as much exceed
All Patrimonies, as the British whale
The Dolphin. VVhiles then Nero did prevail,
His whole dire Band of Soldiers did beset
Longinus, and the Rich Seneca's great
Gardens, and the brave Lateran's delight,
Rare Structures. Seldom did they Cock-lofts fright.
If thou do carry but a little Plare
By night, the Sword and long-staff thou fear straight.
A wagg'd Reeds shade by Moonlight terror brings:
Before a Theif, who travails Empty, sings.
Our first desire it is to most shrines most known,
That our full wealth and store increase, that none (2)
In the whole Forum have so large a Chest.
Who's Poisned yet from Earthen Cups? But Best
It is, to fear That, when thy hand does hold
Gemm'd bowls, and Setine sparkling in large Gold.
Do thou not praise (3) that wise man then, which still
Laughed, if he had put his foot but over his Sill?
And the other too, that wept? Yet at the Rout
Easy it is to Laugh-out a stern^ Flour.
But strange, methinks, it is, the other should Cry
Allways, (4) and still find tears to fill his Eye!
Splenetical Democritus did make
His Lungs with a perpetual Laughter shake;
Though his rude Thracians never saw such things,
As Litters, Rods, Chairs, (5) Robes for Lords and Kings.
But had he seen a Praetor in a high
Chariot, in the dusty Circus, to every eye
Strut in (6) Jove's Coat, and from his shoulders down
To trail a spreading rich-imbroyder'd Gown,
Large as Sarranian Tapestry! Or e're
Seen the Orb of Crown, which no one neck can bear^!
A (7) Public Servant sweats for it; who does ride
In The Consul's Chariot to abate his Pride.
Add (8) the Eagle raised on Ivory Seepter; There
The Cornet-winders, Troops of Servants Here
Marching before; At's (9) bridle white-gown'd friends,
Whose Hope on's Doal, yet in His Chest attends.
Even Then at ev^ry turn just cause, to flout
He found: whose Wisdom puts it beyond doubt,
That brave Men, great Examples, may sometimes
Be born amongst sheepish Dolts, and in gross Climes.
He jeered the People's Cares, and Joys, and Tears
Sometimes; At Fortune's threats he felt no Fears;
He sent (10) a halter to her, and held out
The middle Finger. Wherefore the dull rout
Craves what is Vain or Deadly: and thus bows,
Fixing with (11) wax to the Gods knees such Vows!
Power Subject to great Envy headlong throws
Some: Their (12) branched Pages and extended rows
Of Honors, like a flood, their states quire swallow;
Down come (13) their Statues and the Halter follow.
Then the Axe their Chariot-wheels with banging stroke
Splits out, and their poor horses Legs are broke.
Hark, the Fires snap: the Rout's adored Head lacks
Nor Blast, nor Furnace: Huge S^janus cracks!
Of the (14) worlds second Faceare formed strange matters.
Water-pots, Basins, Frying-pans and Platers!
Crowned (15) be the doors with Bays! A Bull chalk-white
And large, led to Jove's Capitol! O sight! (16)
Sejanus Dragged! O joy! His Lips, his wan
Face saw (...)? Beleive't I never Loved the Man.
But, under what Crime fell he? who detected?
What signs? what witness was there? Quite neglected
These Questions are. A tedious Letter came
From Capreae. Oh, I ask no more of Fame.
But now on whom does Remus his Rout wait?
Fortune Leads them still: the condemned they Hate.
For, the same People, (17) had but Nurtia blessed
Her Tuscan, and the Prince's Age oppressed
VVhiles then secure, had with rare change of Fate,
Proclaimed Sejanus their Augustus straight.
For, since we sold no Suffrages, All live
Neglecting Cares, and They, which once did give
The Empire, Rods, Legions, all things, now contain
Themselves, and but two things strive to obtain,
Bread (18) and the Circus. Many, I hear, must die!
It Is sure: (19) our small Furnace breaths Flames! And my
Brutidius looked half-pale, as me be met
At Mars his Altar! I Am afraid (20) our Great
Ajax overcome Revenge will take, as ill
Guarded! Lets run then straight, and with some skill,
Whiles on the bank he lies, on Caesar's foe
Trample. But let our Servants eyes too know
As much, least they deny't; and by the neck tie us,
Hale us before the Judge, and for life try us.
These were the Speeches, which then passed about
Sejanus; These the whisp'rings of the Rout.
Would thou be now saluted like the Great
Sejanus? Have his wealth? Give one the Seat
Of Justice, or an Army? Be the Admired
Guardian to the Prince (21) with his Chaldy-Heard retired
To Capreae, his Court-Rock? Sure, your Band
Of Foot, your Darts, you would have; Nay command
The Horse-troops (22) and Praetorian Camp! why, still
VVish this. They would have Power, that would not kill.
But what is of so rare and rich account,
Whose Evil does not still the Good surmount?
Would choose the dragged Sejanus's robe to wear,
Or (23) Rule, at Gabis and Fidenae, bear?
And at empty Vlubrae freely speak,
Though a course Aedile, and false measures break?
What then he should have wished, thou do confess
Sejanus knew not. For, whiles he did press
After too great Honors and wealth, his Fate
Raised but more stories in his Tower of State,
Whence to a greater Ruin after all
With a huge Pitch-pole he was forced to fall.
The Crassi, the Pompeii, what o'rethrew?
Or Caesar, who the tamed Quiritians drew
To's scourge? wast not High Place sought by the worst
Arts, and Great Vows obtained of Heaven and Cursed?
To Ceres's Son-in-Law (24) few Kings descend
Unslain; few Tyrants with a Dry death End.
Demosthenes or Tullie's Tongue and Fame
He (25) craves all Pallas's Feast-days without Shame,
Whose young three-farthings wit can yet scarce prate,
On whom a Keeper and small Satchel wait:
Yet both these Orators fell by their Tongue;
From their exundant wit their Ruin sprung,
Wit chopped off Tullie's Hand and Head: but never
Did Silly Lawyers blood the Pew besmear.
O (26) Rome redeemed, deemed lost, yet Happy born,
When as thy Consul's Robes by me were worn.
He might have scorned Antonie's Sword, if still
He' had writ no better. I Would write lines as ill,
Rather then Thee, Divine Philippick, Bold
Though famed, which art, after the First, unroul'd.
He perished too, whose tongue Athens admired:
At (27) whose Curb the full Theater r^tir'd.
Yet was he born with adverse Gods and Fate,
Whom his course blear-eyed Father, that did wait
On glowing It'n and smoke sent from his trade,
From Coal, (28) Tongs, Anvil, upon which are made
Good Swords; from all his black Vulcanian tools,
Unto the Rhetoricians fatal Schools.
The spoils of War, (29) a Coat of Maile fixed high
On Trophie's Snags, a Beaver hanging by
One joint from a cleft Helmet, a Beam maimed
Chariot, a Gallie's Flag by conquest shamed,
And on High Arch a drooping Captive, vain
Opinion counts a bliss more then Humane!
The Roman, Grecian, and Barbarian raise
Themselves to Toil and Danger for this Praise.
The thirst of Fame does so much more Infire
The Breast, then Virtue: which who does desire
Without Reward? Yet former times can show
Kingdoms lost by the glory of a few,
Whose Aim was Titles, that should never die,
Fixed on proud Tombs, wherein their ashes lie:
Which the wild Fig Tree yet, for all their State,
Shrewdly casts down; For, Tombs too have their Fate.
Weigh Hannibal: of's Dust how many pounds
Find ye? To Him yet Africa yields not bounds:
On whose West-shoar the Atlantic waves do beat
The Eastern stretching-out to Nilus's Heat;
To Ethiopia's Inhabitants
It runs too, and (30) to the other Elephants.
He adds Spain; Next, the Pyrenaeans show
Him way: Nature opposes the Alps and Snow.
He digs through Rocks; with Vinegar he eats
Through Mountains. Now in Italy he seats
Himself; and yet even There more must be won:
Nothing, alas, says he, as yet is done,
Unless our Punick Power forcing Rome's Gates
In their Suburra on our Ensign waits.
O goodly Face and Picture! A one-Eyed
General does a Getulian Beast bestride!
Well, what is his End? O Glory! A Defeat
He has! Flies into Exile! There this Great
Strange Client waits at Court his Moan to make,
When the Bythinian Tyrant's pleased to wake.
Yet, neither Swords, nor Stones, nor Arrows can
Drive this tumultuous Soul from this Wild Man:
But That, which just revenge at last did bring,
For so much blood at Cannae shed, That Ring.
Go Madman; Pass the dire Alps; to please fools!
To be a Declamation for the Schools!
To the Pellaean youth one worlds small Ground;
Poor wretch, he Sweats in the worlds narrow bound;
As if Gyarian Rocks enclosed him, or small
Seriphus. Yet when Babylons brick-wall
He enters, a Tomb serves him. It Is made known,
What Dwarfs our Bodies are, by Death alone.
Men once believed, Athos was sailed about,
And all that lying Greece dares story-out;
That those Ships paved the firm Sea, which did beat
Chariot-wheels. We believe deep Rivers were
Drunk up and dried, whiles the Mede dined; Nay, things
Which (31) Sostratus does chaunt with moistened wings.
How yet left the Barbarian Salamine,
Whose whips once made Corus and Eurus whine?
Such in the Aeolian Dungeon they never found;
Earth-shaking Neptune too his Shackels bound.
'Twas well he Stigmatized him not. What God
Would be at such a frantic Masters Nod?
But how returned he? Even in one small boat
Through shoals of Carcasses, which still did float
In waves of blood; His Prow was almost tired.
Lo, the Reward of Glory so desired!
Give length of Life, O Jove, give many years;
With (32) face direct, This only, pale with fears,
Thou begg'st. Yet what continual Ills, how strange,
Greive Age? Chiefly a Face, by deformed change,
Unlike it self! No Skin, but a foul Hide
Behold! Bagg'd cheeks, with wrinkles deep and wide!
In (33) Tabracha's large Shades a Gran'ame-Ape
Just such in her old mumping cheek does scrape.
Young men do differ much: Some are more Fair
Then others; Some then some far stronger are.
There Is but one Face of Age! Limb and Voice g^ows
Feeble; The Head's bald: Moist is the Baby-Nose.
With Gums disarmed, alas, their bread they press;
Wife, Children, and themselves they do distress:
They Would tire the Soother Cossus. Wine and Meat
Yield not the Palate the old delight and heat.
Lust they long since forgot: which would thou know
Now, yet a broken belly would say, No.
No Art or Time repairs thee. When the true
Moisture of Life is gone, can hope for new,
Now Sick and Old? we justly do suspect
Such as do pleasure without strength affect.
Behold the loss now of another part;
For what delight is there from Voice and Art
Of rare Musician, (34) though Selencus 'twere,
Or such as use the Imbroider'd Cloak to wear.
In the large Theater he needs no choice
Of Sear: he scarce hears Cornets, or the voice
Of Trumpets. Loud they bawl, to make him know,
Who's at his door, or how the hours do go.
In his cold Veins the little blood's never hot
Without a Fever. All Diseases got
Into one band do dance about him: though,
If you inquire their names, I Will sooner show,
How many Adult'rers Hippia had; how many (35)
Sick in one Autumn Themison did bane ye:
How many Associates Basilus disseated:
How many woeful Wards rich Iru cheated:
How many Towns He Owns, who went snip, snip,
As his quick Sizzers my young beard did clip.
One's Shoulders weak; another's Loins: One Cries-Out
on his Hip. He has lost both his Eyes,
And Envies those, that have one lest: This lingers,
And his pale lips take food from others fingers.
At sight of Meat, one with mouth drawn awry,
Like the young Swallow yawnes, to whom does fly
The hungry dam with food in mouth. Yet, then
All loss of limb, fan worse is Dotage; when
One does forget his Servants Names, A known
Friends Face, that Supped with him last^night; his own
Children, whom he has long brought up. For by
A Cruel Will, These he does quire deny
To be his Heirs: his State is all conveyed
To Phiale, so far he is oversway'd
By the Art of her Rank Tongue. She long did use
To serve in the fit Prison of the Stews.
But though the sense and wit be still entire,
Yet must they Bury Children; see the Fire
Of their Loved Wife and Brother; (36) view they must
Urnes filled with their dear Sister's Bones and Dust.
Thus are they punished, that live long! Still New
Slaughter does in their House the Old ensue.
'Midst Plaints and daily grief this they behold;
And thus still in Fresh Mourning weeds grow old!
The Pylian King (may Homers Great word go)
Was for long life next Pattern to the Crow.
Happy, no doubt, that could so long withstand
Death, and now (37) count his years on his Right hand!
That drunk so often new wine! Yet hear his strain
A little, how of Fate he does complain,
And his Life's Thread too long, when he saw stout
Antilochus his Beard burn! He cries-out
To's friends, why Live I still? And asks in rage,
What Crime condemned him to so long an Age?
Peleus his dead Achilles thus bewails:
And He that Mourns, whiles his Ulysses Sails.
Had Troy stood, Priamus with happy fate
Had come to Assaracus his Ghost in State,
Hector and's Brothers clad in sad attire
Bearing the Body to its funeral fire,
'Midst the Ilians Tears; Cassandra first had lent
Cries, then Polyxena her Robe had rent:
Had he but died, e're Paris had begun
To build bold Ships, by which Troy was undone!
What Good then brought his Age? His Age saw All
O'return'd by Fire and Sword, Great Asia's Fall!
The (38) Crown laid by, his Age more Armed then Bold,
Before Jove's Altar falls, like Ox grown old;
Which to his Masters knife, his weak neck now
Holds out, now scorned by the ungrateful Plough!
Yet died he like a Man: but his wife, which
Outlived him, grin'd and barked like a grim bitch.
I have unto our Own, and here omit
The Pontick King, and Croesus taught just wit
By Sweet-tongu'd Solon, who said, still attend
In long Life not the Glory, but the End.
The Exile, Poison, and Minturnian Moor,
The Bread at Conquered Carthage begged by poor
Marius, drew hence their Cause. What thing more blessed
Had Nature e're produced, or Rome at best,
Then that brave Man, if having led about
In all the Pomp of War his Captive-Rout,
H' had breath'd-out his rich Soul, when he intended
From his Teutonick Chariot to have descended?
Campania's Providence on Pompey threw
A happy Fever: but the Fates withdrew,
Great Venus so wrought; till Rome's and his own Dread
Fortune chop'd-off his Saved and Conquered Head.
Lentulus and Cethegus such divorce
Never knew; (39) Catiline ^lay an entire coarse.
At Venus's shrine a careful Mother's proud
Hope begs, for Sons softly, for Girls aloud,
Choice Shape. O choice Desires! Never blame my Prayer,
Says she, Latona's Glad Diana's Fair.
Lucretia yet forbids to wish a Face
Like Hers. Virginia would exchange her grace
Of shape for Rutila's bunch-back. A lad
Too fair still makes his fearful Parents sad.
Beauty with Chastity so rarely goes!
Though a Course House such holy manners shows,
As once did grace the Sabine Dames! Nay, though
Kind Nature with a Bounteous hand bestow
Chaste Disposition and a modest Face
VVarm with a Blush; (For, what more Noble grace
Can Nature's greatest Power to Youth impart,
Nature above all Guardians Care and Art?)
They are not suffered to be Men! Rich Lust
Dares bribe the Parents! Gifts they so much trust!
A shape-less Lad no Tyrant e're did make
His dear Court-Eunuch: Nero did not take
A Noble Club-foot-stripling; never contract
With one throat-swoln, gor-bellied, or Crump-back'd.
Go now, rejoice in thy fair Son, on whom
Worse dangers wait. E're long he shall become
A Public Stallion, and such vengeance fear
As the Husbands rage exacts. For, He shall never
More escape the Net then Mars, by Luck or Wit:
That Grief sometimes Acts more, then Law thinks fit.
This the Sword kills: on bloody whips that venters:
And some (40) Adult'rers the quick Mullet enters.
But thy Endymion shall love only some
Choice Dame; But when Sercilia's guist does come,
He Will Please whom he Loves Not. Then Jewels go;
On such moist Youth what will they not bestow?
A Hippia or Catulla let her be:
In this point yet the worst of them is Free.
Does shape yet hurt the Chaste? Good it did none
TO Hippolitus and grave Bellerophon.
The repulsed Cretian Phaedra's blood straight flowed
To' a Blush; and Sthenobaea no less glowed.
Both shook themselves to wrath. Then woman's spite
Is worst, when Shame too does their Hate excite.
Choose what thou would advise Him, whom the Great
Empress resolves to Marry. This so Neat,
Good, Noble Youth is haled, poor wretch, to Fate,
By Messalina's Eyes. She Drefs'd does wait
In Crimson veil. The Tyrian Marriage Bed
Is in the open ^ardens richly spread.
Ten (41) hundred thousand Sesterces, as due
Portion by Ancient Rite, she will make good too.
The South-sayer, with those that Seal, attends.
This thou thought known but to some trusty friends.
She Will Marry in all Form. Now advise right:
Unless he yields, he dies e're Candlelight.
If thou committ'st the Crime, the Delay's small:
'Till the Facts known to Rome, Rout, Prince and all.
The shame of's House He shall know last: meanwhile
Obey; unless a few-days-life seems vile.
Choose yet the best, thy judgment can afford,
This fair, white Neck must feel the sharp-edg'd Sword.
Shall men then Ask for Nothing? If thou wilt Sway
Thy thoughts by mine, leave't to the Gods to weigh
What to us for our Good they may commit:
They Will give, not things that Please, but things most Fit.
To them Man's dearer, then to Himself. By strong
Passions and blind Desires we led along
Ask Wife and Children: But before we crave,
They know what Wife and Children we shall have.
Yet that thou may ask somewhat, and so bow
At their dread Shrines, and (42) choicest entrals vow
With a white Hoggs pure Sasages, still crave
In a sound Body, a sound Mind, so Brave,
That Death never daunt it; that does Death account
Amongst Natures Favors, and all Grief surmount;
That knows no Anger, nor Desire; And more
Esteems of Hercules his Cures and Soar
Task, then of Love-sports, Feasts and the down
Sardanapalus Laz'd on. This renown
Thy self may give thy self without more strife.
Virtue's the only Path to a Quiet Life.
The Gods are All Ours, if we are wise: but we,
O Fortune, amongst the Powers Divine place Thee!
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Tenth Satyr.
Dextro pede. Auspicia dextera and sinistra, why so called. Right-side parts of
the body Strongest, proved from Experience, Authority, Reason. The Cause of
Ambidexters. Public places of safety for the laying-up of Treasure. Opes;
different acceptions of it. Gelasinus. The Nature of Tears. Toga Picta; the
several names of it. Praetor; the ancient use of the word. Tunica Jovis;
whether it were the same with toga palmata. Servus Publicus. The Roman Eagle;
the Fashion and Matter of it; sometimes taken for a Legion. The Color of the
Toga. (...). Digitus Infamis. Medius unguis. Genua incerare D^orum. Tabula
Patronatus. Scalae Gemoniae. Gemonidae. Nurtia. Panem and Circenses; approved
as the best Reading of that passage. Tesserae Frumentariae. Magna Fornacula.
Castra Domestica. Potestas. Quinquatria. Minerval. That verse of Tully, O
fortunanam natam me Consule Romam, diversely censured. Fraena Theatri, expoanded
by Heraldus. Aplustre; (...). The Fashion of a Trophie. Triumphal Arches.
Barbarus, and (...). Alii Elephantes. Xerxes and Caligula's Bridges.
Ennosigaeus. Madidae Alae. Recto vultu. Tabracha. Aurata lacerna. Funeral
Urnes; Their Capacity and Matter. The Various Names of the Fingers; their
Gesture in Adoration. Aetas; what number of years it signifies. The manner of
Numbering with the Fingers, according to Astabasdas. The Latin Translation of
his work rectified. The expression of the Number of Thirty, according to St.
Jerome and Lilius Gyraldus, examined by a passage in Apuleius. Masters expressed
their Commands by the Gesticulations of the Hand. A Table of the Ancient
Finger-Arithmetick. Tiara; the Matter, Color and Different Fashions of it,
showed from St. Jerome, Sidonius Apollinaris, and Antoine le Pois. Juvenal
excused about that passage, -- Jacuit Catilina cadavere toto. The Punishment of
Adultery, with a Muller. (...). Habitations for Pleasure anciently in Gardens.
The usual Portion of the Daughters of the Nobility. A Southsayer and Witnesses
present at Marriage-Contracts. Divina tomacula. A white Hog, a Sacrifice at
Weddings. Tomacinae. (...) and (...).

1. WHat is 't, we e're begun with foot so right? Quid tam dextro pede concipis
--? The Poet in this excellent Satyr shows, that there is no man in the World,
or, as he describes it, between Cadiz in the West (by mariners now called
commonly Calis-Malis, as Orrelius notes in his Thesaurus) and Ganges at the
East Indies, so wise, that he can preserve himself from mistake in his desires;
but that, if he begins any thing (which the Poet expresses by the word concipis
proper to Vota the subject of this Satyr, not by concupis, as some less
properly would have it) he repents of it, though begun never so happily, or as
the Poet says, with so Right a foot. Which expression Lubin here thinks to be
an allusion to their Auspicia, for so he speaks, de dextero aut prospero
auspicio; making those on the right hand to be lucky, and consequently those on
the left, unlucky: whereas he might rather have said the Contrary, speaking as
he ought, according to the Roman Custom. For though the Graecians and Persians
were of another opinion, yet amongst the Romans, In auspiciis quae sinistra
sunt, been eventura putantur; as Alexander ab Alexandro in his Genesis Dier. lib.
5. cap. 13. and Tiraquel on that place largly prove, not omitting the reason;
which was, because in taking their auspicia ex caelo, which was the chief kind
of them, the Thunder or Lightning that came from Heaven, was supposed to come
from the right hand of the God, when it was on the lest side of the Auspex; as,
when it was on his right side, to come from the left hand of the God; whose
face they supposed to be turned toward the Auspex. To the like purpose Donatus
writes on that of Virgil. Aeneid. a. Intonuit laevum --, saying, Quod dixit
laevum, debet prosperum intelligi: cujus ratio haec est, laeva in aliis
contraria significant. In sacris autem signis idcirco prospera accipiuntur quae
sunt lava: quia sacrificantis, vel precantis latus laevum dexterum est ejus,
qui postulata largitur. So likewise in the Singing of Birds, the Rule was, as
Alex. ab Alexandro shows in the forecited place, Semper cantus Oscinis quum
sinister est, secundissimus fuit. He omits not some exceptions in the doctrine;
but thus delivers it for the general; and therefore less warily did Lubin in
general call auspicium prosperum, dexierum. Indeed, that which he adds is true;
Dexira cum erant numina favere credebantur, laeva contra; but this helps it
not; because not dexira but laeva auspicia answered to dexita namina, and
contrariwise Dextra auspicia to Laeva numina. Which I thought fit to be taken
notice-of, to prevent otherwise an easy mistake in this argument. Britannicus
before Him, expressed himself in these words, Pede dextro id dicimur facere,
quod nobis prospere cedit, contra sinistro. Vnde Apuleius in Asino aureo;
Sinistro pede profectum me spes compendii frustrata est. In which expression
there being no mention of Auspicia, it may seem, that he thought them not to be
here intended. And surely the speech may-seem to be founded rather upon the
practice of Nature, then upon Fancy: and so because the right-side parts are
naturally more strong, they in a superstitious expression called them more
luckie. But all having not the same opinion of this opinion, that the
Right-side parts are the stronger, it will be necessary, with ingenuous
liberty, to consider the Opposition and Proof of this truth: to which, as I
have heretofore publicly upon occasion expressed my self to incline; so after
new examination I find my self to remain in my old Tenent. For, though it may
be said, that such difference is not found between the eyes and such smaller
parts of the body; it may as fairly be reolied, that this comes to pass, not
from any defect in Nature, but in Experience; not that there is no such
difference, but that it is not found; a due examination sureable to the subtle
offices of those smaller and more curious parts, being not yet made; whereby
the difference, though less sensible, might be attained unto. Or if for the
subtilty it could not be discovered, yet if the tenent shall be showed to be in
the general a truth, all such particular instances, howsoever obscure, must
consequently he concluded under the same doctrine. Yet even in the former
subtle instance of the eyes, experience teaches us, that when we employ only
one of them, the left eye in most men usually shuts it self, leaving the work
or view to the Right, as to the more happily Active: Again, I see not how the
general use of the right hand can be attributed only to Custom; but rather
think it should be ascribed to God in Nature: which, had it given unto Man two
hands, that they should be both used indifferently (if need required) then
should all men as naturally, not use the Right till the Left hand failed, or
use them both with a constant indifferency. (...) Plato indeed would have his
Citrizens Ambidext^^s: but a City of that frame would have been long in
setting-up; and (to call an Old Fancy by a new name) this was but one of his
Vtopianismea. Nor can some hundreds of such pointed-out in Story prove a
generality: rather the many millions otherwise disposed declare the first to
be but an exception from the general rule of the Creator; and by this argue in
him a Liberty, not a Custom. And whereas it may be added, that if any
prioritie were to be given to either hand, it were rather to be given to that
hand, which is nearest the heart, the fountain of Life and Activitie: it may be
replied, that the foundation of this reason, namely the Opinion concerning the
situation of the Heart on the Left side (implied in this reason) is noted
amongst vulgar Errors, by some of the latest and most curious Anatomists. For
so Bartholinus a man of brief expressions, but of accurate judgment, in his
Anatomical Institution. lib. 2. cap. 6. observes in his Margin saying, Error
vulgi cor esse in sinistro latere; and in his text says, Est autem Cor quead
basin (the upper part, so termed by Anatomists) exact in medio. In which place
he also adds the occasion of the error, that is, the motion of the heart, more
sensibly discerned on the Left side: for which he alleadges two reasons;
whereof one is because in the Left ventricle of the heart is contained the
vital spirit, and a sinistris est arteria magna: hinc vulgus putal, says he,
cor in sinistro residere latere: the other is, because the mucro cordis, the
point of the heart enclines a little toward the left hand, that it may give
place to the midriffe: ad dextram vero (as he adds) declinare non potuis, ob
venam cavam, ibi per medium thoracem ascendentem. And if any should farther
urge (though I know none that have done so) that yet there were no more reason,
why the Right side should have any priority, but only an equality of imparted
strength, the heart being placed in the middie; or if there were any
difference, the left side should rather have it, because of the left ventricle,
the seat of the vital Spirit; (which is the most that can be urged from hence):
I answer, that there is greater reason to oversway this reason. For the
forecited Anatomist, lib. 4. cap. 1. writing de manu, says, that the Right
hand is the more prompt to motion for two causes; the first whereof is, because
in the right side a man has a vein sine pari (without a fellow answering to it
on the left side, and so and advantage to the right side) que forte in
ambidextris gemina est, says he, which peradventure is doubled (or, has a
fellow) in those that use both hands equally: the second, as he says, is
because the bones on the right side are more weighty, as some by experience
have found; [quia ossa graviora in scapulis, humero, and tota manu dextra esse
aliqui habent pro certo and comperto] which, as he says, might be from the
impression of the more plentiful heat in the Mother's womb, cujus pars dextra
calidior. Where he farther adds the authority of Aristotle preferring the right
hand before the left, affirming the first hint of motion to be in the right
fide, and saying, that accordingly a man when he begins to go, naturally moves
his right foot first, and so, that a bird taking his flight does likewise first
move the right wing. And whereas he alleged the experience of some concerning
the weight of right-side bones, though he names none, he may peradventure
intend the Author of the Commentary upon Melancthon's learned book de Anima:
which exposition was begun by Magirus and finished by Caufungerus, both
Philosophers and Doctors of Physic; one of which at the end of th 4th. chapter
of the second Tract, handles this rare problem (for so he calls it) De Brachio
and Manu. Where he auouches, that the point cannot be unfolded by Philosophical
reasons, but by an (...)(or, ocular inspection) anatomical section, as he
speaks; urging, that if we weigh the bone of the right arm (the bone between
the elbow and the shoulder) in one scale, and the bone of the left arm in
another, we shall find the Right to be the weightier. Which natural gravitie,
says he, is increased by frequent exercise, and consequently has the advantage
of larger nourishment. This he proves also from the example of the Amazons, who
searing-off their Right breast, had all the strength, which nature would have
sent thither, conveyed into their right Arm; urging for it the authority of
Hippocrates (lib. de Aere, aquis, and locis.) He shows a reason likewise of
Ambidexters; saying, that such singularity of example comes to pass, when the
bone of the left arm is as heavy as the other; as, we may add, that in whom it
is heavier, such persons become left handed. And for the generality of the
tenent concerning the strength of the right-side parts, he farther urges the
authority of the same Hippocrates (lib. 3. de Morbis): who surely was a man, as
also Aristotle, which would not be easily cheated with a Tradition. And for
mine own part I think that the Opinion of the Ancients was not delivered from
hand to hand as a bare tradition; but that the more curious and Inquisitive Men
took with them also the Morives of the Assertion. Which I think may be made
good from the learned Macrobius; who in his Saturnals (lib. 7. cap. 4.).
handling this Argument delightfully ascends to the reason of this Assertion;
attriburing it unto the Liver, which as he says, is concretus sanguis, and
caloris domicilium: from which Habitation of Heat seated on the Right side of
the body, quoad majorem partem in dextro hypochondrio, as Bartholinus says, in
his Anat. lib. 1. cap. 14. is the advantage of the Right-side parts, the colder
part of the nourishment being conveyed (to the left-side) to the Spleen; nam
ideo omnes dextrae parts, says he, calidiores sunt, and debiliores sinistra,
quia has regit calor visceris sui, illae contagione frigoris sinistra
obtinentis hebetantur. Which passage though it be read thus even in the latest
Editions, yet the intent of the Author shows plainly, it should be a little
mended; as indeed it rightly is by my worthy friend John Price, Dr. of the Law,
in his learned Observations on Apulcius his Apology. p. 125. where
occasionally he observes and corrects the transposition of the pronouns in this
passage of Macrobius; and for has reads illas, and hae for illa; without which
emendation, though seeming small, the Author should speak contrary, to what he
had spoken before. Thus then the Right-side parts have an advantage from the
Liver, the Left a disadvantage from the Spleen: yet I think not, as some, that
the Spleen is but the receptacle of excrementitious blood; but that it it
Sanguificationis organum, preparing blood, though a grosser, ad nutrienda
viscera infimi ventris: whereas the Liver prepares a better blood, and for all
the other parts of the body; as Anatomy teaches us. The preeminence then of
the Right-side parts being an acknowledged truth amongst the Ancients, was
easily corrupted into a superstition; which made them think, That progression
only to be in hope successful, which took its beginning from the Right foot.

2. -- That none In the whole Forum have so large a Chest. -- Vt mazima toto
Nostra sit atca foro --. The Prayers of many men implying as their desires, so
their delights; have been their destruction, says the Poet; some having
perished thus by Eloquence; some by strength; nay, though they had the
experience of it, as Milo (intended here); who in his younger-days doing
strange acts, was in his after-age, as he passed alone through a wood mistaken
in an oak; which being half cleft, whiles he ventured into the rift thinking to
rent it through, his strength failed him, the parts returned together, and he
was detained a prey for wolves, finding to his cost, that old Milo was not
young Milo. But more, says the Poet, are destroyed by Riches, which some so
hoard-up, that their wealth as much exceeds all patrimonies, that is, the
Sufficient though moderate, Inheritances, which their honest and contenred
Ancestors left them, as the British whale (noted by Pliny. lib. 9. to be of a
vast size) does exceed the Dolphin. On which passage the Scholiast says,
Metaphora in Tiberium and Divites; by which expression not very clear, I guess
he means, that their Treasures exceed their ancicient Inheritances, as much as
Emperors and Great Ones exceed mean men. Yet, as the Poet shows, Riches have
but made the Owhers the more subject to the evil eye of Tyrants; whereas the
Caenacula or cocklosis, where the poor dwell, are neglected by the Officers
sent-our for booty. For such by-respects was Longinus destroyed by Nero; so
likewise the Laterani, so the rich Seneca: who in the 4th year of Nero, as
Tacitus (lib. 13.) reports, had Sestertium millies (that is, millies centena
millia Sestertiorum, as it comes from Sestertius, or a hundred thousand
Sestertia) which reduced to our money, amount to 781250 l. and yet he enjoyed
and increased this estate about four years longer in the favor of his Prince.
Of his wonderful riches see Budaeus de Ass. lib. 5 and for his avarice and
monstrous sums for the Interest of money amongst the Iceni here in Britain
(the Inhabitants of Northfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge-shire and Huntington shire);
see our learned Mr. Cambden in his description of them; attributing to Him no
small part of the Cause of that war, which Boodicia the wise of Prasutagus so
famously maintained against the Romans. But, says the Poet, though the poor man
drinks safer in his earthen pot, then the rich, who drinks his sparkling Setine
wine in his golden bowls adorned with precious stones, but not without a fear
of being poisned; yet every one defires to have the largest Chest in the Forum.
Wherein he implies a custom amongst the Romans concerning the disposing of
their wealth; the Public Treasure being kept in their Aedes Saturni (as
Macrobius tells us in his Saturnals. lib. 1. cap. 8.) a steep place for safety
by the Capitol; as Alex. ab. Alex. (Genesis Dier. lib. 2. cap. 2.) well notes. The
wealthy Senators did store up their Treasure in Ironchests placing them at Mars
his Temple in Foro Augusti; till that place was robbed, as Juvenal mertions,
Sat. 14. and then they placed them at the Temple of Castor and Pollux, which
was in Foro Romano. They thought their Money the safer being committed to the
tuition of their Gods; as Brodaeus observes, lib. 4. cap. 17. The Scholiast
here says, that for a time, the Sen^tors did store-up their money in Chests in
Fore Traj^ni; and that the place it self, where their Chests were, was thence
called Opes. Upon which passage the diligent Pithaus, cites a place de arca
Senatus from a letter of Aurelian to the Senate mentioned in Vopiscus, Est
praeterea vestrae authoritatis arca publica, quam magis refert^^ esse reperi^,
quam cupio. Her^dian in the first book of his History tells also, that in the
burning of the Temple of Peace, a great mass of money, lay'd-up there, was lost.
See more of this argument in Georgius Longus, de Anaulis Signatoriis, cap. ult.
and Marcellus Donatus on Sueton's Domitian, cap. 7. And here we may note, that
the Poet makes a difference between Divitia and Opes: between which, as Lubin
notes, Cicero distinguishes in his Laelius, saying, Expetuntur Divitiae us
utaris, Opes ut C^laris, Hon^res ut lauderis; so that Opes is an Overplus or
Stored Wealth; according to which difference I render that of our Poet,
Divitiae ut crescant, ut Opes. -- That our full wealth and store increase. I
may here add, that Servius on Virgil makes Opes only in the plural number to
signify Riches; in the singular, Help; and likewise that Cornelius Fronto, de
Differentiis vocum, tells us, that Locuples is called so a copia l^corum, dives
quia dividendi sacultatem habet, and Opulentus ab Opibus.

3. -- That Wise man then which still Laughed --. -- Quod de Sapientibus alter
Ridebat --. For this cause Democritus was called Gelasinus, or the Laugher. So
Gelasini are taken for the sore-teeth, because they are showed in laughter; and
Gelasinus is, as Suidas tells us, that Wrinkle or Line in the face, which is
made in Laughter; according to that of Martial, lib. 7. Nec grata est facies
out Gelasinus abest.

4. -- And still find tears to fill his eye! Mirandum est unde ille oculis
suffecerit humor. To believe that Heraclitus did continually weep, may, as I
think, well deserve to be laugh'd-at. Yet whither the cies can be commonly
prepared with such store of moisture, though the Interpreters here pass-by the
doubt, Philsophie may resolve it. Which teaches us, that a Tear is but the
moister part ((...)) of our food (meat and drink): which moisture is in all
creatures the necessary vebiculum of the more solid and drier part of the
food. And this moisture being with the blood altered in the Liver is conveyed
into the veins: a great part thereof passing into urine, some more attenuated
vapouring through the pores, and some turning into Sweat, the rest is
conveyed unto the brain; so that the matter of tears is not from the cies,
but only derived unto them from other parts. Thus then as there is continual
food, so a continual humor, which waits but for the compression of the heart;
unto which when the blood and spiries, as in sorrow, retire, the brain being
forsaken of that heat, grows cold, and the overplus moisture being left
without a guide, of its own accord flows-out. And thus tears in respect of their
matter are not only in men, but also in beasts; which notwithstanding never
weep, the compression of the heart (the efficient cause of ordinary tears)
depending upon the intention of the will: whereby in persons of a tender
constitution, as in Women and Children, they are more plentiful and casie; as
in persons hot and dry they are more scarce. Yet we must take notice, that
some tears, which in respect of their efficient cause, we may call
extraordinary, are not from the compression, but contrarily from the dilatation
of the heart, as in excessive Joy: in which the heart opening it self, as if it
would entertain what it delights-in, sends-forth such heat and spirits to the
brain, that the moisture there dissolves into tears. There are also prolicient
causes of tears, as violent strokes, diseases of the head, the use of mustard,
onions, great colds, large draughts, and the like: which may peradventure not
unfitly distinguish tears into voluntary and involuntary; which last are tears
rather materially, then formally; and in such cases we use to say, that the eye
waters, not that it weeps.

5. -- Robes for Lords and Kings. Pratexta and Trabea --. In defect of peculiar
words for the expression of these Antic properties, we render them by some of
their most eminent acceptions. The pratexta was a white gown with a Purple
border about it, the Wear of different persons according to the different ages
of the Roman state. For, Lampridius (in Alex. Sever.) says, Pratextam and togam
pictam nunquam nisi Consul accepit: yet it was worn also by such as had born
some eminent offices; also by Noble-mens Sons; nay afterward permitted to
other men's Sons also; but the purple of this last was but a false one made of
the juice of herbs; as Salmuth notes on Pancirol. lib. 1. Tit. 43. The Trabea
was a garment of three sorts, One only of Purple consecrated to the Gods; the
second of Purple on White worn by Kings; the third of Purple and Scarlet (a
Scarlet on a Purple, as some express it) worn by the Augurs. Where we may note,
that the trabea was afterward, as Ausonius describes it (in ex^^ema Gratiarum
action) adorned with gold: but this addition was not till Gratian's time,
neither is mentioned by Sueton, as Aldus Manutius thinks, de quaesitis per
epist. lib. 3. Epist. 3. Tribunal, which the Poet adds here, and which is
commonly rendered a judgmeat-seat was properly the upper end of the place of
judgment, and rounding, in the fashion of a Semicircle of a Stately Capacity,
wherein was placed the sella curulis, in which the Praetor sat in judgment.
And therefore I render it Chaires; the fashion of which sella curulis, or
rather of a double-one, from some ancient expression is setforth by A^toine le
Pois, as I remember.

6. -- In Jove's Coat -- In tunica Jovis. O how would Democritus have Laughed,
says our Poet, at the vanity of the world, if he had seen but the pomp of the
Praetor at the Circensian Games strutting in Jove's coat, and but beheld his
aulaea Satrana toga pictae, the Purple or Tyrian tapestrie (as the Poet flours
at it) of his embroidered gown, and the huge crown of Gold; which yet was not
so great, as that an Atlas could scarce support it, as some tell; for how could
it then have been held-up by a public servant, behind the Consul, as he rode
in Triumph! Where Lubin notes, that the Prator and the Consul is here the same;
proving out of Pedianus, that the Consul and whosoever had anciently the
Government of the Army, was called Prator. In which recited passage of
J^u^nal, the Scholiast expounds tunicam Jovis by togam palmatam; and Lubin
says; in tunica Jovis, i. e. in palmata trabea, and afterward, i. e. in picta
and triumphali toga. But concerning the toga picta, we may take notice, that it
had diverse appellations according to different reasons; as first it was called
purpurea, because the ground of it was purple, but it was called so, when as
yet it was not picta, as Festus tells us; besides this name was less proper, ^s
agreeing also to the paludamentum, or garment, which the Lord General did wear,
as also to the trabea, which was proper to the Gods; which the Reader may take
notice of to prevent easy mistakes. Secondly, it was called toga picta,
because it was embroidered. Thirdly, palmata, from the form of the embroydery;
though some have thought it called so, because it was worn by them, who for
victory over the enemy had deserved the palm: but to speak more strictly, it
was embroidered with palme-branches, or a part of the victory in the work of
it, like to those garments of Helena in Homer, which Pliny, lib. 8. cap. 48.
takes notice of, and to This purpose, saying, pictas vestes jam apud Homerum
fuisse, unde triumphales nata. Fourthly it was called toga triumphalis, being
the garment which he woar, that road in Triumph; and, which added to the honor
of it, it was fetched from the Temple of Jupiter. Which diversity of names the
Reader may likewise observe to prevent mistake. And this garment was allowed
not only to the Consuls, but also to the Praetor setting-out the Circensian
shows: nay, sometimes to private persons at the same shows, as to L. Aemilius,
who had overcome Perses the Macedonian King, as Pliny notes de Viris
Illustribus. But here we must consider the Scholiast's and Lubin's exposition,
who take tunica Jovis for toga palmata; as Dempster also on Rosinus, lib. 10.
cap. 29. takes tunica picta and toga palmata for the same; which, though none
here take notice-of, yet methinks it seems insolent, that the Poet should speak
so negligently and confusedly, as to call toga, tunica. Besides here were then
a sudden and unseemly tautologie; for he has no sooner said, In tunica Jovis,
but he presently adds; and picta -- aulaa togae: but This, I think, implies
them rather to be different things. Wherefore to express mine own opinion, I
think that he intends here two several garments, toga and tunica; the use being
general to wear both; the tunica as a less and shorter under the toga, which
was a large garment somewhat like a mantle, or for this stately use here
intended, like a piece of hangings, as the Poet jeeringly amplifies it. For
thus the plain toga (for assemblies) being white, the tunica also was of like
cloth, and thus to the toga picta there belonged also tunica palmata. So speaks
Livy, lib. 10. Decad. 3. Ma^^inissam primum regam appellatum -- toga picta and
tunica palmata donat. So Florus, lib. 1. cap. 5. Toga pictae tunicaque palmata:
omnia denique dec^ra and insignia quibus imperii dignitas eminet. And that the
tunica also might challenge the addition of Jovis, I think there is as good
reason, as for the Toga. Julius Capitolinus is clear in this argument (in
Gordiano) palmatam tunicam and togam pictam primus Romanorum privatus suam
habuit. Whereby he implies, that both the toga and the tunica were before
fetched from the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus; which I think to be intimated
in that also of Servius on Virgil, Eclog. 10. Triumphantes omnia habent Jovis
insignia. The form of which dress of Jupiter, his coat, we may understand from
the form of the latus clavus, or tunica laticlavia, the Senator's Coat, which
was worn also by Lord-presidents in their provinces, and had the name from
broad nails heads figured on it, which, as the gown also that was answerable to
it, was called picta, palmata and triumphalis: according to the degrees of
Honor, for which it was allowed. Lazius thus presents the Latus clavus.* Juv.
Sat. X. Illust. 6.
depiction of a man wearing a senatorial coat, or figured dress armor

7. A Public Servant sweats for it, etc. Quippe tenet sudans hanc publicus,
etc. In the same Chariot behind him that triumphed was a Servant carried, who
held up a weighty corwn, to imply the deserts of him that triumphed: yet by
such a course companion they did temper the glory of the business. Where it may
be observed, that the servant is called servus publicus (as by Julian in an
Epist. is mention of (...)): for so the servants of the Magistrates were
called, or of the State; being bought, as Catanaus notes, in the name of the
Commonwealth, and employed in public Services, as in mending Highways,
cleansing the City-Vaults, or the like.

8. Add the Eagle raised on Ivory Scepter -- Da nunc and volucrem Sceptro qui
surgit eburno. He that rode in Triumph held in his hand a Staff or Scepter of
Ivory, on which was expressed an Eagle, the Ensign of the Roman Empire, not
expressed in a Flag or Banner, but in Statue, upon the top of the Scepter. It
was carried in the War upon an halfpike, adorned with Silver (as Arrian tells
us) the ground end of it being somewhat sharp, that it might be the more easily
pitched into the ground. The Eagle it self was of Gold, as the same Arrian
shows (in Dissertat. Epiclet.) and sometimes of Silver, as Portius Latro
testifies (in declamatione contra Catilinam) and in the more ancient times
rather of Silver, then of Gold; because, as Pliny says, Silver may be seen
farther off. For the more lively expression, thou may see them, as they are
thus presented by Guillaume du Choul de Castrametution des Romans, the one is
( fol. 14. page b.) as it was carried by the Foot; the other ( fol. 30. page
b.) as it was carried by the Horse; wherein, with a little advantage may also
be observed the forms of their Military dress. * Juv. Sat. X. Illust: 8
depiction of Roman standard bearer on foot Juv. Sat. X. Illust. 8.
depiction of Roman standard bearer on horseback They had in War other Ensigns
also, as the Wolf, the Horse, the Minotaure, the Boar, as Pliny notes, lib. 10.
cap. 4. but the Eagle was the chief; and in every Legion there was one Eagle;
for which cause Aquila is sometimes taken for a Legion. Marius in his second
Consulship abolished all the other Ensigns, retaining only the Eagle.

9. -- At's bridle White-gown'd friends. -- Niveosque ad fraena Quirites. He
speaks according to the fashion of the Triumph: at which the Clients of him
that Triumphed went for his greater honor by the sides of his Horses, as he
road in his gilded Chariot drawn by four white horses; though the Spectators in
the Theater also woar white gowns, as Robertus Titius notes in his Commentary
on Calphurnius his Bucolicks, Eclog. 7. A bright white is noted to have been
the color of the ordinary toga, for the better sort; so Aldus Manutius de
quaefitis per epistol. Yet the observation should go along with it (to prevent
mistake) that it was the ordinary color at public meetings: but that at other
Seasons, and in private, they woar what mean colors they pleased; as I have
showed out of Pancirol. See Sat. 3. Illust. 25. Besides in latter times the
meaner sort at public Meetings woar the toga pulla, a black gown; though at
the first that color was worn properly by Mourners. And here we may take
notice, that the Poet in the close of this description, intimates the baseness
of the Romans attending on their great Patrons not for Love, but for the
Sportula, which was safe enough in their Patrons Chests, till they were brought
home by their Clients.

10. He sent a halter to her and held-out the middle finger --. -- Cum fortuna
ipse minaci Mandaret laqueum mediumque oftenderet unguem. He expresses how the
wise, the resolute Democritus scorned Fortune, though so honored by others;
particularly that he sent her a halter, as if he would bid her dispatch her
self; and held out in disgrace the middle finger, the rest of the hand being
clinch'd, as Diogenes showed Demosthenes unto some strangers, which inquired
for him, as Diogenes Laertius relates, lib. 6. So also Caligula formed his
hand, when he held it out for Cassius Chaerea ( Tribune of the Praetorian
Cohort) to kiss; who afterward, in revenge was one of them, that slew him; as
Sueton in his Caligula, cap. 58. The Greeks called this (...), and (...), (...)
being properly praetentare -- an gallinae ova conceperint, as Alex. ab Alex.
speaks, Genesis Dier. lib. 4. cap. 26. and hence the middle finger is by Persius
called infamis, and by the Greeks (...). Another way of Disgrace was that which
now the Italians call far le fiche: which gesture if it were here understood,
medius unguis would not signify the middle finger, but the nail of the thumb
placed between the middlemost and the forefinger. See Ferrarius de Veter.
Acclamationibus, lib. 2. cap. 22. After which last form they made the Fascinus;
the picture whereof see, as it is presented by Pignorius, in his Men's. Isiac.
fol. 17. Thus * depiction of an impolite Roman hand gesture

11. Fixing with wax to the Gods knees such Vows. Propter qua fas est genua
incerare Deorum. It was the manner of the Ancients, when they made their Vows
to the Gods, to write them in paper, (and some in waxen tables) seal them up,
and with wax fasten them to the knees of the Gods; (or to the thighs of them;
for so Apuleius speaks) the Ancients counting That the seat of Mercy. Unto
which sense Rutgersius draws the Greek Proverb, (...); implying when they would
signify the uncertain event of any thing, that it lay in the knees of the
Gods. When their desires were granted, the manner was to take away the paper,
tear it, and bring unto the Gods what they had promised. Hence are the Phrases,
Vota concipere, tabellis inscribere, signare, assignare and figere, genua
incerare deorum, insignare and vota solvere. See Rutgersius diligently handling
this argument, yet intimated by the Scholiast, both on that of the 9th Sat.
Quando ego figam aliquid, and here also; and likewise by Lubin, (see Sat. 9.
Illust. 13.) and before them by Marcellus Donatus in his Dilucidations of Livy,
lib. 4. page 15. See also Turnchus, lib. 1. c. 21.

12. -- Their branched pages and extended rows of Honor --. -- Longa at que
insiguis honorum Pagina --. The Poet next shows, how that some are undone by
too great Honors, which here are called Honorum pagina; which might be
generally understood of a Genealogy: but that the Scholiast teaches us more
particularly, that before the Statues of eminent persons there was placed a
Plate or Table of Brass, containing all the Honors of him, whose Statue it
was; and therefore might aptly be called pagina: but in the time of the
Scholiast it was called Tabula patronatus. To which we may add, what the
diligent Pithoeus notes here on the Scholiast, that there are diverse such
inscriptions of Great men's honors at this day to be seen upon ancient stones,
some of which are presented by Onuphrius in Comment. Fastorum.

13. Down come their Statues and the halter follow. -- Descendunt statuae
restemque sequuntur. Thus were used the Statues of Sejanus, to whom many were
erected in the time of his Prosperity; but upon his fall pulled down, dragged
about, broken and melted, together with the Chariot and horses, which, with his
image, were in statue erected to his glory. In which description the Poet
speaks in a bitter jeer, as if the horses had not been statues, but sensible of
the execution. This custom was in part intimated before, Sat. 8. Illust. 3.

14. Of the Worlds Second Face --. -- Ex sacie toto orb secunda, thus from the
most eminent part, he calls the statue of Sejanus; he being the Colleague of
Tiberius (in his fifth Consulship) the Emperor of the Roman World. And by way of
honor they did use to swear by Sejanus his Fortune, and sometimes jointly by
Tiberius and Sejanus his Fortune. Rutilius Gallicus is in the like manner by
Statius called proxima cervix in relation to the Emperor, in that passage --
stat proxima cervix Fonder is immensi --, as being the second neck to Caesar,
that helped to bear up the weight of Government. And here by the way we may
gently observe a slip in the Scholiast, concerning the melting of this statue:
for on the words Jam strident ignes, he says, constatur statua, ut pecunia inde
fiat; whereas in the Poet himself the intent in the melting of it is
satyrically expressed to be, for the making of waterpots, basins, frying-pans
and platters.

15. Crowned be the doors with bays --. Pone domi lauros --. The Poet speaks
here in the person of the People applauding the Emperors happiness in the
destruction of an enemy; and so, as in a restimonie of Joy, they bid one
another crown their doors with bays, according to the custom, which has been
mentioned before; and thus Eritannicus takes it, and, as I think, rightly. But
Lubin would have it be spoken by the people to the Emperor, bidding him to be
crowned with bays, after the manner, says he, of one that triumphed, and so
also sacrifice a white bull to Jupiter Capitolinus, the Color and Figure being
acceptable to him, as representing the shape, under which he consorted with
Europa. Which last passage about the sacrifice we may admit as true and proper;
but not so the former: concerning which we may take notice, that the General,
he that triumphed, did at the first wear a garland of Myrtle; as Pliny says,
lib. 5. cap. 30. in aftertimes one of bays, and at the last he had a golden
Crown (as Agellius notes, lib. 5. cap. 6.) which, being of great weight was by
a Public Servant held over, or above, the head of the General, supra illius
verticem, as Alexander ab Alex. expresses it, ( Genial. Dier. lib. 6. cap. 6.)
saying also, that according to some, he had in one hand a scepter, and in the
other a Bay; wearing on his head, as others add, a lighter coronet, not solid
or of Gold, but gilded, inaurata: which was of Bays immixt with gilded labels,
as Dempster on Rosinus, lib. 10. cap. 29. describes it, in those words of
Tertullian, lib. de corona milit. cap. 12. Triumphi laurea foliis struitur, hac
adumbratur lemniscis, inauratur laminulis. When he came to the Capitol, he laid
down his Laurel, and in aftertimes the weighty crown of Gold also in the bosom
of Jupiter, (as acknowledging his victory unto Him) or else it was hang'd-up in
some Temple, as a sacred Thing. Which things being considered, the word domi
here used, does sufficiently implie, that the bays here mentioned were to be
employed at their houses; and so, though a bay garland was the wear of him that
triumphed, such a custom seems not here intended; but rather, according to
Britannicus, the use of Laurel in adorning their doors. The people then speak
here, both as exciting Themselves to this duty of Joy, and the Emperor to his
duty of Thanks, in the accustomed sacrifice of a white bull. And, because the
massy crown was not worn by the General, when as the Poet says, Quid si
vidisset praetorem -- ferentem -- aulaa toga, magnaque coronae orbem, it must
be observed that ferentem is to be applied only to aulaa toga; for he that did
wear the robe, did not sustain the crown: wherefore only those words Quid si
vidisset must be repeated and applied to magnaque coronae orbem; for otherwise
the Poet should contradict himself, saying, that the Triumpher did wear the
crown, and yet that he was not able, but another was necessary, though not
without swear, to carry it for him. According to which distinction, though not
taken notice-of here by the Interpreters, I have by equal points divided the
sentence; and so made the difference clear: without which this passage were
obscure and absurd.

16. -- O sight! Sejanus dragged! -- Sejanus ducitur unco Spectandus --! The
manner was in the disgraceful execution of some great offenders to draw them to
the place of execution. Where the Reader may observe, that the Poet spoke
before of the drawing of Sejanus in statue with a halter; but that here he
speaks of the drawing of Sejanus himself unco, as he speaks, with a hook. Which
punishment some farther describe to have been thus performed; The offenders
were first drawn to Mount Aventine on the South part of Rome on the (East) side
of Tiber, where near the Temple of Juno Regina, as Alex ab Alex. (Genesis Lier.
lib. 3. cap. 3.) says, was a place called Scalae Gemoniae, which had their
name, as some think, from one Gemonius, who as they say first suffered there,
or as others from gemendo. According to which latter reason (and probably the
better) we may render them, The groaning stairs: women with child by reason of
their pains being in somewhat a like manner called by the Romans, Gemonida. To
which stairs say some, (for, diverse in this argument speak less diligently)
the offenders being dragged, were cast headlong into the River; implying the
place to have been on some steep of the Aventine, from whence the body might be
so cast down. But Rosinus makes the casting of the body into Tiber and to the
Gemonies distinct punishments proceeding commonly from distinct condemnations:
for so he speaks by way of division ( lib. 9 cap 31. Aliquando etiam contumelia
causa cadavera in Tiberim, aut in Scalas Gemonias projecta. Which though he
barely mentions, yet it may be proved clearly from that of Sucton concerning
Tiberius being dead ( cap. 74.) who was so dreadful alive and so odious being
dead; that the People, as the Historian there speaks, -- ad primum nuncium
discurrentes, part Tiberium in Tiberim clamitarent; pars terr^^; matrem deosque
Manes orarent, ne m^rtuo sedem ullam nisi inter impios da^ent: alii uncum and
Gemonias cadaveri minarentur. Yet it must likewise be acknowledged, that on
some both punishments (and therefore it is most likely) by one condemnation,
were executed; as Britannicus here notes saying, Damnati unco trahebantur in
Scalas Gemonias, interdum and Tiberim. For proof whereof he urges that of
Lampridius in the lise of Commodus, Corpus ejus ut unco traheretur, and in
Tiberim mitteretur, Senatus and Poputus postulavit. Which if it does not reach
home to the proof of what he intends, I may add the authority and description
of Sucton concerning the death of Vitellius ( cap. 17.) where he says, that his
hands being bound behind him, and injecto cervicibus laqueo (a halter being
cast about his neck) he was in forum tractus; and after other expressions adds,
tandem apud Gemonias minutissimis ictibus excarnificatus atque confeclus est;
that he was drawn with a halter, and at the Gemonies dispatched; (not by being
so hewed in small pieces as commonly the most render the word excarnificatus,
especially with the addition of mi^^tissimts ictibus in the Author; for how
could he then be afterward unco tractus if he were hewed so small? (for so it
presently follows in the Historian, and inde unco tractus in Tiberim); but, as
the learned English Interpreter of Sueton does aptly expound it, with many a
small stroke all to mangled he was and killed in the end, and so from thence
drawn with a dragge into the river Tiber. Whence we may observe somewhat
differently from Britannicus, who said, Damnati unco trahebantur in Scal^^
Gemonias, that when he was drawn into the Forum, it was laqueo; but that uncus
is not mentioned to have been used, till he was a carcass; and that the Scala
Gemonia were not such a precipice, whence the body was thrown headlong into the
River; but that there was so much distance, that from the Gemonies the body
was afterward dragged with the hook into Tiber: whereas had the place afforded
an instant fall for the carcass into the river, the uncus had been rather a
Delay, then a Dispatch. The Map of Rome (either Old, or New) presented by
Bertellius a Paduan in his Theatrum urbium Italicarum, may clear this doubt by
the view of the Aventine Mount, on which now stands the Temple of St. Sabina,
as is showed by Andres Palladio in his brief, but pithy treatise in Spanish
called Las Antiguedades de Roma, p. 113.

17. -- Had but Nurtia blessed Her T^scan --. -- Si Nurtia Tusco Favisset --.
Sejanus was a Tuscan, more particularly a Volsinian, as Tacitus testifies,
Annal. 4. and Nurtia was the Goddess of the Volsinians, as Livy testifies, (
Dccad. 1. lib. 7.) and others. By which Nurtia, the Scholiast says, Fortune is
understood: which is agreeable to Martianus Capella (de Nuptiis Philologiae)
who also says, that Fortune was signified by Nurtia: both which might be true,
and both here aptly intended: the Poet meaning that if Fortune, especially the
Volsinian's Fortune had favored her own Countryman; turba Remi (for so the
best copies have it, though some read turba tremens, and some fremens) the base
Romans, that judge of things by the event, would, of the same materials, have
made of a Traitor an Emperor.

18. Bread and the Circus --. Panem and Cireenses. The Poet says, that whiles
the degenerating Romans had left one kind of baseness, the Selling of their
Suffrages, which was their custom before the Libertic of the Commonwealth was
quite oppressed by the Monarchy of the Caesar's, they were fallen to another, a
servile sloth: caring for no public affairs, or the glory of their Country;
but, so they might have but victuals and Pleasure, the pleasure of the
Cireensian Shows, too basely they reckoned themselves in a happy case. Where we
may observe (what the Interpreters take not notice of] the Poet's Satirical
expression of the People; who, as he says, effugis curas, and yet presently
adds, anxius optat; jeering them indeed, as having lest-off Cares, but for
worse cares, and more vain. But some, as the Author of the Manuscript
Commentary, would have Pana and Circenses, expounding it by the Lupercalia
dedicated to Pan, which sports indeed were filthy, and so might please corrupt
minds: but these pleasures were too short and cursorie, to give satisfaction to
a whole People; and far from the general warrant of Copies. Some others would
have Pannam and Circenses, because at the Circensian Games the Factions of the
Chariotiers were distinguished by the Color of their Cloth: but of this there
will be occasion to speak toward the end of the 11th Satyr; yet, for the
Present, as Britannicus rightly nores, Pannus and Circenses were in effect but
the same thing, and so would be but a tautologie; besides the Poet expressly
says -- Duas tantum res anxius optat. The most received Reading is Panem, and
illustrated from that of Tacitus, vulgus, cui una ex Rep. annona cura: and so
the tessera frumentariae are here thought to be understood; which were certain
tokens, which being brought to the Overseer or Prafectus frumenti dividendi,
the poorer sort did monthly receive an allowance of corn, as Sucton also
implies in his Augustus, cap. 40. They were called tessera from their fashion,
they being little square pieces of wood; though afterward there were some
round, (...), as Dio (in Tito) shows; the forms of which Pignorius de Servis
expresses in Sculpture. They had certain marks on them, as Turnebus notes,
Advers. lib. 19. cap. 26. Theodorus Marcilius on that of Persius [Sat. 5.]
Tesserula possidet, makes the difference between the round ones and the square
ones, Illae rotunda ut spargerentur in capita: he quadratae quia
distribuebantur: so that the square ones were delivered to every one, and were
their set or ordinary resserae; but the round ones were missilium tesserae,
[though improperly called tesserae] such as upon a more especial and Princely
bounty were scattered among the People.

19. Magna est fornacula. The Poet here mentitions the speeches, which passed
about the fall of Sejanus, implying that many more were likely to suffer death,
because, as the report went, Magna est fornacula! Which some understand plainly
of a great surnace prepared, with horror to destroy Sejanus his associates, and
that by the Poet in a Satirical jeer it is by way of contraries called Magna
fornacula. Indeed the Scholiast seems to take notice of this opposition,
saying, Multes habet fornax quos exurat; seeming to avoid the inconvenience of
the speech, by making it, though but fornacula, yet to be called Magna; not in
respect of the propet capacity, but in regard of the effect: seeing that what a
great one could do at once, this to as full purpose should do in continuance.
But this, methinks, were to slow for the rage of a Caesar; and Britannicus not
liking, it seems, that exposition, says, Magnum est incandium, hoc est, res
maxhmi excidii and furoris moventur: yet others, I think, speak a little nearer
to the truth, who take fornacula for the Emperor's flaming revenge. From which
last exposition we may select a perfect sense, if with the Poet we retain the
litteral exposition by an Oven or Furnace; but according to these last Authors;
understand the figurative sense. Yet thus far I will differ from them; that
whereas They would have fornacula to signify the rage it self; I rather think
it to signify, the breast, the Seat of the rage or revenge: for otherwise the
rage must be called, as suitable to the fornacula, a little rage; which is both
false and absurd; because against the principal intent of the Poet: but being
applied to the breast, by saying That was but small, is truly Satirical,
expressing the narrow size even of an Emperor's breast, but the vast Rage and
sury Flaming thence: according to which sense, as if he had said, Magna est
fornacula nostra, I render it, It Is sure, our small Furnace breaths lilames;
that is, our Emperor's breast, though but of the size of another man's, is
outragiously hot. I may add here, that whereas the Person speaking here adds a
farther reason of his Fear, to wit, that his friend Brutidius looked pale, as
he met him at Mars his Altar, Lubin notes upon the words, ad Martis] Vlteris
scilicet; as if he would intimate That to be (a farther Cause of his fear;
which, methinks, is too nice; for, no doubt, he looked pale, before he met him
there.

20. I Am afraid, our great Ajax overcome revenge will take, as ill Guarded --!
Quam times, victus ne poenas exigat Ajax Vi male defensus --! Britannicus
understands this as spoken of Brutidius; that is, I fear loast my friend
Brutidius like Ajax when he was overcome, will kill himself, and so escape
worse torture, as some in the reign of Tiberixs did. But the Scholiast, and so
the most, understand it of Jiberius, who, as he that speaks here fears, will
become as outragous upon occasion of this impudent treason of ignoble Sejanus;
pretending also that he has been no better defended by his subjects in this his
danger, then Ajax was in his cause, wherein he failed; and that therefore he
will fall upon man and beast, like disdainful and raging Ajax. And this
exposition I the rather choose, first, because the other exposition does not in
part agree to Ajax; for though Brutidius might, as he did, kill himself, yet
Ajux did it not to escape a worse torment: Secondly, because I conceive it more
natural, in a great and sudden fear, for a man to forget the danger of Others,
and provide for himself; and so the person here speaking should seem, for a
time, more sollicitous for Himself, then for Brutidius. And indeed thus
congruously and presently it follows, Curramus Pracipites and -- calcemus
Caesaris hostem; let us with all speed do some act, whereby we Our selves may
be beyond all suspicion of confederacy: and one most eminent act of this kind
he thinks to be, to trample on the carcass of Sejanus, whiles he yet lies on
the bank of Tiber, Dum jacet in ripa. Where we may observe, as we did before
on this Satyr, Illustrat. 16. that there was some space between the Scale
Gemonia and the River; a high praecipice over a River being not properly called
ripa: which is, as it is commonly thought, so called from (...), ictus; and
therefore low, that the water may beat against it. Lubin therefore speaks
distinctly, whiles he says, in ripa] Sub scalis Gemoniis insepultus; making the
bank a distinct and lower place, then the Scalea Gemoniae.

21. -- With 's Chaldie-Heard retired To Caprea his Court. Rock-? -- Augusta
Caprearum in rupe sedentis Cum grege Chaldao --? The Poet here sportingly asks
a Roman, if he would now choose such a Lot as the Best of Sejanus, to have also
the worst of him; and so whether he would, at Sejanus his price, be as it were
Protector to the Aged Emperor; who ignominiously retired with a rout of
Chaldaans, that is, Diviners, and such lewd Impostors (to whom he was mainly
addicted) unto the obscure lland Caprea, called, at this day, by Mariners,
Capri, and here by the Poet, Augusta rupes; lying in the Tyrrhene Sea, near
Surrenium, on the South East side of the Entrance of the Bay before Naples. But
here we must take notice, that some read angusta rupe; which though it were
true, it being but a small or narrow rock, yet augusta is the more Satirical;
his Imperial, or Court-Rock; the Poet so terming it, because Tiberius had
removed his Court thither, where he did live in all impuritie. Concerning grex
Chaldam, see Drusius his Notes, p. 89. on Sulpitius Severus, lib. 1. and also
his Observations, which he there cites, lib. 8. cap. 12.

22. -- And Prat^rian Camp. -- Et castra domestica --. The Prat^rian Guard,
appointed for the safety of the Prince's person; over which Sejanus had the
Command, and was the first, as the Scholiast says, that placed them juxia
aggerem, id est, Diocletianas, he means Thermas. The Castra Praetoria are by
Rosinus, lib. 1. cap. 13. placed extra vetus pomaerium, at the North-East part
of Rome beyound the wall of the City; and so presented by Bertellius in his map
of Old Rome. Britamicus makes these soldiers and egregios equites here
mentioned to be the same; adding that the Romans called these more especially
Stratiot^^; or the men of war.

23. Or Rule, at Gabii and Fidenea, bear? An Fidenarum Gabiorumque esse
potestas? Were it not better, says he, to be a poor Magistrate, at some obscure
Town, or but a Market-Clark, where one might have freedom and safery, then to
dwell in Honor and Danger? where it may be observed, that the word Potestas,
properly signifying Magistracy, is here used for the Magistrare himself; as
likewise by Pliny, lib. 9. cap. 8. Injuria potestatum inhospitales.

24. To Ceres Son-in-Law, etc. Ad generum Cereris, etc. Few Princes there are,
says the Poet (he means unjust ones, as he expounds it, by adding tyranni) who
attain to Kingdoms by fraud or blood, that without blood descend to the grave,
or Lower, to Pluto, who married Proserpina the daughter of Ceres, as it is in
the fable. Many such passages the high-spirited Romans did often let fall in
their writings, even in the times of the Empire, having still a remembrance of
their old Liberty, and a quick sense of the encroachment made upon them by the
power of their own Citizens now become their Emperors.

25. He craves all Pallas Feast days without shame, Whose young three farthings
wit can yet scarce prate On whom a keeper and small satchel wait. -- Totis
Quinquatribus optat
Quisquis adhuc vno partam colit ass Minervam,
Quem sequitur custos angusta vernula capsa.
He shows, how that old and young have vain and dangerous desires; and that
even boys but newly put to School, and attended on by other boys, which carry
their satchels for them, though they have scarce gotten more then
three-farthings-worth of learning; will yet at the Quinquatria, a
Fivedays-feast instituted to the honor of Minerva, the Patroness of wit,
earnestly pray to be as famous for Eloquence, as Tully, or Demosthenes, In
which point some things are needful to be cleared. The name Quinquatria some
think to come from quinque and ater, this seast being kept for five, days after
the Ides of March; the next day after which, was accounted dies ater, or an
unlucky day: yet this feast strictly began neither on the Ides, not on the day
immediately following; the Ides of that Month being on the 15th. day, and the
dies ater consequently on the 16th. But the Quinquatria begun on the 19th of
that Month, and ended on the 23d. day; as appears from the Roman Calendar, in
which the first day of this feast is noted with the letter N. implying it to be
dies nofastus; which oftentimes; signifies unluckie, and so might be taken for
dies ater, which would quite cross this exposition: but in the Calendar,
nefastus was such a day, as the Prator sare not in Court, and so was, as we
say, not a-Law-day: Yet others admitting quinque to imply the number of the
days of the Feast, more easily account atria but a terminative addition to
quinque; as Agellius in effect implies, lib. 21 cap. 21. and likewise the
Scholiast seems to intimate: whose Copy, though it be here corrupt, yet
sensibly yields these words, Atria abundat. It may be next observed, that on
the first day of the Quinquatria was Minerva's Birthday; and that on That day
Schoolmasters received their Minerval or Pay, as is noted in the Roman
Calendar. But whereas the words which follow, namely, colit ass Minervam, are
commonly understood of the Schoolboy; Jacobus Nicolaus Loensis in his Miscell.
Epiphyll. lib. 2. cap. 13. expounds it of the Schoolmaster himself, thinking
it unfit; that such desires (as, to prove equal to Tully or Demosthenes) should
be attributed to Children, He shows then that School masters did offer their
first Gain from their Scholar unto Minerva, whose Image was in their School,
citing for proof, that of Tertuslian (Lib. de Idololatria) Quis Ludimagister
sine tabula septem Idolorum; Quinquatria tamen frequentabit? but Junius has it
better thus, Quis Ludimagister si non tabularia Idolorum, Quinquatria tamen non
frequentabit? Ipsam primam novi discipuli stipem, Minerva and nomini and honori
consecrat. Loensis then adds, that such was the ambition even of a
Schoolmaster, though he had but a boy, to carry a satchel of books for him; and
therefore he reprehends Politian among others for embracing the common opinion.
But though we should grant, that in the School there was the Image of Minerva,
and that the School master might invite her favor, with the first gains, which
he had of every new Scholar; yet he proves not that thi^ is intended in this
place: and some things seem to prove the contrary, if we consider the latter
part of the expression of the person. For if it be thus expounded, of the
Schoolmaster, it were ridiculous to say, that he had one to carry his satchel
after him. Besides, that Capsarius was a servant attending children to School,
is most known, as Britannicas rightly notes upon Vlpian, titule, de manumissis
vindicta, and he is here called vernula, implying, that he was the Son of a
maidservant; and so being born in a rich man's house, attended upon his young
master to the School. Which particulars do not so sort with the ordinary
condition of Schoolmasters in those days. Likewise it was not then a likely way
of advancement for Schoolmasters to aim at Tallie's honors: neither do I
think, that the singularity of Quintilian's example could be a sufficient
temptation to move any wise man to such a mounting appetite. We may observe
also the words angusta capsa; which to apply to the Schoolmaster, were
probably to make him have as little store of learning, as of books, if a small
sarchel could contain his provision, which yet was convenient for a boy. But I
may not omit, that the Scholiast here by uno partam -- ass Minervam, does in a
first exposition understand some earthen statue of Minerva (fictilis Minerva
signum) bought at that vile price; and so does Lubin on the words Eloquium and
faman^] say, -- Minervam, qua minimo unius asses precio comparari potest, colit
and veneratur: by which last words it is clear, that he speaks of the statue of
the goddess, and the price of that statue. Yet afterward on the words, uno
ass, he expounds it not of the statue, but differently from himself (though
truly in respect of the sense) by mercede, the Schoolmasters pay; referring us
for that purpose to Sat. 7. and adding, Parum enim praeceptoribus dabatur. But
the Scholiast better weighing the matter, adds -- aut qui tenue adhue eloquium
buber, taking Minerva: here not for the Goddess or her statue, but for her
Gift, Wit and Eloquence: and so does Britannicus rightly expound it by -- qui
adbuc primis elementis inbaeret, ^or to express it in the Poet's phrase, that
had yet no more learning, then he had purchased with three farthings. The
reason of the former uncertainties and mistakes in the Interpreters was, as I
conceive, occasioned by the mere mention of Quinquatria and colit: for, they
seeing a sacred feast mentioned, wherein they especially worshipped Minerva,
and farther hearing the. Poet say, colit Minervam, took colit for veneratur,
and so Minerva for the Goddess, or her statue. Whereas Minerva signifying here
Wit and Eloquence, colit fignifies only the dressing or rrimming of it by
Study, not a Worshipping of the Goddess's Statue. And whereas at the Feast they
did pray to Minerva, that is implied, though not here, as they probably
mistook; but in the precedent verse, in the words optare and optat,
sufficiently expressing, by the repetition, the servour of their devotion,
According to which examined sense I render it, whose young three-farthings-wit
can yet scarce prate, that is, who has yet no more Eloquence, then he could
purchase uno ass.

26. O fortunatam natam, me Consule Romam. Quintilian (lib. 9. cap. 4.) gives a
rule against this manner of like sounds; though the like be found again, as
Rigaltius notes, in Tullie's Epistles; Res mihi invisa, visa sunt Brute. This
as a fault the Scholiast calls cacemphaton; and Tullie's adversaries jeered him
for this: which fashion of figure was, it seems, quite our of request in
Juvenal's time also; for I suppose he speaks but according to common opinion.
Yet Turnebus (Advers. lib. 7. cap. 19.) dislikes this dislike both in
Quintilian and Juvenal, showing that it was an acceptable elegancy with the
Ancients, as in that of Virgil. 3. AEneid. -- Tales casus Cassandra canebat.
But if a Musician shall judge this Controversy, I may in desence of our Poet
refer it to Pedro Cerone a Spaniard, in his ample work, de la Musica, lib.
12. cap. 6. where he reprehends this verse for the doubling of the parts,
natam, natam, and for the termination of the verse in the syllable am; this
sound am being pronounced three times in this one verse. The like fault he
finds with the beginning of that Epistle of Cicero to Lentulus Proconsul, Ego
omni officio; in which three words the vowel O is sounded four times; and
delivers it as a rule in Music, that the frequency of Unisons is less
acceptable to the car, See him, p. 674. The Poet here adds, that he would
indeed rather be the Author of such a filly verse of Tully, then of the best
Oration, that e're he made, namely his second Philippick (against Antonie); for
this unhappily cost him his life: though (I may add) Juvenal himself ventured
far enough (in his liberty of Satyr) against this Rule of his own Wisdom.

27. At whose curb the full Theater retired. -- Es pleni mother artem fraena
Theatrum. Theatrum has been here commonly taken for an Assembly of Auditors:
but the Learned Heraldus in his Adversar. lib. 2. cap. 16. accurately and
largely endeavors to show, that it ought to be taken properly for the Theater
it self, that being the place among the Grerks where usually the People met and
heard their Orators concerning the weighty affairs of the Commonwealth. To
this purpose he alleges Diodorus Siculus, Plutarch, Isocrates, Heliodorus, and
that of St. Luke, Act. 19. verse. 29. where, in the tumult, it is said, that the
People rushed (...), into the Theater. This exposition is followed by Lubin and
Autumnus (which last proves it farther our of Tacitus and Justin) but without
any mention of Heraldus; to whose observation I may only add this, that both
these Opinions put together do indeed makeup a perfect exposition. For, to take
the Theater properly, will not admit a right sense, it being unfit to say, the
Theater retired: again, to take the word only for an Assembly, without
reference to the Theater, is to neglect that point of Antiquity, which
necessarily here presents it self. But to take it figuratively for the
Assembly in the Theater; does both reconcile the Interpreters, and fully clear
the place.

28. From Coal, tongs, anvile, upon which he made Good swords --. A carbone and
foreipibus gladiosque parante Incude --. That Demosthenes his Father was a
Cutler or one that made Swords, Juvenal here affirms; and by way of disgrace
Demosthenes was therefore called, (...), by AEschines: yet Theopompus in
Plutarch as Brodoeus notes in his Miscellan. lib. 4. cap. 26. acknowledges that
he was both an honest and a wealthy man. And Demosthenes himself in his Oration
(...)says, (...); over which great number of Servants, some of his freed-men,
or his atriensis had the oversight and charge, as Brodaeus thinks. Which I note
to show both what warrant Juvenal had for his speech, that he might not be
thought to speak enviously of so brave a man, as also in what sense it is to be
understood. And this Orator also the Poet here makes another example of humane
misery: who after all his glory of Eloquence, when the Macedonian had overcome
the Athenians, and, to spare the City, required Demosthenes to be delivered to
him, that he might be punished, was glad, so to escape cruelty, to poison
himself.

29. -- A coat of mail fixed high On Trophie's snagges --. -- Truncis affixa
tropheis Lorica --. The manner in war was, where the Conqueror in battle put
the enemy to flight, to erect a Trophie in memory of it: which they did by
cutting down a tree, lopping-off the branches, fixing it in the ground, and
then hanging upon it the spoils won from the enemy; among which he reckons
aplustra, or amplustra, which is taken for the ornaments of a ship, as the flag
and the like; being derived, as Festus has it, from amplius, quia amplius erant
quam necessaria, (which I note only because the word is less obvious) some in a
like sense, from (...) and (...), being things not absolutely necessary in the
ship, that is, such things as belonged to the ship, yet without which they
might sail. Scaliger brings it from (...), and so from (...) and (...), quod
non facile contundatur; others by an antiphrasis from (...). An ancient
expression of a trophie thou may here see. * medal commemorating the Roman
victory over Judaea depicting trimphant Roman and subjugated Judaean soldiers
IUDAEA

Almost the like is in a silver coin of Vespasian for the overthrow of
Jerusalem. Du Choul. p. 10. de la Relig. des Ancien. Romans The name Trophie was
from (...), a turning back. In the like manner (that we may here explain it)
they did use to raise triumphant Arches of marble in the form of three huge
gates, like a stately Palace, (as Pancirol speaks) upon occasion of winning
some new Country or City to the Roman State: on which Arches were Inscriptions
sometimes in brass with the Triumphant Conqueror and the sad Captive expressed,
according to the Poet, -- Et summo tristis captivus in arcu. In like manner
also there was bestowed on him that won in a Sea fight, a Naval Corone; as on
him that first scaled a fort, a Mural Coronet, which Antiquity thus presents to
us. * Juv. Sat. X. Illust 29.
two triumphal crowns or coronets, the first celebrating the capture of a town,
the second a naval victory Now, says, the Poet, after these vanitles it is,
that the Graeciun and Roman and the Batharian General labor so much; where by
barbarus induperator is understood the Persian; and in this Satyr afterward
by Barbarus is simply meant Xerxes, though Eritannicus expounds it by Vesanus.
But in ancient times, as in the Age of Demosthenes and somewhat before him, the
use was, when they said absolutely (...), to understand the Persian King; as
Lalius Bisciola, Hor. Subseciv. lib. 1. cap. 21. copiously and learnedly shows,
discoursing on this word.

30. -- And to the Other Elephants. -- aliosque Elephantes. The Poets next
instance is in Hannibal, who, as he says, was not content with all Africa,
though reaching from the Atlantic Ocean, wherewith it is washed, ( percussa,
says Pithaeus his copy, not perfusa, as the common ones have it) even to
Nilus, and compassing in the South the AEthiopians and Their Elephants: but he
would needs ferch another compass Northward, in respect of Carthage and the
Mediterranean, through Spain, the Pyrenaean Hills, and the Alps; nay, and aim
to place his Ensign in the very Suburra, a chief street of Rome. Whereas then
some here tell us, that he passed from France over the Fyrenaean Mountains into
Spain, it is without proof. For, as Livie relates it, he came first to Spain,
won Canieia (now Cartagena) and, after many famous actions, passed the
Pyrenaean Mountains into France: otherwise he had passed those Hills twice,
without necessity, which had not sorted with Hannibal's wit or Speed. But alas,
says the Poet what was the end of this fierce Man? He was put to flight, and of
a Conqueror became a Client to Prusios the Bithynian King, at whose Praetorium,
or Court, he was glad to wait for a hearing, till as he says, the tyrant
pleased to awake: and when at last the Romans sent to this his great Patron for
their enemy Hannibal, this frerce and unhappy man, to escape shame, dispatched
himself with poison, which he catried always about him in a Ring, as the Port
implies. In which relation some things may be a little considered; as first
that expression, alies Elephantes; by which he understands the Elephants of
AEbiopia, which is in the South of Africa, there being another according to an
ancient and less examined opinion, in Asia: though the oppofition here implied
is not between the diverse AEthiepios, but the Elephants of most note, that is
between the East Indian and the African. Some read here atrosque elephantes;
but this is too obvious an epithet; whereas, according to the other reading,
Statius (lib. 10. Thebaid.) speaks of the AEthiopians themselves, as Juvenal
here of their Elephants, AEthiopesque alios --. Secondly we may consider the
manner of Hannibals passage over the Alps, the Poet saying, that he made his
way through mountains with vinegar which has relation to Livie, who ( Decad. 3.
lib. 1.) says, that when Hannibal's forces were to make a passage through a
rock, they cut-down huge trees, made a great pile of them, set them on fire,
using the advantage of the wind, ardentiaque saxa infuso aceto putrefaciurt;
and that with vinegar poured upon the fire they did rot the slones. Which
passage I mention not for the probability of it (it being more warily omitted
by Polybius, as fabulous) but to save the Reader from vexing his fancy at the
guess of the devise. Laftly we may nore, that the poet calls Hannibal Luscum,
which is because in that dangerous passage, he is said to have lost an eye: and
thus indeed according to this jeer, he is presented in picture by Opmeer in his
Chronology. p. 140. * HANNIBAL Carthaginensis
Juven. Sat. X. Ill. 30.
portrait of Hannibal of Carthage yet I think not as the Scholiast relates it,
that the loss of his eye came by Lightning; but rather as Livie thinks, who
better ascribes it to his distemper through heats and colds, moist air and
night-watchings.

31. Which Sostratus does chaunt with moistened wings -- madidis cantat quae
Sostratus ulis. The Poet having touched upon the vanity of Alexander the Great
born at Pella in Macedonia, and his death (by poison) at Babylon in the height
of his Conquests, adds the Lot and folly of Xerxes, who, as he says, sailed
about Mount Athos, as the old world thought, and dug a chanel through it (as
some have it) of a mile and an half in length, and so broad, that two ships
might meet and safely pass by one another. Besides, the Poet Sostratus relates,
that he did other strange things; namely, that he scourged the Winds ( Corus,
the North-West, and Eurus the East Wind) for throwing-down his ship-bridge
almost a mile in length, on which he drove chariots over the Sea between Europe
and Asia. Yet this was inferior to Caligula's bridge of ships between Baiae
and the piles at Pute^li, above three miles and an half in length, as Sueton
relates in his life, cap. 19. See Satyr 3. Illust. 1. The said Sostratus adds,
that Xerxes ridiculously cast fetters into the Sea, and so shackled
Neptune-Ennosigaeus, so called, because his waves beat-upon and shaked the
Land, or as Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 17. gives the reason out of Anaximander,
because of the Earthquakes attributed to Neptune, the waters or great showers
getting into the rifts of the parched Earth together with the Air. likewise
there enclosed, causing terible vapors; as he describes it. The same mad
Xerxes commanded them to give the Sea 300. Strokes with a scourge, and to box
it, not without a frantic execration. And whereas our Poet says, it was well
that he did not Stigmalize it, as they used fugitive servants, when they were
brought back again, that is, burn them with a mark, that so they might be known
and shamed, Herodotus ( lib. 7.) says, that he caused this also to be done. In
which expression those words concerning the Poet Sostratus, madidis alis, are
somewhat differently understood, Rigaltius expounding them by sudanribus
axillis; and so anciently the Scholiast saying, Madidis -- ideo, quia omnes qui
cum sollicitudine recitant, necesse est ut alae cis Sudent. Sic Horatius, --
sudor ad imos Manabat talos --. But this acception of alae for axillae here
does not prevail; and it seems somewhat affected and remote to take it so: for
though Sostratus might take pains in his poetical descriptions of Xerxes his
Expedition; yet to express his study or supposed recitation, by his sweating
under the arm pits, seems an overplus. Others, though they give no reason of
their refusing that exposition, understand (...) better, I think, whiles
figura^^^^^^ of his poetical wings, that is, his wit moistened with wine, by
which he chaunted-out lofty phansies.

32. Hoc recto vuliu solum hoc and pallidus optas. The Scholiast and Lubin
understand by recto vuliu] laeto and tristi, and omni vitae tempore; I rather
think it expresses a countenance directed to the God, to whom they prayed; and
so signifies, that when they prayed for long life, they did it confidently;
that is, without blushing, thinking That to be bot afair request, as being but
their desire to worship the Gods here on earth, as long as they might;
according to which sense I render it, with face direct --.

33. In Tabracha's large shades --. Tabraca is a City in Africa propria, as
Ortelius describes it, now called the Kingdom of Tunis, on the Mediterranean;
near which was a Wood, wherein was great store of Apes, as Strabo notes, lib.
17. Posidonius (says he) relates, that as he sailed from Cadiz toward Italy,
He touched on the Lybian shore, at a place full of Apes: some whereof were in
trees, some sitting; some with their young ones by them, and long dugges
hanging-down; some bald, some broken-bellied; as he pleasantly describes it out
of Posidonius. Surely we may add 't was cither Tabracha, or another Tabracha.

34. -- Though Seleucus 't were, Or such as use the embroidered cloak to wear.
-- Sitve Seleucus, Aut quibus aurata mos est fulgere lacerna. In the
description here of old men, the Poet says, that whereas in young men there is
great variety of faces, in old men there seems none; probably he means by
reason of their wrinkles, in which respect they seem all alike; alike indeed in
feebleness, and some alike in the unseemliness of too moist, or childish, a
nose, aptly here called, madidi infantia nasi; alike in many other irksome
infirmities, which even Cossus could not, by any wit of Coveteousness, command
himself to endure, though he would almost endure any thing, cogging with the
rich and childless, in hope of an estate. Besides, says the Poet, an old man is
in a manner deaf, not hearing Music, though never so sweet or loud; no not
Seleucus a prime Musician, or such, as according to the fashion of those times,
did use being clothed, for the delight of the Spectatours in a rich embroydered
garment, to walk and sing upon the Stage. For in the Theater they did use the
Lacerna, called by Britannicus, palla aurata, and by some, tunica talaris. This
custom is expressed by Tully, or whosoever is the author ad Herennium, lib. 4.
saying, ut cither aedus, cum prodierit optime vestitus, palla inaurata indutus,
cum chlamyde purpurea coloribus variis intertexta, and cum corona magnis
fulgentibus gemmis illuminata, cytharam tenens exornaetissimam auro and ebore
distinctam, etc. Horace also (de Art Poetica) implies it in these words, sic
priscae motumque and luxuriam addidit arti Tibicen, traxitque vagus per pulpita
vestem --. Where we must take notice, that the garments, which these Musicians
used, were not all of the same fashion or length; for some were short, as the
chlamys is described to be; some moderate, as the palla; some longer, as
sometimes the lacerna; some trailing on the ground, as that described by
Horace. Whence we must most probably conclude, that such variety of expression
could not proceed from a carelessness in such excellent authors, but from a true
variety and liberty in the fashions of the garments.

35. -- How many Sick in one Autumn Themison did bane ye. Quot Themison agros
autumno occiderit uno. The Poet accusing old age of innumerable maladies,
expresses it with the wit of an unexpected comparison, saying that a man may as
easily number Hippia's paramours; or tell how many patients the Physician
Themison (commended by Pliny and Celsus, though here jeer'd-at) kills ye
familiarly in one Autumn; or how many wealthy Provincials Basilus an unjust
governor has undone in his province, by turning them out of their estates to
enrich himself; or how many innocent Wards Irus a known Guardian has cosen'd;
and (to omit some impurities) how many Towns Licinius (or, as by some he is
called, Cinnamus) is now Lord of, who, when my beard (says the Poet) was first
cut, was but a barber, and now of a barber is become a Senator, says the
Scholiast. In which description the Poet repeats the words, which he used, of
this Licinius, in the first Satyr, fixing them on him, as a constant jeer.
Which singularly witty and unexpected comparison in this passage justly
applauded, is a little severely entertained by some offended with the number of
the instances; whereas the number of them, which here are jeer'd-at, is
comprised in so few lines, that it may justly invite commendations, for the
delightful art. The Poet adds one more, and the worst infirmity, Dotage: which
makes a man, by an unnatural Testament, disinherit, his own children, giving
all to a Phiale, a lewd housewife (for some impure offices) though such a one,
as the Poet fitly speaks, that has lived always in the jail of the Stews.

36. -- View they must Urnes filled with their dear sister's bones and dust. --
Plenaeque sororibus urnae. The usual manner of the Romans was to burn the
bodies of the dead, then gather the ashes and the bones, and put them in
pitchers or pots (which were called urnae, vessels containing 4 gallons and a
half a piece) sometimes of earth and sometimes or brass, as Pancirol ( lib. 1.
Tit. 62.) more particularly observes; and so place the better sort in stately
vaults belonging to great families, I omit here the recital of any other Rites
concerning their funerals, it being an argument purposely and largely handled
by many. I may only mention the device, which they used, as some teach us, in
burning the body to preserve notwithstanding the ashes and bones from mixing
with the ashes of the wood, with which it was burnt. Which, some say, was
performed by wrapping the body in a sheet made of a kind of flax, called
asbestinum, and asbeston, inextinguishable (and mentioned by Pliny, lib. 29.
cap. 1.) it being of that nature, that it is not consumed, but only cleans'd,
by the fire.

37. -- And now count his years on his Right hand. -- Atque suos jam dextra
computat annos. The Poet showing that old age is oftentimes the occasion of
much misery, instances in Nestor King of Pylos (in Arcadia, as Strabo says)
who, though he lived, as some say, almost 300. years, and consequently for age
was the nearest to the long-lived crow, which some report to live 900. years;
and that so according to the custom he reckoned his age upon his Right hand;
yet when in his Old age he saw his dear Son Antilochus, who was now grown a man
and bearded, unhappily slain, and his beard burn (as the Poet says) in his
funeral fire, then he bewailed and accused his Old age. The like, says he, did
also Peleus in his Old age, who lived to mourn for his Son Achilles
treacherously slain with darts by Paris and Deiphobus in Apollo's Temple, when
he thought to have been married to Polyxena; the like also did Old Laertes, who
mourned for his Son Ulysses wandering at Sea for ten years space. In which
passage the Poet intimates a point of Antiquity, concerning the art of
numbering upon the hands: but the Interpreters telling us only that there was
such a custom, but not searching out the manner (excepting only that they say,
that they reckoned on the Lest had unto 100. and afterward on the Right unto
1000.) it will be neither unpleasant nor unprofitable to clear this obscurity;
diverse passages in ancient Authors both Greek and Latin intimating it, and
some places in St. Jerome being not to be understood without it. He indeed in
His time mentions it, and Cassiodorus (in Variis); the learned Beda also
discourses of it, and in latter times some more searching men have touched upon
it, as Rhodigine, Lylius Gyraldus, and Christophorus Scobar (in an Epistle to
Matthaeus Barresius; it is the 24th. in the Century of Philological Epistles
published by Goldastus) and of late Johannes Wowerius in his Polymatheia, c. 7.
but above all and anciently Nicolaus Smyrnaeus Astabasdas, who has written a
little Treatise in Greek published by Morellus, to wit, (...), some chapters
whereof are set-down by the learned Caussinus, de Eloquentia, lib. 9. cap. 8.
where he expresses, Vermiculatos digitorum flexus, as Martianus speaks, and as
Caussinus terms it, rationem numerandi putidiusculam. In the description
whereof I shall need only to examine what Astabasdas and Gyraldus say; these
two being the most diligent in this argument: but of those I take the first for
the truth, as writing both anciently and purposely; though some things in the
last also I shall observe. But first it will be necessary to set-down the
names of the fingers, by which they have been anciently called. The Thumb then
is called Pollex, pollux, (...) and (...). The Forefinger, is called (...),
Index, and Salutaris (as by Capella); because with that stretch'd-forth the
Ancients did use to express themselves in Salutation. It was likewise called
(...), (to lick); though some expound this by the Middle-finger. It is by some
called prior digitus (as by us usually, the Fore finger): so Apuleius (in
Asino) expressing the manner of Adoration says, Admoventes oribus suis dexteram
priore digito in erectum pollicem residente; holding their thumb upright and
the end of the forefinger resting upon the top of it, they moved it to their
lips. The Middle-finger was called (...), medius, medius unguis (as some say,
but see in this Satyr, Illustrat. 10.) (...), infamis, famosus, verpus, and
(...). The Ring-finger (next to the Little-finger) was anciently called
annularis; though strictly that finger only on the left hand should be so
called, because of a vein commonly supposed to come to that finger on the left
hand, from the heart: for which cause anciently it had the ring put on it in
marriage. But, by the way, the learned Bartholinus (in his Anatomy, lib. 4.
cap. 1. notes this opinion concerning such a supposed vein as false and
contrary to Anatomy. (See Satyr, 6. Illust. 3.) This finger was termed also
(...), medicus and medicinalis, because Physicians commonly stirred their
compositions with that finger. The Little-finger was called, minimus,
minusculus, ultimus, (...) and auricularis or (...). As for the Order of them,
Astabasdas reckons the Little-finger first, the Ring-finger as Second, and so
forward; and for the Custom it self, he says that they reckoned Vunites and
Decades on the Lest hand; as on the Right, Hundreds and Thousands. By which
rule we may presently judge of their Opinion, who in this passage attribute 90.
years to the life of Nestor; making an Age to signify but 30. years; and so
allowing him but three ages, all can arise but to 90. years: whereas the
received Opinion makes him almost 300. years old, counting to every Age, 100.
years, which must needs be the true Opinion. For, had he been but 90. years of
Age, how could he be said to reckon his years on his Right hand, on which they
did not reckon till they were an hundred? To omit, besides the great
disproportion between 90. and 900. and so between His Age, and the Age of the
Crow according to the vulgar opinion: for I know that some Naturalists allow to
the Age of the Crow not much above 100. years. Again we may by this judge of
Lubin's words, who says, if we stand to this exposition of three by thirty
years to an Age, that then this verse, which we now expound, must be thus
understood; to wit, that they reckoned Decads unto fifty on the Left hand per
dextram (with the Right, I think he means) and then the other four from sixty
to ninety on the fingers of the Right hand per sinistram (with the Left.) In
which expression, though he does not allow of that exposition concerning 90.
years, yet what a supposition does he make, in the manner of reckoning, without
warrant? And how expresses he the fashion of the reckoning, as if it had been
made on the one hand with the other? when as there was no such matter, the
expressions being made on each hand single, and after This manner which
follows. The Little-finger being contracted, or a little bended, the other four
being extended and erect, did on the Left hand signify One, and on the Right.
One thousand. The Little-finger and the Ring-finger being bended and the other
three being erect, did on the Left hand signify Two, on the Right, Two
thousand. The Little-finger, the Ring-finger and the Middle-finger being
bended, the Forefinger and the Thumb being erect, signified on the Left hand
Three, on the Right Three Thousand. The Ring-finger and Middle-finger being
bended, the other three being erect, signified on the Left hand, Four, on the
Right, Four Thousand. The Middle-finger only being bended, and the Other four
erect, signified on the Left hand, Five; on the Right, Five Thousand. The next
number, six, in the Latin Translation of Astabasdas (as it is printed in
Caussinus) is expressed thus, Incurvatis infami and annulari, reliquis
exporrectis; but this is the expression of the number Four, mentioned before;
and so would be a confusion of the descriptions. The Greek copy has it thus,
(...), etc. In which expression, if rightly considered, there is mention but of
one finger, the particle (...) being there only exegetical (or, explicative)
and so but a farther expression of the former name. And thus Astabasdas uses it
in the very precedent expression of the number Five. where the Latin
Interpreter rightly rendered it, tertio mediove contracto; the Greek being
there, (...), the third and middlemost, for the third or middlemost. Thus (...)
and (...) are here the same; and so (...) signifies in the Greek copy in the
former expression of the number Four, where it is thus, (...), etc. where
apparently (...)is the same with (...), and (...) the same with (...), and
therefore the same also with (...); and the Ring-finger is according to
Astabasdas the Second in order. The Latin Interpreter therefore instead of
saying, Incurvatis infami and annulari, should have rendered it, Annulari
rursus, sive secundo incurvato, etc. According to which truth of the Greek
Copy, the Ring-finger being bended, and the other four being extended,
signified on the Left hand, six; but on the Right, Six Thousand. And though I
believe that Gyraldus had not seen Astabasdas his copy, because of the many
differences that are between them, if compared: yet he agrees with him in this
truth, saying that Six is expressed Complicato solo annulari, etsi medium ut
puto perperam quidam existimant: in which last also he said rightly, the
bending of the middle-finger alone being not the expression of Six, but of
Five, as is before showed. The three next expressions differ but a little from
the three first, being made with the same fingers; but whereas in the first
three they were but a little bended toward the palm of the hand, in the three
next they are bended lower toward the wrist. Gyraldus expresses it worse;
saying, that in the three first the fingers are inclined ad manus volam; but in
the three last, digito palmae affixo. But to proceed; The Little-finger being
bended toward the Wrist, the rest being erect, signified on the Left hand,
Seven; on the Right Seven Thousand. The Little-finger and the Ring finger being
so bended (toward the wrist) signified on the Left hand Eight; on the Right,
Eight Thousand. The Little-finger, Ring-finger and Middle-finger bended to the
wrist, signified on the Left hand, Nine; on the Right, Nine Thousand. The next
expressions are of Tenns and Hundreds, and I confess, exceeding difficult to be
understood, yet not doubting of pardon from the ingenuous Reader, if my guess
mistake the descriptions, in so abstruse a point of Antiquity, we may thus
proceed. The Thumb being stretched forth, yet not erect but oblique utique
((...)) and the Forefinger being bended till it came to the first article or
joint of the Thumb, both making the figure of a s (sigma) the other fingers
being stretched forth and joined together, did on the Left hand signify Ten,
but on the Right, and Hundred. The Fourth, or Forefinger being stretch'd-forth
straight, The Three Other fingers bending a little toward the palm of the
hand, and the Thumb both resting upon those bended-fingers and also placed
close to the Forefinger, did on the Left hand signify, Twenty: but on the
Right, Two Hundred. The Forefinger and Thumb [in porrectum subinclinatis]
being stretched forwards with a little bending downward (and insummo apice sibi
appropinquanttbus) and almost touching, the other three being stretch'd-forth
and joined, signified on the Left hand, Thirty, but on the Right, Three
Hundred. Yet St. Jerome's description of this number differs from this, he
making the Forefinger and the Thumb to Join; whereas according to Astabasdas
they should not quite touch one another at their tops, to express Thirty; but
they should only almost touch. But St. Jerome expressing Marriage by the number
of Thirty, says to Jovinian, Ipsa digitorum Conjunctio, quasi molli osculo se
complexans and foederans, maritum pingit and uxorem. Yet, though I justly
honor the learning of St. Jerome, in this point I had rather adhere to
Astabasdas making it his business to search this argument. And though I see
Gyraldus agreeing with St. Jerome, swaid, as I guess, by his Authority, and so
describing it by summo indicis, pollicis summum exosculante, yet I believe,
that the expression used by Astabasdas may be confirmed also by ancient
authority, and more ancient then St. Jerome, by above 200. years; namely from
Apuleius, in his Apology, and indeed by the business it self mentioned there
by him. For, endeavoring there to clear himself from the slander of his
Adversary, who had accused him of procuring by evil means the affection of
rich Pudentilla (whom he got for his wife); urging that he had wrought upon her
dotage, she being, as he said, Threescore years of age; Apuleius tells him,
that he, belies her by Twenty years, and that he might at least have made a
more handsome lie. For, says he, Si triginta annos pro december dixisses, posses
videri pro computationis gestu errasse: quos circulare debueras digitos,
aperuisse. Cum vero quadraginta, quae facilius ^aeteris porrecta palma
significantur, ea quadraginta tu dimidio auges, non potes dignorum gestu
errasse, nisi forte triginta annorum Pudentillam ratus, binos cujusque anni
Consules numerasti. Which very obscure passage in that Author, this doctrine
rightly considered may clearly enlighten. If, says he, thou had said, Thirty
years for Ten, thou might have been thought to have erred in the
hand-gesture of the account, or number; leaving the fingers open, which should
have made a Circle, that is, which should have Met (or, closed). But seeing
that forty, which are expressed more easily with an open hand, are by thee
increased by half as much more; this could not be an error in the gesture of
thy fingers: unless perchance thou thinking Pudentilla to be but Thirty years
old, did reckon every year for two, according to the number of the Consuls.
Wherein he clearly supposes the number intended to be expressed, to be Ten, and
the number mistaken for it to be Thirty; and consequent Ten to have been
expressed with the fingers (the Thumb and Forefinger) closed, and Thirty to be
expressed with the fingers (the Thumb and Forefinger (not meeting, or) Open.
Thus, says Apuleius, had That been thy Lie, it might have been a mistake by the
small difference in gesture on the fingers, between Ten and Thirty: but the Lie
being between the number of Forty, which is expressed with an open hand, and
Sixty, which is expressed with a closed hand (as will appear in the
description of it) is so gross, that it is inexcusable: which justifies
Astabasdas his expression of Thirty, by the fingers not closed into a perfect
Circle. Besides it may be observed, that St. Jerome's description of Thirty is
in a manner the same with Astabasdas his description of Seventy. Of which
differences in the computations of St. Jerome and Apuleius, the learned Bishop,
Marianus Victorius takes notice, in his Scholia, upon St. Jerome, lib. 1.
Adversus Jovinianum. number. 7. whence we must admit that there were varieties,
though but voluntary diversities, of computations in this kind of
Hand-Arithmetick. Yet we may observe, for the more clear understanding of this
difference, that Beda expresses 10. by making the top of the forefinger touch
the upper joint of the Thumb; and expresses 30. by making the topps of those
two fingers to touch. But to proceed with my Author (Astabasdas) as the
observer of the more ancient way, the four fingers being stretched forth, and
(pollice superinducto indici) the Thumb being formed above the forefinger like
the g (gamma) and looking toward the upper and back part of the hand,
signified on the left hand, Forty; but on the Right, Four Hundred. The four
fingers being stretch'd-out and the Thumb formed like a g and inclined toward
the inward part (...), ad pectus sive artum indicis, signified on the Left
hand, Fifty; but on the Right, Five Hundred. The Little-finger, Ring-finger and
Middle-finger being stretch'd-out, and the Fore finger so incompassing the
Thumb (us index contingat media junctura primum and secundum articulum) that
with the middle joint of it (on the inside part of it) it touch the first and
second joint of the Thumb, that is, as I conceive, lying between them, and so
that the frons indicis, the inside part of the top of the forefinger touch the
mons pollicis, the inside and lower part of the Thumb, signified on the Left
hand Sixty, on the Right, Six Hundred. The three foresaid fingers being
extended as before, and the Thumb joined (in a circular fashion) with the
uppermost part of the nail of the Forefinger, signified on the Left hand,
Seventy; on the Right, Seven Hundred. In which expression of Seventy, the
Forefinger and the thumb circularly touching, show, that in the expression of
Thirty the same fingers do not meet, but only almost join. The foresaid fingers
being joined and erect, yet so that the upper parts of them looking to the
palm make fashion of an angle in them, the thumb lying upon the radix or
inside bottom of the Middle-finger, and so fitted to the palm, and the Fore
finger winding about the first joint of the thumb, till the end of it rests
upon the mount of the thumb, signified on the Left Hand, Eighty; and on the
Right, Eight Hundred. The Thumb being erect, the Forefinger bending downwards,
and the other three being extended, signified on the Left hand, Ninty; on the
Right, Nine Hundred. In which last expression he begins the description saying,
manu palmi instar contracta; which gesture of the hand, how it should stand
with the rest of the description, I do not well perceive; unless he means
either the compression of the hand, by bringing the mount of the thumb and of
the little finger to incline toward one another, or else that the three outward
fingers should, though erect, bend in the middle-joint in form of a right
angle, and then the uppermost parts of them from the angle be extended. But I
thought it better to express it without such a difference, as seemed hardly
consistent with all the rest. In many of which descriptions Gyraldus differs
much; among other things saying, that one expressed on the Left hand, is on the
Right, a Hundred, and so forth: and though he takes notice, that some and the
more Ancient writers (though he names them not) say that on the Right hand it
signified a Thousand, does notwithstanding choose the other opinion. Petrus
Colvius also in Apul. Apol. 11. Not. p. 267. says that they reckoned on the
Left hand until they came to 100. and then reckning on the right hand till they
came to 200. they returned again to reckon on the left hand. Beda in handling
the way of Computation upon the Hand [but not this of Astabasdas] is very large
and diligent. But this to the less curious will perchance be too much; though
by this we may see the devises of the Ancients, that would make use of
Curiosity to Expedition and Thrift. Yet we may not omit, that in proceeding
farther in this art [of which I have seen no more of Astabasdas his Copie] it
is employed in an Epigramme, in the Greek Anthologie [ lib. 2.] that the
Ancients after they had reckoned Nine Thousand, began again to number on the
Left hand; as Lubin here notes, and Rutgersius, in his Var. Lection. lib. 4.
cap. 9. referring his Reader to Brodaeus on this last point. And as the
Ancients did thus number upon their hands, so by the hands gesticulation they
did express their commands unto their Servants; and hither some draw that of
the Psalm, 1^3. v. 2. As the cies of servants look unto the hand of her
mistress; etc. as particularly Pignorius notes, de Servis. p. 71. For the
quicker apprehension and delight of the ingenuous Reader, I have expressed here
in picture the sum of this Art, A Table of the Ancient Hand-Arithmetick, so
far as I have described it [ Astabasdas his way] doing it without pattern; yet
by the precedent descriptions, as well as in such an obscurity my Guess could
direct me to give directions for the performance, only the reader may take
notice, that for brevity sake I have in the third column of the
Arithmetick-Table omitted the form of the fingers, they being the same as in
the second column, excepting only, that they are on the right hand, as in the
second on the Left. *

38. The Crown laid-by --. -- posita -- tiara. The Poet's next instance is in
Priamus, who might have been brought to the Sepulchers of his Ancestors, so to
Assaracus [his great uncle] his Grandfarther's brother with honor, his Sons
carrying the hearse, and his Daughter Polyxena renting her garment, according
to the manner of mourning; if he had died whiles Troy flourished. But alas,
says he, living long he saw the confusion of his Kingdom, and in the hurry of
the destruction he was fain to lay-by his Crown, and putting on arms, though
not able to use them, was slain before the Altar of Jupiter, even like an old
Ox past Service; ut vetulus bos: where vetulus was rightly added by the Poet;
for otherwise he had spoken improperly, there being a Law both amongst the
Graecians and Romans, de non mactando bove aratore. See Casaub. Athen.
Animadvers. lib. 1. cap. 8. yet, says the Poet, the Lot of Hecuba, the wife of
Priamus, was far worse; for [as the fable has] she was turned into a bitch; the
fiction being occasioned by her bitter speeches against the Greeks. In which
passage Priamus his Crown is by the Poet called, tiara; which was a Persian
ornament for the head, yet it belonged also to the Trojans, as Tiraquel
observes on Alex. ab. Alex. [ lib. 1. cap. 28.] from this of Juvenal. In which
place Alexander says of it, tiara, pilens crat, ex qua ridimi^ula, quibus
maxillae velantur, deflucbant, qua Phryges in solennibus utebantur saepe;
agreeing thus with the description of the Phrygian Mitra, as Juvenal speaks,
Sat. 6. where I described it, Illustrat. 58. likening it there to a round capp.
For, such St. Jerome says it was [Epist. ad Fabiolam] rotundum pileolum, quasi
sphaera media sit divisa, and pars altera ponatur in capite. By the Scholiast
on that passage, Sat. 6. v. 514. it is called galea sacerdotis; but the
Priest's tiara was not acuminate. It was of Silk [ byssinum; some say, of
several pieces of cloth] and the color of it was purple, according to that of
Ovid. Med. 11. fab. 5. Tempora purpureis tentat velare tiaris. The King's tiara
was for state adorned with precious stones, according to that of Valerius
Flaccus, lib. 1. Argonaut. Ad viridem gemmis and Eoa stamina sylva
Subligat extrema patriam cervice tiaram.
There were indeed two sorts of it, as Johannes Har^ungus notes [in his Locorum
Memorabilium, Decuria 3. cap. 8. number. 21.] the one depressed and somewhat
prominent over the brow, in token of subjection; the other upright and
acuminate, worn only by Kings, [as Seneca says, de Beneficiis, l. 6. c. 31.
Xenophon. Anab. 2. and Suidas] the Priest's being not acuminate, as Savaro also
notes on Sidonius Apollinaris, lib. 8. Epist. 3. yet whereas Savaro there, on
the word myrrhatos, says that mitra and tiara is the same, he had spoken more
warily, if he had said, that they are sometimes so taken. Dempster on Rosinus,
l. 6. c. 35. describes it to have been of the fashion of a half moon, according
to that of Sidonius Apollinaris, Flectit Achemenius Lunatam Persa tiaram; and
farther shows that in war they used to adorn it with peacock's feathers.
Justin. l. 1. seems to make this wear an invention of Semiramis, who dressing
her head with this ornament, did to avoid suspicion of some farther intended
novelty by this novelty, command others to wear the like, observing always the
foresaid difference. See also concerning this ornament, Cerda, on that of
Virgil, Aeneid. 7. Hoc Priami gestamen erat. I will here only add, that Antoine
le Pois in his Discourse sur les Medalles Antiques, at the end of his work, on
page H. figur. 6. presents this ensuing expression for a form of the tiara. *

depiction of a Trojan mitre of office

39. - Catiline lay an Entire coarse.- Jacuit Catilina cadavere toto. Juvenal
in a manner passing-by the misery of long life in Mithridates King of Pontus,
who after 69. years of age (of which he was 57. years a King, and of these for
40. years a warrior against the Romans) was utterly overthrown, and, to escape
shame, glad to be killed by one of his soldiers; passing by also the example
of Crasus the Iydian King, who had like to have been burned alive by his
conqueror Cy^us, passes to the examples of some- Romans, as of Marius and
Pompey. The first of which by living long was fain to fly for his life, and in
the Minturnian senns hid himself; which fens are not, as some tell us, in
Switzerland, but in Latium (now called Campagnia di Roma) by the River Lyris,
as Plutarch informs us in the Life of Marius; and Strabo, lib. 5. yet he was
taken; and though he got out of prison and fled into Africa, again he was in
danger of his life, and in such distress that at the remaining ruins of
Carthage he begged bread: whereas if he had breath'd-out his triumphant Soul,
or his Soul enriched with victory [ animam opimam; so called from spolia opima,
which were properly those spoils, which the General himself won from the
General of the Enemies] as soon as he ended his triumph, that is, after his
glorious riding with his multitude of captive Teutons passing before his
chariot to the Capitol; in the very instant of his descending from his Triumph;
he had been as happy, as ever was Roman. The second [ Pompey] after a long
glory was overthrown, and at last had his head cut off; concerning whose death
the Poet saying, that even Lentulus, Cethegus and Catiline were in that respect
less unhappy, is reprehended by some learned Critics; Pompey, as they say,
dying for his Country, but some of those traitors being justly strangled in
the jail. Besides, to count him the more unhappy, because His head was cut off,
and Theirs were not, seems to Them but weak; for, according to That reason, say
they, even they that die Crucified, should be accounted more happy. But, to
speak gently, let us not crucify an Author, extending him otherwise then he
would. Is Juvenal the only man that calls Pompey unhappy? Or, does he call him
so for fighting in defense of his Country? or rather because his Cause and
Merit was not attended with better success? Or does he here otherwise call
Pompey, though innocent, unhappy, then before he did Nestor? whom he proposed
indeed as an example of unhappiness in old age; yet not because he came against
Troy in behalf of Greece; but because coming thither, he was fain to see the
sad funeral of his flourishing Son, who was slain. In like manner the Poet does
not compare those conspirators with Pompey in respect of their cause, but only
of the manner and consequence of their destructions: in which respect he thinks
it more unhappiness (setting aside other respects) to die with a divided
carcass, then with a whole one. Nor is this speech without sufficient reason,
the whole body being not usually so trivially exposed to scorn, as the head,
when divided from the body, has often and wretchedly been, as is well known in
the death of Tully; as likewise of Galba (as I have showed, Sat. 6. Illustrat.
67.) and what degree of this contempt Pompey's head escaped, was rather by the
humanity of the Conqueror, then of the Executioner. So that in this respect
even he that died as an ordinary malefactor might be termed less unhappy,
whiles he feared not any thing beyond the execution; and though he endured
death, yet not a jeer too. But whereas some here tell us, that Catiline, who
intended a funeral fire for Rome, came to his own entire; it is not without a
mistake: the bodies of Traitors being not burnt; as I have observed, Sat. 1.
Illust. 51. they holding it profane to burn them; or the body of a vestal, if
she became dishonest. See Sat. 4. Illust. 3.

40. And some Adulterers the quick Mullet enters -- quosdam moechos and mugilis
intrat. Our Author speaking here against the vain desire of beauty shows, that
though a doting mother wish beauty for her children, alleging that even
Latona was glad, that her Daughter Diana was fair, yet the known example of
Lucretia might make one wish otherwise; as also of Virginia, who might indeed
have wished to have been rather a Rutila; who was, as Pliny says ( lib. 7.)
deformed, crook-back'd, and above 97. years of age. In like manner says the
Poet, beautiful Sons are but the more obnoxious to Great ones; and as they are
often entertained by wanton Ladies, so sometimes have their predecessor Mars
his luck, they are taken, but more dearly pay for their pleasure; being by
force, according to the nature of Jealousy, clyster'd with a Mullet (to
express the terrible punishment no farther); the outrage of which revenge may
easily be understood from the form of the fish here presented. * Juv. Sat. X.
Illust. 40.
depiction of a red mullet The Athenians by their Law punished adulterers after
the like manner with a raddish, as Casaubon notes in his Animadversions on
Athenaeus, lib. 1. cap. 5. though sometimes by expilation of the Seat-part, as
Alexand. ab Alex observes in his Genesis Dier. lib. 4. cap. 1. which punishment
was therefore called, (...). Even beasts hate adultery, and punish it: as
Bisciola notes, p. 1110. The Poet here adds farther a Mother's answer, to wit,
that Her fair Son shall not be liable to such danger, as applying himself only
to some choice and secret ones: but, says the Poet, when gifts come he will be
a servant to a course and deformed Servilia also. For in this case, says he,
Coveteousness working upon him and Lust upon them, they show the utmost of
their behavior, their freest carriage, not sparing their alluring presents,
whether she be a prodigal Hippia, or a covetous Catulla. For, whereas some by
these names understand, whether she be rich or poor, it does not agree either
with the persons, or the fault here spoken-of: both Hippia and Catulla being
names used in this our Poet for persons as well of wealth, as Wantonness; and
the poorer sort being not equal to the means of such desires.

41. Ten hundred thousand Sesterces, as due Portion by Ancient Rite --. -- Et
ritu decies centena dabuntur Antiquo --. The Poet shows next that beauty in a
man may sometimes be his destruction, though he be innocent, as it was to chaste
Hippolitus by refusing the soul desires of his Mother-in-Law Phadra the
daughter of Minos King of Creet; and also almost the destruction of chaste
Bellerophen, who likewise rejected the temptations of Sthenobaea the wise of
Proetus King of the Archives. But in a nearer (a Roman) instance, it was the
unavoidable confusion of the comely and Noble Caius Silius, who was designed to
be Consul: whom the enslam'd and impudent Empress Messalina so doated-on, that
having separated him from his wise Julia Syllana, she would needs be married to
him. And Claudius the Emperor her husband being gone but to Ostia, she in all
formalitie put-on the flame-colour'd marriage-vail; and the marriage bed (which
was called also lectus adversus) was in honor of the Genius (as Festus gives
the reason of it) richly adorned with Purple and prepared in the Lucullian
Gardens. Of which custom of the Ancients habitation in Gardens for their
pleasure, see Brissonii Select. ex Jur. Civil. Antiquit. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Besides, she made good the Portion, which by ancient rite she Ought to bring;
which was decies centena millia sestertium (as it comes from sestertius) that
is, a thousand- Sestertia, or 7812 l. 10 s. as I have reduced it, Sat. 6.
Illustrat. 17. But some think not that this was the usual portion in ancient
times, but that the Poet only notes-out the invidious wealth of that age, which
so exceeded the honest slenderness of former ages and estates, that now they
thought this sum a Legal, solemn and necessary portion, according to that of
Seneca, Pantomima decies sestertio ^ubaut. Yet the Interpreters generally take
it according to the first exposition, which seems to be the intent of the
place, only with this caution, that it was the usual portion for Women of the
Senatorian blood, as Britannicus observes. Besides this, says the Poet, the
South sayer and Those that Seal were present: for before marriage they
writ-down in Tables, by way of record, the form of the Contract, unto which
Witnesses did always set their Seals, and are accordingly here called
Signatores. The South sayer also was there according to the Custom of their
Superstitious enterprizing nothing, nisi auspicio prius sampto: and the most
luckie sign in such observation was a crow (as Alexan. ab Alex. notes, lib. 2.
cap. 5.) because when one of them dies, the other remains perpetually without a
mate. But what was the conclusion of this solemn adultery? for they made
Adultery a Wedding; pleasing themselves in all solemnity that day and night;
till by a command from the Emperor they were in the same Gardens seaz'd-on and
both slain; but sair and wretched Silius first, and before Messalian's cies.
Some report that Clandius himself sealed the Contract (which may seem
incredible) upon pretense of avoiding by that means some dangers, which were
said to be portended. See Sueton, in Claudius, cap. 29. Thus, had Silius not
done this, Messalina had been his death; and for doing of it, Claudius was. But
whereas some say, that if he destroyed Messalina, Hymen's burning tapers from
her bed should light him to his urne; the Poet makes her rage more swift,
saying he should have died before the lightning of the tapers, pereundum erit
ante lucernes. Besides, if he had not obeyed her, there had been no preparation
of wedding tapers.

42. -- And choicest Entrails vow with a white hogge's pure sausages --
Voveasque macellis Exta and candiduli divina tomacula porci. The word tomacula
comes from (...), because the ingredients of them were cut, or minced, and are
called divina, sacred or pure, because used in re divina, in Sacrifice. And
this offering was of a white hog; Swine seeming to have been the first kind of
Sacrifice, as Varro conjectures, lib. 2. de re rustica, cap. 4. who accordingly
says, that by the Graecians (...) is derived from (...), immolare. Thus a hog
was a Sacrifice unto Ceres, and at the concluding of a league of Peace (as with
a little difference Sueton says of Claudins, cap. 25. Cum regibus foedus in
fore icit, porca caesa) as also at the celebration of Weddings, Kings and
eminent persons, particularly in Hetruria, as likewise the new Bride and
Bridegroom, sacrificed a hog. Such also, says he, was the custom of the
Ancient Latins, and the Greeks in Italy. The reason whereof, as we may guess,
was for the plentifulness of Swine; for so Xenophon, de Rep Laced. tells, how
that of every litter of piggs, there was one due to the Priest; that when so
ever he pleased to offer to the Gods, he might not want a Sacrifice; and for
the like reason probably, That offering might figure-out the fruitfulness of
marriage. These tomacula are by Varro in the forecited place, called
tomacinae; but Scaliger there thinks it to be but a mistake of the
transcribers, and that it should be written tomaculae. The Greeks, says he,
call them; (...) and (...). Scalig. Annot. P. 220. The Poet concluding this
Satyr says, that if men would be wise, that is, ask for inward blessings, the
Gods would be all for us: but we, says he, are all for outward things, and so
make Fortune the Governess of our affairs; implying that Man's Folly had
advanced Fortune to the estimation of a Deity. Which peradventure the Poet
speaks in reference to story; the first Temple that was erected to Fortune
being built by Ancus Martius. But though the Romans were such early worshippers
of her, the Graecians did not so esteem her. For, as Pacuvius says (in that
verse cited in the Author to Herennius, lib. 1. Fortunam insanam esse and
cacam, and brutam perhibent Philosophi. And although Virgil indeed in the Roman
devotion says, Aencid. 8. Fortuna omnipotens and ineluctabile fatum, yet Homer
never mentions her. For though he names (...), which he takes for Fate, yet in
no part of his large work does he once mention (...); as the accurate Macrobius
observes, Saturnal. lib. 5. cap. 16.

SATYR. XI.
ARGUMENT.
In thy Expense, not by thy Mind,
But by thy Purse be still confined.
Our Poet here does thus well fit
His Feast and Friend with Thrift and wit:
Which Country-Bliss he so rehearses
We have the Feast too in his Verses.
The Earthen Dish Virtue of Old
And Fame so Saved, it still does hold:
Whiles Ivory, Marble, Carver's Skill,
Trim Waiters, Music, nay the fill
Of Lust, like Dainties which the Taste
Receives, do rather Please, then Last.
Yet as from Riot, so from Care
At Feast be Free. That Is Wisdoms Fare.
IF Atticus sup pompously, 't is State:
If Rutilus, 't is Madness. For, what is straight
More Jeered, then Poor Apicius? [a] Every walk,
Every Feast, Bath and Theater does talk
Of Rutilus. For whiles his Strength Entire
Might wear a Helmet, whiles his blood's yet fire;
(The Tribune nor Compels, nor yet withstands)
He (1) writes the Fencers Laws and high Commands.
More may thou see, whom Creditors to catch
At last, at the Entry of the Shambles watch.
These Live but for their Palate, and He Is set
On Riot most, that still is most in debt,
And soon must fall; you may see through the rent.
Meanwhile for Cates they search each Element.
No Price deterrs him: nay, if you look near,
Those dainties please him Most, that are most dear.
Not hard 't is then to Pawn, for Coin to wast,
Chargers, or 's Mother's Image (b) first defaced;
And spend four hundred Sesterces on some
Rare Dish: To the Fencer's (2) Mixed fare thus they come.
There Is Difference in Like Charge; In Rutilus
What Is VVast, is Bounty in Ventidius;
And from his Wealth draws Fame. But him I Will slight
That knows how much Atlas exceeds in hight
The Other Libyan Hills: yet never descries
That an Ir'n Chest and a small bag, in size
Differ. That Rule, know thy self, Heaven did send
For Man to fix in Mind, and still attend;
Whether thou 'dst Married Live, or be a grave
Senator. For, Thersites never did crave
Achilles's Armor: which not without stain
Ulysses sought; Or, if thou would maintain
A shrewd Cause, try if thy speech strongly flow,
Or the art some Curtius or a Matho. Know
The measure of thy Cheek; [c] and this still try
In all things, though but when a fish thou 'dst buy:
Nor for a Barbel wish, when in thy Chest
The have but a Gudgeon. For, thy Purse once press't
With want, and Thou with Riot, what is the Event,
Thy State and Goods being on thy Belly spent,
Which swallows the use, Principal, [d] Herds and Land?
Their Ring Such part-with Last; Then Pollio's Hand
With naked finger beggs. Such Riot never
Should count Death Quick and Sow'r: Age These should Fear
Thus they proceed: Money they Hire at Rome;
Wast it before the Owners: Then whiles some
Scrap's Left, and the usurer looks Pale, who shun
Rome, straight to Ostia or Baiae run.
To Leave the Burse [e] is now as to decline
Suburra's hear for the cool Esquiline.
Only this grief such fugitives does daunt,
They must (3) the Circus, for a whole year, want.
Not the least Blush These have: So few do stay
Jeered Modesty, which fain would fly away.
This day, my Persicus, thy self shall see,
If these fair Rules don't with my Life agree;
If a close Glutton [f] Husks I praise, and Cry,
Make Gruel, Cook; but whisper, Sweetmeats buy.
For since by promise the art my Guest, I Will be
Evander, Thou Tirynthius to Me;
Or that Less Guest; yet Venus was his Mother:
Water sent One to Heaven, and Fire the Other.
Hear now my Dishes in no shambles sought:
From mine own field at Tibur shall be brought
A main-fat, tender kid, that never durst croppe
A leaf of Grass or the humble willow's top;
More Milk then Blood he has. Wild Sperage too
We 'il have; My Plow-man's Wife her spindle threw
Aside, to gather it. The nest of hay
Yields large, warm Eggs, and the Hens, that did them lay.
Then (4) Grapes long-kept, yet fresh as on the vine:
The Sigaian and the Syrian pear shall join
In the same baskets: Apples too, of smell
So fresh, the Picene they would fain excel.
Thou need'st not fear them: VVinter's cold has dried
Their Autumn: Their raw juice they have laid side.
This Cheer our Senate once thought Riot; and
Herbs from his small Plot Curious his own hand
Gathered, and Dressed over his small fire; Now such
Fare a foul shackel'd Ditcher (4) scorns to touch;
Of a Sow's Daintles he has learned the smack
From Cooks's shops. Flitches hanged on a thin rack
Men kept for High Days once. To Kinsfolk met
On Birth-days they did Goodly Bacon set,
And fresh meat, what their Sacrifice could spare.
Some Kinsman three times Consul, or some rare
General, that once had the Dictator's power,
Went to These (5) Feasts before the Common hour,
Home from some well-tam'd Hill shouldring his spade.
O, when the Fabii and rough Cato made
All quake; when the Fabricii and Scauri were
Rome's Awe; when a remiss Censor [h] did fear
His stern Colleague: No man did care to know
What Pearls in the Ocean in the Tortoise grow,
With which our Trojans could brave Pillars dress,
For (6) Supper-beds, once without backs and Less:
Whose Brass-Front showed an Asse's vile head Crowned,
At which, good sport, the Country hoyes often found.
As was their House and Stuff, so was their Food.
Our Soldier in the Arts of Greece Then rude,
When in some Cittie's spoils he found rich Plate,
The work of some rare hand, did break it straight,
To glad his steed with trappings, and (7) on Crest,
Ingrav'd, showed the tamed wolf by Rome's fate blessed;
Our Twins too, as under the Cliffe they were,
And naked Mars with glist'ring Sheile and Spear
Hovering aloft, unto his foe designed
To Death; Their Silver in their Armor shind [i]
Their frumenty they served in Tuscan dish:
Which Bliss Brave Envy, though but small, might wish.
In Temples too Majesty more appeared,
And Rome a voice almost ar Midnight heard
From the VVest-Shore, (8) when the Gauls came. For thus
The Gods turned Prophets and admonished us.
Then Earthen Jove so cared for Latian state,
Jove, whom as then no Gold did violate.
Those Times did tables of our Own tree know,
Which did at home and for the same use grow,
If an Old Nut-tree some fierce East-winds spite
O're-turn'd. Now Rich Ones sup without delight,
The Turbet, the Buck relish not, nay, rare
Ointments and Roses stink, unless their fair
Orbs on tall, yawning, Ivory-Libards stand,
Which are [9] those Teeth Syenes Gate sends, and
The Swift Moors, the Indian too more black, and those
The Arabian Peast breaks-off, when a tooth grows
Too weighty for his head. Fierce appetite
This Gives. For, they a Silver-foot do slight
As on the finger an Ir'n-Ring. With Care
I shun a proud Guest then, that does Compare
Me with himself, and scorns small means; (10) so free
Am I, from but an Inch of Ivory,
In Chess-board or Chess-man. Of simple bone
Are my knives-handles. Yet my meat's never known
To stink: A Hen never cuts the worse. No rare
Carver I have, (11) Chief of the School of Fare
Train'd-up by Trypherus the Learned, who
Carves large Sow-teats, the Hare, Boar, the VVhite-Breech too,
The Scythian Phesant, the huge Crimson-wing,
And the Getulian Goat. The Goodly Thing,
A wooden Feast carved with dull knife does sound
Through the Suburra. My raw Lad never found
Art to carve Goat or Turkey; still he is rude:
To steal a mouthful he is with skill endued.
Plain glasses of mean Price a homely lad
Shall bring: yet against cold he is safely clad
Phrygian he is none, nor Lycian, nor bought dear
Of Huckster. Call in Latin y' have his ear.
My youths are dressed alike with cut, plain hair;
Yet against this feast day combed with some small care.
One's a course Shepheard's Son, a neat-heard's the other,
That sighs, so long it is since he saw his mother.
Their Cottage and known kids he longs to see;
One of such Face and Ingenuitie,
As might grace those, whom the bright Purple-coat
Adorns. Lust has not yet made hoarse his throat:
He smooths not yet his skin, nor, with fear, pale
Makes at the Baths his Oil-horn a Chaste veil.
Wine he shall fill thee upon those hills made,
From which he came; under whose top he played.
He is the Grape's Own Countryman. Perchance
Thou Wilt look some Gaditanian wench should dance
Leading a Chaunting Round of Girls, whose Art
Once praised makes them descend to some worse part:
Which Brides do by their Husbands side behold,
Though shameful before Them to be but Told!
The Excitement of faint Lust! The Rich man's quick
Nettle! This makes the Other Sex more sich
Of Passion; which enlarged does in a trice
By the Eat and Eye admit in feebling vice.
An humble house knows not these Sports: (12) the Rich
Shall hear Shell-Musick and the Lend words, which
A Hireling's ear in the rank stews annoy:
Let Him such words and the Art of Lust enjoy,
Whose (13) Pavement of round Spartan Marbles grows
Slippery with drunken Spaulings. Where wrath flows,
Vice Scapes! Dice and Adult'ry mean men shame:
The Rich, for These, Pleasant and Trim we name.
Other delights to day attend my cheer:
The Founder of the Iliads thou shall hear,
And lofty Maro's Lines, for whose rare skill
We doubt, who is Best. What though they are read but Ill?
But turn-back Business Now; Cares from thy breast
Expel; and give thy self a grateful rest.
Since this day thou 'lt be free, talk not of rent
For Money; If at daybreak thy wife went
Abroad, and not till night return, nere let
Thy breast for more suspicious tokens fret:
Though thou were moved at her Hair, Face, Ear, Gown,
All sorrow at My threshold straight lay-down.
House, Servants, what they have broke or lost, what tends
To Grief, forget; chiefly ungrateful Friends.
But Now (14) the Towel and Great Cybel's shows
Grace her Ideaan Feast. In Pomp at Those
Our Horse-spoiler [15] the Praetor sits. Offense
Be It none, I Will say, to Our People grown immense,
The Circus holds all Rome to day. (16) A shout
Methinks, I hear: The Green-Coat wins, no doubt.
Should That fail, sad thou 'dst see This City, just
Astonished, as at Cannae's fatal Dust,
Our Consuls being Overcome. Youths There may sit,
Whom Noise, bold wagers, and such Joys be fit.
Our wrinkled skin must drink-in the Spring-Sun,
And [17] escape the busy Gown. Thy Age has won
Leave, without blush to the Bath to go Thus soon;
Though a full hour [18] as yet it wants to Noon.
In five Such days thou 'dst Tire. Loathing attends
Even Such a Life! Delights Rare use commends.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Eleventh Satyr.
Statio. Regia verba lanistae. Gulosum fictile. Nummus; the value of it
mistaken by Calderine and Merula; likewise by Britannicus and Caelius Secundus
Gurio. Miscellanea ludi. Ludi Miscelli. Hordearii. Bulga. The art of keeping
grapes fresh a long time after their gathering, showed from Varro, Apicius, and
later Experience; also of keeping them long upon the Tree, yet fresh, according
to Palladius. The Flesh of Sacrifices sold. The superstitious persuasion of the
Ancients about an Asses Head. Barthius his conjecture concerning Rupes Quirini.
Deus perdens. Aius Locutius. Porta Syenes. Chesse- play; the Antiquity of it.
Check-mate; the derivation of the word, according to Gregorius Tholosanus.
Pergula. Testarum crepitus. Diverse kinds of Applause, per Testas, Bombos and
Imbrices. (...). Crotalum. Pitysma. Orbis Lacedaemonius. Laconicum. Megalesia.
Spectacula Mappae. Praedo Caballorum Praetor. The Circensian Factions. Color
Venetus. Effugere togam. The hour of Bathing. Convivia tempestiva.

1.HE writes the Fencers Laws and high commands. Scripturus leges and regia
verba lanista: The Poet speaking here against the Luxury of his Times (that we
may here together clear some lesser doubts) says, that the same thing, is not
the same thing, being not done by the same person, as it was anciently said:
for thus Expense in Rich Atticus is Fit; as most unfit in poor, though Noble,
Rutilus, and Apicius. Of whom, says the Poet, every public Meeting talks;
amongst which he reckons Stationes, public places; for though the word
properly signifies the Act of standing, yet it has passed also into other
significations, being sometimes taken for an harbor or safe road for Ships, or
for the place where Soldiers for a time make their abode; likewise for the
place of Judicature, where many met, as Onuphrius Panvinius notes, in his book
De stationibus Vrbis Romae, where he cites his passage of Juvenal; and farther
shows, that in the times and use of the Christians, it signified their standing
at Prayer on the Lords Day, and between Easter and Whitsontide; it being not
lawful at that (...) to pray kneeling; whence those Prayers were called
Stationes; as also their solemn Processions in aftertimes, and meetings to
that purpose, at certain Churches. But, to omit other particulars concerning
this acception, we may farther take notice, that Britannicus reckons amongst
the old Roman stations, their Porticus; which acception being here very
appliable, I choose to render it, Every Walk; this most probably expressing
men's most usual behavior there. The Poet adds concerning Rutilus, that whiles
his Limbs were young and strong, being fallen to poverty, he unworthyly turns
Fencer. In which passage the common copies, and so Lubin also, have, -- dum
valida ac juvenilia membrasofficiu^^ galeae, dumque ardens sanguine fertur,
etc. Scripturus leges --: which, as Rigaltius rightly says, is senseless; and
therefore mends it by reading, -- dumque ardens sunguine (meaning juvenilia
^^embra) and referring fertur to that which follows, namely Scripturus lege^;
that is, he is carried, or with a fierce defire becomes a Scholar to Fencers,
or gladiators. Which place is in the like manner corrected by Rutgersius, in
his Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 17. The Poet here farther expresses, that the noble, or
rather ignoble Rutilus was not by any Nero ( nullo cogente Nerone, as he speaks
in the 8th Satyr) or, as here, by the Tribune (who at the Consuls choice of
Soldiers, made the Romans present their names) compelled to such a practice or
rudiments of such false Souldery: yet, says he, as he compels him not, so he
forbids him not: implying, that it was a foul default in the Roman Government,
that no Law forbad such persons such behavior. But in the expression of the
behavior it self, the Poet says, that he did write, that is, write-out and
study leges and regia verba lanistae: which the Scholiast expounds by superba
and delicata; such as were, attolle, declina, percute, caede, urge; implying
the several points of art for offense or defense. The master or instructor of
the Gladiators was called Lanista (see Sat. 3. Illustrat. 21.) who taught
others the art of Fencing, and hired out such for money to perform their skill,
though with extremest danger, when such shows upon occasion were set forth by
the Great ones. Britannicus more particularly thinks, that Juvenal does here
allude to P. Rutilus mentioned by Valerius lib 2. who taught Soldiers the use
of Arms, and by conference and practice with the chief Masters of the
Gladiators train'd-up in the School of C. Aurelius Scaurus, brought the Art of
Fencing to Rules of a singular subtilty.

2. -- To the Fencers mixt-fare thus they come. -- Sic veniunt ad Miscellanea
ludi. The Poet farther expressing the luxury of his times, shows that some,
though deeply in debt, would notwithstanding watch in the Markets for the
choicest provisions, and that therefore their Creditors did there watch for
them's nay, says he, though one might be said to look through their estate, as
through a will that were cleft, yet will they search every clement for
rarities. In which last expression, some by elementa understand elementa
literarum, the letters of the Alphaber, alluding to the story, which Spartianus
delivers of Geta, who had his dishes served up according to the first letters
of their names, as ^^s^^, aprugna and anas together; so pullus, perdix, pavus,
porcellus, piscis, perna, together; so fasianus; farta, ficus, and the like,
together. Which vanity though in after-time it was a truth, yet here such
acception of the word elementa were very remote, and more usually it is taken
properly for the Elements. Yet whereas the Poet says omnia, Britannicus by way
of correction says, that they could not search all the four elements, because
not the fire, and therefore only the other three, for fowl, fish, and beasts:
which though absolutely and in exactness it be a truth, yet the reprehension
was unnecessary, the nature of the speech intending by all, not simply all, but
all such (and therefore only such) as did at all yield food. And such gluttons,
says the Poer, though they pawn their silver dishes, nay and most ignobly in
their extremity deface their Mothers Image, with the more secrecy to pawn it,
yet will they for a gluttonous dish (gulosum fictile) be at the expense of 400
sesterces. For, so I render quadringentis nummis; taking a Sesterce as it comes
from sestertius; nummus and sestertius being the same: which 400 sestertii (if
we reduce them to our coin) the sestertius being 1 d. ob. qa. q. amount being
multiplied by 400. to 3 l. 2 s. 6 d. the price of one wanton-dish of meat.
Which size of expense though mad enough, is yet by some, though not without
error, made far worse: Calderine taking nummus for denarius, which is four
times as much; and so the sum would arise to 12 l. 10 s. But both he and Merula
are reprehended, for the misinterpretation of nummus, by Budaens, de Ass, lib.
2. who in a folio Edition, p. 40. says clearly in the Margin, Idem numinus and
sestertius. Which I the rather note, because in the same Excellent Author, page
45. by some mischance at the present, (I doubt nor) it is said in the Margin
contrary to his Text, Nummus and sestertium idem Romany: which does both
thwart his own learned proofs, and also the clear testimony of Seneca, Epist.
95. -- adeoque falleris, ut quae maxima babeniur, divitiae, gratia, potentia,
sestertio nummo aestimanda sint. In which place he uses sestertius and nummus
by way of apposition, the one being the explication of the other. But
Britannicus vastly multiplies this error, expounding here in Juvenal,
quadringentis nummis, by integro censu equestri, that is, 3125 l. immanely
mistaking nummus for sestertium, that is, 1 d. ob. q. q. for 7 l. 16 s. 3 d.
and Caelius Secundus Curio spares not to say, Continet ea summa ad december millia
coronatorum. As for Calderines error confounding nummus, that is, sestertius
with denarius, I may sufficiently show it, by presenting the two coins
themselves (agreeing indeed in metal, being both silver, but differing in
value, as in fashion) as they are set-out by Gabriel Simeoni an Italian
Antiquary, in his Illustratione. de gl^ Epitaffi Antichi. See Sat. 1. Illust.
33. But to go on with our Poet, by such mad expenses says he, they come at
last ad misaellan^a lud^. which word miscellanea some expound-by (...)
confusion of their estates, making it the same with con^^rpare, deficere,
solvendo non ess^, ^omniabus ^iscere; to which, opinion the learned Rigallius
^^oms to inoline with the best advantage expounding it thus. Sic (...)
conturbatore pereunt, ^t in miscella consumma^joy^, gladiatorea; that is, as I
conceive it. Thus these Spend thrifts come to their destruction by luxury, as
the Gladiators probibly do, when they come to a combar^^ This (...) grant to be
(...), but if serionsly consider (...) neither very agreeable to the use of the
word Miscallanea, nor to the Grammatical sway of this place! For, the Poet
having said, immediately) before, that it is no hard ma^^^^ for such prodigals,
(...), pown their, b^st goods (and waste, the Money in good Gheen, it were no
clear inference, to say, Thus (...) not (...) come to, he ^^^hat^, but to say,
that by to (...) much good ^hoe^, they come at, lash to sorry cho^^ is lapily
Satirical. Yet Joseph Scaliger ( de Emendat, Temp. lib. 5^. p. ^479. De primo
Agone Capitolino and aliis Agonibus) in a more special acception make
Miscellanea the same with Ludi Miscelll, Games instituted by Coligula (see
Suerpn in his Life, cap. 20. in Gollia Lugdunensi ad aram Caesaris: and so
makes the sense to be this; f^u^t (...) senatoribus mimi, sine ludi. Which
exposition was heretofore brought by Marcellys Danatus, on Sueton's Caligula,
cap. 20. where he expounds -- ad Miscellanea ludi, by saying, ad-ludos
miscellos ex ^^ariis ludor^^ generibus confectos Lug du^j praebitor (...)
Caligula. Acentding to which ^^^ception the sense will be, that such bank rupt
Nobles; did at such shows ignobly at last become, fencers, Ludi (truly written
with the long, or double I, for Ludii.) or, gladiatores. This interpretation as
it may be admitted without inconvenience, so without neceffity, because without
proof. For that Miscellanea and Ludi Miscelli were the same, it is said indeed,
but not proved. The Ludi Miscelli according to some are said to be such shows,
qui ad nullum certum genus ludorum scenicorum referri possunt, whereby they are
acknowledged to be an uncertain kind of ludi scenici, and so Lozius, lib. 11.
De Rep. Romans makes them to confist ex variis multi formibusque ludicris. By
which expression they cannot extend to Gladiatores here intended: besides, that
this exposition of Scaliger is not so much as taken notice-of by Lubin, who
takes Miscellanea here for the hotch-patch or course diet of the Gladiatores,
which upon diverse motives, I think to be the beft exposition. First, for the
probability, for, as the wrastlers had their colyphia, as is mentioned, Sat. 2.
Illustrat. 10. for the advantage of them in their exercise, so it is very
likely, that the Gladiatores had some course diet to practice them to hardness.
Which may probably appear from the name Hordearii, (mentioned in Pliny, lib.
18. cap. 7.) given to the Gladiatores, and, it seems, from their feeding upon
barly-bread. Secondly this exposisition is the rather to be entertained for the
authority of the Scholiast before Lubin, expounding it so, by cibus
gladiatorius; and giving the reason of the name; quia omnia quae apponuntur
eis, miscent, and sic manducant. And lastly it may be preserr'd, for the
singular congruity of this acception; for, the Poet having before spoken of
Rutilus his Curiosity in diet, shows how by That he comes at last to a
baseness in diet; and so, Satyrically oppose, (as I think) gulosum fictile and
miscellanea. In the former exposition Ludii must be the nominative plural; in
This, the Genitive singular: according to That, it must be, Ludii veniunt ad
miscellanea, they come to act as Gladiators at the Ludi Miscelli; according to
This, Veniunt ad miscellanea Ludii, -- To the Fencers mixed fare thus they come.

3. They must the Circus for a whole year want, -- Caruisse ^nno Circensibus
uno. The Poet showed the same expense not to be the same in the different
persons of poor Rutilus, and rich Ventidius, and that therefore every one
should remember the great Rule, Nosce teipsum. Thus Thersices must not speak
for Achilles armor; nor must a vain, swelling Pleader, a Curtius or a Math^,
one of more Tongue than Law, undertake dangerous causes. Bacca noscenda est
mensura tua; says the Poet; where Lubin thinks it should be peradventure,
bulga (which signifies a purse) and so he refers it to that which follows (...)
but this is without warrant of copy, and but needless; because, presendy after,
he says, in loculis, which were but superfluously to say the same thing twice.
But, to go on with the Poer, thus must expense be likewise measured; else
Pollio, though a Knight, and so one who, by Law, may wear a Gold-ring, must be
content to beg with a naked finger, and be afraid of long life (which others
commonly desire) as being but the continuance of such bankrupts misery. But,
says he, such spendthrifts usually fly from Rome to Baia, or Ostia, Sea towns;
whence, if pursued, they may, by ship, fly their Country also, having, with
their estate, lost likewise all shame; Modesty being as ready to forsake Rome
(no body striving to retain her) as ever Justice and Chastity were to forsake
the Earth (of which, see Sat. 6. in the beginning.) Only, says he, one
vexation attends these wanton fugitives; that they must, alas, for a whole
year, lose the pleasure of the Circensian Games. By which last passage, though
it may seem ambiguous, the Poet intends not, that when they fled for their
terrifying debts, they should return after one year, their danger being
perpetually the sames but, by way of jeer, implies their daintiness, which was
not able, forsooth, without great trouble of mind, to endure an absence from
such pleasure, though but for a year; and how much less then, an unwilling and
perpetual banishment. Which doubt I thought very necessary to point our, and a
little dear, it being omitted by the Interpreters. And here we may take notice,
that some copies have, not Ostia, but ostrea, as if the spendthrift went to a
new and greater gluttony: but this seems less probable, both in respect of the
plenty of Rome that could have yielded that provision, as also in respect of
their urgent want. The most received reading then is Ostia: but whereas some
tell us, that it was a Town near Baiae, we may, to preserve our selves from
such mistake, take notice, that Ostia is at the mouth of the Tiber, about 12
miles from Rome, (not as Lubin says, 3 miles;) but the Baiae is in Campania
about 10 miles from Naples, toward Rome; which two Cities Rome and Naples
being 125 miles asunder, though we would allow the distance from Naples to
Puzzolo, which is 6 miles, and from Puzzolo to Baiae, which is but the length
of Caligulas bridge, not full 4 miles, and all the distance from Rome to Ostia
(which yet cannot be required) we must needs grant the distance between Ostia
and Baiae to be above an hundred miles. See Cherubinus Stella in his Post per
diverse parti del mundo. fol. 9. under the title, Post da Roma a Napoli.

4. Then grapes long kept, yet fresh as on the Vine. -- Et servatae Part anni,
quales fuerant in vitibu^ ^v^^. Juvenal inviting his friend Persicus to a
Country entertainment, tells him (in Allusion to Virgil, Aeneid. 8.) that he
will welcome him with plain cheer, as Evander did Hercules (who was brought up
at Tiryniha a City of the Argives) or as he entertained Aeneas, who, though he
was less renowned than Hereules, yet was highborn, contingens v^^tice ^^lum,
being the son of a Goddess, Venus: though at last he was drowned, as the other
(Hercules) was burned. Nor will I deal hypocritically, s^^es our Poet; for I
use not in my private life to hid my Cook, if any body by chance be present
(cor^^n aliis) to provide course victuals (as, pultes ex^s^rina, gruel, or the
like) sed in aure placentas, but in his ear (or, secretly) bid him buy me
dainties. In which passage some would have it, sed in are placentas; which,
methinks, were to lose the just opposition between coram aliis and in aure;
though, for a phanfie, that Reading is pretry. Unfeignedly, says the Poet,
thou shall have plain cheer, such as mine own field yields me at Tibur (now
called Tivoli,) 150 stadia, that is, almost 19 miles from Rome, North and by
East. Thy dishes, says he, shall be did and a hen, besides a salad, which
shall be gathered by my Villica, or Baily's wife, which orders my Country
affairs (whereby he implies himself to have had a convenient estate.) Some
fruit also, says he, thou shall have, as apples, pears and grapes long kept,
and yet fresh: which implied device of keeping grapes was effected, as Varro
teaches us ( de Re Rustica, lib. 1. cap. 58.) concerning the Aminean and
Apician grape, most conveniently by putting them in pots, and likewise by
keeping them in new wine. Some sort of grapes they likewise kept by hanging of
them up: such was the duracine, or hard-skinn'd grape, likewise the Scantian,
and some again add the Apician also; according to which several ways of
keeping them, they called some ^v^s ^llares, others pensiles, as (...) it
annicus notes. Apicius in his Epimeles (his first book) in the Chapter
entitled, Vva us diu ferventur, teaches us to take river-water, and boil it to
a third part; then having put the water and grapes into a Pot, to pitch it
close up, and set it in some cool place out of the Sun; whereby, when one would
use them, one may take them out green. There likewise he tells us, that they
may be kept without hurt, if they be covered in barley. Nor is our age ignorant
of some such devices; as may be seen by H. Platt, in his ingenious and
delightful experiments of the Art of Preserving: where, Number, 64. he says
thus; Clusters of grapes barging upon lines within a close press, will last
till Easter. If they shrink, you may plump them up with a little warm water
before you eat them. Some use to dip the ends of the stalks first in pitch:
some cut a branch off the line with every cluster, placing an apple at each end
of the branch, now and then renewing those apples, as they rot; and after,
hanging them within a Press or Cupboard, which would stand in such a place (as
I suppose) where the grapes might not freeze: for otherwise you must be forced
now and then to make a gentle fire in the room, or else the grapes will rot and
perish. The same Author in the same work, number, 62. shows how to have grapes
growing all the year, saying, Put a Vine-stalk through a basket of Earth in
December, which is likely to bear grapes that year, and when the grapes are
ripe, cut off the stalk under the basket (for by this time it has taken root)
keep the basket in a warm place, and the grapes will continue fresh and fair a
long time upon the Vine. Palladius likewise [ De Re Rustica, lib. 12. Tit. 12.]
shows how to keep them upon the Vine till the Spring. Now, if the Reader would
know how long the grapes here mentioned in our Author, at his supposed feast,
had been kept [though not after this last manner upon the vine, yet fresh, as
if upon the vine] it is apparent, that they had been kept a quarter of a year:
for, as Lubin notes, this invitation of Persicus was Vt ex sequentibus liquet
in hyeme, vel eriam post, sub initium veris. Which, as I conceive, he speaks
from that which presently follows concerning the apples, which he tells him he
should have, and which, as he says, he needed not to fear, their raw or
Autumn-juice being dried up by the Winter's cold; implying that they had been
kept from the time of the Vintage, [which was, as Varro says, De Re Rustica,
lib. 1. cap. 34. in the latter part of September.] till the midst of December.
But, peradventure by some other circumstances, I think we may conjecture, that
they were kept twice as long: for the Poet says, that his husbandman's wife
should lay aside her spindle to gather Sperage [or, as it is brokenly called
from the Latin's Sparagus;] clearly implying, that the Spring was then so
forward, as to yield it. Besides, near the end of the Satyr he tells his
friend, that he thought he heard the shouts at the Megalesian Games [in the
Circus:] which, though he speaks not without an hyperbole in respect of the
place, he being then at Tybur many miles from Rome, as may appear by the cheer,
and rural waiters at his Table, yet we may not, without incongruity, suppose
him to speak so in respect of Time; but that it was then the season of those
Games, which being admitted, it will aptly agree with the former reason: those
Shows being celebrated on April the 4th. and some days after; according to
which it will follow, that these grapes were kept six months. Which I the
rather thus strictly examine, to understand more perfectly the honest and
pleasant skill of the Ancients, and particularly of our virtuous Author,
wherewith they employed their innocent privacy. Juvenal's delight may be a
little farther understood, by Tybur [now Tivoli] the place of his delight, as
it is thus presented by Bertellius, in his Theater of the Italian Cities, p. 89.

This Tybur was famous anciently for the resort thither of the noble Romans in
summertime; and for one of the Sibyls which it claims, as also for the strange
cataract of the river Anio. Juv. Sat. XI. Illust. 4.
depiction of Tivoli

5. Went to these Feasts before the common hour. -- Ad has epulas solito
maturius ibat. The Poet shows that even such moderate fare as he invites his
friend unto, was accounted riot in the time of Curious Dentatus, the good
Dictator [mentioned, Sat. 3. Illustrat. 23.] whom the Ambassadors of the
Samnites found by his fire with his poor diet; such as now a-daies even He
scorns, that is but a slave wearing a fetter [as the manner was in their
ergastula, that they might not run away] and but employed in ditching, or the
like vile work. Yet now, says the Poet, even such are acquainted with your
City-wantonness, your dainties made of a Sow's belly; though the time was when
bacon was a choice dish even on one's Birthday: and, as for fresh meat, they
had a bit peradventure, if they killed a Sacrifice. Where Britannicus notes out
of Valerius [de Institutis Antiquis] that the flesh of Sacrifices was sold [and
commonly at a double rate;] and yet to such homely fare, as bacon and the like,
even the Greatest men would resort, says the Poet; such as had been Consuls,
Generals and Dictators, and that, [as if to dainties] before the common hour,
which was the 9th, or our three of the clock in the afternoon: which haste was
accounted luxury, except on festival days; on which they were permitted to
prevent the ordinary hour. See Sat. 1. Illustrat. 23.

6. -- Supper-beds, once without backs and Less; whose brass-front showed an
Asse's vile head crowned. Sed nudo latere and parvis frons area lectis, Vile
coronati caput oftendebat aselli. In the ancient and innocent times, says the
Poet, they did not adorn their supper-couches with pearls and curious shells;
but they were nudo latere, either with plain and ordinary sides, or sides which
had no backs rising from them, whereunto to lean for ease (as Lubin probably
thinks:) besides, that they were not of that stately amplitude to which they
are now grown. Moreover, in ancient times the bed had usually a brazen front,
whereon was expressed an Asse's head adorned with a garland; about which the
plain Country children used to dance. In which last passage Scoppa (in his
Collectan, lib. 1. cap. 27.) reads coronatae-asellae; which very aptly and
justly may be admitted, the literal difference also being so small, and
consequently, so easy to be mistaken: for whereas the scull of this creature,
according to the Hetrurian superstition, was thought to have power to preserve
the fields (ab incommodis) from ill luck, or blites, it was more particularly
the scull of the she-asse, as Palladius shows, lib. 1. For, showing the means
how to protect the field, or garden, he says, Item equae calvaria, sed non
virginis intra hortum ponenda est, vel potius asina. Creduntur enim sua
praesentia foecundare, quae spectant: whereby it seems to have been done for
fruitfulness, which belongs chiefly to the female.

7. -- And on crest Engraved, showed the tamed wolf, etc. Our soldier, says
the Poet, was heretofore wont in the spoil of a Town, to break what Plate he
got, and adorn his horse and helmet with it: on which (helmet,) says he, he
did in engraven work express three things; the Wolf, which by the fate of the
Roman Empire being happily tamed, gave the Twins Romulus and Remus suck;
secondly, the Twins themselves sucking the Wolf; and lastly, their great
father, Mars, naked, as he was a Lover, yet armed with shield and spear, as he
was a Warrier. Which, though it be briefly (as I conceive) the sense of this
place, yet it will be necessary to see the entire passage of our Poet, which is
this; Magnorum artificum frangebat pocula miles,
Vt phaleris gauderet equus, coelataque cassis
Romuleae simulachra ferae mansuescere jussae
Imperii fato, and Geminos sub rupe Quirinos,
Ac nudam effigiem clypeo fulgentis and hasta
Pendentisque Dei perituro oftenderet hosti.
The order and construction of which words (very necessary to be here taken
notice of,) Britannicus makes to be this; Miles frangebat pocula, ut equus
gauderet phaleris, and cassis coelata oftenderet hosti perituro simulachra
ferae Romuleae jussae mansuescere fato imperii, and Geminos Quirinos sub rupe,
and nudam effigiem Dei fulgentis clypeo and hasta pendentis. In which passage
there are some varieties to be observed; Barthius (in his Ablegmata, p. 55.)
instead of sub rupe, thinking it should be sub rume, that is, sub ubere Lupa;
rumis (in Varro, de Re Rustica, lib. 2. cap. 11.) signifying a teat, and so
aptly implying the Twins sucking the Wolf: yet this is but conjecture; and
according to the common Copies, rupes is taken for rupes Quirinalis, and so the
Twins are said to have sucked sub rupe Montis Quirinalis. Yet Barthius, in his
Conjectures, says, diu quaesivimus, quae illa rupes digna simulachro
Quirinorum adfingi. Nulla repertae est: whereas, if he had observed it, Juvenal
himself says, Sat 2. in valle Quirini; which seems to be an expression of the
same place; rupes and vallis being but as the top and bottom of the same thing.
Yet it does not hence follow, that all the story of Romulus and Remus fell out
in this place; as may appear both from Sat. 1. Illustrat. 4. as also from the
many Monuments in Rome dedicated unto Romulus in several places; and more
particularly from some statues expressing this intended story of the Wolf
giving the Twins suck; whereof we may find one expression in the 8th. region of
the City (according to Onuphrius Panvinius his description,) and another in the
10th. region; sufficiently showing (as I conceive) that such testimonials were
rather to disperse, his same through many places, than to fix it in some one.
And so, to come nearer to the place here intended, it is most probable, that it
was in the sixth region of the City; in which was Mons, Vicus, Templum,
Sacellum, Porticus, and Statua Quirini (for this, was his name given him at his
Deifying, after his death:) and in this Temple there might be as probably an
expression of the Wolf and the Twins, as there was in that Temple, which was in
the 10th. region; though there was also in the sixth region a statue of Romulus
of an exalted stature. 20 foot in height. And here, if conjecture might take
place, I should think it should be, not geminos sub rupe Quirinos; Quirinos
being properly the name only of Romulus, as Britannicus notes; but Geminos sub
rupe Quirini, the place by way of eminency being so called from Romulus. Again,
some instead of Ac nudam effigiem clypeo fulgentis and hasta Pendentisque Dei,
-- read, Ac nudam effigiem clypeo venientis and hasta Perdentisque Dei, making
Deus perdens the title of Mars, namely, Mars the Destroyer. But this wants the
approbation of Copy; though some, which rightly retain pendentis, expound it
but inconveniently, and differently from themselves. So Lubin; who, when he has
rightly said upon, Ac nudam effigiem,] i. e. Vt oftenderet hosti in casside sua
effigiem Martis Dei, says a little after, on the words pendentisque Dei,] i. e.
in clypeo sculpti, qui de sinistro humero dependet; so that first he said the
sculpture was in casside, and then again speaking of the same effigies, he says
that it is in clypeo. But Britannicus well expresses it, saying on pendentis]
-- in vertice cassidis, and therefore adds, that it might aptly be called,
effigies pensilis, according to which sense I render it, Hovering aloft. For,
the more that one with such a sculpture on his helmet strikes at his enemy,
the more does the armed shape seem to hover over the enemies head. But, with
Lubin to apply venientis to clypeo, as if the effigies had been in the shield,
would occasion an inconvenience: for then in the like manner it should be
applied also to hasta, as if on that also had been the like expression. The
sense therefore cannot be, that Mars came engraven on a shield and spear, but
that he came armed with shield and spear, his shape and warlike furniture being
engraven on the Soldier's helmet. Lastly, whereas Lubin expounds, Ac nudam
effigiem clypeo venientis and hasta, by saying, Qui nudus ad Iliam veniebat,
etc. Qui alias clypeo and hasta armatus venit: it is not the Poet's division,
who expressly applies both these descriptions to him at the time; namely, that
he was nudus, and yet clypeo and galea fulgens (glistering with shield and
spear in the bright metal of the Soldier's helmet) and thus appeared (as was
said) both as a Lover and a Warrior.

8. From the West Shore. Littore ab Oceani. Our innocent Ancestors, says the
Poet, had homely cheer in as homely dishes, yet with so much felicity, that if
thou art touched but with the least degree of envy, thou can not but envy
them; and then did the Gods, says he, more apparently in our Temples afford
their presence and assistance, though there their statues were not of gold, but
earth. Yet then were they indeed our best araspices; Liis, sacerdotum more
fugientibus, says the Scholiast, according to his corrupted copy, but aptly
mended by Rutgersius, Var. Lection. lib. 2. cap. 16. reading for fugientibus,
sagientibus, divining, or fortelling our danger, by a strange voice heard at
Midnight, from the Sea-ward, when the Gauls intended our destruction. For,
says he, his monnit nos, speaking of Jupiter mentioned in the verses following;
who thus (that is, by a voice) admonished us: for which cause they erected an
altar dedicating it to the God Aius, as Tully says ( de Divinatione, lib. 2.)
or as Livy has it ( lib. 5.) to Aius Locutius; so called from his advertising
them of their approaching danger. In which passage in the description of the
way of the voice, some Copies have, Littore ab Oceani; or as Scheggius in his
Praemessa, Fpist. 5. reads it by way of apposition, Littore ab Oceano, meaning
the Tyrrhene Sea: but Pulmannus more aptly Littore ab Occiduo, from the
West-Shoar. Which, though it intends the same thing, is yet a clearer
expression, and more particular, pointing-out not only the way of the Voice,
but partly also the enemy; the Senones being by some placed in Gallia
Lugdunensi, North-West from Rome. See Sat. 8. Illustrat. 23.

9. Which are these teeth Syene's gate sends --. Dentibus ex illis quos mittis
porta Syenes. The Poet shows the moderation of their Ancestors, who were
content with tables made of their own wood, which grew for such uses; yet not
as some say less agreeable to our Author, for that same purpose felled, but of
some old nut-tree, which by chance the wind had blown down (for so the Poet
speaks, -- hos lignum Stabat in usus: Annosam si Forte nucem dejecerat Eurus)
The casualty of the provision implying their neglect of choice. Then he
expresses the place from which Ivory was brought; namely Syene, Mauritania,
India and Arabia: the first of which is by Ziegler and Ortelius taken for Asna,
as now it is called [anciently Sena, as Leo Africanus says] a City of Egypt, a
little North from the Tropic of Cancer, and on the East of Nilus; though some
have taken it for Gueguere, a place far more Southerly. But this Asna is here
called porta Syenes, because it was a through fare or passage from Aethiopia to
Egypt; being as for the like cause, Cumae, Sat. 3. is called Janua Baiarum.
Syene then in this place implies that Ivory was brought usually from Aethiopia.
We may farther note, that the Poet in his description of the Arabian Elephant,
says, that when his teeth are grown too big, he breaks them off: which he does,
as some relate, by striking them into the ground or a tree, [and as some add]
to lighten himself so in his fight, when he is pursued in Saltu Nabathaeo;
^tabl^ being here called Nabathaeo [the chief City whereof is Fetra] near
Syria; according to Britannicus, from Nabath [or more truly, Neba^oth] the
eldest Son of Ismael.

10. -- So free Am I from but an inch of Ivory In Chess-board or Chess-man --.
-- Adeo nulla uncia ^^bbis Est eboris, hec tessellae nec calculus ex hac
Mareria --. Great was the Pride of the Romans in our Poet's age, scorning a
Table-foot of Silver, as much as an Iron-ring, says the Poet; yet an Iron-ring,
as Britannicus notes, was worn by him that triumphed, and brides more usually
betrothed with such, though afterward luxury altered the business. But the
Roman humor did in a table-foot more affect Ivory; which notwithstanding our
Poets simplicity so despised, that he had not, as he says, a Chess-board or
Chess-man of that matter; nec tessellae, nec calculus; calculus, though it have
other acceptions, signifying here most conveniently, a Chest-man, as tessellae
the Chess-board, from the small squares, of which the surface of it is
composed; the one half whereof is often of Ivory. As for the Antiquity of the
Chess-play it is usually referred to Palamedes, as the Inventer of it at the
siege of Troy; being a game, which did greatly delight the Ancients, as appears
from their intentive care at it; and their shame to be beaten at it; more
especially from that story mentioned by Seneca [ de Tranquil. animi, cap. 14.]
of that famous Roman. Canius Julius; who being appointed to death by that fatal
Caligula, when the Centurion who was haling others to the slaughter called also
for Him, without the least fear being at Chess-play, fell to the telling of his
Chess-men, and bid him that played with him, not to brag after his death, that
he had beaten him; and then nodding to the Centurion, said, Bear you witness
that I have the better of him by one man. The name of the Game, Checkmate, is
derived according to Gregory Tolosanus, in his Syntagm. lib. 39. cap. 4. from
the Hebrew [(...) sepi^it or vallavit, and (...) i. e. morraus est] signifying
a blocking up of the dead: and accordingly he thinks this Game to have been an
Hebrew Invention. This sport is anciently in part described by the Author of
the Poem to Piso; but diligently by Hieronymus Vida, in his Scacchia-ludus. And
whereas some have thought the Ancient game to have been much different from
that which is now in use; the learned Dempster thinks otherwise, on Rosinus,
lib. 5. cap. 1.

11. -- Chief of the School of Fare. -- Cui cedere debeat omnis Pergula --. In
Rome there were many, and in our Poet's time more especially one Trypherus
eminent for his skill in Carving, who kept a public School [for that Art]
called here pergula [a pergendo] either because it was of a gallery-fashion for
men to walk-in [as some have or because it was properly a balcone, and so the
building it self did jetty out. For, such Masters did purposely choose such
places, thereby to be the more taken notice of; and so to get custom. In which
Schools they had all kind of provision for a feast, made in wood, called by the
Poet Coena Vlmea, literally an Elmen supper: but the intent of the Poet being
only to imply, that it was a wooden feast, as being materials for the
convenience of the teacher, I so render it only in the general. And this
practice being so exposed to the street, and the employment of a whose School,
yielded no doubt no small noise. But, says the Poet, my simple lad has only the
skill to cut a small rasher of bacon; being none of your Asian youths, that are
sold dear by your hucksters, (mangones) which brought-up such choiser servants,
and sold them at high rates. But mine, says he, is no such piece of Temptation
at the Baths (to omit some less clean expression in this place of our Poet) not
is he there sain to veil nature with his oil-vessel, [gutto] which was
sometimes of horn, sometimes of wood or other matter. See the form of it. Sat.
3. Illust. 41.

12. -- The Rich shall hear Shell-Musick --, -- A^dias ille Testarum crepitus
--. The Poet tells his friend, that peradventure he will expect at His feast
some wanton lass brought from Cadiz in Spain: which in those times afforded
many impudent and notorious harlots, with whom the rich wantons at Rome did use
filthily to entertain their guests: as more particularly Joan Baptista Suarez
de Salaz ar their own Country man. [an Inhabitant of that place] shows at
large, in his Antiguedades [ lib. 4. cap. 3. p. 279.] Which filthiness was used
whiles the guests were at the table, the wives as the Poet complains, beholding
it as lendly as their husbands. But, says he, let the rich have such filthy
mirth, and enjoy their Shell-Musick, testarum crepisus: which Brodans in his
Miscellanies, lib. 9. cap. 17. thinks to allude unto a practice of placing
earthen vessels or shells, by the skill of workmen, in the sides of the walls
of Theaters, that so when the Spectators gave an applause, it might with a
certain harmony be returned. Which applause was called per testas; though some
describe it to have been performed by striking such shells with a stick, and
sometimes one against another, and sometimes potsheards one against another.
The name is mentioned by Sueton in his Nero, cap. 20. where he mentions also
two other kinds of applause; the one per bombos, by making a noise like the
humming of bees; the other imbrices, which by some are described to have been
crooked and long tiles (probably like ridge-tiles) which were struck as the
testa were: unless, as some think, such applause was a noise like the fall of
rain upon slats or tiles, and so by similitude was so called. See Franciscus
Bernardinus Ferrarius, de veter. Acclamationibus and plausu, lib. 1. cap. 11.
yet whereas he makes the applause per bombum to be the noise of the hands
struck together, it is not so easily to be conceived; rather one might suppose
it to have been performed with the Voice, according to that of Persius, Sat. 1.
Torva Mimalloneis implerunt cornna bombis. The Scholiast on this place of
Juvenal says, Testis nam antea percutiebant saltantibus pantomimis quidam * buc
non erat ut mesocori percuterent manibus. But some as Rutgersius, mend it thus,
Testas nam antea percutiebant saltantibus pantomimis quidam. Hie noverit, ut
Mesochori percutereat manibus; (see his Var. Lection. lib. 2. cap. 16.) others
mend it thus, Testas antea percutiebant saltantibus pantomimis, quia tunc non
erat, ut mesochori percuterent manibus. Mesochorus was one, that in the
Auditorie gave the sign, when they should begin to applaude; he is termed
pracentor, by the same Bernardinus, lib. 1. cap. 18. The invention of this
applause per testas is attributed to Diocles an Athenian, as Suidas shows in
the words, (...) and (...). Some expound this for the Music on the drum and
cymbal; indeed they which deseribe the Music made by the Mesochorus, think it
to have been made by forming the hand in a hollow, the fingers being closed
together, and so by striking one hand against the other like the two parts of
halves of a cymbal, to have made a found. This we may admit to have been a
fashion in the Scholiast's time, but not to be an exposition of Juvenal, who
calls it Testarum crepitus, and therefore a sound either of shells or
potsheards, and rather of the first of the two; the use of the latter seeming
inconvenient, if not absurd: and so some, that would have it-to be the Music
of the crotalum or rattle, say it was made of earth (though not so
conveniently) or of shells, restis and concbyliis; intimated in that of
Aristophanes, in (...). See Sealiger, Poet. lib. 1. cap. 18. and Athenaus, lib.
14. And as some telate, the Indian Women use such in their dances. I may add,
that with some to understand this of the Castannuelas, as the Spaniards call
them (their knackers, which I have seen them in Spain use in their dances) I
think it may not be admitted as the Music here intended: this Spanish Music
being but ordinary, and rather a trisle (the snapping of the fingers) then a
filthiness, and so below the vehemence of this Invective; this therefore
probably was some wilder Music (though not less understood) and so some looser
motive unto Looseness. But I leave every man to the Ability and Pleasure of his
Own Judgment.

13. Qui Lacedamenium pytismate lubricat orbem, We will with what brevity we
can examine this Riddle, for variety of Readings and Interpretations not easily
to be paralelled in any Author. Flavius then would here have it to be,
poppysinate; Lipsius, pygisnate: according to which aim they interpret Lubricat
and Orbem; or, as Susius would have it, orbum; but all with such impurity, that
Ignorance is here a better Commentary, Muter would have it, petteumate, from
(...), a die; and so taking Lacedamonium orbem for a table of Lacedamonian
marble, would have such a one here to be understood, as did make his rich
tables shppery with dicing. Which sense might happily be admitted, if it were
warranted by Copy: but, when the common Reading yields a just sense, to
entertain conjecture against it, is not to expound, but violate, an Author. And
though the Poet says presently after it -- alea turpis, Turpe and adulterium
mediocribus, hac tamen illi Omnia cum faciant, bilares nitidique vocantur; yet
can it by no Logic follow, that because in these words there is mention of the
die, therefore there was also in the former. Besides, why the practice of
artificial and strange Lusts should so especially be attributed to a great
Dicer, seems to proceed from no great reason. Some would have it here,
pyreysmate; agreeably to which conjecture, Lacedamonius orbis is taken for a
Sudatory; there being many such in Rome, built in a circular form, and from the
Spartan Marble-Materials, called Laconica: according to which, the sense should
be, Let him enjoy the Art of Lust, who with his continual ointments makes
slippery the Sudatories; but this opinion is but Conjecture. Some would have
it, though with little reason, pitteumase, from (...) bto overlay with pitch;
some again pedemate; so Brit annicus; taking it for a dance amongst the
Spartans, in which the Musician sat in the midst and the company danced about
him. Some would have it Pitylismate, taking it more particularly for a certain
gesticulation in dancing; and others would have it pede nudo, as Scheghius, in
his Observat. praemiss. Epist. 5. [yet he in somewhat doubtful alleging that
of Tully, in L. Pisonem; cum College sui domus cantu and cymbalis personaret,
cumque ipse nudus in convivio saltaret, in quo ne tum quidem, cum illum suum
versares saltatorium orbem, fortune rotam pertimescebat: and so he takes
Lacedamonius orbis (according to the former exposition) for a Dance in fashion
of a Round. Which interpretation, if it were warranted by copy, were beyond
comparison; the sense accordingly being this, Let such enjoy the art of Lust,
as at their impure feasts dance naked, a whole round of them, about their
filthy musician. But the common and ancient Reading is pytismate, which
likewise is vexed with strange variety of expositions by the varions acceptions
of Lacedamonius orbis; some taking it for a Ring, which, say they, was a
Lacedamonian invention: and so would here understand Senators and Roman
Knights, to whom belonged the use of the ring; who, say they, did use wanponly
with spittle [pytismate] to make their rings slip off and on their singers,
according to that of Martial, Per enjus digitos currit levis annulus. But
Politian opposes this exposition, denying the ring to be a Lacedamnian
invention, and avouching that it cannot be warranted by Authors. Some others
reading, pitysmate, take it for a ropp made of the Pine- tree [(...).] But,
alas, what a silliness it were to conceive that they did spit either on the
topp or on the ground to make it slippery? Besides, what a filly thing were it
to say, Let him enjoy the art of Lust, that usually delights to drive a topp?
Yet Georgius Valla and others have, without consideration of these
inconveniences, taken Lacedaemonius orbi^ in this sense. But (to mention the
last exposition] it is taken by Joseph Sealiger and Lubin for a pavement or
floor made of round Spartan Marbles, and pytisma either for often spirting, as
in men that bibb often, [in which sense the learned Rigaltius also expounds or
for the Snuff, which in some deseriptions of the chitabus, they threw on the
ground, and so made it slippery. Which last expositions, as little different, I
the rather approve, because they seem to me to be without affectation; as also
because this is the Reading and Exposition of the old Scholiast, saying, Qui
expuit supra marmor Latedamonium, quo stratum est pavimentum. Besides, methinks
it is agreeable to that of Horace, [ Carm. 2. Od. 14.] Et mero Tinguet
pavimentum superbum; or that in the Si^^ Satyr of our Poet; which is spoken of
the large draught of the wanton Dame, Dum redu and terrans lots ferit
inrestino, Marmoribus rivi properant, v. 429, 430. According to which, the
sense will briesly be this. Let such enjoy the Art of Lust, as have wanton
plenty in stately houses: for, such, says he, are excused even in great
faults, as in dicing, adultery, and the like: nay, such vices are in such
commonly accounted but gallant recreations. In which Satirical passage,
peradventure, he intends the rich and foul Virro; whom, in his Fifth Satyr, he
formerly described by his Variety of Wines; to which he may probably here make
allusion by pytismate; and in the 9th. Satyr by his Lust; to which he may
likewise here allude by Libidinis art: but I leave my ghess to the Readers
judgment; and thought it Justice and Delight to give this account of my choice.

14. But now the Towell and Great Cybels shows grace her Idaean Feast. --
Interea Megalesiaca spectacula mappae Idaeum solenne colunt. -- The Poet having
expressed what delights his friend Persicus should expect at his Table, as
namely, Homer and Virgil read unto him, of which two it is still a doubt, which
is the better; (yet see them diligently compared by Macrobius, and since by
Julius Scaliger, and partly here, Sat. 6. Illustrat. 45.) bids him to lay aside
all trouble of mind, though his wife gave him occasion of jealousy by unseemly
tokens, (which therefore I but lightly mention;) and then, in a sudden and
satirical capture, says to him, But whiles we here intend these our delights,
Others (the vulgar Romans) intend the Megalesian shows celebrated at the Feast
of Cybele; which Goddess being worshipped at Ida in Phrygia (for there was
another Ida in Creete) was, at the time that Hannibal wasted Italy, brought
from Phrygia to Rome, upon occasion of a passage in the books of the Sibylls:
in which it was written, that when a foreign enemy made war in Italy, he
should be driven thence, if they fetched the Image of Cybel, (called the mother
of the Gods,) from Pessinus (a City in Phrygia, where Cybele had a Temple) to
Rome. Whereupon Ambassador; were sent to Pergamus unto Attalus the King; and
they received an Image of stone, which the people said, was the mother of the
Gods; who being brought to Rome, had a Feast ordained to her honor; and
because she was called the Great Mother of the Gods, the shows were accordingly
named Megalesia ((...)) and began to be celebrated on the 4th. of April. With
which delighta the Romans were incredibly taken; and when these-Shews were to
be performed, notice was given by a towell hanged out for a sign, at the
Praetor's seat. The occasion whereof was this, as Cassiodorus ( lib. 3. epist:
51.) relates it; Nero on a time sitting alone at dinner, when these Shows were
eagerly expected, caused his towell, with which he wiped his hands, to be
presently cast out at the window (jussit abjici) for a sign of his speedy
coming: whereupon it was in aftertimes the usual sign at those shows. The
order of the Latin text is, as Lubin sets it, Interea, that is, dum nos
convivamur -- Spectacula mappa Megalesiaca colunt Idaeum solenne: which, for
the clearer expression in the English, I render thus in effect, Cybel's Shows,
and the towel at them, do increase the bonour of her Idaean solemnity, or
Feast. And this sign was made by the Magistrate, as the Consul, the Dictator,
and the Praetor; as Martial testifies of the last, lib. 12. Cretatam Prator cum
vellet mittere mappam, Praetwi mappam surripit Hermogenes. Before the mappa
came in use, the sign was classicum, the found of a trumpet, or the like, but
altered on the foresaid occasion, as Hieronymus Columna notes on Ennius his
Fragments, p. 66.

15. Praedo caballorum Praetor sedet. -- This is the common Reading in this
place, Prado caballorum, though doubtfully expounded; some thinking the Praetor
so called, because at those Shows he observed, say they, the best horses, and
then took them from the owners at a small, or no price: Others, because he did
unjustly oftentimes adjudge the victory to such horses, as indeed did not win.
The first of these reasons Lubin approves; which yet may seem unlikely,
implying too gross an injury, and therefore the more probably such as might
have been redressed. The latter reason is given by Britannicus; the judgment,
and so the diversity of is, being in the power of the Praetor, so that he might
cunningly use injustice to his great advantage, and so be aptly called, not the
Stealer of horses, but the Cheater; as being He, that sometimes deprived the
best horses of their deserved reward; and so it might be rendered, -- In pomp at
these our horse-cheater the Praetor sirs. -- A like quip indeed does the Poet
give to the Praetor's usual partiality, in that passage in the 13th. Satyr, in
the beginning, -- Nemo nocens absolvitur, improba qua^vis Gratia fallacis
Pratoris vicerit urnam. But some read, Praeda caballorum, the sense of which
will ill sort with the former interpretation: and this Reading is the rather
entertained, because it is in the Scholiast; who gives a reason also for it,
saying, quia hordeum pro illo die auriga tollunt equorum; which may seem to
imply, that the Chariotiers had that days provision for their horses at the
Prz^or's charge; and so, that the Praetor, that is, his Estate was made but a
spoil, as being wasted by horses. Indeed Boetbius ( Libr. 3. Pros. 4.)
complains, that in His time the Praetorship was but inane namen and senatorii
census gravis sarcina; of which argument see more, in Bulenger, de Circo, cap.
42. But, though this Reading yields a good sense, and has also the authority of
the Scholiast, yet others read, Perda caballorum, confirming it likewise from
the authority of the Scholiast, who, they say, is in that place corrupted, and
that it should be in Him, Perda caballorum. The use of the word they prove by
the like in the Latin, as by Seriba (from Scriba) advena (from advenia)
haredipeta, parricida, and more nearly from officiperda in Cato's Distichs, and
in Isidore's Gloss. Nay, it is proved by another reason, which is here brought
by the Scholiast himself, who says, out ideo ( praeda, as the former copies of
the Scholiast have it; but, as the more corrected) perda dixit, quoniam muhi
equi strangebantur iisdem Circensibus, so what because many horses provided by
the Praetor were spoiled at these shows, therefore the Poet calls Perda
caballorum. Which reason prevailing with the best Interprecers, I chose
accordingly to render it, -- In pomp at these Our horsespoiler the Praetor sits.

16. -- A shout, methinks, I hear: The Green coat wins no doubt. -- Fragor
aurem Percutit, eventum viridis (...) colligo panni. Amongst other pleasures of
the Giraus, one was the running of races with horses, in Chariots, which
occasioned the diversities of Chariotiers, of whom there were four distinct
factions; whose parts the Romans most sactiously and soolishly took sometimes
even to great dissension. The first whereof [to reckon them according to the
seasons of the year, to which they were likened] was saclio prasina, or the
Green faction; the Chariotiers of that company wearing green coats; and the
name was drawn from (...), a leek; their coat being of a leck-green color; and
this was answerable to the Spring. The second was Russea, russata, or as some
have it, rosea, the red, or near a red, and was likened to the Summer, and
implied the fiery heat of the Sun. The third was Alba; which some altribute to
Autumn, for its hoariness: but Tertullian (de Spectac. cap. 9.) likens the
White to Winter, ob nives candidas. The fourth was Veneta, commonly rendered, a
Blue [or Skie-coloured] and by some attributed to the clowdy Winter; but by
Tertullian [in the same place] unto Autumn. Concerning which last, the Venes
color [called so from the Veneti, a people of Italy, chiefly addicted to the
wear of that color, as I have showed, Sat. 3. Ilinstrat. 24.] through it be
commonly expounded by a Blue, yet Egnatius thinks it to have been a Tellow. But
Marcellus Donatus on Sueton's Tiberius, cap. 37. terms it Caruleus [according
to the first exposition] Sky color, or Sea-colour; proving it from Vegetius,
lib. 4. de re Militari, where he says, that Ships, which are sent out as spies,
should have their sails of the Venet color, that they may not be discerhed by
the enemies. The occasion then of E^natius his mistake, might peradventure be
the color of the Sea, as it is near the shore, where it is usually troubled
and foul; but more remote it is of a clear sky color. New unto the four
colors already mentioned. Domitian (according to Sueton in his Life, cap. 7.)
added two more, the Golden and the Purple factions. But of the first four,
sometimes one, sometimes another, according to the several ages and humors of
the Emperors, did flourish: but in Juvenal's time here intimated, the Venet and
Green, chiefly the Green thrived, as is implied here; more particularly in
Caligula's and * Nero's times; as Britannicus nores on that of the third
Satyr, Si potes avelli Ciroensibus; the other two, the white and red, did not
so take, yet thrive they did, and came to wealth, as seems to be implied, Sat.
7. in that passage, solum Russati pone Lacerta. The Poct adds (that which may
raise admiration at their folly) that if these Shows should have ceased, the
City would have been confounded, as at the Romans slaughter at the dust of
Cannae: where they were overthrown by Hannibal, the wind mainly distressing
them by driving the dust in their saces; as Livy writes, lib. 22. A strange
expression of a strange vanity, that a like sorrow should affect a People for
so unlike a cause!

17. Effugiatque togam. -- Although the younger sort, says the Poet, may haunt
the Circus; such making it their delight to lay wagers, and sit by the side of
their Mistresses; yet, my Persicus, it is not for us to attend such delights:
but let our age lie in the Sun for warmth, effugiatque togam; that is, says
Britannicus, Let us put off our gowns, and in the Sun anoint our selves with
oil, to refresh our age; the manner being, before meat, to exercise
themselves, and then by the fire, or in the Sun, to anoint themselves with
oil. Where Britannicus adds, that the Gown which at the first was the general
wear, descended after wards only to the meaner sort; necessarily implying, that
for that cause also they should avoid the Gown. But neither of these aftertions
can be free, methinks, from just reprehension: for, as for the first, the
custom of anointing themselves with oi^c being general, what peculiar
expression could this be of Old age? And, as for the second, it cannot be a
truth, Martial expressly mentioning, that Juvenal himself wore the Gown: for he
says ( lib. 11.) to our Poet, Dum per limina-te potentiorum Sudatrix toga
ventilat. -- Britannicus indeed mentions another exposition, according to
which, toga is taken figuratively for labores comitum togaterum; and so the
sense will be, we must shun Business now in our old age. Which sense, though.
Britannicus refuse it, Lubin thinks to be the best. though he alleges not any
reason against the first. But because, for the reasons which I have urged, I
think his opinion the better, I choose accordingly to render it, Our wrinkled
skin must drink in the Spring sun, And escape the busy Gown. Nor does this
thwart the testimony of Martial, who most probably writ so to our Poet
concerning such employment of the Gown, before Juvenal was grown into old age.

18. Though a full hour as yet it wants to noon. -- Quanquam solida hora
supersit Ad sextam. The custom was in the latter times of the Roman Empire, to
attend their business till Noon, that is, till the sixth hour, or our Twelve of
the clock, [though Lawyers were employed far later;] and then until the ninth
hour, that is, our Three of the clock in the afternoon, to exercise and bath
themselves. But to do thus before Noon, was only usual on Feast-daies, unless
in Old folks: both which exceptions the Poet seems here to imply; saying, that
even in five [that is, a few) such days (or feastival days) a man would
easily be weary. And yet, though Juvenal tells his friend Persicus thus, I
remember, that Sueton, in his Augustus, cap. 71. shows Augustas to have been of
another mind; for that Emperor writing to Tiberius concerning the Quinquatria
(a continued feast of five days) says, Nos, mi Tiberi, quinquatriis satis
jucunde egimus. Lusimus enim per Omnes dies, scrumque aleatorium calfecimus; we
must therefore understand our Poet to use here a certain number for an
uncertain. And here it may be observed from Lipsius on Tacitus [ Annal. lib.
14. near the beginnin] that Feasts earlies then the common hour, were called
convivia tempestiva; and those which were extended into night, in noctem
intempestam, were called convivia intempestiva; that is, unseasonable, or unfit
for the dispatch of business; nox intempesta being commonly taken for the time
of night, in which men were usually in bed. Concerning the several Seasons of
Eating and Bathing, I have written largly, Sat. 1. Illustrat. 38. yet it is
needful to prevent mistake, to take notice of this one particular; that the
time intended here in these words of our Poet, quanquam solida hora supersit ad
Sextam, signifies our Eleven of the Clock, the Romans intending by the name of
an hour the time of the end (or expiration) of, that hour. So when they said at
the Sixth hour, they meant at our twelve of the clock, when the shadow was upon
the Meridional line of the dial. So when the shadow was upon the fifth line of
the dial, as is here implied, it was eleven of the clok. According to which use
Persius also speaks, Sat. 3. saying to the sluggish youth, that he slept,
quinta dum linea tangitur umbra; by an hypallage, till the Shadow touched the
fifth line (that is, till eleven a clock.) So implies Secundus Curio in his
Scholia (on that of Persius) saying Cum^ad sexiam ^ineam umbre venerat Meridre^
erat; So^^ likewise Theidorus. Marcilius (sometime Regius Professor of
Rhetoric at Paris) on the same words of Persius; Linea sive not a quinta, que
Meridiei proxima. Meridies enim hora sexia. Ergo and Persius hoc lineae quiniae
tempus quasi pane meridiem depingit, Pecus omne sub uhro est. Lastly,
Claverius, a learned French Advocate, in his Annotations on Persius, alleadges
upon the same passage, that of Martial, In quintam varies extendit Roma
labores; Sexta quies lassis, septima sinis erit. So that, business lasting
amongst the Romans till the end of the fifth hour, Persius says that the young
sluggard slept so long, that he would be sure to escape the business of study;
thus implying that he would loyter till noon, in dressing and preparing for the
Bath. Our Poet then here invites old Persicus to bath at their fifth hour, the
end of their fifth hour, that is at our eleven of the clock, and so eat at their
sixth hour, or our twelve of the clock; which haft was a wantonness among the
Romans, unless on Feast-days (as was said) and in Old folks.

SATYR. XII.
ARGUMENT.
A Storm, that did Catullus Fright,
By Calm and Wit is made Delight.
His Ship does in safe Harbor rest;
He in our Poets faithful Breast:
Who Sacrifice brings with so true
A Joy, you would think he had escaped too.
Flowers deck his Turves: The flames appear:
The Affection was more Sweet and Clear.
Some on your Childless Rich Ones spend;
Such Love the Booty, not the Friend.
MY Birthday I far less, Corvinus, prize,
Then this: wherein my promised Sacrifice
The Altar of Turves expects: A snow-white Lamb
I kill to Juno: a like fleece I am
Bringing to Pallas, that does bear on Shield
The Mauritanian Gorgon. But I yield
To Great Tarpeian Jove (1) a Beast, which now
Shakes his long Rope, and threatens with his brow.
A Bullock fierce he is, ripe for the Shrine
And Altar, to be sprinkled now with Wine.
He shames to suck: his budding horn does smite
The Oak. But had I ample means, that might
Equal my Love, I Would have a Bull drawn straight,
Fatter then large Hispulla, slow with weight;
Not bred in Neighbour-grass; his blood should flow
Rank with Clitumnian Pastures; A huge blow
His Neck should ask. My Friend's returned! The thunder
Makes him quake yet! His Safety is his wonder!
For besides Rocks and Lightning escaped, a dire
Night of one Cloud obscured Heaven; Instant Fire
Dashed on the Sail-yards. Every one straight thought
Himself struck. Then Astonishment so wrought,
No Shipwreck seemed like flaming sails: Their Eyes
Are mazed, as when (2) Poetic tempests rise!
One Danger more hear: once more Pity: though
A like fate; Grievous! Yet This many know:
Witness our Shrines in Tables vowed at need
In Tempests. Does not Isis Painters feed?
Such Lot on our Catullus too was thrown;
When now the Hold was wave, and a high-grown
Sea half-o're-set the rolling stern unsure
Of plank; when now no help he could procure
From the hoary Pilot's skill, he did cast part
To the Winds, and imitate the Beavers Art,
Which makes himself an Eunuch; so bef^^
He Would escape: He knows, his Medicine it is they would get.
Cast, cast out all that is mine, Catullus cried,
Ready to cast but Robes in Purple died,
Fit for a soft Mecaenas; He Would have fain
Thrown more, (3) made of such fleece as took its grain
From the brave Grass, and from a Spring of rare
And secret power, and from the Baetiok Air.
Parthenian Silver-chargers he did turn
Over board, and a large bowl that held an Urne;
For thirsty Pholus or Fuscus his wife
'Twas a good draught. He threw-out, to save life,
Your British baskets, with a thousand dishes
Much Ingrav'd Plate too, once His, who to his wishes
Bought, by his Craft, Olynthus. But so Bold
Who else, to (4) prefer Life before his Gold?
Their stock some do increase, not to Live better:
But blinded Live to make their stock the Greater.
Most of his useful Goods away are cast,
Yet help not: The Storm presses; till at last
His Mast he felled, and quit himself. Distress
Is desperate, when the Help makes the Ship less.
Go now, commit thy Life unto the Wind:
Trust a dressed plank: Thy self removed thou'l^ find
From Death, four of five fingers breadth, although
The Pine be of the Thickest. Furnished go
With Nets, their Bisked, and large Flaggons: Thou
Must take an Axe too against a storm: But now
When as the Sea lay smooth, the Heavens grew kind,
The Ship-mans Fate conquering the Sea and Wind:
When the pleased Farce with mild hand begun
A better task, and (5) now a white thread spun:
A wind, then greatle airc, ^scarce stronger, blows;
The wretched Ship by art as wretched goes,
With a fore-sprit-saile left, and garments spread.
The South wind ceases: Sun and Life half-fled
Return: they see Iulus his loved Seat;
His Step-mothers Lavinum seemed less near;
A knowl (6) named from the matchless Sow so white;
With thirty tears, to Phrygians a glad sight.
At last he comes within the Mounts, that close
The Sea, the Tytheae Phands too, and those
Arms, which now reach the Mid-Sea; far behind
Italy's left; less wonder thou will find
In Nature's Havens. But the main'd Ship gets
To the Harbour's inmost Lake, where the Calm lets
A Bajan bark lie safe. With (7) shaven pale
The Seamen there of their escaped dangers prate.
Have, have, my youths: Assist (8) with Tongue and Zeal:
With Garlands dress the Shrines; the knives with Meal.
See, the soft flames and the Altar's turf be dressed:
I Will follow, and those Rites done which are best;
Home I Will repair, where (9) slender Crowns shall twine
'Bout my small waxen Gods, which, though frail, shine.
Here I appease our Jove; our Lares too
With Incense: speckled Violets I Will strew.
All Is Trim: Our (10) Gate branch'd-high with bays invites
To Joy, and is adorned with early Lights.
These things suspect not yet, (11) Corvinus. Dear
Catullus, for whose safe Return I rear
These Altars, has three little Heirs. I Would see
One more to such a hopeless friend so free,
To spend but a sick hen, that shuts the eyes,
Nay, a small Quail never for a Father dies.
But let a Fever rich Gallita boil,
Or childless Paccius, (12) straight the Temple's I Will
Is clothed with Votive Tables: there they bow,
And fix them. Some a Hecatombe will vow;
Since the Elephant's no Latian ware. Indeed
That Beast under our Stars does no where feed:
But brought from swarthy Nations they are reared
In the Rutilian Forest. Caesar's Heard
Sleights Subjects: Tyrian Hannibal they obeyed;
Our Generals and great Pyrrhus they did aid.
Their Sires did on their backs carry a Power
Of Soldiers, and a Warlike Marching Tower.
Novius then and Ister Pacuvius! would
Bring the Ivory to the Altars, if they could;
A Sacrifice for sick Gallita due;
Fit for her Lares and such Fawners too.
For, one of these, give him but leave; shall vow
His large, his goodllest flaves, and dress the brow
Of's youths and Handmaids with his Garlands; Nay,
A ripe Iphigenia he would slay,
Though he never hoped some happy Theft to find,
And (13) Expiation from some Tragic Hind.
My Citizen has Brain! what is a Fleet,
To a Rich will! If the sick scapes, (14) it is meet
He cancel his first Act, the weel of merit
Imprisons him. Pacuvius may inherit
Perchance All shortly; Then may tred with State,
His Rivals All overcome. Lo, his showed Pate,
That his Mycenian girl in kindness slays!
Long may Pacuvius live, even Nestor's days:
Let him have Nero's Prey; Hills unconfined
Of Gold. Love let him neither Show, nor Find.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Twelfth Satyr.
The Dress of the Victimarii, and of the Beasts to be sacrificed. Tabellae
Votivae. Lacerna Boetica. Navem minorem facere, Staminis albi Lanificae,
Scrofa, Several causes of the Custom of shaving the Head. Favere linguis.
Mola; the Matter and Use of it. The private statues of the Lares probably
showed to have been of wax. Gates at Feastival times adorned with Bays and
Lights. Quails dis-esteem'd by the Romans. Ebut taken for Elephas. Nassa; the
Ordinary Reading and Interpretation of it, approved.

1.A Beast which now shakes his long rope. -- Sed procul extensum petulans
quatit hostia funem. The Poet expressing here, to his friend Corvinus, the
singular joy which he took at the preservation of his dear Catullus, from a
Sea-Tempest, says, that this day is dearer to him than his Birthday, in
effect, that Catullus his life was dearer to him than his own. Next, he shows
the intended expressions of his joy, saying, that an altar of turves (raised
suddenly upon such occasions) expected his promised sacrifice; yea, that he
raised many to that purpose, as he enlarges it afterward in that verse, Pro
cujus reditu tot pono altaria. Then he recites the Deities to whom he will
sacrifice, namely, Juno and Pallas: which last, as Hyginus says, (though some
say, Perseus) slew Medusa one of the three Gorgons (so called for their
fierceness, (...), in killing men only by by their looks) near unto Mount Atlas
in Mauritania; and in sign of victory wore on her shield the expression of the
Gorgon's head, the hairs whereof were said to be turned into Serpents. He
farther adds, that he would sacrifice to Jupiter, who had a Temple on Mount
Capitol, otherwise called the Tarpeian Hill (from the Virgin Tarpeia
overwhelmed there with the shields of the Sabines) and that his sacrifice
should be a lusty beast, whose strong head should shake his long rope; one that
used wantonly to strike his horns against trees, and which indeed was fit to
have wine (according to the custom) poured on his head between his horns, when
he should be ready to be sacrificed. In which expression he intimates the
manner of leading the beast to be sacrificed, that is, with a long rope, that
he might seem to go willingly, if not run before; unwillingness in the beast
being counted ominous, as Lubin notes: yet he might have observed, that Juvenal
a little after, says, Pinguior Hispulla Traberetur taurus: which therefore (as
I guess) Lubin is fain to expound more gently by duceretur. Which custom of
leading the sacrifice is aptly described, in explication of this verse of
Juvenal, by Du Choul de la Religion des Anciens Romans, p. 276, 277. Where the
Victimarii are expressed from an ancient Marble at Rome, oftentimes
half-clothed with the skins of beasts, which they had sacrificed: and the beast
to be sacrificed (being a large one) with the forehead and horns gilded and
adorned with chaplets and gilded beads hanging down from the horns of the
beast on each side after this manner, as he delightfully represents it, * Juv.
12. Ill. 1
depiction of an ox being led to sacrifice The Poet adds, that if he were rich,
he would sacrifice a beast as fat as Hispulla, a dame, it seems, in those times
of full dimensions, and one whose humor was, as the Poet intimated before (
Satyr. 6.) to delight in your Tragic Actors, according to that, Hispulla
Tragado Gander --. Yet some Manuscripts have it by way of division, his pulla,
expounding his by agna and vitulus mentioned before in this Satyr, and pulla
by nigro sune. The Author of the Manuscript Commentary likewise takes notice of
this Reading, and expounding pulla by vitt a congruente nigredini tempestatis,
yet rejects it, taking Hispulla, as most do, for a proper name. And such a fat
one, says our Poet, my sacrifice should have been, had I been rich; a beast
nourished in the Pastures near Clitumnus, a river, which according to
Philargyrius, parts Tuscanie and Vmbria; and of which all the cattle that
drank, brought forth their young of a white color: and therefore from thence
were chosen all those Sacrifices, which were offered to Jupiter Capitolinus, as
Pliny relates, lib. 2. cap. 7. and Virgil, in that of his Georgicks, Hinc albi
Clitumne Greges, and maxima taurus Victima --. In which passage our Poet says,
that if he were rich, he would bring for a sacrifice a great beast, -- a grandi
cervix ferienda ministro, some understand, as Lubin notes, by grandi ministro
the Pontifex maximus; but he justly rejects the interpretation, expounding it
of the strength of the victimarius, that was to give the blow. Besides, I may
add, that it were unseemly to make that the business of the Pontifex maximus,
that was the office of an inferior person; and thus grandi implies, as I
render it, not the dignity, but the size or strength of the person.

2. -- As when Poetic tempests rise. -- si quando poeticasurgit Tempestas --.
Some here read, Pontica, and so understand such horrible Tempests, as arise in
the Euxine Sea: which Reading yields a good sense, yet Poetica is the most
received, as being both ancient, approved and expounded by the Scholiast;
besides, it is singularly Satirical; for which considerable motives I retain
it. The Poet further implies the manner of men in danger of Shipwreck: who were
wont in their extremity to vow a Table or Picture, expressing their danger,
unto the Temple of Neptune; though afterward, in imitation of the Egyptian
superstition, unto Isis; who, as Pignorius notes in his Men's. Isiac. Expos. f.
5. was held to be the Patroness of Seamen and Commandress of the Winds: and
such Pictures are here called Tabellae votiva. Now even in such distress, says
our Poet, was dear Catullus; the lower, yet capacious, part of the ship, the
Hold, or Howl, (as the Seamen call it) being filled with water, and Alternum
puppis latus evertentibus undis Arboris incertae --, the waves throwing the
ship sometimes on the one side, sometimes on the other (to speak vulgarly) or
rather being ready to overset the ship ( puppis, properly the stern, or
sterage) arboris incertae, made but of unsure or dangerous pla^ks. In which
description I render puppis rather by the stern, then by the ship, the first
acception being more agreeable to the description here intended; as may appear
from the two kinds of troublesome motion of a ship. The one whereof is in
respect of her Length; according to which, sometimes the one end, as the
fore-castle, sometimes the other, as the Stern, is mounted-up by the waves,
and this is called the Heaving and Setting of a Ship: the other is in respect
of her breadth (that is, from side to side) the Sea sometimes laying the Ship
almost on the one side, and sometimes on the other; and this is called (as a
long continuance at Sea, many years since, taught me) the Rolling of the Ship.
Which last motion being here intended, as is plain from the words -- latus
evertentibus undis, and also being more notoriously discerned in the stern (by
reason of the height I therefore render puppis by the stern: which being built
(highest) for pleasure and direction (containing in it commonly, above the
Captain's cabin, cabbins for the Master and his mates) is in the rolling of
the ship most troubled; and therefore well might it be suspected to be, as the
Poet speaks, arboris incerta, of plank scarce sure enough against greatest
danger.

3. -- Made of such fleece as took its grain From the brave grass --. -- Quarum
generosi graminis ipsum Infecit natura pecus --. In the description of Catullus
his deliverance, the Poet says, that he dealt with the Sea, as the Beaver
(according to the vulgar belief) deals with those that hunt him; that is, he
did decidere jactu, decide the quarrel with his loss; the Beaver, as the sable
has it, making himself an Eunuch, and so leaving behind him to his pursuers,
that part which some esteem as singular in Physic, there being made of it an
Oil called Castoreum. See Persius. Sat. 5. v. 135. The form of this subtle
beast is this. * Juv. Sat. XII. Illust. 3.
depiction of a beaver Thus also Catullus dealt with the winds, casting-out his
goods, even precious purple garments, and such quarum ipsum pecus, the very
sheep of which garments, that is, of whose wool those garmens were made,
received their color not from art but nature, the nature of the grass and
water and air, wherewith they lived. He intends the Country in the South-West
of Spain, called Andaluzia, and in that the river Baetis commonly called
Guadalquivir (or the Great River) upon which stands Corduba and Sevil; where
the sheep, as the Poet says, were naturally of a reddish color. Where it may
be observed, that the Poet does not say, ipsa natura, but ipsum pecus: for
properly even in the art of Dying the colors are originally natural, though
ordered by art; but by saying that nature dyed ipsum pecus, was to imply, that
whereas wool is usually dyed, when it is separated from the sheep, this had
the color on the sheep's back; according to that, which the Lacerna Batica, in
Martial, says of it self, -- me mea tinxit ovis. In the farther recital of his
friend's goods the Poet says, that he cast-out also good plate, the work of the
curious Parthenius; as also a boul that held an urne (that is, four gallons and
an half) a pretty draught for Pholus the Centaure, that entertained Hercules;
or, as the Poet Satyrically adds, a convenient draught for Fuscus his wife, a
dame, it seems, in those times of a large throat, and probably, as I think, the
wife of that judge Fuscus mentioned in the last Satyr, and so of a temper not
unlike his wife; only she is described by her drinking, and he by his leaking,
in that passage, Sat. 16. v. 46. Fusco jam micturiente parati Digredimur. To
these losses the Poet adds such engraven plate cast-over board, as formerly had
been the Goods of the crasty Macedonian King Philip: who bribed Lasthenes to
betray unto him Olynthus a City of Thrace, his own Country; for thus we must
expound escaria, dishes, and multum calati, that is, argenti, much engraven
plate, according to the received interpretation; not referring caelati to
Olynthi, as some, not observing the Latin elegancy, have done.

4. -- But so hold who else, to prefer Life before his Gold? -- Quis audet
Argento praferre caput? Some think rather the contrary of this speech to be
truth: but methinks it may with a gentle interpretation stand easily free from
exception; the Poet intending only an aggravation of the Coveteousness of men
in His times. And is it not usual with many in their sickness by an
unwarrantable hope of escape without the Charge of Physic, basely to cast
themselves away? And do not many likewise in Seastorms in hope to save both
life and goods, loose both? And though it be farther urged, that this howsoever
could be no cause of Commendation to Catullus, because he did but that, which
even a beast, the Beaver, does without reason, as the Poet acknowledges: yet it
must be granted, that things in some respect a like, may in another respect, as
of their motive, mainly differ. For so, that which is merely natural in a
beast, as to drink no more then enough, is in man a virtue, as done by the
wisdom of reason. Besides, whereas again a little after some reprehend our
Poet for saying, navem mindrem facere for exonerare, as they expound it; the
Poet speaks it not of casting out the goods, but of cutting-down the mast (ut
malum ferro submitteret --.) 0 Which is but more remotely to be expounded by
exonerare; that being properly a burden or weight, not which is a part of the
ship, but of the carriage. Though in a remote sense, as I said, the mast may
accidentally be called so, when by the violence of wind and wave it is too much
driven on either side.

5. -- And now a white thread spun. -- Et staminis albi lanificae. The Poet
after his expression of a storm, says Let any he now so hardy as to go yet to
Sea, committing his life to a few dressed planks of pine tree (that is, a ship)
and so be but a few fingers breadth (the thickness of the planks) removed from
the wave, and consequently from death: let him lay in his penurious provision,
his bag or net for his bread, with his gorbellied flaggon; but let him be sure
to take an axe with him too, to cut-down his mast upon occasion. But at last,
says the Poet proceeding in his relation, the weather grew calm, and the fatal
sisters began to spin a white thread: wherein he implies the Opinion of the
Ancients, who thought that when the Parcae intended long life unto a man, they
spun him a white thread; as when they intended his death, a black; according to
that of Martial, ( lib. 6. epig. 58.) Si mibi lanificae ducunt non pulla
sorores Stamina --. In this passage there is yet some farther doubt, about
these words, -- tempora postquam Prospera vectoris, some understanding by
vector, Catullus our Poet's friend, but it may seem more congruous to take it
for the Ship-man, or Pilot, that brings the Ship into harbor, and that in the
close of this passage, is called magister, in these words, -- sed trunca puppe
magister interiora petit Baiana pervia, Cymba Tuti stagna sinus.

6. A knowl named from the matchless Sow so white, with thirty teats. --
Conspicitur sublimis apex: cui candida nomen Scrofa dedit. -- The Poet here
shows how Catullus his Ship, the weather being grown gentler, came safe into
the haven at Ostia in the mouth of the River Tiber: which description including
many varieties, it will for the younger Reader be somewhat necessary to clear
it in the several parts of it. He says then, that at last they discovered the
high Mount, near which was built Alba Longa by Julus Ascanius; who having
before dwelt at Lavinum (built by Aeneas, and called so from his second wife
Lavinia the daughter of Latinus, his first wife, the mother of Ascanius, being
called Creusa) increasing in people, departed thence after his father's death,
leaving Lavinum to his mother in Law, and built Alba commonly called Longa from
the long form of it; but Alba upon this occasion. The Oracle having told the
Phrygians, as it is in Virgil, Aeneid. 3. that when they should find by a river
side an huge sow, that should bring forth thirty pigs at one litter, they
should build a City in that place: they finding this rare or matchless beast,
like unto which never any had been seen (before,) and accordingly building a
City, called it from the color of the Sow, Alba; a glad fight, as the Poet
calls it, to the Phrygians, who till now expected a resting place. And here
that of Messala Corvinus may be observed, Troia vulgo Italice latineque Scrofa
vel sus dicitur, that Troy was in Latin the same with sus. But to proceed, this
place the terrified Seamen first discovering, got afterward into the entrance
of the Ostian haven: which two sides, artificial or forced Mounts or ridges
like two arms, ran so far into the Tyrrbene Sea, that they seemed in their
compass almost to enclose it, and as it were, to leave Italy behind them. In
which haven there was also a Pharos, or Watchtower built in imitation of that
famous one in Egypt, and for the like use, to give notice to Seamen in the
night, by a lanthorn hanged up, of the nearness of the shore. The works of
which haven [whose art exceeded the works of natural havens] were performed at
several times by three Emperors, Augustus, Claudius, and Trajan. And into the
innermost part of this haven, says our Poet, these Seamen got at last; a place
so calm, that it is as safe as a quiet lake; so calm, that even a Baian boat
[which is used commonly to quiet waters, such as are those in the Lucrine lake,
in Campania, near Baiae, as says Britannicus] may lie there without danger.

7. -- With shaven pate, -- Vertice raso. Anciently they accounted it ominous
to cut their bair when they were to go to Sea; that being their last vow in a
tempest. To which (according to some) St. Paul seems to allude, Act. 27.34.
There shall not an hair of your head perish, (...) cadet (fall;) as if he
should have said, They should not need to vow their hair (according to the
custom in great extremity;) for without such a vow, and so without the
performance of it, they should all escape. Hence likewise it was, that they
which were made free, were shaved before they did put on the cap of Liberty,
because they had escaped the tempest of servitude; as Nonius Marcellus relates
it. See also to this effect, Jac. Dur. Casellius, in his Varior. lib. 2. cap.
9. Thus Seamen likewise acknowledged themselves preserved to Liberty, which,
by the tempest they accounted themselves to have lost: and for the like reason
such also were shaven, as, being accused, were yet upon trial acquitted.

8. -- Assist with Tongue and Zeal. -- Linguis animisque faventes. He quickens
his servants to make ready for his performance of thanks, the altars of the
Deities; more particularly, he bids them assist with tongue and mind; favete
linguis being not to speak, but a form used by way of preparative at
Sacrifices; that at the time of performance, all that were present with the
Sacrificer might be silent: Hence therefore is that of Virgil, Aeneid, 7. Hinc
fida silentia sacris; according to which, Horace likewise uses the words, Carm.
lib. 3. Od. 1. Favete linguis, carmina non prius Audits, Musarum sacerdos
Virginibus puerisque canto; in which case, Silence in the assistants was a
necessary favor. See Alexander ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 17. and Tiraquell; on
which last, Colerus says, Favere linguis est cum silentio audire, audientiam
dare. Vnde apud Comicos Favorem popull, interpretatur silentium and audientiam
populi. Wherefore this former used here by our Author, may not be understood of
Prayer by word, but of Silence and Devotion.

9. -- Where slender crowns shall twine 'Bout my small waxen Gods, which,
though frail, shine, -- Graciles uhi parva coronas Accipiunt fragili simulachra
nitentia cera. Amongst other preparations Juvenal bids his servants (according
to the custom) to adorn the gates of the Temples with chaplets of flowers, and
to besprinkle the knives, wherewith the beast was to be dressed, with meal,
far, anciently called mola; which some call a cake, making it ex tosto far
mixed with water and salt, as Britannicus expresses it. According to which
description we must then suppose, that it being a cake, it was afterward
broken again into crumbs; the manner being to sprinkle with it the Fire, the
knives, and the head of the Sacrifice Festus Pompcius, lib. 11. describes it
only by far and sale; and it is convenient enough to conceive it to have been
only meal, water, and salt: and so the word mola seems only to imply, that it
was grownd, or had passed the mill. The Poet next bids his servants dress the
soft flames, that is, made with incense, says the Scholiast, or recentes and
teneros, as Bri^^^nious thinks; because the fire was raised on an Altar of
turves, whose grass was tender; though the first exposition seems more
intimate, and so nearer to the truth. The Poet then adds, that He will follow,
and when he has performed his best, that is, his public sacrifice ( quod
prastat; for, this Reading yields a better sense than the other, restat, which
some offer) he says, that he will then go home to offer incense, and strew
violets by way of joy and honor unto his Lares, which he describes by terming
them -- fragili simulachra, nitentia cera. By which it is usually understood,
that they were stames of wax: but Rutgersius, in his Var. Lection. lib. 5. cap.
5. would here take cera, as in that former passage, Sat. 10. Genua incerare
Deorum; and says, that the Scholiast indeed is in this place ambiguous. But it
may seem inconvenient to understand here that custom; since probably such
scraps of wax, by which they were fastened, could afford but little decency, and
less luster. And whereas he adds, that he never read, that the Lares were made
of wax; I think the exception not sufficient, there being no need to express
that particularity of the Lares; it being usual to make statues of wax,
especially such as were not exposed to the injury of weather, of which sort the
Lares here mentioned, were. For, though they were worshipped also publicly in
compitis; yet these were at his own house, as he implies in those words, Inde
domum repetam, graciles ubi, etc. Besides, it is very convenient to suppose
them to have been of wax, specially if we consider the manner of trimming of
them, according to that of Persius [Sat. 5.] Artificemque tuo ducis sub pollice
vultum; and that also of Juvenal, [Sat. 7.] Exigite ut mores teneros ceu
pollice ducat, Vt si quis cera vultum facit. -- Which implies, that they did,
in the forming of their waxen statues, smooth them with the thumb: so that both
in respect of the matter and the art, the Poet might aptly here call them,
Simulachra nitentia cera. Concerning graciles coronas, see Sat. 9. Illustrat.
12.

10. Our Gate branched high with bays, envites To joy, and is adorned with
early Lights. -- Longos erexit janua lauros, Et matutinis operitur festa
lucernis. The Poet here expresses his joy by two circumstances, the adorning
his Gate with Bays, and also with Lights. The first of which customs is
mentioned before by our Poet; as in that of the 10th. Satyr. Pone domi lauros:
on which, see Sat. 10. Illustrat. 15. as also in that of the sixth Satyr, v.
80. Orentur posts and grandi janua lauro. Upon occasion of which last words I
may remember, to prevent mistake, that difference between Scaliger and
Hieronymus Columna, about that fragment in Ennius, Desine Roma tuos hosts,....
where Scaliger reads posts, supplying the rest of the verse thus, -- ornare
trophaeis; which Columna on that place dislikes, saying, that neither in
public nor private joy amongst the Romans, the Posts of their gates were
adorned with trophies, but with bays, alleging this of Juvenal, and methinks
rightly. He alleges also Lipsius, Elect. lib. 1. cap. 3. for that custom:
others indeed supply that verse of Ennius thus, -- hosts horrere superbos. As
for the other custom, some take no notice of it in this place, reading Et
matutinis operantur festa lucernis; so the Scholiast, expounding it by
Sacrificant, and alleging that of Virgil, -- latis operatur in herbis. But
Lipsius reads operitur (which is most received) understanding it of janua
festa, the festival, or joyful gate: which was the custom, according to some,
amongst the Jews upon their Sabbaths, to which they apply that of Persius, Sat.
5. -- Vnctaque fenestra Dispositae pinguem nebulam vomuere lucernae. But that
it was the custom amongst the Romans on their Festivals, is employed in that of
Tertullian, in his Apologet. cap. 35. Clarissimis lucernis vestibula enubilare;
and de Idololatria, cap. 15. Lucernae pro foribus and laurus in postibus. And
such lights are, by the Poet, called here matutinae, to imply the alacrity and
early diligence of their devotion and joy.

11. These things suspect not yet, Corvinus. Ne suspecta tibi sint haec,
Corvine. Some here again reprehend our Poet for this application; it being not
made till after ninety verses: yet I suspect, that even artificial Horace may
be found as liable to the like reprehension, and even in that most elegant Ode,
which begins with Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis: of which Ode consisting of
seventy verses, sixty six verses are spent before he tells his Reader, that
what was said before, was spoken by Alpheus the Usurer; whereas in this Satyr
consisting of 130 verses, there are about two third parts spent before the
application. But, for my own part, I think those contrivances rather Art, than
Negligence, in both these admirable Authors.

12. -- Straight the Temple's I Will is clothed with votive tables; there they
bow, And fix them. -- Legitime fixis vestitur tota tabellis Porticus. -- The
Poet says, that Gifts are commonly bestowed but in hope of gain; and that
accordingly for a father, [that is, one that has children to enjoy what he
leaves] no man will offer for the recovery of his health, if he be sick, so
much as a hen, though scarce able to live any longer; nay, not so much as a
quail, though of mean account [with the Romans] The reason whereof might be,
because it is said to be of hard digestion, affording but excremental
nourishment, and disposing to fevers, and more especially to the
falling sickness, and to be subject to it, as Pliny says, which ill disposition
is caused from their delighting in Hellebore, as Galen mentions, 6 Epid. Com.
5.^.35. But that food being not found by them every where, some attribute it to
a malignity in their nature: yet this then, if not hindered, should always
produce such malignant effects; which, by common experience, being found
untrue, it is though more reasonably, that they dispose into such diseases, by
breeding phlegmatic, gross, and tough humors, when they are usually, that is,
too much fed on. See the learned Sennertus, Institut. Medicin. [lib. 4. part 1.
cap. 3. p. 846.] And such disesteem may probably, methinks, be conjectured
from the great Roman kitchin-Artist, Apicius: seeing that, in his Trophetes,
his sixth book, wherein he purposely handles the cookery of birds, according to
the Roman palate, he yet makes no mention of the Quail. This point being not
touched by the Interpreters, yet very necessary to the understanding of the
Poet's speech, the quail being vulgarly esteemed as a Dainty, yet in the
judgment of the best Physicians thus disesteem'd, I thought fit to discuss
it, and according to the truth. And now to go on with our Poet, if, says he,
your childless Rich ones lie sick, such as are Gallita, or Paccius, you shall
have flatterers, which will Legitime figere tabellas votivas, solemnly with
bowing, according to the custom, fix up in the walks or Isles of the Temples,
their votive tables, their vows written in paper, and those no mean ones. On
which passage, concerning the sickness of the rich one^, says Lubin, Ibi [in
that case] tota illorum porticus interius tegitur tabellis votivis suspensis ab
baeredipetis captatoribus, quibus sese voti and sacrificii reos significant, si
restituantur divites patroni. In which words, to whom the word illorum
[porticus] does relate, is not casie to conceive: for having before made
mention only of the two rich childless persons Gallita and Paccius, and their
Flatterers, to understand, by illorum porticus, Their own, though stately,
walks, sustained by pillars, as if vows had been fixed up there, were a thought
too much remote from the solemnity of the Roman custom, which being a part of
their religion and including a vow, which was to be legitime, according to the
Roman Rite fixed up, we must needs think upon the Temples of the Gods; and
therefore I choose Britannicus his exposition, who on this passage says, In
porticibus templorum suspendebantur tabellae suscipientium vota. Where we may
farther observe, that the Roman Temples, though some were round, yet for the
most part were not much unlike ours (as Franciscus Polletus, lib. 1. Historiae
Fori Romani, cap. 3. observes,) having the (...), answerable to the Quire,
[unto which only Priests might come] 2dly. Basilica, the body of the Temple,
with Isles (or, Porticus on the sides) in which they fixed their vows and 3dly
(...), or the porch of the Temple; to omit other particulars. The Poet
speaking-on concerning flatterers, says that they would promise even a
Hecatombe, a sacrifice of an hundred beasts, or such a huge one, seeing that we
have no Elephants in these parts; except only some few kept in the Rutilian
Forest at Lavinum. But, says he, if we had Elephants, flatterers there are,
which would bring the Ivory, that is, the beast (the tooth being taken for the
beast) unto the Altar for a Sacrifice; though a beast, says he, which
heretofore is said to have carried a tower upon his back, and to have been the
servant only of Kings, such as Pyrrhus the Molossian or such great Ones; and
therefore a very fit sacrifice, no doubt (for he speaks ironically) for the
Lares of Gallita and Faccius. In which passage some reprehend our Poet, for
saying that they would promise a Hecatomb; it being not a Roman, but a Greek
Sacrifice: likewise for saying, that the Elephant carried on his back a cohort,
when as sometimes it consisted of 500. soldiers; Lastly for saying -- ebur
ducatur ad aros, as if they would sacrifice the Ivory, which was not a
sacrifice, though an Offering. All which exceptions I grant to be learned and
sharp, yet I think all these passages may more gently be interpreted; for in
the first, the Poet seems not to intend the property of the sacrifice, but the
value; meaning that such flatterers would promise not properly, but as it were
a Hecatombe, that is, a Sacrifice as costly as a Hecatombe. In the second
likewise whiles he mentions the burden of the Elephant, he does but Satyrically
aggravate it, as speaking but according to the people, and so jeering at the
excess. And so to the third, he speaks not strictly, but figuratively, calling
the Elephant Ivory, as being the Creature that yields it: which if it be a
bolder expression the Judgment of the Author were a Defense. But if the bravest
strains, in the rest of the Poet's, were all in like manner examined with this
severity; the rigor of Logic would call that untruth, which the humanity of
Rhetoric terms an Elegancy. Let us then remember the moderation of the Learned
Jo. Isacius Pontanus [in his Collectan. on Macrob. in somnium Scipionis, lib.
2. cap. 7.] saying on a like occasion, Certe juvanda in pluribus potius vatum
sensa, quam exigenda omnia ad rigidam normam.

13. -- And expiation from some Tragic Hind. -- Tragicae furtiva piacula
cervae. As the Poet before did not intend to speak properly, when he mentioned
a Hecatombe, so in the like license he proceeds in the aggravation, saying that
these fawners, if they might, would in hope of vast gain, dress the brows of
their Servants with garlands, that is prepare to sacrifice Them, nay even a
Daughter, though ripe for marriage, an Iphigenia: and, though he should know
before hand, that she should not be saved by the substitution of some other
sacrifice. Wherein he expresses the execrable coveteousness of those
flatterers, and intimates the story of Iphigenia: which briefly, for the case
of the ordinary reader, was this. The Graecians having killed a Hind
consecrated to Diana, were by the offended Goddess a long time detained at the
haven of Aulis with their Here by a contrary wind Whereupon consulting the
Oracle, and being told that, to pacify the Goddess, they must sacrifice
Agamemnon's daughter Iphigenia, (whom the Poet afterward calls the Mycenian
girl, from her Father's Country Mycana her parents, by the deceit or eloquence
of Ulysses, were persuaded to consent that she should be sacrificed. But when
the time came, Diana conveyed her away, as the fable certifies us, unto the
Taurick Chersonese, to be her she-priest there; placing in her steed a Hind for
a ready sacrifice; a tragic Hind, as the Poet Satyrically speaks: for though
the damsel escaped, the Hind paid for it.

14. -- It Is meet he cancel his first Act. The weell of merit Imprisons him --.
Delebit tabulas, inclusus carcere nassa. The Poet here bitterly jeers at
Pacuvins, saying that he was a fellow of a projecting brain; and that it is
true, Agamemnon would have lost his daughter to have saved the Grecian fleet
of a thousand ships: but alas, says he, what is such a fleet to the estate
which Pacuvius gets by offering [his Iphigenia] His daughter? Surely another
manner of matter, even the wealth of Paccius. Who, if he escapes, must needs
alter his Will, and for the Art of kindness, wherewith Pacuvius has taken him,
as the weel does the fish, Pacuvius, is the man, that must be his sole heir:
which being once come to pass, he may then walk with disdain slighting his dull
corrivals, whom his Master-brain finely surpassed. But, says the Poet
[descending again to sober earnest] Let him out-last Nestor's years, and
our-vie Nero's riches [who, to enrich himself, robbed both the Gods and Men)
yet like a very wretch, let him neither love Others, nor Others him. Yet in
this passage, some take Nassa [or, as others have it, Natta] for the name of a
Physician, at whose house their fancy would have the sick lie for cure, and
therefore to be inclusus carcere nassae. But this, methinks, it rather to be
mentioned [because by others] then esteemed, as seeming opposite to that which
went before; and so yiedling neither coherence nor good sense: which according
to their acception of Nassa, would be this [according to the Latin so
expounded, Si Libitinam evaserit ager, Delebit tabulas, inclusus carcere
nassae] If he recovers, he will alter his will whiles he lies sick. For, if
recovered, how does sickness then imprison him at his Physicians? Or, if he
lies imprisoned with sickness at his Physitian's, how is he then recovered?
Wherefore, though this Reading and accpetion of the word, be mentioned by
Pulmannus without notice of the inconveniences, I choose to retain the Ancient
Reading and Exposition.

SATYR. XIII.
ARGUMENT.
Calvinus a great sum did trust
To one unkind, because unjust:
But when a sum so Great, so Due
He lost, he lost his Patience too.
Our Poet shows him that his Rage
Fits not his loss, nor his old Age:
That, Gold which once did for a while
Men's Lives express, does now Defile.
Now Desperate wretches dare Forswear
By what their Guilt ought most to Fear.
Gold such may get, but never Rest:
Jails they may escape, Never their own Breast.
AN Exemplary Sin always dislikes
The Author. The Guilty this Revenge first strikes;
He Is never Quit: Conscience does still return,
Though Favor Master the false Praetor's (1) Urn.
What think, Calvinus, All think of the unjust
Fresh Crime, the Crime of Violated Trust?
Yet thy wealth's not so slender, that the weight
Of a small damage should straight sink thy state.
Besides, Thine's one of our known Common losses
Drawn from the midst of Fortune's Heap of Crosses.
Groans must not be too deep: Grief Wise men Bound:
It Is Rage must not be Greater then the wound.
Of light Ills the least part thou scarce can bear;
Wrath boils thy Breast! Because thy friend did swear,
Yet renders not thy Pledge. Alas! Appears
This strange to Him, that has Passed Threescore years,
Born in Fonteius's Consulship? Has such
Age and Experience taught thee not Thus much?
Wisdom, which does our Sacred Volumus fill
With Precepts, conquers Fortune with rare skill.
Yet those too we call Blessed, which can Bear strife
Nor toss the yoke, taught by mere use of Life.
What Day so Sacred, but reveals Thest, bold
Perfidie, Cheats, Gain from All Crimes, and Gold
Got by the Sword or Poisoned Box? So Few
Are Good! That, Thebes almost more Gates can show,
Or wealthy Nilus Months. These (2) our last Times,
Our Age is worse then the Ir'n one: for whose Crimes
Nature's Invention has yet given no name
From any Metal. Yet, for wrong, exclaim
We do, O Faith of Gods and Men! More loud
The Doal makes not the Clients, that praise proud
Fessidius, when he Pleads. Speak Grave Sire, right
Fit for the Child's Boss, know not the delight
Another's money yields? What sport the art grown,
(Silly Man!) to the Rout, when thou would have none
Forswear, but at each Shrine and Altar red
With Blood, think some God present! The Homebred
Latins lived thus, (3) e're Saturn forced to fly
Did use the rustic Since, his Crown laid-by;
When Juno was a girl, and Jove for fear
Was hid in Ida's Caves; when no Feasts were
Above the Clouds; no Ilian boy, nor fair
Hebe to fill Joves cup; Nectar then rare
No Vulcan quaff'd, wiping his coarse arms grown
Black from his Liparaean forge. Alone
Every God dined: Then was there no such rout
Of Gods, as Now: A few did serve throughout
The well-contented Skies, and so did press
The wretched Atlas with a weight far less.
The Seas by Lot had no dread Prince: nor sat
Stern Pluto then with his Sicilian mate.
No Wheel, Stone, Furies, vulture foul, they had:
Without infernal Kings the Ghosts were glad.
Villainy then was wonder! 'Twas a size
Of Crime worth Death, if young men did not rise
To the Old; a Boy to All with Beards; though He
More Strawberies and huge Acorn-heaps might see
At Home. Then, Four-years-more such awe did win!
Sacred as Old Age was the Downy Chin.
Now if a friend does but make good his Trust:
If he restores the Old Pouch with all the Rust;
It Is Prodigy by Tuscan Art to be
Searched, and Purged with a Crowned Lamb! when I see
A Holy man, this Monster I compare
To a Child of double shape, or Fish that are
Found by the amazed Plow, or to a Mule with Foal.
I fear, as when in showers stones down do roll;
Or (4) Bees like a long Grape-bunch settle-on
Some temple's top; Or streams have to be gone
To the Seas, with hurrying gulfs of Milk or Blood.
Thou criest, Ten Sesterces a false friend should
Restore! What if two hundred yet, Another
Have lost thus? A third more, (though this he smother)
A sum his wide Chest's corner could scarce hold?
To slight Heavens witness, we 're so prone, so bold,
If man knows not! How he denies! and tears
Voice and set Face! By the Sun beams he swears;
By the Tarpeian Lightnings, yet never starts;
By Mars his Javelin, by Apollo's Darts;
Diana's Shafts and Quiver, and thy Mace,
Neptune, from whom Aegaeus drew his race.
He adds Hercules's Bows, Minerva's Spear,
And all wherewith Heavens Armory strikes fear.
He cries (if he has Sons) Let me be sed
With Pharian Vinegar, (5) and my boiled Son's head,
If Guilty! Let me weep!
Some think All slides
By Chance and Fortune, and that no Power Guides
The World, Nature revolving Days and Years:
All Altars these days touch. Another fears,
Vengeance waits Guilt. Gods this beleives, and still
Forswears. He thinks, Let Isis do her will
On these Limbs, and (6) with angry Timbrel blast
My sight, so I blind hold the money fast.
What Is a Consumption, rank soars, a half-thigh?
Poor Ladas would a Rich Gout gladly try,
If's Brain needs not Anticyra, or great
Archigenes. What does the swift foot get?
Or Pisa's hungry Olive-Crown? And, though
The Anger of the Gods be Great, it is slow.
If then to punish All faults, it is their mind,
When will they come to me? And I may find
Favor perchance; some they forgive. Sometimes
Contrary Fates attend too the like Crimes.
One's Crucified for's Fact, another Crowned.
Thus they their Mind, which Guilt would else confound,
Harden! Then call him to some Shrine, he is there
First, nay, draws Thee, and makes thee make him Swear.
For even in a Bad cause great Boldness may
Seem Innocence. The Mimick he does Play,
Like neat Catullus his lewd Fugitive.
Thou, wretch, with outcry then do Stentor strive
To exceed; or rather Homers Mars. Do hear
This, Jove? not mov'st thy Lips? when fit is were
Thy Brass or Marble spoke? why else, vow-scrowles (7)
Removed, falls our free Incense on thy Coals?
Our Calves slit Liver, and our Hog's white Caul?
For ought I see, difference there is none at all
Between yours and Bathyllus's statue. Know,
What comfort yet his skill, though mean, can show,
Whom Cynicks not yet Stoics Rules e're ^^^'d,
Whose odds is but one Coat; nor e're admired
Glad Epicurus his small Garden-fare,
For Dangerous Patients let great Artists care:
To rude Philippus's Scholar trust thy vein.
If the Earth yields no fact of the like stain,
I Am Mute; with thy Fist beat thy Breast apace,
For me; and with thy Palm thy blubbered Face.
In loss we shut our Door: we groan, we baul,
More for our Gold, then for a Funeral.
In (8) this Case no man feigns; No man's content
Only the Edge of his sad Gown to rent.
No man his Eyes with a forced Moisture blears:
Lost Money is Lamented with True tears.
But if all Courts of such complaints have store;
If, though both sides read writings ten times over,
Some call the wooden Hand-writ Tables Tricks,
Convinced yet by their Hand and Sardonyx,
Their rare Seal kept in Iv'ry-box: would Thou,
Choice Sir, from common Lot stand Exempt now?
Sure, (9) you are the Chick of some white Hen unmatched;
We from unlucky Eggs a brood ill-hatch'd!
Come, come, thou feel'st small loss; thou should vex less,
If Greater Crimes thou look on. Thy distress
Compare with a hired Cur-throat; Flames begun
By Brimstone-plot, which on the door first run:
With those, that from some old Shrine Huge Bowls steal,
Of sacred rust, Gifts of some Commonweal,
And Crowns given by some ancient King. If these
Be wanting, a less Shrine-robber will seize
On a gilt Hercules his thigh; He Will catch
Neptune's Gold-beard; one plate from Castor snatch.
Fears He, that melts whole Joves, whose thunders rent
The Air? Add those, that Poisons mix or vent,
And whom in Oxe-hides into the Sea we throw,
With whom (hard fare!) a guiltless Ape we sow.
What Is this to what from Morn to Night the ear
Of Gallicus our City-Judge does hear?
The Crimes of Mankind if thou fain would know,
His own House shows: A few days there bestow,
Then Dare call thyself wretch. In the Alps who cares
For a swollen throat? In Meroe who stares
At a dug larger then the large Babe? who
A German's azure eyes with wonder view,
Or's yellow lock like horns with moist curles rolled;
When the same Nature they in All behold?
Against a rushing Cloud, a Thracian flight
Of fowl, (10) the Pygmie-warriour runs to fight
In his Dwarf-armour; but soon tamed through the air
The Crane's bowed tallons snatch him. Which sight rare
With us, would shake thee with a laughter. There
Such daily Skirmish is not Sport, but Fear,
Where the whole Band's bare one-foot high.
Yet shall
On his false Perjured head no Vengeance fall?
Beleive't, he is straight haled hence with a huge chain
By Conscience; (could thy wrath wish more?) he is slain
As we'd desire. Yet thine's the loss: what is owed,
He Will never Restore; But if some Blood now flowed
From's Headless Coarse, That beyond Envy might
Content; Revenge, then Life, yields more Delight.
Indeed thus think the unlearned: Cause none at all
Sometimes Inflame them: Sometimes very small;
The least occasion serves. Chrysippus yet,
And the Mild Thales never such Rules did set;
Nor the Old man, that by sweet Hymettus dwelt:
Who part of the Hemlock, which in Bonds he felt,
Would not have giv'n's Accuser. Wisdoms Art
Drives by degrees most Vices from the heart,
And every Error, showing first what is Right.
Revenge is still a weak, sick minds Delight.
Collect it briefly thus, That we do see
Women most joy'd with it. Yet think those escape free,
Whom Guilt astonishes, and dull strokes urge,
The Torturing Soul shaking the hidden scourge?
O, it is a Plague, that does far worse torment,
Then those, which dire Caeditius did invent,
Or Rhadamanthus; Night and Day to bear
A witness in his breast, of Guilt and Fear!
The Pythian Prophetess thus once did shape
A Spartan a Reply; He should not escape
Unpunished, since he doubted to detain
A Pledge, and to Forswear't; The God's mind fain
He Would know, and if Apollo would persuade it.
Through fear then, not through Goodness, he repaid it.
Yet (11) proved the Cave's word true, fit for that shrine;
He was destroyed with his whole House and Line,
His kin too, far removed. Only the mind
To have been Vile did such a Judgment find!
Who thinks a Crime is guilty of the Fact;
What then, if he reduce Intent to Act?
His thoughts still urge him, even whiles he does eat,
As in a drie-mouth'd Fever; half-chew'd meat
Choking the Jaw-teeth: wines the wretch casts-up;
The old Alban's precious Age seems Vile. A cup
Of better show him; Lo, he knits a frown,
As if sow'r Falerne he had taken down.
By night if some short sleep perchance his breast
Admits, and, after tossing, finds some rest;
Straight the God's Shrine and Injured Altars he
Beholds, and, sweating mainly, he sees Thee.
Thy dreadful Shape Greater then Man's does press
His trembling Soul, and force him to confess!
These quake at every Lightning; they are struck pale:
When Thunder first but murmurs, their hearts fail;
As if it never from Chance or fierce winds came
But fell on Earth as a revenging flame.
Did not that Tempest strike? They Are worse afraid
Of the next then, as but to day delayed.
If with a waking Fever they begin
To feel a Pleurisy, they think for Sin
Heavens wrath is sent. These, Stones and Darts Divine
They hold. They dare not promise to a Shrine
A bleating Lamb; or (12) a Cocks Crest to their
Lares. What can the Guilty Hope through Fear,
When Sick? what Sacrifice deserves not more
To Live? most lewd Men's thoughts waver Before
Their Crimes: which whiles they Act, they are Bold. What Is Good,
What Is Vile, when the Fact's Past, is understood.
Their Nature yet Returns, nor is it strange,
To it is damned Course: It Is Fixed; It knows no change!
For who e're left to Sin? who again came
Unto a Blush, whose worn brow once lost Shame?
Who leaves after one Crime? This false wretch sure
Will snare his foot; some foul Jails gyves endure
Or an Aegaean rock, where banished live
Great ones good store. His loathed Name's Plague shall give
Thy wish content. Thou Wilt then say with glad mind,
No God is Deaf, or a Tiresias, Blind.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Thirteenth Satyr.
The Manner of the Roman Trials at Law. Lots; varieties in their Matter and
Fashion. Nona aetas; the Opinion of Britannicus and Lubin concerning it,
examined. The Food in the Golden Age, whether Corn or Fruits; discussed from
Verrius, Autumnus and Pithoeus. Juvenal's large description of the Saturnian
Age, excused. Some places anciently counted Ominous for Swarms of Bees to
settle-on; and the Reason partly showed. Framea, what weapon it was. Boiled
Meats, whether or not used in the Heroical Times; discussed from Servius,
Eustathius, Athenaeus, Wowerius and Others. Sistrum; the Name, Matter, several
Fashions, use and Mythologie of it, showed from Adrianus Junius, Antonius
Augustinus, Pignorius, Bernartius, Bossius and Pierius; but cheisly from
Apule^us and Plutarch. Nephthys, who she was. The Moon, why anciently
represented by a Cat. The Olympic Games not called so from the famous Hill
Olympus. Charta soluta, how commonly expounded; how more happily by Ru^gersius:
Reasons added to confirm his Interpretation. Acerra and Lanx; the use and
distinction of them in offering Incense. Diplois and Abolla. Gallinae filius
albae; conjectures about the Original of the Proverb. Alba, used for Felicia; a
probable reason for it. A Silver Goose, according to some, said to be hang'd-up
in the Capitol. Pygmies; the Name and Fable of them. Some extraordinary Dwarfs
mentioned by Nicephorus and Platerus. The Temple of Apollo's Oracle, described
by Strabo. The Picture of Apollo's Trivet, presented from Du Choul. A Cock, by
the Ancient Heathen esteemed as a most acceptable Sacrifice to their Deities.

1.THe false Praetor's urne. -- Improba quamvis Gratia fallacis Praetoris
vicerit urnam. In this excellent Satyr the Poet comforts his friend Calvinus,
who, having committed a good sum of money to the trust of a supposed friend,
was deceived by him. Now amongst the contents, which he puts him in mind of,
one and that an especial one is, that no such deceiver scapes the scourge of
his own Conscience, though he may, sometimes prevail so far, as to avoid the
Censure of Law by Mastering the Praetor's urne, that is, by corrupting the
Praetor, or Judge of the Cause. Wherein he implies the manner of the Roman
Trials at Law; for the Ordering whereof there was a Praetor, unto whom, as
assistants, were appointed many Judges, whose names being written on little
balls, were by the Praetor cast into an urne, and being there shaken together,
the Praetor drew out again, as in a Lottery, so many as were by Law, according
to the nature of the Cause, accountted fit and necessary. After which the
plaintiff and desendant had power to reject, upon good exceptions, such as they
thought would be but enemies to the cause: in which case the number appointed
was fill'd-up by a new drawing of other names out of the urne. This being done
the Judges appointed and which accepted of the trouble (for in some cases they
were allowed their excuse) took an oath to judge according to the Law: but on
diverse occasions others were often substituted for them by the Praetor.
Likewise after the Pleading of the Cause the Praetor gave to eac^^ of the
Judges three waxen Tables, wherein were expressed so many several opinions; in
one being written the Letter, A, to signify the acquittal or Absolution of the
Defendant: ^n another the letter, C, to imply his Condemnation and in the third
the letters, NL. for Non tiquet, signifying-that the business required a
farther hearing, as being as yet not clear enough; which delay of the cause was
called Ampliation. Then did the Judges, being called-upon, express their
Opinions by the Tables, which they chose to cast into the Urne; and, according
to the consent of the major part of their Opinions, the Praetor pronounced
Sentence. In which many turns of the business acted, by the Praetors there was
room enough for a bribe to slip-in; as Lovy notes ( Lib. 42.) in the case of
Popilius, when Licinius was Praetor: who after a second hearing of the Cause,
upon importunate soliciting, put it off to another day of hearing, on which,
new Magistrates were to come-in, that so he himself might avoid the giving of
Sentence. In which point of Antiquity, I may only add, that whereas it is often
implied that the names of the Judges were written upon balls, as the learned
Dempster on Rosinus (lib. 9.) shows out of Propertius (lib. 4. Eleg. 12.)
according to Passeratius his exposition, as also out of Asconius Paedianus: yet
there were also upon occasion other Lots used by the Praetor of different
matter and form; as may appear from the Fragments of some old Laws published
and Entitled, Leges and Senatus Consulta, quae; in veteribus cum ex Eapide, tum
ex. aere monumentis reperiuntur: in one of which are these words, -- IS.
PRAETOR. SORTICOLAM. UNAM. BUXEAM. LONGAM. DIGITOS. IIII LA -- I omit the rest,
this being sufficient to point-out some variety. And here we may briefly take
notice, that whereas, the Poet presently adds another comfort to his friend, by
implying that the People thought hainously of the Late or fresh wrong done unto
him, -- recenti de Scelere; Rutgersius (in his Var. Lection. lib. 2. cap. 17.)
doubts, if it should not be written, -- retenti. de scelere, meaning, depositi
abnegati ac non redditi. Which for the wit of the Conjecture I mention, rather
then approve, as being without copy, and also less expressive, the Poet setting
out the kind of the offense both in the very next words -- and fidei violatae
crimine? and also sufficiently throughout the Satyr: whereas in the word
recenti, he speaks, methinks, more pertinently, as a Seasonable comforter, that
begins the cure, whiles the wound is fresh.

2. -- These Our last Times, Our Age is worse then the Ir'n one: -- Nona atas
agitur, pejoraque Secula ferri Temporibus, etc. -- The Poet comforting his
friend remembers him of his old age, as that he is now threescore, being born
in Fonteius his Consulship. (implying that he himself writ this in the second
year of Adrian) and that therefore he should be able by the meet use of Life
(vita magistra) that is, by Experience without the precepts of Philosophy to
appease his sorrow: considering that honest men were now as few, as the Gates
of Thebes not that in Egypt, as here some mistake, mentioned Sat. 15. v. 6. for
that had a hundred Gates; but that in Baeotia, which had but seven gates, as
Lubin notes. And this the Poet intimater in what he suta^^y adds, character
number was as small, as the Mouths of Nillis, which likewise were but Seven.
Then does he declame against his own Times, an Age, as he says, worse then that
of Iron, and so could not by the name of any metal be called bad enough: and
therefore he seems to call it, as many think, the Ninth Age; the common copies
having it here, Nona aetas agitur. But it much troubles the Interpreters;
Brilannic^^ by Fancy expounding it thus: that whereas by a traditional
opinion-thor^ were usually reckon^ four Ages, named from Gold, Silver, Brass
and Iron, this age was not only worse, but worse then twice so bad, as that of
Iron. That of Iron then being the fourth Age, and one twice as bad, being by
supposition the eight age, it must follow that one worse then twice so bad,
must be called the Ninth Age: But methinks this is but fancy, being more then
the Po^t^eilds, who only says, that (...) worse then. Iron, pejo^aque secula
ferri Temporibus: and therefore according to the sorce of these words, and the
received opinion, he could properly call it but the Fifth age. For though he
adds, that it had a name from no metal, it will not follow, that though there
were more then four metals, there were therefore eight. But Lubin expounds it
more plainly, saying that the Poet reckons here the number of the Ages, not
after the Roman but the Grecian manner; and so accordingly reckons-up eight
metals, namely Gold, Silver, Electrum. (a mixture of Gold and Silver) Brass,
Copper; Lead, Tin, Iron: and so by consequence the age worse then Iron, must
be the Ninth age; which as he says, may be called Terrea or Lutea; besides,
says he, of simple numbers the Ninth is the Last. In which reckoning he is fain
to strain to make the metals reach to eight; electrum being but taken upon
courtesy, and Copper being but a kind of brass, as Cyprium. (and so called,
Cuprum) a Brass which they have in Cyprus. Besides, methinks, it is a against
the Poet himself, who in the beginning of the Sixth Satyr intimates the number
of the ages, and after the ordinary Roman manner: and therefore it is not
likely, that he would now here imply it after another so different a manner.
They then that shall dislike this Reading, which is so liable to suspicion, may
take that of Pithoeus, Nunc aetas agitur; and avoid the foresaid difficulty.
For indeed though Lubin makes hard shift to make-up the number of the metals,
yet I think it but a shift; as it may appear by his placing ferrum last of all,
and by his telling us, that ferrum metallorum ultimum: which he but added to
help his exposition, because the Poet said that it was worse then Iron, and the
Ninth. But he might have remembered, that in the fixed Satyr, where the Poet
mentions the Ages by the metals, he does not make such a distance between the
Silver and the Iron ages, saying Omne alind, crimen mox ferrea protulit aetas:
where the word mox shows that it was not long after; whereas Lubin makes no
less then five ages, according to the number of so many metals, between the
Silver and Iron ages. According therefore to Pithaeus his Reading, Naa aetas
agitur, I choose to render it, These our Times, Our age, is worse then the Ir'n
one --. And if the Plenty of the expression in the several words, aetas,
secula, and tempora used here should seem an overplus, the sharper sight of the
Critic may peradventure discern some difference between them, taking eatas for
the ordinary age of 60 or 70 years, and secula for 100 years, as often they are
taken; and tempora for a larger and indefinite time, to show the diffused
corruption of times and manners. But I leave this moderate defense to the
civility of the Reader's judgment.

3. -- E're Saturn forced to fly, Did use the Rustic since, his crown laid by.
-- Priusquam sumeret agrestem posito diademate falcem. Juvenal shows here the
vileness and vanity of his times, in that the greatest part being very bad,
others that were better, were yet so silly, as to wonder at lewd actions, nay,
to cry out as loud, as the followers of one Fessidius a Lawyer, who, it seems,
was an arrogant and crafty companion, ordering his business so, that his
followers usually at his pleadings made an impudent, loud, and flattering
applause, in hope of the Sportuld to be bestowd by him. But then more tartly he
quips Calvinus, telling him that he were very young (though threescore) and so
worthy to wear the bosse, the mark of childhood, (of which see Persius, Sat.
5.) if he were so simple as to think, that when men offered at the Altars of
the Gods, making them red with the blood of their sacrifice, some Deity were
there present to take notice of their devotion. Which the Poet speaks not as
his own belief, but by way of Satyr, to express the common Atheism of those
Times. Indeed, thus innocent, thus simple they were once; but it was in the
golden age, in Saturn's first days, before he was glad to fly into Latium,
being expelled from the Kingdom of Creet by his Son Jupiter: it was in the age
when Jupiter was yet a babe, and hidden from his father in the Caves of Mount
Ida, in Creet: it was when there was yet no Hebe, no Ganymede, no Nectar,
Vulcan, Atlas; no Neptune, who, (as Homer has it, Iliad. 15.) was by Lot made
ruler of the Sea, as Pluto was of Hell, and Jupiter of Heaven. In that innocent
age, says he, age was respected before wealth; and even a poor man, if ancient,
nay, if but bearded; had such reverence showed him, that rich men's children did
rise up unto him, though their fathers had at home greater heaps of acorns, and
more strawbetries, than the poor man had. For in such provisions of food did
their wealth then consist; the truest Reading here being fraga, not (as
Britannicus has it) farra, as Pithaus notes, saying, that he marvels why the
critics did here so long read Plura demi farra. For when the Scholiast says on
these words farruta catino, in the 11th. Satyr, ver. 109. qui cibus primus
antiquorum fuit, Pithoeus expounds it by Latinorum and Romanorum, and then
adds, Primus Hominum fraga and glandes. Yet Autumnus would not here read fraga,
because, says he, fragorum acervos cusiodiri non potest: which exception,
though it seems pretty, yet I think it but like an heap of strawberties, it
will not last; First of all, because this is more than the Poet implies; who
names, I grant, glandis acervos, not fragorum, saying only plura fraga, not
heaps of strawberries, as Autumnus aggravates it, though plenty of them; which
in great families, such as were in that multiplying age, needed not to be long
kept. Secondly, because according to the opinion of the Greeks and Romans,
according to whose traditions we must here speak, the food in the golden age
was such as grew wildly of it self, which will infer, that then they had not
farra, according to the instructions of aftertimes. For though Autumnus urges
Verrius, saying, Antiqui trecentis annis farve vixerunt, yet Antiqui there, as
Pithoeus notes, must not in general be meant of Homines, but fink to a latter
time, and be understood of Latini and Romani. Lastly, because an inconvenience
would follow, if we read farra; for then to what purpose should he have added,
glandis acervos? the use of acorns being contemned upon the invention of fowing
corn as, I remember, Jevenal himself witnesses in the 14th. Satyr; where
having in the person of the old Marfians, and of others, said panem quaramus
dratro, he add; a little after, (verse. 184; and 185.) -- grata post mun^s
arista, Continguat ^^^^es ve^urii, ^aftidia quercus, Thus then, though farra,
were the first food of the Letines, yet strawberries and acorns, and such like
(according to the Heathens Traditions.) were the first food of Mankind; and so,
their food in the Saturnian or Golden Age here described at large; yea, so
largely, that some are large in the reprehension of it, counting it too
excessive. And surely, I could not but approve, their Censure, as very
accurate; if I conceived the Poet to intend no more than they conceive he does,
that is, a bare description of the golden age: but I guess the Poet's intent to
be like the nature of his work, satirical; according to which purpose he maked
a large recital of the many follies in he Roman Theology, intending so the
rather by their Multitude and Vanity, particularly to expose them to the secret
derision of severer judgments.

4. Or Bees like a long grape-bunch settle on some Temple's top. -- Examenve
apium longa consederit ava Culmine-delubri. -- The Poet, in the reprehension of
his Times, says, that it was a wonder, if one that was trusted with a purse of
money, restored the purse, with all the coin now grown rusty. Nay, such
honesty, says he, were a prodigy, which might require the Aruspices to search
all the books of their Art (which they first learned of the Tascans) that so
they might both know what it portended, as also how to take order to make due
expiation for it, as by sacrificing a lamb adorned with a garland, as the
manner was. He professes indeed, that he accounted an honest man as rare a
wonder, as Fish unexpectedly turned up by some husband-man's wondering plow
(miranti aratro;) or like a Mule, which naturally being barren, should yet
become fruitful; or like a swarm of bees, which should settle in the form of a
bunch of grapes, upon some Temple. For uva is not here to be taken properly,
for a grape, but for borrus, or racemus, a cluster of grapes: since a swarm
does not settle in the fashion of a grape, which is round; but in the fashion
of a bunch of grapes, which is long, and smaller at one end. Yet this is not
the thing which is here pointed out, this being the nature and custom of bees:
but the wonder here intended, and therefore to be noted, to prevent mistake, is
not in the form, but in the place of their settling; it being accounted ominous,
in the Roman superstition, for Bees to settle on the top of an House, or of a
Temple; as Pliny tells us, lib. 11. cap. 7. or upon an Altar, or on the Ensign
in an Army, as it happened to Pompey before the Pharsalian battle; or on Ships,
as it happened to Dion, as Plutarch relates; or in a Camp, as it befell Brutus.
See Tiraquell on Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 13. And though sometime these
accidents were with good success, yet usually they were accounted dismal. Some
reason of which superstitious opinion seems to be implied by Platarch in his
Dion: who, as he relates, seeing bees about his Ship, made to his friends this
pretry and sad interpretation, that he did fear his affairs would prove like
bees, whose labor, though honest, did yet after a little flourishing come
quickly to an end, and to their own ruin. Since then, says the Poet to
Calvinus, that Honesty is so monstrous, why do thou to cry out, specially
thy loss being but ten sestertia, that is, 78 l. 21. 6 d. whereas,
peradventure, another, says he, loses 200 sestertia, that is, 1562 l. 10 s. and
a third, peradventure, conceals his loss of a far greater sum?

5. -- And my boild son's head, -- nati Sinciput clini. -- To express the
confident, and so the detestable perjury of those times, the Poet recites the
various things, by which they would dare to swear: amongst which is reckoned
Mars his framea; which was a German weapon, by Isidore taken for a Sword; by
others for a Spear, or the like. It is described by Tacitus, de Moribus
Germanerum; of whom he says, Rari gladiis aut majoribus lanceis utuntur, hastas
vel ipsorum vocabulo frameas gerunt, angasto and brevi ferro, sed ita acri and
ad usum habili, ut codem telo, prout rutio poscit, vel cominus vel eminus
pugnent. So that a Sword it was not, as Lipsius also notes on that place; but
rather a javelin ( spiesse, says Lipsins.) The Poet adds, how that such
Perjurers, if they had children, did not fear to wish unto themselves, that if
they were guilty, the miseries of Thyestes might happen to them; that is, that
their dear sons might be murdered, and instead of food, be served up to them
with Pharian, that is, Egyptian vinegar, which was noted for the special
sharpness of it, as by Martial, and likewise by Athenans, lib. 2. cap. 26. and
here added as an ironical aggravation. Where we may farther observe, (though
the Commentators take no notice of it) that the Poet says nati elixi, the head
of his boiled son: which may be the rather observed, because it was a great
quarrel amongst the ancient. Grammarians, whether or not in the Heroical times,
they did eat boiled meats as well as roasted. Servius on that of Virgil, Aeacid.
lib. 1. Abena locant alii, holds that they did eat no boiled meats: but
Eustathius upon that of Homer, Odyss. K. (...), concludes that they did eat
both sorts. So likewise Athenans, Deipnosoph. lib. 1. and Johannes Wowerius in
his Polymathia, cap. 10. wherein, being of the later opinion, and making this
difference, the roasted meats were for the better sort, and the boiled for the
poorer (which, without a suit, will be granted:) He gives this reason; because
boild meats commonly require sauce; and therefore, as a wantonness and
delicacy, they were not fit for famour persons, who were to be content with
more ready food. Which reason I leave to the judgment of the Reader's palate:
but that in those times boild meats were in use, and at the tables of the
poorer sort, he shows from Ovid. Metam. 8. at the poor supper of Baucis and
Philemon, Yet he observes, and acknowledges, that boild meats also were used by
the great ones of those times, at their Tragical and cruel feasts; as by diverse
testimonies he there shows. Unto which this of Juvenal, omitted by him, may not
unfitly be added, the Poet expressly saying, nati elixi; as also that of
Persius, Sat. 5. -- Si quibus olla Thyestae Fervebit, as sufficiently also
implying the same in the word, Olla.

6. -- And with angry timbrell blast my sight. -- Et irato feriat mea lumina
fistro. Some, says the Poet, think there are no gods; Others believe there are,
yet dare desperately forswear, when they come to the temples, where, according
to the custom, they touch the altars of the gods, while they swear, (which
custom is touched by Alex. ab. Alex. Genesis Dier. lib. 5. cap. 10. near the
beginning; and there also noted by Tiraquell, out of Justin, lib. 24.) Nay,
says he, some desperately say with themselves, Let Isis with her timbrel strike
me blind (not properly with the sistrum it self, but with its invisible power,
with a blite) for my perjury, or plague me with other diseases, what care I, so
that I still keep the money, which I forswear? In which passage he implies both
the common belief at that time, that Isis could and did punish some for their
offenses (as Persius likewise intimates, Sat. 5.) and also the instrument used
in the celebration of the Rites of Isis, the Sistrum: which, because
Antiquaries have with some difference described, it may be both instructive and
delightful to consider it. It was then an Instrument commonly used by men, yet
sometimes also by women, according to that of Virgil concerning Cleopatra,
(Aeneid. lib. 8.) Regina in mediis patrio vocat agmina sistro; and that also of
Lucan concerning her. ( lib. 10) Terruit illa suo, si fas, Capitolia sistro. It
was sometimes also used in War, as now the trumpet: nor did only the Priests of
Isis use it. but also Isis her self was described with it. The picture of Isis,
with her sistrum, is by Hieronymus Bossius, de Sistro, p. 22. from some ancient
coins of Adrian set forth unto us thus. * AEGYPTOS

figurative representation of Egpyt: a woman reclining with one hand in a fruit
basket, holding a sistrum in the other, with an isis bird On the one side the
Emperor was expressed; on the other, this here presented, which is Egypt in
form of a woman sitting, and leaning with her left hand and arm on a little
basket full of diverse fruits, holding in her right hand a sistrum of an Oval
form, with an handle. At the foot of Egypt is a square basis, on which stood
the small bird Ibis; Aegyptos being written above, and SC (for Senatus
Consulto) below. Which coin was made in memory of Adrian's passage through
Judaea into Egypt, as Dion witnesses in his life. Which expression being from
an ancient coin, may sufficiently resute the opinion of Adrianus Junius, who in
his Nomenclat. cap. de Musicis Instrumentis, number. 245. thinks that the sistrum
was of a triangular form, with little rings upon each side, as Bossius
expresses it, p. 32. which being struck with a small iron-rod, yielded a shrill
sound. Indeed, the most examined and received etymology of the word, according
to Turnebus and some others, is from (...), to shake (and, as some think, to
strike) because, being shaken in the hand, it gave a shrill sound, being
usually made of shrill metals, as brass, or iron, though sometimes of gold or
silver. Yet, though Bossius dislikes the triangular form, he thinks
notwithstanding, that this also was some Egyptian device; Egypt being
anciently, from the form of it, called () and therefore figured out by the bird
Ibis: from the end of whose bill, if one suppose a line drawn to her feet, she
does express a triangle, and so by way of Hierogliphick, not unfitly Egypt; as
Pierius Valerianus shows, lib. 17. cap. de Aegypto; for which cause some have
called that instrument, Deltoton. But the right and common fashion of the
Sistrum, is that before presented from Adrian's coin; being, for the outward
compass of it, much like a racket, with three or four plates of metal passing
like strings from the one side to the other. After which fashion it is
described from ancient marbles by the learned Antonius Augustinus, lib. 3.
Icon. and approved by De la Cerda upon Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 8. and a like
expression of it in picture Pignorius has, de Servis, p. 88. yet, though this
be a true expression of it, we may add, that there are some more full; as is
that so delightfully presented in picture, from an Italian pattern, by my
worthy friend Dr. Price, in his learned and diligent Notes upon Apuleius his
Apology, p. 30. In which expression the breadth of the compassing band is
rightly described, being like a soldiers belt; as also, upon the top of the
sistrum, a cat is presented with the face of a Woman. But (to go a little
farther) Bossius p. 44. most applauds another form, which he figures from old
Roman Monuments; the compassing plate or band whereof being shaken and so
struck by the crooked ends of the rods of metal passing from side to side
yielded a shrill sound. And he does the rather approve of this form, because
Johannnes Bernartius (whom he therefore highly praises) has thus described it
in his Scholia on the 9th. of Statius his Thebaid. in these words, Erat sistrum
crepitaculum, cujus per angustam laminam in modum baltei recurvatam trajectae
medio pauculae virgulae, crispante brachio tergeminos ictus, reddunt argutum
sonum. Which description does so please Bossius, that he adds this praise of
it, Non profecto poterat paucioribus illud dici de virgis sistri, quod adhuc
nemo, ut vidistis, observavit aut dixit. Which words if he had not added, the
matter had been well enough: but to say, that no man observed it or said so
before, is strange; and the rather, because Ecssius himself might have observed
it in an author, which he read concerning this purpose. For, Apuleius, lib. 11.
Metam. has these words, Dextera quidem ferebat aereum crepitaculum, cujus per
angustam laminam in modum baltei recurvatam, trajectae mediae paucae virgulae
crispante brachio tergeminos jactus reddebant angustum sonorem. Thus the elogie
is due to Apuleius, nothing being added, but the word sistrum. Besides, though
ictus, as Bernartius has it, (and likewise Suarez Salazar, in his Antiguedades
Gaditanas) express a truth, in respect of the plates, that hit the sides of the
sistrum; yet jactus does more fully agree with crispante, implying the swindge
or circling motion of the arm in shaking the sistrum to make it musical. But as
for the figure it self, I approve it as the most perfect, which I have seen;
The upper part whereof is made into three angles, whereas that on Adrian's coin
was more perfectly oval: which differences we may suppose to have been but
voluntary, and so both expressions to be true. But in this last upon the
uppermost angle is placed not only the head and ears of a cat with the face of
a Woman, but close under it is an (...) or circle; then (according to Turnebus,
Fierius and others) on the rightside angle is expressed Isis, and on the left,
Nephthys. Of which last, Pignorius makes some mention in his Mensa Isiaca. fol.
35. where he says, that the Melilote, which grew by Nilus, and of which they
made chaplets to adorn Osyris, was called the herb of Osyris and Nephthys.
Nephthys then was the sister of Isis, as Ludovicus Carrio shows in his
Emendations, lib. 2. cap. 19. out of Julius Firmicus, de Errore profanarum
Religionum, saying of Isis, adhibuit sibi Nephthuni sororem sociam; where
Carrio reads it, Nephthym, and rightly proves it from Plutarch, de Iside and
Osiride. This expression has also three plates passing from side to side. But
now if these additions to the sistrum may seem too much different from that on
the coin, Bossius his conjecture may serve for answer; who think that these
particulars could not be discerned on the coin, by reason of the great
antiquity of it; so that, it seems, they were worn-out. In which darkness of
Egyptian Theology, Pierius (lib. 28. cap. de rerum vicissitudine) and before
him Plutarch (lib. de Iside and Osyride) have wittily thus struck fire. The Cat
in the highest part signifies the Moon, and the Circle under her implies this
our sublunary world subject to the Moon, and so to continual alterations. And
very aptly was the Moon represented by a Cat, it being a Creature, that does
most exercise it self in the night; and also in respect of her fruitfulness;
bringing forth (as some observers of nature teach; the truth of which I leave
to their proof) in the whole time of her Life and Kitning, at the first one
kitten, the next time two, and so till the seventh time, at which she brings
seven, and then ceases; but Damascius (in Phorius) says, she brings seven the
first time, six the next and so decreases: but so, that her young ones make in
all, 28; as many as the days, in which the Moon finishes her course. The face
of a Woman added to the Cat, signified that, though there were many Mutations
in the world, they were yet ordered and tempered not without Reason and
Counsel. The figures of Isis and Nephthys signified the birth and death of
Creatures, or the alterations and motions of them. The Rods, that passed
through it, were sometimes three, to show, that all things were done in Number,
weight and Measure; sometimes four, to imply the four Elements, of which the
things in the lower world consist. And lastly the shaking or wheeling-about of
the Sistrum did more apparently express the Motion and Agitation of humane
affairs.

7. -- Why else, Vow -- scrowles Removed, falls our free incense on thy coals?
-- Aut cur In carbone tuo charta pia thura soluta, Ponimus --? The Poet
speaking-on in the language of the coveteous Atheists of those times, says,
what are all the plagues, which the Gods commonly in this life inflict, in
comparison of money? True it is, that Ladas was famous for his swiftness of
foot, but the poor fellow would have been glad to have had the rich gout, or
else for certain he wanted a sound brain, and either was fit to have been sent
to Anticyra, where he might have had Hellebore good store, to have purged his
brain from madness, or to have been committed to the famous Archigenes, no
meaner a Physician being equal to such a Cure. For, alas, what was it to win
the Race, and having a hungry belly, to be rewarded with Fame and a Garland of
an Olive Branch? For, such was the manner near Pisa in Elis, where in a large
field called Olympia, as Britannicus notes; the Olympic Games were celebrated,
and called so from Jupiter Olympicus, who had a Temple near adjoining, where
also say some was a hill called Olympus, but not the famous Hill Olympus, as
some have mistaken, this being between Thessaly and Macedonia: but the Games
were celebrated in Peloponesus, in the South of Greece. Our Poet goes on
saying, that thus do your perjured persons please themselves; nay, and are so
bold in forswearing, that by their mere confidence they seem innocent; like the
Mimick, who in Catullus his play called Phasma (or, the vision) represents a
runaway servant vexing his Master, nay provoking him, that the lewd servant
himself may be brought to quit himself by his Oath, cheerfully purposing to be
perjured. A pretty story to this purpose is that in Herodotus, and aptly here
alleged by Lubin, of one Archetimus, who being on a journey and to travail
farther, left with his host Cydi^^ a great sum of gold: which being
called-for by him at his return, was denied, the host offering to clear himself
by Oath. Which when he was to take at the time appointed, he came into the
Temple with a staff in his hand, pretending sickness; and whiles he was to
swear, he praid Archetimus to hold his staff for him. Then, with his hands
lifted up to heaven, he did confess, that he had received such a sum of gold,
but swore that he had restored it. At which word, in a vehement passion,
Archetimus, that saw himself thus sworn out of his money, hurled down the staff
with such indignation and violence, that it brake, (being a cane) and the sum
of gold, which was arti^cially contrived into it, did, by divine providence,
discover at once both it self and the fraud. Which story in effect, with a
little variation, is in the fable of Don Quixot; where the curious Author
Michael Cervantes makes Sancho Panca, whom he presents for an Idiot, and upon a
time, the decider of such a controversy, to command the staff to be broken,
thus artributing the singularity of the discovery, not to that way of
providence mentioned by the Historian, but to the strange illuminations of the
soul, which are, as he purposes to conclude, bestowd at certain seasons even on
madmen. The variety does a little help to excuse the borrowing without
acknowledgment in such a work of professed invention: and indeed, his admirable
and plentiful wit might have omitted it, but that his Ancestors, Virgil, and
such others, hearten their posterity as well to borrow, as to imitate. But our
Poet going on, says, that such perjuries make many men, who thus lose their
money, to lose almost their wits also: for this, says he, makes thee likewise,
Calvinus, to cry out like Stentor, who could cry as loud as 50 men; or like
Mars when wounded by Diomedes, as loud as ten thousand men (as even the Poet
Homer tell us, Iliad. 5.) and it makes thee to say to Jupiter, Hold'st thou thy
peace at these crimes, suffering us to be thus abused by Perjury? Is it for
this, that we bring our Incense and Sacrifices to thee? For ought I see then,
there is no difference between thy statue and the statue of Bathyllus. In the
close of which passage there is one special doubt, in those words of our Poet,
-- aut cut In carbone two charta pia thura soluta Ponimus? Where, according to
the exposition of the Interpreters, charta soluta, is taken for the paper, in
which, say they, the frankincense was tied up, when it was brought for an
offering to the Temple: according to which sense it might be rendered, -- From
paper-rowls why else falls our free incense on thy coals? But when I first read
this Author, I was not satisfied with that exposition of charta soluta: but at
last meeting with Ru^gersius his Var. Lection. I found, lib. 5. cap. 5. that
his happy wit guessed at another meaning, making it to be an allusion to that
custom, which is before touched, Sat. 9. Illustrat. 13. of fixing with wax
their vows written in paper, to the knees of their gods. According to which,
the Poet would then here mean, why else do we, when we remove, or take away our
fixed scrowls of paper (wherein our vows are written) from the knees of the
Gods, bring, instead of them, the offerings themselves, which we have vowed; as
Incense, a Calf's liver, and an hog's cawl? Which exposition I believing to be
the better, do accordingly render it, -- Why else Vow-scrowls Removed, falls
our free incense on thy coals? But, because Rutgersius, though he largely shows
the custom of fixing, removing, and performing vows, yet only affirms, that he
believes it to be here alluded to, I think it necessary, since I choose his
opinion, to show what motives induced me to it. First then, the common
exposition seems trivial and superfluous; for, had it not been enough to say,
Why do we bring our incense, but to mention such a petty, yea, a ridiculous
circumstance, saying, why do we open our papers, and thence pour our incense on
your coals? But, secondly, to suppose that they brought their incense to the
Altars in papers, and thence sprinkled in into the fire, is far below the state
of sacred provisions, such as were needful for all occasions, in the service of
the Gods, who might not be served, even in the superstition of those times,
with such mercenary and unhallowed appurtenances. Lastly, to speak from
Antiquity, there was no such matter, as the bringing of their incense in papers
to the altars; there being, for that purpose, an incense- pan, called acerra,
mentioned by Persius, Sat. 2. which was commonly for the poorer sort; out of
which they took a few grains, with three of their fingers, or sometimes with
two: yet sometimes the rich also used the acerra, which then was filled; and so
they poured the incense into the fire. But properly the Lanx (or, Charger) was
for the use of the Rich: according to which size and plenty, Datis, one of the
Governors under Darius, poured on the Altar of Apollo 300 pound weight of
incense, as Herodotus relates it, lib. 6. But it is enough only to mention this
point, it being largely proved by Theodorus Marcilius on Persius, Sat. 2. in
explication of those words, tacita acerra. One doubt more there is yet in this
passage of Juvenal, about Bathyllus, to whom the Gods are here jeeringly
compared, and to whom, though he was but a fool, as the Scholiast says, (by
whom the name is written, Vagellus) or rather as some think, a young and dainty
Musician, there was a statue erected by Polycrates in the Island Samos, and
placed even in the Temple of Juno. And this is the person more probably here
intended; the purpose here being not to liken the Gods to the fool Vagellus,
but more conveniently to a man vainly improved into the condition of a God,
having, as well as the Deity, a statue in a Temple. Indeed, says this abused
Creditor, there is little or no difference between them; there being no more
help or justice in the occasions and necessities of life, to be expected from
the one than from the other.

8. In this case no man feigns. -- Nemo dolorem Fingit in hoc casu. -- Thou
have need, I see, says the Poet to his friend, of some good advice to arm thee
with patience against this present grief: and, it may be, mine may serve,
though I am no Philosopher either of the sort of the Cynicks or Stoics, who
differ rather in their clothes, than in their opinions, Both despising Riches,
but the Cynicks wearing Two cloaks, as some say, the Stoics but One; So Horace
also says [concerning the Cynick, Epist. ad Scavam] quem duplici panno
patientia velat. Which double cloak is by some thought to be the diplois and
Aboll^, as others call it; the first use whereof is by D. Laertius attributed
to Antisthenes. As for the opinions of the Interpreters of this passage, the
Scholiast says, that the Cynick did not wear the [ pallium, or] cloak. But
Lubin says he wore duplex pallium; by which he seems to mean, a thick one; for
he adds, that the Stoic wore tenui, a thin one. Between which extremities the
learned Salmasius says, that the Cloak [without a coat] was the wear of the
Cynick; the Coat [or, tunica] the wear of the Stoic, as also of other
Philosophers, and generally of the Grecians: so that the sense of the Poet
briefly is, The Stoic differs from the Cynick but by the Coat [this being the
wear of the Stoic, and not of the Cynick.] To which, if we add the particular
kind of the Cynick's cloak, I think the exposition will be clear and right.
Now, though, says the Poet, I am none of Epicurus his sect, or such a rare
Physician, as to cure the affections of the mind, when grown desperate: yet
thou being not so dangerously distempered, not only a less Artist, but even a
mean one, such a one as the unskilful Physician Philippus, nay, as his ruder
Scholar, will serve to give order for the letting of thee blood: and so my poor
skill, that pretends not to Philosophy, will serve to advise Thee. And surely,
says he, if thy case be without example, then will I permit thy Grief to be
without example; for the loss of money, men weeping indeed; not as they do at
Funerals: but if thy case be Ordinary, then let thy Grief be Ordinary. In which
expression, when the Poet says, concerning the weeping for lost money, --
majore tumultu Planguntur nummi, quam funera, adding, according to the common
copies, -- nemo dolorem fingit in hoc casu, referring it to the loss of money,
[in which case no man feigns:] Jacobus Scegkius [in his Praemess. Epist. 5.]
would have it, Nemo dolores Fundit in hoc casu, referring it to the last part,
the loss of friends at funerals; at which, says he, no man pours out true
sorrow, but is content only for fashion-sake, to rent the skirt of his raiment,
as they do, who, before a Judge, show also their naked bodies, and the skars of
the wounds which they have received, when they would move compassion; and thus
are they content at a funeral with an hypocrisy of sorrow; but Money is lost
not without true tears. Which exposition is very apt, if we consider the
opposition of the parts of the speech; and may be a little helped by one
Manuscript, which instead of in hoc casu has in occasu, and in another it is
expounded by in occasu amici, in the fall, or death of a friend. Yet the common
way setting forth both the pretended sorrow at funerals, and the true sorrow
for loss of money, this exposition also of Scegkius being founded on
Conjecture, rather than Copy, we may without loss or trouble retain the first.

9. Sure you are the chick of some white Hen unmatched, etc. -- Quia tu
Gallinae silius albae, etc. If all Courts, says the Poet to his friend, he
filled with like complaints; and, though at the sealing of bonds (or, tables of
wood waxed over) the Creditor and witnesses have read them often to prevent
mistake and falsehood, men shall yet deny their handwriting and Seal, men of
such quality, that they have their seal cut in a rich Sardonix, and as choisly
kept; would thou be exempt from such abuses? would thou be singular, like
the chick of some white hen, and shall we forsooth be but as some brood hatched
of crows eggs? And yet, alas, what are these wrongs to those which our
Temple-robbers commit, stealing away plates of gold from the statues of the
Gods, or sometimes a Crown bestowd by some King? or sometimes a whole statue of
gold, which they secretly melt? Or, what are those facts to those of
parricides, or to the many crimes which are daily heard by Rutilius Gallicus,
the City-Judge, (or, praefectus urbis, under Domitian) of whom Statius says,
Quem penes intrepidae mitis custodta Romae. In which passage we need only touch
that proverbial speech Gallinae filius albae; about the Original whereof
Coelius secundut Curio notes out of Erasmus a double reason: the One, that by
the Latins, Happy things were called white, as Dies-albi, and albo lapillo
notati, and so, in Virgil, Daphnis, that is Deified, is, according to some,
called by him, candidus: the other from the History of Galba, as it is in
Sueton, in his Life, cap. 1. where he makes mention of an Eagle, which soaring
over the head of Livia, a little after her marriage with Augustus, let fall
into her lap a white hen with a Laurelbranch in her bill: which hen being by
her appointment kept, became so fruitful, that the place where this happened
(in the Country) was called villa ad Gallinas. Yet he observes, that Columella
de Re Rustica, lib. 8. cap. 2. says, that white hens are not fruitful, as being
but faint and short-lived, and by their color being more subject to be made a
prey. Lubin thinks it to be perchance an allusion to Leda's eggs, which, the
fable says, she laid after she was turned into a swan by Jupiter. For which
last conjecture, it must ask leave to have gallina taken for a swan; and, as
for the story of the white hen in Sueton, it is probable, that the proverb was
more ancient; besides, not the fruitfulness, but the daintiness of the hen is
here aimed at. Wherefore, I think Erasmus his first reason to be most probable:
which yet does show rather That white things were usually counted happy, than
why they were counted so; which probably may be thought to have been for the
natural similitude between whiteness and Light, which, by the secret power of
nature, so affects with cheerfulness both the body and mind. That which follows
concerning nati infelicibus ovis, is on the contrary aptly understood of crows
eggs, or the like. We may here a little farther take notice, that the Author of
the Manuscript Commentary, takes Custos Gallicus for a goose, saying, that a
silver-goose was hung up in the Capitol, in remembrance, that it was once
delivered from the Gauls by the warning of Geese; and moreover, that the daily
complaints were brought to the Capitol, and so by consequence and a jeer, that
they might be said to be heard by the Goose. Indeed, somewhat a like flout
Juvenal uses, Sat. 1. in that passage, -- Jurisque peritus Apollo, jeeringly
implying, that the statue of Apollo, which was at the Pleading place, could now
plead a cause; but this mirth concerning Apollo's statue is raised upon a true
statue. But the exposition of custos gallicus for a goose, is exploded as
absurd, by Britannicus, though he mentions not any silver-goose. Yet there was
a silver statue of a goose kept in the Capitol, in remembrance of the
deliverance of it by Geese, from Brennus, as appears by the description of the
8th. Region of the City. But, notwithstanding this truth, the Scholiast is less
extravagant, saying, that Praefectus vigilum is here called Custos Gallicus, as
being a Magistrate instituted after that the Gauls had taken the Capitol. But
the first acception, of Rutilius Gallicus for the name of one that was
praefectus urbis, is the most sober exposition, as neither making nor deserving
a jest.

10. -- The Pygmie-Warrier runs to fight in his dwarf-armour --. Pygmaeus
parvis curris bellator in armis. Why, says the Poet to his friend, should
thou wonder at things common, such as cousenage and perjury are? For, no man
wonders in the Alpet at a swollen throat, it happening alike to all (through the
loathsome waters, which they drink, as Vitruvius says); or at Meroe in the
confines of Egypt, at a breast usually as big, as the child that suck's it (as
Mela dares report); or in Germany, at their azure eyes and curled locks like
horns; or at the Pygmies, who being but one foot high (as some size them) wage
war with the Thracian fowls, the Cranes; against whom they make an expedition
every spring, riding to the Seaside, on the backs of goats and rams; and being
armed with dates, spend three months in destroying their eggs, and young ones;
to prevent their increase; unless we shall take Gellius and Solinus for Poets.
But, thou will reply, says Juvenal to his friend, Shall I not then take revenge
on such a villane, revenge that is so sweet! Why surely says the Poet again,
the best Physicians of the mind, Philosophers, are of another mind; as was the
mild Thales, and the patient and aged Socrates, who dwelt in Attica at Athens,
and so dwelt near the hill Hymettus, famous for excellent honey: who being by
his enemies condemned to death, was so far from revenge, that he did constantly
affirm him to be more wretched, who revenged a wrong, then him that offered it,
as Laertius reports. Indeed, says he, such is the virtue of Philosophy, that
by degrees it purges the Understanding from Errors, and the Will from Vices. In
which passage the Poet makes mention, though but Satyrically, according to the
ancient fictions, of the Pygmies, a nation, and in the midst of India, as
Cresias the Indian would have us believe: but the experience of travailours now
acquainted with the world, and the more prudent writers explode it; as the
Reverend and my learned friend Dr. Hakewell shows in his excellent and
delightful Apology, lib. 1. cap. 1. Sect. 5. and lib. 3. cap. 5 Sect. 4. And
as for the wars between the supposed Pygmies and the Cranes, it is not only
generally now denied, but more especially excepted against by Lubin on this
place: who says, that he understands not how the Pygmie should be snatch'd-up
by the Crane curvis unguibus (in his crooked talens) when as the Crane's
talents are not crooked. Yet this exception seems contrary to that common and
received relation of the Crane's standing sentinel by night with a stone in his
talent; which should argue the flexibleness of it. Indeed St. Basil an accurate
observer of the excellencies of nature, speaking of the Crane, in his Hexamer.
lib. 8. though he admires his vigilancie, yet mentions not the vulgar opinion.
But the learned Aldrovandus by latter experience testifies, that the talons of
the Crane are as long as a man's fingers; and therefore probably flexible, else
were they very inconvenient. Howsoever, that there have been extraordinary
dwarfs (though not a nation of Pygmies) in several ages, is not denied: we may
rather suspect the degree of reports; Nicephorus, lib. 12. Eccesiast. Histor.
cap. 37. telling of a dwarf in Egypt in the time of Theodosius, about the
bigness of a partridge, who, as he adds, lived about 20. years. Yet this
relation is of a thing ancienter then Nicephorus his own knowledge or time, by
7. or 800. years, and so he could have it but at the second hand; though
Platerus also relates of a dwarf armed with a spear in his hand, and with a
sword girt to him, and so serv'd-up in a pie at the marriage of a Duke of
Bavaria; and that when the pie was opened, the terrible jest leap'd-out. The
Cookery was the Music of the feast. But the Poet having showed the generality
of wickedness. and supposing Calvinus to wish Revenge whiles he tells him that
the ancient Philosophers, especially old Socrates (the Athenian) was of milder
affections, some tell us, that he was but forty nine years old, when he died;
urging Cicero, in his Cato Major (or, De Senectute) to warrant the assertion;
but his age is not there mentioned. If then we consult with Diogenes Laertiu^,
he tells us in his Life, from the testimony of Apollodorus, in Chronicis, that
Socrates was born in the fourth year of the 77th. Olympiad (the sixth of
Thargelion, or April) and died the first year of the 95. Olympiad. being 70.
years old. Demetrius Phalereus writes the same. But some say, he died at 60.
Either of these will agree with what Juvenal implies; but the first of these
two, best; that Socrates was an Old man. We may yet with Aldobrandious,
Annotat. 97. (in the Roman Edition) on this passage note, that if we calculate
right by these Dates of the Olympiads here mentioned, the years of Socrates
Life amount but to 68. (which Age conveniently sorts with our Poets intent)
though in stricter account it comes to as much more time, as from the sixth of
April ( Socrates his birthday) till July the 23d. from which day the Olympic
reckoning began; otherwise he had not lived to the 95. Olympiad.

11. Yet proved the Cave's word true, fit for that shrine. -- Et tamen omnem
Vocem adyti dignam templo veramque probabit. The Poet here to comfort his
friend tells him, that he never needs to desire revenge; such a plague of
conscience perpetually tormenting such perjured wretches, more terribly then
Caeditius (a cruel judge in Juvenal's time) or then Rhadamanthus, one of the
infernal judges: besides, that heaven does sometimes bring them suddenly to
destruction, as he proves by a story out of Herodotus. Who tells of one Glaucus
a Spartan, with whom a Milesian in belief of his singular honesty, left a sum
of money in trust; and that when the Sons of the Milesian came a great while
after to demand it, Glaucus staggering in his honesty, denied it and dismissed
them. Yet going to the Oracle, to know whether he should constantly deny it or
not, he received this answer; That if he did forswear the money, he might escape
for a time; but he was withal foretold, that for this lewd Purpose of Deceit,
he and all his kindred should e're long be confounded. Whereupon Glaucus called
back the Milesians and paid them the money; yet all that the Oracle foretold,
did come to pass. In which relation whiles the Poet says -- respondit Pythia
vates, and Vocem adyti dignam templo veramque probavit, Aextinctus, etc. he
implies some particulars concerning the Oracle of Apollo, who was called
Pythius, for killing in his youth (as Ovid in his Fables has it) the Python, or
Serpent, so called (...), from the putrefaction of the Earth, as sprung out of
the filth after Deucalion's flood. Now the person or Prophetess, that instead
of Apollo gave answer, was a maid, and the first that performed it, was
Phemonoe, the daughter of Apollo. The place was a Temple, in the adytum, the
most retired, secret, or strictly the inaccessible part whereof, as Strabo
describes it, was a deep and crooked cave with a mouth or entrance but
indifferently large, whence the message was thought to ascend and inspire the
Prophetess. Over the mouth of which Cave did arise a high Trivet, upon which
when the Prophetess did for the purpose ascend, she was transported with a
spirit of Divination, and so gave answers sometimes in prose, sometimes in
verse. But it will not be unpleasant to present the form of the Trivet, it
being a thing less obvious, on which was expressed a crow, as sacred to Apollo,
with the Harp also and Bays: which are thus presented by Du Choul, de la
Religion des Ancien^ Romans, p. ^9^. * medal showing Apollo's attributes of a
crow, harp and laurel tree We may add, that in Constantine's Oration, Ad
Sanctorum Coetum in Eus^bius, there is mention, cap. 18. of a Serpent also,
wrapping himself about the Trivet; and of a Diadem wherewith the Prophetess was
adorned.

12. -- Or a Cock's Crest to their Lares. -- Et laribus cristam promittere
galli Non audent. -- This perjured cozener, that has abused thee, says the Poet
to his friend, is tormented even in his dreams, whiles he thinks, that he sees
Thee in a larger shape, that is, some fury representing thee, to terrify his
conscience; it being the opinion of the Ancients, that the divine or infernal
powers did use to appear in a form larger than man's to procure Reverence or
Terror. So Sueton, in the Life of Claudius, says that Claudius his father,
Drusus, in his Rhoetian, or German expedition, prosecuted his Victories against
the enemies fiercely, even into their most secret deserts, till there appeared
to him a Barbarian woman, as to him it seemed, but of a large size, species
barbarae mulieris humana amplior: which speaking to him in Latin, forbad him to
pass any farther. Such wretches, says he, quake also at every thunder, as if it
were not from natural causes, but purposely from divine judgment. Wherein our
Author speaks but according to the general ignorance of the Heathen: for,
though it proceeds from natural causes, yet is it often the special and
illustrious instrument of the divine justice, and even in the natural man, that
is, the guilty man, strikes terror; as in that wretch Caligula, who, at the
fright of it, would run under his bed. The Poet expressed it highly, that said,
-- Et humanas motu^a tonitrua mentes; which does illustriously appear in the
divine story at the ^iving of the Law and in t^^ history of Samuel, ^^o
procured (...) purposely (...) express God's a^ger, 1 Samuel 12. v. ^8.
wherefor^, though innocent men ought not to hear it with distrust, yet ought
they to hear with sobriety of thought, as a most sensible argument of the
divine power. Indeed, says the Poet, the guilty think, Thunder, Disease, and
the like, to be the stones and darts of the Gods: wherein he speaks a truth of
others, which he thinks (not without error) to be but the error of their fear.
And this guilt of Conscience, says he, makes them, in their sickness, not dare
to come unto the Gods, though with a sacrifies: they dare not offer the comb of
a cock, through despair of the divine favor, being indeed more worthy of
death, than their own sacrifice, than any sacrifice. Nor do such commonly, says
he, escape one judgment or other; whether imprisonment or exile, or the like:
so that in the conclusion, thou will confess that the Gods are not blind, like
Tiresias the Theban (whose eyes Juno is said to have plucked out, for giving
judgment against ha^;) but that the Gods are open eyed, and do with purity
behold, and with justice punish, the foul Injustice here on earth. In which
passage, the Poet mentions the sacrificing the comb or crest of a cock: where
some note, that the cock was a sacrifice to Aesculapius after a recovery from
sickness. Yet Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 12. says, In Aesculapii sacris non
nisi caprae and gallinae immolantur: but Tiraquel on that place notes, Addo and
gadum quandoquidem So^rates moriens ipse Aesculapio ^a^^^o^ uo^it apiol
Platon^^^ in Phaedone; yet the same Alexander acknowledges the cock to have
been a sacrifice to the Lares; which is suitable to this of our Poet. Fliny also
lib. 10. cap. 19. says, that the inwards of a cock are a most acceptable
offering to the Gods: and before him Tully, lib. 2. de Divinatione, noted the
same. But whereas the Poet here says, Cristam galli, the margin of one
Manuscript has this note, Gallus mercuri^ immolatus est; and partem pro toto
posuit. To which exposition that it is spoken by a metonymie, we may add that
it probably seems, that the Poet somewhat satyrically named rather cyista, than
any other part, to signify that they durst not promise so small an offering,
which they could so easily perform; aggravating thus, methinks, the greatness
of their Despair, and consequently of their Guilt, by the smallness of their
sacrifice.

SATYR. XIV.
ARGUMENT.
Children the Parents Image are
Somewhat by Nature, more by Care.
The Hand but Draws, the mind gives shape:
The Child is but the Parents Ape.
Dice in the Sire, Rage, Riot, Lust,
Are Vile; but in the Son seem Just:
Since by the Cause the Effect is Tainted,
As by the Face the Glass seems Painted.
The Sire that Builds, often when h' has done,
Though Stones he Raise, pulls down a Son.
Old Superstition begets young:
From one false Fear more fears have sprung.
Though Avarice at first less pleases,
It grows one of our Loved diseases.
Base Fare, Spite, Toil by Sea and Land,
Gain and a Father do Command;
The Son then Loves, what he did hate;
Instructions wonder becomes Fate!
Yet were it such, Rome should love rather
Great Juvenal, his Country's Father.
MAny vile acts, Fuscinus, now there are
Which spot and wrinkle things, that once were fair:
Yet such even Parents teach their children! when
The spend-thrift Die delights the Father, then
The Heir yet in Boss'd Coat plays too, and shakes
In his small box such tools. Nor more hope takes
A kinsman in his Nephew, that can pare
Your Mushromes, and for costly sauce never spare;
Your (1) Fig-eaters half-drown'd swim in it; so
His Lewd Sire's Aged Throat the way did show.
Let such a Child pass but seav'n years, e're yet
All Is teeth renew; though thou on each side set
A thousand Bearded Masters, from such State
Of Kitchen he will never degenerate.
A mind toward small faults mildly just does e're
Rutilus teach, and think our Servants were
Made of our Elements? Or rather fright
His household, and more in loud whips delight,
Then in a Siren, like Antiphates
Or Polypheams? And his heart then please,
When for two Napkins the Tormentors hand
With glowing Ir'n does a poor Servant brand.
What learns his Son, who does harsh chains, slaves dire (2)
Fire-marks, and Country-jails with joy admire?
Can Larga's daughter think thou, win Chaste fame,
That cannot so fast her Mothers sweet-hearts name,
But she must take breath thrice ten times? when young,
Her Mothers Arts she knew: Now from her tongue
She fills small waxen tables, which she sends,
By her known wantons, to her Lusts dear friends.
Nature thus prompts it: by Domestical
Patterns of Vice we do more swiftly fall;
Great Authors undermining us. There may
A Youth or two, whose hearts from purer clay
Titan's kind Art has formed, not thus be led:
The rest do in their Fathers lewd paths tread.
The long known track of old faults draw the Soul!
Abstain from loss then: This cause should control
Vice, that our Children follow not our Crimes.
So soon we intimate what is lewd! All Climes
And people yield a Catiline; But no
Brutus or Cato Vtican we know.
Let not a filthy word or sight defile
The Threshold, where a Child lives. Hence the vile
Queans; Hence the Parasites, that sing all night.
All sacred Cares but due in a Child's sight.
Would thou be lewd? Scorn not his years: Resist
Thy Lust, and for thy Infants sake desist.
For, if the Censor does him just disgrace,
(Since he resembles Thee in limb and face,
The Son too of thy Manners, nor does mend,
But by thy footsteps still does worse offend)
Thou will, no doubt, rattle him for his ill
Carriage, and more provoked alter thy Will.
But how can Thou assume a Parents brow
And Liberty, that grown Old do worse Now!
Thy brain-less pate lacked, as long since distressed,
A windy Cupping-glass. If thou a Guest
Expect'st, thy Servants must bestir 'em. Sweep
The pavement, and the Pillars neatly keep;
Make the dry Spider and the web come down;
Plain Plate some, some the Engraven wipe; with frown
And wand thy Anger hastens thus. Thus, vain
Wretch, thou half-quak'st, least a foul hound should stain
Thy Hall, and thy friends eye, that comes, displease;
Or least thy walk be soiled with dirt: (3) though these
Faults one half-peck of Dust and one Lad mend.
To form a holy household do not tend,
For thy Son's Rule? It Is the best work one can
Perform, to give one's Country a Good Man;
To fit him for one's Countrey's true renown,
Unto the Plow, the Helmet or the Gown.
It Is a great Matter, with what Arts and kind
Of Manners thou inform'st his tender mind.
With snakes and lizards from by-waies her brood
The stork does feed; which fledged seek the like food.
From Beasts, Dogs, Crosses, Vultures with swift wing
Do, to their young, part of the Carrion bring:
This is their food then, when grown big they feed
Themselves, and now do in their Own tree breed.
But Jove's own Eagle and the Falcon tries
The Forest, and at Hare or Goat he flies.
Home the Prey's brought, till their young grown mature
Raised by the wing and Hunger do inure
Their strength to Flight, seeking such food, as first
They tasted, coming from their Egg new burst.
Centronius was a Builder; Houses store
He mounted on Cajeta's winding shore,
At Tibur's Tower, Praeneste's Hills: with fine
Greek Marbles, nay, far-sought, he Fortune's shrine
And that of Hercules surpassed; Our famed
Capitol Thus th'Eunuch Posides shamed.
Whiles then Centronius dwells Thus, thus impair
He does his wealth, and yet leaves no small share:
All which his mad Son wastes, whiles he will have
Of better Marble Houses far more brave.
Some since their sires kept Sabbaths heretofore,
Only (4) the Clouds and Heaven's one Power adore.
Swine's flesh they count as man's: That their advised
Father abhorred; next they are circumcised.
Rome's Law they slight; they Learn, keep, Fear the Jews:
What Moses his deep Volumes teach, they choose.
To none but of such mind the way they will tell:
If circumcised, they will lead one to a well.
But 'twas their Father taught them This: He played
Every sev'nth day, and did neglect his trade.
Yet other vices young men follow still
Freely, but Avarice against their will.
For vice deceives under fair virtue's show,
When in Grave shape and Dress it is pleased to go,
The Niggard we, as Thrifty, boldly praise:
He spares: He guards his wealth; At's task he stays
Surer, than if there did on his estate
The Hesperian or the Pontique Dragon wait.
On such a Reverend Artist All men spend
Their Gaze! These smiths their wealth do still extend;
But by All ways: on Daily anvile Great
It grows, in their still-burning forge's Heat.
A Father then counts those fouls Blessed, that Gold
Admire, and This for a firm Truth do hold,
Never was poor man Happy; They direct
That way, and bid them Plie That Sect.
Vice has its Elements: These First they show,
Making them First some petty Baseness know;
Then, a Desire of Gain beyond all size.
His false peck does his servants guts chastize:
His own feel hunger too; nor at once must
His folks consume every blue hoary crust.
In mid- September yesterday's minced meat
He saves, and beans now boiled next night he will eat;
They Are seald-up, scraps of summer-fish soon stale
He keeps, with half a stinking (5) Nimble-tall;
Nay, a large Leek, whose strings he tells. If some
Bridge-ghest were bid to This, he would scorn to come.
But why gather'st thou wealth with such vexation?
When it is, past doubt, Frenzy of Perturbation,
That thou may Die Rich, to Live Poor. Yet glut
Thy bag with Coin, till its crammed mouth does strut;
The love of Gold increases with new store;
Which he loves less, that has None. One farm more
Thou get'st then: One does not thy mind suffice;
Thy Bounds must stretch. Thy Neighbor's corn does rise
More full and Fair: This and his Grove's delight
Thou buy'st; his hill too, with thick Olives, white;
Or, whom no rate wins, thy lean Oxen vex
By night; thy hungry herds with weary necks;
Which to the ears yet green thou driv'st: Not shall
They back, till their fierce maws have eat up all
His Crop. Thou Would think Hooks made a spoil so main!
Scarce can thou tell How Many Thus complain!
What Fields such wrongs have made men sell! O shame!
What Talk there is yet! What Trumpet of foul Fame!
Tush, says he, What hurt's That? A Pulse-shale more
I value, than the whole Town's Praise: if Poor
I am, and reap but a small crop. No doubt,
Disease and weakness thou shall escape: without
Mourning and Care thou wilt Live: A longer date
Of Time thou shall enjoy with better fare:
If thou of so much good ground be possessed,
As under Tatius [g] the whole People dressed.
Soon after, even the Aged, whose youth did feel
The Punique wars, or the Molossian steel
Of dreadful Pyrrhus, scarce Two acres [h] got
For many wounds. For Blood and Toil such lot
None thought Less than Desert; Or This did call
A Thankless Countrey's Curtal Love. A small
Turf served the Father and his House; where lay
His wife with-child: four young ones there did play;
One servile, three freeborn: but then their great
Brothers, that came from ditch or plow, had meat
More store: with Pulse Then smoked an Ample pot.
Such ground Now serves not for a Garden-plot.
Thence flow most Crimes; No vice did e're afford
More Poisons, or more fiercely use the sword,
Then a dire Love of an untamed Estate:
For, He that will be Rich, will be rich straight.
But then where is Fear of Laws? what shame can hold
The wretch, that makes this Speed to heap up Gold?
Sons, Live content with Cottage and low Hill;
The Old Marsian, Hernian and Vestinian still
Taught Thus. Bread let us provide with our own plow;
What Is Needful: This the Rural Gods allow:
By whose help since the gift of grateful Corn,
The Palate does the Ancient Acorn scorn.
He Will never offend the Laws, who with plain mind
Wears the high shoe in Ice, and against th'East-wind
Turned shins. This foreign unknown Purple spreads
Its tincture, and to all lewd actions leads.
Thus the Ancients taught: but Now when Autumn's Done,
A bawling father wakes his sleeping son
At midnight, crying, To your wax-leaves straight;
Write Boy; wake; Plead: On the old Law-Rubriques wait;
Peruse them well: Or for a Vine-Rod sue:
Away with bone-combs; Let Great Laelius view.
Nostrils All-hair, and shoulders strangely vast.
The Moorish Tents and Brigants Castles cast
Thou down; that when thou art Threescore, thou may gain
A wealthy Eagle. Or if Wars and Pain
Seem tedious, if the Horn and Trumpet make
Thy Intrals loose with fear, (i) thy self betake
To merchandise: Gain half; Loath No ware, though
To The Other side of Tiber fit to go.
Between Ointments and Hides no diffrence think
There is; whence e're it is, Gain does never stink.
That Poet's Verse always repeat, as fit
Even for the Gods Themselves, and Jove's Own wit:
Coin How one Gets, None care: Coin one must have.
Old trots [6] teach boys thus, that three farthings crave:
Your Girls learn This before their Alphabet.
A father pressing such Rules I could yet
Urge Thus; Vain man! who bids thee make this speed?
Thy son, I Will warrant, shall Thy Art exceed;
Be sure: Ajax did Telamon out-go,
And great Achilles surpassed Peleus so.
We must not force young minds: their native sin
Has not full marrow yet. Let him begin
To comb his beard, and the sharp rasor try,
He Will bear false witness, sell cheap Perjurie,
And touch Pure Ceres Altar and Foot. Lo,
With his VVife's Coarse, believe't, he Now does go,
If she a deadly dowry brought. What sly
Poison in sleep she suffers! For, what Thy
Dull brain though Sea and Land should bring, Quick Guile
Procures him straight. A Great Crime's no great Toil
Thou Wilt say, These Motives he had never from Me:
The Cause yet of his Lewd Mind sprung from Thee.
For, he that Cries, Love Wealth, and by advise
Too vile, trains Children up in Avarice;
Who gives them Leave to double their estate
By fraud, the rains he to the Chariot straight
Has given: if thou would recal't, it cannot stand;
It whirles beyond the bounds; slights thy Command.
No man's content to sin but just as thou
Permitt'st: More sins they to themselves allow.
When thou befool'st thy Son, that helps a friend,
Or does a kind hand to a kinsman lend;
Thou teach him to spoil, deceive and get
Wealth by All Crimes, on which thy heart is set,
As was the Decu's on their Country: though,
If Greece says true, Menoeceus loved Thebes So:
Whose furrows yield strange Legions, shields and all,
From Dragons teeth; which straight to dire wars fall,
As if a Trumpeter had risen too. Lo,
The flame, whose sparks thou thy self first did blow,
Spreads broad, devouring all! Such Lot Thou Wilt have.
The Tutour'd Lion with dread noise to 's Cave
Will bear the trembling Master. Thy Birth-scheme
Your Cunning-men hve Cast. But 't were extreme
Dullness to wait Fate's Distaffe. Thou must die,
E're That thread's broke. The art Now a stop to thy
Son's Hopes; vexed at thy long Hart's-Age. Hence straight
Unto Archigenes; buy Mithridate;
If One Fig more, or One more Rose thou would gather,
Get Antidote fit for a King, or Father,
Before he feeds.
Sport I show, that Out-goes
All Theaters, and the brave Praetor's Shows:
If thou will view, how even their Life's distressed
For Gain, Much Treasure in a Brass-bound Chest,
And Gold, which may (7) at watchful Castor's Shrine
Be kept; Mars the Revenger they decline,
Since that he lost his helmet, nor could Save
What was his Own. The Stage-Dress then of brave
Flora, of Ceres and of Cybel slight;
Humane Affairs do yield far more delight.
Makes He more Sport, (8) that through the Air's free scope
Is swing'd alost, or slides down a stretched rope?
Then Thou that in Corycian Ship confined
Remain'st, tossed with the North-west and South Wind,
Base wretch, Merchant of rank wares, whose designs
And Joy are, from old Creet to bring fat wines
And Jove's own Country Flaggons? yet the bold
Fellow, whose twining foot takes doubtful hold,
Gets food: Winter and Famine by his Rope
He scapes. A thousand Talents thy rash hope
Aims at! A hundred Farms! See, all Ports swell!
The Sea is choked with Timber! More now dwell
On the Ocean! Does Gain call? straight under-sail
You Have Fleets. Your Lybian or Carpathian gale
They slight; nay, Calpe too: the (9) Sun's loud sound
They Will hear, as in the Herculean Gulf he is drowned.
Doughty Attempt! That with stretched pouch one may
Return, and of his swollen bags grown-proud say,
H' has seen Sea Monsters and young Tritons! More
Furies then one haunt men! one's not secure
In's Sisters arms the Eumenides and Lights
Fright him. Another, when an Ox he smites,
Thinks Agamemnon and Ulysses roar.
Thus He, though's Coat or Cloak he never toar,
Wants yet a Guardian, that his Ship would have
Stowed full, though but a plank keeps out the wave.
What Is now the Cause this danger he embraces?
Silver stamped into Titles and small Faces!
Do Clouds resist? Do Lightnings? Weigh, weigh, cries
This Badger, this Great Pepper-man. The Skies
Face and black Swarth of Cloud threaten no Ill:
It Is Summer-Thunder. When perchance Fate will
That night his Vessel split, and him plunge deep:
Who with left hand or Teeth his Purse must keep.
He then whose hopes slighted all Tagus gold,
The glist'ring sands too in Pactolus rolled,
Hides his cold thighs with Clouts, begs food, and three
Farthings; A painted storm his help must be.
Wealth got with much care must be kept with more:
To Guard great Treasure's worse then to be poor.
By (10) night the Rich Licinus made a Guard
Of Servants with their buckets watch and ward:
His Amber, Statues, Phrygian Columns, rare
Ivory and large shells, wrought such frightning care.
The naked Cynicks Tub never burned: if broken (11)
'Twas leaded, or a New was straight bespoken.
When Alexander in that Cell did see
That Great Inhabitant, more pleased was he,
He thought, that nothing wished, then he that fain
With worlds of dangers would the whole world gain.
The Gods are all ours, if we 're wise: but we
Make Thee a Goddess, Fortune! yet if me
One asks, what size of wealth is fit, I Will tell:
As much as will Thirst, Hunger, Cold expel;
What served Thee, Epicurus, Herbs small store;
What Socrates his House-Gods asked before.
Nature and VVisdome still the same injoyne.
Or if their lives too strictly thee confine,
Mix somewhat of our Times, and so high rise
As Otho once his twice seven Ranks did size.
If yet thou frown'st, yet hang'st the lip, then be
As rich as Two Knights; if thou will, as Three.
If yet thy Lap's not Full, if spread for more,
Croesus, the Persians, (12) nay Narcissus's store
Thou Wilt slight: whom Claudius Caesar yet did fill
With Gifts: nay, bid by Him, did his wife kill.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Fourteenth Satyr.
Ficedula. Inscripta Ergastula; Ergastularius. Fossores Slaves anciently
Branded; their vast Number, and Danger. Argentum laeve. Scobs. (...); serrago.
Strewing of Galleries with Gold-dust, and Sprinkling the Hair of the Head with
it. Scobina. Crucifying; when first prohibited. A passage about Nubes and Coeli
Numen, in the Jewish worship, cleared. Minutal; Va^ium. Porrum sectivum. The
custom of the Ancients, in their Swearing, to Touch the Altar and Foot of the
God. The Hatt's Age. Assae; Terpsacae. Treasures, laid-up for safety, in
Temples. Petaurus. The Old fancy concerning the Sunne's Noise at his Setting.
Aluta. Zona. (...); Zonarius Sector. Hama. The vulgar Mistake about Diogenes
his Tub. Testa and Later distinguished by Nannius against Erasmus; and (...),
in Theocritus, expounded. The Art of Sodering broken vessels of Earth; Erasmus
excused from the exception of Franciscus Floridus, about Divitiae Narcissi.

1.YOur Fig-eaters half-drown'd swim in it --. -- Et eodem jure natantes
Mergere ficedulas didicit --. In some manuscript Copies (that we may by the way
touch some smaller doubts) after the first verse, Plurima sunt Fuscine and fama
digna sinistra, this follows [Et quod majorum vitio sequiturque minores]: but,
as Lipsius heretofore noted, this was at the first the Inscription of this
Satyr; and afterward ignorantly inserted, disturbing the sense of the place;
and in one of the Manuscripts, which I use, it is almost scrap'd-out, which
being therefore let pass, the Poet shows the traditional corruption of Children
from their parents: for so, says he for instance, if the Father is a dicer, his
heir likewise, though he yet wears but the child's boss (of which see Persius,
Sat. 5.) practices at the fritillum, or box, out of which they cast their dice
(of which also see Persius, Sat. 4.) In like manner from Old Gluttons they
learn to be young gluttons; as in daintiest Cookery, nearly to scrape your
mushromes, radere tuberae; though according to some copies, as Lubin tells us,
it is rodere, to eat them fiercely; yet this Reading, methinks, is less
convenient; first because not so much Gourmandizing, as Daintiness, seems here
to be intended, as may appear by the kinds of the meat here named, Mushromes
and Fig-eaters; secondly, because it is agreeable to the Philosophy of the
Master-cook Apicius, who in his Polyteles, or 7th. book, cap. Tubera, uses this
same word, beginning the Chapter thus, Tubera, radis; Juvenal also, Sat. 5.
using the same word, -- post hunc raduntur tubera terrae. Besides, says he, in
the broth with their mushromes they will serve ye up, in an over-variety, the
dainty birds called the Fig-eaters, called so from their delight in figs (with
eating of which they grew fat); though it seems they no less affected grapes,
according to that of Martial speaking of the ficedula, Cum me ficus alat, cum
pascar dulcibus ^vis, Cur potius nomen non dedit uva mihi? The serving-up of
choice birds in dainty sauce or broth, was according to the wanton Cookery of
those times, and prescribed by Apicius, in his Trophetes, or 6. book, and they
are noted for dainties by A Gellius, lib. 15. cap. 8. where from Favorinus we
may learn this curiosity, that this was the only bird which was usually eaten
All: it being accounted the act of an ignorant palate to eat any more than the
hinder parts of other birds; as he there satyrically implies; to which we may
add the superfluity here noted in the luxurious mixtures of mushromes and
fig-eaters in the same dish.

2. Slaves Dire Fire-marks and Countrey-jailes. -- Inscripta ergastula, carcer
Rusticus. -- The Poet brings another instance, in Cruelty, saying, that the
child learns it, when he sees his father, like another Antiphates (King of the
Lestrigonians) or Polyphemus (the Cyclops) both Man eaters, delight in
punishing poor offending servants, and that for small faults; as, for a couple
of towels, or napkins, Sabana, as (from the Hebrew) the Scholiast calls them,
wherewith they wiped themselves at the Bathes, quae forte, says Lubin, in
balneo surripuit; which, peradventure, he had s^oln at the Bath. In which
passage, the Poet intimates the custom and cruelty of his times concerning
poor slaves, and the usage of them, in the words ergastula and carcer rusticus,
implying Labor and Restraint; as also by the Fettering and the Branding of
them. The Ergastula, as Beroaldus says, were places in the Country, where
servants being settered, did work; Sabellicus more particularly takes them for
the places where they dug Stone or Metal: but Marcellus Donatus reprehends
them both, saying, that they were places, where, after their work, they were
kept all night from running away, and in part proves it from this of Juvenal,
Carcer rusticus. But these differences may be easily composed, the use of the
word extending both to the Places, the Mines and Quarries where they wrought,
and to the places where at night for safety they were kept, and figuratively to
the persons of servants themselves, as appears by the word inscripta applied to
ergastula; fifteen of which servants usually made an ergastulum commonly so
called; as Apuleius is thought to imply in his Apology, where he speaks of
Thalus. The name some derive from (...), detineo, because they were in
custody; others more rightly from (...), operor; the overseer of which persons
was called ergastularius. The poor wretches themselves were often, from their
kind of labor, called fossores, their frequent employment being to dig in
their Lords mines and quarries, of stone, chalk, metal, brimstone, and the like
(wherein their wealth consisted:) and thus the poor Christians in the first
times were lamentably condemned to hard labor, sometimes 2000 at once tasked
in the cutting of marble. Besides, they did anciently use to brand their
servants with deep characters on their faces, being notes of their Masters,
whereby to be known; that if they ran away, they might be taken and brought
back again, as Andr. Alciat. notes, Parerg. Juris, lib. 1. cap. 26. And being
brought back, the common Letter, wherewith they were branded, to express their
fugacy, was PH or F. Diverse also had Iron-collars about their necks expressing
their flight: which sometimes was engraven upon a label or plate of brass or
iron fastened to their collar, as Pignorius de Servis observes, p. 22. And even
such branding was used sometimes to others besides slaves; Zonaras Annal. Tom.
3. making relation of some, who, for more boldly admonishing the Emperor
Theophilu^, had branded on their faces an Epigram of a dozen verses. The
Christian Confessors also were often branded, as Pont. Diaconus, in vit^ Sancti
Cypriani; as also Georgius Longus notes de Annulis Signatoriis, cap. 11. p.
114, 115. And here we may a little farther take notice of the wonderful number
of servants amongst the wealthier of the Ancients; which is intimated in that
of our Poet, Sat. 6: Ergastula tota whole g^ols or work houses of Slaves, and
also in the same Satyr in those words, and castra ^^overi, spoken of the Great
Lady, that went to the Bathes with her Camp of attendants, as he elegantly
jeers at her. Yet this is but suitable to Story; Pliny, lib. 33. cap. 10.
telling that Caecilius left in his Will 3^00 yoke of O^en; of other carrel,
250000, and 4000 servants, as Pignorius observes, de Servis, p. 25^. And that
such ergastula dispersed up and down the Country contained a vast number of
servants, may appear by the use of them, which Marius made; who le^^ing loose
such servants, raised an army of them: for which consideration, the use of them
in Country labors is warily disliked by Pliny, as a practice full of danger.
The Poet going on, says, that thus it is in other vices also, to wit, that by
the Parents bad example children are generally corrupted, except some few made
by Titan (strictly by Prometh^us the Nephew of Titan) of purer clay, alluding
to the doctrine concerning man's Original, mentioned by Ovid. Met. 1. and of
which see Sat. 6. Illustrat. 1. Wherefore, says he, fathers should abstain from
giving bad example, though it were only for fear of Loss (implied in those
words, Abstineas igitur damnis) even for the grievous Loss in their own
children. He adds, that all Climes and people yield a Catiline; of whom I may
note this rarity, that even for Ca^iline, though he be so generally and
grievously cried down by the Roman Historians, we may find an Excuse at least,
if not a Defense, in an Epistle written by Prosperus Fesulanus, and prefixed
before the Fragments of E^rurian Antiquities preserved by him, as he says, and
of late years strangely found under ground, and published by the industry of a
noble Italian, Curtius Inghiramius; in which the said Prosperus says, Lucius
Sergius Catilina quorundam Romanorum Senatorum injuria, aut iniquorum
invidorumque hominum versutia, and callidate Roma discedere fuit coactus. To
deliver the result of the story briefly, He says, that upon the command of
Tully then consul, Catiline left the City; and coming into Tuscany, his enemies
persecured him; quare arma sum^re cogitur, ut se defenderet. The Etrurians, he
says, took part with him, and particularly Prosperus his uncle Ancus, who died
in the Action; their Town Fesula was plundered, and especially their own
family; and only this Prosperus being yet a surviver, adds, -- Romam Ciceroni
Consuli scripsi, me criminis patrui, si modo crimen est, quibus debemus
obedire, participem non esse; nihil epistola mea operata est. This Prosperus
was, as he tells us, of the royal blood, of the Old Etrurian Kings; and that
the heat of the War fell afterward upon Him. I may add out of the Etrurian
Antiquities themselves, lib. 2. p. 155. this Memorial; Lucius Sergius Catilina
optima indolis adolescens, Civisque optimus a calumniatoribus pene oppressus
fuit. Roma est repleta seditionibus, Thuscia armis, Italia omnis timore,
and.... Dii quid futurum fit norunt: homines, ne omnibus mala eveniant, timent.
Ego Prosperus Vesulius Augurum Soriba hane Breviarii partem scripsi. Which
last, it seems, by this relation, was written in the time of the Action, before
the event. Having a copy of these Historical Antiquities in my hands, I thought
the imparting of thus much news in this story, though a little differing from
our Poet's judgment, would not be unacceptable. But the Reader may take
notice, that the whole work is by Leo Attatius a learned Jesuit, judged to be
suppositious, as he endeavors to prove in his large Animadversions upon it.

3. -- Though these Faults one half-peck of Dust and one Lad mend, -- and tamen
uno Semodio scobis hac emendat Servulus unus. Diligent men are, says the Poet,
in other things, though but small; yet negligent in the education of their
children. Thus if a friend is to be entertained, and so expected, One must
sweep-down the Cob-webs, another wipeclean the plate, both the plain plate
(lave argentum) and the rough, or engraven ((...)): and if thy walk or gallerie
be soul, thou art angry, though a boy, with a scuttle of dust strewn over it,
will easily mend it. Wherein he implies a custom of sprinkling dust upon a
float to make it handsome. Semodio scobis are the Poet's words; Scobs
signifying not only saw-dust, (the dust of wood) but also that which comes-off
from metal, such as pin-dust. But the Scholiast here on the word Scobis says,
Non (...)(some read (...)) the dust of wood, which is called commonly Serrago,
as being most usually wrought-out with the Saw; seeming to mean, that saw-dust,
or the dust of wood, is not here to be understood; and therefore rather the
dust of metal: which indeed is more neat, though a troublesome curiosity in
stately and wanton houses, and somewhat difficult to be understood, at least
Believed, if the very practice were not reported in story. For thus
Heliogabalus strewn his porticus, his gallery, or walk, with the dust of Gold
and Silver, as Britannicus notes out of Lampridius: and Gallienus the Emperor,
as Autumnus adds out of Trebellius Pollio, sprinkled his own hair thus with
Gold-dust; which probably being wrought-off with the file, perchance the word
Scobs is thence derived; Scobina being used by Tertullian, in Apologet. in that
sense, for a file. But says the Poet, men are not thus careful of their
children, but giving them bad example, they are surely attended with as bad
imitation. And this they do, says he, as naturally, as the young vulturs learn
of the old their kind of food and nest; fetching that, like the old ones, from
Crosses (or in a less accurate, but proportional expression, from gibbets,
Crucifying in Juvenal's time being in practice; though afterward forbidden, as
the Scholiast says; and as Pithaeus notes out of St. Austin, Quast. in vet.
Testament. by an Edict made, as the Ecclesiastical Historians tells us, by
Constantine.) They learn also, says he, when they are grown big, to rest
themselves like the old ones, in their own trees. Yet here Caelius Secundus
Curio observes out of Pliny, that the vultur nestes not in Trees, but on high
Rocks; though he himself makes answer, that it may be on Trees growing on high
Rocks, as we may see them, says he, often grow. Howsoever, the objection is but
Pliny's assertion, and what is that more then Juvenal's, unless sometimes it be
of the two the more Poetical. But thus, says the Poet, the Son will imitate the
Father, as the Son of Centronius imitated and exceeded his Father, that vain
builder, who raised such stately houses at Tibur (called from the high
situation of it, Arx Tiburis) exceeding the state even of sacred pieces
dedicated to the Gods: his buildings at Tibur surpassing the Temple of Hercules
there, (for so some expound it; where was also a famous Library mentioned by
Agellius, lib. 18. cap. 3.) and his other structures raised at Praneste,
out-vying the Temple of Hercules there, (for so some expound this likewise,
where was also a famous Oracle, as Strabo relates, lib. 5.) yet here may very
aptly be understood with less search, the Temple of Fortune at Rome, built of
most precious marble, as Pliny notes, lib. 36. and likewise the Temple of
Hercules at Rome built very stately by Domitian: which may, methinks, be here
the more easily and sutably understood (though truly also the other) because he
mentions presently afterward the Capitol likewise, a Roman structure, which,
as he notes not without indignation, was exceeded by Posides an Eunuch, and but
Claudius the Emperors freedman; whose vast buildings near the Baian shore,
mentioned by Pliny, were called the P^sidian Baths; not the Possidonian, as
some mistake.

4. Only the Clouds and Heaven's One Power adore. Nil praeter nubes and Coeli
Numen adorant. He shows in another particular, that the Son will likewise
imitate the Father if addicted to the Jewish devotion: which he expresses by
some specialties, as Abstaining from Swine's flesh and Labor on the Sabbath
day; also by Circumcision (calling the Jews, Verpos; the etymology whereof I
had rather you should learn from Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 26. or from
Scaliger, de lingua Latina, lib. 1. cap. 28. then from my Illustrations) also
by their worshipping, as he says, only the Clouds and One God, and by their
refusing of Commerce with any, but of their own Religion. In most of which
particulars he speaks but according to the common misinformation, which the
Romans had concerning the Jews; as that they would not show the way, or a
Fountain to a weary travailour, unless one of their own religion: though the
Scholiast expounds, non monstrare vi^s, by non confiteri religion^s secreta,
and so upon fontem, he says, ubi baptizantur; which were, methinks, to make the
accusation of the Jews more slight; This being but to accuse them of Niceness
in their Zeal, but that of Inhumanity. Besides, though the Poet seems not to
acknowledge by the Light of Nature a Seventh day's worship of the Divine Power,
yet a Set-worship, and that at Set-times is mentioned in him, and, though with
some superstition, as he intimates, in the practice, particularly in the sixth
Satyr; where he speaks of those Women, who held it a Crime to use the Liberty
of the Marriage Bed upon their Sacred Days. But the chief doubt is about the
Deity, which they were said to worship; which is here called, Nubes and Coeli
Lumen, as some would have it. But the best Copies and Critics have here Coeli
Numen, aptly proving it from that of Tacitus speaking of the Jews (Histor. lib.
5.) Judaei mente sola unumque numen intelligunt. Profanos, qui Deorum imagines
mortalibus materiis in species hominum effingant: and so Dion Cassius in his
History, lib. 37. observes it, as a Singularity in the Temple of Jerusalem,
that there were no Images in it. So that they are noted for two things,
contrary to the Roman devotion, their Denying both a Plurality of Gods, and the
Representation of their Own One God, in Statue. And whereas the Poet says, that
they worshipped the Clouds, Britannicus thinks, that it alludes to Aristophanes
in his (...). against Socrates, who was in effect accused as one that Judaiz'd;
and especially to the frequent Appearings of God in the form of a Cloud; as at
the Red Sea, at Mount Sinai, and in the Temple; many of the Heathen being
acquainted with the Holy story, as plainly enough appears (to omit farther
proof) from this mention of Moses, by our Poet. In which exposition the
Interpreters proceed upon this ground, that the true Copies have Numen; yet it
had been more like Equity, if they had disproved such copies, as have Lumen:
which, methinks, they might have done, because Lumen might imply that, which
concerning the Jews, was most false; namely, that they worshipped the Sun and
Stars; for, what else could fitly be understood by Coeli Lumen? Or else, if at
the best, it should be taken but for a larger explication of Nubes, that were
but either an Impropriety, or a Tautologie, Clouds being usually not very
light, especially compared with the body of the sky; or if they were, then
Nubes and Coeli Lumen were but the same.

5. -- Putrique Siluro, Those, says the Poet, that are addicted to money, are
as diligent in watching of it, as in the Fables, the Dragon that kept the
Garden of the Hesperides (the daughters of Atlas) whence Hercules
notwithstanding stole the Golden Apples; or, as the other supposed Dragon at
Colchos in Pontus, whence Jason is said to have stolen the golden Fleece. And,
as they are thus watchful in keeping, so, as base in getting; pinching the
bellies of their servants, in not affording them their due allowance, while
they serve them, as he says, modio iniquo; a servant's ordinary allowance in
bread-corn for a day, being about a Quart. Besides, says he, they have so much
as a little minced meat, ( minutal; diverse kinds of petty ingredients mixed
together, and therefore by some called also Varium) relics not worth the
keeping, specially in mid- September, when they are apt to corrupt. Yet then
also, says he, they do, -- differ in temp^ra ^an^ Alterius conchen, even a
few beans already dressed, and, as he adds, signat^m, kept under lock and key,
as we may say; but according to the suspicious art of those times, kept under
Seal. Which cates, says he, they reserve -- astivi cum part lacerti, with the
scraps of some summer-fish, and half a Silurus, which is now stinking-ripe, and
at the best but vile, and with these even a large leek, and every string of it;
porrum sectivum, non capitatum, says Lubin: that even a Bridge-ghest, or beggar
waiting at a bridge for relief, would scorn to come, though invited, to such
cheer. In which passage, instead of conchen (a bean) some read concham [a
shellfish:] so Caeli^s Secundus Curio; but, methinks, conche being mentioned
before, Sat. 3. in that passage, Cujus conche tumes? as a part of base diet, it
does the more probably suit with this place. Likewise concerning the Silurus
[not to pass it by unexpounded] though in the 4th. Satyr I render it only in
general, fish, from those words, fracta de merce siluros, the place requiring
no more special rendering: yet here it being mentioned with other fish, it
seemed convenient, our language wanting a name for it, to give it one for
distinction, and from the etymology answerable to the Greek name, silurus, a
nimble-tail. For, whereas some would have it to signify a sturgeon, methinks,
they do too incongruously forget the baseness of the diet here intended.

6. Old trots teach boys thus, that three farthings crave. Hoc monstrant vetula
pueris poscentibus assem. They think, says the Poet ironically, that by such
Thrift, and increase of wealth, they shall escape sickness and Infirmity, and
therefore bid their sons with uncessant industry employ their time, either in
the Law (whose Titles were written in Red Letters, and thence called,
Rubriques, as Persius speaks, Sat. 5.) or in the Wars, that so they may get a
Vine-rod (that is, a Centurion's place, who, by his Office, carried a Vine-r^d
(or cudgel) wherewith to correct offending soldiers) and by more eminent
service, as against the Moors, or Brigants, (of whom, see Mr. Cambden, who
shows them to have inhabited York shire, and other places) obtain a wealthy
Eagle (that is, the Office of a Standard Bearer) or in Merchandise, or other
T^ading, though the basest, and from the most stinking wares, as hides of
beasts, or the like, most fit to be ^^^ried to the other side of Tiber (where
persons of such nostrils dwelt.) Such rules, says the Poet, (citing one of more
note out of En^ius) your nurses teach children, when they can yet scup^^
smatter, or crave three farthings for their sp^rt, or fruit: which rules, says
he, they will quickly outgo, and when once come to age, stoutly ^or^wea^, even
whiles, according to the custom, they touch the Altar and Foot of Ce^es her
self (though so celebrated for her severe purity, Sat. 6. in those words,
Paucae adeo C^reris vi^^^s contingere dig^^) But what, says he, will be the
effect of these thy rules at last, who set thy heart upon money, as the
Decii and Menoeceus (the son of King Creon) did once set their hearts upon
their Countries, Rome and Thebe, for which they willingly lost their lives? Why
surely in the conclusion, thy son will prove like the tame Lion (in the time of
Domitian) that drew his keeper into his den, and killed him. For so he already
grieves at thy long life, thinking thee like an Aged Heart, [which, some think,
lives 900 years; but Story ^ess^fies that one has lived above an 100 years,
being sound with a golden collar cau^'d to be put on by Alexander the Great,
and in time quite covered with a deep sat, as Pliny relates; but some would
here read C^rvina sonectus, and aptly enough, if there were Copy for it.] Nay,
says the Poet, going on in his speech, thy son has already east thy nativity
[he has been with a cunning man;] so that thou must be glad to take, against
his sly purposes, some of Mithridates his Antidote [such as indeed Kings and
Fathers must in wisdom take, whose deaths are so commonly gaped after] if thou
would but one year more gather a fig, or rose. In which passage there is
some difference amongst the Interpreters about that place, -- Pueris
poscentibus assem, diverse reading, -- Vetulae pueris repentibus assa, making
the sense this, that Nurses thus teach children, which can yet scarce creep
about; taking assae for nutrices, according to that of Nonius Marcellus, in
Assas, porro nutrices and nutricios Tatas and Mammas appellabant, as appears
from an ancient Inscription, as Pignorius observes, de Servis, p. 193. The
learned Rigaltius adds here, that in an old Gloss, it is said Ass dicuntur
Adsestrices; but he prefers this, which I here use. One Manuscript, [that of
Corpus-Christi Colledge] does in the margin expound assas, by siccas nutrices.
i. e. Sine where; quas nunc terpsasas vocant; dry nurses, now called terpsasae.
It seems he takes the word from (...), and so it shall be as much as
oblectatrices, Pleasers of little ones; women that attend on them. But the most
easy and approved Reading is, poscentibus assem, agreeable to that in Sat. 5.
-- assemque rogatum; implying the manner of little ones, that childishly crave
for some small coin.

7. -- At watchful Castor's shrine. -- Et ad vigilem ponendi Castora nummi. The
Ancients did use to lay up their great treasures in the Temples, as counting
them safe, being committed to the custody of the Gods: yet, as the Poet jeers,
they were glad to change their Gods, carrying their wealth to Castor's Temple,
whereas before it was committed to the custody of Mars, till his own helmer was
stolen from him. Where Rigaltius wittily observes, that not only his Offensive
arms, as his spear, were taken from him, but even his Head p^e^e, his Defense.
Justly therefore did Tertullian (in his Apologet^) ^out at the Heathen Gods,
saying, that Caesar's foul, diers were sain to guard their Gods, speaking of
the Temples wherein their treasures were laid up; giving that for the reason,
why Juvenal here says; vigilem Castora; not that the God, but that the soldier
kept the true watch. And well might he say so, the Poet having before, Sat. 13.
v. 152. told of a bolder thief, qui bracteolam de Castore ducat: so that Castor
too was in no better case than his fellows. See of this custom somewhat
before, Sat. 10. Illustrat. 2.

8. -- That through the Air's free scope Is swing'd aloft, or slides down a
stretched rope. -- Jactasa Petauro Corpora, quique solet rectum descendere
funem. No stage yields better mirth, says the Poet, than one vexing himself to
grow rich: nay, it is better sport, says he than to see one swing'd in the
Petaurus, called so, as is commonly known, from (...)and (...), flying in the
air; as if the motion of the body were as swift; as Evitannicus notes on this
place. Dempster on Rosinus, lib. 5. cap. 1. take it for the sport of casting
one's self through an hoop, without touching it. Circulus erat, says he of the
Petaurus, quem intactum certantes transvolabant; but Lubin a little more warily
says, tum magna solertia -- transvolabant; it a tamen ut vix circulum corpore
tangerent. But Hieron. Mercurialis, an excellent Italian Antiquarie, takes the
sport here intended, to be of a far different fashion, presenting it from
Antiquity, in this manner [in his work, de Art Gymnastica.] * Juv. Sat. XIV.
Ill. 8.
fanciful representation of a women's rope-sport Concerning the other sport
here added, expressed by rectum descenders funem, I find none of the
Interpreters to make either exposition or doubt of the word descendere, though
it may easily suggest some ambiguity to the phanfie, to conceive the manner of
the practice; only in the margin of one Manuscript, is written conscendere;
which seems the clearer, though the other also may be understood, of their
cunning slips, and voluntary descents in their performance, more particularly,
of their sliding down the rope; and so we may retain the common Reading,
descendere.

9. -- The Sun's loud sound They Will hear, as in the Herculean gulf he is
drowned. Audies Herculeo stridentem gurgite solemn. The Poet describes the
madness of men's coverous Desires and Projects: who, as he says, uncestantly
seek to get even a thousand talents; whereof One being 187 l. 10 s. (as it is
rightly summed, but falsely printed, by leaving out the 10 s. in the table of
the Roman Sesterce, set before the learned Apology of my Honored friend Dr.
Hakewill) a thousand amount to 187500 l. See also, Sat. 3. Illustrat. 18. To
effect which vain desires, so many, says the Poet, venture to Sea, that there
seem more to dwell on Sea, than on Land, (as Travelers report now of the
Rivers and Inhabitants of China.) To make a voyage in the Mediterranean Sea,
whither it be near the bottom of the Straights, in the Carpathian Sea, between
Rhodes and Egypt, or nearer either the Middle, or Entrance of the Straights,
as in the Lybian Sea, they esteem it as nothing, unless they pass Calpe, (so
called, because it is like an Vrne, as the Scholiast notes; it being one of
Hercules his pillars; to wit, that on the Spanish side of the Straights, called
now according to some, Gibraltar, the other on the African being called Abyla,
and now according to some, Ceuta,) and unless they hear the noise of the Sun,
when he sets in the Sea, [as vulgarly was thought;] nay, unless they may say,
that they have seen Seamonsters [such as Mear-maids, and young Tritons, half
men, half fish, such as was in fiction, Triton, the son of Neptune.] Nor are
these humors to be wondered at in men, there being more kinds of madness than
one. Orestes was mad after one fashion, thinking himself not safe, though in
the custody of his own sister Electra: Ajax was mad after another fashion,
imagining that when he struck Oxen, Agamemnon and Ulysses roared. And is not he
as mad, though he rears not his clothes off his back, who for wealth, which he
has not, will lose that which he has, and perchance in a tempest be put to swim
for his life, and instead of 1000 talents which he madly hoped for, be glad to
save his poor purse in his left hand, whiles he helps himself with his right,
or, in necessity of stronger swimming, ridiculously in his mouth, so to save
himself by the advantage of both hands? And yet, says he, after his escape,
though lamentable, he must be glad to see himself still in a painted tempest,
it being the manner after such calamity, to carry at their back the picture of
their shipwreck, so to procure compassion and relief. In which expression, to
lay some smaller observations together, we may a little more take notice of
some things, and in the order they are touched by the Poet. First then
concerning Calpe, we may hear Priscian [in His way of Observation] making a
Grammar-wonder, that Juvenal makes the last syllable of that ablative short; it
being of the nature of Penelope, Arachne, and the like, always long. Yet
Coelius Secundus Curio shows, that likewise Ruffus Festus the Interpreter of
Aratus makes it short: besides, others think, that in this place this word is
of the third declension; so that though there be ordinarily Calpe, Calpes, yet
there is also Calpis, Calpas; from whence the word here used descends. But
setting aside this somewhat necessary nicety, we may next take notice of that
ancient fancy, which was greatly entertained, concerning the Sun's noise at
his setting; Antiquity thinking when it went down in the western Ocean, as they
conceived, that it made a noise like burning iron, when dipped in water. Nor
was this a vanity only in the People, but also in the Poets; [as might be
plentifully shew'd] nay, in Possidonius a Philosopher [as Strabo testifies] and
in Epicurus himself, as Rhodigine nores, lib. 24. cap. 13. Indeed, in the
utmost west of Spain, the manner of the Sun set [rejecting the fiction of the
noise] seems to be very admirable, both for the vastness of the Sun's body;
Artemidorus, according to Strabo, lib. 3. anciently affirming it to seem an
hundred times as big as ordinarily in other places [caused by the interposed
vapors of the Sea] and also for the various shapes in which it appears, as
Joan Baptisla Suarez de Salazar a Prebendary of the Church of Cadiz, learnedly
and delightfully relates, in his Antiguedades Gaditanas, lib. 1. cap. 6. p. 86
where he testifies, [and who could be a better witness?] that it is very
admirable, por los hermosos y estrannos arreboles que le cercam; y por las
sentellas, que parecem saltar de las aguas, haziendo el sol en ellas, ayudado
con sus enrizadas olas, mil tornas^les, y cambiantos. 1. For the beautiful and
strange red [or fiery] strakes, which incompass it, and for the sparkles which
seem to leap from the waters, the Sun making in them being helped by their
rufled waves, a thousand alterations, like so many changeable silks. The which
relation of Salazar, Philosophy may sometimes admit, as upon an occasional
multitude of vapors; but that it is so but sometimes Experience also may
teach. For in the year, 1622. my self being in those Seas, and sailing from
Baiona in Gallicia an hundred leagues toward the West- Indies, to fetch a wind
[as out Seamen call to bring us home into the Sleeve [our English Channe we
had not the felicity of such a view. And here it may be farther noted, that the
Western [or Atlantique Ocean] into which, Antiquity thought that the Sun did
every night descend, is in the margin of one Manuscript, called Mare mortuum,
as also by the Scholiast, who adds ultra quod navigare non conceditur: which he
might with pardon call so [by way of it seeming till late discoveries, to be as
dead, whiles without that lively motion, at least, that employment, which in
other Seas is beheld: but otherwise, to take it for that which is usually
called May mortuum [once the place where the unhappy Cities were destroyed by
fire from Heaven] were a mistake, of extent more than the Mediterranean Sea.
But from the Scholiast's addition, the learned Pignorius probably collects (in
his Symbol. Epist. 14.) that this Sea was not discovered by the Ancients, or,
as he says, until Columbus. Thirdly, we may observe, that when it is said,
that the vain Merchant at his return tumida superbus aluta, proud of his swollen
bags, (for so commonly, and, as I think, rightly it is expounded) Lubin offers
another exposition also, telling us, that oluta may be taken for the sails of
the ship, because the Galli are said by Caesar to have had sails of such taw'd
leather. But this were, methinks, little to this purpose, our Poet speaking
here not of Gauls, but Romans: besides, what occasion of Pride were This; (for
he says, superbus aluta) to come home with sails swollen with wet, whence he
might have returned so from any, though the shortest voyage? Lastly, it may be
observed, that whereas the Poet uses zona for a purse, it is according to the
ancient custom, which was to wear their money in their girdles; as appears
from that in St. Matthew, cap. 10. v. 9. Provide neither Gold nor Silver, nor
Brass in your purses; it being according to the Greek, (...), in your girdles;
and so Crumeniseca, or Crumenisen, a Cutpurse, called by Aristophanes, (...),
is by Plautus, in Trinummo, called Zonarius Sector, a Cut-girdle.

10. By night the rich Licinus made a Guard of servants with their buckets
watch and ward. Disposuis pradives hamis vigilare Cohortem Servorum noctu
Licinus jubet. -- In this passage there is much diversity amongst the
Interpreters; Britannicus reprehending the common Copies (which have hamis) and
Reading Armis: but the Scholiast reads hamis, saying, they did watch for the
safety of the City, cum hamis and cum aqua; some taking hamis for hooks,
wherewith they pulled down houses in case of fire; though that may not be
admitted, the first sylable of the word in that sense being long. But the most
accurate Reading and Acception is hamis, as it comes from hama; which signifies
a bucket, such as are used when houses are on fire; the first syllable whereof
is also short: and this Reading is chosen by Turnebus, lib. 19. cap. 19. and
cap. 23. and defended, as the best, by Paulus Leopardus, in his Emendat. lib.
9. cap. 23. And, methinks, this Reading may yet be farther confirmed, and that
of Britannicus also at once refuted, by that which follows in our Poet, saying,
Dolia nudi Non ardent Cynici; where the word Ardent were merely frivolous, were
not the word hamis or the like in sense, implying quenching (by way of
opposition) used before. And for the word hama, it is used by the younger
Pliny, lib. 10. Epist. 42. where writing to Trajan about a vast fire that
happened in Nicomedia, and laying the fault of the increase partly upon the
lazinels of the people, which stood only looking on, he adds, and alioqui
nullus uspiam in publico sipho, nulla hama, nullum denique instrumentum ad
incendia compescenda; that howsoever (though they had used their diligence) yet
there was no conduit-pipe, no bucket, briefly, no instrument for the slaking of
fire.

11. -- If broken, 'Twas leaded, or a new was straight be-spoken. -- Si
fregeris altera fiet Cras domus, aut cadem plumbo commissa manebit. Diogenes
his Tub is scarce more known, than mistaken, if we consider it by the vulgar
name: which only, because it has prevailed in speech, I retain, though the word
in the use of speech implies, a vessel of wood; whereas that of Diogenes was of
Earth. And this is manifest from this of our Poet, who both plainly denies it
to be combustible, (and so not to have been of wood) saying, Dolia nudi Non
ardent Cynici, and also calls it testa; adding, that if it were by mischance
broken, it was sometimes leaded again. Which two last things are a little
considerable; the Matter, and the Repair of it. And for the first, the name
testa does partly declare the matter, being usually drawn from tosta, as being
hardened either by natural heat, as in shells, or by the heat of the fire, as
in argilla, a clammy earth or clay, or in creta, a kind of chalk; and so as
Juvenal says, not subject to the fire. Sometimes later is mistaken for it; as
the accurate Petrus Nannius observes in his Miscellan. lib. 2. cap. 16. who
shows that later does not signify clay that is hardened in the fire, but only
in the sun. For otherwise the Proverb Laterem lavas were without sense; since
later, if it were the same with testa, could not by washing become the fouler,
and so not signify, according to the intent of the Proverb, Labor in vain.
Later then (so called from the broad fashion of it) being earth or clay
hardened only in the Sun, is of the nature of a turf, which, the more it is
washed, the fouler it becomes. For which cause Theocritus calls it (...). 1.
Lutulentam: which Erasmus rendering by nigram silicem, is reprehended by
Nannius, the flint being not the fouler for washing. Concerning the second
thing here intimated, the repair of an earthen yessel when broken, to omit that
which they call plaster of Paris, said to be made of chalk, thoroughly boiled,
and kneaded like dough, of which they make statues, that will bear working with
the chizel; and to speak only of the ordinary testa, or clammy earth hardened
with the fire, if it be cracked, experience teaches to close it again with
soder, a lead and pewter tempered together; or with a cement made of rosin,
bees wax, brimstone, butter and chalk thoroughly tempered. Some with a small
square drill (or steel bodkin) will bore holes in a cracked earthen vessel, and
artificially sow up a crack with a small wier; then with a little cement so
close up the holes, that it shall hold any liquors: which experiment, not
vulgar, I have accidentally seen performed.

12. -- Nay, Narcissus's store Thou Wilt slight. -- Sufficient animo, nec
divitiae Narcissi. -- Though a little, says the Poet, be enough for Nature, and
so for Wisdom, even such provision of garden-stuff, as served the temperate
Epicurus (for he is taken for such an one, by some that think themselves not
mistaken) or as, before His days, served the wise Socrates: yet I will allow
thee, according to the Desires of These times, and Otho's size, to seek to
attain even a Knight's estate, that is, 3125 l. (which is to be understood of
so much yearly revenue;) yea, says he, to get twice as much (6250 l.) or if
thou will, thrice as much ( sac tertia quadraginta, says he, that is,
sestertia; 9375 l.) But, says he, if this will not satisfy thee, then will thy
greediness not be content with the wealth of Croesus, or with the riches of
Persia; no, nor with the treasures of Narcissus himself. Which expression
contains a bitter jeer, Narcissus being but a freed-man, though of Claudius the
Emperor; but of so vast an estate and power, that, as it is here implied, it
exceeded example; [see Pliny, lib. 33. cap. 10.] and even commanded his Lord
and Emperor, and that to the killing of the Empress her self, Messalina. Upon
occasion of which passage concerning the wealth of Narcissus, Franciscus
Floridus Sabinus, in his Lection. Subseciv. lib. 3. cap. 5. wonders at
Erasmus, that he made not this, Divitiae Narcissi, one of his Adagies: to whom
I may answer in his behalf, as I conceive of his Excellent Labor, that his
Wit did not consider what Might be, but his Judgment what Was already drawn
into Proverb.

SATYR. XV.
ARGUMENT.
The Egyptian Gods seem Monsters rare:
The Egyptians yet worse Monsters are.
Their Feasts they keep with such large Ease,
They Are not their Mirth, but their Disease.
In Cruelty they are unconfined,
Beyond all Cause; Below their Mind,
All Beasts are to their own kind Mild:
These Mankind men toward men are Wild.
In Egypt Juvenal did see
This Fact: Verse it is, Not Poetry.
MAd (1) Aegypt's Gods all know: the Crocodile,
Bythinian Volusius, some so style.
Some to the Snake-fed Ibis erect Shrines.
A sacred Monkies golden Statue shines,
Where (2) the Half- Memnon's Magic strings do sound,
And old Thebes Hundred Gates be whelmed in the ground.
There (3) Seafish, here River-fish they adore:
The (4) Dog whole Towns, Diana none implore.
Bite but a Leek or Onion, you're Heaven's Foe!
O holy Nations in whose Gardens grow
These Gods! The woolly (5), Creature's no man's meat;
Not the soft kid: but Man's flesh you may eat.
When at a Feast Ulysses did intrance
Alcinous with such a tale, perchance (6)
Some at the Fabler vexed; some jeered as fast.
Will none into the Sea this fellow cast,
Worthy a true Carybdis, who immane
Cyclops and Laestrygonians thus does sain?
I Will sooner think a Scylla one may find,
Cyane's rocks that meet, and Bags of Wind;
Or that Elpenor, upon Circe's fine
Touch, grunted straight, and's Rowers all turned Swine.
What, thinks he we Phaeacians are so vain?
From Corcyraean draughts thus one of Brain
Yet Free, might have replied. No proof, he knew,
The Ithacan had. We will tell wonders too;
When (7) Junius yet was Consul, lately done
At Coptus, where they are scalded with the Sun;
The whole Rout's Crime, beyond all Buskined strains.
For, fra^^^ from Pyrrha all your Tragic Trains,
A whole Town's not an Actor. Hear, what Rag^
Has ^^ted then, in this out fiercer Age!
Between two Towns, whose fields each other bound,
Old grudge, immortal hate, a desperate wound
Burns still: 'tween Ombos and Tentyra. Th'odds
Is, that each place does hate the others Gods.
None but their own, they hold, should be esteemed
Divine. At the Ombians Feast Day then there seemed
To the chief Tentyrites occasion fit.
To spoil the Joy and Feast; whiles they admit
Invasion; whiles their Tables were in pride
Spread by their Temples and the Highways side.
Whom lazing on their Feast-beds day and night,
The (9) Sun found seav'n days after! A rough sight
Aegypt's here; yet the Barbarous Rout no less
I found, then Lewd Canopus, for Excess.
Besides, they thought the Victory at hand,
Over men in Wine, that scarce could speak or stand.
They dance, whiles their black Minstrel plays; and now
All ointments serve, whiles flowers do crown their brow.
Hence (10) Hate gnaws these: Loud Quarrels first display
Their minds inflamed; the Trumper to the fray!
With equal shout their fury meets; instead
Of Sword, their mere hand wounds: few jaws but bleed.
The whole Rout scarce yields one whole Nose: but ye
May in each Band of them half-faces see;
Changed faces through torn checks in ghastly wise,
Bones yawning; fists all blood from wounded eyes.
Yet this they think but sport, like Armies led
By boys, till on some Carcasses they tred.
Indeed, why do so many thousands fight,
If all Live! They press then with fiercer might:
And stooping down stones they begin to throw;
In Home-Sedition These for Weapons go:
Not such as once Turnus and Ajax cast,
Or great Tydides, who almost displaced
Aenaeay's hip: but such as our hands throw,
Unlike to Theirs; such as our Age does know.
From that size men in Homer's time did fall:
Tke Earth now brings up men both Bad and small.
What Gods look'd-on, with Flout and Hate they viewed.
But to bring-on our Fable. When renewed
The Assailants are with Aid, their bolder hearts
Restore the fight with Swords and gauling darts.
The Om^ians turn their backs: The Tentyrites,
That do enjoy their neighboring Palms delights,
Pursue. When one through fear flies headlong; but
Falls, and is caught: Him into bits they cut:
That so the Conquering Rout might with this one
Carcass rest pleased: They gnawed clean every bone!
No pot, not spit they used: 'twas dull, they saw,
To wait the Dressing: it pleased well, though raw.
We may be glad, the Fire was not profaned:
Which wise Prometheus, though by theft, regained
From Heaven to Earth. I Am glad for the Elements sake;
And think, Volusius, thou like joy do take.
But He, whose stomach suffered him to eat
The Carcass, thought he never had sweeter meat.
For doubt not, but that in a Crime so vast
The Throat was first pleased. He then that came last,
The flesh being gone, did drink the blood he found,
Scooping it with his fingers from the ground.
The Vascons, Fame says, once fed thus, and were
Glad so to live. The Case was Different: there
Was Fortune's spite, the worst of War; indeed
A desperate state, long siege and ghastly need.
This Food then and Example might have claimed
Pity; this People, which I thus now named,
After all Herbs, all Beasts, and what the rage
Of Famine tempts to (which did half-asswage
The Foe, that saw such pale limbs, skin and bone)
Tore others flesh, ready to eat their own.
What Man then, or what God, could well deny
Pardon to such brave Men, as first did try
The immanest Plague? whom their ghosts might forgive,
Whose Carcasses they eat merely to Live,
Yet Zeno said, we may not for Life do
All things. But (11) could a Vascon be a true
Stoic in old Metellus's days? Now where
Don't they a Greek and Latin Athens rear?
Eloquent France does Britans teach to plead:
Thule will Rhetoricians hire to Read.
Brave yet the People was, I named, no less
Loyal, then stour. Sagantus, for distress
Of Ruin Greater, a like fact excuses.
Aegypt's rage the Maeotick shrine refuses.
For though the Taurick Foundress with dire Rites
(Not now to distrust Poets) strangers Frights,
Nay, kills: yet when the Sacrifice his Life
Has lost, he nothing fears beyond the knife,
But what hard straight, famine, siege, warlike act,
Made these dare such a Monster? By what fact
Could they have more made their kind Nilus slow
To Rise and their parched Memphian Land o're-flow?
Never Cimbrians, Britons, Tartars, Scythians fought,
Although immane, like this vile darstard-rout;
Small Sails they hoise in Earthen boats near shoars,
In painted vessels plying their short Oars.
What expiating torture can one find
For such a Crime and People, in whose mind
Dwell a like Rage and Famine!
Gentle hearts
To Men, Nature professes she imparts:
Which Courteous Tears, our Souls best part, does lend:
It bids us then bewail a morning friend;
A guilty Prisoners squalid state; a small
Orphan, that does his cheating Guardian call
T'account; when the Lads locks with tears so flow,
That by the face the sex we cannot know.
Nature commands a groan, when in the street
A ripe-ag'd Virgin's Funeral we meet;
Or when (12) a Babe's Interred, as, for the Fire,
Too young. For, what good man, that would aspire
To Ceres secret torch, but must confess,
He subject is to All humane Distress?
By This from Beasts we differ: Reverend wit
Man only has, for Divine studies fit,
To learn and practice Arts. The Sacred Power
Which groveling Creatures want. At first so kind
Was the World's Builder, he gave us a mind:
Them only Souls; That mutually we might
Ask help and yield it: The disperss'd unite,
Leave Groves, that did our Grandsires once confine;
Build Houses; To our roof Another's join;
By doubled trust to make sleep safe: Defend
Our Soldiers fallen, or that with vast wound bend:
Give onset at one Trumpet; All armed stay
In the same Towers, shut up with the same key.
But Serpents now Love more. The wild Beast will (13)
Spare one like-spotted. Did e're Lion kill
A weaker Lion? In what Forest e're
Did greater Boar a Boar in pieces tear?
The Indian Tigress though she furious be,
A Tigress Loves. Fierce Bears with Bears agree.
But man dire weapons on like anvile makes:
It Is nothing Now; when weeding-hooks and rakes
The first Smiths made: their tired skill did afford
Mattocks and Plow-shares; The it knew no Sword.
Lo here a Rout, whose Rage is not content
To kill a man: The Breast, Arms, Face, are spent
As Food! should now Pythagoras his Eye
See This; what would he say? whether not fly?
Who did from Beast's Flesh, as from Man's, refrain:
Nor (14) could his belly some course Pulse obtain.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Fifteenth Satyr.
Some ancient pretenses for the Egyptian Idolatry, showed from Tully, Nigidius
Figulus and Porphyry. Sanconiathon, the Tyrian Historian, his Works Lost. The
pretenses anciently for the Roman and Grecian Idolatry, showed from Julian the
Apostata, and Maximus, the Tyrian Platonist. Crepitus Ventris, an Egyptian
Deity. Memnon's Musical statue. Caeruleus sometimes used for Aequoreus.
Brodaeus his Conjecture about Aeluri. Mercury anciently worshipped by the
Egyptians in the form of Anubis. Juvenal excused concerning the worship of
Diana in Egypt. Why the Egyptians abstained from the use of Onions and
Mutton. Aretalogus. The troublesome doubt about Consule Vinco, rectified from
the best Manuscripts, and the Roman Fasti. The Number of Seven held Sacred by
the Egyptians; showed from Pignorius and Leo Afer. The Vascones and Saguntines
distinguished; against the Scholiast. The Burying of Infants without Burning.
Suggrundarium; the form of it presented. The Tradition concerning Pythagoras
his Abstinence from Flesh and Beans, with the Reasons of it, examined from
Jamblichus, Laertius, Pliny, Lucian, the Scholiast, Agellius, Hierocles, and
Others.

1.MAD Aegypt's Gods All know. -- Quis-nescit -- qualia demens Aegyptus
portenta colat? -- That the Egyptians were monstrous in their way of Religion,
we have the testimony of Moses, Exodus 8. v. 26. in those words, Shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they
not stone us? And such was the degree of their madness in this point, that in a
great famine which once pressed Egypt, they chose rather to eat man's flesh,
than the flesh of other creatures, which, by their mad superstition, were held
to be sacred. Yet wanted they not pretenses of reason for their defense: and
even Tully Natura Deorum, lib. 1.) could allege, that there was not any
creature worshipped amongst them, but for some special profit which they
received by it. For so indeed, according to some, they adored the bird Ibis,
for eating the eggs of Serpents, which infest their Country; and for
destroying snakes, as some tell us, which are blown from the Lybian Sands to
Egypt by the East Wind; but I suppose they shoul have said, by the West wind,
Lybia lying West from Egypt. They worship also, which may seem more strange,
even the Crocodile, though he devours men; because he kills the Robbers (
Lybians and Arabians) which use to swim over the River Nilus, spoiling and
murdring the Inhabitants. Nigidius Figulus, that famous Roman, anciently
equalled, for his learning, with Varro, does in his Fragments (collected by
Rutgersius, in his Var. Lection. lib. 3. cap. 16. p. 280.) in the title,
Capricornus, give a fabulous reason of the Egyptian worship; saying, that the
Gods coming down to destroy Typhon a Tyrant in Aegyas (whom afterward Jupiter
killed with a thunderbolt) did, whiles they were at consultation about his
destruction, dissemble themselves for certain days under the shapes of
irrational creatures: in remembrance whereof, the People did afterward worship
them under those shapes. But Porphyry [lib. 4. de abstinentia ab esu carnium]
gives a more refined reason; telling us, that the Egyptians did thus shadow
their Theology: because the Divinity passed not only through man, but also
through all the Creatures. With which degree of guess at the chief grounds of
the Egyptian Religion, we must rest satisfied: though pity it was, that
Posterity is deprived of the books of the Phoenitian and Egyptian Theology,
written so long since by Sanconiathon, a Tyrian Philosopher and Historian [as
Suidas tells us; though Porphyry makes him a Berytian] who is said to have
lived before the destruction of Troy, in the time of Semiramis, and of whom
mention is made by Eusebius in his Evangelical Praparations [lib. 1. cap. 9.
and 10. and lib. 10. cap. 9.] as also by Theodoret, Suidas, and Others: who
tell us, that he writ the Phoenician story in that language; which afterward
was translated by Philo Biblius. Yet there wants not store of Others, that have
endeavored to supply such interpretation of their mysteries; as Jamblichus,
Plutarch, Eusebius [De Prap. Evang. l. 2. c. 6.] Proclus, Porphyry, and of
later time Caelius Calcagninus. But whatsoever were the Hieroglyphical reasons,
it was aptly said by Josephus against Appion, [ lib. 2.] that if the World
should follow the Egyptians in their religion, it would quickly be full of
Beasts, and empty of Men. But here we may farther see in our Poet's Censure and
Description of the Egyptian madness, the variety of Idolaters at enmity
against themselves? And, alas, the Romans and Graecians did but Think
Themselves safe in their way of worship, though they raised their defense to
the daz'ling height of Reason: as may be seen in Julian's Fragment of an
Epistle published by Petavius [p. 534.] where he says, Our Ancestors made
Images, and other signs, to be representations of the Gods, -- (...), i.e. Not
that we believe them to be Gods, but that, by them, we may worship the Gods. To
which we may add what the elegant Platonist, Maximus the Tyrian has in his
Dissertation. 38. where purposely and largely he handles this argument;
pleasantly also censuring the Egyptian devotion, saying, that in Egypt, The
Gods die, and are mourned for: that There you may see their Temples and their
Sepulchers; that there they offer to them Tears and Honors. And to show the
sure, though ill-grounded superstition of them in this belief, he tells a story
of an Egyptian woman, which nourished a young crocodile: whereupon, the rest
of the Egyptians thought her a most happy woman, and the nurse of their God,
and not a few sought to please both Her and her Darling. He adds, that this
woman had a young son about the age of her God, whose play fellow he was; and
that, whiles for tenderness of body the God crocodile seemed rame, all was
well: but that when strength came to him, his nature came to him, and [though
he had spoiled his own sport] he eat up his play-fellow: that the mother
notwithstanding, though indeed wrerched, rejoiced at the death of her child, as
most happy, being so honored as to be made the sacrifice of her house-God.
Whether the mother her self also were afterward so honored or not by her Live
Idol, the Author tells us not; but by this we may sufficiently see their
dreadful devotion! Which may make less our wonder at a story in Diodorus (a
witness of the fact,) who relates, that when Ptolomy entertained the Romans,
and was declared their Friend, a Roman having but accidentally killed a Cat,
was so assaulted by the bloody superstition of the people, that neither the
Kings Officers sent for his defense, not the terror of the Romans, though at
that time so great, were able to rescue him. But at Pelusium, Crepitus Ventris
was a Deity, for which they are jeered at by St. Jerome, in these words on
Isaiah, cap. 46. Vt taceam de formidoloso and horribill Crepitu ventris
inflati, quae Pelusiaca religis est!

2. Where the Half- Meu^non's magic strings do sound. Dimidio magice resonant
ubi Me^^^^e cherda. The statue of Memnon at Thebes in Egypt, (which once had
an hundred gates, though in Juvenal's time it was become a ruinous heap) was
very famous. The matter off it was brass, if we believe the Scholiast; but
Tacitus in the second of his Annals, says it was Stone, the upper part whereof
is said to have fallen down in an Earthquake, and that therefore it is here
called Limidius Memnon. The Scholiast says, that it was formed holding an harp
in its hands (which may be employed in our Poet's description) and that at
certain times it did use to sing. Suidas more particularly says, that it
yielded a sound at the rising of the Sun, as soon as the beams of it struck
upon the mouth of the statue. Some say, that with an Humane voice it usually
saluted the Sun and the King: till that Cambyses coming thither, and destroying
the City, caused it, in a curiosity, to discover the suspected fraud of it, to
be opened: after which time, though it continued to salute the Sun, it sullenly
left off to salute the King. See Pliny, lib. 37. cap. 7. Strabe an accurate and
inquisitive man, was at this statue with Aelius Gallus (as he tells us in his
7th. book) and heard the sound, but acknowledges, that he could not understand
the cause. Conjectere did atrribute it to Magic: and this Oypsie Devil
continued this trick till the coming of our Savior; as Eusebius notes, in
Chronicis, speaking of Amenophis. But our Poet, if we take resonant strictly,
implies that it continued longer even till Juvenal's old age. See concerning
this statue, Rhodigine. lib. 22. cap. 5.

3. There Seafish, here River-fish they adore. Illic caruleos, hic piscem
fluminis, etc. Brodaeus in his Miscell. lib. 7. cap. 2. believes that it should
be Illic elures, i. e. feles; the Egyptians, as is acknowledged, worshipping
Cats. But Marquardus Frehevus in his Notes on Ausonius his Mosella, column. 38.
Upon that of the Perch, Nec te delicios mensarum, Perca, silebis, Amnigenas
inter pisces dignande marinis, says, that those which here Ansonius calls
marinos, Juvenal, Sat. 15. in this verse, calls Caeruleos, and commends
Scaliger for observing this (upon Tibullus:) but Turnebus also says as much,
lib. 8. cap. 17. that caerulei are marini. Which, though I grant to be true,
yet not always; as may appear from that passage of Virgil, a Master of the
Latin language, in the 8th. of the Aeneads; where he brings in Nilus calling
unto him, with the vvaring or motion of his garment, those that were overcome
and fled, according to the Poet's words, Contra autem magno maerentem corpore
Nilum,
Pandentemque sinus, and tota vest vocantem
Caeruleum in gremium, latebrosaque flumina victos.
Where we may observe, that Caeruleus is applied to a River, particularly to
Nilus. Wherefore I would not in this place take it as they do, by way of
distinction, for the Sea, as opposite to a River, were it not for these
motives: first, because I grant that it does usually signify as they observe;
yet not always, as appears from Virgil: secondly, because the generality of
Copies has caeruleos, not aeluros: thirdly, because otherwise fluminis would
seem superfluous, it being enough to have said, Illic aeluros, piscem; but
fluminis being added, makes with caeruleos, which goes before, a convenient
opposition: lastly, because, without caeruleos, to have said piscem fluminis,
had been to imply, that they worshipped only River-fish; whereas it is
acknowledged, that they worshipped both forts.

4. The Dog whole towns, Diana none implore. Oppida toca canem venerantur, nemo
Dianam. Concerning the first part of this assertion, Plutarch, de Islde and
Osyride, says, that they ceased to worship the Dog, because a dog eat the
carcass of Apis, which was cast out by Cambyses; whereas Herodotus ( lib. 5.)
tells us, that Apis was buried without Cambyses his knowledge, whiles he lay
sick, in the Temple, of his thigh which putrifted. Besides, Diodorus and
Josephus ( lib. 2. contra. Appion.) Witness that the Dog was worshipped by the
Egyptians; as Pignorius notes, Men's. Isiac. Exposit. fol. 42. Apuletus also,
lib. ult. Metam. says, -- Nuns aurea facie sublimis attollens canis cervices
arduos Anubis; love caduceum gerens; implying in effect, that Mercury was
worshipped in the shape of Anubis; Anubis being represented with the ensigns of
Mercury. Which may be confirmed by an expression of Mercury from an ancient
statue thus presented in Ottavio Rossi (an Italian Antiquary his ( Memory
Bresciane, p. 144. where he says, that (by way of Hieroglyphick) Lo figuravano
in un cane con la certra antica, and col caducto. * Juv. Sat. XV. Illust. 4.
dog with caduceus But concerning the latter part of this verse, our Poet is
thought to have erred as much, whiles he affirms, that in Egypt no body
worshipped Diana, it being noted from Herodotus, ( lib. 2.) that she was
worshipped in the City Bubastis, as Pignorius says, de Men's. Isiae. Expos. fol.
33. and by the name (...), a^ the Egyptians termed her, which in the Greek is
the same with 'Asl^^^is (Diana) as Herodotus says expressly in his Euterpe,
(...), Asla^^^. Which worshipping of her under another name, might easily cause
our Poet to think her not to be worshipped there at all. According to which
concealment of her worship, we may in a like kind farther observe, that when
Hyginus, in Capricorn, says Dianam Aelaro simulatam, Prolemaus Flavius, in his
Conjectan. lib. 2. cap. 78. corrects it into Aeluro, quae vox, says he, Graecis
significat felem, and that so it agrees with the known sable, which tells us
that. Diana was turned into a Cat; according to that of the Poet, Feel foror
Phabilatuit; and that thus, also she was by consequence worshipped by, the
Egyptians. But Franciscus Floridus Sabinus, in his Lection. Subseciv. lib. 3.
cap. 1. would clear Juvenal from his supposed error in this place, by saying,
that in particular parts of Egypt they had particular Deities (as appears by
the Ombians and Tentyrites in this Satyr) and so, that he did not deny that
she was worshipped there at all, but rather not by all; because by none in
those parts where He was. If these helps will not give satisfaction, we may
think, that though she was worshipped there in Herodotus his time, yet in a
time so long after, as in Juvenal's, her worship might be out of request,
especially where they had such store of Deities. Or what if it be supposed,
that Juvenal peradventure was ignoram, coming to Egypt, but like Canis ad
Nilum, to have a lap and away; and so was not so cunning in all the Egyptian
Deities; Varro himself testifying, that even all the learned were not
acquainted with all the ancient Deities. Lastly, it may be said, that if in our
Author this be an error, he is yet, being a Poet, as excusable as Plutarch, a
Philosopher. And here Britannicus aptly notes, that the Poet wittily jeers,
whiles he says, that the mad Egyptians worshipped Dogs, and yet not Diana her
self, though the Hunting-Goddess, that employed them.

5. -- The woolly Creature's No man's meat. -- Lanatis animalibus abstinet
omnis Mensa. -- The Poet Proceeds here to mention other things, which the
Egyptians did forbear to eat, as Leeks, Onions, and Murtons the two first
being, as some write, contrary to the nature of the Moon, decreasing when she
increases, increasing when she decreases: thelast being the flesh of the most
lazy creature, the Sheep. For which cause also they hated Wool, as an
excrement of that creature, as Pign. notes in Men's. Isiac. Exposit. fol. 11.
which is proportionally agreeable to Apuleins [in his Apologie] who tells us,
that amongst other rules of Orpheus and Pythagoras, one was, that a garment of
wool was to be accounted Profane.

6. Perchance some at the Fabler vexed, some jeered as fast. Bilem, aut risum
fortasse quibusdam Moverit, ut mendax aretalogus --. When Ulysses, says the
Poet, making relation of his travels to Alcinous King of Phaeacia (otherwise
Corcyra, now the Island Corsu) by whom he was entertained, did recite the
monstrous fables concerning the Cyclopes and Lastrigonians, some Corcyraean as
yet sober might well have replied, that He would rather believe the report
concerning Scylla and Carybdis, the Cyanean rocks at the Thracian Bosphorus,
the Bags, that Aeolus kept the Winds in; and that Elpenor (the companion of
Ulysses) was with his Seamen turned to hogs by Circe's enchantments; then that
there were any Men-eaters: and that he might therefore likewise well have said,
Is there no body that will throw into the Sea this lying Imposter Ulysses, this
Aretalogus, seeking to please us by abusing us? Which name, Aretalogus, is here
by some taken for a description of Crispinus the Egyptian; who is setout also,
Sat. 4. not without scorn. The word is by some drawn from (...) (gratus)
pleasing, signifying such as speak pleasing things, delighting guests and
moving to laughter; so Marcellus Donatus: who in his Dilucidations, on Sueson's
Augustus, cap. 74. says it may come likewise from (...), and so takes it for
such as talk of virtue, but do not practice it, (like those touched in the
Second Satyr, in which sense or near it, as Casaubon, on that of Sueton, takes
it for a Parasitical Philosopher) and for this reason Donatus thinks that
mendax is added. But the first interpretation is the most received; as by
Turnebus ( Adversar. lib. 10. cap. 12.) and Others; and so Aretalogi are by
Pignorius ( de Servis, 79.) rendered by Narratores, Fablers.

7. When Junius yet was Consul: lately done. -- Sed nuper Consule Junio Gesta
--. Some would have it here, Consule Junco, some Vinco, though without proof
and congruity: but the best Copies [the Poetry being helped by a Synaeresis]
have Junio, as Pithaeus reads, according to two Manuscripts which he used, and
accordingly he expounds it of Appius Junius Sabinus, who as he says, was
Colleague with Domitian, A. V. C. DCCCXXXVII. Which reading I likewise choose
both for the like warrant of Copy and agreement of time: for though that
Tacitus tells us of T. Vinius, who was Colleague with Galba, and so it might by
conjecture be Consule Vinio, yet both the word Nuper must here somewhat guide
us, and the probable time of this fact, which being at Juvenal's abode in
Egypt, cannot be better placed, then in the reign of Domitian. And this
Reading, Junio, is confirmed by two of the Copies, which I use ( Corpus-Christi
and Ben. Jonson's Manuscripts.) Only we a little rectify the time of this
Junius his Consulship, it being one year before that which Pithaeus assigns;
namely, in the year of Rome, DCCCXXXVI. in the fourth [or, as some, in the
third] year of Domitian, at which time Juvenal was in Egypt, as is showed in
his Life. The Poet adds, that what He himself will here relate, exceeds all
Tragedies, figuratively meaning so by syrmata, which are the stately long roabs
worn by great persons presented in Tragedies. But whereas such facts are
usually of some One, or but of Few persons, as an Orestes, a Medaea, a
Thyestes, or the like; This was the Fact and Monster of a People.

8. Ombos and Tentyra. The common Copies have here, Combos: but the accurate
Ortelius following Antoninus has Ombos, aptly supposing the mistake to have
been committed by the Amanuensis, who, when the Copy was read unto him,
hearing adhuc Ombos, writ the last letter of the first word twice, and so writ
adhuc Combos. As for the quarrels here described by our Author, amongst the
Egyptians, they are by Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. said to have been nourished
by some of the Egyptian Kings in policy; so to keep the People, whiles
ridiculously divided, from the danger of Conspiracies: though there were other
reasons also of such worship, as Franciscus Floridus Sabinus shows in his
Lection. Subseciv. lib. 3. cap. 1. And from these Egyptian frensies in
irreligion, arose afterward amongst the Christians [according to some] the
wretched fancies of the Manichies, Gnostics and Marcionites. But concerning
the Combatants here spoken-of, some, as the learned Salmasius, deny the Ombians
and the Tentyrites to have been neighbors. Indeed if we look into the Geogr.
Vet. published by the accurate Bertius, we shall find Ombi [as he has to be
seated about 24. degrees in North-Latitude, and on the East of Nilus; and
Tentyra about 26. degrees, and on the West of Nilus; and so about 2 degrees, or
120. miles, asunder. Yet if by these names we understand the People, as the
chief of those parts in Juvenal's time, they may easily be admitted to have
been neighbors, and in zeal to their own superstition to have been also
enemies; the Tentirites destroying Crocodiles, and the Ombians adoring them.
But one cannot reasonably imagine, that Juvenal should tell so strange a story,
and though he were then in Egypt, mistake the names of the people, that were
the Actours.

9. The Sun found Seven days after --! Septimus interdum sol invenit --. The
Egyptians (as also Pythagoras) held the number of Seven to be Sacred; and more
especially they believed, that whiles their feast of seven days lasted, the
Crocodiles lost their inbred Cruelty. See Pignorius, in Men's. Isiac. Expos.
fol. 18. Leo Afer also (in his description of Africa, lib. 8.) says that even
in His time (who lived but in the time of Pope Leo the tenth, who gave him his
own name in Baptism, upon his conversion from Mahometanisme) the custom of
feasting seven days and so many nights was still used for the happy overflowing
of Nilus. The Poet adds, that though the Egyptians in that part where he was,
were but barbarous, they were as luxurious as the Canopians: under which name
he aims at Crispinus, who in the beginning of these Satyrs is called Verna
Canopi, and so base, even amongst the Egyptians; their Priests being Freemen,
their Crafts-men Servile, as the learned Cunaeus notes on this Crispinus; de
Repub. Hebr. lib. 1. cap. 5.

10. Hence Hate gnaws These. Hinc jejunum odium! He speaks of the envious
Tentyrites, who grieved at the Ombians jollity, passed from Spite to a Fight,
and for want of weapons, to throwing of stones, though not very great, but
suitable to the size of men now-adays, says the Poet, according to the common
complaint about the supposed decay of Man's stature; Pliny in his 7th. book,
denying an increase, whiles he says, that few men are taller than their
parents; of which kind of complaint and mistake, see largely and learnedly, in
Dr. Hakewill his excellen Apology. But, says the Poet; A diverticulo repetatur
fabula (that is, to return to our relation) the Tentyrites, who delight in
their stately palme-trees, put the Onbians to slight, and press them sore,
Terga fugae celeri praestantibus omnibus instant: in which place one manuscript
has it thus, Terga fugae celeri praestant instantibus orbs; by which seem to
be meant Ombiorum orbs saltatorii, that the Ombians dancing in Rounds, being
put to the worst, fled: but the contexture following is more agreeable to the
common copies, which have -- Terga -- praestantibus omnibus, instat Qui vicina
colunt. -- Some read -- praestant instantibus Ombis: but then the next verse --
Qui vicina, etc. would imply, that the Ombians conquered them that dwelt at
Tentyra (the Seat of their enemies,) Vicina Ombosae Palmae, for which some read
Pampae, making it the name of a Town; but this change is of small use. Where we
may farther note, that Lubin farther expounds terga fugae praestare, by
exhibere terga fugae, which I believe to be right, yet not all; the word
praestare seeming to imply a scoff at their cowardly flight, as if, methinks,
he said, they stoutly ran away, they made good, or maintained their backs to
their enemies: meaning that they would never turn their faces again to fight
like men. But in the flight, says the Poet, one of the Ombians fell; who was
presently by his enemies slain, and eaten raw: and well it was, says he, that
they did not dress him; for by this means the Fire was not profaned. For which,
says the Poet, as some Interpret it, I conceive a joy; and I think it self does
so, whereby they would attribute figuratively the like joy to the Fire also:
but the Poet says, -- Elemento graetulor, and te Exultare reor, -- which last
words he speaks to his friend Volusius, to whom he writes this Satyr, I
believe Thou also art glad, that the Fire was not profaned: implying, as some
note, that Volusius was a Pythagoraean, and so held the Fire to be sacred: and
accordingly I render it, -- I Am glad for the Element's sake; And think,
Volusius, Thou like joy do take. But he that came, says our Historian, when
the flesh was eaten, scoop'd up the blood with his hand, so to have a draught.
In which passage, it being according to the ordinary copies, -- Vltimus autem
Qui stetit absuinpt^ jam corpore, Lubin offers a pretty conjecture, namely, for
stetit, sitit: implying, that he which came last, and so was yet thirsty,
scoop'd up his draught with his hollovv'd hand; for a guess is plausible.

11. -- But could a Vascon be a true Stoic, in old Metellus's days --? -- Sed
Cantaber unde Stoicus, antiqui praesertim aetate Metelli? The Vascons, says our
Author, did once, as Fame tells us, eat Man's flesh, but it was in extreme
necessity, in a doleful siege: and though Philosophy teaches, that a man should
not do All things to preserve life, yet how could a rude Vascon in the days of
Metellus, be a Philosopher? But now indeed there are Schools of learning every
where: the Britans being thus taught by the French, and the Inhabitants even of
Thule (Island, as Mercator, but Tile-mark a part of Norway, as Ortelius thinks)
now entertaining Professors of Rhetoric. The Saguntines likewise are said to
have eaten Man's flesh, but it was in a like dreadful distress: but the rage of
these Egyptians is such, that the like is loathed at the Taurick shrine of
Diana; where, though men are slain for sacrifices to the Goddess, yet they are
not eaten afterward! But thus barbarously do these wretches provoke their kind
Nilus to deny the enriching of their Country henceforth with his floods; they
being more fierce than the Cimbrians, Britons, and such like, though indeed but
very dastards, fearing to put to Sea, unless in their petty vessels, their
tile-ships, and in Them but creeping by the shore. In which passage though the
Scholiast, and, as it seems, Lubin takes liere the Vascons and the Saguntines
for one people, and so take it but as one instance, other Interpreters do
rightly distinguish them: the Vascons being a part of the Ancient Cantabrians
in the North-East of Spain (their Country being by Ortelius now taken for
Navarre] and their City, wherein they suffered the distress here mentioned,
being Caelaguris, now Calahorra, by the river Iberus: but the Saguntines being
a people in Hispania Tarraconensi, as Ortelius has it, and so in the South-East
of Spain, and their City Saguntum being now Morvedre. Besides, our Author does
here clearly distinguish them; showing that the Vascons were equal for their
fidelity to the Romans, but the Saguntines exceeded them for calamity; Nobili^
ille tamen populus, quem diximus, and par Virtute atque ^^ae, sed major clade
Saguntus. Story will clear this; the Saguntines besieged by Hannibal, being
destroyed; but the Vascons though distressed, whiles besieged by Metellus,
being notwithstanding at last delivered by Sertorius, who was besieged with
them, as Florus (not the elegant Historian) relates in his Epitome of Livy,
lib. 92. For the did not only by many sallies out of the City exceedingly
damnifie the besiegers ( Metellus and Cn. Pompelus sent by the Romans) but by
brave valor and art raise the siege, making Metellus glad to betake himself to
the farther parts of Spain, and Pompey to France, as Florus also relates in his
Epitome of Livie, lib. 93. Yet before this deliverance, the City Calaguris did
indeed suffer extremest famine, as the Elegant Florus says in his History, lib.
3. cap. 22. where speaking of the Cities which were recovered after the death
of Sertorius, he says, Ipsae quoque in Romanam fidem venere Vrbes, Osca, Term;
Tutia; Valentia, Aunima, and in fame nibil non experta Calaguris. But here to
me does appear a doubt not taken notice of by the Interpreters or Others, yet
necessary to be considered and resolved; and that is; with what congruity
Juvenal can here praise the Vascons for their loyalty to the Romans even in
this their siege, equalling them with the Saguntines (saying, that they were
Populus par fide but minor clade) whereas it is apparent, that they took part
with Sertorius, who was a declared Rebel against the Romans? In the distress
of this difficulty (which peradventure was the cause of error both to the
Scholiast and Lubin) to deliver mine own guess, I conceive thus. Juvenal, as it
appears from diverse passages of his work, was a Lover of the Liberty of his
Country, the Roman Common wealth; and in effect, thought the Caesar's
themselves but Intruders upon the ancient and Roman Liberties, having but by
force and fraud mastered their own Country; of which originally and rightly
they were but private parts. According to which persuasion we may find him,
Sat. 5. magnifying Thraseas, Helvidrus, the Bruti and Cassius; and on the
contrary, Sat. 1. and 2. speaking by name against Sylla, and jeering at his
three disciples, as he calls them. Next we may observe, that the Sertorian war,
in which the Vascons were thus distressed, was in the time of the Syllan
faction, though after Sylla's death; as is clear from Florus in liis Epitome of
Livy; mentioning Sylla's death, lib. 90. and the siege of Calagur^^m (as he
there calls it) lib. 92. and the raising of it, lib. 93. But Sylla's Faction
was continued after his death, and having prevailed in the City of Rome,
carried the name of the Commonwealth; Marius and his partakers being some
slain, some fled. In which war though Marius was overthrown, yet as the more
innocent, at least the less guilty (if compared with admirable, yet monstrous
Sylla) he is for his wealth, highly magnified by Juvenal, Sat. 8. Besides,
though the two factions of Sylla and Marius went not under the names of the
Nobility and the People, yet we may remember, that Sylla was of the ancient
family of the Scipio's, and Marius of very mean birth: so that Sylla's actions
might in Juvenal's guess seem to aim at Tyranny, as the actions of Marius at
Liberty. Next, we may take notice, that Sertorius was of the Marian, party; and
so Juvenal, as one giving his judgment of actions, though of ancient time,
seems to account Marius and His friends to have been, of the two sides, the
truer Romans, and accordingly these Vascons, which took part with Sertorius.
When as then Florus in the words above cited says, that Calaguris and the other
Cities were reduced in Romanam sidem, to the Roman allegiance, he speaks after
the common manner of Historians: it being to the allegiance of the Roman City
in title; but in effect, and in Juvenal's judgment, to the Syllan Faction. As
for some smaller doubts in this passage, we may take notice, that one
Manuscript has here, antiqui ^tate metalli: but this will not bear a trial;
since antiquim metallum, as it must imply a better metal, so a better age, than
that wherein these Vascons were thus distressed; which must be acknowledged to
have been but a part of the Iron-Age. Secondly, by the plenty of Learning, and
the French Instruction of the Britans, our Author seems, amongst other things,
to intimate the exercises performed at Lions, and mentioned, Sat. 1. Thirdly,
we must with him distinguish between the Britans and the Britons: the first
being the people of our own Country, Britany; the last, the Britons, being the
Inhabitants of Bretaigne in the North west of France. Lastly, we may take
notice of their earthen ships [if we may so call them] which in those times of
less experience the Egyptians did use: the possibility of which we may
proportionally understand by a less experience, whiles we see earthen vessels,
either empty, or full, swim in a little water, and that fresh also, which is of
less strength. They had also anciently boats made of twigs, covered with lead.
See Dr. Hackwit's learned Apol. lib. 3. cap. 9. Sect. 4.

12. Or when a Babe's interred, as for the fire Top young. -- Vel terr^
clauditur infans, Et minor igue regi. -- The Poet here implies the custom of
the Ancients in burying, not burning, the bodies of Infants, which died before
they had Teeth, as Pliny notes, lib. 7. and that is, as he adds, not till the
7th. month; and the graves of such infants they called Suggrundiaria, as I
have noted before, Sat. 1. Illustrat. 51. Which Roman Custom, it seems, did
extend sometimes as far as the Roman Empire, as may appear from Joan Baptista
Suarez de Salazar, in his Antiguedades. Gaditanas, lib. 1. cap. 4. p. 294. etc.
Where describing Cadiz, he tells us, that there are vaults wrought in stone
under ground 14 foot in length; in breadth and depth 7 foot; and that within in
the sides, there are open pots, and at the bottom or floor of the vaults, there
are coals and bones of a large stature, and round about there are some small
vessels with inscriptions. And in some of the pots, he says, there are small
bones, without any sign of ashes or coals; and then presents a description of
the Suggrundarium. See also of this point Pedro de Medina, in his work, De
Grandez as de Espana, cap. 30. in the description of Cadiz.

13. -- The vvild beast will spare one like spotted -- Parcit Cognatis maculis
fera. -- There is no good man, says the Poet, but must acknovvledge himself
subject to the calamities of life, and therefore should compassionate others in
their distress, if he will be truly a good man, such an one as (...) worthy
of Ceres her secret torch, that is, such an one as will presume to be present
at her sacred Rites, all lewd persons being by the voice of a Crier forbidden
to approach unto her Sacra: which were by Matrons performed in the Night
with Lights, in remembrance that Ceres did in like ^^^ner seek after
Proserpina. Indeed, says he, that we should be tender hearted, nature has
framed us, making us to exceed beasts by giving to Them a soul (as Philosophy
calls it) but to us a Mind: the margin of one Manuscript (Corpus-Christi) aptly
having this note, Anima est qua vivimus, animou, qu^ sapimus: superior scilicet
pars animae; Ausonius P^^^^ also shows the same from other Authorities. Yet
even beasts, says he, do now exceed us in these instructions of nature; Men
being unnatural one toward another, as these Tentyrites were; but even a wild
beast being tender toward another wild beast. Yet Brodaeus in his Miscell.
lib. 3.28. reckons up diverse creatures, that prey upon their own kind, as the
hippopotamus (a beast that lives in Ni^^^) Sows, She cats, the Swan, the
spawning Tun^ie-fish, the Polypus (a fish of many feet,) and the wild ass.
This he does in refutation of Juvenal, and that passage in Horace, Neque; hic
lupis mos, nec fuit le^^^^^, nunquam nisi in dispar seris. Yet Brodaens adds,
H^rum tamen fides sit penes authors: but what needed he then to have troubled
himself with a seeming refutation?

14. Nor could his belly some course Pulse obtain. -- Et ventri indulsit non
omne legumen. That Pythagoras abstained from Flesh and Beans, has been a
general and received tradition: the reason of the first proceeding, as is
thought, from his fond belief of a (...), or passage of the soul of man in
death into other creatures, and consequently from a fear of cruelty in feeding
on them: the reason of the last, his abstaining from beans, passing as a secret
amongst his followers; as may appear by a story in the life of Pythagoras,
written by Jamblichus ( cap. 31.) Vitio there relates, that Dim^^si^^ the
Tyrant (the younger) having a great appetite to know this secret, caused a
couple of this Sect to be brought before him, one Myllias a Cr^t^nian, and his
wife Timycha a Lacedamonian: but the man being asked the reason, made answer,
that the Pythagoraeans indeed did choose to die, rather than to eat beans; and
I, said he, will rather dye, than reveal the reason. Whereupon, says the
Author, he being with indignation sent away, the woman now destitute of the
company and encouragement of her husband, threatened also with tortures, to
declare the reason, was tried with the same question: but being, it seems, more
Pythagoraean, than Woman, she bit out her tongue, and spit it in the face of
the Tyrant I Howsoever aftertimes are not altogether ignorant of the mystery:
the same Jamblichus, cap. 24. in general tells us, that it was (...); for many
sacred and natural causes concerning the soul. But Diogenes Laertius, in the
life of Pythagoras, descends to particulars, alleging Aristotle, and saying,
that such abstinence from beans, as he conjectured, was (...), i.e. sive quod
pudendis similes sint, sive quod inferni fanuis, (sunt enim insoecundae solae)
sive quod corrumpant, sive quod naturae universi similes sint, sive quod
Paucorum dominatu gaudent: nam his in suffragiis utebantur. Lucian (in (...),
as Casaubon alleadges him on that passage of Laertius) gives the reason thus;
(...). To omit for civility the rendering of which passage, I may farther
observe what he adds, that is, that if beans be boild and let lie a few nights,
they will yield a blood-like moisture. And as for those words of Laertius,
(...) Casaubon adds that of Porphyry, de Antro Homerico, T (...). Pliny says,
that Beans dull the senses and disturb the mind with Dreams. Two of the
Manuscripts ( Corpus C^risti and Ben-Jonson's) allege partly the like reason;
as, that they are a meat which dulls the sense and puffs-up the belly: besides,
that in the Bean there is a secret worm. The Scholiast, not without obscurity,
here says, Aversatus and fabam, quae ex sanguine humano orta esset. Nam flores
in sanguinem v^rtuntur, si sic ponatur. Upon which words Pithoeus adds, -- quod
Jequitur de store fabae, alibi me legisse non memint: we apud Porphyrium
quidem, qui banc haeresim doctissimis and elegantissimis libris defendere
conatus est. Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. lib. 3. says, that the Pythagoraeans
having wives, (as Pythagoras himself had, Theano mentioned by Jamblicus, in
Vit. Pithag. cap. 27.) did abstain from Beans, because they cause barrenness in
men and women. Indeed Theoph^astus, de ^arsis plantarum, says that if the husks
of beans be set near the roots of trees newly planted, they will make them dry
and barren. But Galen and other Physicians tell us, that beans, used as diet,
are rather a cause of fruitfulness, then of barrenness. Yet against this
received tradition concerning. Pythagoras there is one thwart testimony in
Agellius, lib. 4. cap. 11, where he says, that Aristoxenus a Musician, the
Scholar of Aristotle and a diligent searcher into ancient learning relates in a
book, which he writ of Pythagoras, that he used to eat beans, because they keep
the body soluble; and that he likewise did eat pig and kid. Which relation,
says Agellius, this Aristoxenus, it seems, heard from a friend, one Xenophilus
a Pythagoraean, and from some others more ancient, who lived not long after
Pythagoras his own times. The like also concerning his eating of flesh,
Ag^llius writes from the authority of one Alexis a Poet, in a Comedy called the
Life of Pythagoras: adding also his own conjecture about the original of this
supposed error and tradition, whiles he thinks it to have first come-up, by
mistaking that verse, written by Empedocles [who was a Pythagorean.) (...)
where some expound (...) by a bean, whiles others, says he, think it signifies
testiculos; the Pythagoraeans after their manner of instruction calling them
(...), quia sint (...); and thus that it was only a mystical precept againg
Lust. But by his leave, though this were granted to be the mystery of the
precept, it does neither deny nor weaken the common tradition. And whereas
Agellius farmer says, ^^^t Ph^ta^^^ in his first book de ^omato, says that
Aristotle writes of the Pythagoraeans, that they did not abstain from flesh; I
think ^ot that part of the tradition so much (though enough) confirmed, as the
other concerning Beans. Nor does the Hearsay of Aristoxenes seem equal to the
general traditon confirmed by Pythagoras his chiefest followers, and more
particularly by that story of Dionysus before related. Wherefore I think the
opinion of Rhodigine, lib. 27. cap. 17. to be more curious, then sound; who
says, that the Pythagoraeans by (...) meant only an egg; quod in eo sit
animalium (...), i. e. saetura; and thus would make void the common tradition.
Against which novelty may be added the Authority of Hierocles the Alexandrian
Philosopher, a great Pythagoraean: who in his Commentaries on Pythagoras his
Aurea carmina, p. 303. mentioning his Abstinence from Beans and Flesh, makes it
the rule and way of his Temperance, for the Purifying; of the Mind. Besides, he
does more particularly and intimately reconcile some seeming inconveniences,
concerning some precepts in this argument: for, says he, whereas there may be
thought to be some absurdity in these rules, (...), and (...), Abstain from
living creatures, and Abstain from the heart of creatures; as if the last were
superfluous, being forbidden in the first; he answers, that those precepts are
distinct, according to the progress of disciples; the one (not to eat of the
heart) being taught as a part of Abstinence to Novices, the other afterward
[to abstain from feeding on Living creatures] as a rule of Perfection to
Proficients. And easily may we believe his practice of such rules, they being
partly drawn from the Egyptian Priests, who likewise did abstain from Beans;
which it was not lawful for them to eat or sow, or look upon, as Herodorus
relates in his Euterpe. Pliny indeed [upon the Authority of Varro] lib. 18.
cap. 12. says in part the like of the Fl^^en; as, that he might not eat the
Bean, quoniam in store ejus lugubres litera reperiantur that is, says the
Interpreter Dr. Ph. Hilland, Letters that show Heaviness and signs of death.
Indeed the flower of the ordinary bean is, as the Herbalists tell us, [though
there is more variety in their colours] white with black spots, or of a darkish
purple Pliny there gives also another reason of abstaining from the bean,
saying, -- ut alii tradidere, quoniam mort^orum animae sint in ea qua de causa
parentando utique assumtitur. The like reasons and precepts then, it is most
probable, that Pythagoras learned at his being in Egypt: for thither he
travailed, us Laertius tells us; learned the Language, and was intimate in
their Mysteries. Jamblichus, also not only relates the like, but adds [ lib. 1.
cap. 4.] that he continued in Egypt, two and twenty years. See also Malchus,
his Life of Pythagoras; and the learned Rivershusius his annotations on it.

SATYR. XVI.
ARGUMENT.
Soldiers and their Camp-Freedome here
Our Poets Wit does Praise and Jeer.
Yet of his Gifts the General should
Be Free, as they are of their Blood.
WHo, Gallus, can a Blessed Wars Gains recite?
For, if into a Prosperous Camp I light,
Let my young fear with lucky Star its Gate
Enter. More worths one hour of courteous Fate,
Then (1) if to Mars kind Venus for me writes,
Or Juno, in Sandy Samos that delights.
Common Advantages we first may see:
Of which, that is not the least, that to strike thee
No Gown'd-man dares; if struck, he hides his woe;
Nor dares his Teeth dash'd-out to the Praetor show;
Nor his knob'd face all black and blew, with Eyes
To which All Art promise of Help denies.
Seeks he redress? (2) His Judge a Cassock clothes:
Whose shoes and large boots his High Seat never loathes.
Camillus's course we take; by the old Camp-Laws
Beyond the Trench no Soldier pleads his Cause,
Far from his Ensign. The Centurion sure
Will against a Soldier Right me. I Will procure
Recompense too; Suppose the complaint Right.
The Regiment and Companies shall yet, with might
Conjoined, Oppose. Shall the Revenge, say they,
Exceed the wrong? Thus then such causes may
Vagellius the Mutinian Lawyer plead.
Will thou having but two things, yet not dread (3)
So many thousand nailed Boots? Art from Rome
So fled? Or, who is thy Pylades, to come
Within the Bulwark? Tears no more abuse,
Nor trouble Friends; who will themselves excuse.
Produce, whoso'ere it is, whom the Judge thinks meet,
That saw the stroke, and that dares say, I see it;
And I Will believe him worthy of the Beard
And Hair of our Forefathers. Less is feared
Perjury against a Clown, then Truth to swear
Against a Soldiers State and Fame.
Lets heat
More Favors (4) which to these Sworn-Men belong.
If a lewd neighbor keeps from me by wrong
Some field or valley of my ancient ground,
Or does dig-up my sacred stone, my Bound;
To which (5) my yearly Pulse and Cake I brought:
Or if my Debtor says, my claim is naught,
Denies his Handwriting, or pretends Flaws;
A year (6) we wait, till every body's Cause
Thinks the Time's come. Thousand delays then lead
Us on: Only the Seats so often they spread.
Fair-tongu'd Caeditius lays his Cloak aside:
Fuscus leaks ost. When the Cause should be tried,
We part. Thus fight We in the Law's slow Sand.
They, whom Arms clad, and the Belt Girds, command
A Hearing straight. Their means never, without fruit,
Are Gaul'd with the long Trigger of a Suit.
Besides, None but your Soldier makes a Will
His Father Living. For, what He gets still
By War, That Is no part of his Father's state.
Coranus then, that does of the Standard wait,
And still earns Pay, is by his Father, Old
And Trembling Soothed. His worth may make him bold;
To his brave Acts He his Rewards does owe.
Indeed the General should his Guists place so,
That the most Valiant, Happy like their Pains,
Should ride with Trappings all, all with Gold-Chains.
Trin-Uni Deo Gloria. ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Sixteenth Satyr.
The Sixteenth Satyr most probably showed to be Juvenal's, both from Ancient
Authority, and diverse passages in it self; against the Scholiast. Praetor, the
use of the word. Bardiacus judex. Caligatus. Caliga: the Name, Matter, Fashion
and use of it; showed from Nigronus, Antonius Augustinus, Petrus Faber, St.
Jerome and Others. Fulmentae; Suppacta. Donativum clavarium. Clavi militares;
their various Matter. Caliga, opposed to the City-Shooe, and so strictly the
same with Calceus Castrensis. Sacramentum, taken for a Soldier. Meer-stones
accounted Sacred; Sacrifice used at their placing. Comes Signorum. Annus
Litium, expounded by Servius, better by Pithaeus.

1.THen if to Mars kind Venus for me writes, Or Juno, in Sandy Samos that
delights. Quam si nos Veneris commendet epistola Marti, Et Samia genetrix quae
delectatur arena. To omit the useless doubt about the order of this Satyr, as
whether it be the last, as in some copies it is, or the last save one, as in
others; we may more materially consider, whether or not, this Satyr be
Juvenal's: it being left out of the most ancient Manuscripts, as Lubin says;
according to which the Scholiast, I grant, says; Ista a plerisque exploditur,
and dicitur non esse Juvenalis; Rutgersius also, lib. 4. cap. 4. saying that it
is -- ignoti poetae, nibil enim minus quam Juvenalis. Yet Lubin acknowledges,
that Joseph Scaliger thought it to be Juvenal's; and so indeed long before him
did Priscian and Servius. Which opinion I the rather choose, because to me it
seems to contain some quick passages, as exquisitely satirical, as any thing in
him. Witness, for instance, that in the beginning, -- plus etenim fati valet
hora benigni, Quam si nos Veneris commendet epistola Marti, and Samia genetrix,
quae delectatur arena; that is, One hour of Right Luck shall more steed a
Soldier, than a commendatory letter from Venus, or Juno [so honored and
delighted with the I^iand Samos) unto Mars the god of War in his behalf. Than
which, what could be spoken with more sharpness, the One being his Sweetheart,
the Other Mr Mother? who is here said to delight in Samia arena: by which some
understand the Shows celebrated to the honor of Juno, in the arena, or
Shewplace, which was sprinkled with sand, to suck up the blood of the
Gladiators or combatants; though in this place it would seem a little
inconvenience, in a sandy Country to sprinkle sand upon sand. The more
received reason is, that Samos was generally and extremely sandy, yet beloved
of Juno, not only because she had a Temple there, but also and especially,
because it was the place of her birth. Where we may farther note, to prevent
mistake, that the Samos here intended, there being more places of the same
name, is that which lies off at Sea over against Ephesus; being about 55
degrees of Longitude, and about 38 in Latitude, as Mercator places it. But
whereas on this passage concerning the Fortune of Soldiers Britannicus thinks,
that the Poet implies the greater efficacy of the stars, according to the
scheme of the heavens, at a Soldiers first entrance, into the Camp, according
to the Egyptian Superstition: I rather think, since he jeers at such vanity of
opinion, Sat. 6. that he does here thus preser Fate, by which the severer sort
of the Heathen seemed to understand a Deity indeed, before the supposed power
of their fictitious Gods. Witness again, in defense of this Satyr, as
Juvenal's, that expression of the violating the Meere-stones of one's
Inheritance, -- Convallem ruris aviti Improbus, aut campum mibi si vicinus
ademit, Et sacrum effodit medio de limite sa^^^, Quod mea cum vetulo coluit
pulls annua lib^; than which, what more sweetly poetical? Witness That also, --
toties subsellia tantum sternuntur, jam facundo ponente lacernas Caditio, and
Fusco jam micturiente parati Digredimur, lentaque fori pagnamus arena; then
which, what more pleasantly satirical? Witness that also, Necres atteritur
long sufflamine litis; as also that, -- ergo Coranum Quamvis jam tremulus
captat pater, -- expressing a greedy father gaping after the estate of his own
son. Lastly, witness that in the conclusion of the Satyr, Vt laeit phaleris
omnes and torquibus omnes; not only implying the duty of a General in the
reward of brave Souldlers, but also, with a jeer, the neglect of such duty, in
the manner of the expression; whiles he says, that they should have a jolly
reward, and swagger it out bravely in their trappings and chains of gold,
intimating, al^^, that there was neither such encouragement to the Soldier,
nor consequently, such justice in the General. Yet this I grant, that in this
Satyr there is not such rolling eloquence, as generally flows in the rest:
which yet I will not attribute to his old age [though it is clear that he writ
it in his old age] because at that season of his lise, he writ also the 15th.
Satyr: which does not yield to any for an admirable expression of natural
compassion. Wherefore I think most conveniently, that it was some first draught
or design of a Satyr intended by our Author, and so a True one, not a Perfect
one. The occasion of this Satyr is thought to have been our Poet's employment
into Egypt, whither, it is said, he was sent under the pretense and honor of
some Military service, but indeed, by way of revenge, for jeering at Paris,
though but a Player, yet Domitian's favorite: who, as it is said, Sat. 8. was
able to bestow Offices, as Praefectures and the like. But whereas Lubin thinks
that our Poet writ this, when he was fourscore years of age, I belive he much
mistakes, or else he must assign unto him a very long life. For though we
should suppose that he writ not, at least, not published this, to avoid danger,
till Domitlan's death [which was eleven years after this Service, and Junius
his Consulshi and not till then reckon our Poet to be 80 years of age, it would
follow, that he lived an 100 years [which I know none that offer to affirm]
since he himself mentions threescore years from Fonteius his Consulship ( Anno
urbis Conditae, 811.) which number reaches from thence to the Third year of
Adrian, A.V.C. 871. between which and Domitian's death are above 20 years,
namely, the reign both of Nerva and Trajan; which should by that account be
added to the former 80. Some tell us, in explication of the beginning of the
13th. Satyr, that Juvenal writ in the 21th. year of Trajan: but we may
remember, that Trajan reigned not full twenty years. Britanicus somewhat more
warily, thinks that Juvenal writ all his work in Trajan's time; but if he had
said, that he published it not till then, he had, I think, spoken nearer the
truth: since it must be granted, that some of his Satyrs, at least some part
of them were written, and, though not divulged, yet discovered before: for
else, how could he have been thus sent into Egypt, for writing against Paris?

2. -- His Judge a Cassock clothes, Bardiacus judex datur hac punire volenti.
The Poet here under pretense of setting out the Privileges of Soldiers,
satyrically lays open their Licentiousness, saying, that if one, who is not a
Soldier, have by a Soldier his teeth beaten out, and his face made almost
incurably black and blue; yet dares he not show his wrong to the Prator (for
that was the name for the City judge; but anciently for the Consul also, and
generally for him, that had anciently the government of the Army, as I have
noted, Sat. 10. Illustrat. 6.) the Judge being a Soldier, and the Cause, by
the old Law of Camillus, being to he heard within the Camp, that so the
Soldier might not be drawn from his service. In which expression, the Military
judge (the Centurion, says the Scholiast) is by the Poet called Bardiacus
judex, or, as some copier have it, with little difference in the sense,
Bardaicus, that is, Gaulish, or rude and barbarous, as Turnebus with some
expounds it; or as others, a Centurion wearing the Gaulish Soldier's cloak, or
Cassock: whom he farther describes by his seat of Judicature, at which, as he
coursely sets it out, hung his boots and such ensigns. Now all causes against a
Soldier, being to be heard within the trench (fossa) or strictly the rampire
or bullwork (vallum) which encompassed the Camp; no man, says the Poet, in so
foolhardy, as to come thither to plead against a Soldier, unless it be
Vagellius, the Mutinian Lawyer; who, as it seems, was one in those days, that
would venture upon desperate Causes.

3. -- Yet not dread so many thousand nailed- boots? Offendere tot caligatos
Millia clavorum? Art not afraid, says the Poer, to he kicked or trampled on by
so many rude Soldiers that wear nails in their boots? Or, art thou so dull, so
unacquainted with City-wit, as not to understand such danger? Can any be so
fled from Rome? Quis tam procul absit ab urbe? Where, though Vrbs signifies the
Roman or City-wit, yet more aptly may the Poet here say, procul ab Vrbe, though
the Interpreters note it not, if with them we will suppose, that he was now in
Egypt; meaning, that though any were a great way from home, yet they could not
lack so much old wit. For, as he says, will any be such a Pylades, as to
venture to plead for his friend amongst so many soldiers? Or if there were any
so hardy, as that with such danger he durst witness a truth, surely he deserved
to be ranked amongst our brave and virtuous Ancestors, which lived in the age
wherein they wore long hair, and shagged beards. See concerning this custom,
Sat. 4. Illustrat. 17. and Sat. 5. Illustrat. 6. and chiefly, Sat. 6.
Illustrat. 25. but in this place we may especially take notice of his
description of Soldiers by their nailed boots. The common copies have here,
Cum duo crura habeas, offendere tot caligatos Millia clavorum? -- But Dempster
(on Rosinus, lib. 10. cap. 29.) reads better from his Manuscript, though to the
same sense, -- offendere tot caligas, tot Millia clavorum? Art not afraid to
offend so many boots, so many thousand nails? Caligatus is in use of speech a
Soldier, and so used by Vmbritius in the close of the third Satyr, where he
says he will come caligatus, a booted, or military aid, that is, Souldier-like,
to help Juvenal. The word comes from Caliga, which has usually been taken for
leg harness: but it properly signifies the Soldiers shoe; as Julius Nigronus
shows in his learned Dissertation, de Caliga: from which word arose the
cognomen, Caligula, a diminutive from the former. So Tacitus says, that the
Emperor Caligula was so called, because eo tegmine Pedum induebatur; Antonius
Augustinus also I. de Numism. Dial. 7. saying, Caligula vix pedem tegi. Isidor.
lib. 19. Originum, cap. 34. would derive it a callo pedum, and some a ligando
calce, i. e. into pede, quasi calciliga; so Salmeron. Tom. 12. Tract. 35. in
Acta, cap. 12. Some would have it the same with Gallica, a Military shoe used
by the Gauls, and thence draw Caligula, Galicula, and Galoches: thus Petr.
Faber (in his Agenistic. lib. 2. cap. 34. so making Gallica the first name, and
the next from thence Caliga, both used by Tully. It was a thick foal without an
upper Leather; having strings only to tie upon the upper part of the foot,
somewhat like wooden pattens; the foal of the foot being thus saved from the
ground, but the upper part being in a manner naked. In aftertimes the word
Caliga seems to have been commonly used for a shoe, according to that of St.
Jerome. epist. 47. cap. 3. speaking of an immodest maid, that went in creaking
shoes, Caliga quoque ambulantis nigella ac nitens, stridore ad se juvenes
vocat. It came at last to be used by Countrymen and Citizens; nay, by
Religious persons; though most properly by Soldiers of the Mednest sort: by
which Dress and Art Caligula thought to get into the favor of the Soldiery,
The matter of the Caliga was wood and Leather fastened together with many nails
underneath, that they might last in long journies, and both in stony and durty
ways. The Soldiers diligence did for the surer service [as Nigronus notes, p.
64. etc.] set pieces on them, which Plantus in Trinummo, calls Fulmentas [quasi
fulcimenta] Others, Suppacta, (...), and the Italians, tacconi. But the nails
being but small, and therefore many, the Emperors to help the Soldiers did
sometimes bestow on them a Largess of Nails, which was called Donativum
Clavarium, as Dion. Gothofredus, in his Notes on Festus. Lit. C. And such nails
were commonly of iron, sometimes of brass: but Antiochus his Soldiers, as
Valerius Maximus says, had nails of gold; and, as Justin has it, lib. 38.
concerning the same soldiers, they had shooe-nails of Silver and Gold;
treading that underfoot, as he says, for which men fight with iron. Whence we
may see, that the Spanish Golden horse-shooes, in the first American Conquests,
was but an Imitation with Improvement. The Author of the Notes on Festus tells
us, that all the shoes which the Romans wore, reached to the Mid-leg. In the
ancient expressions of the Roman Soldiers they are described with their shoes
tied cancellatim, crosse-wise or lattice wise, twice above the ankle about a
part of the leg and Nigronus thinks it probable, that the Caliga came above the
ankle to the leg, after the fashion of the Italian shoes, Borzacchini; [see
Lorinus on the Acts. 12.] yet he would not have them called tibialia, or
cruralia, but calceamenta, their chief use being for the foot. Moreover [p. 25.
etc.] whiles he opposes the City-shooe and the Caliga, he mentions Tully
comparing himself with Antonie, and urging it as a disgrace to return into the
City, cum caligis and lacerna; making caliga to be merely calceus castrensis,
and that it did portend war. Yet in Juvenal's time, it must be acknowledged,
that though the Caliga were not worn by the Citizens, yet it was worn in the
City, wherein there were not a few soldiers, as Juvenal implies, Sat. 3.
saying, planta calcor, -- clavus mihi militis haeret. See also concerning the
Caliga, Marcellus, Donatus, p. 313. on Sueton's Augustus, cap. 25.

4. -- Which to these Sworn-Men belong. -- Atque alia emolumenta notemus
Sacramentorum --. The Poet here calls the Soldiers figuratively Sacramenta,
from their taking the Oath of Fidelity to their General: before the taking of
which Oath, if they killed an Enemy, it was accounted Murder, as Dempster
shows, lib. 2. de Sacramento Militari.

5. To which my yearly Pulse and Cake I brought. Quod mea cum patulo coluit
pulls annua libo. The Ancients accounting their Meer-stone Sacred, used at the
placing of it to bring a Sacrifice, more particularly, as Britannicus notes, a
Lamb, and as a God, they adorned the stone with chaplets, and as Juvenal says
here offered pulse and a cake made (as Athenaus says, lib. 3.) of Milk, Sesamum
and Honey. But whereas, when the Poet says in the person of one not a soldier,
If some lewd fellow (improbus) offer to wrong my Meerstone, the Scholiast would
by improbus understand a Soldier, I think that he mistakes; the Poet intending
only to compare the disparch of Soldiers Lawsuits and Other men's, and
accordingly saying, that City-Law-suits were most tedious, but that Soldiers
Lawsuits were in the Camp quickly dispatched. Thus improbus shall here
signify one that is not a soldier yet one that does another man wrong.
Besides, otherwise the Poet should speak against his own intent: for, if any
man had a cause against a soldier, though it had been for taking away one's
Inheritance, Expedition he should have had for the soldier's sake; and though
he had not had Justice with safery enough, in respect of the danger from the
Soldiers afterward, yet the Centurion judged rightly, according to that, --
justissima Centurionum Cogniti^ est igitur de milite. Besides, the Gown'd-Man
here implies, that the Judges of his cause were City Judges, Caeditius and
Fuscus; not the Centurion. The comparison then is briefly between a Gownd-man
and a soldier's condition in respect of expedition: the Soldier having it
always; but the gownd-man only in the Camp and for the Soldier's sake, as
only to dispatch a trouble; but that in City-trials with other gownd-men, delay
was an overthrow before sentence.

6. A year we wait, till every body's Cause Thinks the Time's come --.
Expectandus erit, qui lites inchoet, annus Totius populi --. We, says the Poet,
speaking in the Persons of such as are not soldiers, may wait a whole year,
er'c we can get an appointed time for the Hearing of our Cause, and when such
time is come there are a thousand delays; One Judge laying-down his Lacerna;
another going-out to leak. In brief, says he, rather the Seats are prepared,
then the Judges, we being straight dismissed, the Cause being unheard: so that
we are worse wasted in the slow Law-court by Delay, then are the Sword-players
in the Sand of the Amphitheater. The Soldier on the contrary, says he, has not
his estate worn-out with such delay, like a waggon-wheell with the trigger that
stops it. Besides, says he, there are other privileges, which attend the
Soldier, Signorum Comitem (as Dempster more genenerally, and I think, suteably
enough expounds it, on Rosinus, lib. 10. paralip. ult. the privilege here
mentioned belonging to all Soldiers) though Pithaus, from an interlinear gloss
more especially understands by it, Vexillarium, a Standard Bearer a soldier,
much more an eminent one, having power, whiles his Father yet lives, to make a
Will; what he gets in the war being merely his own: which makes the Father of
worthy Coranus basely flatter his Son, in an unnatural hope, that if he dies in
war, he shall become his Son's Heir! Indeed, says he, worthy Coranus owes his
rewards to his own worth; and fit it is that worth should be rewarded; and so,
that brave soldiers should be bravely adorned, as deserving troopers, all with
their trappings and their gold-chains. In which passage there is one
troublesome doubt amongst the Interpreters about -- Qui lites inchoet annus
Totius populi -- Servius upon that of Virgil. Aeneid. 2. Quidve moror? si omnes
uno ordine habetis Achivos, says, uno ordine, uno reatu, and est de antiquo
tractum scientia: quia in ordine dicebantur cause, propter multitudinem vel
tummultum festinantium, cum erat annus litium. Juvenalis, Expect andus erit,
etc. But these last words Petrus Pithaus (in his Adversar. Subseciv. lib. 2.
cap. 20.) thinks to have been added to Servius, by some latter Grammarian; and
persuades himself, that there was no such annus litium. Some think that annus
litium implies the number of causes to have been so great, that a cause could
not come to trial that year, in which it was first brought before the Praetor,
and so that a man was to stay till another year. But why should that other
year be called annus totius populi? there being no one year, according even to
this exposition, wherein all causes could be heard, and so not totius populi.
Some tell us, that they used to dravv lots, and that accordingly Causes had
their days with more speed or delay appointed for the Hearing. In the margin
also of one Manuscript (namely, Corpus-Christi) it is noted, that they did
anciently appoint what kind of causes they would here every year; as whether
they would judge De Hareditatibus, an de Pupillis, an de harede alieno, an de
Terminalibus, or the like; but this is Said, not Proved. Pithoeus therefore
persuades himself (and it seems the most moderate persuasion) that the only
meaning here is; that as the Soldier had a quick dispatch in his Lawsuits; so
the paganus or villager [the Country-man] as also togatus, mentioned in the
former part of this Satyr, might stay long enough, even a year; or, till the
year [but not strictly a year] wherein every body's Cause should be heard;
Satyrically intending that he must wait for a late and a dispatching, but an
uncertain year; Annus thus signifying here, as in that of Terence, -- dum
comuntur, dum launtur, annus est; though some more wittily read there, annus
est; to imply, she was so long in dressing, that she grew old, e're she had
done. Lastly, when as the Poet speaking of the irksome delay in Lawsuits
[which some partly attribute to the number of the Judges, the Centumviri, which
were all to meet, say they, for the dispatch of Causes] says in his Satirical
expression, jam ponente lacernas Caeditio; it may be observed, that the use of
the lacerna differd in different ages; it being here the garment of Coeditius a
Lawier in the time of Juvenal: whereas by Tully in His time, it is opposed to
the City-garment; as is showed on this Satyr. Illustrat. 3. See also Sat. 1.
Illustrat. 2. It may be farther observed, that some interpret ponente lacernas
by his gown on [when as the words signify his cloak being off, or laid aside]
yet the Authors of that interpretation tell us, that Caeditius was in quirpo:
which assertions are inconsistent. Besides, though his lacerna was off, he was
not in Cuerpo [for so the Spaniard writes the word] but we grant, he was in his
Gown; which was according to the Custom of those times [as I have showed, Sat.
1. Ill. 2.] wherein against rain and cold they did abroad wear the Lacerna upon
the Gown; but in the Court probably for convenience of business and the
Solemnity of the place, they laid it aside.

The End of the Illustrations of Decimus Junius Juvenalis. Laus Deo.

FINIS.
Aulus Persius Flaccus HIS SATYRS: TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH By BARTEN HOLYDAY,
Master of Arts, and Student of CHRIST CHURCH In OXFORD.

And since by him reviewed and amended, as also augmented with several
Illustrations.

Hinc trahe quae dicas, mensamque relinque Mycenis
Cum capite and pedibus --
OXFORD, Printed for J. Adams, and F. Oxlad senior, and F. Oxlad junior.

Anno Domini 1673.

THE PREFACE CONCERNING The Life of Persius.
AS the Lives of Men are not without trouble, so sometimes neither the
Desctiptions of them, not the Names, as of this our Author, Aulus Persius
Flaccus: which last has by some vainly been thought to have been assumed by him
in respect of his imitation of Horace in his Satyrs, who was of the same
Surname. But Ascentius and others take it for the nomen Gentilitium, or ancient
surname of our Poet, who was descended from the Flavian family, one of the most
famous for Antiquity and Nobleness both by Blood and Affinity at Volaterrae,
the place of our Poet's birth^^^. His father Flaccus (whose other names we find
not mentioned) was a Roman Knight, as in his time out Poet also; who was born
in the XXI. year of Tiberius, the day before the Nones of December, that is,
the fourth; in the Consulship of Lucius Vitellius and Fabius Persicus (not
Priscus, as Helvicus has it) as it appears in the old Gloss, where his Life is
published by the learned Pithaenus, as also in the accurate edition of the
Fasti Consulares published by Dionysius Gothofrod. At his fathers death he was
left young, not fully six years old. His Mother Fulvia Sisennia afterward
married one Fusius a Roman Knight, and within a few years buried Him also. Our
Poet studied till he was twelve years of age at Volaterrae; after that at Rome,
under the instruction of Remmius Palaemon a Grammarian, and Virginius Flaccus a
Rhetorician. When he was XVI. years old he grew so acquainted with Annaeus
Cornutus (by Country an African, by profession a Stoic Philosopher) that he
never after left his friendship; and from him had a moderate introduction into
Philosophy. His friends from his youth were Caesius Bassus a Lyrick Poet; and
Calpurnius Sura, who died a youth in Persius his life time. Servilius Novianus
he reverenced as a father. By Cornutus his means he became acquainted also with
Annaeus Lucan^s, one of Cornutus his Auditors at the same time with him. For
at that time Cornutus was a writer of Tragedies, and left behind him diverse
Books of Philosophy. But Lucanus so admired the writings of Flaccus, that
hearing him read his verses, he could scarce contain from crying out publicly,
that they were absolute Poems. It was late e're he fell into the acquaintance
of Seneca, but not late e're he fell into an admiration of his wit. Living with
Cornutus he used the familiarity of two most learned and virtuous Men, and at
that time sharp Philosophers, Claudius Agaternus a Lacedaemonian Physician, and
Petronius Aristocrates a Magnesian, whom he singularly admired and imitated,
they being Contempories and Cornutus his juniors. He was almost for ten years
highly beloved by Poetus Thraseus, so that sometimes he traveled with him;
Thraseas having married Persius his Kinswoman Arria. As for his Poems, he writ
in his Childhood a Book called Praetexta, concerning the Gown which Noblemen's
Sons wore; another of his Journies; and (if we guess the corrupted Gloss into
sense) some verses upon Arria, that killed her self before her Husband. All
which were abolished by the Counsel and Persuasion of Cornutus to Persius his
Mother after his Death. He writ seldom and slowly, though betimes in respect of
his beginning to write, For as soon as he left his Master's School, having read
the tenth Book of Lucilius, he did earnestly endeavor to write Satyrs; the
beginning of whose book he did imitate, quipping himself first, and afterward
all others, with such an insectation of the new Poets and Orators, that he
spared not Nero: against whom one verse running thus, Midas the King has Asses
cars --, was by Cornutus thus only amended, who has not Asses rars? least Nero
should take it as spoken against himself. But this Book he left unperfect;
besides, some verses are thought to be taken away in the end of the work: yet
as if it had been finished, it is said, he cursorily recited it to Cornutus;
and to Caesius Bassus, to whom at his desire, he delivered it to be published:
and as soon as it came forth; it began by all men to be admired and catch'd-up.
As for his conditions, he was of a most gentle nature, a maidenly modesty, a
discreet thrist; and for Piety toward his Mother, Sister and Aunt, enough for
an Example. He died of the infirmity of his stomach, at his Country House about
eight miles from Rome, in the Appian way; on the VIII. day of the Calends of
December, that is, November the XXIV. in the Consulship of Publius Marius
Celsus (not of Rubrius Marius, as it is in the Gloss) and of Lucius Asinius
Gallus, as it is in the accurate Gothofreds edition (not Publius Afinius
Gallus, as it is in Helvicus. Which year of these men's Consulships (and Persius
his death) Helvicus places in the ninth year of Nero: which is strictly true,
reckoning, as he must, from the beginning of Nero's reign, which was in October
the XIII. For so Persius dying November the XXIV. outlived the eighth year of
Nero, about six weeks. Which I the rather note, because Gothofred places these
Consuls (and so the year of Persius his death must be placed) in the eighth
year of Nero, reckoning according to the beginning of the Consul's year, which
was on January the first. Thus reckning from October the XIII. to January I.
which was the beginning of Nero's reign, unto the last year of Claudius his
predecessor, he allows unto Claudius XIV. years, whereas Helvicus allows but
XIII. which difference being observed, upon different ways of account, may save
the Reader from mistake both of the exact truth, and of the learned Authors.
Hence we may take notice of the error in the old Gloss in our Authors Life; in
which it is said, toward the end, that he died in the XXX. year of his Age,
when as it was in the XXVIII. some few days before the end of it, according to
the reckning of the Consulships in the same Gloss. Which may clearly thus
appear; there were but XXVII. years between the Consuls under whom he was born,
and those under whom he died, as is manifest by the Fasti Consulares. Now the
time our Author lived under the first Consuls, was but from December. the IV.
till Jan. 1. and the time he lived under the last Consuls, was but from Jan. 1.
till November XXIV. both which parcels of time make not up a complete year,
though but about IX. days less. As for the disposal of his Estate, the old
Gloss tells us, that he left to his Mother and Sister about H-SXX. or
Sestertium vicies, two millions of Sestertji, in English value arising to 15625
l. (as I have by proportion showed on Juvenal, Sat. 6. Illust. 17.) desiring
his Mother (by his Letter) to give unto Cornutus, as some relate it, sestertia
conties, ten Millions of Sestertii, that is, 78125 l. English. But the Gloss is
in these sums too probably to be suspected of corruption; both for the valews
of the sums, and the less seemly division, employed in his desire, by which five
times as much was intended for Cornutus, as for his Mother and Sister. It is
added indeed, that some report, he left to his Master only XX. pound weight in
silver Plate (which in sum, at 3 l. 2 s. for one pound weight in silver comes
to 62?) besides 700. books, being his whole Library; but that his Master took
only the Books, which I think the most probable; Cornutus, as Suidas tells us
of him, being a man of a great Estate. To these Memorials of our Author, which
upon examination Antiquity has left unto us, we may add, what will not be
unpleasant, the Portraiture of one Poet, as it is presented by the inquisitive
diligence of the learned Ormeer (in his Chronographie) and thus presented.
Pers. pref. 1.
portrait of Aulus Persias Flaccus Stelluti (one that has published his Italian
translation of Persius, in the year 1630.) has also a comely expression of him
from an ancient Marble, with a laurel about the head; but in the countenance
with little difference, this being somewhat of a bolder aspect; that somewhat
bashful: which quality, I grant, is attributed to him in the old Gloss; but the
different seasons of his Life, and so riper age, might easily more man his
countenance, and present him with more of the courage of the Satyrist; this
therefore I retein. This learned Stelluti tells us more concerning the
Antiquity of the Flaccian family, that there is yet in Volaterrae, at the Gate
of St. Angelo, in an Ancient Marble, a memorial of one of this family, with
this Inscription, A. Persius A. F. Sever. vix. An. XIII. M. III. d. XIX. He
tells us, that he thinks, that the ancient family of the Falconcini (corruptly
so called for Flacconcini) now flourishing at Volaterrae, are descended from
our Poets Ancestors: which he testifies to be the received tradition of the
Volaterrans at this time; adding, that in memory of our Poet, they have
preserved his name in some one of the family for time out of mind. And for the
more lasting honor of out Poet in his kindred, he relates, that at the time he
published his translation (in the year abovementioned, 1630) there were some
eminent men living, of our Poets name and family. He mentions one Signor Persio
Falconcini famous for Learning and Valor, and Sectetary to the Duke of
Florence; as also a Brother of his, one Onerato, Prior of M^^^eale, a learned
Philosopher and Divine. He mentions also one Signor Antonio Persi^, who as he
witnesses, has written a learned Tract, Del Bever Caldo, (of the hot Draughts
of the Ancients) as also, 18. books, De recta ratione Philosophandi; which, he
says, were shortly to see the Light; besides 12. other books of his, De Natura
Ignis and Caloris: which works he highly praises for the Industry, Invention
and Benefit unto the Students of all Sciences, giving to the Author the large
honor of a Divine, a Philosopher, a Mathematician, a Physician and a Lawyer.
All which he mentions to show that the Descendents of our Poets kindred do not
degenerate even to these times from their Ancestors. Upon the consideration of
which relations, methinks we cannot but acknowledge the Divine Providence, in
thus famously hououring the virtue of this Heathen, in causing his Name and
Kindred to be still thus studiously and nobly preserved. His Country also may
be his honor, to which he was an honor; a Country of such inquisitive
Contemplation, that the Theology of their Augury seemed scarce more a mistake
then an excuse. And as Heathen Volaterrae exceeded Rome in this Art; so did a
Volaterran prevent, and so exceed it, in the glory of Christianity; Linus (not
a Roman, but) a Volaterran being not only a Christian, but, after the Apostles
time, the first Bishop of Rome its self, (which was not above five or six years
after our Poets time) and happy Linus at last made his Death exceed his Life,
by the zeal and glory of Martyrdom. And now I need not farther celebrate our
Poets worth, then by mentioning some, by whom it has been celebrated; whiles
recorded; namely Quintilian, Martial, Censorinus, Priscian, Diomedes, Servius,
Lampridius, Cassiodore, Lactantius, Eusebius, St. Jerome, and St. Austin. With
which Elogy I leave him in a Suprene degree of Nature and Fame; having by his
Virtue made himself a Founder and Repairer of his Volaterrae.

Reader, Be Courteous to thy self, and let not the example of a Heathen condemn
thee, but Improve thee. So wishes Thy very friend BARTEN HOLYDAY.

AULUS PERSIUS FLACCUS HIS SATYRS.
The Prologue.
ARGUMENT.
Need and not Inspired skill
Makes our Author try his quill.
MY lips did never touch the spring
Of the winged horse: nor can I bring
To mind, that e're I dreamed upon
Two topt Parnassus, that thereon
I might be' Inspired and so Vp-start
A Poet by Infused art.
And all the Muses that do dwell
'Bout pale Pirene, and the well
Of Helicon, to Those I leave,
Unto whose statues-brows does cleave
The Ivy-green incircling Crown.
In humbleness I half a Clown
Do only bring this my rude line,
Unto Apollo's sacred shrine.
Yet blame me not for my bold deed:
Alas! I write enforced by A Satirical Irony. Persius was a Knight of Rome of
sufficient wealth.
need.
Who taught the Parrot his kind Hail?
Who taught the Pie so to prevail
To frame our words? 'Twas but to fill
Their belly, master of their skill;
Which skilful is to make them reach
Voices, which Nature cannot teach.
Nay, if there chance to shine but some
Hope, of deceitful Gain to come:
Crow-Poets and poetic Pies
You Would think did chaunt sweet ayries;
And make (when as they harshly Cry)
A Pegaseian Melody.
SATYR I. In Form of a DIALOGUE.
The Speakers PERSIUS. MONITOR.
ARGUMENT.
Inspired Poets Art and Pride
Our Satyrist does here deride.
P. O Cares of Men! O empty Vanity
Of things! M. who will read these wondering Satyrs? P. Why?
Do thou say so my Friend? M. Faith I think none.
P. How say thou? None? M. Perchance some two, or P. none?
M. It Is hard. P. Yet why? Lest Rome's Polydamas
And douty Trojans should prefer the Ass
Labeo before Me? Tush; their false doom
Is but a trifle. If disturbed Rome
Proudly slight any thing, scorn to descend
To their Vain censure: neither strive to mend
The tongue of thy false (1) balance in their scale
Which is as wrong: but if thou would never fail
Know this: To try thy secret innocence,
The surest witness is thy (2) Conscience.
For who is not at Rome? O that I might
But freely speak, yet speak no more then right.
And so I may. Then, when I cast mine eye
On those whose Faces promise Gravity:
On our sad Stoics: on the things we do
Since we left off to play with nuts: and view
Out actions, when we labor much to be
Stern Unckles. Then! then! But, oh, pardon me,
I will not touch. Yet can I hold my peace
Urged thus? and from revenge so just, thus cease?
I Am of a Scoffing spleen. I Love to Flout
At Hypocrites: therefore it now Must out.
Then Thus. Being immured from each man's sight
In some obscure retired place, we write
Some, ev'n-pac'd numbers; Some free-footed prose,
Some weighty thing, which the Author strongly blows
From his large-winded lungs. For he rehearses
Unto the people straight his well-pen'd verses;
His hair being first kemb'd smooth, and then he dight,
In a fair comely garment fresh and white,
Wearing some precious jewel, which some friend
On's birthday to him for a gift did send,
With moist'ning syrrope having cleared his throat
Apt now to sound it in a various note.
Then is he reading in a seat on high,
Dissolved unto a lustful Acting eye.
Where thou may see even those that bear the name
Of Rome's brave Titi (but unto their shame)
To shake with trembling lust, and to rejoice
Obscenely, with a broken' skreaking voice,
When a lewd line their inward loins does pierce,
And touch them with a lust-provoking verse.
But thou Old Dotard, do Thou strive to feed
Other men's ears? nay, Theirs who without heed
Or moderate discretion praise thee so,
That (skin-peel'd Ass!) thy self do first cry, Hoe?
Why did I learn unless this leaven here
Inbred, this strong wild-figtree should appear?
And from it is seat the liver breaking forth
Show to the world its own, though unknown worth?
P. O see ambitious paleness! see Old Age!
At such corrupted times who could not rage?
Think thou, thou nothing know, if it be so,
That others know not, that thou this do know?
O but it is brave to hear men cry, See, see?
And pointing with their fingers, say, That Is he.
Say you 'had a Poem which so smoothly runs,
That 'twere for lectures read to great men's sons,
Brave lads with curled locks, like gold so yellow:
Would not you think your self a pretty fellow?
P. O that is not all! See, our Romulidans
Profane our sacred Poems with foul hands!
Reading, amidst their bowls, Poems divine,
Being full up to the throat with flesh and wine.
Where if forsooth one clad in purple clothes,
Snaffle some musty stuff through's muffing nose,
Melting forth fair Hypsipyle's sad song
Or Phillis fortune with a moist'ned tongue
Or some such tales which Poetry affords
His dainty palate tripping forth his words,
The Men assent! And are not the ashes then
Of this care Poet blessed? This man of men
Has he not how a lighter mole of earth
Gently pressing his bones? A general mirth
Ensues: the Guests with hands and voices ring
His due applause; And shall there not now spring
Even from his Manes, from the hollow womb
Of his thrice happy urn-inclosing tomb
Sweet Violets? But, oh, says one, you touch
Too scoffingly, wrinkling your Nose too much.
For does there breath a man that can reject
A general praise? and his own lines neglect?
Lines worth immortal Cedars recompense,
Nere fearing new-sold Fish or Frankincense?
Well, whosoever thou art whom I did make
But now, the Adverse part to undertake;
When I my self do write, if from my brain
Do flow by greatest chance some happy strain
(For it is by chance) My heart is not so hard
So horny, as to fear the due reward
Of deserved fame. Only I do deny
The scope of virtuous actions to lie
In thy O brave! O sine! for search but this
Thy O fine! and within it what not is?
No; in These papers know thou shall not find
Labe'os helleborated lines confined
Too superstitiously to words: not weak
Love-Elegies, such as Rome's Nobles speak:
Whose judgment, like their overcharged maw,
Wants strong concoctions he^^, and is yet raw.
Briefly whatsoever on Citrean beds is writ,
We hence exclude as the excrement of wit.
Thou do some dish of good hot meat provide
For some poor wretch (whose belly's his tongues guide)
Or to thy quaking foll'wer thou do cast
Thy threadbare cloak (which could no longer last)
Then thus thou speak. You know even from my youth
I hated lies, now therefore tell me truth.
Of me: ( P. Can He tell truth? Will let me speak?
Thou triflest (bald-pate as^e!) and thy skills weak.
Seeing a fat-hogge-trough-p^^ch before thee struts
Full eighteen inches with a load of guts.
O blessed (3) Janus! happy is thy luck!
Behind thy back, whom never (4) Storks bill struck:
At whom no nimble singer'd hand being framed
Like Asses white ears, ever yet was aimed:
Nor so much ^^^gue thrust forth in a base flout
As an Apulian bi^ch for thirst li^^ our.
You O Patrician blood whose heads are blind
In The hinder part, prevent a scorn behind.)
What do men say? That now your verses flow,
In a soft numbered pace both sweet and slow,
Whose well-smooth'd parts are so exactly joynd.
That the severest nail can never find
The least unev'ness. O says one, he makes
A verse, as he that his true level takes,
Shutting one eye, for to direct his line,
Which drawing, with red oaker he does sign.
Whether he scourge with his deep-wounding times
The delicate soft manners of the times,
Or the impious Banquets of revenging Kings:
Our Poets Muse can well express great things.
P. I, You shall see a fellow dare assay
To write Heroic acts, who the other day
But trifl'd out some Fables of small worth
In scarce true Greek: whose skill cannot paint forth
A pleasant self-describing Grove's delights;
Nor praise the full-stor'd Country, that even writes
The story of its own abundant store;
Where fruits and firewood and the fat'ned Boat
Are never wanting; where the shepherds feast
Sacred to Pales is, to expel the Beast
That hates the Lamb: where shepherds on that day
Are purged in a fire of smoking hay.
Whence Remus sprung: where (Quintius) thou wast born,
And where thy Plow-share was in furrows worn;
When as thy wife trembling with joy and fear,
Made thee the great Dictators roabs to wear
Before thine Oxen, and to leave them Now,
Making the Lictor carry home thy Plow.
Behold then this brave Poet!
Some there are
To whom Brisean Labeo's book seems rate:
Whose lines swell like full Veins. Others desire
Pacuvius, whom much they do admire,
And love often to read, and even to stay
Upon his knotty harsh Antiopa;
Whose woeful heart was nourished with grief,
The Depth of sorrow yielding some releif.
When thou shall see the blear-eyed father teach
His son these things; can thou not quickly reach
To know the cause how this our vile disgrace,
This hissing Drying Pan of Speech took place
First, in our Tongues? And yet wherein our smooth
Trossulians vainly themselves do sooth,
And even leap in their seats, when they hear
Old words, which please their thick false judging ear.
When thou art accused, art not ashamed to be
Not able thy now-Aged head to free
From fear of the law, but love the lukewarm cry
Of all thy hearers crying, Decently?
Pedius says one, unto thy charge I lay
The guilt of theft. What now does Pedius say?
In smooth (5) Antitheta's his faul't he weighs,
And for his learned Figures, wins much praise.
O neat! O neat? In judging thou do fail,
Base fawning Roman, do thou wagge thy tail?
For think thou, if some ship-wrack't wretch should Sing,
He e're from me one Halfpenny should wring?
Do Sing, when at thy shoulder thou do wear
Thy self and ship, which the sharp rocks did tear?
His tears shall be expressed through's Misery,
Not-Studied for by Night, that would move me
To pity. M. Yet in Numbers, O there shines
Beauteous composure added to those lines
Which were before but raw. P. I, so it seems;
For one, this as the only skill esteems
To end his verse (But, O ridiculous!)
With Berecynthian Atys; or else, thus;
The Dolphin which did cut Cerulean Nereus.
Ex'lent! and this our Romans count most serious!
So thus another draws his numbered line,
We drew a Rib from the long Apennine.
M. Arms, and the man I sing, perchance you will dare
To term this frothy, fat-bark'd. P. O no; spare
Your too-quick censure, and dissolve your brow.
This Poem as an aged well-grown bough
Seasoned with time, is with the warm Suns heat
Well boiled in its own bark; grown strong and great.
M. What then do you term soft, and to be read
With a loose-bending neck, and bow'd-down head?
P. Their writhed horns the Mimallones did fill
With sounds, and Bassar^ about to kill
The scornful Calf, snatching from him his head,
And Maenas as the spotted Lynx she lead
With Ivy-bridles, often did Evion sound:
The reparable Eecho did rebound.
These, these are brave! But, oh, should such lines be
If any vein of old Nobility
Did live in us? These weak lines in the Brim
Of every mouth, inth' utmost spittle swim.
Maenas and Atys or some foolish Songs
Are always in the moisture of their tongues.
They never Buffeted a Desk for These,
Or Bit their Nails: such lines are writ with ease.
M. Grant this be true: yet Sir You have no need
With biting truth to make their soft ears bleed.
Well, look you to it; I fear; be not too bold,
Lest great men's thresholds toward you grow cold.
Me thinks, they are touched already, and I hear
The doggish letter R sound in mine ear.
P. Nay. Sir, rather then so, all is white and free.
All, all is admitable well for me.
I will not hinder't. Now y' are pleased I think.
You Will say, Let no man make my verses stink,
Making (6) a place for urine, in a scorn,
Among my papers. P. See then you adorn
Your book, and paint two Serpents on'r; Boys, none
Must urine in this Sacred place: be gone:
And I Will go first.
Yet did Lucilins cut
Lewd Rome, and thee, O Lupus, that did glut
Thy appetite, and thee (Mutius) grown weak
With lust, and did on you his Jaw-tooth break.
So Subtle Horace laughing with his friend
Would cunningly his vices reprehend,
And lying in his bosom, in his heart,
Would bitterly deride him with great art.
Skilful he was basely t'esteem the rout,
Yet never wrinkled his nose, or seemed to flour.
And may not I then Mutter? not to the Dust?
Not though Alone? No where? I will; I must
Dig here, even here. (My book) I speak to Thee;
I Have seen, I say, I Have seen; (my tongues born free)
Who has not (7) Asses ears? Thou shall not buy
This my obscure concealed mystery,
This my dear scoff, my Nothing, for whole miliads
Of any base Poets long-winded Iliads.
Thou whoso'ere thou art, that art inspired
With bold Cratinus; or with zeal art fired
Like angry Eupolis; and art grown pale
With that old man, whose style with a full sail
Bears strong against foul vice: vouchsafe a glance
On these my Satyrs also; where by chance
If any thing more perfect thou shall hear,
Among my lines; grow hot with a purged ear.
But him with deepest scorn I do detest
That basely loves to break a bitter jest
At a Philosophers poor Shoe: and winks
At him, whose sight is bad, calling him blinks:
Counting himself no mean man, bearing some
Italian honor at Aretium;
Cause, being Market-Clark (such was his pleasure)
He break their earthen vessels less then measure.
Nor love I him that counts the counting-table
Of deep Arithmeticians but a fable.
Nor him that scoffs at Figures made in dust
By sound Geometry. Such are unjust,
And Enemies to the Arts. They much delight
To see the bold-fac'd queen (8) Nonaria fight
With a good honest Cynick; and will grin
If that she pull his beard off from his chin.
These, in the morning next their hearts I Will send
To study the (9) Edicts lest they offend:
Yet after dinner (for they will turn no more
From vice) unto Callirhoe their Whore.
ILLUSTRATIONS Of some Passages in the SATYRS OF Aulus Persius Flaccus.
In the PROLOGUE,
Paganalia Festa. Nundinae Paganae. Spinning in Highways, forbidden by a Law.
Paganus; the various acceptions of the word. Poverty and Art, Deities.

1. I Half a Clown. Ipse Semipaganus. A Villager. There were Paganalia festa,
scilicet Rusticorum, as Varro notes lib. 5. de Ling. Lat. and Nundinae Paganae,
as Plin. lib. 18. cap. 3. and Lex Pagana, as Pliny father mentions, lib. 28.
cap. 2. Qua cavetur ne mulieres in via torquerent fusos, quoniam frugum
proventibus adversari putabantur. Against women Spinning in Highways, as being
held hurtful to the fruits of the Earth. Marcellus Donatus, page 317. on
Suetons Augustus, cap. 27. Who there shows that Paganus signifies, first a
Countryman: Secondly, one that is not a Soldier; by way of Opposition;
Thirdly, one that refused to embrace the Christian Religion (and still commonly
called, A Pagan) Fourthly, one that desired to be a Soldier, but as yet was
not admitted. Theodorus Marcilius interprets Semipaganus by Satyricus; the
Satyr being drawn from Satyri, and so Rural: Which last though it may be
admitted, yet the ordinary interpretation which I use, seems the more suitable,
and is more received. Autumnus therefore reprehends Marcilius; though it be
granted, that the Satyri were Pagana numina, or, as Cluverius aptly calls them,
Plebs Deorum.

2. Their Belly. Master of their skill. Magister artis-venter. At Cadiz in
Spain there were anciently Altars erected to Poverty and Art, as to Deities.
Philostratus, lib. 5. cap. 1.

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE First Satyr
The Balance and Parts of it. Statera, (...), Amentum, Libta, Examen, Trutina.
Claverius, his Opinion considered. The Inward and Outward Man; a manner of
speech used by St. Paul and Plato. The accurate knowledge of the Tarsensians in
Eucyclical Learning. A Janus with Four Faces. The Flout employed in those words,
-- Quem nulla Ciconia pinsit, discassed from St. Jerome, Ferrarius and Casaubon.
Pinsere; Pistor; their proper sense. The Cutiosity of some famous Men in their
Style. Oletum; Olenticetum. Nonariae; what they were; and the Reason of the
Name. Callirhoe; variously expounded from Ovid and Pasanias, by Claverius,
Stelluti and Casaubon.

1.THE tongue of thy false Balance by Their scale. -- Examenve improbum in illa
Castiges trutina. -- The more clearly to understand this, we may take notice of
the balance, and the parts of it. Some take statera to be a balance which
Goldsmiths use: others, for such a one as is used by wooll-workers, which is
called a standard, only with an hook at one end, and a weight at the other,
which being moved nearer to the center, as they term it, or middle, weighs
more; nearer the end, less. Some take it for the balance, whiles, by the
equality of the weights, the scales hang even. Some again take it only for
(...), or the beam. But, to deliver all upon the nearest examination, statera
is commonly taken for the whole balance, (as also often trutina is) and that in
respect of the civil use, it being the set, or standing size for the trial of
other weights. The parts of the balance are 1. Lanx, the scale (and so bilanx,
the pair of scales;) 2. Amentum, or as Festus calls it, Aptamentum, the string
by which the scale hangs; 3. Libra, the Beam, to the ends of which the strings
are fastened; 4. Examen ((...)) the Needle (or Tongue) that arises from the
middle of the beam. By some it is called scapus, though some take scapus for
the beam. 5. Statera, by such as take it for a part of the balance, is that
iron or wood (used in smaller balance, as the handle) which by a pinn passing
through the bottom of it, sustain^ the beam, to which it reaches. 6. Trutina,
the Eye, in which the needle (or, as it is commonly called, the tongue) moves.
Whereas when the learned Claverius presents in his Annotations on this Author,
a pair of scales with only a ring above the beam without a tongue, from an
ancient coin of Claudius Caesar, as an expression here of this our Poet, I
think it may not be here appliable; since the Poet says expressly, examen in
trutina. So that it must be such a balance, as has a needle moving through the
eye above the beam. As for examen and trutina, Stelluti also thus expounds
them, in his Italian Noves.

2. -- The surest witness is thy Conscience. -- Nee te quaesiveris extra. An
intimate speech excluding Fame, intending Conscience. St. Paul speaks of the
Inward man, and the Outward. Plato spoke in this phrase, lib. 9. de Republica,
p. 589. of H. Stephanus his Edition, (...), and (...). St. Paul calls the
Inward man, the Sanctified man, the Outward, the Natural man, one led by his
Affections. And it is likely that Persius might be acquainted with this
Philosophical phrase; but especially St. Paul, might probably have lighted upon
this passage of Plato, and so used this phrase, but in a higher and purer way.
Specially we may think thus, if we consider what Strabo writes of the
Tarsensians (St. Paul's Contrymen) that they were so cunning in the
learning, which they call Encyclical (in effect, universal) that they surpassed
Alexandria and Athens; as H. Stephanus learnedly observes, in his Schediasmat.
lib. 1. cap. 2.

3. O blessed Janus. Janus was usually expressed by two faces; as is commonly
known: but sometimes with four faces, as the more curious Du Choul shows, De la
Religion des Anciens Romans. p. 20. and 21.

4. Whom never stork's bill struck etc. -- Quem nulla Ciconia pinsit, etc. This
flout was made with the hand: so St. Jerome, ad Rusticum monachum, Epist. 4. Si
subito respexeris, ciconiarum deprehendes post colla curvari, etc. Upon
occasion of which words, Ferrarius, de Veter. Acclam. lib. 2.21. reprehends the
learned Casaubon, (whose accurate diligence not usually slips) for affirming
that St. Jerome by these words implied, that his flout was made with the neck.
He might have as well eccepted against. Marcilius, who says, Pinsere autem D.
Hieronymus, Epist, iv. intellexit colli incurvatione exprimi gestum ciconiae.
But in the words following, Marci^^us does allege the Gloss, taking it for an
expression made by the hand: which by Ferrarius is thus described, (in effect,
the same with Cornutus his exposition) Manus digitis omnibus collectis in unum,
and ad ciconini colli similitudinem curvatis, inque eum directis, qui
irridebatur, pinsentem rostro ciconiam frequenti and stata motione exprimebant.
Pinsere signifies properly to bray, as in a mortar; which was at the first the
manner of preparing corn for bread, as now grinding is in use; and from hence
pistor is now taken for a baker, yet but in a second sense, it properly
signifying one that brays in a mortar. Here it is used figuratively, to express
the repeated motion of the hand in this kind of flour, in imitation of the
stork, that so repeatedly strikes with the bill.

5. In smooth Antitheta's his fault he weighs. -- Crimina rasis Librat in
Antithetis. -- In case of Fame, or Life, to come with affected figures of
speech, instead of a Defense, is here reprehended by the Poet. For otherwise
great has been the diligence of style in the most famous men: as may appear by
Muret, in his Var. Lection. lib. 18. cap. 8. where he instances in the
Curiosity of some famous men in the Choice and Order of their words, as in
Lysias; in whom any change in the order of his words makes it worse: and yet as
they now stand, they seem to have been written without any study. He tells also
of Ariesto, that he labored incredibly in making the two first verses of his
great work; and that Petrach did as much vex himself in making the second verse
of his work, as appears in a copy written by Petrarch himself, which Petrus
Bembus had. Muret remembers also the like (or more to be marvell'd at) in
Plato; in whose written tables, which were sound after his death, was seen
how often he had, altered the beginning of his book De Republica; than which
beginning, nothing seems more plain, using the same words, but often altering
only their order. So Halicarnasseus, and Quintilian, in his Institut. lib. 8.
report of Plato.

6. Making a place for urine. -- Vero quisquam faxit oletum. Some interpret it
more rankly by (...), stercus humanum; so Lubin. But Scoppa, in his Collectan,
lib. 1. cap. 17. says, significare stercus humanum nusquam legitur, yet why he
should deliver such a negative, I know not; since Festus also the old
Grammarian testifies; though Lubin cites him not for his defense; but that of
Veranius, Sacerdotula quaedam in sacrario fecit oletum; but this is of an
ambi^^^us signification; as also in olenticetum, as Ne^risse^sis notes. Being
therefore at liberty, Civility gives the choice, by which I render it, I may
also add, that in Cato it signifies olivetum; if there be not a corruption in
the Copy, to write Oletum, for olivetum.

7. Who has not asse's ears? -- Auriculas asini qui^ non haber? Some would make
the sense of this place to be, that even the greatest are flouted; so Cornutus
the old Grammarian, whiles he says, appositis temporibus pollice, imitantur
aures asini aliis digitis, quasi sannam facientes: thus also Ferrarius, but
from Cornatus. Who tells us also, but without alleging any authority, that
this was a scoff at Claudius and Nero; who, as he says, had large ears. But the
most received inter^retation makes it an allusion to Midas.

8. Nonaria. Such women might not be resorted to, until the ninth hour (with
us, is at three in the afternoon) as the Old Scholiast shows, on Juvenal, Sat.
6. v. 115. (Ausa Palatino) and from thence were called, Nonariae. Stelluti
mentions two other reasons, as that they might be called so from Nonae (the
Nones) which were counted infaustae; as this sort of women was to young men:
or, as some, from Nona, which anciently was called Parca, the end of the ninth
month, being the season of man's birth, and so implied they were fatal women.

9. To study the Edicts. His name Edictum. -- Marcilius here understands by
Edictum, not the Praetor's edict, but a programma, or Bill put up by Nero, to
signify, that after dinner he would sing Callirhoe, according, as he says, to
the intent of Persius in this Satyr, which he conceives to be principally
intended against Nero. But this is spoken without warrant; and though Claverius
mentions it, yet I do not see him approve it. This which I use is most
received, and approved by the learned Casaubon and others. I may only add, that
some take Callirhoe here to be the name of some famous harlot in Persius his
time; and that some think it to signify some Comedy of Callirhoe, whose story
is in Ovid's Metamorphosis, lib. 8. others of another Callirhoe mentioned in
Pausanias, lib. 7. or take it for a fountain to bath in, so called; and so by
this all baths and such effeminate places to be understood, as
afternoon-exercises for such idle ones, as he desires not to read his Satyrs;
thus the Italian Commentator Stelluti; and concerning Callirhoe as a fountain
Claverius also. But the use of baths being so ordinary a business amongst the
Romans, it seems not to me, to have any Satyr in it, to make but a bare
recital of it: wherefore I adhere to the first interpretation.

SATYR. II. UNTO HIS FRIEND Plotius Macrinus,
ARGUMENT.
Profane desires: true sacrifice:
Bold sins: our Poet here descries.
Sign This day (Macrine) with a purer stone
Which does present to thee times long since gone.
Pour wine unto thy Genius; for thy care
Is not to win Jove with a bribing Prayer.
Not crav'st thou, what thou sham'st to name for fear.
Except Jove's drawn aside that none may hear.
Though no small part of Romes chief Nobles can
Sacrifice with a Low-voic'd Incense-pan.
It Is not an easy thing to take away
The murmured whispetings of those that pray
From the Gods Temples. It Is no casie thing
To live with known desires. They use to sing
Aloud, that strangers and the standers by
May hear 'hem, when they pray for honesty
Or a good mind, good fame. But for the rest
Of their desires, inwardly they are suppressed
Under their murmuring tongues; such as are these
Profane requests; O that some strong disease
Would make my Unkles brave rich funeral
To bubble up. O that my rake would fall,
As I were working, on some sounding pot
Of silver; Hercules blessing my lot.
Or would I might expunge this young rich Ward,
By whom from great possessions I am barred
Being the next heir; for he is with scabs perplexed,
And is with swelling choler sharply vexed.
There Is (1) Nereus too, has buried yet three wives,
And I scarce --! O such men lead Happy lives!
That these things thou religiously may crave
Of Jove, in swelling Tybers silver wave
Early thou washest twice or thrice thy head,
Purging the night pollutions of thy bed.
Do hear? answer me this: and but disclose
Thy thought in one small question I Will propose.
What think of Jove? think he may be preferred
Before some? Whom? be it even Stains; art afeard?
And doubt'st thou whether is the fittest Guard
And juster Judge for a young guidless Ward?
This then, wherewith thou dare to press Jove's ear,
Tell but to Staius: would he not even fear
To hear thee Speak? and casting up his eye
Cry, O good Jove! and shall not Jove then cry
Unto himself for vengeance? What? do think
Thou art Forgiven, because he is pleased to wink
At thy black deeds, and sooner strikes a Tree,
With horrid Sulphur, then Thy house and Thee,
When with his roaring thunder he does chide
The proud high-mounting air? Dare thou deride
The power of Heaven, and play with Joves Fond-beard,
As if the had Leave, because thou never was 't feared
With some strange judgment? or never yet did lie
A woeful spectacle to each man's eye,
Unholy, to be shunned in some sad grove,
Then ceasing to be sacred unto Jove,
Or the other Gods, until with sacrifice
The Aruspex great Ergenna purifies
The same, by offering the e^trals of two (2) sheep?
Or else, what is it? with what reward do keep
The bribed ears of the corrupted Gods
That they should only give indulgent nods
At thy vast crimes? is it thy fat offering
Which to their sacred altars thou do bring?
Now you shall see some grandames, or sond Arms,
Whom women's Fury, Superstition haunts,
Take up a tender Infant in their Arms,
And being skilful to depel the harms
Of an effascinating eye, they will spet
Upon their middle finger, and then wet
With this their purging spettle, the child's brow
And pretty lips. Then with a humble vow
Dancing him in their arms, they will vainly spend
Their poor lean hope, in praying Jove to send
This Babe in time to come such happiness
As once wealthy Licinius did possess
In fruitful lands: or such as Crassus held,
Who for brave houses, Romes chief Lords excelled.
They wish that Kings and Queens may be at strife
To make even their best daughter His best wife.
And as for Maids (say they) Ye Gods above!
O let them strongly, strangely fall in love
With his rare beauty: and that wheresoever
He treads, a crimson rose may spring up there.
Brave! brave! But yet I will not bid my Nurse
Pray so: or if she do; then Good Jove Curse
Her Prayers; Though cloath'd-white she strongly Cry,
Yet for thine Own sake, strongly still Deny.
Thou wishest for firm Nerves, and for a sure
Sound body, that would healthfully endure
Until Old Age; why be it, that thy wish
Is Granted by the Gods; yet thy large dish
And full fat sasage make the Gods Delay
To bless thee, and do force good Jove to stay.
Thou'd'st fain grow rich: yet do thou sacrifice
An Ox, (is that the way in wealth to rise?)
Then upon Mercury the God of Gain
With this thy offering, thus thou cry'st amain,
Let my Domestic Gods (great Mercury)
Make all things happy in my family!
Bless thou my Herds of Beasts, bless thou my Lambs,
And make my tender Yews the happy Dams
Of many young-ones. Madman! will thou see?
This is impossible! It cannot be!
When as so many Heifers fats do fry
In flames of Sactifice? Yet does he cry,
And with his Entrals and his dainty Cake
Strives to overcome, and forcingly will make
The Gods to hear; nor yet will hold his peace.
Now does my field, now does my fold increase:
Now 'twill be given: now, now, until at last
Deceived, his great hope proving but a blast:
His Money in his Chest may make its moan
For want of company; yet sigh alone.
If for a gift to Thee some friend presents
A silver Goblet, or rich ornaments
Curiously graven in a massy Bowl
Of purest gold: straightway thy very soul
Is touched with a strong passion: and thou shak'st
Even Drops from thy left breast (Vain heart that quak'st
Thus with a trembing joy!) Now because gold
Thus pleases Thee; hence it is that thou do hold,
The Gods are pleased so to, and overlay'st
Their Statues faces (that thereby thou may
Procure their favor) with gold purchased
From the enemy, which was in triumph led.
For those brass-brother-gods that send a dream
Most true, and purged from thick, corrupted fleam,
Whereby in sleep men are disturbed, or feared,
Let those be chief, and wear a golden beard.
Gold has the pots of earth, and brass disdained,
Though used when Numa, and good Saturn reigned.
Gold likewise has expelled the Vestal Urn:
Gold does the Thuscan Earth to Gold now turn.
Base stooping Souls, that grovel on the Earth,
In whom there is Nothing testifies their birth
To be from Heaven!
Yet, does not this suffice?
But we must bring these out iniquities,
To the Gods Temples, where their powers divine
Do dwell; and even profane their holy Shrine?
As if there could be any thing in these
Infected Carcasses, the Gods to please?
This Flesh of ours makes us in vain to spoil
Sweet Casia, by mixing it with oil
To make us ointments. This does make us stain
The soft Calabrian Fleece in (3) Purple grain,
This makes us with much art to pollish well
Mother of Pearl, drawn from the fishes shell.
This from the unpurg'd Earth made us desire
To strain out veins of gold by purging fire.
This sins; and sins; yet perseveres in sin.
But you great (4) Priests, tell; what does gold within
The holy Temples? sure, no greater thing
Then puppets, which to Venus Virgins bring.
No; let us strive to bring to the Gods, that which
Messala's blear-eyed offspring, from his rich
Large Incense-bason never could give; A mind
By Law and by Religion well confined;
A retired soul; a heart not stained by
Foul lust, concoct in Noble honesty.
This let me bring to the Gods, and I Will obtain
Offering but a small Cake of some course grain.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Second Satyr
Bidental; the sundry acceptions of the Word. Murex; the form of the fish.
Murices. Muricati gressus. Purpura; the form of the fish. Purple; the
Distinction, Excellency, and Ancient use of it. Pontifex; the reason of the
Name Examined, from Varro, Q. Scaevola, and Stelluti. A Deity in Rivers
anciently believed.

1.There Is Nereus to, has buried ye three wives. Nerio jam tertia conditur
uxor. Persius Nerionem pro nova nupta, etc. So Jacob. Dur. Casellius, variar.
lib. 1. cap. 13. but absurdly and coldly. Truly Satirical it is, as it is
ordinarily expounded; and a passion suitable to such a wretch as Nerius, who is
expressed as a userer, by Horace, Sat. 4. lib. 2.

2. Bidental. This Signifies sometimes the Expiatory Sacrifice, for one that
was struck with Lightning; which was two sheep; Sometime the Place, where such
calamity happened; and sometimes that, which was so struck; as here, the
Person. Concerning which argument, see Juvenal. Satyr 6. Illust. 72.

3. In purple grain. Vitiato murice vellus. The Murex was a Shellfish, with
whose juice they died the Purple Color: the form of which was this. * a.
illustration said to represent a murex shellfish which may express unto us the
reason, why caltrops, or three-pointed irons used in war, against horsemen,
were called ^^rices; as also why the sharpness of a rock was called murex; and
why muricati gressus signified dangerous steps. It must be farther observed,
that anciently they died purple with the blood also of the Purpura, a fish
though of a like use, yet of this different form. * b. Besides, Pers. Sat. II.
Illust. 3. b.
depiction of the murex brandaris shellfish, used to produce Tyrian purple dye
it is delivered for an experiment, that the African purple, as nearer to the
Sun, was of a violet color, whose ingredients are much white, and a little
red; vulgar purple being a mixture, as the best Artists tell us, of much red
and a little black. But the Tyrian purple is held to have been more inclining
to a red, (which is a mixture of white and black) or, rather to a Scarlet. So
Lomazzo, in his Art of Painting, lib. 3. chap. 3. The Armorists indeed slight
your common purple made of Grocer's Turnesol, a mixture of Vermilion and blew
bysse, or Cynnaber, or the color of Violets; but count the right purple bright
and admirable: which since the fishing for the shellfish that yield it, has by
the taking of Tire, come into the power of the Turk, is utterly unknown; not
for the want of the materials, the fish being still found, but because the art
of ordering of it is lost. Yet Pancirollus tells us, we may guess, though only
guess, at it, in the Italian July-flower; it being not, as some have thought,
like the Amethyst; but rather like the Ruby, Pyropus, or Carbuncle; or, as some
have it, like the Elemental fire, or as others hyperbolize, like (what they
never saw) the Empyraan Heaven. Indeed the admirable transparencies of those
stones, (rubies, carbuncles, and the like) may by your Oil-painters, by mixture
of colors laxcer'd-over with pure Lake, be made to look, as if they were
covered with burning glass; as Lomazzo shows, lib. 3. cap. 9. To guess at right
purple by the descriptions of the ancients, we may remember, that Juvenal calls
it ardens purpura; that Cicero says, qui fulgent purpura; and that Statius
speaks more advanc'dly, Illius e roseo slammatur purpura vultu. We may not omit
the novelty of some, that mention the dying of a purple with Ape's blood; nor
the Italian trial of the best vulgar purple; by casting upon a piece of purple
silk a little Oil; which, they say, stains not, if the purple be good. Now as
for the ancient use of it, we may know, that the Kings of Troy and the most
noble did wear, on the several days of the week several colors, of which
purple was a chief; as, on Sunday they wore yellow, on Monday white, on Twesday
red, on Wednesday blew, or Thursday green, on Friday purple, and on Saturday
black, as Lomazzo observes, lib. 3. chap. 19. The reason of which Friday-dress
I suppose to have been, because Venus, to whom that day was consecrated, is
said to have used red buskins, which color was not so much different from the
purple, as Lomazzo says, lib. 3. chap. 14. He might more fitly have attributed
to her, as to a Deity, the purple buskin; this being the wear of Princes; but
red (pantofies) of harlors. In like manner the Kings of Troy did on the
Festivals of several Months wear several Colors: as in January white; in
February Ashcolour; in March tawny; in April darkgreen; in May light-green; in
June Carnation; in July red; in August yellow; in September blew; in October
violet; in November purple; and in December black; as Lomazzo notes, lib. 3.
chap. 19. Now the Month November was in the protection of Diana, amongst the
Romans (who counted themselves the Offspring of the Trojans) and she also,
like Venus, wore red (or rather purple) buskins: and therefore for a like
cause, we may probably conjecture, they vvoar purple in the festivals of this
month. Besides, in this month there was a feast dedicated to Jupiter; properly
therefore in this month and in this festival they might go clothed in purple;
the Roman Customs being probably in a great part derived, as their pretended
Original also, from the Trojans. Lastly, we may take notice, that in
aftertimes the Standard, which was carried when the Emperor was present in
the field, was of a purple color; as the excellent Lomazzo observes, lib. 3.
chap. 14.

4. Dicite Pomifices. The Name is commonly said to have been given to the
Priests, in respect of their oversight of the Pous sublicius, which was made
of vvood [by An^us Martius] without any arch, and upheld only with piles of
vvood. It is sometimes called the Horatian bridge, from Horatius Cocles, who
there withstood the Tuscans. It was the first bridge, which at Rome was
built over Tiber, as Andres Palladi^ notes in his Antiguedades de Roma [p. 3.]
who there sums-up the story of it; telling us, that it being broken-dovvn in
the time of Horatius, it was afterward built of stone by Aemilius Lepidus
[and thence called the Aemilian bridge, by Juvenal, Sat. 6.] that it was after
that again ruined by the inundation of the River, but repaired by Tiberius:
that lastly it was built of marble, and very high by Antoninus Pius; but is
now destroyed. But Varro [de Lingua Latina] thinks the name Pantifices to be
given to the Priests, because, as he says, They Built it, and often repaired
it. Yet Q. Scavola, who was Pontifex Maximus, would have it come from Posse
and Facere; from his Power or Authority to offer sacrifice; which last is one
ancient fignification of the word facere. But some not satistied with the
former reasons add a farther conjecture mentioned by Stelluti, the Italian
Interpreter of this Author, and think it may come from Pous and Facis Used in
the last-mention'd sense; the Priest performing at Bridges many and Solemn
Ceremonies, in respect of the ancient opinion of the Heathen, who believed
there was a Deity in Rivers; and therefore, because they built over them, they
used reverent solennities. Which is indeed agreeable to that of Juvenal, Sat.
3. where speaking of a fountain, he says, Numen aqua. See there, Illustr. 4.

SATYR. III.
ARGUMENT.
Young Gallants Sloth, and their Neglect
Of Arts, this Satyr does detect.
WHat every day thus long? fie, fie, arise:
See how the clear light shamefully descries
Thy sloth; and through thy windows shining bright
Stretches the narrow chinks with his broad light.
We snort till the (1) Fifth shadow touch the line,
Enough even to digest strong Falerne wine.
Now what do do? The furious dog-stars heat
Upon the patched corn has long since beat
With its fierce scalding influence, and made
The Beasts to seek the spreading Elmes cool shade.
Thus the companion of some slothful youth
Does freely chide him. Then says he, in truth
And is it so late? indeed? some body then
Come presently and reach my clothes: why when?
If then no body come: Oh how he swells,
And breaks with glass-like choler; and then yels
With such a foul loud noise, that you would say
Surely some great Arcadian Ass did bray.
At last, with much ado he does begin
To take his Book in hand, and some fair skin
Of smooth two-colour'd parchment he takes then
Some paper and his knotty Reed-like pen.
Then he complains how that his Ink does stick
In clots at his Pens nose, it is so thick.
Pour water then to his black (2) Sepian juice,
He cries, now it is too white. Has a device
For every thing. So sometimes he does plead
His pen writes double, or his ink does spread.
Wretched, unhappy man! yet growing still
More wretched! Think we are born to take our fill
Of sloth? Why do not then like the soft Dove
Or great men's little children, rather love
In delicatest wantonness to lap
Some soft sweet spoon-meat, as, a little pap?
Or angry with the teat, why do not cry,
Refusing to be stilled with Lullaby.
Why can I study, Sir, with such a quill?
Alas! whom do thou mock? why plead'st thou still
Such vain ambages? wretched man to flout
Thy self! Thou Art broken! lo, thou leakest out!
And know thou shall be scorned! strike but a pot
Of some raw earth half-boyl'd, and will it not
Tell its own fault, yielding a dull crazed sound?
Well; Yet thou art soft moist clay, and may be wound
To any form: Now therefore, now make have
To virtue: Present time must be embraced.
Now like the Potters clay, now thou must feel
Sharp disciplines effigiating wheel.
But, oh, thy father left thee land enough,
And a clean Salt-seller, with household stuff
Sufficient, need'st thou then fear any thing?
So the have a secure pan wherein to bring
Incense to thy protecting Lares. Well;
But think thou this enough? wilt therefore swell,
And break thy lungs with an ambitious wind,
Because that thou the thousanth off, do find
Thy branch to be perchance drawn from a tree
Of some high Thuscan true nobility?
Or that because clad in thy Purple grain
Meeting Romes Censour with his pompous train
Thou can salute him, by the name of Cuzze,
And arrogantly ask him how he does?
Away: go pranse before the multitude
In these thy trappings: seek not to delude
My judgment: for I know thy soul within,
And see thy faults writ in thy outmost skin.
Art not ashamed to live like dissolute
Loose Natta? but (alas!) he is destitute
Of sense! He stands Amazed in vice! the deep
Fat brawn of Sin makes his heart soundly sleep
That now he does not sin! No, he is so gross,
So stupid, that he is senseless of his loss!
And sunk down to the depth of vice, he will swim
No more again up to the waters brim!.
Great father of the Gods! when cruel lust
Touched with inflaming venom, moves the unjust
Corrupted disposition of fierce Kings,
To act unworthy and unkingly things:
Punish them only thus; Let them but see
Fair Virtue, and their lost felicity.
Then shall their bowels yearn, and they shall cry
In secret, and wax pale, and pine, and die.
Did ever the Sicilian brazen Bull
Roar out his torments with a throat more full?
Or did the sword hung by a slender thread
Up in the golden roof over the head
Of the crowned flatterer, more terrify
His soul, then when a man shall truly cry
Unto himself, I fall, Oh, I do fall
Down headlong; and shall know he is past recall?
And inwardly grow pale (O wretched life!)
Which he is afraid to tell his near dear wife?
Indeed, when I was Young, I like a fool
Would 'noint my eyes with oil to stay from school:
When I Would not learn, through sloth, the stately part
Of dying Cato, though 'twere penned with art.
And my too careful Master praised it much:
And my glad father being moved with such
His praises, brought his friends to hear his boy
Bravely act Cato, and would sweat for joy.
For then I cared not to know any thing:
Except how much the lucky Sice would bring;
Or what the loosing Ace would scrape away
Or that my fellow might not put false play
Upon me, neatly cogging forth a die
Out of the small-neck'd casting-box. This I
Did learn: and for the scourg-stick I did strive,
That none his top with greater art might drive.
But now, Thou art not at this age to learn
Between good and bad manners to discern.
No; thou have learned the Precepts that are taught
In the wise porch, where curiously are wrought
By Polygnotus skill, the conquered Medes
In their short slopes: whose story overspeads
The VValls: and where in searching hidden truths
The little-sleeping close-shorn Stoic youths,
That feed on husks and a course Barley cake,
Early and late industriously do wake.
And unto Thee the Samian letter Y
Whose spreading branches teach Philosophy,
Has marked out even as it were with chaulk,
The high-rear'd right hand path, wherein to walk.
And snort'st thou yet? what? is thy head grown slack?
Art jaw-faln? Does their frame begin to crack?
Lie yawning, to evaporate the excess
Of yesterdays oppressing drunkenness?
Have thou proposed thy self a certain end?
And with thy best endeavor do thou bend
Thy bow at that? Or, careless of thy hurt,
Do throw at Crows, with stones and clots of dirt
Neglecting where thou run'st? Have thou no drift,
But only for the present how to shift?
Well, yet be provident; when our sick skin
Does with the puffing dropsy once begin
To swell, it is then, thou know, but vain to cry
For Hellebore; when a disease draws nigh,
And yet but threaten thee; Then, then prevent
And meet a danger that is imminent.
But if thou do delay, till't be too late,
And that thy sickness once grow desperate:
Then would thou give Craterus half thy wealth
Yet can he not restore thee to thy health.
Learn then, O wretched youths, the mystery
Of Nature in profound Philosophy.
Learn who we are: why we were born: the estate
Wherein we are set; And know that not by fate
But wisdom, we may turn our ship with ease
About high-vertues (3) mark placed in the Seas
Of this our life. Temperately desire
Silver: learn what it is lawful to require
In prayer: and the perfect use, aright,
Of Money: for which, men so sharply fight:
What likewise to thy Country thou do owe,
And what to thy dear Kinsmen; Learn to know
Whom God has made thee, and in what degree
And state of life, he here has placed thee.
Learn: neither envy thou at the full store
Of the greased Lawyer, though he have much more
Provision, then his family can spend
Whilst it is sweet: which the fat Vmbrians send,
As gifts to bribe his tongue. Nor grutch to see
His Marsian Client bring him for a fee,
Pepper, gammons of Bacon, or such kind
Remembrances. Nor let it vex thy mind,
Because he has fresh Pilchars to him sent,
Before the former barrel be quite spent.
But here, methinks, I hear some boistrous rough
Centurion say; Tush, I have wit enough
To serve mine own turn; And I Will never care
To be Arcesilas, or to impair
My health, like Solon: who do lean awry
Their heads, pearcing the eatth with a fixed eye:
When by themselves they gnaw their murmuring
And furious silence, as 'twere ballancing.
Each word upon their out-stretch'd lip: And when
They meditate the dreams of old sick men,
As, Out of nothing, nothing can be brought:
And that which is, can never be turned to naught.
Is it for this they are pale? and that they miss
Their dinner oftentimes, is it for This?
Why yet they are but scorned even by the Rout,
The people: and our Lusty Lads but flout
Them, and with crisped noses aloof off,
Strongly ingeminate a trembling scoff.
Yet, scorn not learning: lest thy falling state
Prove such, as this which here I will relate.
One said to his Physician, Pray Sir see;
Methinks I am not as I use to be.
My heart does quake as if it boaded death:
And my sick jaws send forth a loathsome breath;
Pray good Sir feel my Pulse: and play your part.
Well, the Physician used his chiefest art,
And bid him rest four days. But when each vain
Began composedly to flow again,
On the third night: he bid his servant take
A little thirsting flaggon, and straight make
All speed, to the great house of such a friend,
And tell him, he desired him for to send
Some of his mild Surrentine wine: and so
Having drank that, unto the Baths he would go.
When being there, thither did come by chance
His own Physician: who straight cast a glance
On this his patient, and to him said,
Why you are Pale, and are you not afraid?
Tush man, says he, that is nothing. Yet beware,
Said his Physician, and pray have a care,
What e're this Nothing is. For I do see,
Your yellow sickly skin swells secretly.
Well, prithee now, said he, do not thou rail
At Me: for thou thy self do look more pale
And worse: be not a Tutor unto Me,
One I have had, and buried: now for Thee,
Thou yet remain'st. On then, and do not cease,
Said his Physician, and I Will hold my peace.
This gallant then (4) swelling with dainty cheer,
Bathes his pale Belly, and without all fear:
His throat half stopped with gross corrupted fleam,
Leasurely breathing a sulphurous steam.
But midst his wines a sudden trembling seaz'd
Upon each joint of him, that his diseased
VVeak hand could not his lukewarm bowl retain:
And his uncovered teeth even gnasht again:
And then through his loose lips, his fine-oyl'd meat
He vomits, which he greedily had eat.
Then were prepared for his Funeral
The (5) Trumpet, and the Lights: and last of all,
This seeming-happy man, that would not doubt,
His health, being composedly laid out
On his high bed, his biere; and now daubed over
And even bedurted with the abundant store
Of ointments; stretches towered the City-gate
His cold dead heels; and those whose best estate
But yesterday, was but to be his slave,
Now wear their caps, and bear him to his grave.
What? then belike y' apply this same to me?
But (wretched fool!) thou art out. For know, I Am free.
Touch but my veins: feel how my heart does beat:
There Is but a wonted moderated heat.
Or feel the bottoms of my feet: or hold
My hands: thou shall perceive they are not cold.
It Is true. But know, seduced man, there stick
Diseases in thy Soul, it is that is sick.
For if thou see by chance much gold: or spy
Thy neighbors smooth-cheek'd wench to cast an eye
Upon thee, smiling with a wanton glance:
Speak true: does Then thy heart orderly dance?
There Is set before thee on thy board, to eat,
In a cold dish hard herbs, somewhat rough meat;
And course bread sifted in the people's searce:
Let Us try your chaps. Oh are ye now averse?
In thy soft mouth there is hid a putrid soar,
Which touched with Common herbs, would make thee roar.
So thy hearts cold, when pale fear does affright
Thy hair like ears of Corn standing upright.
Again, fierce anger makes thy blood grow hot,
Even as a firebrand does a seething pot;
And then thy flaring eyes sparkling forth fire,
Thou say and do So in thy furious ire;
That mad Orestes dares swear, such a fact
None but a man stark mad, e're durst to act.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Third Satyr.
Quinta Umbra; what Time it signified. Sepia; the form of the fish. Stringere
metam, and Evitare metam, what. Some Disorders about Bathing, noted. Thermarum
calices. Post-coenium. Laconicum. Cella assa. Balnearia. Insolatio; Apricatio.
Several Officers at Funerals. Amomum. Candles used at Funerals, and sometimes
in the Monuments of the Dead. Images on beds in Chariots carried before the
Corpse of Honorable Persons; and some proportion of it showed in latter times.

1. QVinta dum linea tangitur umbra. This was at our Eleven of the clock
(before Noon.) See Juvenal, Sat. 1. Illustrat. 23. and Sat. 11. Illustrat. 18.
at large; and Necessarily, to prevent mistake in Some, and in Some to mend it.

2. The Sepia, or Cutrel-fish (whose blood some anciently used for Ink) for the
less usual form of it, it will be peradventure not unpleasant to present; which
was this.*

3. Et Vnde. Some understand this of the Meta in the circus: which to touch
with the Inward or Nearer (that is, the Left) wheel of the Chariot, yet so, as
but to touch it, was the choice art of the Chariotier. This they called,
stringere metam; as, to escape the danger in the performance of it, they called
evitare metam. For, if they performed it not very cunningly, by reining
somewhat hard with the left hand, and somewhat slackly with the right; they
were in danger to be cast from the Chariot, and to have the Chariot and
themselves torn in pieces. But others read undae; alluding to the Naumachia,
there being the like contention for glory, in the water also: wherein there
were likewise placed Metae; and the chief art was, when they came to the Meta,
to rack about with their ship suddenly. This not only as the more feasible, but
also as agreeing with copy, and with the word mollis here used (though the
other reading may be admitted) I with others think to be here intended.

4. Turgidus hie epulis atque albo ventre lavatur. The Custom was to bath
before supper; see Juvenal, Sat. 6. Illustrat. 42. and Sat. 1. Illustrat. 23.
and Sat. 11. Illustrat. 18. But the Riotous and Gluttons used to bath also
after supper; and both in the going in, and in the Bath it self, they drank
large draughts, and very hot, to provoke sweat, as Seneca complains, Epist.
122. Such Juvenal, Sat. 8. calls Thermarum calices: and sometimes, instead of
Baths, they used Laconica; wherein, by the heat of the place, without water,
they procured Sweat, to the same purpose: which was to procure sudden digestion
(by the direction of their Physicians, who often humoured them.) See Plin. lib.
29. cap. 1. But the Physician here mentioned by Persius was more honest; this
course being most pernicious to their health, as Juvenal also notes, Sat. 1. in
those words, Poena tamen praesens, cum tu deponis amictus Turgidus, and crudum
pavonem in balnea portas. We may farther note, that at the Baths there were
three Cells, the Cold, the Warm, the Hot; and in most, by way of Addition, a
fourth, which they called Laconicum, or cella assa, that is, sicca sine
lotione, (...): and, where these were, the places were called rather balnearia,
than balnea; according to the property that Tully speaks in, (as Marcilius
notes,) lib. 3. ad Q. Frat. Epist. 1. Assa in balneariis. The riotous had also
another way of digestion, which was Insolatio and Apricatio, an Heating
themselves in the Sun, and sometimes Anointing themselves. Of which Persius
speaks, Sat. 4. upon occasion (as I suppose) of this danger from disorderly
diet in this young gallant here reprehended by Persius, the learned Claverius
adds to his Annotations, a little book conducing, as he says, to the better
understanding of some passages in this our Author: a small work it is of
Hippocrates, never before (1607.) imprinted; but now by him published in Greek
and Latin, from the Library of the famous Jacobus Cujacius. The Title of the
work is, (...); or, Hippocratis de medicamentis purgantibus libellus. Wherein
he affirms, that all meats are medicines; but of less, and slower operation;
yet that by abuse they may be destructive; and gives some choice cautions of
ordering a man in a Fever; by which may here the better be understood the
disorders reprehended by our Poet.

5. Hinc tuba, candela: tandemque beatulus alto Compositus lecto, crassisque
lutatus amomis. Concerning the Funerals of the Ancients, it may be Instructive
to impart here some observations. There were then, 1. Libitinar^i; such as had
the oversight of All things necessary at a Funeral. 2. Pollinctores; such as
did Anoint the Dead Bodies. 3. Custodes Cadaverum; such as attended the Dead,
till they were carried to their funeral fire. 4. Vespillones; such as commonly
carried out by night the meaner sort; such also were the Sandapilarii. 5.
Designatores; such as did marshal every man according to his due place. 6.
Praefica; Women-mourners, that went before the corpse, finging a doleful song,
(to invite others to sorrow) which was called naeniae; as some would have it,
from the noise which is made in weeping. 7. Vstores; Those which burnt the
bodies of the dead; the meanest officers under the Libitinarii.
See Claude Guichard Dr. of Law, De Funerailles, lib. 1. chap. 2. There were,
at the funerals of the Rich, Trumpets used, as, at the poorer funerals, Pipes.
The body was washed and Anointed; the Rich with costly ointments, such as
amomum yielded; which was a shrub growing in Armenia, and some other Eastern
parts; from the use of which, in the embalming of the dead, some think the word
Mumy to be derived. The body was decently covered, and laid upon an high biere,
and placed ready to be carried forth; and a coroner of flowers set upon it.
Wax-candles also were carried before it to the funeral fire. See Pliny. lib.
16. cap. 38. Seneca, de Tranquil. lib. 1. cap. 11. and Lucian, de Luctu. And
here I may remember what Claverius tells us in his Annotations on this place
(published, 1607.) that at Toulouse he himself saw, upon an accidental cleaving
of the earth, a grave open, and the body of a Religious woman clothed with a
long garment, and beset with little Candles. Before the Corpse of an Honorable
Person there went anciently in order many Chariots, according to the number of
their famous Progenitors: on each of which was a bed with an Image of one of
them; and oftentimes they were no small number; there being at the funeral of
Marcellus, the son of Octavia Augustus his sister, no sewer than six hundred
such beds placed on so many Chariots with so many Images on them, as Marcilius
here notes. But the Corpse it self was not carried on a Chariot, but on the
shoulders of some of the Great man's servants made free. Before all these went
Lictors carrying the fasces (the rod and are) with such other ornaments as
belonged to such Honorable Offices, as in their life they had enjoyed. This
may aptly remember us of a less, yet a great Instance, of the stately funeral
of Stephen Gardener, sometimes Bishop of Winchester, a man of shrewd wisdom,
and excellent learning (I intend only his Civil Abilities;) a solemnity not
suitable to the son of his pretended father; but (as may be seen in Brook's
Catalogue published by Vincent) of his true father Lionel Woodvile Archdeacon
of Oxford, and for some years Bishop of Salisbury, the son of Earl Rivers, and
brother to Edward the Fourth's Queen; a Man, that, when by the death of diverse
brothers the Earldome fell to Him, most nobly lest it to a younger brother.
According to this man's excellency was the funeral of his natural son Stephen
Gardener: who leaving behind him 40000 marks in ready money, and for Executors,
the Vicount Mountague, and the Bishop of Ely [as the worthy Bishop Godwin in
his Catalogue relates] had the happy honor to have his body, which was
enclosed in lead, carried from St. Mary Overies Church [where it had continued
in a vault about a quarter of a year] through Southwark to Winchester, in a
Chariot covered with black, having on it an Image lively representing the
person deceased, clothed in a Goap of Gold, with a Miter on the head, and all
manner of Pontifical attire, his Great Executors attending the Corpse with two
hundred horse: which, with the consideration of the length of the journey, may
rank it, though a late one, amongst Magnificent and Ancient solemnities.
Concerning funeral Antiquities, see Juvenal also, Sat. 1. Illustrat. 51. and
52. and Sat. 10. Illustrat. 36. and Persius, Sat. 6. Illustrat. 4.

SATYR IV.
ARGUMENT.
Young Rulers: The complaint of Lust
On Avarice, unsit though just.
ARt thou a Commonwealths chief Governor?
(Suppose the bearded grave Philosopher,
Whom the cold draught of Hemlock forced to dye,
Thus to demand) On what do thou rely?
What are thy grounds? speak Alcibiades,
Pupil unto the famous Pericles.
Oh, wit and grave discretion, I have heard
Indeed, do many times prevent a Beard!
And so Thou know no doubt, though thou art but young,
Both when to speak, and when to hold thy tongue.
When therefore the vexed multitude grow hot
With choler, and their duty have forgot:
Thou do but lift up thy Majestic hand,
And straight a general silence does command
Over the tumultuous rout. Then what do say?
O ye Quiritians (if prevail I may)
I think this is not just that is done by you:
Nor This: 'twere better if you Thus did do.
For thou can weigh truth in the double scale
Of the most doubtful balance. If it fail,
Straightways thou know it: yea, though hid it lie
Between a double crooked falsity:
Of if a Rule (so perfect is thy sight)
Measure not every thing exactly right.
And the (1) black Theta sign of deadly shame
Thou can prefix before an offenders name.
Thou can do this. Oh, 'twere a crime to Doubt.
Come, come: Thou being fair only without
And in the skin, in vain: leave off to shake
Thy tail, before the flattering rout, or make
Suit for great offices, 'till age and cares
Have made thee Fit to manage such affairs.
Thou being fitter yet to drink good store
Of pure unmixt brain-purging Hellebore.
Wherein consists thy last, thy greatest wish?
In having every day a full fat dish:
Then with sweet oil to 'noint my skin, and lie
In the Suns pleasant warmth till it be dry.
Why had thou with the self same question tried
This poor old woman; she had so replied.
Go now and boast how thy Nobility
Comes from the Illustrious Dinomache.
Puff out thy vaunts, and say, I Am comely, fair,
To grant thee such vain praises I Will not care.
When ragged gran'ame Baucis, that does cry
Unto the looser servants, Will ye (2) buy
Any sweet herbs, has as much wit as thee,
That thus does boast of thy vain pedigree.
That no man will descend to his own heart,
And search the secrets of that hidden part!
No man! But have their eyes fixed evermore
Upon his back and bagg that goes before!
For do but ask a man, by chance; do you know
Vectidius farms? Hel' say, Vectidius? Who?
The Chuff of Cures, he whose grounds they say
A kite can scarce fly over in a whole day?
Him even the Gods oppose and the sure fate
Of an unlucky Genius. Who (the date
Of time, bringing again the Plow-mens feast,
When from their painful labors they have ceased,
And now hung up their weary Oxens yoke
By the worn path upon some aged oak)
When he should freely laugh, and make good cheer
For other Plow-men ('it is but once a year)
Most basely fearing to pull off the clay
From his small Wine-vessel; he will sigh, and say,
Pray Jove, that this my Prodigality
Bring me not in the end, to beggary!
A coated oignion then with salt he eats;
(His servants much applauding such brave meats:
Nay, and rejoicing for their happy lot
And for the Barly-pudding in the pot)
Then sparingly he sups instead of Beer,
The cloathy dregs of dying Vinegar.
But straight replies the other, If Thou 'noint'st
With supple oil thy foul lubberly joints
And lie in the hot: Sun letting it beat
Upon thy skin, with its strong parching heat:
There Is one whom thou scarce know, stands here hardby,
Even at thine elbow, that could likewise cry
Against thy Manners, and thy lewder art,
The depilation of thy modest part,
And of thy lungs, to prostitute thereby
Unto a barren lust thy pathick thigh.
Thy Cheeks bearing a kemb'd, oil'd beard: Elsewhere
Where do thou too-unjustly smooth appear?
Scrape on: but though (3) five lusty wrastlers would
Root up these springing Plants: yea, though they should
With crooked pinsers, by their tugging often,
Weaken thy parts of shame, though first made soft
With Barbers soapy water, so to yield
The better, to the Plowers of this Field:
Yet this o're-spreading fearn will never bow
Unto the deepest furrow-making Plow.
Thus we wound others and do yield again
Our thighs unto the darts of other men.
And thus we know man's life pursued to be
By this too-much-assumed Liberty.
Yet some men's faults, because they hidden lie
From the Enquiry of their Enemy,
Are not objected to them; yet are known
To him, to whom they cry, We are thine Own.
Thou have a secret wound under thy side:
But thy broad gold-boss'd girdle does it hide:
So though thou make Men say, Thou Art well (in Vain:)
Will thy Side say so too, that feels the pain?
Thou Wilt here perchance reply, What? when as all
My neighbors Me an ex'lent fellow, call;
And say, I am not as your Common men:
Shall I, ah, Can I not believe 'hem then?
Alas, blind wretch! if at the sight of gold
With avaricious love thou waxest cold
And pale: if every thing thou likewise do,
Which greif-procuring Lust provokes thee to:
If on the Table of thy Usury,
By most oppressing heavy cruelty,
As by a strong deep-wounding scourge, thou make
Many a sure-imprinted grievous struck:
To the false-praising People thou may lend
Thy spungy, sucking ears; but to no end.
Seem not more then thou art: neither believe
The ignorant applause base Cobblers give.
Live with thy self, and quickly thou shall see
The curtailed store of thy bare poverty.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Fourth Satyr.
C. and TH, letters of condemnation: X and LL. letters of approbation.
Different businesses anciently expressed in writings, by wax of different
colors. Ocyma; the various interpretations of it examined. Quinque
palaestritae; Stelluti's opinion concerning the number; Farther conjecture
proposed. Caestus, the description of it presented, from Du Choul. (...).
Discus, what it was, Saltus. Lucta. Quinquertium. (...). The Roman use of the
number, Five, in ordinary expressions.

1. NIg^um Theta. When the R^mans gave the sentence of condemnation, they
expressed it on a Lot inscribed with the letter C. which was cast into an urne;
as I have showed on Juvenal, Sat. 13. Illustr. 1. expressing it therefore here
by the letter TH (for (...)) it is not spoken after the Latin Custom, but as
the Gracians expressed it; as is rightly noted by Marcellus D^natus in his
D^^ucidations on Livy, lib. 43. p. 106. The Ancients had also, as may be
farther observed, notes of Approbation, as the letter x signifying (...) or
(...), as Jo. Wowerius notes in his Polymatheia, cap. xvii. p. 142. and
(double) LL. for Laudabiles Loci, and L. Sent. for Laudabilis Sententia.
Georgius Longus, de Annulis Signat. cap. 9. tells us of some other differences,
according to the variety of the business, in the varieties of seals; as that in
the dispatch of the Breve Apostolicum, as it is called, the Seal was with red
wax; but in the dispatch of the businesses of Favor, it was with green. So in
the Rescripts of Favor there hung at the Seal a Silken string (fasciculus) as
at the Seal to Executory Sentences an Hempen string (cannabaceus) in the like
manner. The first observation is out of Rebuffus, de Praxi, tit. de brevi
Apostolico. The second observation is from, cap. Licet de Crim. Falsi.

2. Cantaverit ocyma vernae. In this place plentiful is the fancy of
Interpreters. First, some would have the word ocymum here, to signify an
unprofitable herb, as they say it is; and so would have it by the repetition to
be as a reproach to an unprofitable servant. Secondly, some think that ocymum
called so from the quickness of it in growing, implies the uphraiding of a
servant with his sl^ath. Thirdly, Others take it to signify Basil, which some
tell us, was anciently sowed with Cursing: (so Pliny says, lib. 19. cap. 7. and
Theophrast^s, de Plantis, lib. 8. says the like of Cumin;) and thus to imply
the woman here spoken of, railing at an evil servant. Fourthly, some think,
that ocymum being the same with Basilicum, which signifies Kingly, or Lordly,
was for this cause a word odious to servants, as by the remembrance upbraiding
them with their servitude; and that therefore ocymum, or basilicum, is called
(...). Fifthly, others think the word salad-herbs; but in that sense it seems
not so convenient, the most taking it for Basil. Sixthly. Jo. Baptista Pius.
Annotat. Posteri^r. cap. 169. reads ozyma, which he takes to be herba ^dorata,
from (...), redolere. Which Interpretation is in effect the same with the best,
if the Reading be warranted by copy. Seventhly, some do hear read, Otia; and so
according to a former opinion, make it an upbraiding of a lazy servant. But the
most received Reading, is that which we first mentioned, ocyma, Basil; which
being a sweet herb, figuratively implies others of the like kind. According to
which the Poet implies, that even a poor woman, which but cries strewing-herbs,
thus performs her daily business in so low a life, better than the Great Ones
of the World in their high condition, whiles they neglect their life, or worse,
abuse it.

3. Quinque palastritae. Whiles the Poet speaks here against some covetous
wretch, he makes him reply, by objecting Lust (even the foulest) against him
that reprehends him; twitting him with his trim beard; but jeering him for not
being so smooth as he would in some other parts, adding, that for all his
lustful defire, he was elsewhere of such an incorrigible roughness, that five
strong wrastlers were not able to grub up his roughness to a smoothness. In
which passage, the Interpreters (except Stelluti) passing by in silence the
chief difficulty, which is, why the Poet says here, five, rather than uses any
other number; I think it necessary to declare, at least aim at, the reason.
Indeed Stelluti, the Italian Interpreter, being it seems troubled at it, as I
my self was, thinks it is said so in respect of the number of the fingers upon
the hand; and so to imply, that even a strong wrastler, with all the strength
and art of his five fingers, were not sufficient to perform this task. This
fancy I admit as pretty, rather than satisfying; since the Poet speaks not of
the fingers, but of the persons. I may with a like liberty propose a farther
guess. We know that palastrita, properly a wrastler, may figuratively be
extended to signify also other combatants; of which there were diverse kinds,
according to the varieties of the Exercises. Of which the Castus was one: which
some describe to have been a kind of club, having plummets of lead fastened to
it, which some call a whorle-bat: the use and ^orm of which is somewhat
expressed in those phrases, induere caestus, used by Valerius Flaccus, and
librare caestus, by Virgil. And so Du Choul, Des Pains and Antiques Exercitat.
p. 19. says, that they did array their arms and hands with the Cestes, which
were made of the hide of the Bustle (or wild Ox, as some render it) filled
with lead within; and from an ancient expression presents it thus, * depiction
of two combatants fighting with cestes in an armed variation on wrestling
setting forth the fight at the Cestus, between Dares and Entellus, as it is
delivered by Virgil. Aeneid. 5. Another exercise was the Cursus, (...), or
Race. A third was called Discus, which some render a quait; but, I think, less
properly, this seeming but a trisling exercise: when as the discus was (not a
flat, though round, but) an Orb of stone, or the like weighty substance, which
the Combatants, being naked, and anointed with oil, did cont^rquere and
rotare, as some express it, and but according to that of Propertius, Missile
nunc disci pondus in orb r^tat. Another exercise was the Saltus, Jumping or
Leaping. A fifth was the Lucta, (...), wrestling, the Combatant being called
Luctator, and (in this place) Palastrita; the first being derived from (...),
solvo, as some think; because, in wrestling, each strives, by victory, to be
quit from his adversary; and the greek they draw from (...), constigo, or
(...), from the agitation of the body. Now, all these exercises; which were all
often practiced in the same day, were from their number called Quinquertium,
and the Combatants, by Livy, Quinquertiones (though by others the exercises are
also thus called) and (...), men skilful at the five exercises. But (...) one
especial kind of wrestling we may not omit, e^^led p^^^ra^ium volutatori^^,
performed in a ^^^bling fashion, and by Mercurialis in his G^^^^^ica,
excellently expressed, p. 106. Now, by a liberty of conjecture, we might here
guess, that this number from these exercises might be here intended by the
Poet, and so the sense to be, that even five Co^batant^ [for of persons he
speaks] though skilled in the variety of Exercises, were not sufficient to make
smooth this impure wretch. Yet, not to advance fancy against judgment, I
prefer not this my conjecture, but think the Poet in this place to speak only
after the ordinary manner of the Romans; to whom the number of five may seem to
have been usual, as with us in a like readiness of speech, ten, a dozen, a
score, and the like. And in this persuasion I rest satisfied, from that of
Juvenal, Sat. 9. verse. 41. -- numera sestertia quinque Omnibus in rebus; -- and
from that also, Sat. 11. in the close of which he says after this manner [in
another argume -- facere hoc non possis quinque diebus Continuis, -- using this
certain number [of five] for an uncertain^ as Persius here five for many or
diverse.

SATYR V. IN FORM OF A DIALOGUE.
The Speakers, PERSIUS. CORNUTUS.
ARGUMENT.
Cornutus praise: Philosophy:
Opps'd desires: true Liberty.
POUr Poets use to wish they had large lungs:
And a whole hundred voices, mouths and tongues:
When they would write a buskined Tragedy,
To be yawn'd out with the sad Majesty
Of a Tragedian: or describe the high
Brave-minded Parthian pulling from his thigh
A hook-like bearded dart. C. Why speak thou thus?
And heapest up such vast robustious
And swelling lines, that Thou thy Self do need
A hundred throats, if thou would attain indeed
The end which such endeavors tend to? Rather
Let them, who will write some lofty matter, gather
Clouds off of Helicon, to whom the pot
Of Progne, or Thyestes shall grow hot;
Of which, the fond Tragedian Glyco must
Often make his supper. But Thou neither dust
Puff from thy mouths full bellows much vain wind
The whilst the matters boiling in thy mind,
Thy forge: nor with an inward murmuring
Hoarsly Crow-like caw'st out some idle thing,
I know not what: nor do Thou strive to stuff
Thy swelling cheeks, to break 'hem with a puff.
Thy words are words of peace, and accurate
Thy style; thy mouth not swollen, but moderate
Smooth out thy numbers; thou can touch to the quick,
Pale manners: and with an ingenious trick
Strike a Crime through; And hence indeed from Crimes
Do thou draw still the subject of thy rimes;
And leave the feast made with the Feet and Head
Of Plysthenes woefully Murdered,
At sad Mycenae: and do Thou descry
The Peoples Banquets, full of Luxury.
P. Surely, I strive not that my leaf may rise
With swelling bubbles of vain fopperies,
Fit to give weight to smoke. We speak retired:
And inwardly I by my Muse inspired
Here offer even my secret heart to be
By thee tried fully. For I Would have thee see
Cornutus, dearest Friend, how great a part
Of my dear, yet divided Soul thou art.
Knock on my breast: for thou have skill to know
What sounds solid, and the covered show
Of a gilt tongue. And oh here I could crave
A hundred voices: that how much I have
Fixed thee within my many-seated breast,
In a pure fluent style might be expressed:
And that which now ineffable does dwell
Within my heart, in words I here could tell.
When first I did begin to leave to fear
Under a Master: and left off to wear
My Purple-Coat, that still preserved free
From violating my weak infancy:
And when my (1) Golden Boss I newly had
Hung up to my succinct House-Gods: when bad,
And flattering companions guarded me:
When now my (2) white Shield granted Liberty
Unto mine eyes freely to rove throughout
The lewd Suburra: when I was in doubt
Which way to take: and when my trembling mind
Was by pernicious error almost blind,
Misled into divided paths: I then
Offered my self to thy Instruction. When
Thou straightway did embrace my tender youth
In thy Socratick bosom: and the truth
Of thy rule well applied, skilful to draw
Feeble inclining minds to reasons Law,
Showed me intorted manners: and my mind
Was pressed by reason, thoroughly confined
To learned Precepts, strove to be overcome;
And took a fair Form from thy skilful thumb.
For I remember often I with delight
Have spent long days with Thee: and of the Night
Have borrowed the first hours, feasting with thee
On the choice dainties of Philosophy.
One work we wrought: we rested both one rest:
Mixing severeness with a modest jest.
For doubt not, both our birth-days joined in one
Sure league, drawn from (3) one constellation:
Or the unchanged Parca weighed our time
With an even balance: or that first, that prime
Birth-hour of us true friends did blessedly
Place our embracing fates in Gemini:
And heavy Saturnes stern malignity
Was broke by our good Joves benignity.
I know not what, but sure some Star I see,
Which inwardly disposes me toward Thee.
Yet there is a thousand sorts of men: and strange
Variety does humane actions change.
Each has his several will: nor do all live
With one desire. For, one his mind does give
To Merchandising, and with care does run
Out to the East under the rising Sun,
To get rough Pepper, and pale Cummin-seed
For Roman wares. Another loves to feed
His panch, and then swell with destilling sleep;
A third does Mars-field wrastlings duly keep;
A fourth turns Bank-rupt by the desperate die;
A fist grows rotten by damned Venerie.
But when the knotty hand-gout has once broke
Their joints, as the boughs of some decayed oak:
Anger and grief do then begin a strife
Within them, for their base and durty life
Now spent: when now, but now too late, they look
Upon the life they wretchedly forsook.
But Thou in learned writings do by night
Grow pale. Thou make it thy chief delight
To sow young purged ears with fruitful truths,
With good Cleanthes fruit. Draw hence ye youths,
Ye old men, for your selves, some certain end:
Some helps from cares your old age to defend.
To Morrow we will do this. Alas! you will do
The same, tomorrow. Why ask we of you
So much, to wit, only one day? But when
The third day comes, we have consumed then
Tomorrow's Yesterday: and thus to borrow
Of time, though yet to come, still one Tomorrow:
Will secretly drive out our Years at last,
When every day a New day will be past,
Never to be recovered. For thou wheel
Which do about the second Axle reel
Hindermost, may in vain strive to overtake
The first still turning forward, which does make
Like have, with equal swiftness: though thou be
Hard by it placed under the self-same Tree.
VVhos'ever then True Liberty would gain,
Let him embrace Philosophy: for vain
Is other freedom; Such, to wit, whereby
Any new Publius may familiarly
In his (the Veline) tribe course Corn demand
By bringing but his Token in his hand.
O men barrain of truth, that think they can
Make, with a Turning, a Quiritian!
Here Is Dama a base horse-keeper not worth
Three halfpence, a mere Sot that cannot look forth
From out the mist of Ignorance, and one
VVho'l lie even for the least occasion,
For horse-bread; whom if's Master turn about,
In The moment of the whirling he goes out
Straight, Marcus Dama. The Gods! Dare deny
To trust one, Marcus being surety?
Or, Marcus being judge, art pale with fear
Of wrong? Marcus said it: then thou may swear
It Is true. Now Marcus seal the Bond. Oh, here is
Brave Liberty and true, which our Cap wears
As well as we! Why is there any free,
But he, the which does live at Liberty?
I live at liberty, and am not I
More free then Brutus then? Oh here stands by
A well-taught Stoic, whose more purged ear
Is washed, as 'twere, with Truths sharp Vinegar,
That says, I grant the First; but where you say,
I live at Liberty, take that away.
Why? since I came from the Praetors tod mine own
Freeman, I Will now be subject unto none;
And why may n't I do with full liberty
Whats'ere Masurius does not deny?
Oh, learn: but this thine anger first depose,
And let fall from thy too-much-wrinkled nose,
Thy rugged scoff? whilst from thy lungs I pull
These old Wives tales, of which thy brest's yet full.
It was not in the Praetors power to give
Pure wisdom unto Fools, or make them live
By Reasons rule. No; thou shall sooner fit
Unto the Harp, a tough rude Soldiers wit.
Against which Reason does stand, and secretly
VVhispers him in the ear, and says, Fie, Fie:
Never attempt what thou can never reach to,
And only spoil, whilst thou do strive to do.
The law of man and nature both deny
VVeak Ignorance the privilege to try
Forbidden things. Do thou mix Hellebore
For a sick Patient, who never trid'st before
To weigh't it exactly to a Dram? The art
Of Physic bids thee not dare act This part.
If a rude high-shooed Clown offer to steer
A Ship, not knowing his guide Lucaser:
The Sea-God Melicerta may exclame.
The brow of modesty has lost all shame?
Has virtues Art taught thee to walk upright?
And can thou with a perspicacious sight
Discern the show of Truth from truth? Do know
Counterfit Gold by the Sound? and can thou show
What things to follow, what things to decline,
The first with chaulk, the last with Coal to sign?
Art of confined desires? have thou a small
And pretty well trimmed house? art kind to all
Thy friends? can wisely sometimes Shut thy store,
Sometimes open thy garners to the poor,
And with a pure affection unhurt
Can thou pass over money fixed in the dirt?
Nor, as a greedy glutton, love to lick
Mercurial spittle, which does use to stick
Upon the lips of Niggards? When as all
These things thou may thine own most truly call;
Then, Oh be wise, enjoy true Liberty,
The Praetors, yea, and great Jove blessing thee,
But thou but the other day of our degree,
Retaining still thy Old skin, being free
Only in a smooth brow, that outward part,
Deep subtilty lurking in thy foul heart:
The Liberty I gave thee, I again
Recall, and do tie shorter now thy chain.
For Reason unto thee does Nothing lend:
Lift but thy finger up, thou do offend;
And what is so small? But thou shall never obtain
By any Frankincense that the least Grain
Of wisdom shall e're rest within a fool:
To mix these two, is against Natures rule.
Nor shall thou, thou remaining a Clown still,
E're dance three measures with Bathyllus skill.
I Am Free. How can thou say so, thy affection
Being invassal'd to the worst subjection?
Know thou no other Master, but he whom
The Manumitting rod did free thee from?
Indeed if Now, one say imperiously
To's slave; Go, Sir, carry presently
This linen to Crispinus Baths; do stand
Still, Lazy knave? This his severe command
Does move thee nothing: because now no whip
May scourge thy Lazy sides, to make The skip.
But if within, in thy sick lungs do spring
Headstrong desires, art Thou in any thing
Less servile then, then is such a poor knave,
Whom the whip and fear of's Master made a slave?
Thou lying long in bed, avarice cries,
Up, up, Not yet, say thou: For shame arise,
Cries she; I cannot thou do reply: Why so,
Says she again? Rise, Rise; do thou not know
What thou should do? Why go to the Sea, bring thence
Fish, Beaver-oile, Flax, Eben, Frankincense,
And loosning VVines of Co; and be the first
To fetch from the Camel, whilst he yet does thirst,
Fresh pepper: exchange somewhat, and forswear
For Gain. O but (alas!) then Jove will hear.
Why, fool, if thou will dwell with Jove, thou shall
Striving but to get out one taste of Salt,
Bore a hole through thy oft-lick'd Salt-seller.
Well; being got up, thou do (not to defer
To execute her will) provide thy men
Bags for to lay their clothes in, and then
Lay'st in wine, with such other things thou know
Are fit for Navigation: then straight go
To Ship; where nothing hinders thee to sail
Over the Aegaean Sea with a full gail,
But Luxury. That does seduce thy weak
Unstayedness, and thus with Art does speak.
VVhither, Oh whither Madman, do thou run?
Whither? what lack'st thou? what would thou have done?
(And now thy hot breast with strong ire does swell,
Which a whole pot of Hemlock can scarce quell.)
VVilt thou pass over the Seas? VVilt thou e're eat
Thy Supper, making a stretched Rope thy seat?
Shall a broad-bottom'd tankard that does stink
Of pitch, fume out the wine that thou must drink?
Nay, vile ruddy Veientane wine? striv'st thou
To make thy laboring money sweat forth now
Elev'n in twelve, the which did here obtain
Never above Five in Twelve, a modest gain?
Come, come: cherish thy Genius: let us be free
To Enjoy a full delight: for without Me
Life is Not: and remember that e're long,
Thou shall be but a Ghost, Dust, and the Song
Of The People. Think how thou by death shall pass
Away, like Time. This which I Have Spoke, It was.
What do thou now? Two hooks a double way
Now draw thee; Will thou this, or This obey?
Thou must be slave to both alternately:
Now serving Avarice, now Luxury.
Nor may thou, if thou do for once withstand
Their instant and importunate command,
Say straight, I Have broke their bands; For, lo,
A Dog by tugging breaks his knot, just so,
Who, though he tun away and bite and strain,
Yet at his neck does trail much of his chain.
Chaerestratus in serious meditation
Biting his nail to the quick through deep vexation
Says to his man; Davus, I now intend
All my fore-passed greifs and Love to end;
Believe me. For shall I be still a shame,
Unto my sober careful friends good name?
Shall I spend all my stock with infamy
At the lewd threshold of a Stews? Shall I
Drunk before Chrysis 'nointed moist doors stand
Singing, my torch extinguished in my hand?
O rare young Master! Be hence-forward wise:
And offer up a Lamb in Sacrifice,
To thy protecting Gods. But do believe
Dauus, if I forsake her, that she will greive?
Do trifle, Idle boy? Then she shall break
Thy pate with her red pantofle, and wreak
Her spite upon thee, that thou shall not dare
To quake, not bite her fast-entangling snare.
Thou Art Now averse and violent; but when
She shall perchance but call thee: thou wilt say then,
I come straightways; for, why? what should I do?
Sha'n't I go to my Love, when She does woe,
And sends for me? But if thou can Now, Now
Redeem thy self All and Entire; Thou, Thou
Art that thrise-happy man, that only He
Whom only, we judge to be truly free.
Not he, over whom the foolish Lictor wags
His rod, and of him, as his Freeman brags.
For, oh, can he be truly called his own,
Whom Candidate Chaulky Ambition
Draws gaping to Her lure? To whom she cries,
Unto her Clients salutations rise
By time, and give a liberal doal to pease
Unto the scrambling multitude: that these
Our large Floralia may be made the talk
Of Aged men hereafter as they walk
In the warm Sun; For what can be more brave?
And art not Superstitious to have
On (4.5) Herod's birthday, many candles placed
In order in the oiled window much defaced
By the fat cloud the which they vomit out,
Though with sweet violets they are decked about;
And to have a Tunies tail, as 'twere to swim
In a red dish, thy white bowl full to the brim
With wine, yet do not fast till night, and pray
All the Jews circumcised Sabbath Day?
Then with Hobgoblins, and the feigned fear
Of danger from a cracked egg, and the austere
Grave Priests of Cybel, and the one-eyed Maid
Of Isis with her Timbrel, the art dismayed.
And think the Gods will puff with some disease
Thy swelling skin: if thou shall them displease:
Refusing by their grave rules to be led,
To taste each morn three times a Garlick-head.
And say thou yet, thou liv'st at liberty,
Being subject to the extremest vanity?
Yet speak this, which the Gods do know, is true,
Among full-vein'd soldiers: what would straight ensue?
Some vast Volpenius with a full deep throat
Would bellow out a laugh, in a base note:
And ten times ten Philosophers of Greece
Would scarcely prize at a clipped Ten-groats piece.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Fifth Satyr.
Little Statues of wood, wool and hay, placed, for Sons and Servants in
families, about their Lares. Bulla; the form, derivation and purpose of it.
Umbo; the knot in the Roman Gown. Horoscopus. Genius. Herodis dies. Sabbata.
What Herod is here intended by the Poet. Herodians; who they were. Ludi
Quinquennales. Lights used at festivals, in sign of Joy. (...), and Vincamus,
expressions anciently used at the lighting of candles. The Jews preparing of
lights against the Sabbath. Recutiti; the Jews, why so called.

1. BVllaque subcinctis Laribus donata pependit. In every family there were so
many little statues of wood (or the like matter) placed about their Lares, as
there were Sons in the house: and when any of them was out of the years of his
childhood (which was at sixteen complete) and was to leave-off the bulla, it
was hanged about the neck of the child's statue, as Festus tells us. Servants
also in every family had statues also of wool, or hay, made for them, and
placed about the Lares. Virgins likewise that were to be married offered their
puppers, or babies, unto Venus, as I have noted on Persius, Sat. 2. in the
margin toward the end. We may farther take notice, that the bulla was made in
the form of a heart, and hanged on the left breast of the child, that at the
sight of it, they might consider they were men, if they had a wise heart. As
for the word Bulla, some derive the word from (...), Counsel; some from (...),
To Will; some from (...), by a figure taken from Archers, intimating the good
purpose, as a mark, that youth should aim-at.

2. Candidus umbo. Some take this literally, and that from the authority of
Virgil: others for a knot in the Roman Toga, which sometimes coming under the
right arm was closed on the left shoulder, (like the bosse in a shield) all the
pleats or folds of it meeting there, as some describe; more particularly
Claverius thinks that the knot or closure was adorned with some bright gemme;
alleging to this purpose the authority of Pliny, l. 37. c. 6. Rhodigine
thinks the toga to be called umbo, because, as a shield it protected a young
man from the reprehensions of overseers.

3. -- Et ab uno sidere duci. Stelluti says here that Persius had said better,
if he had said, that his Master Cornutus and he had been born under a like
constellation, rather than under the same: but had he spoken so, it had been
more flat, though more true. For who may not see, that the speech is not
proper, but figurative and so more elegant? his purpose being to express, that
though his master and He were of different ages, and consequently not born
under the same constellation, yet their dispositions might seem to have been
derived from the same celestial influences, as Horace feigned of himself and
Mecanas. But one more material exception I may here move against our Author
(though not observed by the Critics) who, whiles he seems to approve of the
Astrologers doctrines, may seem to forget himself, when in the Sixth Satyr he
says -- Geminos Horoscope varo Producis Genio --; which is quite contrary to
this assertion. Wherefore to reconcile these places, I think he speaks thus in
this place, rather to show his skill, then his Belief; and thus speaks here
according to the common opinion; but in the Sixth Satyr does in part reprehend,
at least weaken, that opinion. Wherefore in that place I render it, For Often the
same Birthday Has an Ascendant strangly influent Producing even in twins a
different, yea, an opposed Genius; mitigating so the absoluteness of the
speech, though the particle of such moderation, Often (or sometimes) be not
expressly in the Poet. The Ascendent is that part of heaven, which arises in
the East in the moment, wherein a child is born: it is called the first house,
containing 30. degrees; and the Astrologers observe in that point the positure
of the celestial constellations, that is, the state of the Planets amongst
themselves, as also the fixed stars, placing the said planets and the signs of
the Zodiac in a figure divided into 12 houses, representing the circumserence
of the heaven, the first of which is Angulus. Orientis (by some, the Horoscope)
or Ascendent, as is said, showing the life and quality of the body, that is the
complexion and form of the child: and so to the rest are attributed their
several significations. The Poet then in the Sixth Satyr says, it is no marvel,
if they that are born under diverse constellations have diverse natures, when
sometimes (contrary to Astrologers) they that are born under the same
Ascerdent, have different dispositions, one being covercous, another prodigal.
But in this fist Satyr he seems to speak according to the ordinary canons of
Astrology, and from the agreement of his and his Master's dispositions, thinks
they were both born under Libr^^ or Ge^^ni [some add Aquarius] as Manilins and
Others imply; as those that are born under Pisces are of more uncertainty and
difference of affections in respect of one another. We may yet farther note,
that when the Poet says in the Sixth Satyr, that the Horoscope does produce men
with a different Genius, he speaks according to the doctrine and practice of
the Heathen Astrologers; who in the casting of Nativities, did not only hold
that the Genius of every man was the Companion of his Horoscope, but also that
the Horoscope was tempered by it, and that between whom there was a union of
minds, there was a friendship also between their Genii. For which cause they
studied to tell the nature and power of every one's Genius, and with what
things it might be offended or pleased; and particularly what agreement there
was between such and such a man's Genius. This may appear from Plutarch, in his
Antonie, concerning the Genii of Antony and C. Octavian; as also from Appian,
in his Parthicks. Concerning the validity of Astrological Traditions (for it
were a task to promote them to the title of Demonstrations) the more curious
may please themselves with Plolentic, Alcabitius, Albo Hali, Guido Bonat,
Valentine Nabod, Taisner, and multitudes of others: as the more temperate with
the writings of St. Augustine. De Civitate Dei, lib. 5. cap. 5. On whom also he
may there see Coquaus; and Vives acutely disputing against Julius Firmicus. I
might omit Picus Mirandula, because no body will omit him: in which authors he
shall find singular wit and Wisdom.

4. Hanc nobis pilea donant. At the manumission of Servant, his Head was
Shaven, and then he woar the cappe of liberty, The color of it was white. Then
he woar also the Roman Gown, and Shoes. Some add, that on the cap he had also
a Coroner of flowers, or of olive branch, or the like.

5. -- At cum Herodis venere dies -- Tumet alba fidelia vino: Labra moves
tacitus, recut it aque Sabbata palles. In the explication of this passage there
is great difference amongst the Interpreters, some taking Herodis dies and
Sabbata for the same: but the most take the first for Herod's Birthday, as some
for the day of his Inauguration. But if we take the first in either of these
last senses, for a Civil Festival, it must needs signify a Time of great Joy,
and so little agreeing with a Religious Festival, such as the Jewish Sabbath;
which was observed with singular severity, as the Poet implies saying --
Sabbata Palles: on which word I may farther add, what Claverius notes; alludit
ad jejunia faetida Sabbatariorum, qui rot a illa die famelici, pallorem
praeferunt, ut vidimus olim Francofurti, dum in Synagoga suae ejularent.
Besides, The Poet says that on Herod's day they did for ornament use violets;
which to attribute to every Sabbath were ridiculous, but for Herod's feast
seasonable: because being mentioned straight after the Floralia, which were
celebrated the 28th. of April, it may seem congruously to be intended that
Herod's festival was not long after. But the chief difficulty is here to judge,
what Herod is here intended. The most understand it of Herod the Great (called
Ascalonita) who new built the Temple at Jerusalem, and for his great power with
the Roman ^mpuror, who made him King, was statter'd by the Jews. According to
which they think, that the Jews which did thus celeb^ate his festival, were
they which were called the Herodians; whom some make to be a Sect of ^^oreticks
amongst the Jews, which, as they say, held Herod the Great to be the Messiah,
because at that time, he being a stranger, the Scepter was depamed from Judah,
which was the time, according to prophecy, of the Messiah his coming. But it
may seem strangly improbable, that any Jews, who were so acquainted with the
doctrine of the Prophers, should be so vain, as to entertain one not of the
tribe of Judah, nay a stranger to Israel, for their Messiah; to omit his
cruelty in the slaughter of the Intants, and his odious actions in his own
family. Besides, that there were any such Heretics, is not sufficiently
proved; and some understand by the Herodians, Court Flatterers; others more
particularly Herod's Soldiers. St. Jerome thinks them to be such as stood
earnestly for the payment of tribute unto Caesar. Pigworius takes them for
Herod's Servants (de Servis, p. 41.) such potentates of the World having vast
multitudes of servants; and so the Herodians to be understood, Matt. 22. Others
not finding, as they say, in ancient Authors any mention of Herod the Great his
birth day, think it may rather be understood of Herod Antipas [the Son of Herod
the Great] who upon his own birthday, as the scripture testifies, caused St.
John the Baptist to be beheaded. But if we remember that season, as it has been
anciently observed by the Church [on the 24th. of June] they would scarce have
celebrated it, as our Poet describes it, with violets. But the Inauguration of
Kings is usually but a temporary festival during their Reign, as likewise their
birthday; as it was also amongst the Heathen, being performed with Sacrifices
to their Genius, which concerned them not after death. Methinks they, who would
here understand Herod the Great, might rather have remembered the Ludi
Quinquennales, which were festivals dedicated by the College of the
Quindecunviri, to the honor of Augustus, and afterward in Judaea, by Herod,
as Egesippus witnesses. Only against these festivals I may object, that these
cannot so fitly be called Herodis dies, as Augusti, to whose honor they were
instituted. But after this needful examination, to come nearer the decision of
the business, we must chiefly consider the intent of our Poet, who here
reprehends, after other vices in the Romans, superstition, particularly the
Jewish; saying, that some were so superstitious, that they sided with the Jews
not only in their Sabbaths, but also in their Civil festivals, as in the
Celebration of the birthday, or the day of Inauguration of Herod King of
Judas; and thus he seems to speak of a Person in his own time, and a Rite then
in practice. If then we look upon the race of the Herod's, which bare rule in
the Eastern parts at that time, we shall find a man, the last of that race in
authority, in high favor with the Caesar's, in Persius his time; a man also of
such eminent desert, though a Herod, that he did with great felicity obtain
much safety and favor for the Jews under diverse Emperors, till their sedition
overthrew them; although they requited his merits with some affronts. This man
was the great Grandchild of Herod the great; from whom in order descended Herod
Antipas; from him Herod Agrippa, of whose horrible death we read, Act. 12. and
from him this Herod, whom we intend, called by the same name Herod Agrippa, but
by way of distinction commonly Agrippa Junior; this was he before whom St. Paul
pleaded, Act. 26. Now this man was made King of Judas in the 9th. year of
Claudius, which was in the 16th. year of Persius his life, whom he our-liv'd by
many years, reigning under Clandius, N^^o, Galba, Oath, Vicellius, Vespasian,
Tnus, Domitiaen, Nerva, and Trajan, about the space of fifty years; and thus
reigned both before and long after the destruction of Jerusalem. Josephus
testifies his great favor with the Romans; and Photius (Cod. XXXIII.) out of
Justus Tiberiensis, the Continuance of his reign; telling us that he died in
the third year of Trajaw. So that if we reckon even from the beginning of the
honor of Antipater the Father of Herod the great to the end of this man, which
was about 150. years, we may see that this man reigned the last third part of
all the time of the Herodian glory. And of this man I judge, that our Poet here
speaks, as of a business in his own time and sight. And as for the Herodians.
we need not here so much as inquire what they were; they that performed this
honor to Agrippa (or, this Herod Agrippa Junio^ King of Judaea) being his
Subjects, with whom some Romans that were addicted to the Jewish religion did
partake both in their severities and in their Joys. And this I think to be the
most natural and easy meaning of our Poet in this passage; leaving my opinion
to the Reader's judgment. As for the Lights mentioned in this passage in these
words -- unctaque fenestra Dispositae pinguem nebulam vomuere lucernae,
Portantes violas --; it was the manner of the Graecians to express the
celebration of festival days by these words, (...), by Lights and Coronets of
flowers and branches; and it was the custom of most nations to express their
joy by making of fires. Indeed, in ordinary life the Graecians at the first
lighting of candles were wont to cry (...), bonum lumen, and the Spaniards
Vincamus; which was a wishing for Light, Light being the conquest of darkness;
And so the Graecians call Victory (...), as is showed, in Graeca Linguae The
(...), verb^^ (...), our of Enstathius on H^^^r's Hi^^^s. (...) principi^^^.
More particularly concerning the placing of Lights for the c^^^^^tion of the
Sabbath, un^^a fenestra, as the Poet ^ere says, Stell^^^ tells us, that on the
Friday (the Jew's Sabbath-Eve) the Jews set their candles ready lighted in some
window near the door, to have them ready against the Sabbath; to which he
applies that of Juvenal, Sat. 12. Cuncta ^^ent, longes ^^^xit janua ramos, Et
maturinis operitur festa Lucernis. See that Satyr, Illustrat. 10. Here is yet
in this passage of Persius one doubt more, concerning recutita Sabbata, that
is, recutitorum Sabbata, or the Sabbaths of the Jews, so called, because cute
recisi, or circumcised, as it is usually expounded; according to which sense I
also expound it. But surely I never thought that to be the meaning of the word;
yet since it truly expresses the persons intended by the Poet, the Jews, I
chose rather to be modest, then exact, where but one could be chosen. But
finding the Italian Interpretes to guess at the same meaning that I did, I may
with the veil of civility imply his conjecture: who thinks it signifies the
Jews, that sought by art to recover from the mark of circumcision; which being
disgraceful amongst the Romans, they labored to conceal. This is clearly
agreeable to the etymology of the word recutitus. The common interpretation I
grant to be true, and for civility still retain it; but the other I acknowledge
to be exact; and the rather, because the math of circumcision was often
dangerous unto the Jews, especially to those that lived at Rome; as I have
showed out of Sueton, from a story of base inhumanity offered to an aged Jew;
in the explication of that passage in Juvenal, cophinus faenumque supellex;
Sat. 3. Illustrat. 3.

SATYR VI. TO HIS FRIEND Caesius Bassus a Lyrick Poet.
ARGUMENT.
The pining Niggards fruitless care,
To feed the Lust of his lewd Heir.
NOW, Bassus, has the cold made thee retire
Thy self, this winter, to the Sabine fire?
Do thy old (I) Harp and strings live to thee still,
Sounding loud Music with a stiffer quill?
Great workman! whose blessed Muse sweet lines affords,
Full of the Native beauty of Old words:
And on the Roman harp with happiness
Of skill, a masculine, strong sound to express:
Now playing young men's sports, now playing some
Brave Old men's actions, with an honest thumb.
The warm Ligurian shoat grows hot to Me:
And I Am now wintered at my Native Sea;
Where the rocks yield a shore to them that sail,
And where the Haven into a large vale
Retires it self. It Is fairly worth the sight,
The Port of Luna, full of much delight.
Thus said wise Ennius aft'r he had dreamed he was
Homer, (2) the fist formed by Pythagoras
His Peacocks soul. Here I retired live free
From caring what the People think of me:
And what the unlucky South Wind does prepare
For Cattle; Nor do I take grief or care
If that my Neighbors field's more fat then mine.
Let all poor-born grow rich, I Will never pine
With stooping age; for that or want good cheer:
Or touch the (3) sign of dreggy sealed beer
In a hoar'd flaggon. Yet another may
Dissent from this. For often the same birthday
Has an Ascendant strongly influent
Producing even in Twins a different
Yea an opposed Genius. For the one
Warily with great circumspection,
And on his Birthday only, dips his dry
Course herbs in brinish sauce, which he does buy
In a small cup, His own self sprinkling
His Dish with Pepper as a Holy thing.
The other a brave boy courageously
Spends a large portion in Luxury
On his consuming tooth. But as for Mine,
I Will Use it: yet never let my. Freedmen dine
With Turbets: not be curious-mouth'd to know
But by the taste, if it be a Thrush or no.
Proportion thy expenses by thy gain:
And grind out freely (for thou may) thy grain
Laid up within thy Barnes. What should thou fear?
But harrow, and behold straight will appear
Another Harvest. Why, I would thus spend,
But Duty hinders me. For my poor friend,
His Ship being split, held by the Brutian
Sharp Rocks; and buried in the Ionian
Rough waves all his Estate, and his deaf cries
Neglected by the Gods: and himself lies
Upon the shore with his great Gods, which he
Caught from his broken Ship, whose ribs now be
Exposed unto the Cormorant. Nay, Now
Give him some of thy Land: and do not thou
Think thou can be too free; Let him not lack,
VVandring with a Green Table at his back.
But if thou impair thy wealth, thy angered Heir
Of thy last Funeral-feast will take small care:
And with neglect into thy Urn will throw
Thy bones without perfumes, careless to know
Whether he buy dull-smelling Cinnamun,,
Or Casia corrupt with Cherry-gumme.
He Will say, what do thou idly spend thy wealth,
My portion, being in thy perfect Health?
But more; I Am sure there is thrifty Bestius
Does press your Learned Grecian Doctors, thus;
Thus it is, since your Fond Liberality,
Rather emasculate soft Luxury,
With Pepper, Dates, and other ware has come
From your lewd Greece unto our City Rome,
Our very Mowers do with too much oil
Their ancient wholesome meat Sawcily spoil.
But fear these things beyond thy grave? Draw near,
Thou whosoever shall be my Heir, and hear:
And that into our talk none may intrude,
Let us retire from the thick multitude.
My friend, know not the news? Caesar (5) has sent
A Laurel for a sign and ornament
Of his great conquest over Germany:
And the cold ashes which before did lie
Upon the Altars, are now swept away:
And with great care and joy Caesonia
Fixes the conquered Kings armor of proof
And all their weapons to the Temples roof:
Clads all the Captives in a durt-brown freize:
Places the Rheni of a huge vast size:
And orders all their Coaches: Wherefore I
Will bring for this so happy victory
To the Gods and our great Captains Genius
A hundred pair of Fencers. I being thus
Freely disposed, who does forbid? Dare thou?
VVo; if thou yield'st not. Say, that I Am pleased now
Upon the people to bestow a doal
Of oil and flesh-pies: do thou dare control?
Speak out, and plainly. Why, your land, thou wilt say,
Is not so far, so boneless, but I may,
For any cause I see, not greatly care,
Whether or no, you do make Me your Heir.
Well then, scorn Thou my Love; yet thus much know:
Enough will be my Heir, and thank me too.
For were none of my Fathers Sisters left:
No Cousin-germane: or were I bereft
Of all my Unkles Neeces daughters: say,
My Mothers Sister had di'd Barrain: nay,
That none sprung from my Grandame did survive:
Briefly, that not one Kinsman were alive:
I Will go but to Bovillae, or the hill
Of Virbius, where stands ready still,
Poor Mannius: He shall be my Heir. What He?
A son of the Earth? Obscure? Why ask of Me,
Who was my fourth Forefather, I cannot well
And readily declare, though I can tell.
But if you would know his Father, and again
That fathers father: sure you must remain
Satisfied thus; That He did draw his birth
Immediately from his Mother Earth;
And so at last, you will find Mannius to be
By right of Kin, great Uncle unto Me.
Yet why at all should Thou indeed desire
To be my Hier, when thou might be my Sire
For Age? and why should thou demand of Me
My torch, when I in course run after Thee?
Yet if thou be my Heir, methinks thou ought
To be content, with what thou never boughtst.
I Am Mercury, and come, to Thee, a God,
As he is Painted. With a chutlish nod
Scorn'st my free offer? VVilt not thou be glad
For what is left? Why, here is not all you had
Left to You by Your Father. True indeed,
Much I did spend on my own proper need.
But, briefly, this is all is left: which All
I Will give to thee; And do not thou now brawl
Unkindly with me: neither ask me where
Is that which Tadius left me: and never
Give me hard words, as fathers drawing nigh
Their end, do give their sons before they die;
Saying, See thou put out the Principal:
And spend but of the Use: let that be all.
But yet, what is Left? what is left? Now lib'rally
Power, Boy, power oil upon my herbs. Shall I
Upon a high Festival day, be fed
With a sod Nettle, and a lean Swines head
Hung up in the smoke by the ear; unto the end
This lewd Knave may my goods hereafter spend?
And filled with dainty Jiblets, without shame
Lewdly embrace a soft Patrician Dame;
When as his way-ward, full-swolne, chiding vein:
With an uncertain lust does sob again?
Shall I be like the warp of bare cloth, that
To him a strutting panch may quagge with fat?
Oh, sell thy Soul for Gain, to leave thy Heir
Wealthy: and so thou gettest by thy ware,
Never care how honestly. Sift every coast
Of the whole world, that thou may truly boast,
No man feeds fatter Cappadocian knaves
In a rough cage, then are thy lusty slaves.
Double thy wealth. It Is done; nay't has increased
Three, four, ten-fold as much. Yet scarce is ceased.
And now, where likewise I may rest, design,
Chrysippus, thou that did thy heap (6) confine.
ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE Sixth Satyr.
The matter and form of the ancient Harp, according to Titius, Philostratus and
Pignorius. Quintus pavone ex Pythagoraeo, differently expounded against some
Critics; and Persius excused. Ennius his Age, Poverty and Honor. Knots used
anciently, according to some, instead of seals; sometimes both. Funeral Rites.
Coena feralis. (...). Silicernium, Nundinalis coquus. Epulum Novendiale.
Litterae laureatae. Finitor acervi; some differences about it, composed.

1. LYra and tetrico vivunt tibi pectine chorda. The Lyra (as Robertus Titius
says, Locor. Controvers. lib. 1. cap. 2.) was made ex boum cornibus a Mercurio,
jugo addito. Philostratus, in Amphione, says it was made of goats horns; both
which assertions might be truth, in several instruments. The form of the Lyra
is with some variety expressed in Titius his Assertions, lib. 1. cap. 2. p. 10.
and in Pignorius, de Servis, p. 86. as is noted on Juvenal, Sat. 6. Illustrat.
40. Titius expresses a bow with three arrows in it like the strings of an
instrument, and occasionally alleadges out of Zozimus (toward the end of his
second book) that one Menelaus a famous Armenian Leader would thus shoot three
arrows at once out of a bow, and not miss with any of them.

2. Quintus pavone ex Pythagoraeo. The Poet having occasion to mention the
place of his wintering, tells us that it was in Liguria at the Port of Luna, so
called as some think from the form of it. The Town was not big, but the haven
was very large and exquisirely delightful, being half-encompassed with high
hills yielding a fair prospect even to Sardinia; it is described by Strabo; but
it is now ruinated. But as it was, Persius commends it, not only from it self,
but also from the authority of Ennius, whom he here describes to be Quintus
pavone ex Pythagoraeo. But some thus point this and the former verse of our
Author, Cor jubet hoc Enni, postquam destertuit esse Moeonides Quintus, pavone
ex Pythagoraeo, making the sense to be this; Thus did wise Ennius commend the
port of Luna, when Quintus was awaked from his dream, in which he fancied
himself to be Homer, and to have in him the same form, which was once in
Pythagoras, and afterward in a Peacock: so that they take here Quintus for the
Praeno^an of Ennius. And the reason of this their interpretation is, because it
is a great anachronisme to make Ennius the fifth from Pythagoras, by taking
Quintus to signify number, and so to make Pythagoras more ancient then Homer,
when as Homer is by Chronologers placed about the year of the world 3000, or by
some about the year 3250. but Pythagoras about the year, 3360. which I find
indeed to be agreeable enough to Iamblichus, who in his Life ( cap. 2. p. 27.)
says, that he was the Scholar of Pherecydes the Syrian, who is placed about the
year, 3340. This that I have calculated I take to be truth, and that it may not
be defended, to say that Pythagoras was before Homer, and so to say that Ennius
was the fifth from Pythagoras. Yet do I render it by the number, the fifth from
Pythagoras, and so against this Chronological truth, yet not without just
reasons, as shall appear. That this then is a truth, I grant: that Persius
intended this truth, I deny. For an Interpreter to retain the error of an
Author, is not an error: to discover it, is Truth and happiness. Now that our
Poet speaks here according to opinion and vulgar error, it may be probable
from these considerations. First, from the Affectation of the Expression, if he
speak according to truth: for, to say that Ennius was of this judgment, after
that Quintus had done dreaming that he was Homer (the Son of Maeon) seems to me
a harsh and filling construction. For, what a vanity and overplus is it, to say
Ennius, and then presently and unnecessarily to call him Quintus; when as it
had been sufficient only to have said, Cor jube^ boc Enni, postquam destertuit
esse Maeonides, without Quintus, unless in reference to what follows, besides
the inconvenient and ridiculous transposition of the words, saying, Maeonides
Quintus. Secondly, from the Easiness and society of the mistake. For, was this
the Opinion only of Persius? of young Persius and not of others also since his
time? of others of greater practice and experience in study? If we consult with
the old Commentatour upon our Author ( Annaeus Cornutus the Grammarian) does
he not allege, that Ennius himself in the beginning of his Annals relates how
he saw Homer in his dream, who told him that he was once a peacock, and that
the form (or soul) of that bird passed, into him? (for such was the doctrine of
the Pythagorical (...)) And does he not add. Therefore it is said quintus,
because of that opinion, which says, that the soul of Pythagoras passed into a
Peacock, from the Peacock into Euphorbus, from Euphorbus into Homer, from Homer
into Ennius? Is not here clearly the same anachronisme, and avouched as the
mind of Persius? Is it not also in Lactantius (as he is vusgarly called) the
Commentatour on Statius? who on the 3d. of the Thebais, has the same error
against Chronology in respect of Homer and Pythagoras, though he somewhat
differ in ordering the rest, making the descent thus; Euphorbus, Pythagoras,
pavus, Homerus, Ennius. Nay, does not Tertullian (lib. de resurrectione carnts)
a Grande in learning, and one who lived within a hundred and fifty years after
Persius, place them in the same last recited order? Thirdly it is probable from
the comparison of others mistakes; for is it not a foul anachronisme in Virgil,
to make Aeneas and Lido contemporaries, when as Aeneas came into Italy above
300. years before the building of Carthage; as I have showed on Juvenal. Sat.
6. Illustrat. 45. I may therefore say, that Truth made the Interpreters here
mistake, Quintus being the Praenomen of Ennius. And therefore Stellut^ might
have spared his exception in this place; as also before him Hieronymus Columna
(on Ennius his Fragments) doubting of this order; 1 Pavo. 2 Euphorbus. 3
Pythagoras. 4 Homerus. 5 Ennius. Not for the least want of Learning or Judgment
in his exception, but rather for the exactness. Wherefore I render this passage
not according to truth, but according to Persius his mind: from whom to expect
Chronological severity, were more to err from discretion, then he does from
truth. Moreover, that Quintus here does not signify a Name, but a Number, may
be probable from the received tradition of the Pythagoreans, mentioned by St.
Jerome, in his third Apology against Ruffinus, where he says, only with
variation of the persons, that Pythagoras believed, Se primum fuisse Euphorbum,
secundo Callidem, tertio Hermotimum, quarto Pyrrbum, ad extremum Pythagoram; in
like manner implying the same Number of changes. Concerning Ennius, whom our
Poet here honors, I may add somewhat remarkable; Varro telling us (libr. de
poetis) that he writ the 12th. book of his Annals, when he was 67. years of
age. It is related of him also, that he lived to great Age and Poverty, which
he did bear with a brave spirit; as also that he was buried in the monument of
Scipie Africanus major, whose wars he writ; and had a statue erected for him
together with Scipio's, as Livie tells, lib. 38. That little, which he had, he
left to Pacuvius the Tragic Poet, his Sister's, or as some say, his daughter's
Son. See the learned Columna in his Life.

3. Signum -- in lagena. A reprehension of the unworthy niggardliness of some
of the ancients, who would seal-up even the dreggs of wine: yet in the times
more ancient, as particularly in the Trojan times, Pliny ( lib. 33. cap. 1.)
tells us, there were no rings, using Homer as a witness; and says, that they
tied knots for safety, instead of fixing seals, upon their most precious goods.
But this his opinion is rejected by Longus, de Annulis signatoriis, cap. 2.
denying any such thing to be in Homer; unless, as he says, Pliny did
peradventure build his opinion upon the knots, which Ulysses tied upon the
chest, wherein he put the guists of Arete: but that was, as he says, only upon
a special occasion, Ulysses having been before so taught by Circe the witch, as
it appears, Odyss. 8. Longus therefore marvails, that Pliny a man of such
reading, could be so ignorant of the writings of Moses, who Exodus 33. makes
such clear mention of rings, being the offerings of the Women there. Longus
also, cap. 6. de Ann. Sign. shows the fashion of keys with seals, as also
Lipsius does. See more of this argument, in Juvenal. Sat. 6. Illustrat. 3. See
also Laurentius Pignorius of wedding rings with two right hands holding each
other, expressed on ancient coins; in his Symbol. Epist. Ep. 1. and 19. We may
only observe, in reference to what was said before concerning the making things
safe by knots, the use of tying letters with a thread, and then sealing upon
it: which custom Robertus Titius, Locor. Controvers. lib. 10. cap. 14. shows
from that of Plautus; Effer cito Stylum, ceras and tabellas and linum; and a
little after, Cedo tu ceram, ac linum actutum; age obliga, obsigna cito.

4. -- Coenam funeris haeres Negliget iratus -- Ossa inodora dabit. To the
funeral observations which I delivered on Persius, Sat. 3. Illustrat. 5. add
these. When one died he was kept seven days, the eighth day the body was
burned, the ninth buried; so Servius on that of Virgil, Praterea si nona diem
mortalibus almum Extulerit --. The fire (bustum) was quenched with wine; as
Nic. Loensts in his Miscell. Epiphyll. lib. 5. cap. 19. shows out of
Propertius. The bones were gathered together, sprinkled with wine, washed with
milk till they were separated from the ashes, and then perfumed, put into an
urne and so buried. The sepulcher was sprinkled with wine, The bones were
gathered, as Loensis more particularly observes, either by their kinsfolk, or
by the Pontifices, if they were famous warriors or Princes. The Ludi at such
funerals were called Ludi Novendiales. There were suppers also prepared at
funerals, and of diverse sorts, as Marcilius does diligently and learnedly
distinguish them. One was coena feralis (from fera, anciently the same with
Mars) which was but a sorry one; the cook that dressed it is called by Plautus,
Nundinalis coquus, as Loensis observes; and this was usually sent by the
friends of the Dead, and cast into the funeral fire to the Dii Manes, and
burned with the body A Second was (...), a Drinking prepared for those that
returned from the funeral to the house of the mourning. A third was
Silicer^ium, (...); and this was set down at the grave of the dead; The fourth
was the more solemn entertainment and was called Epulum Nove^diale.

5. -- Missa est a Caesare laurus. The Roman Generals after a victory did use
to send unto the Senate liter^^ la^^eat^s, letters wrapped in a branch of Bays;
as Appian says in his Mithridaticks; (...); clearly expressing the custom and
the manner. See also Juvenal. Sat. 4. Illust. 72.

6. -- Finisor acervi. Some make this sophisme an example of this acervus; I
say that I lie, and I lie; I say true then, and do not lie. But by acerous is
generally understood the Sorites, said to be invented by Chrysippus. But here
Stelluti excepts against Casaubon, who says here, that Persius speaking to the
Coveteous man, says Depinge (or depunge, as some have it) ubi sistam, that is,
teach me to set an end to thy Coveteousness: but, alas, thou can no more set
bounds to That, then Chrysippus could of old set an end to his Sorites;
implying he could not. But then, says Stelluti, Casaubon shows not how we shall
understand the next verse, which plainly says the contrany, Inventus Chrysippe
t^^ finitor acerui. Stelluti therefore to salve this, thinks that Persius here
flouts also at Chrysippus his invention, and turns his speech from the
coveteous heir to Chrysippus, saying ironically, O Chrysippus, come Thou and
set an and to this coveteous man's heap, thou that art so skilful at the
setting bounds to an heap; no doubt but thou can do it; but implying that he
could do neither. But is not this in effect the same that the learned Casaubon
said, a man generally of accurace diligence and judgment? And what more common
then for a speech to be delivered positively, but in the intention ironically?
Wherefore not to trouble our selves with these round-abouts, the old and
ordinary exposition, which I first chose and still retain, seems to me most
casie, and so most natural; with this advanrage that I deliver it as the Poet
does, in words positively, but at the liberty of the reader ironically; And
now, where likewise I may rest, design,
Chrysippus, thou that did Thy heap confine.


The end of the Illustrations of Aulus Persius Flaccus. Laus Deo.
AN APOSTROPHE OF THE TRANSLATOR TO HIS AUTHOR PERSIUS.
THou art Redeemed; Nor has the Fate of Time
And Vice seized on thy glory. The worst Crime
Which does o'recloud the Guilty, adds to thee
A Luster, which outshines obscurity.
Who thought not, that the Great-born Spirit of Rome
Had lain overwhelmed in her last Brutus Tomb?
Yet did it Not: but did at last bring forth
Thee the Example of Her Ancient worth.
In whom, had Vesta's fire by which Rome stood,
'Been out, there might have yet been found as good.
Mount then, thou purer Fire, and let thy heat
Strongly exhale from their Infectious seat
The envenomed foggs of Vice; And then inflame
Them, that they may be lights to their own shame;
Which, as a Comet, may affright the Earth
With horror, at its own prodigious birth;
And, with its darting tail threatening dread
Vengeance, point-out to wrath each guilty head.
Be thou the Vestal fire, thy Priest I Will be,
And Consecrate my Vigilance to Thee.
Be thou the enlivening Sun, I Will be the Earth,
And offer up to Thee this grateful Birth
Of thanks: which thus now given, though straight it Die,
It has lived Ages in it is Infancy.
Action, not Time, does number age. Who gives
A just praise to great Virtues Patron, lives
Himself by his just Gratitude. Let Spite
Then do its worst, and with eternal night
Labor to cloud my Name; Obscure to lie
With Virtue, is an Immortality.
FINIS.
Dr Holyday on Iuvenal,


