A Modern Essay On the Tenth SATYR OF JUVENAL.

By HENRY HIGDEN, Esquire.

Licensed June 2d. 1686. To. L'Estrange.

Ridendo Monet.

LONDON: Printed by T. Milbourn in Jewen-Street, 1687.

To the Right Honorable RICHARD, LORD LUMLEY, Baron of LVMLEY, AND Viscount
LVMLEY in Ireland, etc.
THE Knowledge I have of Your Lordships Great Worth and Honor, is the Motive
that pushes me to Publish this Piece under Your Lordships Patronage, whose Name
and Character is so Illustrious, that it was impossible for me to Resist such a
Powerful Attraction: But when I reflect on the Poorness of the Present and
Presenter, and from thence advance my Thoughts, to consider the Grandeur of my
Patron, I discover my Want of Ability to render You the Just Attributes of your
Merit: Who besides Your Lordships Hereditary Virtues, possess so many Excellent
acquired Ones, the Contemplation whereof fills me with Raptures and Transports
too Exquisite for a Description. With this Impotence I wholly desist from a
Panegyric in this Epistle, the general Topic of Dedications, having so Just
an Excuse for the Want of Mine, which would be wholly unnecessary, since Your
Lordships Virtues are so Eminent and Conspicuous, they want neither a Herald
nor an Historian.

I was conscious to my Self ( My Lord) of an unpardonable piece of Confidence
in this Address, in laying so Poor a Trifle at Your Lordships Feet. But, alas!
What boots the Sense of a Fault, without being able to Resist the Temptation of
Committing it? Besides, the Consideration that I was already Listed in the Gang
of Scriblers, and commenced a Brother of the Quill, who of all Mankind are the
least apt to have their Modesty or Conscience fly into their Faces: The Muses
themselves (under favor) being thought but a sort of light Rambling Gypsies
(...) and of so deep an Affrican Complexion, that they were never observed to
Redden, for all their daily Presumptions and Extravagancies; and Whipping (as
Experience has Taught us) does but raise and provoke their Mettle to more
Waggish Pranks. Do not we daily see, that the Lowest Fluttering Dogrell shall
with as great an assurance perch under a Noble Umbrage, as the Highest Soarer
in Heroic Flights? The Carrion Crow shall aspire to Build in the Cedar's Top,
and the Noble Eagle can pretend to no more. This Hereditary Liberty allowed; as
also, That all Modesty is directly against the Rules of our Order, and the
Charter of our Company; And that these Cogent Poetical Reasons being maturely
weighed, may, I hope, Warrant my Obedience to Custom, and Apologize for a
Troublesome and Impertinent Dedication; to suffer in which Case will be for me
much more tolerable, than by my omitting so Necessary a Ceremony, provoke a
Revengeful and Offended Brotherhood, that will assuredly Damn me by a Universal
Consent, for presuming to hope for Salvation, and to Stand and Fall by my own
Merits, without praying the Assistance of an able Patron, according to the
Laudable Custom.

As for this Tenth Satyr of Juvenal, by All approved for the Gravest, and most
Phylosophical, both for Argument and Matter, of all our Authors, (if his Sense
have not lost too much of the Spirit by Transfusion from one Language to
another) I should esteem a Suitable Present to Your Lordship, who has Justly
established a Noble and Spotless Reputation from Worthy and Honest Actions: yet
have Wisely learnt betimes to take up from a too eager and precipitate Chase of
Fame, which Hurries many intemperately through Thick and Thin, violently
breaking through the Fences to pursue and master their Game; who often
(according to the many Examples in this Satyr described) do meet with a
Disasterous Conclusion, which in them is the Effect of an Immoderate Thirst and
Desire of a Name; and does not proceed from the Principles of Steady Virtue*
Your Lordships Wiser Consideration having denied Your Self to the Courtship and
Blandishments of the World, rather than to give the least Violence to your Mind
and Repose; choosing rather a Noble Retirement within the Bounds of a Plentiful
Fortune; of which few Noble Men can boast a Greater, or have given so Early a
Proof of their Knowledge and Skill to use and manage it to Improvement. Which
that Your Lordship may live Long to enjoy with all Happiness and Honor, is the
Constant Wish of,

My LORD, Your Lordships Most Devoted, Humble Servant, HENRY HIGDEN.

To my Ingenious Friend, (...) Henry Higden, Esquire On his Translation of the
Tenth SATYR OF JUVENAL
THe Grecian Wits, who Satyr first began,
Were Pleasant Pasquins on the Life of Man:
At Mighty Villains, who the State oppressed,
They durst not Rail; perhaps, they Laughed at least,
And turned 'em out of Office with a Jest.
No Fool could peep abroad, but ready stand
The Drolls, to clap a Bauble in his Hand:
Wise Legislators never yet could draw
A Fopp within the Reach of Common Law;
For Posture, Dress, Grimace, and Affectation,
Though Foes to Sense, are Harmless to the Nation.
Our last Redress is Dint of Verse to try;
And Satyr is our Court of Chancery.
This Way took Horace to reform an Age
Not Bad enough to need an Author's Rage:
But Yours, Juvenal.
who lived in more degenerate Times,
Was forced to fasten Deep, and woorry Crimes:
Yet You, my Friend, have tempered him so well,
You make him Smile in spite of all his Zeal:
An Art peculiar to your Self alone,
To join the Virtues of Two Styles in One.
Oh! were your Author's Principle received,
Half of the laboring World would be relieved;
For not to Wish, is not to be Deceived!
Revenge would into Charity be changed,
Because it costs too Dear to be Revenged:
It costs our Quiet and Content of Mind;
And when it is compassed, leaves a Sting behind.
Suppose I had the better End of the Staff,
Why should I help the ill-natured World to laugh?
It Is all alike to them, who gets the Day;
They Love the Spite and Mischief of the Fray.
No; I have Cured my Self of that Disease;
Nor will I be provoked, but when I please:
But let me half that Cure to You restore;
You gave the Salve, I laid it to the Sore.
Our kind Relief against a Rainy Day,
Beyond a Tavern, or a tedious Play;
We take your Book, and laugh our Spleen away.
If all Your Tribe, (too studious of Debate)
Would cease false Hopes and Titles to create,
Led by the Rare Example you begun,
Clyents would fail, and Lawyers be undone.
JOHN DRYDEN.

TO Henry Higden, Esquire On his Translation of the Tenth SATYR OF JUVENAL.
I.
I Know You, and I must Confess,
From Sense so Celebrated, and so True,
Wit so Uncommon, and so New,
As that which always shines in You;
I could expect no less.
It Is Great, it is Just, it is Noble all!
Right Spirit of the Original;
No scattered Spark no gli^^^ring Beams,
As in some Pieces here, and there,
Through a dark Glade of Duller Numbers gleams.
But it is all Fire! all Glittering every where
Grateful Instruction that can never fail,
To Please and Charm, even while you Rail.
By Arts thus Gentle and Severe
The Powers Divine first made their Mortals Wise;
The soft Reproach they ^id with Reverence bear;
While they Adored the GOD that did Chastize.
II.
Perhaps there may be found some Carping Wit,
May blame the Measures of thy Lines,
And cry, -- No^ so the Roman Poet writ;
Who dressed his Satyr in more lofty Rhimes.
But thou for thy Instructor Nature chose,
That first best Principle of Poetry;
And to thy Subject did thy Verse dispose,
While in Harmonious Union both agree.
Had the Great Bard thy Properer Numbers viewed,
He would have laid his stiff Heroicks by,
And this more Gay, more Airy Path pursued,
That so much better leads to Ralliery.
Wit is no more than Nature well expressed;
And He fatigues and toils in vain
With Rigid Labors, breaks his Brain,
That has Familiar Thought in lofty Numbers dressed.
III.
True to his Sense and to his Charming Wit,
Thou ^very where have kept an equal Pace:
All his Brisk Turns exactly hit,
Justly maintained his Humor and his Grace:
And with the Language have not changed the Face:
Great Juvenal in every Line,
True Roman still over all does shine;
But in the British Garb appears most fine.
IV.
Long did the Learned Author search to find
The Vice and Vani^y of Humane^kind:
Long he observed, nor did ^bserv^ in vain;
In every differing Humor found
Even there where Virtue did abound,
Some mortal Frailties reign.
Philosophers he saw were Proud
Of dull-affected Poverty.
Senators cringing to the Crowd
For trifling Popularity.
The Judge Reviles the Criminal a^ Bar.
And now because old Ages I^e
Has chilled the Ardour of his willi^g Vice,
Snarles at those ^outhful Follies which he cannot share.
From the vain-keeping 'Squire, and Cully'd. Lord;
The fawning Courtier, States-man's Broken Word;
Down to the flattering, Jilting Curtizan;
And the more faithless couzening Citizen.
The Tricks of Court and State to him were known;
And all the Vices veiled beneath the Gown:
From the Sharp Pulpit to the Blunted Stall,
He knew, and gently did reproach them all.
V.
If Rome, that kept the lesser World in awe,
Wanted a Juvenal to give them Law,
How much more we, who stockt with Knave and Fool,
Have turned the Nation into Ridicule.
The dire Contagion spreads to each degree
Of Wild Debauchery.
The mad Infected Youth make haste
To lay their Fortunes, Health, and Reason waste:
The Fop, a tamer sort of Tool,
Who dresses, talks, and loves, by Rule;
Has long for a Fine Person past.
Block-heads will pass for Wits, and Write,
And some for Brave, who never could Fight.
Women for Chaste, whose knack of Cant
Boasts of the Virtues that they want:
Cry Faugh -- at Words and Actions Innocent,
And make that naughty that was never meant:
That vain-affected Hypocrite shall be
In Satyr shamed to Honest Sense by Thee.
It Is Thou, our English Juvenal, alone,
To whom all Vice, and every Virtue's known:
Thou that like Judah's King through all have past,
And found that all is but Vanity at last;
It Is you alone the Discipline can use,
Who dare at once be bold, severe, and kind;
Soften rough Satyr with thy gentler Muse,
And force a Blush at least, where you cannot change the Mind.
A. Behn.

TO H. HIGDEN, Esquire On his Modern Way of Translating JUVENAL'S Tenth SATYR.
IF Poets without Fiction in Applause
Of their loved Muse speak Truth in their own Cause;
And Wit to Favorites gives a Lawful Claim,
To be Enrolled in Deathless Books of Fame.
However the Rest of the famed Sisters thrive,
And happily to Time's last Sand survive,
Satyr alone finds a Hard Task to live.
Even half a Key in the highest Flights of Glory,
Unlocks whole Volumes of Heroic Story.
Virtue in Robes of Lasting Dye arrayed,
Is down even to Remotest Time conveyed.
Great Deeds are Read so Plain, and spoke so loud,
Casting a Luster which no Age can shroud;
Her bright Divinity breaks through the Cloud.
No Antique Garb can against Worth prevail;
Alcides struts with Club and Lions Tail;
And Bess looks Great in Ruff and Farthingale.
Thus whilst Heroicks their Great Theams display,
Stalking abroad in Fields and open Day:
Remarking Satyr must to Coverts creep,
^ry in close Grotts, and obscure Closets peep.
They Copy by so weak and faint a Light;
Vice is their Theme, in Masquerade they Write,
And slyly walk in gloomy Scenes of Night.
Thus whilst the warm Intrigue is just found out
And the fresh Calumny is dealt about,
Murmured and buz'd through all the Tickled Rout:
Oh! with what Laurel Wreaths is Satyr Crowned!
How ravishing the smart Iambicks sound!
But when the Grin, the Sneer, and Jest is past,
( Malice that runs so swift, and tires as fast)
Poor Satyr then, the Nine Days Wonder done,
Strait lies Neglected, and Forgot as soon:
With its own Parent, Scandal, does expire;
The generous son of an Ignoble Sire.
The Poinant Gall that holds Authentic Text
This Age, is damned to Apocrypha the next.
The Flowery Banks our pleased ^orefathers knew,
O'regrown by Time, we a Rude Labyrinth view,
Where Commentators groap without a Clue.
Whilst Satyr destined to so Harsh a Doom,
Must undergo such Hardship even at Home;
Alas! what must it suffer when it walks
Abroad, and in a Foreign Language talks!
Where Loads of Dross the precious Oar enfold,
Skilful must the Artist be to Extract the Gold;
One practiced to the World and Muses Laws,
And well acquainted with the Face he draws.
Satyr to Trace at Heels, and poorly Line
For Line Translate, is such a weak Design,
Does even the Marks of Life, and Spirit want,
A* Jargon worse than a Fanatic Cant:
A Wise Attempt, and Justified by none
But some Enthusiast Prophet of their own.
Thy Pencil scorns a Portraicture so faint:
Thou animate'st, what such dead Colors paint:
You Naturalize the Author you Translate,
And Classick Roman dress in Modern State.
Sprightly and Gay he makes his Visit here;
Dressed Al-a-mode, and speaks en Cavalier.
Great Juvenal's Wit, who in an English Scene,
By Time's long Rust at best had pointless been,
Thou grind'st to a New Edge, to cut more keen.
From Letts and Rubbish clear'st the craggy Shore,
And driv'st thy own Triumphant Chariot over.
His distant Heat does by thy Labor burn,
And Rear thy Phoenix from his Spicey Vrne.
E. SETTLE*

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Did not think to have given you or my self this Trouble, resolving what I
had said before my Thirteenth Satyr should have served the Turn: But since my
Friend Mr. Shadwell, before his late Ingenious Translation, has taken some
notice of this Essay of mine, I could not in good Manners, but make his
Civility a Return in Print. This English Essay of mine was Perfect, and
Licensed above a Year since, as intended to have been Printed in last Trinity
Term was Twelvemonth, but was by some Accident prevented. In the following
Vacation Mr. Shadwell did me the Favor to peruse it, keeping it for a
considerable Time by him: At the Return he told me, He had a mind to Translate
it for his Diversion, as liking the Author and Subject; which has taken so good
Effect, that I perceive the Younger Brother has by the Common-Mother the Press
outstript the Elder, and lurch'd him of the Blessing: Which I shall not much
bewail, since I had not set my Heart upon it: Nor will I blame his Haste to
Christen his Own Child first, which is but the way of the World. But I thought
it very hard, that his Fondness to his own way, should make him (in crying up
his own) fall so severely upon all others; proclaiming his own for an Exact and
Standard Translation, close to the Words and Sense of the Author, which must be
so, lest it should happen, (as he says it does in all Paraphrases) That the
Sense and Spirit of the Author be quite deaded and lost; Adding further, that
When any presume to Rank and Intermix their sense and thoughts with those of
the Noble Roman Authors, they look like Patches of homely Woollen on the
Richest Silks; this Modern Age producing no Genius like theirs, and therefore
their Imaginations must be Unequal, and short of the Author's. A very fine
Complement put upon this Age and Nation, which without Vanity have produced Men
Eminent and Learned in all Arts and Sciences, and all manner of Learning,
surpassing the last preceding Ages, and beyond the pitch of other Nations. And
as for Poetry, being the matter in Question, I will only instance Mr. Cowley,
who perhaps had as great a Genius in all sorts of Poetry, both Latin and
English, as any one of the Ancients: But, it seems, he would Monopolize and
Confine the Wit of this Age (like the Caballistical Learning of the Jews) to a
Club of his Acquaintance, who (it seems) are no professed Poets, but choice
Spirits, and by much the greatest Wits in England, and so transcending others,
that he thinks England never produced the like in any Age.

This frank way of dealing with the World, and imposing his own Fancy for Laws
on others, led me to consider how my Friend had gone through with the Irksome
drudgery of his Translation; and how his Genius had comported with so mean an
Employment, not doubting but he had nicely observed those Rules he had so
Magisterially laid down for others, and in Modesty had forborne to mingle any
Thought of his own with his Noble Roman Author, which might possibly nauseate
our stomachs like Wine of two tastes; presuming he had surpassed the Elaborate
Translations of Stapleton and Holliday; of which I will not pretend to judge:
When upon Perusal, I found he had not strictly followed his Author, but made
bold to Paraphrase and Embroider his Author's Rich Silken Garment with homely
Woollen Patches of his own, I shall instance only in ^our Verses, being the
first that came to Hand, the two first taken out of his Son's Translation of
Cato's Speech, printed before his Translation; the later two Verses being in
the First Page of his Satyr, and printed with a different Character, to denote
something extraordinary,

In Cato's Speech: Haeremus Cuncti superis: which he renders thus:
We all on God, as parts of him, depend;
There does the Mighty Chain begin and end.


Now I would have our nice Translator point out where the Author so much as
hints any thing of this Mighty Chain; or instruct his tolerable Grammarian
where to find it: which Chain must (like Jacob's Ladder) be Mighty enough to
reach from Earth to Heaven: Of which I can find no more in our Author, than of
a Cable or Sheet-Anchor. Besides, it will allow of a Dispute, whether God has
any Parts.

The other Instance is in the First Page of his Satyr: Cantabit vacuus coram
latrone viator.
Which he Translates thus:
While the Poor man void of all Precious things,
In company of Thieves, joggs on and sings.


Which Mr. Holliday has more truly and comprehensively translated in One Verse,
thus: Before the Thief, who travels empty, Sings.

There was no necessity the Authors Traveller should be a Poor Man; for if he
had nothing of Value about him, he might sing without Fear, though he were
Wealthy at home: And if we allow him a Poor Man we might guess he was Void of
all Precious things. Which word Void is very seldom used in the sense there
intended: May be the Poor Man voided his precious Stones long before he came
into the Thieves Company, that the Capon might sing the sweeter in his Journey.
Besides, I can perceive nothing in the Author that warrants that Heroic
Phrase, ( joggs on.) The Author's meaning is, that the empty Traveller having
no cause of Fear, might sing before the Thief: Yet there is no necessity he
should Jog on in Company of Thieves, who perhaps had other Designs on foot,
than to listen to his Melody. But I suppose, the next time he will mend his
Hand, and not brew and dash his Verse, till it is like Wine of two tastes, that
when we have pallated the New, we shall have no reason to say the Old is
better. Let Milo in the Satyr be an Example to him, not to presume too much on
his own strength, despising others, lest being wedged in a trap of his own
making, he become a Prey to the merciless Critics.

And thus much I thought my self obliged to say upon this occasion, since the
Translator was not only content slyly to top his Translation upon his Friend;
but by way of Anticipation, would arrogantly cry down all but his own
Translati^n.

I should now say something for this Essay of mine, which I never designed for
a just Translation, though I have always kept the Author in my Eye, and not
willingly rambled too far from him, (except in the Description of the Praetor
and his Equipage) which was too stubborn to work into my Verse, endeavoring to
make his sense, English, and such as is now current; All Satyr having a strong
taste of the Humor and particular Hints of the Times wherein they were writ,
which is indeed the Life and Beauty of Satyr. And I am the more confirmed in
the Opinion of my way, since I have read a V^rbal Translation, done by so able
a hand as Mr. Shadwell's. In mine I have rather imitated that Admirable
Translation of Quevedo, that gives Life and Spirit to his Author, by making him
English, in a Modish and Familiar way, which I hope you will approve of, and
excuse*

H. HIGDEN.

I have in the End of the Book Printed a New Translation of Cato's Speech in
Lucan, done, and sent me by an unknown Hand, though in the Printing it has met
with some alterations: For which, I beg the Author's Pardon; submitting his
Poem and my Satyr as Foyls to Mr. Shadwell's; being desirous to Play one
Fragment against another.

JUVENAL's TENTH SATYR, Made English.
SUrvey Mankind, (1) muster the Herd
From smoothest Chin to deepest Beard;
Search every Climate, view each Nation,
from lowest to the highest Station;
From Eastern to the Western Indies,
From frozen Poles to the Line that sindges:
Scarce will you find one Mortal Wight
Knows Good from Ill, or Wrong from Right,
Tanta est humanae mentis coecitas, ut in toto orb vix ab ortu Solis usque ad
occasum, paucissimi inveniantur, qui vera bona a malis possint discernere, vel
quid sit secundum rationem fugiendum quid petendum.
Omnibus in terris quae sunt a Insula nunc Cadiz vocata, in litore Hispanico
sita, ultra fretum olim Herculeum dictum, hodie angustiae de Gibralter; hic
Poetae Herculem duas Columnas statuisse volunt: Extremum occidentem credebant
antiqui unde Elogium Herculis Columnis inscriptum. NE PLUS ULTRA.
Gadibus usque
Au^oram Nobilissimu^ Indiae orientalis Fluvium.
and Gangem, pauci dignoscere possunt
Quae animi tantum sunt, uti Virtus, Justitia, and vitae integritas, quae
fracta Nav^ cum nudo Possessore enatare possint.
Vera bona,

'Cause clouds of Lust and Passion blind
And bribe with Interests our Mind;
And while they Combat in our heart,
Our Fondness crowns the conquering part.
What is the thing under the Sun,
That we with Reason seek or shun?
Or Justly by our Judgment weighed,
Should make us fond of, or afraid?
What 'ere is luckily begun
Brings sure Repentance at long-run.
The distant Object loomeing great, A term of Art at Sea, signifying the
appearance of a Vessel at a distance.

Possessed, proves often an empty Cheat;
And he who wins the wished for prize
A trouble often dearly buys.
-- at que illis multum diversa, remota
Err^ris nebula, quid enim ratione timemus
Aut cupimus? Quid tam Quid tam dextro vel prospero auspicio a Di^s petis,
concupis and precaris* ut non olim tuae petitionis and voti te poeniteat.
Dextra cum erant numina favere credebantur, Laeva contra
dextro pede concipis, ut te Contentionis, appetitus, desiderij*
Conatus non poeniteat, votique peracti?

Some for their Family importune
And beg their ruin for a Fortune.
The Courteous Gods granting their Prayers,
Have intayl'd Curses on their Heirs.
Of Wizards some inquire their doom
Greedy to know Events to come
And by their over Caution run
On the same Fate they strove to shun:
Some have petitioned to be great
And eminent in Church and State;
This in the Wars a famous Leader,
The Other at Bar a cunning Pleader;
The Cause on either side ensure ye,
By dint of noise stun Judge and Jury:
Evertere Dij prompti nimis and faciles ad largiendum, and obsequendum votis
hominum importunis, dum dant hominibus mala and noxia petentibus totas domus
and familias suas perdiderunt, etiam optantibus ipsis dominis.
domus totas opt antibusipsis
Dij faciles: nocitura Toga, nocitura petuntur
Militia. Eloquentia abundans, and Torrentis ins^ar fluens, multis exitium
tulit, ut Ciceroni and Demostheni: ut infra v. 1140.
torrens dicendi copia multis,

And if the business will not bear water
Then banter and perplex the matter.
But their obstrep'rous Eloquence
Has failed even in their own defense;
And saving others by Harranguing
Have brought themselves at last to hanging.
(2) Milo presuming on his strength
Caused his own destiny at length.
The greedy care of heaping Wealth
Damns many a Soul and ruins Health,
And in an Apoplectick Fit
Sinks them down right into the pit.
How many Upstarts crept from low
Condition, vast possessions show?
Et sua mortifera est Facundia. Viribus ille
Confisus periit admirandisque lacertis.
Sed plures Cura in divitiis accumulandis strangulat, opri^it suffocat, dum
omni ratione laborant, ut suus census tanto excedat aliorum census, quanto
balaena Britanica exsuperat delphinam mole.
nimia congest a pecunia cura
Strangulat, and cuncta exuperans patrimonia census
Quanto delphinis balaena Britanica major.

Whose Estate's audit so immense
Exceeds all Prodigal Expense.
With which compare that Spot of Earth,
To which these Mushroms owe their Birth:
Their Mannours to Dads Cottage show,
As Greenland Whales to Dolphins do.
In (3) Neroe's Plotting dismal times
Riches were judged sufficient Crimes.
First swear them Traitors to the State,
Then for their pains share their Estate.
Fat forfeitures their Toils reward:
Poor Rogues may pass without regard.
Some are hooked in for Sense and Wit,
And some Condemned for want of it.
Temporibus diris igitur, jussuque Nero undique occasion quaesita, divitum
opibus insidiabatur and diris illis and Tyranicis temporibus Imperatore
jubente, tota Cohors militum percussoru^ clausit Longinum and Senecae
praedivitis hortos, et aedes divitum Lateranorum ut divitias suas cum vita
adimeret. Exempla illa funesta demonstrant, divitias multis exitiales fuisse.
Neronis,
Longinum, et magnos Senecae praedivitis hortos
Clausit, et Egregias Later anorum Plautii Laterani quem intersici etiam jussit
Nero.
obsidet aedes
Tota cohors.

The over-rich Longinus (4) dies:
His bright heaps daz'led Envious eyes.
Neither could deep Philosophy,
Wisdom, desert, or Piety
Rich Seneca (5) from his Pupil save,
It Is fit he send him to a Grave,
And then resume the wealth he gave.
The Guards the Palaces beset,
For Noble Game they pitch their net:
While from Alarms and Pangs of fear,
Securely sleeps the Cottager.
If you by night shall happen late,
To Travail with a Charge of Plate;
With watchful eyes and panting heart,
Surpised, each Object makes you Start:
Miles vel percussor jussu Neronis Rarus in pauperum casulas and caenacula
venit, ut eos spoliet vel trucidet.
Rarus venit in caenacula miles.
Pauca licet ports argenti vascula puri,
Nocte iter ingressus, gladium contumque ti^ebis:

While Racked with doubts, oppressed with fear,
Each Bush does an armed Thief appear:
A shaken reed will Terror Strike,
Mistaken for a brandished Pike.
Before the Thief, the empty Clown
Sings unconcerned and Travailes on.
With warm Petitions most men ply
The Gods, their Baggs may multiply;
That riches may grow high and rank
Out swelling others in the Bank.
But from plain wood and earthen Cupps,
No poisoned draught the Peasant supps.
Of the Gold Goblet take thou care,
When sparkling wine's spic'd by thy heir:
Et motae ad Lunam trepidabis arundinis umbram.
Securo animo est, cui nihil est, nihil auferri potest; illis autem Maxim
timendum quibus Maximae divitae.
Gantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.
Prima fere vota, and cunctis notissima Templis
Divitiae, crescant ut ^pes, ut maxima toto
Nostra sit arca Trajano scil ubi Senatores et ditiores ar^as habebant, in
quibus argentum and pecuniam tutius disponebant.
foro. Sed nulla aconita bibuntur
Fictilibus: tunc illa time, cum po^ula sumes
Gemmata and lato vinum sentinum flammei erat coloris in auratis poculis.
sentinum ardebit in auro.

Then who can blame that brace of Wisemen
That did in diffring moods despise men:
The old merry Lad saunters the Streets,
And laughs, and drolls at all he meets:
For Pastime rallys, flouts, and fools 'em,
Shamms, banters, mimicks, ridicules 'em.
The other Sage in maudling wise,
Their Errors mourns with weeping Eyes.
Dull Fools with ease can grin and sneere,
And Buffoons flout with saucy jeere.
What sowrce could constant Tears supply,
To feed the sluices of each Eye!
Or to others merry humor make,
His spleen continually to shake?
Jamne igitur laudas quod de sapientibus Democritum Abdecritam philosophum
intellige qui semper stultitias and Ineptias hominum ridebat.
alter
Ridebat, quoties de limite moverat unum
Protuler atque ^edem; Flebat contrarius Heraclitus Ephesius notatur qui semper
hominum dementiam et miserias deflebat.
alter:
Jam hosce: duos contrarios Adfectus inter se comparat demonstrans in promptu
est ridere* sed mirum unde Heraclito suppeteret tanta Lachrymarum copia.
sed facilis cuivis rigidi censura cachinni.
Mirandum est unde ille oculis suffecerit Humor.
P^rpet^o risu pulm^nem agitare solebat
Democritus --

Since the rude Thracian in his City
Never saw procession half so pretty,
As modern Pageantry and State
Does on our City - Triumphs wait;
Than which no Interlude is gayer,
Whilst Sword and Cap usher the Mayor;
A Cap that does with Heads dispense
Without regard of Brains or Sense:
And whose mysterious Power translates
Mechanic Furs to Potentates,
From weighing Plumbs, to balance States.
So Mayor and Aldermen from Stalls
Wiser than Pope L. Chapter J. Scroggs at Jesuits Trial.
and Cardinals,
-- quanquam non essent Vrbibus illis
Poeta hic enumerat Ornamenta Regalia and caetera insignia Romani Praetoris.
Praetexta, and trabeae, fasces, lectica, Tribunal.
Quid si vidisset Praetorem Curribus altis
Extantem et medio sublimem in Pulvere Circi
In Tunica Jovis,

From Shop to Bench with inspired Noddle
The Body Politic does waddle;
Where President mute Judge hears Cause
That Statute never read nor Laws.
So Rablais Gown conveys his spirit
To all succeeding Quacks that wear it.
Thus Furs, more proud than E^^yn, muster,
Gilt Jack-Chains give the Faction Luster;
Whilst the whole Livery attend,
Banners and Trophies without end:
Of honored Guests a Cavalcade
Whose Friendship by the Treat is made;
-- and in palmata trabea, id est in picta and triumphali toga quam ex templo
Jovis sumptam induebant.
pictae Sarrana ferentem
Ex humeris Sarrana, satyrice sic Dictum, sara^ana quasi purpurea and Aulaea
Regia.
Aulaea Togae, magnaeque coronae
Tantum orbem, quanto cervix non sufficit ulla?
Quippe tenet sudans hanc Servus qui triumphantibus a tergo in eodem curru
adstabat ut coronam illam auream immensi ponderis and amplit^dinis sustneret.
publicus, and sibi consul
Ne placeat, curru servus portatur eodem.
Da nunc and volucrem, sceptro quae surgit eburno,
Illinc cornicines, hinc praecedentia longi
Agminis officia, and niveos ad frena Quirites,
Defossa in loculis quos stortula fecit amicos.

By flowing Bowls and City Custard
T'huzzahs and Io Paeans fluster'd.
Thus haughty Mayor without a Charter
Looks big, as if installed 'oth' Garter:
Their Leaden Sword and Mace may swagger;
But the wise State secured their Dagger.
For Children and unskilful fools
Cut their own fingers with edg'd-tools.
Could he in sober honest times
With sharp conceit tax pet^y crimes!
And every where amongst the rout
Find follyes for his Wit to flout:
Which, proves that Goatham and gross Clymes
Produce prodigious Wits sometimes.
Emphatice dictum, quum scilicet homines (vivente Democrito) prudenter and
long rectius vitas suas constituebant; quanto magis nostro tempore hominum
vanitates rideret.
Tunc quoque materiam risus invenit ad omneis
Occursus hominum --

The Joys and fears of the vain crowd,
And whimp'ring tears he would jeer aloud;
Wisely secure, Fortune deride
By Foppish Mortals Deify'd;
Bid her behang'd, and laugh at Fate
When threatened at the highest rate;
Whilst Fools for vain and harmful things
Pour out their Prayers and Offerings,
Fastening Petitions on the (7) Knees
Of their regardless Deityes.
For place and power how many men vy
Procuring mortal Hate and Envy;
-- cujus prudentia monstrat
Summos posse viros, and magna exempla daturos
vervex est convitium hominis simplicis and rudis, sic Pla^tus, Ain' vero
Vervecum Caput, anglice She^ps-Head. Vervex est aries castratus.
Vervecum in patria, crassoque sub aere nasci.
Ridebat curas, neo non and gaudia vulgi:
Interdum and lachrymas, cum nam cum Fortuna minitaretur mali aliquod
Democrito, ille ^n contemptu mandaret fortunae laqueum, in ipsius suspendium,
protendens medium infamem digitum, reliquis digitis contractis, quae contumelia
indicabat ignominiosum Cinaedum vel Scortum.
fortunae ipse minaci
Mandaret laqueum, mediumque ostenderet ^nguem.
Ergo supervacua aut sibi pernitiosa petuntur,
Propter quae fas est Olim concepta vota in tabulis conscripta Deorum genibus
cera obsignata affixerunt.
genua incerare Deorum.
Quosdam praecipitat subjecta potentia magnae -- Invidiae,

Heralds long winded Titles sound
Which the vain owners often confound.
Down go their Statues in disgrace;
The Party hangs up in the place.
In rage they break Chariot triumphant,
Because a Knave first set his rump ont:
Poor Horses suffer for no fau't
Unless by bungling workmen wrought.
The Founders Fournace grows red hot,
Sejanus (8) Statue goes to pot:
That Head lately adored, and reckond
In all the Universe the Second,
Melted new forms and shapes assumes,
Of Pispots, Frying-pans, and Spoons:
-- mergit longa atque infig^is honorum
Tabula aenaea imaginibus affixa quae honorum gradus co^tinebat.
Pagina; Statuae damnatorum tyranidis, laesae Majestatis, vel gravis alicujus
criminis, nomina eorum eradibantur fastis, Statuae frangebantur idque decreto
Magistratus, vel furore populi, laqueos altioribus Statuis solebant injicere
atque ita detrahere.
descendunt Statuae restemque s^quuntur.
Ipsas deinde Currus Triumphale* Statuas equestres, equos aenaeos.
rotas bigarum impacta securis
Caedit, and immeritis franguntur crura Caballis.
Jam strident quibus funduntur and ^^quuntur Statuae, and ardet, and liquescit
caput Statuae Sejani, nuper in tanto honor habitum, fuerat enim perpetuus
Collega Tibe^ii Imperatoris eique secundi honores habebantur*
ignes, jam follibus atque caminis
Araet adoratum populo caput, and crepat ingens
Sejanus: deinde ex facie toto orb secunda
Fiunt urceoli, pelves, sartago, patellae.

The Crowd o'rejoy'd that Caesar's living
Petition for a new thanksgiving.
How the base Rout insult to see
Sejanus dragged to Destiny!
Cries one, that fellow I never brook'd,
How down and hangingly he looked!
What blobber lips the rascal showed?
I told you he would never come to good.
But what is his Crime, or how detected?
That Question wholly is neglected:
What Evidence or Judges sit?
Pshaw, waw, that matters not a whit?
When so apparent was his Crime,
A formal process would lose time.
quod fieri solitum in laetitia Publica, in qua frondibus domus ornabantur.
Po^e domi lauros Cretatum (i. e.) candidum bovem quem Jovi Capitolino ex
triumphantium more immoles; in gratiarum actionem; Superis enim candidas
victimas immolabant, Inferis nigras.
duc in Ca^pitolia magnum
Cret atumque bovem: qui paulo ante alios in Triumphum ducebat, jam ipse unco
trahitur ad supplicium ad scalas Ge^onias juxta Tybrim aliis spectaculum
exhibiturus.
Sejanus ducitur unco
S^ectandus: ejus interitu, ne quis illi amicus videretur.
gaudent omnes. haec inter se populus in horas mobilis, a spectaculo tam tristi
reversus; occiso Sej^no insultans.
quae labra? quis illi
Vultus ^rat? Hic dialogus brevis incipiens cum occupatione, quasi dicat, ego
quidem nunquam amavi Sejanum, sed tamen libenter scirem, sub quo crimine
ceciderit, aut quo test Imperator probat Sejanum sibi struxisse insidias.
nunquam (si quid mihi credis) amavi
Hunc hominem. sed quocecidit sub crimine? quisnam
Delator? quibus Indicibus, quo test probavit?
respondens alter, fatetur se nil horum scire quae in judicio Capitali fieri
solebant, sed verbosa and grandis epistola venit a Capreis qua Imperator
Sejanum esse reum demonstravit.
Nil horum --

Long letters were from (9) Capra sent
By Caesar to the Parliament,
With orders not to be disputed,
The Traitor should be executed.
It Is very well, the other replied
Your servant Sir, I Am satisfied.
What thought the Mobile the while?
Nothing; tame animals they smile:
Contentedly drive with the Tide
And always hate the suffering side.
Had Fortune owned Sejanus part,
And with success had crowned his art:
And our young Statesman had the hap
To Have taken the old (10) Fox in his trap:
-- verbosa and grandis epistola venit
A Capreis: respondet primus interrogator, se jam omnem rem tenere and
intelligere.
been habet, nil plus interrogo; sed quid
Turbaremi? sequitur fortunam, ut semper, and odit
Damnatos. idem populus, si fortuna Dea Thuscorum. sensus est, si Sejanus
Thuscus fortuna Dea patriae favente Tiberium oppressisset, Populus Romanus
Sejanum in T^berii locum assumpsisset, eumque imperatorem Augustum salutasset.
Nurtia Tusco
Favisset, si oppressa foret secura senectus -- Principis,

Then our successful Favorite
The World had owned to have been in the right:
The fawning Rabble had that hour
Saluted him their Emperor.
Poor Roman fools since ancient date
Can Sell no voices in the State;
Now freed from Care, and living idle
Are taught to bite upon the Bridle.
Who once Dictators, Consuls, chose,
And did all Offices dispose,
Pass now ingloriously their days,
And meanly beg for Bread and Plays.
It Is said Warrants are out to seize
Many and great Accomplices.
-- hac ipsa Sejanum diceret hora
Augustum. jam pridem A tempore Monarchiae Julii Caesaris, ex quo imperatores
esse ceperunt; nos Romani per suffragia quae plerunque venalia fuerunt non
eligimus Magistratus, nec vendimus diversis candidatis competitoribus.
ex quo suffragia nulli
Vendimus Populus Romanus curas Electionis and Comitiorum, quippe Imperatores
Consulum comitia ad se transtulere, exemplo Julii Caesaris.
effugit curas. P. R. Qui per suffragia dabat Imperium, dictaturam, Consulatum,
Praeturam, Legiones, Belli prae^ecturam omnia officia and honores nunc optant
cum anxietate
nam qui dabat olim
Imperium, fasces, legiones, omnia, nunc se
Continet, atque duas tantum res anxius optat
Panem ad victum, and voluptatem e ludis Circensibus.
Panem, and Circenses. Alter Populi paventis introducitur dialogismus.
perituros audio multos.

Likely; the Prince his Rage does burn as
Outragiously as fire in Furnace.
At Mars his Shrine I met Brutidius
With ghastly looks, all pale, and hideous,
Since the ill-manag'd Plot took vent
His looks declare his discontent,
As if for game ill played he meant,
Like Ajax to anticipate
With his own hands his lingering Fate.
But to wipe off suspicion
On our part, let us to Tyber run;
While on the Banck the Corpse does ly
Trample on Caesar's Enemy.
Nil dubium: magna est Ira in Pectore Tiberii aestuante. vel Fornacula ad
exurendos malos and proditores.
fornacula* pallidulus mi
Vereor ne Brutidius amicus meus, quem modo conveni pallentem ad Martis aram;
ex male conscio animo, vel metu principis, quod Amicus and Conspirator cum
Sejano se interficiat sicut Ajax.
Brutidius meus ad Martis ^uit obvius aram.
Quem timeo, ^victus ne paenas exigat Ajax,
Vt male defensus! curramus praecipites, et,
Dum jacet in ripa calcemus Caesaris Sejani Cadaver.
hostem.

But 'twill do wis^ly our whole Crew
Of Servants should the action veiw;
That Friends and Foes may testify
How we abhor disloyalty.
The murmuring vulgar at this rate
Did of the fallen Sejanus prate:
Would you on these Conditions, Sir,
Be Favorite and Prime-Minister,
As was Sejanus? Stand possessed
Of Honors, Power and Interest*
Dispose supreme Commands at will,
Promote, disgrace, preserve, or kill:
Be guardian to a careless King
Who in all pleasures takes his swing:
Sed (...)
videant servi, ne quis neget, and pavidum in jus
Cervice obstricta dominum trahat: hi sermones
Tunc de Sejano, secreta h^^c murmura vulgi.
Vis ne salutari sicut Sejanus? habere
Tantundem? atque illi summas donare Magistratus urbanos, sellis Curulibus in
Curiam vehi and ex (...) jura dare solebant Magistratus.
Curuleis?
Illum exercitibus praeponere? Vicarius Imperatoris esse dum in angusta
Caprearum Insula in secessu otium and vitam libidinosam agit, cum Chaldeis
Mathematicis and Fatidicis quibus mire deditus erat Tiberius.
tutor haberi
Principis Augusta Caprearum in rupe sedentis
Cum grege Chaldeo? --

Cloyst'red in Bawdy Grots and Cellers,
With Pimps, Buffoones, and Fortune Tellers.
Have Foot and Horse-Guards, the Command
Of Armies both by Sea and Land.
Why not? Though Good-men would not kill,
Yet in their power they would have it still:
What Pleasure can so tickle sense;
Sharp pains and Grief to recompense,
What happy or exalted State,
But is over balanced by Ill Fate?
Would not you rather ask in Prayer,
To be some Petty Country Mayor:
There domineer, and when your Pleasur's,
Condemn light weights, and break false measures.
-- scio te velle primipilatum vel legionis praefecturam Pila ponitur pro
peditibus pilis munitis.
vis certe pila, Cohortes,
equitum domesticorum Magisterium.
Egregios equites, et Praetoriana quae primus ad muros Romae possuit Sejanus.
castra domestica, quid ni
Haec cupias? et qui nolunt occidere quenquam
Posse volunt. Sed quae praeclara et prospera tanti,
Vt rebus laetis par sit mensura malorum?
Hujus qui trahitur summum imperium cum Sejani periculo et supplicio.
praetextam sumere mavis,
An Fidenarum Gabiorumque esse an in obscura Villa Aedilem vel Magistratum cum
secura tranquillitate.
Potestas?
Et de mensuris jus dicere, vasa minora
Frangere pannosus vacuis aedilis vel Aedilis in vacuo et de serto Volscorum
oppido.
Vlubris.

Though meanly clad in safe estate
Then choose Sejanus Robes and Fate.
Sejanus then we must conclude
Courting his Bane, mistook the Good.
For he who from a mean estate
Vast Honors did accumulate,
And endless Riches, which enable
To build his Fortune high as Babel,
And braved the World; by weight too large
Did the high pil'd Stories overcharge:
Whence shockt with storms the reeling weight
The owner did precipitate,
And Signalized Ambitions Fate.
Repetit propositionem and concludit ipsum Sejanum vera bona ignorasse, quasi
dicat, cons^atergo Sejanum dum honores etc. appetiit nihil boni petii^^e, sed
in altum and summum honorum cacumen ascendisse, ut altius and profundius
rueret. Claudianus.
Ergo quid optandum ^oret ignorasse fateris
Sejanum. nam qui nimios optabat honores,
Et nimias pos^ebat opes, Sibi ipsi numerosas and multiplices contignationes
and tabulata in excelso honorum ^astigio exaedificabat, unde postea deturbatus
per ingens atque immane praecipitium violenta ruina decideret.
numerosa parabat
Excelsae turris tabulata, unde altior (...)
Casus, and impul^ae praeceps immane (...).
Vt Lapsu graviore ruant, tolluntur in altum.

Crassus and Pompeys fate of old
The truth of this sure Maxim told:
And his who first bowed Romes Stiff neck,
And made the World obey his beck,
By Subtle ways and arts aspired
And Sovereign sway at length accquir'd;
While the Malignant Heavens decreed,
His own desires should make him bleed;
Tyrants with some untimely end
To Proserpines black Court descend.
The Novice in his Accidence,
Dares pray his Wit and Eloquence
May Rival Roman Cicero's (11) fame
And Greek Demosthenes (12) high name.
Quid Marcum Crassum patrem a Surena Legato Parthorum rege devictum; ejusque
filios a Parthis and Caesarianis occisos.
Crass^s, quid Pompeium magnum cum duobus filiis a Cae arianis trucidatos.
Pompeios evertit? Julium Caesarem perpetuum Dictatorem intelligit, qui
Q^irites (i. e.) cives Romanos domitos deduxit ad sua flagra (i. e.) imperium
absolutum; imminuta imo amissa liberate, ille a Bruto, Cassio, and reliquis
conjuratoribus in Senatu, 23. vulneribus confossus periit.
and illum,
Ad sua qui do^^itos dedux^^ flagra Quir^tes?
Summus nempe locus (...) art (...),
Magnaque numi^^bus vota (...) a malignis.
(i. e.) ad Plutonem Proserpinae filiae Cereris maritum, pauci Tyranni
de^cendunt morte non cruenta.
Ad g^n^rum Cer^ris sin^ (...), and (...) pa^ci
D^scendu^^ Reges, and sicca morte Tyranni.
Puer elementarius qui literis initiatur, quem servus Capsarius deducit ad
scholam and reducit pauculos ferens libros.
El^q^ium and (...) Demosthe^s and Ci^eronis
Incipit (...), and ^otis (i. e.) in festis Minervae sapientiae praesidis quae
qui^^^ diebus celebrantur; exoptat ^loquentiam Demosthenis and Ciceron^^* alii
pu^ant hoc de Paedagogo non de Discipulo dictum.
Quinquatri^us optat,
Quisquis adhuc uno partam (...) ass (...),
Quem sequitur custos angustae vernula capsa.

Yet to both these, their swelling vein
Of wit and fancy proved their bane;
The Fatal cause that Forfeited,
The Ciceronian hands and head.
No pleading dunce's jobber noule,
Revenge e're doomed should grace a Pole.
O happy Romes secure Estate, Wherein the Translator imitates the gingle of
Cicero's own Verse.

Where I was fortunate innate;
Had happily his Genius chose
To Have writ such inoffensive prose;
His harmless blunt stupidity
Might Antonys Revenge defy;
It Is safer senseless verse to write,
Than in Philippicks keenly bite.
Eloquio sed uterque perit orator, utrumque
Largus, et exundans letho dedit ingenii fons,
Ingenio et Caput Ciceronis absciffa affigebantur rostris e quibus in Antonium
dixerat.
manus est, et cervix caesa, nec unquam
Sanguine Causidici maduerunt rostra pusilli.
versum hinc Ciceronis de oppressu Catalina in suo Consulatu irridet, propter
vocem natam natam inepte iteratam, unde Author innuit: si talia inepta carmina
Cicero semper scripsisset, et tam inepte omnia dixisset ab Antonii gladiis
tutus et securus evasisset.
O fortunatam natam me Consule Romam.
Antonii gladios potuit contemnere si sic
Omnia dixisset: ridenda P^emata malo,
Quam te conspicuae divina orationes Ciceronis in Antonium quas malo omine
Philippicas inscripsit ab iis quas in Philippum regem Macedonia habuit
Demosthenes. Quae ambobus oratoribus aeque exitiales ^uerunt.
Philippica famae,
Volveris a prima quae proxima. --

A violent and sullen fate
Did on the admired Athenian wait;
Whose manage Mobile's had guided
As with a rein where e're he sided.
Yet born under unlucky Stars
Sqinting untoward and perverse,
Was sent by's swarthy blear-eyed Sire
Betimes from sooty forge and fire,
From making swords and martial tools,
To hammer Arguments in Schools.
The Trophies which the vanquished field
Do to the glorious Victors yield,
Triumphant Conquerours can bless
With more than humane happiness.
-- saevus and Demosthenem cujus eloquentia in modum torrentis fluens, regebat
and gubernabat totum Theatrum and auditorium plenum civibus Atheniensibus: in
quo orationes recitare solitus: qui accepto nuntio de Antipatri and Crateri
adventu, in Calabriam Thraciae ad aram Neptuni profugit, a cujus ara cum
Archias satelles eum abstrahere conaretur, Demosthenes veneno quod in calamo
habuit hausto interiit.
illum
Exitus eripuit, quem mir abantur Athenae
Torrentem and pleni moderantem frena Theatri.
Diis ille adversus genitus, fatoque sinistro,
Quem pater ardentis massae fuligine lippus
A carbone, and forcipibus, gladiosque parante
Incude, and luteo Vulcano ad rhetora misit.
transit jam eloquentia ad glorias lauds ac victorias bellicas, quae tantopere
a plurimis appetuntur, and reputantur summa bona and prorsus divina esse licet
multis exitio suisse demonstrat exemplis Annibalis, Alexandrimagni, and Xerxis.
Bellorum Triumphi; Trophaea, Spolia, omnis generis quae victis hostibus in
bello exuuntur.
exuviae, truncis affixa trophaeis
Lorica, and fracta de casside buccula pendens.
Et currum temone jugum, victaeque triremis
Ornamenta navium: Victoriae Navalis ornamenta: Flaggs, Pendants, Streamers,
etc.
Aplustre, and summo tristis Captivus in arcu.
Humanis majora bonis creduntur: --

This Roman, Grecian, and Barbarian, (13)
Spurred to acts hazardous and daring,
In sweat and blood, spending their days
For empty Fame, and fadeing Bays.
It Is the immoderate thirst of Fame
Much more than Virtue does inflame:
Which none for worse or better take
But for her dower and trappings sake.
The fond Ambition of a few
Many vast Empires overthrew;
While their Achievements with their dust
They vainly to their Tombstones trust.
For sepulchers like bodies ly
Swallowed in Deaths obscurity.
-- Trophea quae credunt summa bona erexerunt se Romanus ut Sylla, Marius,
Pompeius magnus, Julius Caesar, Graius, Alexander magnus, Barbarus, Annibal,
Xerxes, Darius.
ad haec se
Romanus, Graius, ac Barbarus Induperator
Erexit: causas discriminis, atque laboris
Inde habuit: Ex hac ambitione and bellicae laudis gloria, hi tot discrimina,
pericula, aerumnas and labores in se susceperunt.
tanto major famae sitis est quam
Virtutis, quis enim virtutem amplectitur ipsam
nam omnes virtute relicta, famam and gloriam bellicam quaesiverunt.

Id est, si honorem* famam, and gloriam, quae virtutis praemia putantur,
tollas: nemo virtutem nudam curabit.
Praemia si tollas? patriam tamen obru^t olim
Gloria paucorum, and laudis titulique cupido
inscribendi saxeis sepulcris in quibus Urnae and Cineres conduntur.
Haesuri saxis cinerum custodibus: ad quae
Discutienda valext sterilis mala robora Caprificus steriles in nulla re
prosunt, quae ex muris erumpentes scindunt validiffimos muros and ^axa in
quibus nascuntur.
ficus:
Quandoquidem data sunt ipsis quoque fata sepulcris.

Behold how small an Urn contains
The mighty Hannibals (14) Remains.
Yet this was he whose swelling mind
To Afric (15) could not be confined;
Though meas'ring that large tract of Land
From Tangier to Niles reaking sand:
Thence southwards to Cape Bon 'Sperance
Negroes and lofty Elephants:
Whence wafting over the Mid-land Main,
He conquers and possesses Spain:
Restless in his ambitious mind,
Italian Conquests are designed.
Strong Bars wise Nature did oppose
The Alps (16) thatcht with eternal Snows:
Hannibalis cineres vel gloriam bellicam
Expende Hannibalem, qu^^ libras in duce summo
Invenies? Hannibal ille quem vivum tota Africa, tunc tertia pars terrarum
orbis existimata, non cepit.
hic est quem non capit Africa a mari Atlantico ab Occidente patens ad Nilum,
Aegypti flumen ob sole verticali tepentem, ab Orient.
Mauro
Perfusa Oceano, Niloque remota tepenti.
Rursus ad Aethiopum populos altosque Elephantes:
Additur Imperiis Hispania: alti montes q^i Hispaniam a Gallia dividunt.
Pyrenaeum
Transilit. Natura Alps altissimos and nivosos Montes, quibus Galliam and
Germaniam ab Italia disterminavit.
opposuit natura Alpemque, nivemque:

His way not craggy Mountain blocks,
With Vinegar (17) he eats through rocks:
Impediments by Nature cast
By art or labor are over past,
To Italy he comes at last;
Where after Towns and Battles won
He cries, Comrades, there is nothing done,
Unless our Conquering Punick Powers
Brake down Romes Gates, level her Towers,
Root up her Posts, and brake her chains,
And knock out all Opposers Brains:
Whilst our Troops scowr the City thorough
And fix our Standard in A high Street in the City, like C^eap^side.
Saburra.
distraxit, divisit, viam per Alps apperiens adhibito incendio, and in^uso
aceto scopulos fregit, ut fabulose scribit Livius.
Diduxit scopulos, and montem rupit aceto.
Jam tenet Italiam: tamen ultra pergere tendit,
verba Hannibalis miram regnandi libidinem exprimentis, quibus milites suos
hortat Romam ipsam perdere, innuens victorias adhinc acquisitas nullius momenti
esse, nisi Punico milite Romae portas frangeret, ac urbe devicta, vexillum
summum Triumphantem, in Saburra nobilissima and altissima urbis part
collocaret.
Actum, inquit, nihil est, nisi Paeno milite portas
Frangimus, and media vexillum pono Saburra.

Oh had you then his Figure seen,
With what a rueful Phis and meine,
The Rhod'montado Captain spoke,
Doubtless your laughter 'twould provoke!
Some pencil now to paint the form
Of this grum bulk of Huff and Storm;
While Swarthy, meager, and one-ey'd,
He does his Africa Monster ride.
But what Catastrophy of Fate,
Does on our famous Leader wait!
His Conduct's baffled, Army's broke,
Carthage puts on the Roman Yoke:
Whilst Flight and Banishment's his Fate,
His ruined Countries Scorn and Hate:
irridet Poeta vanitatem and deformitatem Annibalis, qui tamen tot and tanta in
mente agitabat, quam ridicula facies and figura sit, si unoculus d^x Getulo
alicui Elephanti insidens, in pictura pingueretur.
O qualis facies, and quali digna tabella,
Cum Getula Ducem portaret bellua unoculum alterum amiserat vigiliis and
palustri caelodum in Etruriam descenderet.
luscum!
Exitus ergo quis est? O gloria! vincitur idem
Nempe, and in exilium praeceps fugit,

At the Bythinian (18) Tyrants Gate,
The reformed Fugitive must wait:
And there for audience suppliant sit,
Till the Kings Leve will admit.
Neither the sword, nor spear, nor dart,
Could reach that wise undaunted heart,
And decently dispatch that Soul
That did the Universe control:
With awful Reverence his Fate
Did none but his own Orders wait:
As if decreed by Powers Divine,
His Ring should his own Pasport sign;
That Ring that must avenge the guilt
Of Seas of Blood at Canna (19) spilt.
-- atque ibi magnus
Mirandusque Cliens s^det ad prae^oriaregis,
Donec Bithino libeat vigilare Tyranno.
laethum An^^^ali qui omnia inturbabat non gladii, nec bellica instrumenta
dabant: nam Italia relicta, in Africam reversus Annibal, Zama in praelio a
Scipione devictus, and exilio mulctatus, ad Antiochum Syriae Regem profugit,
quem postquam de pace cum Romany suspectum deseruit, and ad Prusiam Bythiniae
regem se contulit, pro quo adversus Eumenem victor bellum gerit; quo cognito:
Romani mittunt ad Prusiam, Quintum Flaminium Legatum ^uum, ut sibi Annibal
daretur ad Romam perducendus, quo Annibali olfacto, hausto veneno, quod semper
sub annuli gemma habuerat Romanam malitiam illusit.
Finem animae quae res humanas miscuit olim,
N^n g^adii, non saxa dabunt, nec tela: sed ille
Cannarum vindex, and tanti sanguinis ultor
sub cujus palea in hunc usum Annibal venenum in omni tempore paratum habuit,
annulus Cannarum vindex, and ultor modii annulorum, quos Senatorum and Equitum
Cannis caesorum digitis detractos Carthaginem misit.
Annulus.

No other means was found for Rome
To be secure from fears to come,
But poor abandoned Annibal
A weak old Sacrifice must fall.
Go Madman, act thy frantic part,
Climb horrid Alps, with pains and art,
To be with mighty reputation
The subject of a Declamation.
One World's too mean a trifling thing
For the Young (20) Macedonian King,
He raves like one in Banishment
In narrow craggy Island pent:
In one poor Globe does sweat and squeeze,
Wedged in and crampt in Little-Ease.
-- Poeta Sarca^^icus insultat jam Annibali, qui jam mortuus ex tot laboribus,
tot tumultibus, bellis, cladibus, nihil reliqui habeat, quam ut scholasticis
pueris in scholis, materiam declamandi praebeat.
i demens, and saevas curre per Alps
Vt pueris placeas, and declamatio fias.
Alexandro magno in Pella Macedoniae urbe nato, qui cum adhuc juvenis
Anaxarchum Philosophum de infinitis mundis audisset disserentem, flevisse
dicitur, and dixisse me miserum qui unius mundi Dominus nondum ^actus sum.
Vnus Pellaeo Juveni non sufficit orbis:
Quasi in angusto conclavi claus^s, in quo vix spiritum possit ducere.
Aestuat infelix angusto limite mundi
Vt Gyarae Gyara vel Seripho angustissimis Insulis ad quas maxim steriles
facinerosi mittebantur, gravissimi exilii locus.
clausus scopulis, parvaque Seripho.

But he who humane race once scorned,
Gave out high Jove (21) King Phillip horned,
While managed Oracles declare
The Spark, great Ammons Son and Heir;
At Babylon (22) for all his huffing,
Finds ample room in narrow Coffin.
Man swells with bombast of inventions:
When stripped Death shows his true dimensions.
We will believe wild Xerxes rent
Mount Athos (23) from the Continent,
And in a frolic made a shift
To set it in the sea a drift:
What e're Romancing Greek dares tell,
Greece, that for Cracking bears the Bell:
Cum tamen a figulis munitam intraverit Babylonem quam Semiramis cocto a
figulis latere muris cinxit and circumdedit.
urbem,
quem vivum mundus non caeperat mortuus contentus and inclusus est exigua urna
vel capulo ex Lapide Assio dicto quod cadaver consumat, Lapis Sarcophagus intra
quadraginta dies totum Corpus absumit exceptis dentibus: Greci corpora
defunctorum non cremabant.
Sarcophago contentus erit, cum moriuntur homines apparet, qui and quales
fuerunt, and quam exiguo illi loco includi and contineri possint.
Mors sola fatetur,
Quantula sint hominum Corpuscula. Transit ad Xerxem Persarum regem, qui
immenso suo imperio non eontentus Graeciam bello petiit immenso Exercitu, quo
Athonem Montem altissimum Macedoniae a continenti abscindi jussit illumque
navium velis circum dedit and circum navigavit.
Creditur olim
Velificatus Athos, and quicquid Graecia mendax
Audet in Historici Greci vani and mendaces, historiis suis incredibiles
fabulas admiscent ut suam gloriam amplificarent.
historia --

With ships paved over the Hellespont,
And built a floating bridge upon it:
Drove Chariots over by this device,
As lately Coaches on the Ice.
He led so numberless a Rout,
As at one Meal drank Rivers out.
The Kings-Health scarce could go about:
With many like amazing Feats
Sostratus Giddy Muse repeats,
With damp wing in her drunken heats.
This Tyrant we in storys find
was used to whip and Flogge the wind,
Their Jayler Aeolus (24) in Prison,
Never firk'd them with so little reason:
-- Constratum Classibus Navibus quibus Athos velificatus et circum navigatus
Xerxes fretum Helesponticum pontibus sternebat, et Abidum in Asia Sesto in
Europa junxit ubi nunc Turcorum munimenta hodie vocata the Dardanello'es posita
sunt, Rotas ergo Curruum intelligit quae per pontem Transibant.
iisdem
Suppositumque rotis solidum mare* credimus altos
Defecisse amneis, epotaque flumina Medo Xerxe et exercitu ex Medo et Perfis.

Prandente, and madidis cantat quae Sostratus Graecus Poeta qui de expeditione
Xerxis in G^aecia scripsit, qui potu vel Poetico furore ebrius veritatem et
fidem Historiae excedit et transvolat.
alis.
Ille tamen, qualis rediit Salamine relicta insula in sinu Attico, ubi Xerxes,
navali praelio a Themistocle Graecorum duce superatus, cum magna clade
Persarum; Unde fugiens ad Pontem Hellespontiacum, quem cum liberius
tempestatibus fractum invenit piscatoria scapha trepidans turpissime trajecit;
qui paulo ante ventis imperare, et in Little atque Eurum flagris suis dementer
saevire solebat.
,
In Little, atque Eurum solitus saevire flagellis
Barbarus, Aeolio nunquam hoc in carcere passos,

Nor could blew Neptunes (25) Godhead save him,
But he with Fetters must enslave him.
'Twas well he escaped his fury so,
And was not whipped and branded too.
He must be a Complaisant God,
Will budg at such a Bedlam's nodd.
But after all these Roaring freaks,
Routed and broak he homewards sneaks;
Abandons all to the Conquering Greeks,
And Ferry's (26) over in Fisher-boat,
Through Shoals of Carcasses afloat;
His hopes all Vanished, bilk'd of all
His gaudy dreams, see Prides just fall.
The frequent Subject of our prayers,
Is length of life, and many years.
Ipsum compedibus qui vinxerat Neptunum a Graecis sic dictum quia fluctibus
concutit terram.
Ennosigaeum
Ironia mitius et clementius egit Xerxes cum Neptuno quod illi stigma non
inusserit, ut mos erat vernis fugitivis.
Mitius id sane, quod non et stigmate dignum
Credidit verba Poetae huic tam stulto et vesano regi, aliquis deorum vellet
inservire?
huic quisquam vellet servire Deorum?
Sed qualis rediit? nempe una nave cruentis
F^uctibus, ac t^rdo per densa cadavera prora,
Conclusio hujus membri de Gloria bellica. Haec et confimilia mala atque
pericula paenae loco exegit Gloria, ab Hanibale Alexandro et Xerxe et aliis,
Gloria i^^uam quam ipsi toties exoptaverant.
Has toties optata exegit gloria poenas.
pergit jam ad ^otum longae vitae et senectutis cujus miserias accurate
describit et depingit.
Da spatium vitae, multos da Jupiter annos:

We boldly urge these fair Petitions
In health and sickness; all conditions:
But what incessant plagues and ills
The Gulf of Age with mischief fills?
Where meeting tides of sorrows flow
As Rivers in the Ocean do.
Ugly deformed the frightful Elves
Detested grow, unlike themselves.
Instead of skin, on their outside
A withered and discolored hide;
They with long Nails, like tallons claw
Their rivell'd toothless lanthorn jaw:
As a lean mumping Grandam Ape
Her hollow wrinkled chops does scrape,
non demisso vultu and ore ut caetera vota petunt omni vitae tempore laetus aut
tristis sanus vel egrotus.
Hoc recto vultu solum, hoc and anxius, sollicitus, pallens ex metu vel ex
morbo.
pallidus optas;
Sed quam continuis, and quantis longa senectus
Plena malis: deformem, and tetrum ante omnia vultum
Dissimilemque olim juvenis dissimilem.
sui, deformem pro cute sic pellem acute distingunt, ut cutis haereat vivis
pellis mortuis.
pellem,
Pendentesque genas Ordo est: tales in senibus rugas aspice, quales simia jam
matter scalpit in vetula bucca (in illa regione) ubi Tabarcha pandit saltus
umbriferos.
and tales aspice rugas,
Quales, ^mbriferos ubi pandit in silvis juxta Tabarcham in Africa minori
simiarum plenis.
Tabraca saltus,
In vetula scalpit jam annosa and ob id deformior.
matter simia bucca.

Bright glorious Youth inchants our sight
With various objects of delight;
This a more handsome face can show
Than that tall graceful well-shap'd Beau:
In song and dance this spark is rare,
He Fences, Rides, Vaults, flings the Bar.
No diffr'ing forms our fancy strike,
In extreme age, they are all alike;
Weak trembling voice, their hair all shed
Off from their paralitick head.
The Old Dotard to new Childhood comes,
A dripping Nose, and toothless Gums:
While his loathed painful Dreggs of Life
Nauseat his Children and his Wife;
Plurima sunt juvenum discrimina, pulchrior ille
Hoc, atque ille alio: multum hic ro^ustior illo.
Vna senum facies, cum voce trementia membra,
Et jam Calvum.
leve caput, madidique instar infantium. vel jam in secunda infantia.
infantia nasi,
Frangerdus misero gingiva panis Edentula
inermi.
Vsque adeo gravis uxori, natisque sibique,

So loathed, makes even the Stomach rise
Of Rogues, who fawn for Legacies.
Their Pallat's gone, nor Wine, nor Meat*
Can please their no Taste when they eat.
Nor Beauty moves, nor Cupids dart:
Forgetfulness has seized that part.
Long since he there has been bewitched,
It Is a long Age since last he itcht.
Obsequious hand cannot excite
The bafled Craven to the fight;
From hoary loins, and sapless trunk,
In vain strives the industrious punk
To raise the nerve quite num'd and shrunk.
Vt captatori moveat fastidia heredi petae ipsi.
Cosso.
Non eadem vini, atque cibi torpente palato
Ga^dia: nam coitus jam longa oblivio* vel si
Coneris, jacet exiguus cum Hermia s^ro^i ^^more.
ramice nervus,
Et, quamvis tota palpetur nocte jacebit.

In Limberhams, if Will survive,
The impotents new ways contrive:
Having exhausted Natures Source
To filthy arts will have recourse.
His Hearing next is lost, what joys
Can he receive from Minstril Boys:
Once in their Golden Liv'rys, laced,
Before retrenchment had uncas'd:
What boots a Lesson on the flute,
Or if A Person famous for his Skill and Hand on the Lute.
La' Tou'r should touch his Lute.
If he would pass his time at the Opera,
It Is all to him an idle Foppery;
Since placed either remote or near,
No Actors voice can reach his ear.
Anne aliquid sperare potest haec inguinis aegri
Canities? quid, quod merito Qui Venerem affectant sine viribus and in coitu
operam praestare non pos^int merito suspecti sunt ne sint fellatores ita enim
facilius arrigantur, unde Martialis. Summa pe^as ^stic mentula vivit annus.
Idem lib. 4. Quid me Thai senem subinde dicis
Ep. 50. Nemo est Thais senex ad irrumandum.

Senectus saepe promior est ad id genus libidinis ut ^^it Tiberius: vide
Suetoni. Cap. 44.
suspecta libido est,
Quae Venerem affectat sine viribus? adspice Audit^s.
partis
Jam damnum alterius. nam quae cantante voluptas,
Sit licet eximius citharaedus? sive seleucus,
Et quibus aurata mos est fulgere lacerna.
Quid refert magni sedeat qua part Theatri,

He scarcely hears the neighbr'ng noise,
Of Cornets, Trumpets, or Ho-boyes.
His servant in his ear must hollow
Who visits, or what hour does follow.
Through his chill veins, no pulse does beat
Life's march; them only Fevers heat;
All Maladies unite their force,
Besieging round his rotten course.
And should I strive of each disease,
To give the names and qualities.
I Would sooner muster all the kept
Stallions have cast Aurelia lept:
Reckon those Quacks last Autum killed;
And graves by The new-found-wells at Islington so called.
Lousy-Tunbridge filled.
Qui vix cornicines exaudiat, atque tubarum
Concentus? clamore opus est, ut sentiat auris,
Quem dicat venisse pu^r, quot nunciat horas*
Praeterea minimus gelido jam in corpore sanguis
Febre calet sola: circumsilit agmine facto
Morborum omne genus: quorum si nomina quaeras,
Promptius expediam, quot amaverit Uxor Fabricio Vigentoni Romano Senatori,
fui^^^aecha famofissima cum quodam Sergio gladiatori maecho suo in Aegyptum
profugit.
Hippia maechos,
Quos Medicus.
Themison aegros autumno occid^ret uno,

What fellow Subjects were for Gold,
As Slaves, by needy Viceroy sold.
Each heir by dice, drink, whores, or masking
Or Stistead brought unto the The Cant word for a Prison.
Naskin;
Or Gallants Back in amorous play,
Mall Hinton dreyn'd dry in a day:
Count every School boy, name each Child
By Chickin-treading Pedant spoiled.
Survey each Lordly Seat and Manor
Possessed by valet Pimp of Honor.
For Pains in back and knees this cries;
This mourns the loss of both his eyes;
Envyes the pu^-blind; with pale lips,
From others fingers feeds and sipps:
Quot Quot provinciales in Societate^ Romanam receptos, Basilus ille praefectus
spoliaverit.
Basilus socios, quot circumscripserit MAURA Quot medios viros, una die famosa
illa et procera mere^^^ Maura lambendo, venere, et concubitu, exhauriat.
Hirrus
Pupillos, qu^t longa viros exsorbeat uno
HIRRUS Quot pupillos suae tutelae commissos, infidelis ille et frand^lentus
Tutor deceperit, defra^derit, et circumvenerit.
Maura die, quot discipulos inclinat Quot discipulos ille Pedagogus Sodomiticus
ad stuprum inclinavit.
Hamillus,
Percurram citius quot villas possideat nunc,
Quo tondente gravis juveni mihi barba sonabat.
Ille humero, hic lumbis, hic coxa debilis, ambos
Perdidit ille oculos, et luscis invidet, hujus
Pallida labra cibum capi^nt digitis alienis.

With mouth wide open like barrel bung,
Or gapeing bill of swallows young;
To whom the hungry Old-one brings
The hunted prey with Joyful wings.
But the num'd brains stupidity,
Does all the members loss out-vy:
When the Organs of the mind shall leave,
To do their Office, and bereave
Of Memory, then they forego,
The knowledge both of friend and foe;
Forget their Ancient Servants quite,
And friends with whom they supped last night;
Their Children they no longer know;
And by unnat'ral Will bestow
Ipse ad conspectum caenae diducere victum
Suetus, hiat tantum, c^u pullus hirundinis, ad quem
Ore volat pleno matter jejunia. Sed omni
Membrorum damno major Subjungit jam plurima alia senectutis incommoda, et
primo quidem quod plerique bis pueri senes fiunt: Ordo ^st, dementia omni
Membrorum damno (quod senes caeci surdi vel claudi evadunt) major est; Quo
scilicet animus praestat corpore, ita Memoriae, ration^s et mentis organorum,
amissio, defectibus corporalibus major est, cum ratio titubet, Memoria
flaccisset, etc.
dementia, quae nec
Nomina servorum, nec vultum agnoscit amici,
Cum quo praeterita caenavit nocte, nec illos
Quos genuit, quos eduxit; nam Saevis, iniquis, et injustis, Testamenti
tabulis, suos liberos exhaeredant.
codice saevo

Their goods, on their lewd Cockatrice,
Whose Mouth's the very sink of Vice:
So much it is artifice prevails,
Above all Charms of wanton Tails.
Who many years at Whetstone plied,
Morefields and other Stews beside;
At Brothel doors stood wheedling in
Unwary Woodcocks to the Gin;
If the Minds faculties continue
Firm, and in age still vigorous in you,
What troubles must afflict your thoughts,
While your loved children crowd Church-vaults
Ush'red by you, Wives, Brothers, come
To Natures dark retiring room.
Haeredes vetat esse suos, tota feruntur ad Phialem meritricem and fellatricem
suam, quam ex ass haeredem constituit, quae seni libidinoso and irrumatori
fellandi obsequio serviebat, ejusque animum sibi d^^inciebat.
bona tota feruntur
Ad Phialem: ta^tum artificis valet halitus oris,
per os intelligit Phialem meritricem: quae steterat id est more me^iticio
praestabat Lupanari, nam meritrices prae ostium prostibuli vel fornicis
blanditiis scortatores allicientes, constitere solebant.
Quod steterat multis in Carcere fornicis annis.
tamen multi etiam in extrema senectute, corpore, and animo vigeant. Respondit
Poeta objectioni; Ut maxim vigeant, tamen in longa illa vita, multa quae
nolint, vident, omni morte graviora. Ut mortem filiorum, conjugis, fratris,
sororis, and alios luctus, maerores, and aerumnas innumeras.
Vt vigeant sensus animi, ducenda tamen sunt
Fu^ra natorum, rogus aspiciendus amatae
Conjugis, and fratris. --

Nor can your care or sorrow save
Your beloved Sisters from the Grave.
These are the Comforts always wait
On those who long defer their Fate.
Still the fresh slaughter of their House
Maliciously their grief renews:
While cruel providence decreed
They must grow old in mourning weed.
Death Nature's debt, where long delayed
With cruel Usury is paid.
King (27) Nestor, Homers Records show
In length of life, came next the Crow,
Wore out more lives, as story's told,
Than Cat, Intayl, or Copyhold.
His happy years were justly wondered,
That had survived above three hundred.
-- plenaeque sororibus vasa in quibus mortuorum cineres componebantur,
postquam corpus arsissent.
urnae
Haec data poena diu viventibus, ut renovata
Semper clade domus multis in luctibus, inque
Perpetuo maerore and nigra vest senescunt.
Nestor, cujus exemplo demonstrat, illos qui diu vivunt multa mala experire.
Dicitur tertiam usque aetatem vixisse id est 300 anno, and proxime ad cornicis
aetatem accessit, quae vivere dicitur novem saecula vel aetates.
Rex Pylius, magno si quicquam credis Homero,
Exemplum vitae fuit a cornice secundae.

Bore Winters Frosts, and Summers thirst,
As often drank wine upon the must.
See in what melancholy strains,
Of the three Sisters he complains;
Why they should spin his Thread so tough
Of cursed everlasting stuff:
Harsh Laws! when the surviving Sire
Waits bearded Son to funeral fire.
In rage expostulates why he
Survives to so much misery:
And for what Sin of his, the Have
Of Heavens Decrees such lingering Fate:
So Peleus for Achilles (28) c^y'd,
Snatched in the Temple from his Bride,
Death in the nick the Banes denied:
Felix nimirum, qui tot per secula mortem
Distulit, a^que suos jam Graeci numerum in^ra centum digitis sinistrae
numerabantur, numerum vero centarium and illo majorem digitis dextrae.
dextra computat annos,
Quique novum toties mustum bibit, oro, parumper
Attendas, quantum de legibus ipse queratur
Parcarum: quod Atropos non citius stamen abruperit.
Fatorum, and nimio de stamine, cum videt fortis, bellicosi. Hic enim
Antilochus cum patri opem far vellet a Memnone^uit occi^us.
acris
cum defeet (...) s^um cum ejus cadaver combureretur.
Antilochi barbam ardentem: tum quaerit ab omni
Quisquis adest socius: cur haec in tempore duret,
Quid facinus dignum tam longo admiserit av^.
Haec eadem Aeaci filius, Pater Achillis, qui cum Pollixinae nuptias speraret
in Templo Apolinis, ab Paride and Diaphobo* sagittis confosfus est.
Peleus raptum cum luget Achillem.

Ulysses aged Sire did moan
The ten years ramble of his Son:
Priam (29) had died a happy shade
E're Troy had been in rubbish laid.
His mournful Rites with Pomp and State,
Performed by peaceful Magistrate;
His Corpse born up by Hectors shoulder,
(Than whom, no Mortal e're was bolder)
And's fifty Sons, tall Bully-Rocks,
As ever sprung from Kingly Stocks.
E're Fair Cassandra Fate fore-knowing
Bewayl'd sacked Troy, with eyes o're-flowing;
Had he been dead as any Herring,
E're Paris went a privateering;
Atque Laertes senex lugens filium suum Ulyssem Ithacae ducem, orbem december
annos pererrantem and navigantem.
alius; cui f^as Ithacum lugere not antem.
id est felix etiam fuisset Priamus, si Troja adhuc incolumi, and florente
regno, vel ante excidium, and Trojae incendium, mortuus fuisset, tunc enim
magnis solemnibus a quinquaginta fillis suis funus ejus deductum fuisset, and
tot mala, regnique sui interitum, non fuisset expertus.
Incolumi Troja Priamus venisset ad umbras
Assaraci magnis solennibus, Hectore funus
Portante, ac* reliquis fratrum Ex veterum consuetudine hoc dicit, nam (...)
olim funus patris portabat.
cervicibus, inter
Iliadum lacrymas, ut primos edere planctus
Quia vates erat, and futuri conscia mortem Patris scivisset, and ante reliquas
sorores suas calamitates Patris and Trojae flevisset.
Cassandra inciperet, scissaeque pollixina palla:
Si foret extinctus diverso tempore, quo non
Creperat audaces Si mortuus fuisset Priamus, priusquam Paris filius, ejus
audaces naves illas aedificabat, quibus Hellenam Menelai Conjugem abducebat,
quae rapina causa fuit excidii urbis Trojani.
Paris aedificare Carinas.

For Whores and Plunder played lewd Tricks,
Which to the Gutts provoked the Greeks.
Who Clubbing in Revenge o're-turn'd
Their State, and Pyrat-City burned:
At last the trembling King throw's by
His Turbant, and to's arms does fly;
Buckles on's harness, and invirons
His* weak limbs with unw^ildy irons.
And at Joves Shrine resignes his life,
As an old Ox under the Knife.
His weak-worn useless neck does bow,
Casheir'd from the ungrateful Plow.
His griefs how er'e a period found,
And in deaths deep abyss were drowned.
Longa dies igitur quid contulit? omnia vidit
Eversa, and flammis Asiam ferroque cadentem.
Tunc miles tremulus posita tulit arma Tiara,
Et ruit ante aram summi Jovis, ut vetulus B^s,
Qui domini cultris tenue and miserabile collum
Praebet, ab ingrato jam fastiditus aratro.
demonstrat Poeta his verbis, mortem and fatum Priami fuisse tolerabilem and
multo optabiliorem, quam miserimae relictae conjugis ejus* Hecubae.
Exitus ille utrunque hominis.

The Gods to his grim snarling wife,
Prolonged indignities with life.
Changed and deformed to such a pitch;
Through rage, she died, a barking bitch.
Why should we for Examples roam
Abroad, when choice are found at home?
The (30) Pontick King I will omit,
And Craesus taught by Solons wit.
We can pronounce none happy, none,
Till the last Sand of life be ru^.
None justly we good Actors call,
In life's farce, till deaths Curtains fall.
(31) Marius long-life was the only reason,
Of Exile and Minturnian Prison.
-- Sed torva canino Hecuba capta Troja in canem versa fuit ut Ovidius libro 13
Metamorphos and Virgilius: occasio fabulae putatur, quod cum a Graecis captiva
abduceretur and filii sui Polidori corpus in mare fluctuantem agnovisset,
quoniam aliter injuriam ulcissci non posset, amissa patentia, Graecos inanibus
lacessiverit convitiis.
Latravit rictu, quae post hunc vixerat, uxor.
Festino ad nostros, and Mithridatem qui vixit anno 69 and cum Romany 40 annos
varia bella gessit 57 annis regnavit: a Sylla, Lucullo, and Pompeio ter victus
fuit, vitae and belli taedia; cum non posset veneno gladio vitam finivi^.
regem transeo Ponti,
Regem Lydiae ditissimum Solonem ostenso thesauro rogavit vidisset ne aliquem
feliciorem? respondit Philosophus neminem beatum judicandum ante obitum, sic
Ovidius, Ante obi^um nemo supremaque ^u^era felix.
Et Craesum, quem vox justi facunda Solonis
Respicere ad longae jussit spatia ultima vitae.
Marium Arpinarem septies Consul. vide Annotat^one^.
Exilium and ca^cer, Minturnarumque paludes,

Made him beg bread for his relief,
In Carthage where he once was chief.
Nature did never produce of old,
Or Rome a happier man behold.
Then Marius was, when he victorious,
Procession made in Chariot glorious;
With Trophys and attending spoils,
And Captives chained in ranks and files.
Had Death snatched his Tryumphing Spirit,
That day, none e're had matched his merit.
Kind Fate, designing to befriend
Great (32) Pompey, did a Fever send,
That should with favorable doom,
Prevent his miseries to come.
Et mendicatus victa Carthagine panis,
Hinc causas habuere. Quid illo ci^e tulisset
Natura in terris, quid Roma beatius unquam,
Si circum ducto Captivorum agmine, and omni,
Bellorum pompa, animam exhalasset opimam,
Cum de T^^onico vellet descendere curru?
Provida POMPEIO: Exemplum Pompeii magni, qui ante bellum civil Correptus est
febre faventi and benevola, quia mortem and ignominiam provide prevenire
praecaveret, quae mors cum honor^ ante bellum civil illi optanda fuisset ne
victus, ab Achilla ob^runcaretur.
Pompeio dederat Campania fe^res
Optandas: --

Whole Nations for his danger grieved;
Their public prayers obtain, Reprieved.
Fate then that honored head did save,
Which she to insulting Caesar gave.
Slow Lentulus never underwent,
For Treason such a Punishment:
No^ Rash Cethegus, (33) Cataline
A Corpse entire in Arms did Shine.
It Is the fond Mothers constant prayer
Her Children may be passing Fair.
Excelling far all other faces,
In beauty and rare Charming graces.
Which Boon they beg with sighs and groans,
Incessantly on Marrow-bones.
-- Sed mult^ Vrbes, and quae a multis urbibus pro salute Pompeii Di^s
offerebantur and quae illum tantum a morte eripuerunt ut postea miseri^s
moreretur ab Achilla occisus.
publica vota
Vicerunt, igitur Fortuna ipsius, and urbis
Per preces aliquandiu servatum, donec postea Pompeii a Caesare victi Cap^t
amputatione esset ablatum.
Servatum victo caput abstulit. Hoc Cruciatu
Lentulus, hac paena caruit, ceciditque Cethegus
sc. sine capitis amputatione quod scoptice dicit.
Integer, and jacuit Catilina cadavere toto.
Transit poeta a divitiis Honoribus, etc. ad votum pulchritudinis aeque cum
carteris pernito^^m.
Formam optat Modico pueris, Majore puellis
Murmr, cum Veneris fanum videt anxia matter
Vsque ad delicias Votorum. --

Who justly blames a Mothers joy,
That huggs her wanton well-hung-boy.
Or if for joy Latona cry,
To see her pretty daughter Die:
Yet bright (34) Lucretias sullen fate,
Shows fair-ones are not fortunate.
(35) Virginia's chance may well confute you;
Good luck don't always wait on beauty:
The unhappy Fair's in worse estate,
Than a Crump rich and fortunate.
Concern for handsome boys does make,
Ill-boading Parents hearts to ache.
Still dreading mischiefs when they see,
Few fair ones famed for Chastity.
-- cur tamen, inquit
Corripias? pulchra gaudet Latona Diana.
Sed vetat optari faciem Lucretia, qualem
Ipsa habuit, cuperet Lura Rutila, gibbosa and deformis. 97 annos excessit.
Rutilae a Patre suo interempta, ne ab Appio Decemviro servitutem redigeretur,
and castitate violaretur.
Virginia gibbum
Accipere, atque suum Rutilae dare. Filius autem
Corporis egregii miseros trepidosque parents
Semper habet --

Beauty and Virtue often jarr,
Joined in one Person seldom are;
Though bred in honest Country Cell,
Where no debauched Examples dwell;
Whence Lust is banished, Virtue sways,
As in Queen Dick's plain honest days.
Though Nature's bounteous hand should plant
All Graces that can make a Saint;
And in one modest Cheek unite
The blushing Red Rose with the White;
What ever Nature can impart,
Nature more prevalent than Art;
Yet Vice will try her utmost Power,
And Court them in a golden Shower:
-- Rara est adeo Concordia formae
Atque pudicitiae; sanctos licet simplex and inculta domus a libidine aliena.
horrida mores
Tradiderit domus, ac veteres imitata mulieres castissimas.
Sabinas,
Praeterea castum ingenium, vultumque modesto
Sanguine ferventem tribuat natura benigna
Larga manu (quid enim puero confer potest plus
Custod^ and cu^a natural vis ad pudicitiam inclinata multo prevalentior
institutione, doctrina and educatione.
natura a potentior omni?)

To kidd-nap Youth will lie in wait,
And snap it er'e at Man's Estate.
So to corrupting bribes they will trust,
They Will Parents tempt for bawds to lust:
No Tyrant will the ill-shap'd choose
For Guardian Eunuchs for their Stews.
Or on a Youth deformed will pitch,
To cure his Sodomitick itch.
Go now applaud thy fair Sons Fate,
For whom perhaps worse dangers wait.
Let him turn Stallion to the Town,
And dread each hair-brained Husband's frown.
And undergo for punishment,
What enraged Cuckolds can invent.
etc. Scilicet si pulchri sunt aut castrantur aut corrumpuntur (i. e.) aut
spadones fiunt vel cina^d^.
Non licet esse viros: nam prodiga corruptoris
Improbit as ipsos audet tentare parents.
Tanta in muneribus fiducia. Nullus ephebum
Deformem saeva castravit in In Arce Tarpeia solebat Nero ^astrare pueros.
arce Tyrannus.
Nec nobilem puerum ad stuprum rapuit.
praetextatum rapuit Nero Loripedem, nec
Strumosum, atque utero pariter, gibboque tumentem.
I nunc, and juvenis specie laetare tui, quem
Majora expectant discrimina. Fiet adulter
Publicus, and poenas metuet, quascunque mariti
Irati debent. --

Never let him think by Wit or Care
Still luckily to escape the snare:
Surpised, undone, Trappan'd, beset,
He Will fall like Mars into the Net.
Then shall revenge quit his old Scores,
And pay him home for past Amors:
They Will slit his Nose, or Crop his Ears,
And whip off Gun and Bandileers:
Dispatch with Poison, Steel, or Bullet,
Or Fundament plugg'd with a (36) Mullet.
But thy Endimion shall inflame
None but some choice fair wealthy Dame,
By whom, profusely crammed with coin,
His peerless Pomp shall all outshine.
-- nec erit felicior astro
depr^n si in laqueis cum Venere in adulterio.
Martis ut in laqueos nunquam incid^t. Exigit autem
Interdum ille dolor plus, quam lex ulla dolori
Concessit. Necat hic ferro, secat ille cruentis
Verberibus, quosdam moechos and Vetus deprensorum maechorum supplicium, cum
depilabant nates cinere calido, and tunc mugiles, pisces quosdam cum grandi
capite in podicem immittebant.
mugilis intrat.
Sed tuus NATUS: tuus formbsus ut Endimion a Juna amatus.
Endimion dilectae fiet adulter
Matronae: --

But when through vain Expense, or Play,
His hoarded Bank shall melt away;
He for recruit, must let to hire
His Hackney Back, to the desire
Of some old filthy Hagg for coin,
And sell the labor of his Chine;
Then he must strip and buckle to it,
Or from loathed Task must reap no fruit.
Whither by Nature free or base;
No Buttock's hide-bound in this case:
Or will be nigardly and grudge
A liberal sal'ry to her drudge.
And if he 's^ape these threatening Rocks,
He Will surely shipwreck on the Pox:
-- mox cum dederit turpis and deformis, matter Bruti.
Servilia nummos
Fiet and illius quam non amat, omnia dabit, vel ipsa ornamenta corporis, etiam
vestimenta sua ad satisficiendam libidinem.
exuet omnem
Corporis ornatum; quid enim ulla negaverit per udum inguen, membr^m muliebre
intelligitur.
udis
Inguinibus, sive est haec sive sit prodiga and nobilis ut Hippia, vel avara,
ut Catulla.
Hippia sive Catulla?
(i. e.) vel pessima faemina habet omnes mores, viz: liberalitatem
beneficentiam, etc. in remunerandis Amatoribus.
Deterior totos habet illic faemina mores.

Ere thoroughly ripe he will rot away,
Like early fruits that soon decay:
His small remaining stock he trucks,
With Quack for dyet-drink and Flux;
In which his Nose and Pallat fall,
Rots peice-meal, noisome grown to all;
Ends his loathed life in Hospital.
What harm will honest Beauty do;
He may prove Chaste, and handsome too.
What did his Hippolito.
rigid Virtue boot,
That balked his Step-dames lustful suite:
What did (37) Bellerephon betyde,
When he returns of love denied?
In both their Queans Revenge did Reign,
Roused by repulse of Cold Disdain.
Sed cast^ quid forma noc^t? respondit hic objectioni, ostendens exempla
castitatis fatalis and exitialis in Hippolito and Bellerophonte. Hippolitus
erat filius Thesei, a Noverca Phaedria cujus incesto amori non respondebat,
apud patrem stupri falso accusatus, dum patris iram fugeret, ab equis territis
disjectus curru and discerptus est. Bellerophon infinitis periculis expositus
est, propter contemptum amorem Sthenobeae Praeti Regis Uxoris.
quid profuit immo
Hippolyto grave propositum, quid Bellerophonti?
Erubuit nempe haec, cen fastidita repulso.
Nec S^henobaea minus quam Phaedria sic dicta, quia Minoidis Cretensium Regis
Filia,
Cressa excanduit, and se
Concussere ambae --

Then Women rage with cruel'st spite
When shame their hatred does excite:
When trifling Lovers seasons lose,
And kind advances do refuse:
From loathed Contempt of profer'd love
Their Breasts with furious transports move.
Call Council quickly to advise,
Our present Case proves very nice:
Here Is Caesar's (38) Wife resolved to marry,
Nor for the Emperors Death will tarry.
She has designed with lustful Eyes
The Noble Youth her Sacrifice.
The Priest and honored Guests invites
To witness Matrimonial Rites.
-- (...) saevissima tunc est,
Cum sti^^los odio pud^r admovet. Elige quid nam
Suad^ndum esse putes, cui nubere Caesaris uxor
Desti^at. Cai^s Silius, praenobilis Romanus, in quem exar^it Messalina Uxor
Claudii (faemina Libidinis monstrum) and qui coactus dismissa uxore sua palam
Messalinam ducere, re cognita ab Impera^or^ necatus erat.
optimus hic, and formosissimus idem
Gentis Patriciae rapitur miser extinguendus
Messalinae occulis: dudum sedet illa parato
quo nova nupta operitur.
Flame^lo --

The Portion's told, the Gen^al Bed
With Pomp is in the Garden spread:
Does with Capricious fancy burn;
Marriage can only serve her turn:
With which, if he will not comply
He tempts his present destiny:
What shall he do? obedience give,
And that may gain a short reprieve:
Till all the Town the Story hears;
At last 'twill reach the Prince's ears.
There Is hopes in that, for the disgrace
The Cuckold learns in the last place:
Then to her Will obedience pay;
Your Fate may thence admit delay,
-- Tyriusque palam genialis in hortis
Sternitur, and ritu Sestertia, qui numerus erat legitimus and solemnis in Dote
lautiorum, danda marito propter matrimonii onera.
decies centena dabuntur
Antiquo, veniet cum Qui obsignabant tabulas and instrumenta matrimonii.
signatoribus Nullae nuptiae praesertim Legitimae ^iebant sine Auspicio.
auspex.
Haec tu secreta, and paucis commissa putabas?
Non nisi legitime vult nubere: quid placeat, dic:
Ni parere velis, pereundum erit ante lu^ernas:
Si scelus admittas, dabitur mora parvula, dum res
Nota urbi and populo conting at Principis aures,
Dedecus ille domus sciet ultimus. interea tu
Obsequere imperio --

If at the rate of such a Wife
you will purchase a short slavish life.
Both ways his certain Fate's decreed
The wretched lovely Youth must bleed.
Shall men ask nothing then? be wise,
And listen well to sound advice.
Refer desires to Providence,
With thanks take what the Gods dispense.
Let not your stubborn Will repine,
What'ere they shall for you design.
They better know than human wit,
What does our Exigents befit.
Their wise all-seeing eyes discern,
And give what best suits our concern.
-- si tanti vita di^rum
Paucorum. Quiquid melius leviusque putaris,
Praebenda est gladio pulchra haec, and candida cervix.
Nil ergo, optabunt homines? Si consilium vis,
Permittes ipsis, Considerare.
expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
Nam pro jucundis aptissi^a quaeque dabunt Dii.

We blindly harmful things implore,
Which they refusing, love us more.
By love and blind desires still led,
Wee're hurryed to the Marriage bed:
With hopes of issue from our Love,
But Heaven foresaw how both would prove;
Forbearing to disturb our Life,
With Bratts unnatural, and damned wife.
Pray then, that in a Body sound,
A Firm and Constant mind be found.
A Mind no fear of death can daunt,
Nor Exile, Prison, Pains nor Want.
That justly reckons death to be
Kind Author of our liberty,
From Flesh, a Jail-delivery.
Carior est illis homo, quam sibi. Nos animorum
Impulsu, and caeca, magnaque cupidine ducti,
Conjugium petimus, partumque uxoris: at illis
Notum, qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor.
Vt tamen and poscas aliquid, voveasque sacellis
intestina delicata.
Exta, and candiduli divina Farcimina pinguia e Porcinis carnibus.
tomacula porci:
Orandum est, ut sit men's saena in corpor^ sano.
Fortem posce animum, mortis terrore carentem,
Qui spatium vitae extremum inter munera ponat
Naturae --

Banishing Passion from our Breast,
Resting Content with what is possessed.
That every honest Action loves,
And Great Alcides (39) toils approves,
Above the Lusts, Feasts, beds of Down,
Which did Sardanapalus (40) drown.
This, mortals to themselves may give;
Virtue's, the happy rule to live.
Chance bears no sway, where Wisdom Rules,
An empty Name, adored by fools.
Folly Blind Fortune did Create
A Goddess, and to Heaven Translate.
-- qui far queat quoscunque labores,
Nesciat irasci, cupiat nil, and praeferendos.
potiores
Herculis aerumnas, credat, saevosque labores,
Et Venere, and caenis, and pluma Ultimus Assyriorum Rex, omni libidini
effoeminatae deditus.
Sardanapali.
Monstro, quod ipse tibi possis dare, Semita certe
Tranquillae per virtutem patet unica vitae.
Nullum Scilicet tu Tortuna nullum numen habes* i. e. non Dea existimaris a
prudenti homine.
Numen habes si sit. prudentia: sed nos stolidi homines facimus Fortunam Deam
nostram.
nos, te
Nos facimus, Fortuna, Deam, coeloque locamus.

FINIS.
THE ANNOTATIONS ON THE Tenth SATYR.
IN this Wise Satyr, the Author does reprove and accuse the Ignorance of
Mankind, imploring things of the Gods, which often prove prejudicial; As,
Riches, Honors, Martial-G^ory, Long-Life, and Beauty: But neglect to ask
Endowments and Blessings of the Mind; as, Wisdom, Virtue, Justice, and
Integrity of Life, which alone can be esteemed Real Good, of which neither
Chance, Violence, nor Shipwreck can deprive us; true and solid Happiness
consisting in the Indolency of the Body, and tranquillity of the Mind; and shows
that very few men in the World, viz. from Cadiz an Island in Spain, at the
Mouth of the Streights of Gibralter, which in our Authors time, was thought the
Bounds of the Western World, and where Hercules placed his Pillars, to the
Famous River Ganges, Eastward, whose Head ariseing in Mount Caucasus in
Scythia, runs a long Course through the Eastern-Indies, whose Channel where
narrowest, is 8 miles broad, and about 20 where widest; and in the shallowest
place 100 Foot deep. Page 1 st.
Milo: The Poet observing, that many Eminent in Civil and Military Affairs, and
famed for Eloquence, trusting to their own Abilities have been ruined; gives a
lively Instance of one betrayed by his own strength; in Milo the Crotan, who
unfortunately presuming on his Gygantick strength, in an Attempt to rive an
Oak, had his Arm wedged in the Trunk; whence not having power to disengage
himself, he was held in a Trapp in the solitary Woods, where he became a Prey
to Wild Beasts. This Milo in the Olympic Games carried an Ox on his back a
furlong, and after slew him at one Blow of his Fist, and the same day entirely
eat him up. Page 4 th.
In Neroes: The Poet observes this Emperor infamous for Tyranny, Injustice,
and all manner of Villainy and Wickedness; who took all unjust advantages to
trappan and take away the Lives of his wealthiest Subjects, thereby to possess
himself of their Estates, and proceeded to such a height, he did not spare the
Lives of his Domestic Servants and Favorites, im^rewing his hands in the
Blood of his Mother, Brother, and Wife; and others of his nearest Relations.
Page 5 th.
Longinus: Caius Cassius Longinus the Lawyer, whom Nero commanded to be slain,
being charged with no other Crime, but having the Statue of Cassius (one of
Caesar's Murderers) in his house. But his great Riches and Possessions was the
true reason of his Death. Page 6 th.
Seneca: The Tutor of Nero, who by the favor of the Emperor, in his ten years
sole Ministry of Affairs, had amassed together a vast Treasure, and got
splendid Gardens and Possessions; but lost them all by the Command of his cruel
Pupil, with his life. As also did the rich Family of the Laterani. Page 6 th.
The brace of Wisemen: Are meant Democritus of Abdera the laughing, and
Heraclitus of Ephesus, the weeping Philosopher; the first, in a careless merry
humor, continually scoffing and deriding the Vanity and Foppery of Mankind;
the other bewailing their Folly and Misfortune. Page 8 th.
Knees: It was customary with the Ancients, when they had any great or
considerable Request or Boon to beg of the Gods, to write their Request in
Paper or waxen Tables; together, with a Conditional Vow, which they promised to
perform if they obtained their suit; which being sealed, they left fastened to
the Knees of the God, from whom the Blessing was expected; in which if they
proved successful, they took off the Paper so fastened, and performed their
Vow. Page 12 th
Elius Sejanus: A Tuscan born, he was in so great favor with the Emperor
Tyberius, that he denied him nothing: He was made Colleague in the Consulship
and Roman Empire with Tyberius, was likewise Prefect of the Pretorian Bands,
and grand Master of the Palace: Public Statues were erected to him, and the
Romans used to swear by his Fortune; his Birth^day was kept a Festival: Yet
falling into Disgrace with Tyberius, by whom, he with others, were suspected to
have conspired his Death; the Emperor from the Island of Capra sent a long
Epistle to the Senate, charging Sejanus with Ingratitude against the life of
Caesar; whereupon he was by the Senate forthwith Condemned with his whole
Family; and the same day having his hands bound behind him, was by the
Executioner drawn through the street to the Scalae Gemoniae; his Statues pulled
down with Contempt and Ignominy, his only daughter then but a child was
deflour'd and executed by the Hangman. A Notable Example of the mutability of
Humane Affairs. Page 13 th.
Capra: An Island near Naples, whither Tyberius retired, spending his time in
obscene filthy Pleasures, whence he wrote to the Senate against Sejanus. Page
14 th.
Old-Fox: Tyberius who may well merit that Name, being a most profound
dissembler, and subtle Politician, whose Actions had rendered him so odious to
the Romans, that as Suetonius relates on the first news of his Death, some of
the People cried out, that he should be thrown into the Tyber; others would
allow no sepulcher; others threatened to drag the Body to the Scalae Gemoniae.
Page 15 th.
Cicero: The Author shows by the Examples of Cicero and Demosthenes, that Wit
and Eloquence have been pernicious to Orators: Cicero the Chief of the Roman
Orators and Philosophers, as appears by his works; he being the first that
transplanted the Grecian Learning into the Roman Language: He raised himself
through all the degrees of civil Employments to the Consulship, being the
highest pitch of Honor in the Roman Commonwealth; and in his year of
Consulship, broke and defeated the Conspiracy of Cataline: He made several
invective Orations against Mark Anthony, which he with evil Omen Entitled his
Philippicks, in imitation of Demosthenes, who in like manner declaymed against
Phillip of Macedon; but in the turn of the Roman State he was in revenge
proscribed by Anthony and Augustus, and had his Head and Hands nailed on the
Rostrum or Pulpet, whence he declaimed against Anthony. Page 21 st.
Demosthenes the Athenian, the most famous Grecian Orator, and Stout Champion
for the Liberty of Greece; he declaimed against King Phillip, as one who
designed to destroy the Public Liberty and enslave Greece; for which he was
expelled his Country; and again, after Phillips Death recalled: but after
Alexanders Death, under the Government of Antipater, discovering some Designs
against his Life, he fled and took Sanctuary in Neptune's Temple, whither
Archias the Tragedian came, endeavoring to wheedle him to recourse to
Antipater; affirming he had no design against him; but their Plott being well
understood by Demosthenes, he told Archias, that he had never pleased him on
the Stage as an Actor, and much less now when he played the part of an
Ambassador: but Archias threatening he would draw him out by Force; the Orator
told him, he perceived now he was in earnest, whereas before he did but act his
Part, and desiring his Patience till he dispatched some necessary Orders to his
Domestics; he retired to some distance, and drew o^t his Table Book as if he
would write, when sucking Poison from a quill which he had always kept therein
for a dead lift, He expired: thereby mocking the malice and revenge of his
Adversaries. Page 21 st.
Barbarian: When Greece Flourished, She called all the World besides Barbarous:
which Title Plautus as freely bestows on the Romans; but when Rome came in
Power, and Arts Flourished, she treated the World with the same language. Page
24 th.
Hannibal: Here the Poet passes from Eloquence to Martial-Glory, and inquires
what Advantages it brought to that Captain Hannibal, the son of Amilcar, the
Carthaginian General, by whom he was in his youth solemnly sworn an
Irreconcilable Enemy to the Romans; the Poet traces his life through all the
traverses of his prosperous and adverse Fortune, demonstrating he had been
happier, had he limited his Ambition, and not harassed and consumed Himself and
Country, about such vain and improbable Designs of Conquering Italy. Page 25 th.
Afric: He taxes the Haughty and Restless Spirit of Hannibal, who esteemed
Afric, though then one full third part of the known World, too narrow a Stage
and obscure a Scene for his Boundless and Ambitious Actions. Page 25 th.
Alps: A continued ridge of high Mountains, extending one hundred thousand
paces, and dividing France and Germany from Italy: they are continually covered
with Snow, from whose whiteness they took their Denomination in Greek, (...); a
strong and safe barricade to the Roman Empire, against the Gauls and Barbarous
Nations. Page 26 th.
With Vinegar: Our Author laughs at the ridiculous Relation given by Livy, of
Hannibals passing the Alps, reporting, that when the Army was obstructed by a
Rock in their passage; they made a vast Pile of Trees, and with the advantage
of the Wind, setting them on Fire, they poured Vinegar on the red-hot Stone,
which softened, dissolved* and rotted them away; which idle Invention of the
Historian, is by Polibius omitted as fabulous; for what needs such an
Operation, when before Hannibal's time, the Gauls had five times passed the
Alps: It might be necessary the Army making so long a passage, and so tedious,
by reason of the number, and the narrowness, where no Carriages could come up;
that each Soldier should carry his proportion of Bread and Vinegar for the
whole Passage; the Vinegar being necessary to make Beveredge with the Mountain
Water: Which great Preparation of Vinegar provided for the March, might give
occasion to such Fabulous Report. Page. 26 th.
Bythinian Tyrants Gate: Hannibal being overcome by Scipio Affricanus at the
Battle of Zama, near Carthage in Afric; despairing of success or safety, fled
to Antiochus the King of Syria; but suspecting that King was in Treaty to
deliver him to the Romans; he left him and went to Prusius King of Bythinia,
where, as his General he overcame Eumenes; but the Romans not thinking
themselves secure, while so Politic and Inveterate an Enemy survived, dealt
with Prusius by Embassy to deliver him up; which Hanibal discovering, to
prevent shame, dispatched himself by Poison, which he always carried in his
Ring for that purpose: A poor Revenge of Rome, and below the Consideration of
so Great and Victorious a Commonwealth. Page 28 th.
Canna: Where Hannibal in a pitched Battle overcame Paulus Emilius, and
Terentius Varro, the two Roman Consuls, together with their whole Army, being
the Flower of the Roman Militia, killing most of their Horse, and above 40000
Foot upon the Place; he filled three bushels of Rings, taken from the Fingers
of the slain Nobility, which he sent to Carthage as a Witness of his Victory;
and therefore our Poet wittily Remarks, that Hannibals own Ring did revenge the
slaughter of the Owners of so many Rings at Canna. Page 28 th.
Macedonian King: He laughs at the Vanity of Young Alexander, for being
melancholy because there was but one World could fall to his share, as not a
sufficient Prize for his Ambition: it is said, Alexander hearing a Philosopher
endeavoring to prove there were many Worlds, he burst into tears, to his
Friends complaining that he had not as yet Conquered One among so many. Page 29
th.
Jove: Alexander was so puffed up with his Success against the Cowardly
Effeminate Persians, and transported to that degree of Pride and Vanity, that
he procured and corrupted the Priests of Jupiter Ammon, to receive and own him
as the true Son of that God; and set on foot a formal story, that the God had
in a visible Figure conversed with his Mother about the time of his Conception;
which though it might be politickly done, to awe the superstitious Persians and
barbarous Nations, who might think it vain to resist the power of a God, yet it
lessened him in the Hearts and Opinions of his Gallant and Victorious
Macedonians; and by ascribing all to sole Valor and Conduct of his Godship, he
robbed every brave Soldier and Commander of his share of the Honor and
Victory. Page 30 th.
Babylon: A City of the Persians, built by Semiramis the Wife of Ninus, the
Founder of the Assyrian Monarchy; it was surrounded with Walls of brick, being
60 Miles in Compass, 50 Foot in Height, and 200 Foot in Breadth, where
Alexander dyed by Poison: Pythagoras the Magician had foretold, that Babylon
should be fatal to him, where, notwithstanding the Oracle, he was found mortal.
Page 30 th.
Athos: Here the Poet confirms his Argument with the Example of Xerxes, the
Persian King, who not content with his vast Dominions, makes an expedition with
a numerous Army into Greece; and as the Greek Historians relate, cut a deep
trench, wherein he let the Sea, and thereby divided that high Mountain, which
was a Promontory from the main Land, and caused Vessels to sail round; which is
the Exposition the Commentators give of Velificatus Athos; which does not
satisfy me, who rather conjecture that Mount Athos abounding with Pines; they
were by Xerxes cut down and made into Vessels, and then Veleficati or put to
sail, and afterward with them composed a Bridge over the Hellespont, he adding
immediately, constatum classibus eisdem -- suppositumque rotis solidum mare.
Which if allowed, the sense will be parallel, as if we should say; The King in
his great Navy put the Forest of Dean to sea, calling the Wood by the name of
the Place where it grew: the Poet reflecting on the Greeks, who writing their
own History, magnify their own Courage and Conduct, by stuffing their Legends
with monstrous Fables, expose their Enemies to derision, such as the making a
trench about Athos, and the drinking Rivers dry at one Meal. Page 30 th.
Eolus: the Grecian Histories tell us, that Xerxes, to hold a Correspondence
between Asia and Europe, laid a Bridge of Boats over the Hellespont, at the
Place where Sestos and Abidos stood, and the Place where now the Dardanelli are
placed, where the sea is about a mile broad; where the Current being deep* the
Vessels could not ride at Anchor against the stream, but must be fastened to
each other; which long line of Boats upon the first stiff Gale of Wind, at
East, then called a Levant, and blowing with the Current, must necessarily
separate and brake, which was the Fate of Xerxe's Bridge: who to be revenged on
Eurus or the ^ast Wind, caused several Thousands of his Army being drawn up
upon the shore, with rods to strike and whip against the Wind; the Poet
reflecting on the folly of the interprize, says in a jeer, Eolus the Prince of
the Winds, under whose Government and restraint they are kept in the Caverns of
the Earth, never used his Subjects the Winds so Barbarously. Page 31.
Neptune: An Ironical Relation of a freak of Xerxe's, who being offended with
Neptune, as well as the Winds, for breaking his Bridge; did cast Fetters and
Manacles into the Se^, to show he had dominion over Neptune, and could chain
him at his pleasure as well as scourge the Winds: and perhaps to as much
purpose as the Duke of Venice with solemn Pomp and State does yearly espouse
the Adriatic by throwing a Ring with Ceremony into that Sea; the Poet
observes, that Neptune was kindly dealt with, that he was not branded as
fugitive slaves used to be served. Page 32.
Ferrys: Xerxe's being overcome by the Greeks near Salamine, under the Conduct
of Themist^cles with great slaughter, and a Total defeat of his Navy, fled with
a few by Land to Abidos; and finding the Bridge broken, was in a great Terror
wafted over in a small ^isherboat, concluding so great and glorious an
expedition with a base and shameful flight. Page 32.
Nestor King of Pylos: The VVisest and most Eloquent of all the Greeks, who
continued strong and vigorous at an extreme age, being near 300 years old when
he went to the Seige of Troy: by his rare Example, the Poet shows the
unavoidable grief and calamities, that necessarily attend old age, when at the
death of his Son he introduced him in a bitter complaint against the destinies,
for prolonging his miserable life. Page 41.
Peleus the Son of Eacus, and Father of Achilles the valiant Greek, who could
not be comforted for the death of his valiant Son slain in the Temple of Apollo
by Paris and Diaphobus, in the instant when he attended to Marry Pollixena
their Sister. Page 42.
Priam: the last King of Troy, who surviving to a great age, lived to see his
chief City taken, sacked and burnt with the slaughter of his numerous issue,
and subjects, having Fifty Sons, and was himself slain in the Temple of
Jupiter. The Poet observes he had been happy, had he dyed before these
Calamities, which was all he gained by his Long-Life; yet pursuing his Argument
against Long-Life, he prefers his Fate, though it met a distastrous Conclusion
before his Wife Hecuba's who surviveing him, was transformed into a Bitch. Page
43 d.
The Pontick King: Mithridates, who lived 69 years, and reigned 57, and waged
continual war with the Romans 40 years; by whom he was thrice overcome under
the Conduct of Scylla, Lucullus, and Pompey; his affairs were at last reduced
to that extremity, that he attempted to destroy himself by Poison, but finding
by Antidotes, he had so fortified his Body, it would not work the desired
Effect: he perfected his Intention with a Dose of cold Iron. 45 th.
Caius Marius: Produced as another Instance of the misfortune of Long-Life; he
led the beginning of his Life as a laboring Husbandman, and after served as a
common Soldier, and passing through several degrees of the Army, at length
obtained the supreme Command and Consulship. He Conquered Jugurtha in Afric,
and led him in Triumph: So great was the opinion of his Valor and Conduct,
that when the Invasion of the Cimbrians and Teutons, had filled Italy with
Terror and Confusion; Marius was the only Man that was thought fit to defend
his Country, and on that occasion was five times successively chosen Consul;
and at last in two Battles overcame the vast Armies of the Cimbrians and
Teutons, and Triumphed with a general Admiration and Applause, as the Deliverer
of his Country. The Poet pursuing his Argument, shows his Long-Life was
incommodious to him, for had he (says the Poet) dyed the day of Triumph, no man
had ever left behind him a more glorious Memory and Character: whereas, he
after sullyed the Glory of his Reputation and Actions, and survived his great
Reputation, and for his Folly and Cruelty was scorned and detested of all, and
so wearisome to himself, that he at last dispatched his miserable Life. Page 45
th.
Great Pompey: Who having before the Civil Wars performed several great
Actions, fell sick at Capua of a Feavor; his death (the Poet says) was then
prevented by the public Prayers that were made for his Recovery; but had he
then dyed, his Head had happily escaped an ignominious Death; Fortune seeming
then to reserve it, to be cut off by the treachery of Achillas in Egypt, and
presented to his great Rival of the World, Julius Caesar, who (Crocodile like)
shed tears (no doubt of joy) over it. Page 46 th.
Cataline: The Poet observes that Lentulus and Cethegus Traitors and
Conspirators with Cataline, dyed a more decent death, than unfortunate Pompey,
as not being beheaded or mangled, which was esteemed unfortunate and
dishonored: Cataline the Arch Traitor, dyed at the Head of his Army Gallantly
sighting, and made a good Figure, covering the Spot where he fought. Page 47 th.
Lucretia: He passes now from Long-Life, and considers the many disastrous
fates have attended Innocent and Beautiful Persons; producing the Roman Lucrece
for an Example, who being ravished by Tarquinius Sextus, was the occasion of
many troubles, and nobly ended her Life and Dishonor with a Poniard. Page 48 th.
Uirginia: With whose rare Beauty, Appius Claudius the Decemvir fell
desperately in Love, and having tried all means to corrupt her Chastity without
success, at last suborns a Creature of his own, to swear before him as Judge,
that Virginia was not the true Daughter of Lucius Virginius the Centurion her
reputed Father, but a slave born, and consequently, ought not to be free, and
was judged as a slave; by which judgment, she was abandoned (without her
Fathers Protection) to the Lust of her Ravisher; which Virginius perceiving,
seeming satisfied with the Sentence, desired to take leave off his supposed
Daughter, and approaching her, stabbed Her with his Dagger; whereby he
prevented her Dishonor, and disapointed the Intent of the unjust Judge; it not
being punishable in him to kill Her, being adjudged a slave, and taking the
bleeding Body on his shoulders, he returned with it to the Camp, where showing
the bloody Corpse, and declaring his Injury, the Soldiers were stirred up to
revenge his Wrong, which was punished in the unjust Judge with Death, and
occasioned the Extinguishing of the Government, in the Decem-viri. Page 48 th.
Mullet: The Poet observes, that beautiful Sons are obnoxious to the
Temptations of Great Men, and often Caressed by wanton Wives and Ladies; though
they must expect sometimes to be taken, like their Predecessor Mars, who
notwithstanding his Planet and his Sentinel the Cock was taken in Vulcans Net;
where they must expect all the Cruelty and Outrage, Injured and Revengful Men
can commit: and mentions here the Roman Revenge, that used to force a Mullet up
the Fundament of the Offender, with the Head foremost, which having Bristles on
the Back, and Finns like a Perch, was no way to be pulled out. Page 51 st.
Bellerephon: The Author shows that Beauty in young men, accompanied with a
Resolution of rigied Virtue, turns very often to the disadvantage of the
Possessor, which is made out by the Examples of Belerephon and Hippolito: with
the Shape and Beauty of the first of which Sthenobea the Wife of Praetus, the
King of the Argives being Inamoured, solicited him to unlawful Pleasures,
which he refused; whereupon she accused him for attempting a Rape upon her;
which occasioned many Hazards and Dangers, which his Virtue at last overcame:
Hippolito being a very Beautiful Youth, gave himself up wholly to the Diversion
of Hunting, regardless of the Charms and Conversation of Women, with whom his
Stepmother P^aedra fell in love, and Courted him to her Bed, but was by him
refused; she accuses him to her Husband, for attempting a Rape upon her,
Hiplito perceiving she had gained Belief of her easy Husband, and that his Life
was in danger, Flies in his Chariot; but in the way his Horses being
affrightened, would not be governed, but running down a Precipice, dragged the
unfortunate Youth in pieces. These with the Story of Joseph may be a Caution to
Cuckolds, not to be over Credulous. Page 53 d.
The Emperors Wife Messalina: She was married young, to Claudius the Old
doting Emperor: Her salacious Appetite was not to be satisfied, though with
many Incumbents: She played a trial of skill for a prize, with one of the
Ablest, and most Famous Roman Courtezans, who should endure the most
Assailants; in which Contest, the Empress bore away the Bell, and out-did the
professed Harlot in her own Art: She used in a disguise, to go to the Public
Stews by night, and there accoutred like a common Courtezan, she maintained her
Post against all Comers, and in several Incounters was found Invincible,
staying till the Brothel Tap-too went about, as desirous to see the last Man
born: At last she grew so openly Extravagant, that being in love with Caius
Silius a handsome Youth, and of a most Noble Family; made him put his Wife away
and openly marry Her, though the Emperor her Husband was alive, and not twenty
miles from Rome; for which Purpose all Ceremonies were prepared for the
Wedding, and the Portion ready down upon the nail, the Wedding Bed prepared in
a sumptuous Pavilion in the Garden, of which the Emperor being advertised,
forbid the Banes, and causing both to be seized, they both were slain; the
Unfortunate Silius, first suffering before the eyes of the Lustful Emperess.
Page 56 th.
Alcides: Hercules the Son of Jupiter and Alcmena; he was for his Justice,
Valor, and hardy Exploits, worthily translated among the Gods. The Poet
proposes his Toils and Labors, rather to be imitated and undergone, by a
Brave and Virtuous Man, and preferrable to the Indulgence and Debauchery of a
Sloathful and Voluptuous Person. Page Vlt.
Sardanapalus: The last of the Assyrian Monarchs, and the 30 th. from Ninus the
Founder: He so degenerated into all the sorts of Lust and Debauchery; that he
was not ashamed to sit and spin among a Multitude of Strumpets, And therefore
was by the Assyrian Nobility worthily despised and deposed. Page Vlt.
Cato his Answer to Labienus when he Requested him to Consult the Oracle of
Jupiter Ammon.
Being a Translation of Part of the 9th. Book of Lucan; Beginning a -- Quid
quaeri Labiene Jubes, etc.
WHat should I Ask my Friend, if best it be
To Live Enslaved, or thus in Arms Die free?
If it our Real Happiness import,
Whither Life 's foolish Scene be Long or Short?
If any Force true Honor can Abate,
Or Fortune 's Threats make Virtue bow to Fate?
If when at Noble Ends we justly aim,
The Bare Attempt Entitles us to Fame?
If a Bad Cause that Justice would oppress,
Can ever grow more Honest by Success?
All this we know, wove in our Mind it sticks,
Which Ammon nor his Priests can deeper fix.
They need not Teach with Venale Cant and Pains
That God's Inevitable Will holds ours in Chains,
Who Act but only what he Praeordaines.
He needs no Voice to Thunder out his Law,
Or keep his Creatures Wild Desires in awe:
Both what we ought to do or what forbear,
He once for All did at our Births declare:
What for our Knowledge, needful was or fit
With Lasting Characters in Humane Soul he Writ.
But never did he seek out Desert Lands
To Skulk, or Bury Truth in pathless Sands:
Or to a Corner of the World withdrew
Head of a Sect, and Partial to a few.
Natures Vast Fabric he Controuls alone;
This Globe's his Footstool, and high Heaven his Throne;
In Earth, Sea, Air, and what e're else Excels,
In Knowing Heads, and Honest Hearts he dwells.
Why vainly seek we then in Barren Sands
And narrow Shrines, in Temples Built with Hands,
HIM, whose Dread Presence does all Places fill,
Or look, but in our Reason, for his Will.
What e're we see is GOD, in all we find
Apparent Prints of his Eternal Mind.
Let Floating Fools their Course by Prophets Steer,
And live of future Chances still in Fear:
No Oracle or Dream the Crowd is told,
Shall make me more or less Resolved and Bold:
Death is my sure Retreat, which must on All
As well on Cowards, as on the Gallant fall.
This said, he turned him with Disdain about*
And left scorned Ammon to amuse the Rout.
FINIS.

