His MAJESTY'S Most Gracious PARDON, To the Poor Prisoners in NEW GATE. On
Friday the 26 th. of February. 1685/6
A Midst the innumerable Virtues and Graces that have been inherent in the
Royal Line, of our Most Gracious PRINCE, and his Glorious Predicessours, Mercy
and Compassion (the two Cardinal Endowments of a Good Christian Profession)
have at all Times and Seasons, been very obvious and apparent: It was these,
and such other Prince like Qualities and Blessings, that have left such an
immortal Fame, on the venerable Memories of many (if not the most part) of our
most Renowned and Deceased KINGS, whose admirable Clemencies bear a most
laudable Echo, through the farthest Bounds of Christiandom, this Royal
Inheritance (in all Ages) has most meritoriously Commanded the unfeigned Love
and Cordial Allegiance of all good Subjects; it is this which procures Man both
Reputation and Happiness in this World, and is a good Step and Introduction to
that which (...) to come, which Noble Virtue the short space (but propitious
Experience) of the auspitious Government, under His Most Excellent MAJESTY,
does give very satisfactory Testimony, that we are ^^ke to suffer no manner of
umbrage or eclipse of that transparent qualification in the person of our
present KING; but on the contrary, a superlative Luster to all those Blessings
we have hitherto enjoyed a sufficient Test of whose Royal Commiserations,
entirely is disscovered in this following Account.

At the Sessions of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-delivery of Newgate,
Held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, the
24 th. 25 th. and 26 th. of February. 1685/6; Before the Right Honorable Sir
Robert Jefferies Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London, Sir John Holt Knight.
Recorder of the aforesaid City, with other of His MAJESTY's Justices of the
Peace, for London and Middlesex: The Trials being over, His MAJESTY's most
Gracious Pardon was produced and read; the persons contained in which, were
Sixty One in Number, whereof Thirty One came under the Free-Pardon, and the
other Thirty ordered to be Transported.

Those in the Free-Pardon were,
Jonathan Becket, John Spencer, Thomas Draper, Catharine Banse^, Edmund Lawson,
William Rawson, John Price, William Grubb, John Drildell, John Muntith, Thomas
Wanckl^^, William Vanderh^^rst Thomas Weal, Nathaniel Page, John Henly, John
Somerset, Francis Martin, John Fernly, William Ring, Catharine Brown, David
Hunter, Julian Pell, Anne Dye, Jane Sineklow, Daniel Mackrow, John Hoadly,
Robert Brewell, Robert Frewen, Pascha Rose, Ellenor Steel, Alice Garret.
Those to be Transported were,
John Thompson, Cassandra Widows, Mary Fisher, Harbert Thomson, Edward Hawley,
Robert Brooks, Richard Osbern, Thomas Drew, John Dykes, George Arwell, Samuel
Anderton, John Smith, Mary Hancock, Thomas Golesburrow, Elizabeth Hacker,
Thomas Genister, Lionell Fenwick, Thomas Gardner, Richard Jones, Matthew
Morgan, Mary Collward, Anne Davis, Richard Coy, Zachar^ah Thompson, Leonard
Beat, Ambrose Staplin, George Smith, Sarah Warral, Isaac Smith, David Barton,
This may be Printed,

February the 27th. 1686. R. P.

LONDON; Printed by E. Mallet, for D. Mallet, at the sign of the Black-Ball
near Bridwell-Bridge.


