HIS Majesty's Resolution For the Calling of a FREE PARLIAMENT, Upon the Humble
Motion, and Advice of a Great Council of his Peers.
His Majesty was Graciously pleased, upon Tuesday, Nov. 27. 1688. to advise
with a Council of his Peers, about the present Unhappy State of his Affairs,
where they attended his Royal Pleasure according to a Summons unto them
directed. There were present, twenty five Protestant Temporal Lords, and nine
Lords Spiritual, being the whole number that were within distance of appearing
according to the time of Summons. His Majesty was pleased to express himself
with great Clearness and Respect upon the Subject of that Meeting, requiring
their Lordships to deliver their Judgments with all Freedom upon the Matter in
hand, wherein they acquitted themselves accordingly upon the several Points
that they had in Debate; and upon a full Consideration of the whole Affair,
their Lordships came to this Resolution, (without so much as one Negative) that
they saw no way of Redress, considering the Grievances and Distempers of the
People, and the present Circumstances of his Majesty's Condition, but by the
speedy calling of a Free Parliament, which their Lordships with one voice
humbly besought the King to do: Whereupon his Majesty was pleased to Declare to
their Lordships, to this Effect; that their Advice was according to his own
Inclinations, but it being a Matter of so great an Importance, he would take
time til the next day to consider of it. And upon the day following, his
Majesty was pleased to Order the Issuing out of Writs for the calling of a Free
Parliament.

There were present, His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and His Grace of
Tork in Nomination, with seven Prelates more.

The Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor, the Marquess of Hallifax, the Earls
of Oxford, Pembrook, Clarendon, Anglesey, Carlisle, Craven, Aylesbury,
Burlington, Yarmouth, Berkley, Nottingham, Rochester, Vicount Falconberg,
Vicount Newport, Vicount Weymouth. The Lords, Chandois, Paget, Vaughan,
Montague of Boughton, Maynard, Howard of Escrick, Ossulston, Godolphin.


