royal coat of armsAt the Court at WHITEHALL the 29th of June 1688.
Present,

The Kings most Excellent Majesty, Lord Chancellor, Lord President, Lord Privy
Seal, Lord Marquess of Powis, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of Huntingdon, Earl of
Bathe, Earl of Craven, Earl of Berkeley, Earl of Melfort, Earl of Castlemain,
Lord Bellasyse, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Nicholas Butler, Mr.
Petre.
WHereas by the late Act of Uniformity, which Establishes the Liturgy of the
Church of England, and Enacts, That no Form or Order of Common Prayer, be
openly used, other then what is Prescribed and Appointed to be used in and by
the said Book: It is notwithstanding Provided, That in all those Prayers,
Litanies, and Collects, which do any way relate to the King, Queen or Royal
Progeny, the Names be Altered and Changed from time to time, and fitted to the
present Occasion, according to the Direction of Lawful Authority. His Majesty
was pleased this day in Council to Declare His Royal Will and Pleasure, That in
all Prayers for the Royal Family, the Persons particularly to be Prayed for, be
thus named and expressed, Our Gracious Queen Mary, Catherine the Queen Dowager,
His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, and their Royal Highnesses Mary
Princess of Orange, and the Princess Anne of Denmark, and all the Royal Family.
And His Majesty does straightly Charge and Command, That no Edition of the Book
of Common Prayer be from henceforth Printed with these Amendments, and that in
the mean time, till Copies of such Edition may be had, all Parsons, Vicars and
Curates within this Realm do (for the preventing of Mistakes) with the Pen
Correct and Amend all such Prayers in their Church Books, according to the
foregoing Directions. And for the better Notice hereof, That this Order be
forthwith Printed and Published, and sent to the several Parishes, and that the
Right Reverend the Bishops take care, that Obedience be paid to the same
accordingly, within their respective Diocesses.

JOHN NICHOLAS,

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1688.


