royal coat of arms
JAMES R.

JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all and sundry Our good Subjects whom these presents do or may concern,
Greeting.
Whereas by the decease of Our most dear and most entirely beloved Brother King
Charles the Second of ever blessed Memory, the Parliament of Our Ancient
Kingdom of Scotland, which was current before that time, is now actually
dissolved. And seeing upon diverse weighty Considerations, of great Importance
to our Service, and to the Peace and Tranquillity of that Our Ancient Kingdom,
We have thought fit to call a Parliament to meet at our City of Edinburgh upon
the Ninth day of April next ensuing the date of these Presents. We do therefore
Require and Command all Archbishops, Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, Viscounts,
Bishops, Lords, and Officers of State of Our said Ancient Kingdom to be present
and attend that Dyer. And We do also Require and Command all our Sheriffs in
the several Shires, and their Deputs forthwith to call and conveene all the
Freeholders in the respective Shires, to the end that according to the Laws and
Acts, of Parliament, Elections may be made of sit Persons to be Commissioners
for this Parliament. And We do likewise Require and Command Our Royal Burrows
to make choice of Commissioners accordingly; and them and all Persons having
Interest, to attend this Our Parliament, under the Pains contained in our Laws
made thereanet. And to the effect all Our good Subjects may have notice of this
Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby Command Our Lion King at Arms, and
his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, to make
timeous Proclamation of these Presents at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and at
the Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burrows of the several Shires of that Our
Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at White Hall the Sixteenth of February 1685. And of Our
Reign the first Year.
By His Majesty's Command, MORRAY.
EDINBVRGH, the 20 of February 1685.
ORdered by His Majesty's Privy Council, that His Majesty's said Proclamation
be forthwith Published at the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all other places
needful, with all the usual and accustomed Solemnities. And Printed.

WILL PATERSON, Clericus Secreti Concilij
GOD save the KING
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, and Reprinted at London for L. Curtiss, near Fleet-bridge. 1685.


