DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For Securing the Peace of the High-lands.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To Our Lion King at Arms, his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy Council,
Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly, and severally,
specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as Our Dearest and Royal Brother, of ever Blessed Memory, having by
His Commission, Dated the Ninth day of August, One thousand, six hundred,
eighty and two Years, Commissionated the Persons therein-mentioned, for the
Districts therein-specified, to see the Peace of the High-lands: And whereas,
the said Commission has not been Renewed by us to them as yet, (albeit we be
fully Resolved shortly to Renew the same;) And understanding, that there are
several Attrocious Crimes and Riots committed in the High-lands, by dissolute
and loose Persons. We therefore, and for preventing thereof, and punishing the
Offenders and Delinquents guilty of the same; Do hereby with Advice of Our
Privy Council, Revive and Renew the Commission of the ninth day of August, One
thousand, six hundred, eighty and two Years, and fully Authorize, and Empower
the Commissioners mentioned for the several Districts therein-specified, to Act
and Do conform thereto, every manner of way, until Our further Pleasure: And
further to Cognosce and Determine anent any Wrongs, Injuries, Thiefts, Roberies
or Depredations, has been done by any of those High-landers, lately called out
to Our Host, or who not having come out, have been guilty of the same, and to
see the Parties prejudged and wronged, redressed accordingly. And in regard (by
reason of the Confusions occasioned in the High-Lands by the late Expedition
agains the Rebels) Thieves, Sorners, and others have, or may take opportunity
to Thieve, Rob, and Spoil the Country in their ordinary way; We therefore, with
Advice foresaid, Do hereby strictly Require and Command all Sheriffs, and other
Magistrates, Chieftains of Clans, Landlords, Baillies, and others (who are by
Our Laws and Proclamations answerable for the Peace of the High-lands) to
secure the same, conform thereto, and under the Pains and Certifications
therein mentioned. And that Our Pleasure in the Premises may be known, Our
Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent, these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to Our Market Cross of Edinburgh, Market Crosses of the
Head Burghs of the Shires of Caithness, Sutherland, Innerness, Cromarty, Nairn,
Elgin, Bamff, Aberdeen, Kincardine, Forfar, Perth, Dumbarton, Stirling, Argile,
Tarbet, and other places needful, and there in Our Royal Name and Authority,
make Publication of Our Pleasure in the Premises, that Our said Commissioners
may proceed and act conform to their said former Commission, and this Our Royal
Proclamation; and that all Judges and Magistrates concerned may give their
Concurrence, and Assistance to them, and all Our Subjects may give due
Obedience accordingly; As also, that ye cause read these Presents at the
several Paroch-Churches within the respective Shires foresaids, upon the Lords
Day, after Divine Worship, that the same may be more publicly known: And to
that effect, the Sheriffs, and other Magistrates of the said respective
Shires, are to see, and cause the same be done accordingly, as they will be
answerable to their Peril.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty day of July, 1685. And of Our
Reign the first Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. WILL. PATERSON.
Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburg, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, 1685.

And Reprinted at London by E. Mallet, in Black-horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge,


