royal coat of armsBy the King, A PROCLAMATION Commanding the Return of all His
Majesty's Subjects, who have taken Arms Under, and Now are in the Service of
the States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, by Sea or Land.
JAMES R.

WHereas We think it for Our Service to Call home all Our Natural born Subjects
who are now in the Service of the States General of the United provinces of the
Netherlands, being either Mariners and Seafaring Men, or Officers and Soldiers
Serving at Land. We do therefore by this Our Royal Proclamation, by and with
the Advice of Our Privy Council, straightly Charge, Require and Command all and
singular Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen, Shipwrights, and other
Seafaring Men whatsoever and wheresoever, and also all Commanders, Officers and
Soldiers Serving at Land, being Our Natural born Subjects, who have betaken
themselves unto, and now are in the Pay or Service of the States General of the
United Provinces of the Netherlands, or in the Pay or Service of any of their
Subjects, That upon their known and bounden Duty and Allegiance, they and every
of them do quit the said respective Services by Sea or Land, and return home to
their Native Countries, within the times hereby prescribed, That is to say,
That all Officers and Commanders at Land whatsoever, who are now in the Service
of the said States General, in any place or part of the Netherlands or
Low Countries, do quit the said Service, and return home within the space of
Two Calendar Months from the Date hereof, and all other Persons herein before
mentioned, wherever they are or shall be hereafter, in as short a time, and
with as much speed as they shall be able, wherein We do and will expect all due
Obedience and Conformity. And We do hereby also further Publish and Declare,
That all and every the Offenders to the contrary, shall not only incur Our high
Displeasure, but be Rigorously proceeded against for such their Offense, by all
ways and means according to the utmost Severities of Law. And We do hereby also
Authorize and Command all and every Our Captains, Masters, and other Officers
Serving and employed in any of Our Ships or Vessels at Sea, or elsewhere, and
all and every other Our Subjects whom it may concern, to Seize, Take and bring
away all such Officers, Mariners and Soldiers, and other Persons aforesaid as
shall be found to be Employed, or to continue in the Service aforesaid, in
Contempt of, and contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Our
Proclamation.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Fourteenth Day of March 1687/8. In the
Fourth Year of Our Reign. GOD SAVE THE KING
London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. 1687/8.


