J2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King, A PROCLAMATION
For a Solemn and Public Thanksgiving throughout the Kingdom, for His
Majesty's late Victories over the Rebels.
JAMES R.

Whereas it has pleased Almighty God in the beginning of Our Reign, to
manifest his great goodness toward Us and Our Kingdoms, in giving Us so
absolute and signal Victories over the late Rebels, who in contempt of the Laws
of God, and of these Kingdoms, role up against Us in Open Rebellion, threatening
the Subversion of the Peace and Tranquillity of Our Kingdoms, Whereby it has
pleased him in his infinite mercy not only to Restore to Us and Our Kingdoms a
perfect Peace, by an utter Dissipation of all those Rebels, but like wise to
deliver into Our hands the Chief heads of that horrid Traitorous Conspiracy, in
order to their Condign Punishment, that thereby nothing might remain to
interrupt Our peaceable Government for the future. Upon the due Consideration
whereof, We do with all humility Admire and Adore the late Mercy and Goodness
of God, in giving Victory to Our Arms, and Delivering Us and Our Kingdoms from
the Miseries and Calamities that might and constantly do ensue an Intestine and
Unnatural Rebellion. And considering that such signal and public Mercies are
Invitations from heaven to Us and all Our Subjects, to render the most public
and cheerful Expressions of Thankfulness to the Divine Goodness: We are willing
that the just tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving to Our Great Sovereign the
King of heaven and Earth, be Solemnly returned by Us and all Our People for
this his late Mercy. And to the end some Solemn time may be appointed for the
Public performance of this Duty, that all Our Subjects in England and Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, who equally share in the Blessing and Ioys of
this Deliverance, may be United in the Devotions which are offered for it. We
do hereby Publish and Declare, That Sunday the Twenty sixth day of this instant
July be Observed as a Day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God throughout
Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, for
this his great Mercy; And We do Direct and Appoint, That this Our Proclamation
be Publicly Read in all Churches and Chapels on Sunday precedent thereto, to
the end that Notice be taken thereof, and due Thanks and Praise may upon the
said Twenty sixth day of July be offered up unto Almighty God by Us and all Our
People with one heart, and that humble Supplications be made before him for his
continual Assistance and Improvement of this and all his Mercies to the Honor
of his great Name, and the Safety, Peace and Benefit of all Our Kingdoms and
Dominions; We Willing and strictly Commanding all Persons within these Our
Dominions with all Sobriety, Reverence and Thankfulness to perform this Duty on
that day, and to observe the same and becomes so solemn an Occasion.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Eleventh day of July 1685. In the First
Year of Our Reign.
LONDON. Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1685.


