J2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, For an Anniversary Thanksgiving, in Commemoration of his
Majesty's Happy Birthday, being the Forteenth Day of October, etc.
JAMES. R.

FOrasmuch As It Having Pleased Almighty God to set Our most Rightful, and
Re-doubted Sovereign JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of GOD, of Scotland,
England, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Peaceably upon
the Throne of his Royal Ancestors, our most August and Glorious Monarch,
Notwithstanding of the Hellish Plots and Machinations against the Sacred Person
of Our late King, (of ever Blessed Memory,) and our said present Sovereign
(whom GOD long preserve) And also nothwithstanding of the Desperate and
Traitorous Endeavors of those who lately, by Armed Force, Invaded these Our
Sovereign Lords Realms of Scotland and England, of Design, not only to have
Subverted His Royal Government, but even to have embrewed their wicked Hands in
the Sacred Blood of Our said Sovereign Lord the KING, and utterly to have
destroyed all his Majesty's Faithful and Loyal Subjects; Which Traitorous
Attempts, by so signal and remarkable Instances of the Divine Providence; have
been so miraculously Defeated and Confounded; Of all which, his Majesty's Privy
Council being deeply sensible, They hereby, in his Majesty's Royal Name and
Authority, Ordain and Appoint the Fourteenth day of October, being his
Majesty's Royal Birthday, to be Solemnly Kept and Observed throughout this
Kingdom for this Year, and Yearly hereafter, as an Anniversary Day of
Thanksgiving for his Majesty's Happy Birth, and therein to Commemorate His most
Auspicious Entry to his Royal Government, and miraculous Deliverances
aforesaid; And that all Signs and Demonstrations of Joy, on such Solemn
Occasions, be performed by all his Majesty's Subjects: And further Recommends
to the right Reverend the Archbishops and Bishops, that they cause the
Ministers in their respective Diocesses, for this Year, and Yearly hereafter,
upon the said Fourteenth day of October, with the People, at Divine Service in
the Church. Devoutly give Solemn Thanks to Almighty God, and Celebrat his Holy
Name, for his so Signal Goodness and Protection, to Our said Gracious
Sovereign, and in Him, to these his Kingdoms; And that all his Majesty's good
Subjects may have notice, and be Certified hereof His Majesty's Privy Council
does hereby Require and Command his Majesty's Lion, King at Arms, and his
brethren Heralds, Macers of the Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms,
forthwith to pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and there (having his
Majesty's Coat of Arms Displayed) by sound of Trumpet, and open Proclamation,
in his Majesty's Royal Name and Authority, make Publication of the Premises;
And Ordains the Sheriffs of the several Shirs of this Kingdom, to cause Publish
the same at the Market Crosses of the head Burghs of their Shiers; And the
Magistrates of Burghs, at their Mercat-Crosses respective, as they will be
answerable at their highest Peril, that none may pretend Ignorance: And the
Sheriffs aforesaid are hereby strictly Required to cause deliver to the
Ministers within their Sheriffdoms respective, a Printed Copy of this Act, that
they may from their Pulpits on the Lords Day, preceding the said day of
public Thanksgiving, after Divine Service in the Forenoon, Read the same to
the People, and give them the necessary Exhortations upon this Occasion.
Extracted fourth of the Records of his Majesty's Privy Council, by me Sir
William Paterson, Clerk to his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of September, 1685. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti.
Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.

This may be Reprinted by George Croom, at the Blue-Ball in Thames Street,
over against Baynard's Castle.


