I2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION, Continuing the Adjournment of the Current Parliament, from the
first Thursday of April next, to the twenty ninth of that Month, 1686.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith: To our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds,
Macers of our Privy Council, Pursevants, or Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in
that part, conjunctly and severally specially constitute, Greeting: Whereas by
our Proclamation of the date, the Twenty first day of September last, we
thought fit to continue the Adjournment of the Current Parliament of this our
Ancient Kingdom, to the first Thursday of April next ensuing the date of these
presents. And seeing our Service requires the further adjournment thereof, for
some Weeks longer; We, therefore with advice of our Privy Council, Do hereby
continue the adjournment of our said Current Parliament, from the said first
Thursday of April next ensuing, to the twenty ninth day of that Month, and to
the effect our Royal Pleasure in the Premises may be known, our Will is, and
We Charge you strictly, and Command, That incontinent these our Letters seen,
ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Mercat-Crosses of the
Head-Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and other places needful, and there
in our Royal Name and Authority, by open Proclamation make Publication of the
continuation of the adjournment of our said Current Parliament, from the said
first Thursday, to the said twenty ninth day of April next ensuing the date of
these presents: Requiring hereby all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the
Commissioners from the several Shires, and those from our Royal Burrows, and to
meet that day in the usual way, under the accustomed Certifications; and We
Ordain these presents to be Printed.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the two and twentieth day of March, 1686.
and of our Reign the Second Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. Collin
Mekenzie Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno. Dom. 1685. This may be Reprinted at London, R. L. S. March the
29 th. 1686. By E. Mallet, next door to Mr. Shipton's Coffee-House near
Fleet-Bridge.


