I7 R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
By the King
A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.
JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all and sundry Our good Subject whom
these Presents do or may Concern, Greeting.
Whereas by Our Royal Proclamation of the date the 12 day of February 1686/7 We
were graciously pleased for the Causes, and on the Terms therein mentioned, to
grant Our Royal Tolleration to the Professors of the Christian Religion therein
named; With and under certain Restrictions and Limitations; All which are in
the said Proclamation more at length expressed: We now taking into Our Royal
Consideration the sinistruous Interpretations, which either have, or may be
made of some Restrictions, therein mentioned. Have thought fit by this Our
Royal Proclamation, further to Declare, that We will Protect Our Archbishops,
and Bishops, and all Our Subjects of the Protestant Religion, in the free
Exercise of their Protestant Religion, as it is by Law Established, and in the
Quiet and Full Enjoyment of all their Possessions, without any Molestation or
Disturbance whatsoever. And We do likewise by Our Sovereign Authority,
Prerogative-Royal, and Absolute Power, Suspend, Stop and Disable, all Penal and
Sanguinary Laws, made against any for Nonconformity to the Religion
Established by Law, in that Our Ancient Kingdom, or for Exercising their
respective Worships, Religions, Rites and Ceremonies; All which Laws are hereby
Stopped, Suspended and Disabled to all Intents and Purposes. And to the end that
by the Liberty thereby granted, the Peace and Security of Our Government in the
Practice thereof, may not be Endangered, We have thought fit, and do hereby
straightly Charge and Command all Our Loving Subjects, that as We do give them
leave to Meet and Serve God after their own Way and Manner, be it in private
Houses, Chapels, or Places purposely Hired or Built for that use, so that they
take care that nothing be Preached or Taught among them which may any ways tend
to Alienat the Hearts of Our People from Us, or Our Government, and that their
Meetings be peaceable, openly and publicly held, and all Persons freely
admitted to them, and that they do signify and make known to some one or more
of the next Privy Counselors, Sheriffs, Stewards, Baillies, Justices of the
Peace, or Magistrates of Burghs-Royal, what Place or Places they set a part for
these uses, with the Names of the Preachers.

And that all Our Subjects may enjoy such their Religious Assemblies with
greater assurance and protection, We have thought fit, and do hereby Command,
that no Disturbance of any kind be made or given unto them, under pain of Our
Royal displeasure, and to be further proceeded against with the outmost
severity; Provided always, that their Meetings be in Houses, or Places provided
for the purpose, and not in the open Fields, for which now after this Our Royal
Grace and Favor shown (which surpasses the Hopes, and equals the very Wishes
of the most zealously concerned) there is not the least shadow of excuse left;
Which Meetings in Fields We do hereby strictly prohibit and forbid, against
all which We do leave Our Laws and Acts of Parliament in full force and vigor,
notwithstanding the Premises; And do further Command all Our Judges,
Magistrates, and Officers of Our Forces, to prosecute such as shall be guilty of
the said Field-Conventicles or Assemblies with the outmost Rigor, as they
would avoid Our Highest Displeasure; For We are confident none will, after
these Liberties and Freedoms We have given to all, without reserve, to serve
God in their own way, presume to meet in these Assemblies, except such as make
a pretense of Religion, to cover their Treasonable Designs against Our Royal
Person, and the Peace of Our Government. And Lastly, To the end all Our good
Subjects may have notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, We do hereby
Command Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers, Pursevants,
and Messengers at Arms, to make timeous Proclamation thereof at the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh: And besides the Printing and Publishing of this Our
Royal Proclamation, It is Our express Will and Pleasure, that the same be past
under Our Great Seal of that Our Kingdom per saltum, without passing any other
Seal or Register. In order whereunto, these shall be to the Directors of Our
Chancellary and their Deputs, for Writing the same, and to Our Chancellor, for
causing Our Great Seal aforesaid to be Appended thereunto, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Windsor the 28 day of June, 1687. And of Our Reign the
Third Year. By His MAJESTY'S Command, MELFORT.

Edinburgh, July 5. 1687.
Present in Council.

James Earl of Perth Lord High Chancellor. John Lord Archbishop of Glasgow. The
Lord Marquess of Athol Privy Seal. Duke of Hamilton. Duke of Gordon. Earl of
Arran. Earl of Linlithgow. Earl of Dumfermling. Earl of Strathmore. Earl of
Landerdale. Earl of Southesk. Earl of Airly. Lo. Viscount Tarbat. Lo. Viscount
Strathallan. Lo. Livingston. Lo. President of Session. Lo. Advocat. Lo.
Justice-Clerk. Lo. Castlehill. General Leivtenent Douglas. Niddrie.
THe above-written Proclamation from His most Sacred Majesty, being Read in His
Privy Council of Scotland, was in pursuance of His Majesty's Royal Commands
ordered to be published with all due Solemnities. Extracted forth of the
Records of His Majesty's Council by me Sir William Paterson Clerk to His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

WILL. PATERSON.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1687.


