royal coat of armsA PROCLAMATION, Commanding the Return of all His Majesty's
Subjects, who have taken Arms under, and now are in the Service or Pay of the
States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, by Sea or Land.
JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith;
to Our Lion, King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants or Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch as We having thought fit for the good of Our Service, to call home
all Our Natural-born Subjects, now employed in the Service of the
States General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, being either
Officers or Soldiers serving at Land, or Mariners and Seafaring Men: We
therefore with Advice of Our Privy Council, strictly charge, require and
command all and sundry Commanders, Officers and Soldiers Serving at Land; as
also, all Masters of Ships, Pilots, Mariners, Seamen, Ship-wrights, and other
Seafaring Men whatsoever, and wheresoever, being Our Natural-born Subjects,
now in the Pay or Service of the States General of the said United Provinces,
or in the Pay of any of their Subjects, to quit the said respective Services by
Land or Sea, and to return Home to their Native Countries, within the space and
time after-specified; that is to say, that all Officers and Commanders at Land
Serving in any part of the Netherlands, shall return home within the space of
Sixty days from the Date hereof, and all other Persons formerly mentioned,
wherever they are, or shall be, in a short time, and with as much speed as
they shall be able, and that upon their known and bounden duty and allegiance;
with certification to them, that in case of their Disobedience, they and every
one of them, shall incur Our highest Displeasure, and shall be proceeded
against, with all the Rigor that Our Laws can allow: Hereby Authorizing and
Commanding all and sundry Our Officers, who are or shall be any way employed
under Us, either at Sea or Land, and all Our other Loyal Subjects whom these
Presents may concern, to Seize, take, and away bring all such Officers,
Mariners, Soldiers, and others abovementioned, that shall be found to be
employed, or continue in the said Service, in contempt of, and contrary to this
Our Royal Proclamation. And to the end Our Royal pleasure in the Premises may
be made known, Our Will is, and We charge you strictly and command, that
incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Market-Cross of Edinburgh,
and remanent Market-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom,
and Peer and Shore of Leith, and there in Our Royal Name and Authority by open
Proclamation, make Publication of our Royal Pleasure aforesaid, that all
Persons concerned may give strict and exact Obedience thereto, that none may
pretend Ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty second day of March, 1688. And
of Our Reign the fourth year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii COL.
McKENZIE, Cls. Sti. Concilii.
GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His Most Sacred
Majesty. Anno Dom. 1688. This may be Reprinted by George Croom, at the
Blue-Ball in Thames Street, near Baynard's- Castle.


