A PROCLAMATION Adjourning the Meeting of the Parliament of Scotland, from the
ninth to the twenty third day of April, 1685.
JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith;
To Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly
and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas We, by Our Letter of the sixteenth of February last past, did Order
forth Our Proclamation of the same Date, for Calling a Parliament of this our
ancient Kingdom, to Meet at Edinburgh, the ninth day of April, next ensuing the
Date of these Presents: And whereas some Matters of great Importance to Our
Service, do require a short delay of their Meeting. We, with Advice of the
Lords of Our Privy Council, Have hereby thought fit to continue, and Adjourn
the Meeting of Our said Parliament, from the said ninth day of April next
ensuing, until the twenty third Day of the same Month of April; at which Day,
We hereby Require all the Members of Our said Parliament, precisly to attend
under, and upon the usual and accustomed Cirtifications: And to the end Our
pleasure in the Premises may be made known to all Persons concerned. OUR WILL
IS, and We Charge you strictly and Command, that incontient, these our Letters
seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Market
Crosses of the Head Burghs, of the Shires of this Kingdom, and there, by open
Proclamation, make Publication of the Adjournment of the Meeting of Our
Parliament, from the said ninth Day of April, next ensuing the Date hereof, to
the Twenty third day of the same Month, that none may pretend Ignorance

Given under Our Signet, at Haly-rud-house the twenty two Day of March, 1685.
And of Our Reign, the first Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL.
PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD save the KING.
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685. Reprinted at LONDON, for L. Curtiss near
Fleet-Bridge.


