COMPUNCTION OR Pricking of Heart:

With the Time, Means, Nature, Necessity, and Order of it, and of Conversion;

With Motives, Directions, Signs, and Means of cure of the wounded in Heart,
with other Consequent or Concomitant Duties, Especially SELF-DENIAL, All of
them gathered from the Text, ACTS 2.37.

And Fitted, Preached, and Applied to his Hearers at Dantzick in Pruse-land, in
Ann. 1641. and partly 1642.

Being the sum of 80. Sermons.

With a POSTSCRIPT concerning these Times, and the sutableness of this Text
and argument to the same, and to the calling of the Jews.

By R. J. Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth for Thomas Whitaker, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard, 1648.

To the Right Worshipful Mr. THOMAS BVRNEL Governor, the Worshipful Deputy
Assistants and whole body of the Right worshipful Company of East-land
Merchants residing in London, and in other parts of England:
AS ALSO To my loving Hearers here at Dantzick of the same Society, R. J.
prays, and wishes to you all and each, a Share and Partnership in that
Society and Communion of Saints, whereof Christ Jesus is sole Governor and
Head.
THat I do prefixe your names and make choice of you (Right worshipful, etc.)
before all other in this Dedication, and publication of these Sermonnotes, is
not done without good ground and reason. First, I account it very suitable to my
duty, to give you this taste of my labors, and thus to render an account unto
you in part, how my ministerial pains have been employed here for the
spiritual good of your sons, servants, factors, and friends (respectively);
seeing your prayers and desires (attested under so many of your hands at first)
were that my ministry might prevail mightily in these parts, and that those of
our Nation here, might walk answerable to the profession of the Gospel. I have,
to these your good desires, joined not my prayers only, but my best endeavors
that, by the good fruit and efficacy of my ministry here, you may have no
cause to repent you either of your choice of me, or cost on me and them; but
that you may by Gods mercy reap the harvest of that your seed, and fruit of
your expectation and desires. You by this taste, may perceive the method and
manner of my plain teaching, which is framed, not to tickle the ear, but by
Gods mercy to touch the heart; and not to please any man (in his sin and
security) but only in that which is good. My endeavors, I say, tend this way,
the blessing and success is from God, of whom it is still and ever to be sought.

Again, I should be unthankful both to God and to you all (by whose desires,
votes, and good liking, I was called to this employment) if I did not, by some
more then private acknowledgement take notice and give testimony of Gods good
hand of providence toward me, by making you his instruments to call me to this
place and means of employment at such a time, when through the malignancy of
some degenerate spirits, sensualists and time-servers, and through their hatred
of the truth, power and life of religion and godliness; they by false reports,
defamations and accusations without proof, got their lies, if not credited and
believed, yet made use of (though under other pretexts) to my unjust
deprivation, yea and banishment from mine own dwelling house and native home,
by procuring letters in his Majesty's name (whom by like mis-reports they
misinformed and abused) not only for the settling of another in my place and
means, but to require my removal from Newcastle; by which means I was cast
merely upon Gods providence, who yet in the riches of his wisdom and mercy to
me; (I say not to yours in these parts, who yet had been so long destitute,
but) to my self, (who desired nothing more then employment) had provided, as
those here to desire supply (so your selves upon the recommendation at first of
a private friend without my privity, seconded by the approbation and
recommendation of a worthy Divine) to pitch upon my self, and to put me
(otherwise an ancient born -- and sworn-brother of your Company) into
employment again by the free and unanimous vote of your General Court
(procuring me also a warrant from the Council for my transportation) and so to
provide for me not only a competent yearly maintenance and minervall, but a
convenient dwelling house, as also to be at further cost for a place of our
asembling and meeting.

This I acknowledge as a great favor and providence (...) God, who (till he
again gather the outcasts of Israel) provided you to give me a call, as once he
commanded the widow of Sarepta to sustain the (persecuted) Prophet Elijah, 1
Kings 17.9.
sending him in like mercy to her only (as me now a Prophet not accepted (at
least generally) in mine own country, Luke 4.24, 25, 26.
to your friends here,) when yet there were many widows in Israel (as then
were many places destitute of faithful Pastors in England.) Thus it fared here
in some proportion with me -- and many other in England, as once when the Jews
in envy and opposition against Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13.45, 46
did put the word of God from them, and so judged themselves unworthy of
everlasting life, whereby those servants of the Lord, turned to the Gentiles
(God so commanding) who hearing it, were glad and glorified the word of the
Lord. The Gentiles we see (with the woman of Canaan) were glad of that which the
Jews did surfeit on, and of those Crumbs which fell from the richer, but
loathed table of the Children: Even as many now, who (loathing the homely Manna
of the Word, in the simplicity of the Gospel, and longing after such teachers
as are according to their own mind, humor, and heart) find, as those in the
wilderness, who had other meat according to their lusts given them indeed, but
with a curse, both of body (for while their meat was yet in their mouths, Psalm
78.30, 31.
the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them) and of soul
too, for he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul, Psalm.
106.15.

3. By this (not undesired by some here) my desire is (by penning and printing)
to water that seed which at first was sown by preaching, Joh. 14.26.
and (as near as I can) to become a Remembrancer, (this way also as well as by
prayer at the throne of grace) to my hearers here, even after my departure and
decease, by stirring up that spirit in them, which as a Remembrancer is
promised to them in due time and season to bring to their remembrance what has
(by Christ and his Minister) been said unto them; 2 Pet. 1.15.
that so they may either reap that good which was and is intended by me, or
that this may prove a testimony on Gods behalf, in time to come, against them,
that he has not wholly been wanting to them. And thus with hope that my
ministerial pains and conceptions, (which, with some of my ancient hearers,
proved altogether abortive) will yet find better acceptance here, (and such as
I bless God, with many other of better temper among my ancient hearers, they
have found) and that the seed cast on the thornie and stony ground and hearts
of many in England, will take better root and thrive better in another soil (as
some trees transplanted do,) I recommend this mite of my good will to your
Worships, and to their perusal here, as also to the Churches service and use
elsewhere, resting,

Dantzick, June 28, 1642. Your Worships and the Churches Servant, R. J.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
KNow, that this ensuing Treatise was sent into England, and should have been
printed in Anno 1642: but what by the death of one undertaker (after the book
was approved according to Order of Parliament,) and what by the inconstancy of
another, who after he had printed the first three sheets, gave it over, and
fell to a more gainful trade of printing Diurnals, it has been laid aside
thus long. But now, since my return into England, the Copy being recovered, and
the printing of it by a third person procured, I thought good (though after six
years of the date of it) to let it pass in the style it was written in at
first, and so, as if I were still with my Hearers at Dantzick.

Judge of it then according to time, place, and persons, when, where, and to
whom it was preached, and (it being of general use) make improvement of it for
thine own spiritual good; for which thou have the prayers of the unworthy
Author.

The general Contents of each Chapter of this Treatise, and of the several
Sections under their several Chapters respectively, containing the chief
doctrines handled therein.
(As for the many particulars under each Chapter and Section, they may by a
short glance of the eye, be viewed in the margin of the book it self)
CHAP. I. Concerning the time of men's Conversion. Section 1. But first of the
Change which is in Conversion. Section 2. Why Christ converted not so many at
any one Sermon as Peter (and the rest) here did? with Uses. Section 3. Why men's
Conversion is often so long delayed by God? with Reasons and Uses.
CHAP. II. Concerning the Persons converted by Peter etc. their Quality Number.
Section 1. That some, (otherwise) devout men, need Conversion. Section 2. God
freely singles out some of many, of whom his Church consists: And of the
freeness of Gods Grace: with four Uses.
CHAP. III. Concerning the Means of Conversion, the hearing of Gods word
preached. Section 1. Of the Act of hearing: and of the power of Gods Word:
whence it is; with five Uses. Sect. 2. Of the profit of hearing Gods word
aright: whence it is; with three Uses.
CHAP. IIII. The Object of hearing, general, and special here: And what
doctrine is like to do the greatest good: even that which most advances
Christ, and debaseth man: with reasons sons and uses respectively. CHAP. V. The
effects of saving hearing of Gods Word. Section 1. 1 Pricking of heart. Section
2. Pricking of heart considered, 1 As the work of the Word: And that the best
kind of preaching is that which pricks the heart. Why? With two Uses. Sect. 3.
Pricking of heart considered, 2 As the fruit of sin: And that sin carries a
sting with it. With Use. Section 4. Pricking of heart considered here as the
first step to true Conversion. And that Conversion must begin at the heart.
With two Reasons, and three Uses.
CHAP. VI. How these Converts in the Text came to be pricked in Conscience.
CHAP. VII. Showing that all true Converts must first (in some measure) be
pricked in heart. Section 1. The Explication of this point of Doctrine, and of
whom, and how it is meant: with the difference between the Elect and Reprobate
in their legal sorrows. Sect. 2. The former point illustrated by Scripture and
examples. Sect. 3. That all in some measure must be pricked in conscience,
though not all alike: Where four Reasons why. Sect. 4. Who are more roughly,
and who more gently dealt withal in their Conversion: Which difference is
showed with respect of their different conditions, 1. present. 2. past. 3. to
come. Wherein Gods wisdom wonderfully appears.
CHAP. VIII. The Demonstration of the former Point, with the Reasons (both on
man's behalf and Gods) why God will have all Converts (of age) to be first
brought under the spirit of bondage. CHAP. IX. Of the Order of Conversion: and
1. As it depends on Love in God. Where ten approaches of Gods grace toward us:
all free. CHAP. X. Sect. 1. Conversion is also a work of Gods power. Sect. 2.
The Order of Conversion as it depends on Power: And first, In regard of the
Persons and Means employed in working of it, which is only the Word; and no
other means without the word; neither Sacraments, Miracles, Afflictions, etc.
without it. Sect. 3. The order of the work (it self) of Conversion: And first,
seven orderly works of the Law. Sect. 4. Eleven orderly works of the Gospel.
CHAP. XI. Containing an Use of Trial, as preparative to the rest. CHAP. XII.
Uses for such 1. as have not been pricked. And first, The danger of a false
peace; and the desperate estate of secure sinners. CHAP. XIII. 2. A large
Exhortation to the secure: And Motives urging them to be afflicted, and to
mourn for sin. CHAP. XIIII. Containing Means of Contrition: and first, A
removal of Lets. Sect. 1. Such lets removed as hinder the Word of God to
pierce. And they are six. Sect. 2. Lets removed which make the soul senseless:
And first, Sensuality and worldliness. Sect. 3. Three more lets removed: Which
are, Great sins: Little sins: Custom of sinning. Sect. 4. Two more Lets: Gods
secret vengeance: and Hardness of heart; with the nature and danger of it, and
means to prevent it.
CHAP. XV. 2. Of the Means of true Compunction and Sensiblenesse. Sect. 1. And
first, Of Gods Word heard, recalled, and applied: With the power of it in
pricking the heart. Sect. 2. Of the Consideration of sin, Original and
Actual, in the aggravations of it. Sect. 3. Gods judgments on our selves,
past, present and to come, should humble us. Sect. 4. Others sufferings,
especially Christ's, should move us. Sect. 5. Gods high Majesty well thought on,
would abase us. Sect. 6. Earnest prayer with God a means of Humiliation, and a
way to derive power from him, when especially it is joined with watchfulness.
Sect. 7. A reproof of the secure: with an exhortation and caveat.
CHAP. XVI. Uses for such (secondly) as have been wounded. Sect. 1 And first
that they return not to sins, for which they formerly have smarted. Sect. 2.
That secondly they go on with the work of humiliation, and that they seek not
ease too soon. Sect. 3. An Exhortation hereunto, that we follow home Gods
strokes till we be thoroughly humbled and cured. Sect. 4. Diverse reasons why men
are not to take up with legal qualms til they be humbled enough. Sect. 5. The
former exhortation further followed, that our sorrow may be to repentance.
CHAP. XVII. A Case, showing when a man is humbled enough. Sect. 1. Directions
what to do in case of a seeming defect in our sorrow. Sect. 2. Signs of true
sorrow: 1. From the Antecedents of sorrow. And 1. What sorrow is not sound;
scil. That which is caused by envy, anger, natural causes, whether outward, or
inward by melancholy; and that which is grounded on any power of men's will.
CHAP. XVIII. Signs of true sorrow from the true Grounds of it. Sect. 1. And
first, If it be for sin, and upon a true sight thereof; more then for
punishment. Sect. 2. How to know whether our sorrow be for sin as it is sin.
And first, If it be in our prosperity as well as adversity. Sect. 3. If it be
for all sin, in our selves and others. Sect. 4. True sorrow is occasioned by
some hope and glimpse of mercy.
CHAP. XIX. Other Trialls of a sufficient Humiliation from the Concomitants and
Effects thereof. Sect. 1. And first, It is generally showed what is sufficient
Humiliation. Sect. 2. The truth of sorrow showed from two Properties, seven
Effects, and six Concomitants of it. Sect. 3. From other Concomitants gathered
from the Text: As 1. Confession of sin, even to man. Sect. 4. Detestation of
sin an effect of true sorrow for sin. Sect. 5. True Contrition in the heart
fills the head with care, and causes Consultation about the Means of cure; and
is not cured but by spiritual means. Sect. 6. Self-denial accompanies true
Contrition. Sect. 7. The contrite heart is an obedient heart.
CHAP. XX. An Use of Comfort to the truly contrire. CHAP. XXI. Uses (fourthly)
concerning All. 1. Instructing how to carry our selves toward such contrite
ones. 2. Reproving and censuring their censurers and persecuters. Their doom.
CHAP. XXII. An Exhortation to all of all sorts, to get this mournful
disposition of soul for sin: With more Lets removed. CHAP. XXIII. Where is
showed another effect of the word, and what these young Converts said: And that
the heart being once affected, shows it self by words, and thereby may be
discovered. CHAP. XXIIII. Showing that in trouble of conscience for sin, Means
should presently be used. Why: with Uses. CHAP. XXV. Sect. 1. That comfort to
our troubled consciences is to be sought only of Gods faithful Ministers. Why?
Sect. 2. False Means of cure are to be abandoned. What they are: Where the
Libertines Objection against us is answered. Sect. 3. With two other Uses:
showing, 1. That few are pricked. 2. A difference between the sound and unsound
in trouble of soul. Sect. 4. Three Directions to be (in such case) followed,
which the Apostles (being sought unto) do give: And no other in effect, to be
given by Ministers. With three other Directions to be followed in case of
wrongs done by us to other men, to regain our peace.
CHAP. XXVI. The Apostles considered (also) according to their 1. Order. 2.
Number: And that Direction and Comfort is to be sought of others as well as of
Peter; and much more then of Peter's pretended Successor, the Pope. CHAP. XXVII.
Gods Word cures as well as kills. CHAP. XXVIII. Showing how Gods Ministers (and
people) are and shall be sought to and honored at one time or other, by those
that now disrespect them. Why? With double Use. CHAP. XXIX. Showing what Titles
were given to the Apostes, and what now are usurped by the Pope, and kindly
taken by others. CHAP. XXX. God teaches us by Men: the ground and Reasons why:
with diverse Uses concerning both Ministers, and their hearers. CHAP. XXXI.
Shows, that Ministers are Brethren one with another and with their people:
With Uses. CHAP. XXXII. Consultation of many about the good of their souls, is
no Conventicle. CHAP. XXXIII. That there is the same means of cure in like case
for all distressed in conscience. CHAP. XXXIIII. The chief care of Christians
should be how they may save their Souls. CHAP. XXXV. How such as God will save,
must be qualified: And first, That they must question their estate, and shake
off security. With Uses. CHAP. XXXVI. Such as are converted and saved, must
seek salvation out of themselves: Where largely of Self-denial. Sect. 1. But
first, That men by sin bring themselves into great straits. Sect. 2. Why we are
to deny our selves, and all goodness in our selves, in the matter of
salvation. Sect. 3. Use 1 of Instruction; and Exhortation to denial of our
selves, as in other things, so particularly in duties concerning Conversion.
Sect. 4. Containing a more general Exhortation to self-denial: And showing
first, In what things we are simply and absolutely to deny our selves. Sect.
5. Showing (secondly) in what things, otherwise lawful, we are to deny our
selves: And first, In things natural: and these of three sorts. Sect. 6.
Secondly, In things spiritual; as in Duties, Gifts, etc. Sect. 7. Thirdly, In
things eternal: as first, In some accidentals of glory; as in the degree and
time of it. Sect. 8. Secondly, In glory it self: And first, In the salvation of
others. Sect. 9. Secondly, That in some case we should be ready to deny our
selves in our own salvation. Sect. 10. Containing a second Use, or a reproof of
such as being convicted by the Word, do yet oppose it, and are all for
themselves. Sect. 11. A third Use, Encouraging, and Directing what to own; and
showing for what we are to deny our selves: And first, for God in his
Attributes and glory. Sect. 12. Secondly, for Christ, in his Excellencies and
Allsufficiency, by making him All, and in all things to us. Sect. 13. Thirdly,
Showing we are to deny our selves in other things, for the eternal good of our
souls. Sect. 14. Fourthly, Showing that the public good of others, of the
Church and Commonwealth, is to be preferred before our own private good.
CHAP. XXXVII. Sect. 1. Showing (3) That such as God converteth and saves,
must be willing and pliable to Gods will, and ready to submit to him in matter
1. of Salvation. 2. Of Religion and worship. 3. Of Obedience. Why? With Uses.
Sect. 2. An Exhortation to Obedience, with the comfort of it at Christ's coming:
and contra, Terror to the rebellious and disobedient.

The general Method of the whole TREATISE, on Acts 2.37. Where three things.
What these young Converts, 1. Heard. 2. Suffered. 3. Said.
1. What they heard, where of 1 The time of their Conversion; Now, and not till
now. Chap. 1. 2 Persons, They: where, their 1 Quality. Chap. 2. 2 Number. Chap.
2.
3 Means of their Conversion; when they heard this: where 1 The Act, Heard,
Chap. 3. 2 Object, This: 1 general. Chap. 4. 2 special. Chap. 4.


2. What they suffered: They were pricked in heart: which passion is considered
in a threesold relation, 1 To Peter's Sermon, as an effect of it, Chap. 5. Sect.
1, 2. 2 To the sinners themselves, as a fruit of their sin, Sect. 3. 3 To the
whole work of Conversion, and as the first degree and beginning of the same,
Sect. 4. Where 1 How they came to be pricked, Chap. 6. 2 That all true Converts
must first be pricked in heart. --


-- Where The (...) or that it is so: and there the 1 Explication, Chap. 7.
Sect. 1. 2 Illustration, Sect. 2, 3, 4.
2. The (...) or the Demonstrations or Reasons why God will have it so, Chap.
8. 3. (...), or the manner, order, and degrees of Conversion, 1. As it depends
on love in God, chap. 9. 2. As it depends on the power of God: and that in
regard -- 1. Of the means and persons working it, Chap. 10. Sect. 1. and 2. 2.
Of the work it self: where the works 1. Of the Law,. 3. 2. Of the Gospel, Sect.
4.


4. The (...), or the Uses and Application.


The Uses and Application.

Where USES of four sorts, 1. General of Trial, and as preparative to the
rest, Chap. 11. 2. Such as respect those who as yet have not been pricked. 1.
Of Instruction. Chap. 12. 2. Of Terror. Chap. 12. 3. Of Exhortation, where, 1.
Motives, Chap. 13. 2. Means to be used, 1. Lets removed. 1. Such as hinder the
words to pierce, Chap. 14. Sect. 1. 2. Such as keep the soul from being
sensible of pricking, Sect. 2, 3, 4.
2. The Means to be used are 1. Gods Word, C. 15. 1. 1. Heard. 2. Recalled. 3.
Applied.
2. Consideration of sin, sect. 2 1. Original. 2. Actual.
3. Gods judgments 1. On our selves. 3. 1 Past. 2 present. 3 tocome.
2 On others, etc. 4.
4. Gods high Majesty well thought on, Sect. 5. 5. Earnest prayer. Sect. 6.



3. Such as respect those that have been pricked in heart: who are, 1.
Instructed 1. Not to return to sins sorrowed for, chap. 16. 1, 2. 2. To go
forward with this work of Humiliation sect. 2.
2. Exhorted,. 3. where, 1. Reasons why we are not to rest in every slight
sorrow, Sect. 4, 5. 2. A Case resolved; showing when a man is humbled enough,
where 1. Directions to such as seem not humbled enough, Chap. 17. Sect. 1. 2.
Signs of true sorrow, 1. From the grounds of sorrow, 1. Negatively.. 2. 2
Affirmatively c. 18. 1, 2, 3, 4
2. From the Concomitants and Effects of it, cap. 19. in seven Sections.


3. Comforted, cap. 20.
4. Such as concern all: who are 1. Instructed, how to carry themselves toward
mourners. Chap. 21. 2. Such reproved as censure and reproach them. Chap. 21. 3.
All of all sorts exhorted to get mournful hearts, Chap. 22.



3. What they said: And said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men
and Brethren, What shall we do?

Where four thing: 1. Who said? Such as were pricked. Chap. 23. 2. When?
Presently. Chap. 24. 3. To whom; and so, of whom do they seek direction?
namely, of the Apostles: who are considered in relation 1. To God: where 1. The
nature of their Office. Chap. 25.. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2. Their order of naming. Chap.
26. 3. Their number. Chap. 26.
2. To these Converts as the same who 1. Wounded them. C. 27 2. Were derided by
some of them. Chapter 28

4. What they said: where, 1. A Compellation, 1. Men, Chap. 30. 2. Brethren,
Chap. 31.
2. A Consultation: where, -- 1. Who consult: who 1. For number. Chap. 32. 2.
For inward motive. Chap. 33.
2. About what: even the saving of their souls. Chapter 34. 3. The Consultation it
self: Showing how such as are converted must be qualified: namely, --




-- They must 1. Consult, and show care of the main, shaking off security.
Chap. 35. 2. Deny themselves 1. Specially in matter of salvation, and in duties
belonging to Conversion, Chap. 36. Sect. 1, 2, 3. 2. Generally, in all things
else: where, 1. In what things: 1. Absolutely: Section 4. 2. In some case only,
as in things 1. Natural, Sect. 5. 1. Faculties of soul. 2. Things of this life.
3. Life it self.
2. Spiritual, in 1. Duties.. 6. 2 Gifts.. 6.
3. Eternal: as, 1. In some accidentals of glory: as, 1 Degree, Sect. 7. 2
Time, Sect. 7.
2. In glory it self: and that concerning the salvation 1 Of others Sect. 8. 1
dead. 2 living.
2 Our own. Sect. 9. With a General Reproof. Sect. 10.



2. For what we are to deny our selves: namely for 1. God, in his 1.
Perfections, Sect. 11. 2. Glory. Sect. 11.
2. Christ in his 1. Excellencies, Sect. 12. 2. Alsufficiencie. Sect. 12.
3. Our own souls, considered in their 1. Worth,. 13 2. Salvation. 13
4. Public good of 1. Church,. 14. 2. Commonwealth,. 14. 3. Public persons..
14.



3. Be ready to do Gods will, and to submit to it in matter of 1. Salvation. Chapter
37.. 1, 2 2. Religion and Worship. Chapter 37.. 1, 2 3. Odedience: with the comfort
of so doing at Christ's coming. Chapter 37.. 1, 2



A TREATISE OF COMPUNCTION: OR, Pricking of Heart.
Acts 2.37. Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and
said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall
we do?


CHAP. I. Concerning the time of men's Conversion. With Uses.
The good fruit of Peter's Sermon:
THese words and the following show the fruit and good effect of the Apostles
teaching on the day of Pentecost, especially of Peter's Sermon, which was the
conversion of many Jews, Conversion.
even three thousand souls; the beginning and preparation whereunto is
contained in these words: Where we have, first, Where, 1 The Means and
Instrument of Conversion; Gods word preached.
The Isntrumental cause of their conversion expressed, which was Peter's
Sermon, from the fourteenth verse to this verse: but the virtue and power of
the principal Worker, which is God and Christ by the Spirit, is included.

Secondly A double Effect: First, Their being wounded in heart. Secondly, The
expression of their inward sorrow and care to be saved, by their words. Or, we
may refer all to these three Heads: What these Converts, First, heard;
Secondly, suffered; thirdly, said.

SECT. 1. Concerning the change in Conversion.
NOw when they heard this] The sum of what they heard is in the thirty sixth
verse: namely, first, The dominion of Christ. Secondly, Their sin in crucifying
him. This, heard and believed, Where, 1. Time, 2. Persons. 3 Means of
Conversion.
is made the ground of their conversion. Where we may take notice of, first,
the Time, Now when: secondly, Persons, They: thirdly Means, Heard this. Where
first the Act, heard: secondly Object, this. All which being expressed in the
English, are employed in the Original.

The Time, Now, and not till now.
The time of their conversion: Now, and not before, though formerly these Jews
heard not only the Apostles but Christ himself often preach unto them. Now
they are pricked and cry out when before no word would pierce their hard
hearts: nothing was heard from them then, but such like speeches as these, Thou
art a Samaritane and have a Devil: Away with him, crucify him, etc. but now
they are inwardly wounded, their hearts melt in true sorrow, and their tongue
and outward behavior express a great change wrought in them.

Note, 1. Corversion brings a sensible change.
Hence note, first, briefly, That Conversion, where it is in truth breeds and
brings with it a sensible and great change; not only in the state and condition
of sinners, who formerly were not a people, but now are the people of God: and,
which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2.10. but in
their hearts, tongues, and lives. It being indeed a change from darkness to
light, Why? Ezekiel. 26.26. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52,
Ephesians. 5.8. yea, of stones into bread shall I say? yea, into flesh, (which is
softer:) being a greater change then our last change shall be, which is from
grace to glory; that is, from one degree to another; this being from sin to
grace, from nothing to something, that is from one kind to another.

Example in Paul and
An instance of this change may be given and seen in Paul, who once a child of
wrath, was made a vessel of mercy: once ignorant, Romans 7.17. 1 Timothy 1.13. but
after, not rude in knowledge, 2 Cor. 11.6. and 12.14. In a word, changed first
in his judgment, and in his estimation of things: see Phil. 3. verse. 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. and so, secondly, in his affections, of love, hatred, 1 Timothy 1.13.
etc. and, thirdly in his practice: once a persecutor of Christ, now a
preacher; once injurious to the Saints, now ready to dye for them; once a
blasphemer of God and his people, now a blesser of them. The like in the
Jailor, in the Jaylour. Act. 16.24, with 29, 30, 31 32, 33, 34.
even now thrusting Paul and Silas into an inner prison, making their feet fast
in the stocks, presently after, being humbled by an earthquake and so prepared,
and withal hearing the word of the Lord preached to him, he believed, was
baptized, he and all his; washed their stripes, brought them out of the stocks
into his own house, set meat before them and rejoiced, believing in God with
all his house.

Use. Of trial wheth^r we be converted or no.
Use. Though the change in all be not alike palpable and sensible, yet if we
would approve our selves true Converts, our own consciences, at least, must be
able to witness with us and for us, and to say with that young man in S.
Ambrose newly converted, and afresh tempted by an old acquaintance of his, to
return to former lusts, she saying, Know you not me? It is I; yea, but said he,
Ego non sum Ego, I am not the man I was. And with S. Paul of Onesimus, Once
unprofitable, Philem. 11. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
now profitable: and of others, Such were some of you, that is, Fornicators,
Idolaters, -- Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners; -- But
(now) ye are washed, sanctified, and justified.

When thus we find it, we have a blessed and comfortable testimony of the
truth of our conversion; if, especially, the change has been wrought by the
preaching of the word pricking the heart, as here* Whereas profane and civil
men, who can show no such inward and outward change, can have no such comfort,
as being the same now after so many years profession, if not much worse, then
they were ever, still profaine formal, resting in the bare outward performance
of duty, and so children of wrath.

Hence note, God has his times for the conversion of sinners. Some he
sanctifies in the womb, Note, 2. God has his times for the conversion of the
Elect.
some he calls at the last hour; but all that belong to his Election shall at
length be converted most certainly; but when, who knows? Joh. 6.37.

SECT. 2. Why Christ converted not so many as Peter.
Quest. WHy did not Christ himself when he preached convert so many, Question
1.
or so visibly and miraculously?

Ans. I answer: Answer 1.
first, this was more for the glorifying of his grace and power, which he
reserved till after his death, to make it manifest in, by, and after his
resurrection and ascension; for till then Jesus was not said to be glorified:
he was here on earth to execute his kingly office only moderately, and not to
put forth his divine power so fully till afterward; to the end that he might be
put to death (which was the chief end why he came into this word) which else
they would not have done, 1 Cor. 2.8. His power was thus more magnified after a
seeming weakness.
if they had known him to be the Lord of glory. It made more then for his
glory, now by his servants, (weak instruments) and by an apparent sign from
heaven, yea and after a seeming weakness in dying, to show forth his power and
grace, then if he had done it formerly: for it shows in what favor he was with
God now, who had been so despised of men; and that though he died, it was not
of weakness, but of will, seeing he could have saved himself from death, who
gave life, not only to the thief, but now to so many.

Conversion is a glorious work.
This shows that conversion of souls by the ministry of men is a glorious work,
in and by which the glory of Christ, Godman, does wonderfully appear; which
seeing it tends also to the glorifying of the creature should by the
converted be ever acknowledged, Ephesians. 1.2 to magnify the ministry of the Word
by man.
not in word only, but in deed, to the glory of the praise of his grace, etc.

2 This was also done and thus referred, that he might magnify the Ministry of
the Word and Gospel by man, as he had said, greater works then those shall ye
do. Thus he was pleased, yea is still pleased to do greater works by an
instrument, then immediately by his own sole and only power. As we see his like
providence, wisdom, and power in the Lodestone, (a dark, dull, and heavy
stone) which though he have imparted to it an attractive power, yet that power
is not put forth by the Lodestone it self alone, which alone or unarmed draws
but a little, but is, as it were, communicated to the steel or iron with which
it is capped: so that the same stone which alone could scarce take up seven
ounces weight, being capped with iron, has very easily and strongly taken up
two and twenty pound weight, says he that saw it, and has written of it. Mr.
Samuel Ward, in Magnet is Reductorie Theologico, cap. 8.
Thus Christ is willing to communicate the glory of this great work of man's
conversion, to the weak Ministry of men, telling us, Whosoever receives
them, receives him; and, whosoever believes in me, he shall do greater works
then I have done. He converted not by any one Sermon (that we read of) an
hundred, yet by Peter he at once converted three thousand. Thus we again see
what a glorious work the Ministry of the Word by man is, what a glorious
calling it is; Use. 1. To see the glory of that calling. 2. To magnify the
preaching of the word. 3 To prefer Christ's spiritual presence in the word and
Sacraments.
and are hence taught all of us, first, To magnify the preaching, yea also the
faithful Preachers of the Gospel, (though they be men like to our selves, and
of like infirmities) as instruments of Gods power in the conversion and saving
of souls: as also, secondly, not curiously to wish, or dream of Christ's
bodily presence, either by conversiing on earth again, as do the Chiliasts; or
to think he cannot be effectually present in the Sacrament, unless
corporally, either by Transubstantiation or Consubstantiation: No, his
spiritual presence both in Word and Sacrament by his blessing is more
profitable to us. etc. 2 Cor. 5.16.

SECT. 3. Why men's conversion is often so long delayed.
Question 2. Why does God often defer the conversion of men?
Quest. WHy does God so long defer the conversion of his Elect, and suffer
them to go on so long in sin, before they come to faith and true repentance?

Answer 1. For his own glory.
Answ. I answer, This he does first for his own glory: For the glory, 1. Of his
power.
first of his power, in so easily subduing the obstinacy of man's will; which
has so long hardened it self in sin: which will appear wonderfully in the
conversion of the Jews. And so he shows it is only in his will, not in man's
will that men are converted; otherwise it is most likely, that these converts
in my text should have repented when Christ preached to them himself.
Secondly, of his Freedom: and to show his Spirit is not tied to persons, 2
Freedom.
nor times, but like the wind blows and works freely, when and how it lists,
Joh. 3 8. Thirdly; and especially of his mercy, 3 Patience.
his long-suffering and patience, which is more resplendent in and toward such.
See 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Romans 11.30, 31, 32.

Answer 2. For their humiliation.
2 God thus often does, for the deeper humiliation of such Converts: as 1 Timothy
1.15, 16, 17. And that they might have their mouths for ever stopped: See Romans
3.19, 20, etc. 25.

Use 1. It refutes the conceit of such as think it in their power to repent
when they will, To refute men's practice: And to confute the opinion of such as
think men may accept or reject grace at their pleasure.
who accordingly defer repentance upon presumption that at more couvenient
time they will convert and return to God. Yea it confutes the opinion of such
as think the power to accept or reject grace is in themselves. Indeed, I may
say, the power to reject grace is in them, when God leaves them to themselves,
as often as he does leave these presumers; otherwise not, as in these Jews.
But I cannot say that to accept of grace is in man's power, till God work it
effectually in him, though even then, for the subject, it be man that does
accept of it, only the power, yea and will, nay the deed and work is from God
and his effectual grace. No means prove effectual or availeable till Gods
appointed time do come; no not the preaching of Christ himself; why else were
these, why we, no sooner converted? why are not the Jews to this day as yet
converted? and many of us (who have lived long under the means) not at all?

not to despair of any sinners conversion in this life: To despair of no man's
conversion here on earth.
God suffers many long, yea some till the very last, as the Thief on the
Cross, and then and not till then shows them mercy, seeking or intending his
own glory by that means. Thus we doubt not, neither question the conversion of
the Jews in Gods fit time: we have his promise, and he can and will in his own
time graffe them in again. Romans 11.23. And we conclude the like concerning such
particular persons among our selves, as he within himself purposes to call,
though we have it not made known unto us who they are: therefore we will
despair of none, while they live.

Not to neglect the present time.
3. It may yet excite all not to neglect Gods time, so far as we know it, or
any opportunity of hearing the word, by which God converts. There is greatest
likelihood of conversion where the word is preached; for now, in the time of
the Gospel, is the accepted time, and day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Other times
God may wink at, as he pleases, Act 17.30.
but now he commands all men every where to repent. Know we then our time,
which is the present, and leave we the rest to God: Let us take the first,
next, or rather the present opportunity; step we in when and so soon as we see
the waters troubled: John 5.4.
which being but at a certain season, let us not lose the opportunity, seeing
there is much time in a little opportunity. Luke 19.42, 34.
Oh that we would but know then the time of our visitation! which many or most
of the Jews did not know, though these here in my text did. Oh that young men
would know that their best and fittest time (now that they enjoy the Gospel) is
the time of their youth, Eccles. 12.1. That such as have lost so much time of
the Gospel, and of their age, would now at length know the time, Romans 13.11.12.
that now it is hight time (for them) to awake out of sleep: The night is far
spent, the day is at hand, said Paul to the Romans: but I may say to many
Christians among us, The day is far spent with them, and the night is at hand;
the night of the Gospells removal from us, or at least of death; Verse 13.
Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, -- and put on the Lord
Jesus Christ. Luke 19.13. Revel. 1.1, 23. Pro 1.14.10 28
Let us know also that there is a time when God will show no mercy; when he
will leave men in their hardness: In a word, a period of his patience, when no
prayers will be heard.

late comers in, as these here, who neglected Christ's preaching a long time,
For late comers in. 2 Cor. 7.11. Acts 2.41, 42, 45.
let us learn with the Corinthians to be more zealous, and of these here
likewise, who continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and
conversed devoutly and charitably together, selling their possessions and
goods, parting them to others (in the zeal of their love) as every man had
need. To redeem their time by greater zeal.
Let us think how much time we have lost, how long we have done service to our
lusts and to Satan, how far we are cast behind others, how much holy knowledge
and good experience we might have gained if our time had been better spent, how
much glory we might have brought to God, and withal how little time may seem
to be left unto us; and accordingly labor and see that what we want in time,
we may redeem by our zeal: that, as Peter directs, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3.
we should live no longer the rest of our time in the flesh, to the lusts of
men, but to the will of God: That the time past of our lives may suffice us to
have wrought the will of the Gentiles: Especially considering our many sins
so long continued in, and the great dishonours done to his name thereby,
together with the greatness of Gods love in pardoning, and receiving us at
length to mercy: Let this inflame our love and zeal to him, let this love of
God constrain us, and teach us to love him much, Luke 7.47.
(with that repenting woman) that is, zealously, because much or many sins
are forgiven us.

us and ours, To be thankful for being kept to these blessed times.
yea to all converted (or not converted) and to be thankful that God at length
has had mercy on us, and reserved us to these blessed times of the Gospel, and
peace withal, 1 Timothy 1.17. Romans 11.30, -- 33. etc. Let us make use of this
blessed time, or otherwise this great mercy will turn to our greater
condemnation.

CHAP. 2. Concerning the persons converted; their quality number.
SECT. 1. That some devout men need conversion.
2 The persons coverted, They. For quality.
2 THe persons who: They: When they heard this, they were pricked. They are not
named, but only noted generally and indefinitely; first for quality, to be
some of them devout men, verse. 5. that is, 1. Devout men.
such as generally acknowledged they expected the Messiah promised, but knew
not, neither were convinced that Jesus whom they persecuted and put to death
was he: Others to be mere scoffers and deriders of the Apostles, verse. 13.
however generally, to be such as by wicked hands took, crucified and slew the
Lord of life, verse 23. and 36. at least to be impenitent persons, unbeleevers,
and in state of damnation; as may be gethered from verse 38, 39, 40, -- 47.

Whence we first observe, as concerns those devout men, That, Note. Many
devout men stand in need of repentance. Ioh. 4.27.
Outward profession of Christ, devotion and forms of godliness are not enough
to men's salvation, or to make men true Christians. Such may, and usually do
worship they know not what, as the Samaritans, Athenians, Acts 17.23. as the
Jews to this day, who profess Faith in a Messiah, yet acknowledge him not,
but serve God as they think, and are devout in their kind. Blind devotion is
not to be rested in.
Yea Papists, generally, adoring Christ's body in the Sacrament, which they know
not to be present: And common Protestants, who seem to show much devotion in
frequenting the Church, in public prayers, and hymns and hearing, yet rest in
the outward performance, and take up with the duty done, though it be in them
only a lip-labor, without true knowledge, faith, humility and obedience, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
as Isa, 1.12. and 66.3. Jer. 7. having only a form of godliness, but denying
the power of it: as being still lovers of themselves, -- and of pleasures more
then of God: without all life of Religion, or power of godliness, standing in
as much need of true conversion, nay it may be more then open deriders and
persecuters of Gods truth and people, who will sooner be convinced then they.
To these I commend the care of attending diligently to the word of God preached
in power; peradventure, with these here, they may be wrought upon, and be
convinced of their sins of unbeleefe, impenitency, yea of hatred of Christ
and his people, etc. as being yet, wi^h these devout Jews till now, in a
damnable condition, even as the Pharisees persecuting Christ ignorantly. Acts
26. Phil. 3.9.

2 Scoffers.
Secondly, As concerning the rest (or themselves it may be) who some were
scoffers, all persecuters and crucifiers of Christ, we observe from their
attentive hearing now and conversion, The power and wonderful efficacy of the
word of God faithfully and wisely taught, Note The power of Gods word. 1 Samuel
19.28. Acts 9.20.
preached and applied. Here we see how men are changed by it, of Wolves, made
sheep; of persecuters, true penitents; even as King Saul intending to take and
kill David, fell a prophesying and was changed; or as that other Saul,
hastening to persecute the Church, by Christ's voice was made a preaching Paul:
or as those stout Soldiers who were sent to apprehend Christ, Joh. 7.45, 46,
47. But of this anon, when we speak of the act of hearing, as also the duty of
good hearers.

SECT. 2. God freely singles out some of many, of whom his Church consists.
2 They, for number. 1 Many: And those of all sorts of men,
2 THey are noted from their number, or quality discrete, to be of the
multitude, verse 6. and those of every nation under heaven, verse. 5. Parthians,
and Medes, etc. verse. 9.10, 11. they were both of Israel and Judah, who by Gods
providence were gathered together to that gerat feast of Pentecost out of all
nations, or, who dwelt in Jerusalem: of these, three thousand now, and
afterward many more Acts 4.1, 2, 3, 4, were converted by the Apostles
preaching. Whereby might seem (in part at least) fulfilled the prophecy and
type concerning the two sticks, Who make one Church.
for Judah and for Joseph, joined together, Ezekiel. 37.16, 17, -- 19, 20, 21,
etc. noting that the effectual calling of Jews and Israelites (as also
Gentiles) and their union in Christ, or in the hand of the Lord, Christ being
the Fathers hand and arm, whereby they became one Kingdom under Christ, or
David their King; partaking of the same benefits, by virtue of the communion of
Saints, as in the following verses in Ezekiel may be seen. So that there is but
one only Catholic Church, not many; and Christ the only King, Pastor, and
Head thereof, 2 Yet not all.
having no general Vicar here on earth. Now to this Communion none belongs, or
yet truly come, but such as the Father draws; who though here they are many,
yet all that heard believed not; they were but some of the whole multitude who
received the word gladly, verse. 41. yet those were gathered out of all sorts,
without difference of sex, age, calling, country and nation, or condition.

And this notes the Freeness of Gods grace: As he excepts not any one sort or
calling of men, so he by effectual calling, Note The Freeness of of Gods
grace in singling out some from among all. 2 These. 2.12, 13.
singles out from the universality of men and sinners, and adds to his Church
such as shall be saved; as here, verse 47. Who are those? Only such as he has
elcted from eternity unto salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth. And these are not all, but some only, who there opposed
to such, the followers of Antichrist, who shall be damned. This makes Saint
Paul speak with distinction, when he mentions vessels of mercy which God has
before prepared to glory, Even us, says he, Romans 9.23, 24.
whom he has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles: Yet not
all Jews, nor all Gentiles; but us whom he he has called of the Jews and of
the Gentiles. And S. John brings the four Beasts and four and twenty Elders
in, praising the Lamb, and saying, For thou wast slain, Rev. 5.9.
and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and Nation: Not all Nations, but some out of all.

Whence is this, Which depends on his free Election, Romans 9.15. Jer. 31.3.
but from Gods free Election and sovereign will? who will have mercy on whom
he will have mercy, etc. According to that in Jeremy, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee.

1 Use, God excludes no sorts, calling, or kind of men, if they repent. Which
is for comfort.
Use 1. God being so free in his choice and calling of men, as that he choosing
where he will, calling or choosing none for any goodness, either actually in
them, or foreseen, nor rejecting any of any sort of men for their unworthiness
simply, It is for comfort to such as receive the word in humility, who hearing
it repent and believe. Let their condition or state be what it will be in the
world, let not them exclude themselves by impenitency and unbeleef, and God
will not exclude them: He will have none make arguments against themselves,
saying, I am an Eunuch, I am separate, or an heathen, etc. no, Isai. 36.3, 6.
let them but join in covenant with God, and do the thing which God commands,
and they shall be welcome to him as any. So I say also for the rich, whose
salvation is most difficult, and for the noble, 1 Cor. 1.26.
of whom not so many are called, yea for the greatest sinners; let them hear
and obey Gods word, and they may rest assured of acceptance with God. Yet not
for any worth in them, but by virtue only of Gods free Promise, grounded on
his free Election: So that we further infer, That, difference between man and
man (in regard of saving grace) is not from men themselves, God mades the
difference between man and man, singling out some, to whom only he sends the
Gospel,
but from God; from his Election, his saving, free and powerful grace, who in
and by his Spirit, accompanying the word preached, singles out by effectual
calling whom he pleases, and so separates between man and man. To which end,
God, with choice and according to his freedom and will, sends the word so to
some, as that he denies it to others, Acts 16.6, 7. where he has any belonging
to his Election whom he will save, thither he sends his word in the ministry of
it, chiefly for their sakes: Acts 16.6, 7, 14* 30, 31, and 13, 10.
So it was send and directed to Philippi and Thyatira, for the convesion and
salvation (as of others, so) of Lydia and the Jailour: and to Corinth, in which
City God had much people. And however the Promise is to be propounded to all,
and some to whom he makes it effectual.
near or far off that will hear it, yet the thing promised, that is, Christ,
life and salvation, belongs not simply and without exception to all and each,
but to all, with this restraint, To you and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call; as it is in this
Chapter verse. 39. Now these are only the Elect, as Acts 17.48. where it is
said, As many, as were ordained to eternal life, believed; but none else.
These are they whose hearts the Lord opens, as he did Lydia's, that they
attend to the things spoken, and believe them, which all do not. Of which more
anon.

Only this teaches such as find the fruit and effects of this grace of God
in themselves, thankful unto God for the same, To be thankful to God more
then others,
even as God has specially singled them out from among others, and made them
vessels of mercy. Lord what am 'I, that thou have manifested thy choice of me,
as thou passest by? Whence is it that thou thus by thy saving, grace come to
me, and not to 'many others? For if Christ, on the behalf of such, who partake
not of like choice mercies.
confessed to God saying, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them unto babes: Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight; then I
conclude, such as have found this mercy and special grace, should on their own
behalf, bless God from the soul, and seek more to glorify God in their
lives, then such great ones on earth, who having a name of wise, prudent,
learned, holy, yea and of the Church, dishonor God by their pride, insolency,
and arrogance too, ascribing whatsoever wisdom, grace and holiness which they
pretend and presume they have, not to Gods free, saving and effectual grace,
but only to his common grace and favor, vouchsafed alike to the reprobates as
well as to them, but which they have made a better use of then those others, by
using their own Free Will better. A reproof of the unthankful, and of the
enemies of Gods grace. Oh unthankfulness! Who that effectually and truly did
partake of Gods saving and special grace, did ever (long at least) seek to
take the honor and praise of the work from God to themselves, as these do, who
merely fancying that grace they have not, will have the stroke, the casting
voice, or the casting of the balance in their own hands? Let God have the
honor then of making the difference, as well as of giving of grace common to
all hearers, as the Apostle beating down man's pride does teach us, 1 Cor. 4.7.
Of which place more below.

CHAP. 3. Concerning the Means of Conversion.
SECT. 1. Of the efficacy of Gods word: Whence it is: And of the Uses of it.
3 The Means of their Conversion, the hearing of the word preached.
THe third thing here considerable is, the Isntrumental Cause or Means of
these Jews Conversion. And this is, on Gods part, the word preached; on man's,
the same word heard, and received by faith: First generally, by which, through
belief of the threats and law, the heart comes to be pricked and wounded, being
convinced of sin and wrath due unto it; then special, by which, through
belief of the special promise, and by particular application and use of the
remedy here prescribed, verse. 38. the heart comes to be healed.

Now when they heard this.] Where is first the Act of hearing. Where 1 The Act
of hearing, which implies preaching Romans 10.14, 15.


Secondly, The Object, what they heard.

First, Hearing implies teaching and preaching; as here, Peter preaches, and
they hear: and how shall men hear without a Preacher, says Paul? and how shall
they preach except they be sent? first of God. So that we have here to note,

Note. 1. The power and efficacy of Gods Word.
First, the power and efficacy of the Word of God preached,

Secondly, the profit and good fruit of hearing it aright. Peter speaking only
in the outward ear, they that heard are pricked in the heart, and by further
hearing are fully converted.

1. The word of God is a powerful word, because soundly taught and wisely
applied, as here we see, where not only for number, three thousand, but for
quality, scoffers, mockers, yea persecuters were converted by it: so the like
afterward, and in some measure to the end of the world. No word of man, no not
in the mouth of the most eloquent Orator, can work such effect as this does;
In changing the effections, and verting souls, Acts 26.18.
this has a power on the soul, not only to move the affections, but to
change them, to renew them, to convert them and turn the soul to God, from
death to life, from darkness to light (by opening of the eyes) yea from the
power (even of hell, Psalm 19.7.
of the very Devil himself) of Satan unto God. The law of God converts
souls, and changes stones into bread, yea flesh; base metal into pure gold
(beyond all Chymicall transmutation; turning beasts into men.
) yea beasts into men: in which regard the Church differs from the Arc of Noah
(a type of it in other things;) for there the beasts that entered into the Arc
received no chainge nor alteration, but if they went in unclean, wild and
savage, they also came out unclean, wild and savage: but in the Church of
God, where Gods word is powerfully taught, it is not so with every one: we come
in unclean, but go out clean; we come in wild, we go out tame; we come in
wolves, lions, vultures, we go out lambs, dear, and doves; we come in beasts,
and go out men, yea, new men, regenerate, as one well notes. Here it might be
showed how that by the power of one text only some has been converted: Iun. in
vita
as Junius reclaimed from Atheism by casting his eye on Job. 1.1. Saint
Austin, See Dr. Featlyes sermons on this text.
by taking up the Bible, and reading the first place he lighted on, which was
Romans 13.13.14. not in gluttony and drunkenness, not in chambering and
wontonnesse, etc. was fully converted from his wantonness; yea his friend
Alypius, desiring to peruse that place, and reading the next words, Romans 14.1.
Him that is weak in the faith receive you, besought Saint Austin to strengthen
him in the faith, and he became a Convert also. And I believe if every one
would tell their experiences in this kind, and how the word either at first, or
since, in their anguish, distress, temptations, has strengthened, comforted,
and upheld them, we should ^eed no other proof of this truth.

But whence has the word this power? Not from it self, 2 Whence has it this
efficacy? from God and his spirit, Psalm. 149.6, 7, 8, 9.
but from the Author, which is God, who when and where he pleases makes it
powerful and effectual, by his spirit accompanying the same. It is a two
edged sword, and cuts both ways, as God shall please to weild and use it,
either to wound or prick savingly, like the Surgeons lancing-knife; or to wound
to death, like the sword of an Enemy: but we speak especially of the former
work of it whereby it shows it self quick and powerful, Heb. 4.12. whose
instrument it is,
sharper then a two edged sword, piercing even to the deviding asunder of soul
and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, being a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart. And so it is called the power of God to salvanion to
every one that believes; Romans 1.16.
that is Gods powerful instrument by which he works faith in men, and
converts their souls Now as the instrument has no power of or from it self
(but only a fitness thus or so to be used) and works in and by the power of
the chief workman, working in the power of him the principal Agent.
as the steel with which the Lodestone is capped, so it is here. The sword
cuts not without a hand to weild it, and then it cuts according to the power,
strength and will (less or more) of him that uses it: so the word or words of
the Preachers, being quantity, have no efficacy of themselves; or considered as
a sound or beating and dividing of the air, but as it is an instrument of God,
appointed and sanctified to produce such great effects; so that the power is
from Gods Ordinance (and not from the word of the Preachers) who by the
sounding of rams horns made the walls of Jericho fall down: and by virtue of
^is ordinance, as did the rams horns of old, and Moses rod in dividing the
sea.
which sounding was rather a sign at which, then any cause by which the walls
fell; even as Moses his rod by which he smote the Sea had not that power in it
self, but by virtue of Gods appointment; Moses smote with it, because God had
so commanded, but God did the work. And though the Word preached work after
another manner, yet the work done by it, whether it be conversion, comfort,
pricking, melting bruising. etc. is from the effectual power of God, and of
his Spirit, who does the deed; 1 Cor. 3.6.
so that Paul may plant, Apollos may water, but it is God that gives the
increase: and so the Word is compared to a sword and hammer which bruiseth;
Jer. 23.29. Isa. 55.10. Acts 2.1, 3.
to a nail, which pierces; and to fire, which melts and mollifieth; to a
mighty wind, and thunder, which shakes the heart of the stoutest. Thus here
Gods Spirit being like water (both for abundance and strength) poured out, in
the signs of a rushing mighty wind, and of fire, makes the word of Peter and
others thus powerful; the power of which spirit showed it self, not only in
the tongues of the Preachers, but in the hearts of the hearers: so afterward
the Apostles being armed with the promise of this power, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
are sent out to all Nations to convert them, which thing they also did: but
who? a few men of no account, of no learning (some of them) of no authority or
state: whom? Kings of the earth, whom with these chains coming out from their
mouth (as is fabled of Hercules Celticus) they did bind and bring into
subjection under Christ: Bodin. de rep. lib. 4. cap. 7.
So, wise Philosophers, and the learned, the proud and refractory; but by what
meas and arms did they thus go forth conquering whithersoever they came, yea
and subduing spiritual and infernal power? 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Their weapons were not carnal but spiritual, yet mighty, not of themselves,
but through God etc, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Thus Christ came to be set up in his
throne; and thus in after times, after that great defection foretold,
Antichrist began to be cast out in many Kingdoms, by the preaching of Luther,
in whom God showed his mighty power, and of whom one writes thus saying,

Vir sine vi ferri, vi verbi and inermibus armis,
Vir sine re, sine spe, contudit orbis opes:
He was one who without sword or spear, by the only power and weapons of the
word of God, without strength, wealth, and hope in himself, overcame and
subdued the power and strength of the world. Alexander was renowned and admired
because with so few he subdued so many: but here are conquests more admirable
then his, whereby more and greater enemies, even the powers not of the world
only but of hell are subdued, and that by fewer, and, to outward seeming,
weaker means.

Use 1. This power of God in his word, by which he then did, and does still go
on triumphing, Its for terror to the opposers of the word.
as he will till he have brought the necks of all his enemies in subjection to
him, one way or other, is to be admired and acknowledged; and we thence assured
that the Lord Christ and his cause and Gospel shall in his good time prevail
against all opposition of men, devils, and Antichrist; and that it, howsoever
suppressed sometimes, yet, shall not be wholly oppressed; it is like fire, Which
to them will prove like fire.
which though kept under and half smothered down, yet will work it self free,
having a consuming power in it, to devour all combustible matter which stands
in its way, The word cannot be restrained.
as the Arc detained by the Philistines wrought it self out, and (as the
people of Israel in Egypt) by strong hand delivered it self, and made the
enemies weary of it. Which may be terror to all enemies of the Gospel, and of
the sound preaching and Preachers, yea and Professors of it: And a fair caveat
to all, that they meddle not with such edge-tooles; the word will prove a sharp
sword to them, as a mall, hammer, or as a burdensome stone to crush such as
heave at it, or are enemies to it, or yet do resist it in themselves.

Confutation, we hence conclude, To confute, first, the error of Universal
grace. and of free will in man, to accept of grace. And secondly, of man's power
to resist Gods grace.
that to the conversion of a sinner there is more required then the hearing of
the same word, or the same common-motives, and in a word, then common and
universal grace: there must a special and an effectual power go along
therewith; but that is no power of man's free will, but of Gods free and
powerful grace; which therefore would be begged so often as we hear Gods word.
Secondly, That where God will convert any indeed, it is not in the power of man
to resist finally. But these being points of Controversy, I list not to insist
upon them. Only for them both, Know, that conversion of souls and faith is
made the affect, as of the word preached, The power of God in working faith;
Ephesians. 1.13, 20
so of the power of God, the greatness of his power, yea the exceeding
greatness of his power, yea of the might of his power, even effectually, and
actually, and therefore irresistibly working, as it is there also said,
according to the working of his mighty power, even the same power by which he
raised Christ from the dead: (i. e.) the power of the Godhead. Therefore, as a
man conferres nothing of his own to his bodily raising to life, The same by
which Christ was raised from death.
or to his own creation, so he hinders it not, when God will raise him up; as
we see in Lazarus: he rose not of himself, neither could he hinder his own
rising: he arose not by his own power, and yet it was he, even Lazarus who did
rise. Even so is it in our spiritual resurrection from the death of sin,
which is wrought by the power of Christ's word, Ephesians. 5.14.
saying, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead: And we do so, but
then it is Christ, who by his word which is operative, gives us light and life.
Yet we must know, that man in his conversion, though it be thus both infallibly
and powerfully wrought, Yet man is not compelled.
is not forced or compelled to it, but according to Gods wisdom, as well as
power, is first made willing, and so Gods works though powerfully, yet sweetly;
he so draws us as that were un willingly after him.

Which teaches us to live to Gods glory.
This overthrowes the contrary error of Jesuits, Lutherans, and Arminians, and
teaches us to give the whole glory of our conversion to God, from whose mercy
and power it is; to depend on him for a continual supply and influence of his
grace; to live wholly to him whose creatures we are both by nature and grace,
etc.

3 Use, Of comfort and Encouragement, 1 To Preachers, having a refractory
people:
3. It is a point of comfort and encouragement, and that both to Ministers and
to people.

1. Ministers are hence encouraged to preach the word with power and with
authority, as knowing whose Ministers they are, and that they have their
Commission from him, whose is all power, and who according to that power calls
and sends them forth, promising to be with them to the end of the world: so
though they meet with opposition in their Ministry, Neither to be daunted.
or otherwise have a refractory people of hard hearts and necks to deal
withal, opposing, deriding and mocking them, so that through discouragements
they be ready with Jeremiah, Jer. 20.8.9.
who so found it, to resolve to give over preaching, or at least such plain and
home-teaching; yet ought they not to be discouraged, but at Christ's bidding, to
cast in their net again; Not to despair of them.
otherwise we disobey, yea and distrust the power of our Master Christ, whose
word if with Jeremiah we offer to shut up, we also find it in our heart as a
burning fire shut up in our bones, which will make us weary with forbearing,
that we cannot hold. In case then that with Peter we fish all night and catch
nothing, yet at Christ's bidding let us cast in again, as he did, and we shall
in his time catch and make a great draught, Joh. 21.11.
as Peter did of an hundred fifty three great fishes: thereby was but
foresignified to him this great conversion of so many thousand souls by his
Ministry, whereby Christ's promise to him at his calling to the Apostleship was
made good unto him, I will make thee a fisher of men, or thou shall catch live
men. Peter could hardly have expected to have made such a draught at one
Sermon: So though we see for the present little fruit of our labor, yet we
must consider Gods word is powerful, and can when God so pleases change, yea
break and bruise the stoutest heart. But howsoever, we shall not lose our
labor with God; Gods word will have its work and effect some other way, to
his glory and our comfort: See Isa. 49.2, 3, 3, 4, and 5. which is spoken of
Christ, not only in his person, but in his Ministers: and Isa. 55.10. and 2
Cor. 2.15.16. We shall be unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish, etc.

This comforts us again in the weakness of our own gifts, 2 In the weakness
of their own gifts, to to look to Gods promised assistance.
so long as we show our faithfulness in that little which we have: If God
give us a call, we must not plead with Moses, We are not eloquent, Exodus 4.10,
11, 12. we must, and may comfortably expect assistance, ability and strength
from God; as also good success in our Ministry, according to a Promise made
to Christ, and in him to us, Esa. 60.4, 5, -- 14. 2 Cor. 2.14.
Which if we do find, we must return thanks to him which causes us to triumph
in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place.

2. Gods people and hearers generally should not be discouraged too much with
the hardness of their own hearts, 2 To people who complain of hardness of
heart, See 2 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
with their forgetfulness, unfruitfulnesse, deadness and dullness, so long as
they be truly displeased with themselves for these, pray heartily to God and
strive against them. Gods power in the word is such as that it can, and will,
if they wait, subdue all these; It is perfected in Weakness. Nay, though men
were, as these here in the Text, hard-hearted against Chirst and his word, and
such as hate him, and have long rejected his word and grace, we should not
despair of them, as has been said; neither they of themselves, so long as they
withdraw not from hearing of Gods faithful Messengers: They may meet with a
Peter at one time or other, at least; Gods power is not shortened now more then
formerly.

Even refractory sinners may be reclaimed.
Which may encourage and give hope to the greatest sinners, when they consider
this power of Gods word, yea of Gods grace, by which they here were savingly
pricked and pierced, that by their sins pierced Christ, yea and indeed
crucified him; that they, through the preaching of the word came to be saved by
Christ's blood, Not to despair, either of Gods mercy through the greatness of
their sins 3
who with wicked hands, at least by their votes did shed Christ's blood: There
is hope then for the most rebellious. Let none then ascribe so much to their
own wickedness, as with Cain to say, My sin is greater then can be forgiven;
but let such in hope of mercy attend diligently on the word, humble themselves
mightily, beg grace earnestly, wash thoroughly, not by dipping or by little
consideration of sin, which may defile us the more, as the face or foul cloth
lightly touched with water, but by soaking, and rinsing, and bathing our selves
in the tears of repentance, and hearty prayer to God, with David, that he
would wash them thoroughly from their iniquity. Psalm. 51.2.
Neither let any ascribe so little to Gods power and grace, as (because they
have no power in themselves to subdue this or that corruption in them, finding
so much heardnesse of heart, or weakness to withstand temptation) to despair
of help from God. Is either any sin in them, or malice of the devil against
them so great and strong, that these shall be more able to damn them, then God
to save them? This were too injurious to Christ, and to themselves. As it is
too great a discouragement, so it argues too much pride; if they had more power
of their own, they would less be beholding to him: now that they have none of
their own, they will as much despair, with that unbeleeving Prince, 2 Kings 7.
of Gods power as of their own, and so deserve to be used in some proportion
as he was, even to see mercy given to others as bad as themselves, but not to
taste of it, because of their distrust, as it was with Cain also.

To show forth in our lives the power of the word. Why? 1. Its else an ill
sign of no grace in us.
Let it be thus powerful in us, who live, or have lived long under the
Ministry of it. Its an ill sign when one feeds constantly on good, wholesome,
and hearty meat, and yet, with Pharaohs lean Kine, looks ill on it, gets no
strength of body, but keeps lean, little and weak still. And as this is an ill
sign to such, that Gods Ordinance is accursed to them, neither can they have
any assurance that they are the children of God, begotten by the word, when the
childrens bread, this word of God, does not nourish and strengthen them; (for
all in Gods house are fat and goodliking:) So secondly, 2 Its a disgrace to the
Gospel.
they bring a disgrace upon the word and Gospel of Christ, by their
power-lesse and fruit-lesse lives, and so give occasion for enemies of
Religion, as Papists and profane Atheists to blaspheme the same, and to upbraid
Profession, because of the loose lives of many Professors. Ah beloved I know we
what we do? let us take heed of this dishonor done to Christ and his word.
Our lives should be as Comments on the word, or as Wax imprinted with the seal
of the word: As then there is a power in the word, so let there be a power of
Godliness in our lives, and a life of grace and faith in our whole course of
life; neither let us take up take up with bare forms of godliness, nor rest
in outward performances and in heart-lesse, live-lesse services: 3 Sin else and
Satan will be powerful in us to damnation.
Let not the name and word and Gospel of God be evil spoken of through us.
Thirdly, But if otherwise the word of God in us be not (and that through our
own default) the power of God to our salvation, let us look to it lest our own
carnal reason, lusts, and sin become the power of the Devil in us to eternal
damnation: nay the same very word which now has no place nor power in the
disobedient, shall prove a terrible word unto them one day; at the power of
which, heaven and earth shall shake, as they do even in this life, much more
then hereafter, when Christ shall come to judge them according to this Word and
Gospel, in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.9.
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. See we then that we
refuse not him that speaks etc. Heb. 12, 25, 26. and 2.1, 2, 3.

Let such look to this who find an irresistible power in all sorts of
temptations to sin, A reproof of such as suffer the world to be more
powerful in in them then Gods Word.
from their lusts, or the men of the world, who if they hold but up a finger,
it is as a strong cord to draw them with them into all excess: or the very
looks and speeches of the harlot are enough to cause them follow, though it be
as the Ox to the slaughter. And so when they can find, and profess that they
can be moved even to tears, at the beholding of a Play, and that much sooner
then at a Sermon, as some have done, Oh its a sign the Devil has a strong
hold in them, and has taken up their hearts, which are shut toward the word,
and open only to vanity.

Being converted, not to ascribe the glory of it either to our selves, or to
the gifts of the Minister. 1 Cor. 3.5.
let us give God his glory, and not ascribe our conversion in whole or in part
either to our selves, to the power of our own will, to our own wit, aptness,
or good nature: see Joh. 1.13. Mat. 16.17. or yet to the gifts and abilities of
the Preachers: what is Paul, or what is Apollo? I know some Ministers may be
called powerful Preachers, in comparison of others, namely such as follow Gods
method of Preaching, and that course which he chiefly blesses; yet it is not
the Minister but God which converts, opens the hearts, pricks, wounds, and
after heales it. We may and must respect and honor such as so labor, even
with double honor, but, as the Ministers of Christ; God himself must have the
honor of their work. We must not ascribe to them either too little (but honor
them for their works sake, and be thankful to them as to spiritual parents
under God) or too much, but acknowledge the power and grace of God in and by
their Ministry.

And thus for the power of the Word.

SECT. 2. Concerning the profit of hearing Gods word: With Uses.
2 We note, from this their hearing the word so as to be pricked and wounded,
Note 2. The profit of hearing Gods word.
and at length fully converted by it, (as the power of Preaching, so) The
great, good, and saving effects of hearing aright. We may see here how that the
Hearing of Gods Word, as it was taught by Peter and the rest, Proved the means
of their Conversion and Salvation. For bereby, first, their eyes came to be
enlightened, 1 It opens the eyes to know Christ,
and they came to see both their own sins and their Savior, and at length to
be directed in and to the only way of salvation, verse. 37.38. Thus our blessed
Savior discoursing and preaching to these two Disciples that went to Emmaus,
at length their eyes were opened, Luke 24.27 31.
and they knew him: yea afterward presently appearing to them and the rest,
and aplying the Scriptures to the present occasion, its said, He opened their
understanding that they might understand the Scriptures; and the Scriptures.
but that was by his powerful Spirit accompanying his word, seeing formerly he
had expounded and opened unto them the Scriptures. And thus the Lord teaches
men out of his Law, which Law and word of his is a light to give us
understanding of his ways, and of our ways too: Psalm. 94.12.
It enlightens our minds, and directs our Path. Thy word, says David, is a
lamp (or candle) to my feet, and a light unto my path. Psalm. 119.105.
It is given to direct and lead us in this our pilgrimage to heaven, as once
the fiery pillar and cloud did the Israelites to Canaan through the
wilderness: and as Ships are directed by lights from without in their course
into their dangerous havens: which in some havens are double, or two, which are
to be brought in a right line together in the Ships course; so here is a double
light, this of the Word, and that other of the Spirit accompanying the same, by
which we come effectually and safely to be directed. 2 It awakens out of
security.


Secondly, This same Word did also by pricking and wounding these Jews awaken
them out of their security, in which they did lie, and should have lien for
ever: So God awakened David by the Prophet Nathan; and rouzeth men daily from
their quiet sleep in sin.

3 It both wounds and heals.
Thirdly, But as it did awaken them, so pricking and wounding, it did let out
their corruption, and made way for the perfect healing and cure of their souls.

4 It is the ordinary means of conversion and salvation.
Fourthly, In a word, it thus proved a word of life to them, and as we have
said, the means of their salvation.

And so indeed we must conceive of the word, and the right hearing and
preaching of it, as of the means of our salvation. So it was also in Lydia and
the Jailor, Acts 16. And contrariwise, the rejection of the word preached, Acts
13.48.
is an adjudging of our selves unworthy of life.

Whence is it so?
This, in brief, is not from the power of the word it self, but from Gods
appointment and blessing, and by virtue of his Ordinance, seeing he has so
ordained and appointed that faith should come by hearing, Romans 10.14, 15, 16,
17.
and hearing is by the word ( i. e. command and appointment) of God, as
elsewhere (on the text) I show. To this end God stirs up and endues with
gifts, (as here) and sends Ministers where he has any to save, and
accordingly, by his Spirit (whereof the word preached is the Ministry) makes
it effectual in whom he pleases: though by his absolute power he can, if he
would, and does where he will (as in elect infants dying etc.) save and apply
Christ by his Spirit only.

Use 1. This teaches us, as we desire the good and salvation of our souls, Of
Instruction; Diligently to hear Gods word. Why? 1 Considering our ignorance.
to be diligent in hearing of Gods word, as it is faithfully taught by the true
Ministers and Teachers of it. Our necessity requires it: Such is our ignorance,
such is our Impotency, we cannot save our selves. First, our ignorance is such
naturally, since we fell into sin and under the curse, that of our selves we
neither aright and convictingly know our sinful, or yet accursed condition. We
are apt to think well of our selves and of our own ways, though they be never
so bad or accursed of God: much less do we know of God or of his will
concerning the means of our recovery and salvation, till God in and by Christ
declare it to us, Joh. 1.18. neither know we the things of God, or any saving
truth as of our selves, 1 Cor. 2.14. Nay, Secondly, such is our impotency, that
we cannot either know them or yet do any thing for our selves in the business
of our conversion, 2 Our impotency: both which he heals us of.
till God by his word and spirit work the same in us; God must create us anew
by the same mighty power of his word, by which at first he made the world,
Psalm. 33.6. John 3.
We must be drawn, Joh. 6.44. and born again of water and the Spirit; as the
ship cannot move it self but as it is first born up of the water, Secondly set
forward by the wind, both being without her self. Now this is done whilst we
receive into our souls and affections the gales of Gods grace, and blasts and
breath of his Spirit, by attentive hearing of his word, by which his Spirit is
ministered to us.

2 How?
Let us then attentively hearken to Gods word, and so seek and expect the good
and profit of it. Let us choose Mary's part, Luke 10. 1 Take heed of lets.
and take heed of Martha's incombrances, and of such lets as prove hindrances
to the fruitful hearing of it, as of worldly cares, pleasures; and in a word,
of having our hearts set upon the things of the world, as Oxen, Farms, Wives,
etc. 2 So hear as first meditate, (...).
Now we cannot hear it aright, unless we first seriously meditate on the
things we do hear; as the word here seems to carry a continued act; when they
had heard, there was not an end, the word still sounded in their ears, that
they were the Crucifiers of Christ, that Christ whom they crucified was the
Lord of life; these nails stuck in them whether they did eat, drink, lie down
or arise. Whilst the heart museth and meditates on an object, it comes to be
affected, as Psalm. 33. Lament. 3.19, 20. 2 Pet. 2.8. Lot in seeing and hearing
vexed his soul, -- i. e. he pondered the evils done, and was the more vexed
with their unlawful deeds.

2 Apply it.
Secondly, We must so hear as to apply particularly to our selves what we hear;
for so these here came to be wounded, when the point of this sword was set to
their breasts, and they could not, neither did offer to put it by. This belongs
both to the Preacher to do, who must not draw and only flourish his sword,
this sword of the Spirit, but strike home with it, his mark being only or
chiefly the heart; for so the word both hits soonest and pierces deeper, and
becomes as nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies: and also to hearers
themselves, who must help their spiritual Surgeons and Physicians to apply the
plaster or potion, by keeping the one close to the sore, and the other in
their stomach without casting it up. But of these two, On 1 Cor. 11.31. page
1332. etc.
Meditation and Application, as means of Humiliation, more largely elsewhere.

3 Believe it.
Thirdly, The word heard must be mingled with faith in those that hear it, else
it profits them not. Heb. 4.1, 2.

4 Obey it.
Yea fourthly, it must be followed with obedience, as here; these both believed
the things taught them to be true, and being directed to repent and to be
baptized, they both repented, believed, and were baptized. If then we would
reap the fruit and benefit of hearing and be blessed thereby, we must both
hear, and keep the word we hear: Luke 11.
otherwise God will not hear us. Zach. 7.13.

Exhortation with other reasons
In a word, if we will be Christ's sheep, we must receive his mark, and that must
be in the ear, John 10.3. -- 27. Mat. 13.43: and 17.5. If we will be his
servants for ever, we must suffer him to bore our ears (that the pearls of
the Gospel may hang at them.) If we will either believe or pray aright, we must
hear aright: the first link of that golden chain of the Apostle is hung at the
ear: Faith comes by hearing, etc. Romans 10.14, -- 17. And if we would find
such saving effects of the word as these here, we must so hear as they heard,
and as is said, for when they heard, they were pricked in heart and said, Men
and brethren what shall we do? Its said of the Weasel, Mustella concipit aure,
parit ore, She conceives at the ear, and brings forth her young ones at her
mouth: So the seed of Gods word received in at the ear, and conceived there
and in the heart, brings forth the fruit of holy thoughts, meditations, and
devotion, and expressions of inward sorrow for sin at the mouth.

Use. 2 This being the profit of hearing, and duty of hearers, let us see what
to judge, Of reproof, 1. of scoffers, 2. of enemies to hearing in others,
first, of scoffers at the word, etc. Secondly, of such as hinder and keep back
others from hearing; as Elymas would have done the Deputy: such as are enemies
to the spiritual good of souls, and show themselves children of the Devil,
Who are of the Devil.
whose office is to make the hearing of the word unfruitful; if he cannot keep
them from hearing, then he steals the Word heard out of their hearts, as the
birds pick up the seed after it is sown, Luke 8.
lest men believe and be saved: but if he can he will keep them from hearing
it; herein, like the Jaylour, who though he suffered his Prisoners to have
their hands and feet free, yet he keeps the prison door fast locked and bard,
and so long he fears no escape of his prisoners; so Satan lets such as he keeps
captive, it may be to have their hands at liberty to reach out an alms; and
sometimes their feet, to go to Church to hear Prayers (says one) but he will
be sure to keep the ears, Dr. Featly. And under Gods wrath.
which are the gates and doors of their souls, fast. Yea such are also under
the wrath of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.

3. Of such as lightly account of hearing, who to discountenance it, prefer
before it,
3. Generally we see what to conceive of such as with whom Satan prevails so
far, as either through mere negligence refuse to hear Gods word when they may,
preferring their ease and sloth; or at least to hear it only of such as are
like themselves, and will flatter them, and are time-servers: or through
prejudice of the word, to hear the voice of a man, the Pope forbidding them to
hear, when yet God calls them to hear, as our Popish Recusants: or to stop
their ears from hearing, and lock up that door, by breeding in them a contempt,
at least neglect of hearing, not only by pretending that we all know enough
already, practice is more needful; but by opposing to it not only practice,
but secondly, reading; thirdly, the spirit and inspirations; fourthly, praying:
which may also answer so many objections.

1. Practice, as if they needed no more knowledge.
1. What can we hear, say some, that we have not heard? the greatest defect is
in the practice of duties. To which I answer; First, we may hear that which we
have forgot: our memories are like leaking vessels, Heb. 4.1. or we have made
little use of what we know, and so stand inneed of stirring up: see 2 Pet.
1.12.13. Secondly, We must heart to have our affections wrought upon, till
which time, all our knowledge or hearing availes nothing: as these Jews heard
formerly from these Apostles, and from Christ himself that they never believed
till now. viz. that Jesus was the true Messiah, and therefore were never
pricked in heart, or wounded savingly till now. So for other affections besides
sorrow, as joy, hope, fear, zeal. Thirdly, The same word of God the more it is
boulted, the more meal, like good corn, it yields: like a plentiful mine,
in which the deeper we dig, the vein proves the richer; 2 Pet. 3 18. Psalm.
119.18.
and we should grow in knowledge, and desire to see deeper into the wonders of
Gods Law.

2 Reading Romans 10.17.
2. Some reject hearing, and prefer the reading of the word in public and in
private; yea the reading of printed Sermons, as more accurate, for the most
part. To these I only at this time oppose Gods Ordinance, from which only we
may expect his blessing, by virtue of his promise annexed. Its said Faith comes
by hearing, but the hearing is by the word and commandment of God. Bare reading
is not such preaching as the Scripture commends to us. It is the Gospel
preached which is Gods power to salvation, Romans 1.16.
and the preaching of the Cross, which though it be to such as perish,
foolishness, yet unto us which are saved, it is the power of God. 1 Cor. 1.18.
Naamans cleansing was no effect properly of the waters of Jordan, but of faith
and obedience to Gods word etc.

3 Some expect to be taught without the ordinary means of hearing, 3
Inspirations. John 6. Psalm. 94.12.
seeing it is written, They shall be all taught of God. And, Blessed is the man
whom thou -- teach out of thy Law. True; God can save without the word, and
teach us only by his spirit: so he can feed us without bread, as he did Moses
for forty days in the Mount; and he fed the Israelites in the wilderness with
extraordinary food from heaven when they wanted ordinary. But God works now and
usually by means, not by miracles. As therefore no man contemnes ordinary and
corporal food, because God can feed us otherwise: and as the Israelites having
the fruits of Canaan to feed on, depended not any longer on Manna from heaven;
so we must not neglect the hearing of Gods word preached, because God can give
the spirit without it, as to elect infants dying in infancy, because God does
not, (at least ordinarily) give his Spirit but by the word, which, where
preaching is and may be had, it were presumption, tempting and mocking of God
to expect it; yea a provoking of God to give over to delusion of Satan.

4 Those that oppose prayer to preaching, 4 Prayer.
that Gods house is an house of Prayer, not of Preaching, Domus Orationis, non
Orationum, and of Sermons: Of Orations to God, not from God to us. True, Christ
said indeed his house was a house of Prayer; but where said he so? was he not
then preaching in the Temple, to the buyers and sellers? and was there not in
the Temple as well the Oracle, and the Lamp of God daily burning (a type of his
word) as well as the Altar of Incense? But I ask, Who can pray aright, that
knowees neither what to pray for, nor how? both which are taught us by the
word: How can we pray aright without faith? or call on him on whom they have
not believed? how shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? or how
shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.14.
And so, how can men in prayer confess sin, and yet not know sin by the word?
etc. Not to mention, that Prayer and Invocation is often in Scripture taken for
the whole worship of God, Genesis 4 26. Acts 2.21.
and so it includes preaching too.

Use. 3. Lastly, It is a good sign of good intended by God to such as to whom
he sends his Word and Ministers, Its a good sign where the word is, and is
reverently heard.
if especially they reverently and meekly hear and receive the word, without
quarrelling with it or the Preacher when their sins are discovered, they
convinced, Christ his Kingdom and glory advanced, as here comes next to be
showed. Its a good sign that God has some to call, convert, and save
eternally. And it may and should encourage all to hear with deligence, alacrity
and hope to reap the good fruit of their hearing, yea to long for and desire
it, and not to put any bar in the same, by their negligence in hearing,
prejudice had of the Preacher, either his person, matter and doctrine (being
Gods pure word though harsh to us) or manner and plainness. As contrariwise,
where either there is no preaching, or no sound preaching, or conscionable
hearing and practice of things heard, its a sign that (whether Christ with
draw himself from a people, or come by his word to such) it is in judgment,
and for their further hardening and blinding: as Joh. 9.39. Isa. 6.9, 10, 11.

CHAP. IIII. The object of our hearing, generally and specially: and what
doctrine is like to do the greatest good: With Uses.
2 TTe Object of their hearing, This, 2 The Object of hearing.
or these things, or that which was spoken to them by Peter and the rest on
this day, when the Spirit came upon them so visibly.

1 Generally Gods words,
1 In general, the Object of our hearing is and should be the word of God only,
taught by such faithful Ministers of Christ as he stirs up, calls, and
assists by his Spirit. Thus everywhere we are called on to hear the word of
the Lord: Isa. 1.10. Jer. in the mouth of Christ and of his Ministers.
2.4. and 7.2, -20. etc. the voice of Christ, or Christ himself, Mat. 17.15.
hear him. Joh. 5.25. and 10.3, -16. yea of his Messengers, Prophets and
Ministers, Zach. 7.7. seeing he that hears them hears Christ, Luke 10.16.
Luke 16.29-31, And this is no other then the voice of the Spirit speaking in by
the word, as in Noah, Genesis 6.3. which God has of old promised to accompany his
word, Isa. 59.21. and since the ascension of Christ also, who has promised by
his spirit and power to be present with his Messengers to the end of the world,
Mat. 28, 18, 19, 20. and to send the Spirit, the Spirit of truth to abide with
us for ever, John 14.16, 17. to teach us all things, and to bring all things to
our remembrance, whatsoever he had said unto us. This is that Spirit speaking
in his word, It only must be heard.
which we are to hear. Revel. 2.7, 11, 17,-29. This is the word which we only
are to hear.

Why? No Word else will profit us.
Why? In one word, No other word will profit us: without this no conversion; see
Jer. 23.21, 22, -32. Therefore they ( i.e. such as God sent not, but prophecy
false dreams, and stand not in Gods counsel) shall not profit this people at
all: only says God, if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my
people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil
way, etc.

1 Use, For teachers, to preach no other doctrine.
Use 1. For us preachers, to direct us, as we intend any good to the poeples
souls, to lay aside all conceits and inventions, and doctrines of men, our own
and others, much more to abandon all Doctrines of devils, such as are named in
1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. and so generally all other Popish and Antichristian doctrines,
and to preach only Gods pure word unto his people.

Use. 2. For hearers; 1 Not to depend on Revelations, without the word.
2. For hearers: to desire only such teaching: And therefore not to depend upon
the teaching of the Spirit by Revelations, Inspirations etc. without the word,
but only according to it: Much less upon apparition of spirits out of hell,
supposed Purgatory, or yet heaven: Luke 16.29 30, 31.

2 To take heed first what, secondly how they hear. Gods word must be heard as
his word.
2 To take heed what they hear: Mark. 4.24. If any speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. Isa. 8.19, 20. Yet how can they
hear, Luke 8.18. they must hear and received it, not as the word of men, but
(which it is in trurh) as the word of God, which effectually (and which only
effectually) works in them that believe, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. where faith also is
required in our hearing, without which it profits not, Heb. 4.1, 2. So long as
young Samuel ran to old Eli when God indeed spoke unto him, 1 Samuel 3.4, 5, etc.
10.11.
he had nothing revealed to him; but when he could say, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears, he had the word effectually made known unto him.

3 By so hearing it to approve our selves Christ's sheep.
3. Let us all by hearing only Christ's voice in the mouth of his faithful
servants, approve our selves to be Christ's sheep, even by this ear-mark. Joh.
10.3, 27. My sheep hear my voice, etc. Let us not be beat from hearing it by
such Popish Wolves, as will say unto us, as the wicked Jews to the people, He
has a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him? John 10.20. but let us rather
reverently set our selves in Gods presence, with Cornelius, and say, as Acts
10.33. We are here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded
thee of God. It is this word of God only, thus heard and obeyed, ( James 1.22,
23, 24, 25.) which will save our souls; 1 Timothy 4.16. John 5.25. Revel. 3.20.
And as in the Text.

2 The special Object of their hearing.
2. But more specially, What word was this these here heard, and which did wound
their spirits? I answer, That which Peter now spoke unto them: the sum
whereof is in the verse before the Text; Therefore let all the house of Israel
know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye crucified, both Lord
and Christ: Which is according to that main passage in his Sermon, verse 23.24.
Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel, and free knowledge of God, ye
have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: Whom God has raised
up: -- and who ( verse 33.) being by the right hand of God exalted, and having
received of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed forth this
which ye now see and hear.

What Word and Doctrine then was that which so wounded and pierced them?

Its reducible to these two heads: First, concerning Christ, his natures,
office, glory, exaltation and dominion. Secondly concerning themselves, their
sin and wickedness, which thus was discovered, reproved, and they convinced,
and deeply charged to be the crucifiers of this so gracious a Lord, yea of the
Messiah, who was sent unto them, and of their Savior. Note. Their former
blockishnesse, and how they came to be convinced.
This blockishnesse was great before, not to know or acknowledge him whom they
seemed so long to look for, but so to carry themselves toward the Messiah;
(which teaches us, for our humbling, that the very sight and presence of God
and of the things we seem most to long for, as every way satisfactory to our
desires, is not enough to satisfy us, unless God do further strike in by his
grace and powerful Spirit.) But now being thus charged and convinced, August.
in Psalm. 43
began to think and say, Alas! what will become of us, seeing he is so great
and glorious whom we have slain? For now they see and are convinced who this
Jesus was, that he is the Lord of glory, which they saw not before, 1. Cor. 2.
Now they see and are convinced of their vileness, guiltiness of wrath, of
their bloody practices and cruelty, as having persecuted and murdered an
innocent; of their base and vile unthankfulness against so gracious a Savior,
Benefactour, and Physician, who came to save, heal, and cure them.

This was the nature of the Doctrine which so wounded them.

Whence, Observe: What Doctrine is like to do the greatest good. Answ. That
which most advances Christ, and debaseth man. Why? 1.
let us observe and wisely consider, What Doctrine or Teaching is that which is
likliest to do the greatest good, and which is most availeable to conversion,
and to the salvation of men's souls: Here we may conclude it, that it is that
doctrine which most advances Christ, and sets forth his glory, and the glory
of the Father, and which withal most debaseth, vilifieth, convinces sinful
man; letting him see his filthiness, guiltiness, unworthiness, and
inabilities.

Why? 1. Because such Doctrine only sets forth Christ as Christ, as a Savior,
as a Surety, as a Physician, as the sole Prophet, Priest, and King of his
Church, and so most glorifieth God and Christ, in his goodness, bounty, mercy,
and in the freeness and power of his saving grace; none of which can so
gloriously and fully appear, as when man's sinfulness, polution of nature, his
guiltiness, unworthiness and impotency is according to truth, and the
evidence of Gods word laid open to the full.

2. Because without such doctrine man will never come to know either God,
Christ, or himself aright; whithout such knowledge no salvation, because no
true or through humiliation, self-denial, conviction, faith, etc.

Use. 1. This condemns all such doctrines (whether Popish or Lutheran) as make
either Christ but half a Savior, To condemn such Doctrine as makes
or us so much.

1. Christ but half a Savior.
1. The Popish sort make Christ but in part a Savior: first, in part only a
Prophet, adding doctrines of men, of the pretended Church, and Traditions to
his written word, by which as by a rule, he teaches us and our teachers too;
yea, by ascribing to their Popes a power of judging and determining of
Controversies. Secondly, in part a Priest, setting up a sacrificing Priesthood
now in the New Testament, whereby they really and effectually pretend to offer
up Christ for the sins of the quick and dead, which was his work alone, who was
once offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 9.28. and 10.14.
and who by one offering (of himself) has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified: which his work they make common to every Mass Priest; yea, by
ascribing merit and satisfaction to the works and sufferings of men, laid up in
the supposed treasury of their Church, and by dividing the work of Intercession
between him and the Angels and Saints. Thirdly, in part a King, making the Pope
to have a plenitude of power and Sovereignty, both spiritual, over men's
consciences; and temporal, over their persons also, and over all the Kingdoms
of the earth.

2. Which makes us so much.
2. Both Popish, and Lutheran, and Arminian doctrine, make us Men half Saviors
with Christ, if not more; whilst they teach that man's nature is not so sinful
and disabled by sin as it is, ascribing much to nature, and to the power of
man's will, giving him the casting voice or the casting of the balance in this
work of grace, saying Christ gives us grace indeed and power, but so none is
yet converted, it is a common grace given to all; so the grace and power is
only grace to believe if we will, to repent and convert if we will, to be
saved and persevere if we will: and so ascribe merit indeed to him and to his
death, but efficacy and application to themselves, derogating from Christ to
give to man, whereas it is God only that works, and gives both power and will,
Phil. 2.13. 1 Cor. 4.7.
and that effectually works in us both to will and to do, and that only of
his good pleasure: his grace only makes the difference. Where such doctrine as
this is taught, 2. Hence a Trial of Doctrines and of Religions. That Religion
truest, which gives most glory to God, and teaches and practices self-denail.
there is little hope of any good to be done to men's souls.

That which has been taught, may also be a Rule of discerning of true Religion
or Doctrine and the false. It is a sure and infallible Rule; That Religion
which takes away from our selves (not only teaching but working self-denial,
making men go out of themselves, and truly humbling them) and which gives all
glory to God, is the true Religion. But such is our Religion; and such is not
the Popish Religion, (no nor Lutheran, so far.) Do they not teach (beside what
is said of them already) that they have no original sin in them after they are
washed by Baptism? Which 1. Popery does not,
That men are able to fulfill and keep the Law fully in this life; yea more, do
more then God commands, even such things as they call works of supererogation,
whereby they merit heaven for themselves and others? Whereas we teach, that
even after Baptism men have cause to cry out not only of actual but original
sin, and to say with Paul, Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death, or, from this body of death? and to say as Christ says
to us, When we have done all that we can do, we are but unprofitable servants.

An Objection answered.
I know, false Religions seem to teach self-denial; but it is in word only, not
in deed. The Papists will humble the body by afflicting it many ways, punishing
and not sparing it. Here is a show of humility, unless only in show.
and of self-denial; yet it is but a show, being Will Worship, and a voluntary
humility, arguing indeed much more pride then humility, whilst they are (as
without command from God, so) puffed up thereby with an opinion of merit and of
satisfaction, whereby they derogate from Christ, and arrogate to themselves,
whom therefore we justly charge as Paul did such Volunteers in humility as they
imitate, See Coloss. 2.18-23.
to be (under such shows of humility) vainly puffed up by their fleshly minds,
i. e. falsely humble, truly proud: humbled in body, proud in mind and hearts,
which may call to them whilst they are whipping the body, or macerating it, in
the words of King David, when God sent a pestilence which destroyed seventy
thousand of his people, Lo, I have sinned, I have done wickedly: 2 Samuel 24.17.
but these sheep, what have they done? Let thine hand be against me, and
against my fathers house: so we are still proud hearts, wicked hearts, etc.
what has the body done without us? Let thine hand be against us, to humble us.
I say the like of Popish penance, where in their confession to the Priest is a
show of humility and self-denial in shaming themselves; yet in that their other
work of penance or satisfaction, is pride with a witness. And though some
other urge self-denial, and humility, and meekness in receiving the Word, and
in word seem to ascribe much to Gods grace; 2. nor Arminianism.
yet what pride is this, and error, to make this humility, if not a cause, yet
a condition, even of the grace of Gods election, as it concerns particular
persons, at least a respect, a point or term from which election flows, and so
no fruit or effect of it, as yet true humily and all other graces are.

3 Use, to show why so few are savingly pricked:
3 Use. Here we see the true cause why few are savingly pricked in heart, and
truly humbled; namely, ignorance of the worth, office, excellency and glory of
the Lord Jesus Christ; and of our own vileness, sinfulness, and damned
condition, whereof we are not, nay will not be convinced, as yet these here now
were. The truth is, The reason is, their ignoronce
till we see and acknowledge Christ not only in his natures and offices, but
in his exaltation and glory, and as Lord over all, and Judge of quick and dead;
as also, our own baseness, sinfulness, guiltiness, impotency, desperate and
damned condition, we shall never be truly humbled in our selves, or have (nay,
not so much as seek) interest in him, or salvation by him.

1. Of Christ and his glory;
1. Ignorance of Christ and his glory, (against whom we daily sin) is one main
cause why men reject him, and why he rejects them. We see it in the Jews, who,
1 Cor. 2.8.
if they had known him to be the Lord of glory, would not have crucified him.
This is the reason why till this day they do reject him, and are rejected of
him: and till this vail shall be taken from off their eyes and hearts, they
will never convert to God. as we may see in Paul before and after his
conversion,
A notable instance we have of Paul, who, whilst he was and remained ignorant
of the excellency of Christ, and stood upon his own outward privileges and
righteousness, he advanced himself against Christ and his people, and
persecuted them: but after Christ spoke to him from heaven, he is base in his
own eyes, denies himself and his own righteousness, accounting all loss, yea
dung, to win him, and for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his
Lord: he now admires nothing but Christ, and determines to know, or highly to
esteem of none or nothing but Christ crucified. See Phil. 3.5, 6. with 7, 8, 9.
1 Cor. 2.2. So Job, speaking of God to his friends, and in Job.
Shall not his excellency make you afraid? Job 13.11. and to God of himself,
after his eye had seen him, I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes, Job
42.6.

2. Of their own vileness.
2. Again, Why do men carry themselves in their sins so proudly against Christ
and God, dishonor him daily, yea hate and persecute him and his servants, but
because they are ignorant of their own vileness, guiltiness and wretched
condition? they know not their need of him, and therefore they both reject him,
and remain in their sinful course, without check, wounding, pricking and
remorse of conscience. Revel. 3.17.

Contra. the true knowledge of Christ and our selves, would humble us
Wherefore I say to you as Christ himself said to the woman, Joh. 4.10. If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee Give me water, thou
would ask of him, etc. So if we knew what a precious gift Christ is to us,
what a glorious holy God he is in himself, etc. and so withal saw our own need
of him, we would seek to him, in all humility and self-denial we would buy of
him, etc. as his own counsel to us is, Revel. 3.18. yea we would repent, verse
19, and be vile in our own eyes: we would mourn whilst we looked on him whom we
have crucified, etc. as Zech. 12.10. we would be pierced to the heart, and cry
out, Away with all privileges, power of will, goodness of nature, legal
righteousness, civilities, formalities; yea, away with Scepters, Kingdoms,
Crowns, all; give me Christ, or else I die: none but Christ, nothing but
Christ, etc.

4 Use, for us Ministers to teach such doctrine as may humble men,
4 Use. Now that you may thus do, it concerns us in duty to God, and love to
your souls, to teach such doctrine as this to you; and, as we desire the
conversion and salvation of your souls, we must make Christ fully known unto
you, and accordingly seek to prepare you for him, by beating down the pride of
your own conceits, and all high thoughts and imaginations, by beating you off
your own bottoms. Our duty is to form Christ in you, Gal. 4.19, which cannot be
done till ye be nothing in your selves; and form Christ in them.
as in the creation, the earth at first was rude and a confused chaos, out of
which all things were made: so all things must be defaced, even the goodly face
of your own righteousness and moral virtues, all high things and conceits must
be brought to rubbish, and levelled with the ground, before you can be made new
men, or Christ's image stamped on you.

You must then either give us leave, or we must take leave to tell you, even
you, as well as ( Peter told) the Jews, that you are the crucifiers of Christ
as well as the Jews; your sins brought him from the bosom of the Father to die
for them, being as it were the setters on and principals, An endeavor thus to
do,
whereas the Jews were but instruments and accessaries: they cried Crucify
him, crucify him, in the court of Pilate; but our sins cried Crucify him, in
the court of Heaven: yea, by charging men now to be the crucifiers of Christ,
still we pierce and wound him, as ill as they: they pierced him with a spear,
thorns and nails; we with reproaches: our sins are as the gall and vinegar to
him; and by yielding to sin in any kind, we so far, and as much as in us
lies, drive one nail more into his hands, yea the spear into his heart: yea,
so many sins, so many nails, thorns and spears. And, in plainer terms, let me
tell you, that he against whom you sin, is the Lord of glory: who is the Lord
of glory,
you cannot be so ignorant of it as the Jews were, you have often been told it,
you have seen his works in the Church, you profess to believe as much as these
converts here either saw or heard, on this day of Pentecost, the Son of the
eternal Father;
and therefore are less excuseable: It is no less then the eternal Son of the
eternal Father, whom you crucify afresh, and put to an open shame, Heb. 6 6.
It is no other then his Spirit which you grieve, then God whom you pierce. And
does not this pierce and wound you? as it did these here. Oh that I might see
it. Do not you, and to derogate from his glory, and to add to their own,
whilst they oppose his wisdom,
and are you not even they who derogate from his glory, and add to your own?
Do not you oppose your own widom to his, accounting your folly true wisdom, and
his wisdom folly? Do not you stand upon your own righteousness, good meanings,
civil life, formal Worship, and so far exclude his righteousness, as Paul did
before his conversion, righteousness, will and Sovereignty,
and generally the Pharisees? Yea, are not you those that oppose your selves
against him as your King, doing your own will more then his? yea, by exalting
your selves and the creature, do you not undermine his Sovereignty? I speak not
now, whilst I speak to you, of the more gross Idolater, the heathen or Papist,
who denying the sole Sovereignty of God over them, give and ascribe it, some to
Saints* Angels, and Images, by Invocation and Worship; some to the Pope on
earth by slavish subjection; honoring Idols,
nor yet only of such as, magnifying men more then God, serve other men's
humors, lusts, opinions: but are not you to whom I speak, many of you, such as
serve, prefer and obey your own lusts more then God, by your sensuality and
worldliness? and preferring their own will and lusts,
and so doing, do not you in effect say, Who is the Lord, or who is this
Christ, that we should obey him, or be subjected to him, that we cannot follow
our own delights, or do our own will for him? Let us break his cords, we will
not have him to rule over us. Thus, in true account, and as God takes it, you
say and do. Then let me tell you who this is against whom you thus, by and in
your pride and stoutnesse, and partly ignorance, do sin: It is Christ the Lord
of glory, a dreadful Majesty, even against the mighty God, and their Judge;
the Sovereign Lord, who is appointed to be your Judge, and who shall come in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance to all that know him not, nor obey his
Gospel. This is he whom you provoke, against whom you have so long trespassed,
whom you have so much dishonored, whom you have crucified and persecuted in
his Saints and people, whom you as little know or respect as himself, who yet
are of price and worth to him, and as dear as the apple of his own eye, whose
wrongs he is sensible of as done to himself, and which accordingly he will
avenge. Isai. 57.3, 4.

But do you consider this? are you convinced of it? Let the daunkard then,
which should be considered.
the unclean person and voluptuous, the profaner of the Lords Name and Sabbath,
and every sinner, know, and that assuredly, that God has made this same Jesus,
whom ye thus crucify and wound, both Lord and Christ, the glorious and
dreadful Judge of quick and dead. Does not this strike terror into your
hearts? does it not prick, wound and sting your conscience? God expects it
should. If he have winked at the former times of your ignorance, Act. 17.30, 31,
yet now he commands all men every where to repent; because he has appointed
a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom
he has ordained, etc. An dear brethren, let us not mock when we hear these
things, or put off repentance as if ye cared not much whether ye perform it or
no, with the Athenians, who heard these things from Paul, and 32,
and said, We will hear thee again of this matter: 34.
but rather with Dionysius and Damaris there, and others, Let us cleave to
Paul, and believe; and with these converts here, cleave and cling to Peter, out
of true compunction of heart, and repent, saying to him, and to such as now are
in place of him, even Gods faithful servants and our teachers, who so tell us,
Men and brethren, what shall w do? Ah that I could see such blessed effects of
the self-same doctrine.

And so, having in a manner done with the instrumental cause of this
Compunction and Conversion of these Jews, which was their hearing of Gods word
preached, we come to the effects of the same, the first whereof is to be
considered in that which they suffered, expressed in these words: (...).
They were pricked in their heart.

CHAP. V.
SECT. 1. The effect of saving hearing, is pricking of heart.
THis pricking in heart notes an Inward Conviction of conscience, 2. The
effects of this their hearing. 1. What they suffered.
whereby they came at once, in the acknowledgement of Christ and his glory, to
see their horrible sin in murdering and crucifying of him, and their own
deserved condemnation thereby, so bringing the curse of the Law home to their
own consciences, They were pricked in heart savingly,
as not able any longer to put by the thrust, as I may call it, or the dint of
Peter's accusation, which came as a dagger to the heart, and struck them both
with fear of wrath, through a consciousnesse of this their heinous sin of
murder, and parricide; and with hearty grief and sorrow for their sin, not
without some mixture of hope, which made them enquire after a remedy, and say,
What shall we do? Wherein this pricking of heart differs from that cutting to
the heart which was in others of the Jews, Acts 7.54, who being alike charged
by Steven, as these were by Peter, with the murder of Christ, verse 52; yet, as
others by the same word were cut to the heart deadly, Act ^^.52, 54-58.
not convinced that Jesus was the Messiah or Christ, and so that they were
murderers of their Savior, they inwardly justifying themselves, when they
heard these things, were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their
teeth, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him to death, as taking ill at
his hands thus falsely, as they conceived, to be charged. So that the same Word
had a different effect in the Jews in regard of the issue, though all of them
were some way or other pricked in heart, yea cut and wounded; the same Word
proving the savor of life to the one and of death to the other; true
compunction of heart in the one, where was sorrow not only in fear of
punishment, but also in desire, general hope, and some apprehension of
goodness and mercy in God, which assuaged their fears: but in the other a
senseless security and benummednesse of soul, not to see their sin and danger,
with grief and anger only so to be charged. And so, in the one was true
compunction of spirit or of heart, (whereby the Aposteme of it was opened, as
by the prick of a sharp instrument, and the corruption of it discovered; yea,
whereby the heart became sick of the love of God, and desire after him, as the
least prick at the heart causes a present fit of sickness); and in the other,
(...). Romans 11.8. Isai. 6.9.
a spirit only of compunction or remorse, as it may be called, or rather, as
it is translated in our Bible, a spirit of slumber, whereby God gave them eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, even a spirit of
slumber, sottishness, want of spiritual senses, and blindness, not to see the
light of Truth and of the Word, which yet pricked their hearts, as the light of
the sun does fore eyes; yea, cut them to the heart through the accusations, if
not convictions of it, though they still remained stupid, and accordingly
perished. It concerns us then to see how we hear, that we melt by it as was,
and be not clay.

Now for this pricking mentioned in my Text, it proved a saving and healing
wound: And we will now consider it according to three several Relations. This
pricking considered according to three Relations.
First, to Peter's Sermon, as an effect of it: Secondly, to the sinners
themselves, as a fruit and consequent of their sin, and so as an affection of
sorrow in the subject or convicted sinner: Thirdly, and chiefly, to the whole
work of Conversion, as the first degree and beginning of the same, and as a
preparative to Christ and to salvation.

CHAP V. SECT. 11. Pricking of heart considered as the work of the word, and of
the best kind of preaching.
1 To Peter's sermon, as an effect of it. Note. The best kind of preaching is
that which pricks the heart. 1 in what respects. 2 For what reasons. God
himself uses this method. 1 the Father.
1 AS this pricking in heart is an effect of Peter's Sermon, it will teach us
this lesson, that

The best kind of teaching and preaching is that which pricks men's hearts, and
touches, wounds and convinces their consciences.

I call it best, and that both in regard of Gods glory, whose word is thus by
convincing men most magnified, whether it prove the savor of life or of death,
seeing men once convinced by it, God can more glorify himself whether in his
mercy or justice manifested toward convicted sinners; and also in regard of
our good and conversion; and that for these reasons.

1. Because this course is according to Gods own order in the conversion of
souls; 1 God convinced Adams conscience, and so prepared him for the promise of
the Messiah.

2 Christ began his Ministry by preaching repentance, 2 Son.
Matthew. 4.17. he so dealt with the Jews, and with the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4,
18.

3 yea the comforter.
3 Yea the first work of the Comforter is to convince men of sin to their
condemnation, before he convince them in their judgment of righteousness in
Christ to their justification. see John 16.8.9.10. for indeed there is no true
consolation but out of deep humiliation, no true joy and comfort but such as
issues out of straits of conscience (if we speak of men capable) and legal
convictions, The spirit before it comfort, it shakes a man and makes him fear;
see Hebr. 2.14. etc.

Its a course which God prescribes us his Ministers to use, even to cry aloud
and not to spare, to tell men of their sins, 2 God prescribes the use of it.
to cause them to know their abominations, and to give them warning of their
danger, Isa. 58.1, 2. Ezekiel. 3.17. and 16.2.

3 he blesses it.
3 Lastly its that method which God most blesses, as in Nathans plain dealing
with David, thou art the man, and in other Prophets, and in the Baptists
preaching, Use. 1 For Ministers. thus to preach, and to leave stings behind
them.
Matthew. 3.7 8.9.10. or Luke 3.7.8 9. with 10, 11, etc. and in his Apostles
preaching here.

Use 1. It is for the direction of us Ministers, who as occasion serves, must
be full of the wrath of the Lord, not preaching pleasing things to tickle the
ear, but sound, saving and wholesome things to prick and wound the heart,
leaving stings behind us in men's hearts, before we bring honey to please their
taste; first using corrosives by pouring in wine, then lenitives and oil to
supple and heal. The words of the wise says Solomon are as goads and as nails
fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, whech are given from one shepherd:
Eccles. 12, 11. Jer. 23.29.
yea Gods word in the mouth of his servants is like a hammer, not only to
break the rock in pieces, but to drive in those nails even to the head, into
men's not skins only (goads pierce the skin) but flesh and hearts too, thence
to fetch and draw tears, which Saint Augustine calls the blood of the soul.
Our manner of teaching should be such as not to seek applause to our selves,
but sobs and tears in you; our praise should be your tears: your sighs, not
your hemms, not the clapping of your hands, To wring tears from their hearers.
or Plaudite, as at a play, but the knocking of your breasts, and Plangite, as
at a funeral. It was said of one after an oration made to the people of
Athens, that he left certain stings in their minds: so did Peter here, and so
should we send you home as much as we can weeping to your closets, Pericles.
in a sense of sin and danger, and so should we wield this sword of the
spirit as to aim chiefly at your hearts, and so steadfastly and strongly follow
home the thrust, (like Masters of defense) as not to suffer you to put it by,
And to convince. 1 Samuel 15.13. 14. etc. Though such conviction prove not
saving. Genesis 4.7. Call to Newcastle, or methods for discovery of sin in the
Ministers method
by your shifts, evasions, excuses, extenuations, justifications, no more (if
we had the skill) then Samuel would suffer King Saul to evade him, till he had
convinced him and brought him to confess his sin. And this we must do though
our reproofs and convictions do not always prove saving: so did not Samuels:
so did not Gods own reproof and conviction of Cain: And Stephens reproof and
conviction of the Jews, to be the murderers of Christ, had not the same effect
with Peter's here: it was the same sword or word of God, but with the point it
pricked the one savingly, and with the one or both of the edges of it, it,
(being not kindly received) cut the other to the heart, and wo^unded them
mortally; 2 For hearers, 1 to submit meekly to the reproofs of the word.
but of this more elsewhere.

2 This teaches you to desire such kind of teaching, not to be displeased with
such as so faithfully deal with your souls, and to learn of these here, who
though deeply charged by Peter, yea pricked and wounded, did not rise against
him or say, what or who is he, this that thus boldly charge us? but meekly
receiving the word of reproof, and as guilty persons convinced of their sins,
what shall we do? its true alas, we indeed are guilty, neither should you show
your selves unwilling to have your wounds searched to the bottom, 2 Therefore
the law is now to be taught under the Gospel. 3 Its a good sign to be pricked.
Treat on Ezekiel. 16.2. or Gods charge to his Messengers concerning conviction of
sinners p. 237. etc.
or to have your sins discovered, and brought to trial, seeing all sin is a
traitor to God and his glory; and by your unwillingnesse to have it found and
brought to judgment, you make your selves more guilty. But of this, as also
other uses concerning the needfulnesse, much more lawfulness of preaching the
Law, now in time of the Gospel, not to justification but to the conviction of
sinners and to prepare and bring them to Christ; as also that it is no ill
sign simply to be met withal, netled, pricked and troubled in conscience by
the word, so that we seek or accept of ease and help by the word: I say of
these and such like uses elsewhere more largely and purposedly.

CHAP. V. SECT. 3. Pricking of heart considered as the fruit of sin, and that
sin carries a sting with it.
2 The second relation which this Pricking has, is to the sinners themselves
and to their sins.
THE second Relation that this pricking has, is to the sinners themselves and
to their sin, the fruit whereof we see is at best sorrow, fear, pricking and
wounding of the heart and spirit. The word they heard brought to remembrance
their sin, and their sin presented them with wrath, and so their heart is
struck with horror, fear, amazement and confusion; the conscience awakened
would not suffer them any longer to rest or find content in their present
condition, they were stung, and till they got ease, in a very hell. Thus it was
with these Converts here, what will then be the condition and sorrows of such
as do remain, live and dye impenitent?

Let it then be hence observed, that sin must never want sorrow, Observe.
Sin carries a sting with it, never wants sorrow.
it carries a sting with it, which will show it self at one time or other. Its
like those locusts spoken of Revel. 9.7.10. which have faces like men, but
stings in their tails like scorpions. Such a thing is sin, though at first it
may seem to have a beautiful face and appearance, yet such as dally with it
will find it will leave pricks at least, and venomous wounds in the conscience,
such as have been named. And though the conscience at length grow to be seared,
Though the conscience be seared and senseles sometime; yet it will awaken here
or in hell.
yet not only the searing of it is not without pain or without many conflicts
and terrors before it be deprived of all fence, but God after awakens it to
feel the horror of hell even in this life, though he deny such repentance, as
we see Judas, (Julian, Nero, Brutus) King Saul, who having an evil spirit which
formerly had haunted him, yet though (as Brutus his malus Genius or Ghost which
haunted him at Rome having for a while left him, yet met with him at Philippi a
little before his death) though I say it left Saul often, yet often it
returned, especially at Endor, where Satan in the likeness of Samuel told him
that to morrow he should be with him, 1. Sam. 28, 29.20.
which struck him with horrible amazement, as there was cause.

Let this be thought on by all such as can find no delight in any thing but in
sin, Use. For such as delight in sin to expect bitterness. Prove. 9.17.18.
or so far as there is sin in the same. The forbidden fruit seemed (even
because forbidden) to promise more delight then all other trees, yet it proved
bitterness in the end; as sin will do; so stolen waters and bread of deceit
end in hell: and prove like poison given in sugar, which may go down sweetly,
Which young men. Eccles. 11.9.
but kindles a fire in the bowels, and bereaves of life. Think of this you
young men and rejoice -- but know etc. as you have lately heard: remember the
threefold sting which accompanied and followed that of sin, especially that of
Conscience and of eternal torments. Think of this ye Joviall and merry men of
the world: and merry men should think of,
how can ye be merry when so many thousand woes, curses and vengeances belong
unto you, and hang over your heads? sorrow you will find enough one day, which
may be to you without repentance: but know assuredly that true repentance and
conversion cannot be without sorrow: seeing then sorrow must and will follow
sin, And either by godly sorrow in time to prevent it
1 Learn in time to sorrow soundly for sin, to be pricked, wounded and in
heart truly grieved for your sin: for such sorrow only will prove saving,
and prepare you for through conversion and for sound and lasting joy, as in
these converts here.

2 Otherwise know that you will gain nothing by sin or by living in it. 2 Or
assuredly to to look for it.
Grief of heart and pricking and wounding of the soul in some measure is the
easiest, which if you be afraid of choosing rather to enjoy your ease,
pleasures, liberties, then to be interrupted in the same by godly sorrow, There
is nothing gained by sin.
then expect nothing in the end but hellish horror, terrors and torments, not
a pricking but piercing of the heart, a breaking, an opening, a cutting, a
cleaving of it, it may be even in this life; and then a wounded spirit who can
hear? Prove. 18.14.
but assuredly hereafter and for ever in hell.

For the prevention of which consider now well, what you do, what will be the
end of your courses, what the bitter and accursed fruits of your sins, and of
your smothering of the checks of your conscience. Be now in time sensible of
these things, and consider this you that make nothing or but a jest of sin or
of conscience.

Take heed of lading, A wounded name, estate and broken bones, nothing to the
wounding of the spirit. Psalm. 38.4.
wounding and piercing your souls by voluntary and wilful transgressions. The
soul hereby though for the present it be not perhaps so sensible, yet
insensibly is wounded, and burdened with the guiltiness of sin, whereby
wrath is a treasuring up, the burden increases so long till at length your
iniquities grow and go over your heads, and as an heavy burden prove too heavy
for you. Sin long harbored within, will at length fester, break out into
torments, and in a word prove the death of the soul eternally.

The madness of men in falling into the greater evil for avoiding the less.
How is it to be wished then that men were as sensible of pricks and wounds in
their hearts and spirits (which by sin are always made, though not perceived
or believed) or that they feared these half so much as they do a wounded body,
estate or name; how sensible are men of the one and how fearlesse of the other!
hence they receive wounds on the inside and gashes in their consciences, that
the outside may be saved: they will steal and do wrong to prevent poverty, and
yet poverty no such burden as the guilt of theft, they lie, will falsify
word, promise and oath to prevent or get out of debt; and yet debt with man is
no such burden as debt with God, which will exclude them out of heaven. They
will voluntarily smother the checks of conscience, and repel the reproofs of
the word that they may sin more securely, and with less trouble; and yet
this fire which thus smothered will once, yea and for ever break out into
flames, does infinitely surpass that small seeming sorrow or lesser prickings
which are in repentance. They will go to witches to gain health, and yet no
sickness so ill as to be the devils devoted slave: yea to save their skin,
their liberties, their offices, and to avoid reproach for Christ and
persecution, they will deny the truth of God, and give the soul a thousand
gashes to keep the skin whole; and yet no loss to that of the soul. Mark 8.36.
What madness Mr. Harris of a wounded spirit
says one is this? This is to prick the hand to save the glove; to hazard the
head for the saving of the hat or of a feather; to prick and wound the heart,
yea to kill the soul rather then to forgo a little vain and sinful pleasure,
gain or honor; alas! they know not yet, neither will they be told what the
sorrows of a wounded spirit and conscience mean, when God shall set himself
against them, yea them against themselves, making them a terror to themselves.
A wounded name, estate, leg or arm wounded or broken may be born, but who can
bear a wounded spirit, says Solomon? when the bones within are broken, will it
not cause roaring? ask David Psalm. 32.3.4. and 51.8. ask Hezekiah Isa. 38.13.
And yet what is all this, to the eternal, endless and easelesse torments of
hell?

These things would be considered.
Oh consider this then, in time, you that are so secure and fearlesse, that care
not what you say or do, how many oaths you swear, how many Sabbaths and Sermons
you neglect, how many you cozen or wrong in their goods, name, chastity; your
sin one day will show it self in its colors, and your consciences will prove
burdens to you, heavier then mountains; your hard hearts shall be broken and
you crushed, punished, and tormened for ever. Rather in time choose to be (when
ye hear these things and in the timely belief of them) savingly pricked as
these here were, who in the apprehension of such effects of sin as you have
now heard, did presently seek to prevent them, and being thus pierced and
pricked, sought help and healing, which accordingly they presently found,
becoming true converts and partakers of Christ. And so leaving the
consideration of this sorrow as a bare affection in the sinner, The third
Relation of this pricking of heart is to the whole work of Conversion as the
beginning thereof.
and an effect of sin, we come to speak more of it in relation to this great
work of conversion, and as the first step and beginning thereof leading to
Christ and to salvation. So that taking these first words They were pricked in
heart, with those their other words following -- what shall we do? and (upon
direction given them) their doing accordingly, verse 38.39, etc. they will
afford unto us this observation, That a legal terror of conscience and sorrow
for sin through sense of misery thereby deserved, is the beginning of
Repentance, and first step to Conversion. So that we are occasioned here to
take notice, or at least to consider of the order of, conversion, and of the
steps and degrees thereof, and how men are brought to Christ, to faith and to
salvation, which we will speak of in its place, after some generals are first
observed.

CHAP. V. SECT. 4. Pricicking of heart considered as the first step to true
Conversion; And that Conversion must begin at the heart: with reasons and uses
of the point.
THe most general observation which we will hence first raise, is this, Doctr.
Conversion must begin at the heart.
that true and saving Conversion begins and must begin at the heart.

By heart in Scripture is generally meant the soul and all the several powers
and faculties of the same, as understanding, What is meant by heart here.
memory, conscience, will and affections jointly and severally, as might easily
be showed: but for our present use we here by heart chiefly understand the
Conscience, and will with the affections which by this pricking came both to be
pained, and to be severed and parted from sin which was all one with it, and
the corruption of the same to be let out. Yet I take, the Conscience here is
more specially meant, Especially the conscience.
as in David's case when he came to see and to be convinced of his sin of
Pride in numbering of the people, it is said and David's heart smote him -- and
David said; as these here were pricked in heart, and said, 2 Samuel 24.10.
etc. and we shall anon see that this pricking issued out of the conclusion of
that practical syllogism, which being thus convinced, their consciences made.

The heart in true conversion must first be pricked, wounded and put to pain,
as David was in his repentance, and as it was here with these Converts, yea and
as God requires of all true Penitents; Turn you even to me says the Lord by
Joel with all your heart -- and rent your heart and not your garments, Joel
2.12.13.
etc.

Reasons why? Reasons why. Hebr. 3.12. The heart is the First and chief
offender. Math. 15.18.19. It hatcheth and harbors sin. Jer. 4 14.
1 The heart is the first and chief offender: It first turns from God, and by
unbelief departs from him; if the body or bodily parts act any evil, that evil
is first hatched and forged in the heart, for out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies which defile a man, yea it is the heart that harbors sin and
evil thoughts, (as in a common June.) O Jerusalem wash thy heart from
wickedness -- how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge with. in thee? yea it is
the receptacle and lodging of the Devil himself who takes up the chief rooms
thereof, And Satan.
and fills the same. Act. 5.3. Joh. 13.2. The whole imagination (and all the
purposes and desires) of the thoughts of the heart are only evil continually.
Genesis 6.5. Its a proud heart festered.
The heart of man is a proud heart, swollen with pride as is a bladder, and
therefore stands need of pricking. It is a festered heart, full of corruption
and putrefying sores, and stands need of opening, searching and lancing by the
knife of the law, and sword of the spirit which is the word of God. It is a
hard heart hard as a stone, and stands need of breaking and bruising. There is
a stone in the heart, and hard heart. hard 1 as a stone.
the cure whereof is like that which is of the stone in the bladder: there must
be sharp incision, and God must come with his pulling and plucking instruments,
ere sin and that hardness can be got out of it. 2 as metal.
Yea It is hard as metal, men being said to have their necks as iron sin news,
and their brow brass, Isa. 48.4. Jer. 6.28.29.
whereby is meant the hardness of their hearts, and obstinacy; and to be
brass and iron, so that the founder often melts in vain, the bellows (that
is, the lungs of the Preacher) shall sooner be burnt, then the wicked and their
wickedness plucked away. Yet being so hard, it must be not only broken with
the hammer of the Law, but molten, if it be possible, with the fire (partly of
Gods judgments threatened by the Prophets, and in part executed by God himself,
who threatens to blow upon his obdurate people in the fire of his wrath, Ezekiel.
22.18-20, 21.
and to melt them in the midst thereof, but chiefly) of his love in the Gospel,
ere it can be cast into a new mold. It then especially musst be dealt withal in
the first place.

2. The heart is most acceptable to God.
2 The heart, of all other parts, is the most acceptable sacrifice to God,
indeed seasoning all the rest. God requires it as his sacrifice: My son, give
me thine heart, Prove. 23.26. Its that which every one accounts highly of. All
delight to have the hearts of men.
The Pope giving his devoted servants leave for a while to go to our Church in
England in the first years of Queen Elizabeth's reign, in the words now lastly
mentioned, required of his sons and children that (so doing) they should give
him their heart. He knew if he had their heart, he could soon command all the
rest. So the devil is well enough pleased to let his devoted servants make show
of Religion, or of some good duties, as of alms, good words, etc. so long as he
can keep their hearts glued first to any one or more lusts. The like I may say
of lovers, seeking chiefly to insinuate into the hearts, love and affections of
their beloved. Yea, great Kings on earth, who stand not in much need of their
meaner subjects, yet like well to be loved of all, and to have their hearts.

And even thus it is with God himself, who chiefly requires the heart, who
knows if it be wanting nothing can be sincere or lasting; and where it is, it
will bring on all the rest. The broken heart is Gods sacrifice.
He requires the heart as his sacrifice, for and in stead of a sacrifice, yea
before all sacrifice. But what heart? If the heart be a saccrifice, then, as
other sacrifices, it must be slain and mortified, at least, pierced and
wounded: It must be a broken heart, else it is not right. It is not whole or
entire with God, Non est Cor integrum, nisi sit scissum.
till it be broken and cut. Outward sacrifices (where beasts were slain and
offered) were but types of this sacrifice of a contrite heart: so that where
the heart was not contrite, the sacrifice was an abomination. To this man will
I look (says the Lord) even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at my word: But of others it is said, He that kills an ox, as if he
slew a man: Isai. 66.2, 3.
he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a dogs neck: he that offers an
oblation, as if he offered swines blood, etc. God will none of such sacrifices,
where the heart, which should give him praise and prayer, is wanting. Psalm.
50.9, 10-14, 15.
I will take no bullock out of thine house, etc. Offer unto God thanksgiving,
and pay thy vows unto the most High: And call upon me in the day of trouble.
and 51.16, 17.
So again, Thou desire not sacrifice (says David) else would I give it: thou
delightest not in burnt-offerings: The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a
broken and a contrite heart, O God thou will not despise. For, as one notes,
the visible sacrifice (of beasts slain) is but a Sacrament, August. l. 10. de
civit. cap. 5.
that is, a holy and sacred sign, of the invisible sacrifice (of the heart.)
Even as in Circumcision, God required chiefly and firstly the circumcision of
the heart, Deuteronomy. 10.16. by which is meant this pricking and cutting of the
heart. This is that true Circumcision which being in and from the heart, Romans
2.28, 29.
finds praise with God. This circumcised heart is the truly humbled heart,
unto which a promise and a blessing does belong. Levit. 26.41, 42. If their
uncircumcised heart be humbled, etc. or bowed down; or, at the Chaldee has it,
be broken: and it is opposed to pride: as when its said, 2 Chro. 52 26.
King Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride or lifting up of his heart. And so
it implies repentance and turning (in heart), to the Lord, as 2 Chronicles. 32.26.
Yet diverse of Ashur, etc. humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem (when
others mocked) as these here now were pricked, when formerly they or others
mocked. Hence it is truly said by one, God pours not the oil of his mercy,
Bern.
save into a broken vessel.

preposterous course of Popish penitentiaries, who professing compunction and
pricking of heart and spirit, 1. To confute Popish penitentiaries.
whip only, scourge and otherwise afflict the body, and make that a matter of
satisfaction and merit, and so under such show of austerity and humility,
Coloss. 2.
not sparing the body, they become vainly puffed up (with pride) in their
fleshly minds. They seem to show a kind of revenge, which yet is not against
their sins, lodged in the heart, which they spare, yea and fatten it in pride;
but only against their skins and carcases, which without the heart have done
little or nothing. Let the flesh be tamed, and outward senses restrained, as
cause shall require; but first let the heart and inward affections be mortified
and subdued, else it is but a mock-repentance. Page 34, 35.
But of this a little before.

2. To instruct and direct us to begin at the heart. So do true Converts.
2 A second Use is, to learn hence to begin our repentance and conversion at the
heart: so do true converts. First King David's heart smote him, then he
confessed, saying, I have sinned. The poor publican smote on his breast, and
then said, God be merciful to me a sinner: he by so smiting, aimed at the chief
offender. Their sorrow is in the heart before it be in the face or sour
countenance: as in a like case of Nehemiah, mourning for the afflictions of his
people, which the King took notice of, saying, Why is thy countenance sad?
Nehem. 2.2.
-- this is nothing but sorrow of heart. So it was with good King Josiah, who
in heart and soul first apprehending his and his peoples sins, and the wrath of
God due to the same, then rends his clothes and weeps. Therefore says God, 2
Chro. 34.27.
Because thine heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self ( i. e. in
heart first) before God, -- and did rend thy clothes and weep, etc. As
sadness of countenance in true penitents, argues and presupposes sorrow of
heart; and their sorrow is first in the heart, before it be in the garment: so
it is quite contrary with hypocrites; Not so hypocrites. Joel 2.12, 13.
to such God speaks by his Prophet Joel, saying, Turn unto me with all your
heart, -- and rend your hearts, and not your garments. The countenances of
hypocrites only are sad, but not their hearts; (like hired mourners.) Know we
then, Matthew. 6.
that outward expressions of sorrow are not further good, then so far only as
they come from inward grief and affection: as in these converts here, who by
saying What shall we do, showed much inward grief in the apprehension of wrath,
much fear, care, and anxiety of spirit: but then they were first upon such
apprehension and fear, pricked in their heart.

3 Exhortation to begin our reformation at the heart. Why?
3 Let us hence be exhorted to begin our conversion and reformation at the
heart: you have heard reason enough for it: otherwise it were but to lop off
boughs, and to leave the corrupt and bitter root; to purge the streams, when
the fountain and spring is muddy. In a word, it is the next way to hypocrisy
in conversion: its but an acting of humility, not a being humble: a show only
of humility and devotion, not the having of the grace of the same in the heart.
I say then, Humble your souls and hearts before the Lord: if ye would enter
into the Holiest, Heb. 10.19.22
draw near with a true heart, -- and have your hearts (first) sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and (then) your bodies washed with pure water: first be
renewed in the spirit of your minds, and then show your reformation without,
as Ephesians. 4.23. with 24, etc. and 28. Let him that stole, steal no more. This
is the right order, This is the right order:
first to change the heart, and then the life: first to hate sin in heart, and
then to leave it: first to fear an oath, and then to forbear swearing rashly:
first to loath drunkenness in heart, and to be touched with remorse of soul
for it, and then withal to give over drunkenness. Till this be done, that the
conscience inwardly be pricked and convinced of the vileness of every or any
sin, the life will never be thoroughly or constantly reformed, otherwise sin will
break out again. Simil.
(if then.) It is but as with the hand to hold down the water in a spring,
which will ever be springing up: or as by force to hold a blown bladder under
water, which will be bolting up again; whereas if it once be pricked, it will
with little ado be kept under, or sink of it self. This is the reason why we
Preachers, who truly intend and seek your true and through conversion, in our
applications and otherwise, do still aim at your hearts; it is the mark, the
butt, The heart the butt and white which godly Ministers chiefly aim a^;
yea the white which we chiefly shoot at, and direct the point and edge of the
sword of the Spirit, the Word of God against: till we pierce and hit that, we
think we have done nothing: Though, when we do only civilize you, and that
you, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 2.20.
escape the (common) pollutions of the world, it be also the work of our
Ministry, and tend to much outward order, peace and comeliness; yet alas! this
makes little for your inward peace and comfort, when thus by the over powering
force of the Word, you are curbed, kept in, and constrained as it were, through
fear or shame, to bite in your sins: where this is only, you will be ready to
be again entangled and overcome, and so your later end will be worse then the
beginning. Therefore our aim is still at the heart, as knowing that unless it
be pierced and wounded, sin still lives in you, and like a bitter and venomous
root, or corrupt spring, will ever be sprouting and sending out bitter fruit
and muddy waters: but if the heart once be savingly wounded, mortified,
cleansed, we know the outward man and conversation will soon be reformed, as
when the root is deaded, the fruit and leaves fall of themselves, and the
branches wither: if the fountain be once stopped, the streams soon dry up. which
makes them not so eager against the outward carriage and fashions of men always.
Will you then know why wise and discreet Preachers do not in their Reproofs
insist so much and so long and frequently at least in inveighing against men's
wearing of long hair, women's cut locks, men and women's garishnesse in their
attire and fashions, gestures, and outward unseemly behavior, some kinds of
sports, and abuse of lawful sports? Is it because they allow and applaud you in
such things? Nothing less: make not that ill use of our silence, or more
sparing reproofs. But know, the true reason hereof is, because we are assured
that if these things were outwardly reformed, and yet the heart not touched or
pricked, they like Samson's hair once clipped, would soon grow again: the heart
not mortified, all vice would be sprouting again: yea, to cry out against such
things, and not to convince the heart of the sinfulness and danger of them,
would never have any good effect. Nay, we may, I know, as well hope to rob a
bear of her whelps, as to make you leave such fashions, so long as your hearts
are set thereon: experience shows it. No arguments, persuasions, disswasives,
threatenings, though out of Gods Word, will prevail with men to leave such
fashions and customs, till the heart be wounded and pierced. And when this is
done, all these will, in great part, fall of themselves, and people will not be
ashamed to be out of the common and corrupt fashions and customs of the time.
Give us leave then to preach such Doctrines and make such Applications as may
be as hammers shall I say? yea, as goads and nails, as pricks and the point of
a sword to prick your hearts, and to touch you even in your best beloved sins,
that so we may take your hearts from off them, and make them bitter and
loathsome to you. The heart must indeed first be humbled, and then there will
follow moderation in outward things, and reformation of life and conversation,
and the outward behavior will suit well with the inward disposition of the
humbled heart; the heart, as the first or master-wheel in the clock, being well
set, will order both the tongue, as the bell, and conversation and outward
behavior, as the hand and pointer: there will be a consonancie among them. Let
no man then deceive himself, and tell me he thanks God his heart is good to God
ward, and he has a good heart and meaning, howsoever he outwardly frame to the
times and common customs of the world: if the heart were so good as is
pretended, the hand, tongue, eye, and generally the whole outward conversation
would not be so dissonant, at least so much and so constantly, as is in many
who yet brag much of that which few sees, of their good hearts.

Now as saving Conversion must begin at the heart, so it would not be much out
of our way to observe, that it, and all the consequents of it, all the comforts
of a regenerate condition, and all the happiness of heaven, All Comforts begin
with some sorrow, as All Sin ends in sorrow.
begins with pricking and wounding, with sorrow and compunction. Wherein God is
contrary to the devil, the world, and sin, which make offer and promise of much
pleasure, gain and honor at the first; and men find some such like thing at
first, as gives content to their sensual desires and corrupt taste: but all at
the last ends in bitterness and sorrow endless and easelesse: Neither do such
things long enjoyed, See this in Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16.25.
give that content they promised; as on the other side, such as make trial of
the ways of God, find much more content in and comfort from them, then they
could have expected, finding themselves to have been worse afraid then hurt.
This should teach us wisdom, and not, either to be led away with pleasures
present, or to be so out of love with Gods ways. But I hasten.

CHAP. VI. How Peter's Converts came to be pricked in conscience.
BEfore we particularly show the Order and Degrees of Conversion. It would
first be inquired and considered, How these converts came to be pricked. Answ.
how these Converts here upon Peter's Sermon came thus to be pricked? I answer:
They (God opening their hearts as he did Lydia's to attend) came, upon Peter's
wise and skillful handling and applying of the sharp sword of the spirit, or
word of God, (which pierces to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit and by
piercing pricketh) at once to see and be convinced within themselves of their
sin against Christ in crucifying of him, 1 General.
and of Gods wrath thereupon and vengeance hanging over their heads, and of
their own just damnation, and hereupon were pricked in heart, struck with fear,
and made sorrowful. When Peter so deeply charged them that they were the
crucifiers of Christ, they knew well and remembered that they indeed had desired
Pilate to crucify him, and now hearing (and by such apparent signs from
heaven as on that day, which in some degree had astonished them all) seeing a
divine power therein and being told that it was Jesus now exalted to glory,
Verse 33.
who shed forth that which they did now see and hear, and apprehending him to
be indeed a King, the Christ, and that Lord who now as David foretold did sit
at the right hand of God; they are afraid of him as of an avenger now reigning
in heaven, whom on earth as a bountiful and merciful Savior they contemned
and slew.

2 Particular. By being convinced of their sin. 1 Of murder. 2 Parricide.
More particularly, they hearing and generally believing that to be true, which
they were told concerning Christ's glory, do see, and are convinced. 1 Of sin:
their sin. 1 Of murder, whereby they procured or consented to the death of
Jesus as a man, yea an innocent man. 2 Of Parricide, and withal of extreme
ingratitude and unthankfulness, in crucifying him as Jesus, as a Savior, yea
as their own Jesus who came to save them. 3 Of Infidelity, and unbelief,
whereby they so long had rejected him their only Messiah or Christ, 3 Of
unbelief.
refusing him that spoke unto them, and whom God had anointed to be their
teacher or their Prophet, 4 Disobedience.
and their Priest, yea King. 4 Of Disobedience in not submitting themselves to
him as their Lord and King. 5 Of Impenitency, 5 Impenitency.
obstinacy, and hardness of heart, in not repenting and relenting at his
doctrine and preaching, who was incarnate and came into the world to call them
to repentance. 6 Ignorance. 1 Cor. 2.8.
6 Lastly of their Ignorance of him as Lord of glory, whom if so they had
sooner known to be, they would not have crucified him. But now conceiving of
him as Lord and Christ, they are wounded and pricked in that they wounded and
pierced him. Even as Paul's conscience was touched a little after he had reviled
the high Priest, when once he came to know him so to be, Act. 23.5.
but much more when he came first to know Christ, and that it was he, even the
Lord of glory whom he persecuted in his ignorance and unbelief, Act. 9.5.6. 1 Timothy 1.13.

2 of judgment which made them 1 fear,
2 These Jews (thus convinced of their sin) 1 fear and quake in apprehension
of Gods judgments due to such grievous sins and offenses, as have been
named, whilst they now see that, as Christ himself told Paul afterward, they
did all this while but kick against the pricks, and run upon their own death
and destruction in provoking the mighty God and Christ their Lord and King
against them. Now they look upon him whom they had peirced and see him whom
they slew to be one who being Lord of heaven and earth, was able, (yea for
ought they then saw) ready to destroy them in souls and bodies, and therefore
they tremble.

2 Despair of themselves.
2 Yea they withal despair in themselves, and see themselves unworthy of that
salvation which they rejected, and are at their wits end, not knowing what to
do to undo what they have done, or to appease Gods wrath.

Thus they came to be perplexed, troubled and sorrowful, and pricked in heart.
3 Sorrow.


They came thus to be pricked by reasoning within themselves.
Now this was done by a kind of reasoning with themselves and communing with
their own hearts by a practical syllogism; The Proposition whereof the Law
written in their hearts, and word of God afforded them; in effect this:
Murderers, especially of their Savior, and of the Lord of life, are under the
curse, Gal. 3.10. and no murderer (or none that hates his brother) has
eternal life abiding in him, John 3.15. But says Peter and their own
consciences, We are murderers, and that even of Christ: then follows the
conclusion, Therefore we are under the curse, and debarred of life.

Now out of this conclusion made by conscience, follows in the affections,
fear, despair in themselves, sorrow, horror, and perplexity, in a word,
wounding and pricking, and it is as when an evil doer, a secure sinner, thief
or murderer, Out of the conclusion of which syllogisine issued this pricking.
is apprehended and brought to the bar, where the Judge giving the charge,
declares what is Law, what sins and crimes are against Law and by Law deserve
death: after which the Malefactor is accused of such crimes as deserve death,
and by sufficient witness proved to be guilty, and he himself cannot deny the
fact: whereupon the Judge passes sentence of condemnation and of death: at
which the party is stricken with astonishment, and pricked at heart as with the
point of a sword. Such is the work of conscience in sinners, the same
conscience being as a Law to inlighten and to judge generally of good and evil,
it is also a witness to convince, and lastly a Judge to give sentence against
it self, and so to terrify.

Thus it was with these Jews: and no otherwise it is with other Converts, as
comes now to be showed, so that looking on this pricking of heart, as the
beginning of, or first step to conversion, we do raise and make this General
observation following, namely that,

CHAP. VII.
SECT. 1. That all true Converts must first be pricked in heart: Hence.
with the explication of the point.
True Converts must first be pricked in heart.
SVch as God will convert and save, must less or more be first pricked in
heart for their sin. Such as to whom God intends to show mercy must in some
measure be troubled in mind and conscience in sight of their sin and misery.
So that so long as sin never troubles men, there is no conversion, as we see
in those many other Jews, who hearing the same Sermon, yet were nothing moved.

The method of handling this point.
Concerning this large and useful point of Doctrine we will proceed in this
method, first to show the truth of it, and that it is so, (the (...). 2 then
the or) reasons why it is so. 3. the ((...) or) manner, order and degrees and
steps of conversion, 4. The ((...) or) the uses of the point, and so we are to
give you this point with its 1. Explication. 2. Illustration. 3. Demonstration.
1 The Explication of it. 1 Its not meant of infants so dying.
4. Application.

1 For the explication of this point, it holds true in men, 1 Of age and
understanding, living under the means: I do not say that elect Infants dying in
the womb, birth, or in their Infancy, have such prickings or convictions of
conscience, as having no knowledge of sin or of wrath and judgments. Gods
work on them is a work of mercy, not so much of power, whereby through the
spirit more immediately without the word he both imputes Christ and the
benefits of his death to them by virtue of his covenant and free promise, How
Infants are converted.
and sanctifies them in the womb, or after, (but not always in outward baptism)
by a habitual principle of grace wrought immediately by the Spirit of Christ
which, was merited for them as well as for others, and is accordingly given and
applied to them by it; whereby as members of Christ they as well as others, 1
Cor. 12.13.
by one spirit are baptized into one body -- and are made to drink into one
spirit.

2 It holds not on the contrary, that all that are pricked in conscience shall
be converted.
2 I do not say on the contrary that all such as are pricked in conscience or
troubled for sin, are therefore or shall certainly be converted or saved,
unless their trouble proceed orderly and to such a degree of contrition as to
which the promise does belong, and may be proved otherwise in regard of other
graces concomitant to be saving: of which trialls and measure of saving sorrow
hereafter.

Much more then a bare legal terror of conscience, and other works are
required in true Converts.

That the Impenitent, wicked and reprobate may be pricked, It is plain: All
come not to it, as being given over to a reprobate mind and shut up in
hardness of heart; yet many who come to it yet go no further, and so they
miscarry in the end: as we see in King Ahab, who was humbled when he heard of
Gods judgment for killing of Naboth, As we see in King Ahab.
yet returned to other like sin, hating Michaiah and perished in the guilt of
it unrepented; so in King Saul who was pricked and relented after he had
wronged David, King Saul.
and yet saw David's integrity, yea he wept, and yet returned to that sin of
persecuting him. So many after their sin of dunkennesse, whoring, murder,
have no doubt some legal qualmes of conscience, some fits, some stirrings and
stingings thereof, but no more, as we see in Felix, Felix. Acts. 24.25.
who hearing Paul reason of righteousness, temperance and Judgment to come,
trembled: yet he shuffled off the matter and continued in his unrighteousnes,
Intemperance as we may well deem, and in his security without fear of Gods
judgments: otherwise he would neither have expected money as a bribe that he
might loose Paul, nor yet have left him bound to gratify others. And what
think we of Cain and Judas, both which confessed their sin to be great, Cain.
Judas.
and had horror thereupon and were wounded? yet Judas was a devil and died
desperately: Cain did wear it away as much as he could by building him a strong
City: The other Jews.
and though conscience of his sin still pursued him, he never truly repented,
but died a reprobate. And as we have heard before, diverse of the Jews who heard
Stephen preach to them and charge them with the death of Christ, as these here
were charged by Peter, seemed to be more then pricked, Acts 7.52.54
they were cut to the heart through the accusations and convictions of the
word, yet they sought not to the remedy as these here, but stoned Stephen and
so increased their own condemnation. Yea these here being pricked are yet verse
38. bid to repent. Lastly the very fiends of hell do tremble, The devil.
and yet are not capable of repentance. But speaking of men, we may conclude
that it falls out with many of them, These either despair,
as it does with some women, who in false conceptions and abortions though they
be put to grievous pains as much as they that come to their full time, yet,
they miscarry in the birth: so these hypocrites sometime they be much abased by
the Law, yea even to despair, yet they are either swallowed up in that pit, or
are healed slightly and so grow secure.
or else they have bin falsely healed with fair words by temporizing teachers
and popish mountebanks, and so in Gods wrath given up to security, imagining it
to be true peace of conscience; and to hardness of heart, sleeping and dying
in that senseles estate: or otherwise seek to put away such heart-qualms by
mirth, music, merry company, drinking, gaming, or by wordly employments, that
they may no longer hear the noise and cry of conscience within; or put away
their sorrow by following sports, etc.
dealing with their conscience as some with those poor innocent children, which
being sacrificed to Moloch in Topheth, whilst they were tormented in the brazen
bull or calf by fire put under, drums and other noise were used and raised, to
drown the cries of the poor infants, as well as the parents pity. Legal terror
then is but a common gift, and does not necessarily bring on conversion.

Quest. This pricking being but a common gift, what is the difference between
the elect and reprobate in their legal sorrow?
If you now ask me what may be the difference between one truly and savingly
pricked in conscience, and an hypocrite, between an elect child of God and a
reprobate, and how one may be known from another when and whilst they are both
wounded and pricked:

I answer, Its hard at first for a by-stander to judge of them, till the event
and effect of their sorrow, and other concomitants, do show the same: and so we
shall try it afterward. Only we may say there is a difference, though we
cannot for the present see it. Both may be under the spirit of bondage a while,
and apprehend slavish fear and terror of heart, as Romans 8.15. 2 Timothy 1.7. This
spirit of bondage is common to the elect with the reprobate, but with much
difference, 1. in regard of God, 2. themselves, and 3. the event and different
issue.

The difference is 1. in Gods intention, showed
1. Gods intent is not the same to both (which if it were, it should not be
frustrated:) and therefore as he intended the conversion of these here, so the
subversion of those other, Acts 7.54. we need not fear to say it. 1. in these
and those other Jews.
It appears by the Apostle, Romans 11.8. The rest were blinded, according as it
is written, God has given them the spirit of (...).
slumber (or, remorse) eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear unto this day: and as in Pharaoh, who though he could say I have
sinned, upon Moses his reprehension of him, yet he repented not: God raised him
up for another end; 2. in Pharaoh and David. Romans 9.17.
even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my power
in thee, etc. Yet look upon David, who upon Nathans reproof, whom God sent unto
him, repented. So in Ahab and Jezebel, the one humbled, 3. in Ahab and Hezekiah.
(and both raging against Elijah) compared with Hezekiah, touched, pricked and
pierced by Isaiah, and truly humbled for his pride. Romans 9.15.18.
God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.
The Spirit of God being promised as a Comforter, and that is only of the
elect, yet its first work is to convince them of sin, Joh. 16.8. Therefore as
in the resurrection of our bodies, Simil.
both the wicked and godly arise, and that by Gods power; but to different
ends, Joh. 5.29. and as God gives wealth to some as a blessing, to others as a
curse and snare; so it is here. A reprobate may be convinced of sin and
judgment, and see his damned condition, 4. generally in the elect and
reprobate.
but yet have no hope: a child of promise may also be lost in his own
apprehension and acknowledgement, yet in Gods intention shall be sought and
saved: Christ therefore came into the world to seek and save that which (thus)
was lost: and such an one shall undoubtedly be saved, and fully converted; Luke
19.10.
he shall come to Christ. In Gods intention, this, as a preparative act, shall
bring forth faith in the one, but not in the other: God means to follow home
the work in the one, not in the other. God wounds the one as a loving Surgeon,
to cure him; the other, as a just Judge, to kill him, yet justly, for his sin.
The one is pricked as with a needle, which prepares the way for the thread to
follow, and so he comes to be sewed as it were, and joined at length by faith
unto Christ: the other is like the cloth pricked with the same needle, but
without thread: he is left in the estate of slavish fear, whilst the other is
delivered from it by the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.17.
which, where it is given savingly, gives liberty.

2. The reprobate in their greatest fears of wrath, 2. in themselves.
show neither hatred of sin, as sin; (as Pharaoh, in his distress, Take away
not this sin, but this plague) nor love and desire of goodness; the heart
remains hard still, and seeks not to God. It is not so with the other.

3. The event is different: 3. in the event.
The one breaks through these straits, and is soundly converted: the other
sticks in the birth, and is held still in bondage (even in the midst of his
jollity.) But more of such differences hereafter.

Hence, another Question might be resolved, How came these here to be
converted, when those ot^^r, Acts 7, and the rest of these who heard Peter,
^aving the very same outward means, motives and arguments used to them, yea and
feeling the sting of the same reproof made by Steven, were not converted?

This difference is not from themselves, but from God.
Answ. In one word I answer: The difference is not made by man himself, by any
power of a man's own free will, but by God alone, and by the power of his free
grace. Who makes thee to differ? etc. See 1 Cor. 4.7. Conversion is a work as
well of mercy and love in God, as of his power, or of any power else; yea first
of mercy, then of power, as we shall see afterward. If there be any congruity
whether of time or any other circumstance or respect which may seem to sway the
balance in one more then in the other, whence is it but from Gods gracious
ordering, See Dr Pride. in Lect. 4. Arg. 1.
as also effectual working with it? But of this formerly. The Point thus
explained, would be illustrated.

CHAP. VII. SECT. 2. The former Point illustrated.
2. The Illustration of the Doctrine.
NOw for the Illustration of this Doctrine, it would be confidered that before a
man be converted unto God, he must be turned quite out of himself: he must
first see himself, what a vile and miserable wretch he is, and in what need he
stands of mercy. Sense of sin and misery, and self-conviction, must go before
through conversion; showed by allusions to Scripture,
And being naturally proud, self-conceited, secure, and ignorant of himself, he
must be made and brought to know himself as he is; his drowzie conscience must
be awakened and rowzed by the shrill trumpet of the Law; he must either set, or
have his sins set in order before him, and be presented with that fearful
spectacle of hell, death and condemnation, and so, as one self-convict and
self-condemned, must receive the sentence of death in himself, and see hell
opening her mouth wide to receive him: he must see his own miserable and withal
helpless condition: yea, before he be thoroughly converted, he must be not o^^ly
pricked in conscience, and broken, but bruised also, and beat as it w^^ into
powder (as are spices) by true Contrition; yea molten by the fire not only of
the Law, but also Gospel, upon some apprehension and hope of mercy, whereby he
may be made pliable and frameable to Gods will: his icy heart must be thawen.
These here not only quaked to consider whom they had crucified, even the Lord
of glory; but looking on him as the Messiah, Christ, and a Savior, they were
not without hope of help: and therefore, not seeing any means of help in
themselves, they seek direction from without themselves what to do to be
helped, not wholly despairing of all possibility of help, and so they ask,
saying, What shall we do? And this is the true pricking.

Look into examples. and by examples of Adam, Genesis 3.8, 9, 10, 15. Judge. 2.4,
5. and 1 Samuel 7.6. Israelites, and 12.19, 20.
Did not Adam find and see himself naked? was not he ashamed of himself, and
of that which he had done? Yea, was he not afraid (at the presence of the most
holy God) before he was comforted by the promise? Did not the people of Israel,
being reproved by an Angel, weep at Bochim? and after, at Mizpeh, did they not
draw water, and pour it (even tears of repentance) out before the Lord, as
water out of buckets, whilst they fasted and prayed? And did they not after,
fear and confess their sin? Did not David's heart smite him before he repented
of that his sin in numbering the people? And did he not, David, Psalm. 32.3, 4.
before he confessed and got ease in another case, roar all the day? Josiah, 2
Chro. 34.27.
How did Josiah's heart melt, and how did he weep upon hearing of Gods
threatenings? Did not Ephraim bemoan himself, and smite upon his thigh? Jer.
31.18, 19. these Jews. Zech. 12.10.
And was not that foretold, which here in my Text was in part effected, that
they should look on him whom they had pierced, and mourn, and so be pierced and
pricked themselves? And was not the ax laid to the root of the hearts of those
Jews whom John the Baptist converted? Luke 3.
Did not he convince them to be a generation of vipers, before they did flee
from the wrath to come? Did not penitent Mary wash Christ's feet with tears? Was
not Paul struck from heaven, Mary, Paul, Acts 9.6.
charged with persecution of Christ and his people, and so made to see his sin
before he was converted? Yea after, did not the sense of his sin make him cry
out, Miserable man that I am, Romans 7. and 2 Cor. 12.7, 8.
etc. yea and complain of a prick or thorn in the flesh, etc? And was not the
converted Jaylour in the like plight, the Jaylour, Act. 16.29, 30.
when the earth did quake under him, and his heart within him?

More examples need not. Psalm. 4.4.
We know that before we can cease to sin, we must tremble in the sight of
sin, and there must be a spirit of bondage unto fear before the spirit of
adoption to free us from that fear. Matthew. 11.29.
A man must be heavy laden before he can come to Christ, and lost (in his own
sense) before Christ seek and save him: sick and feel his sickness before he
seek to the Physician, and get cure to his wounded conscience as these here.

As then there is no birth without the pain of travail going before, Simil.
though some have easier labor then others, as the Hebrew women, Exodus 1. So
no true Repentance without some terrors of the Law. Think thou then to
convert and come to heaven, when these holy men so roared and were wounded?
can thou be saved in thy security and before thou be in thine own sense lost?

CHAP. VII. SECT. 3. That all in some measure must be pricked, though not all
alike; and why.
BUt to Illustrate and make this point more clear, we will first seek to
satisfy this main doubt and question which some make concerning this point of
doctrine; Quest. Whether all Converts are thus pricked and wounded. Reason of
this doubt.
whether all converted are necessarily subject to terrors of conscience?
whether all must be thus wounded, pricked, humbl'd, who are truly converted?
The reason of this doubt may be because many of whose sound coversion and
sincerity of grace and of repentance we have no cause to doubt, yet cannot
themselves name the time, means o^ instrument, or other circumstances of their
conversion, which in all likelihood, if it were truly effected, they could not
be ignorant of, or at least not easily forget, seeing conversion is our new
birth, and marriage to Christ, and few or none but can tell either by the
relation of witnesses or otherwise, their own age, and the time of their
marriage, place where and person by whom they were married: and we read of some
that have been made other men then formerly with little or no trouble of
conscience, as Matthew who at his first conversion as it is thought entertained
Christ with a feast, as Lydia did the Apostles. But I answer, Answ. All in some
measure must be pricked and troubled.
though I acknowledge a great difference in the manner and measure of this work
of conversion, yet it must not be denied but that for the substance of it there
must be at least some pricking, some griping of conscience and trouble of
thoughts. Even as there is no birth without some pain less or more both to the
mother and child if it come alive into the world (though sometime the extremity
of the birth and straits it pasteth makes it seem, yea the mother too as dead
for the time, after which yet the pains revive and return.)

which is showed 1 From Satan's opposition.
1 Can it be denied but we all naturally are by sin under the power of Satan,
Acts 26.18. who has got possession of us? and may we think he will willingly
without some violence and greater power part with his prey? and if so, must not
the poor soul which of it self is as willing as he to remain in its former
condition (as yet not knowing any better) must it not I say be miserably
distracted, and almost rent in pieces, as the poor lamb which David delivered
out of the jaw of the lion, and paw of the bear? will not Satan the strong man
like Pharaoh put his power out to the utmost to keep his hold and to keep out
the entry of the stronger? there may be peace till then, but no longer, til
it, after a full deliverance and freedom be better grounded and bottomed: the
Israelites in Egypt found their burdens increased ere they departed: so here.

II From that close union and marriage beween sin and the soul.
2 Is not sin and the soul in a manner all one before conversion? yea is not
sin, every sin which a man delights in, (and every man delights in some
sin more then other) as a God in him, commanding his thoughts and affections,
and is it not more and sooner obeyed then God himself? Now before a man be
converted unto God and made pliable to his will (as these Converts here were,
saying in a self denial, what shall we do? or as Paul was Acts 9.6. Lord, what
will thou have me to do?) he must be averted, which cannot be severed from the
soul.
yea and divided and separated from himself and his own will; and so that knot,
that union and oneness (so to call it) which was between the soul and sin,
comes in some measure to be broken, and the soul and sin to part, which how
can it be done! or how can the venom or corruption lying in the ventricles of
the soul be let out, without some pricking at least of the heart, if not some
deeper incision which therefore God is pleased to make use of, causing men to
feel the smart, piercing and woundings and burden of sin, that the soul may be
willing to part with it, or the soul divorced from sin,
and to be severed from it, which, if it (as formerly) found only delight,
ease, and pleasure in, it would never yield or submit it self to the obedience
of Christ; such pricking, wounding and sorrow must first make the divorce
between the soul and sin, without pain.
ere ever it consent to marry to Christ. Now can there be a divorce wrought
between loving couples (otherwise most loath thereunto) without sorrow? ask
Phaltiel who being married to Michal, when David her first husband sent for
her, 2 Samuel 3.16.
went with her along weeping behind her.

3 From the nature of Conversion which is such a change, as a man cannot but be
sensible of it, first or last.
3 This brings us to consider of the nature of conversion, which implies as
much as I intend, which being a change from darkness to light, from bondage to
liberty, in a word from one contrary to another, how should a man discern of
his contrary new estate without feeling in some measure the horror of his
former condition under darkness and bondage? at least he can have no comfort
in his Conversion unless he find and feel a difference between the one estate
and the other, which cannot be felt without some shaking and affrightment: as
he apprehends the greatness of the benefit of his deliverance by Christ, so is
he touched with a proportionable fence of his danger, either imminent or
passed: as we have heard of some who having at first in their sleep, drink, or
otherwise ignorance passed some very great danger, as over some narrow, or
broken and cracked bridge, pit, or the like, being brought after to see their
danger, they have quaked, trembled, been amazed, if they have not wholly
expired and given up the Ghost. Thus such as perhaps at the very first are not
so sensible of their dangerous condition, or yet of their change as others are,
Christ being truly in them, yet afterward when they come to better
consideration and deeper apprehension of their ways and former dangers, they
find a proportionable measure of inward trouble, terror, yea and grief for
such their heinous offenses whereof they were not so sensible before: and so
they have their portion of terror first or last, in less, or greater measure.

Lastly, whom does Christ call to Repentance? 4 From Christ's calling of such.
Matthew. 9.13. Even of such only, as are sinners and laden. and 11.29. Lost
enemies. 2 Cor. 5 Isa. 27.5. in bondage. Rom 8.15. 2 Timothy 1.
he came to call sinners to repentance, such as in their own sense are sinners,
and if Christ call none but such to repentance, who can have repentance but
such? yea but such as are heavy laden with sin, and sense of Gods wrath for
sin, for these (and such only) he calls also to come unto him. And as he
came to call such, so to save the lost sheep: but who are these, but such as
feel themselves to be lost? Christ calls and sends his Ministers to call us to
be reconciled to him, and to make peace with him: but who will ever thus do,
that does not first find and feel himself under his displeasure? and can a man
find that and not be troubled? he calls us to liberty, and must we not then
first be under the spirit of bondage, and that unto fear? In a word how can any
either hunger after Christ, or prize him aright as a Savior and Redeemer, till
they, through fence of misery, and of their hopeless, helpless, worthless,
and desperate condition, see their need of him? or who will ever fly to him
till by the Law as by a Schoolmaster, discovering their fearful condition to
them, they be whipped and scourged and so forced to go out of themselves to
him? This Law then must go before, and as the needle by pricking does pierce
the cloth and make way for the thread to follow and sow, so it must prepare the
way for faith to follow, by which we are knit to Christ: otherwise we would
prove but loose Christians, and break off when we list, as we know many
Libertins to do, who tell us much of comfort, and joy they find in and by
Christ and his Spirit, but neither they nor any other can tell us of any
sorrow, wounding, or pricking going before. I shall ever suspect that joy, yea
that Conversion, which issues not in some measure, out of true sorrow,
pricking, compunction, and contrition for sin. Its but a dream of joy, and a
false conception and birth.

This point yet further cleared, and it showed that though all be wounded, yet
not all alike.
Here then for the further clearing of this point of doctrine, we must know that
all who are truly converted do not suffer trouble and terror of conscience in
the same measure or yet manner, neither does God deal with all alike; some are
pricked only as with a Pin, others as with a spear, yet all pricked. There
are three degrees, as in diverse Resemblances.
and all of them saving, by Gods mercy. 1 A pricking, as in my text, wherein
were some grudgings of conscience, and such a hurt as was presently healed
again, and they filled with the holy Ghost, 2 A wounding or a wounded spirit,
and who can bear that? such as was sometime in Job and David from whom God
seemed to withdraw himself by forsaking them, etc. and in such as wrestle long
with God, yea and with diffidence in themselves, even many years before they
can out wrestle their sorrows, which at length they do. And 3 there is a
killing, whereof Saint Paul speaks, Romans 7.9.10.11.
-- Sin revived and I died, and the commandment which was ordained unto
life, I found to be unto death; for sin taking occasion by the commandment
deceived me, and by it slew me. and yet lo, Paul alive to God; so All are shut
up under the spirit of bondage, as in a prison, Gal. 3.23. before faith come we
are kept under the Law, shut up unto faith: some as Jeremy, let down to a
dungeon, Jer. 38.6. some as Paul put into an inner prison, and his feet fast,
(not in the mire in which Jeremy did sink, but) in the stocks; some only as
Joseph who though a prisoner yet found favor, and had more liberty, Genesis 39
20.21.22. And so, all being locked up under infidelity, some are more easily
set at liberty, and their hearts sooner opened, being like new and fresh locks
easily opened: whereas others are like old rusty locks which the key hardly,
and with much ado opens if at all, so that they must not be broken by force and
violence: such is the difference of men's hearts, some kept clear from rusting
by restraining grace, good education and example: others are old, rusty, and
cankered in sin, whose doors must be broken open by strong hand, and
consciences awakened by terrors. All hearts are hard naturally (as we have
heard) but some as stones, some as metal which must not only be broken, but
molten; and as among stones, some are softer then others, and soon crushed;
some are harder, as the flint, without seams and sutures; so is it with hearts,
some sooner humbled and made to relent then others, some are more hardy, bold,
crabbed and crooked then others: an angry word or look will work more upon some
soft spirits, then many blows will do upon some harsh, cross and sturdy
natures.

CHAP. VII. SECT 4 Who are more roughly, and who are more gently dealt withal.
Who they are that are more roughly or more gently dealt withal in their
Conversion. The difference is to be considered with respect to their different
conditions,
WHO then are they with whom God deals more roughly: and who are they who are
more gently dealt withal?

1 We heard but now that some have more stout and sturdy natures then others;
and hard and knotty wood must have a hard wedge. Some have more tender
consciences then others, and are of a fearful nature, apprehensive of the
least sin, and judgment threatened, so that the same thing which scarce
troubles another, does wound them deeply. Yea they apprehend cause of fear and
trouble needlessely, and through the predominancy of natural melancholy,
suffer such fears to prevail with them; and so lie long under such slavish
fears before they will be satisfied, and comforted. Thus they are afraid if
they be alone in the dark, 1 present, some being at the time of their
conversion 1 Of more hard and sturdy natures, then others of more tender and
fearful consciences.
as if the devil were ready to seize on them and to carry them to hell. The
sense of any thing fearful, as of fire, lightning, thunder, boisterous winds,
uncouth apparitions, presents them with no less then with sudden destruction,
if not with the fire of hell. Yea they dare hardly eat, drink or apparel
themselves (further then extreme necessity or shame drives them to it) because
of their unworthiness, and least they so increase their own condemnation, and
so they bereave themselves even of lawful and necessary comforts, which
otherwise they are bound to use, even of their necessary food and sleep, and
withal have their minds quite taken off their lawful callings, not able,
through a conceit of their own unworthiness, and as if all such labor were in
vain, to do any ordinary work of their special callings. Thus Satan working
through Gods permission with their melancholic disposition, and too tender or
apprehensive consciences, holds them a long time under bondage; when others of
stouter spirits, sounder judgments, and not of so nice or timorous consciences
escape these needless and slavish fears, which yet the other by Gods mercy
break through at length too.

2 Of greater parts, gifts, and places, and so more puffed up thereby.
Again, some men are puffed up with high conceits of themselves, in regard of
their gifts, parts, places and high callings, which keep many from hearkening
to any ordinary means and motives which are used to humble them, and so indeed
wholly from Conversion. Now if God intend the Conversion of such, he deals with
them commonly after a rougher manner, seeing a small thing will not tame their
lofty, fierce and fiery spirits: so he took down Paul, yea struck him down by a
visible apparition and audible voice from heaven, when being highly conceited
of his own legal righteousness, and strongly confident of the goodness of his
cause and Profession, in the height of his zeal he was galloping hard on in the
way of persecuting of the Saints of God. On the other hand, many that have not
any great matters in them to stand upon, and being of meaner rank and
estimation in the world, have nothing to oppose against the reproofs of the
word, or against the simplicity and seeming meannesse of the Preacher, and so
are sooner convinced, and stand not in need of such terrors to tame them.

2 Some have been more grievous sinners, 2 Past. having been either great
siners,
and have run both deeper and longer in debt with God then others; they are
deeply defiled in sin, double died; their sins are scarlet sins, and have taken
deeper root in them through custom and continuance, and have more poisoned and
corrupted their natures other wise bad enough. In which regard if God intend
any mercy to such (as indeed his mercy when he pleases to show it, shines most
in such) he more deeply and sensibly humbles them then others. When once he
opens their eyes to see their sin in the right hue of it, it being of so gross
a nature appears most loathsome and ugly, and more foul then sins of lower
stature and growth: and so the guilt and consequently the burden thereof, will
lie more heavy upon the soul, and press it more down to hell then sins of
less hatefullnesse, till it please God in mercy to remove it, and to assure
them of pardon. As sin brings them deep in debt with God, so before they get a
discharge from God, they must proportionably pay for it, not by way of
satisfaction, but of humble acknowledgement, whilst they are made to feel in
their own consciences some weight of it, proportionable to the greatness of
their sin; (for, the greater the burden is, the greater will be the pain of
the back:) though afterward, finding ease, their comfort is also answerable in
measure to their former dejections, and oftentimes much more then theirs who,
having not formerly sinned in like gorsse manner, find not it may be at first
those terrors, yet afterward in the course of their lives, they pay for it;
and what they escaped at the beginning, they meet withal in their progress,
finding an abatement of the others comforts: in which regard, some have
compared the former sort to such as pay a great fine and sit on a small rent,
Simil.
the later to such as pay but a little fine, but then their rent is greater.

Hence it comes to pass that some men's sins are not so easily washed and done
away as others are; their poison not so soon purged out; their wounds and
festered sores not so soon cured: as some sores may be let out with the
pricking of a pin, when others will scarce be cured with much and painful
launcing and cutting. Some are well educated, and brought up in religious
families and places where they are watches over, or better educated.
instructed, and well catechized; where they, for the most part, see good
examples, and are kept from evil and lewd company: These have grace instilled
into them by degrees, drop by drop; and consequently, not having laden their
consciences with grosser sins, when they come to be convinced of the guilt of
original and their other lesser actual sins, they are not so deeply stricken
and wounded in heart therewith as others are, who have more given the reins to
their lusts, and made a longer trade of sin. These, as they are more insensibly
wrought upon by the Law, and sooner humbled; (herein, as one compares them,
like to Neias hawks, which being taken out of the nest, Simil.
though they have a wild nature, yet are sooner manned then the haggards which
have long preyed for themselves, which must be kept from sleep, hooded, and
much pains taken with them ere they be thoroughly tamed and brought to the Lure:)
so they sooner make use of the remedy, which is of the mercies of God in Christ
laid hold on by faith, as being well instructed in their tender years in the
doctrine of Justification by faith, and of the free grace of Christ, which they
sooner apprehend then others, who having lived wicked lives in their ignorance,
and not having the knowledge of the Gospel, are deeplier cast down, and longer
kept under bondage, when once the Law has fastened on their consciences. The
like I say of such hearers as live under such teaching where the Law and Gospel
are not wisely and intermixedly taught together, but either all Law and terror
and no Gospel, or very little of it; which soon dejects and much terrifieth the
conscience, but not so soon and hardly (if at all) raises up again: or the
Gospel and promises of the same without the Law, whereby men are soon and much
comforted, without any great terror going before; which comfort therefore in
many is justly to be suspected, men thereby turning Libertines as well in
practice and life, as in Doctrine. Whereas where both are wisely taught
together, the hearer is no sooner smitten by the Law, but he can look to the
promise and somewhat help himself.

3 Lastly, 3. to come; as they are designed to greater or lesser works.
if we look to the time to come, we must know that some are deputed and
designed by God to greater works, sorer trials, harder services then others;
whom accordingly he prepares by deeper humiliation: for, as one well says, the
higher and greater the building is, the deeper must the foundation be laid in
the earth: As we see in Moses, but especially in Paul and David; the one being
sore (though suddenly) humbled, the other long tried and humbled before he came
to be King. So S. Austen confesses that whereas his friend Alipius received
his new birth with little or no struggling, he himself found no quietness and
victory but after great terrors and conflicts. And so no doubt others find
it. Now there may be good reason for it, seeing not only Satan will more
strongly oppose such in their conversion as he foresees are likely to be
greater enemies then others to his kingdom, but God in wisdom thus deeply
humbles them, that so giving them experience of his goodness, assistance, as
also power in delivering them, they might be better prepared by faith to
undertake, and more secured against all oppositions and difficulties in
undertaking the greatest matters and trials which they shall be called unto.
Thus both Samson and David were prepared for great undertakings, the one
against Goliath, and both against the Philistines, by the experience they both
had of Gods assistance in their buckling with, and mastering of the lion.

And so from this different dealing of God with those whom he converts, From
this different dealing of God we observe his wisdom.
in that he heath not tied himself to one way, we may take notice of the
wisdom of God who does all for his own glory, and for the greater good of his
children.

1 If he deeply humble some, 1 In those he more deeply humbles. Showing his
power and mercy in them,
it is that he might more magnify his power in sustaining them in such
straits; his free grace in delivering them; and make them more beholding to him
for it, and better fitted for great employments, yea that others not so deeply
humbled may be more thankful for his more gentle dealing with them, and the
unconverted might not he hardened in their evil ways to continue in the same;
for if God should deal gently with such as have been scoffers of Religion,
profane wretches, oppposers of his truth and people, others as bad as they
were; will be ready to flatter themselves in their evil ways, hoping in like
easiy manner to be reformed, and striking terror in others.
or at least to get heaven as those others have done: therefore the Lord will
wound and bruise them, and not show mercy to the (...) in secret (or in hugger
mugger) but will let all the world see their humiliation, as they have been
witnesses of their profancenesse and it religion.

2 If he deal more gently with others in their conversion, 2 In those with whom
he deals more gently, showing 1 To them, his freernesse, pity, and goodness,
teaching them compassion to others, and to walk more warily. 2 To others arming
them,
and not so deeply cast them down; as it is to show them the freeness of his
work, and of the manner of it, as also of his goodness, favor, and pity to
them (especially when they shall behold other converts brought into greater
extremities) who are thereby taught to walk, as more compassionately to their
brethren so deeply wounded, so more humbly, thankfully, and warily, lest though
they have escaped those pangs of their new birth in the extremity of them, yet
they meet with after-throws in the course of their lives to their little ease:
So it is that he might neither discourage others from undertaking this saving
work, whilst they see some at least to go through it with no great ado, 1
Against discouragements, and harsh conceits of godliness. 2 Against opion of
merit in their own greater sorrows.
and to live comfortably and cheerfully in that condition of a renewed and
regenerate estate, which is not necessarily a dumpish, melancholic, sorrowful
life, devoid of pleasure, content and comfort, nor give the converted who
suffer and undergo such extreme terrors and sorrows at first, occasion (by
Satan's suggestion and the flattery of their own hearts) to think that there is
matter of satisfaction or merit in their sufferings, whether of congruity or
otherwise, as if thus avenging themselves of their sins by contrition and
exercises of mortification and deep humiliation, they did either prepare
themselves for grace, (so incroaching on the glory of God and of Christ) or
otherwise as the Popish sort speak, drey their penance, and make as of
themselves some satisfaction to Gods justice, which should also much derogate
from the free mercy of God and merit of Christ. But now when they see that
others share in the like benefits, and partake equally with them of the
blessing, and that without such extremities, smart, and sorrow, When they see
others partake of equal mercies with less sorrows.
they, (as we all observing this different dealing of God with sinners) cannot
but ascribe the whole work of their and our conversion wholly and altogether to
Gods mercy, and to the power and freeness of his grace, and nothing at all to
any merit, congruity or worthiness in our selves. As this now said has showed
us, the reasons of Gods different dealing, with men in their conversion, in
regard of the diverse degrees, and measure of their humiliation, so we are led
on to consider the Reasons why he will in some measure have all to taste of
this distasteful cup, at least to be convicted in themselves, and some way
pricked in conscience before they be thoroughly converted.

CHAP. VIII. Showing the reasons why God will have all Converts (of age) to be
first brought under the spirit of bondage.
THese Reasons I reduce to these two general Heads: 3 The Demonstration or
reason^ of the main Doctrine. And why God will bring all Converts under the
spirit of bondage. This he does with respect. 1 to their good. 1 To their
profit.
-- 1 Man's own Good. 2 Gods Glory.

1 God will in his providence have our hearts to ache by bringing us in some
measure under the spirit of bonage, and have us thus wounded, at least pricked
before he receive us, for our own Good, who otherwise would neither know our
selves aright, nor acknowledge our want and need of Christ (whilst we missed
him not,) nor prize him aright. For methods sake, know the good which God
intends his elect by thus dealing with them, is, (according to that usual
division of good) Profitable, Comfortable, Honorable.

1 The Profit of this method which God uses with his (so far as it is to be
reaped in this life) may be referred to their Justification and Sanctification.

1 God thus brings home to himself wandering sinners as he did the Prodigal, 1
To their Justification.
who never had any thought of returning to his fathter till all outward means
and succors failed him, and till he saw himself destitute of money, friends,
food, yea of very husks, the meanest of meats: he like a man out of his wits
and not himself, never came unto himself, neither thought of coming or
returning to his father till then, Luke 15. Now in this prodigal every
wandering sinner who proves a true Convert, is meant: who is also compared to a
lost or wandering sheep, after which the shepherd sends out his dog to bring it
into the fold.

Particularly: God will have us feel somewhat of our own burden, and see as it
were, the flashes of hellfire; Particularly
and so he turns the Law loose upon us a while, both in the strict commands of
it, 1 To cause them see their own guiltiness.
as also in the curse annexed to the transgressors of it.

1 That we might acknowledge, see and be convinced of our own guiltiness, and
of the infiniteness of our desert and debt, which our Savior signifies unto
us in the parable of the debtor who ought his Master ten thousand talents:
which howsoever he at length did graciously remit, yet before he forgave it, he
strictly required the whole debt of him, commanding all he had to be sold, even
wife, and children, that it might be paid: yet this was but to bring him on his
knees that he might desire and beg sparing and compassion. Matthew. 18.25, 26.
God thus wounds the spirit, and lets men feel the burden of their sin
(which who can bear?) that so they may cry out with Davd, Mine iniquities are
gone over mine head, Psalm. 38.4.
as a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.

2 God thus does, 2 To humble them in sight of their inability,
that in a sense of our burden, and of our own inability to undergo it, we
might be humbled and have those proud, high and lofty thoughts which we have
had, or have of our selves, brought down and levelled with the ground. Till
this be done the sinner will ever find something in himself to oppose against
the work of grace, who else would never seek to Christ. Luke 8.43.44.
either his own righteousness, and moral virtues and civil life, his own
power of will, or somewhat ese, like the woman in the Gospel, whom Christ
healed of her bloody issue, who so long as she had any thing of her own left to
bestow upon Physicians, she never thought of Christ: only when after twelve
years she had spent all her living upon Phsicians, neither could be healed of
any, she sought to Christ and was healed.

Man naturally is like the wild ass colt; or like the ass used to the
wilderness, Jer. 2.24.
that snuffeth up the wind at pleasure, which must first be taken down and
tamed, and like the wild young horse that must be ridden in deep and tough
lands, run against the wall, and otherwise affrighted by being brought to the
brow of some high hill and rock, before it be tamed or made serviceable.

3 To make them willing to seek after help.
3 Thus God makes the heart pliable, and bores the ear to receive instruction,
and to hearken after the means by which it may receive help or ease, making it
to seek help out of it self else where, as Paul smitten down from his horse,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? and as the Jailour humbled by an earth
quake, What shall I do to be saved? and as these in my Text, who when they were
pricked in heart, said, -- What shall we do? as the hunted or shot heart flees
to his harbor, or to Dictamnum, the herb which causes (as they say) the dart
to fall out: or as the stout lion which sought to Androgeus, a man to get the
thorn pulled out of his foot: 2 Cor. 12.4. Or to accept of it being offered.
as Paul having a thorn in the flesh, sought earnestly and often unto Christ.

4 At least men thus are made willing to accept of help when it is offered,
which so many daily (having never been in such strai^s, nor suffered any pangs
of conscience) do neglect: the sick only, not the whole, do see their need of
the Physician.

5 To prize Christ
5 God will thus beat men off their own bottomes, to see their accursed
condition, that they may more highly prize Christ and his benefits: as thirst
makes us relish our drink, and by sickness we better know how to value health;
by imprisonment, liberty: and in a word, as one contrary makes us better to
judge of the other. None can ever so truly prize the worth of Christ's blood as
those that have groned under the burden of their sin, and have been filled
with Gods wrath. God then by such stings in the conscience causes men seek to
Christ, and make use of him, as of old he sent fiery serpents, Numb. 21.8.
that such as were stung by them might look to the brazen Serpent (which was a
type of Christ crucified) and be healed: as Absalom set Joabs corn on fire, 2 Samuel 14, 30.
to cause him to come unto him.

2 God takes this course with sinners, 2 Their sanctification, and to affright
them from sin.
to make them weary of their sin, and willing to part with it, which otherwise
would never be, (there is that nearness, yea Oneness between the soul and
sin, as has been said): The corruption of the soul would never be let out, but
for this pricking When are men willing to pluck out the right eye, or When do
they yield their hand or foot to the surgeon to be seared or cut off, but when
they see and are persuaded that they cannot retain these and their lives too?
when the Gangrene, (suppose beginning in the hand or foot) if it be suffered
further to spread will be their death? when Zipporah saw her husbands life
endangered, (if not her own) she circumcised her son, and cut off his foreskin,
which otherwise she was loath to do. Thus God presents sinners with a true
apprehension of his eternal wrath due unto them for their sin, and sets
hell-gates open before them in the way of their lusts, and fills their hearts
with such terrors and horrors, that they see no safety to their souls in the
ways of sin, and so as Pharaoh by strong hand at length did let the people go,
and the Philistines sent home the Ark, so God (if he love us especially) makes
us weary of sin, and saves us even by fear; not to say, that such as have most
smarted for sin at first, in the pangs of their new birth, are not so easily
drawn back to such or any other sins.) Again the spirit of bondage becomes to
them a spirit of sanctification, and it may be observed that such (of all
others) as have been deep. lie wounded at the first, prove the holiest
Christians afterward throughout the whole course of their lives.

2 As the spirit of bondage proves a spirit of liberty (freeing men from sin, 2
God does this to the increase of their joy.
) and of Sanctification, delivering from the power of sin, so also it leads men
to sound and solid joy and true comfort; there is no comfort but to such --.
The first work of the Comforter, even when it is sent by that name, and to that
intent, is first to convince of sin, so Habbak. 3.16. and Psalm 94.12, 13.
Ease to sores, which being whole do throb and rage, is got by pricking,
lancing, searching: sleep is sweetest after labor; and a pardon from the King
most acceptable when after judgment passed, the head has been laid on the
block; and joy follows the labor of childbearing.

3 as also for their greater honor. Romans 8.
3 I might add that God takes this course with such as he will convert to
glorify them the more: thus to sanctify them and to make them the more
glorious in holiness (and holiness we know, or sanctification, is the
beginning of our glorifications) Yea it is their glory thus to be made vessels
to bear the name and glory of Christ before men, which none do more then such
as have been deepliest humbled. Such of all other are fittest and ablest to
glorify God, as having most experience of his justice, mercy, wisdom,
goodness; and can best speak to his praise, which to do is our glory more then
his: God gets nothing by us; our acknowledgement of him makes him no wiser,
juster, holier, happier then he ever was, even before any creature was made:
when he then sets and imprints on us the stamps of his glory, and shows forth
in us his justice, mercy, goodness etc. That is in deed and for substance our
gloglory, not his. There is somewhat excellent truly added to us, nothing to
him --.

2. God takes this course with converts for his own honor.
And yet we may truly say, God takes the aforesaid course with those he means to
convert, for his own glory, that is, for the further manifestation of the same,
and for this main end, that the whole work of conversion may appear to be his,
not ours.

1. That of his Justice,
1. His very Justice manifests its self in and by these terrors of conscience,
whilst the convicted sinner is made to see the depth of his own ill deservings
is presented with the sight of hell, which by such is acknowledged.
and made inwardly to acknowledge that it were but justice in God to cast him
into the same: yea so strong is this apprehension in some, that for a long time
they can see nothing but justice. Howsoever this makes them at first, and ever
after, to confess and give the glory of justice to God, acknowledging how just
their condemnation should be if God did deal with them according to their
deserts: being ready ever to justify God as clear whenever he judges. Psalm.
51, 4. Romans 3.4.
Thus all by sin are brought under the Law; and the Law is let loose upon
sinners, threatens damnation, and nothing but justice appears, and verse. 19.
that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before
God. God will not in this work of conversion suffer his justice to be swallowed
up of mercy: he must and will be acknowledged just before merciful, taking us,
as it were by the throat, Mat. 18.28.
bidding us pay all we owe, when indeed with that poor woman 2 King. 4.1. we
have nothing at all to pay. And so in every convert he takes away all matter of
glorying, letting them see the depth of their desert, and their own both
unworthiness of mercy, and inability and impotency to make themselves any
help: Is^. 66.2. Job. 9.13. 2 His mercy; which thus is more felt.
And by so doing, whilst the best are made to tremble before him, and that the
proud helpers do stoup under him; he makes way for his mercy, that he may be
the more glorified both by showing mercy, and by the acknowledgement of mercy
by those that find mercy; as it is Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all
under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe: or as Romans 11.32. God has shut up, or concluded them all ( i.
both Jew and Gentile) in unbeleef, that he might have mercy on all. For so, by
shuting all up under sin and wrath, his mercy is more felt and admired by such
as find mercy. and thankfully acknowledged.
The foregoing terrors of justice in the converted which makes them smart,
makes mercy relish better with them, and be more esteemed by them; yea all the
world may now see and that acknowledge the receiving and conversion of sinners
is merely of mercy. None derogate more from Gods mercy, and the freeness and
power of his grace then such as (not sensible enough of their wounds and misery
by sin) ascribe somewhat, in their conversion to themselves; neither can they
be so truly thankful, as others: And by thanks or offering praise unto God,
God professes himself to be glorified. So that God by thus humbling men, Pal.
50.23.
as is said, with terrors, does but make way and prepare matter of praise and
thanksgiving to himself in due time; which accordingly we see given unto him by
Paul, even upon this ground; 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
I (says he, being before a blasphemer, and persecuter, and injurious)
obtained mercy -- And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant -- Christ
came to save sinners, of whom I am chief: howbeit for this cause I obtained
mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering -- Now
unto the King eternal etc. be honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen. So
elsewhere, crying out in a sense of his bondage under the law of sin, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans
7.24.
apprehending his deliverance by Christ, he adds, I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

3 His power and wisdom,
Lastly, the glory of Gods wisdom and power does also thus shine out to the
world, by this his manner and method of dealing with converts, and in making
them new creatures. We all do confess that the works of creation, especially
the heavens, do declare the glory (though not the will) of God. How much more
does his glory appear in this work of effectual Redemption, Psalm. 19.1.
where by a like manner of proceeding, his glory appears in greater
brightness? as in the creation.
There and here he works by contraries: he in the creation made first a
confused, vast and gross Chaos, or rude lump where was nothing but darkness
and confusion: yet out of that darkness he brought light; out of that
confusion he brought order; and this goodly frame and comely structure of
Heaven and Earth do show his wisdom, power, goodness, beauty and glory beyond
all expression: Romans 1.20, 21.
and he is glorified, or should be, in and by the right acknowledgement of
these: Oh how then does his glory appear, when in the new creation, or
conversion of a sinner, he first casts all strong holds and high things into
ruinous heaps, into rubbish, into a confused Chaos, staining the pride of man,
laying him level with the ground? what darkness is in the mind! what
impotency in the will! what confusion in the affections! yea what fears and
terrors is the confounded soul first brought into! and yet (such is the
infinite power and wisdom of God) he, out of these ruins, raises a goodly
building, even an house, a Temple for himself to dwell in: he brings light out
of darkness, strength out of weakness, order out of confusion, joy out of
sorrow and fears; in a word, heaven out of hell.

God in dealing roughly with such intends and prepares way for mercy.
Now for the conclusion of these proofs; we hence may see how man's greatest good
is wrought, and Gods glory most manifested, whilst God in the conversion of a
sinner shows himself terrible, (as there is just cause in us why he should
indeed be so, and so he is to impenitent sinners) and yet intends nothing but
love and mercy, and by humility to exalt us to glory: dealing with us as Joseph
dealt at first with his brethren, roughly, imprisoned some, charging all of
them to be spies, and threatening them, and yet he even intended to discover
himself in due time as a loving brother unto them. Thus before God entered into
covenant with his people to be their God, Exodus 19. he showed himself most
terrible unto them by lightning, fire, thunder and black clouds, Heb. 12.18,
19. etc. yea when the Spirit was sent down on the day of Pentecost, Act. 2.2, 6.
there was a mighty rushing wind from heaven, and show of fire, whereby they
were confounded, or troubled in mind, and thereby the better prepared to hear
that word, which so wounded and pricked these converts in their heart. And so
was Elias prepared to hear the still voice of God, in which God made his will
known to him, by a strong wind rending the mountains, by an earthquake (as
also the Jailor Acts 16.) and by fire. And so were the Israelites humbled,
terrified driven out of themselves by thunder and rain in time of harvest, and
prepared for repentance. 1 Samuel 12.17, 18, 19, 20.

Let this suffice for the Demonstration of the aforesaid point of doctrine:
after which should follow the Application of it by way of Use: but to make
further way for the same, we will, as we at first propounded, speak of the
Order, degrees, and steps by which God proceeds in perfecting this work of
Conversion.

CHAP. IX. Of the order of Conversion; first, as it depends on Gods Love. Where
ten Approaches of Gods grace to us:
4 The Order, steps and Degrees of Conversion and of faith.
THE work of man's Conversion, is an effect both of Gods Love and of his power,
and so is to be considered of us, but yet especially according to the latter
respect, which is more pertinent to my scope. There is an order of Gods
proceeding in each of these: but first we may briefly consider that there is an
order to be observed between these two: First Love, and then Power, the one
leading the way to the other.

The Conversion of a sinner, faith, and the means of both, come to us, first
from the Love, and then from the power of God; And first as it depends on love
in God.
not but that the power of God accompanies his Love (for Gods love is an
effectual and working love, it is real and operative in its time:) and the
Love of God goes along with his power, even then when he seems to pull and
rend us in pieces by his power, (his seeming rigor is mitigated and moderated
by mercy, and ever tends to, and ends in the good and conversion of his elect.)

This is taught us Jer. 31 3. I have loved thee with an everlasting Love:
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. So Joh. 6.37. and 44. All
that the Father gives me (lo, there is Gods free love) shall come unto me,
etc. (there is expressed the power of his grace.) And, no man can come to me,
except the Father which has sent me draw him. No man can come to Christ but by
Gods free grace in love, giving Christ as a surety, John 3.16. and then by
power applying him to our justification, as our head, Romans 3.25, 26. It skills
not much in showing the order, degrees and steps by which Conversion is
wrought, whether I name it conversion, faith, yea or salvation, seeing each
includes or inferres the rest.

Ten diverse degrees and approaches of Gods grace to us
First then briefly, for the Order of Gods work of Love, by which we come to
conversion, faith, to all other saving and sanctifying graces, and to salvation.

1 We must first begin with the consideration of Gods eternal decree of
Election and Predestination. To which purpose see and consider of these places
of Scripture. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, etc. Gods blessing us in time is according to
his election of us in Christ before all time: 1 Election. Tit. 1.
so 2. These. 2.13. Matthew. 11.25.26. hence faith is only of Gods elect: and
only such as are ordained to eternal life, believe, Acts 13.48.

2 Next to this there is Gods sealing and ordaining of Christ (the object
author, and finisher of our faith, 2 The sealing of Christ.
Heb. 12.1.) from eternity also, Joh. 6.27. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Where of Gods
covenant with Christ, and transaction with him.

3 The publishing of the Promise.
3 There is the publishing and promising of Christ made of old to our first
parents after the fall, Genesis 3.15. and that both on the behalf of the Jews to
whom he was made known by promises, sacrifices, and types, as we know; and also
of us Gentiles, Isa. 42.1.

4 His Exhibiting of Christ to the world in the fullness of time, 4 The
Exhibition of Christ in person by incarnation.
Gal. 4.4. Joh. 3.16. when the two natures divine and humane were in the womb
of the Virgin united into one Person, the humane assumed into the unity of the
person of the Son of God.

5 As our surety by imputing our sin to him.
5 Gods imputation of our sins to him as our surety, who was therefore made
under the Law, Gal. 4.4. and our Champion to maintain our quarrel against Satan
that braving Goliath, and all other enemies, as well as to discharge our debt
with God: which Imputation was yet of force to them who before his Incarnation
believed on him the Messiah to come, as well as to us, as those other effects
of his love which follow.

6 His making him a Sin offering also for us, and a curse, 6 As a Sacrifice for
us. Gal. 3.13.
2 Cor. 5.21. whose death was an expiatory sacrifice, he carrying (as our
sins, so) our griefs and sorrows, Isa. 53.3. and 12. Heb. 9.26, 28.

Herewithal we may consider the sufficiency of this his sacrifice; yea the
efficiency of it, seeing he offered it by the eternal spirit, Heb. 9.14. and
his blood was the blood of God, Acts 20.28.

All sufficient 7 Gods acceptance of it, 8 with his invitation of us to
partake of it.
7 Gods Acceptance of it as sufficient for all, and efficient and effectual
for the elect, Matthew. 3.17. and 12.18. Ephesians. 5.2. the Kingdom of heaven being
thus opened.

8 His Invitation of us hereupon, and Calling us by the preaching of the
Gospel to faith and to Conversion: which Gospel he freely, according to his
eternal love and purpose sends so to one place, as (at the same time) not to
another. Act. 16.6, 7. etc. See for this his invitation, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21.
Isa. 55.1, 2, 3, etc.

9 His acceptance of us by virtue of it.
9 His Acceptance of us the elect (who do believe) by virtue of Christ's
Sacrifice, and for his Sons sake, in whom he has made us accepted, Ephesians. 1.6.
or which is all one in effect, his imputation of it to us, and of all his
benefits, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. 2 Cor. 5.21. This implies Remission, or the not
imputing of our sins to us, 2 Cor. 5.19. and then the imputation of his
satisfaction, righteousness, and obedience. All these are mere acts of Gods
Love, most free, and depend on no condition in us, (unless you will say the
last named which requires faith as a condition before the Love of his good
pleasure, become also the Love of his Complacency, concerning which I list not
contend.)

10 His real Communication, of saving grace to us.
10 Lastly, as depending on all the former, there is Gods Communication of all
grace unto us, the grace of effectual calling, Conversion, faith and other
saving graces, which is done by the power of his spirit: Christ being a Savior
both by the merit of his death, and efficacy of his grace and spirit, whereby
Christ comes to be formed in us, Gal. 4.19. and we are made to partake of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.3.4. But this belongs to his power.

Use. To show us 1. the freeness of his grace.
The Use of what is said shall be briefly to take notice hence of the 1
freeness. 2 firmness. 3 fountain of all grace in us, call it Conversion,
Faith, habitual and actual holiness, or if you will, of the whole work of
our salvation.

1 These are free gifts and benefits: grace in us, depends originally on Gods
Grace, that is his free love and favor to us, being all of them effects of his
Fatherly Love, which in him is an act of his goodness, not of Justice, as if
deserved or procured by any thing done or foreseen to be done by us.

1 To humble us.
Which teaches us 1 humility, not to ascribe any grace to our selves, any
worthiness, any thing which might move God to elect us before others, or in
his eternal Predestination to prepare grace for us, or to bestow it upon us in
the temporal dispensation of it. 2 To make us thankful.
2 Thankfulness in the acknowledgement of his free grace, in our free love of
him who first loved us, and in a free consecration of our selves wholly to his
honor and service. But of these more fully In notes on 1 Cor. 1.30.31 page
255. etc. and page 85. etc. 2 The firmness of his grace, to assure us of our
perseverance.
else where.

2 These benefits are firm also, as depending on God, and on his love, (not as
yet to say, power) and not on us or on anything in us; and so, as the freeness
of his love prevents our pride, so the firmness of it or fears of falling
away, assuring us of our final perseverance in grace once truly received,
which flows to us from such a spring as never dries up. And so the Original
of all grace in us well considered prevents our error, etc.

3 The fountain of all grace,
3 We are hence taught and directed whither to go for true and saving grace, for
conversion, faith and all other grace. The Fountain of all is in heaven, in
Gods free love, so that though we may and must use the means of grace, the
word preached. and other ordinances of God, yet we must not rest in them: These
are but streams leading to the fountain, for our direction that we take not up
with the means.
and being separate from the free grace of God in Christ, they are but empty
cisterns. The word, ministers, sacraments may all say, faith, the grace of
conversion, perseverance, etc. are not in us. One main reason why many miss of
grace, of faith, and other benefits, is because they seek them from the means
only, from the minister and his person, or from themselves and their own
endeavors, in which they rest and with which they take up. But we are hence
directed to begin at Gods love, to look first to God in Christ, then to the
means; First to Gods love, then to his power; so to use the means, as from
Gods power in and by the means to expect a blessing: yet first and withal to
pray earnestly, and to beg the blessing from God and from his free grace. And
thus of this work of Conversion as it is an effect of his love.

CHAP. X.
SECT. 1. Of the Order of Conversion as it is a work of Gods power: and that in
regard both of the persons and means working it, as also of the work it self.
2 Conversion is also an effect of Gods power.
BUt we are chiefly to consider this grace of conversion, and so of faith, as an
effect and work of Gods power and effectual grace in us, which is also on our
behalf most needful: for as we are miserable, and stand in need of mercy; so
also helpless, yea wholly impotent, unable, unfit, yea unwilling as of our
selves to convert or come to Christ, Our need of Gods power in our conversion.
1 Cor. 1.23.
we must be drawn if we come at all; our hard hearts must be changed, prepared,
made willing, that so Christ, who to the Jews is a stumbling block, and to the
Gentiles foolishness, may be made unto us which are called, both Jews and
Greeks, the power of God, and the wisdom of God. There is a yoke on our necks
which God only can take off, Hos. 11.4.
by drawing us with cords of a man, even bands of love. God must prepare us for
faith and grace by removing all blocks which lie in our way, and that prejudice
which we generally have of Christ, and take from us the stony heart. We are
dead in sin and trespasses, and no less power is required then that which
raised Christ himself from death, Joh. 6.44. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Romans 8.11.

We are under darkness, yea, under the power of Satan; and to turn us from
darkness to light, Acts 26.18.
and from the power of Satan to God, requires the power of God. Nay, when we
are turned, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5.
we stand in need of the same power of God to keep us through faith unto
salvation.

Conversion not wrought all at once,
Now this work of Gods power is manifested also by degrees, and in a certain
order whereby he brings those he loves from nothing to something, from
infidelity to faith: 1 By driving them out of themselves, and by self-denial.
2 By bringing them to true contrition, and other further grace. 3 And so by
these and other preparatory works, but by some preparatory works.
to through conversion and to true faith: which faith and grace of conversion
is not wrought all at once in one instant (at least it appears not in any all
at once) nor is it wrought alike soon or late in all; but as the Baptist was to
prepare the way to Christ (as to the only City of Refuge by filling every
valley, and bringing low every mountain and hill,) so Gods messengers make way
for his coming in the spirit savingly and powerfully, by preparing the soul for
Christ; that is, by pricking and wounding the conscience, by casting down all
high thoughts in men, by humbling them first, and then by raising them up by
hope, etc.

This work of power then would be traced from its highest original also. The
order and steps of conversion: which is double.
Know we then that the order and degrees by which the grace of conversion and
of faith (as it depends on power) is wrought, may be considered two ways. 1.
There is an order in regard of the persons and means working it. 2. In regard
of the work it self.

SECT. 2. The persons and means used in Conversion.
1. In regard of the persons and means working it. It is originally from God,
1 THis grace, as all other grace, is originally in and from God, and so comes
to be wrought in us in a certain order by himself; yet not always without
means, but in and by the use of his own Ordinances, and by the Ministry of
such persons as he pleases to employ in the dispensation of his ordinances.
The sum is this.

1 The Father.
1. God the Father is first in order, who is said to draw such as by him (in
love) are given unto Christ to save, John 6.37-44. Jerem. 31.3. Faith being
therefore called the faith of the operation of God, who raised Christ from the
dead, Use. Therefore not from us.
Coloss. 2.12. It not being of our selves, Ephesians. 2.8. or originally from us,
as if we first believing moved God to elect us: We are his workmanship, Ephesians.
2.20.

2. Next is God the Son, 2 Son. Hebr. 12.2. Use Christ saves by power, as well
as merit.
who works Faith and Conversion also: For whatsoever the Father does, the Son
does likewise, Joh. 5.19. Christ is a Savior not only by his merit, but by
his power, himself (not we) applying effectually what he has merited; else he
were but an half Savior.

3 Holy Spirit.
3. Now the Father and Christ show their power by the holy Ghost, or Spirit of
them both, which we know was in visible signs on this day of Pentecost given;
by the power of which these many here were converted, and faith given to them:
it is therefore called the Spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.15. and by it faith is
given of God, Use Therefore it is a free work. John 3.8.
1 Cor. 12.9. Whence it is that all that hear the word of Faith do not believe;
the Spirit is a free worker, herein like the wind, blowing where it lists.
And the whole work of conversion must, from these authors and workers of it,
needs be acknowledged to be a work of such power as far transcends the power of
nature, Use of all. This work is 1. Divine, and not of man. John 1.13.
and of man's (supposed) free will: as if a man from the birth, or otherwise
wanted a natural and bodily hand or eye; who could give it him but the God of
nature? So who can give faith, which is the hand and eye of the soul, but God
only? And all these three Persons had their work in the conversion of these
Jews, Luke 24.49. Acts 1.4, 5-8. It is therefore a sure work, 2 Sure.
as depending on 1 the Fathers Love, 2 Sons merit, 3 Power of the holy Ghost.

Now the Spirit (or the Father and Son by the Spirit, all whose power is one)
works this grace of Conversion, and applies grace and faith to the soul either
more immediately, or mediately by the word and Ministry of it.

The Spirit works conversion either Immediately, as in elect infants dying.
1. Immediately, as in elect Infants dying in their infancy; where though the
chief work showed on them be a work of mercy, and of free imputation, yet their
natures are sanctified and changed by the infusion of an habitual principle of
grace wrought by the Spirit, without which they could not enter into heaven.
But of this formerly. The like we say of such elect ones as are born deaf and
dumb.

or, By means, and by the word.
2. The Spirit ordinarily works not but by means, and begets faith and grace by
the ministry and preaching of the word, as here Act. 2.37. Romans 10.17. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; i.e. by the command,
ordination and appointment of God, Isa. 59.21
which therefore carries along with it his power and blessing: so that though
conversion may seem in Scripture or other wise, to be ascribed to diverse other
things; as 1. to the Sacraments, Conversion is not wrought but by the word;
that of Baptism especially, called the washing of the new birth; 2 to voices
from heaven. 3. to visions and dreams. 4. to the constancy of the martyrs
sufferings. 5. to Miracles. 6. to Afflictions; yet these all are to be
considered only either as Preparatives to conversion and furtherances of the
work of the word and Ministry, and not barely
or as seals and confirmations of the truth of Gods promises made known and
propounded in and by the Word.

1 By the Sacraments,
1. For the Sacraments; they, for their efficacy especially, come in the order
of nature, after faith, to confirm and strengthen the same; the Sacraments seal
and assure only that which the word promises, and that is Christ, upon the
condition of faith and repentance; and so he is promised and truly offered in
the Word and Sacraments both to good and bad. Men grown profess faith and
repentance before they be admitted to Baptism, and so believing are baptized.
Mark 16.16.
Infants within the Covenant promise so much by their sureties, which if coming
to years they perform not, then they receive Christ only sacramentally,
specially not by Baptism.
and retain only the external sanctification of Baptism: a subsequent faith is
required of them when they shall be capable, without which they have no
internal effects of sanctification by the Spirit. The change made in the soul
is not by water, or by the bare work wrought in Baptism; but by Faith, and that
is the effect of the word. Christ is the substance, life and vigor of all
Sacraments, whom therefore no unbeleever does receive: now Christ and his
Spirit are not divided; he is not received without his Spirit, nor but by his
Spirit given by the word, which is the ministration of the Spirit. Use Not to
trust to Baptism or Profession without faith.
So that Baptism works not of it self without the Word and Spirit: which (for
Use) does teach us not to ascribe too much to outward Baptism or Profession,
without true faith, and the effects of the word on our souls, and in our lives;
so that we may say of Baptism as was said of Circumcision, Romans 2.25-28, 29. It
verily profits if we keep the Law, else it becomes no Baptism: true Baptism
is that of the heart, in the spirit.

2. Some are said to be converted by voices from heaven, 2. Not by voices. Aug.
Confess. l. 8. c. 12.
as S. Austin tells us of himself, that by a voice from heaven saying to him,
take up and read, he being by Gods providence directed to the place in Romans
13.13, 14. Not in chambering and wantonness, etc. was thoroughly converted: as
his friend Alipius by reading the next words Romans 14.1. as formerly has been
mentioned. And we know for certain, that S. Paul Act. 9. was by the voice of
Christ from heaven converted. But Saint Austin was not ignorant of Gods word
which he had then by him, and was not unacquainted with his will: Therefore
being formerly a wanton, and having much strife within himself, and showing a
lothnesse to leave his pleasant sin, this voice prepared him to yield more
reverence and obedience to the word known, which in effect (though read by him)
yet being thus by divine providence directed to this passage, and it by this
means specially applied to him and his present occasion, the perfecting of his
conversion formerly begun, was thus effected by the power of the Word. Use Not
to depend on immediate teaching from heaven, or Hell.
Yet, as we now are not to depend on this manner of immediate direction from
heaven; so, if it did not confirm to us the doctrine of the Scriptures, neither
it, nor any doctrine brought us by voice from Heaven or Hell, would prove
effectual to work faith, or to convert. But though such voices should teach us
the same truths which the Scripture does, we are not to depend thereon: See
Luke 16.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. The like we say for Saint Paul's conversion: he
knew what doctrine he persecuted, but believed it not till now: howsoever, it
was Christ's voice and word which changed him, and his conversion was further
perfected by the preaching of Ananias to him.

3. Not by visions and dreams.
3 Some men's ears are opened, and their instruction sealed in a dream, in a
vision of the night, etc. and so are withdrawn from their purpose: yet it is
the word of the messenger, an interpreter, one of a thousand, which makes all
effectual, see Job 33.15, 16, 17, etc. with 23, 24, etc.

4 Some have been converted by seeing the constancy of innocent Christians in
their sufferings, 4 Not by seeing the constancy of Martyrs. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8.
and their rejoicing to suffer for Christ, as Justin the martyr witnesses of
himself in his Apology to Antoninus. But this was only an occasion sanctified
of God to him and others (both then and of later times) to sift and enquire
into that truth which they knew not before, by virtue of which, when by the
teachers thereof they were acquainted with it, they were converted; as
Lactantius also shows: so that we are hence taught not to judge of truth
simply by men's sufferings (for no true conversion will always follow thereupon)
but of their sufferings by the cause and truth for which they suffer.

5 Not by miracles.
5 So Christ wrought many Miracles, upon the sight of which many believed on
him: but what did they believe? the word taught by him which formerly they did
not relish. Miracles were not without the word: they only made way for it.
The word by the Spirit did truly and effectually convert them (when once they
were convinced by the miracle that it was the very word of God:) the miracles
only occasioned their convesion.

6 Afflictions often are the occasion of men's conversion, 6 Not simply by
afflictions. Anno 496. See Doctor King on Jon. lect. 40.
(as well as miracles.) so Clodoveus a French King, upon a great discomfiture,
was converted to be a Christian: but he was first instructed by his Lady
Crotildis, and moved to embrace the Christian faith. The like we see in King
Manasseh 2 Chro. 33.11.12.13. -- Then he knew that the Lord was God: he knew
him before, for the Lord spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they would
not hearken, as verse 10. only afflictions brought him to acknowledge God, and
to be convinced that it was he whom he had to deal withal, and to hearken to
his word, and obey it by repentance. So David before he was afflicted went
astray, but now (says he) have I kept thy word: Psalm. 119.
He knew Gods word before, but now he kept it. This we see in diverse others,
on whom Gods word has not its powerful work in humbling them, till some
grievous cross, loss, sickness or danger come to second the word, and to
occasion a more serious consideration and use-making of it.

all which work in and by the power of the word.
In all the forenamed instances, Conversion is from the power of the Word, and
from other things only occasionally. And that it may further appear that Gods
power goes along with the Word preached and heard, we will briefly show this,
first, In the persons who preach and hear: secondly, in the work of the
Ministry it self, and in the order thereof.

The power of which is further showed, 1 In the persons of Preachers, who by
the power of God are 1. Called.
1. There is a power goes along in the very calling and sending of Ministers:
their calling and abilities are from Gods power.

When Christ called Peter and Andrew, James and John from their fishing trade,
Matthew. 4.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. was there not a secret power drawing them to leave
both ship and father Zebedee, and to follow him? but especially in calling
Matthew from that gainful trade, the receipt of custom, Matthew. 9.9. who (forth
with) arose and followed him? so in calling of Paul to be an Apostle, and
after, when the holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul etc. Acts 13.2.
Men may not arise from their ordinary callings, and thrust themselves into the
ministry, unless God more immediately and extraordinarily do call them, as
Christ did these named; where, to his authority he adds inward power to obey.
Men may not then thrust in themselves into the Ministry as of themselves; that
power and authority belongs to God and Christ to call them.

2. Enabled with gifts.
2. Men, even the best, are of themselves insufficient to these things, and
unable to discharge such a weighty duty, what through bodily, what especially
through spiritual defects and inabilities: but yet God enables such as he
calls, and makes them able Ministers, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. Use
etc. who therefore are taught not to trust to their own gifts, studies, and
endeavors: men so doing fail most of all, as might by instances be showed.

3. Made willing and encouraged.
3. Men often are unwilling, by reason of the greatness and danger of the task,
to undergo or undertake such a great, difficult and hazardous work; as we see
in a like work, how unwilling, upon this ground of inability, Moses was to obey
Gods call; but see Exodus 3.11, 12. and 4.10, 11, 12. Jeremy was foretold of
such things, but strengthened and encouraged against them: see Jer. 1.6, 7, 8,
9, -- 19. And when he was, by discouragements ready to give over, Gods spirit
quickened and set him to his work again. Jer. 20.2. From this power it is that
godly Ministers do so constantly holdout and still preach for all their
discouragements, and that they dare oppose and reprove even great ones for
their sins (as John did Herod) who if either they resist the word, or hate and
persecute their reprovers for their faithfulness, they so doing, do resist
the power and spirit of God in them, and the ordinance of God. There is a
wisdom and spirit by which these speak, which the ungodly, though learned
otherwise, are not able to resist. Acts 6.10. In a word, when Christ sent his
Apostles to preach to the Gentiles, saying, go teach all nations, and it is
premised, Mat. 28.18, 19,
All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, which was spoken for their
encouragement, who had a mighty work in hand, the Conquest of nations to
Christ, and were to meet with the wisdom and power of the world to withstand
them: and 20.
This promise is extended to us, even unto the end of the world.

2 For hearers: 2. Of hearers, whose. 1 Hearing or willingness to hear, is a
work of power.
first, It is a work of power that men come to hear, being called. It is God
that humbles them and gives them an heart to do his will, in obeying even the
commandment of godly Magistrates therein. as 2 Chronicles. 30.11, 12. That some
being called, by the bell or otherwise, come to church to hear Gods word,
(especially as Gods word, and as in obedience to him, with desire of profit as
verse 8.) when others, having the same call, refuse, go to cards, drinking,
walking abroad, or to a Mass, in a word, refuse to come; It is not from any
power of man's will, but from the spirit of God, moving the heart of the one
effectually, and leaving the other to their own hardness, who, (as Popish and
profane Recusants now) being by Moses, the godly Magistrate, called on, refuse
obstinately saying, we will not come up. which, Numb. 16.12. Use.
by the way 1 shows The justness of Gods judgments on all such Recusants
(being given over to their hearts lusts) and 2 teaches all such to acknowledge
his power and mercy to them, whose hearts tell them they come to the hearing of
his word, in obedience, and with desire to profit thereby.

2 When men thus lend their presence, 2. So their attending.
yet it is God only who by his Spirit opens their hearts, 1 to attend; as he
did Lydia's Acts 16.14. So that it is a sign, when men do not attend to the
word which they hear, that corruption and Satan is strong. 2 Understanding of
the word.
2 To understand the Scriptures, which otherwise they could not, though
delivered to them by the mouth of Christ himself. Those to whom he expounded in
all the Scriptures the things concerning himself, stood in need that he should
also by his power open their understandings that they might understand the
Scriptures. Use.
See Luke 24.27, with 45. So that men must not so much trust to their own
piercing wits and understandings in their giving the sense of the Scripture, or
expounding the mysteries of Religion, especially those deep points of
Predestination and Election.

2 This power is showed in the effect of the Ministry.
2. And so we come to see Gods power in and by the Ministry who by his Spirit
goes on with his own work and makes it powerful to conversion, as 1 Cor. 3.5,
6, 7. 2 Cor. 3.3. whosoever be the Planter, yet it is God who by his Spirit
gives the blessing and increase. Whatsoever be the pen, yet it is God, who by
his Spirit, writes with it: It is Gods ordination, yea and power by which
hearing, faith and obedience comes, Romans 1.16, and 10.17. All which should
teach us, 1 to magnify the ministry of the word* even in the mouth of weak
man (if otherwise faithful) as Gods power to salvation. And 2 to see, and try
our selves whether it be so powerful in us, or yet have such a powerful and
saving work in us, as it has in many others.

SECT. 3. The order of the work of Conversion: and first of the Law.
2. The order of Conversion in regard of the work it self. The popish order
disallowed.
ANd thus we come more particularly and nearer to the work it self, and to show
in what order God by his word does work conversion and beget faith in us.

Schoolmen and Papists make three degrees of penance, or of repentence. 1
Compunction. 2 Confession. 3 Satisfaction: the first is of the Heart, the
second is of the Mouth, the third is of the Hand, in and by works; but because
they explain themselves dangerously in these, and because a reprobate may have
them all as well as their converts (for all three were in Judas) I leave them,

The order noted which some others observe.
Others much better make the order this, by reducing the whole work to these six
heads.

1. This trouble of mind and conscience upon sight of sin and misery. 2.
Consultation hereupon, what in such case to do. 3. To be brokenhearted, humble
and contrite. 4. Secret desire of forgiveness, with confession of sin and
hope. 5. Forsaking of all, and highly prizing the pearl of the Gospel. 6.
Application of Christ and his promise. Thus that worthy Divine old Mr. Rogers.
See also who list Mr. John Rogers of Faith, Seven Treatises, Treat. 1. Chap. 4.
Treat. of the Christians Apparelling by Christ, part. 3. Sect. 73. and on 1
Cor. 1.30. page 117 etc.
Chap. 2. I have also my self endeavored to show how faith is wrought, and
from thence discovered many men's false faith. Only now I will briefly note
thus much: Before the grace of Conversion and Faith be fully wrought, the
Spirit works orderly by the word, (assisted, as is said, sometimes by Miracles,
Afflictions etc.) so that there is first a work of the Law, then of the Gospel:
not but that the Gospel has also some work on the soul like unto that of the
Law, which therefore so far I refer to the work of the Law, if not of Moses,
There is a double orderly work of Gods power, both of the Law and Gospel. 1. By
the precept, Mark. 11.15.
yet of Christ.

The Law then (yea, and so the Gospel) has a work

1. In and by the Precepts of it, as when it says, Thou shall have no other
gods besides Me: and so in the other Commandments. Yea, so also the Gospel:
Repent ye and believe the Gospel: and so it works on the understanding.

2. In the Sanction of it, 2 By the Sanction. Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
whereby it is established, and a curse annexed to the breakers of it: Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the book of
the Law to do them. So faith the Gospel; Except ye repent, ye shall all perish.
And, He that believes not the Son, Luke 13.5.
shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on him. Joh. 3.3, 6.
And thus it works on the Conscience. By both which works men are brought under
the spirit of bondage, brought to self conviction, and beat out of themselves,
despairing wholly of themselves, or of any help or succor from their own
wisdom, righteousness, holiness, power.

The distinct works of the Law, The distinct and (...) works of the (...) 1
Revealing of sin. 2 Increase of sin.
and orderly proceeding of it, I take to be this; whereby it makes way for the
mercy of the ^^^^^el. This it does, 1 by revealing sin, which formerly lay hid.
Romans 3.20. 2 By increasing sin: not but that the law is holy: but this it does
accidentally through our corruption: for the commandment once coming to the
conscience and showing its spiritual nature; sin, (which, lying in the heart,
as well as in the outward man, was thought to be dead) reviveth, Romans 7.9. and
taking occasion by the commandment, Verse. 11. deceives us and thereby slays
us -- and works in us all manner of lust: when the commandment comes, sin
abounds, and appears to be sin, yea out of measure sinful. This the law
does in and by the precepts of it.

3 Causing of wrath.
3 By causing wrath: that is, by revealing, foreshowing, and threatening of
wrath, convincing the soul thereof, and showing God to be truly angry. Romans
1.18. that his wrath is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men; and against theirs in particular.

4 Horror and fear.
4 Hereupon follows horror and amazement through fear of this wrath and of the
Justice of God. The soul is at a stand; the hammer of the Law has given it
such a blow, that it is dazzeled, confounded, and knows neither what to think
of it self, nor what to do; as it was with Saul posting to Damascus; yea it,
with Belshazzar, see's the vengeance written, and the handwriting of
condemnation against it self, apprehending nothing but some fearful and sudden
wrath ready to befall it, so that it begins to quake and tremble (as he did in
the midst of his jollitie) in an expectation of some fiery indignation; his
life, even that of his soul, hanging in doubt before him, fearing day and
night, as having no assurance of it, and having nothing in his eye but his sin,
the cause of his fear, and damnation and death, as the wages and fruit of his
sin, which seeing God has him in chase, he knows not how soon or suddenly it
may befall him. And this is that spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1.7. Romans 8.15.
and of bondage, spoken of in scripture, Heb. 2.14.

5 Sorrow and grief.
5. Now with this, or upon this apprehension of cause of fear, there goes or
follows sorrow, wounding, pricking of heart, stinging of conscience, and
present feeling of hell torments, less or more. For what is painful when it
is present, is not without pain in the certain expectation of it, (as on the
contrary a man may, and the true Christian does, even under affliction, rejoice
in hope of glory: so these I speak of, do sorrow and feel sensible grief in
the fear of hell) the soul is wounded, pierced and stabbed as with the point of
a sword, hell is already begun in the conscience, which says I have thus and
so sinned against a just God, and damnation is my portion: and thus the curse
of the Law, particularly seizes upon the soul.

6. Self-despair.
6. This is accompanied with self-Judging, and (through a sight of its own
inability to help it self) with self-despair also; whereby the soul lies
plunged, as a bull in the net, and by striving is more entangled, seeing its
own help-lesse and so hope-lesse condition, lying in bondage under the fear of
death, and of eternal wrath. Now this, as the three former, is as from the
Sanction of the Law, and curse annexed and denounced to the breach of it, so
especially it flows from the conclusion of that practical syllogism spoken
of, which conscience makes, where is both self-judging, an act of conscience,
and affections suitable, stirred up in the will and soul.

7. Consultation, and a driving of a man out of himself.
7 Now this desperate condition of the soul makes it (it may be, but always
with those whom God will convert) look about to see, as it were, if any help or
means of help be near, and causes a consultation, and an inquiry after them,
if possibly there may be cure; as in these here, in Saul or Paul, and in the
Jaylour: and this I make also a work of the Law, and of natural conscience; the
law being (I take it in this sense) said to be our schoolmaster, to bring us
unto Christ; not that it taught Christ, but that it, convincing us of sin, and
of the curse, and bringing us to self-despair, so sent or forced us to seek
help, if any, or wheresoever any could be had: and that only is in and from
Christ; for it, as a schoolmaster, first strips us naked of our own conceited
wisdom, righteousness, holiness, power; and then whips and lasheth our naked
consciences, as with the strokes of an iron rod; it so sends us out of our
selves wholly, without affording us any help, hope or succor, to seek and
inquire, first, if help may be had or hoped for elsewhere and then where, or
in, and from whom it may be had, and by what means. (which conceit of
possibility of help, made the heathen of old, and many superstitious ones now,
fly to so many devices and superstitious practices of their own devising). And
thus by the law, and these works thereof on the conscience, the way is prepared
for the mercy of the Gospel: so that were it not for that which reaches out an
hand to such as are otherwise ready to perish, no flesh could be saved.

SECT. 4. The order of the works of the Gospel.
2 The distinct and orderly work of the Gospel.
2 THe works then of the Gospel. (presupposing those of the Law) and the
orderly proceeding of the same, are now briefly to be noted. The Gospel has
also its preparatory works before conversion and faith be fully wrought: and
the order is this.

1 Knowledge of the Gospel.
1 God having by the law, first; humbled the sinner, if he intend him any
further good, he does first support and keep him from utter despair, by
publishing the glad tidings of the Gospel, and by letting him hear and know of
a remedy, and that his case is (though to him in himself, yet) not absolutely
desperate; and that upon some terms salvation may be had, Joh. 3.16. and is
possible: so an assent is wrought in him to the Gospel as true. Which
knowledge, by Gods further grace, works affections and actions suitable in him.

2 Hope.
2 So hearing of a remedy, though the conditions of self-denial in his sweet
and beloved sins, of repentance and faith, seem things impossible (as to him
considered in himself they are); yet being pricked forward by the aforesaid
terrors of the law, as by so many piercing goads, and thereupon put upon it to
do something, not to sit still, but (with the Lepers at the gate of Samaria in
the famine) to put it to the adventure, as knowing he must either do something,
or else dye eternally: this despair of help in himself makes him seek help
elsewhere; not without some general and confused hope that he also, 1 General.
as well as some others he told of, it may get case to his distressed
conscience, which as yet he finds not. And thus he generally assents to the
Gospel as good, as well as to the law, presenting him with wrath: yea as good
to him, and so God gives him, particular hope from the generality of the
promise, 2 particular. Mat. 11.28.
to all that are heavy laden, whereby he excludes none but such as exclude
themselves.

3 Melting and true Contrition.
3. Hereupon the heart, which though broken before, yet retains its hardness,
begins to melt and to thaw, being warmed with a sense of Gods goodness and
readiness to show mercy to him so unworthy, so old a sinner, and (it may be)
frozen in the same: what? any hope for such a vile wretch, and that from so
great and holy a God? oh, beast that I am, that I should ever so much and so
long have offended so good a God! etc. Thus the heart is brought to true
contrition, and now grieves, not in sense of the curse and wrath deserved so
much, as of love ready to be showed to such a vile and immeriting wretch, as he
both thinks and will call him self: not for the punishment of sin so much as
for the sin it self, as it is disobedience, and disloyalty to God, dishonor
to his name, and that which has made, and does still make a separation between
the soul and God: thus he begins to conceive of sin as alone able to make a man
miserable, without any other misery, even in abundance.

With pliablenesse to Gods will.
And thus the heart being molten, is made pliable and ready to be cast into the
mould of Gods will, as in my Text.

And hereof, I take, the reprobate come short, who as Ahab, Cain, Judas, Felix,
may be broken and wounded, and tremble, but still be heard-harted and unpliable
to Gods will.

4 Self-denial.
4. Herewith goes self-denial, renouncing of all parts, and privileges, gifts
and abilities in a man's self, with an inward acknowledgement of his own
impotency, guiltiness, unworthiness.

5 High esteem of Christ.
5. Together with an high estimation of Christ above all, as in Paul, Philip.
3.7, 8, etc.

6 Desire of pardon.
6 Desire of ease and pardon by Christ, and of direction what to do to be saved:
oh, he should be one of a thousand to him, most welcome, who could bring him
such tidings, and bring him an olive-leafe.

7. Then upon good direction given, as in my Text, and the next verse to it, 7
Approach to the throne of grace, where,
verse 38. and as Acts 16.31. there is an Approach and coming to the throne of
grace, with resolution there to speed or there to dye.

1 Confession.
Where particularly i^ 1 humble confession of sin, with all the aggravations of
it, as Luke 18.13. and 15.19. in the publican and prodigal. 2 Prayer. 3 Hope
of being heard, 4 Joy, etc. Luke 19.
2 Prayer, with 3 hope in special of pardon, 4 joy in that hope, grounded on
Gods call and promise (and not as in Agug, but) as in Zacheus, and the blind
man, Mark 10.49 50. be of good comfort, rise, he (the Master) calls thee. 5 A
willingness to part with all, to sell all for Christ.

8 Special application, and closing with Christ
8 After which or with which is a special application of Christ unto a man's
self, and of the promise of pardon and of salvation* with a trusting and
relying on him for acceptance of his person, prayers and endeavors, and for
salvation, and all good things: This is his closing with Christ.

9 Assurance.
9 Then follows the sealing of the promise, assurance and persuasion.

10 Perseverance
Then Perseverance in the faith and grace of conversion to the end, not without
some failings, but without falling away from that grace either wholly (and
habitually) or finally.

11 Salvation.
11 After all follows the consummation of grace in glory, and the end of our
faith, the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9.

The scope of this last discourse, (which is not to prescribe God: or to build
our justification upon duties or qualifications: or to derogate from free
grace, or to hold men to a legal faith, etc.) And the main Doctrine repeated.
Such an order as this there is in the work of Conversion; which I name, not to
bind the Lord to an order, or to an uniform dealing with all converts, some
whereof he humbles more, some less; and accordingly comforts some sooner then
others: in some he works all these in a shorter time, (it may be at one Sermon)
whereas others are long held under the spirit of bondage before they come to
hope or to any assurance; some stick longer in the birth then others: neither
do I intend to tie every convert to give a strict account of all these
particulars, or of the several degrees, and steps by which he has been
brought along: But my chief aim in naming these in this order, is to show and
declare, and withal to make good the former point of Doctrine, which is that
such as God will convert and save, must first be pricked in heart, that
Conversion and faith is not wrought in an instant, without some preparatory
works going before, and that in the general, God first humbles before he
comforts: there is constantly this Order: first, sight of sin, sense of
wrath, wounding, pricking, self-despair, and then and not before, or not
without the other, hope of mercy, joy, comfort, true conversion, faith,
assurance, 5 The application, and use of the said Doctrine
perseverance and salvation,

So that now at length, this main doctrine being explaned, illustrated,
Demonstrated, and both reasons of it given, and the manner, order, steps and
degrees of Conversion showed: It remains that it be applied and made use of.

CHAP. XI. Containing an use preparative to the rest, or of trial.
1 Use of trial. of our estate.
1 THe first Use shall be preparatory to the rest; and it is for Trial, and by
way of Query. I ask thee then whosoever, whether thou ever have been savingly
or at all pricked in in conscience, or wounded in spirt for thy sins? thou
may try thy self and know the state and condition of thy soul by that which
has been taught and proved: at least negatively, so that, not finding such
things, and such effects of the word of God, and particularly of the legal part
of it wrought in thee, thou have just cause to suspect thy faith, yea
undoubtedly to conclude that as yet thou art no true Convert, nor in state of
grace, and that thou have not Christ, as wanting faith: for when all such
effects of the Law are wrought in thee, thou have yet much to do: but if these
things be not done, then art thou far off from grace, and if so in that
state, before thou be so humbled, thou die, thou art for ever undone.

Now whereas these works are the effects of the Law and word 1 preached, Four
Interrogatories put to each conscience*
whereby sin both against the Law and Gospel is made known and discovered. 2
Applied, whereby sinners are convinced and made guilty. 3. Pressed upon them,
and followed home with curses and denunciations of wrath, etc. whereby, 1 in
the conscience follows self-judging, and self-condemnation, 2 In the
Affections, horror, sorrow, shame, self-despair, Yea and 3 it may be hereupon,
in the understanding, consultation what to do. I ask first do thou know thy
self and thy ways to be sinful and vile? Do thou now see that evil by thy
self which formerly thou knew not? 1 Concerning our knowledge.
Does thine uncleanness, evil concupiscence, covetousness appear to thee no
longer tricks of youth, natural desires, good thrift and husbandy, and thine
excess and abuse of Gods good creatures in and for company of others, no
longer good fellowship, and neighborhood, and sociablenesse? and so in other
particulars, where thou have called evil good, and good evil, by condemning in
thy self others, and the good ways of God of too much preciseness, humor,
folly and madness; but do the aforesaid vices now show themselves to thee in
the glass of the Law, and word preached, to be what indeed they are, horrible
sins of dishonor done to God, provocations of the eyes of his glory,
pernicious to thy soul? etc. and have thou another judgment then formerly of
the good ways of God and of his people? This is a good beginning and sign
that God intends further good unto thee, and thoroughly to convert thee. But if
thou art not touched with a sight or sense of thy evil estate and ways, if
yet through thy ignorance, thou be alive in thine own conceit, I must tell
thee, thou art dead in sins, and in thy natural and lost estate, and so
continuing shall die in thy sins, and perish for ever.

2 Concerning the judging of our selves. Revel. 3.17.
2 Have thou yet never been made by the word and Law, to judge thy self, thine
estate and ways? Have thou never been made guilty, self-convinced, self
condemned, to be under wrath, or at least to be most worthy of wrath? I must
tell thee, thou must then be judged of God, and that eternally. Have thou not
been sensible of thine estate under darkness, under Gods wrath, under the
curse and damnation? and so have thou not been weary of thy natural estate and
condition? I say then thou have cause to fear eternal darkness, wrath and
damnation. Do thou think thy self in good estate, and wast thou never
convinced or sensible of worser condition then thou art in? Suspect thy self,
all is not well with thee. He that dreams of a conversion or state of grace,
and of a fullness without some sense of his former estate, shall when he a
wakes prove hungry, empty of grace, deceived in and by a false birth, yea and
hardened to his destruction. Judge then thy self in time, that thou be not for
ever judged of the Lord: I exhort thee to take heed of security, to arraigne
thy self at thine own bar, and to suffer the word to judge, try, yea and to
condemn thee. Try by it not only thy cursed estate by nature, and thy grosser
sins, but thy omissions, yea, thy best actions, thy virtues, and
righteousness, thy services and sacrifices in which thou restest and seem
to trust.

3 Concerning our sorrow.
3 Let me ask thee; have thou never yet sorrowed when thou have heard and been
wounded for thy sin, nor trembled at the voice* Habbak. 3.16. I must say and
tell thee, the more is behind, and for the present thou art far from true joy:
know; that sorrow must be in the evening, before there be joy in the morning:
thou must sow in tears before reap in joy.

4 Concerning our consultation.
Lastly, have thou never as yet either questioned thine estate, or come so
far, as to consult about the bettering of it, and to come out of thine old
and natural condition? I say, do both the one and the other in time, and know
now (till I tell thee more fully of it hereafter on this Text) that God fills
those men's heads with care and consultation, whom he means to save.

This for the first preparative and most general Use.

CHAP XII. Showing the desperate estate of secure sinners, and danger of a
false peace.
2 Second sort of uses concern such as yet have notbeen pricked, or not
sorrowed. 1 Use of Instruction. not to please themselves with their false peace
NOw upon this Trial it will be discovered whether thou have been pricked,
wounded, convinced and made sorrowful for thy sin or not. And first, if not,
here is an Use and matter both of Instruction, and of Exhortation to thee. But
if yea, then here are other Uses for thee.

1 The secure sinner, (whether of more profane, or of civil conversation) is
hence instructed not to please himself in his secure estate, or false Peace. He
that has not in some good measure been under the spirit of bondage, troubled
for his fin, pricked and wounded in conscience, has just cause to suspect
himself, all is not well. Many please themselves in their secure courses, load
their consciences, yea wound and gash the same with the guilt of many enormous
and gross sins, and yet bless themselves in their condition, and remain
unsensible and of stupefied consciences; sorry they would be to be in such case
as they have seen or see some others to be in, who yet indeed are either in the
state of grace, or in a good way unto it. Yet those other are such as these
wretches should be if ever they prove true Converts: Those other it may be with
David, have their sins often before their eyes, which draw out tears of true and
hearty yea alsoof saving sorrow and repentance from them but these secure ones
cast all behind their backs, and leave all to be reckoned for hereafter, are
moved with nothing they either think, say or do; and are not willing at any
time to have ought in their thoughts or before their eyes, but such things as
may give the flesh content, and which may blind their eyes and besot their
souls, namely sensual delights and pleasures gain, nonours in the world, love,
and favor of men and such like.

True peace distinguished from false. 1 It goes with Righteousness. Romans 14
2.2 is grounded on the Gospel.
That it is no true peace, but a fools Paradise and false peace which they
enjoy, is most evident. 1 True peace and righteousness go together; the
Kingdom of God is (not meat and drink or pleasures, or ought else of that
nature but) righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. But their
peace and joy is not such. 2 True peace is grounded on the Gospel of peace,
which works reconciliation with God, Romans 5.1. but their false peace cannot
endure the Gospel or the reproofs of the word, as we see in Ahab hating
Michaiah, and may see in these men not enduring to be told of their sins, or
to be called to mourn and to weep for the same, and for their ensuing miseries.

3 It issues out of sorrow for sin.
3 In a word, true peace, sound and solid comfort is, for order of nature, yea
and working, after, yea out of true sorrow for sin, trouble of conscience, and
spirit of bondage, as has already plentifully been showed: theirs not being
such, cannot be good.

^ Terror ^secure ones, who have not arowed for sin.
Let me then read thee thy doom, thou secure sinner whosoever thou art, and show
thee what cause thou have to suspect thy self till thou have at least been
wounded, pricked, and pierced in thy couscience for thy sin in some sense and
feeling of Gods displeasure against thee for the same.

Their secure estate is a sign that they are still, 1 in their natural
condition, and in sin. Simil.
This is a sign 1 that thou art still in thy natural, that is in thy damnable
estate, in which thou came into the world, and wast by nature a child of
wrath as well as others. Is sin no burden to thee? It is a sign thou art yet
in sin, as in thine own element. For as the weight of water is not felt in the
water, as not of a man who shall dive deep into the sea; whereas one hoggeshed
of water on the land would crush him: so to a soul any way separate and divided
from sin, who her it be in its judgment, will or affection, sin will be as it
was to David, and heavy burden too heavy for it to bear, and will make the
soul to cry to God for ease, as finding no peace, Psalm. 38.1, 2, 3, 4
rest or health because of its sin; whereas if the soul be not in some measure
burdened and troubled with sin, but do still make light of it, as Samson did
of the brazen gates of the City, and do still bath it self in the delights and
pleasures of sin, it must needs prove that it and sin is yet all one, and
that there is no separation made between them as yet, and consequently that it
remains in its natural and damned estate, and that sin unsorrowed for will
prove to it as that dead sea of Sodom, which causes all living things to die
that come into it.

2 That they are in Satan's possession.
2 And so this false Peace is also a sign that such an one is in Satan's
possession, all things are so quiet within him, Satan molests none so much, as
those that make from him, and those he will not suffer to be quiet, as we have
heard; only the Lord first by his word troubles those souls he means to save,
all is so quiet.
as by the Angel the waters were troubled before any cure was done. Now what a
condition it is to be in Satan's keeping, yea possession, let any wise man
consider.

3 and dead in sin,
3 This condition of secure sinners does plainly show them to be dead in and by
sin, and deprived of all spiritual sense and life. To be without the sense
of feeling is a certain sign of death: now these being wounded, as being
without sense.
stung and pierced by the word, yea hewed by it (for such are the effects of
the word, even (...) slay and kill men,) that is to devote the impenitent to
certain destruction, yea damnation of soul and body) yet show themselves no
whit sensible, but are as dead and senseless blocks under the lashes and
strokes of the word, herein like the drunkard, or as he described, Pro.
23.34.35. -- lying down in the midst of the sea, or upon the top of a mast:
They have stricken me (shall be say) and I was not sick; they have beaten me,
and I felt it not, etc.

4 That they are far from Repentance,
4. Its a sign that secure sinners have not as yet entered the porch or so much
as touched the threshold of the School of Repentance, whereof this pricking of
conscience in my text is made the first stop, as has been so largely showed
and proved. It is a strong argument that the word, (the means and instrument
working by the spirit, without the fruit of the word,
true repentance) has not had as yet any healing or saving work on the soul.
What virtue is there in that Physic, which makes not the Patient sicker then
he was, and puts him not to pain? What healing virtue is in the plaster, if it
smart not? and its a sure sign that the dislocated or broken bone is not
brought right to its place, if there be no pain felt in the setting. Where no
sorrow follows sin, where no remorse of conscience is in sinners, and come
short of Reprobates, as not so humbled and sensible as was 1 King Ahab. 2 King
Pharaoh who confessed his sin,
they may justly seem to be in worse case then many who now are deeply plunged
into hell. How many have we that never hung down the head with King Ahab, nor
were moved with any denunciation of judgment? How many who never yet were so
much humbled as King Pharaoh, a very reprobate, but remain yet obstinate and
obdurate? they are called upon to let their beloved and gainful sins go, and
to part with them, as he was to let the people of Israel to go out of his land,
which at length he did, though with little thanks, being forced thereunto by
the extremity of plagues from God: but do many of us so much as he? Exodus 9,
27.28. and 10.16, 17.
he confessed his sin, and said, I have sinned this time, the Lord is
righteous, and I and my people are wicked: entreat the Lord (for it is enough)
etc. and, I have sinned against the Lord your God (said he to Moses and Aaron)
and against you, sought the prayer of Moses, and 12.31, 32, 33.
-- now therefore forgive -- and entreat the Lord your God that he may take
away this death only: yea at length he did (according to Gods command) let the
people go, yea was urgent upon them (apprehending nothing but death for him and
his, who said, we be all dead men); and dismissing them he said, go, and at
length (though forced) did obey.
be gone, and bless me also. But have we not many that never yet confessed their
sinness as he did, who never entreated Moses, or any faithful Minister of God
to pray for them in all their life? who never yet obeyed God, or put away their
beloved sins, neither in love to God, nor in fear?

How many amongst us are there that never see not confess their sin, or show
any readiness to turn from their evil way when God stands in their way by his
judgments threatened, as yet did Balaam? Number. 22.34. that never had any such
good motions, savoury thoughts and speeches as he had: 3 Balaam.
but will go on in the very face of God, and in despite of his judgments
threatened; yea, it may be also inflicted? as Isa. 57.17. and so in other sins.
God meets men in the way of infamy for their uncleanness, and yet they will go
on in that way still: in the way of their hatred and plotting mischief against
Gods faithful servants, and yet they will on still in that way; which yet Balaam
did not: for seeing at length the Angel, and his sword drawn in his hand, he
bowed down his head, and fell shat on his face, saying, I have sinned (for he
went with a purpose to curse Gods people;) now therefore if it displease thee,
Numb. 22.31, -34.
I will get me back again.

How many, who never relent for any wrong they do Gods faithful servants, as
yet did Saul (a reprobate) toward David? 4 Saul. 1 Samuel 24.16, 17, 18, 19. 5.
Herod.
Who never reverence Gods Ministers, or hear them gladly, or upon hearing,
reform and do many things, as yet did Herod? who yet afterward took off John's
head; and yet not without sorrow. Who never tremble when they hear Discourses
and Sermons of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, as yet Felix
did? and yet they (I believe) as unrighteous, 6 Felix. Acts 24.25.
intemperate, and liable to judgment in many other regards as Felix was. Nay,
never complain so much as Cain did, 7 Cain.
either of sin or punishment, or of being cast out of Gods presence, but rather
please themselves in their sins, and cast themselves daily out of Gods presence
and favor, and make themselves unworthy to partake with Gods people in the
communion of Saints? Yea lastly, Have we not many who come short even of Popish
penance? who never were yet so compunct in heart, and troubled in conscience as
was Judas? 8 Judas.
who never confessed their sins by name, and with aggravation of it, as he,
saying, I have sinned in betraying innocent blood? neither ever made
restitution, as he did, of goods ill gotten? or sought to give satisfaction for
any wrong done by them?

The folly of such secure sinners,
Oh then the extreme folly and madness of such secure sinners! who think
themselves in good case, and will hope to be saved as well as any, and yet come
short of very reprobates! But if those named, and such like, who showed more
compunction of heart; and therein, and in their confessions of sins, and other
works, and their certain damnation. Jude ver. 7.
have so far outstripped and gone before you, be yet gone to hell, to the devil,
and to destruction, and now suffer the vengeance of eternal fire; what will
become of you secure and senseless sinners, who feed, sport, play, mind the
world, use means of unlawful gain, without all fear of Gods judgments, so much
and so often threatened in his name by his ministers, and executed by himself on
others? How shall you escape the damnation of hell? where shall you appear, who
yet show not such remorse as these reprobates did? You must needs then, in this
your case, be thought to be next door to hell, and to the estate of damned
spirits, being so stupefied as not to be moved with Gods threatenings, no not
with his gracious promises and peremptory commands.

Unless they do not only outstrip these, but all Temporizers whosoever.
And yet my deerly Beloved (whose salvation I long after, and do thus seek)
though you should do as much as these named; yea, though you should go as far
in humiliation, sorrow, zeal, and reformation as either these, or any other
bare Temporary; yea, as far as he did to whom our Savior said, Thou art not
far from the Kingdom of heaven; even as far as Jehu in zeal against (other
men's) sin; as far as Ananias, to part with a great portion of thy goods for the
public good of others; as far as Demas and Alexander, to forsake the world,
and thy hopes in it, and to follow poor Christ; yea, to venture thy self as
Alexander the Coppersmith did in cleaving to the truth; as far as Nicolas, who
was chosen Deacon by the Church for that reverend respect they had of his
gifts: or lastly, as is said, as far as Judas, who being an Apostle, could both
pray and preach with great zeal: Yet if thou go no farther, and outstrippest
them not in sincerity, Dike of Deacif. chapter 10.
honesty, and goodness of heart (as one well shows) by inward, renewed good
qualities, as good never a whit, as never the better: At least thou will come
short of salvation. But I must remember my self, that I am speaking to, and of
such as are sensualists, senseless sinners, livelesse blocks, muddy
worldlings, in a word such as think it folly to trouble their heads or
themselves with any serious thought of their sin, or of Gods wrath due to them
for the same; who love to be at ease, to enjoy their false peace, and their
pleasures of sin without interruption or molestation, and in a word, who are
loath, with the Devil, to have their sins cast out, or to be tormented before
the time; to these I must now Lastly, or Fifthly say, that this their secure
estate is a fearful sign that all will not end well with them: 5 Sensualists
and secure ones have most cause to morn.
this their calm will end in a fearful tempest: Such as now never dream, nor
will be told of the necessity of this trouble of conscience, are the only men
that have most cause to mourn, and who indeed are (by all that know their
estate, and love them better then they either know or love themselves) to be
pitied and prayed for, and to expect a storm,
(as Job did for his children in and after their feastings.) For these are they
who being merry and light-hearted, and spending their days in wealth and mirth,
suddenly go down to the grave, or to hell; Job 21.13.
as those secure ones of the old world, Mat. 24.37, 38, 39. And as the Jews,
concerning whom Jeremiah does pitiously complain and lament, -- The young men
have ceased from their music: The joy of our heart is ceased, Lament. 5.14.15.
our dance is turned into mourning etc. So will secure sinners find it either
here or hereafter: And yet alas, that they who have most and greatest cause to
weep and mourn, in the midst of their security,
should be as they would seem the only Jovial and merry men of the world! These
feast and make merry, but never think of the house falling upon their heads, as
once upon Jobs children, and on the Lords of the Philistines when they sported
themselves with Samson; or of the point of the sword hanging by a small thread
over their heads, as once over the head of Damocles: or rather of the hand
writting on the wall, as in Belshazzars case, or of Gods writing of their sins
in his book, which will be opened at the day of judgment. These jolly fellows
never think how their sin which they delight in, lies, and that their sin will
do them,
in the guilt and punishment of it, at the door, as Cains did, that is near to
seize upon them, as dogging them continually at the heels, like a bloodhound
pursuing them and never ceasing till it overtake them and fly in their faces,
when the iniquity of their heels shall overtake them, find them out, Numb.
32.23.
and in their hunted consciences meet with them and find them out, if not
before, yet on their deathbeds perhaps, where the guilt of their sin shall
present it self unto them, as that black dog which appeared to Cornelius
Agrippa at his beds-feet whilst he lay a dying, pursue them to death,
or like Brutus his ghost, which standing by him as he was writing, left him a
while, to hell,
telling him he should see it again at Philippi, where in battle he was slain;
1 Samuel 28.19, 20.
or like Satan appearing in Samuels likeness, and telling Saul, saying, to
morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me, at which speech, Saul fell straitway
all along on the earth, and was sore afraid, -- and there was no strength in
him. and judgment.
Little think secure sinners how soon their sin will overtake them, and bring
them to their graves, yea, (as their bones were full of it) lie down with them
in also the dust, Job 20.11. etc. Ezekiel. 32.24.27.
and be upon their bones: and if so, it will rise with them too, stand at their
heels, yea elbowes in judgments to accuse and condemn them; so that their
judgment is not far off, and their damnation sleeps not: 2 Pet. 2.3.
Their end is come, at least it watches, or awaketh against them. Ezekiel. 7.6.
These things being so, a man would wonder, that any should, under the noise of
such canon shot and thunderings sleep quietly, Their security wondered at.
over such traps dance so merrily, and being so near hell (perhaps) as till to
morrow morning, (or sooner if the thread of their life be cut off sooner) to
secure and bless themselves in their vain hope of heaven: their only grief on
earth is to have such ministers or others as shall tell them of their sin and
danger, and check them in their courses; and that they cannot sin so freely
as they would without control: otherwise, no sorrow at all for sin appears.

CHAP. XIII. Containing a large Exhortation to the Secure; and Motives urging
them to be afflicted and to mourn for sin.
WEll; let me now make use of a word of Exhortation to such, and speak to them
in S. James his language, 3 Use, Exhortation, seriously to confider of our
cause of mourning. Jam. 4.8.9, 10.
chap. 4.8.9, 10. Draw nigh to God, -- cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and
purify your hearts ye double-minded: Be afflicted and mourn and weep; let your
laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness: Humble your selves
in the sight of the Lord, and he will lift you up. Ah dearly beloved, And
accordingly to mourn,
let us learn at length, but yet in time, to take our sins and Gods curse and
wrath due to them into deep consideration; and withal to be affected with true
and hearty sorrow for the same: sin you see will have sorrow, here or
hereafter: this has partly been considered before. We see here, the elect of
God, true converts, such as God shows greatest love unto, seeing the elect of
God are not saved without it.
in converting and saving their souls, are at least, and must be pricked and
wounded, and that in their tendrest part, the heart: what will become of thee
then, and of all others, who sinning as deeply as any, yet never mournest for
thy sin in all thy life, (or at least to little purpose) neither have thou yet
any will, purpose, affection or disposition thereunto? Surely if such dear
Saints, Servants, yea Sons and Children of their heavenly Father escape not
without finding and feeling some bitterness from their sin, yea even when
Christ, in whom they trust and to whom they fly; has endured the hot wrath of
God for them; what, may thou think, will be thy portion hereafter, if now
thou be such an enemy to godly sorrow and so averse from it as thou art?
being also by thy sins unsorrowed for, an enemy to God? how much better then to
be pricked here for our curing, (as a tumor gets ease by pricking) then to be
put to endure the whole wrath of God hereafter, and to be stung to death
forever? Where we may also note, and might consider for our encouragement, and
seeing we shall not lose by sorrowing here.
that the greatest sorrows we here suffer, when we mourn for our sins
savingly, are in comparison but prickings, Note. The greatest sorrows of the
elect are but prickings
yea, as flea-bitings, considered with the eternal torments of the damned,
which by timely sorrow now may, nay, undoubtedly shall be prevented, as it was
with these mourners here, who, though whilst they looked on Christ whom they
pierced, they mourned for him as one mourns for his only son, and were in
bitterness for him as one is in bitterness for his first born; and shall be
much more so at their calling, and at the conversion of their whole scattered
Nation: and though some few be longer holden under sense of sin and wrath here
then most other converts are; which should encourage us.
yet what lost these Jewish converts by this their sorrow and smaller wounds by
pricking, when they were presently healed, and withal obtained the pardon of
their sins, ver. 38. the favor of God, freedom from condemnation, Romans 8.1.
and from eternal sorrows in hell; yea, and right of sons, and heirship to
eternal life and glory? No more shall thou lose by thy sorrow here, if in time
thou give over thy profane, carnal, worldly courses, and secure living, and
betake thy self in time to the serious exercises of Repentance and godly sorrow.

Do thou think, (...) ^xhorta^^^ (...) by Motives:
or can thou imagine that thou have no cause so to do? Come tell me; have you
who are now so secure and merry no true cause of mourning, or of being touched
and pricked in conscience and soul?

1 From the consideration of our sin, 1 Orginiall.
1. Are ye without sin? 1. Are ye not inwrapped all of you in the guilt of
Adams transgression? I will not charge you to have brought, each of you for your
parts, in that regard sorrow, sin, and damnation upon all men that are or shall
be damned; though some will have it so: and yet I cannot say but that thou art
guilty, and sharest in the guiltiness of that sin which did all this. And if
so, it, well weighed, were enough to break thy heart, that thou and I and each
of us have had (in our first parents) a part in bringing damnation on our
selves and others. But howsoever, know that there is, in regard of Original
sin, that corrupt fountain within thee, that leaven, that bitter root, seed and
sink of sin in thy nature, whereby, as thou art wholly indisposed, yea
backward, and ready to oppose all goodness and truth: so, inclined to do as
wickedly as ever did sinners, even as did the Sodomites and other heathen, and
as Judas and those Jews who betrayed Christ, and crucified him; yea, as such
Christians as sin that unpardonable sin, the sin against the holy Ghost,
nothing hindering but Gods mercy restraining or sanctifying them. And is not
this enough to humble thee? should it not make thee fear, lest taking such
liberty in thy ways as thou now do, God leave thee to thy self, and to these
thy natural and corrupt inclinations, and give thee over to commit the same or
like wickedness, and to come to like ends?

2 Actual. 1 Our own, considered with their aggravations, Job 13.11. which are
many.
2. But I am sure thou can not but confess thy self to be guilty of many
actual sins, which are obvious to every eye, and ringing in every man's ear
that lives near thee. Will not these bring thee to be ashamed of thy self? or
should they not trouble thee? Is not the least of thy sins 1 Against the great
and holy God? and then shall not his excellency make thee afraid, and his
dread fall upon thee? mercies and goodness? and art thou not ashamed of thine
unthankfulness? threats, and examples of his judgments on others? and shall
not that daunt thee? thy conscience and knowledge, especially in these days of
light? and does not conscience sm^te and prick thee? See Luk 12, 47
Will thou still hold the truth in unrighteousness, and yet not fear Gods wrath
revealed from heaven against such? Romans 1.18. Covenant with God, and vows often
renewed? and do thou not fear to receive the just reward of a traitor, and of
perfidiousness? Wherefore should God be angry at thy voice? Eccles. 5.4, 5, 6.
Why do thou, by breaking wedlock with him (for by covenant thou art become
his) provoke the eyes of his jealousy and glory against thy self? can thou
thus do, and yet live secure? Ezekiel. 16.8.


3. Other men's which we make ours, helping to damn them.
3. Nay, Besides thine own personal sins, think how many thou have helped to
send to hell before thee, by having an hand, head, or heart in their sins. Did
thou never entice any to commit folly with thee, to cast in their lot with thee
in some wicked enterprise? Did thou never encourage, provoke, counsel or
command any to do evil? Have thou never made other men's sins thine own by thy
silence, consent, connivance, commendation, defense, or at least, want of
sorrow for them? Has not thine example, presence, and familiarity with sinners
in their vanities, drawn many into sin, and hardened them in the same? and have
thou not by such means become a murderer of their souls? And if they be dead
in their sins in hell before thee, have not thou sent them thither, or helped at
least? And if so, what comfort can thou have on earth, Matthew 18.7.
to have them, so many of them there to curse thee continually, unless by
hearty and timely sorrow thou get the pardon of all thy sins sealed to thy soul?

Which our sins should cause in us great sorrow,
Here know it also for certain, that if ever thou would kindly grieve, the
Law must not only reveal sin unto thee, and give thee cause of sorrow; but it
must cause the offense to abound, and so afford thee cause of great sorrow: so
that if ever thou partake of Gods abundant grace, Romans 5.20.
or be saved, thou must by the Law see thy sin to be exceeding sinful, and to
abound: considering how they abound, 1 For heinousness.
Which therefore see, First, for heinousness, according to all the
aggravations of it, and in the vileness of it; as by sinning against so much,
and so long patience in God, and against such means of grace, which have
wrought so effectually in many others. 2 Multitude.
Secondly, For multitude; and that thou have been a sinner not in this or that
particular, being ready to justify thy self in the rest, but in all, through
the breach of every Commandment, and neglect of every duty, though of some
more then other. 3 Continnance.
3 For long continuance in thy sin, til, it may be, thou art old in the same,
and have given the Devil and thy lusts the best of thy time. 4 Danger.
Yea, 4. For Danger, as bringing thee into hazrard of hardness of heart, and
final impenitency; yea, of hell torments: and so in the apprehension thereof
thou must feel thy sin to abound. 5 Weight.
5. For weight and burden, without making light of it as formerly.

II. From the curse and judgments due to sin. Sin will have sorrow here or
hereafter.
II. Come then, tell me again: Do not these thy sins bring thee under the Curse?
will they not hale thee to judgment, either going before thee, or following
after to judgment? Will not sin (even thy sin) have sorrow here or hereafter
for ever? Shall you always rejoice? Is not God of most pure eyes? Ah! who knows
the power of his anger? What are millions of men to him, though they be never
so great, when he is angry? What are those glorious Angels of light (which he
made) to him, if once they provoke him? showed, 1 In examples: as of the
Angels. 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6.
Does he not turn both Angels and men to destruction for their sin? God spared
not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into
chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment, etc. and that for their
pride: and it may be, thou come but little short of them in Luciferian pride,
thou man, thou woman. Yea, he spared not the whole race of mankind, which
sinning in Adam, Of the whole race of mankind in Adam.
was with him cast out of Paradise into a state of damnation; and what was his
sin? was it not the doing of that which was forbidden him, a tasting of
forbidden fruit? And do thou think with thy self how guilty thou art, not only
of that original and first sin of thy nature, but of many actual and wilful
transgressions since, and that in the same kind, most eager after such things,
as of which thou art most restrained. And was not the whole world of men,
women, The old world.
and children (eight only excepted) drowned for like l^sts, violence, excess,
and secure eating and drinking etc. as thou art guilty of? Did not God turn the
cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes for their lusts and uncleanness, pride,
fullness of bread, Sodom.
Idleness and uncharitableness? And did he not bring first the Captivity,
Ezekiel. 16. The Jews.
and since that fearful dispersion and curse of Cain upon the Jews, which
lies upon them in soul as well as body to this very day: and all for their
unbelief and rejection of Christ added to their other sins? And in effect art
thou not guilty of the same sins, who rejectest Christ in his grace, and in his
offices? Ah! think not only on such hellish torments as often seize on wicked
men here on earth, 2 In the torments of hell.
in regard of terrors and horrors of conscience; but of the torments of hell
it self, both endless and easelesse, prepared for secure sinners, when God
shall unresistibly come in fury and judgment against them, and against all
such as now contemn or neglect the time of mercy, when his wrath being once
kindled, shall burn to the bottom of hell, into which they shall be cast, where
their worm dies not, Mark 9.44.
and the fire is not quenched. This shall be effected on all out of Christ,
when Christ shall come and be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9
which would seriously be thought on by secure ones now.
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord jesus Christ, who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power.

Ah, whose heart trembles not at these things,! ah that men would seriously
think of that tearing of heart and gnashing of teeth which will be in that
eternal separation! The heart which is not now pricked, will be gnawn and
eaten (yet not consumed which were a mercy) by that worm of conscience, when in
those hellish torments which are endless, easelesse, remediless, men shall
consider how God every Sabbath did stretch out his arms of mercy to embrace
them, The worm which then will gnaw.
and they would not; how Christ offered a plaster of his own hearts blood to
cure them, if they would have been but pricked in heart, but they made light
accout of it, and trampled it under their feet. The holy Ghost put good motious
into their heart, convincing them of sin and judgment, and inviting them to
godly sorrow with hope of pardon, but they rejected those motions, and would
not be interrupted in their ease, joy and false peace. The Minister pressed
hard to have them yield, but they withstood him. Oh the deep wounds, the
grievous bitings and stingings, and the hellish cries that these and like
thoughts then (but too late) will work and fetch from such poor souls! And what
a grief is it now to the hearts of their godly and conscionable Ministers and
others who wish them well, parents, friends and kindred, that these men will not
lay any of these things now in time to heart, or be persuaded or entreated to
prevent their own everlasting ruin, as if all were fables, which we tell them,
and framed only to scare them! What? fables? and scarecrows? Ah dearly
beloved, let neither the Devil, or your own treacherous hearts delude you: but
know that God is truly displeased with your sins (as being many ways
dishonored, grived, and wounded in his name and glory by the same) yea, 3 In
and by the sufferings of Christ, and of Gods severity against sin, appearing
therein.
is infinitely just as as well as merciful: and that howsoever he gave his
Son in the greatest mercy to become man for us, yet his justice against sin
did equally appear in subjecting him (his only dear and beloved Son) to such a
cursed, shameful, and opprobrious, and painful death for sinners, in whom
thus dying we may see Gods severity, which was showed against this his beloved
Son oncestanding in our stead. His justice could not be satisfied with Gold, or
any thing corruptible, not with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil, yea, 1 Pet. 1, 18, 19 Micah 6, 7. Psalm. 49.7, 8.
not with the death and sacrifice of our only or firstborn children. The
redemption of souls is precious, (and in regard of any humane or created power,
price or means) cease for ever. It is not the death or entreaty of an Angel
could do it: no nor barely the entreaty of God the Son himself: How Christ was
pricked for us:
It must cost the price of his blood, if it be done: and therefore becoming man
for us, his head was pricked with thorns; his hands and feet pierced with
nails; his heart pricked, pierced, and wounded with a spear; his body broken
for us; yea his soul heavy, grieved, wounded in a sense of his Fathers wrath
against him, making him not only sweat drops of blood, being in an agony, but
complain and cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? All this (and
more then I can express) the only beloved Son of God suffered from his
Father, ere he overcame death or recovered the sense of his Fathers love, or
yet a possibility of salvation for thee; And what we, Unless here we sorrow
savingly,
and do thou think to pass thy whole time in pleasures, ease, vanity and
sin, and yet not so much as be pricked in heart or wounded in conscience for
thy sin, and troubled in sold in the fear and apprehension of thy so justly
deserved damnation? yea will thou also expect and presume of heaven and the
joys thereof? Let me then tell thee from God, that unless thou in time be
pricked in thy heart for thy sin, yea many sins, especially such as these
converts, as has been said, were pricked for (crucifying of Christ,
unthankfulness, unbelief, impenitency, rejection of him in the offers of his
grace, hardness of heart, obstinacy, ignorance and disobedience, etc.) I say,
neither shall Christ's pricking and piercing, his wounds, and sufferings avail
thee any thing; and which more is, thou thy self in thine own person, most
inevitably shall and must suffer the vengeance of everlasting fire, must in our
own persons suffer in well.
and all those sorrows eternally which the Son of God did suffer as thy surety
(if thou could believe and rest on him and repent) and which made him so cry
out: And then see how thou will be able to endure it; or rather, O my brother,
O my sister, O every one of you, now in love to your own selves consider this
in time: O consider this (says God himself unto you) what? your own ill doings
and desert, Psalm. 50.22.
and yet my patience and forbearance a while; now consider this, ye that forget
God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Consider that the
sins thou have not sorrowed for, which would be considered.
thou must sorrow for here or hereafter; choose where thou will have thy
portion, whether here (where thy sorrow may be saving, accompanied with inward
and true joy, and followed with eternal and unspeakable comfort) or hereafter,
where endless sorrows in soul and body shall be the just reward of thy
security now. Thy sins will be thy ruin one day, Sin else will be our ruin.
and tear thee in pieces, if thou be not their ruin now by mortification of
them, and of thy self so far as to be pierced and wounded savingly for them
in time. God forgets them not, though thou do; they are written before him, as
with a pen of iron and point of a diamond in his book, which one day will be
opened against thee, and be more terrible to thee then was the hand writing
against Belshazzar: for such an hand writing there is for every sin of thine
unrepented and uncancelled; how many then are the curses, wraths, and
vengeances that are due to thee, and will most inevitably befall thee for thy
so many sins not repented of? A wonder that any in this case can be merry. Isa.
5.14.
how can you then be merry or light-hearted, when so many thousand woes belong
unto you, compass you about, and dog you continually at the heels? all waking
and watching against you, like so many hungry bears, starved wolves. and lions!
yea when hell it self gapeth for you, enlarging her self, and opening her mouth
without measure: as for all other sinners, so particularly for such as follow
strong drink, and in whose feasts are the harp, and viol, tabret, pipe and
wine, but no regard of the works of the Lord, with 11, 12.
no consideration of the operation of his hands or of any thing, either their
own sins, or Gods judgments, which is seasonable. Futher to convince the
secure, a few questions are propouneded to them.


O then in the fear of God be convinced of these truths, and of the necessity
of such sorrow: and let me ask thee yet a a question or two. 1 Do thou so
live, or can thou so live as not to sin, thou able to undergo the curse and
penalty of the Law, by suffering Gods wrath everlastingly? no alas! thou
accountest that, (and well may) intolerable. 3 I ask again, what will thou
then do? seeing thou art so many ways a transgressour, Samaria, suffering a
famine within, and a siege of strong enemies without) that thou shall
undoubtedly perish and die. Oh then be sensible at length of thine own danger,
see thine own inevitable destruction, unless in time thou humble thy self with
God and judge thy self, that he judge thee not in hell; be sensible of the fire
of his wrath and of hell, (hold no skreens any longer between thee and it) seek
to quench it in time by thy tears and hearty sorrow for sin, lest thou be cast
into it irrecoverably; and in consideration of the torments of it, now cry
earnestly to God in Christ, O Lord, here give me my part of sorrow, and teach
my heart more truly to mourn for my sin, and be merciful unto me, here O
God, here burn, cut, lance, wound, prick and pierce my heart savingly, that I
never may know what belongs to everlasting burnings, woundings, and gnawings. 4
Or now again (to bar thee off, Deuteronomy. 29. where verse 10 etc. All (without
exception of any present or absent, born or not yet born) are either in their
own persons, or persons of their Parents, presented before the Lord, Deuteronomy.
29.10.18, 19, 20. etc.
to enter into his covenant, lest says Moses there should be any among you,
man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turns away this day from the
Lord our God, etc. And it comes to pass when he hears the words of this
curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have Peace, though
I walk in the imagination of mine heart. -- The Lord will not spare him, but
then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him etc. such an
one shall be cursed with a witness. Know then thou man, thou woman, thou rich
man, thou poor man, thou young man, thou old man; even thou, whosoever thou
art, as thou art a sinner, yea a secure sinner, even thou art such a wretch,
thou art under wrath, and therefore thou must mourn, thou must be pricked and
wounded for thy sin; let us reason it a little, And they are reasoned withal.
according to such general propositions as both Law and Gospel will afford us.

The Law curses every one that continues not in all things which are written
in the book of the Law to do them; Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Joh. 3.18-36
Generally, all impenitent ones and unbelevers.
The Gospel does no less for such as obey and believe it not: He that believes
not, is condemned already; he shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him: so excepe ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish; here is no exemption
of any then. But now the conscience of the guilty will, it cannot but apply:
but I have not continued to do all things written, I as yet have not repented
of my sins and transgressions of the Law, I do not yet believe on Christ
aright, or bring forth the fruits of a true faith: therefore (will the
conscience infer) I am under the curse, I am under condemnation and under
wrath. Now does not this come to thy heart as the point of a sword to wound
thee? if not, its a sign of a seared heart, sealed up for damnation.

Particularly, 1. Swearers,
The Word of God says more particularly* The Lord will not hold such guilesse
as take his Name in vain: but says the conscience of the profane swearer, and
forswearer, I have often and still do take Gods Name in vain by perjury, or at
least by rash swearing; therefore it cannot smoother, but infer, I am a guilty
person, and holden in the guilt of that sin (beside the custom of it) as in
cords, unto condemnation; what swearers heart does not now quake that considers
this? So adulterers and fornicators God will judge; 2 Adulterers,
this the word says; but I am an adulterer, a fornicator, and an unclean
person: I know not now whom I touch; Heb. 13.4.
but the conscience of the guilty will apply: therefore God will bring me to
judgment for this sin. Now how can any thus infer without remorse of
conscience? and many others.
in a word, know ye not, (says the Apostle appealing to the conscience even of
natural men, informed yet with some knowledge of the word) that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived; 1 Cor. 6.9.10.11.
neither fornicators nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. Whom does not the
word now touch? seeing there is the like reason of all other sins that can be
named: but says the conscience of the guilty, Such an one am I, and as yet I
am unwashed; I have not yet mourned or been troubled for this my sin of
Idolatry, Adultery, Covetousness, Theft, Drunkenness, Railing, Extortion,
etc. Therefore I shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Ah woeful case of such a
soul I how should it never rest till it bewail, mourn and grieve for such sins,
and till at length with a good and true conscience it be able truly to say,
such I was, but I am washed, but I am sanctified, but I am justified, etc.

For conclusion of these motives; though the thing exhorted unto, namely sorrow
and humiliation for sin, be an unpleasant argument, for every man's heart is in
the house of mirth, more and rather then of mourning, Eccles. 7.4. Amos 6.3.
and 5, 6. 3 The former exhortations urged also,
and men put far away the evil day, and give themselves to mirth etc. yet it is
wholesome, yea necessary, if we will show any care of our precious souls; and
if we were but truly sensible of our cause of sorrow, as in bodily diseases, as
the stone, toothach and agues we are, as from examples so, from Gods promise
made to contrite ones, and their privilege.
we needed not be so much persuaded or urged to seek the true method for our
cure. But if neither our danger of Gods heavy judgments will move us (which we
might prevent by timely judging of our selves) nor the examples of the elect,
and of true converts, unto which we must be conformable, and who lost nothing
by their sorrow, for by godly sorrow the heart is made better, and it is the
only way to true comfort and blessedness, and to have our prayers heard: Psalm.
34.17.18. yet if there be any spark of ingenuity in us, or desire to partake
of communion and fellowship with God; let us be moved thereunto by this
gracious promise and privilege made and communicated to such: Isa. 57.15.
for thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is
holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart
of the contrite ones: for besides the assured promise of reviving and of
comfort, here is a wonderful privilege, that our hearts shall become as new
heavens for God to dwell in: which he does, as by our faith, so by our
contrition. The great and holy God has but two heavens to dwell in, the heaven
of heavens (for his greatness and glory): and the heart of a contrite sinner
for his holiness and grace): for till this be done, God and our souls will
never close, or dwell together.

Let these things be thought on by all on both sides: both by true mourners in
Israel, which would be considered by all, good and bad.
whose sorrow hence appears is not to be sorrowed for, as being accompanied
with Gods presence, and ending in eternal joy: and by our joviall Gentlemen,
and such as are all for their mirth, to make themselves and others sport, by
breaking jests on Religion, and on the servants of God, whose end (as lives
now) will be different.
who, as Jeremy, at their sitting down (to drink and feast) and at their rising
up, are their music, Lam. 3.63, and 64. these men are rewarded with sorrow of
heart, and with Gods curse upon them, as Jeremy prays; They cease from their
music, and from their joy and dance; their dance (as has been said) is or
will be turned into mourning, Lam. 4.14, 15. The word of truth has pronounced
true mourners to be blessed, and all others to be cursed. Blessed are ye that
weep now, for ye shall laugh. -- And woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall
mourn and weep, Luke 6.21, and 25. Behold, says the Lord, my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold my servants shall sing for joy of
heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation, or
for breaking of spirit, Isa. 65.13, 14. Such as now are pricked in heart and
broken in spirit, shall be bound up and everlastingly comforted: whereas such
as will not now be pricked, shall then be broken in heart and spirit, without
any healing following after.

CHAP. XIV.
SECT. 1. Containing a removal of lets: And first of such lets as hinder the
word to pierce.
2 Directions and means of humiliation and sorrow.
ANother thing to be considered for the furthering of these Motives, and setting
forward the Exhortation, is Direction: Motives may make a man (by Gods grace)
more willing, but Directions (by the same grace) make him more able to do his
duty. Here then we must direct you to the means of self-humbling, and how such
sorrow may be wrought in your hearts. The first of which, or that which is
first to be done, But first,
is a removal of lets and impediments thereunto.

Lets removed: which are of two sorts. 1 Lets hindering the word to hit and
pierce.
Now the Lets to godly sorrow and pricking are either such as by which the
point, as I may say, of the sword of the Spririt, or word of God is diverted,
put by, blunted, or otherwise kept from hitting or piercing: or such as by
which, though the Word hit and pierce, yet it pains not, it puts to no grief,
men still remain insensible of it, and are far from true Contrition. Of the
first sort are these:

1 Want of Meditation and of Application.
1 Inconsideration and want of Meditation; without which all Motives prove
inavailable: for want of this they are not brought home by Application; and so
men are not touched, or but lightly touched, and so as not to be much moved by
them. All actions require time and space for their operation, as fire to burn:
and so all arguments used to the soul, even the most piercing, as Gods
judgments, though they be of a fiery nature, will not warm, melt, or mollify
the heart (which is like green wood, whose sap is in it,) unless by constant
meditation they be holden and applied close to the soul, and the soul to them
by settled and serious cogitation. He only that meditateth burns, as David
says of himself; Psalm 39.3.
While I was musing the fire burned: As a man may take fire in his hand, and
not feel the effects of it, if he presently throw it from him again. Either
then resolve to set thy self seriously to meditate on the aforesaid Motives, or
such like; or never expect to have any saving sorrow (unto which thou naturally
art so averse) wrought in thee. It is not here as in sinful or natural
objects, which like lightning being once apprehended, pass through the soul and
affect the same, unto which the heart and affections of men are like unto dry
tinder, soon enflamed by the same. In this case then set times apart to
meditate on such things as may move and affect thee, and resolve that nothing
shall interrupt or hinder thee in the same, and watch against Satan's wiles.

2 Misconceit of Gods anger against sin.
2. Here take heed of misconceit of Gods Justice and Anger against sin: this
blunts the edge and point of that sword and word of God, which otherwise would
pierce, and (though wound thee, yet by wounding and pricking) would heal, cure,
and say thee. Who knows the power of his anger, when once he sets our
iniquities before him, our secret sins in the light of his countenance? Psalm.
90.5, 7, 8, -11.
O think but on the wrath of a King on earth, if he should be displeased with
thee: The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19.12. And when God as
a lion roars, who will not fear? Amos 3.8. even as all beasts quake when the
Lion roareth. Ah, beloved! great and terrible is this God whom we have to deal
withal, even a very consuming fire to such, Heb. 12.29.
who (by impenitency) set themselves as briers and thorns against him in
battle; though otherwise fury be not in him toward such as take hold of his
strength, that they may make peace with him, Isa. 27.4, 5. It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Hebr. 10.31. Who can stand
before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his
fury is powered out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him, Nahum 1.3,
4.5.6. Presume not then on Gods lenity in thy sin: be once humbled, and let thy
heart smite thee for the same, as David's heart smote him; and then (but not
till then) thou may hope in his mercy, and choose to fall into the (merciful)
hand of God, whom so thou shall have less cause to fear then man.

3 Stoutness of heart in withstanding God.
3. And now I hope I need not advise thee to beware of Pride and stoutness of
heart in standing out with God, when once thou apprehendest him angry. And yet
such has been the pride and madness of some, as that when apparently they have
seen God to fight against them, they have, as it were in despite of him, gone
on obstinately in their sin, and hardened themselves against him, as Ephraim,
and the inhabitants of Samaria, that said in the pride and stoutness of heart,
The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stone; the Sycomores
are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars. But what says God?
Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, -- and
they shall devour Israel with open mouth: -- for all this his anger is not
turned away, etc. for the people turns not unto him that smites them, --
Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, etc. Isa. 9.10, 11,
12, 13, 14. Thou can never humble thy self, if thus thou fear not God.

4. Self-love.
4. But if thou can not thus resist God in his anger by thy pride; yet it may
be, such is thy love to thy self, as that though thou acknowledge God an angry
and just God with sinners; yet thou can not think he can or will be so angry
with thee: thou can not conceive, nay indeed, thou will not be convinced that
thy case is so bad, or that his threatenings are true of thee: and so thou
put and postest them off to others, as not concerning thee, as if thou
had not this need to be so humbled: And thus thou put by the blow or
thrust from thy self to others; or else so hidest, denyest, or excusest thy sin
some beloved sin or other, as if when search and examination is made for it,
there were no such traitor hid in thy house or heart. Or else thou seek to
bribe conscience, or to stop the mouth of it by one trick or other; as some
being arrested, make the Officer drunk, that so, or by some other means they
may escape from him. Or otherwise, as is said, by a good, but ungrounded
conceit of thy self, and of thine own estate, being alive (before the Law come
closer and nearer home to thy conscience) thou think thy self safe and in
good estate, Romans 7.8.
and apprehendest no danger or judgment as belonging to thee, but only to
others. But in a word, know and remember, that though thou be thus partial
toward thy self, yet God is not, as has been said: though thou hide, cover
and conceal thy bosom sin, neither searching it out thy self, nor suffering the
word to search thee; yet God will search thee and find it out. Thy safest way
were to judge and condemn thy self, that thou may not be condemned and judged
of the Lord; and to imitate the poor and humble Publican, who smote on his
breast and heart, confessing and craving mercy for his sin, and to beware of the
proud Pharisee his self-justification.

5. Flattery of soothing Prophets.
5. And as part cause of the former, beware of smoothing and flattering
teachers; who howsoever sometimes they may make a flourish, and declame (it may
be) against sin, and tell of Gods judgments, yet they will have a care, that
they come not so near as to offend thee, or to touch thee in thy special sin,
if especially thou be one in place, or who may come even with them again.
These men heal before they hurt; and what stings others the faithful servants
of God have left in the minds and consciences of any, they seek to pluck out,
and to heal the wound with their oily words: being like the false Prophets of
old, of whom, and of the Priests it was said, They have healed the hurt (bruise
or breach) of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when
there is no peace, Jer. 6. v. 14. And when Gods dearest servants tell the
people of particular judgments belonging to them, and so by wounding and
pricking their consciences bring them on in a good way toward repentance,
these flattering Prophets strengthen their hands, that they should not return
from their wicked ways, by promising them life: Ezekiel. 13.22.
only wounding and making sad the heart of the righteous, whom God has not
made sad. In this case I must say to you, if you would be pricked and savingly
wounded for your sins, as the Lord in another case said to the Kings of the
Nations: Therefore hearken not ye to your Prophets, nor to your Diviners, etc.
for they prophecy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your Land -- and that
ye should perish, Jer. 27.9, 10. and Jer. 29.8.

6. Lastly, 6. Unbelief.
take heed of unbelief: want of faith to believe Gods true Prophets when they
tell you of the danger of your sin, keeps you from applying the threatenings of
God to your selves, so that you reap no fruit by the word; but though fairly
warned, and called to repentance with hope of mercy, perish through your own
unbelief in his wrath, as it was with those of the old world: whereas Noah
himself, by faith, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with
fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house, Hebr. 11.7. So we read of
Enoch, Jude v. 7. (though but the seventh from Adam, and in the beginning of
the world) who yet set the end of the world, or the day of judgment before
him, prophesying thereof; whereas secure men through their unbelief never
humble themselves (if then) till judgments be upon them; being herein like
such as hearing thunderclaps far off, are not moved till they be as present
over their heads, and some hurt in their sight be done: then with Pharaoh they
tremble, but not till then. So want of faith in Christ keeps men from being
sensible of their sin, and from being pricked in conscience for it. When was it
that these Converts in my Text were pricked in heart? It was when they heard,
and withal believed that Christ whom they crucified was the true Messiah: So
it was foretold Zech. 12.10. that when they should look upon him whom they had
pierced, they should be pierced themselves, and mourn bitterly, and be sensible
of their sin, which shall be fulfilled especially at the conversion of their
Nation; but then they must no longer abide in unbelief, Romans 11.23. Seeing then
faith is the gift of God, we must earnestly pray for it, and carefully attend
to the ministry of the word by which it is begotten. To withdraw from the
hearing of the word either in regard of presence of body, or attention of mind,
is to keep our selves out of the sphere and compass, within which only the
word of God, that sword of the Spirit, is active and operative, and will reach
and pierce us.

SECT. 2. Lets removed which make the soul senseless: And first, Sensuality and
worldliness.
2 Lets keeping the soul from being sensible of pricking.
BUt men, who cannot avoid the stroke of the word, the scorching of that fire,
the smiting of heart and conscience (having such teachers as smite home, and
will not suffer them by their evasions, shifts, excuses and extenuations to put
by the blow,) yet, as experience shows, show themselves little sensible of
the same, neither are they truly made sorrowful thereby: being like Jacob or
Israel, Men's senselsness.
for blindness, deafness, incredulity, senselessness and stupidity, on whom,
it is said, the Lord poured the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle,
and it set him on fire round about, yet he knew not, and it burned him, yet he
laid it not to heart, Isa. 42.25. or like the drunkard, who may say, They have
stricken me, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not; Prove.
23, 25. being past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19. and of cauterized consciences, 1 Timothy
4.2.

Now there are diverse things which bereave men of all spiritual sense and
pain, which accordingly, if we would become true mourners for sin, we must
carefully beware of, and see that we give no way unto them. Men have ways and
means by which they (for the while especially) become insensible of pain by
pricking, Diverse things bereaving men of the sense of bodily pain. As, Deep
sleep. Searing.
burning, bone-setting, incision, cutting off a member, and the like; as by the
use and application of narcoticall or stupefactive medicines and potions, by
being cast into a deep and dead sleep, by which all their senses, even that of
feeling, are bound up: so by searing and burning, whereby the part is
mortified, and the inward humidity dried up. So I have heard and read,
Bewithching.
how in the body of witches in covenant with the Devil, in the place where by
sucking or otherwise he sets his mark (or Sacramental sign) the place is so
benumbed and deaded; that a pin of a great largeness and length may be thrust
in to the head, without the grief or any sense of the party; by which means, if
that mark or bewitched place can be but once found out in the suspected party,
it is accounted detection sufficient. So when a member of the body becomes once
to be gangrained by excessive heat, Gangrenes.
or upon a wound or hurt not looked to in time, it becomes to be void of sense,
as being deprived of vital heat and spirit, to be blasted, and like wilde-fire
(some call it S. Anthonies fire) to spread, and so tends to the destruction of
the party. So when that uneven swelling or tumor called a Cancer possesses
any part, Cancers.
that part comes to be black or wan, and without all sense or pain. In like
manner where much fatness is or corruption, Mcuh fatness and corrupt matter.
the outward skin or rind once pricked or pierced, the pin, weapon or
instrument being thrust, further in, is not much felt; such corruption has no
sense in it, and that part is so far without sense till the corruption be drawn
or purged out.

Now if we would be truly sensible, and mourn savingly for sin in a sense of
Gods displeasure, as also spiritual pain and grief.
when and after that the word meets with us, Let us take heed of such things as
in a proportionable manner stupifie, benum, and bereave the soul of all
spiritual sense of sin or judgments.

Take heed then of these things:

1 Sensuality, and worldliness,
First of sensuality, love of pleasures, gluttony, drunkenness, good
fellowship, to which also let me add cares and too much minding of the world.
Some give themselves purposely to sensual courses to stop the mouth, and cries
of their conscience, and to prevent or put away heart-qualms as they will call
them. binds all the spiritual senses.
Howsoever such courses as these do besot and stupifie the conscience, dull and
fill the spiritual senses of the soul, cast it into a dead sleep, whereby
through present delectation in sin and sensual courses, and through cares of
the world, Isa. 6.9.
they have not eyes to discern distinctly of any thing or object which concerns
them: not an ear for God, or for his word and judgments so as to hear the rod
and who has appointed it; when God calls them to mourning, Micah. 6.
sensual courses cry louder and more prevailingly with them; Isa. 22.12, and
5, 11, 12. Psalm. 34.8. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3.
God and the works of his hand can have no attention, they are so taken up with
sensual delights: they cannot be brought to taste the things or goodness of
God and of his ways, all ways leading them to repentance are so distasteful
to them: all the good means used for their good and humbling are the savor of
death to them: 2 Cor. 2.16.
yea their hearts are fat and so brawny that they are past feeling and
insensible: herein like unto Idols and images, Ephesians. 4.19.
having eyes and see not, ears and hear not, etc. Psalm. 115.6. Howsoever as
outward heat abates the inward; and as the love of one thing lessens the love
of another; and as the distempered eye will not let a man see any thing in its
own and right color but like it self; Simil.
so men's love and affection to their lusts and other distempers of their souls,
will not suffer any thing to work upon or affect them, but what is sensual:
they are so taken up in their thoughts and affections with such things as that
what savours not of the flesh or of the world, does no whit affect them. Talk
of Religion, especially of duties of mortification to a voluptuous man, he has
no ear for that: and of like duties to the worldling, and you shall find his
soul so filled and taken up with the love of the world that you shall have him
go a way sorrowful from you indeed, but not for his sin or covetousness, but
because you interrupt his thoughts and courses which he is not minded to leave:
as we see in that rich young man who upon that ground though he seemed to have
an ear to obey in all things else, Matthew. 19.
yet not in that; his love to the world made the duty, of self denial
unpleasant to him. So generally, wine, women, and the world steal away and
besot the heart; the immoderate use of, yea or love to any earthly thing, takes
away all spiritual sense: the more sensible the soul is of such things, the
less it is of spiritual, and so the soul as well as the body becomes
spiritually drunken, and casts into a dead sleep.
and so far senseless, when once it is drowned and drenched with the
pleasures and cares of the world: this casts it into a dead sleep which binds
all the senses of the soul, and possesses it with a spirit of slumber, Isay
29.10. Romans 10, 7, 8. The godly like the five wise virgins may sometimes
slumber, but yet their heart waketh: but these men's hearts are asleep, yea even
in a dead sleep: to whom that belongs, Ephesians. 5.14.
awake thou that sleep and stand up from the dead: they cannot be got
awaked, like such as be oppressed with soporiferous diseases, Abernethy physic
for the soul chap. 7.
as with Lethargies, Caro's Catalepsies, Cataphoraes or Typhomanes, which are
all deadly, except they be speedily cured.

Now to prevent senselesnes from sensuality, I only tell you of our Saviors
advice and commend it to you, The Remedy is watch fullness.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon
you unawares -- (for so it came upon the old world, Luke 21 34.36.
Matthew. 24.37.) watch ye therefore and pray always, etc. yea the Scripture
joins fasting and prayer together, Math. 17.21.
that so we might take heed of bodily drunkenness as well as spiritual. All
deadly sleeps proceed of a cold humor or vapor, replenishing the brain, and
oppressing the animal spirits and senses: so this deadly spirit of slumber is
when men are frozen in the cold dregs of their sins and sensuality, and
sobriety.
Jer. 48.11. whom God therefore will visit, Zeph. 1.12. Take heed then of
ebriety both corporal and spiritual: and be ye sober and watch. As ebriety
causes sleep, 1 Pet. 5.18.
so sobriety keeps men waking and sensible. Let us be sober both in body and in
mind, that we also may be kept waking and affected with such things as do
concern us, even with sense of sin and wrath. Let us, not only when we hear
Gods word, but at all times, wholly put away the lusts of youth; and for other
delights and cares, use a moderation: The like let us (spiritually) do in all
our joys, yea sorrows, in our desires, delights, designs, hopes and
confidence: take we heed especially of spiritual drunkenness, and of the
immoderate love and use of the creature, especially when we go about any good
duties, as this of hearing Gods word. For my part, I otherwise in handling this
argument of godly sorrow, compunction and conversion, shall despair of
fastening any nails in you by the hammer of the word by which ye may be surely
nailed, sewed and fastened to Jesus Christ: a sensual heart, is a senseless
heart, like that of Nabals, whose drunken heart, 1 Samuel 25.37.
though merry within him, died, and he became as a stone.

CHAP. XIIII. SECT. 3. Where three more lets removed; which are, great sins,
lesser sins, custom in sinning.
2 Great and h^inous sins.
2 SEcondly, and more brieflly, take heed of great sins, such as lay wast and
dead the conscience. As the body is subject to two kinds of diseases, and
maimes, some that affect and afflict sense, some that deprive of sense, as
violent blows; so is the soul also. As then a prick will make a man start, but
a heavy blow will dazzle, and stond or astonish him: which astonish and make us
unsensible of lesser sins.
so some lesser sins will be felt when greater shall not, at least not so
soon or easily: as we see in David, who no sooner had received the muster of
the people, whom in pride he would needs have to be numbered, but his heart did
smite him, and he was pricked and wounded in conscience: but in the case of
Bathsheba, but especially of Vriah, he lay long dead and senseless, till after
many months Nathan, being sent of God, brought life, at least sense into him
again. Watch then and pray with David, Keep back thy servant from presumptuous
sins, let them not have dominion over me, so shall thou be innocent from the
great transgression, Psalm. 19.13.

If a man once by some great blow be stonded, he is not easily sensible of
smaller hurts or prickings: so for one that is cast into a deep or dead sleep,
or being the devils vassal, is marked by him by his sucking life and sense out
of him, or casting him into a trance, etc. Give once way to gross impiety, to
wilful profannesse or obstinate contempt of God, his word and ministers, and
never look that lesser sins shall any why annoy or trouble thy conscience, of
which thou will never make bones (as we say) or scruple: the soul so becomes
desperate and careless, hardened and past feeling, to work all uncleanness
with greediness; this is when men once give themselves over unto
lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4.19.
or to any other like gross sin. The heart is so full of corruption and filthy
matter, as it is not sensible, grieved or pained, when otherwise it is pierced
and met withal by the word and threatenings, yea, curses, woundings and
hewings of the Law and Prophets of God.

3 Lesser sins against conscience,
3 Yet neglect not small sins, as they may be accounted, or beginnings: to give
way wittingly and against conscience to the least sin, leads the way to
hardness of heart, to senselessness and stupidity of conscience. Tenderness
of conscience would be preserved. The heart commonly of young men (especially
if well educated, 2 Chro. 34.27.
as we see in King Josiah) is tender, and startles at the least sin and thought
of Gods judgments, is soon pierced and troubled; the least sin will trouble
it, and make it tremble: which being given way unto, make way for hardness of
heart.
but if once least way be given to such small sins, or to beginnings,
especially against knowledge, or that a man begins once to detain the truth in
unrighteousness, to quench the spirit, and to quell checks of conscience, the
heart by degrees grows hard and senseless, and at length can swallow, and
without any great trouble digest even greater and grosser evils, without all
sense of sin, or fear of wrath. One well compares it thus: The heart at first
being tender will endure nothing, but the least sin will trouble it; as water,
when it begins to freeze will not endure any thing, no not so much as the
weight of a pin upon it, but after a while will bear the weight of a laden
cart. against which we must watch,
Let young men especially make use of this; yea, let all men take heed of
giving way to the least sins against conscience. Sin at first, to a conscience
not enured thereunto, may seem intolerable and unsupportable; but unless the
heart watch well over it self, and maintain its life, tenderness and
sensiblenesse, or if once it begin to favor it self, and wittingly give way to
the least beginnings of sin, lest we become at length senseless, as in examples.
it shall be given over by degrees to senselessness and searednesse of
conscience, yea to delight in, desire, defend and plead for it: as in King
Haza^l, first abominating that cruelty which he after practiced: and in Alipius
Saint Austine's friend, first abhorring the bloody spectacles of the gladiatory
combatants, but giving himself leave, by the importunity of friends, to be but
present, though at first he winked and would not open his eyes to behold the
same; yet at length not only beheld them and that with delight, but drew
others to behold that which at first himself loathed. Thus the soul by steps
descends to hell, when men show not themselves from first to last sensible of
sin. Bernard makes the steps to be seven; Seven steps to hell.
whereby sin seems 1 Insupportable, a burden not to be born: 2 afterward
only Heavy: 3 Light: 4 Insensible: 5 Delightful: 6 Desirable: 7 Defensible,
or pleaded for and justified.

If ever then thou would be truly sensible of, and sorrowful for sin, Its
not to dally with suggestions; and first, thoughts of sin.
take heed and watch against the first suggestions and occasions of sin, and
that especially by the government of the senses; as two things especially undid
David, Otium and Oculus, his ease and his eye: so against Cogitation, or of
tossing any sinful objects in thy thoughts, or of dallying with them. These are
the devils baits, at which we must not nioble; and his harbingers, which if
kindly entertained, he is invited to come with his legions: and so thou art
entangled with delight, and drawn on to consent, resolution, practice, yea,
custom, and so to senselessness, defense, and boasting, as Isa. 3.9. Jer.
6.15. Psalm. 52.1. And thus sin, like a serpent, whilst ^tstings, benums us,
and casts us into a deadly sleep and lethargy, of which we die.

4 Custom of stnning. ab assuetis non fit passio.
4. Specially beware of Custom of sinning: Its an old and experienced saying,
Custom of sinning takes away all sense of sin: neither are we much moved with
such things as we are much used to: use and custom makes men sleep quietly by
the falls of great waters, and where much noise is, and not to be afraid of
that which at first was terrible: as in Nottingham-shire, upon the murder of a
woman, Which bereaves of sense of sin,
buried and hid under a tree in a wood, a voice was heard in that place of one
hollowing and whooping, at which all were afraid, and passengers left that way:
but continuing long, and no hurt done to any, they took to their old way
without any terror as formerly; and asked by strangers what it was, It is
(said they) the Whooper of the Wood, and made no more of it. So it is with sin,
if we accustom our selves thereunto. it brings us to carelessness, and that to
senselessness, so that at length custom (our own and others) shall be pleaded,
and at length is pleaded for, and made to justify wicked acts.
and made a justification of our wicked practices: as we see in those
idolatrous women pleading for their Idolatry, we will do as we have done, Jer.
44.17. So Papists harden themselves in their superstitions; and common people
in their profaning the Sabbath by their sports, may-games, and in other their
sinful customs. Thus the heart is hardened at length and becomes senseless:
Simile.
even as some parts of the body become through use callous, brawny, dry and
dead, a dead and thick skin growing over the flesh, which may be pricked or
pared without sense of pain, as we see in laborers.

SECT. 4. Two more lets: Gods secret vengeance; and Hardness of heart; with the
nature and danger of it: and Means to prevent it.
5 Gods secret vengeance,
5 THere is Gods secret vengeance, which we are to take notice, yea, to take
heed of; whereby he gives obstinate and presumptuous sinners over to stupidity
and senselessness, denying and withholding his grace, and the blessing of his
word and other means from such as have neglected or abused the same. whereby he
bereaves obstinate sinners of sense.
Thus he tells Isaiah what the effect of his prophesying should be: Go tell this
peopple, Hear ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye indeed, but perceive
no: make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, ^and shut
their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert and be healed: Isa. 6.9, 10. which
terrible doom we now are the more to be afraid of, because it is six times
made use of in the New Testament, Matthew. 13.14. Mark 4.12. Luke 8.10. John
12.40. Acts 28.26 Romans 11 8.
which is more then is done by any other Text of the Old Testament. So
elsewhere, Isa. 29.10. The Lord has poured out upon you the spirit of deep
sleep, and has closed your eyes: the Prophets and your Rulers, the Seers has
he covered, etc. Here my counsel is: Take heed you do not so long dally with
God, smother his truth, blind your own eyes, neglect his call, who are taught
not to dally with God.
make light of the offers of his grace, despise his threatenings and
corrections, that you provoke him to curse his own Ordinances to you, and give
you up to senselessness and final impenitency and Indolency. Hearken then to
his first call, Heb. 3.7.
and to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, lest he give
you up to final hardness: as now it follows.

6 The not fearring the judgment of hardness of heart.
6. Lastly, As fear God, who thus by our dallying may be provoked to deprive us
of all spiritual sense and feeling; so also be afraid of Hardness of heart,
whether acquired and attracted by your own means, by your sensuality,
presumption, carelessness, giving way to beginnings, custom of sinning: or
inflicted by Gods just judgment, giving you wholly up to your own lusts, or to
Satan to harden you. Keep so much sense, as of all other evils and judgments
to be most afraid of this: for if God once give a man up to it, which if we will
avoid, we must fear.
it is worse then to be given up to the devil: so was the Incestuous
Corinthian, who came to sense of his sin, and repented to life and salvation:
but these are denied that which they never cared for, true sense of sin,
sorrowing for it, and repentance, and so are next door to hell it self, It is a
fearful judgment and evil.
which opens her mouth for them, they being in condition next to the estate of
damned spirits, seeing their damnation is sealed upon them, and they kept under
darkness, and in the insensible chains of the guilt of their sins, and of
their obstinate hardness to the judgment of the great day.

making men 1 Vnpliable to the word, stif-necked, stony,
This hard heart is 1. An unpliable heart, a dry, stiff, and stony heart,
whereby men become stif-necked, wilful, strongheaded, like untamed beasts that
will not admit of the yoke. It is that Adamantine heart spoken of Zech. 7.12.
implying a stony hardness; Physicians would call it a Tophos, or a callositie,
or brawny hardness, like unto that white, hard, and dry substance that
conglutinates broken bones. It is according to S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.18.
(...), blindness, or rather hardness of heart. Such in the soul, as when in
the body any part of it, whether inward, as the liver or spleen, or outward,
becomes hard through the dyring up of the inward humidity, Dry and seared,
whether by any infirmity, as scirrous tumors; or by searing or burning with
an hot iron, as in beasts which are gelt and then seared; or by labor. Such is
a hard heart, being destitute of the moisture of Gods grace and of his spirit,
a stiff and obstinate heart, which will not bow nor yield to Gods word by
obedience, matthew. 23.17. Its an impudent heart, as Ezekiel. 2.14. and 3.7. by
which men grow worse and worse till they perish. Impudent,
It is an impenitent and unyeelding heart, Impenitent,
like metal unmolten, an heart resisting the word and spirit, Acts 7.51. It is
such a heart as was in the Jews before, and now is in them since they are cast
off, Romans 11.25. on whom is Cains curse. Its a heart of Belial, a wicked heart,
without yoke, Deuteronomy. 15.9. that Beasts heart which was given to Nebuchadnezzar,
Dan. 4.16. Howsoever, it is a disobedient and gainsaying heart, disobedient,
and unyeelding,
Romans 10.21. and makes men so. I is such an heart as is not moved at
threatenings, so as to be broken thereby; or at promises, so as to be molten by
them; at judgments inflicted, to be humbled; or at mercies, to rejoice or be
thankful; at injunctions or commands of God, to obey or perform them. being
contrary to the tender heart, or fleshy heart, which is obedient.
Contrary to which is the tender heart, the soft, fleshy and pliable heart;
such as was in these Converts here, who being pricked, presently offered
themselves ready to obey, saying, What shall we do? so in Paul, Lord, What
would thou have me to do? and in the Jaylour, What shall I do to be saved?
This is the heart of flesh in mercy promised to (...) as shall be saved, Ezekiel.
11.19. and. 36.26. The tender heart, pliable showing its tenderssene both to
God,
such as was in good King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. whose property is to be
pliable and yielding both to God and man: 1 It stands not out against, or
resists Gods word, but quakes at threatenings, melts at promises, is humbled at
judgments, as 2 Chronicles. 30.10.11. not such as was in Zedekiah, 2 Chronicles. 36.12.
of whom it is said, he did evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled
not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord:
or in Belshazzar, framing to his will:
Dan. 5.21.22. who did not humble his heart, though he knew all such evils and
judgments as befell his father for hardening his mind in pride, verse 20. In a
word, the soft heart yields like soft wax to the impressions of Gods grace,
word and spirit, and like molten metal frames to the form, and obeys that form
of Doctrine whereto it is delivered, as the phrase is Romans 6.17.2. The tender
heart shows it self also toward others, by showing forth bowels of pity to men
in misery, and man, by pity and kindness.
Heb. 13.3. and of kindness and forgiveness to such as do it wrong, Ephesians.
4.32.

2. This heard heart I speak of, as it is stiff, stony and unpliable, so it is
also insensible, void of all spiritual sense, especially that of feeling; this
is through want of spiritual life; 2 unsensible, and without life,
where no life is, there is no sense at all; and where life is, though other
senses may be wanting, yet not that of feeling: that sense though it be not the
most noble (for so is the sense of sight and hearing) yet it is the most
necessary sense, there being no life without it, where it is wholly wanting or
lost; it of all senses, alone is diffused throughout all parts (almost) of the
whole body, and it being lost, there is no more intercourse of vital and animal
spirits, or influence of them by the nerves into other parts, and consequently
no longer any proportion or harmony of qualities or of temperament, in which
proportion the native moisture and heat is founded and consists. So that
feeling and sense of pain is needful to the very being of every creature:
arguing spiritu-death,
and so is spiritual feeling as necessary to the being of the new creature: so
that we may conclude that the heart which is an insensible heart is a dead
heart, Ephesians. 4.18.19.
and alienated from the life of God: at least (and that is bad enough)
possessed with a spirit of slumber, and dead sleep, whilst not one but all the
senses of the soul are holden in it (as the bodily senses in and by bodily
sleep) and that through a kind of dregginesse which stops the passages of
the spirits, Or at least a dead sleep, depriving men of their spiritual senses.
by which the whole heart and soul is made unsensible: for hereby men are
without, 1 Hearing, Isa. 6.9. 2 Seeing, Isa. 6.9. Ephesians. 4.18. 3 without all
spiritual Taste, Romans 8.5. 4 Smell, 2 Cor. 2.16. Lastly, without feeling, Ephesians.
4.19. having their hearts fat and insensible, Isa. 6.10. yea in a dead sleep,
and sleep of death, and therefore insensible: insensible of good and evil, of
mercies and of judgments, of grace and sin, without true love, desire and joy
in the one; and without Fear, Being contrary to the sensible heart. 1 Kings 3.9.
shame, anger, and (godly) sorrow in the other: contrary to which heart is
that, which having a new life put into it, and it awakened out of the
Lethargy, or rather death, of sin, begins spiritually and savingly 1 to hear:
for so we read of an hearing heart, for which Solomon prayed. 2 to see, Ephesians.
1.18. 1 Cor. 2.14.15. 3 to taste, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. with Psalm. 34.8. Cantic. 4.11.
4 to smell, Cantic. 1.3.13, 16. and 4.10, 11. 2 Cor. 2.14.16. and 5 lastly to
feel, when by self-denial the fat of this gross heart (as it is called Mat.
13.15.) which makes it also without sense Psalm. 119.70. Mat. 13.15. is consumed
and offered in sacrifice to God, according to the type. Levit. 3.3. such a
sensible heart was in these converts here, who being self convinced, self
condemned, and denying themselves, were pricked in heart, and through sense of
pain cried out, and sought help elsewhere then in themselves, and accordingly
found it.

I have thus set the benefit of the tender and sensible heart against the
other, that by the opposition I might better show the woeful condition and
miserable estate of such as, who, being past feeling, The miserable condition
of senseless and hard-hearted sinners.
give themselves over whether unto Laciviousnesse, or to any other sensual and
sinful course of life, and who accordingly are given over in Gods most
terrible, but just wrath to this, the worst of all evils on earth, even the
judgment of an hard and senseless heart; and all with this further aim, that
hereby the sinner that would attain to true compunction and pricking of heart
for his sin, and so to true conversion and salvation, would above all be most
afraid of this heavy judgment of hardness of heart, and of whatsoever may
cause or procure the same. Such as are given over to it are irrecoverably left
to the judgment of the great day: seeing their judgment here is to be denied
all sense of their dangerous and damned condition into which they have
voluntarily brought themselves, and so being left to themselves and to their
own lusts (as incorrigible) Psalm. 81. and to Satan, Hardness of heart the
greatest Let to saving pricking. 2 Pet. 2 4. and most to be labored against.
as his prisoners to be reserved in chains of darkness of mind, and dedolent
and final impenitencie, kept and brought forth to that judgment: wherein their
case is now become like that of the devil and his angels, whose judgment that
is. Of all lets then to this pricking of heart, take heed of this of hardness
of heart: for where it is, the judgment is to be deprived of all sense of sin,
and feeling of wrath, till the soul be plunged into hell, and become
irrecoverably miserable, and then lie under the sense of Gods severest wrath,
and eternal displeasure. not to fear it, is a sign of it.
Oh therefore get your hearts possessed continually with fear of this dismal
evil, and ever be afraid to be given over to it.

Now let me tell you, not to fear it when you hear so much of it is a sign it
has already seized upon you, and benumbed your spiritual senses; especially
if you have any long while lived fruitlesly or presumptuously under the means:
Young men especially to take heed of it.
and therefore especially it belongs to young men to take notice hereof, who by
reason of their age are not yet perhaps so hardened in sin through the
deceitfulness of it. There is a natural tenderness in us whilst we are
young, or a lesser degree rather of hardness which gets strength and proves
habitual through use and age, if it be not in time prevented: Let such then
especially labor to keep tenderness of heart, take advantage of their youth,
and without delays and procrastination begin to repent and to show themselves
sensible of their sin, and of Gods displeasure, lest whilst they presume of
more time and strength, God give them up to hardness and final impenitency.
Jer. 13.23.
It is hard doing good when once we are accustomed to evil. The longer the
young plant or tree grows, the deeper root it takes; and whilst custom is
not in time resisted it becomes necessity. Directions and Means to prevent it.
1 Fear it above all evils.


Therefore that hardness of heart prove no let to thy repentance, follow these
few directions.

1 Fear it as thou woulest fear the devil himself: blessed is he that thus
fears. None are further from the danger of it then those that fear it most:
the not fearing it is the next way to fall into it, or rather a sign it has
taken hold on us already. If now when you hear so much of it, your hearts be
not struck with some terror, but that you account all you hear as an idle and
empty sound of words, your case is dangerous and much to be suspected. Fear it
then when it is so, and fear it lest it be so with you. a Pray against it
Now if you fear it, as you have good reason, then in the next place, Pray most
earnestly and continually against it: pray that God would not take his word and
ministry of it from thee, whereby thou should be hardened and left without
the direction, instruction and reproof of the same, as he threatens to such as
in time repent not by it, Revel. 2.5. Pray that through thy abuse of the word,
he deny thee not the blessing of it, and make it to thee as the white of an eg,
as the savor of death. Pray that he would not send thee such teachers as never
or slightly reproving thee, shall so seem to approve of thy courses, and help
to harden thee to thy destruction: and that thou be not hardened under the
reproof of Gods faithful Ministers as were the Jews, Isa. 6.10. and 63.17.
pray that God would not take away his fear from thee Jer. 32.40. or harden thy
heart against it; Psalm 51.11.
or his holy Spirit, which commonly in the motions of it, accompanies the word
preached, but having given way to thy lusts with David: pray with him and say,
Oh cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.
Whatsoever thou deny me or take from me, (be it wealth, estate, friends,
office, etc.) yet take not thy holy Spirit from thee. Oh beloved, it is the
Spirit of God which mollifieth the heart, and therefore pray that God would
never suffer thee so much or so long to provoke him as that he should say of
thee as of the old world a little before their destruction, Gen 6. Psalm. 19.13.
my spirit shall not always strive with him. Pray and say, Lord keep me from
presumptuous sins, and yea, pray as he himself has taught thee, lead us not
into tentation. Psalm. 81.11.12.
Pray that God would not give thee up to thine own hearts lusts, to thine own
will, desires, affections, or to do evil without check or control of thy
conscience, or of his spirit: that he would deny and cross thee in all evil
or hurtful purposes, desires, endeavors, and teach thee withal to account
such crosses thy greatest blessings on earth: and that he would in mercy rather
hedge up our way, then that we should lose our selves by straying out of the
right way, as Hos. 2.6, 7.

3 Beware of evil company and example.
3 Take heed of evil and lewd company, whose example and encouragement may
help to harden thee, and acquaint thy self with those that are good, and
provoke and exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of
you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.

4 Take heed of such things as make way for hardness, Heb. 3.13. Take heed of
such evils and sins as procure it.
as of all those lets formerly named; that of inconsideration. First set thy
sin before thee, be at some distance with it: whilst sin and thou art all
one, thou will never be sensible of it. It is an experienced rule: The objects
of senses being close placed to the organ of the senses, makes no sensation, as
color near the sight is not discerned: and so in the rest. And withal take
heed of such sins as procure hardness and provoke God to give thee up to it,
as especially these, first, little love to the word and truth; this makes God
give men up to strong delusion, 2 These. 2.10, 11. 2 too much love and desire to
be flattered, Ahab hating Michaiah, and giving heed to flattering prophets, he
shall have such sent him in wrath, 1 Kings 22.8, 22, 23. 3. Idolatry, as Hos.
4.17. Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone; and Romans 1.21, 22, 23, with
24, 26. there is like reason for spiritual Idolatry with the creature, and
when men's hearts are joined to their lusts. 4. Presumptuous sins, Elies
sons, Sam. 2.22,-25. Heb. 10.26.27. and 12.16.17. 5. Corrupt affections which
provoke God to punish by giving up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.27, rejection of
God and disobedience to his word, Psalm. 81.11.12. 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. with scandal
unjustly taken at the truth, Matthew. 15.12, 13, 14. Let them alone, etc.

5 Make not light of sin. be not greedy after it. retain shamefastness.
Lastly Make not light of 1 sin: account no sin light or little, make it not so
by your extenuations and justifications, catch not at occasions of sin, be not
greedy after sinful delights, gain, etc. This will either make you or prove
you, to be past feeling; retain shamefastnes, and tenderness, lest once passing
those bounds you grow extremely impudent in sinning, as Isa. 3 9. Jer. 8.12.
and as young women or men when once they have lost modesty and shamefastness,
they grow impudent and blush at nothing. Or of reproof of the word, Of reproof.
snuff not at it, hate not your reprovers, so only do scorners, Prove. 15.12.
be not grieved when the word of God finds you out. Of Gods threatenings.
Or of Gods threatenings, which strikes terror into tender souls, 2 Cor. 5.11.
they tremble at Gods word, Isa. 66.3. Gods punishments are fear. full to them,
Job 31.23. and Pal. 119.20. account not Gods threatenings as wind, Jer. 5.13.
make not a jest of them, Jer. 23.33. flatter not thy self against them, Deuteronomy.
29.14, 20. These are ill signs, and would in time be abandoned.

Thus you have heard somewhat largely of the hard heart, and the evil and
danger of it, (it being a senseless heart, a sensual heart, a fat and gross
heart, a seared and a gangrened heart, a brawny and callous heart, a stony
heart, in a word, a bewitched heart) yet not impertinently I hope, seeing
nothing is more opposite or a greater enemy to this pricking of heart, or to
the tender, pliable, humble, and contrite heart, (such as I desire and
endeavor to bring you to) then is hardness, and senselessness of heart and
soul.

And thus having according to my office endeavored to prepare the way for you
-- and to gather out the stones, I will come a little nearer to direct you to
the Means, Isa. 62.10.
by the use of which, with Gods blessing, you may attain to true compunction of
heart and contrition of spirit, the thing I aim at.

CHAP XV.
SECT. 1. Of the means of true compunction and sensiblenesse: and first of Gods
word heard, Means of compunction and sensiblenesse such as was in these Jews,
and shall be at their calling again.
recalled and applied.
THis pricking of heart, as we have heard, does imply first tenderness, and
withal pliablenesse to Gods word and will, Secondly, sensiblenesse and sorrow
for sin, not excluding fear of Gods judgments, such as was in these Converts
in my Text, who were 1 pricked in heart, that is, wounded in conscience, and
made sensible of their sin and danger: 2 Pliable to Gods will, saying, what
shall we do? And such as shall be again in these Jews at their conversion, when
first they also being convinced and made sensible of their sin in piercing and
crucifying their Savior, shall mourn bitterly for the same Zach. 12.10. and
shall no longer be stiff-necked or abide in unbelief, Romans 11.23. such a heart
was that of King Josiah, and such as was in good King Josiah.
which was both tender and humbled, yea rent and sorrowful, which made him
both mourn within himself, and send to enquire of the Lord (with readiness of
heart to obey) 2 Chronicles. 34.19, 21, 27. That then which I desire to bring, or at
least to direct you to, The diverse phrases signifying this compunction of heart.
is that which the Scripture in variety of phrases signifies not only by the
tender heart, and heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26. but thus to have the
heart pricked, as in my Text; to be of an humble and contrite heart, Isa.
57.15. to be of a wounded spirit, Prove. 18.14. of a broken heart, Psalm. 51.17.
and to have the caul of the heart rent, as Hos. 13.8. (Joel. 2.13.)

God only can and does soften the heart.
Now howsoever we are exhorted hereunto, and directed to the means by which it
may be wrought in us, yet we must know it for an undoubted truth, that it is
God who only makes the heart truly humble, tender and senfible: Ezekiel. 11.19.
and 36.26. Jer. 23.29.
-- I will give them an heart of flesh: which he does by the means of his
word, which becomes as fire, and as an hammer; by his Judgments, Mercies,
which yet he does by Means. 1 by his word, and,
Corrections etc. which he requires we attend unto, and make a right use of, by
hearing, meditation, application, and prayer, so that whilst we thus do, we are
said to humble our selves, though it be God by whose hand and power such hearts
are given us, 2 Chronicles. 30.11, 12.

1 by our hearing his word faithfully taught.
1 Make conscience of hearing of Gods word, as it is taught especially by such
as Peter here and other the Apostles were, who without flattery, in a zeal of
Gods glory, and of the Conversion of those they preached unto, in power also
and demonstration of the spirit, (now more abundantly powered upon them) told
these Jews and convinced them of their sins, that they were the crucifiers of
Christ, whose glory also they set forth. Such teaching convinces and judges
the harers, yea makes them judge themselves, fall down and worship God, and
(whilst the secrets of their hearts are made manifest) acknowledge a divine
presence and power in the preacher. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25
So was it here with these Converts, who found a greater and more effectual
power in the word preached, and thus brought home to their consciences, The
power of Gods word in pricking the heart which Miracles did not in these Jews.
then in all the miracles which God showed, either before and at the death of
Christ, when yet the very stones and rocks, and the vail of the Temple were
rent asunder; or now at this time, when besides the mighty noise and show of
fire, or fiery tongues from heaven, they saw and heard the Apostles, men of no
note nor learning, speak in all languages the wonderful things of God; Acts
2.13. so in David.
they mocked at that, but were pricked and wounded with this. Thus David after
his sin of numbering the people came to a sense of his sin, and his heart
pricked or smote him for it, and brought him to confession of it: but when?
after the Lord had sent the Prophet Gad unto him to convince him, and by
offering him an hard choice, for that is given as the reason, so that,
a Sam. 24.10, 11, 12. I do not say, the word is always thus powerful, or in
all; some are more hardened by such a ministry, as the anvile by the strokes
of the hammer, God justly denying them his grace, and not working in power with
his word: only I say, if the word thus preached do not prick, if the word do
it not, nothing will do it.
wound and mollify the heart, nothing will do it. If God by his word and
spirit breath not upon the soul, the soul cannot breath out so much as a sigh
for sin. if that wind blow not, the waters of repentance will not flow; if he
send not out his word, Psalm. 147.17, 18. Exodus 17.6.
our icy hearts will not be thawen: if Gods presence, promise, and power be not
there, man's endeavors are not of effect. If God stand not upon the rock, our
rocky hearts, though Moses smiting the same, shall never bring forth water:
only where God will soften and wound the heart, he, by such a Ministry as is
named, shows out his power, and poures out his spirit, and makes his word
effectual to that purpose. Wherefore if indeed we would have such hearts
wrought in us, we must endeavor to live under such a ministry.
we must desire, yea and strive to live under a searching and forcible
Ministry, where we may hear such doctrine and so handled, and applied, as that
the secrets of our soul, our secret sins, and our hearts may be ransacked,
sifted and tried, we may be made known to our selves, and become vile in our
own eyes, the deceits of our false hearts discovered, and our sin and danger
fully revealed to us without all flattery and partiality.

Till we be within such a distance and compass, as within which the word is
only (except extraordinarily) active, we can expect no such (at least saving)
effect from it. Buy the truth then, and spare for no cost, rather then want it;
and accordingly to spare for no cost.
that is, such wholesome and powerful teaching: account it a curse when
(especially through your own defaults) you are deprived of it, yea, a leaving
of you, and a giving up to hardness of heart, if not a sealing altogether of
your destruction.

2 By our calling the word heard to mind.
2 Having such teaching, you must remember, call to mind, ruminate and meditate
on what you have heard; the word heard must ever be in your ears, as here the
word used in my Text implies a continual act; and hearing, (...).
or when they had heard, they were pricked. The word left a sting behind it,
they could not forget it: the voice of Christ's blood was ever in their ears,
after once they were by the word charged with it, and convinced; and so it came
to work such a stinging effect in their hearts. Thus Peter himself had formerly
come to see his sin, and judge himself for it: Its said, He remembered the
words of Jesus, -- and he went out and wept bitterly. Matthew. 26.57.
By such remembrance and meditation on the word, and continuance in the things
we have heard, yea and seen, 2 Timothy 3.14.
whilst we look our selves in the glass of the word, and continue therein,
Jam. 1.24, 25.
these nails at first entered by the masters of the Assemblies, come to be
fastened and struck further home, to the pricking, nay piercing and wounding of
the conscience. In a word, remember often such truths as first, or at any time
wounded or touched thee; wound and prick thy heart therewith in the often
remembrance of them.

3 By our applying the word to our selves:
3. To which end, Apply also to thy self what is applied to thee by thy
teachers, or what more generally is taught concerning such sins as thy
conscience tells thee thou art guilty of. Help them who have fitted the plaster
to thy sore, to bind and fasten the same unto thee by thine own application,
that by lying and continuing close to, it may have its wished and saving
effect. Repel not what the Minister applies. Apply to thy self especially the
terrors of the Law, for so is this pricking wrought. especially the terrors of
the Law,
Suffer the Preacher to do it, but especially do it thy self: till this be done
there will be no pricking. This is the way to be stung by the word in soul;
yea, such cannot but be stung as thus apply, which rightly applied, will sting.
As in like cases.
as when in body a man is stung with an adder, or pricked with the point of a
sword, or hears heavy news which concern himself. If one of Job's messengers
should come and tell thee, all thou have, thy cattle, thy goods are taken away
violently by enemies or robbers, the fire has burnt up thy store, thy sons and
daughters are slain, crushed, drowned or dead: would not this move thee, and
cause thee to rend not only thy mantle, Job 1.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
as it did Job, but thine heart? When David came to Ziklag with his men, and
found it burnt with fire, and their wives, and their sons and daughters to be
taken captives, it is said, he and the people that were with him lift up their
voice and wept, 1 Samuel 30.3, 4.
until they had no more power to weep: this was when he and they apprehended
the loss as their own (men weep not so commonly in other men's losses). Now
certainly such as shall be saved are secretly drawn, Such as God will save are
secretly drawn to apply threatenings to themselves.
they know not well how, to be persuaded, that the doctrine taught does concern
them, and so to be touched with it, as to judge themselves most miserable, and
to loath themselves for all their filthy abominations: to believe their own
misery, and without any exception, or self-flattery, or posting it off to
others, to cast away all deluding conceits which may hinder the work of the
word: so that when it presses them, they do not repel it, or cast off the
burden from them, but say, O wretch that I am, this is my case, I am the man
the Scripture means; 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
I am that swearer whom God will hold guilty; I am that adulterer whom God will
judge; I am that fornicator, that effeminate person, that idolater, that thief,
that covetous person, that drunkard, that reviler, that extortioner that shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God. Woe is my soul, I shall die in the guilt of
this or these my sins, unless I speedily repent. Ah Beloved! without such
faith, and application by faith of the threatenings of the word, and so they
come to be pricked,
and vengeance due to our sins, and to us for our sins, we shall never be
savingly touched; only such apprehension and application will by Gods mercy do
it: as the condemned malefactor is.
as what makes the malefactor tremble at the bar, but fear of the sentence of
death, when he sees so many and evident proofs against him? which sentence,
when once it is spoken of and pronounced, how does it strike him as a dagger to
the heart; how is he wounded with it in the certain looking for and
expectation of execution and death, which now looks him in the face?

SECT. 2. Of the consideration of our sin, etc.
4 By our consideration (according to his word) of our sins,
4 AS a further help to the aforesaid duty, to humiliation of the soul, and to
sensiblenesse, learn aright to be affected with thy sins: to which end follow
these Directions. 1. Consider and seriously think of thy birth-sin, 1
Original, In which we may see what creatures we are. 1 how loathsome,
of the pollution of thy nature by it, now loathsome thou art to God in that
regard, both in thy person, yea in thy prayers, and all thy performances, yea
in thy very righteousness, which all of them are defiled with the contagion and
hateful plague and leprosy of natures pollution. 2 how miserable.
Think also how thereby thou art become mortal, miserable, deprived of all
good, depraved by sin, forward and prone only to evil, froward and backward
to all goodness, not favoring either goodness or truth; in a word, an enemy
to God, and under the displeasure of the Almighty. Meditate hereon, and on the
vileness of thy nature, lest otherwise thou think thy self something when thou
art nothing. Gal. 6.3.
Thou will never be out of love with, or loath thy self till thus thou do:
thou may and wilt remain like a filthy dunghill, which unstirred sends forth
no noysom savor, till it be raked into, or the sun shine hot upon it.

2 Actual, Which we must find out and remember.
2. Ca^^ to remembrance thy actual sins; to which end examine and sift thy self
well and unpartially; use the reason God has given thee, and be not brutish
in letting thy sins pass and escape thee without examination. Here I may say
to thee, as God to the idolater, Remember this, Isa. 46.8.
and show your selves men: bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.

This is the way to bring men to true shame, and compuction withal for their
sins: ye shall remember your ways (says the Lord) and all your doings
wherein ye have been defiled, Ezekiel. 20.43. and 36.31.
and ye shall your selves in your own sight for all your iniquities, and for
your abominations. So David, when upon Nathans coming to him he confessed and
bewailed his sins, complaining of broken bones, Psalm 51.3, 8.
indeed of a broken heart, and sorrowful soul, which he desired might be made
to rejoice, he set his sin ever before him. This helped to humble him when he
considered what he had done, Remembrance of sin causes sorrow,
whom he had offended, and that his sins had deprived him of the comfortable
presence of God: without which consideration and viewing of a man's ways, no
trouble of heart or repentance can be expected: I hearkened and heard, says
the Lord, but they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his wickedness,
Jer. 8.6.
saying, what have I done? As the remembrance of a deceased deer friend
renews a man's sorrow, As of our deceased friends.
when he so thinks of his loss: so the remembrance of such sins as whereby we
have estranged God from us, or hazarded the loss of him altogether, will (at
least should) wound the soul, and cause it grieve for grieving him so good a
God.

and particularly, 1 Gather Catalogues of thy sins, or read them in Mr Perkins,
Mr Bifield, Mr Brinsley in his first part of the Watch. Dr Downams Abstract.
Now to this end it were good 1. To gather a Catalogue of thy daily sins, both
omissions or neglects of duty, and commissions, and to set them down in
writing, as some have done; or often to make use of such helps as are afforded
by some good Writers of late, who have gathered the particular sins under each
commandment, and often to read the same, and examine our selves therewith.

2 To take the advantage of sins newly committed, and presently, whilst
conscience is not hardened through delay, to work upon thy heart, 2 Look on
sins newly committed.
seeing sin is then better known, and all such circumstances better remembered
by which it may be aggravated: so some upon their drunkenness have come to
repentance.

3 Often remember some of thy foulest faults,
3 Howsoever, labor to keep in memory some of thy foulest and grossest faults,
whether lately or longer since committed; two, three, or more of them, being
such as by which thou have most wounded thy conscience; or such as thou would
most of all be ashamed of, if they were written in thy forehead and publicly
known; and compel thy self daily, or often to remember them. as God would have
Israel do.
Thus the Lord would humble Israel: Remember and forget not how thou provokedst
the Lord to wrath in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 9.7. So did Paul, 1 Cor. 15.9.
This kept Paul low in his own eyes, and no question much wounded his spirit,
when he called often to mind and recorded it, how he had been a blasphemer,
and a persecuter, 1 Timothy 1.13. Thus David remembered the sins of his youth,
Psalm. David,
25.17. entreating the Lord not to remember them: and Job, and Job.
in reading such bitter things as God did write against him, had his soul
imbittered, whilst he was made to possess the iniquities of his youth, Job
13.26.

Thou whosoever, whose heart tells thee of thy wickedness, or whose sins are or
have been more gross and scandalous; think thou of this. Gross sinners sooner
repent then civil men and justiciaries, Matthew. 21.31
By making good use hereof thou may be nearer the Kingdom of heaven then such
as seem to be not far from it: much nearer then such as live, or have lived
more civilly; as that rich young man, Matthew. 19.20. who could say, All these
things (that is, the duties of the second Table) have I kept from my youth up;
who yet went away from Christ sorrowful. So did not Publicans and harlots,
those great and known sinners, who coming to Christ sorrowful, went away from
him rejoycing^ Such commonly repent sooner then civil Pharisees, Matthew. 21.32
as being sooner convinced of their sins. The heart of a Turk, Jew, or Pagan is
not so hard, as of a ceremonious hypocrite. The vail of the Temple rent in
twain, the earth did quake, and the rocks rent, and the graves were opened, and
many bodies of dead Saints arose at Christ's death and resurrection, Matthew.
27.51, 52. when none of the hypocritical Pharisees so much as trembled, but
remained hard-hearted, senseless, and still dead in their sins.

4 But seeing the least sin is gross, bad, and foul enough, it will behove thee
to think and consider how foul a thing sin is, 4 Consider the foul nature of
every sin,
which made of Angels such foul fiends, being impurity it self; how it is
compared to mire, to the filthy vomit of a dog, and they no better then dogs
and swine that defile themselves therewith, 2 Pet. 2.22. This should make thee
hate and loath it, and for ever to have an aversion of will from it: But
considering also, that it is unthankfulness, disobedience, and the provocations
in it.
and dishonor to God, and is against his goodness and mercies, against his
Sovereignty, yea and glory, it should make thee quake, pierce thy heart, and
bring thee to true contrition and repentance, left for such thy provocations
thou be utterly consumed in his wrath.

5 Above, p. 113. Look on thy sins in all the aggravations thereof: especially,
1 In their multitude, 2 Thy relapses, 3 Thy willingness, with the weakness of
the temptation. 4 and strength of means to resist it.
5 Consider thy sins in all the aggravations thereof; many whereof we have
touched already, to which I referr: Think moreover of the multitude of thy
sins: how often in the same kind thou have relapsed, how voluntarily thou have
sinned, how weak and light the temptations have been, nay, how thou have
tempted thy self, yea, tempted Satan to tempt thee, by walking carelessly, and
not watching: lastly, against how many and strong means of grace thou have
sinned; which makes thy sin and condemnation greater then that of Sodom, Matthew.
11.24. So that if such Infidels as never heard of Christ shall yet perish, and
suffer the vengeance of hell fire, Romans 2.12. Jude 7. yea, if poor Infants (as
one well notes) deserve death and damnation, Romans 5.24. who yet sin not
actually, or yet against knowledge or means, what do thou deserve, and what
will be thy doom?

Sin would thus be weighed and poised.
Thus take up thy sins and weigh them, and though they may seem light and
little, and thou be not sensible of them, yet thou shall feel the burden of
them at length, and be laden with them. Thou perhaps now go as lightly away
with thy sins, as Samson with the brazen gates of the City Gaza: thou carriest
(I may say) the very gates of hell upon thy back, and go upright under many
execrable abominations, unclenness, drunkenness, oppression, profanation of the
Lords day, and other impieties, and yet art not pressed therewith, (though God
be, even as a cart laden with sheaves, Amos 2.13. and groaning, as it were,
under the burden): thou have a whole sea of Gods wrath upon thee, Without which
we cannot feel the burden of it,
and yet as the fishes in the sea, or as one diving under water, feel not
the burden: But now that thou may feel it, and be sensible of it, consider
thy sin in the forenamed aggravating and greatning circumstance thereof; and so
lay it upon thy shoulders, and thou shall find it heavier then thou can
bear, as David did, Psalm 38.4. as one shall do a small vessel of water laid on
his back on dry land. Sins taken severally, and barely and slightly looked on,
may seem small and little, and nothing burdensome; but if thou look on them
in the heap, or as on the sand lying on the seashore, thou will find them,
and the grief of them heavier then the sand of the sea, as Job speaks of his
grief and calamity when it is thoroughly weighed, and laid in the balance
together, Job 6.2, 3. A weight, suppose of many hundreds, whilst it lies on
the ground, is not felt in the burden and heaviness of it, till we begin to
pluck and heave at it: no more is thy sin till thus thou weigh it in the
balance of the sanctuary, and take it into deep and serious consideration. Hold
thy self then constantly to this duty of consideration and pondering thy sin,
Serious consideration of our sin is needful.
and then a small sin (like a small weight which we carry far and long) being
much thought on, will prove a burden, and make thee in the sense thereof cry,
and by repentance and faith come to Christ that thou may be eased. In case
thou receive an injury from man, or a small affront, by much thinking on it
thou make it very great: Thus deal with the injuries thou do unto the great
and holy God, and which lie upon thy score, and I suppose thou will find and
feel them a burden intolerable, heavy, pressing and oppressing thy heart.

SECT. 3. Gods judgments on our selves, past, present, and to come, should
humble us.
2 God softens our hearts also by his judgments and afflictions, 1 On our
selves. Which accordingly, and to that end we are to make use of Whether the
afflictions be
NOw moreover, seeing God often wounds men's spirits, and softens their hearts by
his Judgments, by Afflictions and Corrections, working with his word; let us
take the advantage thereof, and make a right use of the same, whether they be
his corrections and crosses which befall or belong to our selves, or more
directly and firstly do concern others.

1. God would work in us true and saving sorrow by such outward evils as he is
pleased to inflict upon us, being otherwise justly procured and deserved by our
sins: which may and should be diligently considered and made use of by us to
the same end: and that whether we consider them as past, present, or to come.

1. We are to call to mind (especially being of riper years and judgment)
what great things we have suffered, 1 Past.
and what fore afflictions have befallen us by dangerous sicknesses, hurts,
wounds extreme perils, and sharp corrections of God, when we were young, or
howsoever in former times, whether lately, or longer since, when, it may be,
either through childishness, ignorance, or otherwise by distraction of
thoughts, or sharpness of bodily pain, or astonishment of our senses, we could
not so well meditate on the same, or take things into such serious
consideration as was meet. Such corrections would not now be forgot, but
seriously called to mind and considered of as then sent of God in his
displeasure against us for our sins, whereby we provoked this patient God so to
smite us; that so we may now do that which he expected from us then, Which we
must remember and be humbled for them.
that is, be humbled in soul, and come to true sorrow and repentance for our
sin: Thus Jeremy in the name of the faithful, Remembering mine affliction, and
my misery, the wormwood and the gall, my soul has them still in remembrance,
and is humbled (or bowed) in me, Lament. 3.19, 20. That which was bitter to
the body in the present feeling thereof, is now bitter to the soul in
remembrance thereof, and in consideration of sin the cause thereof. Thus should
it be with us.

2 present: By which God humbles and converts,
2 If Gods hand be upon thee by any outward cross and affliction for the
present, which he sends of purpose to humble thee, be sure thou let him not
smite thee in vain. Afflictions, by Gods mercy, prove means of conversion, as
in King Manasseh (though not without the word, Psalm. 94, 12. and 2 Chr. 33.10,
12, 18.) Its said, when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers: his affliction prepared
and made his heart fitter to receive profit by the words of the Seers that
spoke to him in the name of the Lord. and calls to weeping. Isa. 22.12.
God humbled Manasseh, and he humbled himself. God at such times calls to
weeping and to mourning, to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: and by
such means would break the hardness, stoutness and stoniness of our hearts;
thus bringing us under his hammer and stroke to bruise us, into his fire and
furnace to try, fine, and melt us, unless we be reprobate silver.

In such case then let thy cross drive thee home, first to thy self in
consideration of thy sin, the cause meritorious of thy cross: then to thy God
and Father with the Prodigal, the efficient and inflicter of thy cross.

where, 1 We are to be sensible of Gods displeasure.
And here first, learn to be sensible of Gods displeasure, God will be known by
executing judgment; he will have thee know he is angry and displeased with
thee, and would have thee sensible of his displeasure. See what God said
concerning Miriam, after her sin against Moses the servant of the Lord, for
which she was smitten with leprosy; when Moses prayed for her healing, the
Lord tells him saying, If her father had spit in her face, should she not be
ashamed seven days? Numb. 12.14.
Let her be shut out seven days, etc. Even thus, when God shows any token of
his displeasure against thee, be ashamed and humbled, smite on thy breast with
the Publican, and on thy thigh with Ephraim. Thus Naomi (which signifies
pleasant) disclaimes her name, Call not me Naomi, call me Mara, (that is,
bitter) for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me, Ruth 1.20, 21.
-- Why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the Lord has testified against me, and
the Almighty has afflicted me? Thus the good woman was humbled in Gods sight
who had deprived her of her husband and two sons in a strange land, and that
doubtless in sight of her sin and unworthiness, and acknowledgement of Gods
just hand upon her.

2 To join with God. 1 By justifying him,
2. Secondly, when God by afflictions humbles and bruiseth thee, join with him
in humbling thy self: 1. Justify God in his chastisements; confess him
righteous, and thy self the sinner and justly met withal; this is one main
end of Gods chastisements, Levit. 26.41.
that our hard and uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and that we (when his hand
is upon us) accept of the punishment of our iniquity. and condemning our selves.
Do thou then follow home the affliction; lament thine own unto wardnesse, and
(if especially his hand lie long on thee, or that his strokes be multiplied)
say, Lord, what an hard heart have I and senseless, that needs all this
hammering and melting, this battering and bruising, that none of this could be
spared? Thus at length by Gods mercy thy hard and unrelenting heart shall be
bruised, softened and humbled. 2. 2 By taking advantage of the occasion and
time.
Take the advantage of the time when Gods hand is upon thee. Men of the World
both know and are careful to observe the fittest Seasons for ploughing and
breaking up of their grounds; and God looks that we do the like for the
breaking up of the fallow and hard ground of our hearts, Jer. 4.3.
which he expects from us as a duty. Eccles. 3.4.
There is a time to weep -- and a time to mourn. God by his judgments on us,
by crosses and afflictions softens, bows and masters our stout stomachs,
brings down our high looks and thoughts, when we find him stronger than our
selves (which perhaps we thought not on before) and to take from us such stays
and props (whether wealth, friends, health, etc.) as on which we rested our
selves more than on him. Seeing men commonly under cresses are somewhat
softened, Job 23.15, 16.
Now hereby God works in men more self denial, at least remorse, and some
more fitness and pronenesse to repent then at other times. Thus says Job, I
am troubled at his presence; when I consider, I am afraid of him; for God
makes my heart soft, and the Almighty troubles me. And in regard of troubles
and distresses, David complains to God, saying, I am poured out like water,
Psalm. 22.14.
and all my bones are out of joint; my heart is like wax, it is melted in the
midst of my bowels. And thus in some measure the unregenerate find it with
them in their troubles and fears whereby they find themselves more disposed
to pray, and more disposed to pray and to repent.
and to repent, as the Israelites (though unsound and unconstant) when God slew
them, they sought him, and returned, Psalm. 78.34. Isay 26.16.
and Lord in trouble have they visited thee (says Isay) they poured out a
prayer when thy chastening was upon them. At such times the hearts even of
hypocrites become more remorsefull, as we see in men in their sickness and
distress. Now as Ministers should take such opportunities to work upon men's
hearts, Job 33.22.
so should they themselves especially; as the iron when it is hot is soon bowed
and fashioned by hammering; and as the Wax when it is warm and soft may better
be wrought and formed as we please. which opportunity would be followed home,
My advice then to thee (who desire this pliable and sensible heart) is, to
take the opportunity of thy deep afflictions and crosses to follow home this
work: Is any afflicted? Let him pray; says Saint James. Let him humble
himself in prayer, Jam. 5.13.
confess heartily his sin, and seek mercy. Art thou affected with sorrow upon
the death (suppose) of some dear Friend, Parent, Child, or Associate, Husband,
or Wife? Whatsoever the occasion of thy grief be; yea, or if a secret sadness
or pensiveness come upon thee, so as thou find thy self disposed to weep,
omit not such a fit season: now that thy countenance is sad the heart is made
better, Eccles. 7.3.
that is, more soft and yielding to good impressions: and our sorrow turned the
right way.
the Lord thus softens and inclines thy soul to fresh sorrow for sin, and would
have thee to turn the stream of thy natural sorrow, or melacholicke
pensiveness into the right chanel, from the out ward or inward occasion, from
the known or unknown cause of thy heaviness, to sorrow and mourning for thy
sin, from the effect to the cause; seeing nothing is truly to be sorrowed for
but sin, which is the only true cause of all our other sorrows and
afflictions. Blessed is such a cross, loss or affliction, as bereaving us of
earthly (if not sinful) comforts and confidence, sends us to seek our comfort,
and to place our trust only in God, by seeking our peace with him with true
tears of godly sorrow sor our sin, by which he was offended.

3 To come.
3. Thirdly, for evils to come and judgments threatened, or feared in this
life, or at and after the end of it. Death it self, Hell and the last
Judgment, the dreadfulnesse and terror of which should make us afraid; and
such fear will or should work sensiblenesse and tenderness in us; as
apprehension but of temporal judgments made Josiahs heart to melt (though
there was in him some mixture also of love to God and zeal to his honor:
howsoever, As 1. Temporal judgments threatened.
it made him with tears seek peace with God for himself and his people, for
the aversion of his judgments from them. If an earthly Prince should threaten
us, how would we fear, and by humbling our selves seek to make our peace again
with him? How submissively did Jacob carry himself toward his brother Esau,
when he came toward wards him as an enemy? Thy servant Jacob: and Let me
find grace in the sight of my lord. Genesis 32.20 and 33.15.
How much more should we fear and humble our selves, Amos 38.
when the Lord God has spoken? when this Lion roares who will not fear, and
humble himself before him? How also did the thought of death humble not only
a good King, Hezekiah, but an hypocrite, King Ahab, 2 Death. Isay 38.1, 2, 3. 1
Kings 21.19-21. and 27.29. Jon. 3.5, etc.
and the Ninivites. Let the living then lay death to heart, Eccles. 7 2 and
apprehend it as near, that as men in apparent danger of death both by sea or
land, on their deathbeds, or as men condemned to die, they may be humbled,
sorrowful and penitent. Let us think often also of Hell, and of that place of
torments, 3 Hell.
and how it is prepared as for all impenitent sinners; so also for the secure
and voluptuous livers, Luke 16.27, etc. 4 The last judgment.
such as was Dives and his brethren; so of the dreadful day of the general
judgment, when Christ shall come in flaming fire, etc. as 2 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6, 7,
8, 9. and Matthew. 25.31, 32, to the end. That so by serious thoughts thereof and
by timely judging of our selves, we may prevent the Lords judging of us. O let
the terror of that day fall upon us, that at the least fear of that judgment
and true love to our selves, may now bring us on our knees before Christ, to
seek our peace with him in time, by hearty sorrow for our many and great
offenses, before we come to be judged.

SECT. 4. Others sufferings, especially Christ's should move us.
2. 2 God would soften us by his judgments on others, so that we are to go to
the house of mourning. Eccles. 7.2.
GOd would also humble us and teach us to mourn by looking on the afflictions
and mournful condition and dispositions of others like our selves, but
especially on the sufferings of his only and beloved Son Jesus Christ for us.

That then we may be softened in heart, made sensible, and learn truly to
mourn, let us often repair and go to the house of mourning, that is much
better than (in our security) to go to the house of feasting and drinking, Go
to to the house of mourners both bodily and in practice; go also in mind, and
in thy meditation, and so go and consider the case and condition both of
private Christians, of the Churches of Christ, yea, and of Christ the head of
all Christians and Christian Churches.

1 To private Christians. 1 Even Enemies.
And for private Christians, 1. It were much to bid thee go to the house of such
as other wise are thine enemies: and yet thus to go, or thus to consider of
their evils and afflictions is both a means to humble us, and has been done
by such as knew well enough what did belong to their duty; as by David, Psalm.
35.12, 13, 14.
who speaking of his enemies says, They rewarded me evil for good, -- But as
for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloath, 2 Friends. Whether
their trouble be 1 outward.
I humbled or afflicted my soul with fasting -- I bowed down heavily as one
that mourns for his mother. 2. But howsoever go, resort to such, and consort
thy self with such as be in sorrow for the hand of God upon them, whether it
be by outward crosses, loss of friends, estate, liberty or health, whom thou
should often visit in their sorrows, sickness, and imprisonment, if
especially they suffer for Christ and his cause. The constancy and comfort
which such do manifest in their sufferings and death, 2 in mind, and as they
are mourners in Israel. So we shall profit.
has been by Gods blessing an occasion of the conversion and like sufferings,
even of their persecutours, as has been said; or whether it be from a fight or
sense of their sins, and through tender heartedness: for so thou may and
by Gods blessing shall be much furthered in this work: 1. By their example, 1
By their example.
for thou will readily within thy self reason and say, Does such an one mourn
for the neglects of Duty, and is his conscience so troubled for smaller
failings and slips, yea, to see others sin? so as to question the love of God,
and whether he be in the state of grace or no? Does he or she make such
conscience of an Oath, or of profaning and neglecting the duties of the
Sabbath in public and private? yea, and does he so mourn for the miseries of
the Church? O then, what an hard heart have I? that being guilty of many mo,
and much greater sins, never yet shed a tear, never yet was wounded in spirit
for the same; yea, never sorrowed either for mine own or others sins and
miseries? 2. By their exhortation and encouragement, 2 By their exhortation.
the benefit of which we get by conversing with godly and humble Christians;
what is that? we are kept from departing from the living God: but how? It
follows, Hebr. 3.13.
But exhort one another daily while it is called to day, least any of you be
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Mutual exhortation then is a good means
to prevent hardness of heart, and to keep us from security, and from the
profaneness of the Times, and to work and preserve tenderness and
sensiblenesse of heart in us, when in this manner we (in evil Times especially)
fearing the Lord, Mal. 3.16.
do often speak one to another. And how were the Disciples hearts wrought upon;
and as it were melted, even burning within them, Luke 24.35.
while Christ talked with them by the way? 3. By their admonitions and repro^fs.
3. By their admonitions and seasonable reproves; which as it is a Duty, Lev.
19.17. so it has a blessing, being ordained and sanctified of God to bring men
to a saving sight and sense of their sin, and to keep them from hardening their
hearts therein; as Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Count not his case
desperate till this course has been taken with him.

In a word, and generally we must seek help to mourn from true mourners: si
vis me flere, etc.
seeing the best men and Christians are generally (though cheerful in God,
yet) of mournful dispositions, and apt to weep, its good to be much in their
company, that we by them may learn, and be excited to be of like temper, and
to weep by their example. Christians, and especially Ministers, must show
themselves sensible, and reprove sin fellingly, and first mourn to those whom
they would bring to mourn for their sin. Matthew. 11.17.
And such as would so do must seek this help not only in public, but in
private from them, and from such godly Christians as justly may be called
mourners in Israel: as in a like case, the Lord provoking his people to
humiliation and repentance, bids them consider and call for the mourning women,
Jer. 9.17, 18.
to take up a wailing for them; to what end? but that their own eyes might run
down with toares, and their eyelids gush out with waters. Thus allusion is
made to their custom in funerals and other mournful occasions, which was (it
seems) to hire certain women (and why not men and minstrels) skillful in
singing (and playing) doleful songs to increase their heaviness, and to make
them more apt to mourn. By like proportion we are to make use of the best
helps to provoke our selves to mourn for our sins, and to that end to
associate unto us such as are true mourners in Israel.

2. 2 We are to consider, lay to heart and be affected with the miseries of
other Churches,
Go in thy meditation and present to thine own thoughts the afflictions,
miseries, and oppressions, and doleful condition of the Churches of God in
other places, by the incursions, violence, spoils done, and evils perpetrated
by the enemies of Gods Church and people, by Turks and Turkish Pirates
violently taking diverse of good note and condition out of their own houses in
some parts of England, but especially in Ireland, as also by Sea, as they go
for New England and other parts, putting them to most miserable slaverie: so by
Antichrist and spiritual Babylon tyrannizing over souls and bodies, as
elsewkere, and formerly,
killing, massacring, spoiling, and laying waste whole Towns, Cities,
Provinces and Countries by their cruel and merciless Soldiers: witness not
only of later times Roehel in France, and those of the Valtoline, where
Christians have been forced to fly their Country, others staying to renounce
their Religion in hope and promise of life, and then cruelly slain, the Enemy
boasting they had now slain both bodies and souls of Heretics: so, at this
time in the lower Hassia.
but especially diverse places of Germany, and of the Reformed Churches there,
as the Palatinate, Bohemia, Silesia, anno 1640.
and now at this present the Lower Hassia, overrun with barbarous Soldiers,
burning, killing and spoiling without all respect to Sex, Age, or Order,
forcing men to leave their own homes, to seek to maintain life by feeding on
carrion, and such like, burning and demolishing their Churches, and Colleges,
and School-houses, impoverishing all of all sorts, especially their Ministers
and Schoolmasters, three hundred and more of whom at this time are forced to
seek (and by the recommendation of their Princess The Landgrave of Hassia) to
desire the charitable and bountiful relief of Christians in other Provinces
and Kingdoms for the present relief of the foresaid Ministers and Rectors of
Schools. October. 1641.
And for the re-edifying of their Churches and School: and should not we be
affected with these things, and weep with them that weep, and show a
fellow-feeling with them, making their case our own, We should be alike
affected with them,
not knowing how soon it may be so indeed? in the mean time, so remembering them
that are in bonds as bound with them, etc. which is the Apostles exhortation,
Hebr. 13.3. Herein following the example, not only of Moses, as was Moses,
whose heart melted when he looked on his brethrens afflictions in Egypt; but
especially of that worthy Nehemiah, who at a great distance, and Nehemiah.
hearing of the miseries of the Jews that had escaped, and which were left of
the captivity, Nehem. 1.3, 4, 5, etc.
that they were in great affliction and reproach, that the wall of Jerusalem
was broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire, sat down and wept and
mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven. This
made him no doubt mourn for his own and others sins, against which God by
every judgment of his does testify, that he has just cause and matter
against us and ours. This is a noble president for us to follow, seeing we want
not like occasion; and it would bring us to a mourning temper and disposition
to weep even for our own as well as others sins. At this time also the bleeding
condition of Ireland would not be forgotten. 3 specially we are to meditate on
the sufferings of Christ for us.


3. Lastly, view we in our thought and meditations attentively the sufferings
and greatness of the sorrows of our Lord and blessed Savior Jesus Christ
dying for us, with the cause thereof in our selves and sins, together with
the love of God and Christ himself in giving himself for us. We should look
on his sorrows not with a spirit so much of compassion, as of compunction, not
weeping for him in pity so much (which silly ignorant people and women can do
when they see his Passion profanely acted on the Stage, and on our wounding
him.
or in the streets in their Corpus Christi Plays, or when they look upon the
Crucifix, striking and beating on their breast^) as in true sorrow for out own
sins by which we pierced him, and in some sense do daily pierce him by the
same: so these Jews here in my Text; no sooner had Christ by the Word
evidently set forth to be the true and only Messiah, Gal. 3.1.
and crucified among them, by being charged and convinced that they were the
Crucifiers of him, but they were thus savingly pricked in heart, as it was
foretold (of them and of those yet to be called) by the Prophet Zechary, They
shall look upon him (by the eye of meditation) whom they have pierced, Zech.
12.10.
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be
in bitterness for him, as on that is in bitterness for his firstborn.
Consider herein Christ his bitter death, not only what thou must expect to
suffer in thine own person for ever, unless thou now be pricked in heart for
him, as well as he was pierced in heart, head, and hands, and feet for thee;
but his infinite love, as also on his infinite love in suffering such things
for us.
who would suffer so much for thee, and interpose himself between his Fathers
wrath and thee, yea, receiving in his own bowels the javelin of his Fathers
anger to keep it from thee to whom only it was due; as in like case, did it
not, think we, both trouble David to think of Jonathans hazards for him, and
also cause his heart to melt in true love to Jonathan, who showed himself so
loving to him? Will it not prick and wound thy heart to consider this thy dear
and truest Friend (for thus he was wounded in the house of his friends) one the
rack of the Cross for thee to the end that thou might never come unto it:
Zech. 13.6.
how should, yea, and would this meditation (if seriously made use of) melt and
mollify our hard hearts, and overcome all our obstinacies? His sorrows well
thought on would help to break our hard hearts; but his love appearing in the
same would and should melt and thaw them. 3 God softens our hearts by his
mercies, which we should often think of to that end.
And so generally the meditation of his mercies a thousand ways manifested to
every one of us. How did hardhearted Saul's heart melt into tears when he saw
and was convinced of David's love, integrity, and respects to him and his life,
when in the very act of his hostility against David, yet David spared his
life? And how was David's own heart humbled at the relation of Gods many mercies
against which he had sinned? The like in the Israelites, 1 Sa. 24.16, 17. 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9-13.
who upbraided by Gods mercies in bringing them out of Egypt, lift up their
voice and wept, so that the place had its name thence, and was called Bochim,
or Weepers. Judges 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
They considered Gods kindness to them, and their unkindnesse to him, and
thereupon wept: such consideration of mercy showed (or offered) to the
unworthy is foretold to work shame in the sinners, and loathing themselves,
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, etc. with verses 31.32. O then hearts harder than the Adamant
that are not softened with the milk of this love of God! ye stout-hearted
sinners, and be moved therewith.
be moved and affected with grief to consider and think how ye sin against the
bounty of God, expressed to you in all temporal blessings which you enjoy, and
they are well nigh infinite: in his patience toward you, not cutting you off
and sending you to Hell in your sins, but chiefly in his gracious and
morcifull disposition to wards you, in offering himself more willing and ready
to be reconciled to you, than you are, by true repentance, sorrow and
submission to seek it at his gracious hands. O base hearts, who by living still
in your sins, and without all sorrow, taking pleasure in the same, do seek
his dishonor, Do ye so requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Deuteronomy.
32.6 7, etc. Does not this stab thy heart? O my people, may God now say to us,
and much rather than to his unthankful people of old, What have I done unto
thee? and so in Micah 6.3, 4, 5. John 10.32.
Many good works (may Christ now say to us also) have I showed you from my
Father, for which of those works do ye stone me? How should you answer, but
with more humility, sincerity, and self-denial, as it follows in Micah,
Verse 6. Wherewithal shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the
high God? Yea, and instead of all other sacrifices there mentioned, offer that
of an humble and contrite spirit, and resolve to walk humbly or humble your
selves to walk with God. O that I could hear your relenting hearts, as
overcome with his free mercies and offers of his grace to sound and echo out
such voices, and to say: What? any mercy, or hope of mercy for such a vile
Wretch, bold sinner, base Varlet as I? Might not God many years ago in his
just displeasure have sent me from the womb to Hell? O Patience! Would any man
have put up such injuries at my hands as God has done dishonours? or would I
my self show like kindness to any who had multiplied wrongs against me? O it
grieves my soul, that I have so grieved him, beast that I am. O how have I been
besotted not to see better to answer his love? Men and brethren, what shall I
do to purchase his favor whereof I have made my self so unworthily? I resolve
therefore to wallow in ashes, and to repent in dust and ashes, and not for a
world to offend him as I have done.

SECT. 5. Gods Majesty thought on, would abase us.
4. The serious thought of Gods high Majesty will humble us.
HEre again I might direct you to a meditation also of the high and glorious
Majesty of the high and holy God, of his greatness, excellency, power,
wisdom, glory and all other Attributes of God, that so we may no longer harden
our hearts against him, Psalm. 95.3-8, 9. Deuteronomy. 10.16, 17, 18.-20, 21. that the
immutabilitie of his decrees, Job 23.13, 14, 15, 16. and his excellency may
make us afraid, Job 13.11. and 37.23, 24. that his mighty power may cause us
prepare to meet him by repentance, Amos 4.12. with 13. as we see in Rahab,
Josh. 2.10.-12, 13-18. And that we may at length learn with Job to acknowledge
our vileness, and to abhor our selves, and repent in dust and ashes, Job
38.2, 3, etc. and 40.2, 3. and 42.3. with 6. But I will hasten to the last
Direction, without which all the rest will be used in vain, and it is prayer.

SECT. 6. Earnest Prayer a means of Humiliation.
5 Withal, we must earnestly pray to God, who only can humble us.
LAstly, Seeing God only, as has been said, can humble and soften the hard and
stony heart of man, we are, if we truly desire to have tender, pliable,
sensible and humbled hearts, most earnestly to seek the same by prayer of God.

1 By others.
1. If thou can not through weakness of gifts, or distractions pray of thy
self, desire the assistance of some godly and compassionate Christian to pray
with thee and for thee, that God would graciously and powerfully work in thee
what thou desire. In such case, yea howsoever, send for the Elders of the
Church, when thou feelst thy heart any thing hardened, or thy self to be in any
distress of soul or body, that they may pray over thee, James 5.14.

2 By our selves
But 2. Is any among you afflicted? or would any of you be indeed truly
afflicted in conscience, and come to some remorse for his sin? Let him pray
(says Saint James) himself. Its hard if any man, who has a true and inward
desire of any thing he wants or would have; If, I say, he cannot breathe out
one sigh, and some way or other, though brokenly, express himself to God.
Broken prayers oftentimes show a broken heart and spirit, which God will not
despise. But, as thou art able, beg earnestly, daily, and constantly an humble,
soft and relenting heart, with godly sorrow for all and every sin. Its no easy
thing to break the pride and stoniness of the heart: it requires help from
heaven and power from above: If God do it not, it will never be done. We have
Gods, promise,
But now we have his promise for it, if we will earnestly seek unto him for it,
as for all other things freely promsed, Ezekiel. 36.26, 32, 37. Beg earnestly that
God would melt and soften thy heart, and must be earnest,
be importunate with him till he hear thee: his word is past, and if thou faint
and weary not, it shall in Gods fittest time, and urgent with him.
and in that measure and manner which he thinks good, be accomplished and
fulfilled. Challenge God of his promise of pouring upon thee the spirit of
grace and of supplications, that looking upon Christ thou may mourn, etc.
Zech. 12.10. God, as has been said, must by his Spirit breath in, before thou
can breathe out by thy spirit one sigh for thy sin. And in thy prayer
complain to God of thy hardness, and say, Lord, why have thou hardened my
heart from thy fear? Isa. 63.17. Lord, I have an hard, proud and stubborn
heart; it is too hard for me, do thou take it down, break and humble it. If
thou art not heard for the present, yet cry still, give not over, yea, and
constant.
wait on him for an answer in due time, who has long waited for thee, Romans
10.21 Deuteronomy. 22.26
and for thy Repentance. Cry aloud to God for help, as the virgin was bound in
case she were forced, else lost both her reputation and her life. Cry to God
before for help, and after for pardon; so shall not thy hardness of heart be
imputed to thee, or be thy ruin. That which unfainedly thou desire might be
done, and grievest if it be not done, that shall by Gods mercy in Christ be
accounted to thee as done.

And with our prayer we must join 1. Fasting.
Now to make thy prayer more effectual, join thereunto

1 Religious Fasting: as it will give an edge to thy prayer; so the afflicting
of thy body (if it be done without superstition) will help well to the
afflicting and humbling of thy soul and heart: for so fasting is called. And
we know that the hearts of Gods people have been wonderfully softened at such
times, as Judge. 20.26, 1 Samuel 7.6. So David, I humbled my self with fasting,
Psalm 35.13. and 69.10.

2 Watchfulness, especially against worldly cares and distractions.
2 Watchfulness: watch and pray. Watch against all the former Lets named; but
especially against all worldly cares: take heed of a heart busied with the
world, and earthly thoughts. Distractions from the world keep the heart from
minding such things as might affect it with godly sorrow: as a man hastily and
suddenly smitten whiles he minds his business, is less sensible (at least for
the present) of pain and grief from the hurt, Simil.
then he would be in the apprehension of it beforehand, and for the present,
when especially he cannot avoid or divert the blow: And as a man forgets his
pain when a friend talks with him; which is the reason why such as are sick and
sorrowful for the loss of friends, are comforted by company, as having their
thoughts and minds by conference taken off in good part from thinking of their
sorrow; and why on the night time, and in solitariness men are more sensible of
their sickness and sorrow, (as in their other senses of hearing, etc.) seeing
all sense is from the soul: Alex. Probl. l. 1. Prob. 118.
it is the soul which sees, which hears, which feels, and which accordingly
being distracted with many objects, is the less sensible in each: So by like
reason, if the soul and thoughts be taken up with wordly cares, and distracted
therewith, it can less be afflicted with such things as otherwise by gods
blessing would prick and wound it. To which end in our prayer and^ meditation
we are to retire our selves.
In which regard it will help well, when we would meditate and pray, to retire
and withdraw our selves from company into some solitary place, which we are
also taught both by precept and practice of Christ himself. His precept we
have Matthew. 6.6. so Psam. 4.4. Commune with your hearts upon your bed. His
practice, Mark 1.35. So Peter went up to the top of the house to pray, Acts
10.9. So Jeremiah's soul did weep in secret, chap. 13.17. And of these Jews and
Converts it was foretold they should mourn every family apart, the husband
apart; and the wife apart, Zech. 12.12. Retiredness both of place and thoughts
is fittest to work our hearts unto goldly sorrow.

SECT. 7. A reproof of the secure, with an Exhortation and Caveat.
Conclusion of the Directions.
NOw for conclusion of these Directions, It were good, and it is needful that
such as have heard, or now read the same, would well consider with themselves,
whether they have in any measure followed (or yet so much as do resolve to
follow) the same, or to take any pains with their hearts hereabout.

Where, 1 A trial and reproof of such as yet remain secure and senseless.
1 It is to be suspected, that many continue still secure, careless and
slothful, and do still go on in their old courses as inconsiderately as ever,
without a right knowledge of the power of Gods anger, and are as stout-hearted,
partial, and self-loving, both flattering themselves, and as desirous to be
flattered by timeserving and false Prophets, and as much hardened against the
true and faithful servants of God by unbelief as ever. And that they are still
sensual and worldly, and remain still senseless, without fear of being
hardened either by great sins, which lay waste the conscience; or by giving way
to smaller sins against conscience, or by custom of sinning, or yet by and in
Gods secret vengeance, giving them up to this heavy and dismal judgment of an
hard impenitent heart; neither afraid of it, as the worst of Gods judgments on
earth, and as the first and irrecoverable entrance into hell; nor praying
against it, nor careful to avoid evil company and examples, and such other
things, and sins in special which are the procurers of it, whilst they still
make as light of sin, of reproof of the word, and of Gods threatenings, as ever
before; all of them signs of an hard and dedolent heart: especially
considering how little they care for hearing of such teachers as would most
help them in this work of conviction, pricking and wounding their conscience,
or for calling to mind Gods word, and such truths as have come near them, or
for applying it to themselves. And as for their sins Original or Actual, they
are far from raking into that dunghill, from questioning, or yet loathing
themselves for the same, from keeping an account or catalogue of their sins
either for number, or foulness, or aggravation of the same; never weighing or
pondering with themselves, how thereby they draw upon themselves the heavy
weight of Gods vengeance. And as little do they make use of Gods severe
judgments and corrections, whether on themselves, past, present, or threatened,
and in expectation, as of death, hell, and the last general judgment: or on
others, either private Christians in their sorrows, and true mourners in Sion,
or whole Churches of Christ, or of the sorrows of Christ for them; or of the
unparalleld love of Christ so dying for them, and of other the mercies, yea,
and high majesty of God against whom without all ingenuity or fear they daily
trespass. And as for the exercise of prayer, accompanied with fasting and
watchfulness, its a duty they are wholly strangers unto: they are without
sense of their wants, they have no true desire of this so needful a work of
humiliation; they can spend no serious thoughts thereon, nor time, being so
taken up with their delights, vain pleasures, worldly cares and employments.

Now what may a man think of such men? This their little care and study after
true compunction, this their disaffection to the means thereof is an apparent
sign of their unsensibleness and security, and consequently that all the
evils and miseries mentioned formerly lie heavy upon them, as that they are
still in their natural and damned condition, dead in and by sin, in Satan's
possession, far from the first step to repentance and salvation, and that
they come short of very reprobates, Pharaoh, Felix, Saul, Cain and Judas, and
under certain expectation of eternal wrath, seeing their sin will have sorrow,
if not here, yet undoubtedly hereafter, even such as made the eternal Son of
God cry out on the Cross as he did for a time, and which they must suffer and
undergo eternally without end or ease.

2 An exhortation, and a caveat to take heed that repentant sorrow be not
swallowed up of
Ah then dear Sirs, ye that yet cannot say or give any good proof that your
hearts are or have been pricked for your sins, think in time of these
things; be careful to avoid the former impediments, and to see them removed;
be conscionable in the use of the aforesaid means directed unto, please not
your selves with your present condition, weep, and mourn, when you especially
hear your sins discovered to you, and reproved; be ye also pricked in heart
when you are convinced of your evil doings; not as those wicked and malignant
Jews who hearing Peter, and also Stephen charge them with the Death of Christ,
were, as it may seem, Acts 5 33. and 7.54.
more than pricked in heart, even cut to the heart, yet took counsel against
Peter, and stoned Stephen.

Doubtless, so far as there was any the least spark of good nature in any
of them, either sinful grief, merely for the reproof,
they could not but be convinced within themselves of their sin of malice and
of murder; but so impatient were they of reproof and to be charged (though
most justly) therewith, that this sinful and greater grief quenched that other
(if any were) from natural conscience, as in the body when the greater pain
takes away the sense and feeling of the lesser, as that of the St^^e does that
of the Gout; which when it is, or that such as are sick, or have cause of pain
in any one part of the body, and do not feel their pain, Hippocr. Aph. or of
bodily grief and pain, whilst repentance is deferred till sickness, etc.
Hippocrates will tell them that their mind and understanding is sick and
diseased, or else they would feel their pain. Take we heed then that sinful
grief and anger for the reproof of the Word, take not place, when upon the
discovery of our particular sins, and our conviction thereupon out,
consciences should be smitten and pricked savingly: yea, what we do* Let it be
done quickly and in time of health and youth, least old Age, Eccles. 12 1, 2.
and diseases, and sicknesses come, even the years when we shall say, We have
no pleasure in them; and bodily and worldly pain and grief will so possess us
and take up our thoughts and attentions, yea, intention of mind, that godly
sorrow for sin shall find no place, as we see in those for the most part who
in their greatest sorrows and sicknesses, especially in hot burning Fevers,
and great pains seldom come to sound and saving sorrow for sin, or to any more
than a forced, a formal and hypocritical repentance.

And thus much for such Uses as more specially belong to those that have not
yet sorrowed, or have not been pricked in conscience for their sin.

CHAP. XVI. Uses concerning such as have been wounded: and first, that they
return not to sins formerly sorrowed for.
3 A third sort of Uses concerning such as have been wounded for their sins.
IT now follows to speak to such as upon hearing of the Word, or upon trial
of themselves have found or do find that they have some way at least been or
are wounded, pricked and made sorrowful for their sins. To these I must say
somewhat by way of Caveat and counsel, and then of comfort. 1. The caveat and
counsel is double: Who first are instructed and counseled:
first, that they return not to former sins smarted for. Secondly, that they
go forward with this work and give it not over till it be truly wrought in
them.

1 not to return to such sins as they have smarted for Joh. 5.14.
1. If ever you have smarted, sorrowed, been burdened, or as it were in Hell
for your sins, take heed of returning back to the same, or any other sins,
which may cause like sorrow. The burnt child dreads the fire: and our Saviors
Lesson and Caveat is* Sin no more least a worse thing come unto thee. I tell
you when God thus pricks and wounds for sin, he gives us a Lesson for ever
returning again to the same or like sins. Both King David and King Hezekiah
complain of bones broken for their sins, indeed of broken hearts, sorrows,
By the example of King David and King Hezekiah. Psalm. 51. Isai 38.13.
and terrors of conscience: but such was their anguish then, that we never
read that they, returned or did again fall into murder, adultery, or to like
pride. And if any of us have in the same or other kinds sinned with them, and
have in like manner found like terrors or Gods hand heavy upon us, if we like
so well of broken bones, and to lie under Gods displeasure, we may return again
to like wicked practices: Which were to return to Hell again,
but if we have been already in Hell, or in the Suburbs thereof, let us (both
give and) take warning for ever coming there again, and take heed of such
ways and sins as may bring us into the same condition again. See we that no
pleasure of sin, ungodly gain, love of the world, favor of men, no unjust
dealing, or wicked act draw us back into Hell again, if ever we have been in
it. and to lay more weight on themselves.
If we have at any time found sin an heavy burden to us, or have been wearied
therewith, I hope we will take heed that we lay no more weight upon it. If the
heart have by the hand of God upon it been once made tender and sensible of his
displeasure, it will soon fear and tremble at the first risings and sinful
motions in the heart: it will tremble and not sin. Psalm. 4.4.
He that has been under Gods displeasure for his Oaths, uncleanness, etc. he
will fear an Oath, quake and tremble to see or meet with his Whore, and so in
other particulars. It is a sign that many, Its a sign of unsound sorrow, nor
to fear sin, as in Pharaoh, Exo. 9.27-34. and 10.16-20.
who yet seemed to show some sorrow for their sins, never truly repented
thereof, because they so easily return with the Sow and Dog to the mire and
vomit of former sins; as we see in King Pharaoh, often confessing his sin,
yet as often returning to it again, and hardening his heart, even as many in
their sickness and dangers seem very penitent, and to cry out of their sins,
but when Gods hand is removed, they and their sins are all one again. So it was
with King Ahab also, Ahab.
who having oppressed Naboth, is reproved and threatened for it by the Prophet:
whereupon he humbled himself, rent his clothes, 1 Kings 21.27-29. with
22.8-26, 27.
put sackcloth on his flesh, and fasted: but this was no true repentance, no
hearty sorrow for his sin; if it had, he would not so soon after have fallen to
the like or same sin of oppression, imprisoning, without just cause, of the
holy and saithfull servant of the Lord, Judas.
Michaiah. Judas seemed as sorrowful as any, repenting, confessing, restoring;
if his sorrow had been found, he would not so soon and immediately after added
the murder of himself to the murder and betraying of his Master. Felix
trembled when he heard Paul reason of righteousness and judgment to come:
Felix. Acts 24.25, 26, 27.
but had his heart (in consciousnesse of his own unrighteousness, and
apprehension of Gods just judgment against him) indeed been pricked to
purpose, he would not either have kept him so long a prisoner in hope of a
bribe, or going out of his Office, have left him bound to show the Jews a
pleasure. If the thought of the last judgment had truly terrified him, he
would have been afraid to continue in such an act of unrighteousness. To fear
is a sign and effect of godly sorrow. 2 Cor. 7.11.
Hereby is discovered the unsoundnesse of many men's sorrow: where godly sorrow
is, it is followed as with other effects, so with fear to sin again. He that is
truly pricked, bitten and stung by his sins, dares not return (at least
usually) to them again, but will avoid them or like sins, as much as he that
has been once stung with Adders, Aspes, Scorpions, who will avoid coming near
their holes and haunts, and seeing them approach, will fly as fast from them
as he can: or as one pricked or gored with a wild Bull or Ox, will not easily
come that way, or within its reach again.

What a mad part is it then for men who profess that their sins, their
filthy whoredoms, their swinish drunkenness, profane breaking and neglecting
the Lords day, etc. have cost them tears, sighs, and sorrow, yet not to show
more fear of falling into the same or like sins again, whilst they avoid not
the occasions and provocations thereof, but rather desire, follow after, or at
least readily embrace the same, yea, whilst the remembrance of former sins,
which should renew their sorrow and repentance, Revel. 2.5. insnareth them
again to find sweetness therein, and to desire their fleshpots in Egypt again?

SECT. 2. That they go on with the work of humiliation.
2 To go forward with this work of Humiliation.
2 AS return not to former sins; so take not up with every little pang of
conscience, with a slight sense of sin and wrath, or with some legal terrors
and qualms. Remember that this pricking of heart here in my Text is but a
beginning of Conversion, and the first and remotest step thereunto, This
pricking is but a beginning of Conversion,
such as is common to reprobates, yea, such as in great measure is in the
fiends of hell, who believe and tremble, yet repent not, neither ever shall.
This pricking here is only a good preparative to Conversion and Repentance in
the elect, as the needle by pricking and piercing prepares the way for the
thread: but it is not Repentance. Therefore when being pricked these Jews cried
out and desired direction what to do, Peter said unto them, Verse 38.
Repent, ver. 38. showing thereby that hitherto they had not repented. You must
then go forward with this work, Page 95, 96, etc.
and call to mind how God goes on with it, and how he leads and bring on the
humbled and wounded soul by degrees, til at length he perfect the work, and
have wrought faith in it. which must neither be neglected,
As then you must not quench beginnings, or neglect Gods offer, whereby in his
Gospel and word he comes near unto you, though it be to trouble you a while (as
wheresoever the Gospel first came, it made uproars and stirs in such Cities,)
lest you never have like offers again, but that he reject you, as you him, nor
rested in.
Luke 10.9, 10, 11. Acts 13.45, 46. So neither must you rest or take up with
beginnings. Every slight or short grief or sudden terror is not enough to make
you true penitents, or so much as bruised reeds. This prick in the conscience
is not so soon for the most part healed; this thorn in the flesh is not so soon
plucked out, or the wound made by it so soon cured. This plaster then (though
it smart a little) must not be taken off; this tent and corrasive must not be
pulled out till it eat out the corruption; neither must men be too hasty with
their healing plasters, lest the wound which seemed closed, We must not seek
our ease and comfort too soon.
break open again to the greater pain, hurt and hazard of the party. Seek not
then thy comfort too soon, snatch not hold on the promise before thou be fit
and prepared for it. There is, I know, more mercy in God then sin in us; more
virtue in the plaster then venom in the malady: but this proves effectual
only where the plaster is suffered to have its full and kindly work: this
mercy heals only true Penitents. By the example of one cut for the stone,
If God then once begin this work of Conversion, and of the new birth in thee,
seek not thine ease too soon; desire to be rather soundly then soon healed: If
God, aiming to take from thee thy stony heart, begin (as in like bodily cures
of the stone in the bladder) to prick, cut, lance, and make incision; think not
the cure is done, its scarce begun yet: thou must suffer him, after this
entrance is made, to pinch, pull, pluck, yea break the stone in thy heart, or
thy stony heart; and having begun so to do, to search, scrape, and bring all
away clean, lest thy pain and sorrows in time increase on thee again. He should
be an unwise man, who desiring perfect cure, should not suffer all these things
to be done before the wound be sewed up, or healing and comfortable things
applied: as she should be an unwise woman, and of a woman toward her labor.
who having a child to bear and bring forth, should think the work done when
she has passed a few slighter throws or pangs: such as know what belongs to
such a business, if their pains slack or abate, use all means to quicken them
again, and are afraid of nothing more then that their throws (once begun) do
leave them: seeing that often proves the death of the child, if not of the
mother also: Such then resolve to abide out the last and sorest brunt before
they will look for comfort or joy that a man-child is brought into the world.
Such is the new birth of a sinner, before he be made the child of God. Many
stick fast and miscarry in the birth, and come short of Conversion and of
Salvation, because they seek their case and comfort too soon: whereas comfort
will flow in apace where soundness once is wrought. Ease is not good, unless
it be seasonable.
Ease is not good and seasonable at all times: The godly his ease is ever after
ach and pain; ease unseasonably enjoyed ends in endless sorrows, as in the
wicked.

SECT. 3. An exhortation hereunto.
An exhortation to follow home Gods strokes till we be thoroughly humbled and
cured.
MY counsel then to thee, is, if God by his word has begun to pierce and wound
thee, do thou drive the nail home to the head, that thou may at length be
fast and close joined to Christ; if God have met with thee by the reproof of
the word, or stung thee by his threatenings, see his mercy in it; let the sting
remain till his work be wrought, let him have enough, even his fill of thee,
till thy proud heart be fully humbled, Lest else we get hurt by such prickings:
and thy corruption drawn and purged out: otherwise look for no ease, but
greater sorrows. We have a little venomous fly or midge At Dantzigk where
this was preached.
here, you know that if when it seiseth on the flesh (hand, face or legs,) you
let it alone till by sucking it be filled with your blood, it will leave you of
it self, and leave behind it little or no venom at all; Simil.
only if you put it off before, and seek ease by scratching, the place
affected will swell with the poison of it, and put you long to pain, especially
if you be bit in diverse places near together. This is soon applied to our
purpose here. Prickings of conscience in sight and sense of sin and judgment
being suffered to have their full work in our deep humiliation, whilst we
maintain the power of them, and seek not ease too soon, are so far from
hurting, that they purge us, and draw out our corruption: whereas the sudden
and too hasty healing of them causes the wound to fester, the soul to swell
with self-conceit and security, and greater sorrows (in the end at least) to
seize on it. As God then by such legal terrors of conscience begins with
thee, so follow God in his work; think not the work done when it is only
begun. Go not (which is an holy man's expression) raw from Gods school through
fear of the rod, and go raw out of Gods school and service.
lest thou prove a bad proficient in the Universitle: buy not out your time and
years of service before you have well learned your trade, lest you be forced to
come and be brought again under servitude to the Law, and under the spirit of
bondage. In a word, comfort not your selves too soon: If it be natural sorrow,
in the loss of friends, wealth, good name, liberty, etc. which has taken hold
on thee first, cease not till thou turn it into sorrow for sin, that it may be
more lasting. If it be legal terror, that is, a sorrow for sin, not as it is
sin, but as it presents thee with displeasure from God, and with punishment;
see that it end in sorrow for sin as it is sin, and learn to grieve for the
offense of God, though there were no hell to punish thee hereafter, no shame,
reproach, pain, or punishment on earth to follow it: sorrow most for that which
is the cause of all sorrow. We must see that Compunction end in Contrition, etc.
See that thy compunction end in true contrition; that the pricking and
breaking of thy heart (which may stand with hardness) may end in bruising and
melting in some apprehension of Gods love, and hope of mercy, whiles it is
softened, melted, and made pliable to Gods will. See that despair in thy self
send thee to hope in God; that self-judging send thee to seek absolution and
pardon from God; that seeing thine own damned condition, thou look to Christ,
and esteem of him above many worlds; that fear of wrath make thee more
earnestly desire mercy; that sense of wrath make thee at least consult and cast
about what to do to be saved, as it did these here, who being pricked in heart,
said -- What shall we do?

SECT. 4. Diverse Reasons why men are not to take up with legal qualms till
they be humbled enough.
Why we are not to rest in every slight sorrow.
NOw why are we thus to do? why are we not to take up only with some few
whorish tears, or legal terrors? but to see that we be humbled enough?

1 Because it is but a preparative to Conversion in the elect.
1. Because all the forenamed works of the Law are but preparations to
Conversion, and far off degrees thereof, and indeed common to many reprobates;
to Pharaoh, Ahab, Herod, Felix, Cain and Judas, and to many others now in hell,
as has been said, even to the Devils themselves, who have such stings in their
consciences, and tremble, but without hope: though in and to the elect these
prickings are truly preparative to their Conversion; and yet but preparative.

2. These prickings (being common to the reprobate and elect) tend as well (if
good use be not made of them) to the hurt of the one as health of the other, 2
because being not followed home in others, God is provoked to give them up,
either,
yea they are but beginnings of men's damnation, both furthering and increasing
the same.

But how and why is this? Because where such woundings and prickings are
neglected and not followed home, it is just with God, yea, and usual to give
men over either to senselessness and hardness of heart, which is the first
entrance into Hell; or to anguish of soul, when they most stand in need of
comfort, yea, to utter desperation; so that when such men come to die, it is
either like Nabal, as a stone and block; or as Judas in despair.

1 to senselessnes, and deadness,
1. If when conscience smites, stingeth, pricketh and accuses, it be neglected,
and that men (so fairly called on and admonished by so good a friend otherwise)
proceed not on to godly sorrow and repent not, it will, ere they be aware, give
over its office of accusing, checking, and awaking them by jogging as it were
and pricking; yea, be quiet and silent, in effect, saying as God himself says,
Why should ye be stricken any more? This is when being smitten in heart with
David for sin, they do not repent and seek mercy with David. A wounding
conscience, says one, neglected will prove a dead conscience: as an ungracious
child, after many corrections is hardened thereby, and at length quite given
over and cast off. A wound neglected or falsely healed festers the more, and
often causes mortification of the flesh, numnesse, deadness, rottenness.

Neglect we not then the first stingings and prickings of conscience (by which
God comes near, and makes some offer to us.) You may perhaps make light account
of the rebukes of men, or of us Ministers (and so especially do great men,
rich, noble, and generally proud men:) yet, if ye be wise, neglect not
conscience: if it accuse you to your selves, do you accuse your selves much
more to God, least otherwise he give you up to deadness and security.

Or 2. to anguish of conscience in their death.
2. Or if not that (and that is bad enough, and more dangerous, because more
pleasing) then to anguish of soul on your deathbeds at least, when conscience
which lay asleep before, and the guilt of your sin, which only lay at the door
like a sleeping lion or a dog (whose mouth you had stopped) will awaken against
you, and fly in your faces, and then be your greatest terror, when you most
stand in need of comfort and to have conscience your friend.

3 Or howsoever you shall be given up to Desperation, and therein to perish for
ever, as we see in Judas, who repenting of his sin merely out of horror not
hatred of it, 3 or to utter desperation.
and neglecting in hope to seek to Christ and to show true sorrow for his
treachery against him, was in Gods justice given up to desperation, to be
tormented by Satan in this life till he grew weary of it, as is seen in Judas.
and to hasten his own eternal torments with him in hell. Even thus little
pricks or bruises neglected, prove not only extremely painful, but often
deathfull: and rods are turned into scorpions. How was it with Francis Spira
(whose lamentable story is so well known) who smothering a good while such
checks of conscience, and Francis Spira.
as being hearkened unto, would have kept peace in his conscience, was given up
to be lashed in his naked soul for a long while by so many strokes of
conscience as with so many iron rods, and at length, for all that could be done
or said unto him, to dye most miserably and without comfort? God by such
remarkable examples, though they fall out rarely in such noted manner, yet by
the terror of them would and does warn all men not to neglect conscience, or
to whist and smother the reproofs and checks of it, that so more securely and
with less control they may still enjoy their lusts, their sinful gains,
pleasures, offices, honors, liberty, favor with men, and what else they are
wedded to: more sorrow for such things (whilst stings of conscience are
followed home with godly and repentant sorrow) with self denial in them will
much sooner bring a man to sound ease and solid rest then the enjoying of them
with a false peace, by silencing, deading and dulling of conscience.

But now supposing thou art an elect child of God, who art so wounded (which
that thou art, yea in the elect there will follow,
thou can not know till thou be made truly sorrowful, and be thoroughly
converted and attain to true faith) yet though thy first prickings of
conscience be such as shall prove saving to thee, yet I say if thou follow not
home this work of humiliation, and sorrow once begun, these things will follow;
either 1 an easy return to sin.
and the best thou can expect will be either an easy return to former sins
so slightly sorrowed for, and an often relapsing into the same sins, as we see
in Abraham twice denying Sarah to be his wife; and may see it much more in
others, (not only the wicked as is said, as in Ahab, Judas, Felix, etc.) but
even the elect of God, or 2 a questioning the truth of conversion.
or an uncomfortable walking all thy life time, with a continual questioning
the truth of thy conversion, and so nothing but deadness and doubting: or it
may be, or 3 a new beginning again,
a coming back again under the bondage of the Law, as having the whole work to
begin, after a dead and unfound profession for many years, whereby thou have
deceived thy self: or 4 crosses from God further to humble them.
or lastly great crosses and afflictions sent from God to humble thee yet more
and more; as why not in Jobs cases who by afflictions was made to remember and
possess the sins of his youth, perhaps not so truly sorrowed for at the first.

You see then that there is no resting or taking up with every light or little
pang of conscience; A reproof of such as 1 seek comfort and lay hold on pardon
too soon.
many by seeking or snatching at comfort too soon do altogether miss of it:
they will believe the promise of pardon ere they be prepared sufficiently for
it; they take too great and wide a stride at once, seeing there are many steps
between such slight terrors wrought by the Law and true faith to believe the
pardon of sin: Others after some apprehension of wrath, shaking it off, 2 Shake
off all former sense of sin and punishment.
do think it baseness to suffer themselves to be so much disquieted, as
sometimes they have been, and hereupon most desperately harden themselves
against the word and resolve to outstare the Ministers of it: they will no
longer be such children as they have been; they will do as they have done, let
Jeremy (if he were among them) or all the Ministers in the world say against
them what they will or can. But for men of this stamp I must leave them, seeing
by this their obstinacy and hardening of themselves, which is a fearfuull case.
they show that God has left them to their own graceless hearts in his
greatest displeasure to run on headlong and without fear to their own eternal
destruction, as not meaning (and yet who knows the mind and mercies of the
Lord?) to give them repentance that he might save them. God may do much for
such, and in mere mercy by his mighty power soften and reclaim them: but
neither may they presume thereon, nor dare I promise it. I therefore turn me
to such as have some sense of sin, and are (or shall be) touched with some
gripings and stings of conscience (though for the present it be only in
apprehension of judgment) to these I would speak a word of Exhortation and of
Direction.

SECT. 5. The former Exhortation further followed.
The exhortation further followed, that our sorrow may be to repentance:
TO you then I say, seeing the word has taken hold on you and wounded you, See
that your sorrow be to purpose, that is indeed to repentance, and to salvation;
and that it be according to God, or after a godly manner, that it work and
bring forth carefulnese, 1 Cor. 7.8, 9, 10, 11.
and other such fruits as godly sorrow wrought in the Corinthians upon Paul's
reproof of them; and such as this here in my Text wrought in these Jews by
Peter's conviction of them, the first fruit whereof was carefulness; what shall
we do? upon which question they were directed to repent, verse 38. they were
first pricked in heart, yet had not repented; that was after prescribed to them
as a salve, and as the end of their pricking. So that we see the one of these
is but a beginning, a preparative, and the way to the other: men may be
wounded, heavy laden, and burdened with their sin, and yet not converted, not
as yet come and brought to Christ, Matthew. 11.28. Men must be first sinners in
their own sense; that done, they are called to repentance. The weight of sin
may lie on one, and he as yet not truly, or not sufficiently humbled.

See then ye be humbled enough. And that we be humbled enough. Number. 16.14.
Most come short in this great work, either seeking their comfort too soon, and
so by hastening out of their anguish, make waste of all they have done or
suffered, (like the Israelites in the wilderness, expecting a land flowing
with milk and honey, (only because promised) without enduring with patience
what God was pleased to exercise them withal in the wilderness; which was the
cause that they came short of Canaan; or else mistaking the nature and measure
of true humiliation; and so for want of a little more sorrow, or of me^^
sincerity, they come short of salvation.

which we must endeavor; 1 God else will not accept us. 2 Our pride is not
easily subdued.
Pains then would be taken with our hearts in humbling of our selves, as for the
aforesaid reasons, so because first, God will not otherwise accept of this work
unless it be done thoroughly and to the purpose. Yea, because there is a great
deal of pride in our uncircumcised hearts, and hardness, which is not easily
subdued; as we see in Job, otherwise a good man. What a great deal ado was
there before he was brought to humble himself so much as it became him, to see
and acknowledge his own vileness? God himself must second his sore afflictions
by showing his majesty, might, wisdom, justice and holiness to him by his own
voice more immediately; Job, chapters 38, 39, 40, 41, and 42. And we need not
doubt but that our hearts stand in need of as much humbling as ever Jobs did.

CHAP. XVII.
SECT. I. A Case, showing when a man is humbled enough: with Directions what to
do in case of a seeming defect in our sorrow.
A case of conscience, How to know when one is humbled enough. 1 All men are
not humbled alike,
BUt the main question and case of conscience now will be, How a man may judge
of himself, whether and when he is humbled enough.

In answer to which, we must know, first, That all are not wounded and humbled
alike, who yet are savingly touched and pricked in heart, and so as that they
may have true and found comfort of the same. Now who these are, and the reasons
of Gods different dealing with those whom yet he savingly humbles, as it may
be considered with respect to their different conditions, present, past, and to
come, as see above page 68. to 74.
I have showed distinctly before, unto which I must entreat the Reader to have
recourse.

2 Others measure of sorrow should be no rule to us.
Secondly, That which follows hence is, That we measure not the truth of our
sorrow and humiliation by other men's scantling. Be not thou (...) dejected
hence, as some who can say, Oh if I had been or were so wounded, or might or
had been so long kept under as such and such as I could name, I would think
better of my humiliation --. No: measure not, neither judge of the truth of thy
humiliation by the degree, but by the quality of it; not by that measure which
others (and yet but some others) find, but by the sincerity of it: Otherwise a
child of the Devil may have more legal sorrow, and greater affrightments in
his conscience then Gods own deer children. To stand too much on measure argues
pride and carnal confidence.
And the truth is, to stand so much on the measure, greatness, depth, and
continuance of our sorrow and humiliation may savor too much of inward pride
and self confidence, as if either Christ's sorrows for us were not sufficient
unless we helped, or made some supply by our own; which is a proud conceit,
and such as prevails with the Popish sort, who make a mixture of their works
and pretended merits with his, to make them fully and to all purposes
satisfactory; whereas our humiliation is only to dispose and make us fit,
ready, and willing to receive, seek to, or at least to accept with
thankfulness mercy from him, and to rest only in his merits: Or, as if God
did not more look to truth and soundness in our sorrow, then to the measure of
it. It is true, God will have all in some measure to be brokenhearted and
bruised, We, if humbled enough with less dejections should rather acknowledge
Gods mercy to us:
but not all alike. If then God be pleased not to lay such load on thee as he
might, and as he does on some other, acknowledge his mercy, pity, and gentle
dealing with thee therein, who best knows what is fit for thee: thou might
otherwise with Cain, soon have more laid upon thee then thou can bear: and
take notice of Satan's cunning.
rather herein espy the fraud and cunning of the Devil, whose manner is,
before men be humbled, to keep them from contrition, and to persuade them that
any grief is too much, and more then needs; Christ suffered enough for them,
and God is merciful: but seeing them made truly sorry, and in a godly manner,
he labors then to debar them of that comfort which he himself despairs of,
and would make them (proudly) believe that all their sorrow now is too little,
that scarce any measure of it will be accepted. Directions what to do in case
our sorrow seem not enough.


For direction in this case, seeing God and his grace and acceptance of us is
only in and for Christ, neither is tied to every proportion of sorrow in us; 1
See it be sincere.
Let us first see that our sorrow and grief for sin be sincere, sound, hearty,
though perhaps it be not so much as we may think needful: Which shall be tried
anon.

2. Look to Christ's sorrows.
2. If thou think it not enough, look to Christ's sorrows for thee, which alone
God accepts as satisfactory and sufficient, regarding no man's measure of sorrow
but only in Christ, nor rejecting the measure, if it be true, and in him.

3 Grieve that thou can not grieve enough,
3. If thou have sorrowed, and think thou have not sorrowed enough, take
occasion thence to renew thy sorrow, and grieve afresh that thou can not
grieve enough: make it a part of thy sorrow that thou can not so heartily
sorrow as thou would; and what is wanting in the act and expression of it,
shall be made good in the heart and affection, which shall of God in Christ be
accepted for the thing it self. and God will accept it as sufficient.
It shall be accounted enough, which thou truly desire may be enough.

4. If thy sorrow for sin be not so much as either it should be, 4 See the
defect of sorrow supplied by a greater measure of other graces, as 1. Of hatred
of sin. Psalm. 119.104. and 128. 2 Of stronger resolution.
or as thou would have it, see it be made up by the greater measure of some
other grace, as by a more perfect hatred of sin, and dislike of it in thy will
upon a true judgment of the hatefulness of it: as David, I hate every false
way. I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right: and I hate
every false way. True hatred is out of true judgment. So, by stronger
resolution against sin, as in Joseph, who had not so much sorrow for sin (that
we read of) as he had strong resolutions and reasonings, whereby he withstood
very strong temptations: by more watchfulness, as in Job, 3 Of watch fullness.
I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid? Job
31.1. and in David, Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, etc. So by
more obedience, by more carfulness, 4 Of obedience, carfulness, and other
fruits of godly sorrow.
by more faith in flying to Christ for acceptance, by anger against our selves
when we have sinned, by a greater measure of fear lest we offend God so again,
by more vehement desire to please God better, by more zeal, and by a holy
revenge on our selves and sins in the mortifying of them. By these we either
prevent sin, and consequently, the cause of sorrow; or otherwise both give to
others and get to our selves testimony that our sorrow, if it be not so very
much for the measure, as it was not in Joseph, Zacheus, Lydia, or with these
Converts in my Text; yet that it is true and sound for the nature of it.

SECT. 2. Signs of true sorrow, and what sorrow is not sound.
3 Judge when thy sorrow is enough by the signs of true sorrow.
THerefore thirdly, Learn to judge of thy self, and of thy sorrow by the true
signs of godly sorrow. Would thou then know whether thou be savingly
pricked or no? This may be tried, known and distinguished from unsound sorrow 1
By the Antecedents, causes and grounds of it. 2 By the Concomitants of it. 3 By
the Consequents and effects thereof: which two last we will not speak of so
much severally as jointly, seeing the effects and consequents may in a large
sense be called and accountted Concomitants.


And first by the antecedents and causes of it. Gods word working by his Spirit.
1 True Contrition is the fruit and effect of Gods word only faithfully taught,
convictingly applied both by the teacher and hearer, and made effectual by the
holy Spirit of God, as in these Converts here, who when they heard, were
pricked: and Jer. 23.22. It is the causing the people to hear Gods only word
(not man's) which turns them from their evil way, and from the evil of their
doings. Which conversion and sorrow, though it be often occasioned by
judgments felt or feared, yet it is wrought effectually by the holy Ghost
accompanying the word. The spirit of grace and supplication was first promised
to be poured out (as it was on the day of Pentecost) and then its said, They
shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him -- and
be in bitterness, etc. Zech. 12.10.

Such sorrow is not sound, as is caused,
Now try thy sorrow from hence, whether it be not a sorrow and pricking, 1. From
Envy: many men sorrow, and their sorrow is very great and inward; 1 By envy
at the prosperity either of the wicked.
but the true cause of it is envy: thus the Psalmist or Asaph was envious at
the wickeds prosperity (but it was only in a temptation, and in a short fit:)
Thus (says he) my heart was grieved, (or leavened and sowred) and I was
pricked in my reins, Psalm 73.21. Lo here a pricking in the reins, and grief of
heart, and that in a godly man, yet it was no godly sorrow; Psalm. 73.22.
but such as argued much folly and ignorance, and was repented of and sorrowed
for. Which though it be in godly men, yet is no godly sorrow.
And now doubtless many good men grieve and inwardly fret to see, or to have
seen evil doers prosper in their way, and to bring wicked devices to pass,
ready to think them the only happy men: but this their sorrow is no fruit of
Gods word, but of their own ignorance, folly, yea brutishness, Psalm 73.22.
and 92.6, 7. Neither should such simply justify themselves in this their
grief, which seems bent against wicked men, or think they do well in it. It is
an ungrounded grief; there is no cause for it or ground in Gods word, which
dehorts every where from it: as Psalm 37.1. Prove. 23.17. and 24.1. Such grief
argues not true zeal against the wicked, but rather some discontent with Gods
government and providence. Or much less of the godly, whom to see prosper, is
a grief to the wicked,
How much less then may they justify themselves in their grief, whose sorrow
is grounded on the welfare of Gods people, to see them prosper, to see their
horn exalted with honor, and that they have, or see their desire upon their
enemies. The wicked shall see this and be grieved, Psalm 112.8, 9, 10.
he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away: poor comfort may such have of
their sorrow; and I believe it is the only or chief sorrow that some,
especially in these days do show; though somewhat else may be pretended to
justify their grief.
though perhaps through their blindness, and love to their own conceits,
opinions and superstitions, they pretend it is upon other and better grounds,
as to see religion and devotion with reverence to holy things, as table, altar,
Temple-wals; and to names, as to the bare empty name and sound of Jesus, even
when it is indevoutly pronounced and heard: so of Church, Lord-bishop, and the
like, neglected and not regarded; and learning to be discouraged, etc.

2 By anger, when upon the reproofs and discoveries made by the word men are
angry at the teachers of it.
2. There is a sorrow, and that upon hearing of the word faithfully preached and
applied; but it is merely grounded upon anger: such as was in those that heard
Stephen, Acts 7.54. who when they heard such things as he most truly and
faithfully taught, were cut to the heart, and gnashed upon him with their
teeth, through grief, anger and indignation. Consider whether ever any other
sorrow, or upon other ground, has been wrought upon thee in the hearing of the
word. Thou perhaps have gone out of the Church, and go away sorrowful. Matthew.
19.22.
grieved and sorrowful, but no otherwise then that Justitiarie that rich
youung man went from Christ sorrowful: why? his hypocrisy was by Christ
discovered, and he tried in his affection and love to his bosom sin of
covetousness. This made him displeased with that doctrine, and sorrowful in
himself: so I believe it is with too many now, who come jocund and well
conceited of themselves and of their own righteousness and innocence to the
hearing of the word, but return sorrowful from it; but their sorrow is out of
anger against their teachers who convince them of their sins and beat them from
their vain holds and confidence in themselves: which sorrow therefore being,
not an effect properly of the word or yet spirit of God, but of the spirit of
anger, though they pretend they do well in rejecting of them.
is to be sorrowed for. Yet doublesse some do too much please themselves in it,
thinking now they have just cause to cast off these precise preachers and
Doctors of despair, (who do all they can to shame men and drive them to
despair) and to hearken to such as will not make the way to heaven so narrow.

3 Natural sorrow grounded on natural causes is not saving sorrow.
3 There is natural sorrow proceeding from natural causes, either more inward
and less discerned, as from melancholy, sadness of disposition, heaviness of
heart and natural fears and terrors whereby they dare hardly be alone,
especially in the dark, and are often heavy and dejected, but they can scarce
tell for what; Not that which is from occasions which are outward, by which we
are not to measure our sorrow for sinnne.
or more outward, palpable and known, as from crosses and losses, in estate,
friends, health, liberty, name and from toil, labor, trouble and vexation in
their callings and conditions of life. Such sorrow as this causes mistakes in
judging of true sorrow diverse ways: some finding their sorrow excessive and
that they can shed plenty of tears for worldly occasions, Evcesse in such
sorrow causes some doubtings in the godly of the truth of their sorrow for
sin, as if it were
as loss of wife, husband, child, friend, etc. but that they cannot so
sensibly mourn for their sins, do hereupon question the truth of their sorrow
for sin as not sufficient or enough because not so great, as they conceive, as
worldly sorrow is in them, but without just or sufficient ground: seeing, 1
worldly sorrow runs with the stream of nature, which it has to help it, not
enough. But it should not Why?
whereas spiritual sorrow runs against the stream of nature, and is merely
from grace, which often receives resistance and abatement from the opposition
virtue, though the other seem greater in quantity: as good corn in time will
overgrow the weed which for the present is higher, and as the small spring or
fountain, and still stream fed by a spring, will outrun and outlast the violent
land-flood which though for the present, it run over its banks and make a
greater noise, yet when the great rain that caused it is done, It soon runs it
self dry, but the other still keeps its tenor and constant course. An
affection then whether of Joy or grief is not to be measured by the sudden
indeliberate passing motion of it, How we are to judge of the affection of
grief and joy.
but according to the settled habit in the judgment and estimation, and as is
said, dislike in the will: for as on the one hand, a man sometimes laughs (and
cannot but laugh) at a toy, in which he yet joys not so much as in many other
things, concerning which he does not for the act of laughing so lively carrry
himself; so on the other hand a man may be more stirred and moved, whether with
anger, or with sorrow, for a trifle or a thing of less concernment in the
main, then for a greater matter and spiritual loss, for which yet more
solidly, truly, and lastingly he mourns. Lighter sorrows make men cry out,
Difference betweeen natural and spiritual grief in regard 1 of causes.
when greater do more deeply affect, and are thought on more in silence.

As then there is great difference in the cause of sorrow, wordly grief being
caused by worldly and nnaturall causes, but true sorrow is wrought by the word,
and is for sin; so also in the continuance; natural grief, pain and sorrow
wears away with time, (as who grieves now for the pain, sorrow, sickness, or
loss he suffered many years ago?) whereas true contrition, 2 Of Continuance.
even after pardon, will and ought to be renewed for our further humbling all
our life long, in remembrance of sins of youth, Caveat.
long since repented of. Only to such I say, let this serve to humble you the
more, when you find your selves so excessive in worldly losses, greater sorrow
for natural causes then for sin should more humble us, but not dishearten us
and so remiss in the other, be hence excited to mourn the more for sin, to
check your hearts for this inordination, and to turn the stream of your tears
into the right channel; and if such a cross or loss be so bitter, cry out,
oh bitter sin of mine which has caused all this sorrow. Howsoever measure not
thy sorrow for sin, (as not by other men's scantling, as is lately said, so) not
by thy own greater sorrow (as at least thou think) in and for temporal
evils. But far be it from thee to mistake sorrows, labor, toil and suffering
in and for temporal things for or in stead of saving sorrow, and such as will
bring thee to heaven, Bodily sorrow is not godly sorrow simply, as is mistaken,
1 By Papists in their sufferings, 1 Voluntary,
as yet diverse do who having as yet never shed one tear, or so much as fetched
one hearty sigh for their sins, either all, many or yet any one, yet persuade
themselves that their sorrows and sufferings are, to salvation. Such are the
Popish sort generaly, who ascribe so much to their sufferings, whether
voluntarily inflicted on themselves (by hard usage of the body, by whippings,
scourgings, fastings, pilgrimages and the like, where they take penni worths on
their skins, but their sins and souls are no whit touched or mortified, but
increased rather a superstitious conceit of merit and satisfaction made thereby
to Gods justice) or justly inflicted on them by the hand of justice for their
disloyalties, 2 Inflicted.
treasons, conspiracies, poysonings or attempts to destroy their Sovereign and
Liege Lords and Kings, which just punishment of theirs they will falsely call
martyrdom, and a Baptism of blood washing them from all their sins, and
without any other sorrow for their evil deeds (in whch they rather glory and
rejoice) standing in stead of all other punishment to them either in Purgatory
or yet in hell, which by this means they hope and suppose they do escape and
prevent.

2 By common Christians, who acknowledge no other sorrow for sin, then such as
is outward,
Others there are who through their ignorance (or rather as they are leavened
with Popish principles) conclude with themselves they need no more sorrow then
such as they have found; for if sorrow be good, they have had enough of that,
they have been men of sorrows and labor, they have scarce had any respite or
breathing time, from crosses, sicknesses, aches, in regard 1 of crosses.
pain poverty, toil and labor in their calling all their life time, they hope
they have now sufficiently dreyed their Penance, (that is the phrase of some of
the more Popish sort of them) God forbid that God should lay any more sorrow
upon them either here or hereafter: they hope there is no more for them to
suffer hereafter, they have had their punishment and sorrow enough in this
life. Now as for true contrition and sorrow for sin, tell them of that, or
call on them for it, and they will presently stop your mouth, yea and answer,
satisfy or rather suffocate and choke their own consciences by telling you of
their sorrows in this life, 2 of toil and labor in their callings.
and that they labored truly in their callings, and wrought hard for their
livings, and have not eaten the bread of idleness; they hope God will require
no more of them, neither will they be convinced of the necessity of any other
sorrow for sin. In the rank of these we reckon such as popishly and foolishly
conceive that if a woman die in child bearing, she is undoubtedly saved, 3 Of
death in Childbearing.
as if that sorrow were sufficient, and expiatory or satisfactory to Gods
justice. ah poor souls, wretched creatures, to think Gods Justice can so be
satisfied, or that God should do them wrong if he required any more at their
hands here or hereafter; if they be not saved, who shall be saved, seeing they
have toiled, moiled, and labored hard in their callings? let rich men as was
Dives who was clothed in purple and fine linen and fared sumptuously every
day, look to go to hell; as for them, Gods Justice is not so satisfied,
they are like Lazarus who went to heaven. Thus (as in the former of women
dying in childbed) they can abuse Scripture to their own perdition. But let
such know that neither Lazarus nor any other went to heaven or escaped hell
torments for their poverty, sickness, sorrows, labor and toil in this life,
unless they also forrowed for their sins, neither is such sorrow from natural
external causes sufficient.
and withal sought to the all sufficient sorrows and sufferings of Christ for
them by true faith; without which all sorrows of this life are but beginnings
of eternal sorrows: no sorrows, sufferings or obedience (either active or
passive) of ours, save only that of Christ's, can satisfy Gods Justice which
is infinite. Sin must and will have sorrow if not in this life, then
everlastingly hereafter, as has been showed largely: and therefore their
sorrow being not for their sin, nor humbly and willingly undertaken, will never
save them.

Sorrow from inward distemper by Melancholy, is not true or sufficient sorrow,
And as for Melancholic dumpish fits of heaviness, they must not simply be
taken for sufficient or saving sorrow, being the effects of natural causes and
ill constitution and temper of the body. I know where sorrow for sin and such a
disposition and temper meet in in any one, the sorrow becomes the greater, and
the party is further off from receiving comfort by the the Gospel: but this
increase of sorrow in such, belongs not to Godly and Evangelical Contrition so
much as to the work of the law in a deeper apprehension of wrath and punishment
furthered by the cunning and malice of the Devil whotaking advantage of that
dark, (Though it may and does increase sorrow for sin) neither in the godly,
dull and ill disposition of their bodies, presents strange fancies to their
brain, and dreadful apprehensions yea and apparitions to their souls, whereby
the soul seeing nothing but through such dark and foggy mists, and being
distempered with the distempers of the body, beholds nothing but black
darkness, and is disquieted with needless and excessive fears and doubts, and
that often, till it come to desperate resolutions tending to the destruction of
themselves or those they otherwise dearly love, as husband, wife, child or
friend, unless God mercifully stay them. But in such case their sorrow for
sin, as it is sin, may be little enough, nay if it were more, the other would
be less; seeing true sorrow for sin is not without some apprehension of
goodness and graciousnes in God, and love and hope in themselves who so do
sorrow. But as melancholy in such does not argue a greater measure of godly
and true saving sorrow in them, nor in some other whose natural distempers
being healed,
so in some others it argues none at all of it self, and simply: Let such be
cured of their melancholy, of their natural and bodily distemper, and we shall
see that the Divines work is to begin in them, when the Physician has left
them: sorrow for sin is to begin.
pensiveness for sin is to begin in their souls, after sadness, fullennesse,
foolish fancies and fears, with the cause thereof, distemper, has left them in
their bodies. Not but that, where the distemper of body is not very great, the
Divine may and should take the advantage as much to work on that soul for good
as Satan for evil. None of these sorrows then caused or occasioned from either
sinful, worldly or natural causes, must be mistaken for godly sorrow at all,
much less for sufficient and saving contrition, neither are they to be rested
in. Nor that whereby some in their bodily infirmities, especially distempers of
brain withal fall a weeping and crying, when by others they are spoken to and
pitied.

4. Such sorrow and Repentance is not sound, which is the effect of any power
of will in man.
Before I show positively what sorrow is and may be taken as sufficient for the
present in the young penitent, so as to afford him comfort in the assurance it
is well-grounded, I advise men, who, it may be, little question the truth of
their godly sorrow and repentance, to consider well with themselves, whether
they do not ascribe their repentance (as other graces) to some power of free
will in themselves, as if God only by external motives in the word, and by
some internal excitations thereupon, did let them see what to do, and some
necessity of doing it; but the doing it is of themselves, and from the good use
of their own free will and natural power, without the powerful, prevailing
and determining grace of God. Such men have cause to suspect themselves and
their repentance, See Matt, 9.13.
as built upon a weak foundation, and standing upon feet of clay as well as
iron: The work being of men, will undoubtedly come to naught, as in another case
was said. We have heard, Acts 5.38.
and shall hear more, that true contrition and godly sorrow proceeds from, and
follows upon self-denial, True sorrow is grounded on self-denial,
and felf-despair of a man's own wisdom, worth, will, power, as in my Text; they
presumed on nothing in themselves, but said to the Apostles, What shall we do?
yet not by our own strength: no; and on no power or worthiness in man.
as Peter and John in case of healing the lame man, ascribed all to Christ his
power and grace, Act. 4.12, 16.
and nothing at all to their own power or holiness; so is it much more in the
conversion of a sinner, and in true repentance, where is not only the
restoring the lame to his feet, but the born blind to his sight, the deaf to
hearing, and in a word, the dead to sense and life. This presumption keeps men
in whole, or in part from Christ, that they feek not to him, or depend not
wholly on him for this and all other grace, as having the same, at least in
part, within the compass of their own power: and so not fully and heartily
seeking to Christ, or depending on Christ, his grace and power for it, by going
wholly out of themselves, they wholly go without true and saving contrition
(otherwise then in seeming, and in theiorw^n presumption) and thus harboring
(though secretly it may be, and so as they take no great notice of it) a
conceit of some sufficiency in themselves, they miss of Christ (whose grace
and power must either do all, or in effect it does nothing at all:) these by
presumption think they need not so much be beholding to the grace of Christ as
contrariwise, some men, apprehending the greatness of wrath due to them for
their sin, which whiles some closely conceit.
suffer themselves to be swallowed up of despair: for seeing no power or
sufficiency at all in themselves for their own help, they fall to despair as
well of Gods help as their own, and will not seek to Christ, which is through a
kind of pride, stoutnesse, and stubbornness of heart, whereby seeing they
cannot have what is needful of their own, they will not go to any other to
receive it, and so their despair is not out of sight and sense of sin and
punishment so much, as out of stoutnesse of heart: as in Cain whose sins were
not so great as King Manasses his were, who yet despaired not, being both
humbled in himself, and not without hope of help in God.

They either despair wholly, or in part, and so are long kept from comfort.
And this sometimes keeps even such as otherwise are brokenhearted and prove
true Converts, from their comfort a long while; an apprehension of their own
unworthiness, which makes them repel mercy, as so exceedingly unworthy of it
that they dare not apply the promise. Belike then if they were in themselves
more worthy, they then durst go to Christ, as if Christ were not able alone
without some worthiness or power of theirs to save and succor them, through a
secret Pride undiscerned by them. whereby they still object their own
unworthiness.
but that they must join something with Christ in furthering the work of their
salvation. As such a conceit as this keeps the proud Papist, (for all his
seeming austerity and Compunction) from true sorrow for sin, and from saving
repentance; they like Naaman in his fit of pride and scorn, refusing their own
help, healing, and salvation, because they will not have it so easily without
somewhat of their own; so these though they have as much Compunction as would
and should drive them to Christ, yet in a niceness because they are such great
sinners, so disabled, so unworthy, they dare not be so bold, and so couch and
lie down under the burden of their sins; conceiting if their sins were less,
fewer or not so heinous, they could better hope for mercy, and might be bolder
to beg it, or to cast themselves on it, as if God ever accepted any for any
righteousness of their own (whether simple or comparative) because they are
not so great sinners as some others, or yet rejected from mercy the greatest of
sinners that in a sense of sin and of the burden thereof could or would come
unto him.

True Compunction then and contrition of heart must be grounded on some Hope,
general at least, True Compunction is grounded on Hope in God and not in our
selves.
if not special and particular: but then that hope must be grounded on nothing
in our selves, on no power, worthiness, and less unworthiness and
sinfullnesse of ours; but only on the mercy and goodness of God in Christ; and
so by such hope our sorrow shall prove saving, and not end in despair. If
either thy hope be presumptuous as grounded on thine own power or worthiness; or
none at all in God, because thou can see nothing in thy self to make thee
hope, thou have cause to think that thy sorrow is not found. Its true: many
man's sense of sin and miserry is such that in a fit and for a time they either
cannot or will not see any ground of hope; yet such as God will save, are not
always left to themselves, True Converts are sustained by some hope in God, as
Lam. 3.18, 19, 20, 21.
but are secretly sustained with some hope, and persuaded of a possibility of
help in God, and from his All sufficiency, free love, and abundance of mercy,
which he has for the greatest sinners upon their repentance: whereby they are
able to say when their soul is humbled or bowed in them, this I recall to mind,
therefore have I hope: though formerly they could say, my strength and my hope
is perished from the Lord; so Jonah, in the fishes belly, I am cast out of thy
sight, yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple; so these Converts in my
Text secretly sustain themselves with hope: Jonah 2, 2, 4. and in these
Converts in my Text.
they say not desperately, there is no hope, there is nothing to be done, all
means are in vain: but what shall we do? Is there no way for us, being so
guilty, to escape our deserved punishment? yes certainly, if we could light on
it; ah good Sirs, men and brethren, let us know it, tell us what is to be done,
what course is to be holden that we may be saved: so that they conceiving some
hope and possibility, resolve not to go on, or to continue in their guiltiness,
or to add sin to sin, (as some in like case, desperately would say, seeing we
must go to hell and be damned, we will take our pleasure while we live (as one
expresses it) and be damned for something) but being inwardly and truly
touched in soul and heart, with sense of their sin as well as of hell and wrath
deserved, they become truly remorsefull, and resolve not to despair of that
goodness and saving mercy offered them in Christ, against which they had thus
grievously sinned; and therefore sustained with some hope of acceptance, if
they might be well directed to the means thereof, they ask saying, What shall
we do? Whereupon they are directed to the true means in the next Verse. And
thus we see their wounding and pricking was not merely Legal, with respect to
punishment only, but Evangelical, tending to true contrition and Repentance;
and therefore not wholly an effect of the law, but in part also of the Gospel,
and a work of the saving spirit of God.

CHAP. XVIII.
SECT. 1. Signs of true sorrow from the true grounds of it. And first that it
is, and must be for sin.
TRy we our sorrow then henee whether it be wrought by the Gospel, Other Trials
of our sorrow from the grounds of it.
or only by the Law. If it be true and saving sorrow, it is grounded 1. On some
sight and sense of sin. 2. On some glimpse of mercy and goodness in God.

True sorrow is procured, 1 by the sight of sin, and is for sin.
1. He that savingly sorroweth, sees his sin and misery by sin, and groans
under the burden of both, Matthew. 11.28. he is sensible thereof, his heart is
become like his eye, tender and sensible of the least sin, as it is of the
least mote in it; he looking on his sin, mourns, and that heartily and
secretly: If then the sight of sin be not the procurer of thy sorrow, thou have
cause to suspect it.

Yea, but how shall I know whether my sorrow be for my sin, and fault, or for
the punishment of it either felt or feared? This is a needful quaere; Herein
many deceive themselves,
seeing men are commonly more sensible of the evil of smart, then of the evil
of fault and of sin, and if their sorrow be either only, by sorrowing more for
the punishment then for sin.
or more for the shame and punishment of sin, in this life or in hell, then for
the fault, it is unfound; howsoever it may seem or be pretended to be only for
the sin: Many herein being like one Polus an Actor, who being to act a
sorrowful part on the stage, to move him thereunto, had secretly conveyed into
a corner of the Stage, his fathers (or some dear friends) Urne, in which were
the ashes of the deceased, on which whiles he looked, his sorrow was so much
the more excited; only with this difference, he being to fain sorrow, came thus
to act it truly, and truly to mourn: these while they pretend to sorrow truly
for their sin, do it but in seeming for sin, but truly for the punishment of
it, on which their eye is chiefly set.

Howsoever it is a good sign when men grieve when Gods hand is upon them or
threatened.
It is not denied, but that men may and ought to show themselves sensible of and
grieve for the punishment of their sin, be it present and incumbent, whether it
be public or private, and personal or imminent and only threatened. Nay it is
an ill sign for men not to be moved in such case, but to give themselves to
feasting and jollity, when God by his judgments calls to weeping and mourning,
Jer. 5.3.
as Isai. 22.12, 13, 14. where God threatens the want of it, and elsewhere
complains by his Prophet, that though he had stricken them, yet they grieved
not. And the best men in such case fear and tremble most, and show greatest
humiliation, The best do it,
as David in time of pestilence, 2 Samuel 24.17. Jehoshaphat, when God threatened
an invasion, 2 Chronicles. 20.3, 4. and generally the godly in their own and the
Churches miseries. So true converts do mourn even in respect of the evil and
misery which their sin threatens them withal, as reverencing his Word.
and are made to fear the falling into the like sins again, as Job 31.23.

The reason hereof is, Because they reverence Gods Word, and fear all signs of
his anger. And this God pleases to sanctify as a beginning of saving sorrow,
as in these converts in my Text. So that we here conclude, as formerly we have
showed that it is a sign of an ungracious and hard heart that is not some way
humbled under the tokens of Gods wrath on or toward our selves or others, and
that such come short of many Reprobates, To tremble at Gods word and
judgments, a good sign.
as of Pharaoh, Ahab, Jehoram, etc. 1 Kings 21.29. and 2 Kings 6.30. And on the
other hand, it is a good sign of true sorrow indeed, and such as God does
accept of, when men tremble at Gods word, and at the tokens of his displeasure,
Isa. 66.1, 2. so do hearts truly humbled; which howsoever before, they were
stout and stubborn against God, and relented not at his judgments; yet now an
angry word of God humbles them. And when it is so, as it was with good King
Josiah, Such as are not humbled at Judgments and at the word are not sound.
2 Kings 22.10, 11. its a good sign of a heart truly compunct, contrite, and
humbled. Let such look to this, as hearing of Gods judgments, with Ahah do
quarrel with the Minister, as he with Micaiah, as never speaking good unto
them; far are they from the humble spirit of good K. Hezekiah, who though he
had sinned through pride, yet soon humbled himself for it (when Isaiah so sore
threatened him) saying, 2 Chro. 32.26. Isai. 39.8.
Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken. A heart truly humbled for
sin and hating it, can be content to have it searched out by the word,
discovered and reproved, Yet such sorrow is not enough,
Psalm. 139.24. Yet though it be a thing needful, that, in reverence to God, to
his Word and threatenings, men do humble themselves under Gods hand and stroke,
and in apprehension of his dipleasure befalling or otherwise due for their
sins; unless it be also and chiefly for sin,
yet this is to be taken as a sign of true contrition and saving sorrow, when
withal or chiefly, their sorrow is for sin, and upon the sight thereof, as it
was in Josiah, and Hezekiah, more then for punishment.
who formerly had tasted of Gods goodness, and now finding God displeased upon
the breach of his Commandments, and by reason of the dishonours done unto him,
melt into tears and sorrow, and in true grief of heart for their own and
peoples sin, seek to appease his wrath by humbling of themselves.

If then we would know whether our sorrow be sound and good, we must try and
consider whether it be for sin, or for the punishment of sin: and that first
when Gods hand of correction is upon us for our sin. Hypocrites may then humble
themselves, as is said: but true converts only mourn and are humbled for sin as
cause of those judgments, yea more for the sin then for the judgment. Such
was the sorrow of David, who was willing to endure punishment.
The judgment and evil inflicted they are most willing to undergo, but the
sin procuring it is intolerable, as we see in David, when for his sin the
Pestilence devoured his people (in whose multitude and strength he trusted too
much, and gloried) Lo, says he, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but
these sheep, 2 Samuel 24.17.
what have they done? Let thine hand I pray thee, and of Job.
be against me and my fathers house. Job 1. Levit. 26.
So Job in his sore affliction was content to receive evil at the hand of God,
as well as good, thereby accepting of the punishment of his sin, as true
converts do who are sensible of their own ill deservings, and others.
and are humbly patient under Gods hand, Thus the mournful repentance of them
that escape in the final desolation of Israel is described, But they that
escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the
valleys, all of them mourning, Ezekiel. 7.16. and 18.
every one for his iniquity: as for the rest, when destruction is upon them,
horror covers them, and shame is upon their faces, -- The King shall mourn,
and the Prince shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of
the land shall be troubled; but what? they shall seek peace: what peace? not
with God, but with man; that is ease from their troubles; but there shall be
none: and 26, 27.
Then they shall also seek a vision from the Prophet (in hope God will give
them ease and deliverance, such as their seducing and flattering Prophets did
promise them) but the Law shall perish from the Priest, and counsel from the
ancients; there shall be none to give them any hope from God. Psalm. 38.3, 4.
etc.
So David again being in a pitiful case in regard of some grievous sickness
inflicted on him because of his sin which he confesses, though his sorrow
(which was increased by reason of the insultations and snares of the wicked,)
was continually before him, yet that troubled him not so much as his sin the
cause thereof, therefore says he, and verse. 18.
I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin: So that when he is
sensible of Gods judgments and afflictions, yet his sin is his greatest
sorrow: The troubles of mine heart are enlarged, Psalm. 25, 17, 18.
-- look upon mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins They were
his sins which most troubled him. Now I ask is thy sorrow when Gods hand is
upon thee, Application.
or upon the Church or nation and place where thou live, such as this? If so,
thou may have comfort of it, when thou can turn the stream of thy worldly
sorrow into the right channel, and make thine eyes run down with rivers of
tears because of sin, Psalm. 119.139.
thine own and others, because men keep not Gods Law, and can with those in
Ezekiel mourn for the sins of the place, Ezekiel. 9.
and for all the abominations thereof, more then for the evil fruits and
effects of sin, which thou can in all humility accept of, and submit unto,
heartily bewailing the one, and humbly submitting to the other, as it was with
good Nehemiah chap. 1.4, 5. compared with 5, 6. and with Daniel, chap. 9 5, 6,
7, 8, etc. 14. But if it be chiefly for the evil effects of thy sin either
felt or feared, thou have cause to sorrow afresh, lest thy sorrow being only
for punishment, prove but the beginning of everlasting sorrow and torment to
thee, as to Pharaoh, who when Gods hand was heavy upon him and his people,
showed himself more affected with the evil he suffered then with the evil
which he did, and therefore cried not out to God as David did, I beseech thee,
O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly;
but to Moses and Aaron, 2 Samuel 24.10. Exodus 10.17.
Entreat the Lord your God that he may take away from me this death only.

True sorrow is for sin as sin, and as it is an offense of God.
True sorrow then is more for sin as it is sin and an offense of Gods Majesty,
and a dishonor done unto him, then for any evil consequent of sin, hurt,
peril or danger it brings men into. It is therefore called a godly sorrow, or
sorrow according to God, respecting him more then our selves; being more for
the object of our sorrow which is sin, 2 Cor. 7, 9. and 10.
then for any Act of sorrow caused by sin, whereof sorrowing aright for sin as
sin, we may have much comfort, it being repentance not to be repented of and
not worldly sorrow working death. It is such a sorrow as whereby we lament after
the Lord, as they did, Such is not the sorrow of hypocrites. Zach. 7.5.
1 Samuel 7.2. and not such as the Jews in their captivity performed, concerning
which the Lord bids Zachary, ask the Priests saying, when ye fasted and
mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did you at
all fast unto me, even to me? Nor such as the Israelites formerly made show of,
and of which the Lord complains saying, They return, but not to the most
High, Hos. 7.14.16.
they are like a deceitful bow. And says the Lord, they have not cried unto me
with their heart, when they howled upon their beds, they assemble themselves
for corn and wine, and they rebel against me. The meaning is, what show
soever they make of sorrow for sin, it is not in sincerity nor from the heart:
Whose sorrow merely respects themselves, and that chiefly in things of this
life.
It is not for their sin as it is sin against me and my honor, but it is for
their adversity, captivity, want, through dearth and famine: give them ease,
liberty; and let them have corn and wine, and their sins against me will never
trouble them: Nay, when thus they howl and cry unto me, they rebel against me:
how much rather then would they so do, if they had their desire? they seek (as
worldlings usually do, Psalm. 4.6, 7.) not my face and favor: whom by their
sins they have offended and dishonored, but corn and wine, the blessings of my
left hand, and so in their howling, fasting and sorrow, they have not regard to
me whom by their sins they pierce and wound, but to themselves, and that, not
to their souls, but to their bodies in the things only of this life. Now hence
it is that God having threatened his people with grievous evils for their sins
against him, calls on them to return, and to mourn sincerely, in these words,
Therefore also now, says the Lord, Joel 2.12, 13.
Turn you even to me with all your heart, and with fasting and with weeping,
and with mourning: And rent your heart and not your garment, etc. Where the
Emphasis would be observed, turn you to me, even unto me, till ye come and
reach unto me; Vsque ad me.
showing that our repentance and sorrow comes short of God, if it be chiefly
for worldly wants, crosses, and losses, and not in sincerity of heart sorrow
for sin as it is sin against God.

SECT. 2. How to know when our sorrow is for sin as sin, if in prosperity.
Trials whether our sorrow be for sin as sin.

NOw the better to judge of our sorrow whether it be not more out of fear or
feeling of punishment and shame and such like evils, then for sin as it is sin,
Let it be considered, First, 1 Sorrow for sin as sin is as well in prosperity
as adversity.
whether we can humble our selves and grieve for our sins against God, as well
in our prosperity, when all things in the world go well with us, as in
adversity, in wants, in our fears, troubles, dangers, etc. I know evil men
and hypocrites can in their prosperity rejoice, or rather seem to rejoice in
God as their God: Hypocrites hence discovered, 1. By not sorrowing in their
prosperity, Job 27.10.
but can they then mourn for their offenses against God, as being then more apt
to sin against him then at other times? I trow not, Will the hypocrite always
call upon God? No. Will he mourn for sin, whiles he may yet sin in regard of
health, youth, occasions and opportunities to sin? No: he makes that his time
for taking liberty against God, he will repent and cry God mercy, and sorrow
for his sin when he is old, and that the years come in which he shall say,
which many take for their time of sinning:
I have no pleasure in them; Or in case of some dangerous sickness, cross,
disaster, bodily weakness, or the like. Oh think of this, you young men
especially, on whom God calls for repentance, young and healthy men especially.
and to remember your creator in the time of your youth, or (as the word
implies) of your elections, when you may yet choose the good (yet not by any
power of will of your own) and refuse the evil, that is, before the time of
age, sickness and death come; when through infirmity of body, debility or want
of occasions and opportunities you cannot sin (at least in act, and for many
kinds of sin) though you would, as now you will not when otherwise you may, and
when God chiefly expects it from you. Never then tell me that your sorrow (if
there be any so much as in seeming in you) can be sound at such time as Gods
hand shall be upon you: 2 By their forced sorrowing in adversity.
For I know, secondly, That hypocrites, yea very profane wretches, when by
affliction, sickness, dangers (by sea or by land) Gods hand lies heavy upon
them, they can then humble themselves and seem sorry, as King Ahab did, and the
incredulous and disobedient Israelites, who when God slew them, they sought
him, they returned, and inquired early after God -- Nevertheless they did
flatter him with their mouth, -- for their heart was not right with him; Psalm.
78.34, ^ 36, 37.
and so they lying and dissembling, or at least deceiving themselves in heart,
return, but not to the most High: they in grief and sorrow seek the removal of
Gods strokes, but they grieve not that they have provoked God to strike them:
being as ready (when Gods hand is removed from them, and when without apparent
danger they think they may) to sin against God even with delight, as ever
before. But thus either to forsake sin, when sin (for the acts thereof)
forsakes them first, or to sorrow for sin only when Gods hand is upon them, or
in regard of the shame or punishment of it in this life, or in hell, is a sign
of unsoundnesse: and if thy sorrow, whosoever thou art, be no other then this,
thou have cause to sorrow and repent of thy sorrow and repentance, and
exceedingly to question the sincerity of it, and Gods acceptance; if thou can
not as heartily, at least truly and sincerely mourn for thy sin in thy health
as in sickness, in thy youth as well as old age, in thy prosperity as well as
adversity.

SECT. 3. True sorrow is for all sin, in our selves and others.
True sorrow is for all sin;
2 IF thy sorrow be occasioned and wrought in thee for sin, as it is sin, and as
it is a disobedience and dishonor to God, then it will be against sin, not
only at all times, In our selves, and in others.
but against all sin, both in thy self, yea and in others also.

1 In thy self: Thou will both hate every false way, and desire to be rid of
all sin, as well as to have all pardoned, 1 In our selves,
2 Timothy 2.19. yea also mourn for all, as well as any one, as knowing any one
sin persisted in with delight, will amount to as much in Gods account, as if
thou were guilty of all, Jam. 2.10. And though thy sorrow be not so great for
some one sin as for some other (all sins being not alike heinous;) yet it will
be true and sincere against all, because all sins, There being the same nature
of all sin,
though not all alike, are against God and his will revealed, against his
holiness, sovereignty, crown and dignity, will and glory. This quatenus or as,
all and each being against God.
(when we say we must mourn for sin as sin) being a reduplicative, implies a
universality; because there is the same nature in all sin, every sin being
against Gods holiness, will, sovereignty and glory: so that he that is sorry
for any one sin in that regard, Quicquid propter Deum fit, aequaliter fit.
will be sorrowful for every sin: and he that is not sorry for all sin, upon
the same ground and respect is truly sorry for no sin at all.

True sorrow is, 1 For smaller sins, as well as great. 2 Et contra.
Try then thy sorrow hence. Is it 1 For lesser sins as well as greater? David's
heart smote him for that which (as I take it) was in it self no sin, even for
cutting off the lap of Readiness garment, 1 Samuel 24.5. 2 For greater sins as well
as lesser? seeing hypocrites often strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel. 3
For such sins as the world takes no notice of.
3 Is thy sorrow as well for such sins as the world takes no notice of; to wit,
for spiritual pride, inward lustings, and pleasing thy self with contemplative
vanities, arguing sensuality of heart, covetousness, ambition, revenge, etc.
as for more open and shameful sins? Thus it should be: God is dishonored and
disobeyed by these, and they are against his holiness as well as more open
sins. 4 For natural corruption.
4 Art thou humbled at the uncleanness of thy nature, the depravation of thy
soul, yea deprivation of Gods image according to which thou at first wast made?
Is it a burden and grief to thee to find so much untowardnesse in thee, and
averseness from whatsoever is good, holy or true; and such a pronity and
readiness to embrace error, admit of sin, and to do evil? This was
part-cause of David's sorrow, when bewailing his actual transgressions, he
traced them home to the root and original, confessing and bewailing, saying,
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother ( warm, as it is in
the Original, 5 For bosom sins.
or) conceive me, Psalm. 51.5. 5 Is thy sorrow as much for thy beloved, bosom
and darling sins, such as have brought thee in unlawful gain, delight and
pleasure, and have procured thee favor, respect, yea advancement (it may be)
with and from evil men, as for other sins not so much feeding thy corruption?
By this I believe many men's sorrow will be found too light, whilst their
hearts are not so much pricked and wounded for these their sins, as that the
Word and Ministers of God will not suffer them without galling their
conscience, and with quietness and (false) peace to enjoy them still. 6 For
sins of the first Table as well as the second.
6 Is thy sorrow for thy sins against the first Table, or four first
Commandments of the Law, as well as for sins against the second Table,
respecting more immediately thy neighbor? and against the second as well as
first? 1. It may be it would be thy grief if thou had offended, dishonored
and disrespected thy father or thy mother, thy Magistrate and thy Prince: but
can thou as truly mourn for the dishonor done to God? If thy father on earth
show his displeasure, and spit in thy face, Numb. 12.14.
it may be thou would be ashamed seven days: but art thou so when thou
provokest God to anger? I know, if any of you should kill a man, though
uupurposedly, it would trouble your conscience somewhat, and be grief unto you:
but I doubt whether when you do that which God accounts an offense equal to
murder, as when the Jew killed an ox in sacrfice to God, trusting in the work
done, and living without faith, repentance, and reformation of life: or as when
the Christian comes unreverently and in his sins to the Lords table, and eats
and drinks unworthily, you are any whit troubled in conscience for the same;
when of the one God said, he that kills an ox is as if he slew a man, Isa.
66.3. (and so he that prays, hears, and offers other Christian sacrifices
without an heart humble and contrite, penitent and believing, is the like;) and
of the other S. Paul, Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, as if he
had been the Judas, or the Pilate, or one of the Jews who crucified him. Thou
again may perhaps be ashamed of adultery, to do thy penance for it, as in
Popery, etc. but yet please thy self, in thy spiritual adultery against God,
going a whoring from under him by thine idolatries and superstitions, and show
no shame, sorrow or grief for it. And so on the other hand, and for sins
against the second Table as well as against the first.
Thou may be troubled some way in conscience if thou should worship an
Idol, frame ceremonies and superstitions of men's devising, break out into
blasphemy, taking Gods name in vain, or into open profanation of the Sabbath;
but yet make no conscience, and art not troubled for dishonouring thy parents
and superiors, speaking evil of lawful authority, or otherwise offending
against thy neighbors life, wife, or chastity, goods or good name, either by
sins of commission, or of omission toward them. Jam. 1.27.
This is no true Religion, nor is the other godly sorrow, if thou sorrowest not
alike for these. 7 For evil cleaving to our best actions.
7 Can or do thou as well sorrow for thy failings and imperfections, or for
thy unworthy, and unprepared, and unreverent meddling with holy things, in thy
hearing, preaching, praying and communicating at the Lords Table, as for thy
omission of such duties, or commission of evils and sins apparently forbidden?
There is an evil cleaving oftentimes to our best performances, through
distractions, carelessness, irreverence, confidence in the doing of the duty:
do these things trouble thy conscience or not? Gross and open sins would
perhaps trouble thee; but are these things a trouble and burden to thee? I am
sure they should; and we should put away, by hearty sorrow and amendment, the
evils even of our best doings and sacrifices, Isa. 1.16. Do thou judge thy
self, as thou ought, even for want of due preparation to the Sacrament? thou
should so do, as well as for open profaneness, seeing there is sin and
dishonor done to God in the one as well as in the other. To conclude, Thou
must know, that thou truly grievest not for any sin as it is sin, and with
respect to God, if thou grievest not for all known sins, and that particularly,
if (as one well says) thy very unprofitablenesse, idleness, peevishness,
unconstancie trouble thee not: yea, I add, if thy hardness of heart, and thy
want of grieving as thou should grieve, do not grieve thee.

2 If thy sorrow be right and good for sin as sin, it will also be thy grief to
see and know others to sin against God, 2 True sorrow is also for sin in others.
and by sin to dishonor him, to disgrace Religion and profession, and to cast
away their own souls: This is the property of true mourners, Ezekiel. 9.4 Thus
mourned David, Psalm 119.136. and Lot, 2 Pet. 2.6. So should we mourn for the
sins of the Land, For the sins of the Land,
Town or place where we live, especially if Gods judgments be upon the same or
toward it; and that more for the sins provoking God, then for the judgments
themselves, as in the aforesaid examples. Sometimes in case of Pestilence, War,
Famine, and other great evils and dangers we meet and are called together to
fast and pray, to mourn and humble our selves, and otherwise are much
disquieted and vexed: but what is the true cause of our mourning? is it, as it
should be, our own sins, or the sins of the Land, place, or Kingdom? Nay alas,
these are least thought of, or at least but generally acknowledged, and
slightly bewailed: a sign our sorrow is not for sin, or with respect to God,
but to our selves. So, of our families,
if they be the sins of our own Families, we cannot approve our own sorrow for
our own sins such as it should be, if we do not also mourn for, and bewail the
sins thereof; as of our own children, as Job did, Chapt. 1.5. of our parents
and forefathers, as Nehemiah did, Nehem. 1.6. and Daniel, Chap. 9.8. and one
of another, of those that are nearest us.
every family mourning apart, Zech. 12.12. and as the Corinthians were blamed
for not mourning for the sin of Incest committed by one of them. As we are to
show a general dislike of sin in all, even in those that in other respects are
near and dear unto us, as King Asa, who allowed not his mother in her Idolatry,
1 King. 15.12. so should we both show our care and endeavor to reclaim others
from their sins; but however, mourn to God for them, if we can do no more.
Such as regard not how much wickedness; ignorance, profaneness, Popery,
superstition and like sins be in the Town, place or Parish where they live, or
in their own families, assuredly were never yet truly humbled for any sins of
their own: which would be considered as of all, so especially of Christian
Parents, Magistrates, Ministers, Pastors and Teachers: A reproof of public
persons, and others, who are not moved with the sins of their charge.
if their own sins did ever truly trouble them with respect to God, they would
also be troubled to see others under them to offend, they would both mourn and
cry to God, and endeavor to their power a reformation, as David did in his
house and Kingdom, Psalm 101.

What may such then think of their sorrow and demure looks, when they join in
confession of sins with others, whether in the Church, or family, or perhaps
closet; who in stead of mourning, laugh, sport, but specially such as sport
themselves in the sins of others.
and make themselves merry with other men's sins; yea, provoke them thereunto by
urging healths upon them, or forcing them to drink too much, by delighting to
hear others break profane jests on the Scripture, or on Gods people, bringing
on the stage, or otherwise, their actions, prayers, manner of thanksgiving,
gestures, and all to make themselves sport therewith? Yet such wretches and
varlets must be thought to mourn for their sins too at other times.

SECT. 4. True sorrow is occasioned by some hope and glimpse of mercy.
2 True sorrow is procured by some sight of mercy.
2 AS true Evangelicall sorrow is grounded on a sight and sense of sin as sin;
so also on some glimpse at least of mercy and goodness in God, which makes
them mourn kindly and truly for their sin as sin. They by apprehending Gods
anger may be broken and taken down of their stoutnesse; but till they some way
apprehend goodness and mercy in God, they will never melt kindly into true
Evangelicall sorrow, which is a sorrow for offending so good and gracious a
God, willing and ready to show mercy even to such as now are convinced of their
just desert of wrath and displeasure from him. We never sorrow kindly, till
some sense of mercy melt us.
Hence it comes, that in their deepest humiliation they wholly faint not, being
inwardly supported by a secret trust in God, and of his gracious acceptance,
they belonging to that remnant concerning whom God has promised, saying, I
will leave -- an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the Name of
the Lord, Zeph. 3.12. In the midst of the disquietnesse of their hearts they
are inwardly encouraged to hope in the Lord, as Psalm 42.5, 11. and 43, 5. So
that it will concern every penitent to consider what well-grounded ^ffiance and
hope he has of Gods goodness and readiness to pardon him upon repentance;
seeing if his sorrow be not wrought, occasioned, or at least furthered by some
sense of Gods goodness, it cannot be so humble, so willing, so genuine as true
Evangelicall sorrow should be. But no more of this, having so lately said
somewhat to like effect when I spoke of Hope.

CHAP. XIX.
SECT. 1. Other Trials of sufficient Humiliation, from the Concomitants and
effects thereof: and first it is generally showed what is sufficient
Humiliation.
Other Trials from the Concomitants and consequents of our sorrow.
NOw we procced to try our sorrow from the Concomitants (such as are collateral
as I may say unto it) and by the consequents and effects thereof. We will not
be curious in distinguishing of these. Only first in the general, let us
consider (partly from what is last said, partly from that which must be said)
if we would truly judge of our selves whether we have been humbled enough in
the sight of sin and of judgment, 1. Generally, when is a man humbled enough?
so that we neither lay hold on comfort too soon, by presumption before we be
sufficiently humbled; nor reject comfort by despair when we are otherwise well
prepared for mercy and the grace of the Gospel; let us know that the measure of
our humiliation and sorrow (be it more or less) is not so much to be attended,
as the truth of it, yea the concomitants, consequents and effects of it. Answ.
When he can see and hate sin, and be wearied out of himself,
So that we are to see and consider whether that measure which we have does
lead us: insomuch that if so be we be brought to see our sin and danger
thereby, and in that regard to hate sin, to apprehend the treachery of it, to
find and feel the burden of it, so as to be wearied out of our selves, to see
a necessity of help, and of a Savior from without, seeking his help from
Christ,
and being in the Gospel directed to Christ Jesus, do accordingly flee and run
unto him as to our only city of refuge for succor and safety, for help and
healing, with purpose and promise not willingly to offend him any more, it is
enough for the present; and so doing, as thou can not despair (unless only
of thy self and own power and worthiness, which thou should do) so thou
ought to be comforted in God though thy sorrow equal not that measure of
sorrow thou have seen or heard to have been in some other. This then thou must
strive for in thy sorrow for sin, namely, to find Christ, and not to take up or
to be satisfied without him: as his only refuge,
at least seek him thou must, and that not without some hope to find him: Sin
must be the sourest and heaviest of all things to thee, and thou must flee from
it, as the pursued chicken to the wings of the hen, as the pigeon to her
window, as the coney to the hole in the rock: such in some measure must Christ
be to thee. and shelter,
Yea, when thus thou art pricked in heart and stung in thy conscience with thy
sin, thou must look to him whom by sin thou have pierced, and mourn, even to
him, as of old they in the type, in their bodily stingings were to look to the
brazen Serpent, and brazen Serpent,
expecting healing from under his wings, accounting of him as thine only surety
and Savior, setting him between thee and Gods wrath. If thus then in thy
sorrow for sin, thou can prize Christ above all, prizing him above all,
as seeing an absolute necessity of him, and not rest in any thing without him,
neither in the measure of thy sorrow, (though it were more then it is,) nor in
any means used by thee, thy prayers, hearing or Sacraments, but only in Christ
had and enjoyed in these, and withal hate sin, and not resting in any thing
else.
and with the beat child promisest and intendest amendment, and to reform what
is amiss, though it be to the cutting off the right hand or foot, or plucking
out the right eye of offense, thou may be comforted and rest assured thy
sorrow is sound and good, and such as God accepts of. More, for the present,
thou need not (to stay and assure thee) and less will be too little.

SECT. 2. The truth of sorrow showed from two Properties, seven Effects, and
six Concomitants of it.
2. Particular. Trials of the truth of our sorrow. 1. By two properties of
godly sorrow. It is 1. Voluntary.
BUt now more particularly, not to speak of the properties of godly sorrow
(which some observe) as that it, where it is, is, 1. Voluntary, whereby men are
not so much humbled, (so was Pharaoh) as humble and humbling themselves as did
Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. working their hearts thereunto, and grieving that they
cannot more grieve, yea turning their laughter into weeping, making their fond
and foolish mirth the matter of their sorrow: Of which enough already, when I
showed that it must be as well in prosperity, as extorted by adversity and
fears. 2 Durable.
2. Durable and a thorough humiliation, not for a fit, when they, as some fitly
compare it, are only sermon-sick, and therein like to such as are sea-sick, who
are presently well, when they come to land or into calm water; so when they
turn their backs on the Church and preacher, and come into merry company, and
among their old companions; whereas true sorrow which is according to God,
Psalm. 51.3.
is more constant and durable, as was David's, My sin is ever before me, and so
it differs from unsound sorrow and such as is from natural causes, as has
been partly said already: and this thorough humiliation is the thing now to be
tried.

2 By seven effects of it.
Neither will I speak or largely discourse of those seven Effects of godly
sorrow, whereby was wrought repentance to salvation, not to be repented of,
which the Apostle notes in the Corinthians, and which his former Epistle had
wrought in them: For behold, says he, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11.
this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it
wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what indignation; yea,
what fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea, what zeal; yea what revenge? Dyke of
Repentance. Chap. 14, 15.
I will rather refer the Reader to that worthy Treatise of Repentance, where
they are sufficiently handled, and which is in many hands and easily procured.
Only as occasion shall serve, I shall touch upon some of them.

3. By diverse concomitants and consequents of it.
Only now I shall mention such concomitants, consequents, and effects, as I find
elsewhere in Scripture to be coupled and joined to such sorrow as God will
accept of as sound and sufficient, and which he both requires of all, and has
accepted of in true penitents, reserving such last as my Text will afford or
occasion us to take notice of more specially.

1. Acceptance of punishment.
1. I find, Acceptance of the punishment joined to such humiliation as God
looks for, so that when we accept willingly of the one, God will accept
graciously of the other: If they shall confess their iniquity, Levit. 26.40,
41.
etc. and that I have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the
land of their enemies, if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
then accept of the punishment of their iniquity, then will I remember my
Covenant, etc. This requires an humble (not extorted only, by an humble
patience,
or yet simply a willing) patience and submission unto Gods will, and a willing
and humble bearing of the indignation of God because we have sinned against
him. And it is the truer note of sound repentance, Micah 7.9. with respect to
sin.
because it brings some evidence with it, that sin more then punishment does
trouble that soul, and that we grieve and are pricked and broken in heart,
chiesly because we have grieved and peirced so good a God by our sins,
according to that in Ezekiel. And they that escape of you, Ezekiel. 6.9.
shall remember me among the nations, whither they shall be carried captives,
because I am broken with their whorish heart which has departed from me -- And
they shall loath themselves for the evils which they have committed in all
their abominations. such as was in the good Thief,
Such a convert was he whose words on the cross with Christ, in reproof of his
fellow (who in his suffering only sought deliverance, saying to Christ, Save
thy self and us) were these: Do thou not fear God, Luke 23.39, 40, 41.
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive
the due reward of our deeds. -- But of this before when we spoke of the
procuring cause of godly sorrow.

2 Weeping and other outward expressions 2 Chronicles. 34.27.
2. With true sorrow and tenderness of heart and humiliation of soul before God,
I find that in good Josiah there went weeping and rending of clothes, which
were outward expressions of true, inward, and hearty sorrow; which accordingly
God graciously accepted: Because thine heart was tender -- and thou did
humble thy self before me, and did rend thy clothes and weep before me, I
have even heard thee also, says the Lord. Whence we will conclude, that though
all cannot in their sorrow shed tears, and that shedding of tears in some, as
in Esau, is deceitful, as also rending of clothes (a custom out of use with
us now) yet true sorrow of heart cannot be without some out-ward expressions of
it, Nehe. 2.2. Matthew. 26.75. Luke 18.13.
as sadness of countenance, so it was in Nehemiah; tears, as in Peter; smiting
on the breast, as in the Publican and such like: so that though Hypocrites may
counterfeit all these, (whose hypocrisy by other notes has been and shall be
discovered) yet for such as give themselves either excessively to mirth,
laughter and carnal delights, or constantly, So that a sensual life cannot
consist with godly sorrow. Luke 16.19.
without the exercise of godly fasting and humiliation, as Dives did, who was
clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day; they are
far from true sorrow for sin, whatsoever they may pretend; Its but like the
sorrow of some drunkards who never weep but when they are drunk; their hearts
are not so much at any time seemingly burdened with sin, as when they are
overburthened and oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness; As in such as seek
to put away sorrow by carnal mirth.
but then is the heart farthest off from true and godly sorrow: yea, they
feeling some qualms of grief through conscience of sin to seize upon them, have
no readier way to be shut and rid of them, then eagerly to pursue their
pleasures that so they may forget their sorrow, and stop the mouth of their
pursuing Conscience, as some when they are arrested get the Sergeant into a
Tavern, and make him drunk, that so they may escape him. So it was with those
whom God colled to weeping and to mourning, etc. and behold joy and gladness,
slaying oxen, etc. Isai. 22.12, 13. and Amos 6.1, 2. etc. Such excess in
pleasure shows how little such are humbled, and if ever they tasted of sorrow,
Which voluptuous ones should think on,
how soon and altogether they have forgot it. Think and make use of this ye
voluptuous ones, that are all for pleasure and sports in which ye spend all
your precious time. Know there are times to mourn as well as to rejoice, which
if you did take and truly observe, you could not give your selves so heartily,
and so much to vain and carnal delights, and not wast, but take time for
repentance and godly sorrow.
and pastimes, whereby you paste indeed the time of true repentance, which for
ought you know or deserve, will never return again, seeing you make so light
account of it; and grow so weary of it, as by sports and vanities to drive the
time away, as if it ran not fast enough, without our driving wasting, and
passing of it in and by empty delights, Godly sorrow would moderate earthly
joys.
whereas true and hearty sorrow for sin, would be as sour herbs to us in our
feastings, and be a restraint to us and a bridle in the use even of lawful
comforts and pleasures of this life; and would teach moderation in them all,
(in our eating, drinking, in mirth, music, apparel, marriage, buying,
selling, and using the good things of this life) and so to rejoice in them, as
if we rejoiced not: 1 Cor. 7.30, 31
As David made his bed, which is the place of ease and rest, to swim with his
tears, as some godly men have made their Tables, whilst their tears have
fallen upon their trenchers. Tell not me then of your sorrow or trouble of
conscience of sin in private, when you so let loose your hearts, and pour out
your souls to pleasures, and excessive constant mirth in public and in
company. True sorrow of heart will show and approve it self by sad and grave
looks, thoughts, and behavior.

3 Desire after God,
3. We read how David complained as of a sore bodily disease, so of restlessness
and disquietnesse of his heart, and groaning under the heavy burden of his
sin, being feeble and sore broken: Psalm. 38.3, 4- 8, 9,10.
but withal we have him full of desires after God: Lord all my desire is
before thee -- My heart pants, and elsewhere, As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God: and Psalm. 42.1, 2.
My soul thirsts for God, etc. As in hunger and thirst, there is in the mouth
of the stomach, grief, pain, and pinching, together with desire and sucking; so
also in the soul. As then the thirsty body impatient of pain, and thirst after
refreshing.
longs, desires, and seeks after what may give it ease, refresh, fill, and
satisfy it: so is it with the soul; where it is truly sensible of sin and
scorched with the fire of Gods displeasu^e, weary and burdened with the sense
and load of sin; It will also long after the waters of life, as much or at
least in some proportion, Judge. 15.18.
to that of Sampson, who was like after his great victory, to have died of
thirst: Even as the woman of Samaria being pinched in conscience by Christ for
her Adultety, which desire is strong.
and withal hearing of a fullness in Christ, begged of him saying, Give me this
water, etc. Now as bodily thirst is impatient of delays, and the desire to be
satisfied and refreshed is strong, and in such case so much is drink or water
valued, as nothing on earth besides will give content; As I read of one that
gave his Kingdom for a little water in his extreme thirst, and the Scripture
tells us of Esau, who in his hunger sold his birthright to his brother for a
mess of pottage; otherwise the hungry and thirsty soul faints: So the
spiritual thirst of the soul is such as it makes the soul (pinched with it)
prize Christ above all, (who is only able to satisfy the desires of it,) to
undervalue and pass by Kingdoms, Crowns, Scepters, and all riches, honor, and
favor of men, and to cry out as Rachel for children, Give me Christ, or else I
die: and as the Church, Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am
sick of love, Cant. 2* 5.

Application. Many men's sorrow proved unsound from their faint and lazy
desires after the waters of life.
Now do thou try thy self and thy sorrow hereby, if thou have indeed been hunted
and pursued with the guilt and cry of thy sins, thou will pant, gasp and
breath after Christ, thou will prize him above all, and earnestly desire to be
refreshed with the waters of his spirit and consolation. But thy desires after
Christ are either none at all, or so faint, cold, and lazy, that it is an
assured proof thou wast never yet truly and effectually pinched in thy
conscience, emptied of thy self, humbled under sense of wrath; which if thou
were, nothing but Christ his blood could satiate and satisfy thy soul. But thy
desires are still so strong, (seconded by hot pursuits and endeavors) after
earthly things, if not after sensual and sinful vanities, and so cold and
faint after Christ, that it is a certain sign that thy soul has never been so
much humbled in thee, as to be made weary of thy sin, and to faint under the
burden of it: thou may perhaps now and then in a fit put up a cold and
formal prayer, and express a few faint wishes and heartlesse sighs for Christ:
but if ever thou were so wounded and wearied as true converts are, thy desires
would be stronger and more effectual.

4. Coming to God.
4. Yea, there would also be a coming unto God and Christ, if the soul were
truly humbled and burdened with sin, as we find these coupled together in
those of Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun who humbled themselves and came to
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 30.6.7, 11.
to keep the Passover, and to testify their repentance and turning again to
God; for thus Christ will have such do, as truly groan under their sins, Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat.
11.28. and elsewhere, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters,
Isai. 55.1, 2.
etc. incline your ear and come to me -- And let him that is athirst come.

If this be so then, Rev. 22.17. Unsound sorrow sends men from Christ.
it is a sign few are humbled as they should be; few are laden or labor under
the burden of their sin and Gods wrath; few are athirst; there is so little
coming to Christ, so little seeking to the means of grace, or frequenting Gods
Temple, and repairing to the Minister in distress of conscience for
satisfaction and ease. Nay alas, we see rather some go sorrowful from the
word, which reproves and discovers their sin and hypocrisy, as that young
Ruler did from Christ: but come not sorrowful to Christ or his Ministers
seeking ease to their burdened conscience: yea, many men's sorrow is such as
drives them from God and Christ, as Judas and Cain, in their pangs of
conscience: Judas came not to Christ for mercy, though he were at hand, yea a
Savior at hand; but to the high Priest, and at length hastened to the Devil:
Cain flees from the presence of God to build him a City for his safety. Others
in distress and anguish of conscience do not betake themselves to prayer, or
to God, his Ordinances and Ministers; but with Saul, to music, to the Witch of
Endor, to the Devil: Of which more hereafter.

5. With coming to God and to the throne of grace, 5 Prayer.
there is prayer and deprecation for pardon, where the soul is truly humbled,
as in Manasseh, and in the humbled Publican, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
Luke 18.13.
Here is a sinner, that is one laden and touched in heart for his sin; and here
is his prayer for pardon and mercy. But this follows upon the former, and
belongs partly to somewhat following: Yet it convinces many, who never seek
ease by hearty prayer for mercy from God, unless it be for removal only of
their justly deserved punishment.

6 Reformation of life, and a holy walking with God.
6. True humiliation is accompanied with reformation of life, and with a holy
walking with God: only such humiliation is acceptable to God which is so
followed. Therefore the Lord showing how we may come and bow our selves
acceptably before him, and what is good, this is the chief, That we walk
humbly, or humble our selves to walk with God, Micah 6.2, - 8. such a soul as
has been truly pricked, has been taught its lesson for meddling again with
sin, as has been said. And godly sorrow changes the heart, works in it an
hatred of sin, a love of righteousness; in a word, Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10.
that is a change and alteration both of heart and life; whilst the unfeigned
tears of true sorrow do not only (like the waters of the red sea) drown the
whole army of our sins; but (like the dew and rain from heaven) water (and
refresh) our earthy hearts; yea, make the soul to bring forth and bud, Isa.
55.10.
and to be fruitful in all righteousness, and in the fruits thereof. Without
returning again to sins formerly repented.
Such a soul returns not (at least habitually) unto wickedness, as we have
shown Ahab, Pharaoh, Felix and Judas did; and as is the guise of hypocrites,
who after some seeming sorrow and forced tears, return with the swine to the
same or worser sins again. But do thou examine thy heart, and consider well
with thy self whether thy humiliation have effectually taught thee to walk both
humbly and constantly in a course of humiliation, yea, and reformation with thy
God. An unreformed life is inconsistent with an humbled heart.

SECT. 3. Other Concomitants gathered from the Text: as, 1. Confession of sin.
Other effects and concomitants of godly sorrow, gathered more specially from
the text it self.
TO proceed: As the aforementioned particulars have been afforded us from other
Texts of Scripture which more expressly couple them with humiliation, sorrow of
heart, and feeling the load and burden of sin; so though we will exclude none
of them from having been in these converts, yet we will fetch some signs,
Effects and Concomitants of true Contrition more specially from the Text it
self. Some, besides Hope (of which I have spoken formerly) gather hence these
two Effects of true Contrition. 1. Confession. 2. Detestation of sin. 1
Confession of sin, even to man.
1. Here is implied if not expressed, an open and free Confession of their sin
of murder and of crucifying their Savior, wherewith v. 36. they were charged:
they deny not their guiltiness nor are ashamed to lay open their disease to
their spiritual Physicians: they in effect confess themselves guilty, and
only seek direction what to do to be saved from deserved wrath, saying, Men
and Brethren, What shall we do? And to say truth, where the soul feels the
burden and load of sin, it will seek ease, by disburthening it self by free
and willing confession of the same, as to God especially, so also to man, to
men of God especially, to able and merciful men, and Ministers.
who are not only able to speak a word in season for comfort and direction;
but tenderhearted, pitiful and merciful (who will sympathize with it) yea,
are faithful both for their unpartial dealing with the wounded spirit, not
healing it with fair words and flatteries; and also for secrecy, No ease
without this in some cases.
(so far as it is fit). It is with the soul in this case, as with the stomach:
if it be overcharged with surfeiting, and thereupon sick and pained, it seeks
and gets ease by vomiting: so in like proportion the soul having surfetted on
sin, and now sensible of the load of its sin, will seek ease by confessing
thereof both to God, and in some cases to man too, where either his sin has
been open and scandalous; or personal to the hurt and wrong of any; or where
he finds not comfort and sense of pardon from God: for by making it known to
some faithful Minister or experienced Christian, he may hope for some help by
their prayers and wise directions.

Have you, who pretend sorrow for sin, thus done? or have ye not rather,
Application.
and do you not stand out against the reproofs of Gods word and Ministers, to
such as will not be convinced,
denying, justifying, or at least extenuating and lessening your sins: I tell
you, a heart truly contrite and broken will soon be convinced. None will
sooner take shame to themselves by a free and ingenuous confession of sin, or
take shame to themselves.
then such as are most sensible of their dishonours done to Gods great name
thereby. If by taking shame to themselves they can any whit redeem Gods honor,
they will readily do it. And therefore I ask again, In case you have made some
confession of your sin, as even a Pharaoh and a Judas may do; have ye therein
aimed at Gods honor, and do you therefore by confession take shame to your
selves, that you may give to God the honor of his Omnisciency, Justice,
Holiness, as is fit? Many (as condemned persons) rather then they will shame
themselves by a true confession of the sins for which they justly suffer, or
thereby honor Gods justice, which has found them out, or yet the justice of
the Law by which they stand condemned, as yet the good thief did on the cross)
will with that other graceless thief, choose rather presently to go to hell
with the guilt and load of their sins upon them. Such are the Pseudo-martyrs of
the Romish Synagogue, and thousands more, wherein they come short of Judas who
confessed his treason against the innocent Lamb of God. Or if with Judas some
do confess their sin, or if they confess sin, do it either merely out of
terror not hatred,
is it not merely out of horror of conscience, and a while to stop the mouth of
it? do they not return with Judas and Pharaoh to the same or like sins again
till at length they utterly perish? herein like the dog which casts up his meat
not because he loathes it, Simile.
but because his stomach is burdened and troubled with it, and therefore after
a little ease, he returns to lick up his vomit again. Or if not so wholly, yet
do not many (when they are called, urged and pressed to confess their faults,
or hypocritically and cunningly
or that conscience on their sickbed or otherwise drives them to their
Minister) I say do not many go cunningly to work to deceive others, but indeed
themselves worst of all, confessing some known or smaller sins,
whilst confessing sins known sufficiently already, and which they cannot
deny, or it may be some such infirmities as may stand with grace, as
distractions in good duties, some hardness of heart, some hastiness, but
concealing their bosom and greater saults,
angry and peevish disposition of nature, and the like, yet wittingly hide
under their tongues, and in the secret cabinet of their heart, their beloved
darling and bosom sin, be it some base and noisome lust, pride, ambition,
covetousness, revenge, or some such like secret sin, by which means sin still
sticks at the bottom, the coar comes not away, Satan who has filled their
hearts, keeps his hold and is uncast out, though the room seem somewhat swept;
or at least returns to his old lodging in the heart with seven worse spirits
then himself. which these conve^ts did not.
It was not so here with these converts in my Text, who though deeply charged
by Peter, and that with sins of as foul a nature as any could be, even murder,
parricide, unbelief, ingratiude, ignorance, disobedience, impenitency, (all
which and more being included in the sin of crucifying Christ, verse. 36.) yet
neither denied the same, nor went about to lay the blame on their rulers who
persuaded them to it, but in effect acknowledge all to be true they were
charged withal, and accordingly seek direction what to do, to get comfort to
their guilty and wounded consciences.

SECT. 4. 2. Detestation of Sin, an Effect of true Sorrow for Sin.
2 Detestation of sin accompanies true sorrow for it.
NOw secondly with confession went an inward dislike, hatred and detestation of
their sin, and both these the fruits and effects of their contrition: They
finding the weight and burden of their sin, hate and abominate the same, their
heart is turned from it for ever, and they cast it from them as a filthy and
polluted thing, they with Ephraim will have no more to do with it. Hos. 14.9.
as in these here,
They now loath it, and themselves for it; and accordingly to show their
dislike of it, and of all the occasions of it, they forsake the society of the
obstinate Jews, who as yet were not pricked in heart, and of the Priests,
Scribes and Pharisees, and join themselves to the despised and persecuted
church of God. and in other converts.
And thus it is with other converts; they now loath what formerly they liked,
and hate what once they loved: yea, thus it should be with us, if we would
approve our sorrow for sin to be sound. Is thy sorrow then for sin followed
with hatred and loathing of it? and of thy self for it? Application. To such
as may seem angry with sin, but hate it not,
It may be thou art only a little angry with it, but fallest in with it
presently again; such indeed is the nature of anger; but true hatred which is
bent against an enemy, aims at his utter destruction and death, so true
hatred of sin seeks the death or mortification of it, at least cannot endure
the sight of it, but through an inward loathing of it, Arist. Rhet. lib. 2. and
seek not the death of it,
wishes it, (and whatsoever might represent it to the soul as lovely) quite
out of sight: as the Prophet brings in the repenting Church, throwing away
Idolatrous ornaments, as one throwing away a menstruous clout, Isai. 30.12.
saying to it, get thee hence Sin would be looked upon as an enemy to Gods
glory and to our souls; as of an enemy.
now the more true love we bear to God and to our selves, the greater hatred we
will bear against sin. And as it seeks our lives (for the soul that sins
shall die, death is the wages thereof) so should we seek the death and
mortification of that which otherwise will be our death; as if we met with any
venomous, poysonfull, Simile.
or hurtful creature, such especially as has formerly end angered us, or
stung us, we cease not, so far as is in our power, till we see it dead: Now sin
is as dangerous an enemy to the soul, as any such creature or enemy can be to
our bodies. I now only ask, Neither are well affected to the means of
mortifying it,
if thy behavior be such toward those sins of thine which thou say, have
been thy sorrow; seek thou and usest thou the means by which sin may be
truly mortified in thee? does thine heart rise against the occasions and first
approaches of sin, and art thou afraid of hurt by it, when it first begins to
arise in thine heart, as not nipping it in the head when it first rises.
then seeking to dash it in the shell? as a man would be loath to give a known
and malicious enemy the least welcome or entertainment in his house or
otherwise near him; how likest thou it when Gods Word and thy Minister seeks to
make thy sin hateful and loathsome to thee? when he lays about him, neither
liking that Word of God which would by sharp reproofs kill it in them.
and not only discovers and lays open the vileness thereof, but by sharp
reproofs and threatenings, seeks to hit, wound, and kill it in thee? can thou
bless God for it, etc. desire or at least approve well of such teaching and
teachers? Thus thou should do even in true love to thine own soul, if thou
truly batest, or yet have truly mourned for thy sin; whereas we should
bitterly hate it.
as each thing seeks its own preservation, so should thou hate sin as well
as sorrow for it, accounting it the greatest evil of all evil, as separating
between thy soul and God. and our hearts fret at it.
Thus should thou not only weep for thy sin, but with Peter weep bitterly,
as having the bitter gall of godly indignation, hatred and detestation, mingled
with thy brinish and salt tears; thy heart will not only be pricked, Cant.
5.4. Frementibus visceribus. Jun.
but will fret within thee, yet not against the Word or Minister, but against
thy sin and self. Thus for these two observed by others, Confession and
Detestation of sin.

SECT. 5. 3. True Contrition fills the head with care, and causes consultation
about the means of Cure.
Three more signs of one truly pricked in heart, gathered from the Text.
BUt I shall now, till in due time I come to handle the following words, observe
from them, and gather three principal signs and effects of one savingly
wounded for sin, which here, because we are of purpose speaking of Trials, I
must name in this place.

That they here, being pricked turn themselves to Peter and to the rest of the
Apostles, and ask saying, What shall we do! I gather three effects, and so far
notes and Signs of one truly contrite and savingly humbled.

1. Care and Consultation. 2. Self-denial. 3. Ready Obedience.
1. True contrition and sorrow for sin, fills a man's head with care and
consultation, concerning the means of ease, pardon, and salvation.

2. It sends a man out of himself, and teaches him self-denial.

3. It makes a man ready to obey God in all things.

These will be so many observations when we come to those last words of the
Text: now I will consider them as signs only.

1. True Contrition of heart fills the head with care about the means of cure.
1. Such as are savingly pricked, pinched, wounded for their sins, sit not
still, but with the Lepers at the gate of Samaria, consult, resolve, and show
themselves careful to seek after, and to use means for help, ease, and
comfort to their consciences. They cannot be secure as formerly they have been,
as apprehending and seeing a necessity of a remedy and of mercy, without which
they see (for any help of their own) they must certainly perish. And makes them
consult 1 with themselves as the Lepers. 2 Kings 7. v. 3.4.
Such care as this is made a fruit of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11. And it makes
them as far as they are able, consult with themselves, as the aforesaid Lepers,
saying, Why sit we here until we die? If we say we will enter into the City,
then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there: and if we sit still
here, we die also. Now therefore come, and let us fall into the host of the
Syrians: If they save us alive we shall live, and if they kill us, we shall but
die. So also the Prodigal (signifying every wandering sinner) being pinched
with hunger, The Prodigal Luke 15.17, 18.
came to himself, consulted with himself, and resolved both what to do, and say
to that his loving father whom he had leudly forsaken, and so returned and
found mercy. The like care, wisdom, and consultation, (I will not say
justice) was in the unjust, but wise steward in his straits, saying, What shall
I do? and wise steward, Luke 16.3, 4, etc.
-- At length -- I am resolved what to do, etc. Or, if they cannot well advise
themselves what to do, they who so are wounded in conscience will seek advice
and help of others; 2 With others, as these here with Peter: So the Jailer.
Acts 16.29, 30.
as these here of Peter and the rest: The Jailer of Paul and Silas, Sirs, What
must I do to be saved? The Israelites of Samuel, when they so lamented after
the Lord, 1 Samuel 7.2, 3. and 12.18, 19. Or of Christ himself, as Saul who was
Paul, who, trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do?
And the Woman of Samaria, So Paul and others. Acts 9.6. Especially the
Israelites and Jews. Jer. 50.4, 5.
Joh. 4.15.20.25. Who knew the Messiah would tell them all things. -- Thus it
is said of the children of Israel and Judah, They shall come together, going
and weeping: they shall go and seek the Lord their God. They shall ask the way
to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join our selves
to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. Thus it is
with true converts: but how is it with many who yet so would seem? Application
against secure ones, whose care is chiefly for other things. Romans 13.14.
Their security and careless living plainly shows how far they are from true
conversion. Their care is only for the world, saying, What shall we eat, etc.
as Matthew. 6.31. Or for the satisfying of their lusts, contrary to that of the
Apostle, Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: Or for
many things with Martha; yea for any thing rather then for that one thing that
is most needful; that is the least part of many men's care. Nay, or who soon
give over their fears and sorrows.
such as either do feel or pretend to feel the sting and wound of conscience,
what care show they or consultation about the matter? They are like men who
being wakened in the night by some cracks of thunder, Simile.
storms of wind, noise and cry of fire or the like, lie down again and sleep
securely on their pillows. They think the storm will over, the fire is not near
them, and therefore they will trouble themselves no more with it: and so their
terrors of conscience and sorrow, if any were, (as was in Felix, who trembled)
come to nothing, and themselves too in the end. Whereas, Which they could not
do, if in soul they were as truly pincehed, as were the four lepers, or
Prodigal and others in body.
if they were in soul truly pinched, as the Lepers, the Prodigal and Steward
were in body and outward estate; or if they truly trembled in their
consciences as Paul and the Jaylour did, they could not rest, no more then men
in some grievous fits of the stone, gout, cholick, toothache; but as they, cry
out, Alas! What shall I do? can none help me? send for such a Physician, for
such a Surgeon. So, What shall I do to be saved? how shall I get ease to my
wounded conscience? can none of you direct me to a wise, able, and godly
Minister? whatsoever he shall prescribe I will do.

And here, concerning this carefulness about the remedy, know, (which are so
many subordinate signs of true compunction under this) That as these Converts
in my Text sought not for direction, ease or cure to the Scribes and Pharisees,
as did Judas in his anguish, but only to the Apostles of Christ, and to
spiritual means of cure and comfort, that they might enjoy pardon, Gods
favor, and get him appeased to them: So

And particularly, True converts 1 Seek only to the true means of help.
1 True Converts and contrite ones, as they are not secure; so they seek only
to the true means, to the true and faithful Ministers and servants of Christ,
as King Hezekias in his straits to Isaias, King Josiah to Huldah the
Prophetess. When the soul is truly pricked, it will never seek comfort of
carnal and wicked men, or of such as are guilty of the same or like sins; as I
shall show more fully when I speak of the quality of the persons of whom these
here sought direction. If otherwise, its very suspicious men go only to get the
mouth of their conscience stopped, but not awakened or soundly cured. Learn thou
hence, whosoever thou art, to examine thy self of whom thou soughtest counsel
and have got satisfaction to thy conscience.

2 They are cured only by spiritual things, as pardon of sin.
2 Their griefs are only cured by spiritual things as well as means: nothing
will content them but mercy and pardon, and the absolution of the Judge. It is
not mirth, music, merry company, or any either carnal or worldly thing that
can give ease to a conscience truly distressed. It is both a good and wise
observation of one (whose notions are published on this Text by some) that "
That soul which is cured by any other means save only by Christ, Souls
preparation for Christ p. 155.
was never truly wounded for sin: If ease cure him, then horror was his
vexation: If honor cure him, then shame was his burden: If riches cure him,
then poverty did most of all pinch him: But if the soul were truly wounded for
sin, then nothing can cure him, but a Savior to pardon him, and grace to purge
him.

No, no: As the Lord wounded him with sight of his sin, so to the Lord he goes
to be healed, as Hos. 6.1, 2. his comfort is only from the word; Gods
testimonies are both his delight and his counselors, or the men of whom he
will seek counsel: Psalm. 119.23, 24, and 50.

3 Nothing but God and his face can ease them of their sorrow.
3. In a word, such an ones chief sorrow is for the absence of God, his
lamenting is after the Lord: its his grief when God hides his face from him,
Psalm. 88.14, 15. as chief desire to enjoy him, Psalm. 143.7, 8. Psalm. 4.6. such
with the Church will chiefly enquire after him whom their soul loves, Cant.
3.3, 4. and with Mary Magdalen, seeking Christ newly after his Resurrection; to
whom, when the question was put to her by the two Angels, yea and by Christ
himself, whom she discerned not at first, Woman, why weepest thou? Because
(says she) they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him. -- Sir, if thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him, and
I will take him away, John 20.13. and v. 15. So, the chief sorrow of true
mourners is the want of Christ crucified: their chief care is how and where to
find him. Is thy sorrow such? Go* home, or betake thy self to thy closet,
Application.
and examine and consider well of this thing: who or what has given thee
comfort, (if ever thou have sorrowed for sin,) or if any thing can give thee
ease but Christ, or afford thee comfort if he be absent; and accordingly, rest
not in any thing on earth til thou have found him.

SECT. 6. 4. Self-denial accompanies true Contrition.
2 True contrition of heart teaches and is accompanied with self-denial, and
with humble carriage both toward God and others:
2 TRue Contrition sends a man out of himself, and teaches him self-denial.
These now trust not in themselves: either 1 to their own goodness or
worthiness, which now they see to be nothing: Nor 2 to their own wisdom and
reason; they no longer commune or consult with flesh or blood, but put away all
fleshly shifts and carnal holds: the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, who
persuaded them to the crucifying of Christ, are no longer of authority and
credit with them; the despised Apostles come now to be in credit with them: Nor
thirdly, to any strength or power of their own; (...) in these here.
and therefore in effect with Paul they cry every man, Wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me? Nor fourthly, to their own works and righteousness,
which with Paul also they account loss, yea dung, to win Christ, and to be
found in him, Phil. 3.7, 8. In a word, they cast away all vain props and
confidences, yea the very staff out of their own hands; and though they see no
help nor hope in themselves, yet they do not out of stoutnesse, or through
secret pride (as we have showed some have done) despair absolutely of help; but
renouncing and denying themselves, they seek to lean only on Christ whom they
crucified, desiring to be directed how to enjoy his love, and so with Noah's
dove, expect rest only in the Ark. And thus though they are pricked, and weep
inwardly, yea, and despair in themselves; yet, as in another case, it is not as
they that have no hope, as in Judas, Cain, Esau, who neither had hope in God,
nor self-denial in themselves, and who accordingly perished. And as it was
with these Converts here, and in others,
so is it in some proportion at least with others, who being once truly
pricked and convinced in their consciences of their sins, who being in trouble
of conscience,
though perhaps not so deeply humbled and cast down, yet are willing to deny
themselves in their beloved and most gainful ways and courses, as we see in
Zacheus, now ready to make restitution and to give half his goods to the poor,
who formerly made Extortion his plough and gainfullest trade: and truly
humbled,
And so it is with others, who now being truly pricked and humbled, can deny
themselves in their most beloved sins, in their covetousness, pride, ambition
and other sins. And does not experience tell and show us how humble and
self-denying men are commonly in straits of conscience, and when in sickness,
stick upon nothing, either with God, denying themselves in their Riches,
dangers, or in apprehension of wrath from God, they come to stick at nothing
as formerly they have done? Oh then, how can they deny themselves in their
riches, and give or bequeath to the poor? as some have noted was done in the
sweating sickness in England; Oh then, the most covetous and tenacious could
cry out of themselves, and say, Good Master Parson take this bag, go and give
it to the poor, to such as I have wronged, etc. how also in their stout wills,
Will,
which formerly would not bow to, or hear of reconciliation, how can they, yea
how do they now either seek, or willingly accept of peace and reconciliation?
Merits:
How in their former opinion and doctrine of merit, which they have stiffly
holden formerly? so that if any Papist be truly converted either living or
dying, he is first brought to deny himself in his own Works, Merits,
Righteousness, Power of Will, as might be showed in some Instances; so in
their stout, Or with man.
proud and scornful carriage toward others, toward whom they become gentle,
etc.

Application. With reproof of of such as deny not themselves,
But now the contrary practice of many shows how little they are humbled, who
stand so much upon their own terms, and are so self-wise, self-willing,
self-loving, self-respecting in all things, so impatient in bearing the least
injury, true or supposed, so censorious of others, so ambitious and scornful;
in their proud censuring of others,
disdaining that others should be any ways preferred before them, or to
perform any mean office for their inferiors; that whatsoever conceit of
repentance and sorrow for sins against God they otherwise have, we cannot say
that they are truly, deeply or savingly humbled. in their standing out against
Gods word, greatness, strokes,
True humiliation would make them that with respect to God, they would tremble
at his word, Isa. 66.2. and greatness, as did Job, Chap. 39.3, and 4, and
42.5, 6. and humbly submit to his strokes, Levit. 26.41. yea to his
righteousness, righteousness:
and not go about to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.3. and with
respect to others, In their impatience of wrongs. Numb. 12. In their speaking
evil of others.
it would make them patient in bearing wrongs as worthy of greater evils, as we
see in David when in his affliction Shimei so railed on him; and in Moses who
in silence passed by the envy and grudging of Aaron and Miriam, till God on his
behalf took notice of it: It would also stop their mouths from speaking evil
one of another, which is the very next direction which the Apostle James gives
after that of humbling themselves in the sight of God, Jam. 4.10, 11. verse.
5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
whilst he dehorts first from pride, and next from detraction and rash
judgment of others, showing thereby that the latter is a proof of the former,
that is, detraction of pride, and the not speaking evil one of another, In
their envying others their honor. Romans 12.10.
of humbling a man's self in the sight of the Lord. It would make men seek their
honor, and so to go one before another, by giving honor one to another, and
by serving others in love. Self-denial stands not upon terms either with God
or man; it teaches true humility, and is taught by true humiliation of the
soul; howsoever they go together, so that where no self-denial is, so far
there is no true sorrow of soul for sin, no thorough Humiliation: both which
show themselves more by that which follows.

SECT. 7. The contrite heart is an obedient heart.
3 True sorrow makes a man ready to obey God.
3. ANd now accordingly and in special* True Contrition teaches a man to deny
himself in his own will, and makes the will pliable to Gods will only, ready,
willing, fit, and apt to obey God in all things, when his will is only made
known. as in these here and in others,
This is that which these converts (being in heart pricked) desire in the first
place to be directed in, saying What shall we do? So Paul, Acts 9.6. the
Jailer, Acts 16.30. So the Jews of all sorts whose heart John the Baptist
touched, Luke 3.9, 10, 11, 12, -- 14. So the Prophet Isaiah, once tamed by the
vision of the Lord in his glory, and terrified thereby, Isai. 6.8.
to Gods question, which was, Whom shall I send? Lo, says he, Here I am, send
me. In a word, Isai. 6.8.
an humble heart is a tender and pliable heart, and till it be humbled,
pricked, broken and contrite, it is not fit for instruction or to receive the
impressions of grace, The soft and humbled heart only is the obedient heart,
and yields to his will.
which it repels and resists; so that Gods first work is to wound and humble
the heart, to take away the stoniness and hardness of it; and then his
precepts, commands, will and instructions take place, so that when the heart is
once softened and molten, it, like soft wax, yields to the impressions of his
word and grace, and frames, like metal being once made liquid, to the mould,
Rom 6.17.
and obeyes that form of doctrine which is delivered to it, or as the phrase
is, into which it, or ye, says the Apostle, were or are delivered. This is the
end why God humbles us and we should humble our selves, even as is lately said,
to walk with our God. And why do men walk in the ways of God? they are first
humbled. Therefore is that 2 Chronicles. 30.8. and 11. First, Be not stiffenecked as
your fathers were, but yield your selves unto the Lord, Micah 6. By humility
men walk with God.
etc. Then -- diverse of Asher, etc. humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem,
to renew their Covenant there, and to do the commandment of the King (Hezekiah)
and of the Princes, by the word of the Lord. Men's disobedience is from want of
humbling, Jer. 4.4.10. 2 Chro. 36.12. without which they may be broken, but not
molten or made pliable, as the truly contrite are,
As contrariwise why walk not men in the ways of the Lord, but because they
are not humbled before him? thus of the Idolatrous captived Jews it is said,
They are not humbled, (or as it is in the Hebrew) contrite even unto this day,
neither have they feared, nor walked in my Law, etc. And of King Zedekiah it is
said, He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord his God, and humbled
not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, speaking from the mouth of the Lord.
He had judgments denounced, and enough said unto him to break his hard heart,
but his heart remaining still hard, received no impression from the Word, as an
humble and truly contrite heart will do, which yields presently to the Word
according to the nature of it, it melts at promises; trembles at threatenings,
yields obedience to commands, etc. Yea the greatest cause of its sorrow is to
find so much hardness of heart in it self, so much corruption in it, whose
sorrow is increased when they cannot do as they would.
that it cannot do the good it would do, but that it does that which otherwise
it hates, it was with Paul, who therefore cried out, O wretched man that I am,
etc. Men's sorrow then for sin may he judged of by their readiness or
unreadiness to obey God in all things, and not only in such things as are
prescribed as means of their present ease and distress of conscience. True
Contrition at the first so fits and disposes the heart, that ever after it
shows it self willing and ready to hear what God will say unto it, and
accordingly to do it; but of this and those other two signs last named,
Conclusion of the Trials of Contrition.
more when in the conclusion of all we shall consider them as duties. And thus
much at length for the Trials of godly Sorrow and Contrition, which it will
behoove all, not only to know but to make good use of, even Gods dearest
children, who so often and so much complain of their hard hearts, Isai. 63.17.
O Lord why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear! And, O that they had
such soft and melting hearts that they could weep for sin as they should! but
alas they cannot, and yet they are true mourners. How much more then will it
concern others to try themselves hereby who are so ready to be deceived in this
point, mourning not to God but to themselves, and therefore hypocritically.

CHAP. XX. An Use of Comfort to the truly contrite.
HAving now spoken to mourners or to such as at least pretend to mourn, and
that by way of Caveat more briefly, A third Use more concerning such as mourn.
as also more largely by way of Counsel, we must speak a word or two of
Comfort to such as upon Trial do find themselves truly and sincerely to have
mourned, or now to mourn for their sin. And I wish I knew many such among you,
that I might also be as large in this point, as in the last, and in some others
which concerned the secure.

Do thou then find that thou are truly touched in conscience for thy sin;
thou have then true cause to rejoice, and never till now: Comfort to such as
truly mourn for sin.
As there is no sound joy but such as issues out of true sorrow, so true sorrow
for sin always sooner or later ends in joy. There is cause of joy even in and
for such sorrow; to sin is cause and matter of sorrow and shame; but to sorrow
for sin is cause and matter of unspeakable joy, glory and thanksgiving, Such
sorrow affords cause of joy, as being wrought by the holy Spirit of God, Zech.
12.10.
for none can so in a godly manner mourn, but by the holy Spirit of God; he
cannot pour out any tears for sin till God pour upon him and into him the
spirit of grace and of supplication; then shall they mourns, and not till then,
as it was with these converts on whom inwardly, as well as on the Apostles
outwardly on this day of Pentecost the spirit was poured out. The very spirit
of bondage, (as Gods spirit is called in that it discovers sin and misery and
affects the heart therewith) is in that regard, and a gift of God, Romans 8.15.
requiring our Thankfulness.
a gift, which we are said to receive, how much more when it proves also a
spirit of Adoption? And if a gift, yea a saving gift, what cause of
thankfulness have such, seeing God might have left them in a senceless
blockishness to perish therein for ever, or otherwise to stick in themselves
and so utterly to despair? how ought such to rejoice in this so great a
testimony of his goodness and mercy to them? Comfort promised to such.
Such as so sorrow, shall not sorrow always: God has promised them comfort,
God himself will dwell with him that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, Isai. 57.15.
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. Psalm. 34.18.
The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be
of a contrit: spirit. God is said to be one that comfort those that are cast
down. 2 Cor. 7.6.
Be thou then but truly cast down in thine own eyes, and God will comfort and
raise thee up; Comfort and ease belongs to none but such; thus to tremble is
the way to true quietness. Habbak. 3.16.
Thus the Prophet Habbakuk -- I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the
day of trouble. I may truly say the only remedy, against not only all worldly
crosses, but especially against all legal, desperate, hellish, and comfortless
fears and sorrows, is true sorrow and repentance for sin, Such sorrow for sin
is the remedy of all hellish fears and sorrows.
and that thereby we have offended God; which is that medicine which Peter
prescribed to those here who were pricked in heart for crucifying Christ:
Repent says he, and show your sorrow, not as you now seem to do with respect
only to your selves out of fear of wrath, but with respect to God, that you
have so offended him, and sinned against your Savior. Thus weep for your sins,
and you shall withal have assurance of the remission of your sins. And
assuredly, never do nay find such comfort in God and in his mercy, as when
they are deepliest humbled, and weep most bitterly for their sins. How true is
it even in regard of inward joy in God after trouble for sin, which is said and
promised, Isa. 29.19. The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the
poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel.

Come then and let us reason a little together:

Comfort, 1 to the pricked and wounded.
1 Art thou pricked indeed, and wounded in conscience for sin? fear not, it is
not the wound of an enemy that seeks to kill thee, but of thy Surgeon who
means to cure thee: such wounds are not mortal, but medicinable. Thou have a
stone in thine heart, and it must be broken, and thou cut for it: But as in the
cutting of one for the stone in the bladder, the pain may be sharp and sore for
the present; but it is to ease the patient of continual and greater pain for
ever after: so is it it here: Thou gettest ease and comfort for ever by Gods
mercy, especially after this life ended, for putting thy self to some smaller
sorrow now for sin, so it be sincere and true, and truly humble sorrow.

2 To such as tremble at Gods wrath threatened.
2 Quakest thou in the fear of wrath from him whom by sin thou have offended?
yet hope well: God may show himself terrible to thee, but no otherwise then
Joseph showed himself rough to his brethren with purpose to reveal himself as a
loving brother, yea father unto them. This fear of wrath is a sign it shall
not befall thee, even as the rainbow, though it threaten rain, yet it is a
sign, yea a seal to assure us we shall not be drowned by it. As therefore on
the one hand security and not to fear wrath, is a sign that wrath shall
befall, as we see in the world destroyed by water, and are told of like
destruction to befall such by fire in the end of the world, 1 These. 5.3. so
contrariwise terrors upon a due apprehension and acknowledgement of deserved
wrath, is a sign no such thing shall come upon us.

3 To the sininen and bruised.
3 Has God smitten thee in thy conscience for sin? he will also bind thee up,
Hos. 6.1, 2. his rod (even smiting) comforts, Psalm. 23.4. he will not break the
bruised reed: we have his promise for it, Isa. 42.3. and elsewhere, He heals
the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds and griefs, Psalm. 147.3. I
will bind up that which was broken, says the Lord, and will strengthen that
which was sick, Ezekiel. 36. ver. 16

4 To the burdened in conscience.
4 Art thou burdened in conscience for sin? God and Christ thereby calls thee
to him, that coming thou may find ease, Matthew. 11.28. Therefore in such case
(as it was said to the blind man) Be of good comfort, the Master calls thee.
Thou thus burdened art the man he means, when he says, Come unto me all ye
that labor and are heavy laden; and I will give you rest.

5 To the troubled.
5 Is thy soul cast down; and is it disquieted within thee? as Psalm. 42.11. yet
hope in God: if he trouble thy conscience, it is but as when the Angel troubled
the pool, to heal such as step into it.

6 To the sorrowful and laboring.
6 In a word: Does thy sin make thee sorrowful? take such sorrow as a sign and
forerunner of comfort to thee: Sorrow for sin being godly sorrow, is of the
nature of the sorrows of breeding women, who have their qualms, their faintings
and their longings; yet so they are breeding (not a dangerous disease, but) a
child; and though when they come to bear it, there be pain and sorrow, yet it
is forgot when they are delivered, for joy that a man in born into the world,
John 16.21. such and of like nature is that sorrow which is for sin; unless
with this difference: many women after their sorrows do miscarry; here, such
sorrow as is truly godly, ever brings forth joy in the end, and is not to be
sorrowed for: of such it is said, Matthew. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for
they shall be comforted. Here they have comfort for the present, and never more
then when they trulyest weep for their sin; Its a time of atonement, Levit.
23.27. and of peace and reconciliation with God, and of assurance of pardon:
but a large harvest afterward. Here, light and joy is sown for them, Psalm.
97.11. but they that sow in tears (especially of true contrition) shall reap in
joy, Psalm. 126.5.

The ground of all this comfort is from christ the purchaser and author of it.
The ground of all this is Christ, who by virtue of his office has suffered
that sorrow which is properly due for our sin; and so, though he look we should
some way be sensible of our sin and ill-deservings for special ends (such as
long since have been named;) yet all our sorrows come to be sweetened to us, and
are made harbingers of much joy and comfort to us, according to that promise in
Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. which Christ made his Text when he began to preach the Gospel,
Luke 4.18. saying, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has
anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek (or, the Gospel to the poor, as
Luke 4.18.) he has sent me to bind up (or, to heal) the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty (or, to preach deliverance) to the captives, (and recovering
of sight to the blind) and the opening of the prison to them that are bound,
(or, to set at liberty them that are bruised;) to proclaim (or, preach) the
acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort
all that mourn: to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give them beauty
for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord, that he might be glorified. Here we see is meekness and poverty,
Who by bringing into this condition, prepares his for comfort,
broken-heartednesse and captivity, blindness, restraint and bruisednesse,
thraldom and debt (employed), mourning, ashes, and the spirit of heaviness;
all of them noting that spiritual condition into which God brings those he
intends good unto by Christ: Yet it is not that they should abide always (or
yet very long) in the same; but that they who are intended for trees of
righteousness, and makes them trees of righteousness, etc.
and the planting of the Lord, might thus have their roots well fastened, be
deeply and truly humbled and made low in their own eyes, that God and Christ
might be glorified both in his mercy, and by their greater fruitfulness; yea,
themselves also comforted by the Gospel (having thus been first prepared,)
healed and bound up, set at liberty; and in a word, comforted and made
blessed; whereof all the former are to be taken but as harbingers,
preparatives, and forerunners. Now Christ (who sweetens all such sorrow to his
people, and has tasted, and so taken from us the bitterness of the same) as
he was sent and anointed to preach such good tidings; so his very first famous
Sermon that he did preach on the Mount begins so; Blessed are the poor in
spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for
they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek, and such as hunger and thirst
after righteousness, etc. If thou then be in this mourning condition, be
comforted: thou art one of those to whom all the promises of the Gospel do
belong; one for whom Christ became man, and in our nature suffered all those
sorrows which are due to thy sin; for whom he was anointed with the spirit of
gladness to make thee glad for ever, a tree of righteousness, a plant of
renown, and for his own glory.

CHAP. XXI. How to carry our selves toward such contrite ones: with a just
reproof and censure of censurers of them.
A fourth sort of Uses concerning all.
It now remains that we briefly conclude this large Argument of true Compunction
and contrition of heart with a fourth sort of Uses, which more generally do
concern All.

1 To teach us how to carry our selves toward such mourners,
1 And first, seeing this is the condition of mourners, this the necessity of
their mourning, as without which no true conversion nor salvation; this the
happy end and issue of their mourning, by which method and in which order God
brings his to grace and glory, It teaches and instructs us all how to carry
our selves, how to judge of, and how to be affected toward such as we know or
see thus to be pricked, thus to be bruised and burdened. and not to misjudge
them, but to conceive God intends good to them,
We are to conceive that (for ought we know) God is about a gracious work with
them, even to bring them from a damned condition, even from an estate of nature
to grace, and hereby to prepare them not only for grace here, but for glory
hereafter; so that if they seem roughly dealt withal a while, it is but for a
while; if they be under the spirit of bondage, it is such a condition as tends
to true and perfect liberty of spirit in the end: if they cannot so soon get
comfort, though for the while he withhold comfort from them;
or grow cheerful in a sense of mercy, whilst they are burdened with the
weight of their sin and Gods wrath, yet this is the way to it. Howsoever, we
are all to be careful that we do not rashly censure, or pass any hard, harsh,
or uncharitable sentence upon them: their hearts, as all our hearts naturally,
are stout, unyeilding and untractable, and not so soon brought down: nay, it
may be God is pleased to withold his comforts from them (for special ends)
for some some longer while; so that till they see and apprehend some beams of
his goodness and mercy through such thick clouds as stand between them and him,
they can find comfort in no earthly thing, they cannot frame to their company,
to laugh or to be merry with them; nay, it may be, and that they seem to
neglect others and themselves too.
they so deeply apprehend their condition under wrath, and so intensively, and
wholly, and only seek after some sense of Gods love and mercy, that they
neither can be sociable with others, no nor yet (for the while) mind the works
of their particular callings, and sometimes scarce their necessary food or
sleep. But what? shall we, in such case, uncharitably and unmercifully censure,
judge and condemn them? shall we disdain, cast them off, despise and contemn
them? God forbid.

1 Such as have been in like case, must
1 For such as have themselves at any time been in like condition, and have
received comfort, I hope they are taught, and it will be expected from them,
that they First, show pity and compassion to such distressed souls, seeing none
can do that better then such as have had experience of the like in themselves:
by Christ's example to themselves.
as having tasted of Christ's compassion toward them, who being in all points
tempted like as we are (yet without sin) is touched with a feeling of our
infirmities: Heb. 4.25. and 2.17, 18.
For so in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he
might be a merciful and faithful High Priest: -- For in that he himself has
suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. 2 That
they in pity and compassion, 2 Mourn with them.
do mourn with them and for them, that God may (according to his promise)
restore comforts to them, and to their mourners, Isa. 57.18. Thirdly, That they
by good and comfortable words seek to comfort them which are in any trouble, 3
Comfort them.
by the comfort wherewith they themselves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
Fourthly, 4 Pray for them.
That at least they pray for them to him who is the Father of mercies, and God
of all comfort, when especially they cannot otherwise afford them any help, as
is done commonly when we see others in great extremities, and in danger of
drowning, or perishing otherwise, or in extreme pain, as of childe-bearing, and
the like.

2 So should all others 1 Pity them,
2. All others are also taught, First, To pity (if pity may be expected from
them) those they see to be dejected, troubled in conscience, and groaning under
Gods hand. Howsoever, their case is pitious, and calls for pity at all hands,
their case being pitious.
seeing it is some comfort to distressed souls to be pitied by such as have no
power to help them. It is such comfort as Job wanted when he cried out for and
craved pity: Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the
hand of God has touched me: Why do ye persecute me as God? Job 19.21, 22.
and David, or rather Christ, Psalm 69.20. Secondly, Far be it then for any, in
stead of shewin pity, to persecute, condemn, 2 Not persecute and censure them,
and censure for hypocrites or otherwise, those whom they see to labor under
the burden of inward and spiritual affliction, or reproach them,
or of Gods displeasure. So Job's pretended friends dealt with him, which made
him complain so of their cruelty, saying, as yet is done;
How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words? These ten
times have ye reproached me: as to Job, so
you are not ashamed that you make your selves strange to me, (or, that you
harden your selves against me) Job 2.3. It is matter indeed of shame to be
ashamed of the afflictions and sorrows of Gods people, or otherwise to reproach
them, to cast shame on them, or to become strange unto them; whereof David so
complains, adding, When I wept and chastened my soul with fasting, to David
that was to my reproach: I made sackcloth also my garment, and I became a
Proverb to them: They that sit in the gate speak against me, and I was the song
of the drunkards, Psalm. 69.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Thus it is indeed with men
pricked in heart, and humbled in soul under Gods hand, that profane and wicked
men, and others in all ages:
of all sorts and ranks, look on them as on monsters, wondering that they run
not with them, as formerly, to the same excess of riot, therefore speaking
evil of them, 1 Pet. 4.4. Therefore the holy Prophet and Psalmist pours out
his complaint before the Lord (for he had none else to pity him) in this
manner; My heart is smitten and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat
my bread. By reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin. I
am like a Pelican of the wilderness; I am like an Owl of the desert. I watch,
and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top. Mine enemies reproach me all the
day: and they that are mad against me are sworn against me, Psalm 102.4, 5, 6,
7, 8. and in our own times.
Thus we see and in experience find, that if any, being struck and savingly
wounded in spirit by God, withdraw himself into his closet, sit alone and keep
silence, and go heavily, and walk mournfully under Gods hand, he is made a
wonder, and becomes as an Owl of the desert: every one is ready to reproach
him, and censure him as a desperate person, a fool, as one newly gone mad, and
not himself; and so care not what reproach they lay upon him, jeering and
upbraiding them with their much and often hearing of Gods word, saying in
effect, "I hope you have enough now of "hearing, and of following precise
teachers, and running after Sermons, have ye not? And thus their forwardness
in good duties shall be objected, and (good souls) they shall be upbraided
therewith, and in stead of being pitied, prayed for and comforted, they shall
be censured as distracted, out of their wits, as sullen, peevish and perverse
people, not fit to live in civil company, able to mar all whom they shall
converse withal.

The doom of such censurers. 1 They are without mercy.
Now concerning such censurers, scoffers and upbraiders of humbled and dejected
Christians, I must let them know from God, that First, They are men without
mercy, without humanity and natural affection; which would teach to sympathize
and condole one with another. The good man is merciful even to his beast; and
the Lord would have all men to show like mercy even to other men, yea their
very enemies beasts: Thou shall not, says the Lord, see thy brothers Asses,
Deuteronomy. 22.4. Exodus 23.5.
(the Ass of him that hates thee) or his Ox fall down by the way, and hide
thy self from them: thou shall surely help him to lift them up again. I may
here say, Does God take care for oxen? Yes doubtless: but much more for men,
for his afflicted ones, whom he would have us to our power to help and succor
(when we see them heavy laden, and falling under the burden of their sin and
his displeasure) by our pity and commiseration, helping to bear one another
burden, and so far at least, as also by our comfort, prayers, and as otherwise
we are able, to afford all them all the ease and comfort we can. Though he for
his own ends, yea, And shall find no mercy.
though it were in his justice, do afflict the children of men; yet he would
not have us to please our selves, insult, or any way to help forward the
affliction. This made him threaten destruction to Edom for their want of
commiseration to their brother Jacob: Thou should not have looked on the day
of thy brother, -- neither should thou have spoken proudly in the day of
distress -- What follows? As thou have done, it shall be done unto thee; thy
reward shall return upon thine own head, O bad. v. 12, 15. And says James: He
shall have judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2. ver. 23.
God will meet with such; and as they add grief to grief; so he will add
iniquity to (their) iniquity: which is the reason why holy David devoteth
such his enemies to destruction: For (says he) they persecute him whom thou
have smitten, Psalm. 69.24, 25, 26, 27.
and they talk to the grief of those whom thou have wounded. Add iniquity to
their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousness.

2 They show themselves ignorant of Gods ways,
Secondly, Such censurers do show themselves profanely ignorant of Gods ways in
bringing his own to heaven; and an apparent proof it is, that they themselves
were never truly touched in conscience for their sins, nor do yet know what it
is to be of a wounded spirit; and so consequently, and without the work of Gods
grace on themselves: yea, do so condemn the best of gods servants.
that though perhaps their profession of Religion may to themselves and others
seem fair, yet they never knew what belongs to the work of grace in themselves
or others. And thus ere they be aware, they condemn, reproach and censure such
as are deer to God, and whom God in love corrects and keeps low a while. You
may hear David roaring all the day long, and complaining of his bones which God
had broken. Psalm. 32.3. and 51.8.
So King Hezekiah, As a lion says he, so will he (that is God) break all my
bones, Isai. 38.13, 14.
-- like a crane or swallow so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove, -- yea
Peter wept bitterly: and Paul complains of a messenger sent to buffet him,
which made him so cry out, and it was in regard of that prick or thorn in his
flesh, wherewith his heart also was pricked. 2 Cor. 12.
These here also being pricked in heart, cried out, they minded nothing but
mercy, they no longer regarded their great Rabbis, the learned Scribes,
Pharisees and Priests; they desire the company of the despised Apostles, and
seek their comfort only from them. What now, should any have condemned any of
these for madmen, fools, and men forsaken of God? No, if any so should have
done, as in David's case they did, they should have been the ignorant fools
themselves.

3. They act the Devils part, in adding offliction to the afflicted, like
Simeon and Levi,
Thirdly I add, such as so add affliction to affliction, in so doing take the
devils office upon them, who takes advantage of men's weaknesses, and sets
upon them when they are lowest, and at the worst, with hope by laying more load
upon them to discourage them, and to make them weary of Gods good ways. Thus
as Simeon and Levi brethren in iniquity, and like the cursed Amalekites
set upon the Shechemites, when they were sore the third day after their
Circumcision (for then wounds prove most painful) and as Amalek met the
Israelites by the way, Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18, 19.
and smote the hindmost of them, even all that were feeble, when they were
faint and weary, and he feared not God, for which the memory of Amalek was to
be blotted out: So the Devil stirs up his instruments to lay more load upon
such as are laden with their sins by discouragements, mockings, revilings and
reproaches, and all this either to bring them back again under his power and
command, or to make and cause them sink in despair. Such are merciless
parents, masters, etc. to their afflicted children, servants, friends.
Thus oftentimes parents, masters, and dear friends otherwise, seeing their
children, servants, or worldly friends to come into the aforesaid condition,
what by taunts, mocks, yea threatenings and ill usage, seek to discourage them,
cry out of them, cast them off, and disregard them as unfit for their service,
as lost in regard of their hopes of preferment in the world or the like; all
this while ignorant that they are acting the Devils part, who thus seeks to
hinder the work of Gods grace in them. And doubtless many are near lost, if
not altogether, (after some beginnings and hope given) by the discouragements
of such as should not only approve of them, but add life, comfort, and
quickening to them.

4. Such are most unlike to Christ,
Fourthly, Let such know that they are far from Christ's merciful disposition,
who binds up the broken hearted, who will not break the bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking flax: being herein like unto a loving mother, which most
tendreth the most diseased and weakest child. Of him it is said, He shall feed
his flock like a shepherd: Isai. 40.11.
he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and
shall gently lead those that are with young. And who, says the Lord, Zach.
4.10. his holy Angels.
has despised the day of small things? Christ I am sure does not, the glorious
Angels do not: for they disdain not to afford their attendance on little ones,
having a charge among other things to bear them up in their hands: and we
should not. Psalm. 91.12. and to the godly,
As Christ calls such unto him Matthew. 11.28. so he would not have us cast
them from us; No, he by his Apostle would have us Comfort the feeble minded,
and support the weak. Let us but as we may, see Christ beginning to be formed
in them, 1 These. 5.14.
and we will not, we cannot (if Christ at all be precious in our eyes) despise
them. See thou then such a contrite one, who see Christ in these contrite
ones.
whose spirit is cast down? know he is one whose heart thus pricked and pierced
is a preparing and fitting to be a Temple, and as it were another heaven, for
God himself to dwell in Isai. 57.17. Take heed then of offending any one, the
least of such: for says our Savior, Mat. 18.6. Who so shall offend one of
these little ones which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.

CHAP. XXII. An Exhortation to men of all sorts to get this mournful
disposition of soul for sin.
LAstly, A Second use of exhortation to all, that we labor after a sorrowful
disposition of soul for sin in our selves, as a thing 1. Necessary. 2.
Seasonable and befitting 1. The times, 2. The persons. 1. Of Kings and great
ones, 2 Chronicles. 37.27. Why?
to conclude all, Be we again exhorted all of us, to be so far from condemning
this mournful disposition in others, that we rather conceive it needful and
necessary for our selves; seeing mourn we must for sin, either here savingly,
if we willingly undertake it, and frame our hearts to it; or hereafter
eternally and hellishly, as has been said. And it is a disposition not only
such as befits the times, it being the time of Jacobs trouble, and of the
Churches miseries in many parts of the world, but all sorts and conditions of
men and women.

1. Kings and great ones who are tenderly brought up, may seem (if any) most of
all exempt; yet behold David a King watering his couch with his tears; King
Hezekiah turning to the wall and weeping; but above all, King Josiah humbling
himself, rending his clothes, and weeping before the Lord, Why? Though to other
men they be as gods, yet to God whom by their sin they offend, they are but
men; and it is the great God they are to deal withal, and who will deal with
them as well as with others, seeing he is no respecter of persons. Its no shame
but the honor of the best and greatest on earth to humble and abase themselves
before the great and dreadful God. Who should not be ashamed to humble
themselves.
But I am sure it shall be pride and matter of shame in meaner men not to do
it, when such great and godly Kings as have been named, have not been ashamed
so to do.

2. Rich men (if they be as yet unhumbled) are called on to weep and howl, 2.
Rich men.
(their danger being so great and their salvation so difficult) by being told
what else in the end will befall them, Jam. 5.1, 2, etc.

3. And poor men should strive to be also poor in spirit, 3. Poor men.
their outward poverty and wants inviting them thereunto, as we see in the
Prodigal, whose poverty and wants (though deeper matters be implied) humbled
him and sent him home unto (God) his Father.

4. Young men should begin betimes, 4. Young men.
and so by godly sorrow prepare themselves to do God long and cheerful
service; they should make use of, and maintain that natural tenderness which
is in them, least by time and continuance in sin, they grow more senseless and
hard-hearted.

5. And older men though perhaps less disposed to weep, 5. Old men.
yet have the greater cause by reason of their long continuance in sin, and as
being in all probability nearer either heaven or (if they have not formerly
mourned) hell, and the everlasting torments thereof, which cannot otherwise be
prevented but by timely sorrow here on earth.

6. Nay it concerns us all generally, whatsoever our relations are on earth, 6.
All generally, whether considered, 1. As men, Jam. 4.9.10.
who by St. James are called on to be afflicted and mourn and weep: Let your
laughter (your carnal rejoicing) says he, be turned to mourning, (let it be
the matter of your sorrow that you have so carnally rejoiced,) and your joy to
heaviness. Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, etc. It becomes us
all thus to do. Are we men? since sin came into the world, the world it self is
but a vale of tears, whose condition is to be here on earth, as in a vale of
misery.
a house of mourning and mortality: and surely mad mirth and laughter does not
become it or us, being as men banished into a strange land, from heaven the
place of joy. But are we Christians, are we members of Christ? 2. As Christians
that we may Phil. 3.10. be conformable to Christ.
Then weeping and mourning will well become and befit us, that we may be
conformable to him our Head in his death and sufferings here, as we hope be
like him in glory hereafter. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
This is a faithful saying, If we be dead with him, we shall also live with
him: If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, says the Apostle.
and suffer with him, Matthew. 26.37, 38.
Now his sufferings were for our sins, when his soul was exceeding sorrowful
even to the death, and he offered up prayers, and supplications with strong
crying and tears. Heb. 5.7.
Now though his sorrows and sufferings being alone satisfactory, were to ease
and free us from everlasting sorrows, yet sorrow we must, not by way of
satisfaction, but of sympathy, not by way of satisfaction, but of sympathy.
and so far only as by tasting the bitterness of our own sin, we may not only
so far suffer with him, but feel and express the more joy and thankfulness to
him who drunk the very dregs of that cup of trembling and of wrath, which we
should have been made to swallow down, (as shall the damned who now by not
sorrowing in time, lose the benefit of Christ's death and sufferings) but
whereof we, who are now touched and pricked in heart for our sins, do only sip
and taste a little.

More lets of godly sorrow, with their remedies barely named.
You have heard of Lets to this godly sorrow, which I endeavored to remove, and
to which I do refer; some more might here be added, such as are from the
suggestions of Satan, telling us such an austere course is a needless
strictness; from distractions occasioned by other men and other businesses,
from our selves, and from that natural indisposition unto duties of this
nature; and from a love of pleasures, and lothnesse to bid vain pleasures
adieu: unto all which must be opposed watchfulness, prayer, good consideration
of the straitness of the way and gate of life, and the necessity of the duty.
The sweet content and true pleasure which is in these ways of God, when
sensual men can find no pleasure, no not in things otherwise necessary,
natural and lawful, unless there be sin in them, and some tang of the
forbidden fruit, and leaven of corruption: Whereas there is no such pleasure as
to overcome pleasure, no such delight in the acting of sin, as pleasure in
resisting the temptation thereunto, etc. But we may seem to have said enough
already of such things.

Conclusion exhorting to get soft hearts,
Therefore let us as we love our souls, show care to make good use of the
things we have heard and known; above all things laboring in the use of the
means abovesaid, to get tender, humble, soft and relenting hearts; and when we
have got them, to keep and preserve them so in and by the frequent use of the
same and other like means, and keep them so, How?
and holy exercises of prayer, meditation, hearing, reading, conference with
such as have been humbled; through neglect of which we shall find our hearts
insensibly to grow hard, and through cold performance of duty to freez again:
Even as the water in the cold of winter soon freezeth into hard ice; which once
broken in some parts of it, that cattle may drink thereat, or for other uses,
is kept open by daily breaking of it; which care being for some few days
neglected, requires greater pains to break and open it again: Simile.
So a soft heart and Gods Spirit once had, are easily kept by daily care; but
hardly recovered, when through negligence we have lost them.

CHAP. XXIII. Where is showed what these Converts said: and that the heart
being once affected, shows it self by words, and thereby may be discovered.
It follows: And said unto Peter and the rest of the Apostles, Men and
brethren, The second effect of Peter's Sermon, or, What these Converts said.
What shall we do?

IT has already been considered what these Converts heard, and what they
suffered; we must next consider what they said. And said unto Peter, etc.]
where (me thinks) I see them framing into true Christians, and becoming like a
well set and tuned clock; where the heart (which in them was pricked and moved)
is like the master-wheel, They are compared to a clock.
moving by the weights of their own sin and of Gods wrath, not without some
sense, allurement and hope of mercy: their tongue, like the bell, on which the
hammer, after the moving of the first wheel, does strike, which truly shows
the inward disposition of the heart, and how it is affected; and then their
hand, like the pointer, shows it self ready to do, and put in execution
whatsoever it (according to Gods word) shall be directed unto; as being right
in heart, tongue and hand, as we should be in all other duties, as of
thankfulness.
for they being pricked in heart, said, What shall we do? here is heart, tongue
and hand agreeing in a sweet harmony together in this first work of conversion:
as indeed they do and should do in all other parts and particulars of Christian
practice and duty; as in our thankfulness toward God, where the heart must
begin, Non sola vox sonet, sed and manus consonet, verbis facta concordent,
Aug. in Psalm. 149.
and in the inward acknowledgement of Gods mercies and Attributes love God,
Psalm. 116.1. and the soul, yea all that is within (understanding, memory, will
and affections) must praise him, Psalm. 103.1. Then accordingly our mouths must
speak of, and show forth his praises, Psalm. 51. and our hands work, and show us
really thankful; which is the end of all mercies, temporal, Psalm. 105.43, 44,
45. Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13. and spiritual, Luke 1.74, 75. So God would have us
perform duty to men, even to our enemies (much more to himself) as Matthew. 5.44,
45. where you will find both a Diligite of the heart, and of love of enemies.
Love your enemies: a Benedicite of the tongue, Bless them that curse you: and
a Benefacite of the hand, This their behavior is a sign of the sincerity of
their sorrow.
Do good to them that hate you. And so here: It was a good sign that they were
rightly and savingly pricked in heart, when in this humble and loving manner
they spoke unto the Apostles, sought direction from them, and offered
themselves ready and willing to do accordingly. Others being pricked, are more
hardened then before, and kick against the prick, hating that word and those
persons that do rebuke them, as those other Jews did Stephen, Acts 7. which
puts a manifest difference between such as are savingly pricked, and such as
are not; Four particulars to be spoken of here.
by which we may and should examine and try our selves.

1. Who thus spoke and said. Such as were pricked.
Here we will consider, 1 Who thus said or spoke. 2 When. 3 To whom. 4 What said
they.

1 Who? Such as were pricked in heart. No marvel if thus by the tongue they
showed the grief and sorrow of their hearts: Its a sign they were now sensible
of their own hateful sins, and of Gods just judgments due unto them; of both
which formerly they were insensible: as indeed the greatest evils always are
such as men are least sensible of, as the heathen Philosopher instanceth in
ignorance, folly, (...). Arist. Rhet. 2.
injustice, etc. Now that Gods word and grace began secretly to put some life
into them, and that they began to be at some distance with their sin, having it
now not so much in them as before them, they become sensible of the same, and
show so much by speech.

Where the heart is truly and inwardly affected in any kind, especially where
it is inwardly wounded, and in anguish, Doctr. The heart shows it self by
words, and thereby may be judged.
it shows, vents, and bewrays it self by the mouth, and by words. Words will
burst our like fire which cannot be hid. David resolving to keep his mouth with
a bridle, Psalm. 39.1, 2, 3.
while the wicked was before him; yet when by holding his peace his sorrow was
stirred, my heart (says he) was hot within me, while I was musing the fire
burned: then spoke I with my tongue. So in matter of joy, where the heart
rejoices, Acts 2.26.
the tongue will be glad; so where faith is in the heart, there will be
confession of faith in the mouth, Romans 10.10. where the heart boyleth, bubleth
up, or as we English it, enditeth a good matter, there the tongue will be the
pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom,
and his tongue takes of judgment: Why? The Law of his God is in his heart,
Psalm. 37.30, 31. A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart brings
forth that which is good: and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his
heart brings forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his
mouth speaks, Luke 6.45. This here appears in the passion of sorrow, where
being pricked in heart, especially in sorrow and anguish.
the tongue expresses truly the sorrow of it, as the strokes on the
instrument, or voice of the singer answers the notes that are pricked in the
rules. Dr. Featly.
So that by the quality and nature of the speech or words uttered, the inward
condition, the sincerity and soundness, or unsoundnesse of its sorrow is
commonly discovered. as we see differently in David.
David's conscience being inwardly troubled for sin, whilst he kept silence,
he found Gods hand still more heavy upon him: Then (said he) I acknowledged my
sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said, I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Psalm.
32.3, 4, 5. These here in effect do the same; by these words of theirs
confessing (as has been said) their sins, and finding like mercy, ver. 38. On
the other hand, Cain being pricked in heart and conscience for his bloody sin,
and in Cain,
does also speak and utter; and some other Jews.
but what? words of despair: so those Acts 7.54. being cut to the heart,
gnashed upon Stephen with their teeth, and uttered words of desperate rage and
madness, crying out with a loud voice, -- and stoning him, v. 57. And
howsoever in affliction the tongue sometime belie the heart, Hypocrites may
counterfeit. Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36.
as in the grosser hypocrite, yea also self-deceiver, who, when God smites
them, enquire early after him, as did the Israelites in the wilderness:
Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him
with their tongues: Yet, I say, in true grief, the tongue truly sympathizeth
with the heart, and expresses the affections of it truly: as in the Parrot,
Yet they bewray themselves by their words, etc.
which being beaten, cries like it self with its natural voice, and not as at
other times, like a man, artificially. And though Pharaoh, Judas, and many like
unto them, seem to show by their words and confession some compunction of
heart; yet both their words (being well weighed) at least their after-deeds do
show the hypocrisy or deceit of their hearts, and that their grief was not
true and genuine for their sins, but for the punishment, and through legal
terrors, or mere natural conscience within them.

Contrariwise, a good heart, being smitten of God, will either be silent unto
God, and not dare to mutter or murmr against him; or withal it will utter
only good words, as we see in Job, chap. 1.21, 22. and chap. 13.15. Though he
slay me, yet will I trust in him. Thus it is constantly with it, though perhaps
in a fit it may forget it self, and utter words of discontent, as we see in the
same Job, and Jeremiah, and others.

The reason of all this is that sincerity and integrity which is in the heart
of those whom God does soundly touch, Reason.
which is a single heart, not a heart and a heart, or a tongue and life
different from the heart; which it seems Nature it self would teach us all,
seeing Anatomists teach, that the heart and tongue hang upon one string; Dr. F.
ibid.
so that when the heart is moved with any passion or perturbation, the hammer
(as in the former resemblance) beats upon the bell, and the mouth sounds, and
answers the motions and affections of the heart.

Use. 1 In our sorrows, to show our sincerity by our words, and by the nature
of them.
Let us therefore, when Gods hand touches us, show by our words (and deeds
also) suitable, that our hearts are inwardly well affected, and truly humbled
under his hand for our sins, truly desirous how to pacify him, and to procure
true peace to our consciences. Its a sign the hearts of many are but lightly
pricked or touched with remorse for their sins, they do so little complain or
make their moan to others, who may afford them ease by their counsel and good
directions. As on the other hand, such as most complain, out of an inward
feeling of their sins, and who accordingly move doubts and questions concerning
their estate of soul, are none of the worst Christians; at least they are in a
good way.

2 And so generally,
For more general Use: It were to be wished, that men by their words and
language, as also by the nature and quality of their discourse and speech, did
show the soundness, holiness and integrity of their hearts within more then
they do. The heart will be venting it self by the tongue, and commonly
according to that abundance which is in the heart the mouth will be speaking: A
reproof of such as pretending good hearts, yet are tongue-tied,
Many talk much of their good hearts to God ward; but if their hearts within
were so good (holy hearts, believing hearts, humble hearts, hungering hearts,
zealous hearts) as they pretend, they would not be so tongue-tied as they are,
either to Godward, or toward others. If Gods word were in the heart of many
Ministers, 1 In Preaching.
at least as a burning fire, they would soon grow weary with forbearing to
preach and to speak in his Name, Jer. 20.8, 9.
though his word should be made a reproach to them, and a derision daily. So if
the hearts, whether of many Ministers or others, 2 In Prayer.
were truly pinched with sense of their own and peoples wants, they could not
take up with bare general forms of words in their seeming prayers, or with a
general invitation of others to pray, or at best, to join with them in
rehearsing (more then praying) the Lords prayer. The heart truly touched with a
sense of its own guiltiness, and of Gods displeasure, or of its own wants,
could not take up with forms of words framed by others, or at least long rest
in them, but would vent it self by words, at least by sighs and groans suitable
to its condition. Such as complain that for any expressions of their own, they
are tongue-tied in Prayer, let them strive to get better hearts, sensible
hearts, sanctified hearts, hearts full of the spirit of God, which is a spirit
of grace and of supplication: Zech. 12.10. for were they full of it, they would
otherwise vent themselves then they do: whereas now they draw near to God only
with the mouth, and with their lips honor him, but have their hearts removed
far from him, Isa. 29. ver. 13. their hearts are more tied and shut up then
their tongues; and so in effect both are tied to Godward.

So many are, and some complain, that they are not so profitable in discourse
and in private conversation with others by holy conference as they should be, 3
In speaking of good things,
by instructing, exciting, and for God,
exhorting, encouraging of others, yea, admonishing and reproving them for
their vanity, oaths, reviling of Gods people, and his people.
and for their speaking evil of Gods good ways: But if these would look into
the true cause hereof, they would find, that either the Law of God is not at
all in their hearts, for then they would speak wisdom, and their tongue would
talk of judgment: or that their hearts are not so holy, so charitable, and
compassionate toward others, so zealous for God and his honor, and such
believing hearts as they should be, or for time of profession, calling and
means might be. But for a tongue that straitens it self to speak of better
things then are in the heart, A dissembling tongue reproved, etc.
either in matters of God and of profession of godliness, or in duties and
profession of love toward others, this is a lying tongue, a deceitful tongue,
as Psalm 109.2. and 120.2, 3. Psalm. 50.19. and 52.2, -- 4. such as God will cut
out; and as is but for a moment, Prove. 12.19. a sign of a gross hypocrite, and
of a fool, Prove. 10.18, -20 Such dissembling with God and man argues abundance
of wickedness in the heart, which if it were truly and sincerely affected,
would without all simulation and dissimulation accordingly vent it self to
others, as it did in these here, who being soundly and savingly pricked in
heart and humbled, did in all humility, meekness and reverence to the Apostles
of Christ, truly and sincerely beg their advice, with full purpose of heart to
follow the same; which they also did. See Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29.
Others perhaps purpose and promise fair, but their hearts deceive them.

CHAP. XXIV. Showing, that in trouble of Conscience for sin Means would
presently be used.
2 When? Presently.
BUt secondly, When did they this? When sought they after ease, and after the
means of their cure? forthwith, presently and immediately: Its said, They
(hearing) were pricked in heart, and said. They did not suffer the Apostles to
depart from them till they had sought their advice and obtained it. I know,
many seek ease too soon; but I have fully (I hope) warned such of that deceit.
These here were truly and sufficiently humbled, as has been showed from
pregnant proofs from the Text: and when thou find thy self so, then defer
not to seek relief; so thy joy and comfort shall be seasonable, and not
overhasty, as it is in many hypocrites, signified by the stony ground, who
immediately without any touch of conscience or true humiliation going before,
receive the word with joy: Matthew. 13.20.

Note. Means would presently be used for the cure and ease of consciences truly
touched.
The Observation hence is; That when men's Consciences are truly pricked and
wounded by the word, good means would presently be sought after and used: as we
see here in Paul, Acts 8. and in the jailer, Acts 16. and in King Josiah, 2
Chr. 34.19, 20, 21. Its not enough that a man be sensible of his pain, but he
must also seek to the Physician: as it is not enough that a man that is wounded
in a fray, complain of his sore, cry out of brawling, and repent of his anger,
rashness, and hastiness, yea and resolve not to be so hasty again; but it will
behove him presently to seek to the Surgeon for help and cure: So is it here in
the prickings and woundings of conscience, where a man must not desay to seek
to Christ, and to his word and Ministers for direction and comfort, and
afterward he must follow and practice the same.

Why? 1 Wounds, as of body, so of soul, neglected prove dangerous.
And good reason for it: 1 Nature and experience tells us, that green wounds are
soonest cured, if balsome be presently poured in: an hurt, breach or sore long
neglected does the more deeply fester, and so may prove gangrained and
deathfull: so a bleeding upon a little wound or prick not stayed in time, may
prove mortal and desperate: or as a bone dislocated or out of joint, the
longer the setting of it is forborne, the cure and setting of it will be with
much greater pain to the Patient, and with much more difficulty; yea, it may
so long be neglected, that no skill or art of man can bring it right again. So
it is in the cure of a wounded spirit and of a bleeding conscience.

2 The heart being sofined is fittest to be wrought upon.
2 The heart being newly pricked, softened and made sensible, is more pliable and
soft to receive the impressions of grace: as the ground is fittest to receive
the seed after it is newly riven up and plowed; and wax the impreffion of the
seal when it is once softened and molten. We use to say, It is good striking
while the iron is hot: for as iron after heating, being suffered to cool, is
less malleable and frameable then before; and as water once heated will sooner
cool and freez into ice then other water; so is it with the heart of man: if
being once softened through sense of sin, we take not the time to bind it up,
and to work upon it, it will be more incapable of cure and comfort.

3 To neglect or defer cure
3 Yea, men once touched in conscience for sin, if they neglect to seek for
remedy, or to submit unto it when it is showed, as they are apter to forget
their sorrows, and to be carried away by many occasions and worldly affairs,
Psalm. 51.3.
when sin newly committed is better known and remembered with all the
aggravating circumstances of it: so it is just with God to deny them cure, that
with Esan, they shall find no place of repentance, though they seek it
carefully with tears, provokes God to deny it, Hebr. 12.17.
and to reject them, as he did the five foolish Virgins, when they would
inherit the blessing, and to shut the door of mercy and of heaven upon them,
who when they stood in need, and were some way sensible of their need of mercy,
seeing we so refuse his first offers.
yet neglected and deferred to seek it, or to accept it when it was offered.
Now God by such prickings of the conscience comes near us, and would awaken us
out of the deep sleep of our sins; which his mercy if we do neglect, we
provoke him to leave us, to depart from us, and must not expect he should come
so near us again, but leavens wholly to our own hardness even to perish in the
same.

Use 1. Not to conceal our sin and anguish for it, either through love to sin,
This is of Use, 1. For such as in their anguish of conscience for some sin or
sins of theirs do conceal and smother the same; some through pride and love to
their sins which they will (though inwardly they smart for them) desire to hide
under their tongues as sweet morsels, till at length they become as the gall of
Aspes within them, Job 20.11, 12. They would be comforted, but (secretly in
heart still cleaving to their sin) they resolve not to confess the same,
though to such as are both able to direct and comfort them, and faithful to
conceal their shame. Thus concealing the true cause of their inward malady,
the wound festers, and at length it may be on their deathbed, if not sooner,
they are so overwhelmed with horror and despair (and that by Gods just
judgment) that all the spiritual Physicians in the Town or City, can afford
them no true comfort or ease. They may thank their love to their sin for this,
in that though they smarted inwardly for it, yet they were loath to bewray it or
make it known, even then loving it when they were in torment for it. Others, 2.
Or through shame fac'dness.
through shame and bashfulnesse keep close their sin, which yet they both
sorrow for and do hate, and so long inwardly groan under the burden of it,
till they feel it as fire hid and smothered within them, or their consciences
as a close-stopt burning oven; whereby at length they are forced (through Gods
goodness to them) to give vent to the fire, to seek ease to their consciences
by acknowledgement of their sin to God, and also to men (as the case may
require) which they might much sooner have attained unto if they had sooner
sought to or made use of the remedy. This was David's case, Psalm. 32.3, 4.5.
This may teach such, when with these converts here they are inwardly smitten
and pricked in their heart, to take heed of bleeding inwardly, which is ever
dangerous; Its dangerous to keep the devils counsel,
let them rather, without denying or concealing any longer their sins, seek
after the means of help and cure. And if they have any doubts or temptations
within themselves, let them be sure not long to conceal or smother the same. or
to bleed inwardly.
This were to keep the Devils counsel, which has had in some very fearful and
dismal effects; whereas the making known of such doubts and inward close
temptations upon suggestions of Satan, has both defeated him, and freed them
of their anguish and many desperate fears. The longer such things are
concealed, the longer (at the best) are the patients held in torture, and the
more doubtful (if not desperate) the cure will prove.

2. Hearers once made to tremble, and troubled by the word, must take and make
use of the season.
2. A more general Use is for hearers, whose consciences doubtless are often
touched, so that whilst with Felix they hear discourses of righteousness,
temperance, and judgment to come, their guilty consciences make them to
tremble, and do inwardly prick, smite, wound, and sting them. Now what should
they do in this case? Shall they with Felix shuffle off the business, this
great and weighty work till they have a convenient season? God forbid; so did
Felix indeed, but that season never came yet, so that his trembling proved to
him but a summoner to hell, and a harbinger to Gods judgment, as the like
trembling neglected will prove now to others who make no better use of it then
he did. Oh no, the only season is now when God by his word faithfully taught
and brought home to the soul does begin to trouble the conscience. For as when
the Angel (Joh. 5.4.) went down at a certain season into the pool of Bethesda,
and troubled the water, whosoever then first after the troubling of the water
stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had: So the season would be
watched and presently taken when the Angel or messenger and minister of God by
the word, smites, wounds, and troubles the conscience, to procrastinate or put
all off to another season, till sickness, dispatch of other business, old age
or time of death, is desperately to neglect a man's self and soul. If then thou will follow wholesome advice, Wholesome advice which is presently to get the
sting and thorn removed.
so soon as thou find thy conscience struck by the word, and thy heart
pierced, so soon (after hearing) retire thy self into thy closet, withdraw thy
self from vain company, examine well thy conscience, help to drive and strike
home these nails to the head; defer not to step in presently for cure into
these waters which are healing; look up forthwith being thus stung, to Christ,
figured by the brazen Serpent; put it not off till some other time, least thou
die of the wound and stinging. Be here in this case, as the shot or wounded
Heart, which presently seeks to dittanie as his only remedy to cause the dart
fall out: If you have received into your bosom any such dart, seek presently
to get it pulled out, least otherwise it be your death. Learn of Paul, who not
only at his first conversion, being struck and charged in conscience, with his
sin of persecuting of Christ in his members, Acts 9.6.
sought to Christ for direction; but afterward having some sting, prick and
thorn left sticking in him, 2 Cor. 12.7.8.9.
deferred not, but early and late sought to Christ by earnest prayer to have it
plucked out, and he received a gracious Answer, of which he had comfort. Yea
learn of these here, who when upon heating they were pricked in heart,
presently seek for direction and remedy; and not so only but wisely, also they
seek to the true means of cure of their consciences, and betake themselves to
Peter and to the other Apostles, seeking help, ease, and direction from them,
which is the third point to be considered.

CHAP. XXV.
SECT. 1. Where and of whom to seek comfort to our troubled Consciences; only
of Gods faithful Ministers.
And said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles.
Third Point. The parties of whom they sought cure and direction, Considered
according to a threefold relation,
3. THis is the third circumstance concerning the parties to whom they spoke,
and of whom they sought help and cure. Now these here are to be considered in a
threefold relation: 1. To God, as his messengers or as the Apostles of Christ.
2. To these converts, and as the same that wounded them. 3. To some of these
again, as being the same who formerly had been neglected, yea mocked and
derided by them.

1. To God, and as his Apostles and Ministers. Who are considered 3. ways.
1. These here sought unto are the Apostles of Christ, Peter and the rest: whom
according to the Text, we will consider, First, and chiefly according to the
quality of their persons, or nature of their office. Secondly, according to
their Order here mentioned. Thirdly, Number.

1. These Apostles here were properly the eleven (with Matthias added unto them
by lot in the room of Judas, 1. According to their office who were Apostles.
Acts 1.16.) who were immediately chosen and called by Christ, whilst he
remained on earth, Matthew. 10.2, 3, 4, etc. First, specially to preach to the
Jews only or to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, verse. 5, 6, 7. to
prepare them to receive Christ himself and his doctrine; What is that? Mat.
28.17, 20
then after his resurrection and ascension to preach to the whole world, and to
plant Churches among the Gentiles; being first commanded to wait at Jerusalem
for the promise of the Father, until they should be endued with power from on
High. Acts 1.4. and Luke 24.49.
Which accordingly the tenth day after his Ascension, on this day of Pentecost
they received, whilst the Holy Ghost was in visible manner poured out upon
them, and they thus solemnly inaugurated, ordained and declared to be the
Apostles of Christ, as it were then given from heaven by Christ unto the
Church. These were to be special witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, Ephesians.
4.7, 11 Acts 1.22.
and Ambassadors sent of him into the whole world, there to plant Churches,
being immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost both to teach and write, so that
their doctrine (now written) was to be the only Canon and rule of all Christian
doctrine and religion to the end of the world, Though the office cease,
who had special gifts of miracles to confirm the same; whose office though in
regard of the special privileges of it, which were many, was temporary and
ceased with them; yet their doctrine (unto which the Church of God ever since
is tied) and ministry which was as to pray, so to preach the Gospel and to
administer the Sacraments, cease not, yet not according to the common duties
of it, prayer, preaching, etc. which continue still.
but is to continue in such as succeed them therein, to the end of the world,
Mat. 28.19, 20. God promising the direction and assistance of his Spirit, to
them and to all such as shall teach the same doctrine. These were they who by
preaching Christ unto these Jews, and by the extraordinary work of the holy
Ghost now sent down upon them, pricked and wounded their consciences, unto whom
accordingly they seek for direction, ease and comfort, as to their only
spiritual Physicians.

Doctr. The only way to be directed and eased in conscience is to seek to Gods
faithful ministers.
Whence from their example men are taught, how to get ease to their wounded
consciences, namely by having recourse to the messengers of God, and faithful
ministers of Christ: For so the Apostles are to be considered here, namely as
preachers of the Gospel, and such as under Christ, did know how to speak a word
in season to him that is weary. Isai. 50.4.


Quest. Why did not these here seek to their own Rabbines, to the chief
Priests, learned Scribes, Quest. Why did not these here seek to the Scribes and
Pharisees?
devout and zealous Pharisees, (as they would be taken) who sat in Moses seat?

Answ. Alas! They could expect poor comfort or direction from them whom they
saw to be in the same condemnation with themselves, Answ. They were guilty,
Mat. 27.3, 4,
and the crucifiers of Christ more then they were. They might consider what
little comfort Judas in the distress of his conscience found from them, he
might go hang himself for any comfort they either could or would give him; and
so he went from them immediately to the gallows or Tree. Where the heart is
truly touched, it seeks only to Gods faithful messengers for cure and help. It
is ill seeking comfort to our consciences from such as are deep in sin, yea in
the same sins as we our selves. Such great Rabbis as these (in all ages) know
better how to wound and entangle men's consciences then to heal them. and knew
better to entangle consciences then to cure them.
They care least for men of scrupulous and tender consciences. Such as make no
conscience at all of sin (unless in hypocrisy like themselves, who Matthew.
27.6. seemed to make some conscience of putting into their Treasury the price
of blood, but none at all of taking it out) such I say are fittest for their
turns.

Only the faithful Ministers of Christ can afford true comfort. Why?
No, they must be the faithful Ministers of God and of Christ that can afford
true comfort to troubled Consciences, and that for these Reasons;

1. This comfort and cure of Consciences is originally only in God and Christ,
that good Samaritan who was sent to heal the broken in heart, 1. They only are
in Christ's stead, who is the author of comfort.
as we have heard out of Isai. 61.1, 2, etc. and Luke 4.18, 19. Yet thus he is
not always in person, or yet by his Spirit alone, but by his word and the
preaching of it, which is the ministration of the Spirit; So that those only
(and they are rare) that dispense the Gospel most faithfully as the Ministers
of Christ, in his name and according to his will and word, are they by whom
Christ affords true and solid comfort to wounded consciences, and by whow he
refreshes the weary soul. See Job 33.19, 20. to 26.

The blessing to be expected only from Gods ordinance.
These and none but these have commission from him, and the power as to bind, so
to loose, Mat. 16.19. John 20.23. Gods ordinance then is to be looked unto, who
having appointed the preaching of the Gospel to the same end, has also annexed
his promise thereunto, where his word is faithfully dispensed: from which
ordinance only of his we may expect a blessing.

2. The same hand of the Surgeon which wounds is fittest to heal.
2. The same hand that wounds is fittest to heal; seeing the wounds made by the
word are not the wounds of an enemy, but friend, Surgeon, and Physician. If the
Surgeon lance and cut, as he does it with intention to heal, so he only is the
fittest to undertake that cure: he that pours in wine, is fittest to pour in
oil also. Such an ones words are like (if any truth be in it) the sword, which
making the wound, does also the cure, if the weapon-salve be applied unto it:
or, as they say concerning the wounds made by the darts of Achilles, which
could no otherwise be cured but by his salves. Only Gods faithful Ministers
are the men that savingly both wound and heal. We had need then be well
directed and guided; yea, know well to whom or to what to have recourse for
comfort to our grieved hearts.

SECT. 2. False means of cure to be abandoned.
To seek for cure of conscience only to Gods faithful Ministers:
seek only to such as have been named: and seek directions chiefly from Gods
faithful Ministers, not neglecting the advice of godly, faithful and
experienced Christians.

and not 1 To merry company and drinking.
And here take heed: Satan is a Mountebank, and his Apothecaries will prescribe
poisons. Some, yea thine own false heart perhaps, will bid thee go to mirth and
merry company, so to drink away sorrow, which yet will return, and prove like
the handwriting to Belshazzer on the wall: 2 To music.
some to other sports, and to music; as Saul, when the evil spirit came on
him, must have a Musician to play unto him: 3 To sleep.
some lie down and sleep that they may forget their sorrow: 4 To their wealth.
some seek to comfort themselves in the sight or thought of their gold and
silver, store and abundance, which no more can cure these prickings of
conscience, then the stone or gout, or not so much: some in trouble of
conscience, 5 To physic.
as if it were but mere melancholy, fly to physic, and to the bodily
Physician, with neglect of the spiritual, as King Asa: 6 To the Devil and
witches.
some will send thee to the god^ of Ekron, with King Ahaziah, 2 King. 1.2. or
to the witch of Endor, with King Saul in his great straits, 1 Samuel 28.15. But
should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? etc. Isa.
8.19, 20. Some will direct thee to such Ministers of Antichrist as would heal a
wounded conscience with Reasons, 7 To the Ministers of Antichrist,
and not by the Word and promises thereof, who turn rather tormentors then
Physicians, taking often (as a worthy Divine observes) advantage of the
bruisedness of men's spirits to relieve them with false peace for their own
worldly ends, D. Sibs, Bruised reed, p 202.
inasmuch as a wounded spirit will part with any thing. who counsel for
themselves, and for their own gain.
Herein are they like some cruel Surgeons, who delight to make long cures to
serve themselves upon the misery of others. 8 Not to Libertines, Familists, and
Antinomians,
Lastly, some take an easier course, which is not the curing, but the searing
of the conscience: These are our Familists, Libertines, and Antinomians, if you
please so call them; who will tell you, if your conscience be troubled for any
sin (though otherwise gross) especially after your supposed Conversion, or that
Christ is once come to you, that your sin is only an act of the outward man,
who do not cure, but sear the conscience.
and therefore ought not to trouble your conscience: yea they will tell you,
that to be troubled for sin again, is to bring your selves back under the
spirit of bondage. Conscience of sin is but slavery; whereas not to know, See
Calvin's Tract contra Libertinos.
or (as their phrase is) to unknow sin (that is, not to take such notice of sin
as to be troubled in conscience for it, upon conceit of displeasing God
thereby, and of incurring his disfavour) is to be like unto Adam in his
innocence, who then knew only good and not evil. By all means, say they, you
must take heed of being cast down for any failings. Their Objections against us
Yea they tell us, It is vain babbling, when men are cast down, to raise them by
duties, and flat daubing to build men on doings, though duties died in the
blood of Christ. But contrariwise: we build not men on duties, but on Gods free
and gracious promises; answered.
which promises being yet made upon conditions, the conditions must not be
excluded; they are indeed required of us as duties; How we cure, and how we
teach duties.
but not performed by any strength of our own, and so they, being rightly
performed, are blessings and gifts of Gods free grace, and consequently meet to
assure us; but merit nothing: they are to be done because commanded; but not to
be rested in, or trusted to as any way meritorious: Not so as to rest or trust
in them.
duty must be done; but when we have done it, we must (and do) say, We are
unprofitable servants; we have done that (by Gods blessing and powerful grace)
which was our duty to do, Luke 17.10. So that we see duty is commended where
merit is condemned. But tell me, Does not Peter here raise men (cast down, and
asking what they shall do) by duties, when ver. 38, and 39, he bids them
repent, and be baptized; and elsewhere, ( Acts 16.31.) believe? And is there
not a renewed act of repentance, and of faith flying to our Baptism, and to the
Covenant there sealed, after particular failings, required? Are not men called
on to repent, and do their first works? Rev. 2.5. But to what end? not to rest
in them; we abhor that: but to help us to Christ, and, as assurance of our
election.
but only to fit and prepare us to come to Christ, and to establish our own
hearts, (seeing we cannot do any of these things but by the effectual grace of
God) and to make our calling and election sure to our selves; see 2 Pet. 1.5,
6. etc. with v. 10. for so after doubts and dejections we are raised and
comforted, and assured of the constancy of Gods love and grace to us in Christ:
so also Hebr. 12.12, 13, 14. I am sure the Apostle Paul both requires this
casting down for failings, 1 Cor. 5.2. blaming the want of it, and commends
such as in whom it is, 2 Cor. 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Take we heed therefore that we seek not to vain helps, as Hos. 5.13. and in
case of trouble of conscience that we fall not into the hands of such
Physicians of no value, as who in stead of curing, will kill us; but happy is
he that finds such a wise, faithful, able and godly Physician for his soul,
that can direct him how to secure his estate, to answer Satan's objections, and
scruples of conscience, to assure him of his adoption; he has found a jewel:
for such a one is one of a thousand, Job 33.

SECT. 3. Containing two more Uses.
Discovering that few are pricked in conscience for sin,
and thereby wounded in their spirits for sin: we must needs conclude so much
for most Congregations, because there is so little recourse to the spiritual
Physician, so few doubts and cases of conscience propounded to him. The
Divine's house, as once was said of the Lawyers house, should be Oraculum
Civitatis, as the Oracle of the City: and we plainly see it, that the Lawyers
house or chamber is frequented, yea thronged (in a Term or Session-time
especially) when the Divines house by all is passed by; there is so little
resorting to good Ministers for counsel;
an argument men are more careful and more sensible of their outward estate,
titles, goods, then of the estate of their souls; they question, and find the
one questioned much more by men, then the other by Satan or their own doubting
consciences. but flocking to Lawyers to secure their estates:
They desire to know the worst in their estates, titles to lands, and claims,
and must, yea will, whatever it cost, know of their Lawyer what to do to
secure themselves and estates: when like care is wholly neglected for their
souls, though inwardly they have many doubtings and gripings of conscience. How
also is the Physician for the body sought to, and to Physicians of the body,
and the Surgeon in case of a distempered body, a wound, a broken and
dis-joynted bone? Yea, as is said, in case of some trouble of mind, how shall
we find, or to places of sport, etc.
it may be Play Houses, gaming-rooms (at home or abroad) drinking-houses and
the like, filled? and all to put away melancholy, when the Divine is wholly
passed by. Nay, do not many wish the Minister (if faithful and godly) far
enough off them: in such case do they not, or would they not think themselves
happy? So far are they from being troubled in conscience, that they are ready
to cry out, they cannot be quiet for their Minister: Only troubled that such
faithful Ministers are so near them.
and in case any such godly Minister (who would yet as willingly heal as wound
them) come among them, how are they ready to cry out with the men of Ekron, 1 Samuel 5.10. They have brought about the Ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay
us and our people? and with those of Thessalonica when Paul and Silas came and
preached there, These that have turned the world upside down, are come hither
also? Acts 17.6. But if men were so sensible of their sin and misery as these
now were made by the word, they would not put or banish them from themselves,
so judging, and causing God to judge them unworthy of eternal life; but rather
in their distress of conscience, and in the sorrow of their hearts would cling
close about them, and not let them go till they had got some word of comfort
from them.

difference between the elect and reprobate: both may have aching and quaking
consciences; Difference in trouble of soul between the sound and unsound. The
one seek to God:
but the elect fly to God, and seek help from such as God has given as
Directours, Instructours and Comforters to them; as David, who if he sought it
not, yet being convinced by Nathan, accepted the reproof, and his heart
condemning him, confessed his sin, and received comfort in the assurance of
pardon from him: so King Hezekiah sought to Isaiah, King Josah to Huldah, and
these here to the Apostles. Others in their trouble fly from God, the other fly
from him to comfortless means.
and seek their comfort from comfortless means, from miserable comforters; as
Cain in despair flying from God, seeks to secure himself by building of a City:
Others seek to end their troubles in and by an halter, and by making away
themselves, etc. The elect are never pricked without good fruit: others are
worse by it: the one come to the word and dispensers of it sorrowful, but go
away comforted; the other come jocund and merry, but go away sorrowful: the
one willingly submit to the convictions of the word, and love their reprovers
so much the more; the other unwillingly, with much murmuring and repining, or
with a mad resistance and reluctance. But of this a touch not long since.

SECT. 4. Directions to be followed, which the Apostles do give.
Directions as the holy Apostles in such case do give, In doubts and troubles
of conscience, to follow such directions as the Apostles here and elsewhere
give.
as Peter here, ver. 38. and Paul elsewhere, Acts 16.31. And the Directions
which wounded consciences should follow, are these three: To labor for and to
make use of 1. Faith. 2. Repentance. 3. Baptism. These are such Directions, as
if Christ himself and his holy Apostles, Peter, Paul, and the rest, were now to
live amongst us in person here on earth, and that we had them to consult
withal face to face, mouth to mouth, and in trouble and touch of conscience to
seek advice of them, they would give us the same, and none other: which
therefore are the more carefully to be followed and practiced by us.

1 By says to fly to Christ, and to believe: so Paul directed the Jaylour.
1. I shall begin with Faith, which the Apostle Paul prescribed the Jaylour in
like case as the only thing to satisf^e his main doubt and desire, and to
resolve him in the greatest case of conscience of all; when he came trembling
and in consciousnesse of his sin against them, and of Gods just displeasure
testified by a great earthquake, which did shake the foundations of the
prison, and of his heart also, said unto them, Sirs, What must I do to be
saved? The answer was presently given, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
thou shall be saved, and thy house. To which end they spoke unto him the word
of the Lord, and to all that were in his house, who accordingly were baptized,
he and his, -- and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house, Acts 16.26,
to 35. Acts 4.12.
Christ Jesus as he only is the Savior and also Joy of his Church, so only
faith in his blood quiets the distressed conscience, and heals the wounded
soul: for He was wounded for our transgressions, Christ was wounded for us:
he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and with his stripes (or bruise) we are healed, Isa. 53.5. We know he was not
only whipped, and so had his body torn, but a crown of thorns was platted and
put upon his head, which was doubtless pierced therewith, as we are sure his
hands, feet and side were on the cross; which was nothing to that his sense of
Gods d^^pleasure due to our sins, which then lay upon him, till by de^^^ he
appeased it. When then by faith in his blood we come to be justified, Faith in
him orly brings peace,
then have we peace with God (and with our own consciences) through our Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. Now our justification is from sin, and pardon of sin:
and from the guilt and condemnation of it: And the blood of Christ (by faith
applied and made ours) purges us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. As there is no
remission without blood, Heb. 9.22. so no blood expiatory but only Christ's, v.
13.14. no other blood can assuage the pangs of a tormented conscience.
Therefore in the guilt of thy sin and sting of thy conscience no redress or
succor but by looking up through faith to Christ the true brazen Serpent,
Numb. 21.9. John 3.14. In such case then look to Christ thy surety, whom, as
our surety, we must get to answer for us.
and by faith set him between thee and his Fathers wrath, who has already
received into his bosom the javelin of Gods wrath, in answering for thee, as
Jonathan did for David. Oh, what would one give (what would he not give) in the
anguish of his soul, and horror of hell apprehended, to find one to stand
between him and Gods wrath, to bear that brunt for him, that he and God may
kindly and lovingly close? Lo, Christ has done as much for thee, and none but
Christ: make thou him thine by faith, and then fly unto him, not only at thy
first conversion; but as often as thy conscience by sin is wounded: seek to him
by a renewed act of thy faith, and lean on him, not to bolster thee in
presumption, but to succor thee in true distress of conscience, and thou
shall find rest unto thy soul. He in effect says the same to thee, which he
spoke to his Disciples beginning to be sorrowful and troubled to hear of his
departure from them; Let not your heart be troubled, says he, ye believe in
God, believe also in me: John 14.1.

2 To Repent:
2 Thus the holy Apostle Peter here answers the case of conscience put by these
Converts (I must still so call them; for being only thus pricked, they were in
fieri, or in the next way to conversion, and Converts they were in Gods purpose
and intention) saying, Would you know what to do? Repent and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ; for the remission of sins, etc. ver.
38. for the promise is to you, and to your children, etc. where he chiefly calls
on them (though in words not so expressly) for faith in the promise, and that by
repentance and baptism in the name of Jesus Christ (which presupposes faith,
especially in men of years who shall be converted) they would seek assurance of
the remission of their sins, which only (as the case was with them, and is
with others distressed in conscience) would afford them comfort. And first,
says he, Repent, become other men, be of other minds then formerly, let this
(and your other sins) be your sorrow; and not only confess this your heinous
sin of crucifying your Savior, And not only to consesse, by which ease and
pardon comes,
and take shame to your selves, and restore to God and Christ his glory hereby;
whereby also you shall get ease to your Consciences, as David did after his
heart had smitten him, and that he had confessed and acknowledged his offense,
2 Samuel 12.13. and chap. 24.10. and Psalm 32.3, 4, 5. else not, but to judge our
selves.
Prove. 28.13. but also judge and condemn your selves, Jam. 4.10. be humbled
under Gods hand, resign your selves wholly unto him and to his mercy: but
withal lay your necks upon the block, and deprecate your Judge: Pray that
these your sins may be forgiven you, and he will be favorable unto you, and
you shall see his face with joy, Job 33.26, 27, 28. This in effect is his
advice to them, and to others also in like case.

3 To make a right use of our baptism, in which pardon of sin is sealed,
3. Yea, says he, (seeing nothing can comfort the distressed conscience but
assurance of the pardon of sin, to this end) be baptized every one of you in
the name of Jesus Christ (on whom ye believe) for remission of sins, verse. 39.
that the promise of pardon (which is made to you, and to all that shall truly
repent and confess their sins, Prove. 28.13. 1 John 1.9.) may in your baptism
be sealed unto you; whereby also, having your believing hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and your bodies washed with pure water, Hebr. 10. v. 22.
you may, in the accusations of your conscience, of Satan, and of other enemies,
be able to make and give the answer of a good conscience toward God, and so
we come to answer all doubts of conscience.
by your faith and repentance thus sealed in your baptism: for herein the
effect of saving baptism is made to consist, and not in the putting away of the
filth of the flesh thereby, 1 Pet. 3.21. Baptism is no idle ceremony; but such
as is said to save, (as the Ark saved Noah); whilst we stick to it, and to
Gods promise sealed by it, we are safe, as Noah in the Ark, and need not doubt
of pardon of sin, and so of salvation. In case of doubting then, being
baptized, look back to baptism, as men do (in case their titles to lands be
questioned) unto their fathers and forefathers grants, especially to their
sealed Wills and Testaments.

In the right use of all these, faith, repentance, and baptism,
And (to wrap up all in one) consider that Baptism is into the death of Christ,
it is also to repentance, and joined with confession of sins, Matthew. 3.6, 11.
Romans 6.3. Mark 1.4. Acts 13.24. And therefore, if being baptized, (as the case
is with us) sin causes in thee doubts and trouble of conscience; that thou
may be comforted and assured of pardon, by faith have recourse to Christ, and
to the promise, yea, humble thy self by unfeigned repentance and hearty
confession of thy sin to God. we come to be assured of pardon to our comfort.
Numb. 14.25. Ainsw. ibid.
This is the way (if any) to find comfort and rest to the soul. Thus (in a
mystery) the Israelites sinning in the wilderness by murmuring and unbelief,
are sent back toward the red sea, (a type of Christ's blood) wherein they
formerly had been baptized, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. Exodus 14. Which was to humble them
by repentance, that through faith in Christ they might have entrance into the
Kingdom of heaven: otherwise they should perish for ever, as indeed their
carcasses (not repenting nor believing, by making a right use of their baptism,
though thus occasioned by being brought back to the sight of the sea in which
they had been baptized) perished in the wilderness.

These are such directions as the Apostles of Christ, and so Christ himself, do
give. As then in trouble of conscience for sin and sense of wrath due unto it,
we are to seek our cure and comfort only from the faithful Ambassadors of
Christ, who are in Christ's stead to instruct, exhort, and comfort, Isa. 50.4.
or in part also from godly, wise, meek and experienced Christians, 2 Cor. 1.4.
So, These Directions are to be followed: and to be given by Ministers. By these
we may judge of other advice,
seeing the wisest and faithfullest give only such directions as have been
named, we must both wisely judge by these of such other advice as our own
minds and judgments, or other men would give us; and diligently and
conscionably put the same in practice (yea all Ministers and others may and
must, from the example of Paul and Peter here, learn, in case they be sought
unto for advice, how to temper their spiritual physic) especially they must
make use of faith, and be kept from following ill courses, and from falling
either into despair,
lest when they get no ease by common, external and false remedies, they
following their own distempered judgments, and Satan's suggestions, seek to end
their sorrows in a halter, or by violent death: and of Repentance, not seeking
comfort too soon, lest they presume, and turn Libertines both in judgment and
in practice, or licentiousness.
as many (who seemingly have been humbled, and in conscience, it may be,
pricked and wounded) have done. Peter here directs such as were pricked in
heart to repent, that is, to be more and further humbled and made sorrowful,
as Christ calls sinners, such as are sick and burdened with sense of their sin
and misery, Matt. 9.12, 13.
to repentance: not to cast off all sense, yea conscience of sin, and fears of
wrath; but rather to proceed and go on in their sorrow, only converting such
sorrow as is from sense of wrath for sin, unto sorrow for sin it self as sin,
as the proper cure of the former, and of all hellish or legal fears and
terrors: Especially by repentance.
As it is a very fit cure of the haemorage or bleeding of the nose, to divert
the flux of blood, by phlebotomie or blood-letting in the arm. And when once
the stream of our sorrow is diverted into that channel, it will carry and lead
us into a sea of true and solid joy and comfort.

Other directions in case of wrongs done to men.
But as these are Remedies given and prescribed by these holy Apostles in
respect of God: so, seeing we wound our consciences often by trespassing
against man, we must also seek our cure (as by the aforesaid means with God,
against whom we chiefly sin, when we sin against our brethren, so) as the case
may require, 1 To submit to them. Matt. 5.23, 24. Jam. 5.16.
1 By submission and acknowledgement of our sins against them, and by seeking
reconciliation with them. 2 By Restitution made unto them, whether of their
good name, or of their goods, if by usurious contracts, extortion, 2 To make
restitution if need be.
theft, or otherwise we have defrauded, wronged or oppressed them, by the
example of Zacheus, when he became a true convert and penitent: 3 To desire
their prayers. Job 42.7, 8.
or by desiring their pardon and their prayers for us, as God himself enjoined
Jobs friends to submit themselves to him, who else could have no peace with
God. And thus for this first particular.

CHAP. XXVI. The Apostles considered according to their Order, and Number; and
that direction and comfort, is to be sought of others as well as of Peter, and
more then of the Pope.
2. These Apostles considered according to their order.
2. THe other two concerning their order and number, shall be but named. Its
here declared that they said to Peter, and to the rest, but first to Peter.
Papists, who protend their Pope in special manner to be Peter's successor, and
thence to have a primacie and superiority over all Churches, do here catch at
the placing of a word and name, to prove Peter's authority over the rest of the
Apostles, They speak first to Peter,
as if because these Jews do all turn themselves unto him, therefore he must
needs be chief, a leader and guide to all the rest: Which they would gather
also, because Luke Acts 1.13. and in his Gospel, and some of the other
Evangelists naming all the Apostles together, make mention of Peter, and name
him in the first place. But what of this? In other Scriptures we find James
named before him, Gal. 2.9. John also who was the beloved Disciple, and at
meat, was next to Christ, leaning on his bosom the very night he was betrayed,
whom Peter himself used as his spokesman unto Christ, John 13.23, 24, 25. So
the Disciples are named before Cephas by the Angel Mark. 16.7. But were they
therefore superior to Peter? Our adversaries will deny that. If the naming of
him after others of them makes not against his supremacy, then the setting of
his name before them makes not for it. for special reason.
In this place there was a special reason for it. Peter it was who deepliest
charged them, and by conviction of them troubled their consciences; he was the
chief (though not the only) speaker, and he was therefore first and chiefly
spoken to, and his advice and counsel asked. Howsoever, grant Peter were first
in respect of order among them, An Order may be granted, but no Supremacy.
yet what is this to that primacy and superiority, that power and authority
which Papists ascribe unto him above the rest, as if he were any more or
immediately Christ's Vicar then the rest? No, Christ gave none of them such
authority over other, but expressly forbade it in them, saying, But ye shall not
be so. We conclude then that the proud Pope's claim from Peter will afford him
little power or lordly authority over his brethren.

And Peter here, though first named, is but one among the rest, among many unto
whom these also spoke as well as to Peter; For they said unto Peter, and to the
rest of the Apostles.]

3. Their number, many: Others as well as Peter.
3. For number then those here sought unto, were as well the other Apostles as
Peter; who as they must not be supposed to be dumb all that day, and to stand
as ciphers beside Peter (seeing the holy Ghost in the gifts and power of it,
was promised to them all, as well as to any one of them, Acts 1.4, 5. Luke
24.49. and did accordingly in the visible signs of it, sit upon each of them,
yea and inwardly fill them all, Acts 2.3, 4.
who (all of them) began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance, so must they be thought equally and indifferently, (as to preach the
same doctrine in the like convincing manner, so) to give the same saving
counsel and direction to such as being alike convinced and pricked in heart,
sought the same severally at their hands. Direction counsel and comfort
sought, and to be sought from others as well as from Peter,
For its likely that some of this great multitude spoke to Peter, and some to
the other Apostles, whom they heard, seeing it cannot be imagined that either
all the twelve Apostles spoke at once to the same hearers, or that those three
thousand which were added to the Church that day, did or could all of them
speak to Peter. Howsoever their counsel and comfort is sought as well as
Peter's, and was accordingly given by them, (at least implicitly in Peter their
foreman, who spoke for the rest and in their names, if they spoke not for
themselves:) seeing there is but one and the same rule and ground of true
comfort and spiritual direction (for the substance of it) by which all, both
Apostles and Pastors of the Church must go to the end of the world. For though
it by occasion be said by Christ to Peter, Matthew. 16.19. I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, -- and whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth, (as well as bind) shall be loosed in heaven, yet this was not spoken or
meant to belong personally or only to Peter, but to the rest, and therefore the
same mouth utters the same words to others as well as to Peter, saying in the
plural, Matthew. 18.18. Whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven; And John 20.23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them. Or from his pretended successor the Pope,
So that suppose the Pope were Peter's Successor, yet direction and comfort to
our consciencs is not to be sought only from him, or from any power derived
from him as head and judge. Others may and ought direct in matters of
salvation, who cannot quiet troubles either in the Church or conscience,
in doubts and cases of Conscience as well as he or his Casuists. He can no
more quiet the trouble of conscience, then troubles in the Church: Else why, is
there not an uniformity of doctrine in the Romish Church? and particularly why
did he not determine the controversy between the Domicans and the Jesuits
(which yet troubles their Church, and the Protestants also through the siding
of the Arminians with the Jesuits) when he was sought unto, otherwise then by
prescribing rules of moderation on both sides?

seeing, he goes not by Peter's rule,
Nay the truth is, he goes not by the same rule with these Apostles here or with
Peter; but in like case prescribes unlike remedies; for how does he and his
Priests satisfy wounded consciences, or comfort men distressed for their sins?
but in like case, prescribes unlike remedies,
he goes not Peter's way here nor Paul's, who send men to Christ to receive
pardon, and so true comfort by believing on him, and resting on his only merits
and satisfaction, by true repentance and to the right use of Baptism, to seal
their pardon and comfort. No, such consciences by them are healed only with a
false peace, whilst for pardon they are sent to mumble over their beads, and
to the saying of so many Ave-Maries, as Ave Mary's,
and Pater-nosters; to go on Pilgrimage, pilgrimages, and works of satisfaction,
and to visit the tombs and relics of such or such Saints; to works of
satisfaction, by whippings and hard usage of the body (when it is the soul
which chiefly sins and should be humbled:) or after this life, to their
satisfactory sufferings in Purgatory, and so, telling them of Purgatory penance,
if now and in death they can be free and liberal to procure Masses, Dirigies,
etc. they may hope by the Indulgence and great mercy of the Pope, (who keeps
the keys) to have those days of Purgatory-pennance shortened. So, they are
sent to salute holy graves, so to holy graves,
and crosses, hallowed by the Pope, and dispersed into other countries, which
will purchase them a pardon for a 100. years, if not a plenary indulgence, or
to the shriving of themselves to Popish shavelings, and so to Popish pardons,
and power of absolution, to popish pardons,
especially at the hour of death: and so to their extreme unction at that
time, to holy water, crosses, and crucifixes, unctions,
to Agnus Dei's, to their Masses, as if thereby were made that most special
application of Christ's merits; and to their Sacraments, crucifixes, masses,
even the very bare work done and wrought, which yet even Baptism it self
(which in the right use of it is, and to the bare partaking of the Sacrament.
as is said, for remission of sin) is not effectual by any power of its own,
but of the word and promise of God, and so as joined with faith, Acts 8.37. and
for the Eucharist, upon the same superstitious conceit (that remission is
necessarily conferred in and by the bare partaking of the Sacraments,) it is by
them held necessary to be administered to parties ready to depart this world,
that whatsoever their troubles of conscience are or have been, they may die
with comfort.

Such superstitious ways and means Peter and Paul never used, or enjoined any
to use. Ill then may the Pope be thought to be Peter's successor, No comfort to
be expected from such as teach the doctrine of doubting.
as not going by Peter's rule. In a word, never a Popish Priest in the world can
soundly cure a wounded conscience, or apply that spiritual salve which should
comfort it without delusion, so long as they teach that most uncomfortable
doctrine of doubting: If they sind men in trouble of mind, and in doubtings,
they so hold them, and are sure to leave them in the same, if not in
desperation; or at best they can bid them but hope well, yet so as still to be
in doubt and fear, but true faith would expel all such slavish fear, and bring
assurance of pardon and certain comfort. So much for this first relation.

CHAP. XXVII. Gods word cures as well as kills.
The second relation of these Apostles, being the same that wounded.
2. COnsider, These who are sought unto for comfort and direction, are the
parties who by their preaching and convictions did first wound these Jews. And
thence we may note, That the Word of God rightly taught and applied, does cure
as well as cut, heal as well as hurt, bind up as well as bruise, save as well
as kill; yea save by sauciating, cure by killing, Note. Gods word heals the
wounds it makes. Isai. 53.5.
and bring to heaven by the very gates of hell. The wounds of the word, (being
the wounds of a friend) are like the wounds of Christ, of a healing nature; for
by his stripes we are healed, Isai. 53.5. The word heals in and by virtue of
Christ's suffering for us. This is the mercy of the word: It cures when it might
kill: It cures whom (in some sense) it does kill. Not that every one who is
pricked by it is therefore healed; but that those whom God will save, being of
years and capable, he will have to be pricked; and those who so are pricked in
heart by the word, and in their own sense dead and slain, shall also be healed
and quickened by it. The wounds of it are to health and life.

This is from Christ only, whom the word throughout teaches and aims at,
Reason hereof, from Christ crucified, whom it teaches, and applies.
Who came with healing under his wings.

The wounds of Christ properly heal, (as procuring pardon and favor:) The
Scriptures and word of God make these known to us, and the faithful Ministers
of the word apply them; and these wisely and rightly applied heal our wounds,
he being wounded for our transgressions, that we being pricked in our eyes,
sides and hearts, with the thorns of our sins, brought close to us by the word,
might not be hurt, but healed, and that our wounds might not prove mortal, but
saving. Christ died and was wounded that those for whom intentionally he died,
might not die in or by their sins eternally. Pricked, wounded and to our own
sense, dead we must be in our selves, before we be healed or revived, that we
might know our own desert and case, (if the whole burden of our sin were to be
born by us,) as also how to prize the benefit of spiritual health and life,
and how to give God his glory.

Use 1. It concerns Ministers, 1. Use,
who are hence taught to see that they be not only as ready and forward, For
Ministers, to be as willing and able to answer doubts us to make them.
but also as able to heal as to hurt, to raise up with true comforts, as to
cast down by terrors and convictions. Some can apply the word to the wounding,
convicting and amazing the conscience, and perplexing the heart, by laying home
the judgments of God, and beating men from all their false holds, and from
resting in their own performances, yea and on Christ in a false manner (a thing
most needful) yet it were to be wished they were as clear in laying down
distinguishing notes of trial, and of true sincerity, and did direct how to lay
true hold, and to rest savingly on Christ, and how clearly to to see it, when
it is so, and not to leave the soul perplexed for want of clear and sound
direction. The word it self is every way as able to heal as to wound; and so
should the teachers of it also be. Some (they say) can raise and call up
spirits, but not lay them: Pharaohs sorcerers could by their enchantments bring
blood and frogs, so increasing the like plagues sent of God, but they could not
kill them or cause the plague they brought depart and cease; no, Moses must do
that, both for those brought by him, and those brought by the Sorcerers, Exodus
7.22. and 8.7, 8.

Use 2. Being wounded and pricked in heart by the word in the ministry of it,
Use 2.
think not the worse of the minister as if he intended your hurt or disgrace.
Being wounded, not to conceive worse of the minister.
Each faithful minister though he seems to deal sharply with you, yet aims at
your good; if he wound you, it is because he sees that course to be the only
way to purge, cleanse and heal you: If they preach damnation to you, it is to
bring you to salvation: If by discovery of your sin they seem to shame you, it
is to bring you to glory. And when once they see you truly pricked and wounded,
they are both able (by Gods assistance) and as willing and ready to heal, as
they were to wound; as ready with their oil, as with their wine. As the very
mercies of the wicked are cruel, so the wounds of faithful Ministers, (and of
the righteous generally) are mercies; their smiting a kindness; their reproofs
an excellent oil, Psalm. 141.5.

3. To fly not from but to God, though seemingly an enemy
3. Being wounded, fly not from God, from his word and ministers, but to them.
Usually men fly from such as would wound them, conceiving them enemies; and in
the hearers of the word it is too usually done by many, who being touched by
the sharp reproofs of the word, forsake their teachers as either too saucy with
them or too strict: little thinking that thus flying from them, they forsake
their own mercies. These converts here did otherwise, betaking themselves and
flying not from but to those that pricked them, being indeed inwardly sustained
by a secret power, to expect help and direction from the same Apostles, and no
other. If thou then (or whenever thou shall) be wounded in like case, consult
and say, Come and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will
heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up: After two days will he
revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his
sight, Hos. 6.1, 2. If God (by his word) do wound, If he help not, all other
help is in vain.
it is in vain to seek to any other for cure: when he is displeased, who can
afford help if he deny it? resolve therefore if thou must perish, (as thou art
sure enough to do, if God save not) to die before the footstool of his mercy,
he may save thee though in seeming thine enemy; at least if he do not, no other
can; imitate the Lepers of whom we have heard, 2 Kings 7.4, 5, etc. But if
being wounded in conscience, thou seek to any of the aforesaid uncomfortable
means, thou so forsakest the fountain of mercy, and with Cain fleest from the
presence of God. Thus do many, who (as one says well) as they believe without
repenting, (and therefore their faith is presumption) so they repent without
believing, and therefore their repentance is desperation. They mutter and
murmr, and are like the chafe which when it is shaken, flutters in the face
of the fanner, as angry with him (as those Jews Acts 7. flying in Stephens
face:) but the godly are as great wheat falling down at the feet of the fanner;
as these converts here, humbling to Peter, etc. What shall we do? And so we
come to the third relation which may be considered between these Apostles, and
some of these Jews, if not all.

CHAP. XXVIII. Showing how Gods Ministers and people are and shall be sought
to, and honored by those that disrespect them.
3. The Third relation of these Apostles being the same who formerly were
neglected, if not mocked,
3. UNto whom then did these here in their distress of conscience seek? saying,
Men and brethren, etc. I answer, unto those whom formerly they contemned or at
least neglected and accounted meanly of; and in likelihood some of these were
in the number of those that in the morning of the same day, mocked and derided,
if not reviled them, v. 13. saying, These men are full of new wine. But now
that they are truly touched and pricked in heart, they seek unto them with all
submission and prostration of themselves and of their own wisdom and wills,
desirous to be directed, and willing to be commanded by them. by those that now
seek unto them.
They are now taken down off the high conceit they had of themselves, and in an
high esteem of these Apostles, they make their moan and requests unto them,
seeking comfort and direction from them, whom formerly they so lightly
accounted of, if not railed on, and mocked. Howsoever, they now thus honor
those whom they formerly contemned.

Note. The godly shall be honored of those that contemn them. 1. Often in this
life, which their enemies do, 1. Either willingly, as being converted.
Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King (of heaven) delights to
honor. Even such as seek their disgrace, shall be made to honor them at one
time or another; 1. In this life: Or 2. hereafter. They shall be made to do it
either willingly, or against their wills. 1. Willingly, in and by their
conversion and alteration of judgment concerning the faithful servants of God:
So that whereas they have spoken evil against them as evil doers, they shall
now by the others good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day
of visitation, and so acknowledge them the true servants of God. Thus the
Jaylour having thrust Paul and Silas into an inner prison and made their feet
fast in the stocks, came, not long after, trembling, and falling down before
their feet, seeking help and comfort from them, washed their stripes, and so
did them honor, Acts 16.24,-29, 30, etc. This is according to the promise,
Isa. 60.14. The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending unto
thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of
thy feet; and they shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Zion of the holy
One of Israel. 2 Unwillingly: As 1 It may be, Or, 2. Unwillingly, 1 By command
of others, as in Haman.
by command of higher powers: So proud Haman, who formerly despised good
Mordecai, and now had plotted his and the Jews destruction, was commanded to
honor him; and afterward all the Jews also in the person of Queen Esther, a
Jewesse, before whom Haman stood up to make request for his life to her, Esth.
6.10, 11. and 7.7. 2 Or otherwise, 2 By fear: as the Magistrates of Philippi.
by fear: as those Magistrates of Philippi, who having commanded Paul and Silas
to be beaten, and after they had laid many stripes upon them, cast them into
prison: sent of themselves (after, as it seems, they had heard of the
earthquake, and of Gods presence so mightily with them) to let them go; and
that out of some reverence to them, as Gods servants: but when they heard they
were Romans, whom they had beaten openly uncondemned, they feared, and came
themselves and besought them, and brought them out: Acts 16.22, 23. with 35,
38, 39. 3 By judgments on them:
3 So God by his plagues and judgments on such as despise, envy and reproach,
or any way threaten or misuse his servants, shows himself to honor his
despised people, by vindicating the wrongs done them, and punishing their
despisers and mockers. Thus God sent out bears to destroy those children that
mocked the Prephet: and sent barrenness on Michal for mocking her husband
David, and honored him the more for it, as on Michal,
2 Samuel 6.20, 22, 23. Nay thus by his plagues God makes the despisers of his
children seek unto them for their prayers, and otherwise, and so to give them
honor: on Jeroboam,
Thus King Jeroboam was forced to entreat the Prophet, whom, by stretching out
his hand against him he had threatened, to pray for him, that his hand, which
was now dried up, might be restored him again, 1 King. 13.4,-6. the Isiaelites,
So the people who rejected Samuel's Government, were made to entreat his
prayers for them, 1 Samuel 12.19. Jobs friends,
And Job's friends, who had deeply charged him with hypocrisy, were, when Gods
was wrath signified against them, commanded to go to Job, whom God calls his
servant, that he might pray for them, and they find acceptance for his sake,
Job 42.7, 8. Thus they are made to submit themselves unto him, and (not only
goods and children, but) his good name is restored to him again by the
testimony of God, and by them that sought to spoil him of it. Nay, Aaron and
Miriam.
was not Aaron (on his own and Miriams behalf, through Gods anger apparently on
her by leprosy) forced in all humility to beseech Moses, whom they through
envy spoke against? so that they had the benefit of his prayers, and he
specially honored by the testimony of God given of him, (as his faithful and
highly honored servant) even to them who envied him: Number. 12.1, 2-7, 8-11, 12,
13. Or, 3. otherwise Occafionally, and accidentally.
3 Howsoever, yet often occasionally Gods despised people come to be honored
whilst God recompenseth their disgraces, and the wrongs they suffer, even in
their enemies sight and observation, by procuring their honor some other
ways: as Joseph's wrongs (whilst through envy of his brethren he was sold as
a slave into Egypt) occasioned, by Gods wise ordering, his advancement there,
whereby he was more honored then he could have been at home; yea, by this
means those brethren of his who hated him, came to bow before him, and to
honor him.

But if Gods servants get not honor here by their despisers and persecuters, 2
But howsoever after this life.
they shall not want it hereafter, when God at the day of judgment shall
proclaim them blessed, lay open their innocence in the sight of such as
persecuted them, make them to sit as Judges on their enemies, and shall in the
sight of all, call them to partake with him for ever of his glory, saying,
Come, ye blessed of my Father, etc. come in with me to the marriage; shutting
the door against all the rest, saying, Go, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
etc. Then would they be glad of any comfort from them, or by their means, as
Dives in hell seeks some refreshing by the help of Lazarus, whom formerly he
despised, but now sees in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.21,-23, 24. Thus in the
Book of Wisdom, chap. 5. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. the wicked, after their own
miserable end, are brought in honoring the righteous, whom formerly they
despised: For then shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the
face of such as have afflicted him, and made no account of his labors: When
they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at
the strangeness of his salvation, so far beyond all they looked for: And they
-- shall say within themselves, This was he whom we sometimes had in derision,
and a proverb of reproach. We fools accounted his life madness, and his end to
be without honor. How is he numbered among the children of God, and his lot is
among the Saints?

Reason. Gods promise,
Now whence is all this, but from God, the most just, wise and holy God, who
will not suffer such as honor him to want honor? If any man serve me (says
Christ) him will my Father honor, John 12.26. And (says the Lord) them that
honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. And commonly the greatest honor which one man can receive from
another on earth, is, when God makes a man's enemies acknowledge his virtues and
worth, or the favor and mercy of God toward him. and his own interest in his
peoples wrongs.
God being dishonored in his servants, seeks the repair of his honor by
repairing theirs.

wicked especially) to take heed of contemning, The wicked not to disgrace or
neglect Gods messengers,
persecuting, or any way disgracing Gods faithful servants, especially his
Messengers: such as truly serve him shall not want honor from God, who will
make thee, whoever thou art, restore to them that honor thou have sought to
deny them by thy disrespect showed them, or disgraces done them. Thou may
perhaps, ere thou art aware, if not willingly, lest they be made to seek unto
them in their distress:
(which were a mercy) yet be forced to do them honor in the day when God
visits thee (whether in mercy or) in justice. God may bring that anguish of
conscience upon thee, on thy deathbed or otherwise, that thou may be
forced, and find no peace till thou sendest for them, crave their pardon, beg
their prayers, seek their advice and counsel, acknowledge them (otherwise then
formerly thou thoughtest) the servants of God, and men in favor with him. Men
in fair weather throw stones or cudgels at the apple-or pear-or other
fruit-tree, unto and under which in a storm they fly for shelter. God can and
will so far honor his servants who are faithful to him, or, will they, nill
they, to see Gods love to them. Rev. 3.9.
as that their greatest persecuters shall either seek unto them and bow before
them, or at least see, and be forced to see that God loves them, and
acknowledge his wonderful dealings with them, and to say, The Lord has done
great things for them, Psalm. 126.2. as either now of late or never the
adversaries of Gods truth and people in England cannot but be forced inwardly
to confess: howsoever, they shall see it, though withal they be grieved,
gnash with their teeth, and so melt away: the desire of the wicked shall
perish, when the horn of the righteous shall be exalted with honor: Psalm
112.9, 10.

The faithful not to be discouraged with mocks or persecution:
mocked, neglected, and not accounted of; yea, it may be, persecuted, banished
or afflicted: Let them in their callings serve God faithfully and constantly,
and in and above all things seek Gods honor by well-doing in fincerity: Let
them live by faith, and by faith depend and cast themselves on Christ, and they
shall not want honor in the end: Let them do nothing in vainglory, or simply
to please men; and wether they preach, pray, or do ought else, whatsoever their
thanks be among men, God shall reward (and honor) them openly, Matthew. 6.5, 6.
Yea, as David answered Michal, And of the maidservants which thou have spoken
of, (upbraiding him that in their eyes he, as one of the vain fellows, uncovered
himself shamelesly) of them shall I be had in honor, God will see them
honored.
2 Samuel 6.20-22. so they may rest assured, that in the end they shall be
honored and acknowledged in their sincerity by those with whom their disgrace
was sought; when their disgracers, neglecting, or seeking to break covenant
with God, Mal. 2.2-9.
shall of God be made contemptible and base before all the people (of whom they
sought honor) even as they have not kept Gods ways, but have been partial in
the Law, or lifted up the face against the Law. And thus for the third
circumstance, To whom they said, Men and brethren, etc.

The fourth and last thing here considerable follows, What they said.

Men and brethren, What shall we do?

CHAP. XXIX. Showing what titles were given to the Apostles, what are usurped
by the Pope, etc.
4 ACcording to the order of the words in the Translation, 4 What said they
here.
we here observe and take notice first of a Compellation: Secondly, of a
Consultation.

1 A compellation, Men and Brethren.
The Compellation: Men and brethren, or, Men-brethren: Thus they style Peter
and the holy Apostles of Christ, and that without any offense either given by
them, or taken by the other. Here was not yet in use the title of Peter's
pretended successor, which by his claw-backs and flatterers is given unto him,
and kindly taken by him without any so much as a complementall refusal:
namely, Holiness, No Titles as yet of Holiness, Vicegod, etc. Anno 1514.
Vicegod, God on earth, or Divine Majesty, a title given to Pope Leo the tenth,
by one of his Secretaries in the last Lateran-Councel. And yet for complement,
I must recall my self; when, in deep and modest humility I find him to style
himself, as Noah styled his cursed son Ham the father of Canaan, Genesis 9.22-25,
26.
Servant of the servants of God, as Canaan was to be unto his brethren who were
blessed by their father; Roma tibi quondam Servi Domini Dominoru^, Servi
Servorum nunc tibi sunt Domini. The pride of the Pope under show of humility.
but indeed shows himself Lord of Lords unto them, and that more then the
heathen Emperors of Rome his Predecessors. A servant to Gods servants he may
call himself in a Court-complement; but indeed and in proof no otherwise then
some Courtiers use the phrase, Your servant Sir, to such as they endeavor to
undermine, disgrace and to destroy: or as Judas was Christ's servant when he
said, Hail, Master. He is such a servant of God, and of the servants of God,
that he opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Such a servant is he, that he advances himself
above all his brethren; 1. Above other Priests or Presbyters. 2. then Bishops.
3. Metrapolitans. 4. Patriarchs, His usurpations.
by usurping the name Oecumenicus, universal Bishop of the whole world. and 5.
Solus Pastor, the only Pastor or Shepherd: and 6. Master of all Christendom,
and over Kings and Emperors: And all this as Peter's Successor. Now if at this
time these titles had been on foot (which was after Christ's ascension, and
after he had given him and the rest all the commission and power he meant to
leave to the Pastors of his Church; yea and when by sending down the gifts of
the holy Ghost in that manner, he from heaven solemnly inaugurated them, and
showed his power by them, induing them with power from on high as he promised:)
I say, it had been a saucy boldness and high presumption in these Jews to have
used such homely terms, savouring so much of equality, Showing him not to be
Peter's successor, who was humble,
by giving no other titles of distance and difference then only Men and
Brethren. But we see neither Peter nor any of the rest disdained so to be
styled, either by these Jews, or by other Apostles, or yet Presbyters, whilst
he styles himself a fellow-Elder or Presbyter with them, 1 Pet. 5.1. and I
believe, if any such titles had been given him by any, which his said Successor
takes and assumes to himself, he would have rent his clothes, and taken them up
roundly, and in effect said unto them as he said unto Cornelius, Acts 10.25,
26. when falling down at his feet (as low as his toe) he took him up, saying,
Stand up, I my self also am a man. Thus was Peter in his own person; but being
personated by the Pope, he is no more a man, or no more a mere man, or barely a
man of God (which if it were so indeed, were a higher title then any he can
truly brag of; ^bat, Antichrist.
) but a God on earth, a Vice-god, a divine Majesty. Now this excessive pride
being made one of the characters of Antichrist in the place fore-quoted, we
need not seek that man of sin far; being so contrary and unlike both to Peter
whose successor he would be, and to Christ, whose Vicar he would seem; who
being indeed and truly God, equal with the Father, took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of man, becoming indeed true man, and
one who disdained not neither was ashamed to call us men, brethren, and to be
made like unto [us] his brethren, Heb. 2.11.

But let us turn our selves unto the true Successors of Peter, who (not
standing upon titles of honor, either of Vicegod, Holiness, or of Grace, Lord,
or the like) can with these great Apostles here, be content with the style of
Men and brethren, and that not only from themselves but from such as are their
hearers, and lay people, as they are called.

CHAP. XXX. God teaches us by men: with the Ground, Reasons and Use of the
point.
The first title,] Men. Doctr. God teaches us by Men.
Men.] MInisters, Pastors, Teachers, Evangelists, Prophets and Apostles, yea
Christ himself the great and only Prophet, the Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession; all these were men, of the same nature with our selves, though
withal Men of God; by whom it pleased God, according to his infinite wisdom
and mercy to us, to teach and instruct us men, and to make known unto us his
will and wisdom, whom accordingly he indueth with gifts suitable and answerable
to the present necessities of the Church, either immediately and
extraordinarily exciting, stirring up, enabling and sending them; or otherwise
calling, furnishing and placing them in a more ordinary way, and by usual and
external means.

He teaches us first by Christ his Son God-man, who, 1 By his Son in our
nature.
being made of a woman is also the son of man. So that howsoever God at sundry
times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets; yet in these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son, Hebr. 1.1,
2. not but that he spoke then also to them by him, who is the only Prophet,
and has been mediately or immediately the sole Prophet of his universal
Church on earth from the beginning. This is that Prophet whom the Lord opposes
to all that use divination, who is the only Prophet, unto whom we are to
hearken; and not to diviners, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 14, with 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
to all that observe times, to enchanters, witches, charmers, consulters with
familiar spirits, wizards, necromancers and diviners; and whom he promises,
saying by Moses unto the people, desiring that they might not hear again the
voice of the Lord, which when the Law was given was so terrible, that even
Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake: I will raise them up a Prophet from
among their brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and
he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him, etc. Hebr. 12.19,-21. by
whom only in our nature we come to see Gods glory:
Now that our chief or only Prophet should be a man like unto us was very
needful for us, seeing he as God is a light inaccessible, whom no eye can see
and live: his glory should over-whelm us, but that in Christ it is veiled and
clouded in his humanity, in which as in a glass he shows us the glory of his
Father, being the bright nesse of his glory, and the express image of his
person, Heb. 1.3. in whom only we come to see God, who otherwise is invisible,
1 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 1.14. We see him 1. In his goodness, mercy and grace, 1 In
his Goodness and Mercy.
in that God for our sakes should become Man: See Tit. 2.11. John 1.17. and
3.16. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10. 2. In his Justice, 2 his Justice.
not forgiving sin simply, but upon satisfaction made unto the same by man, 1
Cor. 15.21.3. In his Wisdom, 3 his Wisdom.
which appeased the strife between Justice, which called for vengeance on all;
and Mercy, which would have all saved: for It, or the Son, who is the Wisdom of
the Father, satisfies Justice, by allowing and requiring the punishment of man
(seeing man had sinned): and Mercy, in that he himself would become man, and
our surety. 4. In his Power; inasmuch as this Son of God in our weak nature, 4
his Power.
and as the son of man, and by dying would overcome sin and vanquish the devil.

Use. To bridle our curiosity.
Which may bridle our curiosity in prying into the secrets of the Godhead.

But now know, that Christ leaving us in person, has left only men his
deputies, to teach us the same and no other things then such as he taught them,
2. By men as substitutes to Christ. Why?
Matthew. 28.19, 20. Joh. 20, 21. As my Father sent me, so send I you, Ephesians.
4.8.11.

Now this he does 1. For his own glory; that such great works as are done by
their Ministry, as especially the conversion of souls, might not be ascribed
to such weak creatures, 1. For his own glory, 2 Cor. 4.7.
but to himself; Therefore says Paul, We have this treasure in carthen
vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God; and not of us.

2. For our good.
2. For his Churches good, that by our familiarity with men, of like affections
and sympathy, we might with more easiness learn, and with less terror hear
reproofs and threatenings.

Its a mercy that God does not teach us, 1. By his own immediate voice.
1. Gods own immediate voice, as in giving the Law, would make us exceedingly
fear and quake, as it did Moses. It is a mercy then that he speaks not to us
immediately with his own thundering voice, but by the voice of man: which as the
Israelites desired, so are we to be thankful for.

2. By Angels.
2. To teach us by Angels he thought it not so fit: seeing thence would arise 1.
Matter of terror and astonishment. 2. Danger of adoration.

3. By his Spirit alone.
3. To teach us immediately by his Spirit inwardly and in silence, would expose
us to Satan's illusions and deceits.

For these and like reasons, God is pleased to teach, instruct and convert his
Elect by the Ministry of man: First, and principally of his Son in our nature.
Secondly, by such Deputies as he has left, and daily raises up in his room.

This is of special use both for Ministers themselves, and for others.

1. Ministers being by nature men, Use 1. Concerning Ministers, who hence are
taught,
though by office men of God, must hence learn 1. Not to take upon them to
teach or do any thing in their own name, or to impose any point or article of
faith on the church* yea or ought else which directly binds conscience and
restrains it of that liberty which Christ in his word affords it. 1. To
speak and do all in Christ's name,
This only is Gods royalty and prerogative. We are men, and may err: Every man
is a liar, Romans 3.4. Our doctrine is to be tried, yet not by every private man's
fancy, but only according to the only rule and touchstone of truth, not in
their own.
the written word of God, which accordingly is to be searched. And if any speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isai.
8.20. For us Ministers, We must not preach our selves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. 2 Cor. 4, 5.
What? as many in word pretend, and perhaps inwardly so flatter themselves,
whilst they find their Bishoprics such burdens to them, and such of their
Clergy as will not, indeed cannot, yield to their injunctions, so far as to
master them; and to overcome by their sufferings? No, but truly and without all
court-complement, servants to the Church, doing what we do, heartily as to the
Lord, and not unto men, Col. 3.22, 23, 24.
and as serving the Lord Christ, as we expect any reward of him. Our office is
to do nothing in our own name being but men, yet as men of God, we must seek to
espouse you, 2 Cor. 11.2.
our hearers with Paul, not to our selves, but to one husband, and seek to
raise up spiritual seed to Christ our our elder brother now in heaven, which
is to be called not by our name, but by his.

2. To be humble, and not proud of their parts or gifts, being but men, Psalm.
49.2.
2. Ministers must hence learn humility, and not to be proud of any gifts or
graces, though it were revelations from heaven. We read of Ezekiel, that having
seen the glory of God in a vision, is presently upon it called son of man,
Ezekiel. 2.1, 2, 3. and the word is not Ish, which is the name of man in regard of
heat, valor, nobleness and dignity, nor yet Aenosh, which signifies sorry
man, or sorrowful, doleful, wretched, Psalm. 8.4. and 9.21. but Adam or
earthly man, Genesis 5.2. Psalm. 22.6. and 36.6. and 39.6. to put him in mind of
his original and end, vile,
that he was made of Adamah, the earth, and by birth vile, as being of the
dust, and that to dust he must again return, Genesis 2.7. and 3.19. and all this
to humble him, even as in like case, Paul had given or sent to him a thorn in
the flesh -- least he should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
revelations. 1 Cor. 12.2.4.7.
And doubtless the holiest, and ablest Ministers of Christ have some humane
infirmity and frailty not so thoroughly mortified in them here as they (with
Paul) desire to the same end, that they might be kept down and low in their own
eyes. Nay, they have being mortal men, and mortal.
but a few days of their prophecy to accomplish here on earth after which
when they have finished their testimony, they must be called to give their
accounts. So that, though the word of God spoken faithfully by them endures
for ever, yet they are but grass which withers, or at best, but the flower
thereof which falls away, 1 Pet, 1 24, 25. See Zech. 1.5, 6.

3. To be of tender affections and merciful,
3. Being men, They are taught to be compassionately affected toward such as
they see to be in misery, or in distress of conscience for their sins.
Therefore it is that it behoved, even the eternal son of God, (seeing he would
become a Prophet and surety to us) to be made like (that is true man like) unto
his brethren, as Christ was. Hebr. 2.17, 18. and 3.15.
that he might be a merciful and faithful high Priest -- for in that he
himself has suffered, being tempted he is able (yea and as willing) to succor
them that are tempted. For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points tempted like as we
are (yet without sin.) And such weak men he thought fit to leave behind him as
his substitutes. Which might induce those here in my text, the rather thus to
speak to the Apostles and say, Men and brethren, that according to that which
is implied in the name, they might the sooner and rather move them to
compassion as if they had said, Oh Sirs, though ye be men of God, yet being men
otherwise as we are, subject to like passions, take pity on us in this our
perplexed condition, and tell us what to do to be saved. and not to be like
savage beasts more then men, Jer. 5.1.
Thus humane and gentle should all men show themselves to others, even in that
they are men. But I believe, in some places especially, God may bid his
Prophets run to and fro, to see and know and seek in the broad places (of many
great cities) if they can find a man (not only a man of courage as there, that
executes judgment, and seeks truth but) that shows mercy and compassion
to men like themselves, in their afflictions, or otherwise in their
necessities. Many butchers and cooks may be found, who use men like beasts,
hating the good, and loving the evil, who pluck off their skin from off them,
and their flesh from off their bones, who also eat the flesh of Gods people,
and flay their skins from off them, by using men like beasts., Micah 3.2, 3.
and break their bones and chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as flesh
within the cauldron. Thus not only the Princes of Israel are charged, but the
Prophets also that (not only smite with their tongues, and verse. 5.
Jer. 18.18. but) bite with their teeth. Nay commonly such inhumanity and
savage usage of Gods people, is, if not practiced, yet set forward at least, by
such as would be thought men of God, Priests, Friars and Jesuits by whose
incitement the combination and bloody Massacre of the harmless Protestants in
Ireland has taken force, Massacre in Ireland by Papists, October. 23. etc. 1641.
and where are perpetrated and may be seen not the acts of men, but of beasts,
yea of Devils, from whom men that are good Christians, yea worse then beasts
would use them.
may expect as much mercy as from such bloody hel-hounds. I am sure more mercy
may be expected from savage beasts then from such men as are animated by the
spirit of the Beast and false Prophet. Which makes me remember a story of an
old Indian wife among the Americans, where Spanish cruelty did so far rage, as
that among other cruelties whereby they destroyed many millions of men, whilst
their conversion was pretended, they would hound great mastive dogs, trained up
and fed with man's flesh for the same purpose, to pull in pieces and devour whom
they pleased of the Indians; this poor old woman being sent on an errand with a
letter through the fields, presently a mastive dog used to devour, was sent out
and hounded after, to make his masters sport, in seeing the poor woman rent in
pieces by the dog, but she falling down before the dog, and according to her
silliness entreating her good master (so she called the dog) to spare her, for
she was going such an errand, the savage dog showed her more mercy then his
masters would have had him, and would not hurt the woman. Too much might be
said of such massacres, treasons, and attempts of treasons, of powder plots,
insurrections and other encouragement from the bloody doctrine of Priests and
Jesuits. Popish cruelties.
Whom it should be in vain to hope to move to more humanity by the title of
Men, seeing not only by their falling down before an Image of their own making,
but by such savage doctrine and practices, they forget that they are men, Isai.
46.5, 6, 7, 8.

4. Ministers being men, must not let God and Christ's honor rest with them.
4. Ministers, though men of God, yet being men, are hence taught not to take to
themselves more honor then is fit for them (such as has been named) if
through men's error or superstition it shall be given unto them. They may learn
that lesson from John the Baptist, who had the opportunity of being honored
and acknowledged as the Messiah or Christ, if being asked he had but said it;
yea from Peter who refused Cornelius his devotion in falling down at his feet,
and worshipping him, saying (as we have heard) Stand up, for I my self also am
a man, Acts 10.25, 26. And lastly from Paul and Barnabas, who being reputed as
Gods, and called by the name of heathenish gods, and when sacrifices were ready
to be offered to them, cried out, Acts 14.13, 14, 15. Sirs, Why do ye these
things, we also are men of like passions with you, etc. But does the Pope thus?
yea or did some other inferior Bishops thus, who could be content to have the
Popes title of Holiness (indeed gods true title and attribute) put upon them,
without rending his garment? Or should the best deserving among the Ministers
of Christ take Gods honor to themselves? or, if it be by flatterers given
them, should they let it rest with themselves? they may remember how King Herod
was eaten up with worms for so doing. And I know none who willingly so does
but the Devil, who among the heathen sought Gods honor and took it being
given, so becoming their god; seeking the like honor still in the person of
the Pope especially, as elsewhere more largely I show.

Secondly, for others: they are hence taught 1. As not to give flattering
titles unto man, Concerning others. Job 33.23, 24. 1. To honor Ministers as
men of God,
so not to deny to the true Ministers of Christ such honor and respect as is
due unto them as men of God. God will not have them despised as being men or
sons of men, and in regard of outward relations and respects in the world, as
birth, wealth, etc. oftentimes mean men; for so do proud and scornful men who
oppose their own temporal honors, birth, wealth, offices or dignities to Gods
word in such men's mouths; scorning that such as they term and account to be ex
faece plebis of the dregs of the people, and not worthy to sit at their table,
etc. should teach, reproove, or control them. No, God will have us look on
them as men of God, as his messengers and substitutes of Christ, doing that,
and executing the same office which Christ executed on earth, Romans 15.8.
being a minister of the circumcision, or of the Jews, and now would execute
if he were to live on earth. The name and office of Minister then is
honorable, and not to be slighted; neither is it by any so much scorned as by
the Ministers of Antichrist.

The honor to be done them that are truly faithful is, 1. To receive and hear
them as the Ministers of Christ, 1. By acknowledging them such. Gal. 4.14.
and so as Christ himself, as once the Galathians did Paul, and to receive the
word they teach, as the word of God himself, 1 These. 1.13. 2. By our obedience.
2. To obey them in the Lord, Hebr. 13.17. 3. By our love.
3. To love or esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, 1 These.
5.12, 13. 4. By affording them maintenance and double honor,
4. To honor them with double maintenance, especially such as labor in the
word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5 17.


In a word, God will not have his ministers wronged in their office, he will
maintain them in it, whilst they attend thereon. He has given a charge
concerning them, saying, Do my Prophets no harm. Being men, they are subject to
many wrongs and disgraces; and to take heed of wronging them.
but if any wrong or disgrace them, as, and because men of God, that is, in or
for their faithfulness, zeal, and conscionableness in their callings, God
himself will require it, and requite it, even as David avenged on King Hanun
the disgrace done his Ambassadors, so 2 Chronicles. 36.16. They so long mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy, or
healing.

2. To depend on the ministry of man,
2. That God is pleased to teach us by men, and that as is said, in great mercy
to us, we are all hence taught to acknowledge Gods ordinance, and to depend on
the ministry of men, his men, his faithful servants, Mal. 2.7. though not
without trial of them.
whose lips should preserve knowledge. And though such among men be rare, Job
32.22, 23, etc. and that there be false teachers, and some such as Paul
foretold told the Elders of Ephesus of, saying, Also of your own selves shall
men arise speaking perverse things, to draw Disciples after them, Acts 20.29,
30. who are to be tried by the rule of Gods established truth, as Deuteronomy. 13.1,
2, 3. Acts 17.11. 1 John 4.1. yet we are not to neglect the ministry of man;
as such do as depend, 1. On immediate revelations of the spirit without the
word or against it: For as we must not quench the spirit, and not on
revelations of the spirit, Or 2. of Angels. Or 3. of apparitions of the dead.
Or 4. on witches, etc.
so not despise prophesying, 1 These. 5.19, 20. 2. On Angelical revelations. 3.
On Apparitions of the dead, as Papists do, Luke 16.30, 31. -- They have Moses
and the Prophets, let them hear them, etc. 4. On diabolical Oraches, on
witches, south-sayers, against whose enchantments God has given us his son in
our nature and his substitutes; See Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. -- 14, 15. Isai. 8.19, 20.

CHAP. XXXI. Showing that Ministers are Brethren one with another, and with
their people: with Uses.
Brethren]
THis is the second title given by these humbled Jews, and not scorned by
these great Apostles. 2. The second Title here given; Brethren.
It might seem some boldness, if not sauciness (to some) that private men
should be so familiar with such eminent men and great Apostles, and I will not
say, what humane weakness would have done if these Apostles had appeared in
the silken, satin, golden habit of their pretended successors: And yet me
thinks, men of humbled spirits, and distressed in soul and conscience, would
hardly have given flattering titles, or much respected them the more for their
gay clothes. I dare say, A title too mean in these our days.
it would be thought want of good manners at least, if not sauciness and pride
in any of the Laity now to speak so to Peter's successors, though he should be a
King that should (in humility) call the Pope Brother. Pope Paul the fourth
would disdain that Appellation, who could at table publicly say, that he would
not have any Prince for his companion, but all subject under his feet, (which
he said, striking his foot against the ground.) But Peter here (his first
predecessor as he would have it) took no exception at men meaner then Princes,
yet accepted by Peter and the other Apostles.
who called them all brethren; by which kind acceptance of the title they show
how the men of God (though the greatest Apostles) should not only be content to
be esteemed of by the meanest of their hearers, And not to be disdained by Gods
Ministers now, 1 Pet. 5.3. who must behave themselves as brethren. First with
the people,
but to account of the meanest, as of their Brethren, and to show the same by
carrying them selves as tender shepherds to the flock, not as being lords, or
lording it over Gods heritage. Let them behave themselves as brethren, First,
with their flock: 1. By tenderness of affection and sympathy, learning the same
from their great master Christ Jesus, Hebr. 2.7. and 4.15. and from Paul, Gal.
6.1. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. 2. By love and good agreement, avoiding all unnecessary
suits, and jarres with such as they instruct, 1. By sympathy.
as they desire to see any good fruit of their labors among them: 2. Good
agreement.
yet they must also take heed of becoming, through too much or needless
familiarity with them (in good fellowship as they call it) Brethren in evil.

2. Among themselves.
2 Let them carry themselves also as brethren among themselves, as here, all
these Apostles agreed in one; and conversed lovingly together, which is not so
soon done as said; seeing, before the death of Christ some of these Apostles by
themselves and friends sought pre-eminence above their brethren, yea all of
them strove who should be greatest, though now upon our Saviors reproof of
them, and that they had all received the gifts of the holy Ghost, which taught
them humility, they carry themselves as loving brethren one toward another,
without envy or contempt one of another.

A reproof or discovery of some men's pride.
It were to be wished that it were so now adays, that pride or at least high
place and lordliness did not make some to disdain to account or call others (as
faithful it may be, and as painful in the ministry as themselves) their
brethren, unless perhaps with the distinction of brother or fellow-Presbyter,
least that brother should think himself a Bishop, though for Scripture- Bishops
he may be assured he is one, and as true a Chaplain of Jesus Christ, as some
other who carry a greater port on earth.

Here the Apostles took it not ill to be called men and brethren, as indeed
they were in a large sense brethren in that they were men: In what sense the
Apostles were Brethren to these Jews.
and of the same Country and Nation, and as now they were growing to be
brethren in affection and spiritual obligation as Christians. This was the
humility of the Apostles; and yet it was no pride in these humbled souls to
speak to them in the style of Men-brethren. But you will say, Whether beasts be
our brethren. Dr. F.
Are there any brethren that are not men? Yes, says one, if we will believe
the Legend of S. Francis: for he saluted ordinarily beasts when he met them, in
this manner, Brother Ox, brother Bear, brother Wolf. But this is a note
beneath Gamoth, and a degree below lowliness it self. I add, it is as much
under true humility, being a show and affectation of it in a proud Friar, as
the other is above it, in a proud Pope and Prelate.

Use as it concerns hearers. For the people. Dr. Featly on this Text. Egeon
Askew of brotherly Reconcilement, etc.
(For I list not enter upon the large discourse of Christian Brotherhood, the
distinctions of brethren, yea or yet the Exhortation to maintain such
brotherhood: Others have done it largely and learnedly, and I would not too
much burden my Discourse, which already is grown much bigger then at first
conception of it I conceived it would prove.)

Hearers are to conceive of their Teachers as brethren: and accordingly 1. To
be persuaded of their love and sympathy.
Let Hearers then conceive of their Teachers, being faithful especially, not
only as men (subject to like passions), but as brethren: Accordingly, let them
1 Be persuaded of their love (even when they do rebuke and reprove,) and of
their sympathy toward them in anguish of conscience, as of loving brethren:
neither of which these Jews could expect from their own Rabbis, the high
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, no more then Judas found from them.

2. To be more familiar with them.
2 Let them have (especially in like trouble of conscience) recourse more
familiarly to them by conference and craving their advice, even because they
are brethren; assuring themselves, that none but inhumane and disdainful men
will take it ill to be sought unto in such case. Where they have a faithful
Minister, they may confidently expect from him tender-heartednesse and
sympathy, and accordingly loving usage, as from a natural brother.

3. Not to despise them, though they themselves be great on earth.
3 Lastly, Great ones on earth, as well as others, are taught to honor good
Ministers as their brethren, and not to scorn or to account meanly of them, or
of their calling. They are our brethren, and so far our equals; the calling
being in it self as honorable, and they in regard of their calling, as any
other. Nay, they are to be respected and honored as our elder brethren, seeing
they come in stead of the most honorable in the Family, these being as elder
brethren.
even of the firstborn, Numb. 3.12. who, before the Levites were taken in
their steads, did minister to the Lord, as Exodus 24.5. The firstborn then even
among Lords and Dukes were to perform that office then; neither were it any
disparagement to their birth if so it were now: at least they should not, in
regard of the calling, despise their Brethren.

And thus for the Compellation: Now of the Consultation, in these words,

What shall we do?

CHAP. XXXII. Consultation of many about the good of their souls, is no
Conventicle, etc.
2 The Consultation: and how occasioned.
THese are words full as of sorrow and fear, (yet not without some hope, as
formerly has been showed); so of care and perplexity of spirit: They are now
convinced of their own guiltiness; they are forced to acknowledge that Christ
whom they crucified is indeed the true Messiah, exalted by the right hand of
God, to sit at the right hand of God, and to have shed forth this which they
did now see and hear, being now ready to make his foes (and who were they more
then his crucifiers?) his footstool, Acts 2.33, 34, 35. They, being by the
word also convinced hereof, apprehend wrath and damnation as most justly due
unto them: And therefore as men at their wits end, and as having no help in
themselves, they flee to the Apostles, and consult with them what they should
do to procure a pardon of their bloody sins, and how to flee from and escape
wrath; and in a word, how to save their poor souls, saying, What shall we do?
And the meaning is no other then that of the Jaylour, who in like case and
distress of soul, trembling, and falling down before Paul and Silas, said, --
Sirs, What must I do to be saved? Acts 16.29, 30.

1 Who consult.
1 Now in that they all, being many, ask saying, What shall we do? 1 For number,
they were many. A blessed conspiracy.
It notes 1. A blessed conspiracy in these young Converts, in that they
compass their teachers round about, and thus flock unto them for advice and
counsel; as others also did about John, Luke 3.10, - 12, - 14. and as you all
now that are attentive hearers, make semblance of. Thus to do (especially in
trouble of conscience) is no unlawful meeting, no Conventicle, no matter of
accusation; No Conventicle, nor combination in evil:
as such like meetings in rehearsing, calling to mind and examining the
conscience after hearing of the word, whether with their Teachers, or other
experienced Christians, have been made, by such as either can endure no such
meetings as wherein they themselves are not the speakers: or none but such as
their own are, in Taverns, Alehouses, Gaming-places, and the like, whereby
they may be justified by other men's like practice, which now, being so unlike,
exasperates the malice of the unsound and profane: who yet many of them will
also gather about their Teachers and Instructours; nor such as whereby the
wicked gather about their Ministers, either in hypocrisy,
but then it is in hypocrisy, with purpose and desire to catch and get matter
of accusation against them; and so the Scribes and Pharisees flocked to Christ:
At least, with no purpose or desire to obey or follow the wholesome instructions
of the word, but rather to scoff and jeer; as God of old told Ezekiel, saying,
The children of thy people still are talking against thee by the walls, and in
the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother
saying; Come, I pray you, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32, 33.
and hear what is the word that comes forth from the Lord. And they come unto
thee, and sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will
not do them; and so on. And as those other dissembling hypocrites in Jer. 42.1,
2, etc. 19, 20, 21. who, great and small flocked and came near to Jeremiah,
requiring by him of the Lord that which they meant not, not obeying the voice
of the Lord, nor doing any thing for which either they sent him unto the Lord,
or for which the Lord sent him unto them: even as many now adays seek advice,
in matter of their unlawful marrying, or otherwise, and yet never mean to
follow it, if it prove contrary to them and their former resolutions. Yea, if
this were all, it were not so bad; as when they hearing such things from the
faithful Ministers of Christ as please them not, or in rage and fury.
gather about them in fury and in rage, as the Jews dealt with Stephen, Acts
7.54, -57, 58. run upon them with one accord, and either stone them, or
otherwise by open insurrection, rebellion and massacring, put them, and all
that hold of the truth with them, to death. See also Acts 16.19, -22.

CHAP. XXXIII. That there is the same means of cure, in like case, for all
distressed in conscience.
2 For inward motive and end, they are directed to the same means by the same
Spirit.
2. IN that they being so many, do all with one accord seek to the same means,
it notes, that

There is the same work of the Word, and spirit of Compunction in all who are
truly touched in heart for sin. As it humbles all in sight of sin and misery,
so it heals by sending all to the same remedy, Note. There is the same work of
the word and Spirit, and the same means of cure generally for all.
even to the word, and the faithful Ministers of it; not to other means (such
as have been named): there being the same remedy (though as the case may
require, somewhat divesly to be applied, according to the rules and method of
spiritual physic) for all Converts and wounded consciences. So that the same
spirit working in all, has like effects (for the general) in all, 2 Cor. 4.13.

Use In like case to inquire and make use of other men's experiences.
Would any then, being wounded by the word, know how to find comfort and saving
direction? let him inquire how others in like case have found it, and let him
do accordingly. All find it as these all here did find it: They, being all of
them both touched and directed by the same Spirit, sought and found direction
and ease from the ministry of the word only, and not from any other men or
means, which they were well assured would afford them no help. The word only,
being faithfully dispensed, will fit all sorts and callings of men, it will
answer and resolve all their doubts and cases. Luke 3.9, 10, 11.
In such case then it will behove us to look into this and the like examples in
Scripture, and to inquire of such as having been in our case, how they found
comfort, what directions they followed. Other men's experience will be of great
profit to us, if we wisely make use of it. The reason is, because as Gods
promise is the same to all who are alike prepared and qualified to receive it,
so his dealing is alike with all, he not being partial. This made David
propound his experience to others, and say, The humble shall hear thereof, and
be glad. -- I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my
fears: They also looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not
ashamed, (saying) This poor man cried: Who? literally David; mystycally Christ
(but spiritually every humbled sinner) and the Lord heard him, and saved him
out of all his troubles. Whence the general is inferred, The Angel of the Lord
encampeth about (all) them that fear him, and delivers them, Psalm. 34.2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7.

CHAP. XXXIV. The chief care of Christians should be how they may save their
souls.
2 About what they consult.
A Second thing to be hence observed, is, about what they consult. Now in that
they all consult concerning so weighty a business as is the saving of their
souls, we may learn from hence, that

Note. Our chief care should be to save our souls.
The chief care of all and each of us ought to be concerning our souls, and how
we may save the same.

These here had never a serious thought of this main business till now that by
the word savingly taught and applied unto them they were convinced of their
sin, and thereupon apprehended Gods wrath as justly due unto them for the same.
Now they found they had souls to lose, which they never thought on seriously
before.

Why? and How? Our souls are lost,
Now this is the case of us all by nature; we are all in this same condemnation:
Our souls are already lost; we are all signified by the lost sheep, and lost
groat, as having first in Adam strayed from God, and lost him, his face and
favor, as also our selves: which we daily do more and more by our actual sins
against the Law, which bring us under the curse of the same: but especially
(whilst we speak of us Christians) by our impenitencie and unbeleef, which
bring us under the condemnation thereof. John 3.18.
By sins of the first sort we sell our souls, and bring our selves under the
curse and guilt of eternal damnation; which is by profaneness: But by sins of
the second sort, whereby we, through our negligence or wilfulness, make no use
of the means appointed in mercy, and afforded us of God in and by Christ, which
are faith in him, and only saved by repentance and faith in Christ,
John 3.16, -36. and repentance, Luke 13.1, 2, 3. we through impenitency and
infidelity, and so through our own default suffer our souls to perish eternally
in and through the guilt of sins, for whose redemption and salvation the
eternal Son of God in our nature paid a sufficient ransom in and by the price
of his own blood: so that whilst we make light account of Christ, we are in
the same condition of these Jews who crucified him (for we tread under foot the
Son of God, etc. Heb. 10.29.) before they came to see and be convinced of that
their sin: which when once they saw, they then (and not before) began to show
their care of saving their souls from wrath deserved, and of coming into a
better estate and condition by Christ. And doubtless, till we in like manner
see our own guiltiness, and the curse of God due unto us, and nothing but
certain damnation whilst we live in security, sensuality, unbelief and
impenitency, our souls and the salvation of them from wrath deserved, will be
the least part of our care.

through a sight of our misery.
Oh then, deer brethren and sisters, be all convinced (and the Lord in mercy
convince you) of your lost condition, of the damned and desperate case in which
you all are whilst you live in your sins without hearty sorrow or repentance,
and without true faith in Christ, who came to seek and find that which is lost.
Now till you find and feel your selves lost even in the midst of your greatest
earthly happiness, and abundance, you will but go on in a secure course of your
voluptuousness, worldliness, profaneness, or at best of a civil life and moral
righteousness, to the everlasting and certain perdition and irrecoverable loss
of your precious souls. The careless security of many at this day does
evidently show in what a damnable and desperate condition their souls are in.

You now both see in part how your souls may be saved, (namely, if upon sight
and sense of the loss thereof, you seek by faith and repentance to Christ the
Savior thereof) as also why you are to show your greatest care to save the
same. Why? It is already lost by sin original and infinite actual sins; and
shall irrecoverably be lost and damned, if in time, out of a deep sense of your
damned condition, you do not cry to God for mercy and forgiveness. So that our
perishing is from our selves.
God has now put the price into your own hands, and if you have no heart to
purchase to your self that which is already purchased for you by Christ, and
shall be given and effectually applied to you upon your faith and repentance; I
must then say, as God says to impenitent ones, Hos. 13.9. Thy perishing and
destruction is of thy self; thou have destroyed thy self, and that through thy
wilful ignorance, carnal security, self-confidence and bold presumption.
Therefore, says the Lord to such impenitent ones, Turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11. Let you chief
care then be to save your souls (as undoubtedly it would be, Exhortation to
show greatest care to save and gain our souls,
if you were but once in straits of conscience as these were here, or as the
converted Jaylour was:) and that the rather, because if it be lost, all is lost
with it, God, Christ, life and salvation, our selves: And what shall it profit
a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Mark 8.36.
Where we see it is a precious soul, seeing the soul is 1 Precious.
more worth then the whole world; and therefore would not be sold, or yet
hazarded for any thing of the world, whether wealth, honors, offices, favor
of men, liberty, friends, or life it self, in case we cannot hold both: 2 It is
but one.
yea, it is but one soul; and when it is lost, we have not a second or third to
lose: here is no place then for had I wist. 3 Our own.
And that one soul is our own soul; we may lose and forgo much of the world,
yea the whole world it self, and be no losers by it; it is none of ours, and
losing it, we lose nothing that is ours: But losing the soul, we are undone for
ever, we so also lose our selves, and are cast-awayes, Luke 9.25. and what have
we more? As then men in other things show the greatest care of their own horse,
house, child, etc. so should they much more regard and have care of their
precious souls, because nothing on earth is more theirs then their souls. Now
the soul is lost by selling, pawning, and by careless keeping of it: Take heed
of all these. Who lose their souls: and how. 1 The profane sell it outright.


1. The profaner sort sell themselves and their souls right out for a little
sensual and sinful delight, for unlawful gain by oppression, lying,
defraudation; yea, and so do such as (when Christ and the world come in
competition, as in times of trial) rather then lose their places, offices,
liberty, credit with men, by being accounted fools, or singular, let
profession, Christ, soul and all go. A goodly exchange!

2 Such as defer repentance pawn it, but never redeem it.
2. Presumptuous sinners and procrastinatours, who put off repentance till
afterward: these pawn their souls for the like worldly and sinful things,
hoping in time by their repentance in old age, sickness, and hour of death to
redeem the same: but indeed find themselves to be deeper in debt with God then
before, and less able; and so forfeit and quite lose it.

3 Formalists and civil men lose it by carelessness.
3. Careless and secure sinners, formal men, who rest and take up with bare
performance of duties, and rest in them; or with a false and presumptuous faith
and outward righteousness: these lose their souls through mere sloth and
negligence, through want of serious and strict examination of their ways,
courses, yea, righteousness and (seeming) graces, so suffering Satan to cheat
them of their souls, and their own deceitful and false hearts to betray them
into the hands and power of the Devil.

None of these as yet it seems are so inwardly touched or pricked in heart, so
truly apprehensive of their own sins and of Gods wrath, as these here in my
Text, who could rest in nothing, till they had the state and safety of their
souls secured to them, or were sufficiently directed what course to take and
follow, that they might be at peace with God, and save their souls.

CHAP. XXXV. How such as God will save must be qualified: and first, that they
must question their estate, and shake off security: with Uses.
3. In that they thus do consult, we see how those must be qualified whom God
will save.
NOw thirdly and lastly from this their consultation with the Apostles before
they were truly or thoroughly converted or brought to Christ, or at least saved
by him, we may take notice how all they must be qualified whom God will
convert and save, which will appear especially in three particulars; which as
they are effects and signs of one truly humbled, we have already considered and
showed. We will now consider them as so many useful observations.

1. Observation, They must consult and show their care of the main.
1. We may hence infer, That those whom God means to save, he moves to show
care about the estate of their souls, and in their straits to deliberate what
to do, and so to come to some resolution.

So did these here.

There is little good to be expected from men's casting down, if in distress of
mind, they consult not seriously about their estate. Nay generally, Why?
men must show themselves very careful and solicitous that would walk worthy
of God, and attain to life and salvation.

Rashness does nothing well. Nothing, no not in earthly matters of any moment
is well done without care and consultation; every man's experience will tell him
this, Ecclus. 37.16.

To condemn the careless,
So that we may easily see what to judge of secure and careless livers, who
without all care or fear, doubt or distrust of their spiritual estate, pass
their time and leave all to God, or to the last, not knowing or caring much
either what estate they are in for the present, or in what condition they shall
die; they hope well, and that's all: or else they cast all upon Gods
Predestination, and conclude to the certain hazard of their souls, that all
their care is needless, no care of theirs can alter Gods purpose. These men
overlook Gods word, (which is their only rule) and so by prying beyond the
Moon, especially such as cast all upon Gods predestination.
cast away their souls carelessly and desperately, by neglecting the means and
course which God would have them take and use. It is God indeed that saves us,
and that according to the counsel and purpose of his own will: But he saves by
means which he will have us to use, and on which only to expect a blessing
from him, and so he calls on us to save our selves. Save your selves, says
Peter here to these, from this untoward generation, Acts 2.40. Now the means
he had showed them before in answer to this their question: Repent and be
baptized, etc. v. 38. So, he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved,
Mark. 16.16. So, Believe and thou shall be saved, said Paul to the Jaylour,
Acts 16.31. And, We are of them that believe to the saving of the soul, Hebr.
10.39. So, God will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of
the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. We are saved by hope, Romans 8.24. We are saved by well
doing and by obedience, as Noah by faith obeying God; and by perseverance in
the same, Hebr. 11.7. He that endures to the end shall be saved, Mark. 13.13.
To what end is all this, if we be not to show care to save our selves? may we
at our pleasure neglect baptism, Means of salvation must be used.
the knowledge of God according to his word, repentance, faith, hope, new
obedience, and perseverance in the same, and yet look to be saved? or if we
carefully labor to do and observe all these, shall we not undoubtedly be
saved? Does not God say in effect to us as Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.15, 16.
Moditate on these things, give thy self wholly to them, -- take heed to thy
self, -- continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall save thy self. See 2
Pet. 1.5.6. etc. 10. Such as are saved (being capable of the means) are brought
by the word, to see their need of salvation, to apprehend nothing but wrath as
their just desert, and accordingly in doubt and fear of their estate to use all
diligence to avoid and escape the same. O generation of vipers, says the
Baptist Mat. 3.7. to the Pharisees and Sadduces that came to his Baptism, who
has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? The Lord looks that men being
warned especially, God requires this care in those he will save,
should in care to their souls, question themselves concerning their estate and
doings; but in vain in respect of too many: I hearkened and heard (says the
Lord by Jeremy, Jer. 8.6, 7.) but they spoke not aright; no man repented him of
his wickedness, saying, what have I done? Every one turned to his course, as
the horse rusheth into the battle. This is too harsh a work for them, and loath
they are to sift into their former courses; they account it a trouble and
torment, and loath they are (with the Devils) to be tormented before their time.
In a foolish pity and self-love to themselves, they cast off all care, and
whatsoever might unsettle them in their false peace; and so live at all
adventures with God, and (indeed) contrary unto him. Levit. 26.21.
And all this is because they never truly were in straits of conscience for
their evil ways, nor will be convinced of their damned condition, and so they
wilfully run blindfolded, and headlong to their own perdition; their security
being a certain sign, nay, a cause and certain forerunner of their ruin:
Whereas when God will bring home a wandering sinner, he gives him an heart to
suspect himself, to question his estate, course of life, and doings, as thus;
What is this I have been doing all my life time hitherto, and that they
question themselves.
I was made by God for God himself and his glory; but have I lived to him and
to his glory, or rather not to my self? how have I spent my time? what good
have I either done to others, or got to mine own soul? what glory have I
brought to God? Oh unprofitable wretch! how have I spent my precious time in
vain in the service of my lusts, of the devil, and of the world? how may I
redeem my lost time? what am I now doing? what course of life is this I follow?
what will be the end of it? is it agreeable to Gods word? is it such as becomes
the Gospel of Christ? wherein differ I from a Reprobate? If I were now to die,
where is my comfort? in what condition (without flattering of my self) should I
die? I may commend my soul into Gods hands, but how do I know whether he will
receive it or no? seeing no unclean thing shall ever enter that holy place.
Alas! my case is woeful, What shall I do? Thus God deals with his. But where
men never suspect or question their course of life, The want of which an evil
sign, and a mark of a formal professor only.
their estate and doings, but take up at best with a civil life, heartless
service of God, formal performance of duties, resting in the same, never
questioning whether they be done in true obedience to God, and to Gods glory;
or whither they tend, whether they gain more of Christ thereby, and get more
acquaintance with God, more assurance of his presence with them etc. there is a
certain sign of a secure soul, and of one going on in the ways of death,
especially if withal they from their duties secure themselves, take God bound
to them, so far as to be taken to do them wrong, if upon their hypocritical
fastings and other duties, he do not see, and show himself to take knowledge
thereof, or to reward them, Isai. 58.2, 3. and if in outward show and
profession, (whilst their lives are unreformed and unholy) they seem to lean
upon the Lord, saying, Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us,
Micah 3.11.

But do thou whosoever thou art, labor first to see and to be sensible of thy
sin of Gods wrath, To instruct all to be careful, and accordingly,
and then show thy care to come out of it. As the prickings and woundings of
thy spirit are, so will be thy care to seek or get into a better condition: And
first consult wisely what course to take for mercy and pardon of thy sins, 1.
Wisely to consult.
for peace and reconciliation with God. 2. Seriously to resolve,
Secondly come to a serious resolution and full purpose of heart to save thy
soul, whatsoever it cost thee, and accordingly to break through all lets,
scoffs, disgraces, nicknames, and to part with every lust, to deny thy self in
all thine own ways, in a word, to buy heaven with loss, and not to slick
with God for any thing,
and forgoing of all thy sins, how gainful, how advantageous, how contentfull
soever they have been or are unto thee. In this case of a troubled conscience,
and when God begins once to show thee thy danger, to parley with thee, and to
give thee any the least hope of acceptance, pardon and life, stick not with
him, stand not upon any terms, conditions, exceptions, or reservations
whatsoever; Luke 9.57, 58, 59, 60, 61.
come off freely like a frank chapman, lose not such a bargain for a little
more, like some faint chapmen who having a good bargain before them, perhaps
cheapen the wares, but ding and still expect some abatement in the price, and
so for not coming off freely, lose all. Remember how it was with that young
man, who left Christ because he could not enjoy him and his wealth too, Mat.
19. Think of King Agrippa almost persuaded to be a Christian, but because he
was not altogether so, he wholly missed of Christ and of salvation. Therefore
so show thy care, as not to remain hovering, but come to some through
resolution. Thousands of souls perish, who yet might seem not far off from the
kingdom of heaven.

but to break through all lets
True, when once thou beginnest to consult about thine estate, Satan and thine
own lusts will plead hard with thee; thou can no sooner begin to mistrust
thine own courses, to question thine estate, to think of getting into a safer
way, which Satan shall object,
but Satan (afraid and loath to lose thee) will make use of all his wiles and
stratagems, and of all likely ways and means (too many here to mention)
whereby he might either detain thee, making thy former ways lovely or not so
odious to thee; or bring thee back again to former bondage, as Pharaoh would
have done the Israelites, by pursuing thee with fears and terrors, presenting
to thee a red sea of afflictions and dangers, and nothing but want, hunger and
thirst, fiery Serpents, giants to encounter withal, in a word, disgraces,
fire, and faggot, and death it self by one means or other. And what marvel?
Christ himself tells thee before hand of so much, and to cast the worst at first.
Matthew. 10.16, 17 18, 19, - 21, 22, - 37, 38, 39. and Mark. 8.34, 35. and would
have thee aforehand to cast, and count the cost; Luke 14.26, 27, 28. and to
consult verse. 31. So says he, Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all
that he has, (that is in readiness of affection, and actually also, in case he
be called thereunto, which all are not) he cannot be my Disciple, ver. 33.
Christ then looks for such followers and converts* as shall both wisely
consider and foresee what may befall them in their Christian course, and
consult with themselves whether they be able and willing to undergo such
hazards for him; lest we else become losers in the end.
and also stoutly resolve, if need be, to forgo any thing according to Gods
will and call; as being also told on the one hand, that otherwise they cannot
be his disciples, Mark 8.34, 35, 36, 37, 38.
and that he that will save his life shall lose it; and then what shall it
profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? and on
the other hand, that whosoever shall lose his life for Christ's sake and the
Gospels (if it come to that) the same shall save it: and whosoever shall
confess Christ before men, him will Christ also confess before his Father
which is in heaven, Matthew. 10.32.

Resolution is needful.
Now these things, this necessity, these different issues considered, and by due
meditation and consultation pondered, we see that Resolution is most needful;
and that whatsoever conflicts within, or temptations from Satan without, would
stand in our way, cannot otherwise be overcome but by firm resolutions and full
purpose of heart for the present, and by answerable performance and obedience
(both in things to be done and suffered) afterward. And where this consent and
resolution of heart is (without deceit, or trusting to our own strength) it is
accepted for the present, and such may assuredly hope to find mercy; as we see
in the Jews and Gods promise to them, Isa. 1.16, -- 19. as also in David, Psalm.
32.5. and in the Prodigal, and in Gods performance with them, Luke 15.18.

CHAP. XXXVI.
SECT. 1. Such as are converted and saved must seek salvation out of
themselves. Where largely of self-denial. But first, That men by sin bring
themselves into great straits.
2 Observation, They who are saved must seek salvation out of themselves.
NOw secondly, In these Converts thus consulting we see, That those whom God
will save, must, by self-denial, seek salvation out of themselves, and not
stand upon any thing in themselves. They being pinched in conscience in the
straits thereof, and at their wits end, not knowing what to do as of
themselves, fly wholly out of themselves, consult and advise with the Apostles
of Christ, saying, As did those here.
What shall we do? being further ready to do whatsoever they in the name of
Christ should direct them unto, without any reservation, exception or respect
to themselves in their name and credit, in their ease, delights, liberty,
wealth, friends, earthly hopes or contentments whatsoever, as finding now that
hitherto they in rejecting Christ had but kicked against the pricks, and made
him an enemy to them who is the Lord of Lords, and Judge of the whole world:
hereof they are now convinced in their consciences, and seek help and counsel
how they may obtain his favor and pardon. but as the Priests and Pharisees did
not,
Thus did not the chief Priests and Pharisees; who, convinced of Christ's mighty
power and Godhead, whereby he did great works, specially in raising the dead,
and particularly Lazarus, who had been dead four days; yet they acknowledged
him not, neither sought his favor; but standing upon their own wisdom,
righteousness, and holiness (which they would not seek from him) as also upon
their own power and authority, though, gathering a Council, they could say,
What do we? who consulted,
for this man does many miracles; yet their counsel was for to put him to
death, John 11.39, -- 47, -- 53. Whereas, if they had been as soundly convinced
as these here in my Text, to put Christ to death,
they would not only have asked, saying, What do we? and thereby have seen the
desperate madness of their doings, in opposing him, and been sorry and humbled
for it, as these here were when they considered what they had done in
consenting to Christ's death, and so saw the vileness of their doings; but they
would with these here also have given over their own counsels, seen their own
folly, denied themselves, and asked, not to seek salvation by him.
What shall we do to be saved from his wrath whom we have so hated, blasphemed,
even against the light of our own consciences, and sought to destroy? No, they
were justly denied the grace to deny themselves, who against the light of
conscience, yea of the holy Ghost, opposed their Savior. Whereas it was a
mercy to these here, first to be convinced of their sin, then to be driven into
such plunges and straits as not of themselves to know what to do, especially to
deny themselves withal so far as to seek and submit absolutely to such
direction as should be given them by these Apostles.

A Note, previous to the other. Men by sin bring themselves into inextricable
straits, till God show and give the issue.
Now before we prosecute the Observation formerly made, let this as it were by
the bie, be noted, How sin (our own and others) brings us often into great
straits, so that we shall not be able to know either what to do, or say, or
choose, or think: So that if Gods mercy did nor succor us and show an issue, we
should be quite swallowed up of despair. Thus was it here: Men and brethren,
what shall we do? Where they are as men distressed, grievously and inwardly
pained, whose sores throb and rage; or as men environed with danger, or ready
to drown, crying out, Help, for the Lords sake, we are ready to perish, and
know not how to help our selves: Peter gives them vent by breaking the sore, by
further pricking it, calling them to repentance and faith; Repent, says he,
etc. So when the Jaylour, in like distress and straits, cried out, Sirs, what
must I do to be-saved? Paul delivers him out of his straits; Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy house. Thus faithful
Ministers (as sent of God) afford succors, and, as it were, reach out the hand
to draw distressed souls out of the pit and gulf of dangers. Its an easy thing
to throw a stone, a jewel, or a man's self into a pit, but the great difficulty
is how to get it or him out again: This, in the case of sinners requires help
from heaven, and such was the estate of all mankind through the sin of our
first Parents (which was so easily and with delight committed) that unless God
had become man, Its an easy thing to destroy a man's self, as we see in the
fall of Adam,
man could never have known what to have done, no more then the Devils now, who
being left to themselves, perish without hope. Now, and in our selves.
our case being (for any help we can make our selves) alike desperate, we yet
come not, through the hardness of our hearts and our insensibleness, God only
must save us by convincing us of our ill condition.
of wrath due to it, and of our own impotency and inability to help our selves.
And Gods course is, before he save from sin and wrath his elect, to let them
see their own case and helpless condition: only in that, and in all other
temptations afterward, he is pleased to make a way to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. by
opening some door of hope to them, but that wholly out of themselves. As here,
They are at their wits end, in themselves helpless; only God lets them
apprehend some possibility of help in and from him, and moves them to seek
direction from his Ministers, which following they are delivered from their
straits and fears, and brought into a blessed condition.

Use. See what we get by sin, and sinful courses and evil men.
But see hence and learn what we get by sin, by such courses, suppose of
unlawful gain, rapine and wrong, as in King Ahab, and Judas; of intemperance
and pleasures, as in Esau so greedy after pottage, and Baltazzar in his cups;
of revenge, hatred and violence, as in Cain, etc. and by such companions as
tempt us and draw us into sin: It and these courses, other men's temptations and
allurements, with our own corruptions and lusts, bring us into a snare, into
straits, into a state of perdition, They bring us into straits, and there leave
us.
and there leave us to wrestle with the wrath of an angry God, with the terrors
of hell, with millions of Devils ready to accuse us, and with the hellish
affrightments of a convicted and tormenting conscience. This is the best that
sin can or will bring us unto. Only if God help us out (of whose help, yet
sinning we are not, neither can presume) his mercy is to be the more magnified
by us. Now the way by which God gives an issue, God only gives the issue by
giving repentance, etc. as in David,
is, by repentance, faith, confession of sin, prayer, self-condemning and
self-denial, punishment of offenders; judging our selves and others, with
reformation of things amiss; as we see here in these Jews, and in the Jailer:
so also in David, who through his pride and folly in the needless numbering of
his people, 2 Samuel 24.14, 17, 18.
was brought into a great strait; I am said he, in a great strait, he knew not
what to do, what to choose: yet he finds a good issue by his casting himself
upon God and his mercy, by his confession of sin, 1 Chronicles. 21.13.16*17.
and prayer for himself and his people, joined with fasting and sackcloth, by
rearing an Altar, and offering of sacrifice, as the Prophet Gad directed him.
See this also in Joshua, who through the sin of Achan, in Joshua.
with the whole host of Israel, is brought into mavelous straits, whilst the
men of Ai prevailed against them, Josh. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. Alas, O Lord God, -- what
shall I say, when Israel turns their backs before their enemies, etc. What
shall I say, either to thee O Lord, whom doubtless we have offended, though as
yet I know not wherein? Or to this people, to whom I ever promised good success
and victory in thy name? or to the enemies whose mouths I cannot stop from
blasphemies? or to my self in answer to mine own doubts concerning thy truth
and promises? Yet God gives him an issue also, Get thee up, (for he with his
clothes rent, with the Elders of Israel, was fallen upon his face before the Ark
of the Lord until the eventide) wherefore lie thou upon thy face? Israel
has sinned, -- I will not be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed
from among you, etc. This done God was appeased.

But now, where in such straits and convictions of conscience men do not
betake themselves to such like courses of repentance, Impenitent persons
exclude themselves from mercy,
faith, prayer, etc. but think to wrestle it out by their own strength or
other means, they shut the door of mercy against themselves, and cast
themselves into straits inextricable, and such as wherein they perish; as the
forenamed Cain, who in such straits built him a city, unto which, but not unto
the Lord, he betook him for safety; and as Judas who in like case sought to the
High Priests, but not to Christ for mercy; and in others, especially at the
last day, when sinners shall be speechless, and seeing Christ in glory and as
their judge, shall not know either what to say or do, or whether to flee from
his presence. Nay, even in this life, when evil men will not flee to God by
repentance, confession, faith, and not repenting,
amendment, etc. and so serve his providence and make way for his mercy, they
not only put themselves, they put God (willing to save them) into straits, as
not knowing what to do unto them,
but (be it spoken with reverence) God himself to some stand, so that he (being
loath they should perish) knows not what more to say or do unto them, (in mercy
especially and so as may stand with his glory, who will not save men in their
sins) unless he should utterly destroy them: So God to Ephraim and Judah, O
Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for
your goodness is as a morning cloud, Hos. 6.4.
and as the early dew it goes away. And may not inlike manner, the Lord
complain of our unto wardness, unfruitfulness and iniquity, saying, What could
have bin done, or what can I do more to my vineyard? with his honor and
holiness,
What can I do more with my honor, to you who so long have abused my mercy, not
feared my threats, made light account of my word, smothered checks of
conscience, out-wrastled a while, to the stifling of the spirit, your fears,
doubts and inward anguish, by your own means; unless I should utterly destroy
you, seeing you, by self-denial, and going out of your selves wholly, will not
seek your help and salvation from me? And assuredly dear brethren, seeing your
sin has brought you into such a distressed condition as that all the world
cannot help you, if God in mercy help you not; unless damn them.
and that again, by your presumption, and bold trusting to your selves, and
security and self-confidence you bar up Gods mercy and his power against your
selves; I say, know it assuredly that mercy it self shall never save you, till
or unless, you in sense of your hellish and slavish condition under the power
of sin and wrath, and acknowledgement of your own inability, and by an absolute
denial of your selves, do seek help and salvation out of your selves, in God
only, according to the direction of his word and faithful Ministers and
dispensers of it, and from the power of his saving grace. So did these here.
And so I return to the Observation propounded, Those whom God will save, must
by self-denial seek salvation out of themselves.

SECT. 2. Why we are to deny our selves and all goodness in our selves in the
matter of Salvation.
YOu perhaps will say, did these here in the Text so? Or did the Jailer so,
when he asked, What must I do to be saved? Quest. Did these Jews seek
salvation out of themselves
It seems they are all for doing and works; and that they sought, though the
way of salvation from others, yet the cause of it in themselves and in their
own doings: What shall we do? I will not deny but that generally men seek their
own good by their own doings: when they so speak of doing?
they of themselves by nature know no other way, and are ignorant of Jesus
Christ and his righteousness, and so seek righteousness not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the Law, Romans 9.32.
as did the Jews, whilst they stumbled at Christ. For so according to that
condition at the first, even in nature entire did the Covenant run; Men not
knowing Christ, commonly and naturally, seek their own good from their own
doings,
but more expressly afterward, when the Moral Law was given to the Jews, Do
this and thou shall live. Which condition yet was in the true intent of it for
conviction, and to show man his unrighteousness and impotency, and so to
prepare him for Christ when he should be made known unto him, unto whom
accordingly, even in the time of the Law, men had recourse in the promise, and
by their legal sacrifices all of them types of Christ: and from the first
condition of works, which yet was for conviction, and to prepare them for
Christ,
so that being in their consciences convinced of their sins, and of their just
desert of death, they betook themselves (those I mean who understood what they
did) by faith and repentance to their sacrifices as types of Christ, testifying
their self-denial, confession of their guiltiness, and their faith in Christ,
by presenting the sacrifice to the Priest to die in their stead, so taken by
the wisest,
by laying their hand upon the head of the same, as it were so translating
their guiltsness to it. But most through their ignorance and error offered
their sacrifices without respect to Christ, though much mistaken by most, who
rested in outward works,
rested in the bare work done, (without says, repentance or renovation of
their lives) made God beholding to them for their pains and cost, and in a word
sought their justification therefrom, as Papists (in great part at least) seek
to be justified by works. This I will not say but might be the meaning of that
young man who came to Christ saying, Good master, what good thing shall I do
that I may have eternal life? Mat. 19.16, 17. and Christ to convince him,
answers him accordingly -- If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments: And of those in John, Joh. 6.28. What shall we do, that we
might work the works of God? yet these here did not so,
But we cannot conceive that these here, (yea or any truly touched in
conscience for sin) did any whit aim at or trust to any works or worth of their
own: No, who, being convinced of their guiltiness and danger,
they are now and not till now convinced of their sin of crucifying Christ, are
afraid of his power and justice, and seek nothing more then his favor and
pardon; only they know not how to obtain it (conceiving it a thing not wholly
impossible,) therefore finding and seeing no help in themselves, either from
any worthiness or goodness, renounce themselves, and seek direction from the
Apostles,
wisdom or power of theirs, they renouncing themselves in all these, seek
direction from the Apostles, saying, What shall we do? as conceiving God would
not deal with them as with stocks, or save them unwillingly, but by directing
them to that way and course, whereby they might attain to his favor, not
limiting God to the condition of works, (which thus they confess in effect
were none good in them, seeing their ill deeds put them into this perplexity,)
in all self-denial:
but seeking pardon and life some other way, unto which they should be
directed, being resolved to follow such directions given them by the Apostles
of Christ, (who knew his will and mind) though it were with the loss of all,
name, credit, with men, wealth, who are directed
liberty, yea (temporal) life it self, and that they were enjoined any thing
though never so hard, harsh to the flesh or hazardous. to faith and repentance,
Therefore as our Savior directed those Jews to says in him, saying to their
demand. Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God that ye believe on him whom he has
sent, and John tells us, This is his commandment, 1 John 3.23.
that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. So Paul directed
the jailer, and Peter here these Jews, to faith, baptism and repentance,
things to be done, yet not barely at works, but as leading to Christ,
though not barely to be rested in as works, but as they lead to Christ, being
sanctified of God to that end, and all of them implying self-denial. And it is
Gods manner to bring men to despair in themselves before they can hope in him,
to throw away all their own works and righteousness as so many Idols, and to
say with Ephraim, (repenting) Hos. 14.8. What have I to do any more with Idols?
And with Paul, Acts 9.6. (who also at his conversion asked the like question,
Lord, what will thou have me to do?) Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. What things were gain to
me, those I accounted loss for Christ -- for whom I have suffered the loss of
all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in
him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, Reasons why we
must deny our selves in matter of salvation especially.
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith. And good reason for it, he seeks (as our good so) his own honor
thereby. And therefore injoynes us in our Ministry (by which men are converted
and saved) to convince men, ( to make them know (and acknowledge) all their
abominations, Ezekiel. 16.2. to beat them out of themselves, to take them off
their own bottoms and roots, that so we may ingraffe them into Christ the true
Vine; 1. Gods glory even that of his free grace.
in a word, by the Law to make them know their sin, and impotencie, that
(whether he save or pass them by) yet every mouth might be stopped, and all
the world may become guilty before God, Romans 3.19, 20. to 26. (or subject to
the judgment of God) and that their justification may be acknowledged to be
freely by grace, and not at all of works.

And as God on his part will have it thus for his own glory, even the glory of
his own free grace, Ephesians. 1.6. so it is fit that we, as we desire or expect
the salvation of our souls, do seek it out of our selves, and that for these
two reasons;

2. We are so to do, because 1. All the causes of salvation are without us.
Acts 16. Ephesians. 2.8.
First, All the causes of salvation are without our selves. 1. God the Father is
the author of it. 2. Christ the purchaser. 3. The Holy Ghost the applier and
perswader of the heart. 4. The Word preached, the outward means which God
sends, whither and to whom only he pleases. And 5. Faith the instrument
whereby we lay hold on salvation and on Christ, yet it is the work of God, Joh.
6.29. And his gift which we have not by nature, or of our selves, but by the
mighty working of his power, Ephesians. 1.18, 19.

2. It is not in man to direct his steps, neither is the way of man in himself,
Jer. 10.3. Our wits are incapable of heavenly mysteries, 1 Cor. 2.14. 2.
Because of our natural ignorance and impotency to save our selves.
Our wisdom foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20. Our reason enmity against God and
his Law, Romans 8.7. Our own thoughts and purposes evil, Genesis 8.21. Our
knowledge and affections brutish, Jer. 10.14. Psalm. 73.22. Our new birth is not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God,
Joh. 1.13. 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25.
For all flesh is grass, and all the grace thereof as the flower of the field,
etc. So that we must be quite turned out of our selves, and be born again, Joh.
3.3. and become as little children, Mat. 18.3. else we cannot see the Kingdom
of God. Our new birth is a new Creation, and that is properly a motion from
nothing or not-being, to something or to a being. Now Being is double, Our new
birth is a new Creation,
it is either a Being of nature, or a Being of grace; each (respectively) of
nothing, as it is taken negatively. But man, and before it we, the best are
nothing, both negatively,
in respect of his Being of grace, since the fall and through sin in which he
is dead, and that in all powers and faculties, is nothing, First negatively, (I
mean not in regard of substance either of soul or of faculties, but of the
qualities of those faculties according to which he was at first made after the
Image of God in knowledge, righteousness, holiness, and in the truth of them
all, Col. 3.10.) Ephesians. 4.24.
so that before his calling he is a mere Non-ens, and has no being; for God is
said to call those things that are not, 1 Cor. 1 28. So the heathen before
their calling were no people, and 2. privatively, not before but after the
habit of grace lost, both in act and power,
Romans 10.19. Deuteronomy. 32.21. Hos. 1.10. And 2. privatively, not in a physical
sense, as Philosophers speak of privation, who make it a principle of
generation, and to include in it a disposition to the habit which it precedes;
but in the logical, and more proper sense, as it implies a deprivation of
some former habit (as in our case of the image of God) and that not such as
sleep is, but such as death is; being a privation not of the act and exercise
only of the faculty (as in sleep) but of the faculty and power it self, we
being dead in sin, and not made alive
with respect to spiritual and supernatural objects; of which the rule holds,
that from the privation to the habit (as from death to life) thore is no
return; that is ordinarily and by natural causes: Otherwise if we speak of an
extrordinary regresse and miraculous, none who is not an Atheist, makes any
question. Only we may grant a remote possibility and capability (especially in
man as also in the lapsed angels, so far as Gods most holy and just will puts
no bar,) but we must deny all disposition in the instruments, and of the
subject it self to the habit, but by the effectual power of Christ,
and so must exclude all active power in man to his own conversion, which is
not by Gods grace newly infused into him, who works not only the will or power
to will, but the deed and act of will. Phil, 2.13. And so Christ becomes the
cause and fountain of new life unto his elect, who by his mercy and power are
ingrafted into him as into a new stock, from whom we receive new life (being as
dead and buried, so also risen and quickened with him, Col. 2.12, 13.) and from
whom we receive forgiveness of sin, redemption and life, whereby our youth is
renewed like the Eagles, Psalm. 103.3, 4, 5. And we return to the days of our
youth, Job 33.24, 25. Which change, being by the renewing of our mind, Romans
12.2. is wrought by the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. and is continued and wrought (by
degrees) daily, whereby such as wait on the Lord renew their strength, and
mount up with wings as Eagles, etc. Isai. 40.31.

SECT. 3. Use 1. Of Instruction and Exhortation, to denial of our selves, as
in other things, so particularly in duties concerning Conversion.
To deny our selves, and to acknowledge
who would show our selves true converts, and such as truly hope to be saved,
must hence learn, in all things to deny our selves, especially in this great
business of our salvation, and indeed to see and acknowledge our selves to be
nothing in our selves; at best but as a rude lump and Chaos, like the earth at
the first creation, our selves to be Nothing,
which being made of nothing, was it self then without form, void, and dark,
Genesis 1.2. We must ever acknowledge that without Christ and faith in him (which
in in its own nature implies and includes selfedeniall) all our gifts of
nature or of common grace, are nothing; so that as Paul said concerning one
grace, 1. In regard of gifts,
charity, so I may say of Christ, and of faith in Christ, without Christ and
true justifying faith in him, though I had the gift of prophecy, and
understood all mysteries and all knowledge, though I spoke with the tongues of
men and Angels -- and though I had all (miraculous) faith, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
and had not Christ and true justifying says in him, I am nothing: All
knowledge is nothing, 1 Cor. 8.1. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. And as all our gifts, 2. In
regard of privileges without Christ.
so all privileges without Christ must be accounted nothing: That of a Jew or
Circumcision, Gal. 6.15. and 1 Cor. 7.19. 3. Of our Confidences, As riches,
Idols, Isai. 44.10. 1 Cor. 8.4. strength of kingdoms, power of will.
That of the Gentile which was wisdom, as we have heard, is nothing. All our
Confidences, or things which men trust in, are nothing, as Riches, Prove. 23.4,
5. with Psalm. 37.16. Idols, in which the Gentiles trusted, and Idolaters now
are nothing. All the strength of Kingdoms and nations, with God, Nothing. less
then nothing, Isai. 40.15*17. All power (of will or other wise) in man nothing,
Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. All our own endeavors, like those of
Peter's, who fished all night and catched nothing, till Christ came, Luke 5.5.
Joh. Endeavors, righteousness,
21.3. In a word, all confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. all our
legal righteousness, Phil. 3.9. Yea Christ himself, Christ himself if he be
not all to us.
if he be not all to us, shall profit, us nothing, Gal. 5.2. Though in nothing
we be behind the best, yet we must say as Paul did, that (in and of our selves)
we are nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11. All without Christ must be accounted but as
ciphers, and that is nothing: So that if any man think himself to be something
when he is nothing (and that is the state of us all) he deceives himself, Gal.
6.3. We must then see and acknowledge our own nothing: The knowledge hereof is
rightly made the fountain of all other virtues. The knowledge of our own
nothingness, is the beginning of all goodness.
He only that knows what this nothing or his nothingness is: First, how
inconstant and vain all earthly things are. Secondly, how weak his own nature
is. Thirdly, how base and vile sin is, and how of no reckoning evil and
sinful men are; he will 1. Not set his heart on earthly or transitory things,
but on heavenly and divine things. 2. He will be humble, and distrust himself,
and set his rest and put his trust only in God his mercy, truth, and power. 3.
He will avoid sin, and sinful company as vile, and as finding no content
therein. In a word, he will love, desire, affect, and admire nothing but that
which shall be judged something, (and that is nothing in or of himself) as,
the new creature, 1 Cor. 7.19. 2 Cor. 5.16, 17 2. Faith working by love, Gal.
5.6. 3. Christ himself, and his righteousness, as All, and in all things, Col
3.11.

Contra, Ignorance of a man's nothingnesse makes him trust to and admire
himself, etc.
Contrariwise, he that knows not his own nothingness, 1. Minds earthly things,
and trusts too much in them. 2. Admires himself, and trusts to his own wisdom
and strength. 3. Gives way to his own sinful lusts, and delights too much in
sinful ways and sinful company: In a word, he neglects substance, and
catches at shadows of goodness, and comes short of Christ. Therefore when
God will give a man a being in Christ (which alone by the Apostle is opposed
against being wise, mighty, noble, out of Christ 1 Cor. 1.30.) he oftentimes
takes from him all outward stays and props, all earthly comforts, wealth, God
in mercy sometime deprives men of all outward stays and comforts,
friends, health, children, parents, etc. (for commonly whilst ought remains, a
man will never look to Christ,) howsoever he convinces him, and lets him see
his own vileness, sinfulness, guiltiness, inability every way, as he dealt with
these Jews, and so beats him out of himself, takes him off his own bottom,
and root, that so when he sees all strength is gone, he may then flee only to
God, to his mercy, power and grace. that they might seek to and rest in him and
come to themselves, as in the Prodigal.
This was signified in the Prodigal, who never came to himself, much less to
his father, till he was in extreme want and misery, destitute of outward
comforts and of all help in himself, and so when he came to himself, he said
etc. Luke 15.14* 15, 16, 17. etc. Why, where had he been? when he went from his
father, he was no more himself, he had lost himself, as we have all done in
Adam, so that now there is another self in us then formerly, that is, our
sinful self, which we are here taught to deny. Otherwise if indeed we were our
selves, such as God made us, we neither needed nor ought to deny our selves, no
more then Christ of whom it is said, 2 Timothy 2.13.
He cannot deny himself.

A threefold self in man. 1. Our sinful self, is wholly to be denied 2. The
natural to be denied in some case.
There is a threefold self; 1. Natural, such as was in us by our creation, some
remnants whereof remain not wholly defaced. 2. Sinful. 3. Regenerate, whereby
we become new creatures or new-men. Our sinful self is that which we must
absolutely deny: The regenerate self is to be labored for, and being had must
be preserved. The natural is only to be denied in some case, as of competition
with our spiritual self, and with Gods glory: and so Christ himself submitted
himself, and his will to Gods will, and densed himself in his life, for the
good and salvation of Gods elect. Yet the regenerate self though it may seek
and is allowed to seek it self and its own spiritual and eternal good and
salvation, 3. The regenerate self may seek it self, yet with submission to God,
and may do such things as may further the same, as Moses in refusing the
honors, treasures, and pleasures of Egypt, had an eye to the recompense of
reward, Hebr. 11. even as Christ himself, who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross^ and despised the shame, Hebr. 12.2. (for God having
made promises of such things, yea of this life unto us for our encouragement in
well-doing, we may accordingly make use of them as arguments to move our
selves:) I say it must not thus do, out of Gods way, as not being its own, but
Gods
or without subordinating its own respects unto God: seeing though the
regenerate man be restored again to himself, yet he is not his own man, by
creation,
(and so far not himself) but the Lord, who as he at first gave him his
natural being by creating him in righteousness and holiness, so his new and
spiritual being by redeeming him, redemption,
and so has a propriety in him; yea, man in his conversion and newbirth,
sealed in Baptism, renounceth himself and gives himself wholly to Christ, and
therefore must not, and does not, as do the wicked, give himself any longer to
any thing else, and by its own gift to God,
as to the world, to wine, to women, to his sports, or to himself, as to be too
far addicted to his own wisdom, will, affections and lusts, that he should be
called or accounted self-wise, self-willed, self-conceited, self-loving, etc.
and must not live to it self but to God, as a creature, as a new creature,
Neither must he wholly live to himself as he is a creature, for so he is as
well for and to God and his glory, as from him and his power, Romans 11.36. much
less as a new creature or true Christian, seeing he so^ ^^pends and has his
being only of Christ, who is his Alpha, in regard of his grace first and last,
being both author and finisher of his faith, and should be his Omega, Heb. 12.2.
by doing all to his glory. Whatsoever a Christians relation is, it teaches
him to deny himself and to seek Christ's glory: as a son, as a servant, Mal. 1.6.
a Christian is the Son of God, and Christ the everlasting Father; the servant
of Christ, and he the Lord and Master, and as a son and servant, he should
honor not himself, but his father and master, and fear him. A Christian is a
member of Christ; as a member of Christ.
and therefore as the hand will expose it self even to cutting off, to save the
head; so should we so far deny our selves as to expose our selves, our goods,
name, yea life and all, if need be, for Christ and his glory.

So that to come to the particular in hand; we are taught from these converts,
We are to deny our selves, in matter of salvation, and in all duties belonging
thereunto, all which imply and require self-denial.
to be nothing in our selves, but to become separate and divorced from our
selves, denying our selves in all things, especially in the main business of
our salvation, and in all duties belonging or tending thereunto; I will only
instance in such as Peter here, and Paul elsewhere directed young converts to,
as to baptism, faith, repentance; to which I will add new obedience, and
self-denial it self, which the Text gives ue occasion to take notice of.

1. Peter says, 1. Profession.
Be baptized: Now Baptism is a note of Christian profession, whereby we give
our names, yea our selves to Christ, which I dare say it, none can ever truly
do unless he deny himself; I speak of a powerful profession, and such as in
life answers that verbal profession made in our baptism.

This made some, that otherwise liked well of Christ and of his doctrine, Of
which (through want of self-denial) many are ashamed, as Nicodemus
(because they had not yet denied themselves wholly in their names, and respect
with men, in their offices, and liberties) ashamed to make open profession of
him: as Nicodemus a Pharisee, Joh. 3.2. who in himself approving well of Christ
and his doctrine, yet loath to be known to favor one who was so much hated, and
accounted a ringleader to a faction, came stealing to Christ by night, least
others should perceive it and discover him. Joseph of Arimathea, John 19.38, 39.
Such an one was Joseph of Arimathea (a while) who is said to be a Disciple of
Christ, but for fear of the Jews. Yea what shall (...) say of Peter, who so
confidently bragged what he would do, whilst he trusted to himself and to the
strength of his own resolution, Matthew. 26.44. Though all men shall be offended
because of thee, I yet will never be offended: yet left to himself a while, how
was he ashamed to confess and acknowledge Christ in his sufferings, Peter,
and how did he thrice deny him, even with an oath, saying, I know not the man?
Peter had not yet so fully denied himself as afterward, when he boldly
confessed Christ before the High Priests to the manifest hazard of his life.
Its also said, many chief Rulers,
John 12.42, 43. that among the chief rulers many believed on Christ, but
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out
of the Synagogue: for they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of
God. And how is it in our days when many are ashamed of the afflictions of
Gods people for the Gospels sake, many among our selves, who are ashamed of
profession in the power of it.
and to make any other then an outward, bare, cold, and dead profession
themselves, lest they should go under the common reproachful titles and terms
of the world, and be thought to be Puritanicall, seditious, factious, and
enemies to Caesar? The truth is, shame which belongs only unto sin is now cast
upon profession of godliness. Thus the Officers sent to take Christ, but
justifying his doctrine, as also Nicodemus, speaking but a word for Christ, are
reproached for so doing; Are ye also deceived? and art thou also of Galilee?
Joh. 7.46, 47, etc. and 52. Yea the man who was born blind, and healed by
Christ, asking the Pharisees who so strictly examined him saying, Jo^ 9.27, 28.
Will ye also be his Disciples? was reviled, and that not without scorn,
disdain, and contempt of Christ, Thou are his Disciple, but we are Moses
Disciples.

2. Faith, which excludes all works and confidence in our selves.
2. Faith and belief on Christ of necessity presupposes self-denial, and a
renouncing of the condition of works or of whatsoever worth, excellency or
righteousness is in a man's self. And therefore till we renounce our own
righteousness, and all we do as filthy clouts, and as loss, we cannot believe
on Christ. Yea such as renounce their own righteousness and confess their sin
with Cain, but yet despair of help, do it out of stoutness, and through want of
self-denial, as has been showed formerly. They have not worth or strength
enough of their own, and they will not go to God for it; so men that a respect
their credit with men, cannot believe, Joh. 5.44.

3. Repentance, 3. Repentance
what is it but a disclaiming with sorrow of lll our former courses and ways,
and a renouncing of all such usts as we have formerly delighted in, which is
sorrow for former lusts,
and so a denying of our elves in our vain delights and carnal pleasures, in
our unlawull ways of gain, in our pride, ambition, etc? What keeps men in
their sins without repentance, but unwillingness and lothness to deny
themselves in their former lusts, and a casting them off.
which will plead hard; (I mean the sinful self in man) what, will ye leave us
for ever? shall we never be merry again, will lewd queanes or companions say?
It will be here, as when Ezra reformed strange marriages, exhorting the people
to separate themselves from the people of the land, and from the strange wives,
Ezra 10.9, 10, 11. which they also did, confessing their sins and amending.
This could not be done heartily and truly without much self-denial. Self
humbling requires much self-denial, Micah 6.6. etc.

4. But these Jews here so seriously asking, 4. New-obedience,
what they should do, plainly show how willing and resolved they were to obey
God and his Apostles, and how ready to deny themselves that they might obey
him, in doing and suffering,
whether by doing or suffering. But this could not be done without much denial
of themselves; active duties, as to believe, obey the Gospel and the like, are
contrary to corrupted nature, which requires much self-denial.
(as above nature so far as it remains entire;) which cannot be performed till
a man cross his corruptions; and deny himself in them, in his ease, delights,
gain, etc. much more must he deny himself in things to be suffered and passive
duties, which are not only against corrupt nature, but against nature entire,
which also must stoup and be denied.

5. Self denial it self, if it be not in all things and with respect to God.
5. These here, whilst they ask this question, stand upon nothing in
themselves, and deny themselves fully and in all things, without any
reservations or respects to themselves. Many men seem to deny themselves in
some things, as in their oaths, stealing, whores, ease, and some comforts of
this life; as some civil formalist, superstitious and meriting Papist who
spares not his own body, Some men seek themselves whilst in some things they
seem to deny themselves. All self-respects in duties, even of mortification, to
be denied.
but macerates it with whippings, fastings or pilgrimages; and yet all this is
done in self-respects; in the one, because to do otherwise will not stand with
his honor and credit among men: who it may be also will stoup to suffer scorn
and nicknames for Christ and his profession, which he finds to be more
advantageous to him some other way; in the other is an opinion of merit, and
hope to escape the pains of Purgatory: howsoever all this is both from and for
themselves; who required these things at their hands? And what God appoints
not, is not done to him. Such denial of a man's self stands in need of true
Self-denial, which is in true converts absolute, universal, and without
reservations to our selves, and self-respects.

SECT. 4. Containing a more general Exhortation to Self-denial, and showing
in what things we are first simply and absolutely to deny our selves.
Generally we are to deny our selves in all things here. 1. For what things we
must deny our selves, They are four.
LEt us then be exhorted to deny our selves generally in all things. And here
let us know what those things are which we should chiefly, if not only respect
and seek after; and what we are to deny our selves in. 1. The former are, 1.
Gods glory. 2. Christ his word and truth with the Gospel in the purity and
power of it. 3. Our own spiritual and eternal good, together with the peace
and comfort of our own consciences, and assurance of Gods favor. 4. The
greater good of others, especially of the Church, and that both temporal,
spiritual, and eternal: as we shall perceive more by that which follows.

2. In what things we must deny our selves. 1. In some things simply. 2. In
others only comparatively as we may see in Christ, 2 Timothy 2.13,
2. The things in which we are to deny our selves* are such as either are
absolutely to be denied, or only comparatively, with respect, and in
competition with some of those other things named, for which we are to deny our
selves in them, though otherwise good, and which absolutely, (severed from such
respects) may be sought. This first part of the distinction may be better
conceived in and by the example of Christ himself, (till we hereafter give
other instances.) Of him it is said, that he cannot deny himself: True, that
is in such things as belong to his nature, as his truth, and faithfulness,
there instanced in; in his holiness, goodness, justice, who though he cannot at
all deny himself in his nature,
wisdom and the like; no more needed we have denied our selves in any thing
absolutely at least, if we had continued, remained, and still been our selves
as God made us at first, in innocence, righteousness, knowledge, holiness, and
in an estate of immortality: And in such remnants of entire nature as yet abide
with us, not wholly obliterated and defaced, we are not absolutely, yet
according to his will, he does deny himself for a greater good, in some such
things as, without such respect, he both may and does seek himself, Phil. 2.6,
7, 8. as in vailing the glory of his Godhead a while in our nature,
but only in some respects to deny our selves. But now our Savior Christ, who
in things respecting his nature, cannot deny himself, yet out of will, and
with respect to his Fathers glory, and to the spiritual and eternal good of
men's souls, was content and willing to deny himself many ways; and that even
before he came into the world; and after, in that being in the form of God, and
thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he made himself of of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was found in the
likeness of men, -- and humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the Cross. Thus he is said to empty himself, and to make himself
of no reputation, and to suffer his glory to be obscured in the dark lanthorn
of his humanity whilst he lived here on earth: being God he appeared in our
base nature, and became truly man: Being immortal, he became in our nature
subject to death; being the Lord of all, he became a servant; being the
glorious God, he humbled himself; being the Sovereign Lord of heaven and earth,
he became obedient unto the Law, and unto death; and in his ease and name as man
being most blessed he was pleased to subject himself to the death of the
Cross, which was an accursed, shameful, and painful death; and so in our
nature, and for the good especially of his elect, he denied himself in his
ease, by undergoing sorrows and grief for us; Hebr. 12.2.
in his name, by enduring the cross, and despising the shame; suffering
himself to be reviled, spit upon, and at length crucified, yea and to be a
while under the sense of his dear fathers displeasure; in all which he sought
not his own glory, and in his life and will, which he submitted to Gods will for
us. Matthew. 26.39.
but his that sent him; not his own will, but his Fathers; insomuch that
according to his humane nature without sin, having by prayer sought himself,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup (of death) pass from me;
yet denying his own will, he adds, nevertheless, not as I will, Use, Of his
example to us, scil. to deny our selves much more for him.
but as thou will.

Now this example of Christ's (to note it by the the way) inforceth the like
practice upon us, much more for his sake and glory, to deny our selves, he thus
denied himself for us, who for us men, and for our salvation, came down from
heaven and was incarnate; for us servants, wretched and sinful creatures, and
all this freely: and shall not we for our own good, for his glory, being so
many ways bound to him, our Creator, our Lord and Sovereign, our Redeemer,
our Husband, Head and Father, deny our unworthy selves?

And that, 1 Absolutely, in somethings.
And first, In some things we are absolutely to deny our selves; as in
whatsoever, according to our corrupt nature; we now are not our selves; either
not that which we were at our first creation in the first Adam before the fall;
or not that which we should be in Christ the second Adam, and as new creatures
in him. In all which things we must flee out, separate and make a divorce from
our selves, denying our selves.

as, 1. In our carnal wisdom and reasonings:
1 In our own carnal wisdom and corrupt reasonings, whereby men are wise in
their own eyes, conceive of God according to their own dark hearts, Romans 1.21.
making to themselves similitudes of God as they please, Exodus 20.4. Romans 1.23.
entertaining no truths but such as agree with their corrupt and carnal reason,
disputing against the truths of God, as John 6.52, -60, -65, on which many do
stand so much.
66. 1 Cor. 1.20. accounting Gods word preached, and his ways foolishness, 1
Cor. 1.23. never consulting with God in his word, or by prayer; but directing
and ordering all their ways by their own counsels, and so they live by their
own rules, which they devise and frame to themselves, consulting only with
flesh and blood; and indeed, professing themselves to be wise, they become
fools, Romans 1.22. Whereas the Apostle's rule is, If any man among you seems
to be wise in this world, let him become a fool that he may be wise, 1 Cor.
3.18. that is, let him se^ his folly, and deny his own seeming and carnal
wisdom, We must see our own folly, and submit our thoughts and reason to Gods
wisdom.
that he may be wise by that wisdom of God which he is now ready to charge with
folly. And let all imaginations or reasonings, and every thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God, be cast down, and every thought be brought
into captivity to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. Let the wicked also
forsake his way (which according to his foolish wisdom he has chosen), and the
unrighteous man his thoughts Isa. 55.7. (even such carnal thoughts as he has
of Gods Mercy, and other Attributes). Our own devices will come to naught, and
must therefore be forsaken; only such counsel as God gives us in his word,
being followed, shall stand. How happy then is that man who denying his own
wisdom, our happiness if so we do.
shall in all his ways and thoughts hood-wink himself, make God and his word
the guide of his thoughts and ways, and be content to see nothing, and no
otherwise then according to the wisdom of Gods word: God will guide such with
his counsel, and after receive him to glory, Psalm. 73.24. Such as so blind
themselves, and will see only with Gods eyes, and by the light of his word,
become truly wise: whereas all others, and contrariwise if we do not.
who are wise in themselves, are denied true wisdom, Matthew. 11.25. and their
own wisdom is accursed to them, Isa. 30.1. and turned into folly, as was
Ahitophel's; and 1 Cor. 1.19. and 3.19, 20. John 9.39. etc. I conclude; Forsake
the devices of thine own heart, Hear counsel, and receive instruction (from
Gods word,) that (howsoever men think of thee for the present) thou may be
wise in thy later end, Prove. 19.20, 21. and not as the worldling, who -- at his
end shall be a fool, Jer. 17.11. These here in my Text stood not upon any
wisdom of their own, but sought direction from the Apostles, saying, What shall
we do? And following the same, became truly wise, even to salvation.

2 We must also deny our selves in our own corrupt Will and choice: 2 In our
corrupt wills. Which must be denied; and submit to Gods will both in our doings,
1 Timothy 6.9.
we must have no will of our own, but such as willingly submits it self to
Gods will, who does and orders all things according to his own will: he is
the only Sovereign Lord unto whom our wills should ever be in subjection. We
must so far deny our own wills, as not to say, we will be rich, and we will do
thus or so; We will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy,
and sell, and get gain. -- For that we ought to say, If the Lord will we shall
live, and do this or that, and sufferings.
Jam. 4.13, -15. And so in all crosses and evils befalling us, we are to say,
The will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.14. We must not think all things must be
according to our will, or that God should stoop to us in all things; if he do,
This is the way never to be crossed in any thing.
it is with a curse, 1 Timothy 6.9. The only way to have our wills in all things,
is to deny our own wills; not to be resolute, peremptory and wilful in any
thing, but only according to Gods will: and in all crosses to subordinate our
will to Gods will (when it is manifested) as most holy, and good and wise:
(...) shall crosses be no crosses to us; otherwise we shall never want crosses:
Gods will shall ever be done, and he will oppose them that oppose him. Take we
heed then of being self-willed in any thing, or of making our own will the
only law and reason of our doings; which with respect to men is tyranny; to
God, is flat obstinacy and rebellion, as Jer. 18.12. and 44.16, 17.

3 In all our carnal affections and fleshly lusts and desires, 3 In our
carnal affections: See Heb. 4.10. 1 Pet. 4.1.
from all which we must abstain, 1 Pet. 2.11. Otherwise God will give us our
desires, but with a curse, as to the Israelites, who lusted exceedingly in the
wilderness: to whom God granted their request, but sent leanness into their
soul, Psalm. 106.14, 15. and 78.29, 30, 31. And this self-denial should be
especially in our most beloved and darling sins; Especially in our beloved sin:
so that to deny our selves in all, and to deny God any one lust (being loath to
part with it, or to deny our selves in it) is in effect nothing at all: In our
bargaining and covenanting with God for his Son Christ, for our own souls, and
the salvation thereof, not to part with all and every lust, and not to lose
heaven for one lust: as some do.
is to lose all, even to lose souls, our selves, Christ, yea God and all. How
many lose heaven for one lust? as Judas for his covetousness; and so the young
man, who boasted he had done all; whom Jesus beholding, loved, telling him, and
saying, One thing thou lackest; Go and sell whatsoever thou have, and give to
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and take up thy
cross and follow me, Mark 10.20, 21. Now this was a commandment (not to build
an Order of begging Friars on) only of trial, conviction and discovery. This
Perfectist had not denied himself in his covetousness, and so, going away
grieved, (it seems that he could not enjoy his wealth and ease, and Christ too)
he denied Christ, his soul, and the salvation of it, yea, and his wealth too in
the end, which he could not carry (to hell) with him. So it is with others: A
small thing parts God and some.
A small thing (as one notes) parts God and them: their deceit used in the
shop, their whore, their vain delight otherwise, their pride in apparel, their
ambition, their desire of revenge, their fear of losing man's favor, or of
forgoing such an Office, Benefice or preferment, keeps them wholly from Christ.
And this because they do not absolutely and totally deny themselves in their
lusts, which yet the grace of Christ teaches them, Tit. 2.12.

4 In our sinful practices,
4 In all our sinful ways and practices, and in every such course of life as is
either unlawful, or otherwise not so necessary as dangerous, and full of
strong temptations. Thus men are to deny themselves in all such sinful
practices as by which they use to get gain; as in their briberies, lying,
cheating, falsifying of wares, weights, and measures, buying by the greater,
and selling by the lesser; so by defraudation, and underhand dealing,
interverting from their Masters if they be servants; from their owners and such
as put them in trust, if they be in places of trust or office by sea or by
land; from their Principals, if they be Factours; from the common Treasury, if
they, being Magistrates or Officers, are betrusted therewith; from the King, in
matter of due Customs and Tributes, unlawful callings,
if they be Traders. So in all unlawful callings and trades, as that of
Players and Play-poets, of living by gaming, playing the whore, and the like.
Yea, where there is not otherwise necessity, we are to deny our selves in such
kind of lives, and in unnecessary kinds of life, which debar us of better
things.
which promising, it may be; much carnal delight, gain, honor and
advancement, yet apparently expose us to strong temptations of sinning: as to
live where the Gospel is not either at all, or not in purity and power; as in
foreign parts and Countries, where there are only more opportunities of
getting gain then in our own Country (perhaps,) where yet the Gospel is in
better purity, and more power. We have the instance of Moses, who refused to be
called the son (yea the heir) of King Pharaoh's daughter, or to enjoy the
pleasures of sin in that Court, yea, and made light of the treasures of Egypt,
preferring the reproach of Christ with a good conscience, before them all. And
he lost not by it, Hebr. 11.24, 25, 26.

SECT. 5. Showing secondly, in what things, otherwise lawful, we are to deny
our selves: And first, In things natural; of three sorts.
2 We are to deny our selves in things lawful, in case of competition with
better things.
NOw secondly, we are to deny our selves (not only in things evil and sinful,
which we are to do absolutely; but also) in such things as are not in and of
themselves evil or sinful, but only comparatively and with respect to a
greater good, as some one or more of the aforesaid things which we should more
principally respect: And so in case of competition, comparison and
subordination of the one to the other, we are (though as is said, not
absolutely, yet in such case) resolutely to deny our selves. Now these things
are both natural, spiritual, and eternal: Which because they are many, I
will rather (here) point at them, then handle them. And these are of three
sorts: 1 Natural;


First, The things natural are 1. The powers and faculties of the soul and
body. 2. The comforts and contentments of this life. as first, In the natural
powers of our soul.
3. Life it self.

1 In our Reason.
1. Natural Reason, so far as there is no carnality in it, is not simply to be
denied: And it were much to be wished that men lived more according to right
reason then they do; for so their courses would not be so absurd and
unreasonable as they are, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
whereby they can give no reason of their doings, of their neglect of life and
salvation, How far natural reason may and should be used.
impenitency, Jer. 8.6. of their persecutions, and hating of Gods people
without cause, etc. nay nor of their faith and hope, which they are bound to
do, 1 Pet. 3.15. being able also to examine doctrines, to judge of consequences
and inferences in Scripture, to search the Scriptures whether the things taught
us be so or no, that so they may not blindly either believe or obey any but God
alone, and in God: Yet thus far we are to deny natural Reason, as not to stand
upon it in things above the reach of it; How and in what denied.
as to say, I see no reason for this or that, or how it can stand with Gods
justice, or with the liberty of man's will, etc. therefore I will none of it,
its too harsh and hard a saying, I cannot admit of it. In such case reason must
submit it self, and give way to faith. The mysteries of faith, as that of the
Trinity, of the subsisting of our nature in the second Person of the Godhead,
the resurrection of the same individual bodies of ours, and such like, are not
unreasonable; only our reason cannot reach so high (as even in innocence Adam
saw not the reason of diverse things, as the mystery of the Trinity, etc. which
yet he believed). We must then so far deny our natural reason, It must 1 Stoup
to supernatural Truths. 2 It must not judge of points of Faith.
as 1. To acknowledge it not able of it self to reach unto, or dive into the
deep things of God. 2. In sight of its shallowness, not to take upon us by it
to judge of the mysteries of faith, not to make it a ground of faith, or to go
before it; but only an attendant and waiter upon faith, to follow it, and to
acknowledge that to be reasonable which God does, or which he makes known to be
his will, and a truth, 3 Nor must it make new Articles.
though by reason we understand it not. 3. Not to frame points of Doctrine, or
Articles to be embraced as truths, according to our understanding, judgment
and reason, as do some in the point of Free Will, and otherwise; who show
themselves more Philosophers then Divines, and better read in Aristotle's
Ethics, then in the holy Scriptures of God. We must take things as we find
them, though we can see no other reason of the same then this, God says it,
therefore I have reason to believe it.

2 In our natural Will: Which must not oppose Gods will, but deny it self in
regard of any power it has in supernatural things, either to will,
2 Our natural Will, which inclines naturally to good in the universal, we
must be content to submit the same so far to God, as in the particular wherein
true happiness does consist, and in the way to it (which is only faith in
Christ) to be directed only by him, without opposing his will made known to
us, and without choosing our own ways. So also, though it have some power
naturally, and in natural and moral things; yet to deny it self in regard of
any ability it has of it self either to will super natural good things
(especially upon the conditions, and as they are promised unto us in the word,)
or to choose aright by its own power; or choose,
and when the same objects and motives are propounded to many, to difference it
self from others either in good or evil, either by accepting (as of it self)
that good, as suppose the saving grace of God, which others refuse; or by
refusing and resisting that effectual grace, or yet to resist Gods grace: and
it must submit to corrections.
by the acceptance whereof others come to be converted and saved. So in our
Trials and sufferings, when we are crossed in some particulars which we might
lawfully desire, we must deny our own will, as our blessed Savior did, and say,
Not my will, but thine, O heavenly Father, be done; and so possess our souls
by faith and patience, without murmuring or repining.

3 In our natural Affection:
3. Our natural Affections, especially those whose object is good: In these we
must be content also, with respect to Gods will and glory, to deny our selves:
as 1. as, 1 In our Love.
In our Love, suppose to children, wife, husband, friend, etc. in which we must
be content to be crossed, and patiently endure the loss of them by death, or
otherwise the loss of their love for our love to Christ and his truth, of
which afterward. 2 Desires.
2 In our Desires, as David refused that water of Bethlehem, which he so much
formerly desired. And we are not to desire any thing of this life in
particular, but herein so far to deny our selves as to be content to be denied
(be it children, office, preferment, etc.) yea, to account such denial a
blessing, in hope God has some greater good in store for us, or that God will
sanctify that cross, and make it a blessing to us, seeing we are all apt to
abuse good things to our own hurt, if we had them. 3 In our Joy and delight; 3
Joy.
so as willingly in some case, and for the furtherance of some greater good, to
deny our selves lawful comforts for a while, as of meat, marriage, apparel
and lawful recreations, that we may give our selves to fasting and prayer for
the obtaining some spiritual blessing, and nearer communion with God by
self-humbling; for the averting of some judgment from our selves or others,
etc.

4 In our good nature, and bodily perfections.
And so (passing over goodness of nature, and such bodily perfections, as in
which we also are to deny our selves, and not either to trust to them, or to
think our selves simply better by them, as beauty and comely feature, strength,
agility, yea, health and youth, not priding our selves in them, nor trusting to
them; 2 In the contentments of this life.
) we fall into the second sort of things natural in which we are to deny our
selves, especially when they come in competition with Gods glory, word, will,
and our own spiritual and eternal good.

These are many: as in 1. Riches. See 2 Chro. 25.9, 10. Acts 2.45. 1 Timothy 6.17.
Psalm. 33.16, 17. and 20.7.
as 1. Riches and treasures, estate, offices and possessions: Thus Zacheus,
Luke 19.8. and the case so requiring, believers in the beginning of the
Christian Church, sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men
as every man had need. Yea, riches, in evil times, are not to be trusted to,
nor horses and chariots.

2 Honors and name,
Honors and name: Thus David, when Saul stood between him and a Kingdom,
though he had him at advantage, found Saul in an act of hostility against him,
was incited by others to destroy him, yet denied himself therein: would not (as
men of the world do) violate justice, no not for a Kingdom, choosing rather to
live a persecuted Subject, then to be a King by such means. We must also be
content to deny our selves in our name, reputation, and esteem in the world, in
which for Christ we must deny our selves.
being contented for Christ to be accounted, as he was for us Mar. 3.21. no
better then mad and besides our selves, fools, the offscouring of the world,
enemies to Caesar, to State and Government, factious, seditious, humorous,
puritanicall, and what not? In such case we with Paul must first approve our
selves to God by pureness, innocence, and otherwise; and then be content to
pass by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, to be accounted
deceivers, to be unknown or unacknowledged in our innocence, integrity, and
other graces and privileges of the Saints, 2 Cor. 6.4, -6, -8, 9. So, and so
in bearing of injuries.
in case of injuries, and disgraces and affronts; as when our Savior himself
was smit on the face, and spit on by base soldiers, and being reviled, reviled
not again, despised the shame, etc. And when David was reviled by Shemei, and
put by his Kingdom by his son Absalom, and forced to flee before him, how does
he resign not only his Crown and honor, but all into Gods hands, saying,
Behold, here I am, let him do unto me, as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15.26.
and 16.7, 8, 10.

3 Pleasures, ease and peace.
3. Pleasures, lawful contents, ease and peace in this world: Christ says to
his followers, Think ye that I am come to send peace on earth? I came not to
send peace but a sword: I am come to set a man at vaciance against his father,
etc. Matthew. 10.34. Luke 12.51. We must then so far deny our selves in our ease,
peace, comfort of friends, as to resolve for Christ his sake and a good
conscience, to forgo their love and endure their displeasure. Yea, we must deny
our selves in all easy ways to heaven: Its only easy to go to hell. There is
no going to heaven, as men usually speak in beds of down, we must go by the way
of mortification, and self, denial, by the cross and by afflictions.
Self-denial in all these three particulars named, may be considered again in
Moses his example, Hebr. 11.25, 26, 27.

4. Things indifferent and lawful.
4. In some case, as of scandal and of edifying the Church, we are to deny our
selves even in our lawful liberties, in things indifferent, or not so
necessary, but that they may be forborne without sin, as we see in Paul,
becoming all things to all men, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22, 23. and he would have us
take heed that our liberty become not a stumbling blook to them that are weak,
1 Cor. 8, 9,-13. and verse. 4, 5, 6 12-15.
Yea he restrained himself from marrying, a thing otherwise as lawful for him
as for any; and refrained from taking wages of the Churches, for which he in
others behalf, pleads very hard, but he used not his power, as the case was
with him, lest he should hinder the Gospel of Christ. So should we in some like
case, rather depart from our own right and take wrong, then go to Law before
the unjust and unbeleevers, 1 Cor. 6.1, 6, 7.

5. A man's country is and ought to be dear unto him; 5. Country.
yet in case Christ call him, he must leave it, and follow God even blindfold,
as Abraham, who so called, -- went out not knowing whither he went, Hebr. 11.8.
Genesis 12.1.4. So Ruth, chapter 2.11, 12.

6. If a man will come to Christ, he must hate (that is, 6. Friends.
less love, and resolve rather, if the case so require, to disrespect and
neglect) his father, mother, wife, and children, brethren and sisters, and
forsake all that he has, Deuteronomy. 33.9. Mat. 4.20. and 19.27. and 1 Cor. 7.29,
30, 31. He must resolve of this and cast for it before hand by resolution of
mind, and by actual performance, Luke 14.26, 27. etc. 33.
when the case so requires: otherwise he cannot be Christ's Disciple. And of
this we have a notable example of latter times in Galeacius, a noble marquess,
too long here to relate: I refer to the History which, in print, is in many
hands.

3. Life it self,
Now thirdly, we are, if the case so require, not to respect our natural life
it self, but to lay it down for Christ, as he laid down his for us. which is
to be denied,
So we are taught in the forenamed place, Luke 14.26. and Matthew. 10.39. Mark.
8.35. This was resolved on, and done by the holy martyrs of Christ in all ages.
So that our very lives should not be dear unto us, neither should we refuse any
hazards (though even of life) not only for a good conscience and faithfulness
in our callings, 1. For a good conscience.
as we are Christians; See Acts 15.25, 26.
and for the name of the Lord Jesus, as it was with Paul, Acts 20.24. and
21.13. but with respect to, and for the strengthening of the brethren; We ought
says John, (as Christ laid down his life for us, 2. For the good of others.
so,) to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3.16. and to refuse no
hazards, be we in never so great, even for the temporal good and safety of
many especially, as we see in the resolution of noble Queen Esther, -- Esther
4.16. I will go in unto the King, which is not according to the Law, and if I
perish, I perish: Yea of some one (it may be) if eminent and of great use to
the Church, as Paul was, for whose life, Priscilla and Aquila laid down their
own necks, Romans 16.4.

SECT. 6. Secondly, in things spiritual, as in duties, gifts, etc.
2. Things spiritual, in which we are to deny our selves.
2. THe things spiritual, in which we are, in some case, to deny our selves,
whether they be of a more common nature, or peculiar to the Elect after their
calling (for I list not here curiously to distinguish) they are both duties and
graces, or gifts received.

1. For duties, 1. Duties.
I have instanced already in profession of Christ, in faith, in repentance, in
obedience, yea and in some kind of Self-denial it self; 1. Ordinary,
unto all which self-denial is requisite (unto which I refer). Only I may
add, that not any of these, Page 326. both spiritual,
being otherwise performed in the best manner, are to be rested in as they are
duties required of us, or as they are works wrought and acted by us: And as
they are Graces and gifts of God in us, I shall show how we are to deny our
selves in them under that head. and outward.
The like I say of all other duties whatsoever, of men's hearing, and coming to
Church, of men's preaching, praying, fasting, giving alms, and in the doing of
other good works and great works, if it were building of Churches, casting out
devils, though in Christ's name, if it were the giving of men's bodies to be
burned, or what else soever it were which men do in obedience active or
passive. Men in all these must deny themselves, All which must be done in
submission, 1. To Go! and his glory. Matthew. 6.1, 2, 5, 16. and chapter 23.5. and
7.22. Phil. 1.15, 16. Isai. 58.2, 3. Zach. 7.5, 6.2. In love toward others. 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.
not stand upon them as their works, or as things promeriting God, and binding
him simply unto them: not ascribe merit or satisfaction unto them, but
subordinate them all in humble submission to Gods only glory, not their own, as
yet the Scribes and Pharisees, false Apostles, and generally hypocrites do, who
do all to be seen of men, and so they pray, fast, not to God, but to
themselves: Secondly, in charity, to the good and edification of the Church
and of their brethren, and with such intention and respects more to others then
to themselves: without which others may reap some good, but themselves lose all
thanks, yea and reward with God.

2 Extraordinary. God only is to be obeyed by a blind obedience, by the example
of Abraham,
Yea, in some case, and in some kind of duty enjoined by God, though the same
seem contrary not only to nature and to right reason, but to some other precept
or promise of God there, when once his will is evidently made known, God is
simply, and in some sense blindly to be obeyed. Such blind obedience as this,
is due, not to man at all, in the things of God especially, but only to God
himself. So Abraham, who against hope, believed in hope; Romans 4.18.
and being bid to take his son Isaac (his only Isaac, whom he loved) and offer
him for a burnt offering unto God, he obeyed, Genesis 22.2, 3.
though it might seem to be against humanity, fatherly affection in him,
against the Law of God, (in his heart, Thou shall not kill, yea, which more is,
against the truth and promise of God; (seeing if Isaac perished, the whole
salvation of all the seed and children of Abraham's says, Hebr. 11.17, 18, 19.
might seem in him to perish;) yet its said, By faith Abraham when he was
tried, offered up Isaac: and he that had received the promises, offered up his
only begotten son; of whom it was said, Israelites, Exodus 11.3. and 12.35.
that in Isaac shall thy seed be called, etc. So the Israelites borrowed Jewels
of silver and gold and raiment of the Egyptians at Gods command, at their going
out of Egypt, and so spoiled the Egyptians, though it seem contrary to the Law
in their hearts, Phinehas, Numb. 25.7, 8.
and shortly after written by Moses, Thou shall not steal. So in other
extraordinary cases, instincts, heroical motions from God, as in the examples
of Phinehas, (killing offenders, though he were no public Magistrate,) of
Ehud slaying Eglon. In such cases (which now are ceased or become very rare)
Gods will once distinctly known and revealed, and Ehud, Judge. 3.15, 16, 21.
must without any questioning or disputing against it be obeyed, and not man.
and men deny themselves in their own reason otherwise. Their only reason is
Gods command. And this honor belongs only unto God, whom his people ought obey
without asking a reason: But for men they are only to be obeyed in God and for
God, and not without other reason from Gods word given then their will and
command, so that the tyrannical will of the Pope and Popish superiors, Hebr.
13.17.
who command or enjoin the murdering of Princes and others, and the
observation of many things contrary to Gods law, cannot hereby be justified.

2. Gifts and graces of all sorts are to be denied.
Secondly, for gifts and graces received, of what sort soever they be, common,
or proper, and those either Ministerial or saving and peculiar to the Elect;
In all these I say we are to deny our selves and subordinate all unto God, to
his power and glory, and to the good and edification of others. In all which be
what they will be, we must learn to say, and that from the heart: Psalm. 115 1.
Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for thy mercy,
and for thy truths sake. Mercy in promising, and Truth in performing.

As 1. our knowledge.
1. Is it knowledge we have? though we understood all mysteries and all
knowledge, if we deny not our selves in it, glorify not God, and in charity
edify not others by it, all is nothing: It puffs up, so that if any think
that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Timothy
6.3, 4. 1 Cor. 8.1, 2. and 13.2.
Such an one is proud (or a fool) knowing nothing. The more any truly knows
himself, the more he will deny himself.

2. Ability to do well, as to believe, etc.
2. Is it any ability to do well, to convert, believe, repent, which we receive,
(or suppose we receive) from the word? we must not stand upon it with God, but
deny our selves so far therein, as to seek further strength and power from
God, to will actually and do, what otherwise is in our power to do; and that in
all fear and distrust of our selves, and in all humility, even because it is
God which works in us, both to will and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2,
12, 13.
Neither must we trust to the strength of our own resolutions to do well, And
strength of our own resolutions, purposes, and promises.
or purposes and promises of our own, though we intend therein never so well,
and do not of purpose make semblance of what we mean not. No, Peter did so
before he had experience of his own weakness, and so many others, who in their
sickness, danger or otherwise do vow, and resolve to become new men, etc. In
all these we must take God along with us and Christ, We must take God along
with us.
doing all in his power and strength, or otherwise we shall find our strength
to be weakness. Thus Paul Phil. 4.13. I can do all things, (yea and suffer all
things) through Christ which strengthens me. This he says who yet of himself
was not sufficient (so much as) to think any thing as of himself. 2 Cor. 3.5.
When we thus deny our own strength, and trust not to it, we may be weak in our
selves, but yet never so strong (in the Lord Ephesians. 6.10.) as then. So Paul found
it 2. Cor. 12.10. For when we trust to our own strength, God denies us his;
and so we trust to a staff of reed; as many professing strong resolutions to
become Martyrs and not to deny Christ or his truth, have foully failed; and that
because they denied not their own strength. But when in any thing we undertake
or resolve upon we deny our own strength and do all in Christ's, God will not be
wanting to us; In such case, and in such case only, Let the weak say, I am
strong, Joel 3.10.

3. Our own Righteousness and Holiness.
3. Is it any righteousness or holiness of ours, which we have either from the
Law, in which Paul was unblameable; or from the Gospel, Phil. 3.6. 2 Pet. 2.10.
so far, as through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, any of
us have escaped the pollutions of the world, and so are of civil conversation
and life in the world? Oh, learn we to disclaim all, in the sight and
acknowledgement both of the perfection of that righteousness which is in
Christ, and which is needful for us; and of the inward pollutions of our
souls, hearts, thoughts and affections, boiling there; and of secret pride,
opinion of merit, and of hypocrisy and selfe-deceit reigning there. which we
must not stand upon as the Pharisaicall Jews of old,
Be we far from the pride and hypocrisy of the Jews of old, who in regard of
some legal righteousness of theirs as it might appear to their own eyes, and
to the eyes of the world, could say, (though otherwise they were incredulous,
Idolaters and vile hypocrites, as God himself does charge them) Stand by thy
self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou, and of latter times,
Isai. 65.2, 3, 4, 5. Yea let us beware of the like pride, hypocrisy, and vain
glory of the Pharisees in Christ's time, set out in the Parable of the Pharisee
and Publican, Luke 18, 10, 11, 12. God, I thank thee, says he, that I am not
as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican: I
fast twice in the week, I give tithes of that I possess. Ah take heed; These
being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not (by self-denial) submitted themselves unto the
righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. If these Jews in my text had still stood
upon such terms with God, when had they been converted? we could not have
expected such words savouring of so much self-denial from them, Men and
brethren, what shall we do? and as many amongst ourselves.
No, we should rather have heard, what we may now daily hear; I hope I am no
contemner of holy things, I reverence Gods sanctuary, come to Church, hear
divine service diligently, and carry my self there devoutly, am uncovered,
Thus did not these Jews in the Text,
bow at the very mention of the name of Jesus my Savior, and honor the Altar
the prime place of his holiness and honor, all which I see others, (proud
Pharisees as they are ^rofanely to neglect. I wrong no man, I am no adulterer,
extortioner, or unjust person, etc. Thus they would put the Pharisee from them,
whilst they keep him close in their own bosoms, and think to avoid him by
chargeing others with him. If Paul had persisted thus to do, who once stood
much upon himself, that he was circumcised, nor Paul,
of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as
touching the Law a Pharisee; concerning zeal, persecuting the Church: touching
the righteousness which is of the Law blameless, Gal. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. I say,
when had he been converted, having been especially so exceedingly zealous in
his Religion, (as many are now in their own way of formality) and of the
traditions of his fathers? But when it pleased God to call him by his grace,
and to reveal his son in him, he conferred no longer with flesh and blood; he
accounted all loss to him for Christ, yea dung that he might win Christ, and
be found in him, not having (says he) mine own righteousness, which is of the
Law (lo his self-denial,) but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. And this is that
righteousness unto which these Jews in my Text, whilst they deny themselves,
are directed, verse. 38. as also the jailer, Acts 16.30, 31.

Let us then with the holiest, otherwise of men (next to Jesus Christ) deny
our own righteousness, not stand to plead our civil life, our moral
righteousness, our formal service and strict observation of outward duties,
traditions or injunctions of men: Let us with Paul renounce all these, nor
Isaiah,
and with the holy Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 64.5, 6. truly and from the heart
confess with him, (who puts himself into the number) We are all as an unclean
thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags: Whereas says he, Thou
(O God) meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness, those that
remember thee in thy ways. The humble Publicans confession will better become
us, Luke 18.13, 14.
who standing a far off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but
smote upon his breast saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. The rather let
us look to this, nor the Publican.
because Publicans and harlots (as being sooner convinced of their sins and
unrighteousness) go into the kingdom of God before proud Pharisees and
justitiaries, Matthew. 21.31, 32. These believed John, when those others believed
him not, who came unto him in the way of righteousness: and when they had seen
it, repented not afterward, nor the converted Gentiles.
that they might believe him. Thus it is said, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. That the
Gentiles which followed not after righteousness (indeed were more openly
profane, and had no seeming rithteousness of their own to stand upon) have
attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith (they
would be beholding to God and Christ for it, which the Jews would not be, for
it is added) But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. These stood not upon any righteousness
of their own, either in whole or
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, (which implies and includes
self-denial in their own righteousness) but as it were by the works of the
Law; for they stumbled at that stumbling stone (Christ) -- on whom whosoever
believes shall not be ashamed, v. 33. in part, as the proud Jews did.
They opposed their own works and righteousness against his, or at least sought
to mighle the one with the other, and so their own righteousness failing, they
had no benefit by the other; for if our justification (as well as Election on
which it depends) be not only by faith, (without the concurrence of our works
or worthiness, Romans 11.5, 6.
power or what else of ours in the act of justification) and so merely by
grace, it is not at all by grace: And if it be by grace, then it is no more of
works. How does this concern us all well to consider of, This concerns Papists
to look to,
Papists especially, and all such others as stand upon somewhat of their own,
in point of justification, conversion, or of election, yea all such among our
selves as are full in our selves? Rev. 3.17, 18. Oh how happy were it for us,
and all that are full in themselves.
if emptying our selves wholly of our selves, and especially of all good
conceit of our own righteousness, holiness, devotions, prayers, good works,
good meaning; and not trusting to any of these things, we did seek our
acceptance with God only for the righteousness of Christ, and not for any of
these things as performed by us, and accoringly in all things we do, seek the
justification as of our persons, so of our actions and doings from Christ
alone, and from faith in him, that by the white raiment of his righteousness we
may get our selves clothed, and that the shame of our nakedness do not appear!

Yea such as to whom holiness is ascribed in any kind.
It behooves us also, in case men ascribe holiness to us, by occasion of any
thing wherein we are only instruments of God, to renounce all, and to give God
the glory of his own works, ever acknowledging our own meanness, vileness and
unworthiness, and that by the example of Paul and Barnabas when they were taken
for Gods, Acts 14.11. etc. 14, 15. and of Peter and John, who having restored
one born lame to his feet, stayed the peoples wonder, saying, Why look ye so
earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to
walk? Acts 3.12.

The like denial of our selves is required in regard of all our Privileges,
Page 313.
To this head of things and gifts received, I may refer that of privileges (so
far as they are spiritual) in regard of which we must account our selves
nothing, and deny our selves in them as Paul did, Phil. 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and
as in effect has been showed already, to which I refer.

So also all Confidences in the flesh, or all those things especially wherein
men (with some show of probability) may seem to glory or to trust: These all
are renounced by Paul, and confidences.
whilst he thus speaks, Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. Though I also might have
confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinks that he has whereof he
might trust in the flesh, I more. Then naming many particulars, he renounceth
all, denies himself in them, saying, But what things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ. Yea doubtless I account all things but loss, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, etc. But for such
Confidences I refer also to what is lately delivered. Page 313.
And as for spiritual gifts and graces of God received, No spiritual gift to
be rested in; but God is to be acknowledged.
I conclude that, be they those named, or for particularity and nature, other
and not the same, yet they are not simply to be rested in, and we are to deny
our selves in them so far, in and with respect to Gods glory, as not in any
wise to make our selves either the Author or end of them.

1. The Author.
1. Not the author: Which we are taught of Paul: who, speaking of a main
spiritual gift, and saving, even spiritual life, he says, Gal. 2.20. I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh,
I live by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
And speaking of ministerial gifts, he says, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the grace of God,
I am what I am: -- I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not I but the
grace of God which was with me. And elsewhere, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves; but our
sufficiency is of God; who also has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, etc. And though being forced to commend himself to those who should
have commended him, 2 Cor. 12.11.
he say -- Innothing am I behind the very chiefest Apostles; yet denying
himself again, he adds by way of correction, Though I be nothing.

2 The end of them all.
2. For the end, we must (as in the aforesaid instance) not preach our selves,
(or to get gain and praise to our selves, or to any other base and by end, as
to please men, or to anger and afflict others Gal. 1.10. Phil. 1.15, 16.) but
Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. Where the
end of the Ministry to be intended by us is the glory of God in Christ, 2 Cor.
4, 5.
and the spiritual good of men. If any praise be given to us, we must so far
deny our selves, as not to let it rest with us (remembering the example of Herod
eaten up of worms for so doing) but to send it up to God and Christ,
remembering that we are but men and earthen vessels in which this treasure is,
that the excellency of the power may be of God, and v. 7.
and not of us. If otherwise by preaching, we, as too many do, seek preferment,
riches, honor, and lordship, or our own praise and applause from men, we
perhaps may gain that; but that shall be all the reward which shall be given
us, Some Ministers preaching and seeking themselves have lost themselves.
and so our portion shall be only in this life; but oftentimes we shall lose
that too: God often confounds men when they either trust to their own
preparations, or aim at their own glory. I have heard of some such, who being
confounded in their memory and non-plussed, when they most of all sought
themselves, have so laid it to heart, that one being so disapointed went mad;
another so crossed, hanged himself. But concerning this gift and grace of
preaching, yea and all other spiritual gifts, duties, and abilities to do
duty. I will say with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. with respect both to the author
and end of them, What have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did
receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? Why should we
glory in any thing when nothing is ours? For of him, and through him, and to
him (the holy God) are all things: To whom be glory for ever. Amen. Romans 11.36.

SECT. 7. That we are thirdly to deny our selves in things eternal, as first
in some accidentals of glory, as in the degree and time of it.
3. We must deny our selves (in some case) even in things eternal, 1. In some
accidentals, as
THirdly and lastly, To deny our selves fully and aright, we must be content,
with respect to Gods glory, to do it (at least in readiness of mind and
submission of will) even in things eternal, pertaining to everlasting life and
glory. And first in regard of some degree and circumstance; Secondly, in regard
of the very substance and effence of it, and that not only with respect to
others, such as are otherwise most dear unto us, but also to our selves.

1. In the degree of glory.
1. As there is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another
glory of the stars: for one star differs from another in glory. So also is
the resurrection of the dead, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. Where, says
Daniel, Some shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, others (that turn
many to righteousness) as the stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3. Howsoever,
taking for granted that there are degrees of glory, content with the least
degree (though not of grace)
as here there is of grace, a godly heart though it aim at the highest pitch of
grace in this life, and so far also deny it self, whilst with Paul, Phil.
3.11, 12, 13. it forgets those things that are behind, and takes not up with
any measure of grace already attained, but reaches forth unto those things
that are before; yet so it may but attain by any means unto the resurrection of
the dead, that which is to life, it will not stand with God for measure, or
degree of glory, submitting it self to Gods will and glory therein, yet of
glory, renouncing all merit.
accounting it self most happy if it be but as a doorkeeper in that house. It
stands not upon merit now (as some do) to expect a more glorious crown then
others in that kingdom, striving to sit next to Christ in glory, whether on
the right hand or on the left. No, as then it will not envy the greater glory
of others (granting the forenamed degrees of glory) for envy is banished out of
heaven, and even here it envies not the more shining graces of others; so it
will be content, so it may have a place in that glorious firmament, to be a
star of the least magnitude. At least we should all now so far deny our selves,
as though suppose we were not behind many, or any in grace here, yet not to
expect by way of justice any greater degree of glory then the meanest of Gods
servants.

2. In the time of glory,
2. That happiness and glory which by faith we are assured in due time to enjoy,
and be for ever possessed of, we must be content to stay and wait for it, and
not to hasten it (otherwise then by hastening our preparations for it, content
to wait for it,
2 Pet. 3.12.) nay though, in and with the assurance thereof, we be now in
manifold afflictions, and suffer not only labor, but contempt, disgrace and
all sort of injuries from men, yet we must not be weary of well doing, nor
through impatience or lothness to suffer, and to glorify God on earth though
by suffering,
wish our selves dead that we might be the sooner at rest. No, herein we must
deny our selves also, so we may glorify God by our sufferings on earth, or any
way edify his Church, we must be content to want our own glory, and to wait
till Gods time come. Thus did Paul, who though he were assured of his own
glorification after death, and could wish to be clothed upon with glory, 2 Cor.
5.1, 2, 3, etc. and to be with Christ, as we see in Paul,
which is far better (then to be absent from him by abiding on earth:) yet
knowing that to abide in the flesh, would be more for Gods glory here, and for
the good of the Church, as more needful for the members of it, he is content
to stay for his own glory, and to abide and continue with them all, for their
furtherance and joy of faith, Phil. 1.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. We should be
unworthy of glory, if so much as in our thoughts and deliberate desires we
should so hasten to it, as in the mean time, not to be content to glorify God
in our callings, and to edify others, to do good to our children by seeing
them edified and instructed in the faith and fear of God.

Such as hasten their own happiness too soon, before Gods will be known in it,
And not to hasten our own happiness too soon, as do men of this world.
so far want faith, and self-denial; as it is 01 with many who, mistaking
indeed their happiness, seek it here on earth, and will not deny themselves in
their lusts, in their earthly, sensual and sinful delights, by mortifying the
flesh, and by setting themselves in the ways (and to the service) of Christ,
but through too much haste to be happy, come altogether short of it, as the
impatient Israelites did of Canaan, See Numb. 16.14.

SECT. 8. In glory it self: and first in the salvation of others.
2. In glory it self,
NOw secondly, for the very substance and essence of eternal glory, we are so
far to deny our selves in the same, that Gods glory and will should be
preferred before the salvation not only of our dearest friends, children, or
others, but (if it could be a case) of our own souls.

A ground laid, Gods glory ought to be most dear unto us,
Here as a ground, we must know that Gods glory ought to be most dear unto us,
more dear and precious then any thing else which we are to desire or respect;
and which in the first place and before all other things we are to seek; all
which in our seeking after them, we are to subordinate unto the same. proved
from the order of petitions in the Lords Prayer.
This is most evidently taught us by Christ himself God-man, in and by the
order of that most absolutely perfect form and frame of prayer which he left as
a pattern to his Church, according to which all our desires and wills should be
regulated and bounded in all things. That petition which more directly and
immediately concerns God in his glory, is premised and set in the first place
for order and eminency, In which Gods glory is to be respected, first and last.
as the rule measure and square of all the rest: First, Hallowed be thy name.
Yea that respect of Gods glory, bounds and shuts in all the former Petitions,
all which are by us no otherwise to be made, nor will by God be otherwise
accepted, then as they are referred to the same end, seeing therewith in the
end of our prayers, we are to conclude, yea and to bind God by urging him with
respect to his own glory, saying, For thine is the Kingdom, the power and the
glory, for ever and ever. Amen. By which Attestation of our faith and desire we
confirm, that we beg nothing but so far as may stand with Gods glory, yea that
God thereby may be glorified. A double end of man. 1. Gods glory. 2. His own
salvation.
And whereas the chief end of man, and of all his desires and endeavors, is or
ought to be in the first place, and most principally and universally, the glory
of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. and secondarily, his own (and others) eternal good,
happiness and salvation, which before all earthly things he is to desire,
Matthew. 6.33. See ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof:
The Lord teaches us so much, This last subordinate to the first
by making our own and others spiritual and eternal good to be desired in the
next and second place, directing us to say and pray after the other, Thy
kingdom come, whereby we pray that we and others may be of, or belong to Gods
Kingdom, to reign with him in this life by grace, and after in glory for
evermore.

Now though this be man's chief end in regard of himself, yet in regard of the
former which is the glory of God, the hallowing and sanctifying of his name, it
is secondary and subordinate: For so Gods eternal decree has made it, Ephesians.
1.5, 6. which is showed,
God has predestined us to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will: But to what end? to the praise of
the glory of his grace. Yea, and contrariwise in the reprobation and damnation
of the wicked: Romans 9.17. Even for this same purpose (says God unto Pharaoh)
have I raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name
might be declared throughout all the earth: And Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made
all things for himself; yea even the wicked for the day of evil. Not that he
is author of his wickedness, but that he (according to his eternal purpose)
permits him through his own impiety to oppress such as are good, reserving him
to the day of wrath, and punishment, that he might show in him his power and
justice, by which his name is glorified, Job 21.30. 2 These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
The like reason in the general, and in respect to Gods glory, is to be
considered in such as everlastingly perish, (be they young or old) though they
be not so apparently wicked, as the four last petitions are to the four first.
as those named and intimated. So that as the other four petitions in the Lords
prayer, and our desires of such things (whether 1. the purchasing of good, 1.
Spiritual as the third, 2. Temporal, as the fourth: Or 2. the removal of
evil. 1. Past and committed, the pardon of sin; Or 2. such as may hereafter be
admitted by the temptation of the Devil) should be subordinated to these two
ends named, Gods glory, and our own and others eternal good and glory; So, the
second of these is and ought to be subordinate to the first, and not simply and
absolutely sought but with like subordination to the first, at least with
submission thereunto, as also to Gods will, we being taught in the next
Petition, (in case we be denied the former) to say not only Hallowed be thy
name, but Thy will be done.

From this ground we infer, that we are so far to deny our selves in our own,
(if need were) and in others salvation, as to subordinate all unto Gods glory
(and just will.)

Two Inferences hence.
1. For others, dear unto us, and with relation to our love and respect to them,
whether dead or dying, or as yet living;

1. Concerning the salvation of others.
I know first, that diverse good Christians both can and do so far submit to
Gods will in the death or dying condition of their nearest and dearest friends,
and tender young children, and others, brothers, sisters, parents and
associates, whether wives or husbands, as to rest therein, 1. Dead or dying,
being dear and near to us, and in our doubts of their salvation
and be content to be denied the comfort of them on earth. Only troubled they
are, and know not what to say or think, or how to comfort themselves through
doubt of their eternal salvation and good estate with God after this life. If
they could be satisfied herein, they would take up and moderate their sorrows,
and not so excessively mourn, as David by some is thought upon this ground to
have mourned for the death of Absalom. But what? can we be content in the one
to submit and deny our selves, We are howsoever to rest in Gods will, and in
this that God glorifieth himself in them, whether they die apparently in their
sins.
and not if need be in the other? Is not God alike just and holy in both, and
does he not in the one as well as in the other seek his own glory, and the
hallowing of his Name, and should not we likewise so do? I know it cannot, nay
ought not, but be a cause of very great sorrow to any godly soul to see such as
otherwise in natural respects they love dearly, to die apparently in their
sins, in the act as well as habit thereof, without showing any signs of
remorse or repentance. Yet in such case we must in due season moderate and put
limits to our sorrow, yea and thoughts, and so far deny our selves, as without
grudging, gainsaying reasoning against God, or replying and questioning his
justice, holiness and sovereignty, lay the hand upon the mouth, silence our own
thoughts as well as words; and rest in his most holy will, suffering him to
glorify himself, which way soever he please, whether it be by the way of mercy
or justice, will and sovereignty, ever mindful of that, He has mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardneth: where we are not to reply or
dispute against God,
And dashing such in the teeth, as are ready to lay all blame on him, from off
themselves and to say, Why does he yet find fault? For who has resisted his
will? he by his Apostle, stops their mouth, and calls them to the consideration
of his greatness and sovereignty, as also of his glory in the riches thereof on
the vessels of mercy, v. 20. saying, Nay but O man, who art thou that reply
against God, (or who so saucily answerest again, or disputest with God) etc.
See also verse. 21, 22, 23. It becomes us in such case, (as in all such common
destructions, as of the people of the wilderness, and the like, as now of late
in Ireland, where many savagely have perished by the sword of the bloody
Papist, some of them perhaps not so well prepared, but taken suddenly in their
sins:) to say, Thou turnest man to destruction, and who knows power of thine
anger? Psalm. 90.3.11. and Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works.

But not for tender Infants dying in their Infancy, and others whose good
estate after death is only doubted of, Or only that we are not assured
otherwise of their salvation,
if and when all other arguments of hoping well of them (for whom yet and their
good estate in Christ, their godly and believing parents and friends have
formerly in their life time, both often and seriously prayed) do not fully
satisfy them (as indeed the certain salvation of other men is revealed but to
few, (...) in the death of young children.
much less the reprobation of any, unless God has specially so marked and
branded them, which is not in this case) yet I say, it is enough to stay us,
and (in self-denial herein) it should stay us, and here should we rest and
cast anchor, that God in all things seeks his own honor, and so should we: he
does all for his own glory; and cast the worst (which yet in this case we are
not to believe for certain) yet if God please to glorify himself in their
damnation, which is ever just with him, it becomes us to say, His will be done,
and so far to deny our own natural, yea Christian affections otherwise, as in a
zeal of, and with respect to Gods glory to say, The name of the Lord be
hallowed and glorified; at least in that respect to moderate our sorrows, lest
by honoring our children or others so doubtfully dying, more then God, we
provoke God by greater and sorer crosses in the same or other kinds, to tame us
and teach us, by self-denial to submit our selves to him in one thing as well
as in another.

2. Living, whose conversion we seek, and by all good means would procure,
2. So for others yet living, whose conversion and salvation we both pray for
and seek by all good and possible means to procure, whether they be our
friends, kindred, children, parents, or our hearers, or otherwise under our
charge, or howsoever in our hearty love, out of the former ground, we are so
far to deny our selves in our respect to them, as according to the order in the
Lords Prayer; First, to pray that God would glorify himself; then, if so it
may stand with his glory, That his Kingdom may come to them, and that by making
them heirs of his grace here, and glory hereafter, he would be pleased to
glorify his mercy on them; but if not, His will be done; thus denying our own
wills and desires, (whilst otherwise we are not wanting by our constant and
continued endeavors to further our own desires) and so suffering God and his
Son Christ to glorify himself a he pleases. For thus the Prophet Isaiah, As
Ministers (and others) not seeing the fruit of their labor, must rest,
speaking to his son (in our nature, as also in his Ministers) Isai. 49.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. Thou art my servant (O Israel) in whom I will be glorified, --
yeaChrist himself there says, That though he has labored in vain, and though
Israel be not gathered, yet says he of himself, shall I be glorious in the
eyes of the Lord -- Now Christ would have gathered the Jews and lost sheep of
the house of Israel himself, but they would not, Mat. 23. yet he glorified
himself and his wisdom and justice in their rejection. in that God glorifieth
himself thereby and accepts their endeavors,
So now he would gather others by us the Ministers of the Gospel; and thereby
he seeks his own glory, whether men be converted by the word or no; and our
labor (whilst we do our best endeavor to save our souls) and our persons are
accepted as a sweet savor of Christ unto God, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15.16,
in them that perish, as well as in them that are saved; and why? because God
even in the death and damnation of the wicked glorifieth himself. So that we
(as other zealous and godly Christians) having done our endeavor, and showed
our earnest desires of the good, the conversion and salvation of such sinners,
are in submission to Gods will and glory, yea and with our subscription and
approbation of his work, to rest, yea so far to thank God (with Paul in the
quoted place) for glorifying himself and his own mercy on us, ye thank God
for his mercy to themselves.
whilst he passes by others; even as Christ himself on our behalf, for hiding
saving truths from the wise of the world, and revealing them to babes, Mat.
11.25, 26.
even because it so pleased him, (to glorify himself.)

I will only add this word more, In some case men, by Gods prophets, and in
zeal of his glory have been devoted to destruction. Psalm. 69.28.
though I will not say or determine what we may do, yet in some case others
(setting aside respects of humanity, yea and as it may seem of brotherly and
godly affection, therein denying themselves) have in great zeal of Gods glory,
even devoted their enemies to eternal destruction, saying, Let them be blotted
out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous.

SECT. 9. Secondly, That in some case we should be ready to deny our selves in
our own Salvation.
SEcondly, for our selves and our own salvation; we are so far to deny our
selves, A second inference concerning our own salvation;
as not only to acknowledge, and that from the heart, our selves unworthy of
that mercy, pardon and salvation, which in and by Christ we are assured of, yea
worthy to be cut off for ever, and that Gods judgment if he should damn us for
our sins, not only to confess our selves worthy of damnation, but (to redeem
Gods glory) to be content to suffer with it, as we may see in Moses his wish,
were most just and righteous; but which more is, if it might redeem Gods
glory, and further the eternal salvation of many, to be content at least, (if
not to wish) that our selves for our particular, might perish eternally. This
was the desire of Moses, who when God threatened to consume the people for
making and worshipping the golden Calf, as he interceding for them, urged God
much with his glory, Exodus 32.11, 12. so, confessing their sin, he begs pardon,
at leas sparing for them, saying, v. 32. Yet now, if thou will, forgive their
sin: and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou have written,
that is, the book of life, or of Gods predestination. So Paul, in his zeal of
Gods glory, and desire of his brethren the Israelites salvation, or wishing the
salvation of his brethren, with respect to the glory of God (as Moses also did)
seriously and from the heart protests, that as he had great heaviness in his
heart, in consideration of their rejection, so, says he, I could wish, and
Paul 's,
that my self were accursed (or separated) from Christ, for my brethren, my
kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites, etc. Romans 9.1, 2, 3. That
is (not to speak of some other men's interpretation, as if he meant only of
deferring his glory, or being deprived of it for a time, or that he meant by
Christ the anointed Priests, or that he spoke only hyperbolically, or
otherwise in a violent passion of charity, or according to the disposition of
the inferior part of the mind, but) even to be deprived of the glory and
fruition of Christ, and that Christ by his utter perishing might be glorified
in their salvation. Thus wishing, and as in another case it is said, judging it
better and more profitable, that one member perish, Mat. 5.29. and Chrysostom.
ibid.
and not that the whole body should be cast into hell. Now whereas Paul knew he
could not indeed be separated from Christ, as he but a little before professed,
Romans 8.39. that nothing was able to separate the eelect from the love of God
which is in Christ our Lord, and so may seem (as Moses also) to desire a thing
impossible; we must know this was only a conditional vow or wish, whose wish
yet was but conditional,
if it were the will of God, (as when Christ prayed for the passing away of the
cup of his death:) So here he speaks of this not as a thing possible, but
under a condition, if it might be; Otherwise such excessive love to Christ
seems not to separate, but more firmly to join him unto Christ, seeing love is
a cause of union. This comes not to be a case, Revel. 3.5. neither was it in
Paul; and this comes not to be a cast,
for it was not whether Paul should be cut of or the whole body of that nation;
neither was Paul or Moses so put to it. But this I say, seeing God has
otherwise manifested his glory in their rejection for a while, Romans 11.31, 32,
33.) If God had required this of Paul or of Moses, or that it had been a case,
whether they or their charge should have perished, so that the perishing of the
one, should have been the salvation of the other: In this case, yet if it were,
it should be yielded unto.
Gods glory in the salvation of many, should be preferred before the other. And
it is a duty in us also, if it were required of us. Now in such things as God
may justly require, we are if not to desire the same, yet to show a
willingness, and so far to deny our selves, as (if we knew that God in such a
case or otherwise should will our damnation) to submit willingly and to show no
reluctancie. In such case, we should so say, Thy kingdom come, as first to say,
Hallowed be thy name: And if God declared his will were to hallow his name, In
as much as Christ in effect did as much for us,
by denying us his kingdom or share in it, then to submit and say, Thy will be
done. And good reason; Christ did as much for us, and for our salvation, who so
far denied himself for us men and for our salvation, as to deny his own will
(as man) and submit himself to the will of God, (the Fathers and his own as
God:) and that not to die simply and barely for us, but such a death, as
wherein, I will not say with some, he suffered hell torments for us, but
somewhat equivalent for the time, whilst in our nature, he was denied the
sense and feeling of his Fathers love, crying out -- Why have thou forsaken me
(as the damned shall be for ever,) and being made a curse for us: For it is
written, Gal. 3.13. Cursed is every on that hangs on tree. Which curse
properly belonged to us, as it is written, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the Law to do
them. For there it was a true case; where it was a true case.
(supposing Gods gracious will to us that way) either Christ must have died and
suffered such things for the elect, (or grant it in some sense for the whole
world) or the elect and the whole world, all and each should have perished
eternally, though Christ so dying was not, as the damned are and shall be
separated from God, being even then able to say, My God, my God, (why have thou
forsaken me.) How soever, if it hold true in the former branch, concerning
others damnation, then in our selves also, if once we knew Gods will in it; for
what are we to God more then others (considered in our selves?) I conclude this
point with the speech of a dying man, The speeth of a dying man.
as I have heard it to this effect related; who having accused himself with
God, yet, said he, here is my comfort, I am able to say that in my most serious
thoughts, I ever preferred God above my self: And now Lord, thou know my
heart, if my damnation may more glorify thee then my salvation, Lo here I am.
And thus, I may truly say, we in all true submission of our selves, souls and
bodies unto God, ought to be affected.

And so I conclude this first and large Use, wherein, if in some passages of
it, I may seem to have digressed, yet I hope I shall not be thought (by such
especially as desire truly to deny themselves) to have transgressed, I not
knowing whether, This was preached at Dantzick in Prusia, in March 1642.
in regard of my doubtful stay among you, I shall have like occasion again to
fall upon this so necessary an argument of Self-denial.

SECT. 10. Containing a Second Use, or a Reproof of such as being convicted by
the Word, do yet oppose it; and are all for themselves.
Second use of reproof,
NOw secondly, The practice of these Jews in my text does justly reprove all
such, as being especially convinced of their evil ways and doings by the
word, 1 Generally, of such as being convicted do yet oppose the word,
do yet oppose the same, and withstand the saving work of it, by standing so
much upon their own wisdom, will, worth, and good conceit of themselves, in
which through self-love, and selfpride they cannot deny themselves in the
least. Are we blind also? said the proud and arrogant Pharisees to Christ, Joh.
9.39, 40. And elsewhere, Joh. 8.32, 33, 34. We were never in bondage to any
man: how say thou, ye shall be made free? when yet they were both blind,
and the servants of sin. And though apparently, and much more then these, they
were the crucifyers of Christ, yet (even immediately after a mighty work of Gods
providence in delivering the Apostles out of prison, which yet remained shut,
and the keepers standing before the doors) the High Priests and Sadduces could
say to them, Acts 5.23.28. -- Ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and
withstand their own conversion,
and intend to bring this man's blood upon us. If these here had stood so upon
their own innocence, wisdom, freedom from sin, and not upon this conviction,
have denied themselves in the same, when had they been converted? And so in
like case, when shall many amongst us be converted and saved, as many amongst us
who though manifestly convinced of their sins particularly, by the word of
reproof both publicly and more privately, stand so much on their own wisdom,
innocence, worth, fullness, that through the pride of their hearts, stoutness of
will, and love to their sins, they will not deny themselves in any of these, by
an ingenuous confession or by stouping and yielding to Gods word, but rather
are more hardened and become more resolute in sinning, even because of the
reproof and conviction. The judgment belonging to suchis, whose judgment is
to be let alone,
that they are left to themselves, and given up to their own wisdom and
willfullness to perish at length in their own ways. So said our Savior
concerning the Scribes and Pharisees, after he had with no profit to them
reproved them, Mat. 15.3.-14. -- Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the
blind, etc. As of old, concerning Ephraim; Ephraim is joined to Idols: Let him
alone. Hos. 4.17. and so left to perish.
And in effect God says the like to others now: such a man is wedded and
joined to his lusts, Let him aloue; to his own wisdom and will; let him
alone: to his whore, to his gold by covetousness, to the world; let him alone.
I will leave him to himself, and in the chains of his own willfullness, and
under the command of his own lusts, till he perish everlastingly in them, his
whore shall be his God: that pleasure his heaven, all he will get,

2. Particularly of self-seekers. Prove. 3.5.7. Romans 12.16.
All this is for the just reproof, yea and condemnation of such as Idolizing
themselves, are and willl be 1. Self-wise, and self-conceited, leaning to their
own understanding both in matter of doctrine, and practice of life, framing
nearer ways to heaven and easier then ever God made, and living by rules of
their own devising. 2. Self-willed, stiff, stout, and unyeelding in their own
bad ways. 3. Self-lovers, selfadmirers, and self-seekers. But all this while,
where is selfdeniall? and where is true conversion? and where will be Salvation?

2. More specially, this is for the reproof of such as in whose Practice and
mouths this (and such like) rules and sayings are, Every man for himself, and
God for us all. True, Especially of such as are all for themselves,
thus far, God must either be for us or all we can do for our selves will be to
little purpose: Yea and all which others will do for us his children, who
should be but ill provided or cared for, if God cared not for us. Nay, but this
is said by such as care not for any other God or man, and not for any else,
but for themselves; and that not for the good of their souls, which were much
to be wished; but for the things of this life, with neglect of whatsoever may
make for (not only their own eternal good and welfare, but) Gods glory, the
furtherance of the Gospel of Christ, the good temporal and spiritual of
others. So that whilst men are thus for themselves, Gods glory, the Gospel,
religion, christian profession, and all other men and things must be for them
too, or they are not right. None of these things are respected by them: neither
will they by self-denial be any thing (to the prejudice of their temporal
honor, gain, ease, and delights) for God, for religion, or for the spiritual
good of their own or others souls, yea, or for others in any respect, further
then makes for their own carnal, or at best only worldly ends.

As 1. not for God and his glory,
1. Though Gods glory lie at stake, and the credit and honor of profession, yet
many carnal Gospellers regard that nothing at all, but rather then they will
deny themselves in sinful delights, gainful trade of sinning, foolish
fashions, whose name through them, is blasphemed.
scandalous courses; The name of God through them (for any thing they care)
shall be blasphemed among the Gentiles. (among Papists, Atheists, and such as
are glad of any occasion to reproach religion and profession.) Religion, which
yet they must and will profess, shall be made subordinate to their aims: and
if it will not stoop and serve their ends, and be for them, they will not be
for it, but for themselves. Let religion and Gods glory sink or swim for them,
so they get that they seek and aim at, let it shift for it self: God will have
a care of it and of his own glory, what need they trouble themselves about it.
Every man for himself, and so must God also be for his own honor (for all
them) if he will have it.

2. Not for the good of others
2 And for others good: Its true, God alone is able to do us good without the
mutual aid and help one of another; but he will have it otherwise. He will
have us rejoice and weep one with another: he will have one man teach and
instruct another, Romans 12.15.
and every one give good example to other, and to take knowledge of other men's
graces and gifts as well as their own, as yet God would have them;
whilst he says, Phil. 2.4. Look not every man on his own things, but every
man also on the things of others. When Canaan was to be divided, and 48 Cities
to be set out for the Levites, Numb. 35.2-6, 7, 8. God would not give the
Levites any inheritance among their brethren, or set out those Cities at first,
till the whole land was divided among the other Tribes; then were the Levites
to be relieved our of the others tenths, and out of the shares of the other
Tribes to have those cities severally allotted to them, which they were to give
them, according to the proportion of the inheritances first given unto them.
God has made the Church and Commonwealth two distinct bodies, not for the
good, either 1. of Commonwealth,
in which the members of each body should be serviceable one to another. In the
common wealth he has distinguished callings, (no one man having all gifts, nor
being sufficient to himself) wherein he will have one man helpful to another
(according to his calling) that each may stand in need of other, and each may
afford his care and help to other; Insomuch that the King himself, as he is not
able to subsist of himself, but stands in need of his meaner subjects, even of
the husbandman; the King himself is served by the field; Eccles. 5.9. Romans 13.4.
so is he not for himself, alone, but is the minister of God to his people for
good. If now every one will be for himself, what will become of the
Commonwealth in the end? whence injustice, etc.
what would follow but injustice, defraudation one of another, extortion,
oppression, and in the end utter confusion?

So the Church also or mystical body of Christ, Or 2. of the Church,
wherein is diversity of callings and of gifts, 1 Cor. 12. whereof one cannot
be without another: where God has appointed a Communion of Saints, wherein we
are to serve one another in love, and to have and show the like care one of
another, wherein (besides communion with God internal and external) there is
both an invisible or internal communion one with another in the conjunction of
their hearts by love; where love, and all offices of love and duty are wanting.
and in the offices thereof, in mutual prayers and thanksgivings; and also
external, both in preaching and hearing, and in other offices, both
spiritual, as mutual admonitions and exhortations, reprehensions and
castigations, (by which spiritual evils are removed) so by purity of
doctrine, and good example of life: as also corporal, by alms, and other works
of mercy, yea and duty. Now where by self-denial men do not perform such
duties one to another, (and much self-denial is required thereunto) but that
every one by a disordered self-love and self-respect will be for himself, what
will become of the Church of God, or of the communion of Saints? We see it in
many places and persons, in whom such self-respects take place, Whence much
danger and damage to the Church.
where true love is wanting, places and offices in the Church sought after, but
preaching and good example of life is neglected; the Church is robbed by greedy
Patrons of her patrimony; Levites denied or put from their maintenance and
places of dwelling; people either denied their spiritual food, or fed with
husks of humane inventions, and of errors broached through ignorance, or
ambition and self-respects, to serve the times, and be a step and ladder to
preferment; and maintained by wilfulness and self-love, whilst men in love
with their own opinions, will stick by them, lest they seem inconstant.

Thus as such as these are all for themselves, Or 3. Of posterity,
and not at all either for the good of commonwealth or Church; so some are as
little for their Posterity after them, saying, That if they can have enough to
serve their own turns for the present, and if things go but well with them
whilst they live, they need not care for others after them, who must shift for
themselves as they have done. This graceless conceit, savouring of so much
self-respect, is wicked and unsound, whence danger of ruin 1 To private
families, by wastefull and careless parents.
and the practice of it, if it were general, would be the ruin 1. Of private
Families: For how should children be provided for, if parents (respecting
nothing but their own ease, pleasures and voluptuousness) should either neglect
their callings, and the care, in an honest way, to provide for their families,
and to lay up for their children; or mispend and waste all on their lusts, on
their horses, hawks, dogs, or on harlots, or on their backs and bellies, by
gorgeous apparel, and delicate or excessive fare, above the proportion of their
means and decency of their callings, whereby they are forced to cut down their
woods, to mortgage, and at length to forfeit or sell outright their
inheritances, house and lands, which being left by their Ancestors, they
should leave and transmit to their Posterity.

2 To the commonwealth, by greedy Magistrates,
2 No greater decay or sign of ruin to the Commonwealth, then when
Magistrates and Officers, every man serves himself and his own turn of it, and
respects his own private commodity for the present, and neither the public and
common good of many, whilst each for his time interverts from the common stock
and public Treasury; nor yet of posterity and such as come after them. and
Monopolizers.
Thus it is with Monopolizers, Ingrossers, etc.

3 To Religion,
3 And for Religion; if care be not had to transmit it pure unto posterity,
after our departure out of this life, and that God by others after us may be
glorified and served according to his own will and word, by time-serving
Teachers.
what indeed will become of it, or of the Church? It may fail for the care of
many, who receiving it as pure gold from God and our fathers, seek to mix and
adulterate it for their own base ends and hopes in this world. Thus did not
Moses,
Thus did not Moses, when he was so careful to instruct Joshua, and to charge
him, the elders and people before his death, Deuteronomy. 31.2, 7, 26, 29, etc. nor
Joshua, Joshua,
before his death; see Jos. 23.1, 2. to the end, and chap. 24.1, 2. and so on
to ver. 29. nor Paul, whose both fear and care was, or Paul,
that after his departure grievous wolves should not enter into the Church of
the Ephesians, not sparing the flock; which accordingly he commends to the care
of the Elders of that Church, who had public spirits.
Acts 20.28, 29, etc. All these had, and generally the godly have public
spirits, and are not all for themselves. And such spirits should we all strive
for, that we may attain at length this excellent and most necessary grace of
self-denial.

And so we come to a third, which is also a last Use of the former Observation.

SECT. 11. Containing a third Use, Encouraging and Directing what to own,
showing for what we are to deny our selves: And first, for God, in his
Attributes and Glory.
Use 3 For Encouragement and Direction, what especially to own and seek,
3. THat we may both be better enabled, and more encouraged to deny our selves
in all the forenamed particulars, let us be directed what especially to own,
what chiefly to seek, respect and honor above our selves, and above all things
else on earth; that so by denying our sinful, yea natural, if not (in the
sense already showed) our spiritual selves, we may be no losers in the end,
but such as by the wisest, safest and only way, shall be found truly to seek
our selves, and so in the end prove wise, (when all others shall prove fools)
even wise to the eternal salvation of our souls. This is done, and for what to
deny our selves.
whilst by true self-denial we do subordinate our selves and all
self-respects unto those four generals, which formerly have been but only
named; they being such, and the only things for which we are to deny our
selves, and which respectively we are to admire, and in our thoughts, Four
things especially to be admired and sought above all, without which no
self-denial.
estimations and endeavors to prefer before all things else: And these are 1
God in his Perfections and Glory. 2 Christ, in his Excellency and
All Sufficiency. 3 Our own souls in the excellency and salvation of them. 4 The
Church of Christ on earth, in the whole, and in the particular members of it.

Instance, first in these Jews, who, being convinced, did see and acknowledge
And first, let us see here whether these here in my Text, whilst they denied
themselves, were not the rather moved and enabled thereunto by being first, or
at least withal inwardly convinced, and also made to see, and in heart to
acknowledge all these. Not doubting but that they diligently attended unto the
things which were spoken by Peter and the rest (without which no conversion)
their hearts were, 1 God in his glory. Ver. 16. and 2, 3, 4.
without all question, opened to see 1 The glory, sovereignty and truth of God,
who now according to what was so long before spoken by the Prophet Joel, did
show wonders in heaven, and from heaven by the rushing mighty wind, appearance
of fiery tongues sitting upon each of them, and especially by their speaking of
so many and diverse languages on a sudden: now they are told, and are convinced
that the wonders and miracles of Christ were wrought by God, that God by his
determinate counsel -- did deliver Christ into their hands, and Ver. 22, 23,
24.33, 34.
and now had raised him up, and by his right hand exalted, and set him on his
right hand, and made him both Lord and Christ. 2 Christ's glory and excellency.
2 Withal, they could not but see the excellency and glory of Christ, now
sitting at the right hand of the glory of God, and made both Lord and Christ,
and now, according to the promise of the Father, shedding forth this (even the
holy Ghost) and all such things as they did now see and hear; Verse. 33, etc.
yea, sitting also as Judge over all his foes, till they be made his footstool.
3 Their need of being saved. Ver. 23.36.
3. Now also being convinced, that they by wicked hands had crucified him their
Savior, yea and Judge, they see their souls in a damned condition, that
nothing in themselves or on earth could be given in exchange for their souls,
as equivalent thereunto, unless it were this blood of Christ which they had
shed; whereof being yet somewhat doubtful, and yet seeing a necessity of
saving their souls, they, preferring their souls now before the whole world,
cry out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? and as the Jaylour in like case,
Sirs, What must I do to be saved? 4 The worth of the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ,
4 And thus they also both highly account of these Apostles, (seeking direction
from them) and of those other Disciples with them, not regarding any longer (as
not their own, so not) the wisdom, authority, or favor of their Priests, and
learned Scribes and holy Pharisees (as they would seem: to whom they join
themselves,
) yea also, they joined themselves unto the Church, and preferred the communion
thereof before and their carnal friends, saving themselves from that untoward
generation, admiring only (among men) the saints of God, delighting now only
in those that were excellent on earth, looking on all others as the foes of
Christ, and such as shortly after should be made his footstool, Verse 35.
seeing no more any thing in any of them for which they should deny Christ, as
formerly they had done; Matthew. 27.20. Acts 3.14.
but such baseness in them, and such worth in Christ, as for whom they resolved
to deny themselves and all others whatsoever, and for whom they deny all
carnal friends.
and to prefer one Saint or true Christian before all ungodly ones and enemies
to Christ, how great, wise, learned, noble otherwise howsoever they be.

Therefore let us (who are taught and cannot but know what especially to choose
and prefer as excellent, Hence let us learn to subordinate all,
and that the rather by their example) highly esteem only of those four things
named; subordinating our own desires, judgments, affections and whole selves,
and all things else thereunto, especially whilst withal we compare and
consider our own, and the creatures vileness, weakness, inferiority and
unworthiness: striving and endeavoring to be nothing in our selves, or in the
creature, but all out of our selves, especially in God and in Christ.

1. The Name of the Lord alone is excellent, (or exalted) his glory is above
the earth and heaven, Psalm. 148.13. 1. To God. and his glory, Only admiring him
in his perfections, as
Let us then only admire him, and not our selves, or any thing else but only in
him; and let his glory be dearer to us, then all the world besides. He is wise
in heart, and mighty in strength, Job 9.4. Touching the Almighty, we cannot
find him out: he is excellent in power and in judgment, Job 37.23, 24.

1 In his wisdom that we may deny our own wisdom and reason.
1. Now considering first his wisdom, and learning once to admire it, who can
or ought stand upon any wisdom of his own? who should not deny his own
thoughts? Isai. 55.7. Who dares reason, dispute or reply against his doings? or
bark against his word? who should not tremble at it? and confessing his own
darkness of heart, Romans 1.21. ignorance 1 Cor. 2.14. and blindness of mind,
Ephesians. 4.18. 2 Cor. 3.14. Who should not cry out, thy judgments are a great
deep, Psalm. 36.6. Thy footsteps are not known, Psalm. 77.19. O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! etc. Romans 11.33, 34, With
Job, Who is he that hides counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uttered
that I understood not; things too wonderful for me, which I knew not --
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 42.3, 4, 5, 6.

2 In his power,
2. I know, says Job again, Thou can do every thing, Job 42.2. He takes
away, who can hinder him? If God will not withdraw his anger, to humble us,
that we stand not out against him either
the proud helpers (or helpers of pride or strength) do stoup under him. If I
speak of strength, lo, he is strong, says Job also, chapter 9.12, 13. -- 19. Now
who, thus acknowledging, will not but humble himself under his mighty hand? 1
Pet. 5.5, 6. Who dares harden himself against him, 1. By impenitency, Or 2. by
presumption.
either by impenitency, and not rather upon this consideration of his power,
prepare to meet God by repentance, as Amos 4.12. with 13? or by presumption,
and fighting against this mighty King and God, or against his People, Or 3. by
security.
Acts 5.38, 39. Or by security, not fearing his wrath? who will not rather take
hold on his strength (both by meditation and faith) that he may make peace with
him? Isai. 27.4, 5. as did Jacob with Esau, Rahab with Joshua, Josh. 2.10. --
12, 13. -- 18. and so the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.3, 4, etc. with 11.19, 20.

3. In his holiness, that we do not justify our selves.
3. Admire only the holiness and righteousness of God, whose name is holy,
Isai. 57.11. and who is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works,
Psalm. 145.17. and thence learn upon no conceit of thine own righteousness or
innocence, either to swell against thy brethren, Isai. 65.5. Or to plead it
with God, Jer. 2.35. or otherwise either to justify thy self, Job 9.15. -- 20,
21. Or to condemn God, Job 40.2. -- and 8. saying as v. 4, 5. Behold, I am
vile, what shall I answer thee? etc. For, how should man be just with God? If
he contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand, Job 9.2, 3.

4. In his will.
4. Acknowledge his will only sovereign, Psalm. 115.3. that thou may have no
will of thine own.

5. In his goodness and grace.
5. His grace, and goodness, in the freeness, power and plenty of it, that thou
may not stand on any worthiness, gift, or ability of thine own, 1 Cor. 4.7.
and that nothing may content thee but mercy, ever acknowledging thy self less
then the least of his mercies.

6. In his blessedness.
6. His blessedness in himself, and him the fountain of all happiness, that thou
may not admire any thing here below, or place thy felicity in the same, or
yet measure and judge of thy self by it; but may make God thy portion,
accounting his favor better then life.

7. In his glory.
Lastly, Learn to prefer in thy thoughts, prayers and desires, and in all thy
doings and sufferings the glory of God, above all things else desired, enjoyed,
done and performed by thee, that thou may judge thy self worthy of nothing
but shame, and not seek thyself in any thing, accounting it thy honor when in
any thing even by thine own shame for his name and other sufferings thou can
glorify him, though by thine own death, as Joh. 21.19. In a word, that, as
has been lately showed before, his Glory may be dearer to thee then thine own
soul, and (if need were) then the salvation of it.

SECT. 12. Showing we are to deny our selves secondly for Christ in his
excellencies and all sufficiency, by making him All and in All things to us.
2. All must be subordinated to Christ,
2. BUt God the Father chiefly seeks his own glory, by honoring Christ his Son
in our nature, John 8.54. in whom all the attributes of glory (which immediately
looked upon would overwhelm us) do so shine out as that with safety, and to our
comfort we may behold the same; these especially, his goodness and mercy, his
justice, and his wisdom, in whom the Father will be glorified.
reconciling infinite justice with infinite mercy. Thou art my servant (says
God to Christ under the name of Israel) in whom I will be glorified, Isai.
49.1, 2, 3.-5. Therefore Christ now near his death prays saying, Father, the
hour is come, glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorify thee: And now O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I (as God)
had with thee before the world was, Joh. 17.1. -- 5.

Learn we hence then to seek Gods glory by seeking Christ's glory; and that with
good reason, seeing God seeks his own glory by seeking Christ's, and so by
admiring only Christ, and God in Christ, learn to deny thy self in thine own
name and glory. And here be ravished in the admiration 1. of the excellency of
Christ. Christ should be admired by us,
Secondly, of his fullness and all sufficiency: and so deny thy self in all
things, yea wholly empty thy self, that Christ only may fill thee, and be all
and in all things, yea every way all sufficient to thee; that so by such
denial of thy self thou may savingly and everlastingly find thy self again
in Christ.

1. In his excellencies,
1. Conceive of the person of Christ in our nature as one preferred for person,
office and gifts far above all Angels, Hebr. 1.4, 5, etc. being for his person
otherwise the brightness of the Fathers glory, and as he stands in relation to
us,
and the express image of his person, v. 3. And then down with all humane
excellencies, and with all high conceits that any man can have of himself in
respect of birth, gifts, parts, indowments or any prerogative whatsoever; look
upon him as he stands in relation to us, and then see if we have ought of our
own to stand upon, or to own for ours.

1. As our Head. who must acknowledge 1. Our inferiority.
1. He is our head, the head of the body the Church, -- that in all things he
might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1.18. In regard of this his eminency and
high dignity and headship, learn we to acknowledge, 1. our own inferiority, in
regard of any worth or excellency in us, and that we are not worthy to unloose
the lachet of his shoes, as the Baptist said of him, Joh. 1.15.-17. and 3.30.
He that comes after me is preferred before me: And, He must increase, but I
must decrease. 2. Our Subjection.
So, as Christ increases in our estimation, we will decrease, and be more vile
and low in our own eyes. 2. Our Subjection under him our mystical head, Hebr.
2.8.
whom we ought to obey, and to deny our own wills, knowing our selves to be
only at his disposal. 3. Our dependence on him.
3. Our dependence on him, as the cause of all our spiritual being, life,
sense and motion, which by way of influence are derived from him our Head to us
his members, that so without him, we may acknowledge our selves even the best
of us, but as dead and liveless stocks, (as of our selves) and not able to do
any thing; of which more in the next branch of his fullness.

2. As our Surety.
2. He is also our Surety, and we the debtors who have nothing of our own to
pay: he is one that by his obedience active and passive pleased God, and
appeased him toward us; who must thence see our own weakness, and the
worthlessness of all we can either do or suffer for him. He is one, who to work
our reconciliation with his father stepped in between his fathers wrath and us,
and paid our ransom by the price of his blood, to teach us to acknowledge the
enmity we lay under, the greatness of our debt and desert, yea that most
certain and inevitable damnation under which we are whilst we are in our
natural condition, and shall for ever be, if, not denying our selves in our
conceited innocence, righteousness and goodness, and not relying wholly and
only on him, we lose the benefit of his death and of pardon, and so die in our
sins.

3. As an example to us of all Holiness.
3. He is moreover a most perfect example to us of all holiness in our nature,
of humility, meekness, patience, sobriety, temperance, chastity, to take us off
from bragging of any of these in our selves, and to shame and humble us who
come so far Behind.

4. As our Judge.
4. Let us conceive of Christ as of him that must be our Judge, and before whose
bar and judgment seat we must all appear and stand, Romans 14.10.11, 12. 2 Cor.
5.10. So shall we not stand upon our own justification, but in all self-denial
judge our selves, that we be not judged of him for ever with the judgment of
condemnation.

2. Christ is to be admired in his Fullness and All Sufficiency.
2. Learn we to admire Christ in his fullness and all sufficiency; that we may be
all in him, when, by self-denial, we are nothing at all in our selves. So we
shall be no loosers by denying our selves in other things, as these here were
not. They flying out of themselves were sent by the Apostles to Christ only,
and directed to profession of his name alone, by being baptized into the same:
Acts 16.30, 31, 38. and 10.43.
to faith in his Name, and to repentance for the remission of sin, so as that
through his Name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins.

Now here let our care be above all, by faith and self-denial to get into
Christ, to attain a new Being in him, to regain our selves (being lost in the
first Adam) in him the second Adam, in whom only All fullness of grace, life,
righteousness, holiness is stored up, and of all good and saving things
besides; and from whom only, as from a full fountain, we can hope to have them
derived and conveyed unto us. who is a fountain of grace to us,
God has set and pitched his love only on Christ his Son, and loves no man
savingly but only in him: He makes him a fountain of life, grace and glory to
his chosen; For so it pleases the Father that in him should all fullness dwell
Col. 1.19. And that of his fullness we should receive, and grace for grace, John
1.16. grace according to our necessity and measure, for and according to that
fullness and variety of all grace laid up in him as our Head, and proposed as an
Head, and second Adam.
for us, to be dispensed to us according to our several necessities,
diversities of our callings, several measures of grace; and so, as no grace
(laid up in Christ as in a treasury for us) shall be wanting to us as our need
shall be.

Our chief care should be to be all in him, There is a Being 1 Out of Christ,
before the fall and since: 1 A natural, 2 Sinful, and 3 Worldly Being.
Prefer we then in our thoughts that Being which is in Christ before all other
Beings without him. We had a Being out of him as a Savior, first, before the
Fall in innocence, which was happy, but not stable. Secondly, after the Fall;
and that both a natural Being; for in him (as God) we live, move, and have our
being, Acts 17.28. this is good, but not saving: As also in and under Sin and
Misery, which Being we have only in the first Adam, Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.22.
and it is a miserable being: Yea, and a worldly Being, as a being rich and
wealthy, a being wise after the flesh, a being mighty, a being noble, etc. And
this is a Being, such as most desire, yet not most desirable. But the Being
which most of all we should admire, desire, and delight in, is a Being by faith
in Christ, 2 In Christ by faith,
not by bare and outward Profession only, as some whole Churches are said to
be, (wherein all were not so sound) as 1 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.22. but a Being in
Christ by true faith, and according to power, such as Paul preferrs before all
outward privileges and righteousness of the Law, when (denying all these) he
so preferrs, and desires to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. and speaking of
himself, I knew (says he) a man in Christ, etc. 2 Cor. 12.2. This is that
Being which we read of 1 John 5.20. where it is said, And we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ: this is the true God, and eternal life.
This our Being in Christ in effect is all one with Christ's being in us, whereby
also Christ it in us.
whereby God (and Christ) is said to dwell in us, and we in him, 1 John 4.15,
16. of which Christ says, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood (which
is not orally and carnally, but by faith) dwells in me, and I in him, John
6.56. and, Abide in me and I in you, -- he that abides in me and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit, Joh. 15.4, 5. Thus we once being in Christ, are
one in him, and in the Father, John 17.21. As thou Father art in me, prays
Christ, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us.

This Being in Christ is to be admired and preferred before all other Beings,
as alone being 1 Stable, and better then that we had in the first Adam.
This is the Being to be desired of us above all Beings else; as being 1 A
stable Being, and therefore much better and firmer then that we had in Adam
before the fall; or then that which many yet would have and hold in the first
Adam, whilst they ascribe to themselves such a power of will and natural
abilities, that (being especially helped generally by the illustration of
grace) they have power to believe and repent if they will; and so to stand (and
persevere) if they will, and if they will, to fall: but how, in comparison of
this our stable and established Being in Christ, (who are assured of it by
being anointed, sealed, and by receiving the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts, 2 Cor. 1.20, 21, 22.) are we (if we had even Adams innocence, as well
as power of will) to deny our selves in the same!

2 Spiritual, and better then either our natural or worldly Being.
2. It is a spiritual Being, and therefore better then any natural Being we
have on earth, which for it, when the case so requires, is to be denied: As is
also our worldly Being, and all earthly respects. Hence the Apostle opposes
this our Being in Christ (for the comfort of such as were otherwise base, and
could deny themselves in other things) against being wise, mighty, noble in the
flesh: God calls not many such; but chooses foolish, weak, and base things of
the world --, that no flesh should glory in his presence (or stand upon such
terms with him:) But (says he to such as were chosen and savingly called,
though otherwise but mean in all these worldly respects) of him are ye in
Christ Jesus.

3 Honorable.
3 And as this Being in Christ is spiritual, so you see it is also Honorable;
for hereby, though otherwise never so mean in the world, we become, and are the
sons of God, John 1.12.

4 Rich, whereby we partake of his Annoynting, he becoming to us a Prophet,
4 It is also a rich Being, whereby we becoming by it members of Christ, and
that both in regard of body and soul, 1 Cor. 6.15, 17. Romans 12.5. do partake of
his Annoynting, that is, of his Spirit, Joh. 2.27. and of all the gifts of it,
Acts 2.17, 18. as these in my Text did, ver. 38. by which he becomes to us a
Prophet, revealing in us and to us the eternal will and good purpose of the
eternal Father concerning our salvation, Priest,
John 1.18. a Priest, to reconcile us by his blood, to bring us into favor
with God again, and to keep us in the same by interceding for us, and by
pleading our cause at his Fathers right hand. and King.
A King, to rule and guide us by his word and Spirit, and to fight for us and
protect us against all enemies, bodily, spiritual, eternal and infernal; in
the mean time enduing us with the riches of all his merits. And what are all
earthly things to this Being?

5 Blessed, and much better then a sinful Being.
5. It is also a blessed, holy and happy Being, Ephesians. 1.3. and in that regard
infinitely better then our being in sin and under wrath, as wicked men are; who
being out of Christ, are never well, or to their content, but when they are
drunk, merry, secure, proud, in the fashion of the world, and in their heart
glorifying themselves, as Babylon is brought in, Rev. 18.7. saying in her
heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Such a Being is
a miserable Being; and as it is sinful, so is it temporary, and shall end when
endless sorrows beign: whereas our Being in Christ, as it is from eternity, 6
Eternal.
even before our being in the world, and before our effectual calling, namely,
in Gods election, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. yea, and after our calling, notwithstanding
our falls, which do not separate us from Christ, after we once be truly in him
(though thereby we have no encouragement to sin:) so it is to eternity: Here
in assured hope and right, we even now being raised (in our bodies) and sitting
together inheavenly places, namely in Christ Jesus: and hereafter in the full
fruition and beatifying vision and sight of him.

In these regards we are to deny our selves in the rest.
These things considered, should we not for Christ and the enjoying of him be
content, if need so require, to deny our selves in all things else? What* shall
we lose, if forgoing all things else, we gain him, and such a Being in him,
which (as is said) includes a fullness of all things, and is better then any
being else out of him, as being an estate and a Being most stable, spiritual,
honorable, rich, and blessed even to eternity?

and to labor after this Being; seeing hereby we 1 Get somewhat to oppose our
natural and carnal selves;
And this the rather should we now by self-denial and seeking to become
new-creatures in him, labor for; inasmuch as so we shall find 1 That in us
which will enable us to withstand and oppose our carnal, sinful and natural
selves and Being, which Being alone swayes all, and carries us from God and
Christ to all evil. Where there is nothing but a natural or a sinful Being,
it will never, yea, it can never oppose it self, but being one with it self,
seeing nature will not otherwise oppose or den itself.
will seek ever to maintain it self in its own proper Being: as carnal wisdom
will never oppose or deny it self, but when Christ is once our wisdom, and we
are once made wise in him, carnal reason and wisdom will find opposition from
spiritual wisdom; so generally when we are all and only flesh and carnal,
fleshly and carnal men and company without us, and such like motions within us
have us at command, and no temptation is truly and spiritually (unless upon
carnal, natural, worldly and base respects) withstood: But that then is no
true, genuine, or full self-denial; nature or the flesh rules and commands all
still. Only where we have a new being in Christ, there we have that which
truly and diametrally will oppose corruption and the fleshly part and self in
us. So only it is with the truly regenerate, where the spirit in them (as a
new and supernatural principle) does lust against the flesh, and (though it
lust and strive against the spirit, yet) the spirit in the end prevails. There
is no true selfdenyall of a man's self but by the spirit of holiness, and of
power; This helps to enable us to deny our selves.

2. Thus, by becoming new creatures in Christ, 2 Find f^ll^^ content.
we only find true, full, and every way satisfactory content, which makes us
willing to deny our selves, and to forsake all, whether sinful, or yet if need
be, natural contentments for him, and for God in him. No content out of
Christ: which men in vain seek,
Whilst men want Christ, and enjoy not God in Christ, they seek contentment in
and from every thing, but find it in nothing. They know no sufficiency but
such as is in themselves, or in the creature, or (if you will) in God and
Christ enjoyed and had in their own way, and as carnal reason or proud nature
shall dictate to them and direct them. They want the fruition of God (which now
is had only in Christ) and so they want contentment; yet because they would
have it, they seek it either in some base lust and sinful way, from their
lusts,
whether open or more secret, which to them is as their God, and they know no
other happiness (and so every hypocrite lives in some sin or other;) or from
the creatures, or from the creature,
as from riches, favor of men, friends, honors, etc. unto which they flee for
their comfort, or otherwise for defense and protection: or from themselves, in
whole, or from themselves, as from some worth or merit in them;
or at least in part; so seeking salvation, not from Christ alone (as if he
alone were not alsufficient, and alone able to content them,) but from some
supposed merit, or satisfactory works of their own or other men's, from some
goodness of their own nature, or some power of their own free will, or from
their duties, in which they rest.
or at least from their duties, (otherwise good and necessary to help us unto
Christ, and to assure us of our being in him) in which they rest, and with
which (being otherwise it may be, with diligence and zeal performed) they
altogether take up, and so for want of denial of themselves in them, come
short of Christ. Whereas, if these men did apprehend the fullness of Christ, and
saw, and did acknowledge an alsufficiency every way in him, they would soon go
out of themselves, not in part only, but wholly, and be taken off their own
bottoms, making God in Christ their only shield in all their fears and
dangers, Christ is, and ought to be All unto us.
and their exceeding great reward ( Genesis 15.1.) in all their wants and
weaknesses; yea, and Christ alone should and would be All unto them, and in all
things; as he is to them that know him aright, who of God are (or have a Being)
in Christ Jesus: who of God, says Paul, is made unto us wisdom and
righteousness, and sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

And now that we know the excellency and fullness of Christ, let us (whilst we
deny our selves, who alone sets price on all things else:
or that we may so do) make him All unto us, and in all things, yea and above
all things, accounting all things nothing, and as very ciphers, alone (nay
though multiplied) without him; and the least things precious where he is also
enjoyed; in which regard the second Temple in glory, exceeded Solomon's, because
of Christ's presence: Hag. 2.9. Mat. 2.6. Micah 5.2. Psalm. 37.16.
and Bethlehem was not the least (but greatest) among the Princes of Juda,
because Christ was born there. So a little wealth with Christ and
righteousness is better then the riches of many wicked. Yea brown bread with
Christ and the Gospel is good cheer. So a little respect and honor in the
world, yea the very suffering of shame with him and for his name, is great
honor and matter of much rejoicing. Acts 5.41. Phil. 1.29. which without him
are nothing, Prove. 23.4, 5. 1 Timothy 3.8. Tit. 1.7. -- 11. yea very dung,
And contrariwise what is abundance and all riches without Christ, but mere
nothing, or things which are not? what is gain without him, but filthy lucre?
All is but dung without him, or in comparison of him, Phil. 3.8. but with
Christ the dunghill is a Palace, as in Jobs case; the dung cart a precious
odor: whence the saying of one Constantine, who being with other martyrs
carried in a dung-cart to the place of execution, Well, says he, whereas all
our sufferings and sacrifices, Isai. 64.6.
yet are we a precious odor and sweet savor to God in Christ. So what are all
privileges, works, virtues, righteousness of ours without Christ, but
filthiness, and dung? So that God of old threatened to cast the dung of their
solemn feasts upon the faces of the wicked Priests, Mal. 2.1, 2, 3. And said,
are in him asweet savor unto God.
He would not smell in their solemn feasts, Amos 5.21. that is any sweet
savor, as he does from the sacrifice of Christ, Ephesians. 5.2. and from such as
offer their sacrifices in Christ, as from Noah, Genesis 8.21. and 2 Cor. 2.14, 15.
We are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them
that perish: So the liberality of the Philippians toward Paul in prison, Phil.
4.18. was an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to
God. Such are the prayers of Saints, Rev. 5.8.

Why should we not then strive to be all in Christ, and to make him all unto
us? Make we then, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ All to us,
First wisdom; and that both Author, and as the conduit pipe, by whom through
the means of his Word and Spirit, true wisdom is conveyed to us: being
content to be made wise only according to the wisdom in his Word, 1. Wisdom.
both Author, and Object.
revealed thereby and made effectual by his spirit, Matthew. 11.25, 26.27. Luke
10.21, 22. and not according to books of vanity and policy.: and Object, with
Paul, determining not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1
Cor. 2.2. whom to know is eternal life, Joh. 17.3. So we shall defeat the
wisdom of all plotiers, and the wiles of Satan:
17.3. Phil. 3.7, 8. Hereby we become wiser then the wisest on earth, then all
our enemies that plot against us. Yea whilst we are and will be wise only in
Christ, Satan's wiles, stratagems and devises against us shall be defeated: God
will overreach him and all his instruments on our behalf, and out-shoot them
in their own bows, making their wisdom foolishness, and them the authors of
their own shame and ruin. and find good success in all our undertakings.
Never any failed that in his undertakeings, counsels and actions followed the
direction of Gods word, and suffered that to go before him; and that left the
issues, and events of his actions (so undertaken) to Gods wise ordering and
disposal.

2. 2. Righteousness,
Make we again Christ righteousness unto us, in the matter of our
justification, as Paul did, Phil. ^.8, 9. reposing our whole confidence in him
alone, and holding our selves completely righteous in him, without either any
act of our own (as concurring to our justification with God) or work of his in
us (other then that of faith) or supposed merit, our own or others, or treasury
of the Church. So and no otherwise shall we partake of those rich benefits: by
which we also gain many other benefits.
1. Pardon of sin. 2. Imputation of his obedience active and passive. 3.
Adoption and Sonship, Joh. 1.12. and so to be heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ himself. 4. His Intercossion, and appearance in the presence of God
(to answer) for us, Hebr. 7.25. and 9.24.

3. 3. Sanctification. 1. In all our wants of grace,
We from what has been said, see reason also to make him as God has made him
to us, our sanctification: and that first in the want (true or supposed) of
this or that grace, or measure of grace; in the sense whereof it may be we go
mourning, and are ready to think our selves hypocrites at least, if not
reprobates: In this case, comfort we our* selves, (whilst we hunger and labor
after more grace) and rest we in this, that Christ is our Sanctification,
accounting his grace sufficient for us, which for the present we have, 2 Cor.
12.8, 9.
and that (as he answered Paul, crying out unto him of some infirmity of his)
his grace is sufficient for us: His grace first of justification, by which in
Christ we are accounted perfectly sanctified, and by faith in heart purified:
then of sanctification begun in us, which God in Christ accepts of for the
present. Even this very thing that with Paul we are sensible of our failings,
would fain do better, cry out of our infirmities to God, for help and more
grace, accounting our corruptions as so many heavy burdens to us. This is not
done without Gods grace and spirit, for we cannot so much as breath out a sigh
for sin, till God breath it in, Zach. 12.10. Romans 8.26.

Now this measure God is pleased to accept of for the present as sufficient,
and Christ to us in stead of all graces,
as purposing to perfect his own strength in our weakness; and knowing that if
we had such an abundant measure of grace and gifts as we desire, we would stand
in less need of him, and be prouder of the gift then of the giver, and not rest
in him as alone all-sufficient, and better then many graces to us. Which I say,
provided we truly thirst and labor after more grace.
not that upon this pretense any careless liver should take up with any measure
of grace, or please himself with his infirmities, as he will call his grosser
and more wilful sins (such an one I shall discard from the number of true
Christians and genuine sons of God, and babes in Christ, who will ever out of a
true sense be crying for more food, and grow by it too:) but that we all should
labor for true grace in sincerity, and comfort our selves therein and in
Christ our sanctification, whilst we strive but cannot attain to that strength
and measure of grace which we truly and from the heart desire.

2. In our having of the gifts of grace, all which without Christ, are but
glistering sins.
Secondly, then make we Christ sanctification to us not only in the want but
in the having of any gift of grace whatsoever: without whom all our gifts and
graces are but dead carkases, liveless pictures, mere formalities, yea, like
the virtues of the heathen who knew not Christ, glistering sins. Christ is the
very life and soul of all graces, and must be all to us in them all; as our
knowledge,
as what is knowledge of all things else but heathenish science if we know not
God in Christ? All other knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1, 2. and if any man
teach otherwise, and consent not -- to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ -- he
is proud, knowing nothing; at least as he ought to know, zeal,
1 Timothy 6.3, 4. What is our zeal, if it be not according to such knowledge? its
rather fury and madness. What is our faith, faith, hope,
if Christ dwell not in our hearts by it? Ephesians. 3.17. What is our hope, if it be
not in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19. but a comfortless and ungrounded presumption? What
is love or charity if it be not out of a pure heart, charity, 1 Timothy 1.5. Ephesians.
5.2.
and if we do not walk in love, as Christ also has also loved us? and if our
love be not in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1.14. its but a fained love, patience,
1 These. 1.3. What is patience, but a Stoicall blockishness, if our laboring
and not fainting, and so our patience be not for Christ's names sake? Rev. 2.3.
What are our sufferings and bonds, but a thankless bearing of deserved evil,
Our sufferings,
if they be not in Christ and for Christ? Phil. Our good works,
1.13. What are all our good works, alms, fasting, prayer, and generally all
our ways, if they be not in Christ? and living godly,
and what is all our godly living, if it be not in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.12.
but a death whereby we have a name that we live, and spiritual life,
but are dead? Revel. 3.1. What is our spiritual life, if we be not made alive
in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.22. and quickened together with him, Ephesians. 2.5. and if
Christ live not in us? Gal. 2.20. What is it but an artificial and forced
motion, such as is in walking engines, and in pictures and Images with
artficiall rolling eyes, or otherwise drawn or carved to the life? Our
mortification,
In a word, what is mortification, but a monkish holiness, and apish imitation,
if we be not dead with Christ Romans and humility,
6.8. or our humility, in worshipping of Angels or Saints (as not daring come
so boldly into Gods immediate presence) but pride, and a being puffed up in our
fleshly minds, Col. 2.18. and the punishing, not sparing or neglecting of the
body, and hard usage of the body.
but only a show of wisdom in will worship and humility? Col. 2.23. What Is
sanctification then out of Christ? Why should we not deny our selves in all
these and in like things, further then we do suffer them in Christ? In all
these we are to deny our selves, that we may be them all only in Christ. 4.
Make we Christ to us Redemption in all the parts of it.
or why should we be discouraged in some sense of our own wants and
imperfections in these, when we do and suffer them in Christ, in whom they are
accepted and accounted sufficient?

Now lastly, considering this Alsufficiency of Christ, we have reason to make
him (and him only, or God in him) as God has made him to us, Redemption. In
which benefit is included salvation from first to last: not only freedom from
the guilt of sin, by pardon; and power over it by the Spirit; and so a freedom
both from the damnation, Luke 1.68, 69, 71, etc.
and also domination and power thereof, together with final perseverance in
grace to the end, by virtue of Gods new covenant with us in Christ, Jer. 32.40.
but also protection and defense, by the ministry of Angels, Hebr. 1.14. and
otherwise: yea, and consolation in troubles, and a blessing of curses or
crosses and afflictions to us in this life; Let him be our Consolation 1 In all
our Crosses.
at the end thereof a blessed death; and after death a joyful and blessed
resurrection to life and glory for ever. And what needs more? All this (and
more then I can express to you, or you and I conceive within our selves) is
Christ to us, if once by denying our selves in all power of our own (whether
over sin, or other enemies, or in all earthly comforts) we can seek to be All
in all these, and that only in him.

Let us make then Christ all to us in these things, that All in him may be
ours, whilst he is ours, and we his, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. And so let us make
him more specially in all our losses, 2 and Losses.
in the loss of goods, name, friends, and what else; in all which we lose
nothing, if we lose not Christ, who is all in all these to us. Have we lost our
goods? as 1 Of goods,
say we with Paulinus Bishop of Nola, when the City was sacked by the
Barbarians, Lord, let me not be troubled for the gold and silver, for thou art
all to me. Are we disgraced? 2 Name,
or is a fools cap in disgrace put upon us, as once upon one Alexander Cane?
say we as he, Can I have a greater honor done then to be served as my Lord
Christ before Herod? Have we lost our friends, 3 Friends, Senec in Consolat. ad
Polyb.
who seemed to be a staff and a stay unto us? what Seneca said in the
comforting (in such a case) of his friend Polybius a Courtier, may fitlyer be
applied to a Christian concerning Christ; So long as Caesar lives and is thy
friend, thou ought not to complain of thy condition: whilst he is safe,
thou have lost nothing: in him thou have all; he to thee is in stead of all. I
am sure such a one is (and will be) Christ unto us, if once we make him ours.

3 In all our Wants.
And as in our losses, so in our wants on earth, all which are supplied unto us
from Christ and his fullness; so that with (one) Attalus, we may oppose the
name Christian to all things else, and with him say, whilst others brag of
their wealth, honor, friends, etc. But I am a Christian: and with Paul in
want, I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content, etc. I
can do all things (both be full and hungry, abound and suffer need) through
Christ which strengthens me, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.

4 In Death.
Yea, and as in life, so in death we (by denying our selves) may and should seek
to be gainers by gaining him: as Paul, Phil. 1.21. For me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain. Christ takes away the sting of death, and of most terrible
makes it desirable, and changes the condition of it, so that one in Christ may
desire with Paul, to depart, and to be with Christ; and having once truly by
faith seen Christ, with Simeon say, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart
in peace -- for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Luke 2.29, 30. In which
regard death (when especially we are called to suffer it for his Names sake)
should be no death to us, so that by it we may more fully and immediately enjoy
Christ, and in death truly say, 1 Cor. 15.18. 1 These. 4.16.
as Peter of old, and one Lambert of later times, None but Christ, Nothing but
Christ: For blessed are they that die in the Lord: nay, blessed are they being
dead from henceforth, says the Spirit, that they may nest from their labors,
and their works do follow them, 5 After death, where our gain is Glory.
Revel. 14.13. Then our gain is glory, and an eternal retribution: then do we
enter into our Masters joy, which like a sea, is so great that it cannot enter
into us.

Who need now fear, who can but deny himself for such a Christ? And if thus we
can once truly conceive of Christ (as these young converts in my Text began to
do) It will be no hard matter to us to deny our selves for him.

SECT. 13. Showing we are Thirdly to deny our selves in other things for the
eternal good of our souls.
3 Our souls are to be thought more precious then the whole world,
NOw in the third place, Next after Gods glory, and Christ, our own Souls
(compared with all things of this life) would be thought on, and respected as
more excellent then them all, which (all of them, even the whole world it self)
must be denied, and lightly esteemed and accounted of, in comparison of it.
which is to be denied for it. The world and things of it being unworthy that
the soul should either be hazarded for them,
All things of this life are nothing to it for worth and price (seeing Christ's
blood, and not the world or ought in it could redeem it, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.) And
therefore it should not either be hazarded, or so much as employed (seriously)
about the things of this world and life, which are not worth a man's labor,
Prove. 23.4 or that especially the soul, being a spiritual and immortal
substance, should be made a drudge to earth, or seek any happiness from things
mortal and momentany. Man, and the powers of his soul are made and redeemed by
Christ, as for other ends, even for God and his glory, who made man for
himself, and not for the world, to love, follow, seek and serve it; so for
higher objects, and that is himself too, that the end of his labors might be
the fruition of God himself in glory, and of his own eternal happiness in
God. or that either the noble faculties of it should be much employed about
worldly things: as the Understanding, Memory,
How unworthy a thing then is it, how dissonant and disproportionable, that the
faculties of the soul should be seriously employed about the world, or the best
things in it? that either the understanding and thoughts, and so man's head
should plot or be filled with cares of this life, Luke 12.22. or, that the
memory should be so burdened, that with the thought thereof a man's heart
takes not rest in the night, Eccles. 2.23. Or, that the Conscience should be
defiled therewith, Conscience,
yea galled and secretly nipped in the guiltiness of goods ill gotten, and not
by right; or of our precious time misspent about earthly things with neglect
of better: Will,
Or, that the Will of man (whose object should be God) should so absolutely and
so resolutely propend and lean to such things, 1 Timothy 6.9. Or, that his
Affections of Love, Affections,
Desire and Delight should be so intensive toward and in the same, 1 Timothy
6.10. Psalm. 4.6. Or, or yet our Labor. All which being rightly employed, would
bring us to better things.
that the Heart should be set thereon, Psalm. 62.10. Or lastly, that a man's
labor should so much be employed about them, Psalm. 127.2. when especially the
things of this life so impensively sought, and the Soul, cannot both be enjoyed
or had together, each requiring (the soul especially) the whole man? Matthew.
6.24, 33. 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. with Jam. 4.4. Yea, and considering, that the
noble powers of man's soul being rightly employed, and man's labor and pains
wisely ordered, would, with much less ado, bring him to much better riches,
honors, happiness, even to true wisdom and saving knowledge, to
righteousness, joy in the holy Ghost, and at length to eternal life and
salvation.

Why then should we so overvalue the world, and under-value our precious
souls, as not to deny our selves in all things of this world, rather then
either mis-imploy our chief care, or hazard the life of our souls for the
gaining of the world? This was the care of these self-denying Converts, and
should be ours; who should ever oppose the excellency and preciousness of our
souls against all worldly allurements, temptations and offers which the world
can make us. But of our care of it I have spoken but lately.

SECT. 14. Showing Fourthly that the public good of others, of Church and
Commonwealth, is to be preferred before our own.
4 The public good of Church, Commonwealth and public persons, is to be
preferred before all private respects, all which are to be denied for the other.
FOurthly and lastly, We are much to propose unto our selves the public good
of others, especially of the true Church of God on earth; which should of us in
our thoughts and affections be preferred above our chief joy, Psalm. 137.6. in
respect to which all the enemies of it and of Gods people should be basely
accounted of, though otherwise, and in other respects and references near and
deer unto us; yea, and prayed against, as there, ver. 7. Nay, our own private
and particular cause of joy should not be thought on; but laid aside, when it
goes not well with Jerusalem and Sion: as it was with the Wife of Phinehas, as
in diverse examples, Phinehas his Wife,
who for grief to hear that the Ark of God was seized on by the Philistims,
fell in labor, and would not be comforted in a son which she bare: she set not
her heart to that, neither did she regard it; But (to show what she most laid
to heart) she named the child Ichabod, (that is, Where is the glory? or, There
is no glory:) saying, The glory is departed from Israel for the Ark of God is
taken: and so she died, 1 Samuel 4.20.21, 22. Nehemiah,
The like we see in that worthy Nehemiah, Neh. 1.3, 4. who understanding the
misery of Jerusalem (though he himself was in great favor with Artaxerxes the
King, and that it was well with himself, yet) sat down and wept and mourned
certain days, and prayed before the God of heaven on the behalf of his
distressed brethren. The like I might show in Abraham interceding for Sodom,
Abraham.
and specially for Lot, and in all likelihood not sleeping the night before,
Genesis 18. Ezekiel, Moses, Paul, Joshua, Josh. 7, 5, 6, 9.
So in Ezekiel and the mourners Ezekiel. 9.4, 8. In Moses and Paul, of whom
before: And in Joshua and the Elders, sorrowfully complaining in fear the
enemies should environ them round, and cut off their name from the earth, so
that God should not have a Church on earth to serve and honor him. And thus,
by Gods blessing and mercy, the care of our dread Sovereign, Our own Land at
this time,
and of this our Nation has showed it self concerning the distressed estate of
Gods Church and people in Ireland, not only by and in the monthly exercise of
prayer, not sparing either Prayers,
fasting and supplication for them, to draw down a blessing from God upon them
and themselves; but by supplies made both of money, Money, or
munition and men; who to repress those Popish and Romish Rebels, and inhumane
monsters, have hazarded their lives; Lives for Ireland.
yea, many of them, for the public good and peace of that Church and people,
and re-establishing of the true Religion among them, and securing it to our
selves, have already spent their best blood, and lost their lives. and as we
see it in nature.
Thus in the humane Body, the hand will expose it self to save the head and the
whole body: yea, in Nature, and in the Universe, the water and fire will
forsake their own proper motion and nature, fire will descend, and water
ascend, rather then there be any discontinuity or vacuity in the whole. Yea,
every creature is ordained of God to be serviceable to the more superior, and
not for it self alone. The Earth is for the corn, wine and oil; and these for
Gods people: Birds, beasts, bees are fruitful not for themselves, but for us
men: neither is every man born for himself, but for others also, and for the
more public good of State and Church. Every good man is a common good, and of
a public spirit for the good of many: This makes such an one a Man among men,
one of a thousand.

Let us thus conceive as of the naturalnesse and necessity, so of the
excellency of this public spirit, Private interests to be denied for public
persons: Example in the Galatians once,
that so for the public good of many, especially of those that are good and
public persons, we may be content to deny our selves in our own particular
interests: as the Galatians were once so affected to Paul, that to have done
him good, or that it had been possible, they would have plucked out their own
eyes, and have given them to him, they had him in such love and estimation, in
Priscilla and Aquila.
Gal. 4.15. as also had Priscilla and Aquila, who for Paul's sake laid down
their own necks, Romans 16.4. so engaging in acknowledgment of thankfulness, not
only him, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles, whose Apostle he was.
However, as the need of such requires, in an high estimation of them, as
public good things, and profitable to many, let us be willing so far to deny
our selves for them, as in our wealth (and that is but duty) to contribute to
them, and communicate to them in all good things, or in all our goods, Gal.
1.6. and afford them double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. and in our names, by answering
for them: in our lives (if need be) by speaking or pleading for them, as did
Queen Esther. Thus to do, namely, to subordinate a man's self to the more
public and general good of the Church, Signs of self-denial, gathered from
the four general things named.
cause, and people of God, is an evident expression of one that denies himself
truly; as is also the practice of those other things formerly mentioned; as,
Greater care to gain a man's own soul then the world: High estimation of Christ,
of his excellency, fullness and All Sufficiency, with a true sense of a man's own
emptiness, worthlessness, folly, especially an high estimation of Christ, with
a mean conceit of our selves,
impotency, wretchedness, baseness; or in want of the sense of these, with a
true desire to know the worst by a man's own self; as in Eli, 1 Samuel 3.17, 18.
Job 34.32. and Psalm. 139.23. and by being well-affected to the means of
discovery of him to himself, and not willingly and wilfully ignorant of what
may debase him, and advance Christ.

and respect to Gods glory.
Lastly, Subordination of a man's self and all unto Gods will and glory; of a
man's wealth, liberty, name, yea life, rather then deny God in his truth, glory,
worship, as we see in Daniel, Dan. 6.10. and in the holy Martyrs of Jesus
Christ, not being ashamed to confess Christ, and to advance Gods glory in any
company, or upon any occasion.

The conclusion of this point of self-denial.
But now it may seem high time to leave this discourse of self-denial in this
place, where it is not so directly and by way of precept taught, as gathered
and presupposed in these who were so savingly touched by the word, and driven
out of themselves, so as to cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? But,
as I have said, the uncertainty of my long abode with you, and of having
occasion more purposely to handle the argument, together with the exceeding
great usefulness and profit (as I hope) of the duty, have drawn me on to be so
large.

This, if it seem to be prolixity, shall be recompensed with brevity in the
dispatch of the third and last observation, concerning the qualification of
those whom God does save, with which all shall be finished.

CHAP. XXXVII.
SECT. 1. Showing thirdly, that such as God converteth and saves, must be
willing and pliable to Gods will, and ready to submit to him, in matter of 1.
Salvation 2. Religion and worship. 3. Obedience.
What shall we do?

FRom these words as formerly, they have been laid open and explained we see,
3. Observation, Such as God will convert and save, must be pliable to Gods will,
as these here were,


That those (of years and otherwise capable) who are converted and saved, are
first made pliable to Gods will, and ready to obey him in all things.

It was so here with these, who upon their conviction were first made willing
to be saved, and that in Gods own way; and then accordingly, renouncing and
denying themselves, as is said, in their own wisdom, will, worth and
righteousness, they seek direction from the Apostles of Christ what to do, who
yet neither sought justification from their works,
showing themselves thereby willing and ready to do whatsoever they should be
directed unto. And though they ask saying, What shall we do? yet they seek not
their justification from any works of theirs (as has been showed) neither do
they think that they can be converted, justified, or saved, nor neglected
works.
and they in the mean time do nothing: therefore showing themselves ready to
receive and to follow direction whereby they might be brought into favor with
God and Christ, and obtain pardon of their offenses, that especially of
crucifying Christ, and might so be saved from deserved wrath, they cry out and
say, What shall we do?

God humbles men to make them thus pliable to him,
And this is one reason among many others formerly named, why God will have his
children cast down with Legal terrors, wounded in conscience, and pricked in
heart, when he means to convert and save them, even to make them more pliable
to his will; and that not only at their first conversion (though that here be
chiefly of us to be considered) but for ever after. both before conversion,
Though this question be not here made after their justification, but before
it, and for ever after.
and accordingly the answer, resolution, and direction given, send them to
profession of Christ by being baptized, to repentance, v. 38. and to faith,
Acts 16.30, 31. which are works, not legal but evangelicall; yet we need not
doubt but that they being once justified by faith in Christ would be, and were
ever after careful and conscionable to adorn their Christian profession with
good works, both of piety toward God, and charity toward man (for after their
through-conversion and faith they devoutly and charitably conversed together,
v. 41, 42-45, 46.) we need not fear that men truly justified will neglect good
works. So that we might spare a labor here, for either urging the necessity of
good works after justification, or for declaiming (by virtue of this Text)
against carnal liberty, and the abuse of the doctrine of free justification to
neglect good works. though the former here be chiefly intended.
This is the question here of men wounded in spirit, driven into straits of
conscience, as being convicted of their sin, and damned condition by reason of
their sin, not knowing either what to say (to excuse or deny their sin) or what
to do to be saved, to flee from wrath to come, or to procure a pardon, and in
effect, what to believe, and in whom; and therefore ready and willing to
believe on the same Christ whom they had crucified, to repent, reform their old
course of life, to obey and do any thing which these holy men of God and
Apostles of Christ should prescribe and direct them unto. God in converts
requires a willingness to yield, and to obey him.
Thus God by his Prophet Isaiah calling the rebellious and hypocritical Jews
to repentance, Isai. 1.16.18, 19, 20. to wash them and make them clean, and
that both with promises and threatenings, speaks after this manner, If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good things of the land, as formerly,
Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow. But if ye refuse
and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, etc. The like the Lord now
requires of all such whom he will savingly convert.

Reason. God saves no man against his will.
The reason is, God saves no against his will, or by forcing of his will. Its
true, No man can come to Christ, except the Father draw him, Joh. 6.44. Yet
this drawing is without compulsion: The heart being pricked and so prepared for
Christ, (by seeing a necessity of a Savior, and by being better conceited of
Christ then formerly, when it either knew him not at all, or had a prejudice
and mean conceit of him) is made willing to embrace him, and not only
willingly, but greedily to accept of him for a Savior. Therefore be first
takes away the stoniness of man's heart,
One of Gods first and chiefest works in the conversion of a sinner is to take
away that stoniness and hardness (whether natural only or also acquired) which
is in it, and in stead thereof to give an heart of flesh, in such are converted.
that is tender, pliable and yielding, Ezekiel. 36.26.

The heart naturally (since sin entered) resists, and as much ar in it lies,
withstands the work of grace; but God before he convert any, takes away all
actual resistance, so that it stands no longer out against him; and breaks the
power of habitual resistance, whereby he works it, as a man would do soft
wax, Otherwise they are unfit and unyeelding.
which yields to the disposition of him that works it, and is apt to receive
the impression of any thing that is applied to it. Whereas an hard heart so
remaining, is like hard wax (unmolten) unyeelding, repelling and resisting all
that is good: or if otherwise as wax, it is so only to the Devil, to his
suggestions and to ill counsel and sin; but to Godward and all goodness, like
hard and unmolten metal; or to a stone, which will sooner break then receive
any impression. It is like the fallow-ground, which being hard and clotty must
first be subdued by the plough before it be fit to receive seed, or to bring
forth fruit: or like an untamed heifer and an unruly colt, which unbroken is
unfit for the yoke or saddle. In a word, as one well faith, God first makes us
fit, and then uses us to work; as a wheel must first be made round, and then
turned round.

Here it might be questioned and asked what work man's natural will, Quest.
What grace is needful to a man's conversion.
assisted with a general work of grace, has in his own conversion? To which I
answer. It is not a common grace, such as is afforded to reprobates in the
Church, as well as to the elect; but a more special, effectual and
determining grace from God, which works upon the will, and swayes it.

It is man indeed who wills, (as it was Lazarus who did arise from the dead)
but it is God who makes man not only able to will, but actually to will his
own conversion, Answ. More then a common grace.
from whom is both the will and the deed, the power and the act, Phil. 2.13.
Even special and effectuall^.
It was Gods effectual work on the heart of these converts, that they were so
willing to obey, and so desirous to be directed what to do, by such as they now
judged able and faithful to direct them aright: even as it is with others,
both in and after their first conversion. Such desire only to know what to do
that is pleasing to God, and they are ready to do it; yet do they not ascribe
the power to themselves, but to Gods grace, and the effectual work of his
Spirit: so David, Cause me to know the way wherein I shall walk -- and teach me
to do thy will: as in David,
It seems then he was willing, ready and resolved to walk in that way, and to
Gods will, when once the one or the other should be made known unto him. But
what? will he do this by his own strength (though now converted)? no: for
besides the force of the words, cause me to know, and teach me to do, which
imply more then a general direction, even an effectual knowledge and
practice, he hereunto craves the special help and effectual assistance of
Gods holy Spirit, (or as some read the words) is assured of the same: Thy
Spirit is good, lead me (or thy good Spirit shall lead me) into the land of
uprightness: quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake, Psalm. 143.8, 10, 11.
Howsoever, thus it is with true converts; and in these Converts.
as with these here, who, as they were willing and ready to follow good
direction given, (which was to repent and believe;) so this readiness, as also
the act and performance after, was Gods work in them: As on the contrary, the
high Priest and whole council of Elders and Scribes being in like manner
charged and convinced by Stephen, as these here by Peter, to be the betrayers,
crucifiers, and murderers of Christ, opposed, and stoned him, Acts 7.51, 52,
etc. and the doing thereof was the work of the Devil in them, and of their own
wicked and obstinate wills, whereby, being stiffnecked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, they resisted the holy Ghost, and became the authors of their
own hardening and damnation. But we rather hasten to the Use of the former
Point, and to an end of all.

By what is said, we see what to judge of disobedient and refractory sinners,
Of reproof of such as resist the work of grace, and withstand their own
salvation;
proudly withstand God, without any trembling at his word, Isa. 66.1, 2. and
are ready to say with proud Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord, that I should
obey his voice? and with those citizens (by whom such as I speak of are meant)
we will not have this man to reign over us, Luke 19.14. And Our lips are our
own, who is lord over us? Psalm. 12.4. These very Jews, both more anciently.
as also Gentiles, Pilate and Herod, and others that rejected and persecuted
Christ, are meant by David, (therein a type of Christ in his sufferings) when
he brings them in Acts 4.27, 28. saying, Let us break their (that is, the
Fathers and the Sons) bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us, Psalm.
2.1, 2, 3. These bands ( Jer. 27.2, 3,-6, 7.) and cords ( Job 39.13. Ezekiel.
4.8.) were signs of subjection and restraint: yet though these bands of Christ
be also bands of love, Hos. 11.4. and his yoke be easy, Matthew. 11.29, 30.
these proud and disdainful ones refuse to serve Christ, and will none of him.
Such are also their scholars, who now, being called upon, and now:
in and by the ministry of the word, to repent, convert and turn from their
own evil ways, and to be subject to Christ as their Prophet, Priest and King,
will none of Christ, will not deny their own wisdom, that they may be wise
only by his word; will have, as an hand in the meriting and work of their own
salvation, so other Priests and Intercessours then he; whether refusing to take
on them Christ's easy yoke,
and in a word, will not submit themselves to him as their King, to be guided
by his word, to repent, and believe on his name, or to forsake any sin for
which they are reproved, and of which convinced; being ready to say, Who is the
Minister? what saucy and bold fellow is he who thus reproves us? As for the
word that thou have spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken
unto thee: But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own
mouth, Jer. 44.16, 17. This, if it be not so openly said of all, yet is done by
all such as answer not Gods call, when they are invited to repent, and told of
Gods heavy judgments if they repent not: yea, also, by such as by outward
profession and seeming repentance have been thought to have taken Christ's yoke
upon them; but are such as have revolted, or casting it and his cords off,
after a seeming profession.
and played the Apostate from him, by making defection to Popery,
Antichristianisme, Arminianisme, Lutheranisme, and to other errors; and to the
doctrine, at least practice of Libertinisme, by embracing this present evil
world in the lusts of it, and by licentiousness of life; being such as the
Princes of Judah of old were, Hos. 5.10. who were like them that remove the
bound (as not willing to be kept within the limits of Gods word;) and like
those great men to whom Jeremy did speak Jerem. 5.5. and of whom he says, But
these (as well as the poor and meaner sort of people) have altogether broken
the yoke, and burst the bands. Their doom.
But their doom there follows, ver. 6. as also the like or worse doom of all
disobedient, impenitent and refractary sinners, elsewhere; not only a lion out
of the forest shall slay them, but God himself will be as a lion unto them, as
he threatened Ephraim, saying, I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young
lion (which is more fierce) to the house of Judah: I, even I. (the great,
glorious and mighty God) will tear, and go away, Hos. 5.14, 15. not tear and
heal, unless timely repentance follow, Hos. 6, 1. but tear and go away, and
leave them for ever, unless in time they (in sense of their guiltiness)
acknowledge their offense, and seek my face. But of these men's doom more
hereafter.

We are hence taught and instructed, Of Instruction and exhortation,
especially by his Ministers and messengers sent of purpose to that end, not to
harden our necks, not to be stiff-necked (as we and others formerly have been)
but to give the hand, or yield our selves unto the Lord, etc. 2 Chro. 30.8. to
humble our selves to walk with our God, to tremble at his word, and presently
to yield our selves in obedience to it, offering our selves ready to obey God
according to his word and will, to show our selves ready to obey God. in the
matter and business 1 Of salvation:
as especially in matter of salvation, so also of Religion, and generally of
Obedience both active and passive.

1 For the great business of salvation, we are to deny our selves, as is said,
in all our own works and worth; and in all humble acknowledgement of our
guiltiness, to be content to be directed by the word, and to follow cheerfully
the directions of the same, totally submitting our selves to obey God in all
things, even to the cutting off of hand and foot, and plucking out of the eye,
and parting with all, even with every lust for Christ: where especially we are
to take heed of hypocrisy and self-deceit; and that sincerely:
such as might seem to be in him that said, Lord, I will follow thee
whithersoever thou go, and in those other who would follow Christ, but upon
conditions, Luke 9.57, 58, 59, etc. and more especially in that young man and
Ruler, not as the young Ruler,
who in all haste (to show his readiness) came running to Christ, and in all
humility, as it might seem, Mark 10.17, etc. Matthew. 19.16, etc. Luke 18.18, etc.
kneeled to him, and said, Good Master, what (good thing) shall I do, that I
may (have and) inherit eternal life? Herein in show like these sincere
Converts in my Text, and like the Jaylour, What must I do to be saved? All of
them seeming ready to offer themselves ready to obey and follow direction in
all things: that young man, being directed by Christ, of all others seemed most
ready, as having done already as much as Christ now directed him unto, saying,
All these things have I done, kept and observed from my youth up. And as if
(like another Hercules) it had been more easy for him to do, then for Christ
to bid him do, What lack I yet, who wanted sincerity, and would keep his bosom
sin.
says he? But the truth is, he lacked the main of all, and that was sincerity,
and a good heart and honest: his heart was glued and wedded to his wealth, and
to the world, which he truly and heartily loved more then Christ, or yet his
own soul, and the salvation of it; if he could enjoy and have both, well and
good; he liked Christ well, and salvation well, if he might have had them upon
his own conditions: but when Christ touched and tried him in his beloved sin,
his covetousness, (which he well hoped he might have, by way of surplusage, in
the bargain) and bade him sell all and give to the poor, though he were
promised better treasure in heaven, yet he went away (from Christ) sorrowful:
for he had great possessions. Of this stamp at best are our begging Friars, who
build their Order upon this personal command, which yet was only for
conviction of this forward man's hypocrisy; and all such as pretend they can do
all that Christ commands them, yea more, in and by their works of
supererrogation, and by following Councels more then commands of perfection, in
effect, with their Ancestors and Predecessors of old, asking of God the
Ordinances of justice, Isa. 58.2. as if God had been wanting to their
readiness to obey him. But these here in my Text, which these converts did not;
only ask what they shall do, being truly willing and sincerely resolved to do
that, even to forsake all and every lust for Christ; and yet presumed nothing
on their own strength, but hoped, as for direction from his Apostles, so for
power from him to do accordingly: being otherwise pinched in heart, and poorer
in spirit then any proud hypocrite, that either in love to some lust, or open
presumption of his own worth or power of well-doing shall deceive himself. nor
Paul, who sincerely submitted himself to God in all things,
Such a sincere convert was also Paul, who, though he was going on a wicked
errand, and upon a malicious design against the faithful people of God, yet
when Christ met with him by the way, humbled him, and convinced him of his sin
of persecution, he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? Acts 9.4, 5, 6. And this he said out of an honest and good heart, with a
true and steadfast purpose to perform accordingly; which he also fully and
constantly did even unto the end. Which his sincerity will better appear, if we
compare and consider it with Balaams deceit of heart, who, whose sincerity is
compared with Balaams hypocrisy.
riding on with a like wicked intention and purpose of destroying the lives of
Gods people, and being also met withal by an Angel in the way, and reproved
for his sin, so directly against the charge given him, Numb. 22.12. Thou shall
not go --: thou shall not curse the people; seemed to relent and repent, I have
sinned, -- and to offer himself ready to get him back again, saying, Now
therefore, if it displease thee, I will return back again; yet for all this,
his heart carried him secretly on in the way of his covetousness and of
cursing: Fain he would go on, such was his love to the wages of
unrighteousness; yet seeing apparent danger if he did, he faintly offers to
turn back, with an If it please thee. He could not be ignorant, that his evil
intent to curse Gods people for his own promotion, was most evil in the Lords
eyes, and the cause why the Angel came out as an adversary against him; yet he
conceals that, and makes a fair show of repentance and obedience; which his
hypocrisy God in wrath punished by giving him his desire, and leaving him to
his own lusts, which he followed to his destruction: a just reward of such as,
not hearkening to the express and known will of the Lord, are given up, by
Gods withdrawing of his grace, to the perverse intendments of their own hearts,
to walk (and perish) in their own counsels, Psalm 81.11, 12. Here then we see,
that there must be true and hearty submission of soul to God, and a total
resignation of our wills to Gods will, with a readiness to obey both heartily
and totally in all things made known to us, No lust may be reserved.
without reservation of any lust whatsoever: no true conversion without this
universal obedience, and hearty willingness and readiness to obey in all
things, as it was with these converts here, and with Paul; but not with the
young man, nor with Balaam, nor with Herod, who, though when he heard John
preach (which he did gladly) he did many things, yet keeping in his heart the
love of his whore by an incestuous marriage of his Brothers Wife, he could not,
when he was reproved for it, obey John or God in that; and so, with the other,
and with all such hypocrites, came short of Christ, of God and of salvation.

2 Of Religion and worship; wherein we must neither choose our own ways,
2 As in matter of salvation we are to show our selves heartily to obey God; so
in matters of Religion: where we must not do what seems good in our own eyes,
Deuteronomy. 12.8. nor choose our own ways, Isa. 66.3. nor walk in our own counsels,
Psalm. 81.12. nor enquire how Idolaters serve their (Idol) gods, nor imitate
Idolaters:
saying, even so will I do likewise, Deuteronomy. 12.30. thou shall not do so to the
Lord thy God: that is, not only not serve idols, which thing the heathen did;
but not serve the Lord after the manner that the heathen served their Idols: so
that not only the worship of false gods, but false or idolatrous worship of the
true God, and all imitation of Idolaters is condemned, Lev. 18.3. This was the
sin of King Ahaz, in sending to Vriah the Priest at Jerusalem, as did King Ahaz,
the fashion of the Altar which was at Damascus, and the pattern of it,
according to all the workmanship of it; on which the morning burnt-offering,
and evening meat offering, etc. were burnt, (yet not to idols, but to the Lord)
2 King. 16.10,-15. And this is the sin of such as have lately transformed the
outward face of Religion, and of Gods pure worship, and as others of late among
our selves.
into mimicall gestures, and superstitious observations fetched and borrowed
from the Idolatrous Papists, and Priests of Antichrist. But in offering our
selves ready to obey either God or man in the matter and for the manner of Gods
worship and service, Gods word must be our only rule.
we must look to Gods only will and word: So that what he commands, that
only must we do, Deuteronomy. 12.31, 32. Where we see how God appoints his own word
and law to be the only rule of his service, without imitating the customs of
others, or divising any thing of our own: Whatsoever thing I command you,
observe to do it: thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. And good
reason for it: Why?
for as we cannot see the light of the Sun, but by that light which the Sun it
self affords; so, what man, or yet Angel knows what is pleasing and
acceptable to God in his worship, either for the matter or manner of it, but so
far only as God himself shall please to make it known to him? All other
worship (how specious soever, and gilded over with fair pretenses of reverence
to him and his sanctuary, of zeal and devotion) is such as of which God will
say, (as once he said of some such like specious and glorious abominations,
learnt of the heathen) I commanded it not, neither came it into my heart, Psalm.
106.35, 36, 37.
Jer. 7.31. And to such worshippers, When ye come to appear before me, who has
required this at your hand, to tread my courts? Isa. 1.12.

Lastly and generally, Christians must offer their service to God and be
content to be at his command and appointment in all things; 3. Of obedience
generally, where we, like the Centurions servants, must obey God, whither he
bid us,
cheerfully and readily obeying him in all things how hard or hazardous soever
they may seem, herein like to the Centurions soldiers, Mat. 8.9. I say to this
man, Go, and he goes; and to another come, and he comes: and to my servant,
do this, and he does it. So that if 1. God send us to any place, suppose it be
of danger, and say Go, we must go, though we know not what may befall us there,
other then bonds and afflictions, as it was with Paul, Acts 20.22, 23, 24. So
it was with the seventy Disciples, to whom Christ said, Go your ways: behold I
send you forth as lambs among wolves. 1. Go, though it be to places of danger,
Luke 10.3.17.
They went readily, and returned joyfully. And if our hearts were humbled as
they should be, no command would be too hard for us. The Prophet Isaiah being
humbled and terrified by a vision of the Lord in his glory, and hearing the
Lord asking, Whom shall I send? and who will go for us? presently offers
himself and says, Here I am, send me. A true tender heart (such as was in
these converts) is fit to run on any errand. 2. Or come after him,
2. If God call and bid us come, and follow him, we must run, and come
willingly: as when Christ saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into
the sea, and said unto them, Come ye after me, they straightway forsook their
nets and followed, Mark. 1.17, 18. So when God in a vision called Paul, saying,
Come over into Macedonia, -- Acts 16.9, 10. he presently endeavored to go into
Macedonia in obedience to Gods call. So Abraham obeyed Gods call, and went out
not knowing whither he went, Heb. 11.8. And if God bid us come, though into
danger,
though into a place of danger, we must obey and depend on his presence and
assistance, as when Christ bade Peter, come to him on the water, Matthew. 14.28,
29. In like manner, if when our brother has ought against us, and Christ bid
us leave our gift and go, and first be reconciled, Matthew. 5.23, 24. and then
come and offer our gift, we must obey, and not presume to come otherwise either
to Gods Table, or yet Temple. And if Christ say to any that labor and are
heavy laden (with sin) come unto me, how much more when he bids us come to him
for case?
and I will refresh you, such must not in a niceness, or pretense of their
unworthiness withdraw, but come by prayer and faith, being assured that though
they be unworthy to come, to ask or receive mercy, yet Gods command is worthy
to be obeyed, and his promise of giving rest to such, is worthy to be believed:
They should be of good comfort, for the Master calls them, as was said to
blind Bartimeus, for refreshing,
Mark 10.49. So when Christ now by his messengers in the Gospel calls us to
partake of the great supper, Luke 14.17. etc. 24. saying, Come, for all things
are now ready. It will be accounted not only unmannerliness, but disobedience
in an high degree, if upon any pretense or excuse we refuse; and such
disobedience, and contempt of the word will exclude us heaven. Romans 10.16.
Such want of obedience to the Gospel Christ takes as a great neglect of him,
wherewith he upbraided the Jews (and may us) Ye will not come to me, that ye
might have life, Joh. 5.40. So, for safety, Rev. 18.4. Or 3. do anything, Genesis
22.2, 3. Hebr. 11.17, 18.
come out of Babylon. 3. If God bid us do this, and command and enjoin us the
doing of any thing, though never so cross to our not carnal only, but
natural desires, we must obey, as Abraham in offering of Isaac. There should
be a gracious echo of the soul to God of whatsoever he says to us in his
word; such as was in holy David, Psalm. 27.8. (When thou said) seek ye my
face, my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord, will I seek. And elsewhere, -- Lo
I come, Psalm. 40.7, 8.
-- I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is within my heart. This
was chiefly verified in Christ (who herein is an example to us: Hebr. 10.5. so
if God call us to suffer.
) of whom also we must learn to become obedient (if need be) unto death, even
the death of the Cross: that is, the most shameful, painful, and accursed
death if we be called thereunto for his names sake, Rev. 2.10.

In all these we must obey, First, before, laying aside, 1. All excuses.
Now in all these (whether in matters of salvation, religion and worship, or of
obedience, generally we are, being called, to obey God cheerfully and
sincerely, as is said, laying aside, before, 1. all excuses whereby we show our
selves both to obey; as did Moses, Exodus 4.1, 2. -- 10.13. with whom God was
therefore angry, verse. 14. Where God injoynes any thing hard, dangerous and
impossible to us, we must trust to his promised assistance, which is ever
implied. 2. 2. All delays.
All delays: I made haste, said David; and delayed not to keep thy
Commandments, 3. All fears.
Psalm. 119.60. 3. All fears; such fears would not excuse Saul in his
disobedience, but increased his sin, as fearing man more then God, 1 Samuel
15.24. Let us hear what God said to Jeremy, Whatsoever I command thee thou
shall speak: Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee,
says the Lord -- be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thee before
them, Jer. 1.7, 8, -- 17. Yea let us consider what Christ says to his
Disciples and to us, encouraging and comforting against persecution, -- Fear
not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but rather
fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell, Matthew. 10.28.

2. After we have done any thing which is good, 1. Let us lay aside all opinion
of merit, Secondly, After we must 1. Renounce merit.
and empty and cast down our selves before him, confessing that (as Christ
advises us) when we shall have done all those things which are commanded us,
we are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do, Luke
17.10. Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable
to himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? Job
22.2, 3. (understand it of our gratifying and adding ought to God which he has
not: otherwise our obedience rightly performed is a thing pleasing and
acceptable to him.) If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what
receives he at thine hand? Job 35.7. Our well doing extends not to him,
Psalm. 16.2. neither for our works (faith or any other grace) done or foreseen
to be done ( Romans 3.28. and 9, 11.) has he saved us, and called us, but
according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. and Tit. 2.5. 2. And as we are to renounce
merit, so are we not to rest in any duty done by us, though never so good and
holy, and not performed without some assistance from Christ: 2. Not rest in the
duty done.
so as to think the duty is good and commanded which we have done, yea and we
(as we think) have done it with a good heart and intention too, therefore our
estate is good, and we doubt not of salvation. Indeed duties sincerely and in
poverty of spirit and self-denial performed, are testimonies of true faith,
and so of election, as being effects of the same, and may assure us, as has
been said, of our final perseverance and salvation, 2 Pet. 1.10. But then we
must not take up therewith, and rest therein, as done by our selves or own
strength, or for our selves and our own ends, unless as we acknowledge them to
proceed from the free and powerful grace of God in us, so they carry us
further, even to Christ, and that we give God the glory of his grace in us,
and expect acceptance only from his favor and grace and good will in his
Christ, with whom only he is well pleased, and accept of us and all we do in
his beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

Its a sign of one left to himself, and out of Christ as yet, to rest in his
own legal righteousness, and to take up with the performance simply of his
duty, but of denying our selves in duty formerly.

SECT. 2. An Exhortation to obedience, with the comfort of it at Christ's
coming: and contra.
Conclusion of all, exhorting and showing the needfulness, 1 Of submitting our
selves to the word at first.
NOw for the conclusion of this, and of the whole Treatise; how will it concern
us all first to become and truly to be as these converts here, ready to submit
in all things to the convictions, and ordering of Gods holy word in the
ministry of it, to be guided by it, to embrace Christ upon his own terms,
not barely by outward profession, but by answering effectually our baptism,
and by performing the vows and promises there made (wherein we seem to make as
free an offer, and to profess as much, if not more, and as fair as these here)
and by an effectual faith in Christ and obedience and submission to the
Gospel? 2. Of living according to it over after.
Secondly to walk constantly with God throughout the course of our whole lives,
according to the only rule of his Word, framing our selves to the obedience
thereof, as in the main business of our salvation, so in the religion, worship
and service of God, and generally in all duties both of our general and
particular callings, and that constantly to the end?

Thus doing, besides the true and full content and satisfaction, 1. The comfort
of so doing, at Christ's coming,
which for the present we shall find to our wounded 02 consciences (if ever we
be truly pricked in heart for our sins:) it will be matter of unspeakeable
comfort for us to be found when Christ comes to us either by death or by the
last judgment, and shall find us each one walking in his uprightness, or
before him, Isa. 57.2. Oh blessed, and for ever blessed is that servant, whom
his lord when he comes, shall find so doing, Matthew. 24.46. When Christ shall
come and find us his servants hard at work, watching and in a readiness nor
only to every good work, but at his coming ready to give up our acounts to him
with joy; With what boldness may such stand before the Lamb! as not only being
now at peace with him, but found in his service and doing his work, when he
comes and his reward with him? Paul was such an one; who as at his first
conversion submitted to the voice of Christ, as we see in Paul, and by his
confidence at death,
and freely offered himself to do whatsoever Christ should direct him to,
saying, Lord, what will thou have me to do? so, receiving his direction from
the Lord both then and afterward he did punctually and constantly, follow and
observe the same unto the end: So that, when he was ready to be offered, and
that the time of his departure was at hand, he could boldly with comfort and
much assurance say: I have sought a good sight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day:
And (lest he should in a singular manner ingrosse and challenge all to himself
as an extraordinary person and servant of God) he adds, not to me only, but to
all them also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. This boldness he had,
though he elsewhere cry out of his infirmities and weakness, notwithstanding
the infirmities of his life.
either to do the good he would, or to withstand the evil he would not, Romans
7.18, 19, -- and 24. Which is yet more comfort to such as with Paul shall truly
endeavor to do their duty, when to their hearty grief they cannot do as they
would. With what comfort may such die; and how willingly and confidently
resign their souls, with Stephen, into the hands of Christ, So in Stephen,
Simeon,
who now have him in their hearts, as old Simeon, when he embraced him in the
arms of his body, so of his soul also? Luke 2.25, 26,-28, 29, 30. Such only
can be truly willing to die as Paul, Phil. 1.23. and may be comforted in and at
their death, Ki. Hezekiah, and John.
as Hezekia, Isa. 38.1, 2, 3. yea, may long and pray for Christ's second coming,
as did John, and say, Even so, Come, Lord Jesus, Rev. 22.20. for such only are
blessed: Behold, says Christ, I come quickly: Blessed is he that keeps the
sayings of the prophecy of this book. -- my reward is with me, to give every
man as his work shall be. -- Blessed are they that do his commandments, that
they may have right to the tree of life, etc. Rev. 22.7,-12,-14.

This should excite us so to be doing,
How should this teach and excite us all ever to be doing that, or those things
which we desire, or could wish that Christ, when he comes to us by death or
judgment, should find us doing? Oh, what an Euge, or well done, good servant,
might we so expect from him! who else can from the heart, or dares say, Come,
Lord Jesus, that is not resolved to keep his sayings, and to do his
Commandments? Nay, who, when he so says, is not working the works of Christ?
This would be thought on by all sorts of men according to their callings
general and particular, Kings and Magistrates, that we (according to our
several callings) may be found of Christ 1. In peace. 2 Blameless.
Ministers, Masters, and all others in their places, that they may be found of
him (at his coming) 1 In peace; that is, justified and reconciled to him: 2
Without spot, and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12,-14. yea so, and in such sort
blameless, that God and Christ shall at that day judge us so: So as God shall
approve of our obedience.
otherwise doubtless some will then be found to justify and flatter
themselves, and say as Saul to Samuel, I have done the commandment of the
Lord: 1 Samuel 15.13. or to plead their good and great works, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy Name, -- and in thy Name done many wonderful works? Matthew.
7.22, 23. And when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or
naked, on sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? Matthew. 25.44, 45,
46. To whom God will answer as Samuel to Saul, what then means the loud cry
of your sins unsorrowed for, and unpardoned? Depart from me, ye workers of
iniquity: and so, whilst the righteous shall go into life eternal, these
shall go away into everlasting punishment.

2 Terror to the rebellious, impenitent and disobedient,
Ah deer Brethren, and you especially, to whom (by preaching) this large
Discourse of Conversion has been addressed, Consider what ye have heard, and
meditate on these things; and the Lord (in his rich mercy) give you
understanding in all things. And know, that God (who will not be mocked or
dallied withal) will require an account of you concerning the things you have
heard. Now advise, and see what answer you will return unto him, what accounts
you will give unto him, when either now, in your consciences, or at death or
the last judgment he most certainly will call you to give up the same. who have
not yet begun to do well,
If yet you have not been so pricked and wounded in conscience (by what you
have heard, or now read) as to be made pliable to Gods will, and to say, what
shall we do? to your work again: Consider the helps you have had to
humiliation; pray hard, and from the heart desire that God would make them
effectual to you. or to obey the Gospel.
But if through your negligence, or love to your sins and vain ways, or
through self-deceit and flattery you be yet to begin; think seriously of your
danger, (lo, now you are again warned) and lose no more time, but to day hear
the voice that has called you, and no longer harden your hearts against his
call: yield your selves in obedience to the Lord. And take heed that, Christ
will come against them.
when Christ comes, by death or otherwise, you be not found in a posture of
disobedience and rebellion against him; or, as the Scripture phrase is, walking
contrary unto him; for so you will find him to walk contrary to you, and that
in fury, Levit. 26.21, -24, -28. You that now break his hands asunder, and cast
away his cords from you, shall find him to speak unto you in his wrath, (as he
has in great love and gentleness spoken to you in his word) and to vex you in
his sone displeasure: crush them,
He shall break you with a rod of iron, and dash you in pieces like a potters
vessel, Psalm. 2.3, 4, 5,-9. You that will not now have Christ to reign over
you; when he returns, (which to you will be in death, and after at the last
judgment) shall hear him calling you forth, after he has rewarded others, and
saying, But those mine enemies (lo, how Christ, even when he comes to judge the
world, accounts of such as now are disobedient to his Gospel) which would not
that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me, Luke
19.27. punish them everlastingly.
Now that slaying is a punishing with everlasting destruction from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ: 2 Thessalonians. 1.9, with 7, 8. Ah, deer Brethren, my Conclusion for you all
shall be my prayer to God that ye do no evil, 2 Cor. 13.7. Oh that I had Paul's
confidence concerning you, such as he had concerning the Thessalonians, 2 These.
3.4. when he said, We have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do
and will do the things which we command you: But especially concerning
Philemon, Philem. ver. 21. Having confidence in thy obedience, I wrote unto
thee, knowing that thou will also do more then I say. Howsoever, my exhortation
shall be that of the Apostle, Hebr. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over
you, (or guide you) and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls. And
my prayer his also, ver. 20, 21. The God of peace -- make you perfect in every
good work, to do his will, working in you that which is wel-pleasing in his
sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

(...). A POSTSCRIPT, To the Christian Reader, Concerning these times and the
sutableness of this Text, and argument of Compunction to the same, and to the
calling of the Jews.
CHristian Reader; Thou will perceive that in the whole Treatise of
Compunction, I take but little notice of the times in which it is published, or
of the present affairs, fears, distractions, commotions, and condition of our
own Nation, and of other the Kings Dominions, which yet draw the thoughts as of
our own so of all other nations (both Popish and Protestant, who are much
concerned therein, according as the issue shall prove) and do open their ears
to listen after News, and to observe what God will do with us, whom last of
all he has now brought upon the Stage, and as it were into the field, making
us a bloody spectacle of civil, uncivil, if not unnatural war to the whole
world.

In which regard, a Treatise merely of this nature, may seem less welcome or
seasonable, whilst men of all sorts, especially of our own Nation, most what,
(as is also fit) do study the times, and cannot willingly hear, read, or muse
on any thing (though otherwise necessary and useful) but arguments, books, and
passages of that nature; which do so wholly take up and fill all presses, that
many, otherwise worthy and useful Books and Arguments, can scarce press
through the crowd, or get passage into the view of the world; the Press, as I
am informed, not being at leisure so much as formerly it has been, Anno 1640,
1641.
for the Holy Bible it self, at least fewer Bibles sold, by some thousands in
the year, these two last years then in more quiet times formerly.

Now though I, for that time and more, have, by Gods providence, been made a
Spectator only, (and that afar off) of my native countries troubles and
distractions, and as my calling at Dantzick required, have applied my studies
and labors, to the particular necessities, capacities and fitness of my
hearers, yet I would not now be thought wholly insensible, (not to speak of our
sympathizing here with our own Country, and with the necessities of Ireland
(since the breaking out of that horrid Rebellion there) on the public
Fast-daies in our small congregation:) who formerly, for so many years, during
the time of my liberty and ministry in New Castle upon Tine, Divine
Prognostics on Isai. 9.12, 13. The needfulness of compunction for these times
of war in the Kings dominion.
where then my calling lay, have so largely and long prognosticated of such
times.

And doubtless such a Treatise as this, at least such Compunction of heart, as
here is spoken of, should not be thought so unsuitable to these times, seeing
there can be little hope of the ending of differences among our selves, or of
settling peace till the main difference of all (by the practice of this duty,
and the timely appeasing of Gods just displeasure for our sins) be composed.
Unto which these unkindly dissentions, and the sword now drawn amongst us, do
invite, yea necessitate and call us. For does not the Lord of hosts in this our
day, call to weeping and to mourning, to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloth? And is it still a time for joy and gladness, slaying oxen, etc.
without looking to God, seeing it is a day of trouble and of treading down, and
of perplexity, by the Lord God of hosts in the valley of vision? Isai. 22.5,
11, 12, 13. Is it not a time to be afflicted, and to mourn and weep? and that
we humble our selves in the sight of the Lord, Jam. 4.9, 10. and under the
mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5, 6. For may we not (as formerly prophecy, so)
now say A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished. It is sharpened to
make a sore slaughter, it is furbished, that it may glitter: should we then
make mirth? (seeing says God) it contemns the rod of my son, as every
(other) tree, Ezekiel. 21.9, 10, 11.

Considering the sins of all sorts,
How are we then called (in these days when the sword of the Malignant seems
to despise the rod and scepter of Jesus Christ) from our former vain mirth, and
to remember with sorrow such our secure feeding, feasting, masks, of our great
ones,
shows, dancing, and costly plays and enterludes, some of them even on the
Lords day it self, when afternoon Sermons on the same days were omitted? What
better way have we to appease Gods wrath, when the sword is given (by Gods
justice) into the hand of the slayer, then upon a diligent and unpartiall
search of our own ways, as the true causes and procurers of such wrath, to
show our selves truly pricked in heart and contrite for the same, and so by
true Repentance and Reformation to turn to him that smites us.

From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, says
holy James, even from your lusts that war in your members, James 4.1. Such
lusts, as pride, ambition, covetousness, love of ease and pleasure, hatred of
those that are good, and thereupon an afflicting of the just (a mighty sin, by
the verdict of God himself Amos 5.12.) and such like reigning in the Priests as
much as in any, Of our Priests,
have proved not only the meritorious, but the inward moving cause, the
fomenters and continuing cause of all our evils; Of malignant spirits.
especially now of late since that great design of this present Parliament, and
their zealous endeavor of Reformation in Church and State, has stirred up not
only the Irish Rebels there, but exasperated the minds of loos-livers, of
Papists and popishly affected, and of Malignants and Delinquents among our
selves, to trouble with their wiles this our Israel, through a hope to avoid
questioning, and of being called to account for their own old misdemeanors,
and through desire still to enjoy their lusts and former lawless liberty of
sinning, whilst in the mean time the severity of Justice (of injustice rather
as is too well known) was showed in Courts both Civil, but especially
Ecclesiastical, chiefly against the sincerest, holiest, and most conscionable
Christians and Ministers, yea and most soyall Subjects of his Majesty, whose
molestations and banishments by false suggestions have been procured. Hence
also such interruption of godly proceedings for Reformation (whilst Christ's
easy yoke of discipline is accounted such a burden, and his cords so strait)
hence such and so many mighty plots and machinations, such associations and
practices, such ill counsels and instigations, and all (by raising a combustion
to hinder the work of Reformation which they cannot bear) to draw in (which
upon too just grounds is feared) the Irish Rebels to be our butchers here also.

Ah poor Ireland! and ah poor England! thus after so long a continued outward
peace with the Gospel, now after fourscore years, to be divided against thy
self, and to seek thine own ruin.

And now beloved Brethren, let us but look to God, and we cannot but (taking
all blame to our selves) justify him, and say, in the midst of all this
enmity, The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works,
Psalm. 145.17. Can it or should it be thought any wonder, These judgments just,
considering such connivence as has been showed to practicing Priests,
if God plague and punish us a while, by the profane, Popish, Arminian,
Antichristian faction, and by such as hold of superstitious vanities, when by
our too much connivence used toward such, and countenancing of them, we have
in effect and as God will take it, repealed actually all those good Laws and
Statutes which upon most just cause, have been enacted against practicing
Papists and Jesuits, and against profaneness. Did not the Lord punish his
own people by their lovers the Assyrians and Caldeans, who first defiled them,
and then slew them with the sword? Ezekiel. 23.9, 10. 17, 21, 22, 23, etc. And did
not those Canaannites and other Nations uncast out, prove, (as God foretold and
threatened) snares and traps unto Israel, scourges in their sides, and thorns in
their eyes, until they perished from off that good land which the Lord their
God did give them, Josh. 23.13. concerning whom God had said, Exodus 23.31, 32,
33, etc. Thou shall drive them out before thee -- They shall not dwell in thy
land, lest they make thee sin against me, etc. Exodus 23.31, 32, 33. They shall
vex you in the land wherein ye dwell; and it shall come to pass, that I shall
do unto you, as I thought to do unto them; Number. 33.5^, 50.
even cast you out by them, whom you should have cast out. Even so the sparing
of such (let be pretended what will) is but foolish pity, Thine eye shall shall
have no pity upon them (says God. Deuteronomy. 7.16.) And blood spared (as that of
Jesuits and practicing Priests and Papists) as well as spilt, calls for blood,
as in King Ahabs foolish pity toward Benhadad. God in such case, curses such
as keep back their sword from blood, Jer. 48.10.

The different course and issue held by K. Henry 4. of France.
There has never been any long while peace or safety either to King or State,
where such have been (whether through fear or favor) suffered or connived
withal. It is worth our best observation to consider the different course
holden by King Henry the fourth of France, and Queen Elizabeth reigning at the
same time, with the different events and sucesses of both. He, in policy, says
mine Author, to establish the Crown of France upon his head, revolted to Popery
from the true Religion in which he had been bred, and readmitted the Jesuits
(after their just banishment by solemn Edict of the Court of Parliament) not
only into his Kingdom, but Closet, making Father Cotton the Jesuit his
Confessor, saying to some that would have dissuaded him from the same, Give me
then security for my life; fearing it seems, if he did refuse to admit them,
they would at one time or other find means to send him the same way after his
Predecessor Henry the third, who was murdered by James Clement a Monk,
through the persuasion and encouragement of Father Commolet and others of the
Jesuits society: Yet at length himself was stabbed to the heart by Ravilliac,
through the instigation (as by strong presumptions is probable) of these
Jesuits. Contrariwise, and Queen Elizibeth.
blessed Queen Elizabeth though at first weak, and having many enemies, yet
building by faith upon God, and not upon such worldly wisdom and policy, she
restored and maintained true Religion constantly, reposed her trust in God
confidently, held the Jesuits and all her Popish enemies at the staves end
steadfastly, put her Laws in execution against them resolutely (yet without
cruelty) was protected by God against all their hellish plots and practices
miraculously, reigned forty and four years gloriously, and departed this world
in her bed, in a ripe age, peaceably, so leaving a glorious example to all
succeeding Princes (and others) of constancy and perseverance in the true
profession of the Gospel, and of reposing trust in God more then in humane
policy.

Good use may be also made of the example of King Solomon. Did not Solomon King
of Israel (says Nehemiah, Nehem. 13.26. As also other sins, 1. Of great ones.
) sin by these (or such like) things? yet among many Nations, was there no King
like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him King over all Israel.
Nevertheless, even him did outlandish women cause to sin. Now this was no
sooner done, but (mark it) the Lord was angry with him, and not only stirred
him up two adversaries whilst he lived, Rezon and Hadad, but threatened to rend
the Kingdom from him, and to give it to Jeroboam, 1 Kings 11, 2, 3,
4-9-14-23-25. The foundation of which loss was laid in his own time, though it
were not effected till his son Rehoboam began to reign, who in a suit of
relaxation made to him by the people, forsaking the counsel of the old men
that stood before Solomon his father, and following the advice of young men, and
answering his people roughly, he so occasioned the revolt of ten Tribes,
whilst only two remained with him.

Now if from such effects already felt, or from our danger and fears of worse,
we would unpartially look into like causes, we should soon see what need there
were of true compunction, contrition and godly sorrow; without which it is in
vain by the use of any other means, or by trusting to an arm of flesh, to
expect peace, quietness or safety.

This is the only way, as it may concern our own Nation at this time to
disappoint the Romish Church of their hope, as it is expressed in the late
brief or Bull of dispensation of the Pope to his Sons in England.

But are not the sins of the people to be looked into as a main cause and
procurer of our present unquietness and distractions? 2. Of the people.
Yes doubtless, for when such a wonderful and horrible thing is committed in
the Land (namely that) the Prophets prophecy falsely (witness the Arminian and
Popish doctrine taught by many) and the Priests bear rule, for whose demerits
Princes are left to themselves.
and are strengthened by their means, and that the people also love to have it
so, what will we do in the end thereof? Jer. 5.30, 31. What can be expected
that good is? It is said, The anger of the Lord was (first) kindled against
Israel, and (then) he moved (or suffered Satan to move) King David against
Israel to say to Joab (though unwilling) go number Israel and Judah, and all to
the end that a plague might come upon Israel, 2 Samuel 24.1. Now our people have
(besides all their other provocations) so generally complied with their Priests
(for so in a more Popish sense they will be called) and with their Prophets and
strengthened them by their readiness to entertain their opinions,
superstititions and new Ceremonies, and are yet such enemies to Reformation,
yea and yet so generally senceless of our present sufferings in the true causes
thereof, that we have just cause to think that his Majesty (whose Throne ever
be guiltless) is, what by the demerit of their ill deeds what by their ill
counsel and instigation, moved to say, go, number England and Wales, array as
many as you can, etc. and all that the deserved wrath may (at length) fall upon
themselves as the first and chief procurers of these evils; and that withal
the better affected among them may be further tried, humbled, approved, and
prepared for after mercies.

Yet good hope upon our humiliation and reformation,
Howsoever, our good hope is that upon our more solemn, yea and daily
humiliations in compunction of heart for our own sins and the sins of the land
and times, God (after some trial) will graciously be pleased to crown the
pious, laborious, and constant endeavors of this present Parliament with an
happy end, both for our selves,
with a peaceable and blessed conclusion and happy Reformation, now to be
begun, and in due time further to be settled according to his word in our own
Churches of great Britain, and Ireland, other nations,
and (as our hope is) to be followed (in his good time also) by others in other
Countries by degrees, and so long till the great stumbling block, and main
hinderance of the Jews conversion and calling again, in and by the downfall of
Rome, be removed out of the way. and especially the Jews,


Now that the Jews shall be called and again received as from the dead, and
graffed into their own Olive Tree (their sins according to Gods election and
love taken away, and the vail of their ignorance removed) we need not doubt.
whose calling and conversion we expect,
See Romans 11.12.-15-23, 24. to 29.2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 16. And for the occasions
and grounds thereof, we may more then probably conclude, when they shall be
pricked in heart, upon like grounds,
that by Gods blessing they shall be the same for effect and in the general
which they were (by the same grace working effectually) to these in this my
Text; where that old prophecy of Zachary only began to be fulfilled, God
having on that day of Pentecost (in outward and visible signs and otherwise)
poured upon them (the hearers as well as teachers) the spirit of grace and
supplications: And says the Lord, Zach. 19.9, 10, 11.
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for his first born. Now when was it that these were so
pricked in heart and mourned? as were these Jews here in my Text,
but when they were convicted, first of Christ's glory, and that Jesus the son
of Mary, being now advanced to glory at the right hand of the Father, was made
(and declared) of God to be both Lord and Christ. Secondly, or withal of their
own sin and unworthy carriage toward him, whom they were truly charged to have
crucified, as appears by the close of Peter's Sermon in the words immediately
preceding my Text, Acts 2.36.

And when shall the body of the scattered Nation of the Jews mourn, and
convert to God? but when they also shall be convinced, namely,
first of the glory and power of Jesus Christ, and withal of their own wicked
blasphemies and sins against him so loving a Savior.

Upon conviction and fight 1. Of the glory of Christ,
1. Christ to their conviction, will at length even here on earth (though I
will not say, by a bodily appearance and residence amongst us) show himself
King of his Church, and deliver (as once the Israelites from Pharaoh, and the
Ark from the Philistines, and himself out of the power of death and the grave
so) it from the tyranny of Antichrist, and from all yokes of superstitious
ceremonies, and of his power and victory over Antichrist, and other enemies
spiritual and bodily.
and tyrannical government which has so long (and that in part, even since
the time of Reformation) lien upon the necks of his people; as also from all
licentious doctrines and practices. The Kings of the earth and of the world
(whom those three unclean spirits coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast
and false Prophet, shall gather to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty into a place called Armageddon to make war against Christ, Rev. 16. or
as he is called the word of God, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who sits on
the white Horse, and against his Army, Rev. 19.11,12, -18, 19.) those Kings I
say, by their ill success shall at length see and acknowledge, as the power of
Christ, against whom they warred, so their own madness in opposing him and his
people, and how they have been deluded, and so, not knowing what to do or how
to be saved in their own Religion and way, shall at length abandon the same,
embrace the truth and way of Christ, and submit to his Scepter. Then shall they
hate the whore, and see the abominations of popery: and so shall Euphrates be
dried up, that is, (as a good Author does interpret) the succors, Mr. Cotton
on the sixth vial.
supplies and revenues of Rome, that the way of the Kings of the East, (whom
the best Interpreters make the Jews) may be prepared, Revel. 16.12, 13, etc.
for then also (by the same success of the battle in Armageddon) shall the
Jews see the mighty power of Christ in rooting out all Idolatry and
superstitions (and profaneness of Professors) which have so long kept and
hindered them from coming to the knowledge and acknowledgement of their Messiah.

2. Of their own sin, in crucifying and rejecting* him.
2. Then also upon conviction of their sin against their Messiah and King (now
acknowledged by them) there shall be great mourning, but in a godly manner, as
at the mourning of Hadadrimmon (upon the death of good King Josiah) in the
valley of Mageddon (unto which this Armageddon may allude.) Which mourning
shall be in compunction, such as this in my Text was, and with contrition of
heart, not only because Jesus (now acknowledged their Messiah and the King of
glory) was crucified by them, but also for them, and his blood shed even for
them that spilt it. Yet their sin in crucifying and rejecting him so long, yea
of cursing the name the Lord Jesus in their Liturgies, praying that it might
perish from under these heavens, and from above this earth, shall be their
sorrow also, as having so long brought them and their fathers under the curse
of Cain, Genesis 4.14. and made them no better then fugitives and vagabonds in the
earth.

Thus, when the enemies of the Church, and that man of sin, shall as well by
the mouth ^f the sword, as by the sword of the mouth be destroyed, Rev. 19.21.
these Jews convinced by them both, shall mourn and come to true repentance.
After which, Christ shall reign in the purity and power of his Ordinances here
on earth, and in due time after make his appearance as a glorious King, and
judge of quick and dead, and come to wipe all tears from the eyes of true
mourners, according to his gracious promise, Joh. 14.3. I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also: Rev. 22.20.
Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

Dantzick, October 30. 1642.
FINIS.

