A SERMON PREACHED Before the HONORABLE House of Commons, AT St. MARGARET
WESTMINSTER, on Thursday, the 26th of November, 1691. Being a day of Public
Thanksgiving.

By WILLIAM JANE, D.D. Dean of Gloucester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for Thomas Bennet, at the Half-Moom in St.
Paul's Churchyard, London. 1691.

Veneris 27. die Nov. 1691.
Ordered,
THat the Thanks of this House be given to Dr. Jane (Dean of Gloucester) for
his Sermon Preached Yesterday before this House, at St. Margarets Westminster,
and that he be desired to Print the same: And that Sir Joseph Tredenham, and
Mr. Travers do acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cler. Dom. Com

PSALM. XCVI. 10. Say among the Heathen, that the Lord reigns: the world also
shall be established, that it shall not be moved; and that he shall Judge the
people righteously.


IT will not be very material in this place to enquire into the title of the
Psalm, or whether this, which with some little variation makes a part of that
triumphant song composed by David 1 Chr. 16. at the bringing up of the ark from
the house of Obed Edom to Jerusalem, Ferandus in loc.
were afterward consecrated by the Jews to another use, to be sung at the
rebuilding of the Temple after their return from the Babylonish Captivity; or
whether it might not be accommodated (as also the following Psalm, which seems
to be much to the same purpose) to celebrate those conquests which David won
over the heathen nations 1 Chr. 18. not long after the settling of the ark, the
symbol of Gods presence in the midst of them.

This is certain and confessed on all hands, Theod. Dr. Ham.
that in the literal and most obvious sense, it is a general form of
thanksgiving, and praising God for all his works of grace, and goodness, as the
maker and governor of the world: and in the prophetic or mystical, it
contains a description of the Kingdom of the Messiah, and the blessed effects
of it in the bringing salvation to all people, and the conversion of the
Gentiles to the faith.

I shall treat of it at present only in the former notion; and in the words
that I have read shall briefly consider, with respect to the design of our
present meeting, I. A general assertion of Gods government of the world, say
among the heathen, that the Lord reigns. The government of God is not
restrained to the Jewish nation, but all the people, and nations of the earth
are the objects of his providence, and his sovereignty reaches over all the
world. II. The stability of Gods government, the world also shall be
established, that it shall not be moved. III. The Justice and equity of the
administration of it, he shall Judge the people righteously.


And first of the general assertion of Gods government of the world.

That God has an absolute dominion over all things, a sovereign and
uncontestable right to be the sole Lord, and Emperor of the universe; both
reason, and scripture have abundantly evinced, not only from the consideration
of the supereminent excellency of the divine nature, but also of his mighty
works in the creation, and continuance of the world. Thus the Elders in the
Revelations Chapter 4.11. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and
power, for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and
were created. Thus Hezekiah Esai. 37.16. O Lord of hosts, thou art the God;
even thou alone of all the Kingdoms of the earth. For thou have made heaven,
and earth. Thus the Levites in Nehemiah Chapter 9.6. Thou even thou art Lord alone:
thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth,
and all things that are therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou
preservest them all, and the whole host of heaven worshipeth thee.

If seems to be a lessening, and limiting of the Divine Dominion, what God says
by the Prophet Jer. 18.6. Cannot I do with you as the potter, says the Lord?
behold as the clay is in the potters hand, so are ye in my land O house of
Israel. For the potter neither makes the clay, nor gives activity to the fire,
when he applies the one to the other: it is the Divine influence that enables
him, and after this, when he has done all he can, he at last produces nothing,
but the Shape and Figure of the Vessel. But now with respect to God, there is
nothing in the whole world, but has an absolute dependence upon him for its
whole being, and every particle thereof. Whatever we are, whatever we possess,
whatever we can do, all the parts, and members of the body, all the powers, and
faculties of the Soul, the heads that contrive, and the hands that execute, the
whole use and exercise of them all: the times and opportunities of acting,
together with the several objects, about which they may, or ought to be
employed, are solely, and entirely derived from him, by a supreme, arbitrary,
independent, and uncommunicated power. He is the absolute, and perfect
proprietour of them all. For as they are all the works of his hands, they must
needs be subject to his disposal. He may consequently appoint them their
several ends, according to their several capacities; prescribe Laws and Rules
for the attainment of those ends; and oblige them to observe his orders upon
such terms as his infinite wisdom shall think good. And this power belongs to
God purely for his own sake, without any regard had to any right or interest of
his Creatures, which as they were all made for him, Pro. 16.4. Romans 11.36.
so are to be disposed by him. This is a most certain, and undoubted ground of
propriety, and consequently of power. For surely if the world were made, that
it might be governed, there is none so fit to govern it, as he that made it.

But besides this despotical right of absolute Dominion, there is a Rectoral
right in God (if I may so call it) which results from his actual taking upon
himself the administration and government of the world. And this is expressed in
several places of Scripture. Thus Ps. 103.19. The Lord has prepared his throne
in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all. God is the King of all the earth,
God reigns over the nations. Ps. 47.7, 8. and Ps. 22.28. The Kingdom is the
Lords, and he is the Governor among the people. Thine, says King David, 1
Chr. 29.11, 12. Thine, O Lord, is the Kingdom; and thou art exalted as head
above all: both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all. All
men, of what condition, and quality soever, are under his power, and
jurisdiction. The most glorious, and renowned of all the Sons of men, the
potentates, kings and princes of the earth, however they may resist his
commands, are still accountable for doing so. He will rule in the midst of his
enemies, and if they will not bow to the gentle Scepter of his word, Ps. 2.9.
he has a Rod of Iron in his hand, Luke 19.27.
wherewith he can dash them in pieces like a potters Vessel; and will one day
say openly in the hearing of all the world, those mine enemies, that would not
that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. For he is
the Prince of all the Kings of the earth, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

He is called (...) 1 Timothy 6.15. The blessed and only Potentate, the only
Source, and Fountain of all just power and Dominion, and it is by virtue of his
authority, that all the great ones of the world, administer any of their own.
The Crowns, and Scepters of the world are in his hand, and whenever he imparts
any power or royalty to his Creatures, he still reserves to himself a free
liberty to resume it, to Uncrown, Dethrone, and Depose them at his pleasure.
Dan. 5.20
When Nebuchadnezzars heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he
was deposed from his Kingly Throne, and they took his Glory from him: He
suffered a seven years banishment from the society of men, that s^ ^t last he
might be convinced of this great truth, which so highly concerns all that are
in authority to take notice of, that the most high rules in the kingdom of
men, and he gives it to whomsoever he will. Dan. 4.25. That his kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and that all Dominion^ shall serve, and obey him.

But not to insist either upon the proof or illustration of so plain, and
obvious a point, in the acknowledgment whereof, we are here assembled to praise
God this day, I shall recommend only this one inference, which naturally
results from it, that since God is the universal Monarch of the whole world,
and conducts, and governs all our affairs according to the good pleasure of his
will, we should hence be instructed to own and acknowledge the power, care, and
goodness of God, in all our blessings, advantages, and enjoyments, and to make
suitable returns to him of praises, and thanksgivings for all the merciful
vouchsafements of his providence. For surely if God be the sole governor of
the world, then all the gracious events and occurrences therein are solely to
be ascribed to him. Peace, and safety, victory, and success do not depend upon
the strength and number of our armies, the wisdom of our Counselors, the
conduct of our Commanders, the power, and friendship of our Confederates; For
it is all one with God to save by many or by few, he can make the wisdom of an
Achitophel become foolishness, can strike a terror into the hearts of our
valiant men, he can make our Allies, and Confederates become like the staff of
Egypt, whereon if a man lean, Esa. 36.6.
it will go into his hand, and pierce it, But our whole strength is in the
name of the Lord, and it is his arm alone that brings salvation. Pro. 21.31.
The horse is prepared for the day of battle, but safety is of the Lord. So
likewise in the State it is not the wise man, Jer. 9.24.
nor the mighty, but Judgment and Kindness comes from God. He rules and governs
in all our debates and consultations. It Is he that manages the events of war,
and gives his people the blessing of peace. It is he that raises up one nation
against another, and again, when he sees it expedient, Ps. 46.9.
makes wars to cease in all the world, breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear
in sunder, and burns the chariots in the fire. Esai. 37.29.
He can put a hook in the nose, and a bridle in the lips of a proud, and
insolent enemy, and can turn him back by the way which he came. When the great
mountain becomes a plain before Zorobabel, Zack. 4.6.
it is not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts.
This therefore should effectually teach us not to boast of the arm of flesh, to
sacrifice to our net, Hab. 1.16.
or burn incense to our drag, or say with the Assyrian Isai. 10.13. By the
might of my hands I have done this, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent. But
rather on the contrary, as to have recourse to God alone for relief in all our
straits, dangers, and perplexities, so to return the due tribute of our
gratitude, for all the pledges of his love, and favor, for all his mercies and
deliverances. Ps. 13.6.
I will sing unto the Lord, says David, because he has dealt bountifully with
me. Ps. 63.7.
Because thou have been my helper, therefore under the shadow of thy wings will
I rejoice. This is the duty, which the Lord calls for this day, and which we
are here assembled by public authority to put in practice, to praise, and
magnify his name for our peace at home, our successes abroad, and rescuing a
neighbor Kingdom from the miseries of a war, and the danger of being enslaved
by a foreign power. And how highly are we all concerned, that our thanksgiving
be hearty, zealous and universal, not merely a matter of course and formality,
but accompanied with a real influence, and impression upon our hearts. Which is
the only means to sanctify, and consecrate our past successes and present
enjoyments, and to procure his blessing upon our future enterprises, and
undertakings.

II. And so I pass to the 2d. thing proposed, viz. the stability of Gods
government of the world, the world also shall be etc.

All humane governments, however artificially contrived, are not only liable to
assaults and violence from without, but contain in them the inward causes of
decay, and dissolution. Those four mighty Monarchies had their times and their
turns, their fall and period, as well as a rise, and a beginning. And the most
durable Kingdoms, that histories make mention of, after they have enlarged
their conquests over their neighbor nations, have at last been either ruined
by their own strength, or else become a prey and spoil to another stronger than
themselves. For he increases the nations, and destroys them, he enlarges
the nations, and straitneth them again, Job. 12.23. But Gods government is sure
and stable, his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and his dominion endures
from generation to generation. This Kingdom shall never be destroyed, but shall
break in pieces, and consume all other Kingdoms, and it self shall stand for
ever. Dan. 2.44. and Ps. 10.16. He will be King for ever and ever, even when
all heathen Kings are perishe^ from off the earth.

The main support of all government is wisdom, and power, and the defect of
either of these (much more of both) is a sufficient cause and reason, why all
human governments are so weak, tottering, and unstable.

And first their wisdom and knowledge is narrow, and confined. For, not to
mention how frequently they are biassed by misinformation, prejudice, and
partiality, the most specious undertakings have been often shattered and broke
in pieces by such inconsiderable accidents as ly without the sphere of the most
exalted human understanding, and the success of the greatest affairs of mankind
depends upon future contingents, and because they are contingents, the
determinate motions of them can never fall within the reach or compass of their
knowledge.

Secondly, their strength, and power is weak, and defective: they want ability
to effect that, which even their own foresight tells them is necessary for
their preservation. They cannot act all things with their own hands, and can
never be sure of the power, and fidelity of those agents, and instruments they
make use of. But neither of these disadvantages has any place at all in Gods
government of the world. For by his infinite wisdom he can certainly, and
unerringly foresee the most distant events, and make them all combine in
promoting those great ends, which, before the foundations of the world were
laid, he has fixed, and determined to himself: and his power extends it self to
the whole creation, to the winds and seas, the stars and elements of the world,
he can either effectually wield and guide his instruments, or if he pleases he
may act without them, he can choose the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
and the weak things of the world, to confound the things that are mighty, and
the base things of the world, and things that are despised, and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are. For with him is wisdom, and
strength, he has council, and understanding Job. 12.13. And first, of his
wisdom, and knowledge.

And here first, his knowledge is like himself infinite, eternal, and
unvariable, one simple, indivisible, and uncompounded act, terminated upon all
objects, and not dependent upon any. It is nothing else but God himself,
conceived as tending to all the objects of the creation, and vitally
representing them by his own infinite Essence. And if God, as all Grant, be
Eternal, then his knowledge, as being coexistent to his Essence, or rather the
same with it, must needs be Eternal too. He never began to know any thing, and
shall never cease to know all things. His infinite attention can never be
interrupted by sleep, or business. For all things to him are Eternally present,
and at the same time distinctly terminate a most simple, and infinitely
Comprehensive knowledge.

But secondly, One peculiar excellency of the Divine Knowledge, is an ability
to penetrate into the hidden thoughts, and contrivances of the hearts of men,
to discover all their secret, and concealed designs, their aims, and
intentions, purposes, and resolutions. Woe unto them, says the Prophet Esaias,
that seek deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord, and their work is in the
dark, and they say who sees us, and who knows us, surely your turning things
upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters clay. Esaias 29.15, 16.
For shall the work say to him that made it, he made me not, and shall the
thing framed, say of him that framed it, he had no understanding. Hence the
Scripture so frequently ascribes to God, the faculty of searching the heart,
and trying the reins, of discerning not only the motions, and operations, but
even the inclinations, and propensions of the Soul, whether, to Virtue Genesis
18.19. or to Vice Deuteronomy, 31.21.

And surely, he must needs know the whole bent, and inclinations of his
Creatures, since he alone at first endued them with their several powers, and
activities. He that made the heart, knows all its windings and turnings, all
its corners, and labyrinths. For who can ever imagine that he should not be
able to know what he has made, or that his wisdom, to understand the motions
of his Creatures, should be inferior ^o the power, whereby he first created
them. And thus the Psalmist argues, Ps. 33.15. He ^ashioneth all the hearts of
men, and therefore understands all their works, i. e. their works ^cted in
their hearts, in the innermost closets, and ^ecesses of the Soul. His eyes,
says Elihu in Job, Job 34.21, 22.
are upon all the ways of man, and he sees all his goings, there is no
darkness nor shadow of death, where the workers of wickedness shall hide
themselves. Zeph. 1.12.
He will search Jerusalem with candles, pry into the closest, and most dark
retirements. He needs no spies to inform him of our consultations. For he
keeps our souls, weighs our spirits, and understands our thoughts a far
off. Ps. 139.2.
All things are naked, and open to his eyes from all eternity, long before they
came to to pass.

Thirdly, By this simple, and infinite act of Knowledge, he distinctly, and
determinately from all Eternity, comprehends all the indifferent, undetermined,
and contingent motions of his Creatures. Socinus Crellius.
There are some indeed, who tell us, that this amounts to a plain, and palpable
contradiction, that a thing may be determinately known, which is not determined
to exist. (...) shall not here ofter to discuss this difficult, and intricate
speculation, nor enquire, how the contingency of future events, can consist
with the necessity of the Divine Knowledge, or the certainty of the Divine
Knowledge, with the confes^ liberty of a rational creature, in what medium God
beholds, and foresees contingent events whether in their real presence to
Eternity, his own omnipotence, or decree, in their create^ Causes, or in
themselves. These enquirys leave to those, who are arrived to a greater skill,
than I can pretend to, to comprehend him that is incomprehensible, and set
limits to the operations of an infinite being. That saying of Tertullian,
Praescientia Dei tot testes habet, quot fecit Prophetas, is enough to satisfy
any Christian, that God really foreknows future contingents, though by reason
of the finiteness of our beings, and the imperfection of our knowledge, we are
not able to frame any adequate notion of the manner of it.

There is hardly a Prophecy in Scripture, that is at length otherwise
fulfilled, than by the free, voluntary, contingent actions of the creatures.
The Prophet Micaiah had foretold, that King Ahab should be slain, when he went
out to battle. 1 K. 22.14. and yet the Text says plainly, that the arrow, which
killed him, was shot at random v. 34. The most illustrious acts of the Divine
providence, foresignified by the Prophets, have been founded upon sins. As
might easily appear by various instances both in the Old and New Testament,
Genesis 15.13.
such as the oppression of the Israelites in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 31.
the Rebellions of the people after the death of Moses, Dan. 11.
the Blasphemies and wickedness of Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 9.26.
and other Kings of Syria, the Destruction of Jerusalem, the Tyranny of
Antichrist, 2 These. 2.3. 1 Timothy 4.1.
and the Cheats and Impostures of the false Prophets. Nay the whole book of the
Revelations is almost filled with such instances as these. But to go one step
higher. It was the Jews malice, the Roman cruelty, and Judas his treason that
conspicuously brought to pass the Great Counsel of God in the death, and
suffering of our Savior. And yet this, with all the circumstances of it, was
foretold by the Prophets long before. Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, Luke 24.46. and was at last accomplished according to the
determinate Counsel, Act. 4.28.
and foreknowledge of God, Act. 2.23. Now if the infallibility of the Divine
predictions in this and so many other instances, can consist well enough with
the liberty of the creature, how does it come to pass, that by ascribing to
God, a determinate knowledge of future contingents, the liberty of the creature
is destroyed? And indeed were it impossible in any tolerable measure to
reconcile them, a man would rather choose to let the liberty of the creature
shift for it self, as well as it can, than in the least to detract from that
(...), or suppose that God acted by chance, or no further than his creature^
would give him leave, in that great transaction, upon which depended the
Salvation o^ the world.

And this may suffice at present for a transien^ view of the divine
omniscience. Now how greatly this conduces to the stability of his government,
may briefly appear in these following particulars.

And first, by this he is privy to all the plots, and consultations of men, who
are contriving to frustrate his counsels, and disturb him in his government of
the world. How glibly might men carry on their plots, and promise success to
their devices, if they could be but once assured, that no body plotted but
themselves. But this is sometimes apt to startle them, and make them less
confident in their own imaginations, they have a shroud suspicion, that others
are at work too, and such as are every way their equals in cunning, conduct,
and contrivance. But now in this particular, God by his unsearchable knowledge
has a vast advantage against all the policies of men. As they plot, so does he
too, he has designs with them, and designs beyond them. He is always present
at their cabals and consults, and clandestine meetings, privy not only to their
open but their most covert practices. He is intimately acquainted with all
their designs, but they in the mean time are wholly ignorant of his. And we
need not the help of a statesman to inform us of how great moment it is to be
privy to the Counsels of an Enemy. For by this he can trace and observe their
motions, in the thing wherein they deal proudly, he will be above them. Ex.
18.11. And surely it can be no hard matter for an infinite power to defeat
those Counsels, which an infinite wisdom has discovered.

Secondly, by this he is enabled to make all the Counsels of men subservient to
the establishment of his own government. He can make use of them for the
promoting of his interests, when they think of nothing but driving on their
own. Whatever were the designs of Cyrus in raising forces against Babylon, God
had a nobler end than all, and which Cyrus was utterly unacquainted with. For
thus says the Lord by his prophet two hundred years before Cyrus was born,
Esai. 44.26.
that says of Cyrus he is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even
saying to Jerusalem thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy foundation
shall be laid. And so wonderful was that providence, which conducted him
through the whole course of his affairs, as signally proclaims him to be an
instrument in the hand of God, acted to higher purposes, than he was able to
understand, even the accomplishing his good pleasure toward the captive Jews,
and the manifestation of the glory of his great name in the redemtion, and
deliverance of his people. For so says the text expressly Es. 45.4. For my
servant Jacobs sake; and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy
name, I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me.

Thirdly, God by his infinite knowledge is infallibly secured against all change
and alteration in the administration of his government, in as much as no
accident can ever happen, but what was from all eternity foreseen by him. To
him, who always beholds all things in one view, there can be no after Counsels
to rectify the oversights of the former. The reason why men are often forced to
change their methods, is the imperfection of their knowledge; they know several
things by degrees, and succession and every thing but in part, and every new
event, or occurrence, that arises, adds a new improvement, and perfection to
their knowledge. And this makes men so often to shift their Counsels, to
multiply expedients, what they cannot do one way, to try another, to have
several strings to their bow, because they know not, how many of them may
break. And yet after all this ado, they may be forced to begin again. For there
are (...) thousand accidents, which never entered into ^^eir thoughts, any one
whereof can in an in^^ant unexpectedly put an end to the fairest pro^^cts, and
contrivances. But now the government of God is in this respect above the danger
(...) any miscarriage, or disappointment. He who ^^es all things in all the
differences of time, with one glance of his eye, can never find any cause to
recede from what he has once determined. Nothing can fall out besides his
expectation. For known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the
world. Act. 15 8.


God indeed is said in scripture to repent Genesis 6.6. 1 Samuel 15.11. which is not
so to be understood, as if God acted like men, who fall upon new methods, when
they are defeated, and baffled in their old ones. But as when men repent of
their former errors, they usually take another course, and act in a different
way from what they did before; so when God change^ the external manner, and
method of his operations, the scripture condescending to our apprehensions,
calls it repentance, which yet doe^ not denote any alteration at all in the
counse^ of his will, but only in the works of his hand^ All the great
vicissitudes, and revolutions of the world are the products of one, steady,
constant uniform, and unchangeable Counsel. He h^^ different ends in the same
action, and can ma^^ contrary actions conspire to the same end. (...) wonder
therefore, if we at any time beho^^ a signal mutation in his works, without a^^
revocation of his decree. And as Aquinas ^^termines, when he wills a change,
he ^^ver changes his will. He remains unshak^^ and immovable, amidst all the
agitati^^ and disturbances of the world. He changes times, and seasons,
without any variation in himself. And all the alterations that happen
successively in the outward appearances of things, flow from the eternal, and
immutable purpose of him, Ephesians. 1.11.
who works all things according to the Counsel of his own will.

If therefore God be of that infinite knowledge, as to be always present to our
most retired thoughts, and closest purposes, if he has an exact prescience of
all future contingents, and beholds at one view, what will be the Event, and
Issue of all the actions of the world, if he saw distinctly from all Eternity
every occurrence, that could prevent, further, stop, or hinder his designs, we
may then rest assured, that God will maintain his authority over the world,
against all the devices, and combinations of men. Es. 31.2.
For he also is wise, and there is no wisdom, Prove. 21.30.
nor understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord.

The second perfection in God effectually conducing to the stability of his
government, is an Almighty, Irresistible, and Uncontrolable power. Which though
the Scripture did not ascribe to God, and that in an infinite degree, yet the
many mighty works, which he has from time to time done in the world, will
amount to an undeniable demonstration of it. 'Twas he that created the heaven,
and the earth, and then we may well make the Prophet Jeremies conclusion from
it, Jer. 32.17.
that nothing is too hard for him. He, that with a word made this great fabric
of the world, may surely with the turn of his hand manage every thing in it, so
as to be subservient to his will. And this is the argument, which God himself
in the Prophets often makes use of to silence the doubts, that might arise,
concerning the execution of his purpose. Thus Esaias 40.22. It is he that sits
upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers;
that stretches out the heaven as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent
to dwell in. and c. 14.26. This is the purpose, that is purposed upon the whole
earth, and this is the hand, that is stretched out upon all nations, for the
Lord of hosts has purposed, and who shall disannul it, his hand is stretched
out, and who shall turn it back. For what opposition can we be supposed to
make, who have no strength to arm our selves against him, but what we have
derived from him? Or what cannot he do with us, who cannot only destroy us by
letting loose the influence of one contrary against another, but even turn us
into nothing, merely by the withholding of his own?

And here first, the exercise of his Almighty power, for the establishing of
his government, is singularly observable in his restraints, and influences upon
the hearts and spirits of men. When Balaam the Sorcerer, who loved the ways of
unrighteousness, came ready prepared to Curse the children of Israel, it was
not in his power to utter one word but what the Lord had spoke unto him. Number.
22.35. Nay says he v. 18. If Balak, would give me his house full of silver, and
gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord to say less, or more. We read
Ex. 34.23. There times in the year, shall all your men children appear before
the Lord God, the God of Israel. Now the Jews lived in the midst of their
enemies, who in all probability would not let slip such an inviting
opportunity, when all the men were gone up to Jerusalem, to invade their
country, and destroy all, that they had left behind them. Notwithstanding God
Almighty is very peremptory in his injunction, it is again repeated Deuteronomy. 16.16.
and to take off the objection that might arise from their leaving their Country
naked and defenseless, he assures them, that when they thus went to appear
before the Lord, no man should desire their land. This is a certain proof, that
God effectually orders, and governs the hearts and spirits, and the voluntary
actions of men. Or else how could he infallibly assure them (when men had all
those temptations, advantages, and encouragements) not only that no man should
invade or conquer, but that no man should desire their land. I shall give but
one instance more, and that is, the successes of Cyrus, in which are contained
so many special instances of a remarkable, and overruling power. Isai. 48.20.
Zenophon. Dr. Jackson.
What was it else but the finger of God, who commands all the hearts of the
Sons of men, that brought in so many Confederate Forces to his assistance, and
some of them natural subjects to the Babylonian, without whose concurrence the
whole enterprise had miscarried. This is not to be imputed either to Cyrus his
management, or their own. Isai. 40.15.45.5.
But he, to whom all nations are as the drop of a bucket, who said of Cyrus, I
have girded thee, though thou have not known me, had long before ordered all
things to his hand, and in the language of the Prophet Jeremy on this occasion
set up a standard, Jer. 51.27, 29.
blew the trumpet, and prepared the nations: that every purpose of the Lord,
might be performed against Babylon, to leave the land of Babylon, a desolation
without an inhabitant.

But secondly, this power of God is further visible, in curbing, and keeping
under the passions and unruly appetites of men. Ps. 65.7.
He that stilleth the raging of the sea, and the noise of its waves, is alone
able to quiet and subdue the rage, and madness of the people. Whence are wars
and fightings among you? says St. James, Come they not hence, even from lusts?
so violent are the desires of pride, avarice, ambition, and revenge, so various
are the designs at the same time a driving on directly cross to one another,
such is the eagerness of men in the pursuit of their interests, and so great
the animosities upon a defeat, that we have no Cause to be surprised at the
frequent alterations, we meet with in the world, the only wonder is, that they
happen no oftener than they do. For such are the disorders, which men's
extravagances would Cause amongst us, that if there were not an invisible hand
to bridle, and overrule them, there would be no longer any living in the world,
but unconceiveable confusions would cover the face of the whole earth. But now,
Ps. 93.3.4.
though the waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly, yet he that sits
on high is mightier. The Lord is King, 99.1.
be the people never so impatient, he sits upon the Cherubims, be the earth
never so unquiet. He that set bounds to the sea, saying, Hitherto shall thou
go, but no further, can also restrain, and hold in the most boisterous
passions, and disorderly affections of men. He can reduce, and temper them to
serve the ends of his own government: He can let them loose, when he pleases,
to Cause disturbances and revolutions in the world, and when they have finished
the work, which was given them to do, he can call them back again into their
old channel, compose, and quiet them, as our Savior rebuked the winds and the
seas, and there was a great calm, Mat. 8.26.

We have thus far considered the stability of Gods government, and what those
perfections of his nature are, which render his Kingdom fixed and immovable,
Dan. 4.35
He can do whatsoever he pleases in the armies of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth, so that heaven and earth shall sooner pass away, and
the fabric of the world be dissolved, Es. 55.11.
than any one word that goes forth out of his mouth, shall return to him void,
without accomplishing his pleasure, and prospering in the thing, whereto he
sent it.

And now from this consideration of the stability of the Divine government, we
may infer this useful Corollary, that the way to make human governments firm,
and stable too (as far as they are capable) is to regulate, and conform them
according to the mind of God. Commit thy works unto the Lord, says Solomon,
and so thy thoughts shall be established. Prove. 16.3. And Eliphaz the Temanite,
Job. 22.23. If thou return unto the Almighty, and make thy prayer unto him,
thou also shall decree a thing, and it shall be established, and the light shall
shine upon thy paths. It is vain thing to imagine, that secular wisdom, human
policies, or the projects, and contrivances of crafty, and designing men, are
the way to settle, and give security to a people. All that they can do is to
serve a present turn, and to piece up things for a little while, but when they
have done their utmost, can never lay any sure ground work of a lasting
tranquillity.

In that great distress of Hezekiah Es. 33. When Sennacherib was sending up a
formidable army to Jerusalem, and (which was worse) many of his own people were
dealing underhand with the King of Assyria, and ready prepared for a revolt, he
applies himself to God for succor, and assistance, and receives full and ample
directions from him, what those methods were, which should settle, and
establish him in peace, and safety v. 6. Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the
stability of thy times, and strength of Salvation: the fear of the Lord is his
treasure. Sennacherib had before taken many fenced Citys, laid wast his
strongholds, and at last overreached and cheated him of his treasures, which
are the necessary means of security against a foreign enemy. Nevertheless the
Prophet assures him, that while he was careful to preserve the fear of the Lord
in his heart, and zealous in settling, and advancing the true service, and
worship of God, he should never want either for treasure, or defense, or any
thing conducing to the lengthning the tranquillity of his people, and preserving
peace and truth in his days.

This then is the method which God prescribes, for the sure establishment of a
people. Es. 1.16.
Put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes. Cease to do evil,
learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the oppressed, Judge the fatherless,
plead for the widow, Mal. 3.10.12.
and then prove me, says the Lord, if I will not pour you out a blessing. Then
all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a pleasant Land, says the
Lord of hosts. Whereas if injustice, and oppression, if wrong and robbery
possess the gates, if irreligion, and infidelity be rife in the earth, if
atheism, heresy, and prophanness shall take root among us, and overspread the
land with a contemt of Virtue, and Religion, it is not our Fleets and Armies,
our Forts, and Garrisons, that can secure us. These are the crying sins, that
have heretofore threatened the return of Popery upon this Kingdom, and if they
are still suffered to continue, and increase, 'twill be a very hard matter to
keep it out. It was the observation of a Politician, who seems to have had no
great sense of Gods government of the world, Machiav^l.
we can have no greater sign of the ruin of a people, than to see the worship
of God despised. This as it is true in experience, so it is founded upon this
immutable, and eternal reason, that the great creator and governor of the world
has so contrived the mutual dependencies, and relations of one thing to
another, that peace, and settlement shall be the result of piety and integrity;
and that its folly for a nation to flatter it self with hopes of safety, and
security, where the foundations of it are shaken, and undermined. All
expedients whatsoever, without the establishment of the true Religion, are but
building a wall, Ezekiel. 19.15.
and daubing it with untemper'd mortar. But thus says the Lord, the wall is no
more, neither they that daubed it. It was Jeroboams politic device to preserve
his Kingdom to his Posterity, by dividing it from the established worship of God
in the temple at Jerusalem. 1 Kin. 13.34.
But this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to
destroy it from off the face of the earth. Certainly he who has so firmly
settled his own government, that it cannot be moved, is the fittest to direct us
in the establishment of ours. And this was holy Jobs inference from this
doctrine, c. 23.11. My foot has held his steps, his ways have I kept and not
declined, the reason whereof follows, for he is in one mind, and who can turn
him? and whatsoever his Soul des;ireth, that he does. He performs the thing
that is appointed for me: and many such things are with him. And so I pass to
the third thing proposed, viz. the Justice, and Equity of this government, he
shall Judge the people righteously. And surely no man can make any doubt of
this, for he is righteous in all his ways, Ps. 145.17.89.14.
and holy in all his works. And Justice, and Judgment are the habitation of his
throne; he is, as we have seen, of infinite Knowledge, and Wisdom, to discern
all the actions of men, and also of infinite power, to put his sentence
effectually in execution. And though the full, complete, and glorious
manifestation of his Justice, be reserved to the great day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed, and the great Judge of the world shall render to
every man according to his works, yet in the mean time, he leaves not himself
without witness, but that we may know there is a God that Judges the earth,
takes frequent occasion to demonstrate the glory of his Justice to the world,
both in the outward recompenses of virtue, and the visible punishments of sin.
What good man is there, that has not various instances to relate of Gods
temporal mercies bestowed upon him in this life? what gracious experiences has
he often felt of the goodness of God, though not in a constant Course of
outward prosperity, yet in support under his oppressions, and deliverances from
them? How often has he bin ready to sink under a load of Calumny, and slander,
when God has of a sudden unexpectedly interposed, and brought forth his
righteousness as clear as the light, and his just dealing as the noonday. How
often has God, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, by an
undiscernable providence, so managed, and conducted their affairs, as to give
them a blessed Issue and Success beyond their hopes, and Imaginations? Lastly,
how often has Gods true Religion been persecuted, oppressed, and trampled on, and
threatened with an utter extirpation, when God has seasonably appeared in the
maintenance of his own Cause, Es. 66.14.
and made known his hand toward his servants, and his indignation toward his
enemies. After Antiochus had proudly spoken, that he would make Jerusalem a
Common burying place of the Jews, he was immediately smitten with an invisible
and incurable Plague, and he, who had cruelly entreated others, 2 Mac. 9.28.
dyed a miserable death, in a strange Country, upon the mountains.

But we need not multiply particular instances of Gods dealing in this kind,
since God, who, as we have seen, assumes to himself the power of governing, and
disposing the Kingdoms of the world, has expressly told us, by what rules, and
measures of Justice, and equity he will constantly guide himself in the
government, and administration of them, Jer. 18.7. At what instant I shall
speak concerning a Kingdom, or Nation, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to
destroy; if that nation turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil, that I
thought to do unto them. And at what instant, I shall speak concerning a
kingdom to build, and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, and obey not my
voice, I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them. The
truth of this appears through the whole history of the Jewish nation; and that
great variety of blessings, and misfortunes, that successively happened to
them, was suited to the various instances of their obedience, and disobedience
to their God.

When they started aside to walk after their own Counsels, and rebelled against
the Commandment of the Lord, he set his face against them, made those that
hated them, to reign over them, and strengthened the hands of all that contended
with them. But when they turned from their evil ways, and followed the Lord
their God, he made those that led them away captive to pity them, delivered
them out of captivity, and brought them back again to their own borders. This
is the main scope, and drift of all the Prophets. Es. 1.19.
If ye be willing, and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land. But if ye
refuse, and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword: the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. Salust. S Aug. de Civ. Dei.
And thus much the Historian could observe of the ancient Romans, that they
were magnificent in their devotions, frugal in their families, and faithful to
their friend; and this was the reason that they thrived, and prospered: but
when, through the prevalence of their avarice, and ambition, they had learnt to
neglect their Gods, and become perfidious to men, there quickly ensued such a
corruption, and degeneracy of manners, as at last ended in the ruin of their
government.

It must indeed be confessed, that an unrighteous nation may thrive, and prove
victorious for a time. For God may use the power of one wicked people, to
punish the iniquities of another, and when that work is over, they may suffer
dreadfully for their own. When the proud King of Assyria boasted of the
largeness of his Dominions, God acquaints him with the true reason of the
extent of his Conquests, and the Success of his affairs. 2 K. 19.25. Have thou
not heard long ago, that I have done it, and of ancient times that I have
formed it? Now have I brought it to pass that thou should be to lay wast
fenced Cities into ruinous heaps. But as soon as he had finished Gods work, in
being the executioner of his Justice upon the Jews, and afterward upon the
Egyptians, then did he punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of
Assyria, and the glory of his high looks Es. 10.12.

And thus we have taken a view of Gods government of the world, the absolute
dependence we have upon him for all our blessings, and enjoyments, that his
Kingdom is firm, and stable, and that he has given us directions, how to make
ours so too, that no prosperity can be hoped so without his blessing, and that
it is in vain t^ expect his blessing, without the profession an^ practice of
Religion; that a Righteous God will protect, and defend a Righteous people, and
tha^ nothing, but iniquity, can be our ruin What then remains, but that we
should resolve this da^ to pursue those things, which make both for ou^
present, and eternal interest, that we express ou^ gratitude to God, and love
to our Country, by practice suitable to that holy Religion we profess, that so
our rejoycings, and thanksgiving may not be the work of a day only, but of ou^
lives. This is the way to show your selves goo^ Subjects, and good Patriots,
and such as are re^ly concerned for the good and welfare of yo^ Country. Nay,
this is the way to secure Gods pr^sence with you, and engage his good Spirit so
preside over your Counsels, that they shall s^^ tend to the preservation of our
Church, and Religion amongst us, and make our Sion to contin^^ a praise in the
earth. God will then go on (...) strengthen and stablish, what he has wroug^^
for us, and make one deliverance the pledge al^ earnest of another. And happy
is the people th^^ is in such a Case, yea blessed are the people w^^ have the
Lord for their God.

Now to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory now and
ever. Amen.
FINIS.

