Sabbati, 12. die Aprilis, 1679.
ORDERED,
THAT the thanks of this House be returned to Mr. Jane for his Sermon Yesterday
Preached before this House; and that he be desired to Print his Sermon. And
that the Members that serve for the Universities do return the thanks.

WILL. GOLDESBROUGH. Cler. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached on the Day of the Public Fast, April the 11th. 1679. AT St.
Margarets Westminster; BEFORE THE Honorable House of Commons.

BY WILLIAM JANE, B. D. Canon of Christ-Church in Oxford, and Chaplain to the
Lord Bishop of London.

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Henry Brom, and Richard Chiswel, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

A SERMON ON HOSEAH vii. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength and he knows
it not, yea gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows not.
THE Argument of this Chapter is much of the same nature with the foregoing,
only with this difference, that in that the Prophet directs his speech against
Judah, in this against the Ten Tribes. And because in the end of the former
Chapter he had given the Jews some hopes of their return from Captivity, he
proceeds in this, and those which follow to lay open the sins, and aggravate
the guilt of the people of Israel, and thereby to cut off from them all
occasion of complaining against God, as if he had adjudged them to too severe a
doom in not affording them the like promise of a Temporal restitution.

He makes a distinct discovery of the sins and provocations of all orders and
degrees of men amongst them, not only of the common people but of the Princes
and the Rulers, not only of the lesser and inferior Cities, but (and that
principally) of Samaria the great Metropolis of their Nation. And this seems to
be the design of the Prophet in almost every Verse of this Chapter: First, to
lay before them the sad calamitous condition whereto their sins had brought
them: Secondly, their senselesness and stupidity which increased upon them in
proportion to their miseries, and grew the more incurable by the methods of
their recovery.

Thus we read Verse 7. They have devoured their Judges, all their Kings are
fallen, there is none among them that calls unto me. By which words, as I
conjecture, the Prophet endeavors to represent to them those Treasons and
Conspiracies, and horrible Butcheries of the Kings of Israel, which are more
particularly described, 2 Kings xv. and which at last determined in the utter
destruction of their Kingdom.

And yet notwithstanding the posture of their affairs was so dismal and
amazing, though there appeared among them such visible tokens of the Divine
vengeance in so many revolutions of their Government, so many changes of their
Kings, who all succeeded one another by Sedition, Treachery and Murder, yet
(which is the more dreadful prospect of the two) there was no man among them so
far wrought upon by the sense of the public calamities as to humble himself
before God, to reform his life, or to implore the Divine assistance for
repairing the breaches, and restoring Peace, and settlement to a perishing and
distracted people. The like argument with some variety of expression is again
repeated in the words of my Text. In which we find represented to us,

1. The misery of Ephraims Captivity, Prove. xviii. 11.
strangers have devoured his strength. By strength here we may understand first
that which the Wise man calls a Defense, a High-wall, Eccl. vii. 12.
and a strong City, the Wealth, Treasure and Riches of a people. And how far
this had been impaired together with the occasions of it, we have a very large
account from the xiii. to the xvii. of 2 Kings. Under Jehoahaz the son of Jehu
they were so thresht, and worn out by the King of Syria, that there remained to
Jehoahaz of all the people but fifty Horsemen, 2 Kings xiii. 7.
ten Chariots, and ten thousand Foot. And though afterward under Jeroboam
there began to appear some glim ps of settlement and restoration, yet these
glorious hopes were soon defeated by the Invasion of Pull the King of Assyria,
who forced Menahem the King of Israel to a composition of a thousand Talents of
Silver, xv. 19.
that so his hand might be with him to confirm the Kingdom in his hand. And in
this state they continued wasting and consuming till the coming of Salmanasser,
xvii. 3.
who like an insatiable gulf devoured and exhausted all.

Or, II. By strength here may be understood that wherein the true safety of a
Nation does consist, which is the Divine Providence, and Protection. Without
this the Fortifications of Cities, the Courage of Soldiers, the multitude of
Counselors, the vastness of Revenues are of no avail at all to the defense and
security of a people. For when ever God withdraws his presence and favor from
a Nation, he dismantles their Fortresses, Isaiah xix. 3.
mingles a perverse spirit in the midst of their Counsels, makes the heart of a
people to melt, and their spirit to fail within them, he curses the Treasures
of the wicked, and makes the increase of his house to depart and flow away. Job
xx. 28.


And as Ephraims strength in the former acception had been devoured by strange
men, so in this by strange gods. 2 King. xvii. 12.
For they served Idols of which the Lord had said unto them, ye shall not do
this thing. And what more likely course could they have taken to cut off all
their claim and interest in the Divine favor? They chose new gods, Jud. v. 8.
then was war in the gates.

And surely for the people of Israel, to whom God had made such clear
Revelations of himself, and by so many repeated experiments of his love, an
earnest of his assistance, while they continued stedfait in his Covenant; for
them I say thus in a plain defiance to their known duty, to forsake the Lord
who brought them out of Egypt, and to fly for refuge to the gods of the
Nations; what is this but to distrust the veracity of Heaven, and scorn the
Protection of an Omnipotent Arm, to renounce the Covenant which had Espoused
them to their Maker, and consequently to proclaim a war with the Sovereign of
the world? What in all likelihood can be the consequence of such a daring
heinous provocation but what we read, 2 Kings xvii. 20. Therefore the Lord
rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them and delivered them into the
hand of Spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight. This then is the
misery of Ephraims Captivity, strangers have devoured his strength.

2. We have the symptoms of his approaching ruin, Gray hairs are here and there
upon him. Gray hairs may denote either the intension and greatness, or else the
duration of his Calamity. And in either signification the meaning of the
expression will amount to this, that the people of Israel had been so long kept
under a continued series of pressures and afflictions, that they were in a
manner worn out with old Age, ready to give up the Ghost, and to pine away in
their Calamities; there appeared upon them the constant forerunners and
manifest presages of ruin and desolation.

And whenever God decrees the final consumption of a people, they may foresee
it themselves without the prediction of a Prophet. A general dissoluteness of
manners, an impudent boldness in the practice of iniquity, a neglect and
contempt of all the duties of Religion, the loosing the joints of Government by
Treasons and Conspiracies, divided interests and Dissensions among the people,
Confusions and Divisions in the Church are as infallible symptoms of a dying
State, of the dissolution of a Commonwealth and the funeral of a Kingdom, as
if a flaming Sword had hung over it, or a voice from Heaven had revealed its
doom. These are the gray hairs of the people in the Text. And how near we our
selves resemble them, I leave you to judge by comparing our condition at present
with that of the Ten Tribes before their carrying into Captivity.

But III. Which is the worst symptom of all, here is described the general
senselesness of that people, notwithstanding all the judgments of God either
past or present, a deep sleep that had seized them (like Jonah in the Tempest)
none awakening himself to cry unto God, or to pour out his supplications at the
Throne of Grace. This is his condition, yet he knows it not (that is) he does
not consider the greatness of his danger, or he does not discover himself to be
seriously affected with the sense of Gods judgments, so as to lament, and
bewail, and to tremble at them; he does not resolve them into their proper
principles, nor acknowledge the Author of them, which was the hand of God, nor
the Impulsive cause which was his own iniquity: or lastly he knows it not,
that is, he does not comply with the end and design of it. Afflictions have not
that errand upon him for which they were sent, but he so behaves himself under
them, as if he had been wholly ignorant what had been done unto him.

From the words thus explained, I shall consider, I. The end and design of Gods
judgments upon a Nation, which is, that they may know and consider, that they
may be brought to a sense of their sins, to true Repentance and amendment of
their lives. II. The contrary effects which they often have upon a secure and a
sinful people, which is to make them the more incorrigible and obstinate in
their sins. Gods judgments are upon him, yet he knows it not. III. I shall
discover some Causes of it. IV. The greatness of the provocation, Yet he
knows it not: This Yet has an Emphasis, an accent upon it, and denotes sins
under judgments to be exceeding sinful. V. And lastly, I shall conclude with
some brief Application to our selves. I begin with the first of these which is
the end and design of Gods judgments upon a Nation, which is that they may
know, etc.


And this will appear, 1. From the intention of God in the threatening and
inflicting of his judgments. 2. From the natural tendency of the judgments
themselves. God not only threatens but sends his judgments upon a people on the
same errand as the Ancient Romans did their Heralds, before they actually
entered upon a war, not peremptorily to declare our doom but to warn us to
prevent it by coming in and submitting to terms of Peace and Reconcilement. At
what instant, Jer. xviii. 7, 3.
says God by the Prophet Jeremy, I shall speak concerning a Nation and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down and to destroy it, if that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from the evil, I will repent of the
evil which I thought to do unto them. In the xxvi. of Leviticus, God in a
Prophetical Scheme represents the sorest judgments which were to fall upon his
people in succeeding Generations, he lays before their eyes the Sword,
Pestilence and Famine, expulsion from the Lords Land into a Land of Enemies and
Idols, the ceasing of the Sacrifices and the solemn Festivals, and even all the
utmost miseries of Captivity and Desolation; and yet in the conclusion of that
black Catalogue, which seems rather an inventory of what evils the hand of God
was able to inflict, than what a people should suffer, we have room for
Repentance and a reserve of mercy, Verse 41. If then their Uncircumcised hearts
be humbled and they then accept the punishment of their iniquity, then will I
remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my
Covenant with Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the Land.

We read in Joel ii. of a day of darkness and gloominess, such as had never
been the like before, Joel ii. 2.10.
wither should there be any after it; such Armies and terrors, as should make
the earth quake, the Heavens tremble, the Sun and Moon to grow dark, and the
Stars to withdraw their shining. And yet amidst all this distress and
perplexity the Lord calls upon his people to return unto him, with an
intimation likewise given that he will return and repent,

Gods wrath was never so fiercely kindled against a person or a people, but if
true Repentance intervened, it has removed his hand or at least abated the
fierceness of the blow. Nay the outward and formal humiliation of an Ahab has
procured a reprieve, 1 Kings xxi. 29.
and suspended the execution. It cannot be denied but that God sometimes
punishes a people in vengeance without any mixture or allay of mercy, when he
makes a full end of them, and the consumption overflows in judgment, as in the
Case of the Ten Tribes under Salmanasser, of the Jewish Church at the
destruction of Jerusalem, when the Kingdom of God was taken from them, 2 These.
ii. 16.
and wrath came upon them to the uttermost; of the seven Churches of Asia, who
have had their Candlestick removed, and been swallowed up by the Inundation of
Mahumetanism; of the famous Churches of Africa, which once gave light to the
whole Christian world, now overspred with ignorance and Barbarism, with a thick
darkness that may be felt. But in all these Cases God never proceeds to
excision and casting off, till all his other corrections have proved useless
and ineffectual, till their iniquities are full, till they are ripe for
vengeance, till they have neglected all the seasons of Grace, and out-sinned
the day of their visitation. Then indeed God grows weary of repenting being
pressed with sin as a Cart full of sheaves.

This is the account which the Scripture gives us of the people of Judah when
they were carried into Captivity, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 16, 17.
they mocked the messengers of God, despised his word, and misused his Prophets
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy,
therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldces, etc. This is a Course
which God then only takes when all other remedies fail. But till then he has
mercy in store for a sinful people even in the midst of all his severest
dispensations. God shoots out his Arrows against a Land as Jonathan shot to
David, 1 Samuel xx, 21.
with Letters bound about them, not to destroy but to instruct. As Gideon when
he vexed the men of Succoth, is said to teach them (or to make them to know)
though with the briers and thorns of the wilderness. Jud. viii. 16. Mic. vi. 9.
Gods Rod has a voice as well as a smart, and if we hear the one we may escape
the other.

And upon these grounds we may assure ourselves that in this day of the Lords
anger, of confusion and rebuke, which now lies upon this sinful Land of our
Nativity, the Lord has not given over all concern for our peace and settlement.
He waits that he may be gracious and stands ready to recall his judgments, as
soon as we shall be contented to be saved, to accept of a deliverance. The Lord
looks down from Heaven this day to take notice of our behavior under his
afflicting hand, how far we are advanced in the practice of Repentance which
this day he so loudly calls for. There is not a penitent tear, not a devout
sigh, not a mourner in secret for them who have no compassion on themselves,
nay not a person swearing and revelling, eating flesh and drinking wine in this
day when the Lord calls us to weeping, fasting and mourning, but the Lord
observes it, and lays it to the account of this Nation as well on the one side
for the engagement of his mercy, as on the other for the provocation of the
fierceness of his anger.

It Is not our utter ruin, that the Lord aims at. For what profit is there in our
blood? He has set his judgments, as he once did his Prophet, over Kingdoms and
over Nations, not barely to root out, Jer. i. 10.
and destroy, but to build and to plant, and these judicial proceedings of his
are directed to edification, not primarily to destruction. They are what the
Censures of the Church ought to be, severe in the execution, but salutary in
the event, 1 Cor. v. 5.
delivering up the offender to the punishment of the flesh, that so by
Repentance and amendment thereupon probably ensuing the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord. Job xxxiii. 29.
Lo all these things works God oftentimes with man to bring back his soul
from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living. And God often
visits iniquity with Rods, when he will not utterly take away his loving
kindness from a people.

But, II. This will further and more distinctly appear from the natural
tendency of Gods judgments themselves. Which will plainly appear in these
following particulars.

1. Then they have a natural tendency to work in men a sense and acknowledgment
of their sins. Prosperity is apt to administer such abundant variety of fresh
delights and satisfactions to the fancy, that the soul is never at leisure to
retire into it self and take a true estimate of its own Estate and
Constitution. The world will never be wanting to present the man with baits and
allurements, and external objects to employ his thoughts and gratify his
desires. And so by that means he is enabled for a time to suppress the voice of
Conscience, and drown the cries of a wounded Spirit. As the Jews when they
sacrificed their children to Moloch, had their loud Instruments of Music, lest
they should perchance hear the outcries of their perishing Infants, which
might force their obdurate hearts into tender and compassionate resentments.

But when the hand of God over-reaches him, and affliction sits close upon him,
this embitters his delights, damps his jollity, dissolves the curious Fabric of
his imaginary enjoyments, renders all his most exquisite pleasures toothless
and insipid. None of these things can then stand by him to rescue him from his
miseries, or give any sweetning to the bitterness of his Cup. And thus when God
hedges up his way with thorns, and stops him in the pursuit of his brutish and
sensual satisfactions, then there lies a necessity upon him to descend into
himself, when he cannot look abroad, to turn his eyes inward, to take an exact
view of his own heart, and discover the greatness of his iniquity: Job xxxvi.
8, 9.
When he is once bound in fetters, and holden in the Cords of affliction, then
will he see his work, and his trangressions that they have exceeded. For the
mind of man is active, and restless, it will always be employed one way or
other. And when it has no outward objects to exercise, or divert it, then
self-reflexion takes place, and the voice of Conscience will be heard.

How stupid and senseless was Pharaoh before Gods judgments fell upon him! He
has no sense at all of God or a Providence, of sin or the wages of it. Exodus v.
2.
Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go. But when the Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran
along upon the ground, ix. 23.
his stomach comes down, his proud heart is a little humbled, the voice of God
in the thunder is more effectual, than by his Prophet. For then Pharaoh sent
and called for Moses and Aaron and said unto them, I have sinned this time,
xxvii. 28.
the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. Now therefore entreat
the Lord, that there be no more mighty thanderings and hail, and I will let you
go, and ye shall stay no longer.

When Belshazzar sees the handwriting upon the wall, his countenance is
changed, Dan. v. 6.
his thoughts trouble him, the joints of his Loins are loosed, and his Knees
smite one against another.

And let Nebuchadnezzar be never so puissant in defying the threats, and the
Omnipotence of God, yet that sad calamity of eating grass with the beasts of
the field will bring him upon his knees, and force him to acknowledge, that the
inhabitants of the world are reputed as nothing in comparison of God, iv. 35.
and that as he does according to his will in the Armies of Heaven and among
the inhabitants of the earth, so none can stay his hand, or say unto him, what
do thou? The wound of Conscience is not perceived at first any more than a
wound in the body, as long as the man continues in the same briskness of
motion, which he was in, when he first received it. But when the judgments of
God stop him in his career, force him to sit down and rest himself a little, he
then begins to cool, and consider, to feel his wound, and recover the unwelcome
sense of the extremity of his pain.

2. The judgments of God are in their own nature apt to take us off from Carnal
confidence and security, and to fix us in a closer dependence upon God. When
men's houses are safe from fear, Jo2 xxi. 9.
neither is the rod of God upon them, they are apt to say to the Almighty
Depart from us, Hab. i. 16.
When their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous, then they sacrifice to
their own net, and burn incense to their drag. It is a great vanity in a manner
rooted in the nature of mankind, to affect an absoluteness and sufficiency in
themselves, and an independence upon any superior Cause. They think it too
great a disparagement to them, an upbraiding of their weakness (as if they were
unable to help themselves) to be a burden to Providence, and live in a
precarious dependence upon him that made them. And therefore so long as succor
and relief can be expected from Power or Policy, from Horses or Horsemen, from
any thing within them or about them, from Foreign Interests, Domestic
Treasures, or even Idolatrous compliances, they will keep their distance, stand
at defiance with the Almighty, and never think of placing their trust upon the
hope of Israel, upon him who is the confidence of all the ends of the earth,
Jer. xiv. 8. Psalm. lxv. 5.
and of them that remain in the broad sea.

Jeroboam was sensible enough, that the Law of God would not countenance his
usurpation, and thereupon sets himself to contrive how he might live without
him, and stand in no need of the influence of his Providence. He makes two
Calves at Dan and Bethel, and then grows confident and secure, that the work of
his hands would Establish him in his Throne. And therefore God Almighty often
finds it necessary to frustrate the Counsels, blast the designs, and curse the
Policies and attempts of all such as usurp upon his Prerogative, and aspire to
an absolute Sovereignty of their own. Exodus xiv. 25.
He takes off Pharaohs Chariot-wheels, puts a hook into the nose of
Sennacherib, 2 King. xix. 28.
crushes the impious Politician upon the very brink of his designs, Job v. 12.
disappoints the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. This is dignus vindice nodus, he is as it were concerned in
point of honor to vindicate his Authority and government, to make them know
that they are but men, and that the most high rules over all. He cuts off all
their Provisions at home, and stops all succors from abroad, distresses them on
every side, that so he may convince them of the vanity and madness of their
presumption, that he is a refuge when all else fails, and that there is no
Sanctuary but in his protection. We read in the xxxiii. Ezekiel xxxiii.
of Ezekiel of a very severe threatening of misery and desolation, Verse 28. I
will lay the Land most desolate, and the pomp of her strength shall cease, etc.
And the result and issue of this severity is mentioned, Verse 29. Then shall
they know that I am the Lord. The same is assigned for the end and reason of
Gods judgments in several other places of this Prophecy, that they may know
that I am the Lord. vii. 27. xxiv. 24. xxx. 8.
As if it were such a difficult matter for a people to know, and to trust in
God, till all other support were taken from them, till they had nothing left to
lean upon of their own.

When Ephraim saw his sickness, Hos. v. 13.
and Judah his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King
Jareb, Menahem makes a Confederacy with Pull. 2 Kings xv. 16.
Hosea gives presents to Shalmaneser, and Ahaz sends an Embassy to
Tiglath-pileser, xvii. 3.2 Chronicl. xxviii. 20.
and sacrifices to the gods of Damascus. But alas while they endeavored to
avoid the smoke they fell into the fire. These were so far from curing of their
wound that they both made it deeper, and increased the smart of it. And the
gods which Ahaz went unto for succor, the ruin of him and of all Israel.

But when God takes the matter into his own hands, becomes a Lion both to
Ephraim and Judah, blocks up all their passages, leaves no way open to Egypt
or Assyria, to Idols or Confederates, they then begin to think of returning
unto God. In their affliction they will seek me early. Hos. v. 15.


III. The Judgments of God upon a Nation conduce very much to take us off from
too great an over-valuing of the Honors, Riches, and Pleasures of this world.
Though ordinarily in our sober judgments we set a greater value upon the
everlasting concerns of another world, than upon all the splendid gayeties, and
delights of this, yet they lie under this great disadvantage, that they are
future and at a distance, and by that means unable to make so deep an
impression upon the mind as these temporal enjoyments, which are present and
continually in our eye. And this makes most men so very fond of the world, so
eagerly desirous of building Tabernacles here, and strangely indisposed to seek
a better Country, to reach after their everlasting hope, and the price of their
high calling.

But when God Almighty in the course of his Providence sends his judgments and
calamities upon a people, devests them of their possessions, degrades them from
their honors, puts a fatal period to their choicest pleasures; How effectually
must this needs convince us of the transitory and perishable nature of all
creature enjoyments, and strip them of those deceitful disguises, under which a
deluded fancy is so apt to represent them!

When Baruch was sent upon a message, which he foresaw was likely to abridg
him of some of his former satisfactions, he grows melancholy and disconsolate
at the news, and cries out, Woe is me, for the Lord has added grief unto my
sorrow, I fainted in my sighing and find no rest. But thus shall thou say unto
him (says God by the Prophet Jeremy) the Lord says thus, Jer. xlv. 3, 4.
Behold that which I have built will I break down, and that which I have
planted will I pluck up, even this whole land, and seek thou great things
for thy self* seek them not. As if he should have said, Would thou live at
ease in Sion, when Sion is to be Plowed like a field, and Jerusalem to become a
desolation? Would thou swim in affluence, and enjoy thy pleasures in a Land
now ready to be overspread with Plagues and Vengeance? Would thou build thee
a stately Palace over the blood and bones of thy slaughtered brethren? What
preferment can thou promise to thy self in the ruins of thy Country? Would
thou make a purchase when the world is at an end?

Ludicra ergo publica Trever petis? It was Salvians expostulation with the
Citizens of Treves, when immediately after the sacking of their City, they
petitioned their Magistrates that the Stage Plays might be restored. In like
manner does Jeremy here control Baruch for his now unseasonable desires. And
may not the same serve as a check to those amongst us, who in such times as
these are scraping up all that they can lay hands on, making all the sordid
advantages of the world that they can, as tenants do of an Estate, when their
Lease is expiring. Soul, take thine ease (said the rich fool in the Gospel)
thou have goods laid up for many years, eat, drink and be merry. But surely he
had quite other apprehensions, when he heard that dismal and surprising voice,
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee.

IV. The judgments of God upon a people are apt to unite their hearts in Love
and Charity to one another. When men are at ease in Sion, Amos vi. 1.
and trust in the mountains of Samaria, When they lie upon beds of Ivory, When
they chant to the Viol, Amos vi. It immediately follows, that then they are not
grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. But when we begin to have a sense and
feeling of Gods judgments upon our selves, this must needs (one would think)
forcibly engage us to Charity and Compassion to our Brethren. We shall be sure
to remember those that are in bonds, when we our selves are bound with them,
and to help those that are in adversity, when we find that we also are but
flesh.

That which hastened, and precipitated the destruction of Jerusalem, and made
their final ruin, the more dreadful when it came, was the factions, and
animosities which at that time broke forth among them, which engaged them in
such incredible slaughters and murders of one another, that they never put
themselves into a posture of resisting the Romans, but when they saw them
approaching their Walls. Which they did then, lest their enemies should come
and take the work out of their hands, and so deprive them of being the sole
Authors of their own destruction.

And this I think to be the saddest symptom of approaching vengeance, which is
this day visible upon this sinful Nation.

The modern Romans can hardly in all probability ever enter in upon us, but at
that door, which we our selves set open by our wide breaches and divisions. And
O that we could all be effectually persuaded in this our day, to know the
things that belong unto peace before they be hid from our eyes, to lay aside
all names of parties and distinctions, and mind the true interest of the
Protestant Religion, which now lies at stake, and which I am sure ought to be
dearer to us, than all other concernments whatsoever.

It was once the fate of two Reverend Martyrs for the Protestant Religion in
the time of their prosperity to be uncharitably disunited, and alienated to a
greater height in their affections, than in their judgments. But when the fiery
trial in Queen Mary's days (which for the time it lasted, raged more terribly
than any of the Heathen Persecutions, except that of Dioclesian) had so
desperately threatened the Common Faith, they mutually condescended, quitted
their animosities, and both laid down their lives for their undaunted
profession of the Faith of Christ.

And surely this would be one happy effect of the judgments of God upon this
Nation, if the fears, which we lie under from our enemies abroad, would engage
us to join as one man for the composing our differences, and dissensions at
home. And unless this be done we have great reason to fear, that God will be so
far provoked by our divisions, as to give us up to be united in common
sufferings, who would not be persuaded upon any other terms to be reconciled to
one another.

Let us consider how the Romanists triumph in our quarrels, and how active and
industrious they are in fomenting our differences, and adding fuel to our
flames. When the Kingdom of Israel was divided by the revolt of Jeroboam, then
was the time for Shishak the King of Egypt to forage the Land, 2 Chronicl.
xii. 9.
and take away the treasures of the Temple of the Lord.

And O that God would give us all hearts to consider this, to be sensible of
our own interest, and true to it, that so we may no longer expose our selves
and our Country, our lives and fortunes, and the best Religion in the world, to
the advantages of blood-thirsty, and deceitful men, who have at this day
conspired against us, to take away both our place and Nation. And assure your
selves (for he who is truth it self has spoken it) that a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand, but is brought to desolation. And while Ephraim
stands divided against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim; and every one
eats the flesh of his own arm, Isa. ix. 12.19, 20, 21.
and that, at a time when the Syrian is before and the Philistim behind, and
both ready to devour Israel with open mouth, we have good reason to conclude
that through the wrath of the Lord the Land is darkened, and infatuated, that
gods anger is not yet turned away, but that his hand is stretched out still.

These are some of those ends for which Almighty God sends his judgments upon a
Nation. I proceed in the next place to show

into wantonness.

It was a dreadful sight in the City of Lions when they were so infested with
the Pestilence, ut tota civitas bustum, that the whole City seemed to be but
one Grave, the Soldiers in the Garrison daily issued forth, and committed all
sorts of uncleanness with the dying and the dead. The like stupidity we find in
Salvian charged upon the Carthaginians, who were wholly set upon their luxury
and intemperance in the midst of their Cities ruins, and among so many deaths,
which they daily beheld in the slaughter of their fellow Citizens had no
apprehensions of their own.

However they saw Gods hand lifted up to strike, it had no effectual influence
upon them to turn to him that smote them, unless it were, by the increase of
their provocations, as far as was possible, to smite again. Like those whom we
read of, Revel. xvi. 11. that blasphemed the God of Heaven because of their
pains, etc. Assiduitas calamitatum augmentum Criminum. A certain argument of
the desperate condition of a people, and that they have already begun their
hell, where at the same time men suffer, and blaspheme their God.

And this was the state, and constitution of the Christian world, at that time
when the Vandals, Goths, and Hums, and other Barbarians overran it. So
notorious were the Characters of Divine vengeance in the suddenness of their
coming, the number of their Armies, and the invincibleness of their strength,
that we are forced to leave off all enquiry into second causes and human
designs, and conclude them to be nothing else, but (what one of them called
himself) the scourges in the hand of God to punish a licentious and a back
sliding people. And yet notwithstanding this, they daily increased in their old
sins of Uncleanness, and Adultery, Atheism, and Profaneness, as Salvian has left
upon Record, who is not half so Tragical in the description of the greatness of
their Calamities, as of the iniquities that survived them.

But I shall not proceed any further to seek instances of this, which is so
visible in the carriage of Gods own people. Their whole story is one continued
Argument to confirm it. They sinned under their suffering, and sinned after
they were freed from it. The use, which they made of their afflictions was to
grow more obstinate in the sins that caused them. And as soon as they were
delivered, they looked upon themselves only as more at liberty to commit all
those abominations, for which they were carried into Captivity. Which strange
impenitency under Gods judgments does usually manifest itself in these two
Cases.

1. When men have hardened themselves in evil by a long practice, and custom of
sinning. Custom we say, is a second Nature, and usually gains such strength
by time, that it grows more firm than either Nature or Religion. It hardens the
Heart, sears the Conscience, makes the man incapable of the impressions of
sorrow, and as utterly unable to Repent, as the Ethiopian to change his skin,
Jer. xiii. 23.
or the Leopard to be freed from his spots. The judgments of God may raze the
skin, but cannot pierce so deep as to would the Conscience.

It is seen sometimes in Apoplectick Distempers, that they so far stupifie the
Patients, that no severities can reduce them to acts of life, and it is said
that they have afterward grown sensible, when they have been laid out, and
covered in their Graves, and revived amidst the flames of their Funeral Pile.
In the same senseless condition does a Custom of sin place the obdurate sinner,
the austerest of the Divine methods, the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, and all
the terrible symptoms of impendent wrath, shall in no wise prevail with him to
call his sins to remembrance, or to raise him from his drowsiness and
stupidity; so that he never awakes, till he finds the flames of Hell about his
ears, nor recovers the sense of his sins, till it serves to no other purpose,
but to increase the resentments of his misery.

The judgments of God quite lose their end upon such a man. He cries perhaps,
and roars under his torments, but he has no apprehensions of Gods design in
inflicting them. Like those of whom it is said, Hos. vii. 14. They have not
cried unto me with their hearts when they howled upon their beds. He has felt
the pain and anguish in the flesh, but has no sense at all of any impressions
upon the Spirit. Like a man in a melancholic, and a troublesome dream, he is
scared perhaps and frighted with the terrors of the Almighty, but as soon as
the noise is over, he quickly returns to his former slumber, and security.

This is ordinarily the state of the habitual sinner, placed beyond the
possibility of being reclaimed by the Divine corrections, unless God together
with his judgments set in with the powerful assistances of his Grace, and
Spirit, which that man certainly has little reason to expect, who has so long
grieved, resisted and stood out against it.

And this consideration suggests a second Case, in which the judgments of God
usually prove ineffectual to Repentance, when men have continued in their sins
under the plentiful dispensations of Grace and Mercy. Abused mercies are the
great aggravations of the iniquities of a people. And this we may be sure of,
that whatever tends to fill up the measure of our sins, increases likewise the
difficulty of our Repentance. When the goodness of God will not lead men to
Repentance, Romans ii. 4, 5.
when they despise the riches of his forbearance, and long suffering, their
hearts then grow hardened, and impenitent, they treasure up to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath.

And indeed how can it be expected, that thou shouldft comply with this method
of the Almighty, who have already rejected and refused so many? If the Sword of
Gods Judgments had not yet overtaken thee, yet he has been long fighting
against thee with the sword of his mouth, Rev. ii. 1^.
with the tenders of his Gospel and the effers of his Grace. He has been long
inviting, importuning, and pursuing thee, with the Preaching of his Word, the
suggestions of his Spirit, the blood of his Son, the joys of Heaven, and the
torments of Hell, thy own vows, engagements, and resolutions. And how can we
then think that the showers of Gods judgments should prove more prevalent than
the sunshine of his mercies, and outweigh the united force of all these great
inducements to move us unto Repentance?

We have an instance, that speaks home to this, Luke xvi. where the Rich man
for his impenitence, and neglecting his day of Grace, being tormented in the
flames of Hell, desires Father Abraham to send Lazarus to his five brethren,
that survived him, to forewarn them of the consequence of their sins, and what
bitterness there is in the end of transgression, lest they should also come
into the same place of torment. Luke xvi. 28.
But Abraham tells him they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.
Nay Father Abraham, said he, But if one went from the dead, they will repent.
And would not any one think, that such a message as this were very likely to
produce Repentance? For one coming from the dead would be a visible
demonstration of the souls existence after its departure. And Lazus could
decipher the joys of Heaven, and give a true account of the sufferings of the
damned, as being a person who had a sight of these, a taste and experience of
the other. And yet notwithstanding all these high probabilities, of the
efficacy of this method, Father Abraham concludes, If they hear not Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded by one coming from the dead. From
which we may infer, applying this parable to our present purpose, that those
who are not melted by the offers of his Grace, will be the rather hardened by
the terrors of his Judgments, and that such as have rejected those former
Mercies, if they will not be persuaded by one coming from the dead, they will
surely not Repent, though they themselves are going to them.

These are two Cases in which the impenitency of a people under Gods Judgments
usually happens. I proceed now to some more particular Causes of it, which is
the next point to be considered.

1. And the first cause is a spirit of Atheism and Infidelity, which has
possessed the minds of men, which takes their eyes off from God, and fixes them
upon second and inferior causes. The Plague is nothing else but some infectious
atoms in the air, which in certain determinate periods of time gather together
for the annoyance of a City or a Nation. Wars are caused merely by the
different interests of States, which engage them in mutual provocations of one
another, and by that means dispose Princes to Choler and Revenge. The
Revolutions of Government proceed from the ambition and treachery of subjects,
who, whenever they find an opportunity, will be ready to break forth to
disengage themselves from their subjection, and involve a flourishing Kindom in
blood, ruin, and confusion. It was Jorams desperate resolution in the Siege of
Samaria, This evil is of the Lord, wherefore should I wait upon the Lord any
longer? But the men whom we now speak of conclude with a little better Logic,
but as bad Divinity, These evils are not from the Lord, therefore why should we
wait upon him? It is not he that has broken us, neither is it he, that must
bind us up.

It was an error in the Heathens (which their own reason might have corrected)
that they ascribed all their ordinary success, or misfortune to themselves, or
their enemies, but any great, and extraordinary calamities either to fate or
chance. And this engaged them in a great deal of perplexity, so that they knew
not which way to turn themselves, when difficulties pressed upon them. But
methinks those that live in a Christian Nation and call themselves Christians,
should be better taught, who are instructed by the Sacred Oracles to impute all
the miseries that befall them to an overruling Cause, to discover the Finger of
God in the hand of an enemy, and ascribe all events whatsoever (even such as
are brought upon them by the instrumental mediation of secondary Agents) to the
Justice, Wildom and Providence of God, the Supreme Governor of the World.

It is the Lord, 2 Samuel, xvi. 31.
that bids Shimei to curse David, and that raises up to him enemies out of his
own house. xxi. II. 1 Kings xii. 15.
If King Rehoboam will not hearken to Faithful Counsel, the Cause is from the
Lord. And through the anger of the Lord it came to pass, 2 Kings xxiv. 20.
that Zedekiah Rebelled against the King of Babylon.

And when Babylon has filled up the measure of her iniquities, it is the Lord
that raises up Cyrus, Isa. xlv. 4.
that calls him by his name, that marches forth with his Armies to bring upon
her, a swift, sudden, and surprising desolation. Can a bird (says the Prophet
Amos) fall in a suare upon the earth where no gin is laid for him? Amos iii. 5.
And shall there be any evil in the City which the Lord has not done? It is
God, and not the Air, the Elements, or the Stars, that brings the Famine or
Pestilence upon a Nation. It is God, and not man, whether he be the Foreign
Enemy, or the Domestic Rebel that overturns a State, and dissolves a Kingdom.

These instances are sufficient to evince the Divine efficiency in the works of
second Causes. And if the infidel notwithstanding will not be satisfied in the
Doctrine of a Providence, we must even leave him to be convinced (as he
certainly will either in this life or in another) by Gods own immediate stroke.
This in the mean time is certain, that this prodigious humor of Atheism,
Skepticism, and Infidelity, which so abounds in this Nation, is both a real
cause of men's impenitency under Judgments, and a dreadful symptom, that God
will go on to judge and afflict them still. And by this means (I greatly fear)
our adversaries of Rome are more likely to compass their ends upon us than by
any of their other artifices, and stratagems whatsoever.

II. There is a great indifferency upon the spitits of men, as to the truth or
honesty of the Cause that they are engaged in. Which makes them instead of
thinking of the proper expedients to save their Country from ruin, to plot and
contrive how they may advance themselves in the next turn of affairs, and the
revolution of the Government.

Men that have been used to fish in troubled waters, and by little tricks and
devices of their own to wind themselves in with that side that gets uppermost,
will never in any National calamity entertain any thoughts of returning unto
God, as long as they can have recourse to the same arts to save and secure
themselves.

And this seems to be the Case of Ephraim in the Text. He stood in no great
fear of the Assyrian, because he had no concern for his God, and was not at all
sensible of his misery in being carried away Captive into a Land of Idols, as
long as he was already prepared to worship after the manner of the gods of the
Land. Thus we find the people were in the time of Ahab, 2 Kings xviii. 21.
when they halted between, two opinions between God and Baal. Such were those
Nations whom the King of Assyria placed in the Cities of Samaria, xvii. 33.
that feared the Lord and served Idols. And the Jews in the Prophet Zephany who
could swear by God, Zeph i. 5.
and swear by Melchom. Such as these are men ready and prepared for a change,
whatever it be, and resolved if the King of Babylon (or whoever else) get the
upper hand, that Idolatry and Superstition shall put no stop to their
preferment. Men that can counterfeit any Religion are really of none at all.
And therefore whatever pretenses they may make for the present, what is there
that can hinder them (when occasion serves) from making the best advantages
they can for themselves, by coupling in with that side, that wins the day.

But however such as these by their arts and disguises may make a shift for a
while, yet God will not be mocked. The time will certainly come, when the
sinners in Sion shall be afraid, when fear shall surprise the Hypocrites. And
perhaps it may be no lessening of their miseries, that they are the men to be
destroyed last.

The Gnostics in the Primitive Church, were a sort of Heretics, who professed
the name of Christians, and yet held it lawful to Apostatize in time of danger,
and comply with the Jews for fear of Persecution. But when the days of
vengeance, and visitation came, God makes a distinction between those Carnal
pretenders, and such as continued steadfast to the profession of his Truth. He
provides a Pella for the Christians, a hiding place for them to retire to in
that day of the Lords anger, but leaves those abominable Heretics to be
destroyed with the Crucifiers of Christ, and Hypocrites to perish with
Unbelievers. And this is said by some to be the accomplishment of that
prediction of our Savior, He that will save his life shall lose it, when the
Gnostics who by their compliances expected shelter among the Jews were together
with them so signally involved in the same ruin.

Remember (I beseech you) what the Israelites got by this double dealing with
their God, by all their Politic Confederacies with Egypt, and Assyria, and at
last determine what you will stand to (whatever comes on it) Resolve with
Mattathias in the Book of Macchabees. 1 Mac. ii. 22.
God forbid we should forsake the Law and the Ordinances; We will not hearken
to go from our Religion either on the right hand or on the lest. I speak to
wise men, Judge ye what I say.

III. There are a third sort of men among us, who though they acknowledge God to
be the Author of our calamities, and imquity to deserve them, yet hinder
themselves from true Repentance as much by a stiff Zeal for their several
Parties, as others do by their lukewarmness and indifferency to them all. It
was a strangely confident presumption in the Jews, that they thought themselves
wholly unconcerned in the event of Gods Judgments, and trusted in lying words,
saying, Jer. vii. 4.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are
these. The same Jewish conceits at this day does a fond Enthusiasm nourish in
the hearts of men: Which inclines them only to censure others as the causes of
our miseries, how loud soever Gods Judgments call upon them to accuse, and
condemn themselves.

The Fanatics impute our sufferings to the Restoration of the King, the
resettlement of the Church, and to the throwing down of the Godly party from
their unjust and arbitrary Dominion. And this makes them look upon all public
distractions, as designed on purpose to make way for them to return to their
beloved Tyranny and Usurpation. And have not others better grounds to reply
that God is now making inquisition for blood, and that the murder of our late
Sovereign is required, and visited upon this present Generation?

The Dissenter makes loud outcries against us, that there is so much
Will Worship and Superstition practiced in our Church, that Popery when it
comes, is very likely to meet with a ready entertainment without any
considerable opposition. And have not we far juster reason to recriminate upon
them, that their uncharitable Divisions keeping up the interests of their
several parties, their refusal of compliance in such things as by their own
acknowledgment they may lawfully submit to, and making offenses of things
indifferent, which the word of God has never declared to be so, have so far
weakened the Protestant Interest, as to give encouragement to the Papists in
their present attempts against us, and our Religion?

But surely (which side soever be in the right) this is not the true method to
secure us from our fears, or to prevent our dangers. Let us assure ourselves,
that no conceited privileges will protect us in our sins from the wrath of
God. You only have I known (says God) of all the Families of the earth. Amos
iii. 2.
It does not follow, and therefore you will I spare, but therefore you will I
punish for your iniquities. In the mean time this bold, and censorious charging
of others is the ready way to draw down Gods Judgments upon us both. And if we
would all agree to be severe in judging of ourselves, we should be a great deal
nearer to Peace and Union with one another.

These are some causes of our obstinacy under Gods Judgments. It remains that I
speak a word or two concerning the greatness of the provocation together with
some brief Application to our selves.

And indeed what can possibly be imagined of a more daring and provoking Nature
than this? What can a people do more to incense the God of Heaven, and cause
his anger to smoke against such a stubborn Generation? It directly flies in the
face of the Divine Majesty, and casts an intolerable slur upon all his
excellent perfections. It tramples upon his Justice, crosses and thwarts the
designs of his Mercy. It baffles his Goodness, and defeats the ends of his most
unsearchable Wisdom. It affronts his absolute and uncontrollable Dominion, as
if he wanted Authority sufficient to vindicate the reputation of his Laws. It
defies and braves his Power, as if man were able to contend with his Maker, as
if Omnipotence had done its worst, were quite spent, and had no other Judgments
in store to vex and consume a sinful people.

This is certainly the true intent and meaning of every obstinate sinners
language, who continues incorrigible under the Divine Judgments. And then what
can be expected, but, since men thus rob God of his Honor by their impenitence,
that he should at last assert, and vindicate it by the just retaliation of
wrath and vengeance? He will infallibly get honor upon Pharaoh and all his
host, and make a people that have defamed him to be a byword and reproach
among the Nations. It is said of King Ahaz, that in the time of his distress, 2
Chronicl. xxviii. 22.
he trespassed yet more. But God sets a mark upon him: This is that King Ahaz.
He points him out with a special brand of reproach and ignominy for an example,
and warning to all future Generations.

We read, Jer. v. 3. O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have
smitten, but they have not giveved; thou have consumed them, but they have
refused to receive correction; they have made their faces harder than a rock,
they have refused to return. And then God proceeds to denounce further
Judgments, till it follows, v. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this? There is
certainly a desperate malignity in that guilt, at which Divine Wisdom seems at
a stand; which has (as it were) exhausted the riches of his Goodness, non-plult
and posed him, who is infinite in Mercy, to contrive and find out a pardon.

And how terrible the wrath of the Lord is, when it is once kindled against an
impenitent and obdurate Nation, we have a lively instance in his proceedings
with the Jews, when he could bear with them no longer, when he quite cut them
off from being a people, when they had filled up the measure of their Fathers,
and when God visited upon them, together with the blood of Christ, all the
innocent blood that had been spilt, from the blood of righteous Abel to the
blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, who was slain between the Temple and
Altar. A visitation so dreadful and astonishing, as if God designed in their
destruction to show an experiment what an Almighty Arm was able to do, what
desolations he could bring upon a Land for the wickedness of those that dwell
therein.

Though in Jury God was known, and his name was great in Israel; though of the
Temple at Jerusalem God had said, that he would put his name there, and that
his eyes and his heart should be there perpetually; yet he now wonderfully
declares to the whole world, that Jerusalem is no longer the place of his rest,
that he has forsook his Footstool, abhorred his Sanctuary, and cast off his
Altar. If I had now time to pursue all the fatal circumstances of that dreadful
story, what incredible numbers most miserably perished by the Pestilence, and
the Famine, how many were destroyed by the Roman Armies, and (which was yet
more tragical, and frightful) how many became the executioners of Gods
vengeance upon themselves, and how visibly the hand of God appeared in all; we
should quickly conclude it to be the most fearful calamity, that was ever
executed upon a people on this side Hell, so that nothing but the day of
Judgment can give us a resemblance of the horror of it. Upon this occasion we
may fitly use the words of the Prophet Daniel, Under the whole heavens has not
been done, Dan. ix. 12.
as has been done upon Jerusalem.

I have no design to make any Application of this fearful story to our selves.
We have not yet had the voice in the Temple, the terrible Earthquake, or the
flaming Sword, and from these late discoveries that have been made amongst us,
we have some reason to hope that our destruction is not so near. But though we
have no Commission to forebode destruction, yet we have loud Alarms to provide
against it. And if our impenitence under Gods Judgments continue at the same
rate with theirs, what can we otherwise expect, but that we shall also perish
in the like dreadful desolation?

I cannot here pretend to describe the successive advances of afflicting
Providence, which God Almighty has sent upon this unfortunate Generation. How
fatal were the miseries of the Civil-war! How sad and dismal the confusions,
that succeeded it! We heard nothing among us but the cries of the oppressed,
the confused noise of the Battle, of the warrier, and garments rould in blood.
But after we had been long exercised with this severe discipline, God at length
turns our Captivity, brings back our Royal Sovereign to sit upon the Throne of
his Fathers, and establishes the whole Nation in a full possession of their
Rights, and Laws, their Liberties, and Religion. And (which ought the more to
endear our deliverance) all this was brought about by a Miracle of Mercy far
beyond all our hopes and contrivances, at a time, when we were quite lost,
without all visible means of a Restoration.

And now what ought have been the Natural result of this? What language could
have been more suitable for a redeemed people, than those words of Ezra, Ezra
ix. 14.15.
Seeing thou have punished us less than our iniquities have deserved, and have
given us such a deliverance as this, shall we again break thy Commandments? But
lo! thus has it come to pass, by a prodigy of Ingratitude more astonishing than
the Mercy, that we have again provoked the Lord to take the Sword into his
Hand, to Commission his destroying Angel to bring the Pestilence into our
Streets, to send upon us a raging and devouring Fire, which laid wast the
Metropolis of the Kingdom. Together with these Calamities, he raises up against
us a Foreign Enemy to make war upon our Coasts, to scoff at Kings, and make
Princes a scorn unto them, to break our chains, deride our strong holds, Hab.
i. 10.
and gather our captivity as the sands.

And ever since that time, we have continued under the sad apprehensions of
more fearful Judgments than these. There has remained upon the Nation great
distress and perplexity, Luke xxi, 25.
men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things that are
coming upon the earth. We have long stood in fear of a Famine of the Word, of
the removal of the Candlestick, of the glory of God in his Church ready to
depart from us. To be plain, and in a word, we are threatened with the return of
Popery upon the Kingdom, that is, to have the practice of the grossest Impiety,
Superstition, and dolatry introduced among us, and all the sincere professors
of the Truth of the Gospel in every corner of the Land Massacred, Burnt, Rackt
and Tormented, because they will not receive the mark of the beast in their
forehead, nor comply with these abominations.

This is the Sword which the Lord seems to hang over us this day. And is there
any way left to prevent, or stop it from the intended execution? If instead of
our gratitude to God for such signal mercies, as he has reached forth unto us,
we begin to fret and murmur at our enjoyments, and are ready to make us a
Captain to return into Egypt, is it not Just with God to cause Egypt to
return to us, and enslave both King and People to the merciless Usurpation of a
Foreign Power? If after we have so long lived under a Faithful Preaching of the
Word, a sincere Administration of the Sacraments, a liberal provision of all
the means of Grace, we have loathed our Manna and despised our Mercies, if we
have either quite withdrawn from the Public Assemblies, or not brought forth
fruit in any wise answerable to those great advantages, which we have, of being
saved; may we not reasonably presume, that we have so far provoked the Lord, as
to give us up to a people, who will deprive us of these blessings, who with the
cruelty of Dioclesian will kindle a Fire either for our Bibles, or our Selves,
who instead of the word of God will obtrude upon us their own inventions, rob
us of one half of the blessed Sacrament, and set up the Idol of the Mass
instead of the other? 2 These. ii. 10, 11, 12.
If we have not received the love of the truth that we might be saved: Is it
not greatly to be feared that for this cause God will send us strong delusions,
that we shall believe lies; that all may be damned who believe not the truth,
but have pleasure in unrighteousness?

If after all those mixtures and vicissitudes of Providence that we have had
(as Salvian says of the Spaniards, Mutata sors sed non mutata vitiositas) there
remains still the same senslesness under Gods Judgments, the same
unthankfulness for his Mercies, the same Atheism, Profaneness and Infidelity,
from which God by all this variety of his methods has endeavored to reclaim
us: If the Nation is full of Whoredoms, and because of swearing the Land
mourns: If Treason dares appear with an open Face, and spread daily Libels,
and Defamations against the Government: If Schisms and Factions thrive and
prosper, and again threaten the best of Churches in the world: surely God will
visit for these things, his soul will yet further be avenged upon such a Nation
as this. May we not justly fear that God will raise up against us a bitter, and
hasty Nation to land upon our Coasts, to march through the breadth of the Land,
and possess the dwelling places that are not theirs; that he will henceforth
forget to be gracious, and shut up his loving kindness in an utter displeasure,
that he will bring upon us that heavy doom which our Savior of old denounced
to his own people, Therefore I say unto you, Matthew. xxi. 43.
that the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits of it.

I know but one way left to prevent the approach of these dreadful Judgments,
which is, seriously to put in practice that great duty which we are called to
this day, to repent and turn from our transgressions, that so iniquity may not
be our ruin. This is the only course left us to rescue us from our present
miseries, and preserve us from the evil, which is otherwise certainly to come
upon us. And how great soever our fears are, we have yet some comfortable
grounds to hope, that our day of Grace is not yet past, the door is not shut
against us, but that we are still within the possibilities of Repentance. It
seems that we are not yet quite cast off, by that wonderful discovery which God
has made amongst us of a Hellish Plot for the Assassinating of our King, and
the Subversion of our Government and Religion. And therefore though we might be
apt to conclude with Manoah in the Book of Judges. We shall surely die, because
we have seen God, so terrible in his Judgments in the midst of us? Yet we may
now with Manoahs wife make a better and more reasonable inference: Judge. xiii.
12, 23.
If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have showed us all these
things, nor would he (as at this time) have told us such things as these.

Let us be careful therefore to improve this signal Providence to those serious
purposes, for which God intends it, which are to break off our sins by
Repentance, to reform and amend our lives: Lest by continuing in our
transgressions, we defeat the designs of his goodness, and hinder him from
going on to complete our deliverance: Lest this great Mercy prove but a
lightning before death, and notwithstanding this, if we still do wickedly, we
be consumed, both we, and our King.

So that (we see) a way still lies open for us to appease the wrath of God and
procure his favor; which if we all sincerely resolve to walk in, he will shine
upon your Counsels, bless your Enterprises, and prosper your Undertakings; he
will be a wall of fire round about us, when he is thus the glory in the midst
of us, he will heal our backslidings and make up our breaches, he will defeat
the designs of the enemies of our Peace, and he will remember the Land.

FINIS.

