COPIA LITERARUM Serenissimi Regis Poloniae Ad Summum Pontificem.
Beatissime Pater!
MIraris (Sanctissime Pater) me usque adhuc in otiosis Regni curis Vitam
duxisse, positurum eandem inter Martis discrimina Contra Mahomet quartum
Turcarum Imperatorem; Sed quod non potuit Musulmanna, potuit equidem civilis
dissensio, quoe exitum a Regno ad infaustam Lunoe ecclipsim morabatur. Videns
ergo me nullius notoe hominem fore, Sceptrum, Dixi, Coronam and chlamydem
renunciaturum, ut Sanguinem liberos and vitam (quoe pro fide and Sanctitatis
vestroe gloria sum profusarus) tanquam ut humillimus Miles in Hungaricis
agminibus funderem. Hoec a Senatoribus and Regni Magnatibus audita, tanquam
verba cum tonitru prolata a Deo in Monte Sinai, corda verterunt, and
conciliatis corporis animique viribus, ducam in hac Augustissima die (dies quam
fecit Dominus pro Vienna loeta, pro securitate Christianitatis jucunda, pro
Sanctitatis vestroe gloria memoranda) 40000 Cosacorum, Lituanorumque 12000,
Polonorum 15000, (exceptis famulis majoris numeri) exterarumque Provinciarum
10000, ad Biologrodum Principalem Tartarioe Arcem; quam si mihi debellare
licebit, liceat Sanctitati vestroecredere: me ad Turcarum Regiam ducturum, and
debellaturums effroenatam Barbarorum licentiam, quoe anno proeterito ausa est
Germaniam devastare, and Principalem Christiani Imperii Civitatem aggredi.
Vadam ergo, and ut Spero, Liberator Orientis rediturus, vel pro Christi side,
and Sanctitatis vestroe gloria moriturus.

Datum Javarovae, 15 Aug. 1684. Sanctitatis Vestrae Humillimus and addictissmus
Filius, JOHANNES, REX.

A Copy of a LETTER Of the most Serene King of Poland To his Holiness.
Most Blessed Father!
YOU perhaps admire (most Holy Father) that I should hitherto lead my life
among the quiet and peaceable cares of my Kingdom, who am going to stake it
upon the hazard of a War against Mahomet the Fourth, Emperor of the Turks: but
what the Musulman could not do, Civil Dissension has effected, which has
deferred my march out of my Kingdom, until such time as there happened an
unlucky Eclipse of the Moon. Seeing therefore how much my Fame was like to
suffer, if this ill Omen should occasion any farther delay, I, declared that I
would resign my Scepter, Crown, and Royal Robe, that so I might list my self a
Common Soldier in the Hungarian Troops, and there pour out my own and my
Childrens blood and lives (which I am now going to spend for the Faith, and for
your Holinesses Glory). Which Words, like those God spoke in Thunder from Mount
Sinai, being heard by the Senators and Nobles of my Kingdom, quite turned their
hearts: And now having recovered the Vigor of my Body and Mind, I will on this
most August day, (a day which God made joyful for the deliverance of Vienna,
pleasant for the preservation of the Christian Religion, memorable for your
Holinesses Glory): On this day, I say, I will march forth in the head of 40000
Cosacks 12000 Lithuanians 15000 Polanders, besides a greater number of
Servants, and 10000 of the foreign Provinces; with these I will march to
Biologrode the principal Fortress of the Tartarians; which if it be my fortune
to subdue, your Holiness may assuredly believe that I will march on even to the
Imperial City of the Turks, and correct the unbridled presumption of the
Barbarians, which the last year was so daring as to Ravage Germany, and Attack
the chief City of the Christian Empire. I will go therefore in hope to return
the Deliverer of the East, or to die for the Faith of Christ, and your
Holinesses Glory.

Given at Javarou, 15 Aug. 1684. Your Holinesses Most Humble and most Devoted
Son, JOHN, KING.

LONDON: Printed for R. H. and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall. 1685.


