A further Discovery OF THE MYSTERY OF JESUITISME.

The several Pieces OF THE COLLECTION.
I. The JESUITS upon the SCAFFOLD, for several capital Crimes committed by
them in the Province of GUIENNE. II. The CALUMNIES of JAMES BEAUFES refuted.
III. SECRET INSTRUCTIONS for the SUPERIORS of the Society of JESUS. IV. A
Discourse of the REASONS why the JESUITS are so generally hated. V. A Discovery
of the SOCIETY, in relation to their POLITICS. VI. The PROPHECY of Saint
HILDEGARD fullfilled in the Jesuits.
A further Discovery OF THE MYSTERY OF JESUITISME.

IN A Collection of several Pieces, Representing the HUMORS, DESIGNS and
PRACTICES of those who call themselves The SOCIETY of JESUS.

Dat veniam Corvis --
LONDON, Printed for G. Sawbridge, and are to be sold at the Bible on
Ludgate Hill, 1658.

PREADVERTISEMENT.
THat there should be a sort of people so Apostatically wicked, as to defy the
remonstrances of both Brethren, and Strangers, Friends and Enemies, as it is
the reproach of the Christian name, so does it sound very harsh to a Christian
consideration. Who are meant by this character the ensuing Treatises will
express, viz. Those, who, not satisfied with any title under that of the
SOCIETY of JESUS, seem to carry on the design of ANTICHRIST, instead of
profiting by the DISCOVERIES perpetually made of them and their practices,
prove the greatest persecutors of those that are their Remembrancers, betray
vengeance where they should remorse, and turn all acnowledgement into
exasperation. This was the effect of the discovery made of their pernicious
Maxims by the Author of the PROVINCIAL LETTERS, (a book better known in
English under the title of the MYSTERY of JESVITISME) which, though containing
their Tenants faithfully cited out of their own works, they by their interest
in the Court of Rome, got prohibited; as if the same things were horrid in the
citations of those they thought their adversaries, but innocent in their Books,
as may appear by the Printing and reprinting of them so often. To maintain the
doing of an evil action to be lawful and justifiable, is, no doubt, more
horrid and Satanicall, then simply to do it, this may plead temptation,
ignorance, company, and the like, that speaks the basest of complyances, and a
depraved design, if not an absolute degeneration from all virtue and Religion.
Whence it accordingly comes to pass, that those, who are simply guilty of
evil actions, happily of the highest nature, are seldom seen to justify their
exorbitances, but inclined to a certain regret and acknowledgement thereof; and
that such, whose extravagant maxims give encouragement to crimes, must be
thought either naturally ready to practice what they teach, or the lewdest of
hypocrites, for egging on others to that which they boggle at themselves. But
when the same persons are both the encouragers and actors of things impious and
abominable, what can be said less of them, then that they have shaken off all
sentiments of Goodness, and, as Agents of Satan, seem to make it their
business to divert mankind from all reflection of good and evil.

Thus much premised as to the Persons against whom the several pieces of this
COLLECTION are directed, we shall, for the Readers satisfaction, give a brief
account of each of them, such as may be thought requisite or pertinent to the
present design, though that labor be not necessary in relation to any so much
as the two first.

For the first, which so confidently brings them upon the SCAFFOLD, for
several crimes committed by them in the Province of Guienne, I am to say
somewhat, in the first place of the Author, secondly of the discovery made by
him, and lastly, of the credit to be given thereto.

The French Author is Peter Jarrigius, a Member sometime of the SOCIETY, an
eminent person among them, admitted for his great abilities to the fourth Vow,
the highest honor attainable upon the account of personal merit. All which
notwithstanding, he wanted not either his dissatisfactions or discontents among
them, insomuch that he entertained thoughts of forsaking both the Order and his
Religion, treated secretly with the Huguenots, and, at last, as he acknowledges
himself, on the 25. of December 1647. embraced the Calvinist Persuasion at
Rochel, where he could not stay long, by reason of the violent prosecutions of
the Jesuits against him, upon his desertion of the Roman Church. So that,
frighted thereby, he was forced to fly into Holland, and settled himself at
Leyden.

Being thus gotten out of their clutches, they continued their violent
prosecutions against him, crying him down in the pulpit, railing at him in
their writings, and filling all places with a noise of his Apostasy,
proportionable to the Order he had quitted, his own eminence, and their
exasperation, insomuch that at last, they prevailed so far with the secular
power as to get him hanged in effigy, for a pretended sacrilege, which he
makes it his business to clear himself of in the second Treatise. These
proceedings of theirs obliging him to say something in vindication of himself,
and for the edification of his new Brethren of the Reformed way, he put out the
first Treatise, conceiving it a probable course to clear himself, to retort
upon them, for that one of pretended Sacrilege fastened upon him, a charge of
several horrid crimes of a far higher nature. Not long after which came out
the second Piece, in answer to somewhat written against him by James Beauses,
by the directions of the Society. And so much for the motive of his discovery.

For the credit to be given thereto; I shall not, in the first place, urge the
unlikelyhood there is, that, making an exchange of Persuasion in things sacred,
though granted to fall from the more to the less certain, he should own so
little sentiment of sincerity and Religion, as, out of pure malice to the
Profession he was of before, and to be revenged of the Jesuits, to fasten on
them such things as were purely the excrescencies of his own invention and
calumny. Nor, secondly, how improbable it is, he should put so great an affront
on the States General, to whom he dedicates his Work, and all of the
Persuasion he embraced, as falsely to impose things so horrid upon others,
though his greatest enemies, if they were not really guilty thereof. Nor
lastly, how hard it is to impose any thing upon the Jesuits, and the few
instances there is of any thing done in that kind. But the credit it shall
have, shall rise from their proceeding thereupon, and accordingly let the
Reader judge, whether JARRIGIVS be an Impostor, or the JESUITS such as he
describes them, TRAITORS, MURDERERS, SATYR, SODOMITES, ande.

When men are aspersed and calumniated by stories digested into particulars and
circumstances, such as upon the first sight whereof the person that hears them
concludes the relator to be a very cheat, or that the thing must agree with the
relation, they, if innocent ^ take this course to vindicate themselves. They
very strictly examine the particulars, discover the inconsistency of
circumstances, (it being impossible for a man to be so circumspect in
particularising a long, if false, narration, as not to let slip something,
whereby he may be surpised) and, truly clearing up things, convince the
adversary of imposture, and satisfy the world of their innocence. Now be this
rule applied to the proceedings of the Jesuits with Jarrigius. He lays down
stories of such and such, particularizes them into circumstances, gives you the
time, the place, the names of the persons engaged therein, and does all that is
requisite to make a relation plausible. Have they sifted all these, and thereby
discovered the inconsistency thereof, and accordingly cleared themselves, by
retorting the infamy upon the detractor? No such thing appears. What then? They
rail at him in their Sermons, make him the veriest rogue upon earth, in their
discourses and writings, and represent him as an Apostate in Religion, a
Heretic, a malefactor banged in effigy, and consequently a bold calumniator,
that is, a person to whom no credit is to be given, and accordingly themselves
cleard, of all the crimes laid by him to their charge. This is the Jesuiticall
way of Vindication.

But about two years and a half after, viz. in the year 1650* he abjured the
Reformed Religion again and went back to the Jesuits, was received at Anwerp,
and there comes abroad a Retractation at Paris wherein he acknowledges all he
did was out of animosity revenge and discontent. All this is true. But this is
no more then another branch of Jesuiticall vindication, that is, signifies very
little; and yet they cannot but be sensible, that the world is not so easily
gulled, as to be persuaded they are to give more belief to the Retractation
then to the relations of Jarrigius. The Retractation is indeed so liberal,
that it betrays the artifices of those that contrived it, which gave a certain
Clergy man occasion to tell a Father of the Society speaking of it, That they
had overshot themselves in it, and had been better vindicated had the
Retractation been more modest, and raises a suspicion in many others, that, not
only the World, but even Jarrigius himself is imposed upon in that piece, as
being therein brought to deny, what he had with the greatest professions of
truth and sincerity affirmed not long before. Till therefore they shall take
that course, which all such as would deal heartily, and not elude the world
with apparences are wont to do, let the relations of Jarrigious, in the name of
God, ly at their doors; unless they have the faculty to persuade men, that,
as they assume to themselves, according to their own Maxim^s, a liberty to
calumniate others, so whatsoever others affirm of them, though with ever so
much positive evidence, must give way and vanish at the first appearance of
their pure denial.

Thus having given an account what judgment is to be made of the first piece,
which only they could make any advantage of, I shall*have little to say to the
rest. And of the second only this, that though it be but a private bickering
between a real and a revolted Jesuit, Jarrigius and Beaufes, yet many things
relating to the government of the Society, as also the violence of their
prosecutions when once exasperated, coming occasionally to be treated, somewhat
will be met with, which may not happily be so obvious elsewhere.

The third is a piece of their own, containing the SECRET INSTRUCTIONS for the
Superiors of the Society, and so they have nothing to quarrel at, unless at
that Providence which ordered the unexpected discovery thereof so soon. All the
world has to wish, is, to know, what Additionals they have made to these
Instructions, which seem calculated for the infancy of the Order, before it was
grown up to that confidence in Maxim and Practice it has thriven in since.

As to the fourth, nothing need to be added to the account given thereof
immedia ely before it. It Was the advice of a Friend and should upon that account
have been the more kindly entertained.

The fifth came also from the hands of a Friend, one, as may be inferred from
some passages, that might be an English man, by his familiarity with the state
and affairs of that Nation.

For the last, I met with it at the latter end of a book called ELIXIR
JESUITICUM, written by the same Author as writ that entitled, SPECULUM
JESUITICUM. The remarks of that Author, I in some places confine my self to, in
others vary from, as I thought fit. Whether any thing be said by way of remark,
which is not pertinently derivable from the Text of the Prophecy, I leave to
the judgment of the ingenuous Reader, and for the authentication of it, he may
consult the fragment of Saint Hildegard's Life, which is, to that purpose,
pr^fix'd before it.

Having thus given the Reader a short direction as to every particular piece of
this Collection, there remains only a word to say to those who are brought
upon the stage therein. Either they are sensible of their miscarriadges or not;
if they are not, it is a friendly and Christian work to be their remembrancers,
that, when they are convinced thereof, they may avoid falling into the like. If
they are sensible thereof, yet *dreading the shame of acknowledgement, persist
therein, no remonstrance can be two stinging, nor discovery too satyricall. But
that there is a greater probability of the latter then the former, may appear
from what is said by a Provincial of the Jesuits in Moravia, in a Letter to a
certain Abbot, Counselor to the Emperor, which, giving an account what
judgment the world had of them, and consequently who are to be accountable for
the mischiefs that are done, it will not be amiss to insert, and so conclude.
Venit hora, says he, in qua, etc. The time now draws nigh, wherein every one
thinks he does God good service, when he suspects, thinks, and speaks of the
JESVITS as if they were guilty of all things that are evil. Nor is there any
Religious man of any other Order, no Politician, no Heretic will be persuaded,
that the JESVITS either live religiously, or speak the truth.

JESUITOGRAPHIA.
VEni Rythme mi dilecte,
Surge versus nunc neglecte,
Quondam lepos antiquorum,
Pange labes seductorum.
Fratres carpe Jesuitas,
Et perversos Hypocritas,
Qui pastore gloriantur,
Cujus gregem populantur.
Sancto gaudentes nomine,
Cujus carentes omine,
Non sunt Christi satellites,
Sed Antichristi velites.
Aevi nostri Legulei,
Renascentes Pharizaei,
Quae perversa sunt probantes,
Et quae recta sugillantes.
Christi legem ore sonant,
Jesu fidem verbis tonant,
Sed dictis facta dissonant,
Nec sunt quod esse simulant*
Jesus dabat cunctis pacem;
Sed hi subdunt bellis facem,
Hi principum sicarii
Orbisque incendiarii.
Jesus regna stabilivit,
Legi regis obedivit,
Caesari tributum pendit,
Dum quid juris sit ostendit.
Hi regnorum proditores,
Atque legum fraudatores,
Reges volunt jugulare*
Et sic plebem subjugare.
Sensit magnus Rex Francorum*
Ictum septo labiorum:
Presens laethum vix evasit,
Quod hic sacer ordo suasit.
Rex Anglorum est documento
Cum magnatum Parlamento:
Unoque ictu destinati
Neci, Rex, Regina, Nati.
Horum Grex hoc adornarat,
Et Garnetus comprobarat,
Cum Gerardo, cum Grenwello
Et cum perfido Creswello.
Omnes falsi proditores,
Miserorum seductores
Qui quod piis praepararunt,
In se and suos derivarunt.
Dum Romano famulantur,
Et Hispan is adulantur,
Nihil nisi lites quaerunt,
Et e bellis bella serunt.
Testis bellum Hungarorum,
Testis lites Polonorum,
Et Ru^sorum dira pestis,
Largus nostris dictis testis.
Nam cur aulas frequentatis,
Aures Principum captatis,
Nisi ut dolos necteretis,
Et secreta proderetis?
Jesus docet ignorantes,
Et attollit laborantes:
Ignorantes isti incantant,
Laborantesque supplantant.
Ignoranti nugas vendunt,
Imprudenti rete tendunt,
Tam nummorum appetentes,
Quam salutis negligentes.
Hinc moribundos fascinant,
Et cor aegrorum lancinant,
Non ut ferant levamentum,
Sed ut auferant argentum.
Sic professi paupertatem,
Et crepantes egestatem,
Arcas suas implevere,
Opibus, quas corrasere.
Jesus non vult superbire,
Suos nec fastu prurire,
Sed suadens humilitatem,
Omnes docet lenitatem.
Quid istis arrogantius?
Quid istis petulantius?
Dumdetrectant alienis,
Sua laudant buccis plenis.
Bonosque calumniantur,
Dum de bonis mutuantur!
Neve advertunt hi qui legunt,
Probris sua furta tegunt,
Gratis legunt gratis docent,
Aurum legunt, vico nocent:
Cum promittant cuncta gratis,
Nulla merces ipsis satis.
Ut a luce Lucus dictus,
Et ut homo est homo pictus,
Sic a Jesus Iesuita,
Quem si sapis, semper vita.
THE JESUITS UPON THE SCAFFOLD, For several capital Crimes by them committed
in the Province of GUIENNE.

By PETER JARRIGIUS, Sometime a Jesuit, a Preacher, and Professed of the Fourth
Vow.

The Author's DEDICATORY, To the High and Mighty, The STATES GENERAL OF THE
United Provinces.
High and Mighty Lords,
THe engagement I conceive lies upon me to endeavor the safety and
preservation of a State, which derives its sovereignty immediately from God the
Supreme Disposer of Sovereigns, and the miraculous acquests of your victorious
Swords, obliges me to cast at your Lordships feet, a sort of dangerous persons
that lurk incognito in your Dominions, and a parcel of horrid Tryators,
dressed up like Saints, to the end that in your presence they may, to their
confusion, have the long robe of their hypocrisy stripped off their shoulders.
You need only consider Looks to be satisfied they are your Enemies, since they
are Jefuits, and the bare discovery of their crimes, to conclude them such as
ought to find as little shelter in your Provinces as Tyrants and persons
maliciously resolved to poison any that ly in their way.

The Republic of Venice, looking on them as a public contagion, banished them
their Territories in these imperious terms, Be gone, carry away nothing with
you, and never return again. In England many of the Society have come to
public execution (as Garnet etc.) not in effigy, for pretended Sacriledges;
but really and in person for manifect crimes of high Treason. France thrust
them out her bosom, so to provide for the safety of our Kings, and the
infallible Parliament of Paris which had passed the Act of banishment against
them, have had since occasion enough to curse the repeal of it, when they
bewail the untimely death of the greatest King in the world. Nay your
Highnesses did not long since cause the Rector of their College of Maestrich
to be executed for apparent conspiracies. And your ancient Ordinances, passed
with no less justice then prudence, forbid them upon pain of death from coming
into any place under your jurisdiction.

But if these authentic Provisions made against them be not a sufficient
intimation to raise a jealousy of them, in all those that have, in the
several parts of the earth, the oversight of the public weal, this
impartial Treatise which with all possible submission, I lay at the feet of
your Highnesses, can do no less then justify and confirm, by new proofs,
the judgments of the Republics that have condemned them; and open their eyes,
who at this day do, as your Lordships, manage the common Interest, that so they
may take into consideration both the mischievousnesse of their actions, and the
impurity of their lives.

I speak nothing by conjecture, as a stranger to their ways, but all I produce
is from my own certain knowledge, as having lived a mong them. The charges I
put up against them, are not for some trivial miscarriages; no, the crimes I
lay at their doors speak wickedness in the excess, unless it can be
imagined, that coining is a frivolous fault, or to obstruct the prosperity of
their Sovereign, is an innocent piece of Gallantry. If your Highnesses will be
but pleased to afford your great minds so much remission from your weightier
affairs, as to peruse these few pages, which I presume to present you with,
there you will find, not without horror and astonishment, the inhabitants of
Gomorrha revived, and the highest parts of Sodomy acted over again: you will
find, with no small indignation, such unnatural subjects, as shall make
bonefires, to express their satisfaction at the calamities of their Prince.
The lamentable cries of an infinite number of little children, made away by
them, to satisfy their cruel avarice, will no doubt pierce your hearts; and
the Temples defiled by their abominable uncleanesses will kindle your zeal
into a holy exasperation against the sacrilegious prophaners thereof.

It is not hard for me to foresee the displeasure which the enemies of the
light are likely to conceive at the freedom I take to dragg out of their
darkness to appear before a knowing and critical age, a sort of unsuspected
crimes; and that the partisans and creatures of that Sect will conclude I have
in me more fire then phlegm, and that it speaks rather my indiscretion then my
zeal to enter the lists, alone, against so many enemies. But Truth, my Lords,
which is stronger then any thing of man, forces me to speak, and the welfare of
your State requires as an acknowledgement of the obligations I owe you, this
tribute of my fidelity, since I cannot but confess my being and life the
effects of your liberality and the protection of your arms. The noise which
my Adversaries have made, has raised me out of the lethargy I was in, and
their malicious*prosecution against me has forced from my mouth, what I had
resolved should otherwise have been smothered there. Both divine and humane
right commands me now to disturb my own quiet, and the concernment of Gods
glory puts me upon my own vindication.

I come therefore to blows wit^ them, precisely in that Country when I have
known them, and remove not the seat of the war into Spain to defeat the^ there,
nor yet into Italy to engage the^ there. I make my own party goo^ where I am
set upon, and the same Pr^vince, which has pretended to put ^ an Endictment
against me, shall ha^ the shame to be brought upon t^ SCAFFOLD, for the crimes
it ^ guilty of: The arms I make use ^ against them in this Book, are no oth^
then what they themselves have put i^ to my hands* the wounds they sha^ give
their own reputation will fall upon them so much the more deservedly since that
they have without any reason egged me on, and forced me upon a necessity to
beat them.

Did but the one half of Europe concur with my judgment, and the other were
only distrustful, that these conscientious Hypocrites are prejudicial to
Commonwealths, the other parts of the World, that have not yet heard any thing
of the Jesuits of Gascony would happily make some difficulty to give credit to my
discourse; but the experience the world has of the disturbances and
conspiracies they are guilty of in all Countries, will be a perpetual
confirmation of the truth of those they are charged with in Guienne. For those
noble and triumphant Provinces, I have this to say in particular to your
Highnesses, that these are the men who make it their business to bring an
odium on the Allyances which the greatest Monarchs contract with you; these
bring it into dispute, whether it be not lawful to break the faith they have
sworn to you; those are they that conclude all that fight under your Banners
damned; nay, if it lies but in their power, the glory of your triumph shall be
buried in dishonor, it being their greatest design only to do mischief, and
their maine intention to betray the United Provinces.

They have their Emissaries in your Territories, and there met so considerable
a number of them lately at the publication of my DECLARATION as might make a
just Assembly at the Hague, to consider whether it were fit to answer me. These
ravenous Wolves disguised like sheep, wander up and down both within and
without your Cities, to devour the Inhabitants thereof* and will still be
seeking out their prey* if your seven-arrow'd Lion do not tear them in pieces.
They will shortly have their Conventicles among us as frequent and numerous as
they have had for some years past in England. Fifty of them clad in several
habits, having met together at a Council in London deputed a public Agent to
Rome. The presumption they are guilty of may well engage them in such attempts
here also, and by that means make that advantageous peace, whereby even your
Frontiers enjoy their quiet, subservient to the carrying on of a war in
Religion; and this seems to be the principal aim of these enemies of your
State, and what they so much the more dangerously do insinuate, when they put
the rebellious into hopes of Paradise for their reward.

The multitude and var^etie of the crimes wherewith I charge them, and prove
them guilty of, both in this and the other Treatise, will give you such an idea
of them, as must needs put you upon thoughts of preventing these
inconveniences. I take off their faces the veils of their hypocrisy which hid
their deformities, and bring them upon a Scaffold, that they may be the more
commodiously seen in their ignominy. If the incomparable moderation of your
spirits conceive my manner of proceeding somewhat too violent, I beseech your
Highnesses to pardon it, as proceeding from the zeal of my Religion, and to
consider, that, after their bloody prosecutions upon my change, I neither could
nor ought to have any tenderness for them, without leaving innocence under
oppression, and declaring my conversion blameworthy.

The indignation which swells the^ so much against me, has made the^ stark
mad, and the rage they are in a my conversion has put them upon suc^ courses,
that they think fire and swor^ ordinary things to persecute me withal^ If the
DECLARATION of m^ Faith, lately made, with all Christian modesty, not casting
the least dirt up^ them, has stung them so, as that the^ endeavor my death
for it, what wi^ the SCAFFOLD do upon which* now bring them, and the advice I
have given your Lordships to beware of their traitorous attempts? No doubt but
they will use all the means possible to compass my destruction, that is, will
go on suitable to what they have already begun. But, my Lords, I yet live
through the infinite mercy of God under the security of your Laws, and your
particular protection over me, which I humbly implore may be my buckler against
the persecutions of all my Adversaries.

If therefore your eminent Lordships will be pleased to remember a persecuted
Wretch, who has his pen constantly in hand, and his thoughts always taken up
to vindicate himself against those that pursue him to death, upon no other
account then that he is entered into the same communion with you, as all our
Brethren of France can satisfy you, I shall ly secure under the shelter of
your Palms, and, under the Authority of your glorious Name, shall be not only
courageous but invincible, making it my perpetual suit to the Lord Jesus, for
whose sake I suffer all things, that he would both here and hereafter crown
your Illustrious Highnesses with all blessings, as I am obliged by the quality
of,

My Lords, Your most humble, most obedient, PETER JARRIGIUS.

A TABLE Of the Chapters of the first Treatise.
Chap. I. Discovering a custom (fatal to themselves) which the Jesuits have,
ever to meddle with those, who they fear will reveal their crimes. page 1.
Chap. II. An Impeachment of High Treason against the Jesuits. 5 Chap. III. An
Endictment of Encroachments and Antidates put in against the Jesuits 11 Chap.
IV. The Jesuits arraigned at the Bar for the murdering of abundance of
little children, whereof they have the oversight 17 Chap. V. An information put
in against the Jesuits of the incontinency they are guilty of in their Classes.
24 Chap. VI. A second Bill put in against them for their impurities in their
Visits 29 Chap. VII. A third Bill of Villainies committed by the Jesuits in
their Churches 35 Chap. VIII. A fourth bill, of venereall uncleanness,
committed by the Jesuits in their Houses p 41 Chap. IX. A fifth Endictment of
the Lascivious villainies committed by the Jesuits in their Itenerancies and
Countrey-houses. 47 Chap. X. A sixth charge, of Obscenities, committed by the
Jesuits, in their conversations with Nuns in their Convents 55 Chap. XI. A Bill
of enditement brought in against the Jesuits for coining 60 Chap. XII.
Discovering the ingratitude and exasperatio^ of the Jesuits against those that
had highly ^blig'd them 65 Chap. XIII. Reflections upon the twelve precedent
discourses 7^
Of the second Treatise.
Chap. I. Showing the reason of my writing, after the excellent refutation,
published on my behalf ^ Monsieur Vincent* p. ^ Chap. II. A character of James
Beaufes, as to his abilities in point of Learning 4 Chap. III. A character of
the same James Beaufes, in relation to his life and manners 8 Chap. IV. Giving
an account of the proceedings of the Jesuits against me 13 Chap. V. Discovering
the cheats and evasions of the Jesuits in their prosecution 16 Chap. VI.
Containing an Answer to the accusation put in against me by the Jesuits 21
Chap. VII. Discovering the childish inventions of Beaufes to make my Letters
contradictory one to another. 27 Chap. VIII. Discovering, how that in the
Society of Jesus men are perpetually subject to repining and discontent 33
Chap. IX. Other grounds of discontent among the Jesuits, proceeding from the
conduct of their Superiors 39 Chap. X. Assigning other undeniable causes of
discontent among the Jesuits, taken from the injustice of their Superiors 4*
Chap. XI. Producing several reasons of discontent arising from the
Syindications that are among the Jesuits 48 Chap. XII. Showing the
falsifications of the Jesuits in the impression of my Letters 52 Chap. XIII. By
way of Answer to the two convictions which James Beaufes pretends to draw from
the precedent Letters. 57 Chap. XIV. Wherein James Beaufes is found guilty of a
notorious imprudence, tending very much to the dishonor of his Brethren the
Jesuits, 61 Chap. XV. Wherein observation is made of another imprudence of
James Beaufes prejudicial to the domestic peace of their Houses. 66 Chap.
XVI. Discovering Beaufes to be a notorious Liar. 70 Chap. XVII. Demonstrating,
that their accusations contribute to my vindication. 76
THE IESVITS UPON THE SCAFFOLD. etc.
CHAP. I.
Discovering a Custom (fatal to themselves) which the Jesuits have, ever to
meddle with those, who, they fear, will reveal their crimes.
It Is a piece of Legerdemain now grown old among the Jesuits, to traduce and
calumniate those, who, upon very good grounds, quit their Society, to the end,
that, if they conceive themselves obliged either in conscience or a
consideration of the public good, either by word or writing to discover the
iniquity of their proceedings, they might not be so easily credited. While
there was any thing of the Ligne left in France, all the slight they had to
weaken the authority, and elude the unavoidable accusations of the Pasquier's,
the Servin's, the Arnauld's etc. of that time, was, to persuade the credulous
people that those incomparable men were fautors of Calvinisme, and by a
weakness of spirit injurious to Truth, have imagined themselves sufficienily
vindicated as to the horrid crimes, and execrable parricides wherewith they
were justly charged by those illustrious Officers of State, if in some wretched
Answers that came from them they accused the others of HERESY.

The change I have made some months since in point of Religion having put them
a little to a loss, observe their proceeding thereupon. To disarme me, and to
weaken, or absolutely discredit all the evidence I have to produce against them
before Universities, Judges, Prelates, and Kings, they apply themselves to the
old invention, and thinking it no great matter o^ vindication to say barely,
that I am turned to the reformed Religion, for that is visible to all the world*
they saw there was a necessity of adding two things* The first is, that I was a
person of no esteem or consideration; the second, that, while I was yet amon^
them, I was for some days guilty of Sacrilege. I^ order therefore to their
design, which is, to raise i^ men's minds a prejudice against my person, they
perceived that they had need of an Impostor to feign, of Forger, to falsify,
of an impudent person, to vent thing without any shame, and lastly must employ
again^ me a man of no reputation, that he might not fear the loss of any.

These underminers of all States and Government^ a Body of men which like the
Trojan horse is full ^ Dolophus's and Mirmidon's, are well furnished with
C^lumniators to defile both pulpit and paper, with the blackest detractions.
Had it been as requisite to fi^ out a person of worth and honesty, that should
e^deavour my edification and reduction by his example as it was of consequence
to meet with one emine^ for his imprudence, to traduce me, the difficulty ha^
been much greater, And therefore I must say the choice has proved very
fortunate to me, but fat^ to themselves: for there is no impartial man eith^
within the Society or without it, that is acquainte with James Beaufe's, who
cannot testify this truth that, ^earch the whole Province of Guienne, and it
shall not afford a man that in shamelessenesse shall by many degrees come near
the said James, as being a person of inexpressible confidence, one that can,
without any difficulty, deny, in the hearing and presence of thousands, all he
ever saw in his life, and give out for certain convictions, most apparent
impostures.

I am therefore, alone, forced by an unavoidable necessity, to vindicate my
self, in the first place, against this vast Body, whose arms reach as far as
China; and in the next, against this infamous Preacher of theirs who worries me
so much both by word and writing. I shall accordingly divide my work into two
books; in the first, it shall be my business to discover the horrid crimes,
which the Jesuits of the Province of Guienne have committed, that thence it may
be concluded by all, that the fear they were in I should first or last have
something to say of them, made them so hasty in their designs against me. The
second shall contain an Answer to the Calumnies of James Beaufe's, a Priest of
that Society. I write both conscientiously and with a sense of Religion, and am
rath^r upon the defensive then the assault. It was the pleasure of that
eternal Providence, which will have the crimes that are most hidden to come,
at last, to light, that the Jesuits should first set upon me; to the end that I
^ight afterward let all the world know, what ^rdures, what impurities they
hide under the long cloaks of their Hyp^crisie.

The eternal God therefore, in whose p^esence I write, is my witness, and
those, whom I was ^ost particularly intimate with, can tell, that I was
resolved to be silent, and enjoy the quiet of my own thoughts, but their
implacable fu^y, as is known all France over, forces me to pu^ pen to Paper,
merely to defend my self against their bloody persecutions. They have done as
the Goat did which was to be sacrificed upon the Altars of Jupiter, when the
Priests having let fall the knife among the rushes that were under their feet,
the goat struggled so much that they found it again and thrust it into her
throat. I was retired hither, to a small corner of Holland, to work out my own
salvation in obscurity, having renounced the trouble and distraction of humane
affairs, as Bees make their honey in their combs, or as those excellent
Architects built the Temple of Solomon without so much as the noise of hammer.
They on the other side have made such an hue-and-cry in their Pulpits after the
Sacrilegious person; they have made a search after my Letters to and from all
parts, out of hopes to find in them some matter of discontent whereon to ground
my leaving of them; to be short, they have put in inditements against me, and
so have, for my own justification, forced me to put in the same against them
for the crimes I charge them with. Had they suffered me to be quiet, I should
have lived obscure and unknown in a strange Country, and they would have found
it no great difficulty to have made the world believe me a person of no worth
or parts; but now that they have forced me to write, people will find that I am
not so contemptible as they would have me thought. With this into the bargain,
that, if ever they effect, what they have yet only in design, that is, remove
me out of this world either by assassination or poison, as, I understand from
all parts, they threaten, all France must needs be sensible of the iniquity of
their proceedings. I am therefore to entreat my Reader, if he be a
Romane-Catholick, not to consider my Religion, but their unjustice; and if thou
art a reformed Catholic, I desire thy prayers to the eternal disposer o^ all
things, that he would be pleased through his Grace* to deliver me from the
Knife of the Jesuits.

CHAP. II.
An Impeachment of High*Treason against the Jesuits.
IT is the highest act of Ingratitude for a man to hate that person whom he is
naturally obliged to love, and to rejoice at his losses and misfortunes even
while he lives under his protection, and by his Liberal ty. Lewis the
thirteenth of France, of triumphant memory, made it his perpetual business to
oblige the Jesuits while he lived. The ready money which he gave them to
purchase the place which they have in the city of Pau, and to build a sumptuous
Edifice, which, in greatness, beauty, and magnifi ence surpasses the Palace
Royal, the twelve th^us^nd Livers of yearly revenue which he assigned them out
of his own desmesne, in a necessitous Country, are only small items of the
total Sum of above a Million, which that Monarch ha^h, with an excess of
liberality, bestowed on them in several places up and down France. And yet all
th^s signifies not much with them, nay so little, that Benefits, which have a
certain influence on Tigers, and Presents, which work a change in the
inclinations of the greatest enemies, could never f^rce out of their hearts
that little bird-lime of the ancient aversion which they have conceived against
the blood of the Great Henry, the most affable of all the kings of France. No,
the Act of the Parliament of Paris against them, and against John Chastell for
attempting the life of that great Monarch; the punishment inflicted on John
Guignard a pri^st of their Society, who was hanged; the Pyramid of Paris, and
their banishment out of France have so exasperated these religious Wolves, that
all the good successes of the kingdom they repine at, all the bad, they
rejoice at.

I conceive my self obliged, as a well-wisher to my native Country, France,
now that I am gotten ^ut of their clutches, to discover for the good of that
kingdom, certain criminal actions which they stand guilty of, that the world
may clearly see the secret aversion which may be called the damme-viper of all
their plots and intrigues. A time was, when the enemies of that Crown were very
successe-full under the command of John le Verth, in the Frontiers of Picardy,
insomuch that they took the city of Corbie. News coming thereof to the Jesuits
College at Bourdeaux, where I then was, there was so much joy conceived
thereat, that some half a score Jesuits, having secretly and without noise
gotten the brooms out of their chambers, and some few faggots, and carried them
up to the top of the steeple of their Church, made a kind of a bone fire of
them, and in that place sung Te Deum, with the victories of the Emper^ur and
King of Spain, by the reading of certain pieces of Poetry which they had writ
in celebration of their Valor and exploits. It being wh^spered about the house
that the excess of joy had transported some to that degree of insolence, the
Rector who was privy to it, took no notice of the business at all, and the
Provincial, who was acquainted therewith by some well affected French*^an,
only entreated the same party that it might take no further air. If so much
had been done in a College of Spain against the King of Spain, or in a
college of Rome against the Pope, the Superiors, who have a power to punish
their pretended su^jects for less faults then this, would certainly have
exercised all their authority to cut off, as soon as they could, such contagious
members from the sounder part of the body. But indeed he that knows as well as
my self (who have lived four and twenty years among them) that, to side with
the Spanyard, and to rejoice at the misfortunes of France, is the formal
character of the greatest part of the Jesuits, will not be astonished, that a
crime of high treason of this nature committed in the midst of the city of
Bourdeaux, in a College of the society of Jesus, was not punished; qui ta^et
consentire videtur.

Another time, in the same College waiting in the Rector's outer chamber,
having some business to speak with him about, and wanting something to do to
elude the time during my attendance, I cast my eye on a Map of Flanders that
hung there. I observed that the Graver had, round about the Belgic Lion, drawn
the several Princes that had g verned the Low countries, and found, that some
Jesuit had maliciously blotted out the effigies of one of them, this raised in
me a cu^iosity to find out who it should be that that bold hand thought
unworthy to be of the same illustrious rank with the rest, and I discovered by
the Letters that were left of his name, that it had been the effigies of
Francis de Valois, Duke of Alancon. I was not a little moved at it, and without
mentioning the thing I came to propose to the Rector, I showed him the blotted
picture, saying, that those insolent persons that must needs wreak their malice
on the images of our Princes, were not to be endured, and that he was obliged
to make such secret and serious enquiries into the business, as that the
society might be cleared of those enemies of the Blood Royal. To this that
over-mild and fearful man* shrinking up his shoulders made this answer: you see
how extravagant some among us are, what course would you have taken in it; they
cannot endure the very pictures of the Princes of France. This signifies not
much, you'^ say, and is not happily worth urgi^g. It Is true, but it is enough to
discover what a sort of Vipers France nourishes in her bosom. I believe this
map may be yet found in the said chamber, if what I now write has not given
them occasion to remove it thence or to change it.

Such another discovery of animosity against our Kings fell from a certain
Jesuit, named Fab^icius, at a banquet. This man was, by Nation a Germane, and
companion to Denis l' Espaulart in his preachings in the time of Advent, in the
town of Fontenay le-^omte. The indiscreet stranger, not yet acquainted with the
niceness and reverence which the French observe when they speak of their
Monark, hearing some that were at table saying; that Henry the fourth had some
great designs upon the Empire, and that there would have happened great
revolutions if God had continued his life a little longer; ita est, says he in
Latin, sed, per dei gratiam et bonorum curam, culter obstitit. That is to say,
it is true, but through the grace of God and the care of good men, a knife
prevented it. Had there been a rack provided upon this hint, he would possibly
have said the truth, not by halvs, but absolutely, and had discovered to
posterity, what France has much suspected, but never could clearly find out.
May it please God to let the Grandchild of the great Henry know, who these
good men are, who, as the Jesuit said, put France into mourning, and sent out
of this world his Grand father of famous memory, when he was preparing a
triumph for his dearest spouse.

The Jesuits are afraid God should take them at their words, if in their
devotions, they should say what all France does, in that particular prayer
which is made for the King, Vitiorum monstra devitare, hosts superare: that is
to say, to shun the monsters of vices, and to overcome his enemies. The
Provincial Pitard caused to be razed out of their Litanies, which they say at
eight of the clock, these words printed, HOSTS SUPERARE, TO OVERCOME HIS
ENEMIES: the reason is, for that the greatest enemy of the Crown of France,
since Charles the fifth, being the Spanyard, it would trouble them extremely to
wish any victories to the King of France, to the prejudice of the King of
Spain. I have been my self, and have seen others, very grave persons, reproved
by the Superiors, for having after the prohibition made, added the
fore-recited words. To which these making answer that it was lawful for them,
as French men, and according to the order of Cathedral Churches that prayed so,
to pray to God that the King might be victorious over his Enemies; you must,
replied they, to hide their malicious treachery under the veyl of Piety,
con^orm your selves, not to the Gallican Church, but to the order of Rome,
which does not demand victories for Kings. If there be any one, that, out of
curiosity, would surprise them in this, he may make speed to see the Litanies
which they have in the Oratory of their Hall of recreation, and he shall find
in those little books, if they are still used, that these words, Hosts
superare, are dashed out wi^h a pen. It must needs be, that the wills of these
Zealots, are very corrupt, since they distill venom even into their devotions*
The King of France founds Colleges for these Hypocrites, to the end they may
pray for the prosperity of his arms; and the Superiors of Guienne, by an
express command, forbid those that are under them to desire, even in their
public prayers, that he should overcome his enemies.

This hatred against Kings, which, in many among them is become another nature,
is not satisfied only with Blood royal, but engages them further to wish ill to
all those, who by their wise councels and high enterprises endeavor the
greatness and dilatation of the state. When the news came of the general revolt
of all Portugal, they immediately conceiving, that a revolution so fatal to the
Spanyard had been brought about by the policy of the most eminent Cardinal
Richelieu; I have known for certain, that four Jesuits discoursing of it that
night very confidently and privately in a chamber on that side where Theology
is taught, in Bourdeaux, one of them was so enraged to hear that so
considerable a loss had befallen the Crown of Spain, that out of madness he
took a picture he had of the Cardinall's, and having run it through several
times with a pen knife, at the eyes and the heart, put it into the flame of the
candle and bu^nt it. The wounds given the paper, did that great Politician no
great hurt, but had he ever discovered the exaspe^ated inclinations of these
creatures of Spain, he would have taken a little more heed of those, who, under
the name of Jesuits, would make ^he world believe that they live out of it.
Another of the same society having observed that an unskilful Graver had made a
very wretch^d draught of that great Minister of state, bought up abundance of
them, and having made them up into packets, sent them to div^rse Colleges in
Spain and Germany, saying, that he would have his Brethren to see the Picture
of that Devil. These sal^ies do indeed speak something that is childish, but
they are withal conclusive Arguments of their malice against the Crown under
which they live.

When some Bishops have ordered Te Deum to b^ sung, and public devotions to be
made in acknowledgement of the happy success of his Majesty's Arms, I have
often heard, sometimes one, sometimes another say, I am content to pray
heartily to God, not that he would prosper his Majesty's Arms, but that he
would stay the course of their bloody victories, and confound the counsels and
designs of the Cardinal, who sets all Europe on fire, to s^tisfie his own vain
glorious humor. What will all w^ll affected French men say of those that
persecute the state even in their prayers? If they c^nsider their proceedings
ever since their first coming into France, they will find, that, if this
hypocritical Body ever discovered any respect to the Princes thereof, it has
been merely in order to its own concernments, and is no longer du^iful and
obedient to the sovereign power, then it is flattered and loadenwith benefits
thereby. From the acts of hostility which they exercise aga nst their lawful
superiors the Bish^ps, when they are countenanced by the Court, you may
imagine how violent and furious they will be against the civil Magistracy when
ever the Pope shall think fit, in their particular quarrels, to protect them. I
shall say more, when, in a book it is in my thoughts to write concerning their
Institution, I shall take occacasion to explicate the Rule which obliges them
to stick to one or the other party in the differences that happen between
Christian Princes. In the mean time I wish France may open its eyes, that she
may take heed that this generation of Vipers which she feeds in her breast, do
not at last, to her destruction, eat out their way through her belly and her
bowels.

CHAP. III.
An endi^ement of Encroachments and Antidates put in against the Jesuits.
THose things whereof most men agree in their judgments, are commonly grounded
upon some truth. Of a thousand people in France that shall take occasion to
speak of the revenues of the Jesuits, nine hundred shall accuse them of being
too much inclined to the things of this world, and I dare affirm, without
running the hazard of doing truth any injury, that to procure them they make
nothing to supplant Orphans and Wid^ows, nay, think it not much to oppress, by
false contracts, tradesmen, and the poorest sort of people. When I was sent to
preach in their Priories, and was accordingly obliged to hear the complaints
and lamentations of those afflicted people whom the Agents of the society had,
by pure quillets and surprises in the Law, deprived of those little
inheritances which had quietly passed from Father to son. I could not forbear
blushing, insomuch, that the confusion, wherewith my face was covered, proved
an argument to those innocent souls, that I had no hand in their rapines.

But not to insist upon the particular proof of a truth, which the tears of so
many that suffer thereby, sufficiently confirms, it shall be enough to produce
one example by way of argument that shall take away all answer and further
objection. The Jesuits having taken possession of the Priory of St. Macaire
upon the Garonne, at a time when it was worth but five hundred Crowns per ann.
they have found out so many inventions to improve it, that it is at this day
very well worth twelve thousand Livers a year: which how it could be brought to
that height without the destruction of houses and ruin of Families, I leave it
to be considered. The Mannor-book which Francis Souiller made of the tenements
of that Benefice, heretofore so little and now so big, discovers much of their
earnestness in dispossessing the Tenants. And if the Parliament of Bourdeaux
take no course to curb their insatiable avarice, they are in some thoughts to
dig up all the posts on which are fastened the Tolls and customs of the old
Dukes of Guienne, or to set up new ones if need be, so to grasp all the estates
of the Country. Hence comes it, that when they have once found out by their
subtle insinuations that some poor Labourer has nothing to defend his title,
they desire no more, they presently fall upon him, they produce some old
manuscript and presently devour him. But to press this point more home, we will
make it appear how they grasp at other men's estates by manifest forgeries.

Monsieur Dedie, a person of very good quality, and a Citizen of Bourdeaux,
will happily think himself obliged to me, for the Secret I shall now reveal,
which must needs bring him in a round Sum of money, if he will but call these
Forgers to account; and I shall engage the Parliament of Bourdeaux, by
entertaining them with a piece of Forgery which it concerns them to see
punished. The wolves when they have devoured the Lambs, are ready to eat up
one another. If the Provincial Malescot had not been so eager to persecute
Peter Dubois, a Priest of their Society, and brought him almost to the point of
being cast out of the Order, for having discovered to the Sieur Bosquet, Rector
of the College of Bourdeaux, that the said Malescot and Sabbatheri Procurator
of the Province for the Jesuits had committed an Antidate in the business of
T^llac against Monsieur Dedie, that piece of Forgerie had been kept as secret
as a many others which they are guilty of, and a falsification of so high a
nature had not so prodigiously broke forth among them. It is then possible that
the crafty may be snapped in the web of their own craft. The revengefull
Provincial, was extremely deceived, when he took Peter Dubois for a fearful
man, and a person unable to manage an affair of any consequence, for he
afterward found by experience, that he, though a Limousin borne, was none of
the weakest kind of men. Had Malescot used any thing of dissimulation, the
other good man had stirred no further in the business, but, having sent for
him, partly to frighten him by menaces, partly to be informed how he came to
understand that he and his Procurator Sabbatheri had antidated the Deed, to
possess the Society of the Tillac, an estate that had this privilege that it
was repurchaceable within a certain number of years by the next of kin,
Dubois began to mistrust there was something in the wind, by the
interrogatories that were put to him, and having made him answer, that he had
it from one named Riviere some time Clerk of the College, but at present a
Cure between the two Seas, in the Archbishopric of Bourdeaux, who was fully
acquainted with the whole bu^inesse, he perceived by the reply of the
Provincial, that it stood him upon to lock well to himself. To avoid therefore
being surprised and declared an Impostor by the cunning practices of Malescot,
he took three Priests of the most considerable of the house, hid them in his
Closet, to the end ^ey might be witnesses. Having so done, he got the taid
Riviere to his Chamber, and in^reating him to selate to him, with the same
confidence as formerly, ^how the falsification aforesaid was carried, the
other, thinking himself alone with Dubois, clearly discovered the order they
had observed in the antedating of the Deed, as also the reasons, for which it
had been done in that manner. All which past, he engaged him to secrecy, for
fear, said he, that some one of us may come to be hanged for it. And yet for
all this, the crime had not come abroad, but that God, who of many forgeries,
is pleased that some should come to light, so ordered things, that the
Provincial must needs persecute the said Dubois, and that with so much
injustice, that those who heard the bloody rebukes he caused to be given him,
during the whole time of Dinner, he having caused him to kneel down at that
which they call the low table to receive them, could not forbear the shedding
of tears thereat, but above all, those, who had been secret witnesses to the
verification of the Antedate by the said Rivere, perceiving the implacable fury
of a guilty Provincial, treating with so much indignity an innocent subject,
gave the glory unto God, and, formally proving to the general Mutius
Vitteleschi the truth of the falsification, demanded justice. The discovery was
now gone too far, and men's minds too much exasperated to be denied it.
However, to prevent it from coming abroad, especially to the knowledge of
Monsieur Dedie, the party concerned therein, an information was received in,
and, to satisfy in some sort, not so much Peter Dubois, a Monsieur Dedie, who
seemed to be very much ins censed, it was ordered by a personated piece of*
justice, that Sabbateri should be sent to some other place, Dubois was honored
with the Procuratorship of the College of Bourdeaux, and the Provincial
Malescot, when his time was expired, instead of being sent to the Gibbet, or at
least according to the Monastical orders to perpetual imprisonment, as
convicted of Forgery, was sent out of the Province, in appearance, as if it had
been to banishment, but indeed, to be Rector at Tournon.

Good God; what kind of Goevrnment is this that raises crimes into the Throne,
and puts the virtues into chains. If the civil Magi^^rate justly condemn a
man to death for an Antidate, what kind of justice is that which is observed by
the General of the Jesuits, who bestows Rectories on those that are
canonically convicted of having falsified a pub^ick contract. And yet some will
tell me that after all this, employments are not bestowed among them but
according to desert. Sabbatheri and Malescot are old sinners, who, as I
believe, are yet alive. If Monsieur Dedie has the courage to go through with
it as he seems to have, it is in his power to make these two ancient men, aged
above seventy years, to see their last day upon a Gibbet.

The An^idate was verifyed against the consent of the Superiors among the
Jesuits. As concerning the verification of it in Parliament, there are many
witnesses to be had that are not of the Society, such as having quitted the
Order cannot be ignorant of a crime so generally known, as Monsieur de
Abillon, M. Le Abadie, M. Baut. M. Colon. M. Debou^^ etc. Of those that are
still of it, Peter Dubois is yet living, and in the college of Bourdeaux:
Arnold Bohyre, who was the Commissary appointed by the General, is also
living, if they are not dead within these seven or ^ight months. Thus have I
given undeniable proofs as to this business, to the glory of God, and the
discharge of my con^cience. The business of the Tillac h ath been since taken
into consideration by the Parle^ent of Bourdeaux.

What then may be concluded from all this, but that it is clear, as noonday,
by an illustrious example of justice, that that Body which pretends to so much
purity, is convicted of the most horrid falsifications. For the ancient answer
is not to be allowed in this case, that crimes are to be attributed only to
particulars; here the Provincial acts, as representing the whole body, in the
quality of head thereof, and Sabbatheri in the quality of principal
Procurator, and the most considerable person in relation to temporal affairs.
Both these eminent men in a business of very great consequence commit an
Antidate. Such as are guilty only of trivial Falsifications are taken, but
great ones escape. It concerns the public weal of the state, that care
should be taken, that these devourers of widows estates and Houses should at
last be surprised in their Villainies, that so there may be a check given to
their violence and covetousness, and some quietness may be afforded those
many persons that are persecuted and undone by their continual vexatious suits
at Law.

I shall take occasion upon some other account to discover how these reformed
Ecclesiastics make it their business, when they hear the confessions of the
Concubines of Priests, to persuade them to engage their Ruffians to resign up
the fat priories they are possefsed of to them. I have a pleasant story to
entertain my Reader with some other time, how they abused the simplicity of a
common whore, to obtain the priory of Ligug^, within the Diocese of Poictiers.
But here I confine my self to the discovery only of great and enormous crimes.

CHAP. IV.
The Jesuits arraigned at the Bar for the murder of abundance of little
Children whereof they have the oversight.
THose graceless and debauched Women, who are so inhumane as to murder their
own children after they have brought them into the world, to the end that they
might drown in their innocent blood the knowledge and conscience of their Lust,
are justly rewarded in the Commonwealth with Gibbets and general execrations.
The memory of Herod the Ascalonite, has been looked on with the greatest
horror for these sixteen hundred forty and eight years for putting to death
so many innocents, whose sad fate, even to this day, raises compassion in the
hearts, and tears in the eyes of those that read their history. The Nile has
long since blushed at the cruelty of Pharaoh the most abominable of the Kings
of Egypt, and has been ashamed to feed her Crocodiles with humane flesh by the
commands of that horrid Tyrant, who caused the children of the Hebrews to be
drowned as soon as they came out of their Mothers wombes. These acts of
barbarism have ceased long since in Egypt, and those Massacres are no longer
exercis^d in Palaestina, though it be under the power of the Turk. But these
bloody murders and executions are translated out of strange Countries into the
Province of Guienne, in France, and are now exercised in Bourdeaux, upon little
children that are either exposed or found there: and yet none bewailes their
misfortune, or opposes the fury of their Murderers.

Of the Citizens of Bourdeaux that shall come to read what I now write, some
will be astonished at the first, discoveries of a villainy they so little
suspect, though it be committed in their City, nay, it will happily be a very
difficult matter to persuade them that a crime of this nature should with any
probability be charged upon a sort of people that are Priests* Others, who have
looked more narrowly into things, and have observed that of a many bastards
that are brought to the hospital of St. James, there is hardly one to be found
there, will certainly take occasion to multiply the suspicion they have had a
good while, and will conceive a jealousy, that there may be some kind of
murder committed upon those poor exposed Christians. In a case of so great
concernment to the public good, I shall think it sufficient for me, simply and
as in the presence of God, to examine the state of affairs, and after I have
communicated my own opinion and knowledge of the business, to leave you to be
the judges thereof.

Those who do live, or at least have lived but some few months in Bourdeaux,
know, that in the great street that lies upon the Ditch, not far from the Guild
hall of that City, there is an Hospital, appointed for the reception of the
Pilgrims of St. James, as also for the reception, entertainment and education
of such children as either the necessityes, or the cruelty of the Mothers
advises them to leave in the streets or highwaies. The benefice destined to
defray the Charges of that hospital is of a vaft and very noble revenue, and
was bestowed upon the Jesuits with all the duties and privileges belonging
thereto, in such manne^ that they cannot justly deny either entertainment to
such children as are found, or Lodging, relie^e, and appointed charity to
Pilgrims. The Jurats of the City, who in the quality of public Magistrates are
obliged to look after the government of hospitalls have never yet examined
where those children are* that are found up and down in great numbers; or wh^
brings them up; to what age, or what becomes o^ them, etc. Thence comes it that
the Jesuits have had, and still have the opportunity, not only to swallow down
the revenues of these poor exposed children, but also the convenience to
disburthen both their College and the world of them without any noise.

To insist particularly on the several ways which they have found out to
dispatch the greatest part of these Innocents, is a business of more then
ordinary difficulty, for the crimes themselves being horrid and monstrous, the
ways whereby they are committed are secret and full of mystery, and the
management thereof is confined to a very few hands. And yet it is not hard to
imagine, that they make use ^f several inventions to put them to death, and
this is so obvious, that the mere examination of the business by the
Magistrate, when ever it happens; will clearly discover them to be either the
formal Murderers of them, or at least the occasions and instruments of their
death. Of whether of these two they be convicted, it matters not, the crime is
infinite, considering the great number o^ children that are destroyed.

I was never, I must confess, but once employed to bestow Christian burial on
one of those children (for to smother the mischief as much as may be, and to
prevent all suspicion, it is the business of one certain Priest to stand
ready to put on his Surplice and Stole, and to bury them with the ordinary
ceremonies) but, I here speak it conscientiously and at the feet of Jesus
Christ, I perceived that very time, that the cloth it was wrapped in, was all
bloody; Seized with compassion at the sadness of the spectacle, and desirous
to understand whence it came to pafse that the little body was bloody, Huguet* a
Master Shooemaker by his profession, who was the keeper of the Hospital, and
was present at the enterrement, with a Lay-Brother named Philoleau, made me
answer, that the* woman that nursed it, one that had not many days before
reformed her self of her naughtiness, and resolved to lead a better life,
making a virtuous resiftance against certain Ruffians that would have had
their pleasure of her, they were so exasperated at her refusal, that blinded
with fury they crushed the legs of that little child, and so murdered it to
be revenged of the Nurse. I could not be satisfied with this answer, for after
I had done the last offices of Christianity to that little one, I went my ways
to Francis Irat then Rector of the College, and gave him a faithful account
of what I had seen with my eyes, adding that the Syndic was obliged in
conscience to make inquiry about that crime, and legally to prosecute those
that were guilty of the murder committed on the body of an exposed child, for
whom we were engaged to be accountable. Answer was made me* very much to this
effect; That were to take too much upon us, this little one is now in Paradise,
and therefore, what necessity is there to squander away the revenue of the
college to revenge a crime that has delivered it out of the miseries of this
world. I had made too much noise to be called a second time to any such
service, I spoke too loud, the lay-Brother was charged not to call me any more,
so that ever from that time they have employed, in this last ceremony, a
certain ancient man named Ignatius Lentillac, who is since dead of an Apoplexy.

One single circumstance is enough to discover enormous crimes, and put the
civil Magistrate into the track of Truth. One drop of blood scattered by chance
upon the cloths of a murderer gives much light to find what he has committed.
What I have said deserves to be taken into consideration, and certainly there
is no Citizen of any worth or that any way concerns himself in the public
good, but will cry out, that the Magistrates are obliged to take notice of what
passes in the adminiftration of that Hospital; I dare undertake, that if things
were legally and strictly examined, as they ought to be in a business of this
consequence, it will be found* that, of thirty innocents that are received into
that house, (no longer a house of charity, but a slaughterhouse of cruelty)
there shall not be three alive at the years end. I appeal in this case to the
consciences and sound judgments of the Judges, whether without a general
mortality, it is possible so many children should perish, and not be either
cruelly killed, or dispatched hence more gently by some secret invention,
which, after they have pined away for certain days, carries them insensibly
away. It would be thought, that, according to the ordinary rate of mortality,
of ten children that are born in the Commonwealth, the better half should live
some years: and to speak suitably to the common course of humane occurrences*
it may be said, that of ten there do not die three within the year.

It is further to be considered that these little exposed ones are the more to
be pit^ied, for that it was not long before that they had with some difficulty
escaped death in their coming into this world, for had they been weak and
unlikely to live, their mothers had not exposed them in the streets. I never
heard of any that they found dead. The shrill crying of many of them who
thereby awaken those that have their Cells toward the streets, is an evident
argument that they are strong and lively. The swathing-cloaths wherein they are
found very handsomely wrapped, their names written and put into their bosoms,
or instead thereof salt, if they have not been baptized, and other little
circumstances, arguing that the Fathers and Mothers did all they could for
them, do sufficiently signify, that, though they are forced to forsake them,
yet they doubt not but that they are safely disposed into a good and charitable
house.

Whence comes it then, that they die in such great numbers, and that at this
day, the Jesuits, if they were called to account, cannot hardly show one of
them, unless they be, by some great chance, the children of those who have
sent considerable sums of money, by some faithful Mediator, to the
Procurator or to Brother Philoleau, and had entreated them secretly to have a
care of a child that should be brought with such and such marks? For these
having no other design then to conceal their loves, and a certain tenderness
for the reputation of those maids whom they have had their desires of, are
content to be at the charge of all things necessary for the entertainment of
the fruit of their own bowels; and in such cases, the Jesuits are not only no
losers, but great gainers, at least so far as the obliging of a good Nurse
amounts to. It is not for a person of my quality to read Lectures to the
Magistrates, but to discharge my conscience into their breasts, for the public
good One of the ways which these covetous horse leeches make use of to remove
out of this world so many innocents, is, to make choice of very poor and
necessitous women, who forced by their necessities to embrace any course to get
a little money, undertake to suckle and nurse up these little ones, at such a
pitiful rate, that it is impossible but that both nurses and children must
starve.

Hence comes it that within a little time after out of pure want of
nourishment, the foreheads of these little wretches are full of dirt and
earthinesse, their eyes sink into their heads, where there should be cheeks
there are only pits to be seen, their bones start out through the skin, so
that at last the fatal morning comes, that the nurses brings them home stone
dead and dry as skeletons. Ah Merciful rede^mer of mankind* who sometimes out
of the bowels of thy infinite lov^ and indulgence said to thy Apostles Mat.
19. 14. Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not, for unto
such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven! Shall it be lawful for a sort of
Bar^arous and profane wretches, that call th^^s^lves Rel^gious men, to make
havoc of the Estates and lives of so many little one^ b^^ti^ed into thy Faith,
and to starve them in a Christian City, in a time of abundance and plenty, and
this in a wealthy hospital purposely built by the charity of some good men for
their entertainment? And all this while their Murderers live upon their cost,
and grow fat upon their revenues.

Another way they have to dispatch them, which is no less convenient then the
former, in order to their design, is, to put them out to debauched women, such
as endure a certain martyrdom for their lust and lubricity, in the diseases
consequent thereto, and such as in whom the French Pox is a familiar and
pardonable infirmity, by which means these little babes come to suck poison in
stead of milk. To which may be added another trick of these cattle, viz* that
having left them crying on the ground or in their nests for a long time
together, without ever taking them up, it is so long ere they get them suckled
by some wholesome and charitable woman, that it is easy for a man to
conjecture, nay indeed, to be confident, that they rather wish them dead then
alive. The other more mysterious, and more horrid ways will be discovered to
the Judges, when they shall be pleased to call them to account for so many
children.

What I have further to say as to this point, is, that not content to make
havoc of the reveneues of these little exposed infants, and to put them to
miserable deaths, they have found out a way to ga^n money in that troublesome
employment, and n ache an advantage of that which they ought to do out of duty.
All the world knows that they have removed all causes relating to this
Hospital to be tried at Grenoble, which they have done for two considerable
reasons. The first is, because they might not be within the jurisdiction of the
Parliament of Bourdeaux, which being near might judge of things more justly and
with more expedition. The second, that they might the more ab^ndantly milk
their purses who were either suspected or convict^d of having exposed their
children. For, the fear of making a long and troublesome journey, and that
withal very chargeable, obliges those, that are either guilty or accused, to
purchase their quiet with money. I have heard the Lay-Brother James Philoleau,
through whose hands all these things pass, affirm, that he had received more
money in one year since the causes were removed to Grenoble, then he had done
in twenty before. But especially if some Scholar or Merchant falls into their
clutches, who either would not or durst not undertake that journey, to make his
own defense, they treat him so unmercifully, that they squeese out of him as
much for one child, as they will make to serve for half a dozen.

There Is no necessity I should entreat the Judges, to take this discovery,
which I have made for the public good, into their consideration; the blood of
these innocents cries more loudly in the ears of Justice then that of Abel, and
there is no reason in the world that these unfortunate little ones, whom the
Fathers and mothers expose to the mercy of others, should be murdered by the
Jesuits, and be so miserable withal as not to find Magistrates to revenge
their death and ashes.

CHAP. V.
An information put in against the Jesuits of the Incontinency they are guilty
of in their Classes.
IT is only for the bright eye of Heaven to shed its rays upon ditches and
dung-hills, without any danger of derogating any thing from its purity or
losing ought of the luster of its light. It will therefore be hard for me,
either to fasten my own, or direct the reflections of my Reader on the
impurities which I can prove the Jesuits guilty of, without running some hazard
of corrupting our imagination by impure thoughts. But the God of purity, who
expects, that, in order to the public good, such enormous villainies should be
discovered, will preserve us by his grace, so as that we may go through these
pitchy reflections of vice and filthiness, without being de^iled thereby.

Ignatius Loyola, has, to spe^k properly, left behind him but one Rule for
chastity, but, because he has recommended it to his Monks, that they should
not propose to themselves, the purity of the greatest Saints, nor yet that of
the blessed Virgin M^ry, but Angelical purity, by keeping their bodies in all
cleanness, he has put them into a despair of ever attaining it. And thence it
comes, that not being able to make it appear that they are Angels, for they are
but too too carnal, they have discovered, especially of late, themselves to be
men, and those not the least inclined to sensuality and fleshliness. The
ordinary sort of people who see them converse with so much familiarity with the
zealots of the femal sex that come to them, and spend three or four hours
with them in frivolo s talking cheek by joll, think them as free from these
uncleanness, as the highest sphere of celestial bodies is from the
impressions of the Ear^h. But these prating gossips, who, under the cloak of
devotion and these ordinary familiarities, carry on a lustful love, know very
well how much they are given to the flesh, that is, with as little remorse as
the crows after the deluge, were to the carrions. You would, from their
^ersonations in the business of devotion, infer, that ^y a certain elevation of
spirit they were soaring up in^o the sanctuary of the Divinity, as e^gles do
into the ^osome of the sun; but I can, on the contrary, assure ^ou, that the
greatest part of these lewd wretches, are like those filthy vultures, which by
the height of their flight make as if they were sentinels for the safety of
heaven, and went a round for the preservation of the earth, when in the mean
time they have their eyes fastened here below to seize upon the first carrion
or serpent they shall see rotting on a dunghill.

The Jesuits ever did and still do make it their business, to persuade these
deluded and credulous zealots, that their sect does incomparably surpass all
other Orders in point of purity; but for my part, who have lived a long time
among them I shall not subscribe to this proposition. Nay, I dare further
affirm, that if there be not a greater observation of chastity in other
convents, then there is in the Jesuits colleges, it must be said, to the
confusion of their Institutions, that purity has for saken the Monasteries, as
the satyrist said long since that she was fled out of the world.

I can, without injury to the Jesuits or truth, affirm, that there is hardly
any crime in point of lubricity, whereof I shall not prove the Jesuits guilty,
and that without going any further then three or four Colleges in the
Province of Guienne where I have lived my self. I will make it appear to all
the world, that there is not any kind of Villainy known among mankind, which
some one of them has not practiced. Le^ us then begin with the abominations
they commit in their Classes.

It is a prerogative proper only to God alone to look into the thoughts, search
the reins and sift the hearts of men, far be it from me to think of entering
into that Holy* of Holy's, since it is a kind of sacrilege in man to think to
examine the folds of that little abyss. But to measure them according to the
account they give among themselves of their temptations, it is out of all
controversy, that the greatest part of them burn with concupiscence like so
many enflamed firebrands. The e^teminacy, the lascivious touches and embraces,
the pollutions, and the impurities, which are so common among the younger
students, that they never come any where but they leave the tracks and indicia
thereof beh ind them, to the horror of those, that have any, for such
miscarriages, are but too too praegnant Arguments to prove their uncleanness
beyond all ordinary imagination. There are among them Regents, that have made
it no difficulty to persuade their Scholars to unchaste gropings about the body,
to raise in them the gre^ter inclinations to commit that abominable
filthiness which nature trembles at; in so much that some of them coming
afterward to be of the Society have accused these Sodomites to their Master of
the Novices. Here my ink turns red, that I am forced to write of these
filthinesses.

The College of Limoges cannot deny, that one of the Regents there, whose name
was Sanguiniere, having several times called to him and taken a side a gentile
handsome youth, upon the Sundays and days of recreation, under pretense of
correcting his exercises and compositions, entertained him with amorous
discourses, and caused him to feel him with so much passion, that, growing
more and more habitual in the mischief, his lust blinded him, and induced him
to persuade the young lad to come into the great chair whence he read his
Lectures, ut inter manus illius se pollueret, while his fellow-disciples were
busy about their exercises in the Class. I have my self, when I was prefect
in the College of Again, surprised the Master of the fourth Class named
Francis Mingelousaux, ardently kissing, and hugging between his knees and
arms, a young gentleman one of his Scholars. The child, who was innocent, and
had not the least thought of his villainy, imagined himself extremely much made
of; but had his Father, one of the most generous persons in the Country, had
but the least notice of those infamous caresses, what reputation soever the
Jesuits might be in, he would have cut off his ears for it.

Did I make it my business to give an account of all the rest, who during the
time of their Regency fall or have fallen into this infirmity, I should in the
first place summon in those of the great College of Bourdeaux, and then
running over the rest one after another, and so ending with that of Fontenay, I
should discover in every one of them some beastl^esse of that nature. They
cannot keep their hands quiet without feeling, nor their mouths without
kissing, insomuch, that it is grown an ordinary expression among those
Scholars who look more narrowly into passages, to say, that, such an one,
naming him, is our Regent's young Mistress. Those abominable Sodomies which
some of their Regents are guilty of, are ordinary, not only in their great
Academies, where they have choice to that purpose, but they are also
predominant in their smallest Colleges and Residences, so general are ^hese
horrid practices grown at this day in that Society. Two young Scholars of the
little town of St. Macaire, made complaint to their parents, and the Parents to
the Superior of the place, that one Gervase, their Master, had forced them,
and gave such a particular account of the place, the manner, the circumstances,
that it would have been no hard matter to have convinced him of Sodomy.
Christopher Penaud, prefect over the said Gervase, is an irreprochable evidence
of this conviction, since that he was the person appointed by the Rector of
Bourdeaux, to make true and secret informations of the business. There are
some persons of the highest quality, in Baurdeaux, who know, that Leonard
Alemay has caused them to be untrussed, out of no other design, then for to
contemplate their nakedness. Then to whip them deliciously and wantonly with
the hand is but a pastime with these insamous Gomorrheans, whom God will no
doubt provide a fire for, if they do not reform themselves of a sin which
covers nature with shame and confusion.

CHAP. VI.
A second Bill put in against them for their Impurities in their Visits.
PHilip the second, of Spain, the grand Protector of the Jesuits, and a prince
of a very excellent wit, having one day a mind to be a little pleasant with
them, asked them how it was possible they could be chist when they had the
liberty of private and familiar entertainments with all the ^airest Ladies of
his proud Court? We have, replied they (taking the relation upon the credit of
their own Historian) a certain HERB, which we always carry about us whereby
we avoid the dangers and temptations of impurity, and overcome all the assaults
of concupiscence. Being very much pressed by that ingenious Monarch to give him
the name of that herb, they answered, that it was called the fear of God. But
I dare assure you, that, if they had it then, I am certain they are now so far
to seek for it, that they have not so much as the seed left, and that it is
long since it has grown in their Garden. Let the Reader judge by the following
discourse whether, before they go out of their Colleges, they remember to take
along with them that excellent preservative of the Herb.

It is then in the first place to be observed, that the greatest employment,
and the maine business of the Rectors, as soon as they are arrived to that
office, is, to separate as it were whatever is excellently scattered up and
down the Tribunals of the other Confessors, to make for themselves a grand
Court of Justice, where there are not to be admitted any but the flower of all
the young Gentlewomen of a City. To bring this to demonstration, it will cost a
man but a quarter of an hours reflection, that is to say, but the pains of
casting his eye one Sunday on the Shriving seat of a Rector. One of the
inventions they make use of to draw these silly she^p into their fold, and to
decoy these innocent Doves into their Dove-coat, is to ply them with so
frequent visits, that many discreet men are scandalized thereat. 'Twas an
accident befell Peter Guales, during the time of his Rectorship in the College
of Bourdeaux, that he was so strangely besotted with that kind of fondness,
that he could not spare so much time as to be present at the Orations of the
Regents* upon the renovation of Studies: as conceiving that little time, and so
precious in respect of the glory of the College, better employed in e^^eminate
visits. It was proved against Franton Gadault, Rector of the College of
Fontenay, and Peter Requier his successor, that they had visited Ladies of
eminent quality (whom out of the respect I bear them I fotbeare to name) for
whole years together, five or six times ^ (...) many ^^^es once or twice a
day, and the more to blind their lay*Brethren, lest they might take notice of
that excess of familiarity, as they had the power to take into the City with
them whom they pleased, so they every time changed companions. Can any man be
so lost to all observation, as to imagine, that, if the magnetic force which
drew those unclean Birds thither were not lodged in the Sex, they would bestow
three or four hours every d^y upon the cultivation of their Souls* when they
do not take their igno^ant Brethren into their Chambers to entertain them with
a word of God, once in a month.

I am very much troubled, that the qualities of the persons I should defame by
my writing, obliges me to conceal abundance of misdemeanors, whereof the
discovery would make husbands run hornemad, and prove the destruction of those
silly women, whose honor had yet been unstained, had i^ not been for those
in^inuating Villains. Father Dancereau, one of their Order, dares not deny if
he be juridically interrogated, but that he ha^h confessed to me, that a
Jesuit, whom he forbore to name, had abused a young Gentlewoman, in the little
space that was between her bed and the wall, she pretending her self to be
sick, and he, that he was come to visit her, and comfort her with discourses of
devotion. Father Anthony R^sul, of the same Society, has declared to me, that
he had observed the same thing through the distances of the curtains, at a
house in Poictiers, where Father Bonner* was upon a visit, to take the same
pleasure with one of his penitents. The same F. Ra^ul repeated to the
Superiors, that coming out of a garden into which he went to say some prayers,
he had found one of their greatest preachers, locked into a Chamber w^^h a
married Gentlewoman; and had surprised them in so (...) disorder, that the
Woman, who come to open ^^e door, was as red as fire. At the first begi^ning
of the Colled^e of Fontenay, when the Jesuits went single, one of the Society,
whose name was (...) who was come thither out of the Low coun^ries, being
transported by a strong temptation to go into a house to visit a maid, took her
at advantage, and fastened on her, contrary to the ordinary camion of those
Zelots, with so much earnestness, and withal with so much hazard of being d
scovered, that he was surprised in the action. Francis Robin, one of the most
prudent men of their Order, made it very much h^s business to cover that
ignominy; But the business broke forth wi^h so much violence, that,
notwithstanding all his prudence, they were forced to transl^te Galopin thence,
to smother the scandal as much as might be

Gil^^rt Rousseau, being upon the Mission at Ner^^, had such srequent
conversations, and that with so much privacy* both as to active and passive
visits* with his ^aundresse, that at last she was with child by him; but n some
measure to conceal so notorious a vill^ny, committed in a City where the
reformed Religion was publicly professed, as being such as must needs have
tended much to the disparagement of the Jesuiticall Aposile, a blind report was
scattered about the place, that the Ministers of the Reformation, had purposely
invented the calumny, the more to discredit their Adversary. But the thing has
been made so demonstrable since, that, being my self about six years since at
Monsieur Mombet's, (who shall justisy all I say as to this particular) in the
parish of Cerignac, in the Diocese of Condom, in the presence of several
persons of quality, and two Jesuits, who were upon the Cardinal Mission with
me, a Gentlem^n then present proved the thing so clearly, that we were all at
a loss what to say to it, and had no other reply to make, but that it was no
hard matter to invent a calumny against a Virtuous man. The Fathers, Dominick
Mombet, and Peter Desseinier, of their Society, my Colleagues at that time, can
witness, if they dare, with what constancy, and by what testimonies and
arguments that person of quality made it evidently appear, that the wench had
been ca^oll'd by that Jesuit, who notwithstanding his being guilty of such an
insamy, is nevertheless thought fit to be at this time their Provincial.

If I should now assirm that John Delvaux, one of the most eminent Conf^ssors
that have been for these twenty years in the College of Bourdeaux, had
dep^rted srom Graves les aigrieres, whither he was sent, to go, in the day
time, all alone, to see a wench that had a very ill report, I have my evidence
ready to prove it, John Ricard, and Francis Ducruex. ^or when these two
lecherous Elders, had sifted out of the poor wench by way of confession, (let
the wo^ld but consider how far these people are to be trusted with a secret)
that Delvaux had often had the use of her body, they accused him to the
Provincial, and proved the crime, not so much out of any zeal to justice,
though the Confessor were really guilty, as out of an implacable emulation,
which they were both possessed with, to see him acquit himself of his charge
with more reputation. I shall say nothing of the beastly actions of James
Beaufe's, though they are notorious enough, in his Visits of Beard, and sor
which he ha^h begged pardon on both knees of Arnauld Boh^re his Provincial. I
forbear to mention the disgraces and infamies which this Brother Coadjutor
frequently f^ll into, one whereof was that, having gotten one of their Tenants
maids with child, he was by the judgment of those that h^d the business under
consideration, posted of a sudden from the College of Again, under the name and
in the habit of a servant, to vindicate the reputation of the College, against
a confident wench that brought them a child, and laid it at the Gate. Nor shall
I much insist upon the freedom which many Jesuits take in their ordinary
conversations, to touch the cheeks, feel the breasts, and put their hands into
the pockets of women, as being faults, that, truly considered, are indeed
great, but, compa^'d to the enormous lubricities I have yet to relate, venial
peccadillo's.

The history of Father Olive, a famous preacher among them, might very well
pass for an absolute Romance, were it not as notorious, and well known in the
Order, as the Sun is in the Firmament. A certain waiting gentlewoman whom he
had cajoll'd into the professed house of Bourdeaux, and had often seen in some
corner behind a door, gave him a meeting at Port de Saint Marie, about two
Leagues from Again where he was wont to preach in the Lent time. Love, who is
many time guilty of childish inventions, the more to conceal himself, put it
into his head to give out, that she was his Niece, and, to the end he might
have the enjoyment of her with more freedom, to pretend, that she was come, to
give him an account of some affairs of consequence relating to their Family,
and to entreat him to go along with her into the Country, after he had made an
end of preaching, to take some order about the division and settling of certain
Inheritances* The Lay-Brother, John Testis, by name, but not such in effect,
was not sensible of the personation, but thought it a great matter of
ed^fication, to see that the Gentlewoman was d^sposed into a chamber by her
self, though in the same Lodging, and submitting his judgment, by a blind
obedience, to that of his superior, imagined that all the familiarity he saw
between them was no more then might ^e between Uncle and Niece. To give an
account of all the trivial businesses and Embassies wherein this crafty
companion employed the poor Brother, that he might with m^re freedom
prosecute his enj^yments with his dear Niece; The journeyes he put him upon
thence to Paravis, whither he could not go without crossing the River, to the
end the Preacher might have the more leisure to discharge himself in the
afternoons of the burden of his Sermons into the bosom of that impudent
strumpet; the commands he laid upon him to go to bed betimes, under pretense of
Charity, that he might slip the more imperceptibly into the chamber of his
minion, these I say were shifts and evasions that were mysterious to the poor
ignorant Brother, till that being questioned by the Superiors at his return,
where he had left him, he began to comprehend them, and was satisfied the Niece
was no better then she should be, that is to say, a common Wench. What do you
imagine Readers of these stories whereof you had not the least suspicion. If
you have been so mistaken, as to think the Jesuits much to be celebrated for
their chastity, be undeceived as to that error, and assure your selves that
they, by their insinuations and complyances seduce more women and maids to
naughtiness then all other Monks and Priers besides. I have understood from
one of the Order that had been admitted to the profession of the fourth vow,
that a woman addressed her self to him, saying, that she was much courted to a
carnal kindness by certain Priests, but that she was resolved not to affect
any but Jesuits, for they are mo^e discreet and circumspect. I know the wife of
a Lieutenant General of a Maritime place, whom for the respect I bear him I
name not, who has had some secret dealings with a Jesuit, a great Philosopher.
I know that of a Kings Attorney in the same City, who takes occasion too too
often to invite into the Country her ghostly Father a Jesuit, a person
infamous for his uncleanness in Limoges and Perigueux. Were it as pardonable
in me to name the great Ladies, as it is for me to give the names and sirnames
of these zealous stallions, I should make Gentlemen tremble, Presid ents shake
with indignation, Counselors blush beyond their Robes, Advocates change
color, nay, Treasurers and Governors of Frontier-places look pale upon the
business. But I must here do that out of discretion which the Persians do in
their ceremonies, put my finger upon my mouth, and admire these inexpressible
Mysteries.

CHAP. VII.
A third Bill, of villainies, committed by the Jesuits in their Churches.
It Is a wise saying of the great Augustine, because God is every where by reason
of his immensi^^, there is a happy necessity lies upon us to live according to
the ^ules of Justice and right reason, since that whatever we dee, is done in
the presence of a God who is a just judge* and sees all our works. There is not
any place either sacred or profane where men may take a permission to defile
their bodies: but a filthy action, which were simply a sin done ^n some
places, becomes an enormous crime, and a monstrous sacrilege committed in the
Church. That man, whatever he be, who is guilty of any thing of insolence in
the Temple, is a criminal, but the Romanists are much more reproachable as to
this point then we are, when they profane their Sanctuary. For since it is the
general belief among them, that Jesus Christ resides presentially in body and
soul under the species of bread, which are preserved upon their Altars, it must
needs follow, that, when they come to commit uncleanesses in those holy places,
they are not simply thought to have sinned in a Temple, where God is adored,
but also in the very sight, and in defyance of Jesus Christ, who, in flesh and
in bones is in their Tabernacles. I have already satisfied the Reader that the
Colleges of the Jesuits are so many Cages full of the uncleannest sort of
birds, I shall by the ensuing stories discover how far they are chargeable
with sacrilegious villainies.

I cannot meddle with these common*shores of lewdness, but that the more they
are stirred the more they stink; but I must run the shame and inconvenience of
it, that people may take the more heed thereto. Let it then be observed that
the most ordinary place where they act their more lascivious parts, is the
Church; when they are any where else, they have companions, and their presence
racks their wits to find out a thouand shifts and inventions to avoid
suspicion, and elude the observations of those Aristarchus's. But in the Church
they are alone, with their sweetings, the founder of their Sect having it seems
been of a pious persuasion, that the veneration of the Altars would b^ a
sufficient preservative against all abominations in that place. Thence has it
happened, thence does is* daily happen, that of the house of Prayer they make a
den of Thieves, for there lies the scene of their lascivious discourses,
venereall embraces and feelings, and the mutual pledges of reciprocal
affections, insomuch that, were there a necess^ty their temples should be
sanctified by new consecrations, according to the Canons of the Church of Rome,
when any uncleanness has been committed therein, it were but requisite the
Churches of the Jesuits should be new consecrated once every eight days. Of
above fis^y instances I could produce hereof, I shall insist but on three, that
so I may the sooner disengage my self from these polluted and infectious
places, and come into a little fresh and wholesome air again.

Maniam, the most illustrious and most admired Preacher that the Jesuits have
produced these twenty years, of those that have come up into the pulpit of S.
Didiers at Poictiers, is one of those many that have profaned their Chapels.
This abominable wretch having made it his design to go and divert himself after
his Sermons, with the Procurator of the College, in Liguge, prevailed so far,
by soothings and flatteries, upon a simple devout wench of the Town, that he
persuaded her to give him a meeting in the Monastery, appointing the place of
rendezvous to be the Church, where they were surprised in strange postures, and
that in the v ^y act, by Father M^rin, who cannot deny what I now asfirm,
unless he at the same time acknowledge himself a Detractor, and expect to be
acc^unted such, by above three hundred Jesuits who have seen the depositions
made by him, to the Provincial Jaquinot, to prove Maniam guilty of that
filthiness.

We shall not need to travel far to meet with an abominat^on of the same
nature. A man knowing but what is done there, would think that the Churches of
Poict^u, are designed to be the de^nes of these Thieves and the recep^acles of
their Sacriledges. Let us but fall down into the town of Fontenay le-Compte,
and look into the Church of these good Fathers there. An honest Merchant of
Poictiers coming one morning about a quarter of an hour after four (it being
one of the longest days in Summer) into the Jesuits Chapel, heard distinctly
a certain stir and noise of a man and woman that seemed to be struggling
together behind a partition of wood upon the very place where he was addressing
his Devotions to God. Being frighted at the strangeness of the attempt, he
made a little noise, and putting himself into a posture to see if any one
appeared* he heard the motion of a man, who raised himself very gently, and
slunk down to observe whether any one had overheard them, the Merchant had a
little glimpse of his countenance, so far as to perceive that his beard began
to turn gray. He would have gone immediately into the College to give notice
to the Superior; but his business calling him away to Rochel, afforded him
not the leisure. But that his proceeding might be thought the more considerate
in order to the discovery of this crime, he resolved to be guided in the whole
management of that affair, by the direction of a Confessor, who being satisfied
by the relation of his Penitent that the offense was manifest, obliged him to
give an account thereof to the Superior of the College, which was accordingly
done. Fronton Gadauld, then Rector there, though galled in several places of
this book, if he has any respect for the glory of God, dares not but
acknowledge that this story was related to him. But if he has the confidence
to deny it, the greater would be my trouble to convince him, by the testimonies
of Toussaints Dancereau, and others, to whom the business was communicated,
the Confessor of Rochel who gave the advice, the Merchant who discovered the
deed; and all these, as being such as had seen and he^rd what past, are
sufficient security for what I say. The greatest suspicion lay upon the Porter
of the College* but out of a fear that any one of the consultation, nay,
happily the Rector himself should be found the party guil^y of the transgression,
the business was immediately smothered and swallowed down, that the maxim
should be observed, si non cast saltem caute.

In the same College was found John Surin lockd in the Sacristy with a young
Gentlew^man, whom he lo^ed, doing his devotions to Venus just behind the Altar
on which they pre^end to adore the God of glory, if a man would measu^e them
according to the principles of their belief. What a horrid defyance of heaven
must it needs be for a man to wallow in the mire of abomination at the very
feet of Jesus Christ! Some Ladies of quality have ^ade their complaints to a
discreet ^an of their Order that P. Reigrier had, by his beas^ly
interrogatories, provoked them to sin in their Confe^^ions, and by asking them
whether they had, in their venereal enjoyments, used such and such postures,
that he had Aretine-like instructed them to practice those shameful villainies
which they should never otherwise have thought of.

This last mentioned Jesuit, a m^n guilty of much more malice then subtlety,
and who for the mediocrity of his abilities, had no other inployment then that
of instructing of women, and entertaining them in their visits with Lectures
upon the diseases of the Matrices, was so fervent, while he was Rector of
Fontenay, in getting to him loose women and common prostitutes under pretense
of endeavoring their conversion, that he employed the solicitations and
persuasions of the good and innocent to bring them to him. But the time he took
to converse with them in the Church, was, when all the Masses were ended, all
the people retired, and all the Jesuits at dinner, which raised very pregnant
suspicions, that he called them, not so much out of any design for their
conversion, as out of lustful desires to be dealing with some of them, as
being then at liberty to do what he pleased, in regard there were none to take
notice of his demeanor. Which carriage of his being observed by the Fathers
Dancereau, Le Grand, Veries, and my self, who then preached in that town, we
made some stir about it, so far that one of ^he forementioned gave notice
thereof to the Provincial that some course should be taken therein.

Let them discover, if they have the confidence to speak without taking time to
do it, what it was, that caused a Brother, whose name is Miroart, to be sent
away from the sacristy of Bourdeaux, if it were not for being assistant to the
Rector of the College in a design which the said Rector had to enjoy a woman
at leisure in the Chapel of S. Magdalene, John de Rhede, a Jesuit, who
surprised them in the exaltation of their pleasures, will swear it, not to take
notice by the way, that he himself has a bastard in Bourdeaux, as it was very
innocently related one day in the height of recreation, by a most discreet
Regent of Fontenay, named Theophilus David.

In a word, though I had the strength of Hercules to cleanse these Augaean
stables, so to discover to the world the horridness of their Abominations, ten
years time would be too little for me to cleanse and purify all the Churches
they have defiled in Guyenne. The walls of the Church of Xaintonges blush at
their impurities, and if the paving and pillars of its chapels could speak, I
should produce bloody accusers, to condemn the Surins, the Dugrenes the
Beaufes's, that have blemished them, before the throne of God. The Church of
Limoges is infamous for the lascivious conferences that pass there; that of
Again is full of pollutions, and infected with sacriledges. Nay, they have not
spared even those of S. Macaire, and Marennes; but they also have suffered upon
their seats, in their porches and corners, unseemly and dishonest actions. Many
women and maids have been frightened in several places to see Jesuits going
presumptuously, and without any fear to the Altar, clad in their sacerdotall
vestments, after they had in their Confessionseats entertained them a long time
together with Lovediscourses and discoveries of the earnestness of their
brutall pas^ions. O thou God of purity, when will thou enter again with the
whip of cords in thy hand into the Temples, to drive out thence these buyers
and sellers of Doves? How long will thou suffer these incestuous wretches, to
make a Brothel-house of thy Sanctuary, and under the ma^k of devotion, to make
a prey of chastity, in those very places where it should find the greatest
refuge and protection.

CHAP. VIII.
A fourth Bill of Venereall uncleanness committed by the Jesuits in their
Houses.
THere is no crime so hidden, says Jesus Christ, but at last it comes to
light. The Order of the Jesuits may be said to have been for some years like a
spacious field covered with snow, the whiteness whereof concealing equally the
beauty and the dirtinesse thereof. But now that the Sun of righteousness has
darted his more perpendicular rays upon that delicate whiteness, and comes to
dissolve that pretended snow of Sanctimony, he with the same labor discovers
their filthiness and dunghills. Thousands of times, have I heard the most
tender of the reputation of the Order* expressing themselves to this purpose,
That, if any one of those who quitted the Society should discover the story of
Petiot, our disparagement in the world would be irreparable. If it so happen
that the infamy will reflect on them, it shall be by accident; for my part, I
have no other design then the furtherance of God's glory and the edification
of the public, in the discovery of that crime.

Stephen Petiot is a person*, for his excellent endowments, of very great
reputation in Guienne, and one that has ever been accounted among those of his
ro^e, for one of the most mod^st and reserved. The Panegyric which he writ,
when he taught Rhetoric at Bourdeaux, upon the taking of Rochell gained him a
great fame; and those employments which the Provincial have since put him
upon, by making him Preacher in the most eminent pulpits, have made his person
highly considerable. I am here to entreat the Reader to take notice, that the
story I relate is not to discover the miscarriage, of some drudging Brother, or
of some unfortunate student, forced to cast anchor by a sad ingenistitium, in
the first or second year of his course of Theology, or yet that of some
formal Coadjutor or Assistant, that is, such as are not of any rank or
reputation among them, but that of a Jesuit, that is one of the Bell-weathers of
the Society, as they express it, a man that had taken the fourth vow, an
excellent Humanist, and famous preacher. Vices appear with greater luster when
they are found in the most eminent men of an Order. This illustrious man was of
the professed house; preached at the Church of St. Projectus, in Bourdeaux; and
because he would not be thought idle in the intervall between Advent and Lent,
he sometimes went to the confession-seats as others did, rather out of thoughts
of diversion then devotion, and more to fasten on some prey then to convert
sinners and instruct souls. A voluptuous person prosecutes his (...) desires
wherever he comes, even through grates and lattices. This man who in the
Pulpit seemed to be a Saint, and was an Asmodeus in the shriving-seat, cast his
amorous eyes upon a little brown lass, that had cast her self at his feet, to
disburthen her self of her sins, and at the first sight took so much fire at
the eyes and ears, when he looked upon her, and heard her speak, that,
contraty to the first intention of the wench, he sent her away laden with more
crimes then she had brought thither. The first scene of this wanton Comedy,
was, by crafty insinuations to engage the wench to give him a meeting about the
time that the Jesuits are at Table, that he might have the opportunity to
entertain her between two doors with more security and freedom. The wench,
who it seems, was somewhat in necessity, considering she was a servent of some
quality, finding her self so much made of by a person whom she heard every
where celebrated for his great worth, thought her self in a fair way to
happiness, and reciprocally conceive d so much tenderness and affection for
him, that she was no less punctual to meet him at the place appointed, then
the Sun is to bless our Hemisphere with the gladsome day at the ordinary
hours. To describe the little shifts that passed between these two Lovers, and
the mutual caresses wherewith they entertained one another during that little
leisure, would take up too much time, it is no hard matter to imagine,
considering the violence of their passions, what might be the effects of their
first meeting. There needs therefore no more be said, then that there was no
manner of feeling, which the wench did not freely suffer from him, nor any
pleasure which she received not from him, even to the closest embraces. One
thing only there was that much troubled them; that is, they were obliged ever
and anon to go and see if any stranger came near to disturb their enjoyments.
In a word, not to defile too much paper with so nasty a story, the wench has
since related to three or four Jesuits, that Petiot had kissed her, embraced
her, felt her, etc. Nay so far as, that, effundens semen in manum eius, (O
excess of abomination!) said to her, See my dearest, ex quo Luto nascuntur
homines. The author of the book called the Desirer, had not certainly ever read
or heard of such stories as these, when he said that the Porter of Monasteries
was a venerable ancient man whose name was, The fear of God. Were he to write
now, he would certainly except the Colleges of the Jesuits, which though they
bear in their frontispieces, the name of JESUS, crowned with thorns or beams
of light, do not put those that live within them ever the more in mind to
imitate the purity of the Virgin's Son.

Let us now go into the house, and see what mischief they did there, when they
were so wicked in the Entry. This great Preacher, that he might have the
greater opportunity to study, had a chamber by himself, at some distance from
those of the rest, that had a lock to it, which the provincial Jaquinot had
purposely caused to be furnished for him. Imagining with himself, that he
might easily bring the wench thither, and there enjoy her without any danger,
he persuaded her to disguise her self. She took his advice, reckoned with her
Mistress, quitted her service, bought a hat, and a canvasse suit, such as
should fit a little country lad off her pitch, went into a vineyard, cut off her
hair, put up her m^^d's clothes into a packet, retaining the upper part for a
wascot, put on the boys clothes, and getting a bundle of little walking sticks,
pretended to bring them to that Jesuit, who it seems had a curiosity, by way of
recreation, to mark them in several places with a hot iron. He who wandered
about the Church in expectation of her coming, according to the appointment
between them, came immediately to entertain* her, and receiving her as the
servant of a Country man that was wont to bring him sticks, brought her without
any danger into the Chamber.

What Rhetoric were able to express the mutual satisfaction of this amorous
couple, to find themselves so fortunate in so presumptuous an attempt? Their
passion, which till then had been much abated by obstacles and difficulties,
broke forth now like an impetuous torrent, that has overturned the banks that
opposed its violence: and the reciprocal expressions of kindness that past
between them, were proportionable to the former hazards they had run through.
Yet were not their Loves like those subterranean Rivers which slide silently
and are out of the sight of men. It Is decreed that women should not keep any
thing secret, no, not their own shame and abominations. This wench went and
made her confession to Nathaniel Sichard, a Jesuit, and gave him an exact
account, even to the least circumstances, of all the actions that had passed
between the four walls of that Chamber; nay, out of an excess of stupidity or
malice, gave him liberty (as he alleged, for that I appeal to himself) to
make what advantage he thought fit of it. These scrupulous Hypocrites, whose
brazen consciences will not stretch to the least discovery of those designs,
which are communicated to them in Confessions, tending to the murdering of
Kings, make no difficulty to betray the secret of the same confession, to ruin
their Brethren, especially if they be of a more eminent quality and greater
abilities, as this man was. Pitard, who was not very backward as to amorous
inclinations, when, during the time of his residence at Rochoir he got a
Gentlewoman to come every night to his Chamber to dance, had, out of prudence,
forborne to take any notice of the misdemeanour, which this unadvised
Confessor had revealed to him: but the wench, missng her enjoyments with
Petiot (who had been sent to accompany the Bishop of Xainstes in his visit)
began to talk very loud, and had a second time declared in Confession, to Peter
Thomas, that she had lived eight days within the Professed House with that
Preacher, and gave out, that she would acquaint the Bishop of Bazas with the
business, if they gave her not the sum of money which he had promised her
when he tempted her to naughtiness.

This second Confessor kept the secret of auricular confession no better then
the former, for he came to Francis Labrousse and my self, who were then his
Colleagues in the Cardinal-Mission, to ask our advice how he should be have
himself in a business that was likely to derogate so much from the reputation
of the Society. Our advice was, that it were requisite the wench related by way
of ordinary discourse, what she had said before under the secret of Confession,
otherwise it were to commit one evil by discovering another. The wench, upon
his persuasion, did it, and declared the business to me with so mnch
conviction and ingenuity, that I could not make the least doubt but that she
had been in that Chamber. She gave an exact account, through what Galleries
she had passed, told how many stories there were to go up into it, what kind of
closet there was within it, how the bed stood, what stuff and what color the
furniture was of, what chaires and stools were there, what pictures, nay, what
the length of the sheets, what she did eat, what drink, what Fathers came to
visit her beloved, where she hid her self while they stayed in her shepheard's
habit, what slights and shifts the crafty Jesuit was forced to make use of to
carry them elsewhere, etc. In a word, of all those that have been acquainted
with this story, I have had the most exact relation of it, and though I was at
liberty to reveal it to the Superiors, yet did I smother it, not without much
trouble in conscience, to see so many impious wretches betray a double secret,
viz. that of nature, and that of Confession, merely to seem Hypocritically
zealous, and observant of an Institution, prejudicial to public Fidelity.
What I did then, out of prudence, as being a Jesuit, I now, being none, think
it no less to declare. This wench was a servant in Carnan-street, in
Bourdeaux, borne in Reole in Bazadois; she was sister to a poor woman that had
a blind man to her husband, and lives near the Church of St. Michael at Reole,
and when we were upon the Mission, at the same time that she threatened Peter
Thomas so much to divulge these villainies, she was in service with the Regent
of that place.

From this short relation the world may easily judge, whether that house
dedicated to Saint Francis Xaverius, which these Hypocrites of the Society by
an Antonomatick expression call, The holy House, does not rather deserve the
name of the most eminent Brothell-House in the City. No doubt but it will be
thought such by those that shall call to mind what I have said before of
Rousseau, who was the superior of it, of Olive, who had some relation thereto,
when he played those noble prankes at Port-Saint*Mary, and of Peter Guales, who
was one of the most famous Confessors there. May it be the pleasure of God, out
of his great mercy to open the eyes and apprehensions of the Magistrates of
Bourdeaux, who, by the multitude of their Charities, entertain so many
Religious Satyrs in the heart of their City, to take notice of these things.

Had I not confined my self to give an account only of those things that
happened in Guienne, I might relate the story of that Rector of Languedoc, who
took in a poor blind woman that was begging an alms at the gate, kept her
secretly in his Chamber for three months together, till at last, being cloyed
with her, he put her into an Hospital, with great promises to come and visit
her, and to do great things for her. The wench, discontented at this,
discovered the villainy, and to prove it to one of the Congregation where she
then was, she said to him, You came to give him a visit such a day, and spoke
to him of such and such a thing; I was then in his closet. But I shall observe
the limits I have prescribed to my self.

CHAP. IX.
A fifth Enditement, of the lascivious Villainies committed by the Jesuits in
their Itinerancies, and Country-Houses.
GReat fires have many times their beginning from the miscarriage of a single
spark. A spark begets a flame, a flame devoures all it comes at, so that a
populous City, such as was sometime that of Lions, is turned to ashes in a
night. Carnal Love has in it much of the nature and qualities of fire, i^ ever
gains where it takes, and grows greater still as you supply it with matter.
That of the Jesuit Petiot, which from small beginnings grew up to that hight of
insolence we have mentioned, set his heart so prodigiously on fire, that he
came not any where, but he more or less scattered the sparkles thereof. Before
we come to speak of his uncleanness in his journeyes, it will not be amiss
to find some thing for the Reader to employ his consideration about by the way.

There are two sleights which many Jesuits do now make use of, and have done
formerly, in order to the enjoyment of their Loves. One is, to get themselves
invited by their Confidents into the Country, that so they might enjoy them
with greater privacy, or that they might thence send for those women whose
company they were desirous of. The second is, to make their advantages of their
journeys, that is, so order things beforehand by their plots and secret
correspondencies, that some blind Inn by the way, some tenants cot, nay, it
may be some ditch may be the place for them to satiate their brutall
inclinations. The examples which they have furnished the world with of this
nature are so numerous, that, of four that go abroad to take their recreation,
there hardly ever returns two, who have not committed some uncleanness or
other The liberty of walking, the conveniences of being at a distance from
their companion (if they have any) the opportunities of garden-walkes, groves,
Chambers, lodgings, the several places, into which they are purposely disposed
in the night time, the long and passionate conferences, after the satisfaction
of delicate wine, and provoking dishes, are so many favorable assistances to
heighten their desires, and accomplish the expectation of those that love them.
I would not have any man to infer hence, that my meaning is, that all those
who invite them, do it out of a design to bring them into the occasions of
sinning; no, I know there are many persons of honor and quality, who when they
invite them, have no other end in it then that of obliging them, and giving
them an honorable entertainment and diversion. But I say, that those Jesuits
who lay plots to get themselves invited, and the women that invite them, are
not always guilty of that purity of intention. Guales, Penot, Cadiot, Biroat,
Henry du Chesne, Alemay, Delvaux, Dusresne, Reignier, and other Jesuits, whom I
name not, have made their addresses to servant*mayds, have had designs upon
the Mistresses, have had dealings with the young gentlewomen where they came,
nay, have made use of their Agnus Dei's and their beads, as baits, to draw in
the innocent and the simple.

I know some that have procured invitations into the Country, to a place where
there were Nunns, in order to the recovery of their health, and, under pretense
of devotion and spiritual communication, had inter-crurall dealings with them;
and those I could also name, if the respect, wh ch I owe their Friends did not
prevail with me to forbear. And if it be further considered, that many of
them continue in those houses of recreation, six weeeks and two months
together, he must certainly be very hard of persuasion, who will not infer,
that such a long time cannot but produce abundance of dallyance and Love
tricks, since it is well known they are a sort of people, very delicate in
point of diet, tenderly brought up, and much in the respects of all manner of
persons.

Nor do they make less advantages of their journying up and down to pro^ote
their Loves. The greatest part of their Procurators, who, by reason of their
occasions are many times forced to ride on ^orseback, have, in the Innes, as
they pass, their wenches laid, ready to entertain them in their several
stages. The Colledge-money will not stick too close to their hands, now is it
squandered among their drabs, who are feasted upon the charge of the Community.
The Rectors, who* out of a consideration of decorum, would think themselves
obliged to take a companion along with them, if they went a foot, purposely to
avoid that encumbrance, will needs ride, though the journey were not a quarter
of a mile out of the City, purposely to visit their female acquaintances up and
down with greater freedom. The orders and provisions made in such exigencies
by the Provincialls to be observed in their visits, that is, the obligations of
taking companions with them, whether they were invited or traveled abroad,
sufficiently discover the infirmitie^ of times past, and the necessities of the
present. Certain Pastors of Bardenac found, not long since, one of their
Coadjutors with a beggarly drabbe, digging in a ditch; and at Tulle, was
Brother Coustaud, sound by the inhabitants, busy with the Bakers wise of the
College, in the vineyards. The famous Petiot from whom we have all this while
digressed, shall make this chapter good measure, that so, of thirty whom I
could name, his single example may serve the turn.

An amorous Monk is like a stone-horse got loose, when he is once out of the
walls of his Cloister. This Petiot being commanded to go to Pau, to preach
there in the Lent, made his journey thither very famous by the wanton pranks he
played by the way. There is a multiplication of wickedness, when holiness and
devotion are made cloaks to cover it; and when piety is made a stalking-horse
to commit adulteteries. This lascivious Gamester having a desire to enter the
tables of a young less of Xaintonge, one of his Penitents whom his teeth very
much watered it, gave out, that he would not go out of the Country, till he
had done some devotions at our Ladies Church of Verdelais, and out of an
exc^sse of ghostly kin^nesse, proffered the Maid, to receive her confeshon and
to say Mass for her in that place, if s^e would bear him company thither.
Pilgrimages are never so meritorious in the apprehensions of young wenches, as
when a Monk has the mannagement of the Devotion: she accordingly took the
profie^ for an extraordinary favor. O that the poor less had but had the
least mistrust of the lewd design the Villain had upon her! He had prepared a
bawdy Sollicitrix to go along with her, that is to say, had gotten a she wolf
to keep company with a sheep, and they both played their parts so well, that
after they had gone two leagues upon the river of Garronne, they all landed
with a design to lie one night by the way. I am ashamed to discover these
i^pious practices of a Body, wherein I had lived so long; but the obligation
that lies upon me to promote the glory of God justifies my revelation of these
impurities.

This old bawd, who had, while they were in the boat, by her impudent
discourses craftily endeavored to raise lascivious thoughts in the maid, was
resolved to bring her lewd solicitations to some effect, when they were gotten
close into a chamber in the Inn. For having by thousands of sle ghts and
wanton insinuations somewhat enflamed them both, she took occasion to leave
them together, under pretense of taking some order for Supper. But, as the
Jesuits ill fortune would have it, he met with a Susanna that maintained her
chastity very resolutely; for having through fear suff^red thousands of kisses
and caresses, she at last bethought her of God and the dishonor she was ready
to fall into, and so frustrated the Stallion of his expectation, in such
manner, that he was forced to ^atiate his lust by an evacuation with the Bawd.
Upon her therefore he satisfied his brutish passion, even in the presence of
the Maid, with such expressions of Lust on both sides, as might have forced
impudence it self into a blush. The heat being over, he comes a little to his
wits, and would needs lay a strict charge upon the maid, to keep all secret
whatever she had seen. She did so for the space of fifteen days, but at la^t
being much troubled in conscience, that she had given way to some
lasciviousness, she went and discovered the whole business to the Superior
of the professed House. And this was the first pranke he played in that journey.

But one depth calls upon another. Those that once suffer themselves to be
enslaved and trampled on by that tyrannical passion, never leave sinning. Let
us see what becomes of our Confessor, after this excellent and devout
pilgrimage; we find him traveling toward the City of Pau. Being come there to
the House of Madame de Mommas or Mombas, (a family of as great blood and
Nobility as any in Beard) with John Francis Marin, who had overtaken him at
Macaire, the waiting gentlewoman of that Lady raised such flames of Lust in
him, that he watched his opportunity to get any one of them aside, as a
cutpurse would do the critical minute to give a man a cast of his office. He
that has a mind to do a mischief lays hold on all occasions conducing
thereto. The first exploit of impurity which this shameless man did, was, just
upon his coming from Mass, to run up his hand under the smock of one of the
M^ids, that was going up stairs before him, saying to her, Take heed, fairest,
you lift up pour leg too high. The second was more dangerous, considering the
discreet mannagement of the business. For having understood by some questions
he had made to another, that she was to go away from her Mistress; Come, said
he to her, b^ing me pen, ink* and paper, I will recommend yo^ to the service of
a President's Lady in Bourdeaux, that shall be a thousand times more to your
advantage then that which you now are in. The poor innocent wench, who thought
her happiness indisputable, brought him what he called for, and was cajoll'd
by him into another Room, where the cunny catching companion writ a Letter so
full of recommendation, that the wench was over head and ears in joy at it.
Whereupon taking his advantages upon the reading of it, Does not this, said he
to her, argue an extraordinary affection in me toward thee, upon the first
sight? What can thou refuse to do for so cordial a friend, who would give
thee a Letter, not written with ink, but with his own blood to put thee into a
good condition? His action during all this fine discourse was, to kiss her
forehead, her eyes, her mouth, and to embrace her in his arms with so much
fire and violence of passion, till that at last, the wench sensible of the
danger she was in, getting from him as a serpent that were grasped too hard, I
do not intend, Father, said she to him, to purchase recommendations with the
hazard of my salvation. The noise which these strange sallies of incontinency
made in the house, was at first the diversion only of the Servants, but
afterward coming to the Lady her self, she very angrily expostulated the
business with his companion, Francis Marin, asking him, What Harlot-hunter is
this that you have brought to my house, who has already attempted two of my
Mayds. If any man's judgment be so overgrown with blind zeal as to imagine
this story to be no other then a calumny, be it so; but this I am sure of, that
Madame de Momb^s or Mommas and her servants shall acknowledge, that the Jesuits
never could salve, with any credit, this act of brutality.

Those who are returned to their Colleges after the absence of some time in
travel, or otherwise, pass, for three days after their arrival, for
Pilgrims. The ensuing story shall be the consummation of that notorious journey
of Petiot. Of all acts of unchastity, those, in common apprehensions, are
thought the most execrable which do violence to the chastity of children.
Heaven certainly would not have thunderbolts, but to crush the committers of
such impurities, nor the earth abysses but to swallow them up. Our Sardanapalus
went the next day after his coming home, to divert himself into a place not far
from the house, called Lewis's wood, and to make his diversion criminal in all
the ways imaginable, he inveigled to him, by little Agnus dei's, the Overseer's
daughter, a girl of about nine or ten years of age, under pretense of making
her say her prayers, and so brought her into the thickest part of the wood.
Here my heart beats, and my hand trembles with the horror which I cannot but
conceive at the very remembrance of the crime. This ineffably wicked man put
himself into a posture of forcing the little child, and, with his defiled
fingers, dilatabat illi foemineum vas, when her Father hearing her crying and
complaining, came seasonably to her rescue, and delivered her out of the claws
of that unclean bird.

The di^order wherein he ^ound that infamous Jesuit, and the posture of his
daughter, whom he found laid all along, raised such an indignation in that
afflicted Father, that in the heat of his passion he ran immediately to the
College, and accused him.

What answer will these celestial Eunuchs, who would persuade the world that
they imitate the purity of Angels, make to these things? Disclaim the story?
Truth will dazzle their eyes. Will they acknowledge it? It Is somewhat
indigestible. The stars, will th^se sincere men say, fall out of heaven; It Is
true, but then they never get up again into their spheres, and yet this great
one that is now fallen, after it had extinguished its light in the common-shore
of thousands of uncleannefies, is gone to shine again in another horison. Does
any man imagine, that Petiot, in some measure to expiate so many
transgressions, should have been eternally silent, and never appeared in the
pulpit again, he is mistaken. Be it known to him that so thinks, that the said
preacher is as much employed as ev^r he was, and that he has only made an
exchange of provinces, till that Time shall have eaten out or abated the
resentment of the wickedne^se. May it please that glorious holy Spirit who
takes its greatest delights to be among the Lillies, to gird about their
Loins, and to take off the violence of their concupiscence, to the end that
they may not any longer gull the world with deceitful shows of a pretended
chastity.

CHAP. X.
A sixth charge of Obscenities committed by the Jesuits in their conversations
with Nuns, in their Convents.
THose, who in the Church of Rome, speak most advantageously of the Nuns,
would have us believe, that they ought to be in their Monasteries as the Tree
of Life was in the terrestrial Paradise, such as then but to touch or gather
the fruits thereof, there cannot be any thing more piacular. But I am to let
the reader know, that I cannot put a period to this discourse of the
lasciviousnesses of the Jesuits, till I have shown him how these subtle
Serpents glide even upon those trees, and gather the fruits thereof, without
the least fear that any cherubim, what flaming sword soever he may have in his
hand, should oppose their entrance into those Monastical Paradises. Ignatius
Loyola, a man that studied Policy, much more then any thing of Religion,
thought it not fit to limit his Monks to the government of any one Order of
women, that so they might be at a greater liberty to have a certain
superintendency over all.

It Is the general complaints of all Prelates and the Regular Orders at this
day, that these Cajollers, these Students of Sycophancy and insinuation,
corrupt Religious women by maxims repugnant to the sincerity of Devorion. I
have known some Libertines of that Society, who have dogmatically maintained,
even in the parlours of women devoted by a solemn vow to chastity and
undefilednesse of life, that God, in that commandment which he has given us in
the Decalogue, Thou shall not commit Adultery* obliges men no further then to
be discreet and circumspect in their Loves, so to avoid giving others any
occasion of scandal, considering the great inclination to Love which is
naturally grafted in all men. From which doctrine it must needs follow, that
all lascivious actions between male and female, which, by caution and prudence
are kept secret from the knowledge of men, are not imputable as sins in the
sight of God, but only those, which men took notice of. And whereas the Law
was generally pronounced to all, and accordingly equally obliged all, it was to
be conceived that Religious men and Religious women, that is such as had vowed
the observation of chastity, might privately be allowed reciprocal Visits,
provided their communications bred no noise in the world, it being granted that
their conditions cannot be worse then those of other people.

The tenants are transcendently pernicious, and therefore it may easily be
guessed what the consequenses may prove. It is to me no matter of astonishment,
if, when they have once laid this foundation, they should take so much pleasure
in conferences of four or five hours length in the day, at the grates of
Nunneries. It Is out of all question, that all the discourses that pass there
tend not to edification, and that the best part of them are lascivious.

Peter Cluniac, one of their Society, explicated to one of the Religious women
of Saint Aus^ni in Engolesme, the Treatise of the Impediments which make
Marriages invalid, not ommitting in his Lectures to be very plain and copious,
when he came to speak of men that were impotent, and maleficia^i. Father John
Adam, one of the best Preachers among them, interpreted to one Vrseline, a
Nun of the Convent of Saint Macaire, the Treatise of Generation, and spoke as
freely, and with as much opennesse of expression, concerning those parts which
contribute to the procreation of children, as Monsieur du Laurens does in his
Book of Anatomy. James Beaufes instructed a Nun of our Ladies at Pau, in
Physiognomie, and taught her the way to find out, by the observation of the
face, what is most secret about the body. Reignier could find no other
discourses in the two Nunneries of Fontenay, then those of the diseases of the
matrices, and the retention of Women's terms, etc.

It is indeed hardly imaginable what a strange height of dissolution and
libertinisme they have brought these Religious women to, and what a confidence
they have raised them to, every one having his particular acquaintance, whom he
treats by the name of Friend, Minion, Angel, etc. Putting their hands through
the grates, and holding one the other thereby, are ordinary between them; nay,
it has happened to above half a dozen of these impudent Villains and
shameless women, that they mutually discovered to one another what nature
advises to be kept most secret. The Jesuits of Pau betrayed so much lustiness
among the Religious women of our Lady's there, that many of them had gotten
carnal Timpanies in their bellies, insomuch, that they were forced to disperse
those that had been dabling into other places, where of some came to Bourdeaux.
The Bishop of Limoges surprised several Love letters, written by some of their
young Philosophers to the Monasteries of Religious women, and sent them back to
their Rector, with a prohibition that they should not visit those Ladies. Of
two Jesuits, that by permission went into the Convent of Perigueux, one was
employed in exhorting one of the Nuns that lay at the point of death, and the
other was gotten alone into a chamber with a very beautiful Nun, between him
and whom there had past, of a long time before, very great familiarities.

We are entertained in histories with the formidable hos^il^ties that passed
between the Trojans and the Greeks for a single Helene; and Fables tell us of
Sieges of ten years, with the invention of a Horse that carried an Army within
his bowels. But the Jesuiticall war among themselves, about Religious women,
will be more true and more famous, if there rise but a Virgil (as I hope there
will) to put it into excellent verse. It will be no easy work to express the
infinite discontents whereby the Society is generally pestered, the occasions
and motives of the civil war they are engaged in, to procure the removal of
one another out of the Colleges, and the besotted inclinations which these
perverse Hypocrites have for their penitents, and the Nuns. Jealousy does
sometimes spread its root, so deep in their minds, that they invent execrable
crimes to dispossess their Rivals. I can testify my self that Pinot and
Labourier were so far exasperated against the Philosopher of Rochell, that
they had brought him to utter disparagement, if that person had not vigoriously
vindicated himself, all the quarrel, they had against him, being, that the
women were more taken with him, and consequently, that he drew the greatest
part of their custom to his Sh^iving-Seat.

All those who in the year 1646. were in the College of Poictiers are not
ignorant of the differences between John Adam and James Biroat, two persons
that may be numbered amongst the most considerable of the Order. They persecuted
one another with so much violence, that by a strange secret of divine
Providenee, they discovered their own horrid abominations; it being proved
against James Biroat, that, instead of ringing the bell according to the orders
of Religious Houses, and asking of the Nun that looks to the Gate for her
whom he would speak with, he came in and knocked gently with a little stone
against a plank, so to summon his Confident, who was in expectation of him, and
then went and talked with her at a low part of the garden wall, over which it
was easy for either of them to come to the other. Father Debatz can discover
more of this story then any man in the world, if he would but give God the
glory.

I shall not in this place make any mention of the persecutions that were
raised against Henry Duchez^e in several places, nor yet of the secret plotts
of Father Maria, nor of the jealousies of late Father Ressez, nor of the
directions of Father Andrew Bajole; it is fit I should reserve some materials,
to amplify the explication I intend to make of their Institution. I take no
delight to say the same thing twice; I promise the world a new kind of
Histories, conditionally that I may be pardoned, if in some places of this I
have expressed my self with too much freedom. I^ was impossible for me to
discover such a strange parcel of uncleanness, but I must do it with a
certain clearness and ingenuity. Did I not out of modesty forbear, I could
have revealed things much more horrid, and confirmed them by pregnant and
undeniable circumstances; but I have had a certain tenderness for the
apprehensions of those who shall read this work.

CHAP. XI.
A Bill of Indictment brought in against the Jesuits for Coining.
THe love of money proves the occasion of no less inconveniences in the
Commonwealth then that which proceeds from Lust. This latter is employed in
designs and assaults upon women, the former makes men insolent to that degree
as to wound Kings in that part of their Prerogative which is most tender. He
does the Jesuits no wrong who says they are covetous; it is but too too true.
Nay, it may be further affirmed that they have not been wanting as to matter of
invention to find money, and that if I had no other argument to prove it, but
the imposture they made use of, some years since in Bourdeaux, to bring in
some, there is no^, I conceive, any man of judgment that will not acknowledge
this truth.

Having received from Rome, a Relic of S. Franci^ Xaverius, they called a
conclave, wherein it was considered how that Bone might be so dispo^ed as to
bring in out of the purses of the de^outer sort of people ^ very vast sum of
money. The truth is, the Inhabitants of Bourdeaux were extremely liberal upon
this occasion, and gave much more then might have served to make a shrine, of
an extraordinary bigness, all t^ be of massy silver. But Rousseau, the Author
of the Pro^ect, who was then Superior, basely eluded their devotion, and
instead of employing what had been given to the uses and ends, whereto the
piety of those devout persons had designed it, caused a shrine of wood to be
made, which he caused to be covered with a thin plate of silver only on that
side which was toward the people. The cheat argued so much unworthiness, and
accordingly begat so much distaste, that the people broke forth into loud
complaints against that avaritious piece of imposture, and made so much noise,
that, to conceal in some measure, the horridness of an affront so
unexpectedly put upon a whole City, the General sent him penance from Rome.

There are thousands of examples of the same nature, to show, that they are not
so much poor in spirit, as rich in spirit. But of a hundred persons who charge
them with avarice, there will not happily be eight, that shall bring them to the
bar for Coining. I conceive my self obliged, with all I have already
discovered, not to suffer the public to be injured any longer, through the
ignorance of this secret, to the end that men may not without astonishment
find, that those who accompany Coyners condemned, to their deserved execution,
to prepare them with the Crucifix in their hands, in order to their reception
into the other world, have left in their houses some that are guilty of the
same crime.

In the year one thousand six hundred forty and one, there was, in the
College of Engoulesme, a Preacher, whose name was Cluniac, and a Regent of the
second class, whose name was Marsan, who having observed that there were
certain deep Cellars, made time out of mind, under the third and fourth
Classes, very proper and convenient for their design, got up in the night time
when their Brethren were in their first sleep, and passing through a window of
the Refectory, came down into the Court. From thence they made a shift to get
into the first class, and thenoe through another window that looked into a
Garden, got in at a pitiful old door into those subterranean places, and
there coined false money, without any noise, or fear of being surprised or
discovered by men. Who of the Inhabitants of Engoulesme could have imagined,
that when the Franciscans and the Capuchins rise up to Mattens at midnight* to
address their Devotions to Almighty God, there should be at the same time, in
those solitary Cellers, in the midst of their town, two Jesuits, employed about
a business which the public is so far concerned in, that it hangs and
quarters those it finds guilty thereof. This crime is not so strange among
them; but they have carried the business so closely, that though they have had
some hanged out of their Order for all manner of Offenses, they have not yet
had any Martyrs for coining; but if public Justice sleep not too long ere it
do them right, they may soon enough have occasion to make some addition to
their Martyrologies.

It is not likely but that in an accusation of this importance, it will be
questioned by some how so enormous a crime could be discovered. Thus; certain
Regents having taken notice, that the two Jesuits beforementioned employed a
certain great Lad that was a Scholar in the College, to prepate, in his own
lodging, certain materials, which they caused him to boil till such time as
they were consumed to the one half, they immediately thence conceived a
suspicion, that they studied Alchymy, and having since that seen in the hands
of Marsan a little ingot of silver, and pieces made exactly round, but not
stamped, they were confident they intended them no other impression then what
the King put upon those of the same preparation. To this may be added that
James Bocherel, one of the Coadjutors of the Society h^d observed, that Clumac
had spent a whole day at the Crown-Abby in taking the figures of several
pieces of silver, in Sand, and since that time, when they were both seized,
there were found about them many new pieces, like those that are but just
brought from the mint.

I suppose the Reader is by this time satisfied that I have not only insisted
upon conjectures, such as may be thought sufficient to bring these criminalls
to the rack, but that I have produced certain and convictive prooffs, such as
might bring Barons and Marquesses to a great hazard of their necks, if they
were brought to trial for such a crime. The Scholar whose industry and
simplicity they wrought upon to prepare the materials, was a young man named
Ville-neufue, borne in Rochefocaud, and was a student in the second class in
the year aforesaid 1641. He who was the principal instrument to bring the
business to light, and put in an information against them to the Provincial*
Pitard, was one Michael Brunet, then Regent of the fifth Class in the College
of Engoulesme, and now a Counselor of the King, in the Presidial Court at
Rochell, otherwise called Monsieur de Ronsay, who not able to endure there
should be a crime of that nature among persons who make so great a profession
of virtue, thought himself obliged in conscience to reveal it. He is a person
of too much honor not to bear witness to the truth, it being supposed that
he be jur^dically interrogated, and as in the sight of God. Monsieur Guithen,
who was then Regent of the third class* brought me among diverse others to see
the charcole and the linen clothes which these Coyners had made provision of,
and disposed under the second class, having to that pu^pose taken up one of
the plankes. Stephen du N^yer then Rector, and Bertrand Valade, dug up the
instruments, such as, hammers, bellows, and other uten^^ils, which they had
buried under ground, the more to conceal the crime, which yet God in his
justice has sound out a means to bring to light, to the confusion of a Body,
which imposes penances upon its members for speaking at night after Letanies,
and yet fosters in its bosom Coyners, and casters of counterfeit money.

In a word, though all things seem to speak and cry out against these
ungracious villains, and that the crimes, wherewith they are charged, be of
the highest nature, yet are they not only suf^ered to live in France, but to
raise up their heads above all others even in those great Cities, which they
defile with their abominable attempts. Whence we may well infer, that there
must needs be some other Tribunal, some other world, some kind of life after
this, wherein the crimes committed here may receive their punishment, and the
virtues that are now slighted, their recompense; otherwise it is to be
conceived that it is the fate of virtue to be always in chains, and the
Prerogative of Vice to be ever upon the Throne. May it please that God, who
has the hearts of Kings in his hands to illuminate the understanding of our
great Monarch, that when he is arrived to Majority he may cleanse the Kingdom
of the Lillyes of so many filthinesses and abominations, if our incomparable
Queen do not before ease her beloved Son of that trouble.

CHAP. XII.
Discovering the Ingratitude and exasperation of the Jesuits, against those
that had highly obliged them.
THat famous man, who, describing the ungrateful and the vindicative, said of
the former, that the good turn made no greater in^pression on their
apprehensions then the lightest feather does on the harde^t substance, and that
indignation was a massy weight of lead in the minds of the latter, has in two
words given a most pertinent character of the manners and dispositions of the
Jesuits. Revenge is a serpent that has dispersed its venom through this
Scciety to such an uncurable degree, that when they have received any
discourtesy, they would gladly eat the flesh, suck the marrow and drink the
blood of their Enemies, if it lay in their power. The excess of their choler
does sometimes force them into such furious transportations, that they would go
into Churchyards, were they not deterred by shame, to dig out of the ground
the c^rkases of those, who had any way disobliged them in their life time, for
so poor a satisfaction as that of exercising their cruelty on rotten and
corrupted bodies. Do but consider what mercy they have had on the ashes of the
Surin's and Pasquier's that had some time incensed them, and whether they have
not written books to blast their memories after their death, out of a
reflection on the fear they were in of their writings while they lived. Read
but the book called Recherches des Recherches, or the Inquisition of
Inquisitions, written by Garassus, and you will find that it could proceed from
no other dictation then that of Brutality, to write to a person departed this
world, that he was assured of his damnation. The calumnies invented by him to
defame that great man, are so many demonstrations of the implacability of their
^ury; insomuch, that they seem to have an execration for all those excellent
things which made their adversary so famous, and their malice is equally
directed against his children and his Friends.

Should a man but see them crowching at the feet of Bishops, nay, so far as to
take often their night-caps, to kiss their hands, he might happily thence imagine,
that, in point of respects, they so much exceed all other Ecclesiastics, as
their knees are bent lower, and their reverences speak more external humility.
But when he comes, on the other side, to consider the oppositions they make to
their Regulations, the secret persecutions they perpetually raise against them,
the pains they take, and the insinuations and sycophancy they make use of, to
bring them into an odium in the spirits of Kings; he will easily find, that
they have no other design, then to bring them into the greatest contempt
imaginable. Was it not the Jesuits that egged on the Regular Orders to unite in
a plot, to violate the privileges of the Clergy, and to dilate the power and
heighten the authority of the Pope, to their prejudice. Was not F. Sabbatheri
Procurator of the Assembly held at La Mercy in Bourdeaux, against the
Archbishop? When some Bishop or other makes choice of them to preach in his
Cathedral, admits a Rector or some professed man of the Society into his
congregation, or happily unites some fat benefice to their house; that Bishop
shall be a person of some worth in their apprehensions, and it is not
impossible they may in ordinary discourse let fall something in commendation of
him. But has the same person, with ever so much right, preferred before them
some able Capuchin, or some learned Recollect? There Is an immediate
degeneration of all his excellent parts into absolute ^gnorance. Has he denied
his consent for the uniting of some priory to the revenues of the College; The
same person how considerable soever he may be in himself, is not in their
esteem any thing proportionably to what he was before, and they make no more
account of him in their domestic discourses, and visits, then if he were but
an imaginary piece of prel^cy, that signifies nothing in the Church. I shall
not here make it my business to name those Prelates whose lives and manners
they wreak their malice upon. Crimes, though falsely imputed, may very much
prejudice those whose lives are as it were, the Looking-Glasses of the ordinary
rate of men But should I undertake such a Catalogue, I should bring into that
number, above two Cardinals, above five Archbishops, and above twenty
Bishops, whose reputation, though spotless as the Sun, they have seriously
endeavored to eclipse. I need say no more, then that the Clergy of France is
obliged to demand an honorable reparation and acknowledgement for the
indignities committed by these Enem^es of the Hierarchy, against the most
illustrious, the Lord primate of Aquitaine, the late Archbishop of Bourdeaux;
as also against Lytolft Maroni, Bishop of Bazas, who, having through his whole
life behaved himself as a learned and zealous Prelate, so far as to have spent
some part thereof in the hardship and inconveniences of a painful Mission
among the pastors of his Episcopal charge, to the edification of his whole
Diocese, is nevertheless, by them, accused as a Desertor of the true faith,
and charged with being a cruel enemy to the Pope, and all upon no other
ground, then that he had received order to get Aurelius printed, a book it
seems that contains something against them. The Bishop of Rochell, heretofore
of the same quality at Xainctes* they cannot affect, because he is too much a
Bishop, and too good a Frenchman for their designs. Monsieur de Bethune,
Archbishop of Bourdeaux, is not so well served by these crafty Sycophants, as
he imagines himself, nay, he is not unacquainted with those that have wounded
his reputation with their venomous discourses. I say nothing of the Bishop of
Poictiers, whose life is a perpetual Sermon, and whose learning is generally
known; nor yet of the Bishop of St Papoul, of whose great worth and abilities
they have a great jealousy? They employ the utmost of their malice to revile
and disparage those that any way injure them, and make all the interest, and
lay all the plotts they can, to crush them underhand.

The case is the same with Universities. Let them be never so famous, or
considerable, they shall not be free from their attempts. A man needs no more
then to be a Doctor and to wear the hood, to raise against him the
persecutions of those, who, to the prejudice of Learning and learned men
impudently pretend to the Empire of all Literature. Who of that quality, of the
Inhabitants of Guienne, nay, indeed of France has not heard of the Affronts
they did the magnificent Rector of Poictiers, during the Rectorship of Gilbert
Rousseau? Did they not cause him to be hissed at by the petties of their
Classes? O disgrace that speaks the excess of insolence! The Muses will never
forget that black-pach of Jesuiticall malice. Do but call to mind the
complaints of Sorbonne, the scandalous pamphlets that have been written, the
palpable cheats and foul play they make use of, to bring into a certain
disesteem, the excellent Books of Monsieur Arnauld, and you will soon find
what badgers teeth they have, when they come to bite. Nay, when they are once
exasperated, they have not the least respect or tenderness for Governors and
Intendents of Provinces. I know, that, to be revenged of the Count de Oignon,
Governor of Rochell, who had denied them something, which he could not justly
grant them, they did him at Court very considerable disservices.

Ungrateful men ought not only to be stripped of those things which they have
received from the liberality of others; but should be reduced to a condition
below Beasts, who have all, in some measure, a resentment for a good turn done
them. Monsieur de Ville Montei has been at the charge of building them a very
sumptuous Church, furnished them with means to build magnificent Lodgings
suitable thereto, procured them an addition to their Revenue, of two thousand
Francs per an. in Rochell, made great presents to the College of Poictiers,
maintained them against the university, always countenanced them by his
authority and Interest; and yet, (I speak it in the presence of God) he does
not escape their bloody revilings and calumnies. When the Provinces, whereof he
now has the superintendency, petitioned the King that he might be restored to
his former Employments, I have known some Jesuits, that expressed a more then
ordinary dissatisfaction thereat, and countenanced the discourses of those that
were adversaries to that great person, and that with so much indiscretion and
impertinence, that I went to Peter Regnier, Rector of Fontenay, to give him
notice thereof, threatening him with all, that if he would not stay the flux in
the tongue, which two Fathers, above all the rest, were extremely troubled
with, I would give the General an account of the business. For certainly it
was a thing not to be endured, that that Gentleman, should be spoken of every
where with much honor, and that only those, whose subsistence was in a great
part the effect of his good offices and liberality toward them, should be the
most violent in speaking against his reestablishment.

It Is generally known all over France what extraordinary obligations were put
upon the Jesuits by the late Duke of Espernon, as having been one whose
solicitations contributed more to their reestablishment in France, after they
had been deservedly banished thence for their crimes by the most honorable
parliament of Paris, then any other man's whatsoever. And yet all the Province
of Guienne, whereof that Heroes of our age was Governor, has, with much
indignation, observed, that those ungrateful wretches, thought it no prudence,
with the other Monks, not to engage themselves in the great difference that
afterward happened between him and the Archbishop, but would needs declare
themselves for the latter, embarking the Society in his interests, preached up
the Interdiction, were witnesses in the Suite, and (which is a thing execrable
and wo^thy death) were the Authors of that mischievous Libell which treats his
highness the Duke of Espernon as a Tyrant and persecutor of the Church, with
such strange sallies of infamy, that his Eminence the Cardinal dela Valette,
thinking the insolence of the piece insupportable, made diligent enquiry after
the Author, but could never discover him. But God who has appointed certain
times, wherein crimes should be revealed, has so ordered things as that this
shall not any longer be hid. I conceive my self obliged to make a public
discovery thereof, and it may be Monsieur de Candale will not be displeased, to
know, who have been the implacable enemies of his great Father. The Author of
the Book is Leonard Alemay, a Jesuit, an eloquent man, who this last year
taught eloquence with me in Bourdeaux. The Superiors had laid their commands
upon him to write it, and accordingly Peter Guales his Rector, and the
Superior of the professed house, were the men that furnished him with
arguments and memori^lls, that so the illustrious house of La Valette may be
satisfied, that it was not some private Jesuits that put that af^ront upon the
late Duke of Espernon, but the superiors, who, in law, do always represent
their whole Society. To justify what I now affirm, there are many witnesses,
and among others, Laurence Fontenay, and Peter Chabanal Jesuits, who could
never digest that presumption. Besides, not to mention that the said Duke
having bestowed on them the Abbey of La Tenaille in Xaintonge, they have had
another difference with him since, for that he had built his fair house of
Plassac upon some part of the lands belonging to the said Abbey, and forced him
to pay therefore, seventeen thous^nd Livers. Thus is it remarkable, that God
has sooner or later a punishment to be inflicted on those, who further and
countenance the O^der of the Jesuits, a generation of Vipers so destructive to
the universe.

CHAP. XIII.
Reflections upon the twelve pre^edent Discourses.
REFLECTION I.
IF I had taken a general survey of all the Colleges, all the Houses, all the
places designed for the entertainment of their Novices, and all the Residences
which the Jesuits are possessed of, all over the universe, and made enquiries
into the crimes I charge them with, and convict them of, in the precedent
discourses, the mischief were not inconsiderable, nor the confusion light to a
Body, which, out of a pure regard of its outward profession of Sanctimony, if
it could not avoid all disorders, should not certainly have degenerated so far
as to wallow in so great a number of crimes, and those so horrid. But that
which I would have the Reader particularly observe, is, that it was not my
design to give an account of all the Provinces in the world, no, that were too
great a labor; my Inquisition reaches not all those of France, for I have not
been in them all, but is confined only to the Province of Guienne, which is the
least of all, nor do I search all the Colleges thereof, but limit my self to
four or five of those wherein I have lived. This considered, no doubt but the
inference will be; That the corruption of Manners must needs be grown to a
great height in that Society, when that, upon the examination of four or five
of their Residences, I find in them, some guilty of Forgeries, others of
Murders, others of Sodomies, others of Coining, others of Sacrilege, etc. And
these not guilty of the said crimes once or twice committed, but twenty, fifty,
a hundred times. Let the world then judge of the whole piece by this pattern,
and measuring the other provinces proportionably to this, conclude how
prevalent the spirit of mischief and Villainy must needs be in that Society,
and consequently, that it is not without just ground that the world thinks it
too too burdensome to be any longer endured.

REFLECTION II.
It Is a monastical Maxim, that the offenses, which, being committed by a
secular or worldly person, were venial, become grand sacriledges, and mortal
sins in a high Nature, when they are committed by a Monk or Friar. That a man
may affirm an Order to be guilty of a degeneration, there is no necessity he
should convict the Cenobites of being, Murderers, Sodomites, Traitors to their
King; no he need say no more then that they decline from the profession of that
regular severity which made their predecessors be looked on as Saints, and that
they are come to that degree of dissolution, as not to observe in a manner any
of their rules. Be it therefore taken into consideration, that I do not here
prosecute the Jesuits for trivial offenses, such as they might casually commit
in the observation of their Institution. Of which nature are, grumbling and
dissatisfaction in point of obedience, their shunning the inconveniences of
that Poverty, which they solemnly vow to embrace, that they live more
sumptuously, and feed more delicately then the most luxurious Cittizens' that
they are perpetually quarrelling among themselves, and impose crimes one upon
another, that their bell does indeed ring at four in the morning, to make the
world believe, that they are at prayers upon their knees, when in the mean time
they are stretching themselves in their beds, none rising unless it were two or
three of the most zealous in every college, etc. But it is to be observed that
I charge them with crimes no less then those of Antidates, Murder of infants,
Treason, the violation of Religious women, Coining; such as are sufficient to
prove, not only an irregularity, and deformation or degeneration of the order,
but such an absolute corruption, as is not found in the greatest Republics,
but only among those Cains and Cast-aways that are equally abominable in the
sight of God and men. Imagine then from this reflection, what an order this is,
which yet fills the world with shameless brags, that they outvy the Recollects
in point of austerity, by practicing the exercises of Ignatius.

REFLECTION III.
For a more particular understanding of the accusations I produce to the
public, I desire the Reader to make yet this further reflection, that I have
not made an inquisition into all the horrid crimes committed by the Jesuits for
these seventy or eighty years past, since which time the Locusts have been
scattered up and down the Province of Guienne. But I have confined my self to a
search only of ten or twelve years, for the most part of their crimes, and to
fifteen or sixteen at the most, for some, as for instance, that of the
Antidate. If then they are come to that height of wickedness in so few years,
what can be expected from that Society for the future, when they are already
come to these extremities. And if a man consider those who within these eight
or nine years, upon very just grounds, have quitted it, he will find, that
they are the greatest wits and the most eminent of the Order.

REFLECTION IV.
When some ordinary servant Maid yields to the violence and importunity of
temptation, and betraies her honor, the scandal is not great in a City, two
or three of her nearest relations are a little troubled at it, and four or five
of her neighbors make a stir, that any such thing should happen. But when it
falls out that some gentlewoman of quality parts with that which is accounted
most precious among women* it raises discourse through a whole Country, and
the world is in a manner scandalized at it. The Reflection that naturally
arises hence, is, that the persons whom I produce by name and surname, as
Authors of the crimes before mentioned, are the most eminent of the Order, such
as Provincials, Rectors, Procurators of Provinces, Preachers, Divines, great
Humanists, as for instance, Malescot, Rousseau, Pitard, Sabbatheri, John Adam,
Petiot, Olive, Biroat, Dusresne, Manian, and such others in abundance, as whose
names and excellent parts are known to all the world. When some of the lesser
stars tread amiss and appear not in their ordinary places, it is not perceived
by any, unless it be by some curious Mathematician; but when the Sun suffers
an Eclipse, the people of the four parts of the universe turn their eyes
toward his globe. I do not here entertain the world with the crimes of those
among them whom they contemptibly call formal Coadjutors, (or if I have
produced any, they are very few in comparison of the others) but I bring upon
the stage the Ringleaders of the Society, guilty of the most enormous
offenses. If the denomination of a compositum ought to be taken from the better
and the nobler part, let all the world judge, whether that Society, instead of
being called the Society of JESUS, should not be more justly called the Society
of MALEFACTORS.

REFLECTION V. and last.
When a man has read and diligently examined what is contained in this little
book, I am confident there will be no necessity of my putting him in mind, that
the Jesuits themselves forced me to this discovery, and that it very much
concerned in point of honor, to endeavor my disparagement as much as might
be, as well by indictment, as by books, in case they rationally presumed, that
I should not always be silent, and that if I concealed their crimes for some
time after my coming from among them, so to avoid all meddling with them, and to
shun the first sallies of their exasperation, yet at last I should, upon the
persuasion of the Reverend Ministers of our Church, discover them. But God
knows how far they have been mistaken in their conjecture, and how that they
have put the sword into my hand to defend my self, and wherewith I have wounded
them in their heart, and in the apple of their eye, that is, in their
reputation. I conclude, making a folemne protestation of two things; the first,
that I have not said any thing but the naked truth* The second, that, had they
not betrayed such an implacable violence against me, I should have resolved to
be silent, though it had been out of no other consideration, then that of
avoiding that shame among my Brethren, which I must needs conceive at my having
lived so long in an Order guilty of such horrid crimes.

THE END.
Psalm. XVII.
PReserve me, Lord, from hurtful things,
As the apple of thine eye:
And under covert of thy wings
Defend me secretly.
From wicked men that tyrannize
Let thy hand help me out;
And from my deadly enemies,
That compass me about.
In their own fat they are enclosed,
And bear themselves so high,
That with their mouth they are disposed
To speak presumptuously.
They have encompassed us round
In our own footsteps now:
And down unto the very ground
They beuo their lowering brow.
Like th'eager Lion that does long
To take his prey in chase:
And as it were a Lion young,
That lurks in secret place.
Arise and disappoint him then,
And cast him down, O Lord
Defend my Soul from wicked men,
Which are thy cutting sword.
From worldly men thy help I crave,
From men which are thy hand:
Which in this life their portion have
And do not see beyond.
THE CALUMNIES OF JAMES BEAVFES REFUTED.

By the same Author.

PSALM LIVE.

To the Reverend THE PASTORS AND ANCIENTS Of the FRENCH Reformed Churches,
gathered together in the united Provinces of the Low Countries.
REVEREND SIRS,
IT is certainly an obligation of divine Providence, and a favor which all my
services cannot come into the least degree of deserving, that it has been
pleased to permit the Persecutors of our Churches, and the enemies of the Faith
we profess, to set upon, both by indictment, and by printed books, the
Declaration I had made with all the syncerity of my heart. The seed which is
sown must endure the nipping frosts and the injuries of the air before the
grain can come to maturity. Roses are not gathered without some danger of the
prickles they are environed with. Lillies do many times grow among herbs of
evil scent. It shall ever be honorable to me, to suffer upon the account of
virtue, even flames. The Lord of glory was nailed to the cross between two
thieves. The servant is not greater then his Master, nor the Ambassador more
considerable then he that sent him; as it was necessary that Jesus Christ
should suffer, and so enter into his Kingdom, so is it but just, that through
many tribulations I also should enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. These words
of the great Apostle I hear perpetually ringing in my ears, if we suffer with
him we shall also reign with him; and when all is rightly summed up to gether,
it will be found, that the sufferings of the present time amount to nothing in
comparison of the glory that is to be revealed in us.

I had before some resentments of the powerfulness of celestial Grace in my
happy conversion; but now, I am to acknowledge the finger of God, and the
operation of his divine spirit in my persecutions. That which makes my soul as
it were overflow with serenity and satissaction, and fixes it in a firm and
immovable confidence, is, that the eternal God, who has begun his work in
^e, Will also bring it to perfection, to his greater glory, and that you,
Reverend Sirs, who are the salt of the earth, and the light of the world, will
afford me so much the greater demonstrations of your affection and tenderness,
the more you find me hated by the enemies of Jesus Christ and his Truth.

It is the main design of the Jesuits to make the world believe that the
disgraces they brand me with are marks of ignominy; but if you will but be
pleased to consider their intentions, examine the informations they have put in
against me and the causes thereof, and require thereupon the judgment of our
Pastors and Brethren of Rochel, who have been eye-and ear-Witnesses of all the
proceedings that have passed, you will think my disparagement glorious, and the
pretenses of my adversaries malicious and criminal. One of the most religious,
and eloquent Ministers of the holy Gospel there has already written in my
vindication, with no less truth then earnestness; and his answer has been
highly approved, by the defeat of my Enemies. I should have pardoned Beaufe's
the contumelies he had belched forth against my reputation, by an obstinate
resolution I bad taken to be silent: but those, who look on the glory of God as
what is most considerable in my conversion, do conceive me obliged to speak.

I therefore vindicate my self against a pretended Religious man, who seems to
have made it his main business to do violence to the fundamental maxims of
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and tramples on the laws of charity, whereof the
Scriptures are full. The Canons of the Church of Rome declare a Clerk
irregular, for having contributed any thing to the execution of a malefactor.
And yet Beaufes, giving himself out to be a Priest and Clerk of the Society of
Jesus, makes himself a Judge of life and death upon me in his book, pronounces
and signs the sentence of death against me, and racks his wit to find out new
torments, to make my departure hence the more cruel and insupportable.

His accusation is, that I have celebrated their Mass, after I had engaged my
self in the design of my Conversion, and did not forbear preaching in their
pulpits, even while I was in treaty with the Reverend the Ministers of the
reformation, to find out some safe course to make a public profession of the
Faith, which I had already embraced in my hear. This enrages and exasperates
the man so far, that he turns a prodigal, and spends on me, without the
least regret, all the injurious figures, and all the scandalous terms which
his imagination can furnish him with. In every page he finds out some new
claws to fasten on me withal, I am, in his judgment, a Judas among the
Apostles, and a Devil in the house of God. The words execrable, detestable,
abominable, are too gentle to make any deep wounds; nay, he employes the malice
of his wit, and makes all his Rhetoric sweat again, to find out such as are
more stinging and more venomous. Not thinking it enough to thrust in one or two
into every period, be musters up thirteen or fourteen altogether, as when he
says, page 25. This man was vain, proud, envious, refractory, hypocritical,
sacrilegious, perfidious, desperate, a prevaricator, an impostor, carnal,
treacherous, worldly-minded, etc. In a word, he does as much as lies in his
power to make me the object of an universal persecution, and it shall not be
his fault, if the particular animosity of the Jesuits, pass not through all
the Christian world for the public cause.

I am not to learn, that the Law of Grace, under which we now live, does not
require an eye for an eye, nor a band for a hand, as that did, which God had
given from amongst the thunder and lightning. Nor am I ignorant on the other
side, that the Christian Lenity whereof you make so great prosession, and that
mildness and modesty which distinguishes you to be true Pastors different from
those wolves and hirelings, may happily oblige you to disapprove these
refutations, as such as betray too much gall and Satyr. But I shall entreat
your Reverences to give me leave, without prejudice to the Law of Jesus, to do,
in my own defense, that which nature teaches the very creatures, God fOrbids
not, and reason allows in the prudent. I do not desire the death of Beaufes,
as the reward of the crimes he has committed, though he wishes nothing so much
as mine, and that for no other reason then that I have done a good work; no, I
heartily forgive him, and bless the wounds whereby he endeavors to
assassinate me. But since necessity has forced me to take up arms for my own
just defense, it cannot be expected I should answer so exactly, as that I
should return flowers and complements, for calumnies and invectives. If
therefore, when I oppose my buckler to the stones he casts at me, their
recoyling hurts them in the tenderest places, the mischief caused thereby is to
be attributed to his insolent and inconsiderable attempt, since that God
neither forbids nor hinders the effects proceeding from a rational resistance.

I should have answered him in terms sufficiently civil and obliging, had my
calumniator any way deserved an honorable treatment: but civility exasperates
him, and mildness irritates him; he is much of a nature with the cantharides,
converts into poison the juice of the fairest flowers, and experience has
convinced all the faithful at Rochel, that he grows so much the more insolent
against the truth, by how much the Pastors endure his extravagances with the
greater modesty.

I therefore humbly beseech your Reverences not to take it amiss, if, being to
refute a furious and inconsiderate man, I do not confine my self to a
scrupulous reservednesse; an over-ceremonious observance and respect would
pre^udice the purity of my cause, and might raise difficulties among the
simple, I ought not, nor indeed ca^, without great danger, flatter an enraged
mastiffe, whose teeth, wherever they fasten are venomous. If I discover many
passages of his life, as occasion serves, whereat he may be troubled, I assure
you that the worst I shall do, will be simply not to flatter him. I could never
approve that irrational custom of the Persians to whip their Soveraigne's
robe, when he had offended, without touching his person; no, it is but just
every one should bear with the penal^y inflicted on him for his crimes, and
detractors ought to endure the truth when it is told them.

Were I cited to a higher tribunal then yours, it would certainly be lawful
for me, to do what the holy Spirit allows by the mouth of David, Be angry, but
sin not, and to follow the advice of the Wise man, Answer a fool according to
his folly. But if notwithstanding all I have said, my discourse seem too sharp
to you, be pleased to remember, that I have lived too long among the Jesuits,
and too short a time among you, to be dismantled of those passions, which are
garrisoned and fortify themselves in persons of that Society.

I therefore most humbly make it my suit to you, that you would, without
prejudice, read my Apology, and that with a spirit of love toward a person who
dedicates it to your Reverences with the greatest submission imaginable. And
you will find that I sign an eternal bill of divorce from them, and that,
since I have discovered such truths to the world, I am obliged out of a
consideration of my own safety, ever to look on them as the implacable seekers
of my life. This demonstration of the sincerity of my conversion, and the
obligation there is of my perseverance, shall be a certain earnest-piece of my
real and hearty embracing of our Religion, as also of the respects I owe you,
as being

REVEREND SIRS, Your most humble and Peter Jarrigius.

AN ANSWER TO THE CALUMNIES OF JAMES BEAVFES A JESUIT.
CHAP. I.
Showing the reason of my writing after the excellent Refutation, published on
my behalf by Monsieur Vincent.
IT was ever accounted justifiable, that an innocent person should vindicate
his reputation against calumnies. But if it happen that he says not a word in
order to his own justification, and that God out of his infinite mercy raise up
some Daniel, that undertakes to plead his cause, confound his ^dversaries, and
discover the inconsistency of their testimonies by the manifest contradictions
they fall into, it raises in the people an admiration at the judgments of God,
who never forsakes those that suf^er persecution upon the account of virtue,
and takes a certain pleasure to see injustice and detraction overthrown at the
feet of Innocence. A broad and troublesome sea of three hundred Leagues, which
lies between me and the Inhabitants of Rochell, suffers me not to hear the
coil and hurly-burlies which the Jesuits raise at so great a distance against
me; and if they write any defamatory pamphlet, to humor their exasperation,
and in some measure to alleviate their fury, it is so long ere it comes on our
shores, by reason of the uncertainty of navigation, and the hazards of the Sea,
that three or four months slip away before I can get it into my hands. I was
acquainted with God's raising up of Monsieur Vincent in my defense, before I
heard that Beaufes had put in any charge against me; the preservative came to
me before the poison, and I have seen my adversary laid at my feet, defeated by
him whose very name signifies a Conqueror, before ever I took up any arms my
self.

It is indeed but too easy a matter to insult over a man, that has been
surprised in several falsifications, and delivered up as a Detractor to the
abuses of the people. I know it will prove no great matter of reputation to me,
to pursue a wounded Serpent, that has in a manner spent all its venom, and
hardly has strength enough to hiss. Monsieur Vincent has given James Beaufes
such an absolut rout, that there is no honor in thinking of any further
engagement with him. The most considerable accusation which that devout
adversary had against me, amounted to no more then a certain foaminesse which
that great man had dissolved and burst asunder, or may be compared to a mist in
the morning, which the Sun of truth has dispelled by the lively heat of his
more powerful rays. All those that have seen the refutation, have admired the
prudence of the Author, the sharpness of his Logical abilities, the solidity
of his replies, the modesty of his discourses; and the same persons having
weighed the accusations and outrages of my enemy, have not been a little
astonished, to see, that a Jesuit, whose employment it is to preach the word of
God, should fall into such palpable contradictions, make so many discoveries of
his imprudence, and betray so much passion and extravagance.

And yet, notwithstanding this former Answer, whereby I am more then
sufficiently justified, I conceive it an obligation lying upon me to vindicate
my self, by an Apology, after my fashion, against this injurious Goliath, who
making his advantages of whatever may tend to my disparagement, would no doubt
take occasion, from my silence, to say, that I am such another as himself,
ignorant, and not able to make him any answer. Besides, it is further to be
considered, that Mon^ieur Vincent, in several places of his Refutation, refers
to me the clearing up of many things, which it was impossible he should have
the knowledge of, and which I think it my duty to declare, to the glory of God,
and the confusion of a sect so prejudicial to the universe. That shall then be
the design of this second treatise, which I shall for the greater ease of my
Reader divide into Chapters. And in regard it is but necessary it should be
known against whom I take these pains to vindicate my self, I shall
entertain thee in the two ensuing Chapters with a true character of my
Adversary, that thou mai^t by the claw imagine what a Lion I have to deal
with. If he make it his complaint, that Hercules himself may think it some
disadvantage to engage against two, it argues he does not much consider, that
above twenty thousand Jesuits have declared open hostility against me,
threatening me with fire and sword, and that it is much more easy for him to
make his party good against two, then for me alone to enter the lists against
twenty thousand. All the confidence I have, is, that my honest Countrymen the
French, who shall read this piece, will very much blame the Jesuits, for having
been so furious and implacable in their proceedings against me, when I had done
them no other injury; then that which they fondly imagine they have received by
my leaving of them, and will consequently say so much on my behalf, that I am
not to be found fault with, if my answer be somewhat sharp, and speak the
truth without any disguise. I doubt not, but God, the grand protector of the
Innocent, will confound the designs of my Persecutors, and will inspire my
words with a certain force and persuasion, to their confusion, and his own
greater glory.

CHAP. II.
A character of James Beaufes, as to his abilities in point of Learning.
IF any one be desirous to know what kind of person Rousseau the Provincial of
the Jesuits has made choice of, to bark and make all this noise against me,
so to evaporate the violence of their indignation through the fiery furnace of
his throat, it is one, whose name is James Beaufes, a man, as to his personage,
bulky, fat, and crook-shouldered, one that, for some months past, has, of a
pulpit, which should be the seat of truth, made a ^tage whereon to represent
his own passions, and to find ridiculous entertainment for the people. I shall
not in this place hit him in the teeth with the impurities of his extraction,
though we have the security of the Scriptures for it, that God does many times
punish in the children the iniquities of their Fathers. Nor shall I make it any
reproach to him, that his Brother was hanged for a murder committed by him on
the person of Monsieur Saige, in the City of Tulle. No, I shall only treat him
as a Jesuit, and, in the present chapter, examine him as to his abilities, and,
in the next, make inspection into some part of his life and Manners.

Of all those parts of knowledge which any way recommend a man and gain him
the esteem of an understanding and knowing person, he has so little, that it
is not without reason, that he is no otherwise looked on among the learned,
then as one eminent for his confident ignorance, though his perpetual gagling
raises in those, that know him not, an imagination that he is guilty of some
literature. He is so little versed in Latin and Humane Learning, that, having
taught little children for many years together, he could never get out of the
classes of Grammar, and, being almost choked with the dust of the Colleges of
Again and Perigueux, he was packed away, to finish his course at the noble
College of S. Macaire upon the Garonne, there to teach one of the lowest
Classes, with the assistance of another, whose name is Salabert.

This pretended Refuter of the Ministers is so excellently well skilled in the
Greek Tongue, that I defy him, not to interpret, but to read a page of any
Greek Author, without stumbling thirty times; and for this challenge which I
make to him, it is no hard matter for him to refute it, for there is no more to
be done, but that he refer himself to two knowing men. But I am confident he
dares not put it to the hazard, what bragges so ever he may make of
sufficiency. The Hebrew is a strange and barbarous language to him, for, not to
injure or belly the man, he was never yet acquainted with either the points or
Letters, and it is much to be questioned whether he can turn the Bible the
right way. Having the last year, received from one of our Ministers, a Letter
in Hebrew, he runs harebrained from Ruffec to Engoulesme, a whole night's
journey, to get it interpreted and answered by Monsieur Thomas de Maisonnette,
a knowing person, and well skilled in that Tongue. That excellent person cannot
deny what I say to be true. History and Chronology are those unknown parts of
Learning which were never discoverable to him, and if he says any thing of
them, he does it upon the credit of another, and the security of citations
which he meets with in certain collections of Controversies.

Since he is so unfortunate as to all these it would be thought, that those
shreds of Logic he has made a shift to get together might find him some
employment as to that Science, but the course he was put upon at Bourdeaux,
purely indeed for want of another, discovered the weakness of his dialecticall
faculties. That employment, bestowed on him, not out of any consideration of
his desert, but upon the recommendation of Monsieur Jrat, who had an affection
for him, proved so unfortunate to him, that his Scholars, to show what account
they made of such a master, brought an Ass into the School, got it up into
his seat, and there fastened him in such manner, that the two fore feet hung
over it, as it were to represent Doctor Beaufes, and indeed there wanted only
speech to say Nego, with as much judgment as our Logick-Lecturer could. That
honorable Substitute putting him to a little loss, when he was come in to
read his Lecture, the Scholars hissed him out of the Class, and thereupon,
breaking of that unfortunate course, that stayed till the next year to begin it
again under a more able Master. That Minister, who writing to a friend of his,
told him that this Antagonist was guilty of a little Logic, had not certainly
heard of this glorious accident, which yet was generally known all over
Bourdeaux, notwithstanding the great zeal and earnestness of Pabot, then
Prefect, to smother the business. For had he knomn any thing of it, he would
have given another account of him, and might have said more truly, that, as to
Logic, he was Master of no more then was requisite he should have that
deserved to have his place supplied by an Ass.

His perfections in Divinity I refer to the test of their judgments who hear
his Sermons. Only I shall presume so far as to say, that it is levelled to the
capacities of those that are the most remote from Cities and civil
conversation. For having given, through his notorious rake-heilizing, very
great scandal in the College of Bourdeaux, where I then was, the Provincial
was forced to pack him away thence to Pau in Beard, there to prosecute his
studies, after he had caused him publicly in the Refectory, to receive
discipline, during the whole time, that a Miserere was read. The employments he
is put upon, are proportionable to the account they make of him. All his
business in Ruffec, for four years together, was only to run up and down
the Villages thereabouts; and were it not that he makes it so much his
business to gain a little reputation by endeavoring the refutation of the
Ministers; he would be thought absolutely unworthy to speak in public. Those
of their Society, who know him as well as I do, wonder not to see him kept so
low, insomuch that it was never asked by any one, whence it came that he was
appointed to preach in the Advents and Lents at Sauue-terre a paltry town in
Bazadois, at Vieille Vigne, a village of Brittany, at Ruffec two years
together, while other preachers, that were his Juniors by nine or ten years
preached in the greatest and most considerable Cities. Both Secular Priests
and Regulars are astonished to find him admitted into the pulpit at all,
considering the imprudences and impertinences he falls into in his Sermons.
Some Jesuits were of opinion, that he had some gift in the business of
Controversies, not that they thought him sufficiently skilled as to the
understanding of the Scriptures, or furnished as to matter of ratiocination,
but only because he has a bitter, satyricall faculty, such as easily makes the
audience laugh, by an humor he has of making sport with our maxims. It Is the
general acknowledgement, that he maintains his cause rather like some jugler,
then a Preacher and a Divine. I have had the diversion to see this modest and
regulated Orator with his Jesuiticall cap, one while hanging over one ear,
another, pulled down over his nose, stamping with his feet, shutting his fists,
gnashing and g^inning with his teeth, with his surplice r^l^ed up like a
dishclout under his ^me* If the tears of the Audience sp^ake the praises of
the preacher, as St Hierome says, this man can pretend to very little, for
thousands have seen him laugh very gravely himself, after he had, with
cackling pronunciation of his words, shot out some foolish expression purposely
to excite others to laughter. The town of Fontenay shall confirm what I say,
where our Lecturer preaching the last year, he would needs, in the midst of
his Sermon, ridiculously fall a singing, as it were to personate some poor old
woman, that were singing of a psalm; porters and tradesmen laughed at the
humor of that harmonious crow, while some persons of quality said at the same
time to his Rector, whom I was in company with, These sallyes of simplicity and
impertinence, Sir, are not to be endured. In the some Sermon he made very
di^igent enquiry, and that in very unhandsome terms, by what m^rkes it might
be known that women stood in need of men, and foolishly demanded of the
Audience, whether it were by the eyes, by the hands, by the Legs, or by the
end of the nose. Pardon me if I fo^beare the rest, my writing blushes at his
impudence, but let it be observed by the way, how much his capacity, in order
to preaching ^mounts to, and what degree of prudence he is of to speak in
public.

CHAP. III.
A character of James Beaufes in relation to his life and manners.
God has not bestowed the gift of preaching equally upon all, but it is his
will that al should so lead their liv^^ as that they might give others good
example. Did the Je^^its of Guienne think it their duty to give God the glory,
as to what concerns the manners of James Beaufes, two hundred of that Body
would give it under their hands, that he is one of the most irregular of the
Order. I shall therefore simply say without passion, and out of no other
reflection then that of glorifying truth, that three several times
Informations were put in against him, for his ejection out of the Society. The
first, while he was ye^ a Novice, was, for that he had made several
discoveries of a most debauched inclination, nay, in some intervalls had been
guilty of such sallies of extravagance, as sufficiently betrayed the
unsettlednesse of his brain. Such was that, for instance, when he followed one
of his Brethren into the Garden*walks with a knife in his hand, to kill him, or
at least to do him some mischief, because he had discovered some f^ults of his
to the Master of the Novices, as they are by the rule of that Society, required
to do.

The second charge put in against him, was, when that being in his course of
the M^^aphysicks at Bourdeaux, he fell into far greater dissolutions and more
incredible follies. He remembers, but certainly not without sh^me, his
extravagant carriage toward James l' Esp^aulart, his Rector, which brought him
within two inches of the threshold, in order to his casting out of the house.
This unhappy young man coming one night from Bardenac, a house of Recreation
which they have within a League of Bourdeaux, where he had been merry with his
companions for the space o^ a whole Summers day, would needs in a jea^^ing way
take a sword from one of the Servants, which he hid under his city g^rment, as
the young Students then wore them, and being returned about nine of the clock,
the time appointed for the Jesuits to go to bed, he comes into his Rectors
chamber, who thought of nothing less then that piece of frenzy; The time is
now come, said he, drawing the sword, that yo^ mu^^ with your blood expiate the
afflictions and affront (...) have received by the many penances you have
imposed upon me^ and immediately, through a more prudent act of extravagance,
putting it gently into the sheath again, What, said he, reverend Father, are
you afraid? this swor^ I found in my way. This judicious exploit done by him
after a many mad pranks of the same nature, gave occasion to the Provincial
and the Consultors to conclude, that the only course to be taken, was, to rid
the Province of a mischievous and a frantic person* But his tears and the
intercession of the Rector, who ^xcus'd him upon the debauches of the day, held
their hands for that time.

You reproach, will he say, a man that is now gray hair'd, with the faults he
had committed in his youth. I wish with all my heart, that his modesty had
obl^ged me to conceal, not only those of his youth, but much more those of
his virile age, which being of greater consequence will prove sh^rper thorns in
his breast. It troubles me not a little that I am forced to defile my paper,
and accuse a man, whom I have some time lived with, of the most shameful crime
that is in nature. It is generally known all over the Province, that in the
time of the Provincial Malescot, the General of the Order Mutius Vitelleschi
had written, that they should not forbear any longer with him, but cast him
out, since he was incorrigible, the principal crime he was charged with being,
that he had lasciviously meddled with some little scholars, of exquisite beauty;
nay, that he had one night got out of his own bed, to go to lie with a certain
young Philosopher, a condisciple of mine, named Mar^iall Lamy, one of the
Religious men of the Society of Jesus. This insatiable inclination of his
toward little children, and the proofs which the Superiors had of that
irregular affection, raised in them a violent suspicion of his unchastity,
which grew up to that height, that he was ^onvicted thereof, but that the
Community might be he less scandalized at it, they did all they could to
mother the information, yet not so but that above ^en knew of it, of which
number I was one; as being ^ellow-student with him who was very strictly
exami^ed about the business. And if this be a thing he cannot blush at, I must
needs conclude his face to be ^f brass.

The third cause upon which a charge for ejection was ^ut in against him, was,
a general irregularity and disolution, which was easily perceptible in all his
mona^icall actions, as being one that did in a manner nohing in comparison of
what others did, notwithstand^g the penances which were perpetually showered
down upon him. There was not any thing more frequently ^eard in their
Refectory; morning and evening, then hose words, ordinary in the like cases, I
here on the ehalf of Holy Obedience, discover the offense of James Beauses, for
that he has this day spoken bitter and ^rovoking words to such a one; for that
he was not ^p at seven of the clock; for that he took some little ^holer aside
out of some lascivious design, and spoke ^ith him for too long a time, and the
like, or greater aults, which made him infamous in the Community. Whereupon
issued out the sentence, which troubled ^im much more, And therefore, Holy
Obedience does im^ose upon him by way of penance, that he dine under the Table,
that he discipline himself, that he eat his meat upon the ground, and such like
penances as are in use among a sort of Regular Ecclesiastics, who think it ^
disparagement to be called Monks. I have often ^een him condemned for his
miscarriages, and accordingly with a whip in his hand, stripped naked down ^o
the waste, casting himself on his knees in the middle of the Refectory, and
there ignominiously whipping himself, until such time as the superior gave a
rap upon the table with his knife, as a sign for him to give over. Who of the
Jesuits of Guyenne that shall read these stories, but will immediately call to
mind how that they have sometim^s seen him by way of infamy wearing about his
neck a paper, wherein might be read in capital Letters, the crime he had
committed* I am confident, his memory is still galled with the disgraceful
penance imposed upon him by Malescot, when to punish him for his debauches, he
took him out of his course of Divinity, to make him serve as a scullion in the
Kitchen, for the space of a month. Nor has he forgotten that other infamous
penance inflicted upon him by the same person, which was, to take three turns
about the Refectory, while all the rest were at dinner, with his nightcap on
his head, the sheets of his bed tied about him like a scarf, and the Coverlet
upon his back. Those that have but the least idea of the gravity which the
Jesuits so much pretend to, must needs imagine, that our James was a person
neither very considerable among them, since he was ordinarily treated as a
Rascal, nor very innocent, since he was contin^ally bayted by such ignominious
penances. If in the history of his life, a man could forbear mentioning the
Provincial at Malescot, it would ease him at the heart very much.

But it may be objected by some body, that he has still continued in the
Society. True, he has, but purely out of vanity, as being unwilling it should
be said, he were cast out of it for his crimes. And yet he has not since
discovered any more circumspection, insomuch that the Superiors are forced to
keep him, like a mangie sheep, at a distance from all the rest and call him not
from his lurking hole at Ruffec, o^ of any other design, then to vent his
Satyricall h^mour against ou^ Religion, in the present conjunctur^ of Afsaires.
I intend to give the world a more part^cular character of this man in Latin,
but, in the mea^ time, I conceive thus much enough to discover the
qualifications of this Preacher, who, for some days past has made such a hue
and cry after the Sacrilegious person. It may happily be further urged by some
who see not very much at a distance, that while I give an account of the
proceedings of the Jesuits in order to the cutting off of this putrifi'd
member, I justify the body. I desire him that is troubled with any such
imagination to consider, that the Common wealth of Sa^an has its policy, and
that this maxim of circumspect Stallions, Si non cast, saltem caute, that is
to say, if not chastely, at least cr^f^ily and cautiously, is one of the bases
of the Politics of these Monks. And accordingly he may take it further into
his thoughts, that, since James Beaufes, though found guilty of many late and
ancient impurities, does nevertheless continue in the Society, it is not true
that their Order, like the Sea disburthens it self of what ever stinks and is
corrupted, as they preach and pretend. This discovery which I thought my self
obliged to make, premi^ed* I proceed to my vindication, and pursue my ac^user
as close as I can.

CHAP. IV.
Giving an account of the proceedings of the Jesuits against me.
HE that does but simply cast his eyes on what Beaufes has set forth, cannot
but make an immediate discovery of the malice of my adversaries, and the
palpable blindness into which the insatiable desire of revenge has
precipitated them. The Jesuits, astonished at the change I had made in matter
of Religion, and surprised at the course I had taken to get out from among
them, presently took a resolution, not ^o call me back again in a Christian
way, and according ^o the obligations of the new Adam, but, out of a
Jesuiticall kind of charity, to conspire my destruction. Whether the Gospel,
which they pretend t^ preach, justifies these violent attempts, and bloody
prosecutions, I appeal to the words of it, and the example of Jesus, of whose
Society they affirm themselves to be. Though I am now at the distance of three
hundred Leagues from my dear Country, ye^ am I not ignorant that my Country
men of both the one and the other Religion, are sufficiently satisfied, that
these implacable enemies of mine had no sconer heard of the first news of my
conversion, by the Letters which I had left with a certain friend, but they
breathed nothing but blood and death, and spoke of nothing less then fire and
faggots. I cannot but here entreat the Reader to make a more particular
reflection on this kind of proceedings, as such as should make no small
impression on the spirit of any honest man. When any one of the other Orders,
though with more noise and s^i^re, renounces the Roman Religion, to come over
to us, his Superiors, much more kind, and more morally virtuous then those
that sometimes were mine, imagining, according to their erroneous maxims, that
their dear child is lost, fly to the Altars, implore the assistances of Heaven
by their prayers, run up and down like good shepherds to find out their
sheep, and, if need be, bring it home upon their shoulders. Now let it be
considered whether the Superiors of the Jesuits have taken any such course and
let their cruelty be measured by the mildnes^ and courtesy of the others. The
first act of counsel which pressed among those mischievous Priests a^ Pharisees
against me, was, not that they should of^^ up the least address to God for my
return and ^^pentance, but Rousseau the Provincial, the chief among these
wicked men, pronounced as anoth^ Caiphas, that it was expedient, one man should
^ for the people.

According to which sentence, like so many impl^cable Jews, not taking any
care for the means whereby I might be raised out of the abysie into which they
thought me fallen, they made it their main business to find out inventions, to
dispatch me out of the world.

Taking it theresore as granted, that the design of so great a change cannot
be begun and perfected in a day, and that I must needs have dissembled my
intention for some time, since that I was forced to live after their way (who,
what horrid crime soever they may have committed, or what great mischief soever
they may be hatching, cannot* without some imputation of scandal, be exempted
from saying Mass every day) they presently imagined, more out of malice then
prudence, that it was the most advantageous breach they could have to set upon
me with all their interest.

Their first business accordingly was, to make the^r advantages of the
publication of the several acts, which the Overseers of our Religion had, out
of their zeal thought fit to publish, and to compare that writing of mine,
wherein I had entreated those of my party, to afford me their assistance, to
the end that I might make public profession of my belief, according to the
liberty which the Kings Edicts gave me so to do, with the d^te of the Letters
which I had written to the Rector and Provincial. Having thereby found, that I
had dissembled my intention for some days, that is to say, done, in relation
to the Ecclesiastical functions, that, out of prudence and discretion, which
they with cauterized consciences always do, when they undermine Bishops, and
betray States (for no consideration of that or any other nature can dispense
with them for saying Mass) they immediately raise a hue and cry after the
Sacrilegious person, the Prophaner of holy things, put in a charge against me,
and, to compass my death, would have a pretended Sacrilege of a secret become
a public one, and that a writing given privately to a particular person should
pass for a public and solemn profession. The charge lies now before the
Judges, whatever the issue may be, it will turn to my glory. If by their
powerfulness and bloody prosecutions I am condemned, I shall be a Confessor of
Jesus Christ, which is the greatest glory that a good Christian can aim at; if
by the diligent discussion of the business I am cleared, the world will be
accordingly sensible of the malice and injustice of my accusers. What ever may
be the result, I cannot but hope, that God, who raised up Daniel to vindicate
the innocent Susanna, from the crime laid to her charge by two lustful Elders,
will raise up some charitable maintainer of my Cause, who shall make my party
good; and that the same God who delivered Lot from amongst the Sodomites, and
from the flames of fire, will also deliver me out of the hands of the Jesuits.
In the mean time let us take their proceeding into examination, and consider
the imprudences and poor occasions they are put to therein.

CHAP. V.
Discovering the cheats and evasions of the Jesuits, in their prosecution.
WHen Ignatius said, in the Letter he writ to the Monks of his Order in
Portugal, that it was his desire, that Obedience should be the ear-mark,
whereby the true children of the Society should be distinguished from others,
he had said more truly, according to their Institution and ordinary practice,
if he had expres'd himself thus, it is my desire that cheats and circumventions
should be the undeniable characters, whereby you might be known to be right
Jesuits* For he that shall consider their equivocations in matter of Justice,
their ambiguous expressions in conversation and dealings with men, the mentali
reservations and restrictions which they have introduced into Moral Divinity,
to the great disadvantage of Truth, their crafty designs to cajoll the simple
in their Shriving seats, and their visits, purposely to get a claw into their
Estates, by surreptitious donations, must needs conclude, that a mischievous
crastinesse is the Soul, which informs and gives motion to that vast Body,
which acts not either in ^h^^g^ relating to Morality, or civil affairs, but
by diss^^^u^^tion and complyances. To demonstrate this truth, I have instances
enough to make a volume; but the business now in agitati^n, is to show their
foul practice in their indictment against me.

Beaufes, through whose mouth the Provincial and the Consultors cast up their
choler and indignation, furnishes me with an argument that cannot be answered.
Courteous Reader, says he in the beginning of his Book* you are desired to take
notice, that the prosecution against Peter Jarrigius by way of indictment, is
not carried on either upon any request of the Reverend Fathers of the Society
of Jesus, or for any crime committed by him while he was of their Society; he
is only charged with Sac^iledges, committed by him since his profession of the
Religion pretendedly reformed. And a little lower, the charge they have
hitherto had against Monsieur Vincent is purely civil, to oblige him to
produce, before Monsieur the Lieutenant General of this City, the original
copy of the book he has published, to be compared with the Letters, whereby
Jarrigius himself has refuted the Impostures scattered abroad under his name.
And a little lower, The Consistory was obliged to bring into Court those
pieces, which the Fathers of the Society required, especially the Act of
November* 24. 1647. Here I desire the Reader to take notice that these
Monastical Fiends demand, and that with importunity, that the Act of November,
24, should be brought before the Judge; and he shall find anon wherefore and
to what end they desire it Lastly, he says, in the conclusion of his
Advertisement, that the Scribes, Viau and L' E^piniere, have declared that the
writing and Seal of the Act of Profession of Peter ^arrigius, of November. 24,
represented by M. Gasper Le Roy, Register, agreed with the writing and
subscription of the beforementioned Letters.

Of all men, Liars ought to pray for good memories. This man has one that is
so treacherous, that ere he come to the midst of a discourse that takes up but
a fmall page, he destroys what he had afsirmed in the beginning of it. The
cheat is discovered ere the word is out of his mouth, as a pick-pocket taken in
the midst of the marketplace, with the purse in his hand. I fear me the man
fondly imagines that the French, who will be guilty of so much curiosity as to
read his book, are overgrowne with such a sottish credulity, that he can
persuade them that they do not see what is before their eyes. He impudently
affirms that they are not my prosecutors in that indictment, and two periods
after, he acknowledges, that it was by their means the Consistory was forced to
produce in Court the act of November, 24. which they thought a sufficient
ground whereupon to put in an endictment against me. When they have thrown the
stone before all the world, they withdrew the hand, and then confidently
affirm, both by word and writing, that they did it not. For any horrid thing,
such as this may be, the only way is to deny it. But is it possible the
Inhabitants of Rochell should read this abominable lie in the very Frontispiece
of the advertisement to the Reader, without conceiving an indignation against
the Impostor, who must needs be thought to reproach the weakness of their
understanding, when ^e denies to their faces what they have seen with their
eyes? Methinks it might have been enough for James Beaufes to clear himself
for his own part, and to call for a basin of water, as Pilate did, and to wash
hands before the people saying, I am innocent as to the blood of this just
person; which if he had done, I am confident the people of Rochell would not
have cried out, His blood be upon us and upon our children. No, it is a
privilege proper only to the Jesuits to procure the death, not only of an
inconsiderable person such as I may be, but that of great Princes, and most
Christian Kings, and to say after all, we have not done any such thing.

I refer my self to any man, whether this be not to lie diabolically, or
rather Jesuitically. The Sermons they have preached convince them; the books
they have written betray their malice, and their both private and public
sollieitations, generally known all over Rochell, discover their violence
against me, and yet they are so insensibly impudent as to affirm, nay were it
requisite, they would swear, as Jesuits, that they are not my prosecutors in
this business. Let us divert our selves so far as to snap these notorious
Liars in their Sycophancy and elusions. What should be the meaning of those
violent and furious invectives, wherein Beauses and others were publicly
employed, to the great scandal of the people, all the insinuations of wit and
Rhetoricks, and all to prove, during the space of four whole months, that I was
guilty of sacrilege, and consequently of death? To what end was that
Scandalous pamphlet scattered up and down, under the title of, The Impieties
and Sacriledges of Peter Jarrigius? Out of what design was it, that there was
such importunity used to oblige the Consistory to bring into Court the act of
the 24th. of November? it being the only thing whereon they thought an
enditement might ^e justly grounded against me, as to Sacrilege.

In a word, what is to be inferred from so many consultations? So many
combinations against me? so many designs upon me? so many pers^ns sent to seize
my person? so many falsities imposed upon me? Must it not needs argue an
absolute loss of judgment, not to perceive, that they are so far from being
simply the adversaries that seek my life, but the witnesses that accuse me,
and the Advocates that plead against me, in as many places as they can command
pulpits in, and as many companies as they come into, by word, by writing, and
every way? It is to be feared that the Superiors of that order have a certain
imagination, that all the French have made a vow of implicit obedience to
them, to submit their understandings, to their words, without the least
examination. Iniquity cannot hold out long, and it is the fate of falsehood ever
to ruin and undermine it self. These pretended Ecclesiastics, contrary to the
Canons of the Church of Rome, are lovers of blood, and make it their business
to persuade Christians that no people have a greater aversion for it then they.
But this palpable falsity discovered in the first page of their Book, should
methinks be sufficient to satisfy the Reader, that they have lied too far to
be believed any further. Let the simple give credit to what the Jesuits say,
because they say it, if they think fit so to do, but the more p^udent sort of
people shall ever look on them as malicious Impostors, and such as endeavor
to be ^amous by their surprises and circumven^ions.

CHAP. VI.
Containing an Answer to the Accusation put in against me by the Jesuits.
THe Accusation put in against me by the Jesuits a ^ounts to no mo^e then a
piece of Legerdemaine or trick upon me* and whoever shall exa^ine it without
prejudice or passion, as Judges are obliged to do, will find it to be of no
weight at all I am charged with a thing, whereof all those both Regular and
Secular Priests, who have quitted the Popish Religion, must needs have been
guilty. They affirm that I have said Mass after I had engaged my self in a
design of conversion to the reformed Religion, nay, after I had given a writing
to those of the Resormation, whereby I signified to them that I embraced their
belief, and entreated them to afford me their assistance, that I might make a
public profession thereof. If the Judges are swayed by the inclinations, and
violent passi^ns of my ad^ersaries, I shall be condemned as a ^acrilegious
person; but if they are guided by the civil Laws, and the Edicts of our
Kings, their malice will be disappointed, as may be seen by the ensuing reasons.

1. I answer* acknowledging, that I secretly gave that writing to those of my
Religion, by way of assurance of the sincerity of my intentions, as also of
security, if need were, against the Jesuits, in case they should (as being a
sort of people that would make their advantage of any quillet or forma^lty in
the Law) afterward put in a malicious acc^sation against them, that they
carried me away or forced me against ^y will.

2. I say, that I never gave any commission, nor ever pretended, nor ever
imagined, that that wr^t^ng should or could be printed. For being a man of
Letters, I must needs consider beforehand, that it would be expected from me I
should put forth a Declaration containing the Motives, that had induced me to
that change of Religion, as I have done since, and that it was not fit I should
elude the world with a thing indefinitely and ambiguously written.

3. It is evident by this manner of proceeding, that I never pretended that
that writing should pass for a public Profession. And whereas it may be
further pressed, that the intention is indeed Secret, and that the Judges are
not to take any cognizance thereof, I answer, that whoever would examine the
sense and the words thereof, will find that my intention is quite contrary,
considering the entreaty I secretly make to them to afford me their assistance.
And to bring an undeniable demonstration to prove, that that writing was never
to be accounted either as to my own apprehension, or to those of any of ours,
for a Profession, I have publicly made it since, in the Consistory of Rochelt,
upon the 25. of December following, many days before the writing was published
and the bil^ of indictment put in against me.

4. I say, that all those things which are the necessary attendants and
consequences of a public and solemn profession of Faith are absolutely
wanting in this* 1. I am not either publicly or personally establishe^ before
those, who, according to Ecclesiastical forme^ are empowred to receive it. 2.
I am not in the pr^sence of witnesses, such as are necessarily requisite i^
such a case, for it is apparent that I am as yet in t^ Jesuits College. 3. The
words of the writing a^ indefinite and indeterminate; for my expression is the
I do by this writing require those of the said profession in that City to be
assistant to me, to the end, tha^ according to the liberty which the King
grants to all his Subjects, I may make some shift to get from hence, and
embrace their Communion. From which general and indeterminate kind of
expressing my self, it may well be inferred, that I do not make a solemn
profession of my Faith, but only give them an assurance of my intentions to do
it, in the same manner, as I should do to a friend, writing a civil Letter to
him, in case I expected any thing of assistance from him.

5. If a man would but attentively and with a certain recollection read the
words in their true sense, it will be found a declaration so far only as a
desire may amount to, and no more; and consequently, it comes so far short of a
public and solemn profession, that indeed it is not so much as a bare
profession. And where I say, Which (meaning the Religion) I from this present
embrace, the words are to be explained and understood by all those that go
before, and then it will be apparent, that my meaning is no other then, that I
embrace it from henceforth, not effectually (for that I neither could nor
would, as I have declared) but only as to vow an affection, proceeding from the
desire I had to embarque my salvation therein, as it was then my request, and
as I have since, through the mercy of God, accomplished.

6. From the very titles of the printed piece upon which they ground the whole
prosecution, it will be no hard matter to judge, whether the writing of
November. 24. can or ought to pass for a profession of faith, such as the
Jesuits would have it, and thereupon make the case the more abhomin^ble. I
desire no more then that the title of the writing and that of my Profession
should be examine^. That of the former rnns thus, A deed written and signed by
the hand of M^n^ieur Jarrige* and s^aled with the Seal belonging to the
Jesuits C^lledge before his c^ming th^^^e. That of the latter, thus, An Act of
the Profession of Faith of Monsieur Jarrige, extracted out of the Act of the
Consistory of the Reformed Church of Rochel, Wednesday the 25 of December,
1647. An Act is called a Profession* because it is such, the other is simply
called a Writing, because it is not a Profession. I further make it my suite,
that the subscriptions of both may be considered, to the Writing there is no
other subscription then that of my own name, to the act of Profession there are
three Pastors, the Ancients and the Secretary of the Consistory. Is not this
enough to unplaister the eyes and hearts of the Judges, if so be they are
blinded by the importunate solicitations of the Jesuits, (wherein they
sufficiently play their parts) or regard the metaphysicall ratiocination which
they make use of, to prove, that a secret writing ought to pass for an
authentic and solemn profession? God of his infinite mercy preserve me for
ever falling into the hands of these phari^aicall Monks, who desire only
comma's, and punctilio's to ground an endictment against a man, who has ever
done them good, never hurt, and has not left them, out of any other motive,
then that of putting himself into the way of salvation, and an unwill^ngnesse
to consent to their mischievous machi^ations.

All therefore that now lies on my hands to do, is, to show, in wh^t sense I
could have treated of my conversion, and in the mean time not forbear saying of
Mass. I must needs acknowledge, that, to conceal my design, I was forced to
exercise the functions which I was obliged to before I was illuminated. Could I
have got away on the very day whereon I was first inspired with that
resolution, I had done it; but the season proved so bad, and the weather so
rainy, that I had but that one fair thursday on which I shook off my chains.
Could I further have m^de a public profession of my Faith in the midst of
Rochel, I wo^ld have gone that very day among them, and embraced their
communion; but all the world is sensible, that it was impossible for me to do
any such thing without exposing my life to imminent danger. During therefore
the time of that intervall* it being not in my power to exempt my self from
saying mass, for fear of a surprisall, I considered with my self that in
conjunctures of so great consequence, it was l^wfull for me to dissemble
according to the general maxims of the Divinity I had learned among them. To
the end therefore, that I might be as l^ttle as possible might be injurious,
either to the Roman Religion, which I was ready to shake hands with, or the
Reformed, which I was upon the point to embrace, I had no other intention of
celebrating Mass, then that of doing in general what our Savior had
instituted. So that if Jesus Christ has instituted any such thing as
Transubstantiation, the Romanists cannot charge me with being an Impostor, and
false to them: if he has instituted only the Symbols of bread and wine, to be
received by Faith, as if they were his body and blood, those of the Reformation
have nothing to quarrel with me for. The Holy Spirit, in whose presence I
write these lines, can bear me witness that I speak but the truth. If God had
been pleased to afford me a greater measure of his grace, I might have
generously declared to the Rector the reasons, upon which I had resolved not to
say Mass any longer; but I desire the world to judge from the exasperation and
fury they have betrayed in their pulpits, and the prosecutions they have
worryed me with, what treatment I must have expected from them, in case I had
discovered my design. Alas! Had I made but the least discovery, I had been
six months since in the other world; and this is so far certain, that they
have publicly acknowledged as much, affi ming openly both in their discourses
and writings, that if I were so desirous to suffer for my belief, I needed no
mo^e then to give them notice of my intention. The fear which a constant mind
falls into is accounted in the law for an allowable excuse I hope the Judges
will pardon my weakness, and condemn that rigor, which at this day, is the
occasion that there are so many hypocrites in that unhappy Society. If all
those of their Order, who profane the sacrifice, which they call that of the
body of Christ, were dragged to the tribunals of the Civil Magistrate, to
answer for their Sacriledges, what shall become of those, who, not forbearing
the diurnall celebration of Mass, procure the death of little children, are
guilty of forgeries and falsifications in Contracts, coin money, bandy against
Kings, secretly entertain in their Chambers wenches disguised in men's clothes,
and commit monstrous Sodomies with young Scholars, as I have sufficiently
discovered in the former Treatise? Should this happen, the cities they inhabit
would find it no small work to provide prisons, and erect scaffolds and Gibbets
for Jesuits. There you should have one accused for his impious approaches to
the Altar, coming piping hot out of the Confession-seat, where he had spent the
time in amorous entertainments with some cracked commodity. You should have
another brought to the bar, when he had just before sealed up his Letters,
wherein he had sent some intelligence prejudicial to the affairs of his
Prince: and so consequently a many others for having committed several other
crimes not half an hour before. The reason is this, that these wretched
Galleyslaves of Religion are forced to comply with the Custom which they have
taken up, to say their Masses, what condition soever they may be in. Which if
they do not, the Catamites and Zealots, whereof the Communities are full, very
suspiciously question whether such and such be not sick, since they had not
said their Masses. And thus much I thought fit to say in order to my
vindication from the crime which they would impose upon me.

CHAP. VII.
Discovering the childish inventions of Beaufes to make my Letters
contradictory one to another.
THere is not certainly any thing proves more dishonorable to a man, that
stands much upon the reputation of sincerity, then to be surprised in trivial
and childish evasions. Now according to the present postures of Affairs, I see
not how Beaufes can avoid ignominy two manner of ways, one by incurring the
imputation of a cheat, the other in discovering want of judgment, to carry on
with success, and with a certain circumspection to conceal his
circumventions. For though his beard be powdered by the age of above fifty
years, yet has he not yet put off the swathing clouts and weaknesses of his
infancy; and in two things he betrays himself more particularly, One, when he
denies that I writ two Letters that have come abroad under my name. The other,
when he would refute them by certain shreds and fragments of a Letter I had
written, five months before my coming from among them, to the Provincial.

We shall not think it much, to divert our selves so far as to surprise this
bearded infant in his childishness. If you read the advertisement to the
Reader, you will find these words; The charge, which the Jesuits have against
M. Vincent, is purely civil, to oblige him to produce, before Monsieur the
Lieutenant General of this City, the original copy of the book he has
published, to be compared with the Letters whereby Jarrigius himself has
refuted the impostures sca^tered abroad under his name. Our Consistory of
Rochel has produced these originals, that is to say, my writing, my Prof^ssion
of Faith, and my Letters, ^llequally authenticated by my own hand and seal.

Now observe the Adversaries weakness. Beaufes has taken, and induced others
to take my writing of November 24. as that only thing whereon the Judges might
admit of an indictment against me, and by a weakness of judgment, which all
humane Sophistry and invention cannot cover, says in his book since that
Monsieur Vincent writ the Letters, has fallen very foul upon him, as the
Author thereof, and to demonstrate it can be no other, he opposes not only me
to my self, and my latter Letters to those I had written before, but he
opposes the pretended Letters of Monsieur Vincent to mine, to refute, as he
says, the Impostures scattered abroad under my name.

I here take no more then what Beaufes is willing to afford me, and argue thus;
If Monsieur Vincent be the Author of those Letters, the some Monsieur Vincent,
Minister of the word of God, is Author also of the writing of November 24. and
consequently I have no more to do with that then with the Letters, and so the
Judges cannot have any pretense to condemn me. But if they find that the
Writing authorized by my hand and seal belong to me, they will also conclude,
that the Letters are also mine, since they carry the same Authority of my hand
and seal. So that if I am condemned for having been the Author of the writing,
and that afterward I had not forborne to say Mass, there is as much reason on
the other side that Beaufes should be also condemned for a public Impostor, as
having, in his writings and Sermons, ^alsly affirmed, that these Letters were
not mine, though he were satisfied in conscience of the contrary by the public
production made thereof, by our Consistory, upon the Solicitations of the
Jesuits. It must needs be that this judgment was very precipitate when it
destroys it self so of a sudden: and it speaks an extraordinary passion in
those that were the Revisers of that book, to suffer such a fault to pass as
discovers their malice to all those that pretend to any thing of judgment.

But what has M. James Beaufes to allege by way of vindication as to this
childish, and so palpable an imposture? Will he say (as happily he may,
considering the contemptible character he gives me in point of abilities) that
I was not able enough to write a Letter? But that he cannot, since he
acknowledges my admission to the fourth vow, which is the highest degree of
preferment that the General can bestow on the most knowing of the Society. Can
it be imagined that the most considerable of their Body should not be able to
pen a Letter? No, no, let us not be so severe toward him, passion co^siders
not what it says. Or is it that the style of those few lines that I writ,
makes a greater discovery of the style and parts of Monsieur Vincent, then my
own? But to that there is a whole Consistory, consisting of persons of honor
and credit, making evidence, that I brought those Letters as they were produced
from the College. Besides, my style is neither so pure, so polite, nor so
patheticall as that of Monsieur Vincent, and we must equally, (my quondam
Brother) acknowledge* that both my Genius and yours, what idea soever you may
conceive of your self, are very much below the excellencies of that worthy
person. This book which I write, and that misshapen abortive issue of your
brains, which you have dressed up and sent abroad under your name, will ever
be sufficient demonstrations of the difference there is between us and him.
Whereto may be added, that the things which I discover are of such a nature, as
that it was impossible Monsieur Vincent should have known them, and it was
necessary he should first have them from my mouth. Whence may be started this
question, what necessity there was, that, to lay them down in a simple and low
style, as I have done, I should employ the pen of that eloquent man?

I must therefore, to your confusion and the glory of the Gospel, let the
world know, what stumblingblock that is, which makes you fall so infamously. It
is your ordinary custom, according to the secret and mysterious rules of the
Society, to impose things upon the Pastors of the Reformed Church in your
injurious and treacherous r^futations, and make the world believe that they say
what never came into their thoughts. This you thought a likely course to crush
Monsieur Vincent, by falsely attributing to him what I had written. But that
person, much more judic^ous and considerate then you, has snapp'd you in your
crasty designs, and has lashed you in his Refutation as a boy of the fifth
form: And whereas God has by the adorable secrets of his divine providence, so
ordered things, that whatsoever happens turns to their goood that fear him; so
has it been his pleasure, that this very imposture, which you make use of to
render me contemptible, has raised me into reputation among my Brethren, and
has given them occ^sion to suspect all the accusations, you load me with, to
be false, as thinking it no prudence to believe a man who is so palpable and
notorious a Liar; which proves not a little to my advantage among those of my
Religion.

Nor come I to examine the ridiculous refutation which the adversary has made
to my Letters, and it shall be seen whether this famous Logician has not
justly deserved that the scholars of Bourdeaux should put an ass to supply his
place in the seat whence he read his Lectures. He has fastened upon two
Letters, whereof the former and that of most consequence was written four
months, and the Latter, two months before my departure. And by an unheard of
kind of argument, he takes certain broken periods of the one not relating any
way to the other to weaken the credit of certain propositions that are in the
second. Were it lawful, according to his unperfect Philosophy, to argue in
that manner, St. Paul may very well be in fear that some mischievous person,
such an other as Beaufes, might take some of his Letters, and mustring
together, contrary to all coherence, certain passages straggled out of the body
of his other Epistles, should endeavor to make him guilty of contradiction,
for there is nothing more easy, if this manner of disputation be allowable.
What can be more formally against the Laws of Contradiction, then to make that
competible to one time which is only to another? For instance, I had said in
one of my Letters whereof he produces this shred; I had been admitted to the
fourth vow, to which none are, but such as have been approved for^a long and
constant prosecution of virtue, it being a degree which raises the person
received into it to so much respect and reputation in your Body, that it is the
mark at which all aim, and those are thought most happy that can attain
thereto. To this he brings by way of answer, a sort of words mangled out of
another Letter, and says thus, The Answer of Jarrigius; I refer those to the
judgment of God, who have condemned me without affording me audience, and
particularly two, Father Pitard, and F. Ricard, the principle instruments of
the treatment I have received, Your Reverence only has ever cast your
obligations upon me, therefore was it that I have had, and shall have a more
then ordinary confidence of your assistances. Let us now but obse^ve the
impostures of this notorious falsifier, and the palpable absurdities into which
the lechery of evil speaking precipitates him. The question in hand is of a vow
I made publicly in the professed house of Bourdeaux, before the principal
Altar of the Church, after I had given those demonstrations of Learning and
virtue, which are requisite for my admission to the same. And this envious
wretch, knowing that the Society must needs be exasperated to see one of those
that were admitted to the fourth vow fallen into the reformed Religion, the
better to dissemble it, and elude the reflections of the world thereupon, cites
the words before mentioned, I refer to the judgment of God those who have
condemned me etc. Now this is the greatest weakness imaginable. For a man to
be of the number of the Professed, that is, to be admitted to the fourth vow,
be it upon what ground it will, there must be a juridicall proceeding, by
personal examinations and by informations, and the Judges are obliged to
swear, that they judge the person capable to be admitted to the fourth vow. It Is
therefore upon no just ground that Beaufes produces these mangled words taken
out of another Letter, I refer to the judgment of God those that have
condemned me, etc. For it cannot be said that I am condemned, since I am
admitted to the degree of greatest reputation that the Society can bestow; and
much less am I condemned by Pi^ard, since he was the most powerful instrument
that furthered my graduation, as being then Provincial, and having received
order from Mutius Vitelleschi to admit me to that degree. Nor am I condemned
out of any relation to ignorance or insufficiency, for Beaufes, my most
implacable adversary, cannot deny, that for a man to be of the Professed, he
must be excellent either in Polymathy, as the great Hnmanists are, or in
Theology, as those that are either designed, or actually do teach it, or in the
gift of Preaching, of which predicament are the most eloquent. It shall not
much trouble me which of these three degrees he puts m^ into, I shall in either
of them be accounted excellent in their Society, while there are abundance of
others repining at the injustice of their rejection, and this is sufficient to
show I was not condemned. Nor am I on the other side condemned by Ricard, for
being his pretended subject, I made the Oration of the Dolphine of France, in
the presence of the Prince of Conde and the Parliament of Bourdeaux, whom he
went himself to invite, and since, that called Chrispus* which was entertained
with great applause, and all this through his means for which I am extremely
obliged to him. It is therefore upon an unjust ground, that those words are
produced by Sir James, I refer to the judgment of God those who have
condemned me* etc. Should I run through and examine all the rest of the mangled
passages which he maliciously confronts, I should engage my self into an
infinite discourse, and every where discover the like absurdities and foul
play. Monsieur Vincent has taken him in hand as to this point, and that with
so much truth and conviction, that I wonder Beaufes has not left Rochel to go
into his lurking hole at Ruffec, that so he might not any longer appear at the
exercises of our Religion.

That which yet lies upon me to do, is, to discover the occasions upon which I
writ the Letters they make such a stir about, and press so much, to oppose
the sincerity of my conversion. To that end, I shall entreat the Reader to
reassume his attention, and to read again and again the ensuing chapters, as
being of very great consequence to apprehend the Government of the Jesuits. I
shall in the first place give some account of the occasions which those of that
Society ever have to write Letters that betray their discontent and resentment;
and then I shall give a reason why I writ those, which they have caused to be
printed, to bring an odium on my Conversion.

CHAP. VIII.
Discovering how that in the Society of Jesus men are perpetually subject to
repining and discontent.
ALL is not gold that glisters; what advantageous apprehensions soever the
world may have of the Government of the Jesuits, there is too much policy in it
to be good. By the ill color of a sick person, and the irregularity of his
pulse, there is a rational conjecture raised, that there are crudities and
peccant humors in the body. The capital crimes wherewith they are chargeable,
and of which they are convicted; the great number of those that quit the
Society upon very just grounds; and the infinite multitude of the discontented,
who still continue in the Order, like so many malefactors in a Goal, are but
too too apparen^ symptoms of the indisposition of that Body, denoting the
approaches of its ruin. When a man shall once upon serious consideration find,
that their Government is tyrannical, that false reports and slanderous
informations are ordinary among them, and that there is ^ very
disproportionable distribution of charges an^ employments, he must needs be
astonished, that the discontents of Inferiors break not forth much more then
they do. I durst be deposed, that of ten Letters which they writ to those that
manage the Government, there are ever seven or eight that contain only
complaints, and those commonly very bloody one^ and deplorable. Were it once
the pleasure of God, that, for the space of but fifteen days, there might be
intercepted those that are written to the Provincial of Guienne; I should need
no further proof the^ the bare reading thereof, to demonstrate the proposition
laid down. His Eminence, the late Cardina^ of Richelieu, having caused some
packets to be intercepted, upon concernments of the Crown, not discovering at
that time any treason therein (for they a^ more subtle then to take the
ordinary way when the^ write of matters of that consequence) said to the king
These are a sort of people, that bait one the other, an^ write only to
discover their mutual exasperations. Thy is a discovery of such consideration,
that we need no^ look for a greater.

I know above thirty pretendedly Religious me^ that Province, who, for that
they were hindre^* further progress in their studies of Divinity, and
consequently thought unfit to be received into the degre^ of the professed,
groan at this day under a perpet^ all regret, which, like Prometheus's Vulture,
cont^nually eats into their hearts, I can name some of exce^lent parts and much
learning, who, having been, through the malicious partiality of the Examiners,
and the prejudice of the Consultors of the Province, brought down to the degree
of Spiritual Coadjutors, are fallen into such an insensibility, that, being
very highly qualified in order to preaching, and the reading o^ either
Philosophy or Divinity, are become stupid through ^ffliction, and have shaken
hands with all literary employments, condemning themselves to an idle and
unprofitable kind of life, being overheard groaning in their chambers, and in
the Garden-walks with so much expression of heart-burning as might raise
compassion in Tigers. Some being not any longer able to digest their melancholy
in the pleasant Provinces of France, will needs go and wander it down in the
Forests of Canada, among the Savages, there to lead in obscure life, as if
they had renounced humane Society. Others stick not to say, by a Proverb come
into vogue amongst them, That the Goat must needs be con^ent to brouse where
she is fastened, but were they younger, and their health in a better posture,
they would never continue two months in the Society. The ground of their
discontent, is, that, though they should in process of time become Or^cles in
all the Sciences, yet are they ever forced to continue in that low degree,
wherein they are infinitely contemptible in comparison of those that are
admitted to the fourth vow. The Provincials cannot deny, but that they have
discarded some men that were able to go through the highest functions and
performances of their ^^ciety; and to the end that that unjustice should not
(...) apparent to all the world, they are always put up^ base and
dishonorable employments. I have ^eard it affirmed by Monsieur de Lingende
Bishop of ^arlat, one of the greatest wits, and the most able Divines in
France, that they might with a s^fe conscience ^uit the Order, and that, being
treated with so much tyranny, they were dispensed from their simple vows, for
those never make any solemn. And yet so strangely is this great Body animated
by Hypocrisy, that; that is attributed to zeal, which proceeds merely from
dissatisfaction, insomuch that the greatest part of those that go upon Missions
into the East and West Indies, not going thither upon any other account then
that of avoiding the domestic trains of villainy and discontents, they are
forced to struggle with (I say the greatest part, not all) these ambitious
spirits, who make all things contributory to their own reputation, will
nevertheless have these afflicted souls transported into those parts as great
Apostles, and would persuade the people that their earnestness for the glory
of God had wafted into those barbarous regions, such as dissatisfaction, and
the affronts they had received, had banished into those disconsolate places. It
has been told me not long since by one of the most sincere and virtuous men
that were engaged in that Apostolical Mission, that the motive which induced
him to go for Portugal, and thence into the Indies was the supplantations and
intrigues which were but too too apparent in his Province. I could give the
names and sirnames of a great number of these discontented persons; and, if the
insolence of Beaufes force me thereto, I shall do it, and moreover produce a
catalogue of those that are not of the number of the professed. Yet do I think
fit to forbear it at the present, merely out of a consideration, that it is a
kind of inhumanity to add to the afflictions of a sort of wretches, whose
consciences cannot groan in this world under a greater burden, then that of
their being Jesuits and wanting the courage to quit the Society.

Nor is this Pandora's box of discontents and disturbances opened only for the
persecution of those that are called formal or Spiritual Coadjutors, whom the
Lay-Brothers distinguish from the others by the contemptible title of The
shorter sleev'd Fathers. No, those that are of the professed number have their
share of the mischief, but with this difference, that the dissatisfactions of
these latter last only for a certain time, and those of the others are
perpetual, because of the fatal necessity there is, by reason of the degree
they are in, that they should be contemptible. In a Country where treacheries
are so predominant, it is not to be expected that any man should say he lives
without discontent. The community of the Jesuits is a knot of undermining
Serpents; let a man be ever so eminent, it is impossible he should live a
month among them, where there is so much bandying, without making some
complaint. John de la Renaudie, a late Provincial among them, was wont to say,
that the most eminent of the Society, the better to digest dissatisfactions
they were to meet with, should imagine to themselves that they were condemned
to the Galleys for ninety nine years. Jealousy makes a division amongst the
bravest minds. Ambition forms in the souls of all those that are more
considerable in the Government of the Society great idaea's of their own
persons; for, perceiving themselves raised to a higher condition then their
Brethren, they think no acknowledgements more then their due. And this is the
seminary of those bloody complaints, those inappeaseable heart-burnings, and
the implacable discontents which raise divisions among them, and smother all
sentiments of Charity. If therefore there be any man that ever hears them make
their braggs, that their Order is the Land of Goshen, full of light, while the
Egyptian world is covered with darkness; let him confidently reply, that it is
a piece of ground full of noisome mists and clouds; and if out of an excess of
insolence, they further retort, and affirm it to be the suburbs of Paradise,
answer, it is the dark entry that leads to Hell, thus described by their
Virgil, where,

Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia curae,
Pallentesque habitant morbi, tristisque senectus;
Terribiles visu formae, le^humque labosque
Tum consanguineus lethi sopor, et mala mentis
Gaudia, mortiferumque adverso in limine bellum:
Ferreique Eumenidum thalami, et discordia demens
Vipereum crinem vittis innixa cruentis.
Multa ubi praeterea variarum monstra ferarum
Centauri in foribus stabulant, Scyllaeque biformes,
Et centum geminus Briareus, ac bellua Lernae
Horrendum stridens, flammisque armata chimaera,
Gorgones Harpyiaeque et forma tricorporis umbrae.
where,

Sorrow reposed, with her revenging rage,
Pale sicknesses, and discontented age,
[Fear, with dire famine and base Poverty,]
Labor and death, shapes terrible to see.
Then Sleep allied to Death, and fond joys are
Placed on the other side with deadly war;
On iron beds, Furies and Discord sit,
Their viperous hair with bloody fillets knit
-- Then a hug^ brood
Of various monsters, biform'd Scylla stood,
And Centaures in the Porch; with hundred hands
Briareus and the Lernian Hydra stands,
Chimaera hissing loud, and armed with fire,
The triple shade, Gorgons and Harpyes dire.
So that, if a man would speak according to a Christian and evangelicall
apprehension, he may tell them, with no less truth then confidence, that God
has, by way of anticipation, cast the Jesuits into utter darkness, where there
is perpetual weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

CHAP. IX.
Other grounds of discontent among the Jesuits procceding from the conduct of
their Superiors.
WE come now to a more particular anatomy of the distractions that are so
predominant in the Colleges of the Provinces of Guyenne. The Tyrannical
government which some Provincials have introduced among them is the wild bore
that makes havoc where ever he comes. There is one, by name, John Pitard, who
caused Arsenick to be given to some Brethren that were more then ordinarily
addicted to drunkenness. Another, a very Bacchanalian Priest, called John
Ricard, a worm crept up into greatness out of the dust, by his profusions of
the revenues of the Novitiat, and the interest of certain Jesuits of Paris, who
recommended him to Rome; and since his time, one Gilbert Rufseau, a man of an
implacable and revengefull disposition, one that, the more to exasperate the
Bishop of Poictiers, presumptuously threatened he would have the head of the
Sieur des Estangs, though it should multiply like that of a Hydra These I say
have, with so much insolence, managed the affairs of that unhappy Province for
the space of nine or ten years last past, that the one half of the young men of
greatest hopes have forsaken them, and others of longer standing have been
content to groan, and still do groan under their Tyranny. Were I now of the
Order (which God forbid I ever should) it were but just I should represent
these inconveniences to the Pope, as their Supreme head, as some have already
done. But since it has been the pleasure of God to bring me from among them, I
shall discover them to the greater advantage of the public.

Those, who take the Government of the Jesuits into a general examination,
cannot but conclude that so pestilent an indisposition will ever be falling
from the head into the members, and that that imperious Monarchy that exacts an
implicit obedience from its subjects and that in all things whatsoever, cannot
subsist but it must fill their hearts with perpetual bitterness and heart
burning.

The first foundation of discontent is thus laid. The General of the Order,
who creates these subalternate Superiors, and the Provincials, upon whose
suggestions and informations they are preferred to superiority, are guided by
this maxim, not to put into employments, the most deserving, but the most
confident, to the end, say they, that they may ever be ready at hand, to be,
like so many Mastives, put upon the execution of those Orders that come from
Rome. From this, it must needs be inferred, that the Superiors are neither the
most knowing, nor the most able, but a sort of upstarts, and very
inconsiderable in point of Literature, who not able to get into preferment upon
any account of their own worth, as having not those qualifications which are
requisite to render men excellent, are accordingly obliged to prosecute the
designs of those who are the Raisers of them.

Now I desire the kind Reader to imagine with himself, what disturbances there
must needs be in that Body where the blind lead those that have their perfect
sight, and he that is guilty of thousands of imperfections, and has little or
nothing that is excellent in him, governs and disposes of the greatest Doctors
and wisest men. Hence must needs follow a contempt of the person governing, who
is accordingly called proud, self-willed, imperious, ignorant, thence
dissatisfactions are to the General, who admitted him, and exasperations
against the Provincials who had recommended him. And thence proceed
heart-burnings, and indigestible discontents, and then Letter^* written with
the greatest bitterness and exasperation of spirit.

The second inconvenience, is, that the Rectors are not shie of any so much as
those who are any way excellent above others; and accordingly they make it
their main business to tread them under foot and make them contemptible. Upon
this account is it, that they are insupportably imperious in their government,
not calling those that are eminent above the ordinary rate, to advise with
them, no more then if they were not of the house. And if they take them along
with them in their visits to great persons, it is only to make ostentation of
their superiority above them; they speak first, and make their insolence the
more notorious by the humility of those great persons, who are in all things
obliged to comply with these imaginary Idols of pre-eminence, and, by their
submissions, to make it appear, that they are inferior to such as they far
exceed in reputation and abilities. Haec Tyranni vox est, quicquid excelsum in
regno cadat. To say nothing without some kind of demonstration, I desire the
Reader but to enquire what kind of people are John Ricard, William Ricard,
Milseneau, Ishier, Gombaud, la Rhede, Coulon, Saige, Guillard, Reginer,
Soulier, Gadaud, and others of that rate, and he will find that they are no
more known in Gnienne then if they were not there, so inconsiderable are their
qualities. And yet these are the Superiors who sit at the helm of the Society,
and exercise their empire over the Camains, the Martinons, the Godefres, the
Gossets, the most eminent Preachers and most excellent Divines. Is it possible
men should live under so unjust a kind of Government, without complaints and
discontents?

A third disorder, is, that these Superiors, without the least ground, and
upon no other account then that of the commands laid upon them by the
Provincial, stick as closely to him as Ivy does to an old wall, are ever of
his opinion, and, out of pure compliance with him, abett whatever he seems to
be inclined to, as well for their continuance in the present employments, as to
obtain new ones, after they have gone through those they are in. If any does
but mutter at their Government* you shall presently find the confiding
creatures of Superiority engaged in a combination to ruin that unsatisfyed
man, with no less violence then if they were so many Lions. So that the
Provincial is the only person that governs the whole Province, by the
correspondence there is between him and his Rectors; and consequently, the
General, who having by the same maxims of Government, chosen the Provincials,
pitches not on the best and most able, but those of mean parts, governs the
whole Society with such an absolute supremacy, that it is seldom seen that any
one is so confident as to oppose it, which if it happen that any one should,
though he were a Saint Paul he shall be accounted no other then an humoro^s,
troublesome person, and disturber of their peace. Thence comes it, that it is
commonly said, that all the affairs of the Province are managed according to
the directions of the Provincial and two or three of his greatest confidents,
who make no account of the rest though in all things to be preferred before
them. Thence also comes it, that at Rome, the General grows so imperious by
reason of the intelligence that is between him and the Provincials, whom he
knows to be his creatures, that the yoke of obedience becomes insupportable.
Now let the Reader consider with himself, whether any honest man can possibly
bear with the insolence of these Machiavils, without so much as writing some
Letters to discover his resentment of such miscariages.

The fourth misfortune is the damme of no fewer disturbances, and
dissatisfactions. These pearching Rectors, not for that they had those parts
which were necessary for their recommendation to the Government, but merely
for their complyances with the Provincial, and the excellent talent they had in
dissimulation and sycophancy, do all things with such an absolute power, that
they are not any way to be diverted or opposed. And whereas it ordinarily
happens, that those who are of very slender abilities would fain make it
appe^^, in their actions, that they are persons of a great reach and conduct;
so those pitiful Rectors, who labor in order to another man's harvest, to let
the world see that they are highly qualified for Government, carry themselves
like Bashaw's, and never taking any other advice then that of their own heads,
dispose of the Revenues and persons of their Colleges, with so much tyranny,
that the condition of the most ignorant is at this day to be preferred before
that of the most learned. It Is the general complaint of the gravest men, that
all designs are undertaken and accomplished without communication; for these
proud upstarts, would think themselves slighted, if a knowing man had given
them some good advice. I have been in some Colleges where the Rectors have
made so little account of the Ancients, that they called them not into their
chambers to consult with them, once in six months, and when they did, they
proposed nothing but trifles, so true is it that the presumption of some
particular men has brought the Government among them to an incredible height
of insolence. For a man to see his condition and fortunes managed according to
the humor of an imperious ignorant man, and not bemoan himself, speaks a
constancy above that of the severest Stoics.

There remains yet a fist spring of discontents, which is, that the same
Rectors carry things on with such an absolute disposal in their Colleges,
that it is in their power to put in execution their own advice, though contrary
to that of all the rest, and to oblige, nay they really do oblige their
Subjects, prejudicially to the Laws of the Nation they live in, to obey their
unjust commands, and to do their will.

In this point the Juniors are so insolent, that they impose upon the most
illustrious things that are highly base and unworthy, me^rly to show their
Authority, and to make them know, as they say themselves, that they are the
Grand Masters. What possibility is there that a man of any courage should
patiently suffer his judgment to truckle under that of an extravagant person,
and not take occasion to discover some regret at such unhandsome dealings?

CHAP. X.
Assigning other undeniable causes of discontent among tht Jesuits, taken from
the injustice of their Superiors.
THere is no Community that can possibly keep long together without justice,
though it were a community of common Rogues and Highway-men. The most notorious
defect chargeable upon those whose devastations are so remarkable in the
Province of Guienne, is, a neglect of Justice, whereof the perpetual
attendants are those of Rebellion, such as threaten the approaching dissolution
and ruin of that Body. All Jesuits, even to the Novices, are not a little
troubled to see Offices distributed among a small number of persons. Some
continue Superiors for the space of fifteen or twenty years, and others are
excluded from ever being such, though they have the general approbation of all
to be the most prudent. There is nothing more generally heard both in their
greater and lesser Colleges then these words, Why is not such an one N. N.
chosen Superior? and there may be perceived ^ cloud of sadness and
dissatisfaction rising in the coun^enances of those that hear it. In like
manner, when some Superior comes in the time of recreation, and says, that
the Rectorship is conferred on such an one, the general silence wherewith the
news is entertained, the stifling of all discourse for some time, and the
reciprocal looks that pass between them, as they express their admiration
and astonishment, so do they very much discover how infinitely they are
troubled to see persons of no worth raised out of the dirt, to d^mineere over
others, so to make those great men that are discountenanced the more
despicable. When tidings came that la Rhede was chosen Rector of the College
of Again, Peter Cadiot of that of Rochell, Bernard Soulier, of that of
Poictiers, Fronton Gadaud, of that of Pau, the disdain and scorn conceived
thereat was universal, nay, many sticks not publicly to laugh at the choice.

All a man has to do, to be excluded all employments, is, to be indu'd with
those qualities that ^re necessarily requisite for him to be admitted thereto.
Learning is accounted a disqualification in order to preferment, under pretense
that great Wits are not the most fortunate in things relating to the practick.
Solidity of judgment, and a more then ordinary constancy, are always
enviously looked on by those that ^it at the helm, so that it is the main part
of their business to find out pretenses for their exclusion. It Is given out of
some that they are too much inclined to choler, of others that they are too
melancholy, of some, that they are guilty of too much confidence, of others,
that there would never be a good intelligence between them and the General: and
so, as it commonly happens that all great minds have some imperfection, these
envious wretches take advantage of the defects of such eminent persons* to
exclude them from the government. Hence it comes to pass that th^se whom
Nature had favored with a certain prehe^inence, are made Vassals, and those,
whom the same Nature had ordained to submission, are invested wi^h superiority;
and consequently the Latter grow insupportably insolent, the former are
exasperated.

The Pope, coming at last to hear of these circumventions, published a Brief
not long since, whereby he commands, that all Superiors (the General only
excepted) should be displaced precisely at the expiration of three years, and
should not be admitted to any superiority for the space of eighteen months
thence next ensuing. This intermission of Government, making them equal, if
not inferior to those whom before they had tyrannised over, galled their
spirits to the quick, they accordingly left not a stone unmoved to get the
Brief repealed, but not being able to obtain it, they could not be persuaded to
have it proclaimed, to the great contempt of the Popes power and authority;
nay, to make up the measure of their infamy, they have cast out pious and
devout men for discovering a certain satisfaction at that piece of reformation,
so important in order to an abatement of their insolence, whose ambition it was
to perpetuate their charges and employments.

There is yet a more intolerable injustice committed by them in the abuse of
their usurped authority. The most eloquent Preachers are not those that preach
in the most eminent places, nor are they the most acute Divines that teach in
the most famous Schools, nor yet those the greatest Rhetoricians that are the
most considerable in their chiefest Colleges. No, it is the prudence of the
Superiors to advance their own favorites, to the disparagement of those of
greater abilities.

Hence comes it that Learning is not attended by reward, excellency carries not
the honor of the day, deserts are discarded, and there is hardly any one
admitted to employments of consequence but those tha^ can crowch and adore
them. This is the reason ^ha^ great Wits are cast down and discouraged, for,
perceiving it will ^ost them so much to arrive at some eminency, they content
themselves with a mediocrity. And the consequence of that, is, that humane
Learning is neglected, Philosophy grows despicable, and Divinity is not
studied by many, but a little for fashion sake. Preferment depends absolutely
on the favor and countenance of the superiors; virtue is the only way to be
trod under foot.

This kind of unjustice will discover it self much more to our observation, if
we do but consider the satisfactions required by such as are injured. If any
one makes his complaint to the General, against the violence of some immediate
Superior, what just ground ^oever he may have to demand reparation, he shall
never obtain it, nay, though he should suffer persecution for the Faith, yet
shall the guilt still lie on his side. To mutter at a palpable fault committed
by the Rector, is a crime; to make any stir about it, or to charge him
therewith, is to be over censorious and disobedient.

For a man to behave himself toward them as they expect, he must be like those
Idols that have eyes, and see not, that have ears, and hear not, that have
mouths and speak not. But on the other side, to converse among the Brethren,
he must be all eyes, to take notice of their miscarriages, all ears, to hear
what they say, and all tongue, to give an account thereof to the Superiors, to
the end, that all the faults of the former should be concealed, and all the
imperfections of the latter should be discovered.

This erroneous kind of Politics grinds and crushes the Inferiou^s, and makes
those that command outrageous and insolent. They are confident, let them do
what they will, that they shall carry the cause, and that the General and the
Provincials will discountenance the accusers, that so they may not allow their
Subjects the liberty which Galley*slaves have, to complain.

I know three or four persons of very great worth that have lately left their
Province for having demanded justice against some Superiors that accused them,
and never could have the favor of so much as a hearing of the difference.
Monsieur Baud made a just complaint to the Vicar of the whole Society against
John Ricard, and had no other answer then a glorious Panegyric in commendation
of the person he accused. I believe that that eminent Preacher, whom they
persecute for his having deserted them, has the Letter yet to produce, which
is such as that there needs no more then the bare reading of it to fill the
hearers with indignation.

This discourse is so demonstrably true, that of ten Jesuits, there shall be
nine to confirm what I say.

And to make it further apparent that this kind of Government must needs burst
asunder, there have been some overtures already made to the Pope, that there
may be appointed, in every Province, a certain number of discreet persons to do
justice to those that demand it, and there is some likelihood it may be
obtained. But the business concerns me not.

CHAP. XI.
Producing several reasons of discontent arising from the Syndications among
the Jesuits.
I Come now to the Syndications that are among the Jesuits, and the unjustice
consequent thereto. Ignatius, the better to lay the foundations of a
tyrannical government, rather then a Religious, left his disciples two rules,
which under pretense of augmenting charity prove the ban^ thereof In the
fo^mer, h^ injoyns all to be ^eady to discover themselves, when they shall be
called to account by the Superior. In the latter, he obliges every one to
inform the Superior of the f^ults which he may have observed in the lives and
manners of his companions. I shall not here press, how that it is observable
in the Roman History, that in the times of wicked Emperors, such as, for
instance, Nero and Domitian, infamous Informers were very much countenanced,
but that under good Emperors such as were Vespasian, Titus, Trajan, and
Antoninus Pius, they were beaten, banished, and many times put to death. All I
have now to do shall be to make it appear that these Rules are two Sources of
injustice and discontent. Of injustice they are, for that these Syndications
are a ^ort of secret informations made of the faults or offenses of another,
given in to the Superior without proof or hearing the parties concerned. There
cannot be a fairer opportunity then this, for the mischievous to oppress the
good by their secret accusations, which the other never come to the knowledge
of. The envious have the like advantage to put a rub in their way whose
endeavors are fortunately contributory to the public good, when they least
think of any such thing; and the Superiors, who have not an equal affection
for all their Subjects, are not a little glad to have, in their Reading-Seats
articles and informations to put a slurte upon knowing men, and such as any way
eclypse their reputation. Now I leave it to the consideration of any judicious
man, from the general inclination which we have to take notice rather of that
which is evil then that which is good, and the impression that an obligation
which they imagine lies upon them to discover all things rather then break
their Rule, may make in weak minds, whether such a government be not
destructive, and without any difficulty, chargeable with injustice; it being an
ordinary acknowledgement, that the omission of some trivial circumstance may
make a good action bad* or a bad action good.

In the second place, I affirm these Rules to be a sourse of discontents, for
it will be found by the perusal of the Archivi of the Superiors, that of
three hundred such, that now live in Guienne, there shall not be one that may
be called a virtuous man, that is, has not been accused of several offenses.
The informations, such as are those of diverse of them, are contradictory; one
says white, another black. In the greatest part there are aggravations and
imaginary inferences made, and ordinarily falsifications and impostures. Were
there a legal proceeding, some would be acquitted, others convicted of their
crimes. But instead of a juridicall procedure, the Superiors go by the way of
informations, as they think most convenient. If any one has spoken
advantageously of any of their Friends, they make the best they can of those
favorable Suffrages, and the world shall hear nothing of their defects. If any
one has spoken ill of those whom they affect not, or any way stand in fear of,
they conceal their virtues, and produce against him those injurious
suggestions. So that they are ever furnished with materials to condemn some and
to acquit others, it being the main design of these Syndications, or secret
informations, to make the Superiors uncontrollable, the inferiors unfortunate.

This contagious union, and poison of fraternall charity cannot but raise in
them a mistrust one of another, and puts them into a fear that any one may sell
them in a manner, to ingratiate himself with those that govern. I desire any
one that has frequented the classes, to reflect and consider, whether they are
not much more free in point of conversation, when they have to do with secular
persons, then when they are among themselves. Though ten strangers should come
into the place where they are engaged in discourse, their presence should not
oblige them to any more reservednesse, but if some Jesuit drop in, all is
immediately smothered. The reason whereof can be no other then that their
Government is grounded on censures and Syndications, and that every man is
afraid of the ill offices of Eves*droppers and Informers*

To the end therefore that a man should not be discontented among a Society of
Sycophants and detractors, the only way, is, to burn the Rules they have, and
to make others. Let not therefore any man be astonished to find so many
forsaking the Order, when they do it merely for their own quiet sake, nor
wonder that those who continue therein have in a manner perpetual occasion of
complaint and repining, and betray it in both words and writing. I acknowledge,
that I bemoaned my self to Rousseau, the Provincial, four months before I
came from among the cursed crew, but it is as certain withal, that the grounds
of my complaint were so just, that I should not have exposed my self to ever
the more censure, though my Letters had been more sharp and s^tyricall then
they were. If the Reader does but reflect on the occasions of complaint which I
have discovered in the four precedent Chapters, he cannot but he satisfied,
that it is an ordinary thing in that ill disciplined body, to write bloody and
invective Letters, and that they have injured me very much, by producing mine,
to persuade the world, that my conversion was not real and sincere.

CHAP. XII.
Showing the falsifications of the Jesuits in the impressions of my Letters.
SAtan who transforms himself into an Angel of Light, cannot so absolutely
conceal his ugliness under the borrowed beauties of an Archangel, but that he
still discovers himself to be a Devil, by some claw or other which divine
Permission will not give him leave altogether to hide. Let the Jesuits pretend
ever to so much sincerity, in the publication of my Letters, yet shall the
world find them to be, what they really are, cheats, falsificators, impostors.
I must needs acknowledge that I writ a Letter to Gilbert Rousseau, out of no
other design then to expostulate a little with him about my employments, and to
let him know how much I resented, and was dissatisfied with the disposal he
had made of me to preach on Sundays and festival days at Rochell. Not that I
thought my self any way disparaged to be employed in that noble City, but that
it was my expectation that the infamous impostor should, according to the
Letters I had received from him, have disposed more honorably of me, and taken
occasion to appoint me some good place to preach in the Advent and Lent,
sutably to the good success I had had at Nantes, when there was a general
Assembly of the Estates of the Province of Brittany, and but a little before on
the Octave of Corpus Christi day at Poictiers. But, finding my hopes
frustrated, I must confess I put pen to paper and writ the Letter mentioned,
with great deliberation, insomuch that out of the intimacy there was between me
and Peter Reignier and James le Grand, I communicated it to them. All those
that know me will say thus much for my justification, that I had reason to
complain. Nay, the Provincial himself was not insensible thereof, as may
appear by his keeping of the Letter for the space of four months in the
Archivi, out of a design to vindicate himself against me, if the business
should ever come before the General, but now that it has pleased God, out of
his mercy, to reduce me to the Reformed Religion, he has made other advantages
thereof.

It argues a strange conjunction of weakness and malice to be forced to make
use of Falsifications to persuade the world there can be much inferred from a
pityfull Letter penned out of discontent. This inconsiderate and vindicative
sort of people, who make no great difficulty to swallow Forgeries and
Antidates, making it their business to persuade the people, first that I was
an inconsiderable person, and secondly, that it was a suggestion of vanity
rather then of verity that prevailed with me to forsake the Roman Religion,
imagined, that the Letter I had written, whereby I discovered the
dissatisfaction it was to me to preach in Country villages, might contribute
somewhat to their design. But finding withal that in the same Letter I made
mention of my preaching before the General Assembly of the Estates of
Brittany, and on the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament (as they call it) at
Poictiers, they could not but at the same time craftily infer, that the
world, reflecting on the qualifications requisite to preach with applause at
Poictiers, and before a general meeting of an illustrious Province, might open
their eyes and say, It is not without reason that this man complains of hard
measure. For if it be so, as is apparent to all the world, that he preaches
with satisfaction before an Assembly of Bishops, Lords, Presidents, etc. and
that in such a number that there are seldom seen so eminent Auditories, the
Provincial is very much to blame to put him upon a mission to country
villages. They therefore concluded it necessary to falsify the Letter, and to
suppress the beginning, so to produce only what made for their design, and
conceal what made for my advantage and commendation, upon which resolution they
shortened the Letter, which ran in these words.

REVEREND FATHER, Pax Christi etc.
Upon the 7. of September I understood the disposal your Reverence had made of
me to preach at our Church at Rochel. I expected some employment suitable to
the good opinion which your Reverence was pleased in several Lett^rs to
express that you had conceived of me, so far as to tell me in some of them,
that you had received thousands of good reports of me, not only from our own
F^thers, but also from strangers. All those I have ^een have assured me, that,
in the places whence they came, there was a general face of gladness when it
was said that I preached on the Octave at Poictiers. This at least I am certain
of, that the Professors of Divinity, and all the younger Students, were
extremely satisfied at my being in those parts, and much pleased with my
company; and though Father Leon, a Provincial, and Commissary of the Pope for
the reformation of his Order, an eminent Preacher was then and had been for
several weeks before, the admiration of all Poictiers, being at that time in
the head of a General Chapter, yet had I as great an Audience as the most
qualified that ever preached there, nay so great, that the Capuchin had not one
for six. I am therefore much to seek, what suggestions your Reverence may have
received, that should engage you to make so hard a disposal of me,etc.


I must confess that I writ in these simple and familiar terms to Gilbert
Rousseau, and if they have produced the Original Letter, the beginning will be
found word for word as is before laid down. And yet William Ricard Rector of
the College of Poictiers has caused it to be printed mangled and falsifi'd
etc. to make it the more serviceable to his design, for, smothering all that in
the beginning made any way for my honor or advantage, he puts it out thus.

A Letter from Peter Jarrigius to his Provincial.
REVEREND FATHER, Pax Christi etc.
I heard not till the 7. of September, of the disposal your Reverence had made
of me to preach at our Church at Rochell. I know not what suggestions your
Reverence may have received that should engage you to make so hard a disposal
of me, I am not to learn, that if a Preacher etc.


Now I desire the Reader but to compare this Letter with the precedent, and he
will soon find, how that that malicious man has, by a palpable falsification,
cut off all that whereon they ground their prosecution against me, and which
makes my complaints rational and justifiable.

But God, who is graciously pleased that the mouth of Forgers and detractors
should in some measure be stopped, to their confusion, has so ordered things,
that Father John Ponthelier a Priest of their Society had sent copies of my
Letter into Holland, with all those beginnings, which I need no more then
produce to demonstrate the falsification of that Printed by William Ricard, to
be sold by Herna^d living at the Name of Jesus; which is a notorious discovery
of the foul play used by the Jesuits of Guienne. Nay; by Gods further
permission, it is come to pass that the said Letter has been translated into
Dutch, but with so much distortion, that it is not any ways the same with that
which Beaufes had caused to be printed in order to his justification. Had I but
any acquaintance with the Dutch tongue, I would discover the impertinences,
which the Jesuits l^rking in this country have pestered it with. I have the
Dutch translation in my custody and shall produce it, if requisite. All these
pitiful circumventions trouble me but little, but I am infinitely pleased to
see a sort of people, pretending to the greatest sincerity imaginable, betray
so much imprudence in their subtilty. William Ricard is a man so infamous for
his insinuations and criminal inventions to keep himself up in repute, that
it is no miracle he should make use of falsification to oppress me, could he
do it. He has not forgotten that during the time of my being at Poictiers the
whole College was dissatisfied with his Government, and that the gravest
Fathers there were combining against him. If it ever happen, as I hope it will,
that I write a Treatise of the Government of the Jesuits of Guienne, he shall
not be forgotten, and his treacheries in the Affair of the Basque and Saige
shall not be omitted.

CHAP. XIII.
By way of Answer to the two convictions which James Beaufes pretends to draw
from the precedent Letters.
THere is no star in the Firmament which has not its spots, nor any Cedar on
mount Libanus that has not its shadow. I acknowledge my self to be a wretched
Sinner, laden with a greater burden of imperfections then James Beaufes has
yet discovered in my Letters; but that worm of mad^esse and indignation which
makes him so restless, makes him withal fall into extravagances to aggravate
them. It is my daily suit to my Savior Jesus Christ that he would cleanse me
through his blood* and I never go to the Lords Supper, but I sing in the
company of my Brethren, with the Kingly Prophet, Psalm L X.

You are not therefore to expect Mr. James, that I should justify my self, as
you and those of your fraternity do, who would make the world believe you are
absolute Saints. I shall never blush at the acknowledgement of my infirmities,
but shall give God the glory, though you should charge me with sins I am
truly guilty of.

You have indeed taken but too much pains in your ^ook to make it appear that I
was a person full of vanity. There was no such necessity you should spend your
grease so much to find out all the passages you could in my Letters to make it
the more notorious, and consequently me the more odious in the eyes of France.
Novum crimen Cai Caesar, and ante hoc tempus inauditum; all the Jesuits in
general, to speak of them, according to the opinions of both Seculars and
Regulars, lie under an imputation of being proud and presumptuous. Could I do
less then howl and yell, while I was among wolves, or not be guilty of some
vanity while I continued among the insolent? I acknowledge, that I was not the
humblest man in the world while I was of your Society; but God, who has been
graciously pleased to make me quit your robe, will also free me from the vanity
it is lined with. I have desired honorable employments with moderation, while
my colleagues were laying base designs, and crowching into infamous complyances
and prostitutions to obtain them. I have presumed that I was qualified much
beyond those whom the favors and partiality of the Superiors advanced without
any regard to their deserts. My vanity was not indeed a virtue, but the
disposals of the Provincial were not without injustice. If a man should
examine one o^ the Sermons which you make, more like a Mounte-bank then a
Divine, he shall discover more vanity i^ it then there is in my Letters.
Therefore, that the aerie bubble, as you imagine it to your self, should now be
burst asunder, because it is fallen under the feet of those, over whose heads
it thought to have flown, is only a fond and false imagination of yours.

The second discovery you make from the same s^ much canvassed Letter, is, that
of my discontent. Wh^ I beseech you* of all your Society is not such, or indeed
can be otherwise, considering the distractions s^ prevalent therein? If there
be any one, he is a whit^ crow among a knot of men who are accounted a black in
their consciences as in their habits. T^ what end do you imagine that I have
made four Ch^pters of your Politics, but to demonstrate, that it ^ impossible
any man should expect any ration^l satisfaction from your con^uct? So that it
is not a thing s^ incredible, that, living in the house of weeping an^ gnashing
of teeth; I should be so stupidly stoicall as ^ot to bemoane my self: no, I
could not forbear howling and gnashing of teeth as well as others. It cannot be
denied but that I have had much reason to complain against John Ricard, yet I
never did it with so much violence as you have done, who made your braggs that
you had put a slurre upon him in the Provincial Congregation, and have, out of
a contempt of his person, said an hundred times, that that pitiful Curtiers
Son made the government subservient to his own fortunes I could not forbear
some resentment, to find my self sometimes slighted; I do not deny it. But it
has never been seen that I was condemned to the drudgery of the Kitchen, as
you were, nor dismissed out of the class, as you were. It bred some discontent
in me that I was appointed to preach in Country villages, that is to say, at
Vielle-Vigne, but you preached there before me, and Timothy Cloche ^^ce though
one of your most eminent Preachers. There was indeed somewhat of aggravation in
that expression, that bawling among the Country people I ^^rnt nothing but
bawling: but I was but two years upon the Cardinall-Missions, you spent three
in them. Nor indeed needs a man consult any thing but your own language, to
find, that your Sermons are calculated for the meridian of country villages,
and not for eminent Cities. I said I was despicable in the apprehensions of
the Provincials, and that I was in an incapacity to serve my Friends. It Is true,
but the employments you have run through have made it appear what poor
thoughts they have had of your abilities, since they have suffered you to grow
gray haired, and never raised you out of the dust. It may be, the cal^^nies you
have belched up against me in this ur^^nt necessity will bring you into some
reputation among them, and will induce them to do something for you by way of
gratification.

But your vanity, you will say to me, and your discontents have proved the
occasion of the double Apostasy you are guilty of; one in forsaking the
sanctified Order of Jesuits, the other in falling from (...) Church of Rome. I
deny the consequences; ^and say that he who forsakes error* to embrace tr^th*
never was an Apostate. In like manner, he who quit^ an Order, that maintains
the killing of Kings, is not guilty of any thing so much, as of too long a
continuance among Assassins. My Declaration, dedicate^ to the High and Mighty
States of Holland, alread^ translated into several Languages has given in a
manner all Europe an account of the motives which induced me to renounce the
Roman Religion, and m^ Book entitled, The JESVITS upon t^ SCAFFOLD, has made
a discovery ^ abundance of crimes, which, taken into serious ex^mination, would
oblige the most reserved to quit the Society, and prevent the most prudent from
entrin^ into it. I am confident, that even you your self have had occasion
enough to repent you, that ever yo^ put on that habit, so destructive to the
State, and injurious to Religion. The Breviary and the Rosary which you defy
all acquaintance with, as Father Fr^gne and diverse others have clearly proved
to the S^periours, plainly show, that your being of the Ord^ signifies no more
then that you dare not get out ^ it. May it please God out of his mercy to
forti^ your heart to do it, and so return you that good for all the evil you
have endeavored to do me.

CHAP. XIV.
Wherein James Beaufes is found guilty of a notorious imprudence, tending very
much to the dishonor of his Brethren.
WHat can be expected from a fool that has gotten a sword into his hand, but
that he should strike without any consideration, and happily do as much mischief
to his Friends as those whom he takes to be his enemies. 'Twas a simple
imagination of Beaufes, to think he did me a shrewd discourtesie when he said I
was of a mean birth. But his understanding, not being of any great reach,
foresaw not the wound he at the same time gave himself and those of his
Fraternity. Could Monsieur Vincent have a fairer occasion to handle him as he
has, or could they give me a better opportunity to discover the genealogies of
abundance of the most eminent of the Society? I am confident that Beaufes never
consulted Rouseau, his Provincial, when he fell into this piece of
indiscretion, nor took the advice of Penot or Daron, who live with him in the
College of Rochel.

The Jesuits made it very much their business, from their first institution to
this very day, to make the world believe, that, for the most part, those who
were admitted into their Society were persons of good extraction, and many were
persuaded it was so; but this man has of a sudden pulled down all that they
had built, and were builded upon that account. The first act of vanity which
their Regents betray themselves in, is, to pretend relations to Lordships, and
make braggs of the nobility of their blood. Dupre, a Native of Franche-Comte,
son to one that sold salt in the streets, derived himself from the house of
Vaudemont, and having exactly learnt the genealogy of the Counts and
Marquesses of that illustrious race, made his visits to the greatest of the
Nation; under pretense of kindred. Henry Duchesne, a bastard upon record* being
extremely desirous to raise, in the minds of the meaner sort of the Inhabitants
of Bourdeaux, an imagination of the Nobility of his extraction, pretended very
near kindred to an eminent Bishop of the Province, and I must confess he was
very much in the right, for it is not unknown to most of the Jesuits that he
was his Father, and that his Mother was since forced to set up a prostituted
trade in Paris. Beaufes has betrayed all: had he owned any thing of
discretion, the Jesuits might have continued in the reputation, they are so
ambitious of, that they are of high and honorable birth. For no body would
have t^oubled himself so f^r as to deprive them of a recommendation they had
usurped. But now the obl^gation that lies upon me to give God the Glory, who is
the protector and refuge of the humble, stirs me up to let the world know,
that, fetting aside a small number among them, they are all of the dreggs and
dross of the Commonwealth. For, confining our selves still to the Province of
Guienne, if we except Peter de la Brangelie, John l' Estade, Pontius la Devise,
Francis Reymond of Bourdeaux, and another Reymon of Again, John Sevin,
Quadreils, Camain, Josset, and happily about a dozen others, who* without all
dispute, come o^t of good houses, all the rest, to the number of above two
hundred and sixty, are of vulgar extraction. So that Monsieur Vincent might
very well say, with as much truth as h^ppinesse of conjecture, that, since
Beaufes has discovered the mystery, those who had a good Idea of the
genealogies of the Jesuits, might upon very good grounds suspect and say of
them when they ^eet them; See, there goes a disguised Mason, or a journey-man
Tailor, or some discarded Serving-man, who yet pricks up his ears, and looks
for respect and veneration upon the account of his habit.

It somewhat troubles me that I am forced to come to a demonstration of what
that excellent wit could but give a guess of. But I see not how I can avoid it
though I would; I must take the staff out of the hands of this frantic
person, and therewith smooth not only his shoulders but also those of his
Fraternity, who have suffered him to fall into an imprudence so obvious to all
the world. When Ignatius came to insist on the qualifications, which should
make the Superiors of his Order the more respected, his direction is, that
those should be particularly advanced to Government who were of noble
extraction; for besides that they are more recommendable in the sight of
strangers, the Religious men themselves are more willing to obey such persons
then those that issue out of the peasantry. If therefore there be any thing of
Nobility in this Society, we shall find it in the most eminent charges thereof.
We will limit out selves to the space of twenty years, and examine the
extraction of the Provincials. He who commands in that quality at the present
is Gilbert Rouseau, son to a pitiful fellow that sold trifling commodities,
and among the ^est Tinder-boxes, about the streets, one, whose whole shop and
estate lay in a basket that he carried upon his breast. This it was that gave
the Scholars occasion when this great Provincial was Prefect in the College
of Bourdeaux, purposely to try the patience of the man, to cry Matches,
Matches. His Predecessor in the Provinciallship was John Ricard, the son of an
honest Currier, who lived in the very corner of that spacious place, near the
Monastery of the V^selines, as you go to St. Andrews, over against the
College of Lois. The third, prede^essor to both the sorementioned, was one
John Pitard the son of a simple Attorney belonging to the Siege royal at
Xaintes, who for that he came from somewhat a nobler family then those of his
successors, was celebrated by Francis de Creux, at his reception into the
College of Engoulesme, in a Royal Poem, whereof this was the intercalatory
verse. Clara Pitardeae canimus praeconia gentis.
The fourth (ascending still) was called Bartholomew Jaquinot, son of a
Bookseller. The fifth, one Arnold Bohyre, born in Perigueux, and son to one
that kept a tipling-house. His Predecessor was Nicholas Viliers, of Figeac in
Quercy, a person of obscure and mean parentage. The Superior of the professed
house at the present is the son of a Botcher. The most eminent of those in
the same house that are designed for the pulpit is the son of another of the
same profession, his name John Adam. The Rector of Poictiers is the son of a
Currier. The Preacher there, the son of a Bastard of the house of S. Iuyre.
In a word, persons of birth and blood are very rare, nay it will be found,
there are among them four times as many sons of Catchpoles as there are of
Counselors, whence I leave it to any man's judgment whether Beaufes has done
prudently, as things stand among them, to meddle with that string. Can there be
a greater demonstration to show, that the Jesuits, for the most part, are of
mean extraction, then to produce a catalogue of their names, and to discover
the poor descents of those who have managed the Government among them for the
space of these nineteen or twenty years? Or could there be a more pregnant
proof of it, then by naming even those who command at this day, if they have
not been laid aside within these eight months? Cadiot, who was my Rector when
I departed from Rochel, is he not the son of one that keeps a victualling
house at Villebois? And for your part Sir James, who make so much noise, and
take occasion to bite at any thing, are the decaies of your memory so
deplorable, as that you should not remember that your late Father, nicknamed
ironically Beunas in the dialect of Limousin, that is to say, fair nose, was
an honest Waggoner, whose diurn^ll work it was to goad the mules toward the
mountains of Auvergne. I do not pretend my self to be of a better house then I
am, but shall presume nevertheless, that my kin^ed have been, and are at this
day in better reputation then yours, and that I have not had Sister in laws
common whores upon record, as you have had.

The whole Jesuitical Academy took it very heynously, when, to solve the
objection made by the Author of the Academicall Questions, That your Regents
were ^ot well experienced in ^eaching, Father Ducreux m^de ^nswer in his
Oration, that the reproach was very unjustly laid upon you, for that all of you
in a manner had taught children in the quality of domestic Schoolmasters,
before your admission into the Society, which certainly is a no^orious argument
of the greatness of your ^xtractions. For my part, I cannot blame your
Colleagues to be a little moved at the imprudence of the Answer; for it is not
either necessary, or convenient, that all (...) hs should be known. But what
indignation will they not conceive against you, when, coming to read what I
have written, they shall take notice of the just ground, and fair occasion you
have given me to make the world sensible of wretched genealogies. The truth is,
I had things of another nature to lay to your charge, Et genus, et proavos, et
quae non fecimus ipst,
Vix ea nostra voco, --
But you have cast your selves at my feet to bite me, so that when I had
resolved only to treat you as a sort of people excessively malicious, but
withal reserved and considerate, I am engaged further to give an account of
you as arrant rogues and ragamuffins. Learn to be more discreet if you think
^it, for I shall little value your defamatory Libels when you fall into such
palpable miscarriages, nay, I shall need no other justification then what I
derive from your own words.

CHAP. XV.
Wherein observation is made of another imprudence of James Beaufes,
prejudicial to the domestic peace of their houses.
IT is a great argument, that James Beaufes is a person, whose passion very
much out-weighs his judgment, otherwise he would not have given me so fair an
occasion to cast division and disorder in their Colleges, by a discovery of
the degrees that are among them. I affirmed, that their General Mutius
Virteleschi, after informations duly made of me, had advanced me to the
Profession of the fourth Vow, which is the most eminent degree of their
Society. This he could not deny, but, to dissemble, with more imprudence then
policy, the dignity of that quality among them, replies, that, it was an
impertinent and base kind of vanity for a man to think to derive any advantage
from those general qualities; ambiguously intimating that all the Priests that
were of a longer standing then I, were accordingly admitted to that degree. If
their Rules were c^nceal'd, as they were for a long time, strangers would happily
find it some difficulty to conceive the truth, and be convinced of the
imprudence of this man.

But he that shall observe, that, in every page almost they speak of the
Professed of the fourth Vow, and of formal Coadjutors, as of two conditions
absolutely dif^erent, will, with the same labor, be satisfied, that the former
only are the Professed, the latter are not, and withal that he gives me
occasion to make a public discovery of those things wherein that difference
consists, whereof I have made mention to make it appear that what I have done
proceeds not from discontent.

The world may therefore take notice, that there are four kinds of degrees
among the Jesuits. The highest, and most noble is that of those who are
admitted to a Profession of the fourth Vow, of which rank are the General,
the Assistants, Provincialls, Superiors of professed Houses, great Divines,
eminent Preachers, and rare and excellent Humanists. No man ought to be
admitted to this degree, but upon the account of some more then ordinary
endowments. The essence of this condition consists in the making of the three
solemn Yowes of Poverty, Chastity and Obedi^ce, as also a Fourth, with the
same solemnity, to the Pope, which is couched in these terms; Insuper pro^itto
specialem obedientiam summo Pontifici, circa mis^^ones; that is to say, And I
further promise a particular obedience to the Supreme Bishop, the Pope, to be
sent whether it shall please him. The persons that have made this last Vow are
engaged to the Pope by a very strict obligation, and it is the business of the
Superiors to give his Holiness a catalogue of those men's names, who, being
thus devoted to him, might, not improperly, be called, the Popes ^^ssals.

The second degree is that of those who have made profession only of three
vows, that is, the three solemn Vows of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience,
with the same ceremonies as the precedent, there being this only difference
between these two degrees, that these latter make not the fourth Vow to the
Pope, because they are not come to that height of knowledge, which is requisite
to be admitted to that degree, and so are accordingly forced to truckle in a
lower, till such time as they are. Of this rank are those, who, having not a
sufficient proportion of Learning, are otherwise more recommendable in regard
of their extraction or virtue then those that follow

The third degree is that of formal spiritual Coad^utors. The very term it
self sufficiently declares that they are simply assistants to the Professed,
and, as an honest Recollect of Marennes said, little Titus's and Timotheus's in
comparison of the Paul's and Peter's. These also make the three simple and
solemn vows of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience, and cannot aspire to any
advancement, though they should, in process of time become more learned then
Aristotle or Aquinas.

The fourth and last degree is of those, who are received into the Order to be
serviceable to others in the drudgeries of the Houses, such as are those that
are employed in the sacristy, the Kitchen, Shoom^kers, Tailors, etc. And these
are called temporal Coadju^ors, for they are helpful to the Professed, in
things temporal. I have not in this place any thing to say of the Novices, nor
yet of those whom they call Scholars after their two years of Novice-ship, for
they are not of any degree, but only in a way of Approbation, to be admitted
in due time and place to any of the forementioned.

The ordinary way, to bring Learned men to a rank suitable to their deserts and
Learning, are the Examinations, through which a man must pass to make a
discovery of his abilities; and these ought to be so impartially managed, that
the Examiners should swear, that they give their suffrages and judgment
conscientiously. From this short explication the Reader may infer what a
discourtesy James Beaufes has done many of his Brethren, when he gives me
occasion to discover the wretched conditions wherein many of them are involved,
and the reason I have had to make boast of my admission to the first and
highest degree.

This laid down by the way, we may observe in the discourse of Beaufes, three
notorious defects. The first is, an impudent falsehood, when he says, that to
be of the number of the Professed is a thing so common, that there is not any
Priest elder then my self who is not of it. But to go no further than Rochell
to convince him, there are Father Penot, F. Daron, F. Galtier, F. Richard, F.
Quintin, (if so be they are there still) all elder then I am by fifteen years,
yet are not os that number. Nay, I could name sixty more, were it necessary,
but I forbear, because I think it hard measure to add to the afflictions of
those whose hearts are sufficiently burdened already through the imprudences
of my Adversary.

The second very much argues the decaies of his understanding, in that, being
to write a treatise, he knows not what he ought to fasten on, what to let
pass. What trouble was it to him that I should be of the number of those that
are admitted to the fourth vow, when he was resolved not to deny it? Did he
imagine, that upon his telling the people, that in the best regulated Societies
it is not impossible but some worthless skip-jack may creep in, men would be
immediately persuaded that an excess of favor advanced me to that degree? Ah!
I pity the impr^dence and dis-circumspection of the man, who forgets that he
makes my discontents and dissatisfactions the occasion of my quitting the
Society, and yet does withal reproach me with the meannesse of my birth.

The third is an insupportable injury, which he does many of his Fraternity
that labor earnestly in their rank, who yet, not being known to be spiritual
Coadjutors, manage their business with reputation; but when the world comes to
be acquainted with their condition, they fall into disesteem and their
endeavors in point of edification prove the less effectual. How often have
these depressed Assistants addressed themselves, not without reason, by way of
complaint to the Superiors, against the insolences of some that crow'd over
them, and would, the more to disparage them in the Monasteries, tell the Nuns
that they were not of the number of the Professed? When they reflect on these
malicious offices, it raises such a heart burning in them, that they cannot
look on their Judges without indignation, nor hear any thing of this
difference of Orders in their Society, without being dejected and discouraged
thereby. Beaufes to give them some comfort, by a singular act of his wisdom,
pretending to reduce all the ancient Priests to the same Category, obliges me
to discover the difference there is between them, and to make it appear, that
those good people have been thought incapable ever to arrive at any degree of
excellence, and the greatest part of them have been discarded in the study of
Divinity for want of appreh^nsion. But it is to little purpose to wash a Negro.
Notwithstanding all my advertisements and plucking of him by the ears, Beauses
is never the more circumspect, never the more reserved, but betrays his
inconsiderateness and his imprudences to all the world.

CHAP. XVI.
Discovering Beaufes to be a notorious Liar.
WHen a devout conscientious man, such as Beaufes, is forced in his books to
make his advantage of a Lie, he ought to take very good heed that he let not
any thing slip afterward that might betray him to be a Liar. Where he says,
that when I left the Society I carried nothing away with me, because I had
never been trusted with any thing, he should have read and perused the second
Letter of mine which he caused to be printed, and there he might have observed
that I writ to Peter Reignier in these terms; Father Daron was not in the
House to receive the money assigned him; whence it follows, that, not long
before Peter Reignier had put money into my h^nds to deliver to Father Daron.
Therefore he had trusted me with something. Therefore Beaufes is a Liar, and an
inconsiderate person when he says that I never had been trusted with any
thing. While therefore he says, that I am not charged with having taken away
any thing, he justifies me, and betrays himself.

Whereas to prove to Monsieur Vincent, affirming, that I was chosen to go along
with the Preachers of the Order, that he was mistaken, he says, that Monsieur
Vincent lies by multiplication, by making of one single person many; I answer,
that Beaufes lies most impudently himself, for there were at that ti^e three
m^st excellent Preachers in the College, Raymond de S^rictis, Claudius
Herbodeau, and Stephen Audebert, who all three heard the Ministers, and
preached in their turns.

When he adds, that Monsieur Vincent lies in the second place by subst^action,
as having been unwilling to name Audebert, because that good Father was known
to be no dissembler, but con^tant to his Principles: it is another lie; nay, he
therein opposes the ju^gem^nt of many Jesuits, who have been of opinion, and
that upon probable grounds, that Audebert was rather a Reformed Catholic then
a Roman, and have accused him to Malescot the Provincial, and since to
Arnauld Boy^ere, of being a Prevaricator in the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
and a favourer of Calv^nisme. De Mo^ceaux, Raymond, and Mautias, his Rector and
advers^ry, caused him to be taken off from the Controversies; and banished,
upon suspici^n, to the College of Tulle, to be there a simple Prefect of
Studies. Audebert made his complaint to the General, and I know thus much more
then all the world besides, that, if his courage had been so great as to slight
humane concernments, he would have given God the glory, and verified the report
which was spread up and down, that, sooner or later, he would go to Geneva. I
am confident he never believed any thing of Purgatory, or the intercession of
the Saints, and I saw him one day mightily enraged, the Recollects, it seems,
having obliged him to justify the baptism of a Bell, which they had newly
baptized.

Where he says that Monsieur vincent ly'd by addition, adding, that ordinarily
I was chosen to accompany the Preachers of the Order etc. he lies again with no
less imprudence then the two precedent times. Regnier and my self were
appointed to go and hear the Sermons preached by the Ministers of the
Reformation, with the three Preachers before mentioned, and the reason which he
alleges, that on Sundays it was my employment to govern the congregation of
Scholars, is a quid pro quo. For the congregation was not established till two
years after the foundation of the College, during all which time I was at
leisure to accompany the Preachers to the Reformed Church. O the weakness of
this gallant Refuter of men!

Forgery goes seldom without the attendance of Lying. Beaufes is excellent at
both, when, to disguise and disparage my employments, he says that I was not
declared the sole Confessor of all, because it is the Popes pleasure, as he
says, that there should be two. Had this man but one small grain of judgment,
he could not thus contradict himself in all he says. For if I am one of the
two Confessors, as he acknowledges, I am consequently a Confessor to all, and
all are at liberty to come to me, according to the Brief, and I am obliged to
receive them all. My Colleague has the same power, and we have an equal
jurisdiction over all, for according to the Popes intention, they are at
liberty to make their Confessions, sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the
other; and I may say that it has happened several times that I have my self
heard the confessions of all; which could not be, if one part were assigned to
me and another to my Colleague. The thing is as clear as day, if a man would
but consider the reason why the Pope put out the Brief; that is, to the end
that the Consciences of the Religious should suffer no violence, he gives them
liberty to go indifferently to either as they should think good themselves. But
observe withal the malicious envy and the metaphysicall flights of this
ignorant Sir James, who is so cautious as not to add that I was, without
colleague or companion in matter of spiritual advice, the ghostly Father of
all, and consequently had an advantage over the other Confessor, who had not
the same management of things spiritual. If ever I write any thing by way of
discovery of their Institution, I shall take occasion to show wherein the great
weight and charge of this latter office consists.

But to proceed, my Adversary could not more evidently make it appear that it
concerned him to shelter himself under some notorious lie, then when he,
purposely to make my charge of Admonitor the more contemptible, says, that all
had not only a power, but also stood under an obligation, to admonish one
another, in a charitable way, of their faults, and that the Superiors as well
as others had an Admonitor. Certainly this man thinks his Readers are a sort of
people that may be begged for their credulity, and that, upon his word, they
will take that for a simple office of charity which is an express charge,
bestowed by the Provincial, and established by their Rules. 1. Reg. Niti debet,
ne bujus muneris occasion reverentia atque obedientia interior vel exterior in
ipso debilior reddatur, The Legislator taking it into consideration, that this
charge might make the Admonitor less obedient and respectfull, by reason of
the power which is given him to admonish his Rector, thought fit to make some
provision against it, commanding him not to be guilty of any remission of
obedience under pretense of that Office. On the other side, out of a fear lest
too much compliance might any way hinder the execution thereof, he gives him a
second rule, to encourage him to do his duty seriously and freely; 2.
Animadvertat, ne reverentia and obedientia ^idelitatem aut necessariam
libertatem opprimat, quo minus superiorem admoneat de iis ^que proponenda
judicabit. You see then, that, among the Jesuits there is an Office of
Admonitor, much different from that obligation of Charity, which generally lies
on all Christians.

Whence we come to consider, how far it differs from that, under which
Beaufes, by a specious piece of falsehood, would have it to be comprehended. 3.
Reg. Admoneat Superiorem de iis quae major pars Consulto^orum ei dicenda
judicaverit, etc. Is it then your judgment, that, to admonish a Christian out
of sentiments of Charity, we enter into consultation, or call an Assembly of
Counselors? The Rule tells him plainly that he is to advertise the Superior
of such things, as the major part of the Consultors shall think fit to be
represented to him. And to show further, that he is particularly empowered to
admonish of things which he himself only shall think worthy his care and
observance, and that upon the account of his Office, and not simply out of any
consideration of Christian charity; the Rule says afterward, Admonebit
duntaxat de iis quae non levis momenti* post orationem censuerit, five illa ad
personam, five ad officium Superioris pertinebunt, juxta constitutiones et
decreta. That is to say, He shall admonish him of such things as he shall
conceive to be of importance, whether they relate to the person, or reflect on
his Office as Superior, according to the Constitutions and decrees.

Whereas Beaufes s^yes that it was no more my duty to transfer, to the
Provincial, the compl^ints which were to be made to the Rector, then it is
that of a Postilli^n, to b^ing to the Council of State the aff^ires of
P^ovi^ces; he discovers himself to be su ha palpable Liar, ^h^t ^e who is but
the least acquainted with the rules of the Jesuits, must needs take him in it.

What else should be the meaning of this fifth Rule of the Admonitor? Cum
Superior, cujuspiam rei admoni^us, illi remedium non adh^buerit, Admonitoris
erit cum debi^ ^ s^bm^ssione, ite^um et saepius ^um commone facere; quod si
emendationem non sperat, id superiori significet, When the Superior shall have
been admonished of any thing, if he apply not some remedy thereto, it is the
duty of the Admonitor to put him in mind of it again, nay often, if occasion
require, and if he perceive that there is no likelihood of amendment, he is to
give notice thereof to the Superior, that is to say, to his Provincial or
General.

In the second place I ask, whether it be not the business of the Admonitor,
to make a collection of the ordinary Letters of the Consultors, and to send
them to the mediate Superiors, nay, to give them notice whether they have
written or no. Regul. 6. Admonitoris erit ordinarias epistolas Consultorum suis
temporibus colligere. Simulque referet utrum illi scripserint an non. The
Adm^nitor therefore is not only empowered to transfer to the Superior the
complaints of the Inferiors, not as a Postilion, but as a discreet man, and
^ne set apart to give his advice with prudence. But indeed Beaufes is in some
measure to be excused, for he has not lived with that circumspection and
reservednesse among them, as was reqnisite to be advanced to that office, and
consequently may well be ignorant of the duties and exercise thereof.

And whereas lastly, speaking of the Seal, which I had in my custody, and
wherewith I sealed my Act, and my Letters to the Provincial and Rector, he
says, that it was a common Seal; it is so shamefully and so palpably injurious
to truth, that there needs but the very Rule to declare him an Impostor and a
Liar. Reg. 7. Sigillum apud se habeat, quo suas et Consultorum, ac aliorum
nostrorum literas, si ad eum detulerint, qui ad mediatos Superiores scribere
voluerint, obsignare possit. Whence it is clear, that the Novices are so far
from having this Seal, that the Consultors themselves have it not, and when
they write to the mediate Superiors, they come to the Admonitor to seal up
their Letters, it being his office to be Keeper of the Seal, for the use of
all those who have any occasion to write to the Superiors. Were I in Beaufes's
case, after such clear convictions, I would put up a petition to the Superiors
that I might be sent to Canada or the East Indies, to avoid the shame that must
fall upon me, and withal to exchange, for the glorious name of an Apostle, the
shameful title of a notorious Liar.

CHAP. XVII.
Demonstrating that their accusations contribute to my Vindication.
THough Beaufes be a person of such qualification, as makes him unfit to
pronounce sentence against any, though the greatest malefactor, yet so great is
his thirst after my Blood, that there is no captious argument which a
Sophistical wit could think of, nothing of surprise or foul practice that a
crafty pettifogger could imagine, but he has made his advantages of, as well
in his Sermons as his book to incense the Judges and exasperate the people
against me. But God, the tender Guardian of the innocent, brought things so
about, that he has not been able, in the inquisi ion he has made into my
life, to find my thing whereby he might fasten a just disparagement on me. It Is
true, the ordinary terms he can af^ord me, are the execrable, the detestable,
the abo^inable person, with a dozen more of such honorable epithites as
pretily time to the precedent, which do a little violence to the breasts of the
zealous and ^ell-minded people, and persuade Butchers and Porters that I am
guilty of a degree of profanesse beyond that of any that have gone before me.
But, ^hen he has spent all his venom, his allegations ^mount only to this,
that, treating with a Consistory, about a safe and prudent course to make a
public profession of the true Religion, I did not in the mean time forbear my
ordinary employments, as Priest ^^d Preacher.

The horrid noise which he has taken occasion to ^^ke upon this proceeding of
mine, is to be looked on rather as the sallies of his violence and implacable
^ury, then as any effect of his zeal. The wound I had given that imperious
Order was too deep and ^marting to be endured without crying out. But, of all
the exclamations, those certainly are the most impertinent which would incline
people to make no other account of me, then of a Judas among the Apo^^les, a
Traitor in the house of Jesus Christ, and a devil among the children of God.
For as I may, through the grace of God, presume to say of my self, that I am
neither Traitor, nor Judas, nor Devil; so may I withal affirm, that Sodomites
and Murderers cannot be, either the children or servants of God, or Apostles,
and that such as are traitors to their Kings are real Judas's, and Liars are
devils, or what abates very little of it, the children of the devil.

They have spoken that which is untrue in many particulars, as the world has
seen, and the prudent Reader, if he will but take the pains to compare their
words with their words, shall easily surprise them in their abominable lies. If
they chance to lie hereafter, they are thus far in some measure excusable,
that, finding themselves so strangely betrayed by a discovery, of the horrid
crimes they are really guilty of themselves, they are forced unjustly to fasten
those on others which they are not chargeable withal.

I am therefore to entreat the Reader to take this into his particular
observation, that, though they have not left a stone unmoved to compass my
destruction, as well by indictment, as in their Sermons and printed books, yet
have they not been able to say any thing to my disparagement, save that I have
committed an imaginary Sacrilege, by saying Mass, afafter I h^d conceived
some thoughts of embracing the Reformed Religion.

Now therefore that I have disburthened my conscience and made it appear, as I
had promised, to Universities, Judges, Prelates and Princes, that they are
guilty of crimes of High treason, Antidates, Murders, Sodomies, Sacriledges,
Brutalities, Coining, etc. they have two ways to be revenged, one by
dispatching me out of this world, if they can find any Assassin that will
undertake it, (a thing no man that knows them conceives they are much shie of)
the other by detraction and contumelies, that is, if in case they cannot
compass my death.

What ever may become of me, it is not unfit I should let the world know, that
I have lived in Sodom as another Lot, and have, among those Murderers, kept
my hands undefiled, insomuch that they have themselves been my compurgators, in
Fontenay, in Rochell, in Bourdeaux, and those of the Reformed Religion, who
made enquiries after me, for the space almost of two months, found nothing but
commendations of me, even from their account of me who are my professed and
most implacable enemies. Nay God, who has disposed of us from ete^nity,
without any way advising with us, had, before my arrival in Holland, by the
conduct of his divine Providence, brought into those quarters a Jesuit named
John Pontelier of their own Province, as another Joseph, to raise a good report
of me. For, having heard it doubtfully reported, that one of their Order had
embraced the Reformed Religion, and afterward particularly understanding, that
it was one of the Fathers, named Peter Jarrigius, he breaks forth into these
words, for which truth and regret forced a passage from his heart; Alas! what
a sad misfortune is this! Erat filius Gallinae albae, adding withal, 'twas a
person, who for his excellent endowments was an ornament to the Society. It was
never found that he did any thing misbecoming a man of honor; certainly it
must be some affront done him, or some discontent that has forced him to this.
Monsieur de Launay, a person of quality, and of the noble house of Vivans, to
whom he then spoke, told it in those very words, and above a dozen others have
confirmed them to me since. He said the same thing to the Queen of Bohemia, so
that it was all over her Court. He gave the same character of me to Salmasius,
an incomparable person, and known all over Europe by his admirable Writings.
Nay, after the publishing of my Declaration, which he heard of, he commended my
life and manners, so far as to give me extraordinary Panegyricks in point of
chastity.

These testimonies given me by one of the most gallant men among them, to
Salmasius, in the presence of four Ministers, immediately upon my abjura^ion,
are certainly enough to stop the mouth of all Calumny. Father Fraguier, an
excellent Divine of their Society, has written to the French Ambassador,
Monsieur de la Thuiellerie, as the same Father Pontelier has related, that I
was a person of consequence, who had not all the time of my abode among them
done any thing that might blast my reputation, and that he would very much
oblige their Order, if he could prevail with me to come back again to the
Roman Religion, since that it must infallibly be some high disgust that had
forced me to that extremity. Now let the Reader but compare the Elogies, which
these dis-interessed persons, give me, with the contumelies cast upon me by
Beaufes, and he will find that those two former speak consonantly to the truth,
and the reputation I lived in; and that the latter, who is a person, infamous
even among his own for his evil speaking and detraction, does not write and
speak in his Sermons, out of any other motive then that of choler and
exasperation.

If therefore, after they have called me, the Malefactor, the impious, the
profane person, for having been g^ilty of a little contempt of their
Sacrament, and made small account of their Mysteries, they shall add any thing
to the impeachment, and, by way of recrimination, impose some crime upon me
which I am not chargeable with, I desire the Reader to make answer for me, that
I have lived among them, even to the day of my departure with the reputation of
one of the most devout of the Society, and one of the most religious observers
of their Rules, since that, in the quality of Ghostly Father, I regulated the
devotions of the rest, and did every night appoint the Meditations which were
to be made at four in the morning.

For what concerns the public he may tell them, I was their Preacher, that is,
one that ought to be as remarkable for his life as doctrine. And for what
passed within their walls, I was their Confessor, and consequently, it is very
much presumed that I was eminent for the piety and qualifications necessary for
that Administration. For matter of Prudence wherewith they would represent me
as weakly furnished, for that I had, as they say, trusted a Minister with a
Secret wherein my life was so much concerned; it may be retorted; that I was
the Admonitor of the Rector, and that person, whom the Consultors, of which
number I was one, might entrust with all their designs and discontents. And
if, after all this, Beaufes cries, lay hold of the impious person, tell them,
the impious then are our Gho^^ly Fathers. If he cries, take notice of the
sacrilegious person, tell them, the sacrilegious it seems are your Preachers.
If he rais^s ^ hue andcry after the profane person, reply, the Profane then
are your Confessors. The Reader may have observed by the evasions and
equivocations he has been forced to, how much it stood him upon, to disguise
the malice of his intentions in a quaint expression. They are now biting their
fi^gers, that they ever put me into these employments, which makes me wonder
the more, that they should endeavor to persuade the world, that want of
advancement in the Order had been the occasion of my departure, yet never name
those in the College of Rochell who were more eminent for offices. I was their
Preacher, their Admonitor, their Confessor, the Moderator of their devotions;
what other dignities are there that may come into comparison with ^hese,
unless it be only the charge of Rector, which elevates a man above all the
rest.

It is in the power of God only to bestow judgment on those that have not
any. Had I been the most despicable among them, the employments they put me
into challenged respect; so that it must needs be granted that the Jesuits are
very indiscreet, ere I can be crushed out of a persuasion of my want of desert.
For when an understanding man shall consider and say with himself, that, this
man was their ordinary Preacher at Rochell, chosen to that purpose by the
Provincial, was their Confessor, the Regulator of their devotions, their
Admonitor, he cannot but with the same breath say, this wretched Society is
extremely dis-furnished with excellent men, or there must be something more
then ordinary in this man. Beaufes is a person not much versed in the art of
writing of Books, the reaches of his understanding are but short in order to
such a design, having spent his spirits in the first sallies, he becomes
subject to illusion, and lies open to palpable weaknesses. A refined judgment,
would, by way of alleviation, have said, that the stars fall out of the
Firmament, that when a man is to make choice of pearls, it is not impossible
but he may pitch upon what is adulterate; that the number of Gods elect is
certain and determinate, etc. But this shallow-brain'd fellow must needs
immediately fall to invectives, to persuade the world, that I was a person fit
only to be employed in Country villages, because I had in a Letter discovered
some dissatisfaction that I was forced to endure the inconveniences of
Cardinall-Missions. There it was that Monsieur Vincent took him by the ear,
telling him, that the very year of my departure I preached before the Estates
of Britany at Nantes, at Poictiers on the Octave, at Rochell, according to
ordinary designation, and thereupon takes occasion to ask him, whether Nantes,
Poictiers and Rochell were Country villages, whether Prelates, Lords,
Presidents, and all the Deputies of the several Estates were Peasants, and
whether all the delicate inhabitants of those fair Cities were yeomen and
carters? This puts poor Beaufes to such a loss that he has not a word to say,
but folds up his Letter which gave him occasion to make such a noise, to show,
that I preached only in Country villages. Fontenay*le-Comte, a place but nine
Leagues distant from Rochell, will witness on my behalf, that, the year
before I preached on the octave at Poictiers, I had preached at our Lady's
fair Church there, in the Advent, Lent, on the Octave, and all the Sundays
through the year, etc. that is to say, that I came up into the pulpit there,
in one year, above a hundred and fifty times,, and that his Majesty's Lieu
tenant, and the Archbishop of Bourdeaux honored me with their presence, and
were pleased to approve my gifts and abilities in preaching.

If exasperation be that which raises such disorders in their judgments that
it dragges them into thousands of extravagances, I am no l^nger to doubt, but
that they will employ all the interest they can to compass my destruction. But
however I shall with David in the quiet and serenity of my conscience, sing,

I laid me down must quietly,
I slept and rose again;
Because I knew assuredly
The Lo^d did me sustain.
And though ten thousand of my foes
were round about me laid,
And came on pu^pose to oppose,
I will not be afraid.
And these soul satisfying words shall be the begin^ing and end of my ordin^ry
Devotions,

Who dwells in the secret place
Of him that is most high,
In shadow of the Almighty's grace
Abide^ continually?
Thus of the Lord I will report
My gracious God is he,
He is my refuge and my fort
In whom my trust shall be.
What pains s^ever they may have taken to persuade the people, that I was
guilty of a degree of pride higher then might consist with my deserts, I am now
to assure the world, that I had no extraordinary opinion of my self, though,
that, in comparison of those wretched, rough-hewne persons, whereof there are
no small number in the Society* I had written something to the Provincial in
my own commendation.

But now that I have understood since my coming into Holland the stir they
have made upon my conversion, and the bloody courses they have taken to work my
disparagement, merely out of the fear they were in that I might reveal their
mysteries, I have imagined my self to be some body; for it is not likely I
should be thought so dreadful to a sort of people who are admired for their
prudence, had they not some opinion of my abilities, and were afraid of the
wounds and stings of my pen.

The more they endeavor to crush me, by their fury, the more they advance me
by their extravagance; I was of no great account among strangers, but now,
through the mercy of God, I begin to come into esteem among them. Their
persecutions are my crowns. For my Lord Jesus Christ does, by way of exchange,
fill the hearts of his faithful ones, with pious sentiments, such as oblige
them to afford me a greater measure of their affection, nay to honor me beyond
my deserts. Before I did not expect to make any advantage of my employments
among them, now, through the goodness of God, I hope all things.

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies and God of all consolation, who comforts and supports us in all our
tribulations.

Amen, Amen.
Psalm LIVE.
LOrd, for thy promise sake defend,
And thy all-saving shield extend;
O hear my cries
which with wet eyes
And sighs to Thee ascend.
For cruel men my life pursu^,
And who thy statutes never knew,
Suppress my Foes,
O side with those
Who to my soul are true.
With vengeance recompense their hate
And in an instant ruinate
Then will I bring
My offering,
And thy great acts relate.
Thy name for ever praised be
Who from those snares have set me free,
Eor l^e these eyes
My enemies
Desired subversion see.
THE END.
SECRET INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE SVPERIOVRS OF THE SOCIETY OF JESUS.

Faithfully rendered out of the Latin.

Of the strange discovery of these Secret INSTRUCTIONS.
When Christian Duke of Brunswick, who also pretended to the Bishopric of
Halberstadt, ransacked, not many years since, the Jesuits College at
Paderborn, he bestowed their Library, and all their writings whatsoever upon
the Fathers Capuchins, who, among the Archivi of the Rector, found these SECRET
INSTRUCTIONS. And that the like accident happened at the Jesuits College at
Prague, there are creditable persons that will testify. Nor indeed can any man
well doubt, that has the least acquaintance or familiarity with the Jesuits,
but that the principal persons of the Society do manage all things according
to some private directions of this nature, received from their General, when
there is nothing fo manifest, as that the behavior of the Jesuits is in all
things suitable to the present Collection. On the other side: it is certain,
that they are not any way consistent with those Rules, Constitutions, and
Instructions of the Society that are printed: insomuch that it does not require
an excess of Faith to believe, that the best part of the Superiors among the
Jesuits (for some, it is granted they may not have the least knowledge thereof)
have, not only a double habit, but also a double Rule, one domestic and
private, the other fitted for Courts and the public; that they are Introrsum
turpes, speciosos pelle decora:
or such as our Savior describes the Pharisees when he said, ye are like to
whited Sepulchers, fair to the sight of men without, but within full of
rottenness and dead men's bones. So the Jesuits make great shows to the world
of justice and Sanctimony, while they are within full of iniquity and
Hypocrisy. Which character of them, that it proceeds rather from truth then
any spirit of envy or aggravation, there needs no other conviction, then that a
man call to mind, how that Claudius Aqua viva their own General charged the
greatest part of the Superiors, with an over-pragmaticall frequentation of
Princes Courts, too much meddling with temporal affairs, and Hypocrisy; as
being such as, under pretense of Gods glory, and the furthe^a^ce of their
Neighbors welfare, sought only themselves and their own advantages. Be it
therefore left to the judgment of the Christian Reader to consider whether
these short Commentaries of secret Admonitions be to be taken for that
DEPOSITUM whereof Saint Paul puts Timothy in mind, where he says, O Timothy,
Keep that which is committed to thy trust, and the things that thou have heard
of me, the same commit thou to faithful men, etc.

The Principal Heads of the Instructions.
SECT. I. Discovering how the Society ought to behave it self immediately upon
some new Foundation granted them in any place. SECT. II. What course is to be
taken to insinuate into the Favor and familiarity of Grandees and Princes.
SECT. III. What we are to expect from such Grandees, as being much behind hand
as to matter of money, are nevertheless of great esteem and authority in the
Commonwealth, and may otherwise very much oblige us. SECT. IV. Of the
principal design of such as are Preachers and Confessors to Princes and Great
men. SECT. V. How we are to behave our selves toward those Religious Orders,
which pretending to the same design with us, do very much derogate from us.
SECT. VI. How to cajoll rich Widows into a veneration of the Society. SECT.
VII. Of the ways of persuading Widows to perseverance in a single life, as
also of the disposal of their Revenues. SECT. VIII. Of certain expedients
whereby it may be effected that the Sons and daughters of such women as have
resigned themselves to the conduct of our Society, may embrace a Religious
kind of Life. SECT. IX. Of the ways whereby the Revenues of our Colleges may
be improved. SECT. X, Of the necessity there is to make some ostentation of the
severity of discipline in the Society. SECT. XI. How the Fathers of the Society
are generally to behave themselves toward those that are dismissed. SECT. XII.
Of the choice of young Lads for the Society, and the ways whereby they are to
be retained. SECT. XIII. Of the Nuns. SECT. XIV. Of reserved cases, and other
causes of Dismission out of the Society, then what have been mentioned before.
SECT. XV. What persons of the Society are most to be cherished and encouraged.
SECE. XVI. Of the contempt of wealth. Conclusion.
SECRET INSTRUCTIONS For the SVPERIOVRS OF THE SOCIETY OF JESUS.
SECT. I.
Discovering how the Society ought to behave it self immediately upon some new
Foundation granted them in any place.
The Society is to endeavor to ingratiate it self as much as may be with the
Inhabitants of the place where they are entertained, especially upon the
allowance of a new Foundation. This may be advantageously done by an
explication of the end and design of the Society, as it is laid down in the
second Rule of the Summary, namely, To be as tender of the welfare of our
Neighbor as their own. Upon this account are the meanest things to be
undergone, Hospitals are to be visited, the poorest ministered unto and advised;
the Fathers are to go to places at no small distance if need require, to
receive the Confessions of all whatsoever; charitable collections are to be
made, and those to be disposed of to the poor, in the presence of many, to the
end that they, edified and stirred up by our example may afterward prove the
more liberal toward us. Let there be remarkable generally in all a great
observance of external modest^, such as may prove matter of edification to
others. If any among us fail but as to that very point, let them be dismissed
the Society.

SECT. II.
What course is to be taken to insinuate into the favor and familiarity of
Grandees and Princes.
THis is, above all others, a thing to be endeavored with the greatest
earnestness possible. It Is a lesson learnt by experience that Princes do
ordinarily conceive an affection for spiritual and ecclesiastical persons,
when their actions are not Baptistically censured and reproved, but with as
much favor as may be all^viated. This is apparent in the marriages of Princes
with their nearest kindred, there arising always great difficulties in the
negotiation thereof, by reason of the vulgar opinion which fastens something of
execration on such contracts, When therefore we see Princes resolved on such
things, it will be our duty to encourage and assist them in their incestuous
inclinations. Let such reasons be insisted on, as may heighten their desires,
as for instance, that Matrimony with those circumstances might prove the
occasion of a stricter alliance, and contribute more to the glory of God.

In like manner, when the Prince intends to do something, which the Nobility
seems to be averse from, or not very ready to give their consent to, (as for
example, engage in a wa^) his will is principally to be humored, and constancy
of resolution to be celebrated as the greatest endowment of a Prince. The
Fathers are to persuade the Nobility, that a compliance with the designs of
their Prince is the noblest character of that rank. But let them forbear
insisting on particulars, left any imputation fall upon us. Yet if it happen
that we are charged with any thing; let the Fathers cite those general
Instructions which permit us not to intermeddle in such things.

It is also no small step into the favor of Princes to engage in the Agency
and negotiation of things acceptable to them. Those that are their nearest
attendants must be gained by little presents, to make a discovery of the
Princes humor and disposition, what things he is delighted with, how he is to
be pleased; yet this is to be done with a respect had to virtue and good
Conscience. And so making their advantages of such discoveries they are to
insinuate themselves into an intimacy with great men and Princes. If they are
Batchelors or widdowers let the Fathers propose matches to them, but such as,
with their Relations, are favorable to us. Let those be recommended to them as
such as the Princes themselves would wish them to be. By this means will it
come to pass, that we shall by these allyances ingra^iate our selves more and
more This experience has confirmed by the influence of the House of Austria in
the Kingdoms of Poland, Prance, and other Dutchies and Territories.

Left the women change their minds, or time work any remission of their favor
toward us, let their affection for our Society be represented to them as the
most meritorious thing of any, as well by our Fathers, as by such of their own
sex as creep into their attendances by some recommendation of ours; with whom a
certain correspondence is to be held by presents and good offices. By which
means will the easy natured wenches be induced to reveal their Mistresses
secrets, and discover such things, as it may make very much for our advantage
to know.

The Fathers of our Society, are, in the disposal and directions of Great men's
consciences to follow the opinion of those Authors who allow a greater freedom
and indemnity to sin, contrary to the practife of the Monks and Friars.
This done, the effect will be, that, those discarded, they will follow ours,
and be guided by their advice and direction. Wherefore, the better to curry
favor with Princes, Prelates and Noblemen, it will not be amiss to
communicate to them the merits of our Order: to persuade them that we have
extraordinary privileges to absolve in reserved Cases and matters of Censure,
to give dispensation as to Fasting, as also to exempt men from paying their
debts, to dispense with them, as to the impediments of Matrimony and other
vows. Let them be invited to our Schools; celebrated with verses; Let Theses
be dedicated to them; if it be requisite let them be entertained in the
Refectory: and if the quality of the person will permit it, let them be saluted
in several tongues, while they are at Table by some of our Fraternity.

If there be any differences between great men, let the Fathers endeavor the
composure thereof. If there chance to be an eminent person that, being no
favourer of our Society, is nevertheless employed by Monarch that is much at
our devotion, let it be presented to him what favor and advancement he ^y
arrive to by our recommendation. In a word, ^ the affection of Princes,
Prelates, and Potentates ^ards the Society be so seriously endeavored, that ^
matters not if the Fathers disoblige their nearest ^ends and relations. Let
those that are dismissed ^e Society feel the weight of their persecution left
^ey should rise into any favor. Let them predict ^^at honors may be conferred
on some principal ^en, and if they accordingly are, let them be con^atulated
with Poems and Panegyricks by our Stu^ents at their first coming to those
places where they ^e to exercise their Jurisdiction.

SECT. III.
that we are to expect from such Grandees as being much behind hand as to
matter of money, are nevertheless of great esteem and authority in the
Commonwealth, and may otherwise very much oblige us.
IF such grandees are secular persons we are to endeavor their favor and
interest against our Adversaries; also their recommendations as to matters
relating to the ordinary Courts of Justice; and their authority and power in
order to the purchasing of Farms, Houses, Gardens, Quarreys of Stone to build
Colleges for our Society, especially in those Cities that are unwilling to
afford us any entertainment. We are further to ingratiate our selves into the
patronage of the said Grandees, that they would mitigate and abate the fury of
persons inferior to them being exasperated against us; we in the mean time
seeming to have no hand at all in the business.

If they are Ecclesiastical persons, as Bishops Archbishops etc. they must be
courted according to the several Nations they are of, and pressed to those
things which according to the present circumstances are most requisite. In some
parts it must be our business only to ingratiate our selves so far into the
Prelates and the Parish priests who are under them, as that they would
reverence us, and prove no hindrance to our Ministrations: in other parts we
may do much more. For in Germany and Poland the authority of the Bishops is in
great esteem and veneration, in so much, that, without any difficulty, having
communicated the business to the Prince, they can procure Monasteries,
Parishes, Residences, and the foundations of Altars for us, some small matter
being, by way of gratification, allowed the Secular Priests. And this may also
be obtained in those places where the Catholics are chequered with Heretics
and Schismatics. Be it represented to the Bishops what advantage the Church
reapes thereby, whereas all the benefit it could derive from the Secular
Priests and Monks consisted only in a little singing. Let their zeal be
commended, the perpetual remembrance of the fact be much insisted upon. Now
such Foundations, as those wherein the Society is possessed of the Benefices of
secular Priests, may easily be procured by the influence of those Bishops who
have of ours to their Confessors, and are guided by our direction, and are in
hopes to be preferred to fatter Bishoprics by the mediation of the Society.

Be it very much the care of our Fathers as well when they have to do with
Bishops as Princes, that, when they found Colleges where there are parish
Churches, ours may have the perpetual right of placing a Vicar with the cure
of souls. The Sup^rious ^ the time being, shall have the said Vicarsh^p; so at
all things relating to the government of the ^urch may be managed by us. With
the same as^tance shall they obtain the liberty to build Col^dges in
Universities, whereof the Inhabitants op^se our Foundations in their Cities.
They shall also ^ocure us pulpits in the chiefest Churches of their ^incipall
Cities.

If any one of ours be to be beatified or canonized, shall be the business of
some Noblemens sons to llicite it at the Apostolic See. If it happen that ^y
of those great men be designed for an Embassy some place, without any notice
taken of other Re^ious men, who may happily have the same design ith us, let it
be given out as if he were a favourer of ^em, and be brought into those
Provinces where we ^e most considerable. Wherefore, if any illustrious ^en
pass through the Provinces where any of ours ^e, let them be entertained in
our Colleges, and ^eated with a respect had to Religious modesty.

SECT. IV.
Of the principal design of such as are Preachers and Confessors to Princes
and Great men.
FOr the better Institution of Kings, Princes, and persons of Honor, our
Fathers are to direct them in all things with that circumspection and prudence,
that their direction may seem to tend to the quiet regulation of their
consciences whereof they have trusted them with the management and disposal.
Their direction therefore ought not immediately, but by insensible degrees, to
incline toward things relating to external policy. They are, to that end,
often to inculcate to Princes, that the distribution of Honors and dignities
in the Commonwealth is to be moderated according to Justice, and to persuade
them that they never offend God so highly as by a contempt thereof. But these
things are to be represented with this caution, that it is not without some
violence to themselves that they any way meddle with the administration of the
Commonwealth, and that they are in a manner forced to speak out of a
consideration of their duty.

This when Princes are once made sensible of, let them have lectures read to
them of the Virtues where* with those persons ought to be endued who are to be
advanced in the Commonwealth. But let the maine design of the recommendation
reflect on such as are Friends of our Society, and such others, whose admission
to Government may prove advantageous to the Society: whom yet it is not fit for
the Confessors and Preachers to name to the Prince, but to leave that to be
done by such as are assured Friends to the Society, and have an interest in the
Prince. To this end are the Confessors and Preachers to have an account from
the Society of what Men there are in all parts of the Princes Dominions, of
their qualities, power, interests, wealth, and particularly, of their
liberality toward us. They are to have a list of their names, that they may
accordingly give a character of them to the Prince to whom they are to be
dexterously commended; that so he may be the sooner induced, when occasion
serves, to prefer those, whom he shall call to mind to have been long before
recommended to him by his Confessors and Preachers.

The Confessors and Preachers to Princes are further to remember, that they are
to deal very mildly and tenderly with them, by all means to forbear being too
much given to reproof and censure in their Sermons and private conferences. Let
them be very hardly prevailed with to accept of Sweetmeats, Spirits, etc. and
content themselves, in order to their private use, with little money. When they
are in Palaces, let them not think it any dishonor to make visits to the most
obscure Lodgings. Let them prudently inculcate to their Princes, that there is
nothing so dangerous, as, in the least measure to slight the advice of their
ghostly Fathers. Be they careful, with the soonest, to get notice of the death
or removal of the Officers of the Commonwealth, that so timely provision might
be made for the supply of their places. But that no imputation of being
over-pragmaticall in the affairs of the world, might be fastened on them, let
them not undertake the solicitation even of their Friends causes to their
Princes, but rather recommend them to the management of others.

SECT. V.
How we are to behave our selves toward those Religious Orders, which
pretending to the same design with us, do very much derogate from us.
It Is impossible to humor all mankind, and therefore some things must with
constancy be endured. Men are to be persuaded that our Order is the
consummation of all Religious Associations, and that, if there be any thing,
for which other Religious Institutions are remarkable, the Society is much more
venerable for the same as making a greater light in the Church. Setting aside
singing and austerity of life (wherein indeed we differ from Monks) there is a
better regulation of all other things in the Society even to the meanest that
have any relation thereto. Let there be an aggravation of those defects, whence
it may be inferred that other Religious men cannot so well go through those
employments wherein they any way entrench upon us. We must bandy with the
greatest violence possible against those Religious Orders which have Schools
erected for the education of youth, especially in those places where our
Society undertakes the same thing with reputation and advantage. Let it be
hinted to Princes that such men are likely to prove disturbers of the Common
wealth. Let it be proposed to foreign Universities, that it is more probable
those Religious men should prove their rni^e then we. Let it be suggested to
Princes* that the Society alone is sufficient to carry on the education ^f
youth. I^ they have Letters from the P^pe or recommendations from some
Cardi^als, let their solicitations to the Pope be managed by the interests of
Princes, that He also may be satisfied that the Society is not any way
blameable, but acquits it self of the charge lying upon it. They shall procure
from the Cities wherein they have Colleges, Testi^onialls of their good
conversation. It is of no small concernment to persuade the said Cities, that
it is much to be feared that a diversity of Schools and Teachers might
occasion some disturbance. Be it supposed they are Religious men, it matters
not, let ours in the mean time endeavor the affiduity of Study and exercise,
to the admiration and with the applause of the rest.

SECT. VI.
How to cajoll rich Widows into a veneration of the Society.
LEt there be chosen to carry on this design Fathers that are about midle-aged,
and of a fresh and lively complexion. Let some of ours make frequent visits to
them. If any one of that condition express an affection for our Society, it is
but just, on the contr^ry, that the assistances of our Society should be
profferred her. If she accept thereof, and thereupon begin to frequent our
Churches, let such a Confessor be assigned her as may direct her well, and
encourage her to continue still a widow, by representing to her the advantages
of a single life, as such, as, if observed, would prove extremely meritorious
to her. That the business may the better be carried on, let her be persuaded
to dismiss those Servants of whose attendances there is no great necessity.
Let officers and s^ewards be proposed to her. Let such only be assigned as are
necessary for the government of her house, respect had of the place where she
lives and her quality.

The main thing which the Confessor is to endeavor, is, that she may so far
comply with his direction as to continue still a widow, and that she follow
his advice as that whereon is grounded all the assurance of her future
spiritual advantages. Let the frequent use o^ the Sacraments be proposed to
her* as also the hearing of Sermons, and recitation of the Letanies. Twice or
thrice a week let exhortations be made to her concerning the happiness of
Widdow-hood, the inconveniences of second marriages, and the dangers and
grievances occasioned thereby. Let him merrily propose to her such Noblemen,
as the Widow, he has to do with, would gladly venture a marriage with; but
let them withal be so described, by a discovering of their humors and
imperfections, that when the Widow comes to hear thereof, she may abhor all
thoughts of marriage.

Things being so managed as that they are inclined to embrace a single life,
the next thing to be done is to recommend unto them the excellency of Religious
vows. To the end, that having once made a vow of chastity, they may not
entertain the least thought tending to a second marriage. And when they are
brought to this pass, let them be earnes^ly persuaded to dismiss these young
men (if they have any in their retinue) that are more then ordinarily given to
jeasting, to admit of few visits, and to take order that those few may be
managed with a great observance of mediocrity. Care must be had, that their
Stewards, Chaplains and other Officers be such as were either entertained upon
our recommendation, or whose continuance depends on our character. Having gone
thus far with the Widow, she is by degrees to be flattered into an inclination
to do some good works, wherein yet she must resign her self to be guided by the
direction of her Ghostly Father.

SECT. VII.
Of the ways of persuading Widows to perseverance in a single life; as also
of the disposal of their Revenues.
IF, beyond the ordinary affection she may have for us, the Widow make some
demonstration of her Liberality toward our Society by giving us her jewels or
a very considerable sum of money, let her be mad e a partaker of the Merits
of our Society. If she has made a vow of chastity, let her, according to the
custom among us, renew it twice a year. Let the domestic order of our Society
be discovered and explained ^o her: which if she be taken with, let it be
prescribed for her own Court* Let monthly Confessions be appointed, as also
for the Feasts of our B. Savior, the B. Virgin, and the Apostles. Let there be
certain Censors of Manners, or a kind of Informers be appointed between the men
and women, whose duty it shall be to take notice of what passes between the
Gentlemen and the Women, and to give an account of it to the Lady. Let all
noddings, whisperings, private conferences be strictly forbidden; let those
that offend to the contrary be severely chastised.

Let there be about the Lady's palace virtuous maids well brought up, whose
business it shall be, by working several vestments for the use of the Church,
to spend their time and themselves in the works of piety. Let these have over
them a Governesse, to take an account of the expense of their time, and
instruct them as to good manners. Let the Widows be often visited, and
entertained and diverted with pleasant discourses, but such as have some
tincture of spiritual edification. Let them not be harshly dealt with in
Confessions; u^lesse it be that there is little hope of getting any thing out
of them.

It further contributes something to the continuance of Widdow-hood a^^ the
keeping of a fair correspondence with the Widows, that some small things
should be done merely to humor them; as for instance, to give them the liberty
to come into our Houses, to admit them to conferences, when, and with whom of
our Fathers they please. Let them not be obliged in the cold winter season to
come out of their houses upon any occasion of Devotion. Let them have the same
privilege when they find themselves any way indisposed. If their Daughters
marry, let their Nuptials be celebrated by Stud^nts that are not of our
Society. If there happen to be a Funeral, let mourning be allowed but r^spect
had to decency: if there be any necessity of a Monument, let the structure be
sumptuous. Lastly, whatever can be done that contributes to the sensuality and
enjoyments of Widows (^f so be they are liberal and much devoted to the
Society) let it be done, but with circumspection, and a care to avoid scandal.

As to the disposal of Widows Revenues, let that commendable state and
perfection of the holiest men be particularly proposed to them, who through a
pious neglect of their Friends, scatter the wealth of this world mong those
that are poor upon the account of Jesus Christ. Let the examples of other
Widows, who in a short time* g^in'd the reputation of great Saints, be urged
for their imitation.

When therefore the Widows have committed themseves to our conduct, with a
readiness to submit to the direction of the Ghostly Father, let it be
seriously suggested to them that their actions will be much more acceptable in
the sight of God, if, being re^olved to bestow their charities on Religious
persons, they do it not without the privity of their Confessor. Thence will it
not be amiss for the Confessor to require a schedule of the charities they
intend to bestow, to the end he may, according to his discretion add to or
substract from the Sums set down therein. The Confessors are to make the best
provision they can to prevent the frequent interloping of Religious men of
other Orders, lest they should seduce the Widows, who being women, are
nat^rally unconstant.

When the Widows have by a frug^ll managemen^ of their Estates, got together
vast sums of money, to prevent their taking any occasion thence to think of
second marriages, let the Confessors propose, nay, persuide them to an
allowance of ordinary pensions and annuities for the better support and
subsi^tance of our Colleges and professed Houses, especially the professed
House at Rome. They may also be drawn in to bestow the said money upon
Repositories, vestmen^s, and other ornaments belonging to the Church, which may
be serviceable for our Houses after the Widows are dead. Let the Widows, to
that end, he made sensible of the exigencies of our Churches, as also of the
decays of our Colleges. Let them be encouraged to spend their superfluities on
things whence they may d^ri^e eternal fame, such as are Churches, S^ructures
dedicated to Religion, which mu^t of purp^se be designed at that time* that
they may not w^n^ whereupon to exercise their liberality. The some cour^e is to
be taken with Benefactour^ and Princes who are at the charge of some su^pt^ous
Edifice for us. If it be to get jewels, let it be suggested, tha^ they are
consecrated to Eternity, if the Widows bestow them on the Sepulchers of our
Saints at Rome.

Let all this be confirmed by the examples of other Matrons that had done the
like Let it be shown, how that by those courses they shall arrive to the height
of perfection, when, by discarding the love of the things of this world, they
quit the possession thereof to the Lord Christ in the servants of his Society.

If they have any children who they intend shall embrace a Religious life,
their liberality is by all means to be accepted, if any thing be offered; but
for those Widows whose children are so disposed of as to continue in the
world, they are not to be so much pressed to liberality as the others.

SECT. VIII.
Of certain expedients whereby it may be effected that the Sons and Daughters
of such women as have resigned themselves to the conduct of our Society, may
embrace a Religious condition of life.
THis design is to be carried on by a confederacy with the Widow their
Mother. For the Daughters, she is to treat them with all harshnesse, to
persecute them with chastisement, threats, and abstinences, not to allow them
clothes suitable to their quality and the mode, and she may sooth them up with
hopes of greater portions if they will go into Nunneries. Let her aggravate the
insupportable humors of the husbands they may meet with, as also the
grievances and inconveniences of Matrimony in general Let the Mother pretend
no small regret, that she had not been a Nun. In a word, let her behavior be
such toward her daughters, that wearied out with the insufferable cruelties of
the Mother, they may entertain some thoughts to rest themselves in a Monastery.

For their Sons, let our Fathers make frequent vi^its to them. Let them be
civilly treated in our Colleges, where they are to be entertained with those
things which may induce then to come into our Society. Such are the Gardens
adjoining to our Colleges where we take out recreations, etc.

When they are brought into the Refectories, let them be made acquainted with
our cleanliness as to all things relating to those places, as also with the
external conversation among out Fathers. Let them not spare for little
presents, and facetious discourses, yet such as savor something of the Spirit.
Let there be placed near and about such Widows sons such instructors as are
very good Friends to our Society, nay, such as are resolved to be members of
it. Let not the Mother be over-ready in supplying her sons with necessaries at
certain times; let her pretend extraordinary expenses, and encumbrances in her
estate. If they are sent to study, into Provinces that lie at a great distance
from the place where she resides, let them be kept as short as may be of money;
to the end, that cast down with a consideration of their exigences in strange
Countries, they may earnestly make it their business to fasten on some
Religious kind of life.

SECT. IX.
Of the ways whereby the Revenues of our Colleges may be improved.
THe principal instruction to be given the Confesfessors of Princes, great
Men, and Matrons, is, that, while they supply them with spiritual things, they
may receive of them temporal things for the good and advantage of the Society.
To which end they are to have a care they do not let slip the occasions of
accepting of any thing while it is offered; and if it be delayed, let them be
put in mind of it, yet so as that it may appear to be done with much
indifference. Whoever among the Confessors shall not discover themselves very
industrious as to this particular, let them be removed from their charge over
Princes, and condemned to a domestic obscurity, as such as endeavor not the
advancement of the common good. It is with no small regret that we have
understood, how that some Widows suddenly snatched hence by unexpected death,
have, merely through the neglect of our Fathers, for born to leave us in their
Wills abundance of rich and precious things belonging to the Church, our
Fathers it seems making some difficulty to accept of them while the Widows
were alive; whereas indeed to get things of that nature, there ought not to be
so much consid^ration of the opportunity, as of the will of the person that
makes the profser thereof.

The Confessors are further enjoined to make their visits to the houses of the
wealthiest Citizens and richest Widows, as also to the Courts of Noble men. At
such places are they prudently to make enquiry, whether, out of a desire to
further their souls welfare, they themselves, their Friends or kindred or any
others whatsoever, are resolved to leave any thing at their death to the
Churches.

The same thing is also with no less circumspection to be si^ted out of the
Pastors of parishes and Prelates, such as had before been drawn in to some
intentions to do works of charity. Things may be so ordered, that we may be no
small gainers by the bargain.

With all the forementioned, the Confessors are to ingratiate themselves, by
persuading them into a belief of the Gratitude of the Society, and their
faithful performance of whatever they undertake to do in relation to the
places, which are bestowed on them by their Benefactors, much beyond what other
secular Priests and Monks do.

They are further to have a particular account of the Gardens, Quarreys of
Stone, Vine-yard^, of the Cities wherein they reside, of the villages
adjoining, of the Farms thereunto belonging. They are further to take notice
whose possession they are in, upon what contracts they are held, what
encumbrances they are liable to; and la^tly they are to find out, whether those
e^tates may be gotten, either by contract, or by a reception of their sons into
the Society, or by deed of gift.

It will not be amiss sometimes for those that have devoted themselves to our
Society, whether sex they are of it matters not, to m^ke over their estates to
the College, with a proviso, that, after a short time all shall be made sure
to the Society. If it happen that the Widows so qualified as aforesaid have
only Daughters, let them by all means be thrust into Monasteries, that so with
a certain dowry allowed them they may be dispatched out of the way. For the
rest, that is their Manors, jewels and the whole real Estate we shall make a
shift some way or other to hedge in.

But if the Widow at our devotion have only one son or more, and that there be
no hope they will come into our Society, let it be suggested to the Matrone
that it is sufficient, if she leave the Estate in Fee to her Son or Sons, and
make over the sum of money which she may have raised out of the Estate, by
way of recompense for the Fortune she brought, to the S^cieety It happens
sometimes that there are devout Widows, whose inclinations toward our Society
are more then ordinary, living in several parishes; if so, our ^usinesse must
be to induce them to make over their Estates to our Colleges, they receiving
out of them from us a certain annual Allowance for their lives; to the end,
that they may prosecute the great affair of Religion and their^ Souls welfare
with more earnestness and less distr^ction, being freed from the distu^banc^s
consequent to the care of t^mporall things.

SECT. X.
Of the necessity there is to make some ostentation of the severity of
discipline in the Society.
IT will not be amiss to express a certain severity of discipline, by an
ejection of those members out of the Society, whom it may be for the advantage
of the Society to cut off as unp^ofitable As to their qualities and conditions,
it matters not whether they are old men or young men, though they have spent
their age and spirits among us, or that they have been troubled with the stone,
cholick or some other painful chronicall disease ever since their first coming
into the Society. The causes of ejection (besides the reserved causes, for
which, unnatural pollution excepted, it is lawful to dismiss any) shall be
these; if they divert the devout Matrones and others that are any way
beneficial to* the Society, to other Religious Institutions, or use any
arguments to the Parents or others who have the oversight of them, whereby the^
are induced to forbear coming into the Society: If in the disposal of Estates
they exp^esse any affection to their kin^ed, and prove occasions that all be
not given to the Society. But before they be absolutely dismissed, let them be
mo^^^fy'd for some years in the S^ciety. If they chance to be Stud^nts, let
them be put upon the vilest ^m^l^yment^; Let them be kept back in the lower
Sch^oles, that ^hey may teach there* For the higher Studie^, ^specially the
f^urth year in Divinity let them not by a^y means be admi^ted ^o. Let them be
often put upon the reading of Chapt^rs while the rest are at Table. If they are
Fathers, let them not be suffered to receive Confessions; let them be d^prived
the freedom of all conversation with the strangers that come to the College.
Let the things they most delight in be taken out of their ch^mbers. Let
frequent penances be enjoined them, and that publicly.

These things will by degrees open a gap for a dismis^ion. If it chance that
the persons charged with such disservices toward the Community, m^ke their
complaints to the Provincials of the hard me^sure they receive from their
Superiors and others whom they find it so diff^cult to satisfy, let not such
expo^t^lations be easily entertained or credited, let the carriage of the
Superior be excused, let them be returned with exhortations to obedience and
compliance with their Superior in all things wherein there is no sin.

Let not the Superiors be any thing scru^ulo^s in point of dismission. For
since the word SOCIETY is the characteristick of our Order distinguishing us
from all others, and that a Society supposes there are Socii or Members of it,
it is not to be wondered, that where there is a Society, there should also be
Dismission. The obligations that are between a Society and its Members are not
indissoluble, nor argue any perpetu^ty. No sooner was the Society settled but
dismission was immediately exercised.

And to make this appear, there needs no other argument, then that the Society
requires on^y simple vows from Scholars and those that are c^lled F^rmall
Coadjut^rs; which vows do not include a mutual contract, as if the Society
were obliged to a perpetual maintenance of those persons that are entertained
into it upon such vows. No* that cannot without absurdit^ ^e imagined, for the
obligation lies only upon the person that makes the vow, and not upon the
Society, which has a privilege to dismiss any whatsoever rec^ived in upon
such vows, whenever, and upon what occasion soever it shall be thought
convenient* Nay, wha^ is yet more then all this, though there are some in the
Society who make profession of four Vows, others of the three solemn vows,
according to the custom of other Monks, yet is it not impossible but that such
may be dismissed out of the Society.

SECT. XI.
How the Fathers of the Society are generally to behave themselves toward
those that are dismissed.
WHereas it is in the power of such as are dismissed to do no small prejud^ce
to the Society, it is but fit some ways should be thought on whereby they might
be prevented. To which end, before they be absolutely dismissed out of the
Socie^y, let them be engaged to promise, and that by a testimonial under their
hands, that they will not speak any thing that shall derogate from the ho^our
of the Society. Let a great care be taken, that the person dismissed may not
h^ve access to those spiritual or secular Grandees, into whose favor he
endeavors to insinuate himself and make his advantag^s of* Let his vices, ^
his evil inclinations be aggravated where ever he may casually be spoken of,
especially those imperfections, whereof he had, for the innocent satisfaction
of his conscience, some time made a faithful discovery to the Superiors, and
according to which he was governed and disposed of in the Socie^y, to which end
he had made that revelation of his infirmities.

If the Grandees whom such a person makes his add^esses have an aversion for
our Society, we must ^^nd out some grave men in whom we have an intorest, who,
not seeming any way to reflect on us, may lay rubs in his way, and hinder him
from coming into favor with him who is not well affected to us. But if all the
applications of such persons cannot prevail so far with the Grandees as to make
them slight the dismissed person, let them be induced not to countenance him in
all things. Let there be a writing sent from one College to another giving an
account of those that are dismissed; and let the causes of their dismission be
laid down with the greatest aggravation that may be. In our exhortations, let
it be said of the person dismissed, that it was his earnest desire to be
rea^mitted into the Society. For the satisfaction of strangers, let those
things be assigned as causes of his dismission, for which we are generally
abhorred by the vulgar; and this will make the dismission of any whatsoever
seem much more plausible.

If the person dismissed be credited in the things he scatters abroad to our
prejudice, let the mischief he intends be as much as may be prevented, by this
course. Let some of the gravest of our Fathers be culled out, whose business
it shall be to oppose and smother the speeches of the pers^n dismissed with the
authority of the Society, the reputation it is in, the advantages which the
Church of God derives from its endeavors, the great esteem men have of it as
to strictness of life and soundness of doctrine. That thence it comes to
pass that our Fa^hers are entertaind for Confessors and Preachers to Kings,
Princes and Magistrates Le^ them make appear how Ze^lous we are for the good of
o^r neighbor, and therefore much greater must he the tenderness we have for
any one ^f our own Socie^y Let those be invited to dinners in whom the
dismissed person seems to have any interest: and this, o^t of a design to
^ersuade them not to countenance the discarded party, and that they are obliged
in conscience to presume that a Society of Religious men are rather in the
right then one discontented dismissed person.

Upon that, they are to take occasion to give an account of the causes of his
dismission; convincing them with as much probability as may be, making all the
discoveries they can of the frailties and imperfections of the person
dismissed, omitting nothing contributory to their design.

But, be it supposed, that some things are doubtful, let them beware how they
admit dismissed persons to any Ecclesiastical Benefices or employments,
unless they give a considerable sum of money, or make over their estates to
us, or, after some extraordinary manner express the great affection they have
toward our Society. The Confessors are in like manner to suggest the same
thing to Kings and Princes, that when they are to advance any one to honors,
they may look on as a great motive to do it, the liberality and good affection
of such toward our Society, as having founded us a College, or done something
of that nature for us.

If it happen that the persons who are dismissed find much favor in the sight
of men, let there be a diligent enquiry made into their lives, dispositions and
defects, and let them be divulged by some secret Friends of our Society, and by
the devout Matrons of a lower rank. Let not these latter any way countenance
the dismissed, and if they afford them any entertainment at their houses, let
them be terr^fi'd with Censures; and if they persist to do it, let them be
denied absolution. If the dismissed person be commended for any thing, we must
on the contrary, as much as may be, endeavor his disparagement, to which end
though we make use of subtle and ambiguous propositions, yet must it be so
done, as that they may alienate the inclinations of men from the dismissed
person, and bring him to some remarkable discredit. The unfortunate accidents
that happen to such as are dismissed are to be discovered, in our Exhortations,
with much commiseration, that others may be terrified, and remain in the
Society, though not without some indignation.

SECT. XII.
Of the choice of young Lads for the Society, and the ways whereby they are to
be retained.
THis is an affair requires the greatest care and industry imaginable. There
are four qualifications which we would gladly have in those who embrace our
Institution; that they be of good wits, of allowable beauty, of a noble
extraction, and rich. That such may be the more easily drawn in, let the
Praefects show them all the favor they can; let them not be persec^ted by the
Praeceptors; let them be often commended; let presents be made them; let them
be permitted to go into the Vineyard and there entertained with fruits: upon
solemn occasions let them be treated in the Refectory. For others, let them be
perpetually terrified with rods, let them be ch^rg'd with crimes though there
be only some slight conjectures of their being guilty thereof; let them always
be entertained with an angry countenance; they are to be sharply reproved, and
put upon things that are most displeasing to them. Let it be shown how
inclinable youth is to that which is evil; if they embrace not a Religious
life, let them ^e terrified with ^ternall damnation. But when they make it
their suit to be ad mitted into the Society, let them be put of^ s^r a time. In
the interim, let them be cherished and encouraged; in the conferences that are
had with them, let the ea^inesse of the Institution be much insisted upon. By
this means will their desires be heightened to a greater earnestness for their
admis^^on.

And if it comes to pass afterward that any one of those that have been thus
dealt with chance to leave the Society, let him have cast in his dish his
former importunity to be admitted into the Society.

But whereas the main difficulty lies in cajolling the sons of Senators and the
wealthiest men in the Country; if there be any such recommended to our
Colleges let them be sent to the Novitiat at Rome, but let the General or
Provincial of Rome have notice thereof beforehand. If they come into Germany*
France, Italy, and seem to have some inclinations to enter into the Society,
let them without any scruple be entertained in those Dominions wherein the
supreme Magistrate is our Friend. For under such a Governor the precedent
instructions, or some thing suitable thereto, is to be put in practice; for his
Subjects, finding it much to their advantage that they are countenanced by us,
will not easily rise up against us, and if they do, they shall get nothing by
it.

And if any occasion offer it self to draw in the sons of those, who, in order
to their studies come to our Schools out of other Provinces, let it not be
neglected, especially when they are arrived to the understanding to lose and
squander away their money, and so, partly by reason of the shame they conceive
at their prodigality, partly out of a fear of their Parents and Friends
displeasure, and the inconveniences they are likely to run into, are the more
easily prevailed with.

To prevent the inconstancy of those we entertain, according to the several
qualities of the persons, we are to insist very much on the mi^fortunes that
happen to those that are dismissed. And that the Parents and Relations of those
that embrace our Institution may in some measure be satisfied, let them be m^de
sensible of the transcendency of our Order above all others, and what a
veneration the world has for our Order; as also let them be entertained with
something concerning the great respects which Kings and Princes bear the
Society. Nay further, let out Fathers insinuate themselves into their
familiarity and humor them as much as may be, if there be any necessity or
that the worthiness of the person require it.

SECT. XIII.
Of the Nu^nes.
LEt our Confessors be very careful that they do not any thing whereat the
Nu^s may be dissatisfied, because they have proved such great Benefactresses to
us, that some of them have very much contributed to the foundations of our
Colleges, many of them given half their dowry* with the consent of the
Monasiery and Abbess* Wherefore, were it only for that they are re^ired out of
the world, let them not be molested, but resigned over to the Bishops. On the
contrary, let us hold a f^ir corres^ondency with the Nuns, left they bring any
trou^le upon the Society for the half dowries we have received from them, and
upbraid us therewith.

SECT. XIV.
Of reserved Cases, and other causes of Dismission out of the Society, then
what have been mentioned before.
BEsides the cases elsewhere assigned in these Instructions wherein it is only
in the power of the Superior, or an ordinary Confessor, by a privilege
derived from the Superior, to give absolution (that is to say, in the cases of
Sodomy, Fornication, Adultery, rapes, unchaste embracings of man or woman; as
also if any shall upon any account whatsoever attempt any thing against the
Society, what zeal soever his action may proceed from) be it known that there
are other causes of dismission out of the Society, and that accordingly the
persons therein concerned are not to be absolved, till such time as they have
prom^s'd, out of Confession, to discover, either of themselves, or by their
Confessor, what they have done, to the Superior. Who, being acquainted
therewith, if he find there were several persons engaged in the sin confessed,
or that it is a thing tending very much to the dishonor and prejudice of the
Society, he shall not absolve the Penitent, unless he promise, either that he
will write of it himself to the General, or give his Confessor or the
Superior to write concerning it. If he make any difficulty to do either of
these, he shall be looked on as absolutely incapable of Absolution. Now the
General having taken cognizance of the penitents case, and consulted with the
Secretary, shall make that provision therein which he shall conceive to be most
for the advantage of the Society, and so shall order the Penitent to be
dismissed out of the Society. Which sentence if he shall refuse to submit to,
he can never be effectually absolved. The same course we have concluded to be
taken with our Divines in reserved cases, and the approbation of the Apostolic
See, notwithstanding the fruitless endeavors of some to the contrary. The
Confessor however is not to reveal that the Penitent is to be dismissed out of
the Society for the reason aforesaid. If the penitent shall, of himself out of
Confession, discover his fact, let him be dismissed. If he shall refuse to
discover, let him be dealt with according to the provision made against feigned
cases. In the mean time, as long as he shall refuse to declare the business,
out of confession, so long let him be accounted unworthy to receive absolution.

If it happen that any of our Confessors shall come to hear, that some person
that is not of our Society (whether of the two Sexes the party be of is not
material) has committed some act of abomination and uncleanness with one of
the Society, they shall not absolve the former, till such time as ours has,
out of Confession, acknowledged the crime. But if he will acknowledge it, let
ours be dismissed, the other absolved.

If two of the Society chance to commit Sodomy together, let him who shall not
reveal it be dismissed; let him who made the first discovery thereof be
continued in the Society; but let him be so persecuted with acts of
mortification, as that he may be glad after a short time to follow the other.

It is further a certain prerogative of the Society as it bears an analogy with
a Body, to disburden it self of such persons, as, in process of time, it shall
find unciviliz'd as to point of Morality and ordinary discourse. Nay, it is
left to the Superiors to dismiss any one assigning what causes they think fit
for their so doing, having first acquainted the General with the business.
And somewhat to hasten their dismission, let all things be done contrary to
their inclinations; let them be purposely vexed; let all their desires be
answered with de^ials, though they be for things ever so inconsiderable; let
them not be admitted to the more worthy studies; let them be disposed under
such superiors as they cannot comply with, but with regret and indignation. If
any discover so much of their exasperation as to oppose the superior, or make
complaints of him before the lay brothers, let them be wormed out of the
soci^ty. Let the same course be taken with those who shall express any
dissatisfaction at what is done in the society, in relation to widows, and the
management o^ commonwealths, or shall speak favorably of the Venetians who
banished the society out of their territories.

Immediately before the dismission, let the person to be dismissed be sharply
reproved; let him be removed from a certain employment, and be put one while
upon one thing, and another upon another. But whatever he is employed in, let
some fault or other ^e found, that he does not discharge his du^y as he ought.
According to the excess of his miscarriages, let him be assigned more grievous
penances. Let a recital be made of his failings and miscarriages, out of the
readingplace in the refectory, while the rest are at table, to put him into the
greater co^fusi^n. And so at that very time, while he bet^ayes a rema^kable
impatience, in the sight and hearing of the rest, let him be dismissed, as one
that is a scandal and gives evil example to others. But before hand let there
be notice taken what things he has, and let him be commanded to go to some
place, as into the Vineyard, or the next adjoyn^ng college, to the end that in
the place where he least expects it, the irrevocable decree of his dismission
may be served upon him.

SECT. XV.
What persons of the So^i^ty are the most to be cherished and encouraged.
IN the first place are to be numbered those indefatigable laborers in the
harvest, who make it their business to improve not only the spiritual, but also
the tempo^^l good of the society. Such are the confessors of weal^hy widows,
who, when, by the decay^s of age, they are no longer able to discharge those
places to the satisfaction of the Matrons: are to be removed, and others that
are more vigorous and full of spirits appointed to supply their places. Let not
these want any thing of accommodat^on in what relates to mea^, cloa^hs, or
ought else; and let them not be persecuted by the M^nisters of Penances. Ag
inst such the confessors are not easily to admit any complaints or informations.

Let there be also a great tendern^ss expressed tow^rds those, who, h^v^ng
observed the least miscarriages in others, put up secret inform^ti^ns thereof
to the superior, or being appoint^d Ministers, sub*ministers, Beadles, are
very ^ngenious in finding w^ys to mortify others, no^ out of any affection
they have for them, but a love of Religious discipline.

Let thos^ y^^ng men ^e chrished who are an^ way rel^ted to our B^nefactors and
Founders, to which end let them be sent to Rome. I^ they s^udy in their own
Provinces, let them be so far complied with in all things, that they man be
s^nsible of the indulgence of the society toward them.

Let some favo^r be also shown those young men, who have not yet made over
their estates to the Society. But when that is once done, where they had before
bread and milk, bread alone may then serve the turn.

Nor are those to be disposed into the lowest rank, who prove excellent Decoyes
to bring in many choice youths into the Society; for in that they express the
greatness of their af^ection and respects for our Institution.

SECT. XVI.
Of the contempt of Wealth.
THat the world may not imagine that we mind nothing but our own advantages,
and think us too much inclined to avarice, it will contribute some thing
thereto, if we do not admit charities for the ordinary offices that are done by
our Fathers. Let not the meaner sort of people be allowed burial in our
Churches. For the Widows who have devoutly exhausted themselves by their
liberality toward us, let them be harshly dealt withal by the Fathers. The
same course is to be taken with those persons who have made over any thing to
the Society; nay, though they should come to be dismissed, let it be done so as
that nothing may be returned them, or at least, let the Society be sufficiently
allowed for the charge and trouble it has been at about them.

Let it be the especial care of the Superiors to keep those secret
Instructions in their own custody, and that, if there be any occasion they
should be communicated, it be done to very few and those the gravest among the
Fathers. They are also to gather out of them those directions which may prove
most advantageous to the Society; and let them not be communicated as things
written by another, but as the observations of their own prudence and
experience. And if it come to pass, (which God forbid it ever should) that
these admonitions fall into the hands of strangers or any that are not members
of our Society, that is, such as are likely to take them in the worst sense;
let it be absolutely denied that the Society makes any such advantage thereof;
and let such men be confirmed in that apprehension by those of our Fathers who
it is well known are ignorant thereof. To oppose the credit might be given
these Secret Instructions, let our general Directions be produced, and those
Rules of ours, either printed or written, that are contrary thereto. Lastly,
let strict enquiry be made, whether the discovery of them happened through the
treachery of any of our own (for it is impossible any Superior should be so
negligent in the safe custody of Secrets of so great concernment to the
Society) and if any one be suspected, though upon ever so groundless
conjectures, let him be charged therewith, and dismissed out of the Society.

THE END.
OBAD. Chap. 1. Verse. 6, 7.
How are the things of Esau searched out? How are his hid things sought up.

The men that were at peace with thee deceived thee, and prevailed against
thee: They that ^at thy bread have laid a wound under thee.

A DISCOURSE of the REASONS Why the JESUITS are so generally hated.

Originally written, by FORTVNIVS GALINDVS.

Printed for Richard Royston and Thomas Dring, 1659.

To the READER.
FRom some passages in the ensuing Treatise, it may easily be inferred that the
Author thereof was a Roman Catholic, thas is, one, who, though dissatisfied
with the Jesuits, yet seems to deal with them as mercifully, and with as much
tenderness as might be. So that it is to be imagined the Piece was written
rather out of design to bemoan their miscarriages, that they might thence take
occasion to reform them, then out of any pique that the Author seems to have
against the Society, whose serviceablenesse to the Church upon their first
Jnstitution he sufficiently acknowledges and celebrates. Whence, if a man
reflects on the time it was written in, that is, while the Society had yet
somewhat of its first purity and zeal left, before the Canonisation of S.
Ignatius and Xaverius, he must withal imagine, that it began to degenerate, in
a manner, as soon as it began. And what is consequent to this, that, if some
zealous Christian should in these days undertake to give an account, why the
Jesuits are so generally hated, since the discovery made of their horrid and
extravagant Tenants, and the abominations they have introduced into Christian
Morality, he would be so far from confining himself to the shortness of such a
Discourse as this, that he would happily take it as a favor, to sit down and
breathe a little, after a second or third Volume.

A Discourse of the REASONS WHY THE JESUITS Are so generally HATED.
THat the Jesuits are so odious every where, and that, where there happens any
discourse of them, they are evil spoken of, not only by Heretics, but also by
the greatest part even of Catholics themselves, I am for my part inclined to
believe it done, in some measure, undeservedly, and that in some measure also
it may come to pass through the miscarriages of some of the Society.
Vndeservedly, I say, in some measure; How serviceable the Jesuits have been to
the Church and Catholic Religion.
because, as it is notoriously known to all the world, if the Jesuits, by the
miraculous providence of God raised up in this last age, had not with might and
main bestirred themselves, Germany had been overrun with Protestantisme, and
the Catholic Religion clearly turned out of doors.

For the Fathers of the Society were the men that found out A Character of the
Jesuits at their first Institution.
the secret of bringing youth under the yoke of Religion; those instructed the
Priests no less in good manners then sound doctrine; they animated the
Princes* in the cause; they waged a holy war against the Heretics both by word
and writing. They are as it were the choice forces of Israel commanded by their
Captain-Generall JESUS, fighting against the Amalekites, did they not attribute
to their own valor the good success they have, whereas indeed it is due only
to the Moses on the top of the Mountain whose earnest addresses to Heaven gives
them the victory over their enemies. For when Moses held up his hand, Israel
prevailed; but when he let down his hand, Amaleck prevailed. Exodus 17.

And that this was also a figure of the manner whereby the Enemies of the
Church of God were to be destroyed, we have a hint in the book of Judith, Chap.
4* Moses overthrew Amalec who put his confidence in his own strength, by
fighting against him, not with a sword, but by holy prayers. So shall it be to
all the enemies of Israel, which is as much as to say, as that they were to be
overcome, notindeed by humane force, or a transcendenc^ of Learning and
eloquence, but by the pious addresse^ of men that have absolutely resigned up
themselves t^ the service of God.

Now one miscarriage of the Jesuits, They are odious for their Aulicisme and
monopolising the favors of God and Princes.
which makes them so generally odious, is this, that some among them are more
intermedlin then they should be in the affair and counsels of Princes and to^
often seen in their Courts, as ^ their design were to monopolize to themselves
all favor with God and man, to the end that all being forced to make their
applications to them, whether they address themselves to God or their Princes,
they may think themselves obliged to court the mediation of the Jesuits. Hence
comes it that the Society looks upon those that make their confessions to
Franciscans, Dominicans, or Augustine-Friers, as no good men. And thence it is
obvious to infer, that, in those Courts where the Jesuits are predominant,
Godliness is made a stalking horse to temporal advantages.

For if a man make frequent Confessions to the Jesuits, (if being supposed A
way for Courtiers to insinuate into the Jesuits favor.
done after he had, by a former confession, cleansed himself to some other Monk
of all the more horrid crimes he was guilty of) and, when he comes to hear Mass
casts himself devoutly down on ^oth knees, smite his breasts the harder to
make a ^reater discovery of his penitence, give up his name to he sodality of
the blessed Virgin, He speak highly of he childish plays and comedies, though
full of pedan^cal fooleries and elusions, that are acted in their Col^dges; in
a word, if in all things he express his af^ction to the Society, this they look
on as a godly ^an, and one sequestered to the service of God, and ^nsequently
one to be very earnestly recommended to ^inces, and to be put into the most
beneficial places the commonwealth. And if it ppen that, aster he has so crept
inemployments, How far they may be wicked and Tyrannical in the employments
they get into by their recommendation.
he play ever so much ^ Tyrant in them, cheat the Prince ^t entrusts him, make
havoc of the ^vinces committed to his charge, ^ if he send presents to the
College, ^, in case there be any money to raised or fine imposed upon, give
Fathers of the Society timely notice thereof (to the ^ that their
solicitations on that behalf may prevent ^se of all others.) they think it
not the least violation conscience and Religion to p^tronise him, as conving it
a thing not inconsistent with the glory of God, ^t the society should be
remarkable also for its alth, powerfulness and influence over Princes. Whether
ye ea^e or drink, or what ever ye do else, (says the Apostle, [1 Cor. 10.]
for instance, patronise such wicked men in their enormities as are benefactors
to the Society) Let all be done to the glory of God [Prov. 16.] For the Lord
has wrought all things for his own sake, yea, even the wicked man; especially
such of that predicament as by their wealth endeavor to further and oblige the
godly. Those Princes therefore are to be highly, commended, who, though they
express a more then ordinary affection to the Jesuits, yet think it no
impudence so to confine them to their Colleges as not to suffer them to set a
foot in their Courts, unless there be need of a Confessor, or that the Fathers
have some urgent occasion personally to attend the Prince.

There is a kind of devotion that The several affections of men, women and
children toward the Society.
speaks a certain manhood and generosity, and there is another kind which
betrays its childishness and effeminacy. It is not to be imagined that man
hates the Jesuits who does not in all things approve and applaud what they do,
and according to the Proverb dance where ever they pipe. Nay on the contrary,
he puts a greater obligation on them then any other who endeavors to limit
them only to a care of their own concernments, and diverts them from an
over-busie solicitation of Court*suits and projects. The unfitness of the
Jesuits to meddle with Courtaffairs.
For being persons of a scholastical education, and consequently of a pedantical
humor and judgment, it may easily come to pass that they should be mistaken
and overseen in giving political and oeconomical advice* Which when ever it
happens, the miscarriage of the design undertaken is fastened on them, and
consequently on the whole Society; in so much that thereupon a general odium
falls upon them, so that their after-endeavours prove ineffectuall, and what
Homer said of Margites may pertinently be applied to them.

Multa quidem n^rat, sed prave eadem omnia n^rat.
Nay, though they were not the Authors and abettors of counsels pernicious and
destructive to the public weal, yet there needs no more then their
importunate frequentation of Courts, and their familiarity with Princes, to
make a discovery of their polypragmatical insinuations, and to show they cannot
well avoid the censure of being the givers of those counsels. Nay, which is yet
more, be it supposed their prudence is such as that they avoid all these
inconveniences, yet methinks the very The example of S. Peter should deter them
from Palaces.
example of S. Peter should give them an alarm to depart Princes Courts. For if
his but once coming to Court proved so unfortunate to him, as that he denied
his Master thrice, what miracle is it, that they who have their habitations in
Palaces, should deny Christ once, especially when they cannot pretend so great
an affection to him as Saint Peter could.

They are odious sor their insatiable covetousness
Another thing that brings an odium upon them, is, that it is apparent they are
too great lovers of themselves, and a sort of laborers in the Lords vineyard
that will not work but at excessive rates. And this proceeds out of an
Imagination they have, that their endeavors will not prove so beneficial to
the Church, if they abound not in all the accommodations and enjoyments of
life: but as for the Monks, Friars, and others, who yet make it their business
to be in some measure serviceable to the public, whether they have bread to
put in their mouths or not, they think themselves not any way concerned; it
being their m^ine design to work themselves into such annuities and revenues,
as that they may with the profits thereof build Courts and Palaces.

This it is that makes them so They care not how burdensome they are ta Princes
and Provinces.
careless how burdensome they are to Princes, and without the least remorse,
make deep holes in their Exchequers, though to the apparent inconvenience of
whole Provinces, whereas, had they the least reflection of their being religious
men, and such as had professed the furtherance of public advantages, they
would have made it their main business so to order the management of affairs,
that they might be as little troublesome to others as possible. Si populo
consulis, says Cicero, remove te a suspicione privati alicnjus commodi. If
thou would promote the advantages of the people, be careful to avoid the
least suspicion of minding any private concernment. Nay, though it were
granted, that Princes were, of their own accord, inclined to be so profuse in
building Palaces for them, their insinuations and eloquence should rather be
employed to divert them from such extravagances, and that they should prove a
means to persuade them to make provision for those whom the fear of poverty
deters from the profession of the Catholic Religion, out of a mistrust, that
they should not find among the Catholics a comfortable subsistence for their
wives and children. And the better to effect this, they should ever be minding
them of that golden saying of Clemens Alexandrinus; 2 Paedag. 12.
S^io Deum potestatem nobis usus dedisse, sed eum tamen usque ad id, quod ^st
necessarium, and usum communem esse statuit. Absurdum ve^ o and turpe est unum
Laute vivere, cum multi esurient. Quanto enim est gloriosius multis benefacere,
quam magnifice habitare? Quanto autem prudentius in homines, quam in lapides
and in aurum impensas facere? I know God has left things to our disposal, but
with this caution that we pursue only that which is necessary and in some
measure contributes to the general good, Twere an unhandsome and unworthy thing
that one man should live in the height of enjoyments, while a many others are
ready to starve. For, how much more glorious is it for a man to be a benefactor
to many, then to live in Palaces? Does it not speak a greater prudence for him
to exercise his generosity upon mankind then upon stones and gold; And this
the Jesuits should so much the rather make it their business to practice, for
that they have found by many examples of their own society, how great an
influence a sincere, and not a personated profession of poverty has over the
minds of men. Possevinus in his Bibliotheca Lib. 4. cap. 9. gives a How the
Jesuits first behaved themselves among the Indians.
relation how that the Chinese and the Indians, observing in the Jesuits a
certain contempt of wealth and the concernments of this world, became great
admirers of them, and it proved a motive to many to embrace the Christian
Religion. Now how true the old saying is, Coelum, non ^nimum mutant qui trans
mare currunt,
We need go no further for an instance. For with the Jesuits continue among us
Europeans, their humor and behavior is much otherwise then it is among the
Indians and Chinese. How among the Europeans.
For here they are a sort of horseleeches that can never be satisfied, nay on
the contrary, when there is a plentiful provision made as to their
subsistence, yet can they not forbear milking men's purses out of contributions
toward the utensils and necessaries of the Church, or to enlarge or beautify
their* habitations, or to make their gardens more pleasant, or in order to
preparations for the acting of some Comedy (which if it be not done with the
greatest profuseness and magnifice^ce imaginable, plays must unavoidably fall
into discredit) or lastly, to furnish themselves with something, whereof only
they themselves see the necessity there is of it, And it will be found upon
enquiry The end and means of the Jesuits.
true, that, what ever they may pretend of the glorious end they have proposed
to themselves, namely, the salvation of men's souls and the glory of God, they
put much more confidence in the weak arm of man, then in assistances of God.
Whence it comes that the Jesuits do not work miracles.
Whence it is to be conceived, that it comes to pass, that God does not so much
prosper their endeavors with his benediction, nor favor them with the gift of
doing miracles, as he does other religious orders. For they are of the number
of those who are said in the Scripture to be of little faith, and to carry
their eyes in their hands, as hardly believing even that which they see. Such a
character is that which our Savior gives those that are not firm in the
faith; when he says, Be not overcarefull, saying what shall we eat, or what
shall we be clothed with; for all those things the Gentiles are inquisitive
after; that is to say, those who have not Faith. But it is the property of that
Faith that works miracles to believe in hope even against hope, not to be
distrustful, but to give glory to God who calls those things that are not as
those things that are.

Nor indeed is it a small affliction to them* to find themselves much more
inconsiderable then all other Religious Orders as to the gift of Miracles, in
so much that when any thing more than ordinary happens among them, it is a good
shift for the reputation of the society, immediately to cry it up This passage
agues the piece written before the canonization of Ignatius Loyola and Xaverius.
for a miracle. But God, who blesses sincerity and abhors Sycophancy, has so by
his all-seeing providence disposed of all things, that the Church has not yet
found just grounds to admit any of the Society into the number of Saints: not
that the Institution of the society is either less holy, or less advantageous
to the Church then those of the Franciscans, Dominicans and the rest, but as it
were purposely to abate the pride and insolence of the Jesuits. For since it
ordinarily happens, partly by reason of the excellent men that are of the
society, partly by reason of the familiarity they have with Princes, that many
of them grow insolent to the highest degree, as I shall more fully discover
anon; how sarrc would they forget themselves, if the society were honored with
the gift of miracles? For this reason was it that God was not wont immediately
Why God sometimes heard not the Prophets.
to hear even the Prophets themselves, lest they should be flattered into a
great opinion of themselves, as we might exemplify in Eliah, Elishah, Jeremy
and others. Another reason of Gods withdrawing his hand from them, may be, to
teach us, that, in all things, especially those wherein his own glory is
principally concerned, as the ordinary means and helps to compass the thing
intended, are not to be neglected, so ought a man not to put his trust too much
in humane prudence; for that were as much as if one should upon his own
strength undertake to do all things, and have so little reliance on God as if
he were not concerned in his affairs.

But this turns to their prejudice and alienates men's inclinations from them,
so that it happens through their own fault that they have not to do with many
great affairs wherein they might prove serviceable. For there are many who
oppose their admission, and the building of Colleges for them, principally out
of a fear they are in, that they will never be satisfied, but will ever be
begging till such time as that they have not left any thing to ask. For though
they take nothing for Their teaching gratis, no great advantage to to any.
teaching, and that any one of them in particular have not the disposal of
ought, yet what convenience or advantage does accrue thence to the Prince or
Provinces, when they can make no other use of them or their labors, unless
they be at vast charges to build them Colleges, and endow them with
con^iderable Revenues?

Besides, by this proceeding of They are prejudicial to many.
theirs, they incur the displeasure of the Monks and other learned men, who
really are in want, when they are so busy about men's estates both real and
personal, that, grasping all to themselves they leave as little as may be to
the others.

Lastly, Heretics, perceiving A scandal to Heretics.
the track of abundance of money going into the Jesuits College, but not the
least sign of any coming out again, and being persuaded that they live very
frugally, spending little in food and clothing, take thence occasion to
imagine theyhave vast treasuries, and that they lay the foundations of tumults
and di^turbances, and think they do that which is unjustifiable, when, having
all the accommodations of this life, they are nevertheless such importunate
Beggars, and entrench so much upon others that are in necessity, and upon these
grounds conclude them worthy hatred. Est intolerabilis res poscere nummos
Sene^. de Vit. Beat. lib. 2.
and contemnere. Indixisti pecuniae odium; hoc professus es, hanc personam
induisti, agenda est. Iniquissimum est, te pecuniam sub gloria eg^statis
acquirere. It Is an insupportable thing in a man to be desirous of money and at
the same time to contemn it. Thou have declared hostility against wealth: thou
must prosecute it; thou have undertaken that part, thou must needs act it.
'Twere an unjust thing in thee to grow rich under the name and pretense of
poverty.

Another thing that brings an odium on the society is the insufferable They are
odious also for their pride.
pride of some Jesuits, who conceive such an overweening of themselves, that,
because there are some among them very eminent for their worth and learning,
they presently imagine they ought also to be accounted such, behaving
themselves arrogantly, and crying out, Who but we Jesuits? Hence comes it that
they would not have any man accounted an Orator, Poet, Philosopher, or Divine,
unless he be a Jesuit, or at least have been a disciple of the society. They
would have men look on the society Would monopolize wisdom and learing.
as the ware*house of all wisdom, nay, would so far monopolize all Literature
to themselves, as not to allow any the least reputation of learning, if he did
not acknowledge it derived from the Jesuits. Whence it Contemn and slight all
others.
comes, that, besotted with a strange persuasion of their abilities, they
in^olently trample on the most learned, pass their censures on their writings,
with as much contempt as if they were the compositions of those that come to
hear their Lectures, and thus do they presume to exercise a certain Tyranny in
letters.

To what has be^n said may be added, that it is ordinary with How they abuse
the favors of Princes in the protection of ma^efactors.
them to make use of the interest they have with Princes to protect and show
favor to the greatest malefactors, thus abusing the goodness of their
Sovereigns, merely to make oft^ntation of their own power, as also to draw in
others, that is in a manner to encourage them to mischief out of hopes of
impunity. Nay, they are so strangely besotted with an insupportable humor of
being the managers an disposers of all things, that they think it nothing to
raise misapprehensions and dissatisfactions between subjects and their lawful
Magistrates, and stick not to fasten any calumnies and disgraces on those
Sovereign Princes who are not at their lure. Nor were it any difficult matter
to give in^tances thereof; but, out of tenderness to the reputation of the
Princes therein concerned, I forbear them.

Lastly, their Curiosity is none They hated for their pragmatical intermedling
in all men's affairs.
of the lea^t causes of the aversion conceived against them. They are come to
that height of it in Rome, that they generally commence themselves in all
affairs and transactions, there being nothing relating to Religion, private or
public interest, that they can endure should be essected without their agency
and solicitation. He therefore that is desirous of a Canonry, an Abbacy, or a
Presidents place, must above all things be sure to make his addresses to the
Jesuits. Moreover, in matter of far greater concernment, such as may be the
making of great matches, nothing thrives unless the Jesuits are employed in the
management of The Jesuits Procurat^r a great Favourit^ of Paul the fifth.
the business. His Holiness Paul ^. in the settling, disposal, and improvement of
his Domestic affairs makes use of the Procurator of the Jesuits, a person it
seems so much in favor with him, that, though he has hardly the face of a
man, and very little acquaintance with Letters, Why so gracious.
he intends to honor with a Cardinals cap, to requite the fertility of his
brain in finding out projects to raise money, and his dexterity in removing the
Obstructions arising therein. In so much that he has not only the privilege
to come into his Holiness's presence, when others, such as the Ambasdors of
Princes, are forced to attend, but also to bring in what persons he pleases
along with him.

Whence it is manifest how far more advantageous it is for a man Better
Projectors then Pastors.
to be well-skilled in contriving ways to raise moneys, then in providing for
men's souls, at least among those, who, though they have undertaken the
direction of souls redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, either know
not what a soul is, or make no more account of a man's, then they would do of a
fishes, and reflect no more on the duty lies upon them, then only the word
Fishing whereby it is allegorically expressed; as being such as among whom that
person should not have wanted entertainment who give out of him self, that he
had rather, with Paracelsus, A Christians wish.
have found the soul of Gold, then that of the Elector of Saxony. Since
therefore the Jesuits are to be numbered among those, who, so they get gold and
silver, are not much troubled by what means it comes, as putting in practice
that of the Poet who says, Vnde habeas quaerit nemo; sed oportet habere,
how can they avoid the imputation of Busy-bodies and the censure of a
polypragmatical curiosity, as being such as can with so much ^ase divert their
thoughts to affairs of so different a nature?

The Pope cannot dispense with the Jesuits.
For though the Pope has a power of dispensation as to things inconsistent,
that is, of exempting those from the penalties of the Laws, who enjoy such
spiritual emoluments as the Canons make them incapable of; yet is it the
peremptory doctrine of Christ that the same man cannot both serve God How they
at the same time serve both God and Mammon.
and Mammon, that is, seek the Kingdom of God, and have his thoughts taken up
with the getting of money. Ye cannot, says the Apostle, serve God and Mammon;
Be not over-carefull* as to your so^le, what shall eat, nor yet, as to your
body, what ye shall put on, f^ these things do the Gentiles seek after. But
seek ye t^ Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof. Thus coul neither the
Apostles themselves, nor can the Pope wh have succeeded them, seek both the
Kingdom of Go and money (for as our Savior says, he who loves a^ bears with
the one, must needs hate and despise the other much less is it in the power of
the P open to favor th Jesuits with such a privilege, as that of prosecuting
s^veral things at the same time.

Let therefore the Jesuits take it into consideration who profess themselves
but to be Janus's, at least, di^semble not this earnestness and pursuance of
things i^ compatible, how they can avoid incurring the deserve hatred not only
of Heretics, but even of Catholics them selves. For my part it is many years
since I took ver^ much offense at their over-curiosity, when I found certain
young men sons to some of my friends, whom had brought to Rome to study in the
Jesuits College to have been very strictly examined in private about a^ things
relating to their friends, estates and fortunes For when I imagined that the
The examination of the young men upon their first admission to the Jesuits
schools
Prefect of studies had taken the^ aside to make trial of their proficiency in
learning, they were locked into a certain Chamber where the Jesuit coming to
them took out a great Book, such as may be those of steward^ Accounts, and
having put many Interrogatories to them, writ their Answers very carefully into
the sai^ Book. The Questions put to them were much to this effect; what their
names were, what their age, what Schools they had been at before, who were
their Parents; what age they were of, what estates they had; whether they had
any real estates, and if lands, where situated; what kindred and alliances they
had; and whether they expected any estate might fall to them ^on their death or
otherwise: whether they had any ^ters, whether married, unmarried, or
marriageable, ^d if married, to whom.

When the young men upon their return home again, ^ve me an account of these
things, I would not be ^ought so stupid and inconsiderate as not to appreend
what advantages the Jesuits

^ight make of those voluminous The advantages they make of the said
examinations.
xaminations. For when the ^olledges came to be supplied, ^d that the young men
were to ^ encouraged, that they would -- Eandem
Ire viam pergant and eidem incumbere Se^^a,
here would be little difficulty in the choice of such as old be admitted. For
there is no more to be done ^n to consult the Books of Examinations, where they
^de it faithfully recorded who are the most rich, who me from the best friends,
and accordingly who to be ^snared into the society, applying to themselves that
^pression of Terence, In Illis fructus est, in his opera luditur.
^ding therefore that the young men had not made ^ proficiency in their Schools
which I thought they ght, as being not able to give account of any thing e a
sort of dull fables read to them by some pitiful after by way of Lectures; and
ving understood from some The Jesuits Schools dangerous places for young L^ds.
ung Gentlemen of good quali- who lived and boarded among ^ Jesuits, that the
unnatural ^e of Children was an ordinary and diurnal sin amongst ose that
conversed toget her, which in case any one old be ignorant of, he might, from
the words of the Rector, in the exhortation he The impudence of the Jesuits.
was very imprudently, wont to make against it, take notice of; as also for that
I had heard from very good hands, how that in Germany certain Jesuits had, by
their indiscreet interrog^torie^ in Confession, brought some young men into the
knowledge and practice of that sm, and that thereupon many Colleges were
polluted; for these, I say, and some other reasons, I thought fit not to send
the young men any more to the Jesuits Schools, but got a Praeceptor to have the
oversight of them at home.

There is yet another thing which brings a suspicion of an excess of curiosity
upon the Jesuits, especially at Rome, and not unlikely, at other places also,
which is, that no small number of the chiefest Women make diurnal confessions
to the Jesuits.
Matrons resort in a manner daily to their Churches, and there sit away two or
three hours at a time, discoursing with their ghostly Fathers. And yet it is
not probable they should every day fall into so many sins as should take up so
much time to make an acknowledgment A Jesuitical insinuation betrayed.
thereof. But the truth is, when we reflect that women are a sort of running
vessels, indefatigably talkative, and not much retentive of the secrets they
are trusted with, it may well be thought they are not every day detained there
so long out of any other design then to sift out of them all they know;
especially when the Jesuits themselves stick not to discover the great
earnestness they have to hear any thing that is new. Upon this account The
frequent visits made to them.
is it that so many visit them, even from the least to the greatest, and that
they many times spend whole days in entertaining them; nay, they come upon
them with so much importunity, that it often falls out they are not able to
give reception to all, but are forced to put them off, and appoint them other
days to wait on them. Insomuch that it is almost grown into a general opinion,
that there is not any King or Prince upon the face of the earth that has so
punctual an account of all things that are done in the Universe, even to the
Antipodes The great advantages of the General of the Jesuits in point of
Intelligence.
as has the Father General of the Jesuits: not only because the Rect^rs and
Provincials, scattered over the world according to the Missionary oath they
have taken, fail not to write to him once in eight days; but also because,
either out of the need they stand in of their assistance, or the desire of
hearing news, or lastly the earnestness some are in to communicate what they
have received either by discourse or Letters, people will be perpetually
haunting the Jesuits, who as they are not all of a nation but divided into
factions, so they all endeavor to incline the General to do what may be most
advantageous for their own. Whence it comes, that some stick not to attribute
that to the Jesuits which Johannes Sarisburiensis writ some ages since against
certain Religious men of his time; lib. 7. cap. 21. Rumusculos inqui^unt,
^umultibus A character given of the Jesuits above 500 years since:
gaudent, dissiden^ium secreta explorant, and eadem nunc ad amico^ perferunt,
nunc ad h^stes, u^risque grati, utrisque per^^di, magis tamen ad ista videntur
idonei, etc. They are great enquirers after News, they are the promoters of
tumults, they dive into the secrets of dissenting parties, and one while they
discover them to their friends, another to their enemies, well entertained by
both, though perfidious to both, yet those among them are the most fit to
manage such affairs (namely, discovering the secrets of several parties to
both) who are guilty of the greatest personation in the business of Religion
and consequently are the less suspected of treachery (for what Prince can
easily believe that a secret wherein his estate is concerned should by his
Confessor be discovered t^ the F. General, and so come abroad Their restless
curiosity.
into the world? What is done in Palaces, what in Courts, what in the Country
they only are thought to know best; as being such as seem to have a greater
experience in those things then even those who are perpetually therein
employed. If it be for their convenience, they can act the parts of Father^ in
the Court, Citizens in commerce, Soldiers in expeditions, nay, if a Council or
Synod be called, this chimaerical Sect of Religion will needs thrust it self
into the greatest concernments Their earnestness in reforming Monks and
Clergymen.
thereof. They are the Satyrs of the Clergy, perpetually carping at their
manners; for the reformation whereof they are the constant sollicitors of the
public Magistrates; but all out of a persuasion that it is a testimony of
their own virtue to endeavor the disparagement of others. They petition to
have Their encroachings upon the monasteries.
the Colleges and subsistence of worthy and well deserving men bestowed on
them; they pretend rigor and austerity in their profession, and make
ostentation of the difficulties they encounter with, but when they are gotten
within the curtains, they are tender enough to themselves, doing those things
that are easy and Their professiont are good.
feasible. Yet does not the sycophancy of these men derogate any thing from the
truth of their Religious Institution. For of that all are satisfied because the
names they go under, and whereof they, are obliged to the duties, are
honorable and praiseworthy. Their countenances make a show of But their
hypocrisy intolerable.
austerity, to fetch up deep sighs, is a trick they are by custom perfect in;
wear their hair short, having their heads in a manner shaven all over, of a
low voice, soft gate, as if they were to order their steps according to a
certain proportion. In matter of clothes they are tattered and ragged, yet
betray an affectation to be accounted such, but out of a design, that they
might be more highly exalted by how much they expressed the greater submission
in assuming the least honorable place, as conceiving that those who of their
own accord, abase themselves, shall against their wills be preferred. These are
the men, who would persuade An instance of their Love to the Church.
the public Magistrate, that for the miscarriages of the persons, the Churches
should lose their rights. They would take away from the Churches, Tithes and
Firstfruits, and yet take the same Churches from the Laics. These are they,
who turning the right owners out of their ancient Inheritances, reduce Farms
and Villages to solitudes; What ever is near them, they grasp to themselves;
they pull down Churches, or convert them to secular uses. What was the house of
Prayer, is They have somewhere in Spain a Stable, where the body of Christ had
formerly been kept.
either made a Stable for cattle, or converted to a spinning house. These and
greatter things they presume to do without any fear of punishment, thinking
themselves secure under the horns of Ecclesiastical Power; For they apply
themselves to the Church of Rome, they implore her assistances, creep under the
shield of her protection, to avoid the prosecutions of those they have injured,
and that they may be remitted from paying Tithes, they pretend Apostolical
privileges They go yet further, and the more they are born wit^ the more
earnestly do they endeavor to free them selves from the jurisdiction of all
Churches, and be come the Spiritual sons of the Church of Rome* Another shift
they have, is, to implore the assistances o secular Powers, promising them by
way of requital the enjoyments of divine grace. Those, who, havin^ committed
some offense, are afraid of the hand of Justice, they entertain into their
SOCIETIES, receive their Confessions, and presume to bind and loos whom they
will. But for the wealthier, and more powerful sort of people, having received
some favou or reward from them, they discharge them at an easie^ rate, and
undertaking themselves the burden of other men's sins, they bid them only
pretend remorse an^ mourning, however the others may seem desirous t^ regret
their offenses. They encourage miscarriage^ in Morality by flattering those
that are guilty there of; and affecting nothing so much as popularity, the^ by
their crafty insinuations so stop up the ears ^ men, that they will not heed
the reprehensions of the Prelates* Let fall but the least ill word of them,
tho^ art presently declared an enemy to Religion, and a^ opposer of the truth.
Take it therefore patiently, i any injury or damage happen to thee from these
men, who seem to have a Privilege to do any thin^ notwithstanding all
Apostolical and supreme Authority, and yet they pretend all below their
desert^ They therefore wander about the Churches, they c^lebrate the merits of
their COLLEGES, the trade in Indulgences, and sometimes Preach up a ne^
Gospel, adulterating the Word of God. At first i^ deed, while their Religion
was really i^ poverty, an that their exigences made them serviceable to other^
they were honored with Privileges, which, now tha there is no longer
necessity, and that Charity waxet^ cold, may justly be thought the Instruments
rather ^ avarice then devotion. The reason is, because these priviledg'd men
seek only their own conveniences, and JESUS, who is publicly preached up,
either is not among them at all, or lies so hid, that he never appears. These,
and many other things to the same effect, may be found in Sarisburiensis.

These therefore are the principal things which make the Jesuits hateful in
the sight of Heretics, and being more obvious and remarkable then their
virtues, do accordingly make a greater impression on them, and are sooner
divulged. For if there be any among them furnished with a more then ordinary
stock of virtue, they commonly dissemble it, the more to avoid the danger of
pride, it being withal the fate of Virtue, that her acts seldom escape the
bitings of Calumny, as it is many times seen, that things gallantly done, are
said to have been unadvisedly undertaken* Besides, it is in a manner natural
to most men, to make inquisition into the least miscariages of others, yet
pass ^y their worthy actio ns, though never so apparent, intimating the
Uultures that mind not sound and living bodies, but smell and follow at a great
distance stinking carcases. No doubt, but there are in the Society of the
Jesuits many that ^re not chargable with any malice or wickedness, many
eminent for their Learning and Virtues, but these, un^esse it be when they
discover themselves by the Books ^hey set forth, or are publicly employed,
make no ^oise among them. For they are not wont to put into ^he more
considerable employments, such as are most emarkable for their excellent
Learning and sanctity, ^ut those who are best furnished with craft, confidence,
and brazen foreheads. For having made it their design o heap up riches
together, to be made use of, as I have ^id, to c^rry on great enterprises, and
men inclined to ^earning, being of that simplicity, that they have neither
cunning, nor courage enough to work m^n out ^f their Inheritances, and hedge in
still greater sums ^f money, it is but fit, they should g^ate upon this
employment those that are of unanswerable importunity, such as having had many
repulses, renew their solicitations, and watch all opportunities to compass
their designs.

And when these creatures happen to miscarry in any thing (which is no more
then speaks the decays of humanity, and cannot be avoided) two things are
consequent thereto. One, that their faylings are sure to be observed and talked
of among the common people. For that is a thing we all generally know (says
Zenophon in Agesilaus) that what is done by eminent persons cannot be hid:
which is also insinuated by the Poet, in this distich; Omne animi virium tanto
conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quant^ major qui peccat habetur.


The other is, that, be the offense ever so small, yet the malice of men shall
so magnify it, as to make an Elephant of a Fly. To such men therefore, whether
considerable for their dignity or their reputation, it may be thought Seneca
directed this wholesome precept. De Clem. l. 1. cap. 8. Alia conditio ^orum est,
qui in ^u^ba, quam non excedunt, latent: quorum virtutes ut appareant ac videri
possint, diu luctantur, and vitia^^nebr^s habent. Vestra facta dictaque rumor
excipit; et ideo nullis magis cavendum est, qualem samam habeant, qudm vobis,
qui, qualemcunqu^ merueritis, magnam habituri estis. There is a great
difference between your condition and theirs* who, not exceeding the ordina^y
rate of men, d^ accordingly make no noise in the World; an^ whose virtues, as
it is with much struggling an^ difficulty that they come to appear to the
public view, so does their obscurity draw a curtain over their vices. But
what you either d^ or f^y, comes into the mouth of Fame, and therefore none
ought to be more careful what reputation they may have with men, then you,
since that whatsoever you may, whether good or bad, deserve, you must expect it
will be great.

From Bononia, Kal. December. M. D C. X.
FINIS.
A DISCOVERY Of the SOCIETY In relation to their POLITICS.

Written Originally, BY A Well-wisher to the JESVITS.

To the READER.
WFe are*by a Divine Authority assured, that there are those in the world, who
who like the deaf Adder, out of pure obstinacy, will not hear the voice of the
Charmer, and that there is a generation of men that hate to be reformed. Thence
is it, that accordingly experience is so pregnant to show, that, of all the
people, these look on the least discovery of their enormities, as the m^st
heinous injury can be done them; making so little advantage either ofthe
charming Admonitions of Friends, or the censorious Reproaches of Adversaries,
that thoy think it the greatest shame that may be to retract, and choose rather
to betray their exasperation, then express any desires of amendment. That the
ensuing Piece was written long since, and that by a Person not much an enemy to
the Jesuits, are things not to be dissembled, as being remarkable from several
passages of it: but to gi^e an an account of the present revivall of it, is
what cannot be done without a certain regret, and compassion. That Religious
men, such as had by solemn Vows abjured not only the enjoyments of this world,
but also all commerce with it, as to what concerns the management of the
affairs thereof, should be guilty of so great miscarriages, argues such a
grievance, and dereliction of the Spirit, that, according to their
Justifica^ion, they should be guided by, as cannot without horror fall into the
reflection of a good man. But to find them so wedded to mischievous practices,
as that, though they were long since laid at their doors, there should still
be a necessity to bring them upon the stage, and that merely because former
remonstrances proved fruitless and ineffectuall, it certainly speaks not an
indifference, or backwardness, but a hatred of reformation. And yet thus does
the case stand with the Society, whose courses gave occasion of the present
DISCOVERY.

A DISCOVERY Of the SOCIETY In relation to their POLITICS, etc.
UPon the first Institution of the Society and religious Order of the Jesuits,
it was generally looked upon as a Tree planted in the Vineyard of Christ,
whereof the fruits should be an Antidote against the poison of Heresy, and
whose blossoms should be no other then those of Christian and Religious works,
for the edification of, and reduction of those souls that otherwise were likely
to stray. And such no doubt it was intended by the Founder thereof, Ignatius,
and such, it is to be thought, continued while it was cultivated by those first
Fathers, from whose Piety, and austerity, as it derived vigor and life, so did
it ^orce the esteem and veneration of all, This glorious Tree spread it self
into two Branches, one of Love toward God, the other toward their Neighbor.
So that considering the smalness of its roots, it is almost incredible, what
abundance of fruit it brought forth, in the excellent education of children,
the saving of souls, and the propagation of Christian and Catholic Faith.

But the indefatigable Enemy of Mankind, the Devil, who is exasperated at all
manner of good, and whatsoever has the least tendency to reformation, discover
d his earnestness and subtilty to destroy this glorious tree, and with it all
the fruitful advantages the world expected to reap thereby; taking occasion
even from the greatness it self of this Religious Order, and from that
admirable improvement which it had made in so sm^ll a space of time, to pervert
the first Institution thereof, with artifices, sycophancy and insinuation.
Instead of these two branches of Charity toward God and man, now utterly dried
up, he has engrafted two others, one of self*love* the other a spirit minding
only the advantages of this World* Which how great a prejudice (...) has
proved to the Christian Religion in all parts of the world, if that be the
design of the present DISCOVERY to demonstrate. Wherein, I speak it in the
presence of the All-seeing, I shall not advance any thing out of passion or
interest, but that whatever is done, proceeds srom an innocent zeal to the
public good, and a tenderness to the welfare of the Society it self, as also
to the end, that Princes being acquainted with their artifices, may, for the
benefit of the people they govern, by timely remedies, prevent and elude them.

It is therefore to be noted, that the Society of the Jesuits spreading and
enlarging it self more and more by their undertaking the education of Children
(a design no doubt acceptable to all Cities and Kingdoms) they accordingly,
upon their first Institution so far ingratiated themselves with Princes, that
in a few years they diffused themselves so far as other Orders had done in many
Centuries.

This unexpected arrival to Greatness, which ever works a strange alteration
in men's minds and humors, raised in the Successors of Ignatius such a high
opinion of, and love to their own Society, that vaingloriously hence concluding
themselves more beneficial to the Church of God, and such as had made a f^r
greater progress into the business of Reformation then all other orders, they
thought it their main concernment to endeavor it is further growth and
enlargement, that is, (to give it you in their own words) to promote the Cause
of Christ, the advantages of his Church, and to improve the Patrimony of Jesus.

And here can I not but wish my self the subtilty of Aristotle* and the
eloquence of the Roman Orator to discover and express the miraculous ways
whereby they effect the r design (a thing that by reason of its novelty seems
incredible) and daily enlarge the jurisdiction of their Society. But I shall
think it sufficient to glance only at some few things, leaving it to other men's
judgments to make what glosses they shall think fit thereupon, and to
conceive an Ida a of those men suitable thereto. The ensuing heads therefore I
desire the Reader to take for the ground of his discourse.

The Fathers of the Society finding that their teaching, preaching,
administration of the Sacraments, and other religious and Monastical exercises
contributed not so much as was expected to the raising of them to the
greatness they aspired to, were forced to think of other ways to effect their
design. For though (as is said) they were entertained at the beginning with all
kindness by many people, yet in process of time they perceived that, through
dissatisfaction, or some other occasion, those that had honored them bebefore
withdrew their affection from them; wherefore fearing their growth should
determine in their infancy, they found out two other ways to keep up, and to
enlarge the greatness of their Order.

One was, by calumnies and crafty insinuations to raise in the minds of
Princes, and consequently as many others as they could, a base opinion of all
other Religious Institutions, making them despicable by discovering their
imperfections, and like subtle Politicians, building up their own greatness
upon the ruins of others. By this means got they out of the hands of the
lawful Possessors, many Monasteries, Abbeys and other Spiritual revenues,
depriving those Religious men that formerly enjoyed them, both of them, and all
that belonged thereto.

Another was, their pragmaticall engaging themselves in Affairs of State,
thrusting themselves into the interests and concernments of Christian Princes.
To bring this to effect, they have as subtle and artificious a device as any
the world was yet acquainted withal; into which, as it is hard to penetrate,
so is it almost impossible to make a full discovery thereof.

Rome is the constant residence of the chief of the Society, commonly known by
the name of General, or Pather General, to whom all the rest render exact
obedience. Besides him, there are for the most part resident in the same place
certain persons chosen from among the other Fathers, who from the Assistance
they always give Him, are called his ASSISTANTS. Of this quality there is one
at least as a Representative of every Nation, who, from the Nation he
represents, takes his name. Hence, one is styled the Assistant of France*
another of Spain, a third of Italy, a fourth of England, a fist of Austria,
and so of all Provinces and Kingdoms. Their main business is, to give the F.
General an account of all Occurrences of State in those Provinces and Kingdoms
whereof they are the respective Assistants. This they perform by the means of
their Correspondents, who, upon that design, have their residences in the
principal Cities of the Provinces and Kingdoms where they are. And these are
perpetually shuffling up and down to inform themselves of the State, quality,
nature, inclination and intentions of Princes, and take advantage of all
opportunities to advertise the Assistants of such accidents as they have
discovered. These no sooner receive them, but they disburthen themselves of all
into the bosom of the Father General, who thereupon calling his Assistants to
Council, they do as it were anatomise the whole world, comparing and
ballancing the interests, concernments and designs of all Christian Princes.
Here they consult of all fresh intelligence received from their Correspondents*
and curiously examining and conferring them together, it is at last resolved,
that the affairs of such a Prince shall be promoted, the designs of another
opposed as they shall conceive most for their interest and advantage. And as it
is possible, that the stander by may better see the result of a Plot, then the
Gamester employ*d in it; so is it likely, that the Fathers of the Society
taking as it were a general view ^f the interests of all Princes, are the
better able to observe the circumstances of place and time, and effectually
advance the Affairs of that Prince who is likely to prove the greatest favourer
of them.

It is certainly a thing evil in it self and insupportable, that a sort of men
devoted to a Religious life, should so much intermeddle with matters of State,
it being their duty to provide for the welfare of souls, as such as had to that
end taken leave of the concernments of the world. But it is to be considered,
that the Fathers of the Society, are, as to this point, more entangled then
those who have the management thereof, and for many pernicious consequences
arising thereby; this procedure of theirs will be found most mischievous, and
consequently such as requires a speedy and effectual remedy.

For, in the first place* the J suits are Confessors to the greatest part of
the Nobility in all States and Kingdoms that acknowledge a submission to the
Church of Rome. Nay, that they might be the more ready to entertain these, and
none but these they m^ke no small difficulty to admit ordinary persons to their
Confessionaries, aiming rather at an Empire over the Consciences of Princes,
themselves. By this means do they craftily dive into the design^s, resolutions
and inclinations as well of Sovereigns as of Subjects, whereof they immediately
inform the Father- General or his Assistants at Rome. Now to perceive and be
satisfied what prejudice this must needs be to Princes, and what rubbes may be
laid in their way when they imagine their affairs in a saire and secure
posture, a man needs no extraordinary measure of understanding.

Secondly, since secrecy is a proper and inseparable accident which so attends
the safety of a State, that without it tre^cheries, circumventions, and so
ruin must needs follow, it is not to be admired Princes should be so secure
against those who discover their secrets, punishing them as the most dangerous
of their enemies. And whereas on the other side, the understandiug of another
Princes designs makes a man the more circumspect, and more able to judge of his
own condition, it is accordingly ordinary with them to be at vast charges in
the maintenance of Ambassad^urs and Intelligencers; and yet are many times
deceived in the account they receive from them.

But the Jesuits, that is, their father- General, and his Assistants making
their advantages as well of Confessions and Consultations, whereof their
Corespondents residing in all the chief Cities of the Christian world, give
them an account, as by the means o^ some other their Adherents, (of whom we
shall have something to say hereafter, are most faithfully and punctually
informed of all determinations concluded even in the most secret Counsels.
Insomuch, that they have a more particular knowledge of the power, possessions,
expenses and designs of Princes then the Princes themselves have, and this
without any other charge then that of the carriage of their Letters; which yet
in Rome alone (as I have it from the relation of the Persons employed about
those affairs) amounts to seventy, eighty, nay, sometimes a hundred Crowns of
Gold to one Courrier ^r Messenger.

Coming then by this means to know exactly the Affairs of all Princes, they do
not only do ill offices between them, but wound their reputation with their own
subjects, depressing or advancing their concernments at their pleasure. And
that they can with the less difficulty do, for that by the same way of
Confessions and Consultations they serpent-like glide into the very secrets of
the peoples souls, knowing who stand well affected to their Prince, who
dissatisfied and exasperated. So that by these relations which they have of
State Affairs they may easily sow discord among Princes, raise thousands of
jealousies, and by their insight into the Subject's affections, raise
commotions and tumults, making the person of the Prince contemptible.

From all which there can be no less inferred, then that there is not any
thing may prov^ more dangerous to the State, then that a Prince should discover
himself by Confession or otherwise, or that he should permit any of his
Confidents, Favorites, Secretaries, Counselors, or others his chief Ministers
should make their Confessions to persons that are perpetually ^ifting matters
of State, and making their advantages thereof to infinuate into the favor of
Princes. For there are men of other Religious Orders, comparable for life and
Learning to any among the Jesuits, who may with the more safety be employed,
out of confiration that they attend nothing more then the cultivation of souls,
and the Government of their monasteries.

Thirdly, which is a greater discovery then has been made yet, the world is to
take notice, that there are four sorts or degrees of Jesuits. The first degree
is composed of a number of secular persons of both sexes, that are taken or
admitted to be of the Society, living accordingly under a certain obedience,
which themselves call an implicit Obedience. These are guided in all their
actions by the advice of the Jesuits, resigning themselves in all things
absolutely to their conduct. Those that are admitted to this degree, are for
the most part Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, rich Widows, wealthy Citizens, and
Merchants; which like a Plantation in the Indies, bring in to the Jesuits a
very vast revenue of Gold and Silver. Of this kind are those Women, who in
Italy, are called Chettine, who are by the subtle persuasions of the Jesuits
induced to forsake the world, when in the mean time they take a care to
disburthen them of their Jewels, apparel, and ornaments, household stuff, and
in a word, if there be any thing, of their estates of great value.

The second degree consists of men alone, and that cheequer'd as well with
Priests as Lay^en, yet such as live wholly after a secular way, being not
obliged to a regular life. These are a sort of people who by the mediation and
recommendations of the Jesuits, creep into Pensions, Abbeys, Benefices and
other revenues; but they vow to put on the habit of the Society, when ever it
shall please the Father- General to require it of them, for which reason they
are called Jesuits in Voto; and of the labors of these men, the Jesuits make
no small advantages in order to the erection, and settlement of their Monarchy.
For they maintain in all Kingdoms and Provinces, in all Princes Courts and
Palaces of Great-men such of this degree as they know how to make use of; as
shall be further discovered in the seventh point of this discourse.

The third sort of J^suits are those who are resident in Monasteries. These are
either Priests, Clerks or Converts, who may at the pleasure of the Father
General* be dispensed with, as to any thing relating to their Profession,
though of themselves they have no power to leave it. And these being such as
have no Office of importance in the Community, do for the most part simply obey
in any thing they are put upon by the Superiors.

The fourth sort is that of Politic Jesuits, to whom is committed the
management of the Affairs of Religi^n, and the regulation of the Society. And
these are they, who being tempted by the Devil with the same temptation, that
Christ had in the Gospel, viz. All these things will I give thee, have taken
the Tempter at his word. Upon which account it is, that they so much endeavor
to reduce their Society to an absolute Monarchy, and to place the head thereof
at Rome, the center where all the principal affairs of the Christian world
meet. There constantly resideth the grand Monarch of these Politicians (their
Father- General) with a great number of others of the same Institution, who
having received information from their Spies of all such weighty and important
businesses as are to be canvass'd in the Court of Rome, they presently call a
Council, and having in the first place taken order to secure their own
interests, every one in particular makes it his business to go their circuit
through the Courts of Cardinals, Prelates and Ambassadors. Their business
with these is cunningly to shift their discourse to something relating to the
business then in hand, or shortly to come upon the stage, representing it to
them after what manner they please, so disguising it* as makes most for their
interest, so far as if need be, to show black in stead of white. And whereas
the first repres^ntations of a business made by men pretending to sinceri^y,
and the strictness of a Religious life cannot but make the more remarkable
impr^ssion in the mind of him that they are addr^st to, the consequence is,
that Affairs of very great importance treated by the Ambassadors of Princes,
and other grave persons, in the Court of Rome, have not carried on with the
success expected by the Princes therein concerned meer^y through the
sycophancy of the Jesuits, who by their adulterate relations had so shuffled
things, that there was but little credit left for what might be alleged by the
Ambassadors and other Agents employed therein.

The same tricks they play the Prelates of Rome, they also put upon other
Princes, either by themselves, or by the means of their Pensionary Jesuits, out
of Rome. So that it may well be concluded, that the greatest part of what is
done all over the Christian world, passes through the hands of the Jesuits; and
those only take effect, against which they make no opposition. Stupendous and
inexpressible are the artifices and insinuations they make use of in this kind,
which though it is impossible for me to decypher, yet may it not happily be so
obscure to those Princes, who shall seriously observe the slight Character I
have here given of them. For if they do, they presently reflect on the things
that are past, and as they must needs be more and more convinced of the truth
of my discourse, the more they call to mind with what Art things have been
handled, so will it still further them in the discovery of what seemed so
strange and mavelous to them. Nay, not content with this close artifice,
whereby they insensibly thrust themselves into the Affairs of the world, out
of a confidence that it is the only means to attain that Monarchical
Superintendency at which they ^ime, they were so insolent as to petition Pope
Gregory XIII. "That for the time to come he would publicly countenance their
Project. And thence taking occasion to commend it to him under pretense of the
public good of the Church, they required that he would command all his Legates
and Apostolical Nuncio's to take to them every one for his Companion and
confident, some Jesuit, by whose Counsel he should be governed in all his
actions.

Fourthly, by these crafty insinuations, and their infight into Affairs of
public concernment, the most eminent among the Jesuits have gained the love of
many Princes, as well Temporal as Spiritual, whom they have the confidence to
persuade that they have said and done many things for their advantage; and this
proceeding of theirs is the Damme of two very considerable inconveniences. The
first is, that, abusing the favor and friendship which the Princes had for
them, they have made no difficulty to disgust many private, though otherwise
rich and Noble Families, usurping the wealth of Widows, though with the
exposing of their Retinue and Relations to extreme misery: enticing, to embrace
their Institution, and to frequent their Schools, persons of the noblest and
most hopeful inclination, who yet if they proved unfit for the employments
they designed them for, were under some pretense or other dismissed the
Society, which though it parted from their persons, yet could not be got to
part with their Estates. And wh^le they did thus, they absolutely excluded the
poor from their Schools, forgetting quite the pious provisions for such of
their Founder Ignatius, and the intentions of those patrons of theirs, who
endowed them with large Revenues, not that they should mind only their own
conveniences, but be serviceable to the Christian Commonwealth*

The Second Inconvenience is, that these Jesuits omit no occasion whereby they
would make the world sensible of the familiarity and influence which they have
over Princes, making the people, by their crafty representations of it, look
thereon as through a magnifying glass, to the end they may ingratiate
themselves with their Ministers, and so bring things about, that all that stand
in need of favor may make their applications to them. Thus they stick not to
make their braggs, that it is in their (...) to make Cardinals, Nuncio's*
Govern^urs of Places and other officers of the public. Nay, some of them h^^e
roundly stood upon it, that their General could d^ more (...) the Pope himself
Others have added, that it is b^^^er t^ ^e of that Order which makes Cardinals,
then to be a Cardi^al.

These, and such like expressions of their insupportabl insolence are obvious
to all that converse wit^ them.

Fifthly, having thus laid the foundation of their i^terloping into State
affairs, the first thing they buil^ upon it, is a pretense of power to raise
or ruin who^ they please. And indeed making Religion a mere stal^ing horse to
their own Reputation, they many times e^fect their designs. But when they
recommend an^ man to the Prince in order to advancement, they neve make choice
of the most fit and deserving, but rather, i any such appear, oppose him,
especially if he be one the^ know to be no favourer of them. So that they make
i their design to prefer those that are likely to countenance their interest,
never minding his good affection t^ the Prince, or his capacity to go through
the Employment he is advanced to: whereof the consequences are to the Prince,
Exasperation at his being eluded, to the people disgust and insurrections.

Sixthly, as the Master of a Galley, when he finds the wind fair for his
voyage, with once whistling, makes the slaves handle their Oars, and set the
Vessel to her full speed: so when in the Asse^blyes and consultations (which
these Fathers continually hold by their General and his Assistants at Rome) it
is concluded, that it makes for their advantage, that such a person should be
promoted to dignity, the Father-Generall signifies so much to those that reside
elsewhere, and all those immediately join together, and with united forces
bring him to the honor intended him. Which having gotten, he were an
i^sufferable example of Ingratitude, if he should not afterward endeavor to
serve the Jesuits, with a zale suitable to that of theirs, when they advanced
him. And hence indeed does it proceed that such a man, nay, many such men (for
it is not to be imagined the dependants on the Jesuits of this kind are few)
acknowledging themselves more obliged to the Jesuits then to their Prince, for
the honor and greatness they are raised to, do accordingly serve the Jesuits
with far greater affection then they do the Prince himself. Thus are their
Princes fooled and deluded by them, when imagining they have got a trusty
servant, they have only made way for a Spy of the Jesuits, who only make their
advantages of him, to the great prejudice of the Prince that advanced him.

There are many examples might be brought to confirm the present discourse; but
indeed it needs not; daily experience, and the general report are sufficient
attestations of the truth delivered. To avoid tediousness therefore, I shall
conclude th^s point, saying, that this happily is the cause why the Jesuits are
wont to call their way of Religion, A Grand-Monarchy; as if they governed all
Princes and their Ministers at their pleasure. Nor is it long since, that one
of the chief among them, being to treat publicly with an ^llustrious Prince in
the name of the Society, began with these words full of arrogance, and grounded
upon a conceit of their Monarchy; Our Society has always maintained good
Intelligence with your Grace, etc.

Seventhly, those Fathers make a great stir to let the world know, that all
those that are any way in the favor of their Prince, were sometimes Creatures
of theirs, and are obliged for their advancement to them. Hence it must follow,
that they have a greater command of the subjects affections then the Prince
himself, upon whom this must needs bring great inconvenieniences. For it is in
the first place an affront to the public Interest, that a sort of Religious
Persons, that pretend to have abjured all commerce with the things of this
world, yet so ambitious and politic, should have such an influence over
Ministers of State, that when ever it pleases them, they can cause Treasons and
insurrections. Secondly, it is dangerous, since that by the mediation of the
Ministers their Adherents, they induce into the Princes service for Counselors
or Secretaries some of the Jesuits in Vote, of whom mention is made before, and
these again persuade the Prince to take some Jesuit for his Confessor, or
Chaplain. Thus do they all combine together to serve as Intelligencers to the
Father General to whom they give an exact account of all the transactions of
the most secret Counsels. Whence it comes, that many times we see designs
prevented, and secrets of the greatest importance discovered; and yet things
are carried so cunningly, that no man can fasten on the true Author, but it
commonly happens, that the greatest suspicion lies on those that are most
innocent.

Eighthly, *It Is a common observation, that Subjects are naturally much given to
imitate and comply with the inclinations of their Prince. In like manner those,
who give obedience to their Father General, perceiving that his thoughts are
wholly taken up with matters of State, as endeavoring by that means to improve
and enrich their Society, do also apply themselves that way; and thereupon
making use of their Relations and friends, would penetrate into the very hearts
of Princes, so to discover their most secret designs, only to betray them to
the Assistants at Rome, or the Father General; out of a confidence, by that
means, to get into their favor and be advanced into some employment, which
otherwise they could never have expected. For among them, none are ever
preferred to any Office of consequence and trust, but only those whom they have
observed mosi inclined to advance their Society to that height of Greatness
whereto they aspire, and consequently none but such as are known to be able and
expert in the management of State Affairs.

Ninthly, as from diverse Flowers and Herbs, by the means of an Alembick, a man
may extract such an ointment as shall have the Virtue to heal a mortal wound;
and as from several blossoms Bees draw that which afterward becomes honey: so
these Jesuits, from the infallible account which they have of all Princes
affairs, and of all the emergencies of every State, do by the power of their
discourse, extract from them what makes for their own advantage, which is in
some measure a remedy for their insatiable avarice and ambition. And they are
excellent Masters in a certain Art, unknown to others, whereby they effect
their designs equally from other men's either good or ill; but more often from
their misfortunes then happiness.

Nor is it unusual with them to ensnare the unwary Prince into whose secrets
they have dived, proposing to him, that they have in their hands the only
excellent means to make him master of his desires. But when by these pretenses
they have made their advantages of him, if it do but come into their
imagination that the spreading greatness of that Prince may one day prove
prejudicial to them, they do, as Lawyers in their causes, prolong the success
of the business what lies in their power; till at last with strange juggling,
and an imperceptible kind of Legerdemaine they utterly ruin those designs to
which they had given birth.

The Ligue of France treated and concluded by them, they not long after basely
renounced all meddling with, when they saw things prosper on the Kings side: and
England, so often promised by them to the Spaniards, yet in such manner
performed, so confirms the present discourse, that there needs no further proof.

Tenthly, from what has been already alleged, it necessarily follows, that
the Jesuits have no sincere affection toward any Prince whatsoever, either
temporal or spiritual, but only comply with them so far as stands with
their own convenience and advantage.

Nay, it may be yet further inferred, that no Prince, much less any Prelates
of an inferior degree can make any effectual use of them, because they seem,
at the same time to be equally affected to all, complying with the French as if
they were French, with the Spaniards as if they were Spaniards, and so with all
others, as the occasion requires; from all which the only rule of their
Chemistry is, to exact their own profit and accommodation. They never regard
the prejudice of one more then another, and thence it comes that those
enterprises, wherein they have intermedled, have seldom succeeded well,
because they are no further embarked therein then their own interest advises
them. And as to this particular, the artifices they use are notorious; some of
them pretending great inclinations for the prosperity of France, others of
Spain, others of the Empire, and others of some other Princes of whom they
desire to be favored.

And if any of these Princes be desirous to make use o^ some Jesuit, whom he
imagines to be very much his Friend, he immediately acquaints the F. General
by Letter with the business which he has to treat, and expects his Answer,
together with order what he shall do, and suitably to the commands he receives,
he proceeds in his affair. Never regarding whether that Order of the General
be conformable to the intention of the Prince, who has entrusted him with the
management of that business. But so the Society be served and complied with,
he matters not what disservice it may be to the Prince.

To this may be added, that the Jesuits understanding the several interests of
all Princes, and being acquainted with all things daily treated in secret
Councels, those who pretend an inclination for France propound to the King and
his principal Ministers certain Memorialls of State and important
considerations sent to them from their politic Fathers at Rome. On the other
side those who pretend to hold with the Crown of Spain, do just the same with
them, and ^o with the rest. From which carriage of theirs arises this
mischief, that it causes such distrusts in the hearts of Christian Princes,
that they cannot credit one the other; which is a great hindrance to the
public peace, and the universal welfare of Christendom. Besides, this
diffidence of theirs is that which makes it so difficult a thing to conclude a
league against the common enemy, and the precious enjoyments of peace to be of
so little value among Princes.

Furthermore, with these circumventing devices, though they have so opened the
eyes of the world, and so sharpened men's wits in matter of State that they are
notorious to all, yet, even at this very day, to the great prejudice of the
Church, they are wholly taken up with matters of policy, and balance all their
actions according to their worldly and selfish concernments.

But that these Jesuiticall Mysteries and Stratagems may be made yet more
manifest, I cannot here conceal the means whereby they inveigle Princes to
their party. There are some years now past, since one of these Fathers, called
Father Parsons, the Assistant of England, wrote a book against the succession
of the King of Scotland to the crown of England; And another Father of the same
Society called Crittonius, with some others, in a Book which they wrote,
defended the Title of the King of Scotland, opposing the opinion of Father
Parsons, and pretending to be at difference among themselves. But the truth,
was, that all was ^unningly contrived and carried on by the command of their
Father. General, only out of this design, that whosoever should succeed in
the Kingdom of England, they might have an excellent argument to work in him ^
great good opinion of their Society, and so as much (...) may be make their
advantages of him.

What more pertinent example can we desire to show that Princes and their
interests are the objects of all Je^uiticall actions and determinations, and
consequently, to make good their own assertion, That their Society is a ^rand
Monarchy?

Again, that this truth may also be made manifest* That the Jesuits regard not
whether they please or displease any Prince when their own commodity lies at
the stake; though the experience of infinite things past make it ^s clear as
the Sun, yet the particular instance I shall now add will make it somewhat the
more conspicuous.

There is not any person in the world whom they are more bound to serve, or
indeed, for whom they themselves pretend greater submission, then the Bishop of
Rome, were it not for other particular reasons, but out of a consideration only
of the solemn vow they make to obey him. Yet when Pius Quintus would have
brought in something of reformation amongst these Fathers, by reducing them to
a performance of their duty in the Quire, they submissively refused to obey
him, as conceiving it a notorious prejudice to their Society to be reduced to
any thing suitable to the practice of other Monks. And for those few among
them tha^ conscientiously did comply with the Popes pleasure they were ever
afterward called by way of derisio^ Quintini, and made so contemptible that
never any o^ them could be admitted to the least preferment amon^ them.

After the same manner did they oppose glorio^ S Charles, Archbishop of
Millaine, when in the qualit^ of Legate ^ latere to his Holiness, he
endeavored to reduce them to Religious discipline.

But to what end do I mention these, when they thin^ it a scorn to submit to
the sacred Canons themselves but contrary to the provisions made therein make
me^chandise of Jewels, Rubies, and Diamonds which the trade to the Indies for.
Nor is that opinion altogethe^ groundless, that the greatest part of the
precio^ stone^ sold in Venice belong to the Jesuits; since th report took its
first rise from their own Agents an Brokers whom they employed in the sale of
them.

But that they are no faithful Servants to the Bisho^ of Rome, what ever they
pretend, I need only the a^knowledgement of those Fathers who for no mean
default were called by process to Rome. I neither can nor would, if I could,
name them; nor am I much inclined to wade any farther into this business,
partly t^ avoid the bringing of any Prince upon the stage tha^ might take
offense at my discourse (it being my desire to please all, and not to disoblige
any) and partly that it might not be said I were guilty of an humor to inveigh
against the Jesuits; my purpose only having been to give a short and plain
account of their courses and customs.

For as it many times happens, that we see a person afflicted with some
grievous infirmity, betraying the extremity of his sufferings by such
lamentations and cries as reach heaven it self; and it is apparent to every one
that the man suffers no small torment, yet there is not any able to discern the
original cause of his indisposition: So the world is full of complaints
against the Jesuits, some for being persecuted by them, others for being
treacherously served by them, yet the mischief still remains among us. Nor is
the cause thereof easily discovered, though it is conceived it does not proceed
from any thing so much as from that prodigious and indeterminate desire which
they have still to increase their power. This is the apple of their eye, which
if it be but ever so little touched, they make no difficulty to disgust any man
whatsoever, to circumvent and overreach Princes, to oppress the poor, to force
Widows out of their estates, to ruin whole Nations, nay many times by their
interloping into affairs of public concernment to raise jealousies and
dissatisfactions among Christian Magistrates.

Now as there would happen a great inconvenience, if that part which according
to the design of Nature was last formed as an instrument to serve the rest
that for their precedence are the more noble, and should attract unto it self
all the purest blood and vital spirits, for it were the way to bring the whole
to destruction. So is it no less inconvenient, that the Jesuits, an
Institution lately graffed into the body of the Church to be isntrumental, as
they themselves pretend, in the conversion of Heretics, and the reduction of
Sinners into the ways of Repentance, should grasp into their power, and presume
upon the management of all the most weighty and important affairs of Prelates
and Princes, drawing from them the very life and spirits of their interests, t^
make their own advantages thereof. From this sourc^ springs all public and
private disturbances, many ar^ depressed, who, were their worth considered,
should be exalted, many advanced who were more deservedly trod under foot, with
thousands of other inconveniences consequent thereto.

Many reasons might be produced, drawn from experience it self, to make it
apparent what an insatiable ambition the Jesuits have to increase still more
and more in greatness. It shall therefore suffice to make it appear out of
the words of Father Parsons, one of the Society, as they may be found in a book
of his which h^ writ in English, entitled, The Reformation of England. Having
in the first place blamed Cardinal Pool, and then taken notice of many defects
and imperfections in the Council of Trent, he concludes, That when England
should return to the Roman Catholic faith, He would reduce it to the form
and state of the Primitive Church, making common all Ecclesiastical Goods, and
assigning the oversight thereof, unto seven Sa^ii, or wise men who should be
Jesuits, and were to make distribution of the same as they should think
convenient. He further thinks it fit, under a grievous penalty, to forbid all
Religious persons of what Order soever to retu^n into England without their
License, resolving that none should be entertained there, but those that were
to be maintained by Alms.

But, as it often falls out that Self-love so blinds the wisest man that he
betrays his imprudence to all the world, so is that a most ridiculous passage
which the same Father adds in the place before*cited, When England (says he)
shall once be reduced to the true Faith, it will not be convenient that the
Popes (at least for five years space) should expect any advantage from the
Ecclesiastical Benefices of this Kingdom; but remit all into the hands of
those seven Savii, who should dispose of them as they conceived best for the
good of the Church, This being his design, that, the first five years being
past, by some other invention (whereof they are very full) they would get the
same privilege confirmed to them for five more, and so onward, till they had
utterly excluded his Holiness from having any thing to do in England.

Now what more lively representation can there be made of the avarice and
ambition of the Jesuits together with the desire they have to erect an absolute
Monarchy? Who sees not with what slights they endeavor to promote their own
Interest, not caring who are made happy, who unhappy, so their concernments be
secured. What should I say more of them? Did they not, in the time of Gregory
the thirteenth, make it there request that they might be invested of all the
Parish-Churches in Rome? that they might there lay the foundations of their
Monarchy? and what they could not get in Rome, have they not at length obtained
in England, where not long since they have chosen an Archpriest, one of the
Jesuits in Voto, who instead of protecting the Clergy, like a ra^enous wolf
persecutes all such Priests as have no dependence on the Jesuits* worrying them
even to exasperation and despair, and depriving them (under a great penalty) of
mutual communication. To which may be added their for^ing the English Clergy
to become Jesuits in Voto, not admitting any one into their Colleges, who has
not made some engagement to be a Jesuit. So that when that Kingdom shall
return to the ancient Faith* it will give a fair beginning to an absolute
Jesuiticall Monarchy, when all the Ecclesiastical Revenues, all the Abbeyes,
Benefices, Bishoprics, Arch-Priestships and other dignities shall be
altogether at the disposal of the Jesuits.

There are many other things I might have insisted on, as the pretentions they
make concerning other men's estates; as also how jealous they are of their
welfare, and desirous of their prosperity. What a sly way is that they have to
insinuate into the favor of Princes, by persuading them that their Subjects
are more inclined to the Society in matters of devotion, then t^ any other
Order or Religious Institution; and what mus^ needs be consequent thereto, that
they, of all men, ar^ the most sit and able to make them well affected toward
their Prince. Such obvious things as these, ^ leave to every man's particular
observation; and with four brief considerations conclude the present discourse.

First, that men of such turbulent spirits, and such reaching designs must
withal be Lovers of Novelty, ever searching for it, ever begetting it;
because, without some new raised motions, it were impossible they should attain
their ends. Whence it is to be inferred, that the Jesuits cannot be helpful to
any Prince that either loves Peace or endeavors the preservation of his own
estate, since they are more likely to prove the occasions of much distraction
and disturbance, nay to endanger the loss of his estate, if he favor not
their party, or be not in some things guided by their advice.

Secondly, be it taken into s^rious consideration, if these men, who though
they have not yet any temporal jurisdiction, are able by their stickling and
bandying to occasion so great and prodigious disturbances in the world, what
can we imagine they would not do, if it should happen that one of them were
created Pope? No question but he would in the first place, fill up the
Consistory with Jesuits, and by that means perpetuate the Papacy in the
Society. And then making advantage of their insight and interest in
State*affaires, and having the arm and power of the Pope they would be in a
capacity to endanger the estates of many Princes, especially those that are
their Neighbors and Confiners.

Thirdly, one of them being once gotten in the chair, it would be the design of
that Pope (if he could by any means effect it) to give the Society possession
of some place of importance or temporal jurisdiction, by the advantages
whereof they would in process of time make way for thousands of other
designs, which they could never compass, but with the prejudice of other
Princes.

Fourthly, when the Consistory shall be once entirely Jesuited, the whole
Patrimony of Christ would be at their disposal; whereof this would be the
consequence, that as one in a dropsy, the more he drinks, the more thirsty he
is, so their Ambition, encre^sing proportionably to their greatness, would
occasion a world of tumult and trouble. Now, since there is nothing more
subject to change then matters of State, it would be the aim of these Fathers,
with all their power and policy, to alter the course of affairs, that they
might at length introduce the form and project of their own Government, and by
that means absolutely immonarchize themselves. It has been long in their heads
to cajoll into the Society the son of some Sovereign Prince, who should be
drawn in to make an absolute resignation of his estate and Dominions to them.
And this they had long since effected, if some others taking strict notice of
their design, had not prevented them. But had they once made that step, no
doubt, but the next would have been to become Patrones of the State
Ecclesiastical; and being a sort of people very subtle and much inclined to
plots, they would afterward have found thousands of ways how to enlarge it.
Thus would they not have omitted any thing to put their projects in execution;
and if nothing else would have done it, the very jealo^sies which they would
have raised in the minds of their neighbor Princes would have turned not a
little to their advantage.

From all that has been said, it seems to follow as a thing most necessary,
that for the preservation of the public peace, the tranquillity of all States,
the advantage of the Church, and the general good of the whole world, Paul the
fifth, together with other Princes should set bounds and limits to this
Society, whose desires are so extremely inordinate, lest happily that come to
pass which was anciently effected by the Dauidi (whose courses the Jesuits
seem to imitate) who were not destroyed till the time of Claudius the Emperor.

And if ever I am commanded to write my opinion concerning an opportune remedy
for the reformation of these Fathers, without any prejudice or disparagement to
them, nay to their very great advantage (as wishing them rather Monarchs of
Souls, which are the riches of Christ, then of the World or the enjoyments
thereof, that are nothing but vileness and dung) I shall be ready to do it
with charity, and according to the best ofmy skill, as it shall please God to
enable me.

FINIS.
THE PROPHECY OF Saint HILDEGARD fulfilled in the JESUITS.

A SHORT VIEW OF the Life of Saint HILDEGARD, Taken out of the XII. Century of
the Centuriators of Magdenburg; cap. 10. page 1700. etc.
SAint HILDEGARD was a Native of Spanheim, born of noble Parents, her Father
named Hildebert, her Mother Matilda. Being arrived to the eighth year of her
age, she was sent to Jutta, to the Monastery of Saint Disibod, to be
instructed. Growing famous in that place for the Visions and Revelations which
she frequently had, even from her infancy, diverse Emperors and Bishops, and
among others, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, made their addresses to her,
desiring by their Letters to be remembered in her prayers. But what was more
obviously remarkable, was the strange conflux of the more superstitious
multitude to her, nay so far, as that many Ladies of noble extraction came, and
both put on the fame habit, and obliged themselves to the same course of life
which she had engaged her self in. Now the place aforesaid being too narrow for
the entertainment of so great a number, she was, by a certain revelation from
Heaven, commanded to remove thence to another, called the Mount of S. Rupert,
not far from a Town now called Binghen, where the River Naba falls into the
Rhine, and to take those of her Sodality or Institution along with her.
Whereupon choosing out eighteen Virgins, she left the Monastery of S. Isibod,
where she had hitherto lived, to the great grief of the Monks of that place,
and planted her self with the female attendance aforesaid in another Monastery
built upon the said Mount by some Magical assistance, where they lived after
the manner of a Religious life, Hildegard being constituted Abbess thereof.
She is also said to have written many Books, whereof we are furnished with a
Catalogue by Trithemius and others, as follows.

1. Upon the Rule of S. Benedict. 1 2. Solutions to eight and thirty Questions.
1 3. The Life of S. Rupert, the Confessor. 1 4. The Life of S. Disibod, the
Bishop 1 5. Fifty and eight Homilies upon several places of the Gospel 1 6.
Of the Sacrament of the Altar 1 7. Sciviae, a large Volume 1 8. Of Medicinal
compositions 1 9. Of the Life of Merits 3 10. Of Divine works 1 11. To the
Inhabitants of Moguntia 1 12. To those of Cologne 1 13. To those of Trier 1 14.
An Exhortation to Saeculars 1 15. An Explication of Athanasius's Creed,
dedicated to her Sisters 1 16. To the Gri^ean Monks 1 17. Of several Poems 1
18. To S. Bernard Epist. 1 19. Of Epistles to several people 135. collected
all into one Book 1
All which Treatises were by Eugenius the third, in the Council of Trier,
approved, in the presence of the same Saint Bernard, in the year of our Lord M.
C. L.

She had no acquaintance at all with the Latin Tongue, as she acknowledges her
self in the Book before mentioned, called the Sciviae, where she expresses her
self to this effect. Being come to the two and fortieth year of my age, and
the seventh month of the said year, a fiery light, of extraordinary
brightness, coming from the open heaven, dispersed it self all about my
Brain, and all about my heart, and all about my Breast, as a flame, yet not
such as burns, but such as warmes, raising in me such a warmth, as the Sun does
in those things whereon it sheds its rays. And immediately I was illuminated
with the understanding and exposition of books, as for instance of the Psalter,
the Ghospels, and other Catholic Volumes as well of the Old as New Testament;
yet not so as that I was any thing skilled in the interpretation of the words
of the Text, or the division of the Syllables, or understood ought of cases or
Tenses. As may be found in her life, Lib. 1. cap. 1.

But her manner was to make use of a Secretary a faithful person, whose
business it was, being well skilled in the rules of Grammar, to do all things
with observance of cases, tenses, and genders, yet with this caution, that,
neither as to the sense or understanding of what was written, he should not
detract from any thing, or add ought. She is reported to have written to Pope
Adrian, and to have given him an account of what had been communicated to her
in a Celestial Vision; as if a Voice had said to her, What thou learnest from
above, thou shall not according to the ordinary custom pronounce in the Latin
Tongue, for that privilege is not given to thee; let him that is so qualifyed
prepare it for the apprehensions of men. In her life, lib. 2.

And to Wibert, a Monk of the Monastery at Gemblours, she thus writes of her
Visions. God, says she, works all things in order to the manifestation of his
glorious name, and not that man, born of the earth, should be thereby exalted.
For my part, I am always in fear and trembling, because I have not any
security what I am able to do. But I lift up my hands to God, for that it is b^
his strength, that* like a feather, which has nothing of weight, but is blown
up and down by the wind, I am sustained. Nor indeed dare I be overconfident of
even the things which I see, while I am encompassed with a body, and the
exigences attendant thereon, and reach not the invisibility of the Soul; for as
to these two, there is a deficiency in man. Though the Vision appeared to me in
my infancy, even while my bones, my nerves, and my veins were not yet well
knit together, yet do I see it in my soul at this very present, now that I am
above seventy years of age; and it is the pleasure of God so to dispose of me,
as that my soul ascends up into the height of the Firmanent, and is carried
through diverse places, and takes notice of several Nations, though they are at
a great distance from me. And whereas, it is after such a manner that I see
these things in my soul, it is also accordingly after certain interpositions of
clouds and other creatures that I behold them. It is not therefore with my
outward eyes that I see these things, nor with my outward ears that I hear
them, nor is it with the thoughts of my heart, or any assistance of my five
senses that I apprehend them: but all is transacted in my soul, my outward
eyes being open, so as that I never suffered any defect of exstacy in them, but
I constantly see these things waking night and day. See her Life, lib. 1. cap.
8.

She is very Satyricall in inveighing against the vices and miscarriages of the
Clergy of her time. Whereupon it is that she in a certain place says: But now
is it come to pass, that the greatest contemners of the Law are these who by
their functions ought to be most tender thereof, they neglect both the doing
and teaching of that which is good. The Spiritual Masters, and the Prelates,
justice being slighted and scorned, mind nothing but their own ease. In a
certain vision she had the Church appeared to her in the form of a Woman
making sad complaints, that her face was all bespattered with dirt by the
Priests themselves, and her garments rent in pieces, etc. that they neither in
their doctrine nor in their example were guides to the people; but rather did
the contrary: that they forced away the innocent Lamb from them. She said
moreover, that all Ecclesiastical Institutions grew worse and worse, and that
the Priests did not teach, but rather endeavor to destroy the Law of God. And
that for those horrid wickednesses and impieties, she threatens and foretells
the heavy wrath and judgments of God that were like to fall upon them. See
Catalogus testium Veritatis.

She also foretells a restoration of Religion, and that it shall be to the
great encouragement of the Godly. Then, says she, shall the sacred badges of
Apostolical Honor be divided, because no Region shall be subject to the
Apostolic See; but rather it shall come into contempt, through the dignity of
that name, and the people shall make other men and Archbishops over them;
insomuch, that the Apostolic See shall at that time be brought so low in point
of Soverainty, that there will be only Rome, and some few places adjacent
shall acknowledge its spiritual jurisdiction. Now these things shall come to
pass, partly through wars and invasions, and partly also through the common
consultations and consent of both Ecclesiastical and secular Powers. Then
shall Justice reassume its place and majesty again, so that in those days, men
shall be made acquainted with the ancient customs and manner of living of
those that went before them, and shall accordingly observe them, and behave
themselves suitably thereto, as the Ancients did. Ibidem.

And in certain Letters to Anastasius the fourth, she says, And thou Rome,
situated in the extremity of Christendom, thou also shall be shaken, so that
the strength of thy feet, upon which thou have hi herto stood, shall fail thee:
because thy affection toward the King's daughter, that is to say, Justice,
proceeds not from a fervent love, but is as it were lukewarm and sleepy, so
that thou forcest her from thee. Whence it will come to pass, that she also
will be desirous to leave thee, if thou call her not back again. Chronicon
Hirsaugien^e.

She is reported also to have done several Miracles. She dyed in the year of
Salvation, one thousand, one hundred, and eighteen; of her age the eighty
second. Calend. October. as may be seen in her life, lib. 3.

THE PROPHECY OF Saint HILDEGARD Fulfilled in the JESUITS, etc.
THere were published, of the said Saint Hildegard, many predictions and
Prophecies, as also seven other very profitable Books, which were, by eminent
Writers in the Council of Trier, nine Archbishops, and particularly those of
Moguntia and Trier, approved of. Which said Volumes, as also the Instruments
wherein they were approved, were to be found in the Monastery consecrated to
Saint Rupert, not f^rre from Binghen, when J^hannes Wolsius writ these things:
but the Monastery coming to be destroyed by the wars of Germany, they were
either lost, or translated thence to some other place. She lived about the
Year of Christ MCLXXX. Among many other Prophecies of Saint Hildegard, whereof
diverse are already come to pass, is found also that which follows, which to
what Order of men it can be more truly and pertinently applied, then to that of
the JESVITS, will soon appear both by the text and remarks thereon. Take it
then first in the Original, and afterward translated by parcells in the
several Paragraphs.

IN d^ebus illis exurget gens insensata, pomposa, cupida, perfida, and dolosa,
quae peccata populi comedere, ordinem quorundam timentium devotariorum sub
assimulata mendicantium specie tenentes, seque caeteris devotione, inflata
scientia, ac praetensa sanctitate praeferentes, sine rubore ac Dei timore
ambulantes, multa nov^ mala adinvenientes, fortes and validi, a sapientibus and
Christi fidelibus ORDO ille male dicetur. A laboribus cessabunt, and otio
vacabunt, assumentes potius Ordinem adulantium, quam mendicantium. Studebunt
insuper omn^s nimium* qualiter Doctoribus veritatis perverse resistant and
eosdem cum potentibus interficiant, and potentes seducant, and decipiant,
propter necessitate^ vitae, and delectationem mundi. Diabolus na^ que in eis
quatuor vitia radicabit; videlice^ 1. Adulationem, uti eis large detur. 2.
Invidiam, quando aliis dabitur non ipsis. 3. H^pocrism, ut per falsam
simulationem aliis hominibus complaceant. 4. Detractationem, i^se ipsos
commendent, extollant, and alios vitupe rent propter laudem hominum, and
seductione^ simplicium; ac sine devotione and exemplo marty rium praedicabunt
instanter. Detrahent Principibus saecularibus, Ecclesiarum sacramenta veris
pastoribus subtrahentes, recipientes eleemosynas pauperum, infirmorum and
miserorum; necnonse in multitudinem populi trahentes; familiaritatem cum
Mulieribus habentes, easque instruentes, qualiter marit^s and amicos suos
blande, and per verba dolosa, decipiant, nec non res proprias, eisdem furtive
subtrahant, and i^sis tribuant. Tollent namque res furtivas, and male
acquisitas, ac dicent, Dato nobis, and nos orabimus pro vobis; sicuti aliorum
^itia curiosius tegant, and suorum penitus ob^viscantur. Heu tollent etiam res
miseras a ^ptoribus, furibus, latronibus, aut sacrilegis, ^ usurariis,
foeneratoribus, Adulteris, haerecis, Schismaticis, apostatis, mulieribus
luxuosis, lenis and lenonibus, a potentibus, perjuris ercatoribus, falsis
Judicibus, militibus, Tyran^, Et a Principibus c^ntra legem viventibus a multis
perversis persuasionem Diaboli, and ^cedinem peccati, ac vitam delicatam,
tran^riam and brevem; necnon satietatem in ^demnationem aeternam sectantes.
Haec au^ ^mnia in eis aperta and manifesta erunt ^ulis universis. Ip^i vero de
die in diem durio- and nequiores efficientur. Et cum seductiones and quitates
explorate fuerint, tunc cessabitur eis ^i. Et tunc ibunt circa dom^s familici,
et ut canes rabidi, submissis in terram oculis, contrahentes cervices suas,
veluti turtures, ut pane satientur. Tunc clamabit populus super eos; Vae vobis
miseri filii moeroris; Vos mundus seduxit, Diabolus vestra ora infrenavit; Caro
vestra lubrica, and corda vestra sine sapore. Men's vestra vaga fuit, and oculi
vestri delectabantur in vanitatibus and in insaniis multis. Venture vester
delicatus dulcia fercula appe^it; pedes vestri veloces ad currendum in malum.
Mementote, cum eratis apparenter beati aemulatores, pauperes divites, and
simplices potentes, devoti adulatores, perfidi traditores, perversi
destructores sancti hypocritae, veritatis subversores, nimis directi, superbi,
effrontes, Doctores instabiles, martyrs delicati, Confessores lucri, immites
calumniatores, Religiosi avari, humiles elati, pii duri, mendaces dul^es,
pacifici persecutores, simplicium oppressores, malarum sectarum, per v^s de
novo excogitatarum, adinventores, misericordes nequam, amatores mundi,
venditores Indulgentiarum, spoliatores beneficiorum, oratores incommodi,
conspiratores seditiosi, suspiratores crapulosi, desideratores honorum,
zelatores criminum, mundi raptores, insatiabiles praedicatores, applausores
hominum, seductores faeminarum, seminatores discordiarum. Been etenim de Vobis
gloriosus Propheta Moses in cantico suo cecinit, Gens absque consilio, and
sine prudentia, utinam saperent atque intelligerent, ac novissima providerent;
Aedificatores in altum, and dum altius ascendere non poteratis, tunc
cecidistis, sicut Simon Magus quem Deus contrivit, and plaga crudeli percussit:
sic and vos per seductionem, nequitias, mendacia; detractiones and iniquitates
vestras corruistis. Et populus dicet illis, Ite Doctore s perversitatis,
subversores veritatis, and fratres Sunamitidis, patres haereticae pravitatis,
pseudo-Apostoli, quia simulastis vos vitam servare Apostolorum, nec tamen in
minimo vitam illorum implevistis. Filii iniquitatis, scientias viarum vestrarum
nolumus, nam prae^umptio elata vos decepit, and infatiabilis concupiscentia
subvertit erroneum cor vestrum: Et cum in altum, ultra quam decet, ascendere
voluistis, justo Dei judicio, deorsum in opprobrium sempiternum cecidistis.
Joann. Wolfius in memorabilibus Cent. XII. Anno, 1180. page 400.

Thus far the Prophecy it self; of which and the ^ike, what to think, and
what credit is to be given ^hereto, others have given their opinions, viz. that
^t is not impo^^ible Prophe^ies and Predictions of this ^ind may amount to no
more then the dreams of me^ncholy, super^titious, and di^tempered persons, such
^s of which it may be said, Augurium vanum vani docuere parents,
Cui credens, dignus decipiatur eri^.
^ut to deny all credit to Prophecies is to be guilty of ^ incredulity greater
then that of the incredulous Thomas. Nor are we to think what God says by the
Prophet Joel, to be spoken in vain, That in the last days, the old men should
dream dreams and see visions, and the sons and daughters prophecy. Many
examples might be alleged of Prophecies of this kind which the event has
confirmed to be true, and therefore they may challenge belief, when they are in
their effects fulfilled.

But for what we have at the present to do with, it is to be observed, that it
was approved in the Council of Trier, as may be seen in the precedent life of
Saint Hildegard; whereto is added the suffrage of Eugenius the third, Bishop of
Rome, which according to both Jesuits and Canonists, is an extraordinary
authentication.

But the Society may object, that, all this granted, this prophecy is not more
applicable to them, then to the Franciscans, Dominicans, Augustines, Minorites,
or indeed the whole Clergy. To this all that can be answered, is, to desire the
Reader very seriously to consider, first the words of the Prophecy, and thence
direct his thoughts on the Life, Doctri^e, Manners, and Humors of the Jesuits;
and comparing the one with the other, he will, if I mistake not, find, that
they cannot be so pertinently attributed to any Order as this last of the
Jesuits. To which purpose, the ensuing Remarks are laid down by way of
comparison between the Prophecy and the Society, to show that it, and no other,
is designed thereby.

Paragraph 1. In diebus illis surget gens insensata, In those days shall arise
a sort of people that will be insensate.) Some happily may wonder why she should
call the Jesuits an insensate sort of people, when it is known to all, the
world affords not any thing more crafty, or overreaching then that Sect.
Insomuch that a certain Germane Prince was wont to say of it, What the Devil
knows not, a Jesuit does. And another used this Simile of them; As far as the
Devil exceeds men in craft and mischief, so far do the Jesuits exceed the
Devil himself in slights and elusions. But she calls them insensate, because
they above all others advance and maintain opinions and maxims contrary to
those of other men, and such as are inconsistent with common sense, so as it
may be said of a Jesuit, Tu semper contrarius esto.
Whence it comes that they are by some called Stoici and Stoicidae, as opposing
the general Tenet of all other men, and out of an unparalleled obstinacy,
denying things as clear as that the Sun shines at noon. Or happily, because
they have put off all sense of humanity and commiseration, whether they have to
do with Heretics or Catholics it matters not, if they will not comply with
their desires; as also in their maintaining of Murder and other Enormities
lawfully committed upon the slightest grounds imaginable. This the Monks of
Portugal felt very heavy, when Philip the Second of Castile, how justly or
unjustly I say not, made an hostile invasion into the Kingdom. But it may also
be imagined that the insatiate Brutality her^ attributed to them, has some
allusion to those Enthusiasmes, which the Jesuits very much pretend to, and for
which they much celebrate their Founder Ignatius, as when he abstained from
sustenance a whole week together, as Orlandinus, a member of the Society,
affirms Chapter 1. page 26 or when he ran into a Poole of water, to deter a
light woman of his acquaintance from a venereal inflammation. Ibid. page 69. Or
when he is said to be in an exstacy for the space of eight days together. l.
1. 28. Or when he had celestial Visions, L. 1. p. 13. 27. 34. 40. though the
Jesuiticall Catechism seems to make the same Ignatius a person so stupid that
he was not admitted to Catechisation for the space of four years. page 64.

Parag. 2. Pomposa; addicted to pomp) then which nothing could have been more
oracularly spoken, for what indeed is the whole Institution, but pomp? There
is nothing so apparent in their humors, carriage, actions. ^or though they
seem in their discourses to make profession of humility, yet is there not any
thing they really le^se intend, then submission of mind. They are full of pomp
and sumptuousness in their gate, in the structure of their Churches,
Colleges, Gardens, Houses of recreation, Schools, in their teaching, reading,
professing, singing, acting of ^^^^dies* in ^^^ir Processions* in a word* all
things are done with such affectation, ostentation, pomp and theatricall
magnificence, as in the apprehensions of all others are inconsistent with the
simplicity and austerities of a Religious Institution, and no small scandal to
the general profes^ion of Christians.

Parag. 3. Cupida; Covetous) To produce examples to make this more manifest,
were to demonstrate that fire is hot: it is a thing notorious to all the world,
and lies very heavy upon the whole Clergy whose sighs and groans are
sufficient arguments of the burden they feel. Bring, bring, are their morning
prayers; Give, give, their evening. They who desire further satisfaction may
look into Thomas de Vergas, in his Book Of the slights and stratagems of the
Jesuits, C. 25. 32. 33. 44. 45. 46. 47. and Speculum Jesuiticum, Mantiss. 6. 8.
13. 16. The Jesuits and a Beggars wallet are both in the same predicament, sick
of the same disease, insatiable.

Parag. 4. Per^idia; Per^idious) Toward God, Princes, People, and especially
the rest of the Clergy. To God, in that having made a solemn vow and promise
in their Baptism to be faithful to him, they afterward swear allegiance to
Ignatius. To Princes, that is to say, all Kings and supreme Magistrates, except
the King of Spain whose spiritual Janissaries they are. They maintain him with
their pens; he them, with the sword. To the People, who have so often smarted
for their treacheries and the inconstancy of their humors and interests. Nor
is it enough that they are themselves guilty of breaches of fidelity toward
the Secular powers of the World, but they are the encouragers, maintainers and
abettors of all the like breaches in others; so that now in matters of
correspondence, commerce and contract, a man is no longer tied to the
observance of promises, then it shall be for his advantage to do it. By their
exasperations and suggestions came the toleration of Religions in France to be
so much disturbed, and the ensuing calamities occasioned. By whose means came
the Edicts of Ferdinand the second for a free exercise of Religion granted to
the Bohemians, Austrians, Carinthians, Moravians etc. to be broken and
repealed, but by that of the Jesuits? By whose persuasion came the same
Ferdinand to violate the privileges sworn to by him at his coronation before
the Electors, but by theirs? By whose instigations did the same Ferdinand put
out the Edict concerning the restitution of Ecclesiastical Goods, whereby he
brought the House of Austria, and the whole Empire into inextricable
inconveniences, but by theirs? Who are they that teach, preach, maintain in
their writings, that all Transactions, pacifications, accommodations are so
long to be observed as the Pope and themselves think it convenient, but the
Jesuits? To what end serve all their evasions, prevarications, aequivocations
and mental reservations, but to elude all they have to do with, and to make a
certain Science of perfidiousnesse? See Thomas de Verg^s c. 41. 42. The awful
observance of oaths, promises, engagements, is a thing not mentioned in the
Jesuits Gospel, where it is almost a maxim, Nucibus pueros, juramentis viros
fallendos, That children are to be deceived with toys, men eluded with oaths.

Parag. 5. D^losa; full of deceit) This is ever a near neighbor to the
precedent; for it seldom happens that he who is perfidious and treacherous, is
not also fraudulent; and he who is fraudulent, is not guilty in some measure of
perfidiousnesse. Virgil's Sino compared with these was a simple harmless
fellow: these are not so much deceitful, as made up of fallacy and deceit,
nay, they are essential to them. This is the end and design of their so much
recommended amphibologies and aequivocations. Notorious were those of the
English Jesuit Father Garnet. To this head may be referred feigned and
supposititious Letters, and the counterfeitings of other men's Seals. Mercurius
Jesuiticus relates, that in the year M. DC. IX. when they were about to build
a College at Troyes in France, to carry on the business with more expedition
and encouragement, they writ to the King that the Inhabitants were extremely
desirous of it, and by way of answer produced Letters from him to them, wherein
the King encouraged and commanded them to accommodate the Fathers; but in both,
the forgery of the Jesuits was most remarkable. Having counterfeited the
public Seal of the City of Rochel, they signed Letters therewith, which being
accidentally intercepted, brought the Rochellers into a sad and deplorable
war. But their transcendency in deceiving and circumventing is not so
notorious in any thing as the famous History of Cottaba, which happened in the
year one thousand six hundred twenty eight, which who desires to consult may
find in Greek and Latin, at the end of the book called MYSTERIA PATRVM
JESVITARVM, Printed one thousand six hundred thirty three, written, by way of
Letter, by Gregorius Hieronomachus the Patriarch. Much also to the same effect
may be seen in the ANTI COTTON, as also in SPECVLVM JESVITICVM.

Parag. 6. Peccata populi comedet, That shall feed upon the sins of the
people) This has some relation to those that drive a trade of Indulgences. But
they have a more subtle and more gainful way, that is, they of all men, are
the most experienced in the advantages are to be made in the Confessions of
Kings, Princes and other illustrious persons, by whom the ordinary sort of
people are governed and disposed. These they have a knack to engrosse to
themselves, and so to order them as to make their Kitchins warm, and their
purses heavy. This is so apparent every where, that it is their own complaint,
but full of ostentation and design, that they are overwhelmed with the
innumerable conflux of Penitents that address themselves to them. See more
hereafter.

Parag. 7. Ordinem quorundam timentium devotariorum sub dissimulata
mendicantium specie tenentes: Assuming to themselves the title of an ORDER of
men devout and fearing God, under a personated resemblance of poverty:) All
which words require our particular consideration and exposition. Assuming to
themselves the title of an Order, for so it seems they will needs be called,
and take it most heynously when any one gives them the denomination of MONKS
or FRIARS Devout and fearing God; they indeed put on a show of much fear and
reservednesse, as also pretend to a more then ordinary degree of devotion, as
such as serve the Lord with fear and trembling. But all proceeds from their
exquisite Sycophancy and personation, for they are so far from being fearful,
that they are excessively confident and ready for any mischief; and if they be
guilty of any devotion, it is in order to do somewhat that is indirect, and to
carry on his ends whose Rule and institution they are sworn to. Under a
personated resemblance of Poverty; What ever they do, what ever they meddle
with, whatever they are concerned in, is not free from dissimulation and
imposture, nay it is that part of their trade they now make the greatest
advantages of. To this may happily relate what the Jesuit Orlandinus fathers upon
their own Ignatius, l. 1. p. 20. That Ignatius, being entertained at the
Hospital of S. Luke at Minorissa, suffered his hair (which according to the
fashion of that time was very long) his beard and nails to grow neglectedly,
and his whole countenance to be sordid. His clothing was a piece of course
sack -- cloth; his bed, the bare ground; his sleep very little, and that
subject to mid night interruptions by his prayers. Thrice every day he very
unmercifully disciplined himself; seven hours he spent upon his knees in
several prayers, not accounting the time which he on the same days bestowed
in hearing Mass, and saying the several parts of the Office. He fasted whole
weeks together, taking no sustenance but a small piece of bread, which he had
begged, and water, and that only once a day. Only upon the Sundays, when he
went to the Sacrament of Penance and communicated, he remitted somewhat of the
severity of his abstinence, if he had the convenience to do it. If he could so
acquit himself of these employments as to have any spare time, he either
ministered to the sick, or begged alms to be bestowed upon other pooremen, or
by devout and pious discourses, endeavored to make those he met better then
they were, making it his constant business to be ever so employed as not to
afford his body any indulgence. Here is certainly the description of a man
truly devout, and working out his salvation with fear and trembling; but
whether it be truly attributed to the person on whom it is bestowed is that
which is much in question, as being extremely at a distance with the rules of
the Institution in things relating to Diet and the Kitchen, and much more with
the practice of those who oblige themselves thereto there being not a more
delicate sort of people in the' world besides; as shall be shown hereafter. Not
to mention, that these characters of sanctimony and austerity frequent in
Jesuits and none other, are by themselves advanced merely to claw one the
other, a kind of hypocrisy, whereof though they fail of the reward they expect
here, namely the credit and respects of men, yet shall they not of what they
are to have hereafter, confusion and gnashing of teeth.

Parag. 8. Seque c^teris, ficta devotione, inflata scientia, and praetensa
sancti^ate praef^rentes: preferring themselves, through feined devotion, an
aerie Science, and pretended sanctimony, before all others.) She allows them a
devotion, but it is fnign'd; a knowledge, but an aerie one; sanctimony, but
pretended only and personated. The Substantives are indeed very commendable,
but the Adjectives spoil all and make them detestable. A thing feigned, as a
thing painted, is of no long duration; what is aerie, soon vanishes and comes to
nothing; what is only pretended signifies a ly, and wants those testimonies
and demonstrations whereby a thing should subsist. Of feined devotion, somewhat
has been said in the precedent Paragraph, and more shall be in the subsequent.
Concerning the aerie science, and the pretended sanctity they make so great
ostentation of, let us hear what the Jesuit Ozorius says, tom. 4. Of his
Sermons of the Saints, in that upon the death of Ignatius, taking his text out
of the ninth chapter of the Apocalypse. And the fifth Angel blew his Trumpet,
and I saw a Star etc. The fifth Angel there spoken of, says he, is Ignatius.
And page 166. he says; God has a tenderness for the ORDER which takes its
denomination from the name of JESUS, equal to what the Patriarch Jacob had for
his son Benjamin, whom he had begotten in his old age. The Institution of the
Jesuits, says he elsewhere, is an institution of men grown up to the height of
perfection. Of their feigned Sanctity, much need not be said, since not only
the books put out by themselves, speak it sufficiently, but it is notorious to
all the world. Let a man but consider their institution, their vows, their
lives, their doctrine, he will find nothing, but painting and feigning and
pretending and dissembling. Their aerie and imaginary Science is so obvious in
their works, as if they were bent upon nothing so much, as to make all others,
in matter of science and learning, compared to them, the most despicable things
in the world. Witness that voluminous work put out by them of Anwerpe in the
year 1640. under the title of Images. Witness the Amphitheatre of Honor, or
as others will have it, of Horror, scribled by Scribanius, wherein Scaliger,
Causabon and Gruterus, esteemed by all the learned a Triumvirate of
transcendent Wits in their times, are accounted in comparison of the Jesuits,
persons of no parts, children, fit to go to School again. For the Jesuits are
to be thought the hereditary Professors of all Learning. To what has been said
may be added the Dedicatory Epistle of the Jesuit Raderus, before the life of
^anisius, of the same Society, whereof part may be read in the Speculum
Jesuiticum Man^is^. 5. There among other things he says, That it is the
principal design of the Jesuits to bring Cities, Provinces, Nations,
Commonwealths, Kingdoms, nay the whole World to a nearer relation to Heaven,
and to be their conductors to eternal Beatitude. Nay the Jesuit Ozorius makes
no difficulty to assirme, That the Jesuits were ordained to supply the defects,
to cure the infections, to correct the miscarriages of other Orders, Societies
and Religious Institutions, and to put the proud masters of the World to
silence,

Parag. 9. Sine rubore and timore Dei ambulantes; Walking without any shame or
the fear of God) It will be to little purpose for the Jesuits to celebrate
themselves, and to make ostentation of their austerities and sanctity, if there
be any credit to be given to this holy* Woman's prophecy. She tells us they own
no shame* and if we consider them well, we shall find they make her words good*
Who are those that commend Regicides and call them Ehuds? Who countenance
Homicide* and all those crimes which other cowardly bashful people conceive a
horror at? Who are so confident, and have such adamantine foreheads, as to
deny what most Historians affirm, millions of people have seen and attest? Who
have Maxims calculated for all sorts of persons, encourage breaches of trust
in Servants, of allegiance in Subjects, of duty in children and Wives, and
dissolve the ties of humane Society? Who are the Abettors of detraction,
perjury, lying, etc. Of which who desires particulars may consult the Mystery
of Jesuitisme, and open the Book where he will. Without the fear of God before
their eyes. Ah Hildegard, take heed what thou say of those, who, if we
believe themselves, are the Reformers of the world, the good Genii that conduct
men to Beatitude. They are employed upon the Embassy of the Gospel to all the
world, and for that reason assume the name of Religious men above all others,
and will not be called Monks, nay among the Portuguizes and the Indians will
not be content with any under that of Apostles. But that certainly not without
pretense; otherwise they would not be the occasions of so many commotions,
wars, insurrections, and accounted incendiaries and the abettors of all
impieties, even by those who are not upon any account of Religion their
enemies. See Elixer Jesuiticum, part 1. printed in the Year M. DC. XLV. and
Spec. Jesuit* page 239.

Parag. 10. Multa nova mala adinvenientes; Introducers of many evil things) O
Hildegard, how truly have thou spoken, and how much is it to be wished it were
otherwise! For what new evil have they not introduced, and do daily brood?

1. The ORDER it self, or the institution of that Order, what is it but a new
Evil introduced, a new order brought in after so many others, under which the
world sufficiently groaned before.

2. Their separation and difference from those Orders.

3. Their unheard of and arrogant assumption of the name of Jesus.

4. Their maintaining of opinions contrary to those of all other men.

5. Their artifices in creeping into the Courts and concernments of secular
powers, and insinuating themselves into the affections of the weaker sex.

6. Their depriving of other Orders of their subsistence and habitations.

7. Their imitation of Proteus's and Vertumneus's, and putting on all shapes,
to make good, that a Jesuit is every man.

8. Their Aequi^ocations.

9. Their sowing of dissension, and raising of Jealousies between temporal
Princes.

10. Their dissolving the m^tuall obligations between Husbands and Wives,
Parents and Children.

11. Their forging of Letters, and counterfeiting other men's hands and seals.

13. Their making of new Creeds.

14. Their denying, discountenancing and oppressing of the Truth.

15. Their bringing up of their Disciples to a more then theatricall
confidence, and encouraging them to Regicides.

16. Their doing of all things under a pretense of Religion, when they have not
the least tincture of any.

17. Their doing of all things in order to their own accommodation and
advantages.

18. Their casting of mists before men's eyes to induce them into an erroneous
persuasion, that piety, sanctity, religion, modesty, learning and the knowledge
of all things spiritual and temporal is only to be found in them.

19. Their unspeakable subtilty.

20. To extol and acknowledge the Pope in Spiritualls, and the King of Spain
in Temporalls for the only supreme Monarchs....... But who is able to give a
particular account of all their new inventions? Lybia is not the dam^e of so
many Monsters, as they are Authors of new evils* till at the last they find out
also a new Hell.

Parag. 11. Fortes and validi; Strong, and in good plight.) And why should they
not? They eat what is delicate; they drink of the best; they lodge at their
ease; their habitations are the most delightful, they are warmely clothed,
they enjoy themselves in all things, they want for nothing, they are not
troubled with the care of worldly things, they are accommodated even to
superfluity, they have the tuition of youth, nay many times are the bodily as
well as ghostly Fathers of those whose education they are entrusted with. And
in this they are not unlike Cucko^s who laying their eggs in the nests of other
birds, leave the burden of their hatching and breeding to them. They are
Goliah's in body, Goliah's in mind, Goliah's in their words, Goliah's in their
actions; only in this they differ from him, that they appear not in the
forefront of the battle, lest they should meet with the mortal sling of
David. They think it enough, if like Demosthenes, they fight with thundering
words, and when the business comes to handy-blowes, slink away.

Parag. 12. A sapientibus and Christi fidelibus Ordo illemaledicetur. That
order of men shall be evil spoken of and cursed by wise men, and the faithful
ones of Christ.) Not undeservedly. He whom many fears, must needs stand in
fear of many; and who speaks ill of many, must expect to be evil spoken of by
many. They undervalue, and speak evil of Christ when they advance maxims
destructive to those of his Gospel. If the name of Christ were not despicable
with them, they would not, by the extravagance of their opinions bring
Christian Religion into so much contempt. Christ therefore has long since
cursed them in his Word in the fruitless Fig Tree, and under the names of
Scribes and Pharisees, when he pronounced his eternal Woe against them. They
are cursed and ill spoken of by the Wise men, that is, by those who detect
their artifices and subtilty, for their craftiness cannot be always kept
secret. God and Time, who reveals all things, brings also their wickedness to
light, nay they have been discovered in the very beginning of their
Institution. How often has Ignatius himself been ill spoken of, one while in
Spain, another in Italy, another in the midst of Rome by Guidictius, another in
France, by the College of Sorbonne and the Parliament? See Orlandinus Lib. 1.
2. How they have been, and still are hated and ill spoken of by all the other
Orders and the rest of the Clergy, the Philippick Orations spoken in the
Parliament of Paris by the Advocate Pasquier, Menilius, Mortivillerius, etc. can
testify. The same thing is manifest from the bandyings against them of all the
Universities in Europe, and to what height their differences came may be seen
by any that will in the Jesuiticall Mercury, Thuanus, Mettera^us. But we shall
not think it much to give a catalogue of those who have publicly opposed the
Institution of the Jesuits, though the names of many are yet unknown. Of a
greater number take only the ensuing, as such as were more easily procured.

All Universities, and chiefly those of France: as may be seen in Thuanus,
Mercurius Jesuiticus, Tom. 1. 2. That of Cracovia. Mercur. Jes. Tom. 1.
Of Lovaine Mercur Jes. Tom 1. Of Doway

Of Padua. Thuanus. Anno 1541. Anticotton. Antonius Arnoldus. Amichanus. Thuan.
The Austine Friars. Thuan. Aphorismi doctrinae Jesuitica. Barthol. Guidiccio.
as appears by the Jesuit Orlandinus in his Jesuiticall History, and
Ribadeneira, in the life of Ignatius. Belloy, the Attorney General in the
Parliament of Toulouse, Mer^. Jesuit. part. 1. Barlie^tus, in his suspicions of
the four Monarchies. Carolus Molin^^s, ictus, Thuan. l. 35. Cheverinus
Cancellarius, anno 1598. The Advice of a Nobleman of Poland, Anon. concerning
the ejection of the Jesuits out of Poland. Eremitam Monachi 1540. Thuanus.
Harlaeus, President of the Parliament of Paris. Thuan. l. 37. Johannes Gerson,
Chanceller of the University of Paris, Merc. Jesuit* par. 1. Thuan.
Mortivillerius, Rector of the University of Paris. Pasquierius. Thuan l. 110.
in his Jesuitical Catechism. The Parlements of Paris and Toulouse, as to be
seen in several places of Thuanus. Passeratius, especially in his Oration, de
ridiculis. The Professors of several Universities. Spec. Jesuit. under the
title of Academies. Petrus Alliacus, Cardinal* Thuan. Petrus de Mortivilliere,
Counselor at Law and Advocate, Anno 1613. The Professors and Peers of Poland.
1564. 1606. 1607. 1622. Merc. Jesuit. par. 1. 2. Thuan. Simon Marion,
Counselor, Thuan. l. 119. The College of Sorbonne at Paris. Thuan. in
several places. Merc. Jes. par. 1. Stanislaus P^^^ski, a Nobleman of Poland.
Thu. l. 137. Thuanus President and Historian of France, in several places of
his own works. The Republic of Venice, 1591. 1606. 1612. Thuan. Meteran. The
Relations of Francfort. Tu^nebus in his Poems. Guilielmus de sancto amore,
Thuan.
This the Reader is to look on, as a taste of what might be produced as to this
particular. Who desires more, may consult Speculum Jesuiticum, and Elixer
Jesuiticum.

Parag. 13. A laboribus cessabunt, and otio vacabun^: They shall be no great
pains takers, but lovers of leisure.) How can that be? Why, they leave not a
corner of the world unsearch'd; they are upon perpetual missions, and travells
by sea and land, they have the management of Schools, the education of youth is
their burden, they preach, they celebrate, they advise those that consult them,
they hear the confessions of all that apply themselves to them, from the Court
to the Cottage they find something or other to do. Can these men be said to be
at leisure? But as we find, that, of men, some spend their lives in doing
nothing, others in doing what they should not, a third sort, in doing that
which is evil: so they are busy about that which they should have nothing to
do with: They have one foot in the pulpit, another in the palace. Or they do
that which is evil; teaching what ought not to be taught, commanding those
things which cannot justifiably be done: which while they do, 'twere better
they did nothing. For their pains in the education of youth, it is far from
what the simplier sort of people imagine. Let a man but consider the
distribution of Classes, and Lectures, and the multitude of Teachers, and he
will find it far short of what they would persuade the world to. For, their
Classes being disposed according to the several sciences, there is one or two
designed for every art, and he not for many years, but for one or two, after
which he is succeeded by another, and he, having gone through his course, by
another. For instance, There is one teaches only Etymology, another only
Syntaxe, another Pr^sodi^, another Poetry, another Rhetoric, another Logic,
leaving all the other parts to others: whereas among others the Masters are
employed all day in teaching, taking ten times as much pains as any of them.
The same course is taken in the writing of Books among the Jesuits; for they so
divide the whole task among many, as the Builders of the tower of Babel did,
one brings lime, another stones, a third water, a fourth other necessa^ies: so
when any Jesuit intends the publishing of some piece, he first draws the
principal draught o^ design of it, and sends copies thereof to the other
Colleges, where being received, the tasks are divided, every one contributing
his endeavors. So that the Author of the Book, having all his materials
prepared to his hands, disposes them according as his fancy leads him, orders,
polishes, and dresses up all into such form as he thinks fit. Now among us
all is otherwise, a man is forced like a spider to spin all out of his own
bowels, so that their labor, compared to ours, amounts to little more then
recreation, nay is mere divertisement. Another employment of theirs wherein
they take much pains, is, to work themselves into the secrets of Kings and
Princes, and to dive into the nearest concernments of private persons, and to
hold correspondence, and write news all over the world. Pride we know will
suffer a little pinching; hor shall we attribute that to labor or business,
which is the pure effect of a pragmaticall curiosity.

Parag. 14. Assumentes po^ius Ordinem adu lan^ium quam Mendicantium; taking
upon them an O^der rather of Flatterers then Mendican^s) What should be the
reason of such a distance between their Vows and Actions? No other then that of
him in the Gospel, working is a little hard and indigestible with such delicate
bodies, and to turn ordinary, obulary, beggars, they think a sh^me. What
rema^ns then, but that they should endeavor to supply their exigences by
Flatteries, Insinuation and Sycophancy. To beg from door to door is not
therefore to be expected from them, though even in that day they degenerate
from their Founder, who, as Orlandinus affirms, thought it no shame to beg,
not only for himself but also for others; but they are wholesale beggars.

There is a more secret, more compendious, and more gainful way of begging, by
the visitations of sick persons, especially those, whom, by reason of age or
extremity of sickness^, they conclude not long to remain among the mortal.

The voluntary proffers of their intercessions, are seeds that grow up into
considerable advantages to t^em.

To draw people in to contribute toward the building of Colleges or Churches
is an old bayte, and yet proves so effectual, that their Edifices, like
Phoenixes derive glory from their ruins. Notorious was the conflagration of
the Jesuits college at Cullen; but it may be there are those yet living who
can attest, that, some days before the fire happened, their Library and what
else was most considerable, were conveyed thence to other places.

To this may be added the influence they have over Princes, great men, such
great Ladies as being Widows are eminent for their simplicity, and doting old
women, and thousand of other ways they have to milk money out of men's pockets.
No doubt but the Secret Instructions of the Society, whereof we have a short
summary before, have been very much enlarged, as to this very particular.

He therefore is the most mistaken man in the world who think these to be
trivial beggars, such as will be dispatched with a piece of money or two.
Todo, Todo, Todo, Au, Au, Au is their motto, deriving it from their Country
men the Spanish Soldiers at their plundering of Anwerpe. Artem adulantium
^ssumentes: they are indeed very eminent Masters in the science of Adulation.

This is the only way to creep into Courts, and to insinuate themselves into
the secrets, nay into the very breasts of Princes. Nay, indeed whither not? And
this they are so excellently well read in, that the famous parasites described
by Terence and Plautus, were they alive, might take instructions from them. Had
not this been used very successefully, they had not been so easily readmitted
into France; they had not been in such esteem with the King of Castile;
Ferdinand the Second had not in the space of nine years one way or other
scattered among them twenty five Tuns of Gold, according to the computation of
Holland, not to mention the profits, tithes and other advantages which he
bestowed on them, besides the ordinary revenues, as was attested by Caraffa the
Popes Nuncio. See Speculum Jesuit* page 208.

But they never make greater advantages of this art, then when they have to do
with those of the weaker sex; How are those poor things cajoll'd by them? How
do they undermine their Ho^ours and estates by glozing speeches and the most
refined part of pious Sycophancy? Who desires further satisfaction as to this
particular, has only to read over the first piece of this Treatise, which is
such a discovery of pollutions as happily never saw the light before; If that
satisfy not, see what is said in the Mantissae, or Additionals to Speculum
Jesuiticum. See also what is said hereafter, Paragraph 28.

Parag. 15. Studebunt omnes nimium qualiter Doctoribus Veritatis resistant.
They all shall make it too much their fludy how they may oppose the Teachers of
Truth.) To prove this to be true, Francfort Mart shall be our testimony, as
groaning under the infinite number of books spawned by the Society, and brought
thither. For what article have they not depraved? what truth have they not by
their pernicious glosses and interpretations corrupted and ener^^ted* If that
satisfy not, take the Mystery of Jesuitisme, from one end to the other, and
let that and the Additionalls, concerning the differences between the Jesuits
and the Curez of Rouen and Paris, be an eternal Pyramid, to show that they
care not what truth, nor what persons they oppose, when they have the Casuists
and those of their own Order to vindicate.

Parag. 16. Et eosdem cum potentibus interficient; And shall put them to death
together with the mighty.) Not with the spiritual sword, for so they would not
oppose the Doctors that maintain the truth, but with the temporal. France has
with sorrow known this; Austria can witness it; Scotland has felt it; Poland
cannot deny it, nor has the Low countries been free from it. It Is added,
together with the mighty; T^rk or Trojan it matters not, so he be in their way,
he must be removed out of it. The manes of the great Monarch of France, Henry
the fourth are not yet appeased. Who would see more as to this point, may
consult Speculum Jesuiticum, and the Apology of the Jesuits upon the parricide
committed upon Henry the fourth.

Parag. 17. Potentes seducant; seducing the powerful.) with as much diligence
and assiduity as if it were the principal design of the Society. There is a
twofold seduction, a spiritual and a temporal, they are excellently well read
in both. For the Spiritual, their Tenants witness against them. Let there be
a parallel made between the doctrines of the Gospel, and those of the Jesuits,
and it will be found that for a man to be a right Jesuit, he must be somewhat
much different from a Christian. See the Mystery of Jesuitisme. As to what
concerns temporal and political seductions, it is a thing so manifest, as
that it is day, when the Sun shines. However an instance or two will not be
amiss. Sebastian, King of Portugal, how miserably was he blinded by the
Counsels of the Spanioliz'd Jesuits, so as to engage in a war upon Africa,
which cost him both his kingdom and his life, as may be read in History, and
particularly Thuanus lib. 65. By the seductions of the same Politicians,
Sigismund Prince of Trensilvania was dep^iv'd of his Principality, and after a
long and wretched captivity, ended his life and misery in prison. Thuan. lib*
110* Spec. Jesuit. an^s 1594. By the crafty suggestions of the same persons,
Sigismond King of Poland, attempted an un^ortunate reformation in Swethland,
for the expedition whereby he would have settled it, proving unsuccessefull he
with much danger of life returned into Poland, and lost a Kingdom that had
anciently been his own. Their persuasions wrought so much on Philip the second
of Spain, that he treated his son Charles most unworthily, keeping him a long
time in prison, where at last he dyed, but how, God only knows. Canisius the
Jesuit writ a Letter to the Emperor Ferdinand, wherein he would persuade him
that his son Maximilian had some thoughts of embracing the Augustine
Confession, and therefore was to be severely treated (as Philip used his son
Charles) or banished the Empire: which Letter of Canisius was, after the death
of Ferdinand, found among his secret papers, yet did not Maximilian call the
Jesuit to an account for it further then an expostulation.

Parag. 18. Propter necessitatem vitae and delectationem ^^ndi: in order to the
conveniences of life, and the enjoyments of this world) Why should a man be a
Jesuit for nothing? A Thief steals to furnish himself with those conveniences
of life which he could not honestly come by. A man ventures the breach of a
commandment with a woman, for his pleasure and enjoyment sake. The wickedest
men propose to themselves, some, though but an apparent good in their actions.
So what mischief is done by the Jesuit, proceeds from their extraordinary care
for the accommodations and enjoyments of life. The belly is the master of many
bad arts, and the inventor of many; but what is below it and what is about it of
more.

Parag. 19. Diabolus in eis quatuor vitia radicavit; the Devil has sown the
roots of four Vices in them) It Is well there is no more. Or is it spoken
allusively to their quadrangular Miters. But the holy woman's meaning by four,
is principally four; she names only four, the rest she leaves to the Reader
to find out himself.

Par. 20. Adulationem, et eis large datur: Flattery, that large gifts may be
bestowed on them.] For their flatteries, somewhat has been said thereof in the
precedent paragraphs, and particularly that which begins artem adulantium
assumentes. Nor is it without design that they are so well versed in it, that
is, that they may the better furnish themselves with the accommodations of
life. Who ever grew rich, who ever procured friends by telling of truth? No,
soothings, flatteries, and insinuations are the most approved receipts for that
purpose. We find in Scripture what become of Nathan and John Baptist, alas,
ignorant, plain-dealing men, they had not the Ignatian Art.

Par. 21. Invidiam, quando aliis dabitur and non ipsis; Envy, that any thing is
bestowed on others and they get nothing.] Though they are the richest beggars
that ever were, yet can they not but take it heinously that any thing falls
besides their wallets. They are ever the first served, they prevent all others,
and like supplanting Jacobs carry away the first blessing. And yet how heavy
they lie upon all other Orders and the whole clergy, the complaints are
general. But had we lost all examples as to this particular, there needed no
more then to instance in their vast revenues, and colleges like Royal places.

Par. 22. Hypocrisin, ut per falsam simulationem aliis complaceant; Hypocrisy,
that by their crafty insinuations they may comply with others.] Hypocrisy is
the deity they serve night and day, whom they above all others sacrifice to.
It Is an art they study beyond all other, as such as they know how to make their
advantages of in Courts, in palaces, in the pulpit; in the schools, in
commerces, in conversation, in all things. The divisions of it, are simulation,
dissimulation, sycophancy, evasions, prevarications, mental reservations,
aequivocations, restitutions, directions and diversions of the intention,
advantageous interpretations of favorable circumstances, and many other such
like common*places, which who is once well read in, may elude all he converses
with, and say and unsay what he please at the same time. Who desires
particulars may consult the Mystery of Jesuitisme; Mysteria Patrum Jesuitarum,
This is also a most compendious way to insinuate into the favor of great men,
and to get an influence over rich Widows. Excellent in this Art was F.
Cotton, Confessor to Henry IV. of France.

Parag. 23. Detractationem, ut se ipsos commendent and extollant, and alios
vituperent, propter laudem hominum, and seductionem simplicium, ac fine
devotione and exemplo; De traction or Calumny, that they might celebrate and
commend themselves, to the disparagement of others, to gain praise among men
and to seduce the simple, and that without any devotion or example.) How
pertinently is this applicable to the Society, exclusively to all other Orders
or communities of men, Religious or profane? Who are the countenancers of
Calumny, and take it amiss that, though Courts and Kingdoms are put into
combustion by the advance of so horrid a tenent, it is not publicly taught and
practiced* See the Mystery of Jesuitisme, LETTER XV. etc. and you will find who
they are, and whom the honest plain dealing Capuchin confidently charges with a
MENTIRI IMPUDENTISSIME. So that all truly considered, it may be imagined, that
it is through detraction and contempt of others, the commendation and
overweening opinion they have of themselves, they are arrived to that height of
esteem and authority wherein we now find them. Of this the Universities of
France, those of the Low Countries, Poland, Italy, have had sufficient
experience, as may be seen in the Jesuiticall Mercury in several places.

All other Religious Orders and Communities have selt the burden of their
Calumny, as being by them treated no otherwise then with the terms of Asses,
Ignoramus's, Drones, fit only to consume the allowances of the laborious Bees,
and the like, whereby they make them as despicable as they can in the
apprehensions of others. And how can it be otherwise, when they make it appear
both in their tenets and practices* that the most infallible way to get into
honors, dignities, wealth; superiority, is, by the depression and ruins of
others. The sad remonstrances of the generality of the English Catholics is
but too pregnant an example of this truth, and their perpetual complaints to
the Sea of Rome against the usurpations of the Jesuits an argument of the
little redress of their exorbitances. The story of Wisbich is yet like the
head of an arrow in the breasts of the secular Clergy, as reflecting on, and
daily feeling the extremities they have been reduced to, since those spirits of
division came among them and disturbed their peace. They are the Eagles that
soar above the clouds, others only reptile animals to be trod under their
feet. Hence is it, that they pretend all Monasteries and such like places
belong to them, and endeavor all they can to get them into their hands. In the
time of Gregory XIII. they had by their false suggestions, almost wrested the
Monastery of Saint Paul from the Benedictines. In the time of Clement VIII.
they, by the same artifices, but ineffectually, would have forced the
Carthusian Monastery near Lucerna from those of that Order, The like they would
have done to the Carmelites at Antwerpe, but with the same success. The
College they have at Nuys they by artifice and calumny worm'd out of the hands
of other Monks, whom they forced away thence. See a book entitled,
Conscientia Jesuitarum; and Spec. Jesuit. Mant. 6.

The same course they take to insinuate themselves into the favor of men, They
dispraise all, they only are the excellent directors of youth, their books and
precepts are only to be followed; what ever other people publish are fit only
for Grocers and Tobaccoshops. They are only a flight of Phenixes, Angelical
Preachers, the great Masters of Eloquence, Nor does their arrogation of
Auricular Confession to themselves, and administration of the Sacraments,
contrary to the prohibition of Superiors and Bishops, argue less then a
certain insolent opinion of themselves, that they only are fit to have the
mannagement and conduct of all Souls, and that all others were ordained to
truckle under them. But it is to be observed, that S. Hildegard adds, that,
all is done, to gain praise among men, and seduce the simple. It is their own,
not Gods glory, which as the Pharisees of old, they seek: whence it comes, that
whatever is done among them, speaks pomp and ostentation, and out of design
upon the simple, that is to say, of such importance is it handsomely to cast a
mist before the eyes of people. See their own Hydropicall Volumes, especially
that intractable collection of their own Encomiums, put out in 1640. under the
Title of Imagines. See the History of the Society of Jesus, put out at Rome by
Nicholas Orlandinus, Printed 1615. To these may be added Scribanius's Theatrum
honoris. What horrid faggoting of calumnies upon other men and mutual elogies
and celebrations of themselves shall an unprejudiced and unbewitched Reader
find in them; and all, if we may believe this holy Woman, in order to their
vain glory, and the seduction of the simple, without any devotion or example of
godliness and sincerity.

Parag. 24. Martyrium praedicabunt instanter; They shall be great pretenders to
Martyrdom) Of their conversion of the Indies and Plantation of Christian
Religion there, there is an authentic discovery in the My^tery of Jesuitisme.
L E T. V. Now how a man can have any confidence of their Martyrologies, when
there was such palliations in the introduction of Religion, is somewhat hard to
imagine. For their Epistles from Japan, and their Indian Relations, if, out of
civility and stendernesse to persons of a Religious Institution, we grant there
may be some truth, it were on the other side but prudence, in many, to turn
Sceptiks, and suspend our belief, considering also the persons and places they
come from. For those who die for treasons, conspiracies and other crimes against
the civil Magistrate, and are put, qu^ Jesuits in the martyrology, that is; to
prove it done by them, there needs only a short story of Pope Urban, who
hearing that some English then at Rome, thought it both ridiculous and a
scandal to Religion, to find the picture of F. Garnet, (one of the
Powderplotters,) among those of the Martyrs of the Society; ordered it to be
removed, which yet they took so heynously, that they could never after endure
the Pope. But as to this particular, as they are liberal enough in their
Catalogues, so the world begi^s to grow wary, and moderate in crediting, when
they have to do with not easily credible Legends and Romances. John Chastell
attempted the life of Hen. IV. of France, yet the Jesuits writ an Apology for
him, wherein they both vindicated and celebrated the attempt, as Thuanus
affirms. Of this more may be seen in Thuanus, Metteranus, and Baudar^ius l. 38.
of the continuation of Metteranus. How numerous the Ma^tyrs of the Society are,
See the Epistles from Japan, hinc inde.

Parag. 25. Detrahent principibus saecularibus; they shall derogate from
secular Princes.) Whether they acknowledge the Papacy or not, if they dance not
suitably to their piping, thati^, cross their designs. Hence proceed their
perpetual Remonstrances to the Sea of Rome, of the remission and indifference
of Ca^holick^ Princes in the maintenance of the Papacy, and extinction of
Here^icks. They were very much dissatisfied with Charles the fifth, for that,
having subdued Frederick Elector of Saxony, he took not away his life with his
Electorall dignity, and put all the Heretics to death, attributing to his
Lenity toward them his ill success afterward. They made Henry III. of France
despicable in the sight of his people, because he was not as violently zealous
as they would have him, for the Papacy, nor prodigal enough of Heretics
blood, and consequently insinuated the hastening of his death. Their quarrel
against Henry IV. was his over-countenancing of the Huguenots; whence it came
that his life was so often attempted, and at last received its period by an
infamous assassinate. They raised diss^tisfactions between their greatest
Patron Ferdinand the eleventh and the Pope, whom they exasperated against him
as much as lay in their power. See Alphonsus Toletanus in his Relation of the
Sleights and Stratagems of the Jesuits in matters of Policy, cap. 22. 28. 29.
30. 31. They called Henry the third, King of the Moabites. Nay, the Popes
themselves escape them not, if they oppose their designs, notwithstanding
their particular vow and dependence on them, as may be seen in the precedent
Piece of The Discovery of thae Society in relation to their Politics. Thus was
Sixtus Quintus, in their apprehensions, a Lutheran and a Wolf, because he would
not countenance them in all things; Henry the fourth, an abetter of Heretics a
renegado, an Apostate; the Elector of Saxony a Hog; William of Orange, the
Prince of Beggars; for others they had other terms of the same kind. Nor was
this derogation only verbal, but they often discovered their violence in
actions, by endeavoring the ejection and disposition of Sovereign Princes out
of their lawful dominions, and absolving subjects from their allegiance. Upon
which account came those Books which treated of the absolute power of the
Papacy over Kings, and their depositions etc. to be condemned and burnt. See
Speculum Jesuiticum, Mant. II. where there is a Catalogue of those Authors that
maintained that unchristian opinion; out of which we shall cull out the
following.

Mariana, de Reg. l. 1. c. 6. de jus^a Henrici abdic^^i^ne. Lugduni, apud
Societatis Bibliopolam.

Rosaeus, de justa Reip. Christ. Author. c. 3. number. 6.

Gregorius de Valentia, t. 3. did. 1. qu^st. 11.

Creswellus, insuo Philopatre, hinc inde, inprimis, sect. 2. 157. 161. 162.

Bellarminus, de potestate Pontif. contra Barclaium Romae, 1610. and in disp.
de controver. Christ. ^idei. Paris. 1613. t. 1. l. 5. c. 6. 78.

Gregorius de Valentia, in Comm. Theol. disp. 1. qu^st. 12. Paris. 1609.

Cotton. in Iustit. Cathol. Paris. 1610.

Emanuel Sa, in Aphorismis, Colon. 1599.

Suarez, de censuris Excomm. Lugd. 1608. disp. 15. l. 6. and ^ursus in
defensione fidei Cathol. Colon. 1614. l. 6. c. 4. etc. 8.

Ribadeneira, lib de Religione and Virtutibus Princip. Duaci. 1610.

Carolus Scribanius, in Amphitheatro Honoris. lib. 1. cap. 12.

How Suarez's book was treated by the Parliament of Paris, as also what became
of other Treatises of the same nature, see Spec. Jesuit. the Apology for
Chastel, Jesuit^ Jicarius, Anti*Cotton.

Parag. 26. Ecclesiarum Sacramenta veri^ Pastoribus subtrahentes: depriving the
lawful Pastors of the Sacraments of the Church.) They have indeed a strange
magnetic Virtue to draw all things to themselves. Their envious eyes are
perpetually fastened upon the revenues and accommodations of the rest of the
Clergy. Whatever they see, they pretend some title to, of whatever they touch,
something will be sure to stick to their pitchy hands. This is the complaint of
all. See an instance of their griping the management of the Sacraments, and
their submissive carriage toward their Bishops, in the Arch bishop of
Maechliu's Letter to Cardinals of the Congregation de propaganda ^ide, at Rome,
at the latter end of the ADDITIONALS to the Mystery of Jesuitisme. How the
Catholics of England have groaned for their avarice and pragmaticall
interpositions, their loud jarrings and recriminations demonstrate. Hence arose
their differences with all U^iversities, and particularly the College of
Sorbonne. They are in Christian Religion, as the Spleen in man's body: of that
increase, all the members pine away; so the richer they grow, the more are
other Orders crushed and impoverished. See the Jesuiticall Mercury, part I. and
2.

Parag. 27. Recipientes eleemosynas pauperum et infirmorum et miserorum:
receiving the alms bestowed on the poor, the sick and the indigent.) It may
be imagined the holy woman would have said rapientes, taking away, that is,
converting to their own use, those pious charities, a word more suitable to
their insatiable avarice. 'Twas drollingly said by one, who being demanded what
part of speech the Pope was, answered, a Participle, because he takes part from
the Clergy, part from the Laity. But how truly might it be said of the Jesuits,
who are such excellent Projectors as that can make their advantages of any
thing, nay, clip the charities of the sick and poor to fatten themselves. Oh
unfortunate Hospital of Saint James at Bourdeaux! how have the poor exposed
orphans, which thy revenues should have sustained, experienced the truth of
this prophecy? See the first Tract of this Book, chap. 4. Since they take it so
heynously to be called Ignatians, from the founder of their Order, Ignatius, a
denomination as suitable to them, as those of Franciscans, Dominicans,
Benedictines, Augustines, etc. are to the other Orders, they ought not to take
it ill if henceforward they are called Vespasians since in that Apothegme of
his, that Gain smells well whencesoever it comes, they are his exact Disciples,
deriving their own enjoyments and accommodations from the groans of the sick,
and crying bellies of the poor. How careful they are to watch their advantages
may be seen in the following stories. A Lisbo Merchant put a cabinet of jewels
and other things of great value into the hands of the Jesuits, to be divided
among his daughters, who after their fathers death requiring it of them, they
swore he had bestowed it on the Society, and so undid the poor wenches.
Another Merchant of the same city dying, was persuaded by the Jesnits to make
the Society his heir; the next of kin not knowing any thing of it, coming to
take possession of the deceased house, was put back by those that were in it
with this answer, The Apostles (sor so the Jesuits are called in those parts)
were the heirs; whereupon the poor man full of resentment and grief cries out,
O Jesus Christ, had thou had such Apostles about thee, the Jews never durst
have taken thee, much less, crucified thee! But the trick put upon them by the
Genueses was very handsome, when, after they had by their insinuations cajoll'd
abundance of jewels from the richer Citizens wives, they were by the Senate,
forced to return them to their husbands. See the Book of the Jesu^ts
Conscience, and Spec. Jesuit. Mant. 8.

Parag. 28. Nec non in multitudinem Populi se trahentes, as also insinuating
themselves into a familiarity with the more ordinary sort of people.) from the
court to the cottage, from the Shepherds crook to the Scepter, from the
highest to the lowest, a Jesuit finds employment, it concerns him to know what
is said, what is done, what consultations are carried on, what is concluded, at
all times and in all places, from the wench that sweeps the kennell to the
Princess in the palace. So that it is now come into a Proverb, that a Jesuit
knows what Jupiter whispers Juno in the ear. And from this diving of theirs
into the knowledge of all things, comes it to pass, that in those Cities where
they are grown powerful, as Cullen, Aken, and others, no Magistrate is chosen,
no Consul created, no person put into any public employment, no public edict
passed, without the secret suffrage of the poly-pragmaticall Jesuit.

Parag. 29. Familiaritatem cum mulieribus habentes, ea^que instruentes:
desirous of familiarity with women, and instructing them.) Consonant to the
Secret Instructions for the Superiors of the Society, which is the third piece
of this Treatise: where see more as to this particular. In vain therefore do we
expect another Order or Society of men wherein this Prophecy should be
fulfilled, for as to what is said by the holy woman in this Paragraph, it falls
so perpendicularly upon the Jesuits, that he is too much a partisan of theirs
who denies it. This familiarity with women, a sort of creatures stilled with
any thing, as it is of great advantage, so would they make it a privilege of
the Society, and take it very unhandsomely and insolently done, that any other
Monk or Friar should set footing where they have any thing to do, as
encroaching on their peculiar Province. And indeed how far they have as to
this point overreached all other Religious Orders, we need not quote books,
but the observation of those who take more particular notice of their demeanors.

But it may be said, all is pardonable, since the vow they have made of
chastity exempts them from all suspicion of irregular conversation with them.
How tender they are of that, the discovery made in the first piece of this
Collection, though coming from an exasperated, apostatized Jesuit, may in some
measure be credited. When they are grown old, dry, exhausted, are become
emeriti in the Venereall Militia, there may be thoughts of some such thing as a
Vow; but till then, why should we imagine Prometheus such a churl to them as
not to have furnished them with Livers, and all things requisite for the
greatest of worldly enjoyments? Who desires instances of their Lubricities, may
look into Speculum Jesuiticum, Page 196. 198. 199. 228. where among other
stories is that of Sommerman the Jesuit, who being to cast an evil spirit out
of a possessed Nun in Swisserland, made a shift to get her with child.

But this familiarity of theirs with women proceeds from a pious motive, their
instruction and edification of their souls. The world has not forgotten their
instruction of the Genueses and Venetians wives, and the consequences thereof.
Had the Jesuitesses been confirmed, we should have had rare work between them;
for what could not the joint endeavors of the suttellest wits of both sexes
have effected? But it was another quarrel they had against Urban VIII. that he
dissolved the female Society by his Bull of the year 1621. upon which, one
writ this Epigram.

Foemineus sexus sociis immixtus Jesu,
Transcendit sexus munia foeminei:
Non tulit hanc labem Urbani vigilantia Papae,
Suppressit Socias, mox Sociosque premet.
But what design they have in this familiarity (which is not for Lazarus but
for Martha's sake) and private ^nstructions of Women, we are yet to look into.
The holy woman tells us that it is.......

Parag. 30. Quomodo maritos decipiant, et res furtive subtrahant, et iis
tribuant: that they may beguile their husbands, and take things surrepticiously
from them, and give them to their instructors.) Is this then the end of
Jesuiticall familia^ity and conversation with Women? Well, let married men look
to it, lest they come to those imaginary excrescencies, whereof their heads are
not so sensible as their reputation. That may be thought one end, but she adds
another undeniable cause, that they may f^lch from their husbands to supply
them; Money, jewels, household stuf^e, etc. They have made it lawful for a
woman to take money from her husband to buy her clothes and to game withal,
and why should they not out of gratitude take somewhat the more, that they may
have to bestow on them for their indulgence and good instructions? See Mystery
of Jesuitisme LET. IX. page 133. No question the Genueses remember both them
and the instructors. Alas! what can that woman deny who is liberal of her
self? Prudently therefore was it done by the Republic of Venice, who
conceiving a jealousy, at the familiarity of the Jesuits with their Wives, to
prevent the inconveniences that might ensue made a divorc^ with the Jesuits,
causing those things which they had cunningly cajoll'd to be returned to the
right owners.

Parag. 31. T^llent namque res furtivas et male acquisitas, et dicent, orabimus
pro vobi^: for they shall take the things that were f^lch'd and unjustly
acquired, and say, we will pray for you.) For the encouragement of those that
are light fingered, they now know where to meet with receivers; but the misery
is, they will give them nothing but words for what they receive, though of ever
so great importance. Prayer is a commodity they have lying by them, and will
truck and barter with any other whatsoever, and gain by it. Why should they
spend their breath, hurt their render knees, and wear out their toes of their
slippers for nothing? If they pray for you, it matters not how you came by what
you give them for their pains.

Parag. 32. Sic uti aliorum vitia curiosius ^egant ^suorum obliviscantur: so as
that pragmatically d^scovering the miscarriages of others they may forget their
own. for legant reading delegant, as most suitable to the humor of those who
are anatomized in this Prophecy. Of their curiosity and pragmaticall
interlopings into all men's affairs, somewhat has been said a^ready. They are
in like manner the quickest sighted things ^n the world to spy other men's
imperfections, and ^o fifth and winnow their vices, and think to hide their own
deformity by pointing at the black p^tches of others* They are so far from
covering, from curing or binding up the wounds of humane frailty in their
neighbor, that he must not only expect to hear of what he is truly
chargeable with, but happily to have that imposed upon him which he is not any
way. Nay it is come to a probable opinion, that is, safe in point of conscience,
to impose a false crime on one whom a man has a difference with. See Mystery
of Jesuitisme, LET. XV. This is the constant character of all Hypocrites and
Pharisees; in seeing other wens vices they are Epidaurian Serpents, when they
come to their own, they are blinder then moals.

Parag. 33. Heu tollent res miseras a raptoribus, praedonibus, furibus,
latronibus, aut sacrilegis, ab usurariis, foeneratoribus, adulteris,
haereticis, schismaticis, apostatis, mulieribus luxuriosis, lenonibus and
lenis, a potentibus, perjuris mercatoribus, falsis judicibus, militibus,
Tyrannis: They shall receive the wretched contributions of common rogues,
highway-men, Pirates, thieves and sacrilegious persons, of usurers,
extortioners, adulterers, heretics, schismatics, apostates, debauched women,
such as manage the negotiation of lust of both sexes, of powerful men,
perjured bankrupt Merchants, corrupt Judges, Soldiers, Tyrants) A fair
harvest! and who would think these had only devotion or ought to bestow among
religious men? What advantages can be made of them? who shall make those
advantages? Who but those that pray for them and their success that they may
have contributions from them? Whom should those people contribute to, but those
who take abundance of pains to dress up maxims, to palliate their crimes, and
to make that seem justifiable which most men look on with horror? Who are
these most obliged to, but to those who facilitate the way to Beatitude, who
enlarge the straight gate, who have the slight to make those things which were
sins before not to be such now, and who have the art to reconcile the
contradiction and inconsistency of probable opinions. See Mystery of
Jesuitisme, LET. V, VI, VII, VIII. and indeed any where. Accipe dum dolet,
says the Physician, accipe dum adest, says the Jesuit, not examining whence
it comes nor how 'twas gotten, Vnde habeas quaerit nemo, sed oportet habere.
Famianus S^rada, in his History of the Low Country wars, relates, that, in
the year 1574. the Spaniards having laid a heavy tax on the inhabitants of
Antwe^pe, the seditious soldiery exercised a pious liberality on some of the
Religious Orders, bestowing on the Franciscans 4000. Guilders; but that the
Jesuits were so far from seeking ought (an example the more remarkable
because so rare* considering the humor of the Society) that a sum of money
being brought as a present to their College, they at first refused it, but
afterward received it. To that answers the story of a man, who entreated to sit
down and eat with others, at first out of modesty refused, but afterward
repenting, and perceiving the other forbore further importunity, asked the
Master what he had said to him at his coming in, I entreated you, replied the
other, to sit down and take part of such as you found, Oh, said he, now I
understand and you, and so sat down, and fed like a Farmer. Or happily the reason
of their resusall was because the Franciscans were presented before them; or
happily because the first proffer was below their expectation. But of their
modesty in that kind, Thuanus gives another example, where he affirms that they
got such a sum of money out of the spoils of the city of An^erpe as built
their College at Machlin.

Parag. 34. Tollent etiam a principibus contra legem viventibus and a multis*
perversis: they shall also receive from Princes living contrary to the Law, and
from many wicked people.) From any that shall give them, it matters not what
they are. But, as intemperance and irregular living makes a harvest for
Physicians; and contention is the nursery of Pe^ifoggers and Lawyers, so are
the miscariages and exorbitances of Princes and great men the secret mines and
revenues of the Jesuits. Father Cotton would not have had such an influence
over Henry IV. of France, as not to ask any thing which was not granted him,
had he not connived at his extravagances and breaches of the Laws, and acted
the part of a Gnatho, instead of that of a Nathan. Nor should we now find them
so much in favor and esteem with great men, were it not for their complyances
and dissimulation.

Parag. 35. Persuasionem Diaboli, and dulcedinem peccati, ac vitam delicatam,
transitoriam and brevem, nec non satietatem, incondemnationem eternam,
sectantes: being guided by Satantcall suggestions, and the pleasures of sin,
leading a delightful life, (which must accordingly be transitory and short)
even to satiety, to their own eternal damnation.) What can be said less of
those who make sin a things so imaginary as that most men are innocent; who
palliate all crimes; who maintain homicide to be lawful upon ever so frivolous
occasions; who countenance equivocations, perjuries, breaches of trust, and the
violation of contracts, who authorize calumnies and recriminations, and in a
word, bring an odium upon the Gospel and Christian profession, by their
manifest elusions thereof, then that they follow the suggestions of Satan, and
are bewitched by the pleasures of sin? But that they are guilty of these
things, the Books quoted occasionally in this Treatise, but especially that of
the Mystery of Jesuitisme, make evident.

For the delicacy of their lives, what could the good woman have said less?
Look on the sumptuousness of their Colleges* Gardens, Houses of recreation;
people that would be more remarkable for their austerities then delicacies
might content themselves with others. But indeed how can they be otherwise then
delicate who are the ear wigs of Princes, and perpetually at the elbowes of
great men? But it is to be noted that this delicate life is transitory and
short, it is indeed but just that that which delights should be momentany here,
that which torments eternal hereafter, especially to those who prefer the
pleasures and enjoyments of this life before the felicities of the next.

But they shall be lovers of delicacy, even to satiety* says the holy Woman,
to their cost, to their eternal damnation. For being overwhelmed with the
pleasures of sin, and overflowing with the delights and accommodations of
life, they must needs at last come to saciety. But what terrible noise is that
of eternal damnation? What other harvest can be expected from the seeds of
Satanicall suggestions, sinful pleasures* and the enjoyments of this life?
They who received the good things of this life are according to the Gospel to
expect the torments of the other. But can this be the portion of Jesuits, new
Apostles, a new order of Religious men, the companions of Jesus? It may, since
that as the precedent part of holy Hildegards prophecy is verified in them, as
has been shown, it must be inferred, that what follows, concerning the
punishments due to such as she describes, must also by the same necessity be
fulfilled.

Parag. 36. Hae^ autem omnia in eis aperta and manifest a fient populis
universis. And all these things shall be so remarkable in them, that they shall
be discovered and become manifest to all people.) They have abused and deluded
all the world, it is just their artifices and deceits should be made manifest
to all. They may be said in some measure to have discovered them, who have
forbidden the authors thereof an abode in their dominions, as Swethland,
Norway, Denmark, England, Scotland, the Low*Countries etc. Their slights were
discovered in Hungary, Bohemia, the principalities of Silesia, Moravia,
Lusatia, about the years 1618. 1619. 1620. upon which they were forced to
remove; but Frederick the V. dying and deprived of his kingdom of Bohemia,
they were afterward restored* and new Colleges erected. Manifest also are
their attempts upon Henry the fourth, and the Kingdom of France, as the acts
of the Parliament of Paris, and Toulouse, the complaints of Sorbonne, the
differences between them and the Universities, the depositions* protestations
and processes of the rest of the Clergy all over the Christian world,
sufficiently testify. Who hat^ the curiosity and leisure, may, to this purpose
read the Philippick Orations spoken at Paris by Arnoldus, Menilius, Belloius,
Brulardus, Dolaeus, Molinaeus, Mortvillarius, Marion, Pasquier; especially his
Jesuiticall Catechism. Nor was Poland insensible thereof, as may appear by the
Oration of a Catholic Nobleman of that nation, concerning the expulsion of the
Jesuits out of the Kingdom of Poland. To which may be added the consultations
of the Peers of that Country, in a Parliament at Warsow, which may be read in
the Jesuiticall Mercury.

Parag. 37. Ip^^ porro de die in diem duriores and nequiores efficientur:
Moreover they shall become more inflexible and worse every day then other.)
Nature is not easily altered. Tell them of these horrid things as much as you
will, they shall nevertheless continue to maintain them. Tell them of the
extravagances of their darlings the Casuists, who have poisoned Christian
doctrine with their pernicious decisions, they shall nevertheless countenance
and maintain them. They were troubled at the Author of the Provincial Letters
for ripping up of things formerly laid to their charge, never mentioning
whether the things so urged against them were reformed or not. It Is a dishonor
to the Society to retract any thing that is once advanced, to maintain it,
though ever so pernicious* a glory. Those Satanicall suggestions and pleasures
of sin which they suck in in their younger years, are by time heightened to
inflexibility and insensibility in wickedness. Jairigius tells us, that the most
daring and confident are the most cherished, countenanced and preferred* He
that having done a villainy, can glory in it, and outface all reprehension, and
smother all remorse, is a person for any employment. Confidence is that they
endeavor to outvie one another in above any, as knowing that to be without it,
is the only way to be the derision of others. Upon their first coming into
Cities how humble, how complyant, and complementing are they? But when they are
once settled, what dare they not attempt?

For their inflexibility. Who more hard-hearted, who more inexorable? as if
their bowels were surrounded with flint, especially where they are in any
power. The Clergy of Portugal felt the weight of their indeprecability when
Philip II. of Spain invaded that Kingdom. If they can get a Monastery from
some other Order, into their hands, no entreaties shall ever get it out again.
But of all, those are most to be pitied whom they keep in subterraneous caves,
or starve, or beat to death, as may be seen by the short ensuing piece. Their
inhumanity toward Charles, son to Philip II. of Spain was such, that it could
never be known how he came to his death, though in pr^son. The cruelty they
exercised upon Stanislaus Kostha of an illustrious family in Poland may be seen
in Raderus a Jesuit, in the life of Canisius cap. 13. which yet they say was
done upon an account of mortification. But it happens to most thus mortified as
to the horse mentioned by Hierocles, who put to try whether he could live nine
days without meat, died the eighth day of the probation. But most deplorable
and crying is that account of the poor exposed Orphans of the Hospital in
Bourdeaux, to show that no consideration of humanity can prevail with their
adamantine hearts.

Of their growing worse and worse, that is, continuing in a constant course of
wickedness, its a thing clearer then to need proving, only this may be said*
that their insolence, pride, impiety and obstinacy is come to such height, that
they are formidable even to Popes themselves, as may be seen in the history of
Poza, in T. de Vergas c. 15. 16. of which kind there are in the same Author
examples, C. 24. 39. 55. 57. how they treated Sixtus Quintus, how they abused
Urban VIII. may be seen in Speculum Jesuiticum p. 228, and 229. of their
unmercifullnesse toward the rest of the Clergy, See Thom^s de Verg^s c. 10.
11. Spec. Jesuit. Mant. 6. 9. 15. 16. So that if that ode of Horace had been a
Prophecy, they would have verified ir,

Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturo^
Progeniem vitiosi^rem.
Parag. 38 Et cum seductiones and iniquitates exploratae suerint, tunc
cessabitur eis dari: and when their deceits and iniquities shall be discovered,
then shall men cease to give them.) Since as the precedent paragraph assures
they grow every day worse and worse, how can it be but that their seductions,
artifices, and iniquities should at last come to light, to their confusion and
the satisfaction of others who will be glad to know by whom they have been
deluded, that they may accordingly trust them another time. Thus when England,
Scotland, and the rest of the places before mentioned found them out, they
shook them off, and would give them no more. Nay, if this prophecy sail not,
other kingdoms will turn them out, and will be so far from giving them
ought, that what they have, even those feathers which they have borrowed from
the rest of the Clergy, wherewith like the Horatian crow, they strowted so
much, the alms due to the poor and indigent, the presents that are made them
out of robberies, rapines, confiscated goods, etc. shall be taken away from
them, and distributed among others, as it happend to the Knights Templars, in
the year of Christ M. CCC. XII. When the Spung is full it must be squeezed.
Spiritual goods, diverted from their proper use, are like ^agles feathers,
consume all others near them.

Parag. 39. Et tunc ibunt circa domos famelici, and ut canes radibi, submissis
in terram oculis; And they shall go from house to house with hungry bellies,
and as mad dogs, having their eyes fastened on the ground) That the end may
have some allusion to the first institution of the Society. But why as mad
dogs? It seems then that though reduced to these extremities, they will not
give over their barking at, and biting of other men's fame. But what a sad
change will this be! How insupportable will it be to those that have lived in
abundance, in delicacies, and have quarrelled at nature that there were no
greater enjoyments, to struggle with the miseries of life and malice of
fortune. So that it will be no miracle, if according to the words of the
Prophecy, they grow impatient and fall into madness and exasperation, and so
became in a manner mad dogs; yet having their eyes fastened on the ground, for
that will be the time of their visitation, the time of their tribulation and
chastisement.

Parag 40. Contrahentes cervices suas velut turtures, ut pane satientur:
wrigling their necks like Turtles, that they may be filled with bread.) But
these wriglings these cringings, these insinuations and submissions will come
too late, they will be little the better for them; people will suspect them to
proceed from artifice and dissimulation. They shall make a doleful noise like
forsaken Turtles, men shall hear; but neither regard nor help them. To what end
then are all these submissions and complyances? that they may be filled with
bread; bread, dry bread, course bread will now go down, and they find a
difficulty to get it. Where shall then be the tender pullets? where the
exquisite dishes of fish? where the sumptuous collations and banquets? where
the march pane, the march pane I say, whereof there were such quantities found
in your College at Aken, when it was rifled by the Citizens? No, now course
West-phalian bread, that has endured the torrid zone of the Oven for three
days together, and is baked almost into brick, will be welcome.

Parag. 41. Tunc clamabit populus super eos, Vae vobis miseri, filiimoeroris:
Then shall the people cry out unto them, Woe be unto you wretches, the sons
of affliction.) but a just retaliation, that those who brought so many others
to misery, sorrow, anguish, should at last be reduced to the same extremities
themselves. What pity can they expect when fallen into exigences, who, having,
by their crafty counsels, brought others into want, stand and laugh at their
calamity? This you must expect, that it may be fulfilled, what is said, you
shall weep, but the world shall rejoice and laugh.

Parag. 42. Vos mundus seduxit: the World has beguiled you.) And they the
world, therefore they may shake hands. The world was that you doated on, the
pleasures and enjoyments therefore dazzled your eyes, it took up all your
thoughts to heighten the delights thereof. But now it is possessed of all your
goods, has deprived you of all your former accommodations, and leaves you to
weep and bemoane your selves.

Parag. 43. Diabolus vestrum ora infr^enavit: the Devil has put a bridle into
your mouths.) to hinder you from speaking and teaching the truth. No, you think
it more advantageous to have maxims calculated for the humors of all men, to
divert them from the ways of truth, then with sincerity to preach it to them.
You surround truth with clouds of lies and errors, and so it comes to pass
that while you make it so much your business to deceive and seduce others, you
are your selves also over-reached by another who it seems is craftier then you,
and can put a bridle into your mouths.

Parag. 44. Carovestralubrica, and corda vestra sine sapore: your flesh is
frail, and your hearts without savor.) For the lubricities of your flesh
enough has been said already. But not only your flesh, but your lives, ways,
doctrines discover your frailty, and your want of the solid foundation of good
and whole some doctrine. And because your hearts are without savor, God has
cast you up, as meat without salt* You should have been the salt of the earth,
but because you are found to be without savor, you are cast into the dunghill
to be trod under men's feet.

Parag. 45. Men's vestra vaga fuit, and oculivestri delectabantur in vanita^ibus
and insaniis multis: your minds were wandering, and your eyes delighted in
vanities and many extravagances.) The perfect character of a pragmaticall
nature, intermedling and interloping in all men's affairs. As if she should
say, you have an oar in every man's boat, you are amphibious animals, your
thoughts are ever wandering toward the temptations and delights of the flesh;
you mind only the things of this world, you make it your main business to
heap up wealth, you are ambitious of worldly honor, you think all other people
despicable. What vanities do you not follow? All your actions are vanities and
the effects of pomp, affectation, extravagant magnificence, hypocrisy and
Sycophancy, as has been already shown.

Parag. 46. Venture vester delicatus dulcia fercula appetit: your delicate
bellies long for dainties.) you are of those who place felicity in the
enjoyments of the belly. It Is to sacrifice to that Deity, that you haunt great
men's Courts and Kitchins; it was out of an extraordinary tenderness to your
stomachs, that in the infancy of the Institution you were so exquisite in
making rules for the Cook* and in taking care that the knives should be clean
and sharp. There is a pleasant Story in the second part of the Jesuiticall
Mercury giving an account how the Rector of the Germane College at Rome was in
perpetual martyrdom for the cause of God. That he daily died for the cause of
God, when others write of him, that abounding with all the accommodations of
life, and distempered by an excess of the enjoyments of fortune* he
extravagantly desired to be accounted a Martyr, saying, I dye daily for the
cause of Christ. I never knew any, says the Author, no not any of the sacred
Consistory of Cardinals, whose condition, laying aside the expectation of the
triple Crown, might be preferred before that of this man. He has under his
jurisdiction, and as it were at his beck, the most illustrious and most noble
of the Germane youth, and such as are at no great distance from the Empire
ready to obey his commands. The revenues of the College, (which amounts to
200000 Crowns yearly) he disposes of at his pleasure, not giving an account to
any of what he either receives or expends, unless to the Patriarch of the
Jesuits, that is to himself. Wine he drinks, such as in comparison whereof
nectar is not nectar; bread he eats whiter then the brains of Jupiter. Flesh,
fish, and all that relate to nutriment the choicest in their kind and season.
And I remember it happened one day, that having invited two divines of the
order of S. Dominick, and resolved to entertain them in the Gardens belonging
to the Germane College, he caused three of those eight boys, which (whom the
College maintained for singing) for the heightening as well of the voice, as
to show their excellent skill in singing, to be disposed into so many trees
near the place where the entertainment was, and like nightingalls to sing while
they were at dinner, and all as it were to give the Dominicans an instance of
the felicities which the Jesuits enjoyed. To this might be added several other
examples of their Luxury and gluttony, but the shortness of our remarks on
this prophecy admits them not. Their own Marian^ betrayed too much as to this
particular even in his days when he says the Jesuits are lovers of
deliciousness, and not able to bear the want of worldly conveniences. And,
that they are not sick and dye through overmuch pains taking and austerity, but
through their intemperance and irregular lives* And that the Lay-brothers among
them, that is the beasts which the others ride upon, are not content if they
feed not like Lords sons. There is a pleasant story of the late Prince of
Conde, who being present at the taking of certain fresh water fish of
extraordinary greatness of the kind, would needs have it sent to the market,
and an excessive price set upon it, to try who would, like Aristippus, be so
extravagant as to give it for so small a fish. Diverse demanded, but were as
soon deterred by the price, till at last the fish would have been returned, had
not the Jesuits taken it at the price set, and sent it to the College. The
Prince having an account what became of it, makes a visit to the Rector much
about dinner time, and would needs dine with him, which the other would have
avoided, alleging they were much unprovided for the entertainment of so great
a Person, to which he replied, Come come, Father, I know what you have, you
have such a fish, naming it, that cost so much; and so leaving them to the
confusion of their Luxury and dissimulation he departed. No, there is no people
in the world eat better, drink sweeter, ly softer, or have more attendance then
they. So that it was handsomely said of a Germane Nobleman, That those of the
other mendicant Orders were great fools, who, by feeding on herbs and scraps,
lying on mats and benches, going barefoot, and breaking the sweetness of their
midnight rest, hope to force their way to heaven, when the Jesuits, flowing
with delicacies, and endeavoring nothing so much as their own ease and
enjoyments, are no less confident of their coming thither.

Parag. 47. Pedes vestri veloces ad currendum in malum; your feet are swift to
run into evil.) To do mischief, to raise dissentions, to scatter pernicious
maxims. they are Pegasean Coursers, indefatigable Mercuries: but to do the
contrary, slower then snayles and tortoises. They run over the world, as Christ
said of the Pharisees, to make a Proselyte, that is to make him ten times worse
then he was before. They have traveled both sides of the World; but to what
end? to be the disturbers of peace, the trumpets of war. What have they not
done in France* Italy, Portugal, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, Germany,
Transylvania, nay, in Turkey it self among the Christians living there? What a
fate is it that hangs over them? Nothing can be attempted that is notorious for
the mischief and exorbitance of it, no sedition, no plot, but they are thought
some way or other engaged in it, so that they are complaind against of all
sides. Orthodox and Heterodox, Catholics and Heretics, all are dissatisfied
with them. So that the man's opinion of the Devil may not unfitly be applied
here: being demanded what he knew of him, he answered, that for his part, he
had no acquaintance with the Devil, and could say but little of him by his own
experience, but that by what he had heard of him, that is by the general
complaints of all against him, he must needs be an arrant Knave, in regard it
was impossible all should be mistaken. The application I leave to him that will
bestow his thoughts on the parallel.

Parag. 48. Mementote cum eratis apparenter beati aemulatores, pauperes
divites, simplices potentes, devoti adulatores, perfidi traditores, perversi
detrectatores, sancti bypocritae, veritatis subversores, nimis directi, superbi
effrontes, doctores instabiles, martyrs delicati, confessores lucri, immites
calumniatores, religio^i avari, humiles elati, pii duri, mendaces dulces,
pacifici persecutores, simplicium oppressores, malarum sectarum, per nos denue
exco^titatarum, adinventores, misericordes nequam, amatores mundi, venditores
indulgentiarum, spoliatores benesiciorum, oratores incommodi, conspiratores
seditiosi, suspiratores crapulosi, desideratores honorum, zelatores crimin^m,
mundi raptores, insatiabiles praedicatores, applausores hominum, seductores
foeminarum, seminatores discordiarum. Remember the time when you were in
appearance blessed oemulators, poor yet rich, simple yet powerful, devout but
flatterers, perfidions traitors* perverse detractors, pious ^ypocrites,
subverters of the truth, over direct in your ^ayes, proud, shameless, unstable
teachers, delicate Mar^^rs, covetous confessors, unmercifull cal^^^^iators,
religi^us for filthy lucres sake, humbly insolent, of an inflexi^le piety,
insinuating liars, peaceable persecutors, op^ressors of the weak, introducers
and authors of evil ^ects, mischievously compassionate lovers of the world,
Merchants of Indulgences, robbers of Ben^^ices, impor^^ate Orators, seditious
conspirators, sighing but out of ^luttony, ambitious of honors, criminally
zealous, gras^ers of the world, insatiable Evangelists, applauders of ^^n,
seducers of women, sowers of dissension.) Ah Hildegard, what a sad
recapitulation is this! They ^re it seems very forgetful of what they are
reproach^d with since they must be thus minded of it again ^ith a memento. If
there be any good in them, thou ellest us, it is all apparenter, in show, in
appearance, ^om the teeth outward, pure personation; what is ill, ^all and
essential. They know the world is dazzeled ^ith appearances* and that few make
strict enquiries ^to things; and it is more advantageous to please and ^mour
the former, then satisfy the latter. But ^ough this description of them has
been demonstra^d in the former Paragraphs, yet does the repetition ^ it seem to
inculcate something more, and consequent^ require some short explication. She
says they are; Parag. 49. Beati aemulatores; blessed amulators;) ^ey are
indeed thought blessed by many; but what ^ppinesse, what felicity it is to
emulate, to envy, to ^^k at other men's worth, as they only are desirous ^ it,
so theirs be the reward. The inconsistency of the ^ords betrays their
aemulation to be base and back ^ting, whereas such as are truly blessed envy
none, de^ct from none: but how liberal they are as to this ^^ticular, has
been already shown, as thinking God ^d nature in a manner unjust to bestow any
thing of orth or excellency on those that have not some relati^ to their
Society.

Parag. 50. Pauperes, divites: poor yet rich) To pretend poverty is easy, but
how far they are subject to the inconveniences of it, nay how they make the
name a stalking horse to all the delicacies and enjoyments of this li^e, has
been sufficiently shown alre^dy. They are such poor people, says S. Bernard,
^ want nothing. See more. Parag. 7.

Parag. 51. Simplices potentes; simple yet powerful* Their habit would raise
in the simpler sort of peop^ an opinion of their simplicity, and
harmlessenesse; b^ there is a double heart within, the long cloak has many
folds, and the quadrangular cap is lined with t^ fou^e cardinal vices before
mentioned. Parag. 22. 2 24. 25. 26.

Parag. 52. D^voti adulatores: devout but flatterer^* Devotion is only that
part of the show which is e^pos'd to amuse the simple spectators, who know ^
that all is moved by the secret engines of hypocri^ and dissimula^^on. See
Parag. 14. and others.

Parag. 53. Per^idi traditores: per^idious Traitors To what end should they
insinuate into all men, di^ into Princes secrets, wander up and down the wor^
but to betray and make their advantages of all the have to do with. Of their
per^idiousnesse and tre^ cheries, see more* Parag. 4.

Parag. 54. Perver^^ detra^^atores: perverse detr^ctors.) perverse,
irretractable, inconvincible detr^ctors; no state or condition, religious or
politic^ ecclesiastical or civil but has felt the badgers tee^ of their
implacable detraction. Who would* see mo^ as to this point, may consult
Parquier's Jesuiticall C techis^e.

Parag. 55. Sancti hypocritae; pious hypocrites. up^ the same account as they
are blessed ^^ulators; in a^pearance, they seem to be pious, but behind the
c^taine they are quite other persons: to be what the seem would destroy all;
See more, Parag. 8. etc.

Parag. 56. Veritatis subversores; subverters of the truth.) by their false
explications, distortions, corruptions, mutilations, dispunctious, pernicious
interpretations, aequivocations, absolute defiance of the truth, and assertion
of falsehood. See Parag. 18.

Parag. 57. Nimis directi; over-direct in your ways.) What the holy
Prophetess means in this place is somewhat doubtful; but if we may
conjecture, it is not, nnlikely this you would have the world believe that you
are rigid Catos, living strictly according to your Institution; you would be
thought to do all things by the rule of just and right; you would have the
reputation of Aristarchus's eying the imperfections and miscarriages of others;
but truly considered, it will be found an argument of your being insolent
opinionative, and as the prophecy goes on,

Parag. 58. Superbi: pro^d.) insupportably ar^ogant, even to the assumption of
the highest, but ^ithall the humblest name that of the ever-blessed JESUS, and
living so disconsonantly thereto. See Pa^^g. 2. and 8.

Parag. 59. Effrontes: shameless. So far from ha^ing any remorse upon the
discovery of your crimes, that after frequent reproaches you persist in them;
See Parag. 9. 10.

Parag. 60. Doctores instabiles; unstable teachers.) As to those things wherein
the truth is to be maintained, ^ou are full of evasions, elusions and
tergiversations: ^ut when you engage upon the maintenance of maxims and
opinions that are destructive to humane society and good manners, your
obstinacy is notorious to all the world. Unstable, that is not constant to any
place, ^ut somewhat relative to him that compasses the ^arth.

Parag. 61. Martyrs delicati; delicate Martyrs.) ^itable to their lives and
entertainments, such as thereof we have an instance in the Rector of the
Ger^ane College, Parag. 46.

Parag. 62. Confessores lucri: covetous confessors.) having a greater respect
to the gain accrueing there by then to the glory of God; minding rather their
own temporal, then the spiritual advantage of their penitents. See more as to
this particular; Parag. 3. 16. 20. 22. 25.

Parag. 63. Immites calumniatores, unmercifull calumniators) Ah blessed
Hildegard! how true a Prophetess art thou in this character of them? Had
thou been to give us the true specificall difference of an Ignatian spirit, it
would not have been more compendiously done. Catholic and Heretic, Trojan and
Tyrian, it matters not, if they stand in their light, shall be sure to feel the
stinging of their viperous tongues. Nay even those other religious Orders, and
with them the Clergy, whom it might be thought they should have some respect
for upon the account of their being of the same character, they implacably hate
and persecute. Nay Kings, Princes, and Popes are not free from their satyricall
invectives. For a further confirmation of this, consider their Christian
behavior toward the Religious Women of Port-Royall, and the JANSENISTS;
Mystery of Jesuitisme, LET. XI. XII.

Parag. 63. Religiosi avari; religious for filthy lucressake.) What can they
not do who are able to make two things so incompatible as religion and
covetousness to consist together. But of their avarice so much has been said,
as clearly makes them incapable of having any reality of Religion. See
Paragraph 3. 6. etc.

Parag. 65. Humiles elati; humbly insolent.) such another character as the
former, whereof one admitted the other must be cast off as being inconsistent
in the same subject. See what is said, Parag. 2. 7. 8.

Parag. 66. Pii duri: of an inflexible piety.) As to this particular, though
much might, yet were it superfluous to add any thing to what is laid down, in
Paragraph. 18. 25. 28.

Parag. 67. Mendaces dulces: insinuating liars.) They are able to lay people
asleep with their lies, they are the guilt pills, which they make the simple
imprudently swallow.

Parag. 68. Pacifici persecutores; peaceable persecutors*) holding peace, and
an olivebranch in one hand, a stilletto in the other: disciples of Joab, and
imitators of Judas; wounding in the midst of their kindness, betraying with
their care^ses. They would be thought the greatest friends that can be to
peace, and fasten the persecution on others: which humor of theirs see
perfectly displayed in the Factum or Remonstrance of the Curez of Paris, in
answer to The APOLOGY for the CASUISTS, among the Additionals to the Mystery
of Jesuitisme.

Parag. 69. Simplicium oppressores; oppressors of the simple.) As long as there
be simple people to be overreached, oppressed and trod under foot, as long as
there shall be Jesuits, we need not be to seek who shall do it. See Parag. 4.
5. etc.

Parag. 70. Malarum Sectarum per vos de novo excogitatarum adinventores;
Introducers and authors of evil Sects. There is certainly in this somewhat
that's highly prophetical. There were a sort of people, called by some
INIESUATI, as if a man should say Jesuify'd, who got together first, at Sienna
in Italy, about the Year 1365. or some few years later. They were afterward
called APOSTOLICI. Apostolicks; but their Order coming in a short time to
nothing, they were succeeded by the present JESUITS. So that Saint Hildegard
seems to intimate as if the Jesuits should introduce and revive that expiring
Order; unless it may be thought to have some allusion to the THEATINES, by
which name the Jesuits are called in Spain and Italy, because of the
resemblance of their h^bits.

Parag. 71. Misericordes nequam; mischievously compassionate.) To palliate
crimes, to countenance exorbitances, to study maxims for the encouragement of
evil doing, is a kind of compassion that will prove fa^all to those whom it is
shown to. There is a certain comp^ssion iu a common whore, or a ravenous
soldier, who think they oblige, when they leave any thing, and tak^ not all.

Parag. 72. Amatores mundi; Lovers of the world.) to which may be added, and of
the vanities and enjoyments thereof. They are in the world, and the world in
them. See more, Par. 18. 28.

Porag. 73. Vendit^res indulgentiarum, Merchants of Indulgences.) Here some may
doubt whether this Prophe^y be to be attributed to the Jesuits, since they go
not from town to town, and from house to house selling and trading in
Indulgences? Who is troubled with that scruple is to know, they are not indeed
a sort of peripatetick Pedlers to carry them up and down the Country, but cry
them up and celebrate them in the pulpit, whereby the traffic of that
commodity is extremely improved.

Parag. 74. Spoliatores bene^iciorum; robbers of bene^ices.) Of their
conscience and carriage as to this particular, and what artifices they have to
grasp all to themselves; See Parag. 27.

Parag. 75. Oratores incommodi; imp^rtunate Orators.) Such was Commoletus, and
Herean at Paris, one in the pulpit celebrating King-killers, the other in his
public Lectures making homicide lawful. Such was F. Boezius at Cullen, who
wasted one sermon in inveighing against maids that wore red stockins, and
another in the commendations of Hysop. To these may be added the great ornament
of the pulpit James Beaufes, whose character may be found in the second piece
of this Collection. To this head may be referred their ^riviall catechifing of
children, whereof this is one question

Quest If you had Luther, Calvin, or Beza in your power, what would you do with
them?

Answ. One says, he would dispatch them with a kni^e, another with a dagger, a
third with a bodkin, a fourth with a hammer, a fifth with a pisto^l; others
that they should be drowned, others, cast from some high place, others hanged,
others otherwise treated. And thus do they trif^le away several hours
together: but what will not serve children and superstitious old women?

Parag 76. Conspiratores seditiosi: seditious conspirators.) for which they
have, in many places, accordingly suffered. In France they have been more
mercifully dealt with then in England, where, till Londonbridge either sink
into the River that runs under it, or suffer another conflagration, will be
seen the relics of those seditious Martyrs. See Thuanus, in several places,
and Pasquier's Jesuiticall Catechism, l. 3.

Parag. 77. Suspiratores crapulosi; sighing, but out of gluttony) What people
think the effect of devotion is but thebelching of a full belly, and the
discoveries of overcharged stomachs.

Parag. 78. Desideratores honorum; ambitious of honors.) Upon this account is
it that they are so desirous to be saluted in the ^treets; for this reason
would they be called Fathers, that they might be honored as such. They would
be accounted the companions and camerades of Jesus, Apostles, Rabbis and
Masters, that they may be reverenced and respected as such; and as they are the
last of all Orders, so would they retain so much of monastical observance, as
to be thought more worthy then those that went before them.

Parag. 79. Zelatores criminum, criminally zealous.) To smother crimes by
favorable maxims, to maintain what is most unjustifiable, to enervate the
law of Christ, is an effect of their zeal and tendernes^e for mankind. There
may be a certain zeal even in evil doing: but what scale they place their
zeal in, whether of good or evil, it concerns them to take care, since that,
as it is found heavy or light, they shall have their reward.

Parag. 80. Mundi raptores; graspers of the world.) the pure children, as the
Scripture terms them, of this generation, they extremely out-wit the children
of light. A man would think by their habit, institution, profession and
deportment, that they had shook hands with the world, but it seems they are as
much in it as ever they were. The world is their study, their darling, they
mind nothing so much, for which reason Passeratius, in his Oration calls them
Harpyes. See more of this head, Paragraph 3. 6. 18.

Parag. 81. Insatiabiles praedicatores; insatiable teachers.) Something
consequent to the precedent Paragraph. They are before compared to a beggars
Wallet, that is never filled; to the Sea, which though it receives all rivers,
is not satisfied; to hydropick persons, who the more they drink the more dry
they are; such, of whom, it may be said, -- Semper locus est and pluribus --
See further, Parag. 3. 6. 15. etc.

Parag. 82. Applausores hominum; applauders of men.) Was there ever such a
description of men? Jesuita est omnis homo, say they; Saint Hildegard sets them
forth as if they were all men. One while they were emulators, another, devout;
another, religious; another, traitors, here they play the claw backs and
parasites. The reader, I hope, has not forgotten what has been said of Father
Cotton, Confessor to Henry the Fourth, but the prophet pronounces a Woe against
such Applauders of men, as, sowing cushions to their elbowes encourage them to
sin. Parag. 14. 20. etc.

Parag. 83. Seductores foem^narum; seducers of women.) As long as there are
Women in the world there will be serpents to deceive them. Of their performance
in this kind, see more elsewhere.

Parag. 84. Seminatores discordiarum; sowers of sedition.) An oracular
conclusion! what is related of the infernal furies, of the Eris of contention,
of the Goddess and the golden apple, is indeed but a (...) the discords,
dissentions, heart burnings, jealousies, (...) bickerings, which they are
incendiaries of between Magistrates and subjects, Princes and people, husbands
and wives, parents and children, and all relations, as if it were their design
to dissolve the bonds of humane Society, and bring all things to their
original confusion.

Thus much by way of brief remark upon Saint Hildegard's description of the
Jesuits; which how pertinently applicable it is only to them, what has been
alleged does in some measure demonstrate. But she proceeds to some admonitions
and notes of what must in probability be the consequences of the fullfilling of
her Prophecy, on which somewhat may be further observed.

Parag. 85. Been enim gloriosus Propheta Moses in cantico suo cecinit: for well
says she, has the glorious Prophet Moses sung in his song. conferming her
own prophecy by the authority of Moses. To all which we may add what an
anonymous Author has collected in the characters of the Jesuits, in IV.
Centuries, out of holy Scripture and others writers. Whereof, see Physiognomia
Jesuitica.

Parag. 86. Gens absque consilio and sine prudentia: A sort of people without
counsel and void of prudence.) Having characterized them elsewhere for the
craftiest and most subtle sort of people, and such as are incredibly well read
in slights and circumventions, it might be wondered how s^e comes here to say,
they are void of prudence. But the knot is soon untyed. They are without right
and sound counsel; hey want, as to good counsel. Evil Counsel, as the
proverb says, falls heavy on the head of the giver. They are indeed crafty and
acute, but in order to mischief. The devil has bewitched them, the delights of
the world has dazzled their eyes. Their prudence is worldly, and that is
foolishness in the sight of God. They are said to be imprudent here as in the
first Paragraph they were said to be an insensate sort of people.

Parag. 87. Vtinam saperent, and intelligerent and novissima praeviderent. O
that they were wise, that they would understand, and take care for their latter
end) A Christian and compassionate wish, but here is the misery, that the
Jesuits will not be persuaded it concerns them, and so slight the advantages
they should make of it. They are of those who while they seem to be over wise
and over-carefull and over*provident, mind nothing, and make no provision at
all, that is, as to what concerns their latter end. For being wholty taken up
with the things of this world, it is no great wonder, if they neglect what
belongs to true wisdom, and understanding, and the care of those things that
relate to their dissolution. For as geese and other tame foul, which, by
reason of their fatness and cramming up* are incapable of any high flight: so
they, having their thoughts fastened on things below, such as the building of
sumptuous Colleges and pallacies, heaping up of wealth, improving by hook or
by crook, the revenues of the Society, and the seeds of happiness hereafter
being choked by a profane Solicitude here, that of Christ condoling the state
of Jerusalem, might pertinently be ^pplyed to them, Did thou understand,
even in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace; etc.

Parag. 88. Aedificatores in altum, and dum altius ascendere non poteratis,
tunc cecidistis* Builders up on high, and when ye could ascend no higher, ye
fell.) Dishonor and disgrace is the consequences of pride; their high thoughts
and defignes will be brought low enough. But to take the words of the prophecy
in the literal sense, their magnificent structures, their high built edifices
sufficiently betray their high minds and projects. But, says she, because you
could ascend no higher, ye fell: what else could be expected from such as are
perpetually climbing up, but that, being gotten so high as they think it a
shame to be brought lower, they should break that which cannot well be mended
again. ye fell, says the holy woman, denoting the certainty of their fall; ye
are fallen in some measure already, many Countries have cast you out; in the
rest you are tottering, and upon the brink of the precicipice, ready to receive
an irrecoverable downfall.

Parag. 89. Sicut Simon Magus, quem Deus contrivit, and plaga crudeli
percussit, As Simon Magus whom God broke to pieces, and struck with a cruel
wound.) Simon's flight into the air, his fall and death is thus laid down by
Nicephorus, l. 2. c. 36. Because he said to Peter the Apostle, with whom he had
great contestation. Is thy Christ therefore any great person because* he
ascended from earth to heaven? That's a thing I can as easily do my self. And
immediately, stretching forth his hands, evil spirits sustaining him, he was
carried up and down. Whereat Peter much troubled, prayed to God in his heart,
rebuked those wicked powers, which had taken up the Magician, and commanded
them to depart from him. Upon which Simon falling down headlong is broken to
pieces. This was the end of Simon Magus and his Magic. The parallel will be
more apparent in these particulars.

1. Simon was a Magician, a great Master in delusions and enchantments: they
are well wishers to the Mathemati^i^ks, they countenance Conjurers, and have
laid down favorable maxims for such as shall seriously study those which not
only either Christians but even Heathens have condemned and prohibited as
unlawful Sciences. See Mystery of Jesuitisme, LET. VIII. page 115. 116. If
they countenance, if they encourage, why may they not practice? That sad
oversight of Father Cotton rung all over France. Who has a mind may see the
story at length, with the questions he intended to have made to a possessed
maid, too long to be here inserted, in Speculum Jesuiticum, page 106. 107. 108.
109. though not so largely* as in a Book entitled PHYSIOGNOMIA JESUITICA,
printed in the Year 1610. It is also related by Thu^^^s lib. 132. where he
says that the o^iginall came at last to the hands of Hen. IV. to whom F.
Cotton was confessor.

2. He bewitched men with his delusions, making them to see things otherwise
then they were* How much they endeavor to cast a mist before men's eyes has
been already shown, and is apparent to all the world, in that, though they
maintain what is most horrid and destructive to Christianity, they will
nevertheless have a reputation of sanctimony, austerity and devotion beyond
all others.

3. He contested with Peter the Apostle; they oppose the doctrine of all the
Apostles.

4. He was ambitious of the worship due to God; they would be terrest^iall
Gods, the companions of Jesus.

5. He would derogate from the ascension of Christ into Heaven: They pretend
miracles, but done in such places as few will visit to disprove them.

6. Sustained by evil spirits, he fled up on high: how probably they would make
use of the same assistance to accomplish their high designs, their own Maxims
sufficiently discover.

7. What does there remain, but that as Simon, was, by the prayers of Peter,
brought down and broken to p^eces; So they, by those of pious men, should be
defeated of their hopes, and disappointed of their ends, when they endeavor
things destructive, not only to the generality of Christians, but even to
themselves*

Parag. 90* Sic and Vos per seductionem, nequi^ias, mendacia, detractiones, and
iniquitates vestras corruistis. So are you fallen down, through your seduction,
wickedness, lies, calumnies and iniquities.) Through your own iniquities,
says holy Hildegard. You will be so far from having any thing to charge others
with, that, on the contrary, it will be a certain torment to you, that you
slighted their advice, and reformed not your ways upon the discovery of your
exorbitances and impieties* No, their ruin proceeds not from the designs of
others upon them, but will be the effect of their own mischess, seductions
conspiracies, delusions, detractions.

Parag. 91. Et populus di^et Illis, Ite doctores perversitatis, subversores
veritatis: and the people shall say unto them, Go ye teachers of perverseness,
subverters of the truth.) Possible! Shall they be laid so open so naked, shall
they be so anatomized, as that the people, the br^inlesse multitude, sensible
of their malice, artifices, cheats, lies, calumnies and iniquities, will cast
them out and triumph over them. Get you gone, says the people, ye teachers of
perverseness, you have poisoned us long enough with your pernicious doctrines
and tenants, our eyes are at last opened to see your abuses and extravagances.
Depart from among us ye subverters of the Truth: ye shall betray us no longer
by your pollutions and prevarications. But of this has been discoursed more at
large, Paragraph 15.

Parag. 92. Fratres Sunamitidis: Breehren of the Sunamite*) The story of her is
to be read, 1 Kings chap. 1. but it were to be wished they were as free from
Women as David was from her: they should no^ be guilty of so many breaches of
the seventh Commandment, as they are.

Parag. 93. Patres h^retic^pravitatis; Fathers as to heretical depravednesse.)
If to be obstinate, and inconvincible, in an erroneous and pernicious opinion,
be any thing of ^in to heresy, or be any disposition thereto; they are not
injured in this character. They will maintain any thing of that nature till
they grow Fathers in it, and if advanced under that authority, it must not be
quitted. But if they are the Heretics, we must needs quit those whom they
calumniate and persecute as such. Now the JANSENISTS may know where to retort
the HERESY so much laid to their charge, and lay it at their doors who are
most clamorous against it. It Is in like manner from this obstinacy and
depravednesse that they have such contestations with all Universities and
Parlements, and that so many of their books are censured and burnt; though many
more would come to that destiny, were they writ by any other then Jesuits,
whose prevalence in the Court of Rome exempts their books from the doom that
falls so heavy on those of others, though few know for what.

Parag. 94. Pseudo Apostoli; false Apostles.) The denomination of Apostles they
are highly ambitious of, and accordingly have it among the Portuguizes and the
Indians; but i^ we may believe our Prophetess, they are false ones, not to be
trusted, who run where they are not sent, and preach where they are not called,
and give a good reason for it.

Parag. 95. Quia simulastis vos vitam servare Apostolorum, nec tamen in minimo
vitam illorum implevistis; because you pretended to live according to the
example of the Apostles, but ye have not in the least observed it.) As to the
denomination, ye ^re indeed Apostles, but as to the thing it self, as to the
charge and burden consequent to that dignity, you are not such. He that would
have the name of an Apostle, ought to live suitable to that name: but for such
Apostles as are only nominall, suppositious, or rather false ones, it is a
sin to*bestow on them the name of Apostles. But t o make it more manifest,
let us but make a general division of Apostles into the trne and false and by
a clear parallel see whether side they are to be ranked on, whom this Prophecy
aims at.

1. The true Apostles were called by Jesus, and sent about the world for the
conversion of those that belonged to the house of Israel; these are a sort of
pragmaticall intermedlers who run where they are not called, and preach things
inconsistent with the sacred provisions of the Ghospel.

2. The Apostles contented themselves with the general name of Christians, not
arrogating the title of companions to Jesus: these slighting the common
appellation of Christians, will needs assume the title of Socii, companions, of
Jesus.

3. The Apostles were so far from persecuting others, that they suffered
persecution themselves; those, who stand so much upon their being of the
Society of Jesus, make it their business to persecute and crush Christians,
especially such as are eminent for their piety and excellencies, and engage so
much as may be the secular powers of the world against them.

4. It is not any where read, that the Apostles either built or lived in royal
palaces: the new Apostles build as many royal palaces as they do Colleges,
where they live splendidly, not after the rate of persons devoted to poverty,
but suit ably to the magnificence of Kings and Princes.

5. The Aposiles were not burdensome to any, but avoided it above all things,
because none should take offense, imitating therein their Lord and Master* who
was so much to seek as to the accommodations of this life, as that he had not
what the fowls of the air, and the foxes are not unfurnished with; the Jesuits
worry all the world by their insatiable importunity, grasping even that which
should fill the barking bowels of the poor and sick.

6. The Apostles were poor fishermen and tradesmen, such as whose brawny hands
laboriously earned what they put into their bellies, as Peter, Paul, etc. the
Jesuits are grown wealthy beyond either Crassus or Croesus.

7. The Apostles preached up subjection to the higher powers, because they are
of God: these not only dissolve the relation between People and Magistrate, by
being the incendiaries of rebellions, tumults, and defections, but celebrate,
countenance and encourage those that lay their sacrilegious hands on those
anointed ones, and attempt their lives, absolve those that do it, swell up
their martyrologies with their names, and make them equal with the Patriarchs
in Heaven.

8. The Apostles admonition and command to wives was that they should be
subject to their husbands; the Jesuits teach them to be Quaquers, to do the
contrary, and by their insinuations and familiarity with them, advise them to
be false to, and filch from their husbands, that they may the better gratify
their Evangelists.

9. The Apostles preached humility, patience, longsuffering, as the greatest
demonstrations of true Christianity: these have found out maxims to
countenance men in their ambition, and irregular passions, by teaching them
that honor is to be preferred before all things, and that to vindicate it, a
box o'th'ear, a hasty word, a gesture, is ground enough for a man to spill the
blood of his brother, for whom Christ sacrificed himself, and shed his.

10. The causeless calumniating of one's brother was a thing in the Apostles
days wholly unheard of: these have made it so innocent, and so safe in point
of conscience, that if that be overthrown, all moral Divinity is destroyed.
But to what end to dress up such a catalogue of inconsistent Tenants, to show
the vast difference between the Apostolical and Jesu^icall doctrine, when
there is hardly any article wherein they absolutely agree?

Parag. 69. Filii iniquitatis, scientias vestras nolumus; ye sons of
iniquity, we will have nothing to do with your sciences.) The people, as they
are more and more illuminated make still greater discoveries of them and
accordingly betray a greater aversion for them. As if they should say* time
has been that we were bewitched by your Learning and seeming excellencies,
but, now we have found out the cheats and artifices thereof, we shake hands
with you, defy your further acquaintance, and will not be trapann'd by you.
But* blessed Hildegard^ will no milder term then sons of iniquity express
their villainies and thy indignation? No, they must endure it, they are the
words of the Prophetess: she does not call them simply wicked, but sons of
iniquity or perdition. The son, we know, is the heir of his Fathers
possessions; if then they are the sons of iniquity, it is but fit they should
carry away the inheritance of iniquity. Now what that is may easily be
conjectured: for if those who are the conductors of others in the ways of
righteousness, shall shine like stars in the firmament of Heaven, it
follows, o^ the other side, that those who corrupt such as shall corrupt
others, so as it were to poison all mankind by the propagation of iniquity,
and are accordingly the sons of iniquity, shall burn like enflamed brands in
that part which is opposite to heaven. A sad and eternally deplorable
inheritance.

Nolumus scientias vestras; we will have nothing to do with your sciences. Be
it granted you are the most learned, the most experienced, the most diligent,
and the most successful guides and Tutors of youth, we will have nothing to
do with you nor your Learning, for you are the teachers of iniquity and
perv^rse things, the subverters of truth. Your science, as was said in the
beginning is an aerie, imaginary science, your sanctity nothing but personation;
you are without shame or the fear of God before your eyes. There are indeed
five Arts in which you are beyond all degrees of further perfection, Adulation,
Seduction, Envy, Hypocrisy, and Calumny. But all will prove unprofitable, when
the multitude has discovered the vanity of your Sciences, and say they will
have nothing to do wi h them.

Pa^ag 97. Nam praesumptio elata vos decepit: for an insolent presumption has
deceived you.) Presumption is indeed an enemy to study, and hinders the
progress of science. Nor is it only ^ hindrance to the advancement of
Learning, but also to the improvement of Piety and the works thereof: for where
presumption, and that attended by insolence, has planted it self in the mind
of a man, it debars true Learning and the acknowledgement of Christ, from being
entertained there. The Jesuits indeed have that opinion of themselves, and
would have all others think no less, that they only have admission to the
divine Mysteries, they only hold a nearer correspondence with JESUS, to them
the Blessed Virgin communicates her self, and dictates their books, as
Mascaregnas professes of himself in that Treatise published by him, in the
year 1656. whereof there are some propositions laid down among the Additionals
to the Mystery of Jesuitisme, that they only and no other are to be heard; but
this arrogance, this presumption is that which has deceived them, and whereby
they have deceived and will deceive others, till it be discovered.

Parag. 98. Et insatiabilis concupiscentia subvertit erroneum cor vesirum: and
an insatiable concupiscence has subverted your erroneous hearts.)
Covetousness is indeed the root of all evil: this has been the destruction
of many Cities and Countries, and will be the ruin of all addicted thereto.
Besides the covetousness of wealth, there is also a covetousness of honors,
dignities, pre-eminence, commonly known by the name of Ambition: and this is a
disease the Ignatian Fraternity are as deep in, as ever Myriam Moses sister,
or Gehazi the Prophets servant were in the Leprosy. Hence proceed their
insinuations, and courtings of Kings and Princes, their consultations and
communications with the people. To these may be added a third sort of
covetousness, which is concupiscence, or the insatiable pursuance of fleshly
ple^sures. And this is div^ded into two branches, one relating to things
appertaining to the Belly, the other to what is not much below it; of their
performances as to all which, how well they acquitted themselves, may be seen
by what is alleged in the precedent Paragraph. But the holy Prophetess says,
that by these several kinds of concupiscence, their erroneous hearts are
subverted. Nor indeed could it be otherwise; for where Covetousness, Ambition,
and the pleasures of the flesh are predominant, it will inevitably follow, that
a man's heart must be subverted. They cast a darkness over the intellectual
part, eclipse that particle of Divine inspiration that should illuminate a man,
and put out those sparkles of Virtue that they lie under the embers of humane
Reason.

Parag. 99. Et cum in altum, ultra quam decet ascen^ere voluistis, justo Dei
judicio, de^rsum, in opprobrium sempiternum cecidistis. And when you would have
ascended higher then you should have done, you fell down, by the ^ust judgment
of God, into eternal reproach. What can ^e said less of those, who pretend to
reform God in his lord; who prefer themselves before all learned men, and
spend their censures on them; who vent their sa^yricall humors against Popes
and Empero^rs; who ^ould regulate Kings; who assume to themselves an ^uthority
over men's consciences, and make what they ^lease to be sin or not to be
sin, who would grasp he whole world's wealth, who build royal palaces, ^ho
reform studies and books, and presume to toss and turn all things as they
please themselves; what can ^e said less of such men, such as are formidable
to the ^ighest as well as lowest, then that their aims are too ^igh, and that
according to the just judgment of God, they should be tumbled down into
sempiternall reproach, to the final ruin of their temerarious pretensions?
For so shall the certainty of the divine sentence long since pronounced against
such be made manifest, that whosoever exalts himself shall be brought low:
and that of the Poet confirmed, -- Tolluntur in altum
Vt lapsu graviore ruant --


And thus much shall suffice by way of descant upon this authentic Prophecy of
Saint Hildegard. Many other things might have been alleged, but have purposely
been omitted, parley for brevity sake, partly out of modesty and a tenderness
to the persons here uncharacterized, out of a hope that, upon so moderate a
discovery, they may tak^ occasion to reform the miscarriages laid to their
charge, and, if it be possible, by a surprising change of deportment, stop the
mouths of all Adversaries, and make it appear that they are not the men, but
that we are to expect others, in whom this Prophecy may be absolutely
fulfilled. What has been said, is only by way of remark, or short annotation,
and not as a Commentary which would have swelled into a just volume, as done
out of no other design then to lay the Prophecy at their doors, who, in the
apprehensions of most, and upon serious consideration of what is produced
against them to justify it, are the more justly chargeable therewith; nor hope
of other effect, then what is laid down by Saint Augustine contra Faustum, lib.
1 cap. 3.

Sicut vestra intentio est Semichristianos quos decipiatis, inquirere; sic
nostra intentio est Pseudochristianos vobis ostendere, ut non solum Christiani
peritiores vos convincendo prodant, sed and imperitiores vos cavendo proficiant.

FINIS.
Errata.
page 1. l. 8. r Ligue. p. 14 l. 34. r. as. p. 31. l. 12. r. related. p. 36. l.
28. r. thousand* p. 52. l. 21. r. Gentlewomen. p. 75. l. 8. r. concerned them.

P. 6. l. 21. dele that* p. 12. l. ^2. r Provinci^lat of. ^. 14 l. 3^. for
pressed r. passed. p. 16. l. 21. r. evasions. p. 1^ ^ 3. r. wash his* p 23. l.
21. for an. r. and. p. 25. l. 13. for of* ^ in. p. 30. l. 22. for Nor. r. Now.
p. 40. l. 36. for are r. as. p. 45. l. 15. r. stuck. fill the blanck in the
fourth piece. p. 19. They affect to wrest their necks. in the preface to the
fifth Treatise for Justification. r. Institution* in the last piece p. 22. l.
34. r. All, all, all.


