ON THE DEATH Of the Renowned GENERAL GEORGE Duke of Albemarle.
I Bring mean Things, as Hecuba who gave
Her Hair a Sacrifice at Hector's grave.
Oh for Wild's teeming Muse! mine is at that pass,
As was old Hellens, when she brake her Glass.
My Fancy's dull, my Muse wants feet to go,
My clumsie hand is like his Gouty Toe.
Oxford and Cambridge were invited Guests;
My Verses press like Beggars unto Feasts,
But yet Monk's farewell-Volley to advance,
I Will fire my Pistol with their Ordinance.
And that his Funeral-pile may blaze the higher,
I Will throw waste paper to augment the fire.
His Metal will make Mercuries of Blocks,
And with his Steel, inflames my Tinder-box.
What though I add my Sackcloth to their Sable,
My Verse suits with the cause, being Lamentable.
Why sits upon each face black sorrows Cloud?
Why are the sighs so deep, the groans so loud?
Such face poor England had of Consternation,
When she beheld her Father's Decollation:
Our Greife's renewed, Great George's breath does cease,
The great Restorer of his Country's Peace.
Luxurious Death could nothing please thy Palate,
But thou must have Anchovy's for thy Sallet?
Foul Cannibal, did ravine so prevail,
That Worth nor Loyalty could be his bail?
But yet thou can not boast of Victory,
His posture showed, He scorned to stoop to thee.
He greeted thee, (whom Nature much abhors),
Sitting, as Kings do treat Ambassadors.
So would Vespasian entertain his fate,
So Egypts Queen sunk so her Chair of State.
Whom don't thy fall concern? A Starr so bright
Setting, leaves every one with his lesser light.
By thee the Gentry kept their Dignity,
From Tyler's Level, or Cade's Parity,
Prelates owe thee their Miters, Kings their Crowns,
Nobles their Coronets, Scholars their Gowns;
Thy Country owes its Peace, being freed from dread,
Unto thy heart, three Kingdoms owe their head.
A King and People sweetly met in thee,
He had his Crown, and they an Amnesty.
His way not spread with Carcasses but Roses;
His breast not hit with bullets, but with Poseys,
The Canons then did speak another sense,
And powder smell as sweet as frankincense,
Baleon's Briarian claps, joy signalize,
And Windows view him with their Argus eyes.
Thou did out-wit the many headed Beast,
Out-didst those called the Glory of the West,
Egbert first Monarchiz'd an Heptarchy,
But thou redeem'st us from an Anarchy.
Great Warwick's title [ MAKE-KING] was his shame,
The clouded Trophy of a Guilty fame.
But yet a glorious Character in thee,
The lawful purchase of thy Loyalty.
Lower your Sails, you Heroes famed for War,
You Will all be found but Comets to this Star,
The Candid Lillies of his peace outvies
The Blushing Roses of red Victories.
Who by your bustling made the World to groan;
Not to support but to usurp a Throne:
For your Advetures we may thank your pride,
Not done to hold the Stirrup, but to ride.
State-Hypocrites, with Maidens modesty,
Do often resolve to take, but yet deny.
Like some men's formal Nolo Episcopari;
Or Oliver's demur, Nolo Reguar^e.
Not he, (alas forsooth) He Will not be King,
But kecking at the name, devoured the thing.
Thus men will pick the Marrow, leave the Bone,
Swallow the plum, and spirt away the stone.
But yet our MONK will not so mind his own
Ambition, as to seek a Triple-Crown.
Nor force, nor fraud, shall him in the Chair install
Against Justice Vote, that virtue Cardinal.
He knew a bastard title n're would do it,
Which as a Sea weed grows without a Root;
A claim (like Vermin) sprung from sweat and dust,
The lawless offspring of a Soldier's lust;
Which Madam Fortune to a Buff-Coat bare,
Who stole a Crown amongst other plundered Ware.
But can that thrive which has such feeble roots?
The Son rides not, though in his Father's boots.
When all the stir and bustle at his fall,
Was bread and butter thrown against the wall;
The furious Action of the Usurper's Son,
When news was brought, his Highness-ship was gone:
Thus Mushrome Titles spring up in a day,
Answer their birth, by fading soon away.
Misplaced Scepters are not hum'd but hiss't,
Like the Priest's Censer in a Layman's fist.
MONK then is not Coach-ruling Phaeton,
But Morning Star to usher in the Sun.
He sees the Crown can fit no head but one,
And He a Royal Stem, a Martyrs Son.
The best of British, Danish, Gallick blood,
Meet in his veins to make his title good.
Nor can his Country's obligation cease,
From's Father's patience and his Grandsires peace.
Him, he conducts unto his Royal Throne,
And longed for Peace is born without a groan.
But thine Eclipse does most thy brightness show,
When Fortune Judge on both sides proved a shrew,
When the Dutch water-snakes by help of fate,
Set on our Herc'les in his weakest state;
With half a Navy he would make a stand,
His English heart would fight them with one hand,
He scorned so to degenerate from his Nation,
To shun a foe without a Salutation,
He will not be rebuk't by Greenvil's Ghost,
Whose single ship attaqu'd the Spanish Host.
And he will make them find him e're they go,
A surley, though an unprovided foe.
Not Sparta's handful, routing Xerxes host,
Nor Hannibal's climbing the Alps in Frost.
Nor Cocles swimming with his Sword in's hand,
Nor Cato's March through Lybian Snakes and sand.
Nor Caesar's Acts can thy retreat outdo,
In that thou fought'st with Foes and Fortune too.
When thou had lost thy Bullets in their sides,
When not befriended by thy Sails or Tides,
When foes (pust up with Luck and Brandy) proud,
Thy Canons hoarse with speaking long and loud,
When thy maimed Vessel like a tired Horse,
Did vex thy active soul, and check thy force.
When friends remote, but adversaries near,
Thou could stand fight, do any thing but fear.
Thou did retire but only to refit,
Not to put up thy Sword, but sharpen it.
So great Alcides tired at Cacus den
Withdrew and breathed, then set on him again.
I Will raise the Cypress of June's Agony
Above the Bays of July's victory;
When thou did chase them with revengeful ire,
And celebrate the Joy with Schelling's Fire.
But now insulting Death to make a mock.
Of Fortitude, feeds on a fighting Cock.
Yet for his loyalty and warlike parts
He is embalmed in Tears, and Tomb'd in hearts.
We prize his dust, as Turks his name-sakes bones,
And celebrate our grief with pensive groans.
The aim'd-at Gowns shall be for mourning Weeds,
And threatened Steeples be his Pyramids.
He does deserve a Monument far higher
Than Paul's old Fabric topt with Strasburg Spire.
His Name we will in Chronicles insert,
Which is advanced by duty and desert,
We Will pray that after-ages may inherit,
The Loyalty and Valor of his Spirit.
And that such worth may be by others shown,
But never have such cause to make it known.
By T.J. Master of Arts.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, 1670. 60.


