THE Tragical History, Admirable Atchievments and various events OF GUY EARL OF
WARWICK A TRAGEDY Acted very Frequently with great Applause By his late
MAJESTY'S Servants.

Written by B.J.

Car^iere vel noli nostra vel ede tua, Mart Epig. First Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Vere and William Gilbertson without Newgate, 1661.

THE Tragical History OF GUY EARL of WARWICK.
Actus Primus.
Enter Time TIME that is past, the Muses now recalls,
forcing my fleeting presence to retire,
and pitch my feet upon the English shore,
I had almost drowned in black oblivion,
an honored History of an English Knight,
as Famous once for deeds of Chivalry,
as any of the Worthies of the world:
Renowned Sir Guy of Warwick whose great Name,
makes England famous in all after times,
for nursing up so brave a Martiallist.
Time now renues his fortines, to the world,
and lays them open to your Gentle Views;
think then with apprehensive eyes yo see
this warlike Lord boldly attempt to fight,
with that fell savage Bore of Calledon
that spoils the fields and murders passengers,
him has his sword subdued; and now again,
he combats with that huge and monstrous beast,
called the wild Cow of Dunsmore Heath;
all for the love of Phillis he performs
for Phillis love, old Rohons only Child,
what will not Guy of Warwick dare to do?
and having done those things that she enjoined,
he reaps the harvest of her happy love,
and at the length enjoyes her for his wife.
To grace this bridal feast, imagine then,
King Athelstone has left fair Winchester
and here in Warwick Castle keeps his Court.
What follows now of Guy and his fair Deeds,
sit and behold, the story now proceeds.
Exit Time.
Enter King Athelstone, Guy, Phillis, Rohon, Herod, with others. King. Brave
Guy of Warwick, honorable Earl.
thus long in love and favor to thy self
King Athelstone has left fair Winchester,
to frolic here with thee and thy fair Bride;
Phillis the comfort of old Rohons Age
thus long to you we have been troublesome,
and used your Parkes and Pastures as our own;
but now we will leave these parts of Warwickshire
and back again return to Winchester.

Guy. These Kingly favors that your grace has shown,
in honoring me a worthless Subject thus,
has plumed my thoughts with Eagle-flighted wings,
and bears my mounting mind as high as Heaven;
till I have done some deeds of Chivalry
Worthy the love of your Dread Majesty:

Guy. Which i will perform with treble diligence,
and at your yearly Feast of Pentecost
will Guy of Warwick send a hundred Knights,
suddue'd and conquered by these Warlike Arms,
to do their Homage to King Athelstone,
lowly upon their knees at Winohester.

King. We thank thee Guy, but will not have it so,
live with thy love, thy sword has won thee Fame,
and all the world does speak of Warwicks Name.

Herod. The conquests that by thee has been Achieved,
makes men amazed, and warlike Knights afraid
to come in danger of thy Conquering Sword.

Lord. Thy manly deeds are Graven in each man's breast,
and thy large fame is spread from East to West.

Rohon. Live then in peace, my fair high-hearted Son,
since all men muse to think what thou have done,
the Calledonian savage Bore is dead,
and by thy hand the wild Cow slaughtred,
that kept such Revels upon Dunsmore Heath;
and many adventures have thou past beside
to make my Daughter Phillis thy fair Bride:
she now is thine, and all that I possess,
is Guy of Warwicks so he will stay with us.

Phillis. Intends my honored Lord to leave us then,
speak gentle love, my heart is full of fear;
O seek not danger, that is every where.

King. Content thee Phillis for he shall not go,
thy love entreats but we command him so,
And now Earl Rohon, reach the King thy hand;
Old man we thank thee and we take our leave;
Farewell Sir Guy, fair Phillis now adieu,
all earthly comfort still attend on you.
Exit King.
Guy. Bright Angels still protect your Majesty,
Father conduct the King a little on his way,
Exit Rohon and Herod. Sir Herod attend them, Phillis here, and I,
must yet confer, we will follow presently.

Phillis. What means my honored Lord to stay behind,
when every one attends his Sovereign;
why do thou look so sad and stand so mute?
all looking downwards with thy care-craz'd head:
speak gentle love, if grief thy mind oppress,
Phillis will never leave thee comfortless.

Guy. Ah Phillis!


Phillis. Sweet: what has Phillis done
that thy great heart should grieve to think upon?

Guy. Nothing, O nothing, and I now to thee,
neither the fear of death, the loss of friends,
nor any thing this mortal life can yield,
does trouble me or once molest my mind.

Phill. What then disturbs thy high heroic Thoughts?


Guy. That I must leave my Phillis whom I love;
O be not sad dear soul, but hear me speak;
for what I say must stand irrevocable.
Seven years to win thy love this Sword of mine,
has beat down Monsters, and subdued strong Knights;
seven years to win thy love this breast of mine,
has bin opposed even against the face of death:
But for my God who gave me power and strength
to do these wonders in the sight of man,
has Guy of Warwick yet no service done,
the thought of which torments my inward soul;
and breaks my heart until I have redeemed
my great neglect of service to my God;
For which to him alone I have made a Vow,
never to lie by my fair Phillis side,
to eat, to drink, nor rest long in one place,
till I have seen my Saviors Sepulcher,
within the Walls of fair Jerusalem;
and with my Sword for my Redeemers sake,
beat back those misbelieving Saracens,
that seek the Ruin of that holy place,
making them leave deluding Mahomet,
and trust upon the blessed Name of Christ.
All this has Warwick sworn to undertake,
or loose his Life for his Redeemers sake.

Phill. Sweet Lord!


Guy. O do not bid me stay,
and ask me what thou will, I must away!

Phill. See the rich burden of my youthful womb,
the hopeful issue of thy happy love;
let that yet move thee, dear Lord do not go,
lest both of us do pine with grief and woe.

Guy. Weep not sweet love; for tears will not avail;
but when the time comes thou art brought on bed,
and of thy child art safe delivered:
Give it to Herod if it be a a son,
with it deliver him this Ring of Gold;
tell him that I entreat him from my heart
that he will see my Infant well brought up;
bid him be kind to him, as I have been,
in all Adventures dangerous to him.
Now give me my Palmers Gown, my Hat and Staff,
these must I wear, fly hence all worldly pomp;
thus for my Savior and Redeemer's sake
these blessed Weeds of Pilgrimage I take.

Phill. My hearts so sad I know not what to say,
God grant thy Grave be not that Gown of gray;
My much misdoubting heart says I shall see,
my high loved Lord laid low in misery.

Guy. Do not presage, dear love, but here me speak,
I charge thee on that love thou bearst to me,
never to reveal to Father, Friend, no nor the King himself,
what I intend nor whither I am gone;
until a month be past and I hence free;
for pursuit of my Friends will follow me.
Do this and Phillis love will brightly shine,
and Guy return with joy from Palestine.

Phillis. I must, I will even do what you please,
your will shall be fulfilled yet ere you go;
this pledge of my true love I will bestow;
upon thy Hand I put my marriage Ring,
If ere I see the same and thou not by,
Phillis will grieving weep, and weeping die.

Guy. I take thy pledge of love, and in exchange,
give this true loves kiss, and here Vow,
nothing but death shall make me leave this Ring.
Time calls me hence, fair Phillis now farewell,
with thee let all Heavens joys for ever dwell.
Exeunt.
Enter Old Philip Sparrow, and his son the Clown. Old. Do thou hear me soon,
zoon.


Clow. Never talk Father, never talk; for Youth will have his swindge, if it be
in a Halter; and I being a young Man and a Scholar, will go travel to try the
fruits of my Learning.


Old. But whither will thou go soon ha?


Clow. Faith Father, Romo Romulus, even to Rome, Mortar morteribus, with a
Mortar on my Head. But Father I Will come upon ye with a Verse, Prapria que
maribones tribiunter mascula dogstones.


Old. What Is that zoon ha?


Clow. That is, you must give me Forty pounds, and I must go seek my fortune.


Old. Nay chil hold thee vorty of my teeth on that, the whoreson knave, and he would
tarry at home he might be Clark of our Parish, so he might; he has his writing
and reading Tongue, as perfect as eating porredge, so he has; and sides all
that, he spowts Latin as vast as a Mill grinds sault; but che know the eause
why thoudst so vain be jogging?


Clow. Why Father?


Old. Nay chill tell thee with a witness, it is comported all about our Parish
that thou have got our Neighbor Sparlings Daughter with Barn.


Clow. How comes the old Fox to know this trow; well I must set a good face on
the matter or alls marred. Who I get her with Child? Father, why I take to
witness the backside of our Barn-door, I never kissed her but twice in all my
life.


Old. That thou shall see, come hither Parnell,

Enter Parnell.
Par. O Mr. Sparrow I little thought you would have used me thus!


Clow. Why Parnell how have I used you? If there be ever a one in the Parish
can use you better, let him take you and the Child too for me.


Par. But Mr. Sparrow you are not so good as your promise.


Clow. Nay Parnell never talk of that; for I have been better to you then my
promise.


Old. How Knave, have thou been better to her then thy promise, ha?


Clow. Why Father if you will not bite off my Nose, I Will tell ye, I promised her to
go home and eat a sour Milk Posset; and if I have got her with child, it is
more then my promise, and she is beholding to me for my labor.


Old. I sirrah, but you must marry her and make her amends.


Clow. How like an old fool you talk Father, why, she had more need make me
amends; for I have made her look pretty and plump, and she has made me look
like a shotten Herring. But Father take your blessing from me, for I must needs
be walking.

Honey sops queen Mary's pence,
Tears parts at going hence,
Ego volo Domine tu,
Sparrow will come with joy to you.

Old. Gods malediction go with thee good soon, Ah wees me, wees me.


Par. Farewell good Mr. Sparrow.

Exeunt Old Man and Parnel.
Clow. Nay do not cry good Father, do not weep sweet Parnel, but even farewell
and be hanged, that's twice God bo'ye; I made as though I had been sorry, but I
could not weep and if I should ha been hanged; but now will I go serve the
bravest Man in all the world, his Name is Sir Guy of Warwick; they say he is
going to Jerusalem and Jerico; but if he goes to the Devil I Will go with him,
that is flat; and if Parnel be brought to bed before I come again, some honest
Fellow do so much as pay for the Nursing of the Child, and I Will do as much for
him another time.

Exit.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Time. DEvotion and Divine Atchievments cause
Great Guy of Warwick to neglect all Laws,
Of Nuptial League, he leaves his pregnant Wife,
Country and Kindred for a holy Life,
But in his progress, makes himself a prize
To multitudes of matchless miseries;
By which it may be justly understood,
He is not truly great, that is not good:
In Holy Lands abroad his spirits roame
And not in Deanes and Chapters lands at home,
His sacred fury menaceth that Nation,
Which has Indea under Sequestration:
He does not strike at Surplices and Tippits,
( To bring an Oleo in of Sects in Sippits)
But deals his warlike and dead-doing blows,
Against his Saviors and his Sovereigns foes;
That Coat of Armor fears no change of weather,
Where sanctity and soldier go together:
So does our Champion march up to the fight,
Sit, silent, pray, Time will bring all to light.
Exit. Enter Guy and Sparrow. Guy. What Sirrah Sparrow?


Spar. Anon, anon Sir.


Guy. What are you turned Tapster since you came out of England?


Spar. Tapster quotha I shall never be so good a man while I live; for I had
rather see a Tapster then a King: I like your long Journeys at Sea well but for
one thing.


Guy. What Is that I pray?


Spar. O Master here is no Alehouses by the way, a man cannot get a Can of Beer
for any Money; but Master why did you give that great Castle you got from the
Giant to that pueling harlotry in the silk Gown?


Guy. Why Sir she was a Lady of great birth.


Spar. A Ladle of great birch, why and she had been a ladle of holly; I would
not have given't her I trow, you had bin better a given it me by half.


Guy. What would thou have done with it?


Spar. I would have wrapped it in a Letter and sent it into Warwickeshire for a
token: but Master, good sweet Master lend me your Sword.

Enter an Hermit.
Guy. What will thou do with it?


Spar. Here comes an Old man I Will kill him.


Guy. Ye cowardly Rogue will thou kill a Hermit?


Spar. An Emmot quotha, it is one of the fowlest great Emmots that ever I saw.


Guy. God bless thee Father and send thee happiness on Earth and Heaven when
thou die.


Spar. And the Gallows when a dies, what should he do with Heaven?


Her. O what art thou that speak of God or Heaven, full forty Winters have I
lived here, and never heard the Name of God till now, but in my prayers and my
orisons.


Spar. A saucy old Knave I perceive, he uses to eat Orrenges, Which very word
makes me have an appetick as fierce as a Fiddler at a Feast; it is a question of
some difficulty, to resolve whether my Masters Spirit, or my Stomach be the
greater; if he have the valor to knock down a Dun Cow, I have the Courage to
Cut he rup, and the Confidence to Carbonado her quarters.


Guy. Father into your private ears I dare,
power out my spirit, my designments are
for holy Actions, you may understand,
my pilgrimage is to the holy Land,
where my Redeemer's cause is trodden down,
where he wore Thorns, Usurpers wear a Crown,
I go to view the Monument and story
Of him that was no less then Lord of Glery.

Her. You answer punctually to what I ask,
but son you undertake a tedious task,
as intricate as dangerous, may I crave
the name of him whose valor is so brave?

Guy. Although I now shrouded in these Pilgrims weeds,
(an holy habit fit for holy deeds)
I am an Earl, men call me Guy of Warwick.

Her. In all the space betwixt Dover and Barwick,
I have not known a man of clearer Fame,
(whose actions add new glory to his Name)
then he that owns that title, all that is good,
attend your Spirit and preserve your blood.

Spar. And Father Emmot did you never hear of the Famous actions and valorous
Atchievments of one Squire Sparrow?


Guy. Away you Hedg-bird.


Spar. Phillip is his Name,
A bird of Venus, and a Cock of the Game,
who once being in Love with pretty Parnell,
did crack her Nut, and thou may pick the Kernel;
she is a Peacock every man does veil
his bonnet to her, when she shows her tail.

Guy. Leave talking of your trundle Sirrah.


Spar. Why so? my Mistress Parnell is as precious to me, as your Lady Phillis
is to you, we have gotten them both with child; and all the difference is, that
Phillis is your wedded Wife, and Parnell is my unmarried Mistress, and we must
needs run up and down killing of Dun Cowes, Dragons, VVild-boars and Mastiff
Dogs, when we have more work at home then we can well turn our hands to.


Her. I like your high design, that for the truth,
can in the days of dalliance and youth,
prosecute piety, and attempt things
that Consecrate the Crowns of greatest Kings.

Guy. Father your benediction will add wings
to all my undertakings.
Guy kneeleth.
Her. May the springs
Of ever pregnant providence never be,
shut to your wants, but flow fertyle and free,
may you never feel necessities sharp rod,
the blessed Guardians of the highest God,
protect thy steps and keep thee far from ill;
so farewell Son my prayers attend thee still.

Spar. Nay but do you here Old Man, pray let you and I have a two or three cold
words together? Have you ever a House here in these Woods?


Her. No House but a poor Cottage, gentle friend.


Spar. Unch, How say ye? you would fain curry favor with me, but 'twill not
serve your turn: Have ye ever an Ambry in your Cottage, where a Man may find a
good Bag-pudding, a piece of Beef, or a Platter of Bruis knockle deep in Fat;
for I tell thee old fellow, I am sharp set, I have not eat a good Meal this
Fortnight.


Guy. Come hither Sirrah, can I no sooner come into a strangers Company, but
you seek to disgrace me!


Spar. Who I? why Master? you are mightily deceived in me, for I never use to
say Grace before I see meat on the Table.


Guy. Sirrah, I speak not of saying Grace but of Disgrace, therefore Sirrah go
and tell him you want no meat.


Spar. Shall I tell him so?


Guy. I Sir.


Spar. I shall tell him a monstrous lie then.


Guy. You Will tell him so, quickly too if I entreat you.


Spar. Yes i will tell him because I dare do no otherwise; old man did I tell you
I wanted meat?


Her. I marry did you.


Spar. Ye lie like an old Knave, yet if you have any Bread and Cheese about
you, put a piece in my Cap.


Guy. Sir leave your prating, Father fare you well.


Her. More good attend thee then my tongue can tell.

Exit Hermit.
Guy. This is the stately Tower of Donather,
where Huon of Bordeaux a courageous Knight
slew Angolofar in a single Fight:
go Sparrow, seek find me an entrance in,
let me alone to cope, with those comes forth.

Spar. Why Master have you no more wit but to send me, did not you hear that
there keeps a monstrous Giant in this Castle, that eats a quarter of an Ox at
a bit, his mouth's as wide as a barn door, his eyes as broad as two pewter
platters, and besides all that, they say, he has Four and twenty Men to throw
Mustard in his Mouth; Now if I should come in the way, fall in the Mustard Fot,
and be thrown into his mouth, you might go look for a man where you could get
him.


Guy. I but you being a Sparrow methinks should fly from them.


Spar. O Master I must confess I have been something loftily minded in my
young da^es, but Parnell and the rest of the pretty Wenches in our Parish have
so pluct my plumes, that I was never good mounter since in faith.

It Thunders and Lightens.
Guy. Very well, then you will not go?


Spar. Go, yes i will go that is flat. O Master! the Devil, the Devil, the Devil.


Guy. Why? how now Sirrah, are you afraid?


Spar. No, I scorn to be afraid, but good Master for Gods sake grant me one
request, upon my knees I ask it.


Guy. What Is that Sir?


Spar. Sweet honey Master go your self.


Guy. I thank you Sir, but if you go not soon, my Sword shall bring you of a
stomach to go.


Spar. O Master, never talk of that; for I have a stomach like a Horse, but no
heart in the world to go to such a breakfast, but yet I Will go what somere
comes ont, though I run into a bush presently; I am in Master, I am in.

It Thunders and Lightens.
Guy. It is no Giant sure that keeps this place,
but some Inchanter or damned Sorcerer.
Hell-hound come forth, that I may cope with thee,
I fear not all thy charming Sorceries;
send forth no shadows to afright my soul,
my Faith no Hell-born Fury can control.
Enter the Inchanter.
Inchan. Let all my horrid Vapors cease their strength;
Let the Air Freeze, the Earth be cold as Ice,
whereon this during Knight dothset his Feet.
For though Hells Force can no ways daunt his heart,
he soon shall know my Force can tame his Pride.

Guy. I cannot lift my Arms unto my Head,
my Feet stick fast into the solid earth,
and I shall never move my self from hence,
damned inchanter, hellish sorcerer,
whose black damned Art, has wrought my lucklesse fall;
O that thou durst let loose this damned spell,
I soon would send thy fiend-like soul to Hell.

Inchan. By all the burning brooks of Phlegiton,
by Styx and Acheron I vow and swear
never shall thou go alive out of this place.
Thus do I lay a charm upon thy head,
a hell bred slumber close thy senses up;
there grovelling lie, and never more arise,
Guy falls. a black enchanted charm close up thine eyes.
Exit inchanter.
Enter Oberon King of the Fairies. Obe. But I will break thy charming Sorceries,
and he shall wake to be thy overthrow.
You harmless spirits of the flowery Meades,
Nymphs, Satyrs, Fawnes, and all the Fairy train,
that waits on Oberon the Fairy King,
attend me quickly with your silver tunes;
and in a circled Ring, lets compass round,
this sleeping Knight that lies upon the ground.

Enter the Fairies with Music, they Dance about him, Oberon strikes Guy with
his Wand, he awakes and speaks. Guy. Where art thou Guy? what heavenly place
is this?
what ravishing sound of Music fills mine ear?
what blessed shadows do appear to me,
that am a woeful wretched sinful man?
O pardon me as I am faithful true,
I never yet meant hurt to none of you.

Obe. We know it well, arise fair Knight, stand up,
Guy arises. thou were enchanted by a hellish fiend,
that does inhabit in this hateful Tower;
he casts thee in a deadly charming sleep,
and but by my means thou should never have walked,
I am the Fairy King that keeps these Groves,
for Huon of Bordeaux sake, thy Warlike friend,
the dear loved Minion of the Fairy King,
will I make Guy of Warwicks name be feared;
for conquest of the Tower of Donather,
here take this charming Wand, I give it thee,
which is of such great virtue if it touch,
all the Enchantments in this spacious world,
they all shall be dissolved immediately.
For proof whereof make trial against this Tower,
and in a moment it shall vanish hence.

Guy. Great Fairy King, how am I bound to thee,
that from these dangers have delivered me,
I Will touch this Tower, if that dissolve these charms,
Warwick is free from all enchanting harms.
It Thunders, Lightens. Enter Sparrow running.
Spar. Fire, Fire, Fire.


Guy. How now Sirrah, what is the news with you?


Spar. Whoop Master are you alive still? nay, then I care not in faith, but I
have been peper'd since I went from you.


Guy. How Sir I pray.


Spar. When you sent me to seek an entrance into the Castle, I thinking it was
good sleeping in a whole skin, ran and hid my self in a bush, I had not lain
there long but it began to Thunder and Lighten monstrously, and presently the
Bush flew a Fire about my Ears; that with your favor I came away in a
stinking complexity; but Master what fine little hop, O my Thumbs have you got
here.


Guy. Sirrah take heed what you say for these are Fairies.


Spar. Fairies quotha, I care not what they be, I Will have about with them for a
bloody Nose; I have a better stomach to sight with one of them, then with the
Giant agreat deal; Unch ye whoreson little pigpies, you i will tickle ye in faith.

The Fairies fall about him, pulls him down, pinches him, he cries out.
O Master help, help.


Guy. How now Sirrah, what is the news with you?


Spar. I am killed master, I am killed.


Guy. Killed knave, where art killed?


Spar. In the Buttock, in the Buttock.


Guy. Well Sir, rise, or i will rise ye.


Spar. Rise quotha, yes, I Will rise, but I am sure I am dead; do you call these
Fairies, a vengeance on them, they have tickled my Collefodiums in faith; but
master what is that same little gentleman's name?


Guy. Sir his name is King Oberon.


Spar. Little Gentleman is your name King Colbron?


Obe. No Sir, my name is King Oberon.


Spar. Why then good King Muttonbone learn your little Munkies to pair their
Nails with a pestilence; for my posteriors will feel the print of them this
fortnight at the least.


Obe. Sir hold your peace, and Guy give me thy hand,
the way i will show thee to the holy land,
where I will add such glory to thy name
that all the world shall speak of Warwicks fame.
The black Inchanter he is gone to Hell,
in endless torments ever for to dwell,
Nymphs, Satyrs, Fawnes, and all the rest march on,
before stout Guy, and youthful Oberon.
Exeunt.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Time. THus swiftly runs the silent hours of Time,
whilst wordly men secured by their wealth,
think not on time nor on their souls fair health
but those whose well adorned lymbes are made,
of that pure metal which shall never fade;
those that have learned of Angels how to sing,
and to the world all piety does bring,
and fills the world with learning and with art,
to those does Time her Golden gifts impart;
you fair beholders of this honored story,
think now that Guy of Warwick he is gone,
leaving these Fairies and King Oberon,
and now to fair Jerusalem takes his way;
where hearing of the Wars the Pagans make
against that City and that holy Land,
he now prepares himself by force of Arms,
to save Judea from ensuing harms;
long stories are not told in little time,
much matter in small room we must combyne:
we will curt all nothing, yet make something short,
because we would shun tediousness of sport;
if it be long, say length is all the fault,
if it be lame, say old men needs must halt.
Enter Sultan Shamurath, Sultan of Babylon, with Zorastes. Sult. Thus Sultan
Shamurath, as Earthly God of Kings,
have marched along with all their Warlike Troops.
Ten Thousand Galleys, ships and brigandines,
lie dancing on the Adratique Sea,
ready to be commanded when we please,
to bear this Captive King of fair Jerusalem,
to our Triumphant City Babylon;
but say Zorastes, how shall we employ
our Warlike Forces against these Christians.
Most dread and mighty Emperor of the East,
whose puissant and warlike Force commands
even from the orient to the sons decline;
suffer not thus these hated Christians
to inmure themselves in walls of stone and brass,
whilst Sultan Shamurath with all his Lords
attends a day of battle with their swords.
Great King of Babell, now be ruled by me,
and let Zorastes counsel now prevail,
I Will raise up heaps of damned spirits from hell,
that shall make way unto my bold attempt.
Legions of Devils attend my dreadful Charms,
ready to be commanded when I please;
then mighty Sultan make no more delay,
my art shall make the Conqueror this day.

Sultan. Thanks stout Zorastes, great Magician thanks,
but first lets summon them unto a parley
perhaps they will yield their City to our hands,
knowing our force to be invincible,
and they not able to withstand our power.
Trumpet or Drum summon a parley there.
A parley sounded, Enter the King of Jerusalem upon the walls.
King. What craves Thasirian Emperor at our hands?


Sultan. Homage and fealty as thy Sovereign Lord,
of all these spacious bounds of Christendom;
know petty King of fair Jerusalem
I am the mighty Sultan Shamurath
that rules the tripple City Babylon,
and all the Kingdoms of the Eastern world,
only this little part of Asia,
holds out against us and derides our faith
scorning our Laws of holy Mahomet,
but by his blessed Alcaron I swear,
I Will never depart, nor draw my Army hence,
till in the Temples of Jerusalem,
both Mahomet, Asteroth and Termagaunt,
those holy Gods that Governs Babylon
be set for you stout Christians to adore,
which ye shall do, or all of you shall die,
and basely at our foot like Vassals lie.

King. Proud and Presumptuous Tyrant as thou art,
we fear no bugbear threats of Tyranny,
nor all the multitudes thou can command,
we guard and keep the blessed Sepulcher,
of our dear Savior and Redeemer Christ,
within the walls of fair Jerusalem,
though on a sudden with your heathen Troops,
you have begirt us with a fearful siege:
yet know proud Syrian that fair Zions hill,
King Solomon's Temple, and the marble Tomb,
which we adore with awful reverence,
can raise a hundred thousand Christians
and proudly beat you back to Babylon.

Sultan. Thou will not then surrender us thy Town?


King. Not whilst one man survives to lift a sword,
attempt the worst you can, to save or kill,
we are prepared even against the worst of ill.
Exit King.
Sult. Why then at all, march forward warlike Lords,
we will parley now with Pole-axe, Bills and Swords,
darraigne our battles, and begin the Fight,
and Mahound still direct my course Aright.
Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Guy of Warwick Solus. Guy. Thus through the help of my dear Savior
Christ,
whose out-strecht arm has still preserved me,
I am escaped from Sultan Shamurath,
and all his Host of cursed Saracens;
now I am come where I may fix mine eyes
safely upon King David's City walls.
Is this Judeas pride, fair Zions hill?
Sanctum sanctorum and the house of Heaven,
the place where my dear Savior lost his Life?
O how it grieves me to behold thy walls,
hemmed in with Dogs and cursed Saracens,
that seek to rob thee of thy beauty quite,
and turn thy joyful day to mourning night.
But heaven assisting me, I will prevent
their damned purposes, and make them repent,
their journey taken against Judeas good,
or in that fair adventure spend my blood.
Enter Sparrow crying.
Spar. Tarry, tarry, tarry, hold, hold, hold.


Guy. Why? how now sirrah, what is the news with you?


Spar. O Master are you there? I have done such an exploit as you never heard
of in your life.


Guy. What Is that Sir?


Spar. Nay, I am sure it passes your Capacity, but I Will tell you though, for it
was a valiant piece of service, when I saw you got in amongst the Pogons, I
thought some body had hired you to break heads by the dozen, for you never hit
any of them, but they shook their heels as though they had the Palsy; I
seeing you so hard at work thought it not best to trouble ye, but after the old
manner ran and hid my self in a bush.


Guy. O Cowardly slave! was this your Valiant piece of service?


Spar. O Master you do not hear half yet, I lay so long till you were gone,
and looking out of the bush, I could see all the Pogons laid fast asleep; then
went I sneaking and stole away their Snapsacks with all their Victuals, I got
up to the top of a Hill, and eat it up every bit, when I had done, I began to
hollow; the Pogans missing their provant, came running after me, but I made one
pair of Legs worth two pair of Hands, and outrun them all in faith.


Guy. I thought what hot service you do always, but peace, here comes the
King of fair Jerusalem.

Enter the King of Jerusalem.
King. I am a wretched King, the more my woe,
Kings are sometimes distressed, and I am so,
but if thou be that warlike Conqueror,
that through the Pagan host has cut thy way,
I do beseech thee even with woeful tears,
to save Judea Sion Palestine
from base attempt of heathen servitude.

Spar. If it be? O scurvy, if it be! why I Will tell you Goodman King, it was I and
my master tickled 'um in faith.


Guy. True Sir, you and your Master and I, pray what did you?


Spar. Why Master? when you had killed them, I came and cut off their Heads.


King. Where were thou born? or what is thy Countries name,
brave Christian Knight, may I be bold to ask?

Guy. My Native Country is fair England called,
my name Sir Guy of Warwick hither come
of holy zeal to see my Saviors Tomb,
but seeing it hemmed round about with foes,
I cut a passage with my Warlike sword,
meaning to rescue it or lose my Life.

King. Heaven prosper thy attempt, lead on Fair Knight,
God and good Angels still protect our Right.

Guy. God and Saint George in Warwicks quarrel Fight.

Exit Omnes.
Alarm, Enter Sultan, Zorastes from the Fight. Sultan. O speak Zorastes, what
Devil or Man is that,
which in his Fury confounds such heaps of men?

Zorast. My Lord I cannot tell, but this I know,
neither Turk nor Saracen can withstand his blow,
our Soldiers fly like chaff before the Wind,
and none can stand against his Conquering sword.

Sultan. Can thou not tell me what he is?
nor by thy Magic charms confound the slave?

Zorast. I can do both as you shall straight behold;
Bellemoth, Asteroth Ascend.

Spirit. Quid me uis?


Zorast. I charge thee tell me truly who it is,
that in his rage confounds and spoils our men.

Spirit. It Is Guy of Warwick that is hither come,
of holy zeal to see his Savior Tomb.

Zorast. But never shall he see that Marble Grave,
go Bellemoth, and in a fierce flame,
hoyse him aloft into the vacant Air,
and throw him headlong into the Neighboring Seas.

Spirit. Abeo.


Zorast. No, we fight my Lord, for victory is yours.


Sultan. Why? then Zorastes once more to the Fight,
and Mahomet direct my course Aright.
Exeunt Omnes.
Alarm Excursions. Enter Sultan and Zorastes flying, Guy and they Eight,
Zorastes Escapes, Guy takes Sultan Prisoner. Then Enter the King of
Jerusalem. King. Command these brawling Drums to cease their noise,
whilst I salute our Warlike Conqueror,
renowned Sir Guy of Warwick, whose great name,
extolls fair England with a glorious fame;
fit in our Throne victorious Englishman,
our Crown and Scepter shall be all as free,
to Guy of Warwick as it is to me.

Guy. Far be it from the thought of Englishman,
to usurp the seat of fair Jerusalem;
but for those favors you have graced me with
here I resign unto your princely hands,
Great Sultan Shamurath, King of babylon.

King. Victorious Knight, both in thy words and deeds,
this proud presumptuous King of Babylon
which thou surrend rest here as prisoner,
I freely do deliver back to thee,
to ransom or dispose as thou think best.

Sultan. Let me be ransomed mighty Christian Knight,
and I will back surrender to thy hands
all those Towns and Castles I have won,
Joppa, Samaria and Rich Nazareth,
with fifty Thousand bars of silver plate,
to ransom home great Sultan Shamurath.

Guy. I scorn thy league and love, proud heathen King,
I Will make thee now my Vassals underling.

Sultan. Scornst thou to love the Monarch of the world?


Guy. The Monarch of black Hell, should I not scorn,
the love of Beelzebub Leviathan,
Sultan stamps. Nay Sir I Will make you tear your Mahomet,
and stamp and stare.
Enter Sparrow with a Pagan in a Halter.
Spar. I and swear. too in faith before I have done with him; O Master you think I
can do nothing, I have catchta Pogon.


Guy. How sir I pray?


Spar. Why Master after the valliantest manner that could be; for I found him
asleep, and having a Halter in my pocket, put it about his Neck instead of a
falling band.


Guy. But what will you do with him now?


Spar. Marry Master, first and come fordermost, I Will hang him two hours by the
Clock, then I Will cut off his head because he shall not call me knave for my
labor; and when I have done so, I Will let him go his way, nay ye whoreson Pogon
I Will tickle ye that is flat; The Pogan takes the Halter from his own Neck, and
put's it about Sparrows neck, and runs away.
O Master the Pogon has given me two slips for a Tester, but I Will after him, if
I catch him again, I Will give him a Cawd east in's Chaps, that is two turns and a
wry mouth, and then he may drink to his friends all the day after.

Exit Sparrow.
Guy. Since that your Majesty has back delivered,
this Sultan Shamurath into my hands,
know the ransom I will set on him,
shall please our God and all good Christians.
O blessed Emperor think upon the Cross,
which is the true badg of our sweet Savior Christ
by whose great help we have got Victory.
Then to enlarge the Fame of Christendom,
and our great makers ever glorious name,
Thou Sultan Shamurath with all thy Host,
shall leave your faith and become Christians;
do this, from any ransom thou art free,
and all thy people set at liberty.

Sult. We yield consent victorious Conqueror;
the God you serve is great Omnipotent,
ruling the day of battle as he please,
making one hundred kill ten thousand men,
such were the odds of our Battallions;
therefore for Guy of Warwicks sake,
we will trust in Christ, and Mahound clean forsake.

King. Then fit we honored to the Marble Tomb,
where you shall have received your Christendom,
you and your Lords shall take a Solemn Oath,
that all your Empery shall do the like;
come on brave Guy, for by thy hand is done,
this Everlasting fame to Christendom.
Exeunt King and Sultan.
Guy. Go on great Kings, I Will follow presently,
and now since all those wars are at an end,
and that my heavenly Maker has vouchsaft
to give me victory against his foes,
in lowly Pilgrimage I vow to come,
and visit my dear Saviors blessed Tomb;
there for an everlasting memory,
I Will offer up my sword and furniture,
and here I make a vow in sight of Heaven,
that henceforth i will never bear Arms again,
but spend the residue of my sinful Life,
in zealous Prayers and repentant Tears,
for all the follies of my wretchlesse youth.
Now glorious God with thy Auspicious eye,
smile on this happy work that is thus began,
to enlarge the fame of blessed Christendom.
Exit.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Time. THus Time that in his ceaseless motion,
controuls the hearts of Kings and Emperors,
has now converted Sultan Shamurath
to tread the path of perfect Christendom;
and now with Bishops, Priests and Patriarks,
they are returned back to Babylon,
to Christen all that Heathen Nation;
think this is done, and now again suppose,
that Guy of Warwick after he had seen
his Saviors Tomb, and there had offered up
as Monuments of lasting Memory;
his sword, his shield, and Warlike Furniture,
he there vowed never to bear Arms again,
and now toward England is returning back.
Imagine that Sir Raynborn his fair son,
is grown a man, and hearing of the deeds
of his great Father, leaves all his Friends
to seek him out in Foreign Nations.
Think this is done, and now again suppose
that Guy of Warwick now is waxen old,
and at the length of many a weary step,
he comes to England, where perforce alas
he must oppose, his weak decayed limbs
against the vigor of a Giants strength;
for now the Danes in absence of this Lord,
have set their feet so far on Englands ground,
that they had almost conquered all the Land,
and to a forced Parley drives the King;
how they conclude, and by what means agree,
Time shall make known to you immediately.

Exit Time. Enter Swanus King of Denmark, with him Colbron. Then Athelstone
King of England, with him Herod. Athelstone. Swanus of Denmark, since to this
Enter-view,
by thee appointed, we here both are met,
Speak what can thou demand from Englands Crown?

Swanus. Thy Crown and Kingdom is by conquest won,
yet if thou can provide a Champion,
that dares encounter mighty Colbron here;
if he that Fights for thee, do win the day,
all Title to thy Crown we will lay away;
but if that Colbron gets the day in field,
the English power to the Danes shall yield;
and then thy homage and thy Princely Crown,
will Swanus bear to Denmark as his own.

Athelst. I force, perforce must yield to thy demand,
But had I Guy of Warwick thou should know,
thy Giants force he soon would overthrow.

Colbron. I tell thee King, no weak-bred arm of thine,
can shed one drop of mighty Colbrons blood,
whilst I have power, or any strength to stand,
or grasp this Truncheon in my Warlike hand;
for in my Fury I will take my Foe,
and fling him higher then the Moons bright sphere,
then bandying back the Football of my rage,
cast him down headlong to the Neighboring Seas.

King. No more, no more, to morrow is the day.


Swanus. When Might or Right shall bear the Crown away.

Exeunt.
Enter Guy being Old. Guy. Thus one and Twenty Winters have I been,
a very stranger to my homebred soil,
and never set my Feet on English ground;
in Foraign Countries have I eat my bread,
and now bring Winter on my Snow white-head;
which of my Friends that meets me by the way,
will once imagine that I am Sir Guy,
that vanquished Knights, and made stout Monsters die.
O, no not one, will once remember me,
beauty and youth so little lasting be.
What place is this, wherein I am Arrived?
I know it well, it is called fair Winchester,
whereas King Athelstone does keep his Court,
the nights far spent, and my age withered limbs,
are weak, and weary, with long traveling;
here will I sit and rest my self a while,
He sleeps. and with sweet sleep my wanward thoughts beguile.
Enter Athelstone with Guy, disguised.
Lord. What means your Majesty, thus carelessly
to walk abroad without your wonted Guard?

Athelst. I Will have no Guard, unless thy self with me,
for know this Night as I lay in my bed,
a blessed Angel bright and Christaline
in golden slumber did appear to me,
bidding me walk out of my Castle Gate,
and the first man that I should meet withal,
choose him my Champion to defend my right,
which makes me rise thus early for to see
this heaven bred Champion sent to let us free.
Guy starts from his sleep.
Guy. Give me my Sword, mine Armor, and my shield,
that I may Coap with Hybean Hercules;
the horrid villain in a Centaures shape
has ravished Layda on her wedding day;
therefore I hand to hand will Coap with him
were he the Master Monster of the world:
alas where am I poor distressed Man?
my troubled mind utters I know not what,
thou Fight with Monsters, Fight thou with thy grave,
and for thy sins humble forgiveness crave.
But out alas, I fear I am o're-heard,
He espies the King walking. I will enquire of these the ready way
that leads directly to your City fair;
good morrow, and God bless you Gentleman.

Athelst. Good morrow Father.


Guy. May I be bold to crave which is the way,
that leads directly unto Winchester?

Athelst. This path good Father leads to Winchester.
O heaven what should I think my dream pretend,
that willed me choose the first man I should meet;
but this good Aged man is far unfit,
yet will I ask his Counsel in this cause
that may avail me far more then his strength,
good Father may a stranger be so bold
to have some private conference with thy self?

Guy. Speak on good Sir, and what so e're it be,
My truth I give to keep it secretly.

Athelst. Then know good Father that I am a King,
my Courts beset with many Enemies,
and this last night as I lay in my bed
a Heavenly Vision did appear to me,
bidding me rise up straight and walk abroad;
and the first man that I should meet withal,
choose him my Champion to defend my right;
thou Aged Father art the first I meet,
but he that does maintain this Fight,
is a most monstrous Giant huge and strong,
and thou art feeble, weak and impotent,
yet thy Counsel Father, what I were best to do?

Guy. Do as Heaven wills, ye do my Gracious Lord,
if by the all foreseeing power thereof,
I am appointed for to do this deed;
though I be old, yet you shall well perceive,
I Will not give back nor yield one foot of ground;
what though he be a Giant that maintains
this deadly combat? ere I Will turn my face,
I Will leave my body breathless in this place.

Athelst. O how glad's my very Soul to see
a youthful mind in Aged Livery!
come Reverend Father, for thou now shall be,
a Kings companion that will honor thee.

Guy. Go on great King, an old man once will try,
the Vigor of a churlish Giants strength;
though he be huge and strong with whom I Fight,
my God is just and still maintains the right.
Exeunt.
Enter Swanus and Colbron. Swanus. Now Colbron rowse thy Giants setled-limbs,
for all our blessed hopes on thee we lay,
thinking to bear the English Crown away.

Colbr. I tell thee King thou troublest me with doubts,
for half their Kingdom is already won^
by Colbron and the Danish Conquerours,
upon the rest I will sharp vengeance take.
Where are these faiat-hearts? O that they were come,
that I might finish up a day of Doom!

Swanus. I hear them coming, therefore lets prepare,
to bid them welcome to a bloody feast,
Enter Athelstone with Guy and others.
for I perceive they all are resolute.
Athelstone. Swanus o^ Denmark, see we keep our word,
and come to try our right by dint of Sword.

Swa. Bring forth thy Champion.


Athelst. Here he stands prepared.


Swanus. O, who? he alas poor silly man,
give him a pair of Beads to pray upon.

Athelstone. Scorn him not Swanus, for this old man's hand,
against thy mighty Giants force shall stand.

Colbron. Must Colbron Fight with such a withered Ghost,
a very shrimp, a worm, a gnat, a fly,
I scorn him and will spurn him at my feet.

Guy. Leave of thy braves, blaspheming heathen dog,
for God whose quarrel I do take in hand
will add fresh strength to these my withered limbs,
these aged sinews that are weak and old,
he can renew with monster conquering strength;
therefore to show, I do not fear thy threats,
sound an Alarm lets begin the Fight,
for with my Palmers staff i will coap with thee.

Athelst. Thou shall not hazard so thy honored age,
begirt thy self with these wars Ornaments.

Guy. What shall I do? unhappy wretched man,
for when I left the wars of Palestine;
I made a vow even in the sight of Heaven
never to Fight with Sword or Shield again;
but I must break that vow, or leave this Land,
my Native Country to the violent hand;
of damned Usurpers, which shall never be,
I Will break my Oath, and sweet Heaven pardon me.
Here do I take this Sword into my hand,
and buckle fast this shield unto my Arm,
although I know it is no armed hand
that can prevail, but Heaven where truth does stand;
and now thou great Arch-guyder of the world,
that saved Daniell in the Lions Den,
look down on me, with thy all-pitious Eyes,
and by my Hand vanquish thy Enemies,
that all may say in Glory to thy name,
that little David has Goliath slain;
St. George for England, lets begin the Fight,
Angels by me defend fair Englands right.

Colbron. In Mahounds name I do thee here defy,
for I will crush thy bones immediately.
They Fight, Guy kills Colbron.
Athelst. St. George, St. George, England has prevailed,
and Denmark and his Champion now are quaild.

Swa. Mahound Confound that old man's hellish Arm,
that has wrought Englands good, and Denmarks harm;
now force perforce, to Denmark we must go,
never had the Danes so great an overthrow.
Exit Swanus.
Athelst. Since by thy means most Reverend Aged Man,
I and my Country are delivered,
from the usurping Danish Tyrants power,
I conjure thee by that holy vow
which thou did make in taking on this weed,
of thy religious holy pilgrimage;
tell me thy name, and what thy Countries called,
which was so happy as to Foster thee.

Guy. Upon Condition that your Majesty,
will vow to keep close what I shall reveal,
I will resolve your princely mind at full.

Athelst. Speak freely then, for what so e're it be,
upon my word I Will keep it secretly.

Guy. I take your princely word then know great King,
I am your Subject and in England born,
and many favors have received of you,
past the deserts of my unworthiness;
for which it glads my soul that e're I dye,
I have done some service for your Majesty.
When I was young, men knew me by my looks,
but now the hand of age has changed me so,
that not one man does Guy of Warwick know.

Athelst. So said my soul, when I first saw thy face,
welcome, O welcome, to thy Native soil,
which thou have freed from ruin and from spoil;
and ten times welcome art thou unto me,
thy absence long has wrought my misery,
But tell me, have thou seen fair Phillis yet?

Guy. My Lord I have not, nor I do not know,
whether my beloved Phillis lives or no.

Athelst. I can assure thee that thy Phillis lives,
but her old Father Rohon he is dead;
Sir Rainborn thy courageous hearted Son,
Guy weeps. has been these two years for to seek thee out,
why weepst thou Guy?

Guy. I weep for joy to hear this happy news,
has Guy of Warwick then a Kingly Son?
and is fair Phillis still in perfect health?

Athelst. She is good Guy, and i will send speedy post,
to Warwick Castle for to fetch her hither.

Guy. O I beseech your grace to give me leave,
an end of this my Pilgrimage to make;
for when I took my way Palestine,
I made a vow for seven and twenty years
to keep my self unknown from all my Friends;
full one and twenty are expired and gone,
six more being past, I from my vow am free,
and then to all my friends disclosed i will be.

Athelst. I must consent, since thou will have it so,
but at the six years end i will come to thee,
and with me I will bring so rich a Train,
as shall in state, bring Warwick home again;
till then I leave thee to thy sweet content,
willing my life for thy good be spent.
Exit King.
Guy. Farewell my Liege, Farewell my Sovereign,
and now poor Guy, since thou art left alone,
think on thy Makers mighty love to thee,
who in thy youth did make thee feared of all,
and by thine age has wrought a monstrous fall;
he has preserved thy true and faithful Wife,
whom thou did love more dearer then thy Life;
to her i will go as fast as I can hye,
but she will not think that Warwick is so nigh:
ah Phillis, now thy Lord is waxen old,
who when thou saw him last was stout and bold;
yet as I am, I Will sek my Phillis Face,
if he that made me gives me Life and space,
I Will tell her tidings of mine own estate,
and fetch my food at my own Castle Gate;
And for six yea^s which I alone must lead.
Phillis must feed her unknown Lord with bread.
Exit.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Time. THus Guy to Warwick Castle now is gone,
where hearing of the Alms fair Phillis gives
to Palmers, that do daily pass that way;
he thither goes, and at her hand receives
his daily food; and being unknown,
he tells her tidings of his own estate;
and in a forest not far from the place,
a mile distant called Arden wood,
with his own hands he builds himself a Cave.
What follows now of Rainborn his fair Son,
Sir Herodes meeting, and of their return,
and what to Guy of Warwick does befall,
sit pleased a while and Time shall show you all.
Exit Time. Enter Guy Solus. Guy. Now am I come in sight of my fair Home,
that's called Guye's Cross, for that I did erect,
before I went to fair Jerusalem;
here was I wont to sit and view my Land,
and eke my Castle that on Tiptoes stand,
to overpeer this part of Warwick shire.
Enter two Palmers.
1 Palmer. Come hither, lets a little mend our pace,
for we are near to Warwick Castle now;
where I have heard of late fair Phillis dwells,
who gives Alms to all that pass that way.

2 Pal. Good brother lets go thither presently;
but stay, methinks here sits an Aged man,
lets ask him if he will go along with us?

1 Pal. With all my heart;
all happiness attend you Aged Father.

Guy. The like I wish to you good gentle Friends.


1 Pal. May we entreat you go along with us,
to Warwick Castle, where fair Phillis dwells,
who gives Alms to all such as we are.

Guy. With all my heart, I Will go along with you.

Enter Phillis, and a Servant with Bread and Wine,
1 Pal. See where she comes out of her Castle Gate.
Both Palmers kneel and pray. Heaven bless fair Phillis for this deed,
and send Sir Guy of Warwick home with speed.

Phillis. Amen, Amen, come give them a reward,
there is Bread and Wine, eat and refresh your selves;
and there is some Money to relieve your wants,
and pray for Guy of Warwick and his Friends.
But wherefore stands this Aged man so sad?
What art thou Father?

Guy. A poor distressed Pilgrim gentle Lady.


Phill. More welcome art thou unto Warwicks Wife.
for in a Pilgrims weed my Lord is gone,
even to the furthest part of Christendom.
But tell me Father, have thou traveled far?

Guy. Lady I have, and seen my Saviors blessed Sepulcher.


Phillis. In all thy travels did thou never hear
of Guy of Warwick, and his Warlike Deeds?

Guy. I have both heard, and been with him,
even at the siege of fair Jerusalem;
where he performed such deeds of Chivalry,
that by his means the City was preserved,
and Sultan Shamurath with all his Host,
was overcome and holy vanquished.

Phillis. Let me embrace thee in my tender Arms,
and kiss thy Aged Cheek, for until now,
of my dear Lord, I never heard so much;
reach me a stool, I prithee Father sit.

Guy. Here on the ground I Will sit, it is earth and dust,
from it I had my Birth, to it I must.

Phillis. Give me some Bread? I prithee Father Eat.


Guy. Give me Brown Bread, for that's a Pilgrims Meat.


Phillis. Reach me some Wine, good Father taste of this.


Guy. Give me cold Water that my comfort is,
I tell ye Lady your great Lord and I,
have thought our selves as happy as a King,
to drink the water of a Crystal spring.

Phillis. O do not break my sorrow beaten heart,
with sharp remembrance of his miseries,
that is more dear to me then all the world;
but gentle Father for this happy news,
which thou have told me of my beloved Lord;
if in my Castle thou will stay with me,
for VVarwicks sake I will make much of thee.

Guy. I thank you Lady, but I cannot stay,
my have in Pilgrimage calls me away;
therefore in duty here I take my leave.

Phillis. O stay a while, and do not go so soon,
for I am loath to leave thy company;
this poor reward of Phillis shall thou take,
which I do give thee for my Warwicks sake;
so fare thee well, whatsoever the cause should be,
my heart is full of grief to part with thee.
Exit Phillis and her Servant.
Guy. And mine of sorrow and deep misery.


1 Pal. Come Father, will you along with us?


Guy. Go on good friends, I follow presently,
Ex. Palmers. as fast as weakened age will give me leave.
And now poor Guy fall prostrate on thy knees,
and thank the God that gave thee such a Wife;
Phillis when thou art dead and laid in grave,
few such true Women will fair England have.
Now will I hye me unto Arden wood,
there in a Rock of stone I Will build a Cave;
and of my Phillis fair, whom I love best,
i will fetch my daily Food, and thus in rest
till full fix years be brought unto an end,
unknown to any, I my life will spend.
Exit Guy.
Enter Rainborne Solus. Rain. Now that the poasting Charet of the Son,
has tired Phoebus and his wanton steeds,
the duskey Clouds has closed up the day,
and Hesperus is left to guide the world;
Here Rainborne rest thy self within these woods,
and give thy weary limbs some time of stay,
until that Phoebus chase the night away;
then will I buckle on my Arms again,
and never cease pursuit till I have found
my Warlike Father, the renowned Sir Guy,
He sits down. which I will do, or in this journey dye.

Enter Sparrow. A Pilgrimage quotha, marry here is a Pilgrimage indeed, why? I
have lost my Master, and have been this fortnight in a Wood, where I have eat
nothing but Hips and Hawes, that ye may make Fiddle strings of my Guts they are
so thin: but I am served well enough; for when I was at home with my old
Father, where I had my belly full of Beef and Bag-pudding, but I must be
Traveling with a Pestilence.

He espies Rainborne. But stay, who have we here? some Traveller I hold my Life
on it, I care not greatly if I knock out his Brains, and then take away all his
Money, yet sure he has not much, he has such fine Clothes on; for commonly now
adays our Gallants in their Silks and Velvets have the Devil dancing in their
great Hose; for there is never a cross to hinder him, therefore I Will wake him
sure, Whoop whow, etc.

He Hollowes in his Ear.
Rainborne. How now Sirrah, what are you?


Sparrow. A Curstian, what art thou?


Rainborne. Art thou a Christian? prithee where were born?


Sparrow. In Faith Sir I was born in England at Stratford upon Aven in
Warwickshire.


Rainborne. Were born in England? what is thy name?


Sparrow. Nay I have a fine finical name, I can tell ye, for my name is
Sparrow; yet I am not no house Sparrow, nor no hedge Sparrow, nor no peaking
Sparrow, nor no sneaking Sparrow, but I am a high mounting Iofty minded
Sparrow, and that Parnell knows well enough, and a good many more of the pretty
Wenches of our Parish in faith.


Rainborne. Very well Sir, what make you here in these Countries?


Sparrow. Marry I have lost a stray Master, can you tell me any tidings of him?


Rainborne. What was thy Masters name?


Sparrow. My Masters Name, why you would not hear it would ye?


Rainborne. Yes sir that I would.


Sparrow. Well he has a tickling name I can tell ye.


Rain. Howsoever let me hear it.


Spar. Yes you shall hear it, he is called the most Courageous, Bravagious,
Contagious; but do you hear young Gentleman, have ye ever another suit of
apparel never hand.


Rain. Why Sir?


Spar. Why truly all will not be well with ye if you hear my Masters name;
therefore I would wish you take heed what ye do, for you will perfume that, so
that ye will have need of another.


Rain. Sirrah leave your prating, and let me hear it.


Spar. Nay ye shall hear it, he is called the most Renowned, Profounded,
Compounded; but hark ye, have ye ever a clean shirt about ye?


Rain. Why Sir?


Spar. Why? I know if you hear my Masters name you will blow your Nose backward,
and then your Landresse will call you Sloven.


Rain. Why ye base Pesant, shall I not hear his Name?


Spar. O Lord Sir, ye are deceived! I am no Phesant, though I be a Sparrow, yet
you shall hear my Masters name, he is called Sir Guy of Warwick.


Rain. Sir Guy of Warwick, my Renowned Father.


Spar. Thy Father, thy Halter, indeed when I came out of England I left a Wench
pretty and plump, thou may be my Son, if thou be, kneel down and ask me
blessing, and i will give thee two pence.


Rain. Away you base slave.


Spar. Why do thou think scorn to ask me blessing?


Rain. I Sir that I do.


Spar. Then I think scorn to give thee my two pence.


Rain Sir leave this talk and tell me certainly,
where brave Sir Guy at this time does remain,
and with rich gifts I will requite thy pains.

Spar. Will ye so, why the last time I saw him he and I were going toward
England, and in the midst of a great wood I lost him, but I had better have
been hanged or some worse mischance come to me, for I am like never to get-home
as long as I live.


Rain. Nay fear not that, for if thou't stay with me,
for VVarwicks sake I will make much of thee.

Spar. But are you Sir Guy of VVarwicks Son?


Rain. Upon my Knightly word I am.


Spar. Faith I doubt you are some lying Hangman; for indeed we Travelers may
lie by Authority; but I Will tell ye what I Will do, stay you here till I go into
England, and ask your Mother, if she says so, I Will come again and then I Will
dwell with you.


Rain. Nay stay Sir, for it is above a Thousand mile into England.


Spar. A Thousand mile, nay sure i will take your word before i will go so far to
try the matter, but if I should be content to dwell with you, what diet will
you allow me?


Rain. Why Sirrah? to your Dinner you shall have a Pomgarnate.


Spar. A pound of Garlike, why I never eat Garlike in all my Life;


Rain. I say a Pomegarnate, which is almost like an Apple.


Spar. Apples to my Dinner, and what to my Supper? quickly, quickly.


Rainborne. Why to your Supper you shall have a Couple of Olives.


Spar. Nay that is not much amiss, for that is two legs of Beef stuffed with
Parsley.


Rain. You are deceived Sirrah, for an Olive is no bigger then a Plum.


Spar. How Apples to my Dinner, and Plums to my Supper, O my belly, my belly,
my belly; why Master you have killed me already, but i will tell ye how ye must
use me; at Eight of Clock you must call me up; but ye must not make too much
have, for I must have half an hours scratching before I can put on my Shirt;
then betwixt nine and ten I must be at breakfast, and from eleven to one at
Dinner, then I must go to sleep till three, then I must have my Afternoons
Nunching, then at five of the Clock my Supper; and then what work you will all
the day after, but you must not feed me with Apples and Plums, for I must have
my fill five times a day of Beef, Brewis, Bag-Puddings and Pies. Oh how my
Teeth waters to think on them, besides odd bits in a Corner; and if you will deal
thus with me, I Will dwell with you, and do all this that I have promised you.


Rain. That Is eat your Victuals and sleep.


Spar. Why aye and something else too, though it be no great manners to speak
on it.


Rain. But art thou sure my Father is gone for England?


Spar. Am I sure? why I tell ye, he is in England long ago.


Rain. Why then in have i will post to England now.
but I Will not tarry in it, nor else where,
unless I find my Warlike Father there;
Come Sparrow follow me.

Spar. Do you hear young Master, though you be my Master, yet I am your Elder,
and therefore your better, and always while ye live, learn to let your betters
go before ye.

Exeunt.
Enter Guy Solus. Guy. Thus have I almost brought unto an end,
the tedious time of my long Pilgrimage,
for of my seven and twenty years remains
only seven days to be accomplished.
The longest Summers day comes to an end;
The dials point though none perceive it stur,
in length of time creeps round about the same;
even so this long thought time is almost spent,
only seven days to come, and I am free,
and then to all my Friends disclosed i will be.
Enter an Angel.
Angel. Thou blessed Champion of the highest Heaven,
be firm in faith, and here my message out,
for my great Master sends thee word by me,
that seven days being past thou sure shall dye;
tears change not fate, poor pilgrim now farewell
go meet more joys then Angels Tongues can tell.
Exit Angel.
Guy. Welcome O welcome be thy glorious will,
thou great Archfactor of the Firmament.
O had thou let me lain but one day more,
to have revealed my self unto my Wife,
my dear, dear Phillis, who languisheth in pain,
hoping to see her aged Lord again.
Then had I been contented for to dye,
So am I now, thou must be pleased, not I.
Yet Guy bethink thee what thou have to do,
will thou not make thy self known to thy Wise?
but thus unknown to any lose thy Life?
where no man never shall hear of thee at all,
nor give thy body Christian burial;
Yes, I will hye me strair to Phillis Gate,
and there reveal my self and my estate,
and my dear Phillis, whom I loved best,
shall close mine eyes, and bring my soul to rest.
But will thou break that vow of sanctity,
which thou did make to him, that has made thee;
and seek to contradict his holy will,
that has showed such great mercies to thee still:
O God forbid! That vow true kept shall be,
I Will commit all to him that saved me.
and when I dye, instead of Tomb or Grave,
I Will leave my body in my stone cold Cave.
Thither I will, and spend my short sweet days,
in contemplation and in holy pra^ers;
I poor old Guy go hye and have thee thither,
for life and Pilprimage must end together.
Exit.
Enter Sparrow Solus. Sparrow. Ha, ha, the world's well amended with me
by-Lady, why? I am as plumb as a pudding now, for ever fince I came to my young
Master, I have been so pust up with good cheer, that Barley puddings are no
meat, nor Cheese-cakes, nor Custards, no banqueting stuff with me; for as
soon as ever we ca, me into England, my young Master goes to the Court
presently where he and I were Counterpain'd with such implements as passes; I
am tossed up and down like a Shittlecock in every bodies mouth; for who but
Master Sparrow, the greatest Traveller that has been at cost twenty Nobles and
Jerico, and I cannot tell ye where; but for all that I was served a Sluttish
trick to day, for my Master being bidden to great a Gentleman's house to din
ner, took me along with him to wait at the Table; well as they were at Dinner,
the Serving men as they took off the meat set it before the fire to keep it
warm for themselves: I seeing the good cheer standing in battle Ray, and having
not broke my fast of all day, I began to draw near the fire, and look over my
shoulder upon the victuals, at last I spyed a Fat leg of Pork; O how my Teeth
did water to look upon it! I had not stood long, but seeing every body busy, I
whipped the leg of Pork into my Pocket, and stood very mannerly with my hands at
my back, as though I had done nothing; but it was not long, e're the Fat Pork
with the heat of the Fire began to fry out of my Slops, and all the dogs in the
House came Snukering and licking about my Breeches, and not content with that,
but one unmannerly Cur above all the rest, popt his Nose into my Pocket,
snatched out the leg of Pork, and tore ^way all the tone side of my Breeches,
that I was sain to go out edgling like a Crab in faith; put i will never steal Pork
again while I live, i will have one bit of Mutton whatsome're comes on it in faith.

Exit Sparrow.
Enter Guy being in his Cave, to him the Angel. Ange'l. Now Guy of Warwick is
accomplished,
the full effect of all thy Pilgrimage,
then rise and pray, thy sins may be forgiven,
for Angels wait to bear thy soul to Heaven.
Exit Angel.
Guy. Gods will be done, I am resolved to dye,
and have asked mercy at the hands of him
that gave me Life, and now will take the same.
O what a precious soul has sinful man!
that in it self alone does comprehend
the figure, state, and lineaments of Heaven,
yet cannot measure nor define it self;
so when that all great workmen of the world,
had framed man's flesh out of a clod of clay,
and all the Creatures of the Universal world,
of the same mould, to whom his very word
gave present life only in man's breast,
that vil'd ambitious sinful heap of dross;
he breathd his own breath, even the breath of heaven,
that is the glorious soul we now possess,
which is immortal and can never dye.
Yet he that late was framed of Mire and filth,
placed in a glorious state of innocence,
was not content, but strived to be as good
as his great maker, who could with one word,
throw him down headlong to the deepest Hell;
yet he in Mercy, Love, and mere good will,
did grant him pardon for his soul offense;
and seeing him unable to perform
his blessed will, did send his own dear Son
to pay his ransom with his precious blood,
and to redeem that soul which sinful man,
had forfeited to Satan, Death and He^l;
and for a death damned cursed and unpure,
he gave him life eternal to endure;
which life eternal, grant sweet Christ to me,
that in Heavens joys I may thy glory see.

Enter Rainborne and Herod of Arden with Sparrow. Rain. Go good Sir Herod Post
and meet the King,
who now is coming with his warlike Troops,
to meet my Father and to honor him,
in his return from fair Jerusalem.

Herod. Hie you to Warwick Castle to your Mother,
tell her this happy news of his return,
whose absence long has made her weep and mourn.
Come Sparrow you shall go along with me.

Spar. Shall I go meet the King too Master?


Rain. I Sir, you shall attend upon my friend.


Spar. But I pray tell me one thing, is the King a Man or a Woman?


Rain. He is a Man.


Spar. Well, I shall never love him while I live, for a Cousin of his, the King
of Clubs made me loose six pots of Ale, at Mother Bunches in faith.


Rainborne. Well Sir go along with him.

Exit Sparrow and Herod.
Now Rainborne glut thy heart with wished for joy,
O how it glads my soul, that I shall see,
my dear loved Father once before I dye!
The people flock together all on heaps,
Clapping their hands, and crying out for joy,
that Guy of Worwick is come again,
and all report it of a certainty,
that in the dreadful day of Winchester,
he vanquished Colbron in a single fight.
Guy groans. But stay, methinks I hear a doleful sound
of a departing man, and see here lies
an Aged Pilgrim, at the point of death;
what art thou Father? prithee speak to me.
Guy. A poor age-withered Creature gentle Son,
that straight must yield my due unto my grave,
for age and sickness now my life will have.

Rain. Alas good Father thou art sick indeed,
yet if thou can but lean upon my Arm,
I Will lead thee to a place where thou shall be
comforted and attended carefully.

Guy. I thank thee Son, but cannot leave this place;
yet if thy thoughts be equal with thy words,
let me request one kindness at thy hands,
it is the last that ever I shall make.

Rain. Speak freely Father what soever it be,
thy will shall be performed immediately.

Guy. Then unto Warwick Castle hie thee straight,
enquire for Phillis Guy of Warwicks Wife,
deliver to her this same ring of Gold,
tell her an old door Pilgrim at deaths door,
did send it to her as a recompense,
for her good deeds, to him and many more,
since her dear Lord away from her did go.

Ramb. I Will give it her, as I have hope of Heaven,
and bring her with me hither presently;
that with sweet balmes she may comfort thee,
so fare thee well, sweet heaven thy comfort be.
Exit.
Guy. Go on in peace, my peace with heaven is made,
thou go to carry such a doleful gift,
as with the sight will kill my Phillis heart;
for when I took my leave to go from her,
that ring she gave me as a pledge of love;
which if I see quoth she, and thou not by,
Phillis will grieving weep, and weeping dye.
O did she know her VVarwicks death so nigh,
and he so never in a cold Cave to lie;
she soon would come and take her last adue
of him, whose love to her has still been true;
but shall I dye before I see her face?
I feel death ceazing on my heart already;
O my sweet Savior strengthen me this hour,
and in my weakness show thy heavenly power,
I come, I come, to thee sweet Christ I fly,
save my poor soul, let my vile body dye.
He dies.
Enter Phillis and Rainborne. Phillis. O have thee Son, and bring me to the man
that sent this Ring, alas we are undone!
it is thy Father Boy, good Rainborne run.

Rain. You tell me wonders that amaze my soul,
it cannot be my Father that should lie,
in his own Country and his wife so nigh.

Phillis. This is the Ring I gave him, which quoth he,
nothing but death shall ever part from me.

Rain. See where he lies even yielding up the ghost.


Phillis. If it be he, he has a mould Wart underneath his Ear.

She looks under his Ear, and cries out, they both kneel to him.
Rain. View him good Mother, satisfy your mind.


Phillis. It is my Husband, Oh my dearest Lord!


Rain. O my dear Father speak unto thy Son,
but he is dead, and we are quite undone.

Phillis. O gentle Warwick, speak one word to me,
I am thy wife that seven and twenty years
bewailed thy absence even with woeful Tears;
speak, speak, if any spark of life remains,
I Will think one look enough for all thy pains.

Rain. See Mother now he looks upon us both,
and see how fast he holds my Fingers now;
something he wants, behold he makes signs,
that we with our two hands should close his eyes.
Now it is done, see how he faints and dies.

Phillis. O break my heart, that I with him may dye,
that in one grave our bodies both may lie.

Ram. The King is coming, good mother be content;
O heavy is my heart, with too much grief is spent.

Enter Athelstone, Herod with others. Athelst. Sir Herod of Arden this is the
time and place,
that I appointed for to meet Sir Guy,
and do him honor as he has deserved,
but yet we have not heard where he remains.

Herod. See where Sir Rainborne and fair Phillis sits,
and in their Arms an aged Pilgrim lies.

Rain. And famous Warwick in this Pilgrim dies;
see mighty King, and worthy Lords behold
the flesh and blood of him, that when he lived,
was the most famous Knight that e're drew sword,
or clad his loins in complete Arms of steel.

Athelst. O you have broke my heart with this sad news!
is it possible my dearest friend Sir Guy,
should end his life, in such an unconth place.
O cruel fate! O woeful destiny!
arise fair Lady, sorrow helps not;
for if that sighs, or tears, could ought avail,
to bring his Heaven bred soul to Earth again;
my Kingly tears should day and night be spent,
to fetch it thence, but Heaven does that prevent.

Rain. Your Tears, nor mine, dear Mother can prevail,
nothing at all, Heaven has appointed this;
Angels conduct his soul to endless bliss.

Athelst. Rainborne it is true, sweet Phillis weep no more,
lets comfort all our selves with thinking thus,
we must to him, but he will never come to us;
but in the honor of his worthy name,
the shield-bone of the bore of Calladon,
shall be hanged up at Coventries great Gate;
the Ribs of the Dun Cow of Dunsmore Heath,
in Warwick Castle for a monument;
and on his Cave where he has left his life,
a stately Hermitage I will erect,
in honor of Sir Guy of VVarwicks Name,
pass mournfully along, we will follow all
his bloodlesse Corpse, and heavy funeral.
Four takes the body of Guy, the rest follow.
Enter Time with the Epilogue. THus Time concludes this dolent History,
And ends this Scene with GUY of Warwicks Death;
So what is it but Time can bring to pass?
Time lays up Treasure where there is Virtue scant,
And gives the silly Fool when wise Men want:
Both Poor and Rich confess my power Divine,
And every one does say, make much of Time,
Through the whole World, while the world was Time rangeth,
And it is men's manners, and not, Time that changes.
O you whose Souls look for Eternity,
Rest in the peace of perpetuity,
And kindly grant to this request of mine;
For he is but young that writes of this Old Time.
Therefore if this your Eyes or Ears may please,
He means to show you better things then these.

Exit Time. Finis GUY of WARWICK.

