

SALMASIUS His Dissection and Confutation of the Diabolical Rebel MILTON, IN
HIS Impious Doctrines of Falsehood, Maxims of Policies, and destructive
Principles of Hypocrisy, Insolences, Invectives, Injustice, Cruelties, and
Calumnies against his Gracious Sovereign KING CHARLES I.

Made legible for the satisfaction of all Loyal and Obedient Subjects: But by
reason of the rigid Inquisition after Persons and Presses by the late merciless
Tyrant Oliver Cromwell, durst not be sold publicly in this Kingdom, under pain
of Imprisonment, and other intolerable Damages.

Regi qui perfidus, nulli fidus.
London, Printed for J. G. B. Anno 1660. and are to be sold in
Westminster Hall, St. Paul's Churchyard, and the Royal Exchange.

To the Sacred Majesty of KING CHARLES II. King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
Whilst Artaxerxes the mighty Monarch was marching through the Fields, one
Syneta a poor Country man ran for a handful of water, with which he presented
this Great Prince: Even such, is this, my Munus Levidense, for which most
humbly I beg Your Majesty's Pardon and Reception. The famous Author hereof
could not undoubtedly be unknown to Your Majesty beyond Sea; whose learned
VVritings against Sedition and Rebellion (such was the rigid Inquisition after
Persons and Printing-presses) were evermore deemed malignant and unsufferable,
insomuch that to sell one of his Books was a Crime almost unpardonable; or to
read one, a sufficient proof for Sequestration: For the Authors profane
Antagonist ( John Milton, one of your Majesty's grand enemies) I shall leave
him under the rod of correction, where with God has evidenced his particular
judgment by striking him with blindness, and the Writings of the learned Author
to solid and rational understandings to censure, subscribing (with your
Majesty's leave) my self (as I ever have testified by writing) one of the
humblest of

Your Majesty's Votarie: and Vassals, John Garfeild, Bibliopola.

The INTRODUCTION.
WHen the book called Icon-basilice was coming forth the Rebels guilt
Suggested Suspicions to them of danger from the memory of his late Majest: as
formerly they apprehended from his life, striving, that he might not appear to
posterity out of those ignominious Circumstances, which they had contrived in
the murder of him, and thence their rigid Inquisition after persons and
Presses. Rebels rise by flattery, rule by force, and they, that made so many
appeals to the people, forbid them now to know the groans of a dead Martyr.
Upon the coming forth of the book, they found what they feared, that many,
whose passion kept them from a right judgment in the heat of Action, saw their
own errors in that book, and that the person, and cause of his late Majest:
began to be more Generally understood, and being not able to strangle it in the
birth, they sought how to cast itt forth to be destroyed, raysinge rumors,
that it was not the work of his late Majest: thinkeing to make men less
intent on the book, if the author were suspected, and that they might thereby
take of all opinion of piety, and wisdom from his late Majest: which might
be collected from his writings, it being the Custom of Rebels to prevail
more by Calumnies upon the disposition, then the Actions of Princes. They seek
to improve cruelty above nature for having by wicked hands destroyed the Lords
anointed, they would deface the Memory of their own vile Actions against him,
hyring false Prophetts to curse him, and they grudge at his Crown in heaven,
as they usurped that on earth. Its no new thing for persons of most eminent
virtue to fall into the obloquy, and suffer by the rage of the misled people,
and therefore no wonder if innocence find an orator to accuse it, and Treason
an Advocate, to defend it. Rebellion never wanted a Trumpet and though the
contrivance of it be in Caves, and vaults, yet success makes it outface the
light. His Majest: book has passed the censure of the greatest part of the
learned world, being translated into the most spread Languages, and strangers
honor his Memory, and abhor his murderers, but such, as regard not the al
seeing eye of God beholding their wickedness, despise the judgment of the whole
world, and there is a man found out, that will break down the united reason
of mankind, and he tells men, they must take his word above their own, and
all men's reason, this he undertakes, that looks on kings, as Ants, and the
kings book, as wanting all moment of Soliditie, and if, as he chose the Title
of Iconoclastes he had written his book in a Foreign, or learned language,
his unfaith fullnes, and impudence would be as open, and odious as his vanity
is ridiculous.

And though the exceptions against his Majest: book fall away of them selves,
and Traitors Apologies carry with them their own Confutation, yet indignation
at the shameless insolence, and untruth of Iconoclastes provokes a just
vindication of his late Majest: from the lewd slanders of the answearer. A
Dumb child got speech at the apprehension of an Injury to the father, and
its a dead Loyalty, that stands vnmoved at the cursing of a shimei, and those
curses of shimei recorded in Scripture were less virulent, and more excusable,
then this Authors language of his late Majest: through his whole Treatise,
which is a Treason against God, and Man, Religion, Truth, and Justice.

THE Preface Examined.
HIS First words are. To descant on the misfortunes of a person fallen from so
high a digintie, who has also paid his final debt to nature, and his faults,
is neither of it self a thing commendable, nor the intention of this Discourse.

That it is not a thing commendable is a greed by all, and that it is the
intention of this Authors Discourse all men discern by this very expression,
and in every Period he insolently, and scorn fully speaks of the person of
his late Majest: as fallen into that misfortune, and his whole book is a
continued Confutation of this false assertion. base natures delight in the
misfortunes of persons in highest place: It is hateful in any to descant on
the misfortunes, of Princes, but in such, as have relation unto them by
service, or Subjection as this libeller to the late king is the Compendium of
all unworthiness, and unnatural insolence. Could he say his Majest: had paid
his debt to his faults without descant on his misfortunes? But he gives timely
warning, what is to be expected in his book, where like a shameless theife
taken in the fact he denies what he openly acts.

He says it is not to get a name, for no man ever got honor by writing
against a King, being strong in Legions, weak in Arguments.

Some men have desired a name for Brutish arrogance against Princes, and that
may be the Authors ambition, but however it have fared with others, that have
spitt their venom in the faces of Kings, its certain he has lighted upon the
prediction of his own success, for he will gain only in famy by this
undertaking. Never man found honor by raking in the ashes of dead Princes, but
unnatural cruelty seeks to Surfeit upon the grave. This Author does not only
digg up the bones of the dead King, but seeks to bring Destruction on al
Kings, and bury them in the ruins of their Authority. depraved natures
account the greatest wickedness the greatest glory, and more honor to subvert
humane Society, then destroy a Single person.

The first step, where by he mounts to Triumph over his sacred Majest: is for
that he was a King, and that is urged as proof Sufficient, that he was weak
at Arguments, Kings (he says) being accustomed from the Cradle to use their
will only, as their right hand, their Reason always, as their left.

So desperate is the wickedness of these men, that must vilify the Ordinances
of God for their defense. Had they matter of just exception to his late Majest:
they needed not, they would not draw matter of Reproach from his Office, and
had they any fear of God, or reverence to man, they would not thus Lewdly
traduce this great Institution of God for the governing of mankind the Kingly
Office. God him self says the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, and he
turns it as Rivers of water. That a wise Sentence is in the heart of the
King, and yet this man pretends to expect belief in his Calumnies upon the
late King, when he affirms the kingly Office to be a cause of weakness of
judgment, and insufficiency, turning all the promises of God in Scripture for
assistance of Kings with his spirit to mere Compliment, and wretchedly
belying the many Monarchs of the world, that have been as far above others in
Wisdom, as they have been in power.

We have lived to see that sore evil, which the Scripture by the pen of a
King, and the wisest of men complained of, to see Princes on foot, and
Servants on horseback, when the Licentious insolence of the meanest tramples
upon the Soveraigntie of the highest, and the basest of the people revile their
King.

He says for their sakes, that have not more Seriously considered Kings, then
in the gaudy name of Majesty, and admired them, and their doings, as if they
breathed not the same breath with other men he will (for it seems, he says, a
Challenge both of him, and his party) take up the gantlet (though a Kings) in
the behalf of liberty, and the common wealth.

Loyalty has no friends, that so admire Princes, as if they breathed not
common breath of nature, they well know who has said of Kings, I have said you
are Gods and the guilt of their sin, that disobey, or revile the^, yet non are
ignorant, that their breath is in their nosthrils, and that they shall dye, as
others. They, that are best instructed, and most considerate give most
reverence to Kings. They understand, that Princes have greater promises of
wisdom from God, and greater means to attain it then others, and that by
obeying them humane society is maintained, though they breath the same breath
with them. When Saul was made King of Israel, there were wicked men, that said,
how shall this man save us, contemning his Authority, because he was taken
from among them selves, and in our days there is a Confluence of all the
Rebellious inclinations, that troubled the world, pride of base people, and
disdain of all Authority. Because Kings are men, must they not therefore
Rule? Must Gods vicegerents be despised, because they are men? And because we
know Kings to be men, must we believe, that seditious slanderers are more then
men, which are carried, as natural brute Beasts? The Archangell disputing with
the Devil durst not bring against him a railing accusation, and such, as take
up Railing accusations against Princes partake of the wickedness of the evil,
and hate the holiness of the blessed Angel. When the woman told David, he was
as an Angel of God, did she think he breathed not the same breath with
others? This Author by pretending to rectify an error, that never was of
admiring Kings, as if they breathed not the common breath of men would persuade
men to scorn, and despise kings, and Rebel against the king of kings God
himself, who will be called king, and to style that Title a gaudy name
expresses rather a scoffing Atheist, then a professed Christian. Ambitious
Rebels, that sow the seeds of disaffection to their king among the people,
begin with a plausible truth, that kings are men, that they may err, that
they may be wicked, thence they come to application of particular Actions of
their king, represented as deceitefully, as falsehood can frame to the unwary
hearers, and because it may be so, therefore in their logic it must be so,
and experience it self has made apparent, how few, or none admire Kings, as
if they breathed not the common breath of men, and how many forgett their duty
to them, that in Scripture are called Gods. the prevalence of corrupt nature is
so far above reason, that men are sooner infatuated by the plausible
discourses of ambitious aspirers to believe absurdities making way for
Rebellion, then mistaken of the nature of Kings by their sacred Title, or
dignity, for we have seen men seduced to believe they might make war
against the King, so as they said it was aganist his evil Councillors, and
for King, and Parliament, that because the two houses sat by the Kings
authority, therefore him self had none. That they made war in their own
defense against the King, and yet said they fought for King, and Parliament, and
contrary to the knowledge of the whole world traduced his Majest: Government,
which was the time, if ever, when his three Kingdoms attained the height of
honor, strength, and wealth above their neighbors. As the Arts of those
seedes-men of satan were (...) by their Master to the ruin of mankind: so
how far they have effected it in his Majest: three kingdoms by this logic
of the Devil all men are witnesses. All boundaries of right, and wrong broken
down, and any wickedness acted by authority, that serves to secure the
Tyranicall power, and will of the Rebel Masters. What floods of Christian
blood, what starving, and pininge to death of poor Captives have our days
been wittnes of in England? what jmpudent pretenses of justice for public
Murders, scenes of Judicature, and theaters of slaughter? honor, and virtue
prostituted to the Common Executioner, so as the miseries of former times were
but an Epitome of those numerous evils, that have been brought upon his
Majest: Dominions in these sew years, and the facts would seem incredible in
after ages, did not such, as this Author undauntedly boast of the insolences
they have committed, no history yiedling on example of the like, whether we
reguard the impudence, cruelty, insolence, and hypocrisy of the contrivers,
deceit imposture and profannes of preachers, or credulity, and precipitation,
of the vulgar.

The author might have done well to show, why his Majest: book seemed a
Challenge, it provokes no answer, nor handles any thing by way of
controversy but his very devotions, and instructions to his son seem a
Challenge, Evidence of worth in the sufferer torments the persecutour, and they
cannot rest, while the virtues live, though the bodies are laid in the dust by
their wicked hands.

But he will take up the gantlet (that no man threw down) though a Kings. He
lately said Kings were puny Antagomists, and no honor to begotten by writing
against them and now he will take up the gantlet, though a Kings, it seems he
reckons it a condescension to stoop to take up a Kings gantlet, those todes,
that thus swell will break with their own venom.

This Authors pen shows what liberty he loves, to endure, no justice toward
the living, or Charity to the dead, and to break those fetters of modesty,
and truth, wherein a Christians liberty consists. Those pests of Government
always talk of liberty, but its only a license to exercise their own
inperious Tyrany over the people, and when fire breaks out of the bramble to
consume the Cedars, nothing can be expected, but insolence, and cruelty we
have seen the liberty under the Rebels in England, which is to rail, and
Rebel against the King, and destroy such, as are loyal.

He says its the drift of a factious, and defeated party to make the same
advantage of his book, as before of his name, and authority and intend not so
much the defense of his former Actions, as promoting future designs.

Those, whom he calls a defeated party in so great contempt are never the
nearer a faction for the success, that confessed Rebels have gained over
them. Though Armies have been defeated, a good cause can never, and though he
would have his Traiterous faction believe them, that followed the king a
defeated party yet it seems by his jealosie him self does not. Tyrants
cannot sleep, while lawful heirs survive, and the guilt of their
consciences, and usurped power make their Enemies as terrible after they have
lost Armies, as before. When Rebels prevail they declaime against Treason,
and in contempt of God, and their consciences reproach such with their Crimes,
that most oppose them in their first Actions, they made use of the Kings name,
and authority, their declarations cannot be retracted, wherein they professed to
be for King and Parliament, that they fought not against the king, but his evil
council. The Crime offighting against the king, was a Treason so known, that
shame, as well, as fear would have lessened their party, had they not made
use of the kings name, and pretended his authority, and unless they think,
that their assertions of apparent untruths will have the same power over the
reasons of men, as their Arms have gotten (...) their persons they would not
patch up discourses (...) such incongruities, objecting, that the kings party
(...) his name, and authority, which vndoudtedly they (...) and which those
men profess to destroy, and which had been vseles to any, had it not been the
acknowledged power of the kingdom, and a confessed Crime to oppose it, and
which those Traitors would never have pretended, had not the evidence of its
right been so apparent, nor have destroyed after so much use of it, had they
not exceeded all former Traitors, as far, as he did his Predecessors, of
whom the spirit of God says, there was none like him, that sold himself to
work wickedness. Its the drift of the Rebel party to confirm, and continue
their power by the same Arts they have gained it, and deny justice to the
memory of his Majest: as before obedience to his Government. Those whose power
has been gotten by the peoples credulity would willingly deprive them of
reason, whereby they might see their error, which is the cause, that the
Rebels having misled many into the present mischeyfe by Calumnies of
insufficiency in his Majest: and disaffection to the established Religion,
account anyproofe published to the contrary the plot of a faction against their
Rebel Commonwealth, and although their often accesses to him, and debates
with him during his restraint, and the observation of his devotion gave such
proof of both, as diverse of their followers were vndeceived both in him, and
the cause they had prosecuted, yet this they would have an effect of faction,
and any relation of his Maj: afflictions a design. His Maj: actions need no
defense, the Rebels impious actions against him are incapable of any, and this
Author has some reason to conjecture, that all mention of the sufferings of
his late Maj: tends to the ruin of the Rebel power. True narrations of the
horrid Actions of Traitors, though they recount the greatenes, and glory of
their triumphs, sting them with an expectation of vengeance, and destruction of
their power. There are a great number, that since they have seen that book
think it had been a great loss to the world, if it had perished, and yet they
are far from design by it, and if it were published with any design, it was
an innocent one to publish what a murdered King, had left written of himself
for the reason of his Actions, and clearing of mistakes.

The design is now the third time to corrupt the people to the dishonor of
the present Government, and retarde a general peace so needeful to this
afflicted nation.

They cannot say any were corrupted, that followed their King, unless the laws,
their legal oaths, and Scripture it self corrupted them, for these were the
guides they followed, and the Rebels may rest assured, that if there were not
these bonds upon the loyal English, humane Treatises, though never so
excellent would little move them to the loss of life, and fortunes.

For the dishonor of that, which he calls the present Government themselves
have written enough, though the King, and his party were silent. Their power
was gotten by often repeated propositions, and protestations, of affection, and
loyalty to his late Majest: which they never meant to perform, many false
pretenses to the people to defend the King, and established laws, and
Religion, breach of oaths, murder of the King, and of these nothing can be
denied by themselves, and there is nothing can be said of any to dishonor
beyound swearing, and fore swearing, Treason, and Murder. And can they think
their peace is retarded by the Kings, party, when themselves have so often
sworn by the name af God in hypocrisy to deceive, made Religion the Mask of
sacrilege, and murder, and pretend pity to the afflicted nation, while they
afflict it and continue the same wickedness, where by they brought the misery
upon it? They may be sure, though they destroy the King, and his party, God
will raise them Enemies they think not of, and prepare destroyers they fear
not.

Its a Good deed (he sajes) to the living by remembering men of the truth of
what they know to he misaffirmed to keep them from entering into war.

But it is wickedness to oppose truth, and offer that to be believed by men
which they know to be false. If this Author would remember men only of truth,
he would find no adversary, and if his party would act according ly, there
would be no need of a new war, for then they would restore King, and laws,
but this Author by falsifying of Actions, at corrupting of principles
endeavors to draw men into a state of Rebellion against God, and their King,
and make the war endless, and the people helpeles, and his pretended Charity
is more odious, then the Hipocrites Alms, this respecting only self glory,
that of this Author a snare to destroy others.

As to moment of soliditie (he says) in the book it self stuffed with naught
else, but the Common grounds of Tyranny, and Popery, suguered a little over, or
any need of answearing in respect of stayed, and well principled men, I take
it on me, as a work assigned rather then by me chosen, or affected.

He would have it thought there was no moment of soliditie, because he has
none in this Iconoclastes stuffed full of the common grounds of Rebellion, and
confusion, which are only of Moment to the support of usurpation, the measure
of his well principeld men to whom a railing libell is more convincing, then a
Logical Argument. That the book is stuffed with naught else, but grounds of
Tyrany, and Popery, when the most part of his exceptions comprehended not those
heads is an Hiperbole unbefitting any, but such, as had sacrificed shame, and
conscience to a wicked cause.

If the publishing of his Majest: book as (he sajes) containing nothing but
grounds of Tyrany, and Popery were a design of his party, surely it must
concur with the Authors ends, for the chief Calumnies, whereby the Rebels
sought to draw the peoples affections from his Majest: were, that he would
introduce Tyrany, and Popery and the publishing of such a book in his Majest:
name was most effectual to make good, what was objected. And the man, that
thinks the Kings party so void of sense, may think them well principeld
men, that swallow such crudities, as he has provided for them, and they may be
excused, if they be not moved with his Majest: book, for it cannot be expected
they should understand, and receive reason, and for those doubtless the Author
writ his book, for it could not be hoped, that they, who had any dram of
reason, and had not resolved to continue in Rebellious undertakings against all
the light of Religion, and reason would be fit readers of such incoherent
Barbarismes. Grounds of Tyrany, and Popery are not so subtle to escape all the
world without the help of this authors finger to point at it, and had the
book contained any such matter, he would have used less railing, and more
reason, heat, and foul language proceed from impotencie of defense, and
thence is the great noise of words, and insignificant matter of Iconoclastes.
Common angers disorder reason, but unnatural furious distempers destroy it.
The present Traitors at least as many of them, as sat in the beginning of
his late Majest: Parliament, where this Rebellion was hatched protested before
God to defend with their lives, and fortunes the doctrine established in the
Church of England, and that must conteyne the grounds of Popery, or the author
will find none in that book, but in the sense of Traitors: Church is Popery,
and King, is Tyrany. If they, that assigned this work on the Author differed
not in judgment from him touching moment of soliditie in his Majest: book,
they showed a very slight esteem of a Champion so confident of his parts, but
they knew his malice, not his soliditie, And they knew it was in vain for them
to seek to answer his Majest: book with soliditie, falsities, and
detractions being all their hopes, and they knew not a man else, whose credit
they could more easily prostitute, nor any man more greedy of so base ane
employment.

He sajes if the late King, had thought sufficient those answeares, and
defenses made for him in his life time, they who on the other side accused his
ilGovernment, judging enough had been replied, the heat of this controversy
was in likelihood drawing to an end, and the farther mention of his deeds, not
so much unfortunate, as faulty had in tenderness of his late sufferings been
willingly forborne, and perhaps for the present age have slept, while his
adversaries calmed with succes had been less vnfavourable to his Memory:

The late King, thought those answeares, and defenses made for him in his life
time a bundantly sufficient, and so did all indifferent men, and it was not any
thought of defect in these, that moved him to write on particular occurrents of
most moment in the time of his troubles, and as his memory will not stand,
orfall at the Rebels courtesy, so their aspersions will rather increase,
then diminish it. This Author thinckes, that men are daunted with his
Contumelies, and that if the King, had known what words he would have written
against his book, he would not have adventured upon such pikes, but as the
Kingly Prophet David sang to his harp, and wrote his Divine meditations, while
his Enemies sent forth their sharp Arrows, bitter words against him, and
that of so much venom, as he sajes, the poison of Aspes was under their lips:
so his late Majest: composed those his meditations, while his Enemies compassed
him on every side, and ceased not to persecute him with their Tongues set on
fire of Hell, and though his person suffered by them, his cause, and innocence
was a bove their reach.

His Majest: expected the utmost of their malice after death upon his name, as
he had felt it in his life, and it was so far from his desire, that mention of
his deeds should be forborne, especially those his Enemies excepted to, that
his endeavors were cheifely bent to make them manifest to the world with all
the objections, and invectives, that had been made against them, and time has
tought this Author, and others of his crew, that many have been convinced of
the wickedness of their Rebellion, by the declarations, and replies they made
against his late Majest: Truth fears nothing, but to be hidden, and his late
Majest: needed noe other Advocate, then the clear discovery of his deeds,
that he was unfortunate was the great wrath of God upon the nation, where so
many in the midst of so great blessings of peace, and plenty, as they
enjoyed under his Reign, continued murmuring, and unthankful, and it is not
the least sign of the heavines of his displeasure, that makes the people
executioners of it, one upon another, and that they should act such execrable
wickedness by words, and Actions against that King, who was freest from
personal vices, and public pressures of all his Predecessors, that had
Reigned so long, as he had done. The present age must needs have a deep sense
of his loss, and posterity, as well, as strangers will wonder, when they read
his story, and find such groundles slanders, and barbarous cruelties acted
against so eminent virtue, and the confidence in obtruding such gross
absurdities, for reasons, as are used by this Author and others, will be the
infamy of the present age, when such evident folly, and wickedness find credit.
Can any man be so stupid to think, that such wretches, as boast of their
destroying the innocent, will cease to defame their memory? and that such, as
had no mercy on their lives, will have a tenderness of their sufferings? That
they, which suborned detractours, and raised lewd reports to give color to
their cruelty, would have a tenderness to him they had tormented, and express
no tenderness for their own villainies? It had been contrary to his Majest:
wisdom to have expected tenderness to himself, from such Monsters, and
contrary to the nature of such savage beasts, to have their blood thirstines
slakt, or their cruelty calmed with any successes.

But since himself has left this book, as the best Advocate, and interpreter
of his Actions, and his friends by publishing etc. and almost adoring it, seem
to place therein the strength of their cause, it would argue doubtfullnes, and
deficiencie of the other party, not to meet his reason in any field, the
force of whose Arms they have so often met victoriously.

This libell more evidently proves the deficiencie of the Rebel party, then
the omission of an answer could have argued, and all men see, they are not
doubtful, but convinced by their own reason of the lewdenes of their Actions.
It might be exepcted from the libellers mention of the esteem his Majest:
book has amongst his friends, that his answer should be of equal account
with his Masters, and thereby the world may be informed how their cause has
been maintained. They pretend to meet reason in any field, but are resolved to
contradict it, and the Author will reproach, and despise truth, and reason, as
his Masters have fought against it, and since their impiety cannot be denied,
it must be avowed. They glory in their victories in the field, as thieves in
their booties, and boast, that they can do mischeife, their victories being no
other, then the poisons and knives of Assassins, that have destroyed Princes,
and success is the evidence of their faith, and reason.

He proceeds to say, that he who at the Bar stood excepting against the
form, and manner of his Judicature, and complained, that he was not heard,
neither he, nor his friends shall have that cause now to find fault being
met, and debated with in this Monumentall Court of his own erectinge, and not
only heard, but answered.

But still he is unwillingly heard, and they, which took his blood without
hearing, are loath to hear the cry of it and they endeavored the same course
with his book, they had taken with him, to condemn it unheard, and as this
work was not chosen, nor affected by Iconoclastes, so was not the occasion
acceptable to his Masters.

It has been reported of some high way robbers, that they use a form of
Judicature upon the Traveller, when they take him, and condemn him solemnly
to lose his purse, and Iconoclastes holds it strange, he should stand excepting
at the form, and manner of their Judicature. It was the prodigy of insolence,
that Rebels presumed to bring their King to the Bar, and the Prodigy of
impudence in this libeller, that imagines an expectation of the Kings
submission to a Tribunal of Traitors. But with Traitors, where strength can
act, right, and Justice, are ridiculous considerations, otherwise those
Monsters, that made themselves Judges without the least color of authority
(the lower house being not able to punish a wandering Rogue, which the law
allows a Conestable) would not so presumptuously sit in Judgment upon a King,
and not only their own but of another Kingdom; and profess wonder, that any
should think, that they cannot bring any King, to the block, that they get
into their hands. Who may not defend the ^s of intemperance to satisfy lust,
as well, as those of cruelty to satisfic ambition, and why might not Ric: 3:
defame his mother, and Kill his nephews to secure his Tyrany, as well, as these
men reproach, and Kill their King? do outward solemnities legitimate Murders,
and is a professed villainy innocent, and a secret only Cryminall?

Though those Murderers, before whom he stood at the Bar excepting, had
resolved, that neither fear of God, nor reverence to their lawful king, nor
importunity, that moves such, as the other respects do not, should prevail
with them, yet he promises afaire debate, though he justifies them, and
performs it with the same falsehood, offering clamorous reproaches and shamles
untruths, instead of answeares, erecting a Monument for him self, wherein the
defense of impiety, and scorn of truth have engraven his infamy in
everlasting Characters.

Which he sajes to do effectually, if it be necessary that to his book,
nothing the more respect be had for being his, they of his own party, can
have no just reason to exclaim.

Truly his own party had reason to expect, that from resolved Traitors, his
book would have less respect for being his, for having suffered greater
cruelty in his person for being a King, could they think his book would have
more respect for being his? The Rebels themselves have published it a rule,
that a man borne in Scotland, while the Kingdoms stood divided, was not
subject to their Judicature, and therefore they urged against Duke Hamilton,
that he was naturalized, and yet they subjected the King to their will, whom
they could not pretend to have had that Ceremony, and by the law of these
miscreants, the King must be more subject to them then any of his subjects of
that nation, and the Author might have spared the pains to seek a reason for
his impudent language, for his Majest: partic know, it was for the interest of
his Traiterous cause, and a necessary effect of a Rebellious disposition. The
book of any Author ought to find respect according to its own merit, and its
folly, or injury to slight, or reproach it for the Authors sake, and the like
of a person for his office sake, but they, that reproach an office instituted
by God, or the person, that bears that office for the office sake, will hate a
book for the good, that it conteynes, and the Kings party will never exclaim
for the Authors detraction of the book, which they expected from him, but they
have just reason to detest his insolent language, and impious assertions.

It were too unreasonable, that he because dead should have liberty to speak
all evil of the Parliament, and they, because living, or any for them have
less Freedom.

Its too unreasonable to belly the dead, and to affirm his Majest: to speak
all evil of the Parliament, when he well knows, that his Majest: speaks
nothing of them, but what this breaker confesses to be true, and if his Majest:
had spoken evil of a faction in Parliament, its too unreasonable for him to
censure it, who not only speaks evil of a faction in Parliament, but is the
Advocate of those, that not only speak evil of them, but have destroyed them.
What if his Majest: had spoken evil of the Lords house, have this Authors
Masters done less, that have taken it away? What if he had spoken evil of a
part of the lower house, have they done less, that have imprisoned, and
expelled the Members? And if the King reprehend, or reprove his subjects in the
capacity of Parliament, or otherwise, it is not only unreasonable, but
damnable for them to censure, and reproach him, and most detestable for every
licentious Pamphletter to traduce, and vilify him. Rebels use not only feirce
arrogancy, but impudent petulancy, and it makes for their design, that the
scum of the people cast of all reverence, and mention of superiors.

Have not the present Traitors reproacht, and condemned the Parliament for
their professions of loyalty, and duty to the King? Have they not made that
the highest Crime, which the Parliament judged their necessary duty to serve
their King? And may not the King complain of their dealing with him, as well,
as this Author with his new Masters? can Iconoclastes reprove the Parliaments
vote, that it was Treason for the Army to overaw the Parliament, which he does
in being Advocate for the Army against them, And is it a Crime in his Majest:
to represent their evil Actions against him? The Parliament voted a Treaty
with the King, and voted his concessions to be a sufficient ground for peace,
the libeller taxes that vote for folly, and falsehood. The Army remove that
Parliament, and call some Creatures of their own the Parliament, and they
together take the person of the King, and murder him notwithstanding this
Treaty, and vote of Parliament. If it were the Parliament, that voted the
Treaty, and the concessions to be a sufficient ground for peace, they must be
Traitors by the Parliaments Judgment, that dissolved them, and placed the name
of Parliament upon others, and this Author must speak more evil of them, then
his Majest: does, or more of his Masters, and might with far more reason take
on him the defense of the Tumults, as afterward he does, then the Parliament,
for if the Parliament, may be modelled by Tumults, and are no longer a
Parliament, then the leaders of the rabble, judge well of their Actions, then
the King, in speaking any thing against the Parliament, does no more, then this
Author confesses the Tumults may do, and himself too. He might have claimed
a privilege to speak for the dead, as well, as write against the King, being
dead, for his Masters murdered it, with the King, and its like he has leave
from his new Masters to name it yet, for it will not stand well hereafter with
their Government to name a Parliament, which may continue the memory of King,
and Lords, and the new Representatives will, when the Masters are ready for it,
make the name of Parliament, like an old Almanacke, and the Author will be
forbidden to name it, as reason now forbidds the defense of their Actions
against his Majest:

As he to acquitt himself has not spared his adversaries, so to him in his
book no more Court^pp will be used, then he uses, but what is properly his own
guilt, not imputed any more to his evil Councillors (a Ceremony used longer
by the Parliament, then he desired) shall be laid here without Circumlocutions
at his own door.

Courtship, nor Civilitie could be expected from any, that took on them the
defense of such a cause, as this Author has done, and his Majest: moderation
in speaking of his adversaries, stigmatizeth this Author for his vnprovoked
insolence, and malicious falsehood, and the cause he maintaynes, that could not
stand, but by ^ayling, and slander.

In laying the ground work of this horrid Rebellion, the Master work men saw,
that people are to be debaucht by degrees, and they cannot suddenly believe
absurdities, till their passions by Custom be made Master of their reason, and
confirmed in the pursuit of what was propounded to them, under pretense of
their good. The people then held it a sin to offer violence to the person of
their King, They thought they could not cut of the lap ofhis garment. They
held it odious to reproach his person, and the Parliament had so often
declared, that kings, can do no wrong, and that the law for bidds the speaking
of it, that though the wickedness of some were enough confirmed to wish his
destruction, they durst not say it, but pretend desire of Justice against other
persons, and they resolved, as Assassines to stabb him, while they kneeled to
him, and to betray him professing duty, and loyalty, vndermininge his
authority, with aspersions on his evil Councillors, as they called them. And
as then they laid faults upon his Councillors, that never acted, so now this
slanderer will make the King guilty of Actions, that were never done by him
and under pretense of not sparing him in laying the guilt on him, that was
properly his, seeks to lay all men's faults on him, and is as disloyal to
truth, as Loyalty.

To acquit himself his Majest: needed to be very careful, for his adversaries
by their declarations have done it, and they have acquitted his Councillors of
these very Crimes they objected to them, for this Author will have the faults
they were charged with to be the Kings, and it is in his Language a Ceremony
to accuse men falsely, and by forged Calumnies to seduce the people to the
spending of their blood, and hazard of their souls. This Author is the first,
that sought to be believed in an Apology for falsehood, and to defend the
Parliament, and yet contradict it, says these deceites, and lies were in
Ceremony. Its certain the King endeavored to vndeceive the people, that they
might have known, that the malice of these Traitors was to himself, whatever
they pretended against his evil Councillors, and this Author makes traynes of
Treason, framed of known untruths to be only Ceremonies, and ranks the fifth,
and ninth Commandment in the Ceremonial law, and as many of the rest, as the
breach may be made serviceable to their deceites. If the reproof of evil
speaking against Kings in Scripture be a Ceremony, if duty, and loyalty be a
Ceremony, if veracitie be a Ceremony, what is moral in this Authors
judgment? Those, whom he calls the Parliament used those impostures, until
they had drawn the people to establish their own slavery, and the Empire of
those miscreants over them, and now they laugh at these miserable people, that
thus believed them, as they do at the finesse of their frauds, and despise
the power of God, as they do his Precepts. It is sufficiently evident to the
world, what promises, and professions those the Author calls the Parliament
vented to make his late Majest: a glorious King, and besides their legal
oaths, they devised new protestations of loyalty, and this the Author calls a
Ceremony to make the world believe they were loyal to their King, for the
Actions they intended needed strong Charms to delude the people, and make them
believe those men loyal to the King, that raised a war against him. The
Parliament in one of their declarations told the King, that if they should say,
that the evil Acts they complained of were done by his Maj: they should speak
contrary to the law, and the Testimony of their own hearts. In another, that
they were ready to lay down their lives, and fortunes, and spend the last
dropp of their blood to maintain his Crown, and Royal person in greatenes,
and glory, and cast themselves down at his Royal feet. What would he have
the world think of this so stoutly acted vehemence only a Ceremony? Certainly
one of the most pernicious, that ever was practiced, and an impudent defense
suites well with a discovered falsehood. They profess themselves Enemies to
stage plays, but it is, that they might engrosse the trade to themselves, for
their Pulpits, as well, as Pamphlets sound principally this representation of
passion, and stage devotion, but it is a sollesisme in so great an actor, as
this Author, that speaks alowde, that all is but a Ceremony, for he thereby
gives the world to understand, that he intends the same falsehood in his
slanders, then the faction in Parliament used in their professions of duty,
and loyalty.

This course of his in laying the faults on the King he says is, that they,
who from the beginning, or but now of late by what unhappiness he knows not are
so much infatuated not with his person only but with his palpable faults, and
dote upon his deformities, may have none to blame, but their own folly, if
they live, and die in such a strok'n blindness, as next to that of Sodom has
not happened to any sort of men more gross, or more misleadinge.

We have found many by hellish impulsion hating his Majest: person, and
authority, and seem not to think, that God has given them up to a reprobate
sense, and strong delusion, and would be thought to believe all those, that
love, or honor their King infatuated, and thence it is, that the Author knows
not by what unhappiness it is, that men are so infatuated, for he would have it
believed a great happiness to hate, and detest his King, to reproach not only
his person, but his office Persecutors endeavor to make them unhappy, on whom
they exercise their cruelties, and they wonder at those, that run not with them
to the same degree of wickedness, and this Author makes it an unknown
unhappiness, that men runnot from their protested, and sworn Allegiance, and
loyalty into so disperate a Rebellion, as he maintains, he may well say he
knows not by what unhappiness it comes, but it is an unhappiness of greater
wonder, that so many should renounce the very names of loyalty, and
obedience, make Rebellion the most renowned virtue, and this after so many
vows, and oaths to the contrary, that men, who some few years since professed
the greatest hatred of a Traitor to their King, should now think no man so
praise worthy, nor any blindness so near to that miraculous stroke of the men
of Sodom, as that of the opinion of loyalty.

If his Majest: faults had been, as palpable, as this Authors falsehood, it
could not diminish his subjects duty, nor excuse the Rebels impiety, nor the
taunting scurrilitie of this Author, but his virtue being so eminent, calls
for vengeance on the heads of those, that call good evil, and evil good, this
prodigious blindness is a beginning of his punishment, that finding noe man
abroad, or at home of learning, Religion, or sobriety, that detest not the
courses, which he seeks to defend, and this so known to him, yet he objects
blindness to them all, and as those negroes, that paint the Devil white will
have none free from blindness, but such, as Rebel against him, that sent that
blindness upon the men of Sodom, while they inhumanely pursued their wikednes,
and while these men with fury break down the fences of humane society, and
seek to turn men into beasts, the spirit, that rules in the children of
disobedience has blinded their eyes, and taken possession of their souls
confirming their sin not only without remorse, but with augmented impudence,
their writings being composed of language to outface truth, and jeere at piety.

If this Author had intended a right information of men, as he pretends, he
would not have played the painter in every period, as he has done in making
Chimeraes, and goblins to affright men. Can he hope, that any reading his
book, will conceive him rightly relating Actions, or cases that tells men they
are blind, infatuated with the palpable faults of their Murdered King, and
doting upon his deformities? Do not men see he bends his strength to misleade
those, that see, and reteyne those in blindness, that were like to recover.

Some men have by Policy accomplished after death that revenge upon their
Enemies, which in life they were not able, and instances, that the will, and
legacies of Caesar, being read, wrought more in the vulgar to the avenging of
his death, then all the art he could use to win their favor in his life.

Its true, that the virtue, and worth of many injured persons, has appeared
more evidently after their death, and has caused grief, and repentance in
their Enemies moving revenge in those, that were seduced to destroy them, and
the cruelties exercised on his late Majest: and his eminent virtues in his
sufferings have manifested unto many, how unhappily they were mislead to the
destruction of a King, of so great goodness, and to place their confidence in
such false, and bloody hipocrites. But he sajes those Apologies, and
meditations are over late. Its true they cannot prevent the evil past, and the
Author holds their strength invincible, though he be not confident of men's
inclinations without the efficacy of his pen. But would those Apologies, and
meditations have been more powerful, if sooner known? Truth will wrest some
thing from him unawares, for he must confess, if men, that were drawn into
this Rebellion against his late Majest: by slanders, had understood what now
they do by this book, they had stayed long before, and it will be a great
unhappiness to the poor people of his Majest: Dominions, if they be so over
late vndeceived, that they be not able to revenge his blood, nor redeemce
themselves from the yoke of those Traitors, under whom they serve.

This intent he sajes appears by the conceited portraiture before his book
drawn out to the full measure of a masking seen, and set there to catch
fools, and sily gazers.

And are Portraitures of the condition of persons, and their sufferings only to
catch fools, and silly gazers, to what end then is the portraict of the house
of Commons with the speaker in his Eminence, and the rest set in a serious
posture so frequently published? And are the portraitures in MR. ffoxes book
of the Acts, and monuments of Martirs only to catch fools, and silly gazers?
The Authors catching at flies shows the impotencie of his malice, and disorder
in his understanding.

Next this intent appears by the latin words. Vota dabunt, quae bella
negarunt. Intimating that what he could not compass by war, he should
atcheive by his meditations, for in words, which admit of various sense, the
liberty is ours he sa^es to choose that, may best mind us of what our restles
Enemies endeavor.

In words of various sense that interpretation is to be chosen, which is most
probable to be the Authors meaning, an interpretation for politic ends is
vninge^uous, and injurious, and when it is against the apparent signification
odious, and the Author shows with what candor he deals, that makes
constructions to serve his turn, and least the truths contained in his Majest:
book should prevail with any, he will make such a sense, as may prevent the
right understanding of them. His Majest: prayers, and desires through his whole
book, whereto the latin words are referred were directed to God for blessings
upon his Kingdoms, and restoring right, and Justice to them, and all men may
hope they will have a gracious acceptance, and return from the Almighty,
though the wars procured it not, but this Author will referr these words to
the publishing of the book, because it best minds them to prevent what their
Enemies end^avour, and because it may usher in a conceit, which he makes much
of.

For he says here may be well observed the loose, and negligent curiosity of
those, who took upon them to adorn the setting forth of this book, for
though the picture in the front would Martyr him, and saint him to befoole the
people, the lattine Motto, which they understand not leaves him as it were a
politic contriver.

The lattine being taken in the right sense, what room had there been for this
curious observation? And if they, which set forth his Majest: book had been
curiously, or stupidly negligent, the Author had detracted nothing from his
Majest: It is not the picture but the cruelty exercised upon him, that made
him a Martyr, and these miscreants are enraged to see their own Actions in
picture, which they shamed not to commit in the face of the world. The picture
is far short of the measure of his Majest: piety, and sufferings, and we may
expect hard measure upon the book, when a picture in the front cannot escape
the Image breaker. This Author its likely wrote from them, that understood not
lattine, that seeks to make the front, and lattine in the end so different,
when the front has a picture in the posture of prayer, and the lattine in the
end is applied to the efficacy of prayer. If he had expected to work on such,
as understood lattine, he would not have obtruded such an insignificant
observation of misconstrued lattine. Does the commendatious of a man's devotions
show him a politic contriver?

They that published his Majest: book are herein free from that negligent
curiosity, the Author would have seen by contriving a sense, which himself
will not affirm to be theirs, which used the words, but his own by a liberty
of choice, where are different senses to be made, but the Author shows
himfelfe, an vnpolitique contriver of detraction, when he inserts the detection
of it in the relation.

Quaint Emblems, and devices begged from the old Pageantry of foam twelf nights
entertainment at white hall will do but ill to make a saint, or Martyr.

The Traitors are loath to see the Emblems of their own inhumane cruelty,
and how instead of harmeles Pageantry they erected the Theater, of their
Barbarous villainy at white hall. The wickedness of those, that Martired his
Majest: may be shadowed by Emblems, but neither art, nor wit can fully express
it. Bloody Massacres are the Pageantry of Tyrants, and the scritches of Martirs
their Music.

If the people resolve to take him sainted at the rate of such a Cannonizing, I
shall he says suspect their Calender more, then the Gregorian.

He is very Kind, that will suspect their Calender no more then the Gregorian,
for that Calender which has nothing peculiar, or notable, but the new account
of the year is received by a great part of the world for the truest, and if
the Author have no greater aversion from the Calender he supposes, he is likely
very near the belief of it, but it seems he had a mind to make a conceit
from the word Calender and therefore produces the Gregorian Calender of
computation, instead of the Calender of saints. The Authors Pageantry playing
with a picture is not the way to vncannoinze a saint. The peoples opinion of
his Majest: sanctity is not wrought by a picture, and if they have any esteem
of such representations of his sufferings their just passion condemns this
Authors malicious detractions.

The Memorial of the just shall be blessed in despite of the malice, and scorn
of men. God looks on their sufferings, puts all their tears into his bottle,
and their death is right dear in his sight. And if we look upon the eminency
of the Sufferer, the pride, and cruelty of the persecutors, the true causes on
the part of the sufferer, or the pretended causes of suffering on the part of
the persecutors, we shall find few Parallells in Calenders among saints to
that of his late Majest: and its memorable in his story, that his persecutors
their expressions so much resemble the cursed Jews, that crucified our blessed
savior. This man would make his Majest: after death a politic contriver, the
Jews our blessed savior adeceiver. This Author pretends a plot to work by
this book published after his Majest: death that revenge, which he could not
obtain in his life, the cursed Jews pretended the belief of our saviors
resurrection of greater danger, then his Miracles in his life time. Such as
preserve the Memory of the sufferings of holy men in Calenders have Zeal for
their warrant, and it was an ancient practice in the Church of God, and such,
as deride that Custom to cast reproach upon the persons, they have persecuted,
will have their memories rott, as they have their faces hardened, and their
consciences seared. We may see what answer this Author intends to his Majest:
book, that makes such observations upon the Claspe, and frontispice. Is it the
way to confute a book to revile the printer. Iconoclastes has an indignation
at any holy meditations in his Majest: book, and tells men there is danger of
a Design, and to keep men from reading it gives Caveatts against the outside.

In one thing he must commend his opennesse, who gave the Title to this book
(...) that is to say the Kings Image, and by the shrine he dresses out for him,
certainly would have the people come, and worshipp.

Was man made to be worshipped, because the Scripture tells us, he was created in
the Image of god. And is this author so great a stranger to the expressions of
such, as writ the lives, and Actions of worthy persons, who term some men
patterns, or Images of Kings, Captains, Judges, and the like? and when his
Majest: book contained such Kingly meditations was it improperly named
Icon-basilice. Such sorry Jests show more will, then wit to speak foam what,
and the confidence of his slanders are the same with his conceits, that binds
this trivial scoff with a certainly.

For which reason this answer is entitled I conoclastes the famous surname of
many Greek Emperors, who in their zeal to the command of god after long
tradition of Idolatry in the Church took courage, and brake al supperstitious
Images to pieces.

And the end of this answer is to break all good Emperors, as well, as Kings
to pieces, and the Author made an improper choice, of the famous surname of
good Emperors, that reproaches their calling, and justifies the violence done
them for that very worthy Act of theirs in breaking superstitious Images, for
if the people may judge their Kings for their Actions in Church, or State, how
will this Author exempt the good Emperor Leo from the Jus^ice of the peoples
violence against him for breaking down of Images, for he must confess their
power to use violence, if he will erect a Tribunal in the people over their
Kings, as he does over his own. Poets have fancied transformations, and men
turned into Beasts, and noe age has produced more Monsters in opinion touching
Religion, and morality, then this of ours, that glory in their defacing of the
Image of God in man by Creation, and in Kings, and governors by institution,
and if every man may use violence against his King upon his own authority,
and the murder of Kings be an Act of Justice, whereto must mankind be
reduced, but to be Tigers, or Devils in destroying one another? And they
cannot deny, but what may be done to a King, may be done to any other, schism
and Rebellion are inseparable Companions, and as this Author defames the Kingly
Government, so the Church may not escape his fury, for rather, then it shall
have any estimation, he will have a long tradition of Idolatry before those
good Emperors, but if he had vouchsafed to read the story, and depended not
upon his spirits, he would have found, that not tradition, but an impious
Rebellion stirred up against a good Emperor brought the ^perstitious Images
into the Church, and that the good Emperor with stood the bringing in of them,
not brake them down after long Tradition, and thence he might have told us
what kind of reformation must be expected from popular fury, and that as then
by Tumultuous violence superstition was established, so now in England
confusion, and prophanenes. This Image breaker thinks he may as well usurp an
Emperors surname, as his Masters their Kings power, and Estate, and while he
magnifies the good Emperors corrects himself, least the people thence think
on their reverence to their King. For he says the people exorbitant, and
excessive in all their motions are prone often times not to a Religious only, but
to a Civil kind of Idolatry in Idolizinge their Kings, though never more
mistaken in the object of their worshipp, heretofore being wont to repute for
saints those faithful, and caragious Barons, who lost their lives in the field
making glorious wars against Tyrants for the common liberty.

Never time can better witness this truth, then the present, that the people are
exorbitant, and excessive in all their motions, nor ever man, that put pen to
paper could more improperly lay it on their score, then this Author, that takes
on him to defend the most exorbitant, and excessive motions of the people, that
any Kingdom has felt, the power of his Masters being founded on those
motions, and if the people yet see not their error, they cannot longer be
deceived having such a Testimony, as this Author a man without exception in
that point, and its likely they begun to see, how they were made instruments of
their own slavery, that this Author gives so severe a Character of the people.
If they be prone to a Religious Idolatric, as the Author says they are, they
are very unfit Reformers of the Church, and for that Civil kind of Idolatry
in Idolizing their Kings, that is in an eminent degree of obedience, for such
appears his meanings, it will never prove sin to them, and the contrary vice
Rebellion is more frequent, and more dangerous to their salvation, and many
will go to heaven with this Civil kind of Idolatry, when Rebels, and
despisers of Dominion will be excluded. The Author should have done well to tell,
what this Civil kind of Idolatry is, if it differs from true, obedience, and
whether it may not be given to others, as well, as Kings. I believe if there be
such a Civil kind of Idolatry, the worst degree of it is in the reverence
borne to King killers, and common destroyers of their Country, as the stories
of all times testify. Rebels never wanted pretentions, but liberty, and
Justice were the common Mask of such Monsters, so this man will have the world
believe the pretenses of Rebels, and that Rebellion was always the lawful
side, and thence those faithful, and courageous Barons, that had broken their
faith, and Alleagiance to their King, Traitorously armed the multitude for
private revenge, and ambition must be sainted, and those whom the clear
evidence of law judged Traitors, and their wars Rebellion must be the patrons
of common liberty. I think the Author will hardly find a Calender of such
saints, if he receive a Connonization at such a rate, it will deserve farlesse
credit, then the Gregorian Calender, but he is not like to find a Calender of
saints for his purpose, unless it be filled with such faithles Traitors. It
has been said of Politicians, that they love the Treason, and hate the
Traitor, but these new Masters saint the Traitors, and make Treason the Canon
of their Religion. Some men have pitied men of parts, whose passions have
carried them into unwarrantable Actions, but never till this age did Christians
adore such saints. Rebellion is dearer to this Author, then Religion, and he
will rather commend superstitious Actions of a blind age, and the very dreggs
of Popery against which he professes so great Zeal, then want an ingredient
to the varnish of that horrid sin, and rather then that shall be discountenanced,
Popery, and Judaisme it self shall be admitted. There were a people, that
Idolized Todes, and vipers and all venomous creatures, and these men have
resumed that Idolatry, that will have the most cruel, and destructive
impieties to make men saints.

He instances in two particulars Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester against
Hen. 3. and Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster against Edward 2.

For the first of these, he was by the Testimony of the stories of that age the
most ingrate full Rebel, that any state has harbored, a man overloaden with
his Masters favors, matched to his sister, instrusted with his secretts, and
his forces, yet this man, whom neither benifitts, affection, nor trust could
oblidge, nor keep from thrusting the King from his Throne, and assuminge the
Government to himself for the common liberty, as the Author will have it, is
enrolled for a saint. If there were any so exorbitant, and excessive in their
motions to saint such a faithless wretch, the Author will hardly find any so
much mistaken in his Civil Kind of Idolatry to their Kings, but whence comes
Hen: 3: to be a Tyrant, of whom the stories report so much mildnes, and hardly
so great an error, as the unadvised advancement of that Rebel Montfort? But
it is very usual with these men, that wherever they find an Example of
Rebellion there the King is a Tyrant, and all such Presidents, as were conveyed
to our times to show us the mischeife, and wickedness of Rebellion are produced,
as authorities for the committing of it, and Garnetts straw will be a Miracle,
and he a saint, and the Assassins of Kings glorious Champions for common
liberty. For the secound, the stories are very silent of any common liberty
pretended by the Earl of Lancaster, or any Tyrany against that King, but it
matters not what truth there be in an assertion so a King be made the
Criminal, and though the mistake of such, as held the Earl of Lancaster for
some time a saint, were ridiculous to that very age, yet this Author will have
it a less error, then the keeping of the fifth Commandment, and the people,
that used a Civil Kind of Idolatry to their good Emperor, that had the
famous surname of Iconoclastes more mistaken in the object of their worshipp,
then such, as Idolized the superstitious Images he had broken, for the Author
says they were never more mistaken in the object of their worshipp, then in
the Civil Kind of Idolatry in Idolizing their Kings.

Its apparent in the stories of our nation, that superstitious Churchmen had
their hands in those Rebellions the Author mentions, and therefore might induce
the ignorant rabble to adore the Calves they had set up, and in our days we
find they have successors, that teach the people doctrines of Devils and
seduce them from obedience to those, that had the rule over them.

Now with a besotted, and degenerate baseness of spirit, ex, cept some few,
who yet retain in them the old English fortitude, and love of freedom, and
have testified it by their matchles deeds, the rest embastardized from the
ancient noblenes of their Aucestours are ready to fall flat, and give adoration
to the Image, and memory of this man, who has offered at more cunning fetches
to undermine our liberty, and put Tyrany into an Act, then any British King
before him.

Its very strange, that all except some few are so besotted, as not to love
liberty so natural to man, and those, that have so contended for it, as the
English nation, but if it were possible for Iconoclastes to deal faithfully,
we might have expected, that he would have told us, what that liberty was the
people loved not, which is the liberty of those ambitious Traitors, that now
lord it over them, which are those few he mentions, whose matchless villainies
have wasted more English blood in these few years, then all our Kings in their
victorious wars since the conquest. The people doubtless love liberty, but
they find themselves cheated of their just liberty under a lawful King, and
brought under the slavery of many Tyrants who persuaded the poor people it was
liberty to be without a King, though subject to the licentious will of vpstart
usurpers, and why is it degnerate baseness of spirit to vindicate their laws,
and liberties against Tyrants, that have usurped it, and revenge the fraud,
and injury done them by deceivers, that under pretense of law, and liberty
bereft them of both. The best of the Rebels pretense, which this Author
defends is to fight for liberty, and if the people find their liberty taken
away, is it unlawful to resume it from Tyrants, and usurpers, which this
Author holds lawfullKings? Its true men were besotted with the name of
liberty, and those Mountebanques infused the principles of Rebellion into the
people by telling there could be no liberty under Monarchy, as if the nature
of Governments were unknown till our time, and thence this Author writes, as
if none, but besotted people should read him. If these vipers had professed in
the beginning of their Rebellion, that Simon Monford, and Thomas Earl of
Lancaster had been saints, and that they intended to follow the Example of such
Traitors, the people would not have been so besotted, the miseries brought on
the Kingdom by such seducers being so largely delivred in story, but the
people have now found by sad experience, that the leaders of the present
disorders are the Progeny of those cursed Rebels, whose Actions made them
odious to all posterity, and dishonored the times wherein they lived, and
this Author would brand the whole nation making Rebellion their fortitude, and
love offreedome, when its plain to all readers, that those Rebellions were the
scourge of the nation, which langiushed under the burdens, that were increased
by those, whom they followed against their kings.

How the people have been Idolized by those Rebels, Tumults defended, and the
power over their king pretended for the justification of this odious Rebellion,
besides the declaration of those they call a Parliament, this Author frequently
tells us in this answer, and yet is so careless of truth, or shame, as
here their reason, and affection are as contemptible, as their right in
Government, and some few must reign over them. The greatest unhappiness of the
English nation has been in the misfortunes of their kings, and the greatest
dishonor in the prevalcne of insolent, and sly Rebels, the noble blood of the
most renowned persons being wasted in those disorders, and Civilitie for many
years destroyed. If we place virtue in the insolent attempts of Rebels
against lawful Princes, not only Christian fortitude, but moral virtue grow
contemptible, and rage, and venom will sooner get a saint-shipp, then Justice
or innocence.

If so many are so ready to fall flat to the Image, and memory of his late
Majefl: as the Author says, his Masterts have cause to use new principles, and
as they fought against their king by faining a power in the people, so they
must now lay fetters on them, and cast away the mask a Ceremony to be used no
longer.

It was not a part of our liberties to be deprived of our king, nor to Rebel
against him, such acts being contradictions not only to Christian, but English
liberty, and such, as take that liberty to themselves, robb others of their
just, and lawful liberties. Do the present, or did ever Traitors give
liberty to any, but their faction? And do they allow them any more, then
liberty at the will of the Commander? And if liberty be so precious to these
men, why should John lilborne bemore restrained, then Iconoclastes? And why
should any be more Cryminall, that write, or speacke against an usurped power,
then they, that wrote against the known legal authority? Prisoners in Gayles
hire persons of strong voices to beg for them at the grate, and the Rebels
have found this Authors rancour, and impudence so sublimated, as his falsities,
and slanders were probable to infect the world, though to knowing, and honest
men they sound the voice of a Beast, and not a man; what one liberty of the
English Nation is there now left? Do not all men see, that their ridiculous
house, and state Council act at the will of their sword Master, by whose act
those Ciphers are disposed of to signify what he pleases? Do not all men
see, that the use of the name liberty signifies nothing, but a sound to fill
the peoples ears, and deceive their understanding?

That Tyranny should be objected to the best King, in whose time fewer men
suffered death, then in any time of like extent throughout all our Kings, shows
hellish rage, not common impudence. In his Reign of sixteen years, until
this abominable Parliament, one only Peer of the Kingdom suffered death, and
that not for any provocation, or offense against the Kings person, but for
Crimes of another nature, a raritie in the stories of the best Kings, and yet
so brutish is this man to say, that he has offered at more cunning fetches to
undermine our liberties, and put Tyrany into an art, then any british King
before him. Wherein should Tirany appear, was there any violence used in
taking away men's Estates? Can they object Covetuousnes, or luxury to his late
Majest: they have not yet pretended it, but they would make Tyrany by
imagination, and that Government which stands in their way must be called
Tyrany, and the want of instances of Tyrany makes them thus giddily stagger
from side to side, and talk of offering at more cunninge fetches, what does
this signify? Does this Author think, that he will be believed in his slanders
of Tyrany, when all is resolved into offers, and offers at cunning fetches, and
all is only their malicious, and inconsequent inferences? This Author well
knows this assertion of his, is so far from truth, that he cannot name one
Act of his Maj: whereunto he, or his Masters have excepted, that wants Example
of his best Predecessors, so wide has he opened his mouth in saying more then
any British King before him. And his late Majest: took not such Examples, as
those men, that make Acts of violence, and Rebellion Examples, but such
Actions, as were by Council, and in the way of law, and Justice. But this
Author having so lately mentioned the old English fortitude, how falls he to
name the British Kings? If he intend the Kings, which the Romans found at
their coming, or which succeeded their departure, his comparison is not of any
large signification, for the Catalogue is very short, and the Actions less,
but perhapps he means to make Authenticke the story of Geoffry of Monmouth,
where the Catalogue has as little truth, as the persons Actions, he does not
mean the Saxons to be British Kings? If he do, he will find among them not
only offers at fetches, but open rapines, and homicides, which when he thinks
on, what he has written might shame him, if he could shame at any thing, and
if he thought knowing readers would have the patience to pervse so much
scurrilous language, and impudent untruth, as he has packt together in this
book, he would expect just reproach for offering at such a Comparison so
impertinent, if he intended such Kings only, as were properly termed British
in regard of descent, whose persons, and Actions are so inconsiderable, and so
lewdely false. If he intend all others, that have Reigned in England, whose
stories contain so evident a refutation of his untruth.

In the first Parliament of King James, there was a debate touching the Kings
Title, which he desired to have of great Brittaigne in reguard of his Dominion
over the whole Island, the lower house then reputed wise, much opposed it, and
would retain the name of England, under which name they said their Ancestors
had been famous. These men tell us noe contentions are infallible, but the
present, and they are in love with the name of British Kings, of whom they
know nothing, that the people may forget their English Kings, that made them
famous.

We read of some in Scripture, that wrought mischeife by a law, and this
Author, that talks of making Tyrany an art, strives to make Rebellion a law,
and all Government a Tyrany, and having undermined Monarchy with cantinge
terms of Liberty, seeks to suppress all Liberty by lawless power. He does
not wonder, though he pretend it at the change in the people, for the many
odious lies, and slanders his Masters have used of the King, the many promises
they have falsified to the people, the continual oppressions they exercise over
them justly provoke hatred to such Tyrants, unless the people were condemned to
perpetual stupiditie with their present slavery.

The Rebels, whom this Author reports to be Sainted, though they objected
misgovernment to their Kings, never were so impudent to pretend their laws
slavery, but the present Traitors have improved all the impieties of former
ages to extreamitie, and they call all the Government of England, for many
hundreds of years Norman slavery, and will imagine a liberty that perished by
the flood, which they now resume. Their pretense of laws is turned into
sickely fancies of distempered brains, and though the leaders are hardened by
their confirmed corruptions, the people begin to recover their understanding,
and see the cunning fetches, whereby they were undermined, and the Art, which
Traitors used to betray them.

Which low dejection, and debasement of mind in the people, he cannot
willingly ascribe to the natural disposition of an Englishman, but rather to
two other causes.

And is it a low dejection, and debasement of mind to restue a man's self from
a common cheat, or a malicious oppressor? Is it not dejection, and debasement
of spirit to follow detected villains, and common thieves? Is it the natural
disposition of an Englishman to betray, and kill his King, and put his neck
under the yoke of his inferiors? Is the English disposition so base, as to
leave a King, and be subject to a Jack straw? And is stupiditie the English
disposition, that can swallow any deceites, and abuses, though never so
palpaple? Doubtless whoever looks, what Government was heeretofor lived under,
and what now, must needs conclude, that such, as willingly forsook the on,
and submitted to the other, expessed as low dejection, and debasement of mind,
as ever the English nation showed fortitude and the many s^fferes for refusing
their submission to this usurpation, and the few, which the Author says
retain the old English fortitude shows, that it is not the disposition of an
Englishman, but the unnatural, and degenerate inclinations of some, that
assuminge the English name have sought to dishonor the nation, and transfer
the infamy of their Actions on the natural disposition, stiling the greatest
Traitors the best Englishmen.

The first of his causes, whereto he ascribes this low dejection, he says is
to the Prelates, and their fellow teachers, though of another name, and sect,
whose pulpitt stuff both first, and last has been the doctrine, and
perpetual infusion of servilitie, and wretchedness to all the hearers.

Could the Prelates, and their fellow teacher, against whom not preachinge was
cheifely objected by these Hipocrites, work such Miracles by their pulpitt
stuff. And could those, whom they have excluded pulpits, for so many years
cause this new degeneration, of whose causes he seems so inquisitive. Pulpitt
stuff was a Term only proper to their s^uffling Levites, which was an
infusion of contempt of the persons, and detraction of the authority of their
Rulers. How full were pulpitts, and Tubbs of these froggs, and vermin,
Emissaries of hell, who decryed Christian patience, and allowed noe fortitude,
but what resisted Authority. The preaching of the Prelates in England will
remain to their honor, and the infamy of these hipocriticall Rebels, and
their works follow them, which schismatic Lunacie vainly rages to defame,
and all men can wittnes, that the ridiculous, and impertinent repetitions,
vain, and senseless inferences, the common pulpitt stuff of puritan
Sectaries made preaching to many, as Elies sons made the offerings of the Lord;
And the Rebellion, perjury, and Atheism, that has followed such sermonizers,
shows what spirit they are of, and that they wait on Ieroboams Calves, least
men should return to God, and their lawful King, but this railing at the
Prelates is grown stale. The servilitie, and wretchedness he means, we shall
know more plainly hereafter, for obedience, and sufferinge are the servilitie
and wretchedness, which he calls the pulpit stuff of the Prelates. We may
shortly expect, that as these miscreants have altered state, and Church, so
they will compose an Index expurgatorius of the Bible, for it cannot be
imagined, that they will object this heinous Crime of preaching passive
obedience to the Prelates, and leave so many places in the Gospel, which
command it, and themselves need not the Gospel to make men obedient, they
have the sword, and this Ceremony of Religion is abolished.

But what are these fellow teachers of the Prelates of another name, and sect?
why did he not speak out, and name the Presbiterian? was it not as easy to
name him, as describe him? such terms are long in coming forth, that carry
with them the reproach of the speaker. The common guilt, wherein these sects,
and parties were involved appears in their division, and how they deceived the
people, and one another. Its happy, if any men, that have gone far in an evil
way stopp, and return to the right path. St. Paul gloried, that men said of
him, that he now preached the faith, which before he destroyed, and if there be
any, though of another name, and sect in the sense of this author, that preach
loyalty, which before they destroyed, Its Gods great mercy to them, and that
they reduce others from the errors of their way. These Presbiterians may hence
observe, how unhappily they were engaged against the Prelates, and with this
other sect in settinge forth contumelious, and scoffing libells, that now have
the same language cast on themselves by these brethren in evil. Schism, and
Rebellion have noe mean, and he is much deceived, that thinks to retain
either of them in any bounds without force, and this the Pers^iterian now
finds to his loss, who is grown as contemptible to those he meant to rule,
as he endeavored to make the Prelates.

Besides their pulpit stuff he says their lives the Tipe of all worldlines,
and hypocrisy without the least true pattern of virtue, righteousness, or
self denial in their whole practice.

Of those Marks, which the Scripture gives for the Trial of Hipocrites, what
one do these Rebels want, their pride in assuming holiness to themselves, and
denying it to others, is held forth by them on all occasions. Stand further
from me, I am holier, then thou, was the old Jew, and Lord I thank thee I am
not, as other men, nor as this Publican was the reformed Pharisee, and how
impiously these Traitors appropriate to themselves righteousness, and self
denial, as if none, but Traitors could attain the kuowledge of such graces?
If righteousness consist in Blaspheming God, contempt of his ordinances, and
scorning the doctrine, and practice of his saints, these men may lay some
claim to it, And if such, as deny not themselves the lives, and Estates of
others, that deny not themselves any power, or pleasure they like, be the true
self denyers, we cannot exclude this Author, and his Masters from attaining
it? Do these men imagine, that using the terms of righteousness, and self
denial, which they have made much in fashion, induces any man to think they
esteem it, whose whole endeavors are self seeking? Can they persuade any
man, that when our blessed savior would pay Tribute, though not due from him,
that he might not give offense, that the righteousness, which he commended to
his servants was not only to deny Tribute, but to fight against those to whom
it was due? Are they greater practisers of self denial, that preach war, and
blood rather, then obey, then those, that preach passive obedience, and
suffering rather then violence? Certainly the Alcaron Religion of these men,
cannot entitle them to that Evangelycall virtue of self denial, and their
Actions being so opposite to it, theit frequent use of the word proves their
confirmed hypocrisy, and resolved impenitencie. He may well wonder, if such
pulpit stuff, and such lives, as he mentions should attract so many from his
old English fortitude. If he would have assigned a cause for such an eminent
change, as he supposes, it should have been some way proportionable to the
effect, and his best way had been to have advanced the knowledge, and subtle
behavior of the Prelates, and their fellow teachers, but madd men only will
believe him, when he says men gross in their doctrines, and offenfive in
their lives persuaded the most part from the old English fortitude, this
shows only a will to rail, not ane Argument to prove. It will be an hard task
for him to prove men the Tipe of worldlines, whom his Masters have stripped of
all worldly means of living, and exposed them, and their families to beg, or
starve. Was there ever a time in any one Kingdom, when so many have endured
the spoiling of their goods, and undergone so great poverty from plenty,
rather then renounce their faith, and former profession, as the Prelates of
England, and their follow tachers? hypocrisy, and worldlines consist not with
that condition, and in this Estate they cannot charge the Prelates with
railing, and virulent language against their persecutors, as the Rebel
Ministers used against their Governors.

The people now discern the difference between the Prelates humility, and
the pride of their present Imposters, and that pride is less incident to just
Titles, then usurpations, and that popular insinuations never want ambition,
and arrogance. The Bishopps eminent virtues, and sufferings are so conspicuous
to all men, as cannot be obscured by malicious detraction. But such, as make it
their sin to preach passive obedience will judge Martyrdom hypocrisy, and
patience worldliness.

His next cause he attributes to the factious inclination of most men divided
from the public by serveral ends, and humors of their own.

Factious inclinations carry men to Rebellion, and disobedience, and private
ends divided from the public are excentrique to lawful Government. All
changes proceed from these ends, and humors, and submission to Rulers is
inconsistent with them. But the Author will have the resistance of parricide,
and Rebellion an effect of factious inclination, as patience, and passive
obedience to be a worldly doctrine; By his account Rebels only have care of
the public, and all that oppose them have ends divided from it. This humor
of seditious Traitors has been anciently discovered, and yet by the peoples
unhappy credulity never prevented, and thence it comes, that they complain of
faction, and innovation, while they are busy in contrivinge it. And it is noe
wonder, that they, that have found so many deceived by their dissembled
passions, will offer such palpable absurdities to the people, that men oppose
them for private ends, and that themselves seek only the public, when by
blood, and rapine they have got possession of all the wealth, and power of the
Kingdom, and tread all under foot, that had right to rule They say truly
they seek the public, but all men see it is for their private ends, and
ambition.

At sirst noe man less beloved, noe man more generally condemned, then was the
King from the time, that it became his Custom to break Parliaments at home,
and either wilfully, or weakly betray protestants abroad to the beginning
of those ^ombustions.

He would prove the people inconstant, who doubts it? there has been proof
enough of it in their wretched levitie tossed to, and fro by these Rebels.
Been facere, male audire Regium est, will not be denied by Iconoclastes to be a
known truth, and that it is the common lot of good Princes to be misreported.
That his late Majest: suffered by the privy whispes of ambitious seducers to
the credulous vulgar is easily granted, but it was their ingratitude, not his
merit, and the Authors less beloved and more generally condemned is a
supposition void, of truth, as the Act it self was void of duty, the causes
he would have to be his Custom in breaking Parliaments, and betraying
Protestants. Let us examine what ground there was, for this aversion from the
King upon either of these. There were in the time of King James, men, that made
ill use of Parliaments, and insteede of amending what was amiss strived to
make the people believe things were out of order, which they felt not, and to
create discontents at the Government. This caused the breach of some
Parliaments in that Kings time, his late Majest: finding the people possessed
with great jealosies of his match with spain, and great desires to break
the peace with that nation in order to the recovery of the Palatinate became
the instrument of settling a right understanding between the King, and his
Parliament in the 21. th. Year of his Reign. Then was the Treaty of the
match, and peace broken, the session of Parliament concluded to the great joy
of the people, and with their great professions of affection to his late
Majest: for so happy a work. King James was noe sooner dead, and his late
Majest: by the Council of the Parliament engaged in a dangerous war, but the
seditious contrivers, that had pretended such Zeal for the regaininge of the
^alatinate, cast about how they might ruin his Majest: by that undertaking,
and in his first Parliament without respect to their own promises, his Majest:
merit from them in procuringe their desires, or the public necessities
ingratefully withdrew their assistance from him, and spread abroad rumors
against his Government, and when he called a Parliament, the private
annimosities, and personal thirst of revenge in some men were entertained in
the house of Commons, to exclude the consideration of the pressing necessities
of his Majest: affairs, and foreign agents had their fingers with these
leaders in Parliament, to divert all supplies from his Majest: that both
Protestants, and all other his allies might be disappointed, and which by that
means was effected. Its well known with what industry, and difficulty his
Majest: in the midst of his necessities advanct releife to the Protestants,
and if they were betrayed, the Treason must lie on the Parliaments credulity
to those underminers, that forsook their King in the prosecution of that work.

To betray Protestants, these Traitors know signifies much to the people, and
therefore they make it a reproach to their King against the known evidence of
the fact, and all sense, and though they hipocritically pretend affection to
the Protestant Religion, the world knows, they do not as much, as give it a
toleration, for the Protestants do not account John of Leidon, and the mad men
of Munsters Protestants, and there is noe Religion, but theirs, now current in
England.

This Author sees the cleerenes of the proof against their malicious
allegations of betraying Protestants, and therefore descends a little in his
terms, and says either wilfully, or weakly. Could he betray them by
impotencie of force, or Council? that's a new found Treason, that the mind
intends not, but its too much respect to such an absurd Calumny to give it an
answer.

He goes on, all men inveighed against him, all men except Court vassalls
opposed him, and his Tyranicall proceedings.

Inveighinge against the King was unknown in England before such Monsters, as
this Author were hatched by Rebellion, and made their words accord with their
Actions, when their lying, and hypocrisy could noe longer serve turn. Before
this time malcontents muttered their censures of Government, and people that
believed them, thought it their sin, and shame to inveigh against their King.
Though discontents were nourisht among many, few, or none were so impudent to
inveigh. There is noe Courtier, whose observance to his Prince, or his
flattery of him can bind him to like vassallage, as he is, that serves
Rebels by false, and impudent detractions of Rulers. Noe slave so base, as
he, that will be hired to murder the fame, and honor of others. There are some
Courtiers among his new Masters, whose falsehood to their true Master, and base
observance of the Traitors to him entitles them to the worst of vassallage.
This Author goes an ill way to prove Tyranicall proceedings, when he says they
were so opposed. Its strange a Tyrant should suffer himself to be opposed,
and how were those Tyranicall proceedings opposed? he will say by disputes in
Courts of Justice, and was this Tyrany to admit contestations in ordinary
Courts? There was never time, wherein there were not questions of right
between King, and subject, and is it Tyrany in a Prince to be a party in a
Process? And does this Author hold malicious reports, and rumors notes of
disgrace upon King, or any other Magistrate? good Princes lives confute
detraetours, and though the people for a time may be deluded, they will come to
know a good King in his loss. Rebellious humors are an Epidemicall
pestilence, whose violence cannot continue.

This full Parliament was at first unanimous in their dislike, and protestation
against his evil Government.

This has not the least color of truth, and as there was never time, wherien
something was not to be amended, so in the beginning of this Parliament,
there were things of that nature, but not such, as laid Crime upon his Majest:
Government, nor did the Parliament judge so, but all corruptions of Courts,
Errors of Council, ill successes of Actions are charged by this Author, as
his Majest: ill Government, and every judgment of Parliament in a particular
case made a protestation against it.

This Author cannot, but know, that the most vnamimous protestation, that ever
the Parliament made was to defend the Kings person, honor, and Estate, and
they, that made this protestation could not be unanimous in protesting against
his evil Government, nor in destroying both him, and it. They protested to
defend the laws of the land, one of which they declared to be, that the King
could do noe wrong, and that if they should say his late Majest: did, they
should speak against the law, and the affection of their own hearts. Can this
Author find any room here for an unanimous protestation of the Parliament
against the Kings ill Government. And yet these were made long after the
beginning of the Parliament, but they, that have noe conscience of speaking
truth, have noe shame to be convinced of falsehood.

But when they, who sought themselves, and not the public began to doubt,
that all of them could not by one, and the same way attain to their ambitious
purposes, then was the King, or his name at least, as a fit property first
made use of, his doings made the best of, and by degrees justified.

He is very industrious to find out causes, why so many would not be
Traitors, why could he not fall into the consideration of the oaths of
Alleagiance, and supremacy, that all members of Parliament take at their
entrance? why could he not think on the protestation themselves contrived to
defend the King? how did he forget the Commands of obedience from God? If
himself, and his Masters had not preferred their ambitious ends before their
duty to God, or man, if they had not thought all oaths, and vows of noe
obligation against their ends, they would never have attributed other men's
desertion of their courses to proceed from ambitious ends, Could men, that saw
these Traitors making such oaths, and protestations of loyalty with a
resolution to break them, run without remorse with them? Could any, that
retained any spark of Religion, or moral honesty concur with such persons
in their lewd courses? But all could not attain their ambitious ends by the
same way. What way? by destroying the King? we are sure some have attained
their ambitious ends that way. And does this Author think, that any men had
higher ends of ambition, then they, that now have attained theirs? if he do,
he has very few of his mind, how ever there was a way to ambitious ends, but
it was not wide enough for all, and who had these ambitious ends they, that
took the way, or they, that left it. They that had obligations of honor, and
conscience for their ways are uncharitably charged with ambitious ends, and
they, that brake the bounds of duty, and oaths to attain their ends, are
sottishly pretended to seek the public.

How the Kings name, and office has been made a property, and all duty, and
oaths to him a Ceremony by the Traitors is known to the world. They have not
spared any thing Religious, or Civil. They have made a property of the very
name of God, of fasts, of thankesgiving, of prayers, of preaching. They have
made a property of Justice, of Delinquents, evil Councillors? how often have
they made the lords house a property calling it the Kings hereditary Council?
how often of loyalty? And how frequently in this very libell does he make a
property of the name of Parliament. All men see there has been nothing real
with them, but their ambition, and cruelty.

Which begat him such a party, as after many wiles, and struglings with his
inward fears imboldened him at length to set up his standard against the
Parliament.

After many Messages to the Traitors, that possessed both houses of Parliament.
After many offers to relinquish his just rights to take away all jealosies, and
fears of his power, which were then pretended. After many Remostrances, of the
Calamities, that attend Civil distractions. After the undutiful rejections of
al his motions for peace. After the discovery of the insatiable ambition, and
blood thirsty malice of the prevailing party. After the violation of all
privileges of Parliament. After the compulsion of the better part of both
houses to desert them. After the seizing of his Majest: forts, and Navy, and
assuminge the Militia. After the longest, and most provokt patience, that ever
King retained, his Majest: set up his standard against those Rebels, that
took the name of Parliament.

But Iconoclastes remember, you have here vpbraided fears to the King, when
you come to deny he had any. What wiles were used to seduce the people, what
jealosies, and ridiculous fears were blown up to disorder them is yet fresh
in Memory, and he well observes the Kings standard at length set up, for there
was just cause to have done it long before, and much disadvantage to his
Majest: by the delay.

When as before that time, all his adherents consistinge most of dissolute
swordmen, and suburb roysters hardly amounted to the making up of one ragged
Regiment strong enough to assault the unarmed house of Commons.

What time does he mean the setting up of the standard? If his Majest: had
sooner declared against the Traitors, he had not wanted a greater Regiment.
And if he had intended to assault the house of Commons, those he had with him
were enough to have done it, though those, that then sat had been armed,
otherwise those members would not have been absent, when he eame.

For the quality of the Kings adherents, as he Phrases it, the persons, that
then waited on him were for the most part of better quality, then their Rebel
General, whom now they adore. It was the art of one of the guides of this
Treason at that time to style such, as were about the King Cavileers, as a name
vnagreeable to the prickeard Puritan, whose supersilious demurenes made wry
faces at such a name, it being the Custom of false Traitors to lay claim to
those behaviors, that may hide their inward wolvish disposition, and defame
others to ge^ reputation to themselves, and thence suburb Roysters, and
dissolute swordmen became names for such, as followed the King to add terror
to the citizens of London, who have found more pride, cruelty, and robbery
among their schismatic pretenders to piety, then any such danger, as was
threatened them from such, as followed the King.

Though this breaker would destroy the reason, and sense of his readers, yet
its impossible by such incoherent Arguments, as he produces. Can he hope any
man will believe him, that such, as followed the King at that time to the lower
house, were all, that took offense at the proceedings in Parliament, and that
none else were resolved to assist the King against the inivries offered him? That
were too unreasonable considering the Actions both then, and succeedinge, and
because he had not endeavored to get more strength, therefore he could not?
But if the number of them, that had a right understanding of the Kings affairs
were very small, does it follow, that the contrary was the better because
numerous? The Author refutes it himself in his next words, and surely the
Argument is more strong against the cause he maintains, that the people, that
at first followed them have now left them, then the motions of the people
carried by rumors against their King in the beginning were of any Tyrany, or
ill Government in him, for a people are easier stirred up to follow an evil
cause, then reduced after they have begun, and the quality, and number of such
persons, who have lost their lives, and fortunes in maintaining the Kings cause
in regard of Estate, honor, and integrity, and in Comparison of such, as
Rebelled against him, might justly have withheld this Authors hand from
objecting against their condition, for his own party must admire his
impudence having such evidence of the fact.

After which attempt seconded by a tedious, and bloody war on his subjects,
wherein he has so far exceeded those his arbitrary violences in time of
peace, they, who before hated him for his misgovernment, nay fought against him
with displayed Banners in the field, now applaud him, and extol him for the
wisest, and most Religious Prince, that lived.

And let Iconoclastes show other reason of this change, then the evidence of
their former mistake. Could it be ambitious ends, that made men extol him,
whom they had offended, and that after his imprisonment, and murder. After
the defeat of his forces, and noe expectation, but of oppression upon all
such, as expressed a good opinion of him? surely he has abundantly requited
his scornful expression of his late Majest: ragged Regiment in the beginning,
that here tells us after all his losses, and lowest condition, nay after death
his very Enemies changed their thoughts of him. Repentance is a great reproach
among those Rebels, the preaching of that doctrine is worse to them, then
passive obedience. That there were some, that hated his Majest: may be
believed, their tongues, and pens set on fire of hell have published it to the
world. They that hate Christian virtues, hate such, as have them. They, that
hate the ordinances of God, hate such, as are appointed to exercise them, But
it was only in some fiery schismatickes; whose pride disguised with profession
of humility, at first appeared in their petulancy against their teachers, and
at last came to exalt it self above all, that is called God. These men
perfectly hated the King, that hated all Government, and by this measure
Iconoclastes would comprehend all such, as through credulity, or error at
first fell into this misfortune to bear Arms against their King. Doubtless,
they, that after this tedious, and bloody war became more affectionate to his
Majest: descerned not such excesses on his Majest: part, as this Author
supposes, for that had not been an Argument for a change. Its manifest to all,
that his Majest: Actions in this war were noe other, then such, as the
necessity of that condition draws with it, and which the noblest Enemies use,
and his Enemies cannot produce one Act done by him, which themselves did not
avow, and yet he says in the war he exceeded his Arbitrary violences in time
of peace, and if we take the word of Iconoclastes, they were not irregular,
that the necessary Actions of war did exceed, and by the way neither
Iconoclastes, nor his Masters for their justification have produced one Act of
Arbitrary violence against his late Majest: though they make outcryes of
Tyrany, and violence to hide the vglines of their villainy.

By so strange a Method amongst the madd multitude is a sudden reputation won
of wisdom by willfullnes, and subtle shifts. Of goodness by multiplying
evil. Of piety by endeavoring to root out true Religion.

But is it only the multitude he means, in whom this strange change is? that
cannot be, for the severe proceedings of his Masters against eminent persons
for deserting their side, their purging the Parliament, as they call it, and
this Authors succeeding discourse denote others, besides the madd multitude.
Its a strange Method, that the madd multitude should be moved to honor
suffering virtue, which themselves had persecuted, were not the evidences
without exception? And its not strange, that such, as knew not the King, but by
the sly insinuations of seducers, should come to the knowledge of their Errors
by his eminent virtues in his sufferings. The Method, that Iconoclastes calls
strange, is certainly as strange, as the Method he takes to be believed, for
will any man give him credit, that after such an aversion, as he mentions in
the people from the King upon the pretense of his imprudence, and unsoundness in
Religion, the people should be drawn to an opinion of his wisdom by
willfullnes. Of goodness by multiplying evil. Of piety by endeavoring to
root out true Religion. Though the people were deceived in his late Majest:
yet take them at the worst, if they had hated him, because they thought him
evil, they would not be drawn to love him, because they found him so. Its
not strange, that the multitude finding themselves cheated should be ashamed of
their error, and among other seducements, that cry of rooting out Religion
made lowdest noise in the beginning of this Rebellion, and this Author, and his
fellows have vndeceived the people, for they have rooted out all Religion, and
left nothing, that has the face of it. Did the people expect, that all the
cry, that was made of Religion was to bring in Arrianisme, Anabaptisme,
Socinianisme, and such sects, as they never heard of? was this the Religion
they intended to fight for? Its not strange at all, that the mad multitude, who
were inflamed with the reputation, and Authority of the Parliament coming to
see, that the orders, votes, and other Trumperie, with which they were led on,
were only the contrivance of a factious crew, should abhor them. That
coming to see the abolition of Parliaments, and scorn of the peoples Power,
which at first was preached to them over their King, they should bewail their
own misery, that was so unhappily brought on them by their own
precipitation. The proofs of his late Majest: wisdom, goodness, and piety
are obvious to the meanest capacity, and the sublimest understandings have
made his virtues, as well, as his misfortunes their wonder, and though we have
lived in an age, where prodigies of villainy are every day acted, this Author is
a wonder to wisemen, that makes a Method of lying, and dissimulation: But as
the Government of hell is confusion, so are the Arts and Method of the
Ministers of that Enemy of mankind, which confound reason, and sobriety, and
so, as they may contradict truth, care not to contradict themselves.

But it is evident, that the chief of his adherents, never loved him, never
honored him, nor his cause, but as they took him to set a face upon their
own malignant designs, nor bemoane, his loss at all, but the loss of their
own aspiring hopes.

Its evident the Author says it, and evident, that it is without ground, or
color of truth. would men, that never loved him, never honored him, nor his
cause, not only hazard, but loose their lives, and fortunes in defense of him,
and his cause, and that when the best successes they could hope for, could not
equal the perils they ran? If there be either honor, or gallantry in any of
those, that call themselves soldiers, and Enemies to their King, and that
Rebeilion has not vnnaturalized them, they would hate such an impudent
Parasite, that seeks to please them with such impotent Calumines of persons
(whose worth, and honor they have so often tried) because they were Enemies
to his party. What Malignant designs would he have imagined, such, as noe man
ever dreamt of? Does not this man believe, that his readers see, he follows
the common places of detraction without respect to the propriety of persons,
or Actions? May not this language, that he used of any persons, that follow a
party? was there ever in the world an Example of a cause prosecuted upon more
disadvantage on behalf of the Kings party?

When a King is prosecuted by his subjects, Iconoclastes tells us they that
adheare to him do it for malignant designs. Its certain the Rebels had noe
other, but wicked, and malignant designs, and whence came malignant designs
in such, as opposed them? Because they Rebelled, other men had malignant
designs, and if any had malignant Designs, and secrett disaffections to the
King, or his cause, does he think it adds any weight to his slanders against
the King? will he lay on him the faults of his party? It seems he thought
some madder, then the multitude would read his book, otherwise such trash
would not have been worth his binding up, but he took this to make use of his
Greek, how the Captive women seemed to lament Patroclus, though in truth their
own condition, and that's the best of his evidence for this assertion, and
therefore he notes the book, where it is.

It must needs be ridiculous to any judgment vninthrald, that they, who in
other matters express so little fear either of God, or man, should in this
one particular outstrip all Precisianisme with their Scruples, and fill men's
ears continually with the noise of conscientious loyalty, and Alleagiance to
the King, Rebels in the mean while to God in all their Actions besides.

It is ridiculous to any judgment vnin thrald, that such, as Rebel against
their King should pretend they are not Rebels to God, and that such, as
profess Precisianisme in crying down dances, and May-games should expect to
be believed, that they fear God, or man, when in the meanetime they violate
all oaths., and duty to God, and man. Have not this generation showed to the
world, that all their outward formalities were noe other, then the washing
clean of the outside of the vessel? Are such fit judges of conscience, that
pretended this Precisianisme he mentions, who made great scruples, and cases
touching Ceremonies, and make noe bones of robbery, murder, and Rebellion? It
was our saviors judgment, that they which neglected the greater matters of
the law were most properly Hipocrites. Notwithstanding their Precisianisme,
that all men of any party, or society should be free from scandalous
offenses, where there are multitudes is without Example, and it could not be
hoped in the best, and cleerest cause, that all, that followed it should have
sincere ends, but none could have less fear of God, or man, then he, that
would make all guilty of the Crimes of some, that for particular crimes of men
will take the Devils office to accuse all their Actions. He makes it not in
among the number of scruples, and cases, whether Rebellion be a sin, but holds
it a clear case to be none? And then why not Idolatry, adultery, and what
not? Its possible, and probable to any judgment vninthrald, that some men may
make scruples of some sins, and are peccant in diverse others, and its far
from ridiculous, that me^ have greatest remorse of sins, the greatness of whose
guilt it most evident to their consciences. But this Author does not love the
noise of conscientious loyalty, and had rather noe conscience then any
loyalty. The particular Crimes of some, that followed his Majest: cause, and
made war against him by their sins have been lamented, and reproved out of
Christian zeal, not hipocriticall austeritie, nor can any judgment from
thence draw any conclusion against the cause they have followed, nor convince
them of sinister ends in following it.

But is not a Rebel to his King a Rebel to God? The preachers among those
Rebels have had a long heart rising against their Rulers, and to take men of
from being tender in Rebellion against their King, when ever they reproved any
sin that term of Rebellion against God came with it, insinuating a distinction
of Rebellion against Princes, from Rebellion against God, yet Rebellion against
Princes is a sin against God, and they cannot free themselves of the greatest
guilt of sin, that seduce men into it, and handle the word of God
deceitefullie, and such, as open a gate to Rebellion against Princes by
transferring the Term from the most ordinary signification, and applying it
wholly to the borrowed sense, seek to get slaves to hell, not saints to heaven:
These were the infusions of their ordinary lecturers, and serves aptly for the
Rebel Politiques.

Much less, that they, whose professed loyalty, and Alleagiance led them to
direct Arms against the kings person, and thought him nothing violated by the
sword of hostility drawn by them against him, should now in earnest think
him violated by the vnsparing sword of Justice.

What means he in this? Is it much less ridiculous in these latter, then the
former? The form of his Period went, as if he meant to make a gradation to the
greater, and I think he intended it, and an error of the press; for sure
nothing is more ridiculous, then to think the King nothing violated by the
sword of hostility, whom he means we must guess, for he cannot name them,
but by circumlocution. There is a great difference between the sword of
Rebellion, and the sword of hostility, and between the sword of lawles
violence, and the sword of justice, and Christians never thought, that any
sword drawn by subjects against their King did not violate their loyalty, and
Alleagiance, much less, that their professed loyalty, and Alleagiance led
them to direct Arms against the Kings person: If loyalty lead to hostility,
it were an ill foundation of obedience. Truth is not less wounded by lying,
then loyalty by Arms against the King. Some doubtless foresaw not the
consequents of their beginnings, and being deceived by wrong principles fell
into unhappy conclusions, which they suspected not to follow from their
premises, but as they are deceived, that will sever absurd conclusions from
erroneous premises, so are they, that will hope to avoyde desperate consequents
from ill grounded Actions.

Does Iconoclastes hold it necessary, that al they, that have fallen into an
impiety, must be impenitent, and because they have been sinners, must they
become Blasphemers, and Apostats? There have been Examples of many Rebels,
that yet abhord the shedding of their Kings blood. But Iconoclastes holds it a
dishonor to be a small villain, and he that will be wicked must act Crimes of
the highest degree, and if he fail in the last Act, he must be thrust from the
stage. The more impious the Actions of Traitors are, the more evident the
guilt of them, the greater praises they give them, and most magnify that,
which is most abominable, and they style their most outrageous cruelty
vnsparing Justice. As they will spare noe man's blood to pass to their ends;
so they will not be sparing in the Titles of their villainies; If this shameless
man had not been sensible of the vinversall detestation of the fact, he
mentions, and that it was acted in defiance of Religion, law, and Justice, he
would never have chose^ this expressio^ of the vnsparing sword of Justice. If
Rebels may judge of Justice, the cleerest Justice will become the fowlest Crime,
and the Justice that inflicts punishment on their Rebellion the greatest
Tyrany; Laws are oppression, where Malefactors have got the Tribunal. The
vnsparing sword of Rebellion will noe more appear the sword of Justice, then
the vnsparinge virulency of a lewd tongue appear a legal condemnation of a
lawful Magistrate. Is it vnsparing Justice, that gives the sword into every
hand, that would kill, and reproachful language into every false tongue? If
there be offenders, they, that without authority take one them to punish, are
more guilty, then the offender: But we may be assured, where Rebels, and
usurpers are Judges, innocence will be the greatest Crime, and horrid Murders
vnsparing Justice.

But he proceeds to say, which undoubtedly so much the less in vain she
bears among men, by how much greater, and in highest place the offender.

This need explication. He spoke but now of the sword of Justice, and now
says she bears, this is foam new speculation. St. Paul says the Magistrate
bears not the sword in vain, and this man would have every man the
Magistrate, and the sword borne without an hand to strike with it, and Justice
executed by a Metaphor. He makes Justice some wandering spirit, that invisibly
carries a sword. Whence comes the sentence of this Justice from the mouth of
the Cryminall, or the Judge? for by those motions both may lay equal claim to
it, and because justice ought to be administrated impartially, such, as are in
highest place, and from whom alone the administration of Justice is derived to
all others must be murdered by those that are subject to them? Justice has
noe sword, but the power of the lawful Magistrate, which is called the sword
of Justice from the Magistrates duty, and becomes the sword of violence, and
murder in the hands of another, but the is men think they may use the sword
without a calling as preach, and administer the Sacraments uncalled. Would
Iconoclastes be content, that the Bayliffe of westminster should draw the
impartial sword of Justice against his new Masters, that are in highest place?

Else Justice, whether moral, or political were not Justice, but a false
counterfeite of that impartial, and godlike virtue.

Justice cannot become noe Justice, but the Acts of men may be just, or unjust,
as they follow, or forsake the Rules of Justice. And what greater contempt of
Justice, then to pretend it for the ruin of mankind? What grater reproach to
that Godlike virtue, then to prostitute it to all the execrable Parricides of
the world? Does the Image breaker think, that having called it a Godlike
virtue, he has well defined it by King killing, for that is the sense of his
highest place? Its a part of his Method to insinuate an opinion of his esteem
of Justice by the praise of it, and that such, as he opposes were less Zealous
of it, but his context shows, that Justice is defied by him, and he seeks to
wash the bloody hands of the worst of Traitors by casting their odious acts on
his imaginary Justice. But whence comes I conoclastes to assume the expressio^
of a Godlike virtue, and is so angry with Iconbasilice? Is there more warrant
for his Godlike virtue of Justice, then for the Godlike office of Kings? And he
is as much Iconoclastes of the one, as the other, for they, that will wrest the
sword out of the hands of Gods vicegerents will not stick to wrest that
Godlike virtue to their own impieties

The only grief is, that the head was not struck of to the best advantage,
and commodity of them that held it by the hair.

Doubtless they, that struke it of did it for their own advantage, and
commodity without respect to Justice, or fear of God, and sure if some were
greived, that it was not struck of to their advantage, they, that struck it
of did it to that purpose, and to the fatisfiction of their own cruelty, and
laying the foundation of their Tyrany, this follows from Iconoclastes for that
commodity, which some had, and others missed caused the Murder. They, that
hold it by the hair, and they, that struck it of have cause of grief, though
Iconoclastes, and his Masters, that have, as they think the advantage, and
Commodity of it, now laugh at their partners, whom they put by, and at the
wickedness they acted, and himself gives stronger evidence, that the
ringleaders of this horrid Rebellion sought their own commodity, and
advantage, then can be supposed of Malignant designs in any of his Majest:
party.

Which observation, though made by a common Enemy, may for the truth of it
hereafter become a proverb.

Wicked Actions are not the less odious for Company, and the observation,
which it seems he intends, that some of their party, that now forsake them,
were equally guilty with them of the Kings death, will noe way excuse them,
that proceeded to that high degree of impiety. But why is the observator
called a common Enemy? Why is he more an Enemy, then they, that reproach the
present Murderers, as much, as he? Their Enemies are now all man kind, and
such, as believed not their intentions, nor Actions cannot be deceived of them
now they are defended by this Author. If that observation become a proverb,
will not the wickedness of these Murderers become a Proverb to denote the
greatest degree of villainy?

But as to the Author of those soliloquies, where it were the late King, as is
vulgarly believed, or any secret Coadiutor, and some stick not to name him, it
can add nothing, nor shall take from the weight (if any be) of reason, which he
brings. How the Champion traverses his ground. At first he looked with great
scorn to have such an Antagonist, as a King, then he condescends to take up
the gantlet, then as an induction to his Traiterous reproaches craves excuse
for not using Courts hip, and now he makes a doubt, whether the King, or some
coadiutor be Author of those soliloquies, and he says some stick not to name
him. Truly its noe secret, or strange thing, that there be not men wanting,
that would not stick at any Action, or word against the King. Is it the nearer
truth, when some stick not to name the man, when Iconoclastes sticks not at
so many untruths? He, that reads this Authors book will rest assured, that
he will stick at the affirmation of nothing, that may dishonor his late
Majest: But its strange he thought his insinuation of any weight, that some
stick not to name him, when all men see the license taken by so many lewd
persons, and noe restraint from saying any thing against the King, whereat
should they stick, their impudence is commended, and rewarded? Would they
stick at truth, that's out of fashion in the new state? But perhapps they
stick to name a man, least they have a conviction from him, or some else, that
could discover the Circumstances about it. But since he makes a scruple, if
there be not reason in the book, why is he so unwilling to admit the King to
be the Author, surely it were for his advantage to make the King author of such
a book, and if they were a Coadiutors, why does he lay his weakness, or
errors, as he pretends upon the King. The Author does not add, nor take away
from the reason in the book, but the book commends the Author, and shames the
answer.

But allegations, not reasons are the maine contents of this book, and need
noe more, then other contrary allegations to lay the question before all men in
an even balance.

The allegations in his Majest: book are either such, as are only known to
himself, or such, as were evident to all men by the light of reason, or
notorietie of Actions. And Iconoclastes vainly flatters himself, that his
contrary allegations will be of any weight to move the scale. Sober men take his
ostentation of confidence rather as an effect of frensy, then a persuasion of
reason, But through his whole book he offers allegations against apparent
rea^ous.

Though it were supposed, that the Testimony of one man in his own case
affirminge, could be of any Moment to bring in doubt, the authority of a
Parliament denying a contrary allegation against this, would weigh down the
balance in most men's judgment.

The periuries, impostures, cruelties, and devastations of those he calls the
Parliament are so known, and common abroad, that the mention of them is a
name of infamy, and takes away all credit from their Actions. Their own
journalls tell the world, that they never speak truth, but for their
advantage, and omit noe falsehood, that will serve their turn. But does
Iconoclastes think any Parliament infallible, or that all men condemned by
Parliament had Justice done them? He will then find, that they condemn one
another, and for this last misnamed Parliament, their bloody executions have
such apparent marks of Injustice, and cruelty, as themselves cannot deny it,
unless they will deny the records themselves have made, and the Testimony of
former Parliaments. There are in his Majest: book many particulars, that the
Parliament neither did, nor could deny, and through the whole book the Author
has produced few, or none of their denyalls. There has been much use made of
the name of Parliament, but the Author must think he has an enchanting pen,
if after the murder of the king, abolishing the Lords house, plucking out the
members from the lower house, prostituting the very constitution of Parliament
to the lawless multitude, and packing the Room with a few mean persons,
either terrified by power, or flattered by promises, he can persuade any, that
such a Company sitting on the usual seats of the lower house be the
Parliament, he may as well give the name of Parliament to a Parish vestry, as
that Convention, all the odds is the place of their meetinge.

But if these his fair spoken words shall be here fairly confronted, and laid
parallel to his own far differing deeds manifest, and visible to the whole
nation, then etc.

His Majest: words he says are fair spoken, and will appear sincere against
all the foul spoken words of this author to confront them; And his actions are
so well known to the whole nation, as he does in vain appeal to them, as
witnesses of the truth of those false, and incongruous Calumnies, that he has
produced. His Majest: Actions being laid parallel to this Authors different
expressions show the lewdnes of the Libellers impudence, that will appeal for
the truth of what he says to those, that best know the contrary, and in a
case, where the evidence of the fact excludes all appeal.

The Author concludes, that we may look on them, who notwithstanding shall
persist to give to bare words more credit, then to open Actions, as men, whose
judgment was not rationally evinced, and persuaded, but fatally stupefied, and
bewitched into such a blind, and obstinate belief, for whose cure he says it
may be doubted, not whether any charm, though never so wisely murmured, but
whether any prayer can be availeable.

If after the reading of this Authors book any man think him a modest man,
that he has dealt ingeniously with his Majest: book, or person, he may be
sure, that such a person were not rationally evinced, but either maliciously
prepossest, or stupidly infatuated, and neither understood words, nor Actions,
And this Author means not to cure, but to charm expressing his delight in the
term of murmuringe, which was the Custom of witches in their Charms, never
used by servants of God, though wicked men are compared to the deaf adder,
whose ear is stopped to the murmuring Charmer, as theirs to the holy advice.
But Iconoclastes may as well hope to turn men into ftones by his absurd
assertions, or into serpents by his lewd reproaches, as persuade men of his
reason, or honesty. We know the prayers of the wicked are abominable, as well,
as their wilful falhood, and slander, and while he seeks to place those, that
will not be led by him, among those that Charms, cannot cure, nor prayers
profit, declares his prayers, noe other, then Charms, and himself a man, that
can neither cure, nor pray, and sets prayer among those things he scoffs at,
as well, as the Titles of him, that is only to be prayed to.

(...)
Upon the KINGS Calling this last PARLIAMENT.
THat, which the King lajes down, as his foundation, that he called this last
Parliament not more by others advice, and the necessity of his affairs, then
by his own choice, and inclination, is to all knowing men so apparently
untrue, that a more inauspicious Sentence could hardly have come into his mind.

That his Majest: intention could be apparent to all knowing men, must have
better Authority, then this Authors word to be believed. His Majest best knew
his own intentions, and ought to be credited against the Malicious conjectures
of such, as seek matter of slander against him to shelter their own
impieties, never King of England showed greater affection to Parliaments, then
his Majest: and never King found greater ingratitude. His frequent coming to
Parliaments in his Fathers Reign. His many good offices done the houses, and
the larg acknowledgments of their obligations to him are upon the Records of
both houses. Upon the death of his Father he instantly called a Parliament,
seeking to continue the same understanding between him, and his houses, as
there had been in the time of his Father. He had then entered into a dangerous
war with Spain upon the Parliaments Council, was in preparation of a great
fleet, stood charged with a great debt left on him by his Father, besides
deep engagements to his Allies abroad, the supplies the then Parliament gave
him were two Subsidies, he then desired an addition only of forty thousand
pound, which was refused him. If any man shall say now, that the King called
not that Parliament of his own inclination, because he was discontented to be
so dealt with by them, knowing men will hardly believe him, and such men, as are
justly displeased with factions in Parliament, might truly affect them, when
they are rightly disposed, and this Sentence, which I conoclastes holds so
inauspicious imports not that, which his false Augurie Prognosticates, for
though his Majest: received provocations, and causes of dislike from several
Parliaments, it follows not, that he could have no intention to call one, when
there was a probability of removing the causes of former disorders, which his
Majest: expresses in his ensuing discourse.

The inclination of a Prince is best known by those next about him, or by the
current of his Actions. These nearest this King were Courtiers, and Prelates,
and it was their Continual exercise to dispute, and preach against them.

For the Actions of others Iconoclastes would think them a weak proof of his
intentions, though the persons were very near him, and though there were
preaching, and disputes against the proceedings of some Parliaments, its no
proof of the Kings intentions, nor theirs, that used them against the right
use of Parliaments, and the proceedings of some Parliaments might give just
occasion to men to say the King (they hoped) would have no more need of them
and it is a very great happiness of any state not to need them, the
necessity of them proceeding from want, and danger, and there was a time, when
people held Parliaments a burden to hem, and those in Parliament claimed it,
that they were not bound to attend the Parliament above forty days, and our
own stories tells us of an indoctum Parliamentum, and insanum Parliamentum.
And does Iconoclastes think, that all such, as were out of love with such
Parlaments had no affection to any.

This was (he sajes) but the Copy, which his Parasites had industriously taken
from his own words, and Actions, who never called a Parliament, but to supply
his necessities.

Such, as have observed the inclinations of persons near his Majest: find non
greater Parasites, then such, as proved Traitors to him, and Parasites are not
wanting to other powers, as well, as Kings, for we find by this Author what men
will do to please their Masters either by offitiousnes to their persons, or the
performance of villainy against others. This Author spends his mouth in vain
following his common place of Parafites, and Courtiers, when the Actions he
mentions are so far from reflecting upon his Majest: as they leave the blemish
upon the Relatour. That his Majest: had necessities, when he called a
Parliament is known to all, and the causes of them, but that he was ready all
ways to hear, and redress the just greivances of his people could never yet
be contradicted by the experience in any Parliament, al though the Author say,
having Supplied these, he suddenly, and nominiously dissolved it without
redressing any one greivance of the people. But if the Parliaments never
presented to him on greivance to be redressed, which he denied, where lies the
ignominy? It seems the Author takes not the petition of right to be of that
nature, for that was granted by the King, and that concession of his was then
judged as great an Act to the redress of greivances, as ever King of England
granted his people. His Majest: summoned three Parliaments before the short
Parliament at the beginning of these troubles, and in non of these were there
any greivances presented by the Parliament to the King to be redressed, but
that petition of right, unless a Remonstrance against the Duke of Buckingham be
reckned in that number, and if the people, had just greivances to be redressed,
they had just cause of complaint against those Conventions, and of late
repentance for their credulity, that depended so much on them, that so little
regarded their Sufferings. If we look upon the length of time, wherein these
Parliaments sat, we shall find sessions concluded, and diverse good laws
made in the like space of time in the Reigns of former Kings, and whoever
looks to the journalls of the houses in these Parliaments of his late Majest:
or whoever was present in them must confess, that those, that governed in the
lower house minded nothing less, then the redress of greivances, or making of
laws, which were formally talked of to entertain time, while private
annimosities, and personal revenges were made the sole business of importance,
and in the space of four months no one greivance was prepared to be presented
to his Majest: and Iconoclastes heaps up untruths without respect to the
appearance of their detection, for this first Parliament was so far from being
suddenly dissolved after the King was supplied, that the great Plague not
permitting them to sit longer at west minster, his Majest: adiourned them to
Oxford, and in another Parliament after the supply given him, there was a
second meeting, which might have had a longer continuance, if it had insisted
on the redress of greivances, but whence takes he the occasion to say
Ignominiously dissolved. Where was the Ignominy? Had not his Majest: a legal
right to do it? And if the houses would not agree in the redress of
greivances, and supply of the necessities of the Kingdom, their continuance
would prove ignominious, not their dissolving.

Sometimes choosing rather to miss of his subfidies or to raise them by
illegal courses, then that the people should not still miss of their hopes to
be releived by Parliaments.

Iconoclastes in his Preface talked of laying parallel actions to words, and
here he uses words of actions, that never were, for among those Parliaments of
his late Majest: where can he find a number to make up his Sometimes, using a
language, as if the King had called as many Parliaments, as he had reigned
years? And where can he find, that the King chose to miss his subsidies,
that the people should not be releived by Parliaments. Two of the Parliaments
are already mentioned. In the third, where he had non, he was so far from
choosing to miss of his subsidies, if he might have had them, that his
reiterated Messages to the then house of Commons to prepare their greivances,
that he might apply just remedies to them, sufficiently prove, that nothing was
wanting of his part to have received the subsidies, and releived the people;
Its well known, that his Majest: had at that time a war with Spain, and
France, and that nothing, but inevitable necessity on his part, could have
made him decline the obtainnig of subsidies from that Parliament. And after the
house of Commons had declared, that they would supply him in such a way, and in
so ample a measure, as should make him safe at home, and feared abroad, they
agreed upon the number of subsidies, but voted, that the Bill should not come
into the house, till their greivances were answered. His Majest: sent them
there upon several Messages to hasten them to present the greivances, which
nothing wrought on them, but without any reason after long expectation, they
denied to have the bil of subsidies brought into the house. Its well known, that
no Kingdom had less greivances, then that of England under his late Majest:
And the people were persuaded into an opinion of greivances, not by sense of
Suffering, but the disputes of Pragmaticall Incendiaries, and they would have
rested quiet, had they not been seduced by such Craftsmen, and there is no on
thing, that this breaker can name for a greivance, which his Masters, that now
Lord it, do not increase.

The first he broke of at his coming to the Crown for no other cause, then to
protect the Duke of Buckingham against them, who had accused him, besides other
heinous Crimes, of no less, then poisoning the deceased King his Father.

This Author takes himself not concerned in speaking Truth, for the public
Records of the Kingdom, and some late declarations of the pretended Parliament
would have held his hand from this false assertion, if he had valued Truth at
the rate of perusing them, for the Duke of Buckingham was not at all accused by
the first Parliament of the King, nor in any Parliament for poisoning the
deceased King. He might have found, that in the second Parliament of the King,
Among other Articles against the Duke of Buckingham, he was accused for a
Transcendent Presumption, and of dangerous consequence touching Physic
applied to the deceased King, but the malice of such, as hated the Duke of
Duckingham did not extend to an accusation of poisoning the deceased King, yet
the venom of Treason in this Author makes him madd, and say, that a fact of
presumption, and of dangerous consequence was a poisoning. If such were the
wisdom of a house of Parliament to call poisoning of a King, a presumption of
dangerous consequence neither King nor people need be troubled to want their
Council. This is the first instance, though not the first falsehood of
Iconoclastes, but to the matter of what he sajes in that second Parliament,
wherein the Duke of Buckingham was accused, his Majest: by Message to the lower
house told them, he was well pleased they should proceed against the Duke of
Buckingham they did accordingly give up their Articles to the Lords, the Duke
of Buckingham made his answer, which was sent down to the Commons, who being
unable to reply to it, such, as then swayed the house contrary to the Council
of a great number of the most experienced amongst them resolved to hinder al
proceedings, and necessitate the King to a Dissolution of the Parliament. This
is no secret, the journall books of that house sufficiently ^vince it.

Still the latter breaking was with more affront, and indignity put upon the
house and her worthyest members, then the former.

This appears not by his subsequent reason, but if this breaker had thought
either the dissolving of Parliaments, or indignity, and affront to members any
offense, why does he take on him the defense of those, that have Ignominiously
excluded the whole house of Lords, and so many of the Commons, and among them
some, whom he terms the worthiest persons in the Parliament he speaks of,
but his reasons, and narrations are of the same stuff; And if any man compare
the affronts, and indiginties offered his Majest: by some persons in
parliament, and his proceedings against them, he will judge, that their
provacations exceeded his passion, and their own sufferings.

In so much, that in the fifth year of his Reign in a Proclamation he seems
offended at the very Rumor of a Parliament divulged among the people, as if he
had taken it for a kind of slander, that men should think him that way
exorable much less inclined.

What strawes this man pickes up. If the King did seem offended at a factious
Rumor, does it follow, that he held it a Scandal to act that, which was
Rumoured. Because a King does forbid Rumors of his intended Actions, does he
not therefore intend them? And must his Counsels be the subject of common
Rumor? It is a factious practice to spread a Rumor of a parliament, before
the King please to declare it, and tends to the precipitation of his Counsels
by sedition. But as his premises are (he seems) so his conclusions are (as
if) and men may as well believe him on his bare word, as such inferences he
appearing inexorable to speak Truth, or forbear slander.

And forbidds it, as a presumption to prescribe him any time for Parliaments
that is to say, either by persuasion or petition, or so much, as the reporting
of such a Rumor, for other manner of Prescribing was at that time not
suspected.

His Majest: therein forbad no more then the law forbidds, and accounts it a
presumption to Prescribe him any time for Parliaments. But such, as have
destroyed King, and Parliament would have it esteemed strange, that they should
not prescribe what they list, and the breaker, that would have the King
Prescribed will allow non to Prescribe his now masters. His explanation
signifies nothing, for does he think, that the King ought to be petitioned, or
persuaded by every on, that will, or that the spreading of a Rumor is a fit
mea^es to induce him to call a Parliament? He endeavors to defame the King for
restrayning popular license, and Sedition, and when he seeks to confirm the
Tyranny of his Masters, he reproaches the people with Levitie, and violence;
And the ways of Prescribing by him mentioned were unorderly, and by him
particularised as Plausible, not sound, other manner of Prescribing was then
not Suspected, he intends the force of a scotts Army, and though he commend
that way of Prescribing, and attribute the calling of the Parliament to it, and
accuse the King for resisting it, yet he will charge the King with beginning
the war.

By which feirce Edict, the people forbidden to complain, as well, as forced
to suffer began from thence forth to despair of Parliaments.

The people have now greater cause to despair of Parliaments then ever they
had in the time of his late Majest: for if these men prevail, they are sure
never to have more, for they profess to introduce a new form of Government
which has nothing of the Parliament of England and however the people by
seditious practices, or false apprehensions despaired of Parliaments, that
proves nothing of his Majest: inclination, or aversenes to Parliaments. How an
edict can be called feirce, where no punishment of the breach of it appears to
be denounced, nor any severitie ensuing it, cannot be imagined, but its well
known what Titles this Author will give to any of his Majest: Actions
respecting only the reproachfullnes of the Terms, not their proportion, or
(...) to what they are applied, and whoever looks on the time, while
Parliaments were intermitted, the sufferings of the people were less, then
when Parliaments were frequent, and they need not be forbidden to complain,
when their peace, and plenty were a reason strong enough to restrain them,
however querulous murmurings wrought by seditious contrivers, may happen, and
ought to be forbidden in all just Governments.

Where upon such illegal Actions, and especially to get vast sums of money
were put in Practice by the King, and his new Officers, as Monopolies,
compulsive knighthoods, Coat, Conduct, and Shipmony, the seezing not of on
Nabaoths Vineyard, but of whole inheritances, under the pretense of forest, or
Crown lands, Corruption, and bribery compounded for with impunities granted
for the future, as gave evident proof, that the King never meant, nor could it
stand with the Reason of his affairs ever to recall Parliaments.

All the pretenses of Tyranny, and oppression, wherewith the Rebels have
sought to mask their disloyalty are reduced to this on sum to get money.
That Princes must have supplies from their people for support of the Kingdom
cannot be doubted, and where the laws have given the King a richt to demand
money of particular persons in certanie cases, or of the whole people, these
are no illegal exactions, but due debts. The King of England is entitled by
law to diverse dues from his subjects, and of such things his learned Council,
and his Judges have the care, that he loose not his rights, and they are bound
by oath to preserve them, and if in any cases they sail in their judgment,
their King cannot be guilty of illegal exactions in following their Council,
and of such nature are the particulars he mentions, unless Coat, and Conduct
money, which had been disbursed by the Counties for the present, where
soldiers were raised, and was of inconsiderable value and to be repayed, and
only of practice in case of war when necessity requires greater
contributions, and such Actions, as these the best Governments could never
avoyde, and those forms of Government, which these Rebels Prefer before
Monarchy ordinairly practis, but they must supply with exclamations, what they
want of matter, and having broken all bounds of duty, Justice, and humanity,
they seek to make the common means, which necessity compells Governnours to
use for public support, the height of oppression, and Tyranny. The vast sums
received by all the ways were far short of that great charge, which the
Kingdom required, and of what former Kings had received in the like space, but
inconsiderable in regard of the present exactions. He resembles the legal
proceedings in cases of civil right to Nabaoths vineyard; so as al suites for
recovery of detained rights is the getting of Nabaoths vineyard, but they that
by the blood of many Naboaths have gotten their inheritances would have Civil
Controversies, not bloody murder the sin of Ahab. Corruption, and bribery
compounded for with impunitie for the future is a denomination, which cannot be
fixed to any Actions of Majest: That his Majest: has a power to pardon was
never denied, and therefore no act of grace in that kind can be illegal, but
this, which they call corruption, and bribery was no other, then the fees,
which some officers received, and were questioned to be above their due, and
had they been convict, their mulct was pecuniary, and due to the King. They
urged long Custom in their defense, and in a case of that nature, where only
error, not corruption, or bribery can be admitted, it was nearer to justice,
then favor to forbear prosecution; And as the fact was not illegal, so had it
been, it was only theirs, by whose Council it was done, and these men, that
profess such zeal against corruption, and bribery, pretend, that it was
necessary to take away the starr chamber, where such Crimes were punished, and
from whence comes it, that it could not stand with his majest: affairs te
recall Parliaments, when his Majest: desired to continue nothing, but what was
necessary for the Kingdom?

Having brought by these irregular courses the peoples interest, and his own
(...) so direct an opposition, that he might foresee plainly, if nothing, but
a Parliament could save the people, it must necessarily be his undoing.

The King had no interest, but that, which was common to the people with him,
and nothing, that was their interest could be opposite to his. The people were
very far from any such apprehensions of being Destroyed, or that they might
not be saved without the Kings undoing; And wherein could the King foresee his
undoing by Parliament, must he necessarily foresee, that a Parliament would
follow Traitors against him? Or must he necessarily foresee that a Parliament
would undertake an illegal, and un just power? Must he necessarily foresee,
that a Parliament would produce a Rebellion, when no Action was desired to be
continued by him, which was not according to law, nor any greivance duly
proved vnredressed? But because in the Parliament, which he called a faction
destroyed him, and has undone the Kingdom, therefore Iconoclastes would have
it plainly to be foreseen. Such, as know the difference of the last from
former Parliaments, know likewise, that it was not from the condition of the
Parliament, but the conjuncture of affairs at the time of calling it, that
produced those wicked effects filling the minds of many with ambitious
thoughts, and desire to lay the foundation of their private greatenes in the
public ruins. It is impossible, that the interest of a King can have an
opposition to that of his people which is vainly fancied hy him, or that any
thing by him alleged should work such opposition. And although there have
been disputes in Courts, and Parliaments touching the profitts, and rights of
the Crown, yet before this Rebel generation, non were so shameless to pretend
them causes of the subjects violence, and necessarily destructive to the King,
or people, which had the people imagined would have been the issue of a
Parliament, they would have had a greater aversion to it, then Iconoclastes
supposes in his late Mejest: And as the preservation of the people is the
Kings, interest, so his preservation is theirs, which the people now find to
late, and could not foresee, that such, as made use of the pretense of their
interest, minded it least.

Till eight, or nine years after proceeding with a high hand in these
enormities, and having the second time levied an injurious war against his
native country Scotland, and finding all those other shifts of raising money,
which bore out his first expedition now to fail him, not of his own choice,
and inclination, as any child may see, but urged by strong necessities, and
the very pangs of State which his own violent proceedings had brought him to,
he calls a Parliament.

Iconoclastes is very industrious to show, that he can express the malice of
his heart with his pen, and can give false denominations to Actions with
greater confidence, then true, where it may advantag his Masters. The gentle
hand wherewith his Majest governed during the nine years he mentions, brands
that high hand of slander, and de^action, which this breaker stretches out
against him, and it will fill posterity with amazement at the folly of the
present age, that should take such things for enormities, as fines for
knighthood, Coat, conduct, and shipmony, whereof some of them were scarce
felt, or observed, and the rest easily borne; And submit themselves to
contributions, excises, loanes, and taxes, to which those, which he calls
enormities hold no proportion. But not contented with the false appellations of
his Majest: Civil Actions, he proceeds to defy, and reproach his Actions for
preservation, and defense of his Kingdom, and calls it an injurious war to
resist an invading Enemy. That the Scotts were entered near a hundred mile into
the Kingdom, at the time he mentions, he cannot be ignorant, and to call the
war injurious on his Majest: part cannot come from any, that thinks any thing
injurious, that Rebels commit, or any thing just that Governors command.
When any Actions are rehearsed of his Majest: against the Scotts, the Traitors
call them unjust, and amplify their slander with the Circumstance of his
native Country. When the Scotts offer obedience to the King, or he concur
with them, they decry such Actions, in respect they are of his native Country,
thus shifting, saying, and gainsaying to deceive the people. If there any yet
remain, that will trust such common Cheates. His collection, that necessity,
and not choice brought the King to call a Parliament follows not from any of
his premises. His Majest: does not exclude the necessity of his affairs from
moving him to call the Parliament: When he says, that be called the Parliament
not more by necessity, then his own choice, does he exclude necessity, or
affirm his own choice only without consideration of Circumstances.
Parliaments ought not to be called, but upon great occasions, and their too
often Convention is a burden, not an ease to the people, and such was the
judgment of the late Parliament at the beginning. It is not new, that
necessities, have caused Kings to call Parliaments, which yet was never made an
Argument to prove their own vninclination to call a Parliament. His descant
upon strong necessities, and pangs of state lays open the Treason of these
conspiratours, that plotted how their Country might pine, and languish, that so
unnatural Emperickes might exercise their bloody practice, and a merciless
Tyrany could only be exspected from such, as sought their power by their
Countries sufferings: And if his Majest: proceedings had been violent, they
had not produced that necessity.

First in Ireland, which only was to give him four subsidies, and so to expire,
then in England, where his first demand was but twelve subsidies to maintain
a Scotch war condemned, and abominated by the whole Kingdom, promising their
greivances should be considered af^erwards.

The Parliament in Ireland he might have known was not the first, that was,
called in the nine years he mentions, but falsehood are so common, that
mistakes are not worth the observation, and if the King had called that
Parliament in Ireland to obtain ^ower subsidies, where had been the fault: May
not a King call a Parliament to be supplied? But if Iconoclastes had patience
to know truth, or speak it, he might ea^ily have found a great number of good
laws made in that Parlia^ent, to work a conformity of that nation to
England, and he unseasonably produced this instance of the Parliament of
Ireland, which so mainely contradicts his assertion, for the necessities alone
he supposes could not work the calling of that Parliament, where Parliaments
had been so frequent before. In England, where he says his Majest: first
demand was, but twelve subsidies, he has lost his expectation, and his
Ironicall but has lost its mirth for he cannot think, that the people now
apprehend twelve subsidies so great a demand by the King, when they see a
far greater proportion given the Scotch for invading the Kingdom, and
aftersuch an execrable war, and barbarous prodigality their greivance is
increast, and all, that is effected, or pretended to be done for them is the
Destruction of King, and Church, and dividing the Estates of both among the
Master Rebels, upon whose Arbitrary, and unlimited power they must now depend.
That those twelve subsidies were demanded to maintain Scotch war has no
color of truth, it being not at al propounded; And as it had been a sottish,
and perverse disposition to have condemned the war against the Scotts, when
they were in preparation to invade England, so it is as shamelesly said by
Iconoclastes, that it was condemned and abominated by the whole people.
Himself if a wicked obduration had not made him love lying, must have
conffessed, that the late Earl of Essex, though afterward in Rebellion against
the King, with great demonstrations of Zeal, and affection to his Majest:
went a Commander in that expedition; And if we respect the quality, or number
of noble, and worthy persons that engaged themselves in that first war, our
stories have rarely remembered an Army, that went into Scotland of greater
number of eminent persons, so as Iconoclastes has just cause to condemn, and
abominate himself for the Lewdenes, and evidence of this untruth, and if the
then Parliament had not been abused by some representing his Majest: desires,
the designs of such, as meant to make advantage of the breach of that
Parliament had been disappointed, and the Calamities ensuing had been
prevented; And as there were no greivances then in the Kingdom, but might
admit longer delay of redress, then the public necessities of supply, so his
Majest: might justly demand subsidies in the first place with promise to
redresle their greivances afterward; And Iconoclastes too late observes the
order of that demand of his late Majest: to be amiss, when the late
Parliament granted so many subsidies for the Scotts without expectation of any
such promise.

Which when the Parliament, who judged that war it self on of their maine
greivances, made no haste to grant, not enduring the delay of his impatient
will, or else fearing the conditions of their grant, he breaks of the whole
session and dismisses them, and their greivances with scorn and frustration.

That the Parliament judged that war any of their greivances, that never
mentioned it in their debates, or resolutions is fit for the affirmation of
this Author only. But if the Parliament had judged that war one of their maine
greivances, the rest, whereof so great noise has been made, will hardly be
thought weighty. This war was then newly begun, the King had received no
fupply from the people for the charge past, and could this be a maine
greivance? We see at what rate this man makes greivances, and to what ordinary
accidents he applies his exorbitant expressions. The then Parliament would not
have been slow in his Majest: supply, if some false Ministers had not
interposed, and some seditious persons had not plotted to impose a necessity
upon his Majest: to dissolve the Parliament. They had not presented him any
greivances and therefore there could be no such dismission with scorn and
frustration, as he Phrases it. There were evident tokens of grief, and
discontent in his late Majest: that he was necessitated to that act, but there
was rejoicing, and insolence amongst the turbulent Sectaries for it.

Much less therefore did he call this last Parliament by his own choice, and
inclination, but having first tried in vain all undue ways to procure money,
his Army of their own accord being beaten in the north, the Lords petitioning,
and the general voice of the people all most hissing him, and his ill acted
Regalitie of the Stage, compelled, at length both by his want, and by his
fears, upon mere extreamitie he summoned this last Parliament.

This man acts the part of a Lord of misrule to stir the passions of the
people with taunts, and abuses, and for his over acted petulant scurrilitie
fit to be whipped of the stage. If he had ever given proof of his own
courage, he would not thus barbarously reproach his late Majest: with fears,
who was so well known to have hazarded his person in so many perils, and
these Phrases are the froth of a base insultation, not the censure of a just
Ennemy. But why for fear should the King summon a Parliament if he fore saw,
as the libeller says it would be his undoing? Could he have greater fears,
then that? He has not instanced one undue way of his late Majest: to get money
for the war against Scotland, and therefore his repetitions import his
impertinence, as well, as his malice but gain no credit by their frequency.
The peoples hissing, which the Traitors desired, had been as inconsiderable,
and undutiful, as his assertions are false, but as it no way contradicts, what
his Majest: says, if the allaying of popular discontents, and rectifying
mistakes were one end of calling the Parliament, so the petitioning of the
Lords instructs all reasonable men to think, that fears and wants were not
the sole cause of summoning that Parliament and that his Majest: choice was not
excluded. And as the beating of his Majest: Army had not so disabled him, but
that they were in number, and courage superior to their Enemies, so if his
Majest: choice had not guided him, he might with less hazard in common
appearance have tried the success of a battle at that time, then he did at
diverse times afterward. That, which he says of the Armies, being beaten of
their own accord is little to their honor, if it were true, but infamous to
this Author being false, and if there were any so perfidious to betray their
own, and their nations honor unto strangers, they could not be many, for its a
known truth, that the most eminent persons in that service, and the greatest
number of common soldiers served his Majest: afterward in his wars, not only
against the English Rebels, but the Scotts.

And how is it possible, that he should willingly incline to Parliaments, who
never was perceived to call them, but for the greedy hopes of a whole national
bribe, his subsidies, and never loved, never fulfilled, never promoted the true
ends of Parliaments, the redress of greivances, but still putt them of, and
prolonged them, whether, gratifyed, or not gratifyed, and was indeed the
Author of all those greivances.

It has been already showed, how his Majest: was perceived to call Parliaments
out of his own choice, and inclination, and it was not only in his Majest:
time, but in the time of Queen Elisabeth, that Parliaments were said to be
only called to give subsidies, there never wanting malcontents, and slanderers
of the Actions of Princes, and the case may be such, that subsidies may be the
chief motive, to call Parliaments, considering the sufficiency of the laws in
force, and the small number of greivances complained of. Malicious detraction
is accompanied with absurdity, and Iconoclastes becoming a Champion of
Rebellion reckons Tributes, and supplies of the sovereign by subjects, which
is their duty among the number of scandalous sins, and that which was practiced
by our savior, and commanded by his Apostles he calls national bribes. This
brain sick, and profane Libelling can be acceptable to none, but such, as
are delighted with the unhappy distempers of Bedlam. He has not so much
passion to have greivances redrest, as love to the word, because, as he
thinks, it imports matter displeasing to the people, who yet are now
satisfied, that those, which abused them by the frequent use of the word
greivances, never intended the remedy, but by multiplying complaints sought to
lead them into discontents against the Government, whereby they might become
Captive to ambitious usurpers. That, which he says is the true end of
Parliaments to reform greivances justly condemns those, he now calls a
Parliament, who, he well knows sit to no other end, but to increase
greivances, and in eight years time never redressed one. Though Kings take
notice of greivances in Parliament, and take, order to redress them, yet that
cannot be called the true end of calling Parliaments for there are often
occasions of calling Parliaments in respect of public safety against
Enemies, and conspiratours, addition, and alteration of laws, public
supplies, the redress of greivances is accidental to the Parliament, and the
pretense of greivances has proved the greatest greivance, that ever the people
suffered, and his scurrilous objection of greedy hope to his late Majest: on
whom malice it self has not yet laid such a Crime increases the Libellers
infamy, not the weight of his charge.

To say therefore, that he called this Parliament of his own choice, and
inclination argues how little truth, we can expect from the sequel of this
book, which ventures in the very first period to affront more, then one
nation, with an untruth so remarkable.

If the venturing upon an untruth in the first period be an argument to expect
little in the sequel of the book, what may we expect of this Author, whose
whole book is a confutation of his first period, not to descant on the Kings
misfortunes? That in seeking to disprove this first period adventured on so
many palpable untruths, and sticks not to pervert the very period it self,
and affront not only more, then one nation, but all indifferent men? For if his
Majest: had been necessitated either through the disorder of persons to
dissolve Parliaments, or for bear them, he might yet call a Parliament by his
own choice, considering, that not the condition of Parliament, but the male
volence of some persons were cause both of the dissolution, and forbearance.
The often Parliaments in Ireland, and the precedent Parliaments in England to
that, which he mentions, maintain the truth of that first period against the
many remarkable falsities of this Image breaker.

And presumes a more implicit faith in the people of England, then the Pope
ever commanded from the Romish laity, or else a natural sottishnes fit to be
abused, and ridden.

Kings may expect credit to their words from their people, Rebels cannot
though experience has confirmed that if a great part of the people of England
had not followed them with a more blind, and obstinate belief, then ever
Romish laity did their Pope, they could never have been ridden, and jaded, as
now they are. And Iconoclastes could never presume the belief of his
extravagant assertions, if he thought not his readers of worse, then natural
sottishnes to be abused, for while they lie grovelling under the Tyrany of their
present oppressors, and lament the loss of their happiness under the Kingly
Government, this man will persuade them out of their sense, and memory.

While in the judgment of wisemen by laying the foundation of his defense on
the avouchment of that, which is so manifestly untrue, he has given a worse
foil to his own cause, then when his whole sorces were at any time overthrown.

Surely there wiseme^ showed as little reason, in judging an assertion, as
knowledge in military affairs, that made by comparison of this period to the
defeat of an army. If his Maj: have given so great a foil to his cause by the
first period of his book whence comes the danger, that Iconoclastes would
prevent? Was this first period unintelligible without his comment, and what is
it to the Kings, cause, whether he called the Parliament of his own choice, or
not. Its very likely his wife men here are the same with his well principled
men he mentioned else where, and their principles, or impiety being the same
with his, their judgment is as corrupt, as their conscience, and as far from
wisdom, as the libeller from modesty, and if any had such a judgment, they
might soon find their error, which all others descerne, and such a judgment
were a greater foil to their wisdom, then to his Majest: cause.

They therefore, who think such great service done to the Kings affairs in
publishing this book will find themselves in the end mistaken, of sense, and
right mind, or but any mediocritie of knowledge, and remembrance has not
quite for saken men.

They will find themselves no whit mistaken if sense, right mi^de, and
mediocritie of knowledge, and remembrance have not quite for saken men, but the
libeller, will find himself very much mistaken, if he expect, that his sense
shall be so received against apparent truth, as to give a greater foil, then the
defeat of Arimes, and understanding must have left the world, where the Author
of such a comparison finds credit.

He comes now to prosecute his Majest: discourse in pursucance of that period,
and first to what his Majest: affirms of Parliaments to have always thought
the right way of them most safe to his Crown, and best pleasing to his people,
he says we felt from his Actions what he thought of Parliaments, or of
pleasing his people.

The people feel now, that, which makes them confess, that they had just
cause by what they felt from his Majest: Actions to be well pleased with them,
and to believe, what he affirms here to be his judgment of Parliaments, and
if any people were pleased with the ill way of Parliaments, they have seen
their error by the evil consequents, and now think the right way of them
only most safe for the Crown, and them, and that nothing, but ruin to the
Kingdom can be expected from disorderly Parliaments.

He goes on to that, which his Majest: adds, that the cause of forbearing to
Conveene Parliaments was the sparks, which some men's distempers there studied
to kindle. To this the libeller says, they were not temperd to his temper, for
it neither was the law, nor Rule, by which all other tempers were to be tried,
but they were chosen for sit men in their Counties to quench those
distampers, which his inordinate doings had inflamed.

Is the choice in Counties the law, and rule whereby rempers are to be tried?
And would the libeller have it believed, that all such, as are chosen in the
Counties, are of better temper, then the King. If choice be the law of temper,
why does he justify those men, which have affronted, scorned, and punished
such, as have been chosen by the Counties? If all a^e so well temperd, why are
some so ill handled, and excluded? And if there may be distempers, as he must
confess in despite of impudence, why was it not a just reason of his Majest:
fo^ebearance, if he found it? We know what fires small sparks kindle in great
Assemblies, and we have felt the flame of them like the sudden eruption of
burning Mountains, when all was quiet, and there were men, that studied to
turn the Parliament into confusion having not the temper to quench, but to
inflame.

Were these men, that were of the two Parliaments in the first year of his
Majest: Reign; The first called within two months after he begun, the second
within twelve, chosen to allay those distempers, which his inordinate doings
had inflamed, what were these inordinate doings, that could inflame so
suddenly? We need not argue this Authors credit from one untruth, but he would
obtain some credit, if one entire truth could be found in him.

If that were his refusing to conveene till those men had been quallified to
his will, we may easily conjecture what hope there was of Parliaments, had not
fear, and his insatiate poverty in the midst of his excessive wealth
constrained him.

His Majest: might with reason exspect, that many, who through error had
caused distempers, might return to a right mind seeing his temper, and their
little reason to desire such Parliaments, as make it their whole work to
divide the peoples affections from the King, and follow the Counsels of such,
as are malcontents for want of preferment, and if men had been quallified to
his Majest: will, Parliaments would have had happier, success, and the people
pleased with their agreement, that now groan under the miseries of their
division. But whence his insatiate poverty in the midst of his excessive
wealth should constrain him is not understood, wants, and wealth are
inconsistent. This libeller has great poverty of sense in the midst of his
excessive expressions. He goes an ill way to prove that the King was so
vninclined to Parliaments, and that poverty compelled him, if he had wealth
certainly that would have kept him from hazarding a course so disliked. He
shall be rich, and poor, that some may contemn his poverty, others may grudge
his wealth.

The King hoped by his Freedom, and their moderation to prevent
misvnderstandings. To this says Iconoclastes, wherefore not by their Freedom,
and his moderation.

The Champion cannot fuffer a King to pass without signifying to him, that
there is no difference between King, and subject. The King had resolved to use
Freedom in his concessions, and hoped they would use moderation in their
demands. This man would have him say, that they should use Freedom in their
demands and he would use moderation in his concessions, has he not made it a
proper speech? Will his wise, and well principled men think him a fit Champion
to break Bell, and the Dragon? But he gives a reason, why the King would
speak sense, for he thought says he Freedom to high a word for them, and
moderation to^ mean for himself, and he concludes, this was not the way to
prevent misunderstanding. Its sure this man took the way to make
misvnderstandings, that would have Freedom applied to the people, what ever
the subject be, that is spoken of, and its like he would be well pleased, that
they had Freedom from law, prosperity, loyalty, and obedience, which might
be as well spoken, as the sense he has framed to prevent misvnderstandings.

He says the King still feared passion, and prejudice in other men, not in
himself, and doubted not by the weight of his own reason to counterpoise any
faction, it being so easy for him, and so frequent to call his obstinacy
reason, and other men's reason faction.

He had great reason to fear passion, and prejudice in others, which he had
so often tried, and which they, that then feared not have since found true, and
the concessions the King purposed, and performed might make him confident to
counterpoyse any faction, but the libeller will have it believed, that he,
which granted more, then any of his Predecessors was obstinate, and they,
that demanded what former Parliaments thought unreasonable, and impious, had
reason. But the King was deceived, that had to do with Monsters, not
reasonable men.

We in the mean while must believe, that wisdom, and all reason came to him
by Title with his Crown: Passion, prejudice, and faction to others by being
subjects.

Kings have advantages above others for wisdom, and reason, they are assisted
with diverse Counsels, and in public affairs reason must be presumed in
Kings, and faction feared in subjects, nature being averse to submit, and
interests, and partialities incident to all great Assemblyes, and the
detraction from the wisdom of Rulers in the Rebels foundation, and a sure
sign of corrupt intentions.

He was sorry to hear with what popular heat elections were carried in many
places. To these words of the Kings he says sorry rather, that Court, letter,
and intimations prevailed no more to divert, or to deter the people from
their free election of those men, whom they thought best affected to Religion,
and their Countries liberty, both at that time in danger to be lost.

They were in danger to be lost by a Traiterous conspiracy with an invading
enemy, but no other danger imaginable to any. There was never less cause to
complain of Court letters, and intimations, nor ever greater mistakes of
persons chosen, the Countries affections to Religion, and liberty making way
for the insinuations of Hypocritical seducers, and had the Countries known
the dispositions of the men they chose, as their Actions have since discovered,
they would not have trusted them with their Religion, and liberty, which they
have betrayed. This Image breaker declaimes against the violence, and levitie
of the people, and here calumniates his Majest: for observing the popular
heat, whereby elections were carried in some places, it being a most known
truth, that popular, heat is as frequent upon such occasions, as any other,
witness the long annimosities between families, and the great contentions, that
arise from such Elections.

Among the many clamours in the late Parliament, where malice was as busy, as
this Author is now to find out Court letters to divert, or deter the people
from free Elections, there was not one instance produced of such letters or
intimations. How wickedly industrious many were to blow abroad jealosie, and
suspicion of the danger of Religion, and liberty, and how causelessely the
people in many places were drawn into passion by vain surmises, is too well
known, and it is too late, for the Image breaker to seek to reduce the people
into those misopinions, which they have detected by too dear bought
experience, for they well see, that there was no way so certain to endanger
Religion, and liberty, as that they were seduced into, upon pretense to
preserve them.

And such men they were, as by the Kingdom were sent to advise him, not sent
to be Cavilled at, because elected, or to be entertained by him with an
undervalue, and misprision of their temper, judgment, or affection.

Though such, as were elected, were not sent by the Kingdom, but by the
respective places, one not intermedling with another, yet if Iconoclastes had
not been more forward to express his impotencie, then warry in producing
reason, he would not have spoken of being Cavilled at, whereof he had not
montioned the least color, and if he hold the persons of men elected so
sacred, and the King faulty for not esteeming them, as he ought, what is the
reason, that he defends the Tumults, that reproacht, and assaulted them What
is the reason he professes so much honor to those Masters, that plucked them
out of the house, and kicked them into prisons? Kings send for their subjects
to advise with them, and Iconoclastes might find by the Elections of members
of the lower house, that they were sent to do, and consent to such things, as
should be ordained with the common Council of the Kingdom, and therefore
mistakes their directions, that says they were sent to advise him, and with
what childish levitie does he insult on his sovereign, for undervaluing of the
temper, judgment, or affection of persons chosen, as if their Elections refined
their natures, and sublimated their tempers, as this man's Rebellion has
inflamed, and besotted him.

In vain was a Parliament thought fittest, by the known laws of our nation
to advise, and regulate unruly Kings, if they insteede of harkening to advice,
should be permitted to turn it of, and refuse it by vilifying, and traducing
their advisers, or by accusing of a popular heat, those that lawfully elected
them.

If a Parliament were thought fittest by the known laws of our Kingdom, to
regulate unruly Kings, it was certainly in vain, for such Kings, as stories
report most irregular, were least regulated by Parliaments, but on the contrary
the Parliaments concurd to their desires, and in such extravagant Actions, as
were the greatest blemishes of their Government, and ^conoclastes does well to
make a supposition of known laws, for he knows not any, that thought his
supposition true, for the known, laws will not suppose an unruly King, and
therefore cannot think, of a way to regulate what they will not suppose, but
were it supposed, that a Parliament were the fittest way to regulate unruly
Kings, does it follow, that there will be no heat in elections, nor noe
misadvice in persons elected? Must the King take all for truth, and reason,
that any of these advisers will tell him? Or is a Major part of them so
infallible, as the whole Kingdom must stand, or perish by the advantage of a
few voices, and perhaps one only? But this breaker has broken out into this
unnatural heat, upon the alone mention of heat in Elections, a matter not
only of possibility, but known truth.

His own, and his Childrens interest oblidged him to seek, and preserve the
love, and welfare of his subjects. To this of his Majest: he says. Who doubts
it, but the same interest common to all Kings, was never yet availeable to make
them all seek that, which was indeed best for themselves, and their
posterity.

But if it be the interest of Kings to preserve the love, and welfare of their
subjects, in vain does Iconoclastes from the transgressions of particular
persons defame the sacred office of Kings, and endeavor to set up usurpers,
whose interest cannot so much oblidge them to the love, and welfare of the
people. He says all men are oblidged by their interest to honesty, and
Justice, but that consideration works little in private men. It seems by his
writing, it works little in him, that so little regards honesty, and Justice.
But his interest is not to regard it, for the interest of his profitt; and
esteem with his Masters cannot be maintained by honesty, and Justice, and
that interest is more prevalent with him, then the interest of a good
conscience, or heaven it self. He might well have descerned, that his Majest:
argued from the Humane, or Civil interest, which men are apt to judge
strongest, and the breaker impertinently diverts the sense to talk of men's
failing in the exercise of virtue, when their temporal interests are the cause
of their miscarriage, and therefore his Majest: reason was strong, that since
his interest, as well, as right carried him to the inclination he mentioned, it
might be more probable to others. But the Image breaker admits no reasons, nor
gives any, but magisterially lays down his position, that Kings have less
consideration of honesty, and Justice then other men. It were an injury to
that high calling to offer an answer to such a barking detractour against the
most approved, most ancient, and most sacred office for the preservation of
Humane society, that will deprave that, which God has sanctified, and will
make those, by whom God dispenses the blessings of peace unto men, the
greatest Enemies to God, and goodness.

He intended to oblidge both friends, and Enemies, and to exceed their
desires, did they but pretend to any modest, and sober sense. To this he says
mistaking the whole business of a Parliament, which meet not to receive from
him obligations, but Justice, nor he to expect from them their modesty, but
their grave advice uttered with Freedom in the public cause.

This man mistakes the whole business of a Parliament, that would exclude
modesty from the advice, and liberty from the advised. The freedom, that the
libeller intends is inconsistent with modesty, as well, as Monarchy, Traiterous
dispositions having an Antipathy to moral virtues. How often have Parliaments
made petitions to their King for graces, and were they not oblidged, when they
were granted? But it cannot be expected, that such, as despi^e duty should
willingly acknowledge the right of those, to whom it belongs, and such, as use
no modesty will acknowledge no gratitude, or obligation. If their advice had
been grave, their behavior would have been modest, and they whose duty was
only to advise, had no pretense to Command, and dictate, nor they, that were
to receive Justice from their King, to snatch what they desired, and become
judges of their own demands. Such as will not be oblidged by laws, nor oaths
cannot by benefits, and favors, and such, as have robbed a King of his power,
grow quickly to that height of impudence to deny he had ever any, as this
Author, that is so Brutish to affirm, that Kings cannot oblidge their
subjects, and thence it follows, that they owe no thanks to God for a good
King, as they profess to owe him none for his good Government.

His talk of modesty in their desires of the common welfare argues him not
much to have understood, what he had to grant, who misconceived so much the
nature of what they had to desire.

His excepting at the talk of modesty shows how little he understands other
modesty, or the right, or practice of Parliament. Is not humility a word of
larger signification, then modesty, and yet this breaker will make modesty
contrary to the nature of the Parliaments desires, and the Kings graunts, when
humility is the common expression of the Parliaments petitions to the King.
And he might well have said the King understood not, what he had to grant, if
he had not expected his subjects desires to have a modest, and sober sense. Can
there be desires of the common-welfare, that exclude modest, and sober sense?
But the truth is the desires of the late faction in the name of Parliament had
neither modest, nor sober sense, and thence the libeller would infer it
unnecessary, and it was very far from the nature of what they had to desire to
demand their Kings Crown.

And for sober sense the expression was too mean, and recoiles with as much
dishonor upon himself to be a King, where sober sense could possible be so
wanting in a Parliament.

And must it be the Kings dishonor, if an Assembly of Parliament want sober
sense, how does that recoile upon him, can he make them otherwise? Iconoclastes
lately reprehended his mention of heat in Elections, and now its the Kings
dishonor, if the Parliament want sober sense, was there never experience of a
Parliament, that wanted sober sense, or was any man so savage, as to hold sober
sense too mean for a great Council? We have seen not only sober sense, but
al Religion, reason, law, and Justice, wanting in a Parliament, being taken for
the prevalent party, and Histories record it to have happened, more, then
once. Kings have been unhappy in such Parliaments, but the dishonor, and
infamy rests upon such Assemblyes, and these Apologists are the Trumpetts of
their shame, not the covers of their nakedness.

The odium, and offenses, which some men's rigor, or remissenes in Church, and
state had contracted upon his Government, he resolved to have expiated with
better laws, and regulations. To this he says the worst misdemeanors of
rigor or remissenes he has taken upon himself, as often as the Clergy, or
any other of his Ministers felt themselves over-burthened with the peoples
hatred. He instances in the superstitious rigor of his sundays Chapel,
remissenes of his sundays Theater, that reverend statute for Dominicall Iiggs,
and Maypoles derived from the Example of his Father James, which testifies,
that all superstition, and remissenes in Religion issued from his authority,
and the general miscarriages in state imputed cheifely to himself.

That the remissenes and rigor of some men may contract odium, and offense in
the best Governments was never doubted, but that this libeller would take
occasion from his Majest: intention to expiate them with better laws, to cast
them on his Majest: shows that this Rebellion arose not from offenses in
Government, but wicked inclinations of ambition, and Covetuousnes, and that
amendments were not desired but confusion. It was just, and honorable, that
the King should take on him the defense of his laws against Sectaries, and the
protection of officers, in the exercise of just authority, against the hatred
of frenitique persons. The hypocrisy of the schismatic party, that
professed great tenderness of conscience, and grief to see Children whipp a
top on a sunday, was ridiculous to al sober men, yet these are the motives to
embroyle a state. That, which he calls the superstitious rigor of his sundays
Chapel is noe other, then observation of the order of the Church of England,
which none, but the Bedlam Brownists ever called superstitious. His Majest:
Chapel had nothing in the exercise of Devotion, but what the laws of his
Predecessors had appointed, and this must be his rigor. That, which he calls
his sundays Theater it seems are recreations upon sundays, and to that he
profanely, and scurrilously adds his Dominicall Jiggs. Can a Christian, that
has respect to the day, make Dominicall the matter of his jest, but having
abused sacred titles to impious Actions, they proceed to scoff with them. He
intimates a book published touching recreations, wherein his Majest: followed
the example of his Royal father, and the advice of the most learned Divines.
Judaisme, and ridiculous superstition of the hipocriticall sectaries cheifely
occasioned that book both in the time of his Majest: and King James.
Permission of sunday recreations is more agreeable to the doctrine, and
practice of other Churches, then the prohibition, and the pretended tenderness
of conscience in the Sectaries, appears as false, as frivolous, and these
Sectaries, that make this imaginary rigor, and remissenes a foundation to
overthrow a Kingdom allow noe limits to their own rigor, and remissenes,
taking all liberty to themselves, and denying any to others. Why are these
doughty objections made against his Majest: when all know it touches not him
particularly (if it were considerable) but his Father, and queen Elizabeth, in
whose times recreations on sundays were more practiced, then in the time of
his Majest: and by the way we may take notice of his scornful appellation of
his Father James. And for the miscarriages in state, we may expect, that as
the Actions will be by this Author unfaithfully related, so they will appear
of as little weight for a ground to those Calumnies, which he frames upon them.

His Majest: disavowed none of these acts, till this Parliament, and here
seeks to wipe of the envy of his evil Government upon his substitutes.

His Majest: always disavowed illegal Acts, and whatever other men's rigor,
or remissenes had contracted. And must a King satisfy the curiosity, and
malice of all, that cast envy on his Government^ And was there ever a
Parliament, wherein laws were not made to expiate the odium contracted. When
his Majest: seeks to take away the occasions of evil in his substitutes, he
deserves the love, and thanks of his people, but it is the practice of Rebels
to cast the rigor, and remissenes of the substitutes upon the Government. His
Majest: ought not to bear the evil of other men's Actions, and his Government
will be glorious to posterity, as it was happy to them, that enjoyed it in
despite of envy, and his Author, and such, as seek to wipe of the guilt of
this lewd Rebellion, by pretenses of evil Government, which can noe more
justify their fact, then provocation a private Duel, sufficiently clear his
Majest: of their reproaches by the lightness of these objections, and by
offering vulgar envy, as a reason to destroy the Kingdom. He goes on jeering
the Kings promises, for reforminge Religion, as too late, and because popular
confusions had overtopt reason, therefore he concludes their Justice in working
mischeife, and breaking all the bonds of faith, and Religion. The purposes,
which his Majest: had for reforminge Religion, could not by him be expressed
artificially to gain abatement of that violence, under which he suffered, for
they are noe other, then what he had often proposed in the beginning of the
Parliament, and the works of the dead King lose not their weight, because they
declare to the world the unjust usurpation of his authority.

All his undertakings heretofore declared him to have little, or no judgment
in that work of Religion. This libellers book declares him to have little
conscience of Religion, and no wonder, if schismatickes are so shamles in the
contempt of the greatest judgments, that differ from them, when they
acknowledge the authority of no person over them, and that, which Iconoclastes
pronounces here of the King, he will not stick to determine of all the world
besides, that agree not with his sect. Sectaries are no less insolent, and
cruel, then false, and fantastique, there being not any like excess in such,
as attain to highest preferments in Church, or state by ordinary ways, as in
those popular seducers, presumption being of more force, then truth with vulgar
spirits, and thence this Champion of schismatickes not only vilifies his
Majest: judgment in Religion, but tells the world, That his breeding, or course
of life could not acquaint him with a thing so spiritual. The breeding, and
course of life of this generation of sectaries is not unknown, and they seek
to supply with impudence, what they want of ability. It were a fault to
mention here his Majest: parts, learning, and piety, and the Scripture, which
directs us to try the spirits has given us such marks of the false, and lying
spirits, as we should be much wanting to ourselves, if we could not judge
those men, that are proud-boasters, despisers of Parents, despisers of
Dominion, Traitors, faith-breakers to be such, as descerne not the things of
the spirit, though they pretend to them.

The Reformation, they could expect from him must be some politic form of an
imposed Religion, or perpetual vexation to such, as comply not with that form

And let all the Churches, that profess the name of Christ through the world
be produced, and there is none of them, but have a form of Religion which this
libeller here calls politic, and an imposed Religion, and the observation of
such forms are in all Churches exacted with some penalties, and hereby all
men may see, that we have not to do with a confined Rebel, that has only
disaffection to the Government of the place, where he lives, but one, that
accuses all Churches, but his own Conventicle to have little, ore no judgment
in Religion, and not acquainted with a thing so spiritual, for the ground of
this reproach is from his Majest: resolution to use forms in the public
duties of Religion in the Church.

The like amendment, he says, he promises in state, not a step further, then
his reason, and conscience told him was fit to be desired, wishing he had kept
with in those bounds, and not suffered his own judgment to have been overborne
in some things, And this he says is to set up an Arbitrary Government, and all
Brittany to be chained to the conscience, judgment, and reason of one man, as
if those gifts were entayled upon him, with his Fortune to be a King.

We know not the Misteri^s of this man's Religion, otherwise we might demand
of him, why the King should go further, then his reason, and conscience
directed him, and why the libeller, and his Mates should hold it lawful for
them to spurn at al laws both in Church, and state upon pretense of their
reason, and conscience against them, he cannot deny to have ^oue this, and they
should do well to show, how the King may go against his reason, and
conscience. Is it intayled upon him with his Fortune, as a King to have less
privilege, then they? and must he renounce his own reason, and conscience to
the advice of a Parliament? And must they control him, and the Parliament?
Surely the King must give an account to God for the Talents, he has lent him.
But how can the breaker conclude, from the Kings forhearance of Acts, wherein
he is unsatisfied in his conscience, that is to set up an Arbitrary Government
when as nothing is introduced? And why must not all Britain be chained to the
judgment, reason, and conscience of the King, as well, as all Israel, Gods
own peouliar people, and not only all Britain, but the whole world are
Chained to the reason, judgment, and conscience of their Rulers be they one, or
many, And the seducers would persuade us, that Britain could not be happy,
unless it were reduced to its (...), and governed by a multitude of Kings, and
Religions. God had promised peculiar assistance to Kings, and Commands the
peoples obedience to them, and the miseries of the Kingdom many be imputed in
a great part to what his Majest: observed, that he had suffered his own
judgment to be overborne in some things.

A Tyrant may make this pretense, and it were in vain for any Parliament to
have reason, judgment, or conscience, if it th^arted the Kings will.

It were much more tolerable for a Tyrant, to pretend conscience in governing,
then for a people to pretend conscience in rebelling, and this libeller has
reprehended the peoples levitie, and violence so sharply, as he cannot if he
pretend reason, subject the reason, judgment, and conscience of the Rulers to
the control of the subjects. Because Tyrants may pretend conscience, therefore
by good logicque no King may use it, and because some Kings may not rightly
govern, therefore he will have the right judgment in the people, which he so
much despises, and which, as it has been the means of the Rebels present
power, so it has been in all ages the cause of confusion, and misery to
states, and Kingdoms. The reason, judgment, and conscience of a Parliament is
not therefore in vain, because not infallible, it is most probable, that a
King will follow the best Council, but it cannot be presumed that in
Parliaments, the greater part will continue subjects, if they may be Kings by
saying they will be, and it was the wisdom of our Ancestors, that would have
no laws made without the will of their King, and they never trusted such, as
they chose further, then to present their desires, and offer their Council
unto him, and consent to what should be ordained by him with advice of the
Lords, and it were in vain to have a King, if he were not empowered to judge of
Counsels, or if laws might be obtruded upon him, and the people without him.
The present Calamities testify how unhappily, and absurdly a Parliament seeks
to Command, whose office is to Council, and pretend Council vseles, unless
they may deprive him, whom they advise of the benifit of Council, taking away
his power to use it. To what end do they Council, if there be none to be
Councelled, but all to be commanded?

That thus these promises made upon experience of hard sufferings, and his most
mortified retirements being thoroughly sifted, contain nothing much different
from his former practices.

His Majest: expressions being thoroughly sifted contain nothing in them, but
pious, and Princely considerations, and from this libellers own mouth all men
may see, that his Majest: practices, against which they maliciously exclaim
were consonant to Religion, and Justice, and only opposite to Traiterous, and
schismatic license. It was the libellers profession to parrallell his
Majest: fair spoken words, as he calls them to his own far different
Actions, and now his words, and deeds being sifted by malice it self are not
much different, the libeller is some what ingenuous to discover his own
vanity, and falsehood.

He leaves it to prudent foresight, what fruits in likelihood his Majest:
restorement would have produced.

We have seen already the fruits of the inhumane cruelties exercised upon
him, and the continuance, and increase of those abominable impieties, that
attend such Actions, where of the libeller makes a large profession, who
confidently obtrudes lavish lies, for known truths, petulant insolence, for
sober sense, and maxims of villainy, for sound Arguments, which are the bitter
fruits of disobedience, and Rebellion.

To that part of the section, which he calls the devout of it, and modelled
into the form of a private Psalter, he objects nothing, but his spleen, that
it is not to be admired, more then the Arch-Bishopps late Breviary, and other
manualls, and handmaides of Devotion, and these he calls the lip work of every
Prelaticall leiturgist, quilted out of Scripture Phrase, with as much ease, and
as little need of Christian diligence, or judgment, as belongs to the compiling
of any ordinary, and saleable piece of English Divinity, that the shopps value.

The Authors of leiturgies, and helps to devotion, have their memory blessed
by the benefit, which many devout souls have acknowledged to have received
from their labors, and the cruelty, which bloody Rebels exercised on the
person of the late Arch-bishopp, and their other barbarismes, toward the
Prelates, to please that kennell by whom they acted their Rebellion, has
satisfied the world of the nature of Sectaries, of whose bloody disposition,
many by sheepes-clothing were much deceived. Quilting of Scripture Phrase was
wont, to be the praise of their long winded Lecturers, who used it more for
sound then sense, but it seems their spirit is changed. The libeller will
hardly get credit, unless with those, for whose sake he does not profess to
write, that is his wise, and well principled men the Sectaries, if he affirm,
that there is more need of Christian diligence in the bold, and extempore
bablinge of their senseles zealots, then the compiling of those Leiturgies, and
Manualls, he mentions. And such, as have observed the presumption of this
rabble in their prayers, will believe they hate diligence, as much, as they
want judgment. Why English, or saleable should dininish the esteem of
Divinity is not understood, but because they are common terms, he would have
his readers understand, that they signify nothing, but common matter, and he
expects, that some will think English, and saleable Divinity of no regard,
though they understand no other.

But he proceeds such a kind of Psalmastry, or other verbal devotion,
without suitable deeds, cannot persuade any of Zeal, and righteousness in the
person.

But such, as make Psalmastrie a word of contempt, relish not the Zeal of the
sweet singer of Israel, and their deeds are odious to all good men, that
seek matter of reproach upon the devotions of others, and make their malicious
surmises positive truths. The instances of Tyrants counterfeiting Religion are
frequent, and that hypocrisy is inseparable from Tyrants, by usurpation such
as this libellers Masters, whose want of right, seeks protection from
dissembled virtue, but this seldom happens to Kings by just Title, whose power
wants not that support. His comparing his late Majest: to known usurpers, that
confirmed their Crowns, gained by robbery, and kept with falsehood, and blood
shows his odious shamelessnes in the dissimititude, and whoever observes the
profane assumption of the Titles of piety, by these Monsters, and their
hipocriticall professions, to mask their wicked ends, shall find, that
Andronicus Comnenus; and our English Rich. 3. Came short of them, not only in
counterfeiting Religion, and conscience, but in falsehood, and cruelty.
Insteede of shake spears scene of Rich. 3. The libeller may take the
Parliaments declaration of the 29. May, where their words are. The providing
for the public peace, and prosperity of his Majest: and all his Realms, we
protest in the presence of the all-seeing Deity to have been, and still to be,
the only end of all our Counsels, and endeavors, wherein we have resolved to
continue freed, and enlarged from all private aims, personal respects, or
passions whatsoever, and again in their petition of the second of June, they
tell him, that they have nothing in their thoughts, and desires more precious,
and of higher esteem next to the honor, and immediate service of God, then
the just, and faithful performance of their duty to his Majest: and the
libeller will not find in history, or poet words of a deeper hipo^risie in
the mouth of a villain, nor more contradicted by their Actions. That which he
adds from his Testimony out of shakespeare of the imagined vehemence of Rich.
the 3. In his dissembled professions, holds noe proportion with, these
hipocrisies, really acted, not fancyed by a poet, and this libeller has learnt
to act a part out of shakespeare, and with Rich. 3. accusing loyalty, and
innocence for high Crimes, and crying out against their wickedness, that sought
to restore the disposessed heirs of the Crown to their right, and amplifying
their offense, as the highest against God, and man, and wherein comes the
libeller short of his pattern in this scene.

He says herein the worst of Kings professing Christianisme have by far^
exceeded him, and he gives his reason, for that the King has, as it were
unhallowed, and vnchristned by borrowing to a Christian use prayers offered to a
heathen God.

And does saint Paul exceed the worst of Kings professing Christianisme by
borrowing to a Christian use the words of an heathen Philosopher, and poet, did
he thereby unhallow, and unchristian Scripture?

His meaning is, as follows afterward, that the King used a prayer taken out
of S. Philip Sydnies Arcadia. After the first Edition of his Majest: book, the
Printers finding the great vent of them, in the following Editions Printed
prayers, and other things in the Kings name, not belonging to the book. Among
these prayers, there is a prayer taken out of the Arcadia. That prayer is
neither made by a heathen, woman, nor to a heathen God, but is composed by the
Author a Christian without reference to any heathen Deity, and the Author is
not thought to unchristian prayer by it, the libeller himself saying the book
in its kind is full of worth, and wit, but as his outcry has noe cause from
the matter, so here is no evidence of the fact, that his Majest: made use of
that prayer, or popt into the Bishopps hands as a relic of his exercise,
though he might warrantably have used it and professed it.

But he goes on to show what he can say upon this occasion. Who would have
imagined so little fear in him of the true alseeing Deity, so little reverence
of the holy Ghost, whose office is to dictate, and present our Christian
prayers, so little care of truth in his last words, or honor to himself, or to
his friends, or sense of his afflictions, or of that sad hour, which was upon
him, as immediately before his death to pop into the hand of that grave
Bishopps, who attended him, as a special relic of his saintly exercises a
prayer stolen, etc.

All men, that have observed this Authors practice hitherto rest assured, that
he has so little fear, or reverence of the allseeing Deity, so little care of
truth, or honor, as he sticks not to charge his Majest: with facts neverdone,
and innocent Actions, with transcendent guilt. If his Majest: had used the
prayer, or delivered it, as he imagines, no man of Christian sobriety could
charge the fact with Crime, what one word, or sentence is there in that prayer,
which a Christian may not use, but the Image breaker has a great quarrel to
al forms of prayer, and by the reason he produces, that the office of the holy
Ghost is to dictate, and present our Christian prayers, all set prayers want
reverence to the holy Ghost, so tender is he of the best reformed Churchs, of
whom he so often makes a property. And whence concludes he no care of truth
in his last words, when the King never spoke of it. He aggravates this fact by
the person of the grave Bishopp, who had been a Prelaticall leiturgist, had it
not been to paint a slander. The laughter, which he conceives is caused by the
thought of this, that he, which acted so Tragically should have such a
ridiculous exit might rather strike horror in the libeller, for his malicious
opposition to truth, that will so contrary to his own knowledge charge him to
act tragically, that had governed so mildly, and to have a ridiculons exit,
that left the world with so great piety, and such universal grief of the
people for his sufferings, but desperate wretches laugh at the wickedness they
act. His Majest: friends have had good experience, that his Enemies, who have
spared no pains to traduce him, would not forbear any occasion of detraction.
His Majest: enduring afflictions with admired patience, his suffering death
with Christian fortitude, his virtuous life, and holy Martyrdom, cannot be
blasted by an Atheists scorn, nor a Rebels malice.

His conclusion in the begging of the question, that it is clear the King was
not induced, but constrained to call the last Parliament, which by his own
showing is apparently false, for if there had been such a constraint, the Lords
in vain petitioned, and all the necessities, that he has supposed may concur
with the Kings inclination to call a Parliament, and if necessity had
constrained him to call a Parliament, what should hinder, but he might avouch
in the ears of God, that he did it with an upright intention to his glory, and
his peoples good. If necessity of his peoples preservation, or welfare cause
him to call a Parliament, may he not use these words; Whence would the Image
breaker have it a cause of trembling, more, then any thing spoken in the
presence of God. The permitting man's wickedness is no approbation of it, nor a
token of his hatred to those, that are afflicted by it. There are some, whom
God has given over to delusion, and of that the libeller appears to have a
great measure, who not only beleives lies, but is the Author of them, making
the names of Religion, and conscience, and the fear of God baits to dec^ive,
and venom to reproach

Upon the EARL of STRAFFORDS DEATH.
THis chapter he says is a penitent confession of the King, and the strangest,
if it be well weigbed, that ever was auricular, for he repents here of giving
his consent, though most unwillingly to the most seasonable, and solemn piece
of Justice, that had been done of many years in the land: But his sole
conscience thought the contrary.

Impieties that were strange heretofore, are common with this libeller, and it
is unheard of that repentance of an act conceiveded sinful by the athour, was
reproached by any before this Atheist, he never weighed neither repentance, nor
confession, if he had, he would never have thought it strange, that his Majest:
should confess, that he sinned in following a multitude to do evil, and if
the murder of the Earl of strafford had been Justice, is it strange, that
such, as had acted in it without sufficient satisfaction to their conscienc,
should confess their sin in concurring to such an Action? Was it not an
injustice, that was done unwillingly, and ought it not to be repented of? If
his Majest: sole conscience thought the contrary, was it not sin in him to
consent to the fact, and is it without experience, that a single man in an
Assembly has judged the right, and the rest proceeded in the wrong, but he
applies himself to readers, whose affections, and capacities, are proportioned
to his expressions, and therefore his Majest: confession is the strangest, that
ever was auricular. He would have them believe, that his Majest: discourse in
this Chapter was popish auricular confession, else his Jnigly of auricular, had
no congruitie with a written confession. For the merit of that, which he calls
solemn piece of Justice, no age had produced such a solemn, and formal piece
of villainy, which is by so much more odious, as it had the figures of law, and
Justice.

And thus was the welfare, the safety, and within a little the vnannimous
demand of three populous nations, to have attended still on the Singularity
of one man's opinionated conscience, if men had always been so tame, and
spiritles, and had not unexpectedly found the grace to understand, that if his
conscience were so narrow, and peculiar to it self, it was not fit, his
authority should be so ample, and vinversall over others, for certainly a
private conscience, sorts not with a public calling.

The welfare, and safety of these three populous Kingdoms, had been probably
preserved, if they had attended on his Maj: conscience, and what has been the
consequence of that spirit, and grace, which he says they found, and was
indeed the infusion of impious inclinations into many by the spirit of error,
and disobedience, but the most desperate, and languishing misery, and danger,
that ever lay upon the Kingdom. And these graceles miscreants sport at the nam
af grace, and profane the profession of it. He would be understood a little
modest in adding with in a little to vnannimous, but being weighed, his
impudence will appear little less in this, then former passages. If the three
Kingdoms be considered in comparison to that small number, that understood the
case of the Earl of Strafford, it was a very little part of the Kingdoms, that
made the demand he mentions, and if he would advantage his cause by the cries
of those, that were stirred up by the Seditious Seducers, to cry Justice, their
giddy wilfullnes, as well, as ignorance, and lewdenes, will add little to the
weight, though it encreas the number of these demaunders. But this man thinks
conscience unfit for a King, and therefore would not have so narrow a
conscience have so large an authority, for he says a private conscience sorts
not with a public calling, and declares that person rather meant by nature
for a private fortune. The must professed Atheists, and loose debauches, never
avowed a greater scorn of Christianity, neither is there an Author extant,
that has adventured so far upon the reasons of men, as to complain upon a
King for Tyrany, and errors in Religion, and with the same breath, charging
him with unfitness to be a King, for want of a wide conscience. These me^ are
true to their principles, to make vehement professions of Religion, though they
hate it, and in the midst of their profane fasts, and presumptuous thanks
giving, they jeere at al Religion, and conscience, and profess to the world,
that a public conscience ought not to be narrow, nor stick at any thing, and
as their conscience is, so is their practice, and they, that made no conscienc
of their loyalty, make no conscienc of exercising their power.

He, whose conscience thinks it sin, to putt to death a Capital offender,
will as often think it meritorious, to kill a righteous person.

If his Majest: had thought the Earl of Strafford, a Capital offender, he had
made no conscience of his death, and this libeller vainly supposes conscience
of sin, to put to death a Capital offender, which cannot consist, with a
conscience so informed, neither does an erroneous conscience in sparing blood,
as often think it meritorious to kill vndeservedly, though it be nothing to the
present purpose, for he can fasten neither upon his Majest: conscience of
sparing a Capital offender, or killing a righteous person. But in this whereof
he repents.

That the sin of signing the Bill of straffords execution, he would not have
matter to trouble the Kings conscience, and his reasons are, That all men
looked upon him, as one of the most impetuous instruments to advance any
illegal design.

The Earl of strafford was a man, that the Seditious disturbers of the state
hated, and feared, and sought, underhand to raise the malevolence of others
against him. If any men have so far lost reason, as to measure the Ministers
of Kings by the libells of Traitors, they are likely to take the best men for
most guilty, and if a King should sacrifice his faithful Servants, because
they are not looked upon with a good eye by the multitude, he may not expect to
be served by men of fidelity, or merit, and we have seen, how the peoples
looks have been won, and lost.

That he had ruled Ireland, and some part of England in an Arbitrary manner.

The word. Arbitrary in the beginning of the late Parliament was used to scare
the people, and made to signify great affrightments to them, but that
bugbeare is now grown rediculous to children, for all men see, that in all
places of Government much is left Arbitrary to the Governor, and it was
evident to the world, that the Earl of strafford did nothing in an Arbitrary
manner, without President of his Predecessors, and the Judges in Courts of
equity, might be as well made Cryminall for proceeding in an Arbitrary manner
as he. That he had endeavored to subvert fundamental laws was a supposition,
not a fact, and if the Image breaker look over the Articles, where with he was
charged at his Trial, he will find nothing of such a Crime. To subvert
Parliaments, and incense the King, against them was not as much, as urged
against him at his Trial, that Article being declined by his accusers in
regard of known falsehood, and that the Earl of strafford advised the King, to
call the former Parliament. That he had endeavored to make histolitie between
England, and scotland was a legend devised for vulgar temper, not rational
consideration, for both Kingdoms being under one King, they must be Rebels in
either Kingdom, that make war against one another without him, and what
dreamer can fancy that any Minister of state, that were affected to the Kings
designs, as this libeller supposes the Earl of strafford to be, would stir
up hostility between the nations. They have not yet adventured to charge the
Earl of strafford with stirring up the scotch hostility, and if he
endeavored to refist them, is that to make hostolitie be tweene the nations,
It has been the practice of these Rebels to style men incendiaries, and
malignants, that opposed their Rebellion, and such evil Counselors that
advised any course to prevent their attemps, and the following confusion but
though this vain delusion were cast abroad among the people, it was never
offered, as a charge against the Earl.

That he had councelled the King, to call over that Irish Army of Papists,
which he had cunningly raised to reduce England, as appeared by good Testimony
then present at the consultation, is unseasonably remembered by the libeller
after those Rebels, whom he serves, have several times drawn in foreign
Armies into England, reduced the nation to serve an usurped power, set up an
Arbitrary Government, subverted the fundamental laws, and destroyed both
King, and Parliament. It may astonish Knowing men to read this Author,
objecting Capital offenses to the Earl of strafford, and numbering up for
instance the same Actions himself defends: so as it cannot be an humane
error, but hellish-fury, that hurles him into such mad contradictions, and its
worth the observing, that to this particular he adds, as appeated by good
Testimony then present at the consultation, well Knowing, that the Testimony
was not only single, but subject to most just, and apparent exception in regard
of known enmity, and former prevarication in several examinations upon oath,
and it no way helps a false Testimony, that he knew the truth, or that he was
present at a fact, whereof he makes an untrue relation, and if the Earl of
strafford had councelled the King to make use of the Jrish Army in either
Kingdom in case of Rebellion, how comes that to be an offense, though that was
not the truth, that he spoke of England, nor the Army raised against England,
and is it a commendable cunning, to raise an Army against a Rebellion.

His reference to 28 Articles directs us how to know, that he trusts on number
more then weight, and those Articles remain a Testimony to posterity of the
ridiculous pretenses which effected such mischeife. He says the Commons by
far the greater number cast him, and yet is so absurdly impudent to charge the
King with singularitc of conscience, and allege presently a part of the lower
house of the same opinion. The Lords, he says, after they had been satisfied
in a full discourse by the Kings solicitour, and the opinions of many Judges
delivered in their house agreed likewise to the sentence of Treason. Those
Lords, that condemned the Earl of strafford, might be satisfied by terror of
the Tumults, and their own corrupt passions, never by law, nor reason. Its
well known, that the Lords, and Commons were assaulted, and threatened by the
unruly rabble of the City, and Suburbs, if they condemned him not, they had
not freedom in their coming, or going to the house, or sitting there. There
was no one judge, that gave his opinion for the sentence against him, and the
Sollicitours discourse was very strong against the present Rebels, wholly
impertinent to the case of the Earl of strafford, and showed his own deceit,
and the sottishnes of them, that relied on what they understood not. Diverse
lords for sooke the house having not liberty to be present, so far were the
lords from being satisfied. That which he calls a sentence of Treason, was an
act of power, it being a Bill to take away his life, but an exception of all
men else, from being proceeded against for the same matters, in ordinary
Justice, and this very Action, so scandalous in it self, and so grievous to
many, that consented to it, must be dressed out with a shameless commendation,
to accuse the King, for his repentance of a fact, which so much afflicted him.
That the people universally cried for justice is noe wonder, if we consider
former examples, and they had a President in the people of the Jews, that
cried Crucify. If we believe this libeller, telling us how light, and violent,
they are in their motions, or if we look upon the acts of a powerful faction,
then prevayling with them, that could easily make them cry, what was put in
their mouth, we may easily judge the injustice of their cry, and their
ignorance of the cause, and a sober author would have hated, to borrow an
Argument of Justice, from popular outcryes, which are the most evident proof
of injustice, and oppression of innocence.

He says none were his friends, but Courtiers, and Clergimen, the worst at
that time, and most corrupted sort of men, and Court ladies, not the best of
women.

His fer friends, and many Enemies, render the proceedings against him more,
then suspected, and men may easily believe, that in such a condition fury was
the accuser, and malice, and cowardice the judge. The confining his friends to
Court, and Church, is the effect of the libellers engagement to schism, and
Rebellion, who holds such loyalty, and affection to the King, and
conscientious reverence to the Church, for the marks of great offenders. If
multitude of Ennemies be a Testimony of guilt, the best men will become the
worst of sinners. But having noe friends, as he says, it adds much to the
right of his cause, that so many who were neither Courtiers, nor Clergymen,
nor any way obliged by him, or the Court, should in discharge of their
conscienc declare their dissent to that bloody law, though they were thereby
objected to popular fury. His impertinent railing at Courtiers, and Clergymen
argues his malice, not Crime in them. His mention of Court ladies was for want
of matter, and their activitie in state affairs belongs not to this occasion.

The King declared to both houses, that noe fears, or respects what so ever,
should make him alter that resolution, founded upon his conscience, and says
either then his resolution, was not founded upon his conscience, or his
conscience recieved better information, or both struck sail, for within few
days after, four of his Bishopps picked the thorn out of his conscience, and
he was persuaded to figne the Bill.

Men, that are sincere often fall, but such never have consciencie, nor
sincerity, that jeere at it, and make the falls of men, and their wounds of
conscience matter of their mirth. Though his Majest: did that, which he had
formerly professed to be against his conscience, could he not repent of that
frailetie of falling from his resolution? Or might he not afterward discover
the errors of those reasons, that induced him to it? If fears were any motive
to what he did, the curse lies on them, that caused it, and on them, that
reproach him with it. Poets have not fancied a higher degree of wickedness in
fends of hell, then in their malicious glory of compelling others to sin, and
reproaching their repentance for sin. Experience has represented his Majest:
fortitude, and that not his personal fears, but his apprehension of the
Kingdoms misery wrought most on his passion, and we cannot find Parallel
expressions to those of this libeller in his Scoffs at conscience, and picking
the thorn out of it, unless amongst those desperate, and profane Atheists,
that make it the highest pitch of wit to render things sacred most ridiculous.

Perhapps, it wrung his conscience to condemn the Earl, not because he
thought him guiltles, had half these Crimes been committed against his
personal interest, as appeared by his charge against the six members, but
because he was principal, and the Earl but accessory, and thought nothing
Treason against the Common wealth, but against himself only.

Playing with conscience he cannot part with, whose own is insensible. In
those particulars he has rehearsed against the Earl of Strafford, no one of
them could be charged upon the King, and the nature of most of the Articles
coud not admit a supposition of the Kings activitie in them. The charge against
the six members contained matter of direct Treason against known laws, and
his Majest: cannot be supposed to think the Earl of Strafford guilty,
because he charged the six members, with some offenses laid to the charge of
the Earl of Strafford, but never proved, yet it was an infamous injustice of
them that so violently proceeded against the Earl of Strafford, and would not
admit an accusation for the same offenses against others. If his Majest:
thought, that noe Treason could be committed, but against himself, he thought
no otherwise then the law has provided, and the accusers of the Earl of
Strafford maintained at his Trial. And the libeller must check himsefle for
his imagination of Treason against the Common wealth, which had not a being,
unless he will make a Treason by Prophecy, and antedate his ordinance. He well
knows England was a Monarchy, and that his Masters profess the change of it
into a supposed free state. These Traitors, that would imagine some Treason
against the King are come to affirm, that there are no Treasons against the
King, for they are sure they have committed all, that concern his person. His
impertinency is very tedious in demanding, why the King should seem satisfied
to sign the Bill by those Judges, and Ghostly Fathers, as he calls them, of
his own choosing, and now pretend, that it was the importunities of some, and
fear of others made him sign.

He does not produce any Testimony, that the King professed himself satisfied,
or had he been satisfied, it was no bar to his future information, and
repentance, but an instance can hardly be produced, that ever any man's
repentance of a known fact was traduced, or scorned by any, before this
libeller, and he might as well jeere at many famous saints, and Martyrs, that
fell from their resolutions, and after recovered, as at his Majest: And the
picking out of his thorn, striking sail to his fear, and a fleeting
conscience, may upon the same grounds be the most eminent penitents in the
Church of God. To make his Calumnies stick, he says. That his Majest: ensuing
Actions declare he could dissemble satisfaction, for that he had the chief
hand in a conspiracy against the Parliament, and Kingdom. How the King could
conspire against his Kingdom, or what should be his end is not intelligible,
and when a King is traduced by Rebels for a conspiracy against the Parliament,
and Kingdom, no men of common reason can receive such a palpable fiction, but
this great conspiracy, which he says came to light by the examinations of
Percy, Goring, and others was to rescue the Earl of Strafford by seizing the
tower of Londen, to bring up the English Army from the north, joynd with eight
thousand Irish Papists raised by Strafford, and a french Army to be landed at
Portsmouth against the Parliament, and their friends. And where is the offense
in all this, if it were true, and a powerful faction assume the name of
Parliament? No wise man will blame the King, if he had done such an Action to
prevent the miseries, which he foresaw, and the Designs, that were plotted
against him, but this story is now stale, though it then served the turn to
distemper the people. The examinations, which he speaks of, do not yet charge
the King with the knowledge of this design, but the readers of Iconoclastes
must be of miraculous stupiditie, if they think it a Crime in the King to
intend the bringing up of his Army from the north, or any other force, and
think it lawful for the Rebels against him to bring up their Army against
the Parliament, and pluck them out of the house. Was not the Tower of London
always in the Kings possession, and might he not make it good against
Traitors.

For which purpose he says the King though requested by both houses refused to
disband those Irish Papists. Though there were many reasons, why his Majest:
refused to disband the Irish, and the request of the houses were a vote
constrained by Tumults, not the result of a free debate, yet had it been so,
that his Majest: had refused to disband them to prevent the plots of the
Traiterous faction in Parliament, he had just reason to do it. And as the
Religion men profess, though true, does not privilege them from offending,
though they are thereby a scandal to their profession: So Irish Papists, or
any others of contrary Religion may be employed against such, as have stained
their profession by such Actions. These Rebels sought shelter from their
Religion for their Treason, and persuaded the people of their sincerity,
because Papists fought against them, but it was in truth their infamy, that
gave the reason, and the frequent repetition of Irish Papists shows, that it
is a stale to misleade the weakest capacities, that can only suspect, not
prove, nor descerne.

He concludes the King as Criminous, as the Earl, and therefore he says,
instead of detesting his ambition, evil Council, violence, and oppression of
the people, he falls to praise his great a bilities.

It had been a Kind of slander to forbear the due commendation of such
abilities, as all men admired, and an inexcusable injustice to reproach the
memory of the innocent with the false accusations of malicious Enemies. If his
Majest: had recounted any faults of the Earl, it had been no satisfaction to
his conscience for consenting to his death, but it had been a sign of an
unsound mind to seek matter of excuse for an illegal sentence from the
disposition of the suffering party, and such Actions, as the law had not made
the merit of such a sentence. The world is well informed now, that those
Rebels account the due performance of just authority violence, and
oppression, and that their chief hatred against the Earl of Strafford was for
his fidelity to king, and Kingdom, and his opposition of Rebellion his evil
Council.

That beneath the decency of a King, he compares him to the sun which in all
figurative use bears allusion to a King, not to a subject.

If such be the Kingly Prerogative, that the sun bears allusion only to Kings,
not to subjects, then must this libeller confess himself to be of that sordid
generation, which by that influence are raised out of sinkes, and puddles to
obscure that glorious luster, and his observation of this allusion might justly
make him reflect upon himself with detestation contending against such clear
light, and s^andring truth it self. But virtue in other persons besides Kings
has been set forth by allusion to the sun, and his trivial exception at the
decency of that allusion shows him as insignificant, as will full.

He has a conceit, that the King Knitts contradictions as close, as words can
lie together, not approving in his judgment, and yet approving in his
subsequent reason, all that Stafford did, as driven by the necessity of times,
and the temper of that people The Kings words are, I cannot in my judgment
approve all he did, driven it may be by the necessity of times etc. And let
the reader judge, whether this libellers falsification be not Knit, as close,
as words can lie together, and its like he knew it by his impertinent use of
the Phrase close Knit to his supposed contradictions. Though the King justly
excused some things, which he could not approve, does he therefore approve all,
and does the libeller think, that what a man cannot approve, he must think
inexcusable, and that Circumstances do not alter the quality of Actions?

But he says it is the marvel, and may be the astonishment of all, that have
a conscience, how he durst with the same words of contrition, wherewith David
repented the murdering of Vriah, repent his lawful compliance to that just
Act.

It is noe marvel to men, that know these Rebels, though heretofore it might
have been the astonishment of all, that such should offer to persuade others of
their esteem of conscience, that make it their common scoff, and while this
libeller, charges the King with no less then murder in consenting unwillingly,
and consequently in him to an unjust sentence, makes an exclamation, why he
should repent in David's words for the like Crime. The libeller well knows,
that if it had been to a lawful sentence of condemnation, yet blood guiltines
lies, where consent with the tongue, had not the persuasion of the heart, and
when the King, thought blood lay on him, should he think to hide his sin from
God? and this profane Sectary wonders a sinner durst repent. These miscreants
are loath to behold their murders in those bloody colors, which the truth of
God gives them, and therefore they will call that Act just against the cry of
their Consciences, as they stirred up the people to cry justice without
knowledge of the fact.

It would have taken much from the heavines of his sin to have told God in his
confession, how he labored, what dark plots he had contrived, into what a
League entered, and with what conspiratours against his Parliament, and Kingdom
to rescue so notable an instrument, etc.

Doubtless the King would have taken that course, if he could have charged
himself with any sinful labor in that kind. That he ought to have used all
his power, and skill to have rescued that Earl, was his duty to God, and a
person so cruelly, and shamelessely oppressed; And all men know what false
fears were pretended, what ridiculous plots were imagined to disorder the
people, and when there is such apparent discovery of Traiterous plots, and such
avowing of Traiterous Actions, there can be none so infatuated to believe, that
all necessary prevention of such wicked designs was not to withstand the ruin
of the Parliament, and Kingdom.

It was fear, which made him feign both the scruple, and the satisfaction. And
what fear could make him feign a scruple, whom could he fear, if he had not
scrupled, but God only? and where does it appear, that he feigned satisfaction,
but its the libellers want of the fear of God, and men, that makes him thus
feareles of slandering, and contradicting.

Repentance came not on him, till a long time after, when he saw, he could have
suffered nothing more, though he had denied the Bill.

Though the King say, he could have suffered nothing more, though he had ^ed the
Bill, he never finds, that repentance came not from him till long after, but
knew very well, his repentance followed the fact close at the heels.

He asks a question, how he could understandingly repent of letting that be
Treason, which the Parliament, and whole nation so judged. He has already told
us it was al thost the whole nation, and the greater part of the Parliament,
but he finds now, that any diminution induces doubt, and it must be the
Parliament, and whole nation. May not a man understandingly repent, because the
whole nation was in the same fault? how many Acts of Parliament have been made,
whereof it had been happy for King, and people, they had repented? there need
not an cnumeration in so Known a truth.

It was a worldly repentance, not a conscientious, or else a strange Tyrany,
which his conscience had got over him to vex him like an evil spirit for doing
one act of Justice to fortefie his resolution from ever doing so any more.

We may see what account this man makes of sin, or conscience, that thus
derides the terrors of conscience. We may believe their consciences
cauterized, that are such strangers to vexations of conscience, and that sin,
and Rebellion have got a strange Mastery of them, that fortifies their
resolutions against all repentance, and the approbation of it in others. This
libeller cannot persuade himself, that when he calls murder Justice, and
Rebellion loyalty, that he is believed, though he profess admiration, that
men disrelish those his prime qualities, and makes the execration of such
wickedness to be strange infatuation, and hardness of heart, and so calls the
Kings unwilling, and forced consent to an act, he judged evil, the tasting of
a just deed, and his repentance for it, he calls spattring at it. The Devils
are tormented with the repentance of others, and their Agents blasphemously
deride it, and its doubtful, whether the pity, or detestation ought to be
greater to wards such desperate persons, that call the consent to an execrable
murder, tasting of one good deed, and the resolution against the like
spattring at it, no doubt this man spatters at conscience, and direlishes all
repentance, nothing being so natural to him, as the opposition to piety.

That woe is denounced to the Scribes, and Pharisees for straining at a gnat,
and swallowing a Cammell. We scarcely find so great a Cammel swallowed by the
Scribes, and Pharisees, as many, that are greedily devoured by this libeller.
His profane, and malicious scorns, and reproaches of repentance in this very
section, and magnifying an execrable Murder are Cammells in the Judgment of
true Christians, though it seem not so to that sense, which is wholly
reprobate, the straining at gnats, and swallowing Cammels was never more
apparent in any sect of men, then this libeller, and his crew, and if the ruin
of three Kingdoms be so big, and bulky, as he confesses, and would falsely
have to be the deeds of his late Majest: and that a woe belongs to them, what
may this libeller, and his Accomplices expect, that have strained at forms, and
Ceremonies, and swallowed down not only periuries, and Murders, the desence
of odious sins, and the reproaching of Christian duties, but have undoubtedly
brought this ruin upon his Majest: three Kingdoms.

He follows his common place of reproaching his Majest: conscience, and says,
if it were come to that unnatural di^rasie to digest poison, it was not for
his Parliament, and Kingdoms to feed with him any longer. This Chapter the
libeller has composed for a satyr against conscience to make it more a bhord
by his crew of Caniballs, with whom none can feed, but blood thirsty
savages. Could he name a greater discrasie then what he commends, that consines
conscience to shed blood, exludes it from sparing. These Traitors had made
falsehood, and disobedience unnatural to them, and thereby they caused such, as
sought to preserve themselves from that pestilence, to avoyde them, and those
venomous persons according to their malicious quality sought to infect with
their disposition, or destroy by their rage all that came near them, or
restrained their Company.

That the King would persuade us, that the Parliament escaped not some touches
of remorse for putting Strafford to death in forbidding it to be a President
for the future; but he says in fair construction that act employed rather a
desire to pacify the Kings mind, not imagining, that this after Act should be
retorted on them, whether it were made a President, or not, no more then the
want of a President for this.

Its some what strange, that the Image breaker finding his rigor only to rail
would meddle with this Argument, but it seems he apprehended the hope of a
fallacy in the word after, and would insinuate, that this Act was made after
the murder, which was made to authorize it, and in a fair construction it
has not the least shadow of a desire to pacify the King, for it did not
diminish any of their power, or purposes, that contrived that Act, but only to
exclude this fact from ordinary Justice, which in a fair construction implies,
that it was not law, but will, and power, whereby they proceeded. The truth was
themselves saw, that by the consequence of that fact of theirs, all men's lives,
and fortunes were exposed to danger, and ruin, and no Magistrate, or officer,
but might be drawn within the compass of Treason, by the Rules they had held
with the Earl of Strafford, and all they, that were present at the debates of
that busnies know well, that their proper fears caused that provision in the
Act, and though themselves were not bound to Presidents, they were afraid,
that others would follow their Presidents, as in truth they ought, if this
President had been according to law. He would not have, that this Act argued in
the Parliament, their least repenting, when it argued so little in the King, who
accused the six members for the same Crimes, which he would not think
treasonable in the Earl.

The accusation of those six members was of other, and higher Crimes, besides
some of those objected to the Earl of Strafford, and upon better grounds, and
if it had been only those it shows apparently, that they, that would not
proceed upon that accusation, repented of what they had done against the Earl
of Strafford, or had no conscience at all, but were only guided by corrupt
respects of person, and interest, and his Majest: might try what they would do
against persons evidently guilty of that, which they had judged so high a
Crime in another. For the discovery of their former false proceedings; that the
King held nothing Treason, but against himself. He has been already told, was
the judgment of the accusers of the Earl of Strafford, and he might have
known it to be so far from a Tyranicall principle, as he calls it, that it is
the rule of law, and Government, for have not his Masters changed the style of
proceedings against offenders, which the law formerly used in regard of their
change of Government, and devised one according to their new model? Its
possible they, that devised that clause in the Act, did not expect, it would be
retorted upon them, they were blinded with their fury, and precipitation. But
the Image breaker might have observed, that a greater evidence of their
injustice could not have been provided. He that is so shameless to insinuate
the Kings instigation to that clause in the Act for the death of the Earl
Strafford, which were a madness in any man to suppose, may as well pretend it for
his death. The six members must stand condemned, if he acquit them, for the
contrary of what he affirms is constantly true. And it were folly to ask him,
why he should conclude the six members guiltles, that never were tried, when
they were accused of such facts, as he himself says were Treason in others,
for he will certainly say it, though he think it not.

He concludes against the Kings conscience in saying, that he bare that touch
of conscience with greater regret then any other, in regard of the proditory
aid (he supposes) sent to Rochell, and Religion abroad, and a Prodigality of
shedding blood at home (as he phrases it.)

There cannot be a greater evidence of the Kings innocence, and the Rebels
lewdenes then their absurd accusations of him who after their barbarous
reproaches, and cruelty make his greatest Crime the resistance of their
Rebellion, and the misfortune of an expedition in favor of Rochell, and
Religion. No man is so senseles to believe that Rochell could have defended it
self without other aid, then their own, and if the King had not intended
their releife, he needed not have undertaken such chrageable, and dangerous
expeditions, and whence can any reasonable man, collect that the Kings
assistance to them could beproditory, when they were not their by hindered to
use their utmost endeavors, besides the English succors, and hereby we may
see how miserably the people of England have been misled by hipocriticall
Traitors who while they made profession of conscience and Religion, acted the
greatest villainies against Religion and conscience that the worst of Atheists
ever attempted, and shame not at such assertions of falsehood as common States
blush to be detected of.

The reason he says is worth the notinge, why the King would have notice taken
of so much tenderness, which is, he hoped, it would be some evidence before God,
and man to all posterity, that he was far from bearing that vast load, and
guilt of blood laid upon him by others, which has (he says) the likeness of a
subtle dissimulation.

When the Prophet David humbled himself, and put on sackcloth even that was
turned to his reproach, and his Majest: tears, and afflictions of soul are no
less reproached by these vipers, then the greatest sins, that could be
repented of. Cursed shimi will call David a man of blood, and his repentance
for the murder of one man with bitterness of soul shall be counted a
dissimulation, rather then the wretch will allow it any evidence, that he was
innocent of that blood, he would lay to his charge. This was not the first time
his Majest: charged himself with that innocent blood, the Rebels published
his Cabinet, wherein they found it, and he might well hope, that God would
clear his innocence, as the light, and his righteousness, as the noone day.
Prayers may be made for mercy to a man's name, and a penitent may piously hope
God will make his repentance evident to men, and his sorrows for one sin, an
evidence he was not guilty of many of the same Kind. His Majest: hopes not,
that his expressions here will be evidence, but that his regretts, which were
Known not only to God, but men could be evidence, how far he was from the
guilt of what his Enemies charged him with, and to declare a hope of the
benifit of repentance is no more like a dissimulation, then repentance is like
a justification. If his Majest: had shed the blood of thousands, whom he
counted Rebels, as this Author mentions, he could not suffer regretts of
conscience, though he had a sorrow of heart, his understanding being satisfied
of the Justice, and necessity of the fact. But those horrid Traitors, that
imbrewed themselves in the blood of that innocent King, were hardened against
the sparing of multitudes, and would secure their consciences by reproaching
his Majest: repentance, and transferring the blood of war upon him, which
their Rebellion, and cruelty had spilt. This libeller in this very page within
few lines told us, that strafford was by him put to death unwillingly and
presently concludes, thus by dipping voluntarily the tipp of his finger in the
blood of strafford whereof all men clear him, he thinks to escape that sea of
blood, wherein his own guilt has plunged him.

And may not a man's own conscience strike him for that, which all men clear
him of? but that himself has related to be otherwise in this case, where so
many concurred in Judgment against the death of the Earl of Strafford, and
when so many have made confession of their own unhappiness in the consent to
that Action, and so few at present, that do not abhor it, and think it a
great cause of Gods displeasure against the nation, it is far from truth,
that all men clear him. The Libeller holds a single murder, but dipping the
tip of the finger in blood, and gives just cause to conclude, that his
conscience is not touched with shedding a^ea of blood. Al men must confess, it
a cause of greater regret to have his hand in the blood of one man against the
persuasion of his conscience, then erroneously to enter into a war, where many
are distroyed upon the opinion of Justice, but the known Justice of his
Majest: cause, lays the blood of this war at the Rebels doors, whose
malice, and Treason, not ignorance, or error drew upon them the guilt of that
blood of Strafford, and those thousands, which the war has devoured. If the
King had never published his repentance for the blood of Strafford, all knowing
men would have judged he had cause to do it, and if he had never gone about to
purge himself of that blood which the war had shed, all men would have
cleared him of it.

Upon his going to the HOUSE OF COMMONS.
COncerning his inexcusable, and hostile march from the Court to the house of
Commons, there needs not much be said.

There need little to be said for his Majest: defense in going to the house of
Commons, who had so high a provocation to make an hostile March, and took the
way of so mild, and peaceable a coming to it, but this Authors impudence in
calling it inexcusable after the many violences, and hostile Marches of his
Masters unto that house, and their taking out, and driving away the members
will never be excused. How shameless is this man to call his Majest: going to
the house of Commons with an ordinary guard without Pike, or Muskett an hostile
March, after the March of a complete Army led by his Rebel Masters against
that house. But he vrges for proof, that his Majest: confesses it to be an
Act, which most men cried shame upon, which his Majest: says not at all, but
that his Enemies loaded it with obloquy, indifferent men grew jealous of, and
fearful, and many of his friends resented, as a motion rising rather from
passion, then reason.

The cries of his Enemies prove nothing, but their own passion, and
partiality, and the jealosies of men are oftener resolved into their own
mistakes, then the truth of Actions. The opinion of his Majest: friends
condemned not the Action as injurious, though they might think it passionate,
and if this Author could set aside the malice, and corruption of his heart, he
might justly learn from his Majest: cleerenes in stating his own Actions,
with observing all the Circumstances of them that make to his disadvantage, to
forbear these feigned discourses of every Action he writes of.

That in one of his answeares to both houses, he made profession, that he was
convinced that it was a plain breach of the privilege, it was greater
satisfaction, then ever King gave his houses of Parliament, and it must have
been an inexcusable disloyalty in them, to press him after such a profession,
and make it matter of complaint. It Is true his Majest: denied any intention to
break their Privileges in that Act. But no man yet could assign a reason to
exclude the King from any of his Courts, or Counsels, and why he might not
as well come to the lower house as to the higher, and speak to the Commons in
their own, as well, as send for them to the higher house, or else where, as was
both law, and Custom. And as no privilege of Parliament does extend to
Treason, but that a Conestable may apprehend any member of that house being
accused of that Crime, so why the King should be forbidden to come to the house
to cause Traitors to be apprehended, none but Traitors, will find a cause,
but here he says he represents it fraudulently. We have found already it has
been fraudulently expressed by the libeller. He says the King would make some
benificall use of his worst Actions And surely his Actions, which were most
charged with guilt appear just, and shame his accusers.

These men meaning his friends knew not the just motives, and pregnant grounds
with which I thought my self furnished. To these words of his Majest: which he
has interlaced with meaning his friends, he says, his best friends knew not,
nor ever could know, and it would have tended to his justifying to have named
them in this place, and to show his own impertinence the next words he cites
of his Majest: are, that, he had discovered, as he thought unlawful
Correspondencies, which they had used, and engagements to imbroyle his
Kingdoms. What more would he have had in this place? But he says suppose them
real, and known, what was this to that violation, and dishonor pu^t upon the
whole house, whose door was forcibly kept open, and all passages near it
besett with swords, and pistolls cockt, and menc'd in the hands of about three
hundred swaggerers, and Ruffians, who but expected, nay audibly called for the
word of onse^t to begin a slaughter.

But suppose them real, was it not a matter of more importance to apprehend
such conspiratours, then to omit the opening the door of the house of
Commons? Is it a dishonor to have Traitors taken from them. There need not
any answer to his pretended tenderness of the house, that approves such open
violence against them with Pikes, and Musketts, but reproves swords, and
Pistolls. Does not he think, that all men look upon him, as a common
prostitute, that uses such aggravations of a cause, which himself defends,
though accompanied with outrage, and violence. A word of onset to begin a
slaughter could never be expected by such an inconsiderable number, armed only
with swords, and pistolls, a strange preparation for a Massacre, but there are
men apt to be disordred by any rumors of danger, and some are willing to have
a pretense for unwarrantable Actions, and thence proceed these onsets in the
air. He would willingly persuade the Rebel rowte, that whatever the King may
do for the securing of himself, and Kingdom, Rebels may do to destroy him,
and usurp his Kingdom, and therefore to that, which his Majest: says of the
correspondencies and engagements, which the accused members used to imbroyl his
Kingdoms, the Libeller answeares, that he remembers not his own conspiracies
with the Irish, and. French, English and scotch Army to come against the
Parliament, the least of which attempts by whomesoever he says was no less,
then manifest Treason against the Common whealth.

To imagine a Monarchy, and Commonwealth, or Republique in the same state can
enter into none, that understand either, nor that a King can commit Treason
with his subjects, or against them. Kings have been charged with Tyrany, never
with Treason, till those brutish undertakers. If there had been any law to make
such a Treason, this libeller would never have added the word manifest, for it is
a sure Rule with him to add most vehement asseverations, where he knows there
is no color of truth. He well knows how careful the people of England were,
that Treason should not be made Arbitrary, and therefore they were confined
into one positive law, and in that law this Author finds not his fantastical
Treason. Can any, but mad men dream, that when the privilege of Parliament
extends not to Treason, that they cannot committ Treason. Its Treason by the
law to leavy war against the King, and that this libellers Masters have
acknowledged, and can he find it consistent in the same Government, that there
can be Treason in the King to leavy war against the Parliament, and because a
King may have confederations, and Alliances with Foreign Princes can subjects
have so too? These are not the opinions, but the Stratagems of Rebels. The
people of England are bound to assist their King against any without
distinction, and the law has provided for their indemnitie, though the King
miscarry, but laws are chafe, when Rebels Reign. The particulars he
mentions, if they had been real on his Majest: part, as they are only
imaginary, the Actions of the Rebels have given Testimony to their Justice,
and necessity.

To demand Justice against the five members, there needed not so rough
assistance. But the success tells us there needed more, for these members were
guarded with an Army, and a fleet, and instead of being committed on such an
accusation, which themselves resolved could, not be denied by law, they
protected them against law.

If he had resolved, meaning the King, to bear that repulse with patience,
wherefore did he provide against it with such an armed, and unusual force. Is
a Kings guard any unusual force, and though he resolved to bear a repulse
with patience, he could not resolve to tempt the malice, and insolence of
those, that waited, but opportunity to destroy him. But had he provided any
force to secure himself against insolence, does that condradict his bearing
the repulse with patience, and here the libeller casts away his Argument, that
he may use his scurrilitie, that the Kings heart served him not for such a
desperate Scuffle. So the great hostility, and provisions for a Massacre is
come to noe more, then to have hazarded a desperate Scuffle with the unarmed
house of Commons. The Kings heart served him for the highest hazards, where he
held his courses just, and honorable, but it never served him to act such
violences, as these Rebels have feigned, he intended.

There were two statutes, that declared he ought first to have acquainted the
Parliament, who were the accusers. These statutes this Author, nor any man else
ever read, and if there had been such statutes, that men ought not to be
accused, before the Parliament be acquainted, who were the Accusers, they were
much to blame that committed so many for Treason without any Accusers, and that
these two statutes should never be practiced, or known before now? How comes
it, that the King, nor his Attorney general can accuse a man of high Treason,
when the meanest subject of the Kingdom may do it? Its well known, that the
house of Commons upon the word of MR. Pym, without the least knowledge of the
fact, or any accuser, or witness, charged the ^arle of Strafford of high
Treason, where were these laws then? His Majest still professing to govern by
law, as he says, did no way break it, and he was noe way oblidged to name any
accusers, especially to the Parliament, where a Rebellious, and potent faction
united themselves to the Accused members, that had contrary to their own Rules
denied that proceeding, which they declared just, and according to law.

The fair tr^all, which was offered, was noe other, then to take opportunity
for justifying those members, what ever the proof were. Had it been thinks he
a prudent Act in the King to have accused Traitors, and made a Commission to
their fellows to judge of the fact. He could not doubt of the same Justice
from these men, which he found in many other occurrents. Could he suppose, that
they would condemn a Traitor, that had combined to prosecute the Treason, and
it was not for want of just matter, but the forefight of injustice, that caused
his Majest: to let fall his proceedings. When Rebels are protected by open
force, when the power, and impetuositie of Tumults are boasted of by this
Author, when the inclination of the potent faction unto the members is
confessed, he would yet have the King choose such a Trial.

He would have it a thirst of revenge in the King against the members for
opposition against his Tyranous proceedings. If their innocence of the Treason
had been as evident, as his Majest: of Tyranous proceedings, they had never
been accused, and if they had not been conscious of their guilt, they would
never have sought Tumultuary protection, and if his Majest: had thirsted for
revenge, he needed not have gone to the house of Commons to have satisfied it,
but Malefactors count legal pcoceedings the malice of Enemies, and effects of
displeasure.

To that the King (says he) missed but little to have produced writings under
some men's hands, the libeller says he missed, though their chambers trunkes,
and studies were sealed up, and searched, which though altogether false, there
might be such writings, and its like there were, which caused the house of
Commons to be so jealous, least their chambers, should have been searched,
that they made an order to use violence against any, that should search, a very
grave vote, and a sure sign of good Justice, if the fact had been brought
before them that would prevent the discovery, and deny a search of persons
accused for Treason.

The King says Gods providence would have it so, and to that the Libeller
joins, that curbes the raging of proud Monarchs, as well, as of madd multitudes.

Is it the curbing of proud Monarchs, when the miss of evidence against
Traitors? If the King had produced this writing, he mentions, had that been a
Monarchs rage? But why does he join the madd multitudes, whose rage was then
so feirce, he may believe, as he says, that God will set bounds unto it, and
turn them against their misleaders. Why pregnant grounds, and probabilities,
may not both concur in one cause noe man understands, though this Author would
have probabilities a diminution after pregnant grounds had been used. His
resemblance of Queen Mary's cushion, whereto he likens the Kings proofs,
would have suited with the clout, and pistol, the stables under ground, the
Danish fleet, and their many other ridiculous devised Conspiracies, the
bringing up of the northern Army, the landing of the french at Portsmouth,
cutting throats by the Papists, and the disignes of the spanish fleet, fit
only for the story of the knight of the Son, or the wandering Jew.

As Kings go now, what shadowy conceit, or groundl^s toy will not create a
jealosie. And was his Majest: jealosie created by a toy, when those persons
have acted that, which he was then jealous of. Can this breaker accuse him of
causeles jealosie, when he defends the fact? And is it a shadowie conceit, if
Kings ar jealous of such Rebellious inclinations, as this Rebel vaunts of? And
if these Rebels might have their will, there should not be a King left to be
jealous, and while they profess their purposes, accuse Kings of unjust
jealosie, and if subjects go now in other places, as in England, the world
will have cause to know, that all the jealosies of Kings were necessary to the
preservation of mankind, and that there is no jealosie of any King so causles,
as the attempts of ambitious Reformers.

That his Majest: denies, he has designed to assault the house of Commons, is
not contradicted by his answer to the City, that any course of violence had
been very justifiable, The libeller guesses, it was not far from his design,
because it might be so, and concludes as senselesly, that because his Majest:
forbear an act, which he held justifiable, it discovered in him an excessive
eagernes to be avenged on them, that crossed him, and that to have his will, he
stood not to d^e things never so much below him. So eager is the man to rail
himself out of reason. If he had an eagernes to be revenged, he would have
done high things, and not below him. It was no becoming sight to see the King
of England so affronted, and abused by his own subjects, many beholding
disobedience, and vulger insolence with sad hearts, and greiving at the ruin
of Government, and that his Majest: was constrained to call for Justice, and be
denied it. Such as lament the misfortunes of Princes, cannot but abhor the
Rebellion of subjects, and this vnbecoming sight to see the King of England one
while in the house of Commons, by, and by in the guild hall among the Liveries
this libeller does not remember out of affection to the Kings person, or
office, but out of joy, that he was enforct to such extreamitie. If he had had
any sense of duty, or regret at any Action ill becoming a King in reguard of
his place, or dignity, he would not so scurrilously descant on his
misfortunes, with the terms of Solicitor, pursivant, apparitor for that
prosecution, and it is a plain Testimony of the Rebellion then begun, when the
King was driven to Actions beneath his Majest: and this libeller will hardly
allow a King more, then such offices, for he says the Kings office is to
execute the Parliaments Command, and either in that he believed not what he
said, as is most certain he did not, or else he vainly objects the doing of
Actions beneath him, but it appears his desires are to reduce all Kings to the
lowest of the people.

That though the King in his answeares to the Parliament said, that as he once
concieved he had ground enough to accuse them, so at length, that he found as
good cause to desert any prosecution of them, yet here he seems to reverse
all.

He seems so to none, though some out of wilful malice would have it seem
so,' The King found, that he had good cause to desert the prosecution in
regard of the injustice, and violence of the Rebel faction, And is there any
thing said here to the contrary of it? Could the King find any cause to
continue the prosecution upon the cleer^t evidence, that could be produced?

It is the Method of the false Sectaries to infinuate an opinion of their
virtue by rigid censures of others, whereby they draw men from observation of
their own lewdenes, and they seem very sharp against sins of most common
obloquy, and offensive to sobriety, and thence the libeller calls his Majest:
guard the spawne, and shipwreck of Tavernes. Such, as were of his Majest:
guard may not think to escape these false tongues, when their King has tasted
so largely of them, and these hipocrites think to hide their blood guiltines,
pride, robbery, perjury, and oppression by reproaching their Enemies with
Stews, and Tavernes. The principal zealotts of this Rebellion were the tags,
and rags of the people, who were glad to hear voluptuous living, and riott
objected to the Kings party, that they might compare their beggary, and base
condition before other men's vices, whether true, or feigned. If the house of
Commons declared, that the coming of those Soldiers, Papists, and others with
the King was to take away some of their members, and in case of opposition, or
denial to have fallen upon the house in a hostile manner, they showed
themselves men of as little creditt, as this Author, for the world knows, that
they neither had, nor pretended proof of such a purpose, and their
declarations in that kind are no truer, then their professions of loyalty. If
the house had denied their members, and opposed, was it ^esse then Treason?

He inferrs from the Kings profession, if he purposed any violence, or
oppression against the innocent, then let the Enemy persecute my soul, and
tread my life to the ground, and lay my honor in the dust, that God has
judged, and done according to the verdict of his own mouth. The king well knew
his Enemy persecuted his soul, when he wrote this, and that he was in the
hands of those, that would take away his life, but assassination was noe proof
of his guilt, nor of Gods judgment of his cause, and these word^ used by the
prophett, and him are not an imprecation for trial, but a deprecation of the
offense, and it was not to satisfy men, but to acknowledge his judgment of the
Crime to God. The kings party are assured, that the proceedings against him
were odious to God, and man, and this Action touching the members was noe
other, then necessary Justice, and there appears not any purpose of violence,
or oppression of the innocent, and in vain do murderers seek to shelter
themselves from the guilt of their impieties by pretending Gods secret
Counsels, The sincerity of his Majest: heart is noe less manifest, because
he fell into the hands of wicked men, who cannott tread his honor in the
dust, which outluies their fury, and though they murdered him, his life is
with the Lord, and their infamy endless. God will bring their wickedness upon
their own heads in his due time.

The Kings admirers may see their madness to mistake this book; But all men see
his madness to traduce the book, and to profane, and prostitute all things
sacred to his lewd detractions, who says it is his doomesday book not like
that of William the Norman his Predecessor. Thus making the common appellation
of the great day of the Lord an inducement to vilify the kingly office, which
must be a day of wrath to such mockers, as ask, where is the promise of his
coming, which did these Traitors expect, they would not proceed so
presumptuously in their wickedness, and compile a book of it against that day.
The Admirers of the kings book are noe white mistaken, but they see the
breaker very much mistaken in his confidence, that thinks all men madd,
because himself is so, and they were madd indeed, if they received his
sense, or saw not, that only rage at the excellency of the kings Book, not
right understanding made him seek these silly objections, and face them with
such ostentation.

Upon the INSOLENCY Of the TUMULTS.
HE must confess to have here a neat, and well couched invective against
Tumults, which surely ought not to be answered with a impudent defense of
them. The misfortunes of Princes are the mirth of Rebels, and therefore he
says Rehoboam the son of Solomon could not have composed a better. It was not
only the son of Solomon, but his Father David, and himself too, that felt the
fury, and danger of Rebels, and Rehoboams misfortune does not mittigate the
sinful Revolt of the ten Tribes, which the Scripture calls Rebellion, and this
Author scoffing at his haste to escape their fury shows how affectionate: he
is to Rebelliaon. That the Tumults at whitehall were not so dangerous, as
these at sechem he cannot affirm, for those Tumults at whitehall have produced
greater impieties, and Calamities, then those at sechem, and those Tumults have
since, felt the scourge of their violence, as those at sechem soon did; their
revolt being punished by God, who gave them a King in his rage, that brought in
Idolatry with their Rebellion, which after many sore afflictions at last rooted
them out of their land, and they ceased to be a people.

He would insinuate, that because this is a neat invective, therefore the
Kings Household Rhetorician made it, but this has as little credit, as his
exceptions have truth, or weight.

That the matter considerable is, whether these were Tumults, or not, next, if
they were, whether the King himself did not cause them. Doubtless he would not
have it believed, that there could be any Tumults, nor any Rebellion against
him, for if there could be any, he knows themselves have committed it. The
known laws allow noe causes of Tumults from provocation, for if so, tumults
may judge of laws, and law makers, as these defended tumults presumed to do.
His first cause is the Kings unwillingness to call the Parliament, but these
tumults were after a parliament called; His not enduring to be overswayed by
them. Were this a cause of Tumult, or Rebellion, there would never be cause
wanting of such disorders in any kingdom, or state, when the Counsels of
kings must be subject to vulgar appeals, and Tumults must reform the kings
Judgment.

His often repeated imposture of the Kings tempting the English, or scotch
Armies is grossly introduced for a cause of the Tumults, when the Tumults
preceded these suppositions, and we may see what causes this man will have of
Tumults, that will make subsequent Actions the grounds of them.

The profering the four northern Counties to the scotts was an invention as
ridiculous, as the Authors commendation of an honest discovery of a thing never
acted. He formerly spoke of Timpanies, and Queen Mary's cushion, which might
have caused him to have forborne such a gross, and exploded a forgery.

That the Parliament, or people descerned a malignant party was no other, then
the artifice of the conspiratours in Parliament to devise names, which the
people understood not, and suggest terrors to them from things, that had not
entered into their thoughts, and of that nature was this name of
malignant-faction brought forth by the Junto to amuse the people, but he might
well remember, that not as much, as the name of malignant party was hatched,
when the Tumults begun.

The Rebellion in Ireland was then broken out, which was not till near fix
months after the insolence of the Tumults began, and that Rebellion in all
probability took example, and encouragement from these Tumults

The imaginary conspiracy of Scotland while the King was there is not of a
piece, the tumults having preceeded the Kings journey thither, and that
conspiracy he knows vanished into air, and could give noe more occasion of
Tumults, then of this Authors remembrance.

That great numbers of unknown persons resorted to the City was as unknown
to such, as were then there; as the persons to this Author, and as such resort
is known to be noe cause of such Tumults.

The King being returned from Scotland dismisses that guard, which the
Parliament thought necessary in the midst of so many dangers to have about
them. Its true the conspiratours in Parliament either from the guilt of their
consciences, or advantage to their plots pretended apprehension of danger, that
they might have a guard, which they might make use of to execute their
designs, and affront the members of the house that refused to cuncurr to their
plotts, and therefore noe guard pleased them, but such, as were composed
cheifely of such persons, as made up the Tumults.

The King dismissed the guard, which the Parliament thought necessary, and put
in another contrary to the privilege of that high Court, and by such a one
commanded as made them noe less doubtful of the guard it self. Its very
likely, that they had as little doubt of danger, from any other, as from the
guard, for they sought to create dangers to others, feared none to themselves,
but from their own guilt. Its well known there was not the least appearance
of danger, but from what that faction intended, and such desire of a guard was
noe less unknown, then ridiculous to all former Parliaments, and it was so
far from being a privilege to that high Court, that the leaders of the
faction in the lower house procured a vote to desire it of the king. And how
could it be contrary to the privilege of that high Court for him to change the
guards, that had first placed them? The guard, which the king appointed was
commanded by the chief officer of that guard, and because he gave command to
keep of the Tumults, therefore the Rebel faction, concluded their busnies
could not be done by such a guard, nor such a Commander. Which they therefore
says he discharge, deeming it more safe to sit free, though without a guard
in open danger, then enclosed with a suspected safety. And in what safety
sat they, that were threatened, and abused by those Tumults every day. The
visible cause of a guard was the Tumults, but the cause, why guards were
desired was to act the same for which the Tumults were raised, and the danger
pretended was a deceit, for they, that desired a guard would rather be without
one, then not have a Commander of their own faction, and the houses found noe
inconvenience in the want of a guard, but in the insolency of the Tumults,
which the seditious faction invited, and would not have them hindered by any
guards.

The people therefore least their worthyest, and most faithful Patriotts, who
had exposed themselves for the public, and whom they saw now left naked,
should want aid, or be deserted in the midst of these dangers, came in
multitudes, though unarmed to wittnes their fidelity, and readiness in case of
any violence offered to the Parliament. It has been aldeady observed, that
these Tumults preceded the desire of guards, and they were so far from being
acceptable to the Parliament, thar the house of Lords desired their restraint,
and invited the lower house to concur with them to suppress these Tumults,
and though the factious party withstood the motion, yet it was thought
necessary by a great part of that house to join with the Lords in that
desire. And how could they wittnes their fidelity to the Parliament, when so
great a part thought them a greivance? And why did they menace, and assault
the members of both houses? Why did they prescribe resolutions to the
Parliament, and in case their demands were not granted, denounce terror to
the opposers? Is this fidelity to the Parliament? This Author need not seek
such blind excuses for Tumults, that justifies open Treason, noe doubt those
his faithful Patriots well understood, that their greatest danger was from the
law, which they had violated, and they would be secure by subverting it, and
engaging, multitudes in their own guilt. The king had reason to send into the
City to forbid such resorts, and nothing, but sedition could encourage, or
permit them.

The supposition of the kings envying to see the peoples love devolved on
another object, shows, that Rebellious inclinations were the desire, and
strength of the leaders in the lower house, and the envying may be properly
changed into indignation, that subjects should break their duty, and become
workers of their own misery such Tnmultuous license had not so much
probability to hinder any action of the King toward the Parliament, as to
ruin the Parliament, and kingdom. The faction feared not any action of his
Majest: but endeavored to promote their own designs against him.

He is now come to tells us some reasons, why the Parliament petitioned the
king for a guard after they were content to sit without one, and while be
maintanies a power in his imaginary Parliament to murder the king, he presents
them petitioning the king for a guard, and their words, which he will not take
notice of are worth observing. The Knights Citizens, and Burgesses of the
house of Commons, your faithful, and loyal subjects, who are ready to lay
down their lives, and fortunes, and spend the last dropp of their blood to
maintain your Crown, and royal person in greatness, and glory, do cast
themselves down at your Royal feet, with such elaborate deceites did they
hope to persuade the king to give them a guard to oppress himself. Their
subsequent actions have been a full Comment upon these wicked dissimulations,
and these false professions convince the present shameless challenges of power
in these, that thus address themselves.

That blood was drawn in a fray, or two at the Court gate, and even at their
own gate in Westminster hall. Are not these proper motives for a Parliament to
call for guards? A Constable of a Parish might more reasonably set a guard
about his house after the parting of a fray, then the Parliament seek for an
armed guard upon such an occasion. If the tumults were so seditious, as to
show their insolency at the gate of white hall, or Westminster hall, and any
of them were wounded in such disorderly resorts, it had been just, and
necessary to forbid their coming in such numbers, and provoking such danger,
and their continuance is a mainfest sign, that these tumults were not the
voluntary motion of the people, but the instigation of the factious party in
Parliament.

That it was reasonable, and just for the Parliament to make choice of their
own guards, and Commander will only appear to such, as had traiterous plotts
against the King, and the choice, that they made of the Earl of Essex shows
by their after employment, and his ensuing Actions, that the King had just
reason for the refusal, and though this Author think, that he has said
somewhat by naming him the Kings own Chamberlain, yet all men see, that these
obligations, which the King had put upon that Earl, could not with hold him
from being a leader to the mad multitude against King, and Kingdom.

It is the right of inferior Courts to make choice of their own guards, which
is utterly false, but can he tell, that ever an inferior Court undertook to
be guarded by a Militia, or that ever they had other guards, then from
Constables, and inferior officers, whom they might require to keep the
peace, and do their duty, and noe Court could ever make choice of any guard
either for number, or Commander.

He says, that why the King refused the guard desired, the next day made
mainfest, for then he came to block up, or assault the house of Commons. It
soon appeared, wherefore they desired a guard, to protect Traitors, and
destroy the King. That the King came to block up, or assault, the libeller
has already confessed to be false, for he did it not, when it was in his
power, and if he had refused a guard for that reason, he would have performed
it, and its impertinently alleged for the cause of those tumults, when he
has showed, that those tumults were begun long before, for he lately told us
of the blood drawn at the gate of white hall, and Westminster hall, which
himself knows was in the tumults.

He proceeds to say, that he had begun to fortify his Court, and entertained
armed me^. How absurdly does he produce any acts of his Majest: which were
occasioned by the tumults to be causes of the tumults? fortifying his Court,
and entertaining armed men, there was good cause for, and what could it
signify, that the King fortified his own house? B^t an app^hension of danger.
And how could it offend any, unless such, (...) were disaffected to his safety?

He says these men so entertained standing at his Palace gate reviled, and
with drawn swords wonnded many of the people, as they passed by in a peaceable
manner, whereof some died. His own relation makes it more then probable, that
such, as were wounded gave the occasion of the hurt they had, for they were not
drawn to the Palace gate, and might have quietly passed by though any of his
Maj: Servants stood at the gate, and the truth is they daily provoked his Maj:
with insolent, and menacinge words, and Actions, and enforced such, as guarded
the Court to repel them with force, and if they were reviled, they gave the
provocation by their seditious carriage, and these armed men are now come to
drawn swords there being no arms found by this Author, but swords, wherewith
the persons usually walked, and which were necessarily drawn against that rowt.

The passing by of a multitude, though neither to St. Georges feast, nor to a
tilting of it self was no Tumult. The expression of their loyalty, and
stedfastnes to the Parliament, whose lives they doubted to be in danger was noe
Tumult. but wherefore should such a multitude resort, that had nothing to see,
unless they were tumults? If a multitude, of people either at St. Georges feast,
or a tilting should threaten the King, or with violence press into his Court,
and reproach, and assault such, as they found there, this would be a tumult,
and somewhat more, but this was not al these tumults acted, they assaulted the
members of both houses near their doors, they threatened them, that consented
not to what they would have, they prescribed to the King, and both houses, what
they should do, and does this trivial discourser make no difference between
such Actions, that are the most pernicious disorders in states, and the coming
of a multitude to see a tilting. If the purpose of such multitudes had been
preservation of the lives, or safeties of any members in Parliament, it was
very vnsuteable to their pretense to enquire into the proceedings of the
houses, and assault, and menace the members. The loyalty, which he says they
bare to the Parliament was il expressed by breaking the privileges, and wronging
the members, their loyalty was due to their King in the first place, and they
owed nothing to the Parliament, but as their Kings Court, and Council, but the
Author thinks fit they should break their sworn loyalty to their King to
maintain a faction against him.

If it grew to be so, the cause was in the King, and his retinue, who by
hostile preparations, and actual assailing the people gave just cause to
defend themselves. can himself believe this dream of his, when he reads it
over, that the kings preparations against the tumults after a long continved
insolence against him, should more excuse them for increasing their violence,
then justify their first attempts? Need they come to white hall, or
Westminster to defend themselves, but these disorderly, and absurd pretenses
are fit Apologies for a tumultuous rowt.

These petitioning people needed not have been so formidable to any, but to
such, whose consciences misgave them, how il they had deserved of the people,
and do non forbid such petitioning people but those, wose consciences misgave
them, how il they had deserved of the people? why then were the kentish
petitioners, and others so roughly handled coming unarmed, and more
peaceably, then these Tumults? And do the libellers Masters permit such
petitioning people at present, unless it be some of their own suborning? And
are the people, which he so lately described to to be exorbitant, and
excessive in their motions become such exact judges of al men's meritt, and
determine of punishment without respect to their Rulers. If the libeller would
have shown what these Tumults wanted to make them Cryminall, and wherefore
other Tumults were condemned, he would have found means to have come to
himself, and have said, that Tumults, were necessary, Preparations to
Rebellion.

That the King was so Empha^icall, and elaborate on this Theme will redound
less perhaps then he was aware to the commendation of h^ Government, for in
good Governments they happen seldomest, and rise not without cause. It is more
then perhapps, that this libellers commendation of the Tumults will condemn
his defense. If Tumults never happen without cause, we must accuse the best
Governments of giving that cause, we are sure David's Government wanted them
not, but Absolon, and Sheba shall condemn the man after Gods own heart. Did
this libeller think any truth in scripture, or was he at all acquainted with
it, that will have a just cause for all Tumul, s, when we read so many
against Moses by the children of Israel? And if he had pleased to have
perused the Roman story, he must acknowledge many causses Tumults in that
state. Its like he holds, that Demetrius, and his Craftsmen had a cause for
their Tumults, and surely it was not so violent, as the Tumult he defends. And
if all Tumults, and Rebellions be caused by ill Government, we may reasonably
conclude, that the people needed not Governors, that knew so well how to
govern themselves, and did never judge a miss of the Actions, or Counsels of
their Governors. The libeller at first said he took up the gantlet for
liberty, and the Commonwealth, which he has now expounded to be for
destruction of liberty, and Kingdom by Tumults.

If they prove extreme, and pernicious (that is the Tumults) they were never
counted so to Monarchy, but to Monarchical Tyrany. Who doubts, but Rebels will
pretend Tyrany, and oppression. Did ever reasonable man before this unreasonable
creature pretend, that Tumults were not pernicious to all governments, and can
any man conceive, that they will not grow extreme, if not prevented, but left to
their own violence? what is become now of his judgment of the peoples
excessive, and extravagant motions, are there none in Tumults? Can any
Rebellion want a pretense, if the extreamitie of it be a proof of Tyrany in
the Rulers? There can hardly be supposed an assertion more vo^de of truth, and
modesty. What public wickedness was there ever acted to the subversion of
Kingdoms, but by Tumults? How many usurpations, how many murders of most
virtuous Princes have been acted by Tumults? But this libellet glories in those
exploites of the rabble, and makes the Calamities they have brought on others
the matter of his mirth.

Extremes he says are at most Antipathy. If then the King so extremely
stood in fear of Tumults, the inference will endanger him to be the olliert
extreme. Where does he find in his learning, that Tumults, and Tyrany are at
any Antipathy, which are but one, and the same thing, for was there ever
greater Tyrany exercised, then by Tumults? And are not the laws of all states
most severe against Tumults? And can there be any inference from thence, that
the Government is Tyrany, are not Government, and Tumults at most Antipathy?
Its a certain Rule, that all watchful Governors will fear Tu^ults. The King
had just cause to fea^e the Calamities ensuing the violence of Tumults, and
this trifler vainly infers his fancied extremes from a prudent foresight, and
if there were noe other example of causeles, and mischeivous Tumults then those
the King complained of, they only were sufficient to instruct the world upon
what mistaken rumors they are raised, and unto what desperate impieties they
proceed.

He never thought any thing more to presage the mischeifes, that ensued, then
those Tumults. To this says the libeller. Those Tumults were but the mild
effects of an evil, and injurious Reign. Tumults the prodigious, and
pestilentiall reigns get up in a mild, and gracious Government, wherein
seditious, and traiterous factionists take liberty to defuse their venom among
the people, and mild tumults, and loyal Rebellion are phrases agreeable to
this man's modesty.

Those signs were to be read more apparent in his rage, and purposed revenge
of those clamours of the people. That those tumults might overcome the patience
of any King, the severitie used upon less provocations by others is a full
evidence, but his Majest: moderation was constant, rage, and revenge being only
legible in his Enemies. That tumults did presage the mischeifes ensuing, al
knowing men concur with his Majest: and descerne the libellers servile defense
of popular clamours.

Not any thing portends more Gods displeasure against a nation, then when be
suffers the clamours of the vulgar to pass all bounds of law, and reverence to
Authority, to this he says, it portends rather his displeasure against a
Tyranous King. As God sometimes gives an evilKing to a people, so whenever he
destroys that King by the contemptible vulgar, it is a sign of the increase
of his displeasure, and seldom, or never was any King good, or evil so
destroyed, but the peoples sufferings were increased.

That those, whom he calls a supplicating people, and that did noe hurt to
law, or authority, but stood for it in the Parliament were a Rebel rabble
cannot be doubted, since the libeller defends them, and he cannot be believed
they did noe hurt to law in as much, as he defends the subversion of law, and
the attempts of this supplicating people, that were in order to that end. This
supplicating is one of his abolisht Ceremonies, The libeller tells, that they
ought to have stood for law, the world knownes they did the contrary, and he is
wittnes both of their guilt, and his own falsehood.

That they invaded the honor, and freedom of the two houses. To this he
says, It is his officious accusation, not seconded by the Parliament, who, had
they seen cause, were best able to complain. And how were they able, when
they were threatened, if they did complain, and because the Parliament is
overawed by Tumults, that they cannot complain, therefore their fredome is not
invaded. But how shamelesly he charges the King with the officious accusation,
he tells us in the next words, for he says, if they struck, or menaced any,
as the King said, they were such, as had more relation to the Court, then to
the Common wealth, Enemies, not Patrons of the people. Is not the honor, and
freedom of the two housce invaded, when their members ar struck, and menaced?
And is it an officious accusation to say so? Can this man pretend the name of
Parliament, when he will allow the base rabble to abuse them at pleasure? And
could any man but he tell the King, that persons elected were not sent to be
Cavelled at by him, or entertained with an undervalue of their temper,
judgment, or affection, and here defend the rascallitie in striking, and
menacing the members, and not only undervaluing their temper, judgment, and
affection, but handling them, as cullions. Never was libeller more passionately
malicious, more blindly absurd, more wilfully false, yet he thinks he has a
reserve against all opposition, for he says, if their petitioning unarmed were
an invasion of both houses, what was his besetting it with armed men. Is
striking, and menacing so quickly returned to petitioning, Is it a way of
answer not to speak to the question? Did ever Kings of England come without
an armed guard to the Parliament, and do they beset the house, when the guard
is at the door? And can he say, that the Kings coming with his guard to the
house is a greater invasion of the honor, and freedom of the houses, then the
striking, and menacing the members by the Tumults? Doubtless he had consulted
better to his credit to have said nothing, then that, which was so different
from the case himself had stated, and his repetition of petitioning, and
supplicating people is noe other, then the noise of the Ephesian Rabble, that
great is Diana of the Ephesians.

The King says, They forbore not rude deportments, contemptuous words, and
Actions to himself, and his Court. And to this the libeller says. It was noe
wonder, having heard what treacherous hostility he had designed against the
City, and his whole Kingdom, that they forbore to handle him, as people in
their rage have handled Tyrants here to fore for less offenses. The
supplicating, and petitioning people may use rude deportments, contemptuous
words, and actions. To what purpose has he minced his Tumults into
supplicating, and petitioning people, when he defends their highest violence?
The King designed Treacherous hostility against the City, and Kingdom. The
last thoughts, that madd men had before their destraction run most in their
fancy in the time of their frenzy, and these Traitors having lost all reason
inculcate still those ridiculous frauds wherewith at first they seduced the
people. The designs of Treacherous hostility was one of the Ceremonies, which
its now time to give over. Who but an I diot can believe, that the King can
have Treacherous designs against his Kingdom, whereof shall he be King, and
whom shall he have to execate hostility against his own Kingdom? but these
dreams of the blowing up of Thames, and tales of wind mills, and fiery
Dragons are over, and its become the peoples sorrow, and shame to look back
upon the cheates, whereby they were deluded. He cannot name any Tyrant ill
handled by tumults upon such pretenses, as he makes, and the most wicked Tyrant
was not so guilty, as that people, which exercised their rage upon him, yet
the libeller determines, that the tumults fury is as justifiable, as the
Parliaments order, for he ascribes noe more to the one, then the other.

They were not a short ague, but a feiree quotidian fever. And the libeller
says he may best say it who most felt it. He will rather boast of the
greatenes of their villainy, then reprove the impiety of it, and therefore he
sports himself with the injuries of it, after his appellations of mildnes, and
supplicating people, and extolls the highest of their violence, as a feirce
quotidian fever, and he is so Lunatique, that out of his malice to the King,
he calls them mild, and out of his insolence confesses them violent, and
deadly.

The King would persuade us, that men scared themselves, and others without
cause. And al men are now satisfied of the truth of it, the frauds being so
apparent, and confessed by this breaker.

Wise fear, and suspicion would find weapons. And we have found by
experience, that Rebels by suggesting vain fears, and suspicions have gotten
weapons, and armed the people to their own destruction.

Upon the Kings repeating the mischeifes done by the tumults, that they first
petitioned, then protected, dictate next, and lastly overaw the Parliament.
They removed obstructions, they purged the houses, cast out rotten members. He
says, if there were a man of Iron such as Talus by our poet spencer, is feigned
to be the Page of Justice, who with his Iron flaile could do all this, and
expedititiously without those deceitefull forms, and Circumstances of law
worse, then Ceremonies in Religion, I say God send it done, whether by one
Talus, or by a thousand. Religion, and laws are less then Ceremonies in this
Authors account, and when Pages follow not, nor acknowledge, Masters Justice
will be ill waited on, such cut-throates are not the Pages of Justice, but the
furies of hell, and these this libeller prays to God for; what will not such
call Justice to satisfy their ambition, and cruelty? Poets are short in their
fancies of what the English Rebels have acted. Their Giants were Pigmyes to
these Monsters, and their Hidra too few heads, and too little venom for the
service of these Enemies of mankind. What a silly property does this libeller
make Parliament, and laws, that subjects them to Tumults, and how barbarous
are their proceedings, that made endeavor to subvert fundamental laws a
Capital Crime, and here he commends the fact, and calls them deceitefull
forms, and Circumstances of law. Might he not better have said, they would
make good their villainies by the sword, then prevaricate, and say, and unsay,
and pretend Religion, and yet pray God to send Tumults, and Confusions to
break all laws in order to their designs?

The King says, they subdued the men of conscience in Parliament, backed, and
abetted all seditious, and schismatic proposalls against Government
Ecclesiastical, and Civil. To this he says. That it was not the Kings grace,
but this Iron flaile, the people, that drove the Bishopps out of their
Baronies, Cathedralls, Lords house, Coopes, surplisses, papisticall
innovations, threw down high Commission, starr chamber, gave us a trienniall
Parliament, and what we most desired. And is not this brave? Is it a credit to
a Church to be thus reformed? Is this the Christian Religion to glory in
oppression, robery, and Rebellion? There is noe doubt, but many things granted
by his Majest: in the late Parliament, were Acts of grace in respect of his
compliance with importunity, in hope thereby to preserve the people from a
Civil war, not in respect of the nature of the things granted. The libeller
might have remembered, that the King never consented to drive the Bishopps out
of their Baronies, or Cathedralls, and his Trienniall Parliament, which he so
much commends is repealed by his new Masters, for the people must not look for
the execution of any such law. And this Iron slaile, the rashness, and cruelty
of a disordered multitude has thresht, and broken the bones, and sinews of
the people, and made them know the difference between a golden Scepter, and an
Iron flaile.

In revenge whereof he says he now so bitterly inveighs against them. And how
can the libeller think it bitter, when their Actions, which he confesses
exceed in impiety the greatest Crimes, that ever were inveighed against? And
if we could wonder at any thing, we might wonder at his mention of
Schismatic proposalls consented to by the King, when he well knows, noe one
thing by him mentioned of Cathedralls, or Ceremonies was consented to by the
King, and noe less strange is it, that the other particulars are by him
recited, as intended by the King to be the Sedi^ious proposalls, though all of
them are not free from that name, when as there were so many seditious, and
Traiterous proposalls besides these.

That these Tumults played the hasty midwives, and would not stay the
ripening, but went straight to ripping up, and forcibly cut out abortive votes,
to this he opposes, that the Parliament complained not, and therefore those
confluxes were not by them thought Tumultuous. And were they not thought
Tumultuous by such, as they had expelled, and driven away from the Parliament?
And did he but in his last words call them an Iron flaile, and recount the
wonders, which they wrought, and now would not allow them to be Tumults? We may
besure the seditious faction in Parliament stirred them up, and such, as
differed in judgment, or affection from them, were enforced either to be
absent, or silent,

But what good man had not rather want, any thing the most desired for the
public good, then attain it by such unlawful, and irreligious means, which
is says the libeller had not rather sit still, and let his Country be
Tyranized, then like men demand their rights, and liberties, And that is the
people ought, when they think fit to Rebel against their Governors, and say
their laws are deceitefull, and their Government Tyranicall.

This is the artificiallest piece of finenes to persuade men to be slaves, that
the Court could have invented. Is it not Scripture, that we may not do evil,
that good may come of it, And what other thing does the King say, or this
libeller make the artificialest finenes of the Court, Traitors persuade men,
that they demand their right, while they seek only to oppress the right of
all men by a lawles usurpation, and noe man can doubt, but such, as Rebel will
make pretenses, and not spare the laws of God by profane interpretations, nor
the Actions of their Rulers by false representations.

The moral of this lesson would better serve the teacher, and it is the
libellers sense. What good man had not rather want a boundles, and arbitrary
power, and those fine flowers of the Crown called Prerogatives, then for them
to use force, and perpetual vexation to his faithful subjects, nay to wade
for them through blood, and Civil war. And have not these Rebels waded
through blood, and Civil war to place these Prerogatives, and flowers of the
Crown upon themselves, and continue force, and perpetual vexation upon the
people of England to set up a boundles, and arbitrary power. The Kings just
Prerogatives, and flowers of his Crown were of absolute necessity for his
peoples safety, and they could be a vexation to noe faithful subjects This
libeller has inherited Cains lurce, a restles motion, and discord within
himself, that here talks of faithful subjects, and by, and by will allow
none to be subjects, nor faithful, but the King is their officer, and noe
oaths bind them to him.

The King says, who were the chief Demagogues to send for those Tumults, some
alive are not ignorant, he says the King cannot coin English as he could
money, and it is believed this wording was above his known style, and
ortography, and accuses the whole composure to be conscious of some other
author. And this learned observation upon the word Demagogue deserves the
Laurel. Why is demagogue amore hob goblin word, then Pedagogue? And why should
the one be above the kings known style, and ortography more then the other?
And why may not the king make an English word current, as well as another,
There are very many whose known style, and ortography is beneath the Kings,
that could have transcribed Demagogue out of many English Authors without
offending against ortography.

If these Demagogues were men of reputation with the rabble, it adds not to
their reputation with knowing men, nor lessens the guilt, nor danger of those
tumults, but rather made them more mischeivous; and the baser sort of people
have such most in reputation, as are nearest to their own condition being
strangers to virtue, and true worth.

The King says complaints were made, yet noe redress could be obtained. To
this he returns the Parliaments complaint of danger, and that it cheered them
to see some flore of their friends, and in the Roman, not pettifogging sense,
their Clients so near about them. Though he sometimes use the names of
Justice, and Patriotts, and love of Country, yet he affects nothing more, nor
praises any thing so much, as seditious contrivances, and exploits, and to
defend the Tumults, while he would deny there were any, and the seditious
Gracchy, Catilnie, and other conspiratours against the Roman Senate shall be
commended, for what were these Clients in the Roman sense, but a powerful
number of such persons, as were ready to fire the state at the command of
their Patron. The Senate never made use of such Clients, but the power of
private men by them became the ruin of that state, and he has given himself
a full answer, why the Parliament complained not of the Tumults, when he
boasts, that they were cheered to see them.

The Parliament, and people demanded Justice for those assaults, if not
murders, meaning those pretended brawles at the Court gate. If any had
demanded Justice they might have had it, for what should hinder? the
procedings of noe Court were shutt but by the Rebels. And it is not Poetical
fury, but Bedlam distraction to compare the hurts done in a fray, ptrovoked by
an unruly rabble to the sheddinge of the blood of Nabaoth, and the murder of
the king to the revenge of Nabaoths blood. Their choice of the place for that
execrable Act before the kings Palace gate is only an evidence of the pride,
and malice of their hearts, and of their self condemning consciences, that
contrived Circumstances to disguise their cruelty with a counterfaite of
Justice.

The king complains, that he found noe declarations of the Bishopps could take
place against the Tumults. To this he asks, was that worth his considering,
that foolish, and self undoing declaration of twelve Cipher Bishopps, who were
immediately appeacht of Treason for that audacious declaring? Surely it was
worth the considering in reguard of the Justice of the declaration, and the
Injustice toward those Bishopps, and there can hardly be produced a more
impudent Act by an assembly of men, that would allow tumults to offer violence
to their members, and charge their members for complaining of the injury with
Treason. And as they proceeded without shame, or truth, so they make it their
mirth, that they could by such a ridiculous means, effect so great a
villainy. That declaration, which he calls foolish, and self undoing will stand
a perpetual Monument of the virtue, and courage of these Bishopps, and the
infamy of those Cipher Lords, that committed them. And if the Bishopps were
pulled by their Rochetts, as he admitts, was not this a just cause in fear in
his Majest? And does this pulling by the Rochetts amount to nothing but
petitioning? This libeller says, the Bishopps deserved another kind of
pulling. And noe doubt he would have justified their murder in the streets,
as well, as the Kings since, and that must not have been the blood of Nabaoth.
He would infer, that the King had noe cause of fear, because he came the next
day after his going to the house of Commons into the City without a guard. The
King believed at that time the City was not so totally debaucht, but that he
might find some, that would guard him against the disloyalty of others, and
those humble demeanours, which he mentions are well known to be most insolent
provocations of base people, and though at that time the infection was not so
venomous, as it grew afterward, yet the king found disloyalty very apparent.

Though the King might have feared in reguard of his own guiltines, yet he
knew the people so full of awe, and reverence to his person, as he dared to
committ himself single among them. If the King had known guiltines in
himself, he could not have hoped for that awe, and reverence, but his going
single at such a time, and after so many affronts shows the audacious
scurrilitie of this Author, that has taunted at him so often for seares, and
terrors, and now says he dared go single among such outrageous tumults. And
if awe, and reverence to his person were a commendation to the people, as this
libeller would have it, it must be the brand of infamy upon him, and his
Rebellious pack, that have trodden awe, and reverence underfoot, and wickedly
despised, and murdered him.

He would prove, that the King had no fears after all the reproachful
scoffing at his fears, because he went into Scotland after the Bishopps had
been worse handled, then in England, and after two Armies had entered England
against him, and this he says argues first, that he was a stranger to England,
and full of diffidence. To the Scotts only a native King in his confidence,
though not in his dealing, next he says, which shows beyound doubting, that
all his fear of Tumults was but a pretense. We cannot boubt, that this
Authors brain is as Giddy, as the Tumults, for to prove, that the King had noe
fear of the Tumults, he affirms him diffident to the English confident of the
Scotts, and labors much to make periods of non sense, that he may use words of
Calumny. Might not the King have cause to fear in reguard of their malice,
though not his personal suffering? And does not his libeller show his vain
falsehood, that here makes the king feareles, and so lately made mirth of the
terrors of the Tumults. The libeller doubted he should not find credit to his
many contradictions touching the tumults, and therefore turns about to another
theme of the Kings relation to the scotts, and is so void of sense, as having
affirmed within ten lines before, that the king was confident of the awe, and
reverence of the people of England to his person, here says he was full of
diffidence.

But he says he took occasion from the Tumults of absence from the
Parliament, to turn his disorderly bickerings to an orderly invadinge. That
the King might be absent without showing a reason why, from his Parliament, noe
man of knowledge, or common reason ever doubted, and he might, as well go to
York, as into Scotland. But he must be persecuted by disorderly Tumults, if he
stay, and followed with a formed Army, if he depart, and they, that sought
Colors, and disgiuses for the Tumults grow so impudent to raise an Army for
the King to fight against him.

The King says he would not have weakened himself by so many former, and
after Acts, if he had meditated war, as some suspected, when he left white
hall. The libeller says his former Acts did not weaken him, and it might come
into his mind after passing these Acts. That which strengthened the Rebels
must weaken him, and was the Act for continuance of the Parliament, without
which they could not have sat, nor acted, nor deluded the people, nor part of
their strength, nor the Kings weakness? But he that objects cunning fetches,
and evil Councillors to the king now allows him nothing, but improvidence,
and fear.

The King doubted not, but all had gone well, if the Parliament had sat still
free, as it was in its first election, and says the libeller, his not doubting
was all good men's greatest doubt. And these are the good men, that could not
endure a free Parliament, and the libellers Parliament, that must govern is a
new model, not a free Parliament, as it was at first elected; that stood not
with their Rebellious disignes, and his good men doubted, that all would not
so well with them, if that sat still free, and therefore the Iron flaile must
thrust the Bishopps out of the Lords house, and purge the lower house, and yet
it is still Tyrany, and obstinacy in the King by this man's judgment not to
accept all the Dictates of this ridiculous pack, and he has a narrow
conscience, and not fit for the public, that follows not the cry of this
kennell.

To the Kings resolution to hear reason, and consent, as far, as he could
comprehend. The libeller asks, what if his reason comprehend nothing, but his
own advantages, was this a reason to be trusted with the common good of three
nations? Yes truly, and it is noe Paradox, that if the King comprehend his own
advantages, it is sufficient for the common good of the three nations, for
whatever is their common good is his advantage, and whatever is his advantage
is their Common good, but all his Patriotts for whom the libeller is so
Zealous have advantages of their own, that are opposite to the Common good of
the three nations.

The King says, as swine are to gardens, so are Tumults to Parliaments To
this says the libeller. The Parliament could best have told us, had they found
it so. And doubtless such of the Parliament, as found it not, may be accounted
among the number of these swine, or the herdsme^ of them.

But he says one great hog may do as much mischief in a garden, as many
little swine. And it seems, that the like evil spirit, as entered into the
heard of swine has possessed this libeller, and driven him on head long in his
Rebellious impudence.

The King says, he was some times prone to think, that had he called this
last Pa^liament to any other place in England, the sad consequences might have
been prevented. To show, that the place could have made noe change, the
libeller instances in his Majest: first Parliament at oxford, which was
dissolved. What does that prove to contradict what his Majest: says, that if
he had called the Parliament at another place, these sad consequences might
have been prevented? Does the libeller think, that because there was
misunderstanding between the King, and some of his Parliaments, that they
would therefore have run to the same extreamities, that the faction in this
last did, or that these factionists could have brought this mischeife upon the
kingdom, by like Tumults in another place.

He goes on to say, that the King called his last Parliament at Oxford a
Mungrell Parliament consisting all of his friends. Noe doubt there were in that
Parliament many loyally affected to his Majest: but it cannot be denied, for
time has tried it, that there were many among them, that were spies, and
disturbers corrupted by the Rebel faction at Westminster, and their own base
inclinations, who sought to disorder all Counsels, and consultations.

The libeller would comprehend the whole people of England within the Tumults,
and interprett the Kings prayer against the tumults to be a prayer against his
people. Is it not God, that stilleth the raging of the sea, and madness of the
people? And is not a prayer for the people to pray they may be delivered from
such madness, and yet this libeller says, that the king praying to be delivered
from the Tumults prays to be delivered from the people, and blasphemously
concludes, God save the people from such intercessours. And we cannot believe,
that God is in his thoughts, whose mouth so often abuses his name.

Upon the Bill for TRIENNIALL PARLIAMENTS, and for settling this, etc.
HE says the Bill for Trienniall Parliaments was a good Bill, and the other
for settling this at that time very expedient. And this he says in the kings
own words was noe more then what the world was fully confirmed he might in
Justice, reason, honor, and conscience grant them, for to that end he
affirms to have done it. This man has a confirmed enmity against truth, and
cannot make a right recital. The kings words are, that the world might be
fully confirmed, in my purposes at first to contribute what in Justice, reason,
honor, and conscience I could to the happy succes of this Parliament, I
willingly past the Bill for Trienniall Parliaments. The greatenes of the trust,
which his Majest: put upon the people by passing that Bill was a strong
Argument, that he would deny nothing, which in Justice, reason, honor, and
conscience he might grant, not that the world was confirmed he might grant
that Bill in reason, honor, and conscience in respect of the matter of it, for
a great part of the world was of opinion, he might with better reason have
denied it, had not his desire to show his purposes of contributing what he
could to the happy success of the Parliament moved him. And they might be
confirmed thereby of his purposes to deny nothing, which in Justice, reason,
honor, and conscience he could contribute to the happy success of the
Parliament.

It is the Kings manner to make virtues of his necessities, and that neither
praise, nor thanks are due to him for these beneficial Acts. It cannot be
expected, that Rebels will retain gratitude, that have cast of loyalty, but
let us look on his reasons, and the first is, that this first Bill graunts
much less, then two former statutes yet in force by Edw. the 3. that a
Parliament should be called every year, or oftener, if need were. Either the
libeller is vain in producing this instance, or in commending the Bill, that
gave much less, then two former laws in force, and he must make the
Parliament very inconsiderate, that would so much importune a law so far
short, of what former laws had enacted. His ancient law book called the
mirror, and his late Treatise, that Parliaments by our old laws were to be
twice a year at London, carry as little Authority, as cleerenes, what those
Parliaments were they mention, but neither the statutes, nor law books did
ever affirm the right of calling Parliaments in any other then the King, or
that he might not deferr the calling of them, if he saw cause, and these
statutes were made to declare the subjects duty to attend the King in his
Parliament once a year, or oftener, if need were, and there was noe reason why
oftener should have been inserted into the law, if any obligation were intended
thereby upon the King. And its contrary unto the writ, whereby Parliaments are
called, that the time of Parliaments should be defined, for it is recited to be
an Act of Council to call a Parliament, which needed not, if it were necessary
at a prefixed time.

The second Bill he says was so necessary, that nothing in the power of man
more seemed to be the stay of all things from ruin, then that Act. We are
sure, that nothing did more confirm the designs of the Traitors nor hasten
that ruin of the Kingdom they have wrought, then that Act. All men descerne
the fraudulent artifices used to gain that Bill by pretending public debts,
which seditious faction had contracted, and intended to increase for the
carrying on of their Rebellion, and his Majest: in granting that Bill hoped to
take of those occasions of it? the Reports, which they cast out among the
people of his unwillingness to raise money for discharge of the Armies. These
charges were occasioned by the Kings ill stewardshipp, but the world is
satisfied, it was from a traiterous conspiracy of the guides of this
Rebellion. He alleadges his needeles raising of two Armies to withstand the
Scotts, which noe man, but a professed Rebel can so call, for should he have
raised noe Army, but left all to the mercy of the invader? next he had beggerd
both himself, and the public. When by this libellers own confession the
King had received noe supplies from the public for raising those Armies, and
these shameless Traitors blush not to talk of the Kings beggering of the
people, when the great plenty his Government had enriched them with, is so
visible in those vast leavies, which the Rebels have since made upon them.

The King left us upon the score of his needy Enemies. If they had not been too
much friends to the traitors of England, there had been noe score to them, for
all men know whatever they received from England was by the contrivance of the
Traiterous faction in Parliament to accomplish their ends. To diseng age him
great sums were borrowed. Which its well known was not to disengage the
King, but to advance the designs of the Traitors, who dealt under hand with
some of the Scotts to protract the Treaty, that the charges might be encreast.

The errors of his Government had brought the Kingdoms to such, extremes, as
were incapable of recovery without the absolute continuance of this Parliament.
They never did one act after that Bill, but in order to the Kingdoms
confusion, and all men saw there were noe extremes to be recovered at the time
of passing that Bill, but the return of the Scotts, and the disbanding the
faction in Parliament, and the only recovery had been by setting an end to the
Parliament, which they, that made it their property could not endure.

The King past these Acts vn^illingly. It cannot be doubted, but the King
foresaw the danger of both, and the libeller might have seen in the first
section of this Chapter, that his Maj: was not without doubt, that what he
intended for a remedy might prove a disease beyound all remedy, and though to
avoyde a Civil war he made some concessions in hope to bring the people to
see their own good, which might turn to his, and their greater mischeife, if
by them ill applied, yet his Majest: deserves praise, and thanks for such Acts
of grace, and the necessity, which this libeller so impudently vrges to take
of his Majest: just thanks. was the danger of a Civil war, which his Majest:
sought by these Acts to prevent, and might have entered into with less hazard
before the passing of these Bills, then after. The libeller only increases the
infamy of the Rebels ingratitude, and his own impudence by obt^ding
necessities to take of the Kings grace in passing those Bills, and it had not
the shape of a Masterly brow, but gracious aspect in his Majest: saying the
greatness of the obligation above their deserts, that he had put upon them by
passing the first Bill, and the Masterly brow suites not with the following
scurrilous conceit, that the kings recital of the obligation he had putt upon
them by that Act was, as if he had beggd an office to a sort of his desertles
grooms, and these desertles grooms now Rule the new Republique, there being
none, that had the least desert that would accept such a Traytorous office.

That the King passed the latter Bill to prevent the oncroase of the present
disorders, not out of consideration of the fittnes of that Bill, he need not
spend time to prove, and his consent was moved from the reason of the time, not
the matter, and the ^ller has well observed, that they had offended him much
more after the passing of the former Bill, which is not to their creditt, but
shame.

It was fear made him pass the Bill, least the Parliament, and people
^neenfed by his conspiracies should resent his doings, if he had added the
de^all of this only means to secure themselves. Either his memory is short, or
his absurdity unnatural that so lately said the kings fears were pretenses,
and does he think, that his Majest: could fear their resenting more at that
time, then afterward, besides his supposed fantastical conspiracies were not
as much, as named, or spoken of to Parliament, or people at the time of passing
that Bill, and there cannot be imagined any cause of his Majest: passing that
Bill, but his earnest desire to avoyde a Civil war, and assure his people of
his purpose by committing so great a trust unto them, neither can there be
imagined other cause, why the passing of that Bill was so much importuned by
the Rebels, but to secure themselves, for being conscious of their own guilt
they knew themselves vnsecure, unless they gained a power over King, and laws.
The libeller cannot excuse neither the ingratitude, nor disloyalty of the
Rebel party in Parliament, from the Kings consent to these laws to present
disorders, and mischeifes, which in themselves had not been fit, for his
consent at another time, and their insolence in binding him first of all his
Predecessors, shows their corruption, and guilt, that would use so much
violence, and difloyalite to a Prince whose, gracious Government had least of
all his Predecessors provoked it.

The King taxes them with undoing what they found well done. The libeller
says. They undid nothing in the Church, but Lord Bishopps, Liturgies
Ceremonies, high Commission judged worthy by all true Protestants to be thrown
out of the Church. These Protestants, which are true only to him will judge the
like of all Kings, and Rulers of State, and all orders of the Church, that are
not of their Bedlem pattern. These false Sectaries talk of Church, and true
Protestants just as they do of Parliament, as long, as it consists of their
own limbs, it must be obeyed, but if it dissent from their Commands, then
they are worse, then Ceremonies in Religion. Doubtless al true Protestants
abhor this den of Schismatickes, that boast of their Rebellious defacing of
the Church, and hate their society, there having not been yet any true
Protestant, Church, that ever pretended, that Lord Bishopps, Leiturgies,
Ceremonies, or high Commission were worthy to be thrown out of the Church the
greatest part of Protestants retaining the like.

They undid nothing in the state, but irregular, and grinding Courts. The
Courts they took away were judged by all wisemen to have been profitable to the
Kingdom, and fit to be continved, and the best Governors sometimes grant
that to the peoples irregularities thereby to preserve them from proceeding to
their own ruin, which were sit to deny at another time, and its their Zeal
to public safety, not fear, and dissimulation, as the libeller calls it.

It was a greater confidence of the people to put into one man's hand a power to
Summon, and dissolve Parliaments, then the King put in the people by the Act of
continuance of the Parliament. And if the libeller could show the Act, whereby
the people put that power in the King, he had said some thing. But how had they
put it into his hands, or what confidence was it, if they might take it away,
when they list? This man cannot see truth through his own contradictions, and
while he acknowledges the Kingly power to Summon, and dissolve Parliaments
forthwith adds, that Kings could not dissolve Parliaments till all greivances
were redressed; and then where was the kings power to dissolve, or the peoples
confidence?

This is he says not only the assertion of this Parliament, a strong proof,
but of our ancient law books, that noe man ever read, which averr it to be an
unwritten law of Common right so engraven in the hearts of our Ancestors, and
by them so constantly enjoyed, and claimed, as that it needed not enrolling.
this is pretty poetry, that because a law is no where to be found, therefore it
was engraven in the hearts of our Ancestors, where are those law books? But
how many hundred years since was this engraving worn out, surely if there had
been either such an unwritten law, and so constantly enjoyed, and claimed, it
would have been often enrolled ere now, but the libeller expected applause for
his conceit, not creditt to his assertion.

If the Scotts could charge the King with breach of their laws for breaking up
that Parliament without their consent, it were unreasonable, that the wisdom
of England should be so wanting to it self, as not to provide against the not
calling, or arbitrary dissolving of Parliaments. If they had provided against
it, where was the confidence he talked of? It follows not, that because the
Scotts charged the King with breaking of the Parliament without their consent,
that therefore the King offended in it, neither was the wisdom of the English
nation wanting to it self in leaving the calling, and dissolving of
Parliaments Arbitrary to the King, it being a power essential to Monarchy, and
we have seen, that the taking away of that power dissolves the Government, and
draws confusion, and misery upon the state, and it cannot be avoided, but
that from a power erected to affront the soveraigntie, there must follow
sedition, and Civil discord. People must depend upon their Kings grace, and
goodness for redress of their greivances, whose power, and safety consists in
their welfare, not seek by violence to be their own Carvers, and the people
never found so great suffering by submission to their, Kings, as by seeking
ways to oppose them.

It appears, that if this Bill of not dissolving were an unparalleled act, i^
was a known, and Common right. That it was an unparalleled Act he does not
deny, that it was a Common right nowhere appears, and how can that be an
unparalleled Act, that is a Common right? He says its not enrolled, and how
then shall it appear to be Common right?

What needed written Acts, when as it was anciently esteemed part of his Crown
oath. His Crown oath is well known, and may not be tried by estimation, but
inspection. The libellers estimation has as little proof, as authority. He
referrs the lawerlie mooting of this point to a book called the rights of the
Kingdom written it seems by some Author of as much fidelity in his
quotations, as this libeller in his narrations, and to other law Tracts being
neither his Element, nor proper work, since the book, which he has to
answer pretends to reason, not to Authority. And he holds reason to be the
best Arbitratour, and the law of law it self. And it appears by his writings,
that reason is neither his Element, nor work here, for had he use of reason,
he would not referr us to books, that are only of Authority to prove the
ignorance, and boldness of the writer, neither could reason judge it a law, that
a king should not dissolve a Parliament, till all particular greivances were
considered, though the setting of it might prove an incurable greivance, but
his reason would have the Parliament defend the Kingdom with their votes, as
the Roman Senators their Capital with their robes against the Gauls.

The King must not be at such distance from the people in judging what is
better, and what worse. That the people are not the best judges of what is
better, and what is worse the libeller himself acknowledges, saying they are
excessive in all their motions, and is it not reason, that the King then should
be at such distance in judging, but the libeller seeks to be at great
distance with truth, that says the Kings own words condemned him, that he had
not known as well with moderation to use as with earnestnes to desire his own
advantages. Where as the King spoke not of himself, but others, his words
were, If some men had known as well with moderation to use, as with earnestnes
to desire advantages of doing good, or evil. Does this man think reason the
law of law, or falsehood the Master of both law, and reason, that so palpably
belyes the book before him.

The King says a continuael Parliament, he thought would keep the
Commonwealth in tune. To this says the Libeller. Judge Commonwealth, what
proofs he gave, that this boasted profession was ever in his thought. The king
doubtless thought not, that every Parliament would keep the Commonwealth in
tune, but a Parliament, that preferred public good before private faction.

The King says, as he relates him, some gave out, that I repented me of that
settling Act. The Libeller says, his own Actions gave it out beyound all
supposition, for he went about so soon after to abrogate it by the sword.
Here the Libeller omitts a material word, which the King used, which was
soon, for the Kings words are, that I soon repented. It is well known that
the wicked use, which the Traitors made of that settling Act, might give the
king just cause to repent him of it, but as the king used not the sword till
many Months after the passing of that Bill, so the cause of his Arms were
the violent, and Traiterous Actions of a faction, not the abrogation of that
Bill.

The King calls those Acts, which he confesses tended to their good noe more
Princely, then friendly contributions, as if says the Libeller to do his
duty were of Courtesy, and the giving back of our Liberties stood at the
mercy of his contribution.

He would have it believed, that Parents can do nothing for their childrens
good out of favor, all is of duty, and noe thanks belongs to them from their
children, nor any from subjects to their Sovereigns, or rulers, for the
greatest benefitts they receive by good Government, and all the vigilance,
watchfullnes, and piety of Princes for the peoples good is not at all thanks
worthy, these are the Maxims of Rebels, and if Kings will not yield up their
power, they may be compelled, and the quitting of Government, for which Kings
must give account to God, is by these men's Divinity the giving back of
liberties, being noe other, then to give license to all wickedness, and bear
the sword in vain.

The kings says he doubts not, but the affections of his people will
compensate his sufferings for those Acts of confidence. To this says the
libeller, not his confidence, but his distrust brought him to his sufferings,
and he trusted nere the sooner, for what he tells of their piety, and
Religious strictnes, but rather hated them as Puritans, whom he always
sought to extirpate. The libeller himself cannot deny, but that if the king
had not had confidence that those Acts of his would not have bee^ abused, he
would not have granted them, for if he had not been so confident, it had been
much more eligible for him to have run the peril of a war without granting
them, and we have seen by experience, that many as well as the king were
deceived in those, that professed piety, and Religious strictnes, and though the
king had just cause to hate the faction of the hipocriticall Puritan, yet he
thought, that there could not so much impiety lurk in many under such
profession of piety, and Religious strictnes, as has since exceeded the most
blasphemous Atheist, and had the king sooner distrusted, he had in humane
reason prevented much of the Calamity, that has befallen himself, and his
kingdom.

That those Acts of the Kings did not argue, that he meant peace knowing, that
what he granted out of fear, he might as soon repeal by force. It is noe
argument, that he would do it, because he might do it, but it is one of the
libellers usual Arguments to conclude from the possibility to the being, and
there cannot be a greater Argument of a man's desire of peace, then to part with
his right to prevent a war, and by this rule of the libeller there must never
be peace, nor end of Rebellion but by the destruction of the king, because
their guilt is still vnsecure.

That the Tumults threatened to abuse all acts of grace, and turn them into
wantonness. This says the libeller is abusing of Scripture not becoming such
a saint to adulterate sacred words from the grace of God to the acts of his
own grace. And is it an abuse of Scripture to say the King did Acts of grace?
and whence then comes it to be an abuse of Scripture to say the people abused
the Kings grace, or turned it into wantonness? was it not a sin of wantonness
in the people and may it not be so expressed without any abuse of Scripture.
Scripture is abused, when it is applied to a profane, and ludicrous sense, but
the words here are not transferred from a right signification. There are
diverse words, that signify both divine, and humane Actions, and there is noe
abuse of them in either sense And the libeller having excepted to the use of an
expression of Scripture, presently makes bold with Scripture saying, that Herod
was eaten up with worms for suffering others to compare his voice to the voice
of God. when as the Scripture says, he was eaten up of worms, because he gave
not God the glory. And is not this to adulterate Scripture but nothing is
sacred to Rebels.

That the King by this Phrase gives jealosie, that he likens his own Acts of
grace to the Acts of Gods grace cannot be understood, noe more then the use of
the name of mercy, or justice should give jealosie of likening humane virtues
to divine Attributes, though there be a difference between resembling, and
comparing,

The libeller says from prophanes he scarce comes of with perfect sense, To
prove, that he shows himself senseles. The Kings words are, that being not in
a Capacity to have taken r^ge in a hostile way, he could not have given his
Enemies a more desired advantage, then by so unprincely inconstancy, to have
assaulted them with Arms, thereby to scatter them, whom but lately he had
solemnly settled. And where is the libellers exception? he says what place
could there be for his inconstancy to do a thing, wherein he was in noe
capacity? There was place for inconstancy, if he had endeavored to undo
that, which he had done, though he were not in a capacity to have effected it,
and if the libeller had sense he would not have missed it and come of without
it.

He would not have, that considerations of hazard, and dishonor, withheld the
King from that course, and that he would prove, because he made a war, and yet
objects fears to him for the cause of all his Actions, and ^om then^ might
well conclude that nothing but extreamitie caused him to defend himself by
war.

The king says his letting some men go up to the Pinnacle of the Temple was a
temptation to them to cast him down headlong. By this says the libeller, he
compares himself to Christ who is not at al named. The Parliament to the
Devil, which is not neither, and that ^^^ling Act his letting them go up to
the Pinnacle of the Temple. The libeller says its a goodly use of Scripture.
Similitudes of Actions imply noe Comparisons of persons, but the congruitie of
the allusion made the libeller angry, and yet he may not be believed, that the
Actions of some Traitors, and particularly his Masters may not be resembled to
that of Judas without comparing the person betrayed to Christ.

He says, it was noe Pinnacle of the Temple, but a Nabucadnezars Palace, from
(...) and Monarchy fell headlong together. Those Rebels have robbed, and
ruined the Temple, as Nebucadnezar did, and they, that glory in casting king,
and Monarchy headlong have the spirit of that tempter, which persuaded our
savior to cast himself down. The people now, as these of old find it the
extreamitie of desolation to be without King, and Church, and it is an horror
to them, that the unclean spiritts of Rebellion inhabit the Kings Palaces.

The King says All the Kingdoms of the world are not worth gaining by ways
of sin, which hazard the soul. And says the Libeller, he left nothing
vnhazarded to ^pe three. He hazarded nothing, but what he was bound to God, and
his people for the preservation of his Kingdoms, and these Rebels left noe
wickedness unattempted to get them.

The Act of settling was noe sin of his will, and the Libeller says, It was a
sin of his unwillingness. But his false hood is proved wilful in this, as in
most of his assertions. The King confesses the ill consequence of that

Act, but he says it was not a sin of his will, because it proceeded from
other men's malice, and though he willingly past the Act, yet he judged the
Evil ensuing, not the Act of his will, and it was a sin of the Libellers will,
that so knowingly perverted his meaning.

The Libeller says, that at his prayers, he had before him the sad presage of
his ill succes. And is it his fault to descerne his Enemies cruelty, and his
own afflicted condition?

But he says his prayer books noe sooner shutt, but other hopes flattered him,
and that was his destruction. Its not impossible, but he might have hopes, but
his misfortunes will be the guilt, and destruction of them, that caused it
without Gods great mercy which they yet despise.

Upon his RETIREMENT FROM WESTMINSTER.
THe King says, I staid at white hall till I was driven away by shame more
then fear. And says the Libeller in his Messages, and declarations and in the
whole Chapter next but one before this he aff^rmes, that the danger, wherein
his wife, children, and his ^e person were by those Tumults, was the maine
cause, that drove him from white hall, and affirms here, it was shame more
then fear, from whence, and the Ld. Digbies speech to the same purpose, he
says, we may descerne, what false, and frivolous excuses are avowed for
truth. We may see, how wilfully, and absurdly this Libeller will contradict
truth, and himself, that not only in one Chapter, but in every Chapter past
vpbraids his Majest: with fears, boasts, that by fears he was compelled to
consent to the death of the Earl of Strafford, and to pass those Acts, for
which he deserved noe thanks, because he did them for fear of the Tumults,
and is now so shameless to call them false, and frivolous excuses.

The King formerly expressed, that valor is not to be questioned, for not
scufling with the sea, or an undisciplined rabble. And though he had not a base
fear he could not be vnapprehensive of violence intended by that rabble, and
it cannot be doubted, but that a King must have a greater measure of shame then
fear to see such insolences, and if this libeller had any shame, he would not
have argued from that expression of his Majest: a contradiction of what he said
of danger from these Tumults. But he thinks his readers have a short memory,
as well as sense, and therefore he reguards not the repugnancie of his own
Periods.

He magnifies the courage, and severitie of Zeal to Justice in Rebels of
former times, and calls them our fore Fathers, and that their folly, and
wickedness may have some excuse in following subtle conspiratours against their
King, he calls it courage, and severitie of Zeal, and that he may authorize
their lewdnes, he says their courage was against the proud contempt, and
misrule of their Kings.

He says, that when Rich. the 2. departed, but from a Committee of Lords, who
sat preparing matter for the Parliament, not yet assembled to the removal of
his evil Councillors, they first vanquished, and put to flight Robert de
Vere, his chief favorite, and then coming up to London with a huge Army
required the King, then withdrawn for fear, but noe further of then the Tower
to come to Westminster, which he refusing they told him flatly, that unless he
came they would choose another. And who can read this relation, but must judge,
that it was a Traiterous conspiracy of these Lords, and a giddy, wicked
Rebellion in the people? By what law was the king bound to attend these Lords,
or what authority had they to prepare matter for the Parliament, more then any
others of the Kingdom? Is it not a known Treason to endeavor to depose the
King, and did not the late Parliament profess to abhor the thought of it?
And how comes it to pass, that these Lords have a power to threaten the King
with deposing him? What Rebels can be convicted by any law, if this Action be
not Treason? The libeller getts nothing by this example, but an evidence
against his Masters, for these Lords, and their assistants had their pardon for
that Rebellion. And wherein did this Rebellion of these Lords differ from that
of Jach straw, and other Traitors mentioned by Mr. Sollicitour against the
Earl of Strafford. His folly in seeking to draw an Argument from the Actions
of Rebels, to prove a Crime in the King is ridiculous to any reasonable man,
and its not imaginable, that the king should be bound to attend any meeting of
his Peers, and Councillors, which did tend toward a Parliament, for by that
Rule he must attend in as many places, as there are factions noe sober time
ever pretended, that the king was bound to attend the Parliament, which was to
be called, and dissolved by him, and our Ancestors would be esteemed as void
of reason, as loyalty, if their Parliaments were governed by a Tumultuous
rabble, and the king were oblidged to do what they would have, though the
whole kingdom were bleeding to death of those wounds, which their impious, and
inconsiderate violence, and fury had inflicted.

The king says the shame was to see the barbarous Rudenes of those Tumulte to
demand any thing. And this the libeller believes was the truest cause of his
deserting the Parliament. And was it not a just cause for him to desert the
Parliament, or faction in it, when either they could not, or would not
restrain that barbarous rudenes.

The worst, and strangest of that any thing they demanded was but the
vnlording of Bishopps, and expelling them the house, and the reducing of Church
discipline to a conformity with other Protestant. Churches. And this the
libeller would have noe Barbarism. What did the Parliament there, if the
Tumults may demand the alteration of the Government of Church, or state? Can
it be presumed, that a rowte of Mechannicks could determine what, was
conformity to other Protestant Churches. The libeller at first remembered Mr.
Solicitours discourse against the Earl of Strafford, there he might have
found, that it was Treason to go about, and assemble a multitude to alter the
Government of Church, or state; And to seek the vnlording of Bishopps by
force, in that manner they did was Treason by the law, and we have seen, that
this desperate rabble, whose demands the libeller says were but the vnlording
of Bishopps, and the like think the murder of the king, and destruction of
his family noe other then a but.

They were demanded by the Parliament, which is untrue, but they were
demanded by a factton, who suborned these Tumults to overaw, and drive away
the greatest part of the members of both houses.

The King in a most tempestuous season forsook the helm, and steerage of the
Common wealth. He withdrew himself from that storm, which the Traitors had
raised against him, and admitted not any steerage, when all was whirled by
tempestuous Tumults. The libeller would willingly mince the causes of his
Majest: departure, and therefore he catches hold of the mention of shame to
exclude fear, and from the barbarous rudenes of the Tumults to demand any
thing, he would conclude; there were only demands, and noe barbarous rudenes,
and would make the last word to exclude all, that went before.

To be importuned the removing of evil Councillors, and other greivances was
to him an intolerable oppression. To offer violence to him for his protection
of faithful Councillors, and the support of Government in Church, and state
was intolerable, and though the libeller do commend the violence of the
Tumults, yet here he calls it only importunity, and the Kings denial of the
impetuous demands of a rabble to change the Government in Church, and state
denial, and delay of Justice. If violence be lawful, as he often affirms, why
does he mince his defense, and so often fly to these terms of importunity,
and petitioning?

The advice of his Parliament was esteemed a bondage, because the the King
says of them, whose agreeing votes were not by any law conclusive to his
judgment, for says the libeller, the law ordaines a Parliament to advise him
in his great affairs, but if it ordain also, that the single judgment of a
King shall outballance all the wisdom of his Parliament, it ordaines that,
which frustrates the end of its own ordaining. There is no doubt, but in a
Monarchy the dependence of the people is upon the King the greatenes of whose
interest in the prosperity of the Kingdom is more likely to oblidge him to
their preservation, then any number of private men can be encleined to, and as
the law ordained a Parliament to advise him, so it forbidds them to command,
or prescribe him, though the Major part of Parliament involve the whole, Its
against all reason to include the King, who is always furnished by law with
his other Counsels, and may see good reason to prefer the Counsel of the
smaller number, and that law, which ordained the Parliament to be called, and
dissolved by the King had destroyed what it ordained, if the King had been
bound to consent to all advices given him by the Parliament. Such a restraint
upon the King not only makes void, and vseles those select Counsels, which by
law are continually to advise him, but destroys the Government of Monarchy,
which the law cannot intend, and gives the Parliament the absolute
soveraigntie, which the people would not live under being contrary to their
desires, and dispositions, and the trust reposed in such, as they elected.

The Kings judgment may dissent, he says, to the destruction of himself, and
Kingdom, And so doubtless may the judgment of a major part in Parliament, and
we have found by long experience, that Parliaments have produced Acts to the
prejudice of the state, and corruption of Religion, but this libeller holds all
means frustraneous, that beget not Rebellion, and as in his affection he
preferrs the judgment of the Parliament, before the Kings; so any Company, or
committee of Lords, that conspire against him, as appears by his late
remembered instance against Rich: the 2: And what power he would have in the
Parliament over the King, he would place in the Tumults, his admired Iron
flaile over the Parliament, and prays unto God to send them, that they may
purge the Parliament, and prescribe laws both to the King, and them, and
therefore he judges, that it is vnlawlike, that a remedy so slender should be
the utmost means of public safety. And we are sure, that Rebellion, the
only remedy, which he approves, is the destruction of al public safety, and
shows the Libeller as unable to judge of law, as unwilling to obey any.

He concludes, that the Kings negative voice was never a law, but a reasonles
Custom grown up from flattery, or usurpation. And how shall we judge, that
so long a Custom without contradiction was noe law? and that the contrary was
an unwritten law, and constantly enjoyed, and claimed. Can he think, that
because the support of Rebellion is a subversion of law, that therefore Rebels
reasons are the rule of law? And yet he is confident, it is better evidence,
then Rolls, and records, and as they deal with law, so with Scripture making
their fantastic dreams, and Diabolical infusions the Canon of their
Religion. And the Monarchy of David, and his successors ordained by God, and
that had both a negative, and affirmative voice, was a reasonlesse Custom from
flattery, or usurpation.

He proceeds to show the strength of his Argument. Because the negative voice
is claimed to one man, not as a wise, or good man, but as a King. And how does
he claim the power of the Parliament as to wise, or good men, or as to elected
men? And it may be easily supposed, that the Major part of the Parliament may
not be so wise, and good, as their King, especially so assisted by other
Counsels, as kings are, and it were noe abusive thing to Summon Parliaments,
though the King do take their advices by weight, and not by number, but it
were an abusive thing, that such, as were called to advise, should take upon
them to determine.

The King says. The whole Parliament represents not him in any kind. To this
says the Libeller. If the Parliament represent the whole kingdom, the king
represents only himself, and a king without his kingdom in a Civil sense is
nothing, nor without, nor against the representative, and so his negative as
good, as nothing, and though we should allow him something, yet not equal to
the whole kingdom, nor them, that represent it. But what answer is this to
the King, that being not represented, cannot be bound by the votes of them,
that represent him not? Is the Libellers making him nothing, or not equal to
the representative any reason why he should be bound by their votes? The King
is by law, and reason the representative of the Kingdom, and as this sottish
libeller cannot deny it out of Parliament, so he might well see, that the
election of persons to advise him, does not take away that supreme
representation, which the law has given him. there can be nothing more absurd,
then that an elected company representing subjects to their King, should take
away the Kingly representation, and it is a ridiculous sophistry, that because
the king is not the subject, therefore he is without his kingdom. The people
in Parliament are represented petitioning, and consenting, not commanding, and
revolting, and it is repugnant to their condition to be equal, or not
inferior to their King, which were to destroy the relation of king, and
subject.

The king maintains to be no further bound to agree with the votes of both
houses, then he sees them to agree with the will of God, with his just rights,
as a King, and the general good of the people. The Libeller would allow him
freedom with due bounds, but not, that he should have a negative, upon that,
which is agreed by the whole Parliament. Where are his bounds now? for if he
have noe freedom, where they agree he has none at al, for if they do not
agree, he can neither consent, nor dissent, but such poor sophismes are the
reason of these popular Tribuns, and they will have both affirmative, and
negative in the Tumults, but not in the King.

To know the will of God better then his whole Kingdom, whence should he have
it? The Libeller doubtless will, affirm, that himself knows the will of God
better, then many whole Kingdoms, and why will he deny that possible to a
King? I may ask him, why he should call the judgment of the Parliament, or a
Major part of it, the judgment of the whole Kingdom, when the Major part of
the Kingdom be of another mind, if because they represent it, then why may
not the Kings judgment in the highest representation be preferred before
theirs? If the Libeller were put to tell whenever such an Action had happened,
that the king dissented from his whole kingdom, he would hardly find it, when
people have in greatest multitudes opposed their king, they were rarely, or
never in the right.

To know the will of God better, then his whole kingdom, he asks, whence
should he have it? Court breeding, he says, and conversation of flatterers was
a bad schole. But conversation with Sectaries, and Rebels was worst of al,
kings may be presumed to have better breeding, then any others, and the
Libeller in another place argues from the kings breeding a greater expectation
of ability. Flatterers are most hateful to kings, and their principal
breeding is to avoyde the insinuations of such deceivers, but the present
faction have outdone all Court flatterers in falsehood.

The king could not judge of his own rights, but he had a right to keep them,
when they were judged. He says the king had noe right by law to judge in any
Court. And yet he judged in all Courts, all judgments being in his name, and we
are sure, that the lower house could never judge of the smallest cases, nor the
higher, but in respect of the kings presence among them, because the king
judges by his delegates does he not judge, or can they judge his Crown to
themselves.

That the king cannot judge of Treason, and felony because he is held a
party. And why did he then exclaim, that the king should hold noe Treasons,
but against himself, but if that were the reason his Judges were incompetent,
as well as he, but it is necessary that in a learned profession, as the law, the
king should judge by others.

The kings rights, he says, must give place to general good. But it is
general evil to take away his rights. He may not yeilde to Traitors, that
desire him to part with them for their own advantages. It is noe arrogance in
a king to suppose a cleerer insight of the general good, then others, though
chosen for the Parliament, whose breeding, and condition could not quallifie
them for such a descerninge, and it is a fond imagination in the Libeller to
suppose the Parliament the kings Council, and suppose the king void of
Judgment to descerne the soundnes of their advice.

They have most authority to judge of the public good, who for that purpose
are chosen out, and sent by the people to advise him. But it necessarily
follows, that he has most authority, whom they are sent to advise, their
authority being to advise, his to determine, and being sent to advise they
destroy their own authority, and office, when they Command.

If the King see often the major part of them not in the right, it had been more
his modesty to have doubted their seeing him more often in the wrong. The
libeller prescribes modesty to the king, insolence, and impudence to subjects,
that the Rule of their Rebellion. If the king had not governed his Actions by
good advice, nor seen the often Levitie, and precipitation of a Major part, he
should have doubted of their seeing him in the wrong, however they own him
duty, as their king, he no submission to them.

That the King ought to grant the peoples rights, and liberties, because of
right demanded, it being his duty, not his bounty to grant these things.
But it is the subjects misery, as well as their madness to demand the kings
rights, as their own, and we know, that the demands of Rebels are for
themselves, and to take away the peoples rights, as well as loyalty, and we
find, that there were such, as the king mentions, whom noe fountain of
Royal bounty was able to overcome, and for whom the comparision of hidropike
thirst was very favorable being more insatiate then gusters in a wine sellar,
and nearer the nature of horse leaches, and swine.

The King confesses a rational soveraigntie of soul, and freedom of within
every man, and yet with an implicit repugnancie would make vseles that
freedom of will in all other men but himself. That cannot be by using the
liberty of his negative voice, for are the wills of other men captivated
because they cannot do as they will, and because the king will not do what
they will have him, and because men are subject to Government is freedom of
will denied them?

Them, that yeilde him the obedience meaning the king, he pronounces worthy to
be slaves, which he inferrs from these words of the King, the he deserves to be
a slave, who captivates the rational soveraignetie of soul, and liberty of
his will to compulsion. And how can the libeller draw any such conclusion from
these words? Laws, that restrain Actions do not cap^te the will, nor does he
consent to have his will captivated, that snbmitts to Government. But he
captivates his will, that Acts what another directs him, though he judge it
evil, and in such case a law may not be obeyed, though violence may not be
used against the lawmakers.

What that Freedom is which cannot be denied him as a King, because it belongs
to him as a man, and a Christian the Libeller says, he understands not, if it
be his negative voice, it concludes all men, who have not such a negative, as
his against the whole Parliament, to be neither men, nor Christians. And as well
he might have said, that because every man ought to have freedom in giving his
vote in Parliament, therefore every man ought to be there. The Libeller need
not be ashamed to confess ignorance, that blushes not at such fooleries. The
king argues, that he could not be debarred of that, as a king, which belonged
to him as a man, and a Christian, which was liberty of will in giving his
vote, and by what Logicque could the Libeller thence conclude, that all, that
have not a negative voice to what the Parliament propounds are noe men, nor
Christians? If the king have not a negative voice, he has noe voice, and every
members of Parliament has a voice affirmative, and negative, and they deny
that to the king in denying his negative voice, which they allow all, that have
any voice.

He demands what was he himself all this while, that we denied it him, as a
King. He had the freedom of his will, when he gave noe vote against it, but
all the world says that you were Traitors in the denial. His natural
liberty of will was not taken from him by your Traiterous violence, though his
right to use it in his kingly office were Rebelliously withstood. If a King be
prohibited the use of his reason in his Government, he is denied that, which
belongs to him as a man, and a Christian, and these impudent Traitors are so
cauterized, that they scoff at their Lewd villainy asking whether he did not
enjoy the liberty of his will, when they had imprisoned, and deposed him.

He asks, might not the King have enjoyed both reason, and conscience
governinge us as free men, by what laws we our selves would be governed? And
how could he govern, if you make the laws, he might be governed? And who
shall govern, when every man is a lawmakers, and he could not enjoy reason,
nor conscience governing by laws he approved not.

It was not the inward use of his reason, and conscience, that would content
him. Doubtless it ought not being a King, but says he to use them both as a law
over all his subjects in whatsoever he declared as a King to like, or dislike.
The King were noe King, if his subjects might make laws without him, and his
reason, and conscience ought to be his laws in governing, and he justly said.
It were better to be without the Title of King, if it should carry with it such
a vassallage, as not to suffer him to use his reason, and conscience in what he
declared as a King to like, or dislike which use of reason says the libeller
most reasonles, and unconscionable is the utmost, that any Tyrant ever
pretended over his vassalls. Tyrants were never esteemed by their pretenses,
but by their Actions, and it shows that these men knew not, what Tyrany was,
who make a just right of all Governors, the use of reason Tyrany, and that,
which never king was thought fit to be denied, though Tyrants abused it.
Tyrany is in the abuse of power, not in the rule of Government.

In all wise nations the Legislative power, and the judicial execution of that
power have been distinct. But never divided being always subordinate one to
the other, the judicial execution depending on the Legislative.

He makes an assumption, If then the king be only set up to execute the law he
ought noe more to make, or forbidd the making of any law, then other inferior
Judges. But if the king be set up to make law by the advice of his Council the
Parliament, can they make laws without him, but this Libeller, that would be
thought so strong at Arguments, talks himself into contradictions, and
allows the king, neither the one power, nor the other, for he affirms the
king cannot judge, and make laws he must not, and what will he conclude, sure,
that his own nation is not wise, nor himself honest, or rational.

He cannot reject a law offered him by the Commons, no more then make a law,
which they reject. And has it sense, that because a man cannot do an Act
without the advice of another, therefore he must do what that other advises?
The man dictates, and would be believed, though the Commons never did, nor
could offer a law to the king, for he well knows it must pass the Lords before
it come to the king, but he was loath to mention the Lords, least it should cry
down the noise he has made of the kings single judgment, for the Lords house
may not have a negative in his judgment, notwithstanding their number. But why
is it offered the king, if he may not reject it, and whence has it been, that
so many Bills have been rejected in all ages, without any complaint.

When Kings come so low as to fall upon Philosophy, which before he neither
valued, nor understood is a figne they are then put to their last trump. If the
king had not valued nor understood Philosophy, he could not have made so
pertinent use of it, and if the Libeller had understood Philosophy, or valued
truth, he would have given better signs of it. Could not his Majest: discourse
of his reason, and will, but it must be out of the way, or above his ability.
But why is this a sign, that kings are then put to their trump, why the use of
Philosophy more then other, learning? Though kings come low, Rebels will come
to seek corners to hide themselves. He shows not how Philosophy breaks the
neck of their cause, or how he has made advantage of Philosophy against the
king, but we find how his elaborate contradictions, have broken the neck of
his own cause through out all his discourses.

The king says he cannot think the Majest: of the Crown of England to be
bound by any Coronation oath in a blind, and brutish formalitie to consent to
whatever its subjects in Parliament shall require. And says the Libeller, What
Tyrant could presume to say more. And the law it self, Religion, and reason
never said less.

It cannot but be yielded, that the oath, which binds him to performance of
his trust, ought in reason to contain the sum of what his chief trust, and
office is. But what if it do not, is there an argument to be drawn from what
the oath ought to be, but is not? The oath may contain the general duty of
Justice, and right, but it neither did, nor could comprehend all the ways of
effecting it.

The libeller says, that the Kings negative voice is not contained in that
oath. But that oath oblidges him to govern by just laws, which comprehends a
negative to all unjust laws, and can it impose an obligation upon the king of
doing Justice, and not give him a liberty of judging what is just, or unjust?

The Libeller says, that his oath requires only his assent to those laws,
which the people have already chosen, or shall choose, there is noe such word in
that oath, and his mention of the Lattine, and old English of that oath are of
another sense, and that the libeller was conscious of, and therefore he says.
All reason admits, that the people should not loose under a new king what
freedom they had before. but their freedom consists not in an exemption from
sovereign power. It is the custom of Rebels to contradict, and corrupt al
laws upon pretense of their private reason, and allow no reason but what
concludes against just authority, he well knew there was not that double sense
he assigns, but we will make his sens the kings oath? if the peoples choice be
referred to the time past, it implies not, that their choice was or ought to be
a law, though they had a choice in the laws made, as still they have, and they
could not loose what they never had, and the Parliament, which at first
mentioned the kings oath acknowledged, that as they did not determine the
question how far forth the king is obliged, to follow the judgment of his
parliament, so as to conclude that a new law might be mad without his consent.
so they acknowledge that the contrary may be truly inferred out of al they had
said.

That if the King deny what the Parliament has chosen, he makes himself
superior to his whole Kingdom. And who doubts but he is? do not they which
take the oath of supreamacie acknowledge it? The libeller says the general
maxims of Policy gainsay it. The general maxims of Rebellion do, but Policy
cannot. It is impossible in Policy, that he to whom every soul must be
subject, should not be superior to them all.

Our own standing laws gainsay it, as has been cited in Remonstrances that
the King has two superiors, the law, and his Court of Parliament. The merit
of those remonstrances are near the rate of this libell, though as yet they
never mentioned such standing laws, and if there had been such standing, laws
the Author would have found them enrolled, but that he does not, and how
absurdly such a pretense is obtruded, when the superiotie of persons, and
places is in quesstio^ to name the superiority of law, which holds comparion
with sciences, not with persons, and that the Parliament should be above the
king, who is the head of the Parliament, without whom a Parliament has no
being is as Monstrous to reason, as law, and it is impossible that the law ca^
say, that the king has no superior but God, and say, that the Parliament is
his superior, and the king might well say, that this was blind, and brutish
formalitie, and no part of the law, his oath, or duty, but such brutish
formalities Rebels use to blind the people.

The King, and Peeraes represent only themselves, the Commons are the whole
Kingdom. Which is as apparently false, as that the Common Council, of London
are the whole kingdom, and the commons in Parliament have no power from the
people, to do any thing without the king, and Lords.

Infinite mischeifes may grow while our safety shall depend upon the over
weening reason of one man. And we find by experience, that desperate ruin
inevitably follows, when our safety depends upon the agreement of a
multitude. It is the nature of sectaries to be wise in their own conceit, and
thence come arrogance, and contempt of Government, and it is a principal in
their schism to improve this natural insolence, and contemn all Estates, and
abilities of men dissenting from them, and though his Majest: were of most
eminent natural endowments this libeller calls him a man neither by nature, nor
nurture wise. Which shows he understood not wisdom in others, nor was
sensible of his own folly so apparent to all his readers. That a King should
want breeding to make him wise, is strange in the libellers own judgment, and
that the experience, and breeding of the King was eminently extraordinary the
world well knows.

He calls the Kings negative his will, and the Parliaments demands advice. May
not their demands be wilful, and his negative advised? The nature, and
nurture of this libeller is disobedience, and therefore will have the Kings
wisdom to be will, and the Rebels rashness wisdom, and it is impossible,
that men, who have sucked in such principles should ever be obedient to any
Government, studying only how they may disaffect subjects to it.

He says the Kings error was imperious, and force was used not to dispell
error out of his head, but to drive it from of our necks. These Rebels
sought to be imperious, and put the yoke upon the necks of the people, and
that, which restrained them from an absolute arbitrary power, which was the
Kings negative, they would take away by force, and place negative, and
affirmative in themselves. The libeller says well that force was not used to
dispell error, which was used to enforce consent, and to make error, and
shows their wickedness, that took that course.

The King says the vprightnes of his intention will excuse the possible
failings of his understanding, who seriously endeavors to see the best reason,
and faithfully follows it. This the libeller says is a position false in law,
and Divinity. But for that we must take his word against all law, and
Divinity. But he says its contrary to the Kings own better principles, who
affirms the goodness of a man's intention will not excuse the scandal, and
contagion of his Example. And does it contradict what the king had said, of the
excuse of error in judgment, by the vprightnes of the intention, because a man
cannot excuse an evil Action by the intending a good end, where there was noe
error of the fact, but a known evil.

His not knowing through corruption of flattery, and Court principles will not
excuse him. But we are sure, that this libellers wilful falsehoods, corrupt,
and Rebellious principles condemn him, and make him odious to God, and man,
and he is not like a Pilot mi'sled by a wandering starr, that may be possible,
but like a Pilot, that will not be giuded by stars, but maliciously destroys
the ship, and men, and this Author might sooner excuse a drunken Pilot, then a
savage Piratte, and such are they, who wilfully practice doceites, and
cruelties under the name of national rights.

They used force to acqiut their own reason, and conscience from force That is
they used force to Domineere over king, and people, and establish their own
will for law. And to rebel against their king is to arqiut their reason and
conscience.

The king says never thing pleased him more, then when his judgment concurd
with theirs. The libeller to this says. That was to the applause of his own
judgment, and would as well have pleased any self conceited man. But could the
king despise the judgment of the Parliament, as this addle headed libeller
continually exclaimes, and make it matter of applause to himself, that his
judgment concurd with theirs? Could he slight their judgment, and conceit his
own credited by their concurrence? If he had noe other esteem of their
judgment, then the libeller would have believed, doubtless he might have
suspected his own Judgment, for concurring with theirs; And whence comes itt,
that a self conceited man would be so well pleased with such a concurrence? A
self conceited man scorns the concurrence of other men's judgments, and
preferrs his own against all others, but reason cannot be expected from this
man being use les to his undertaking.

The king says in many things he chose rather to deny himself then them. And
says the libeller. That is to say Trifles, for of his own interests, and
personal rights he conceives himself Master. And who can deny itt, but he is
Master of them, and yet he has parted with these, land could he part with any
thing wereof he was not Master? And were all these laws, which the libeller
commends, trifles?

To part with if he please says the Libeller, not to contest for against the
Kingdom, which is greater then he, whose rights are all subordinate to the
Kingdoms good. If he may not contest for them, he must part with them, though
he please, or not please, but being for the Kingdoms good, he is bound to
contest for them, and it is to ruin the Kingdom, when subjects contest to
take them away from the King. Those rights are in compatible with subjects, and
inseparable from Governors, and are noe more subordinate to the peoples good,
then Justice, or law are, but they are the peoples good, and the people are
subordinate to their Rulers in judging what is their good. But he must part
with them because the Kingdom is greater then he, as the Libeller says, That
is noe reason, but it is according to the Rebels principles, that there is no
right, but force, and the weaker may not contest against the stronger.

The libeller is very copious in his declamations against Monarchy, and it
would be tedious to follow him in his verbofitie, he excepts to these words of
the King. In what concerns truth and Justice, the right of Church, or his
Crouwne, noe man shall gain his consent against his mind. And says the
libeller. What can be left then for a Parliament, but to sit like Images,
whilst he assumes the best ability of judging, or restraynes all men from
enjoyment of any good, which his judgment thinks not fit to grant them. And
what were a King but an Image, if he were bound to grant, whatsoever his
subjects in Parliament demand of him, and to what end do they take an oath of
Alleagiance, if he were bound to quit it, when they ask it? And are there any
so sunk in understanding, as to believe, that it is the office of a King to
judge of nothing, and the right of subjects in Parliament to command al
things. But this man is of Achitophells mind, that if his Council be not
followed, he will go home, and hang himselse. Advice from subjects to a King
is ordained by law, but the subjection of a King to advise is monstrous, and
vnsupposable. The Authors repetitions of railing Epithites upon what concerns
the King, or his Actions, and commendation of the wicked Actions against him,
will not alter the nature of one or other, and his vehement asseveration, that
the law, and Coronall oath require the Kings undeniable assent to what laws
the Parliament agree upon, is not out of opinion of truth, but the strength of
his language himself showing the contrary as well as the Parliament.

The King says he had rather wear a Crown of thorns with our savior, then
to exchange that of gold for one of lead, whose imbast flexiblenes shall be
forced to bind, and comply to the various, and often contrary Dictates of any
faction, when insteede of reason, and public concernement they obtrude
nothing, but what makes for the interest of parties, and flows from the
partiality of private ^ills, and passions. The libeller says many would be
all one with our savior, whom he will not know. They who govern ill those
Kingdoms, which they have right to, have to our saviors Crown of thorns noe
right at all. Such as are Rebels to lawful Princes, and usurp Kingdoms,
will never wear a Crown of thorns with their savior, nor can hope to be
known by him, while they suck the blood of his anointed, and Tyranize over
kingdoms so wickedly gotten. That Crown of thorns, which this libellers
savage soldiers, and others set upon the last king, is now his Crown of
rejoicing in heaven, and honor among men, and the infamy of these hellish
miscreants. The libeller twists thorns, and snares for himself by his
shameless Calumnies, seeking to make the assassination of a gracious king his
own demeritts.

A Crown of gold is not due to him, who cannot first wear a Crown of lead,
not only for the weight of that great office, but for the compliance with
them, who are to Council him. A leaden Crown may well express stupiditie,
and baseness, and the Crown of gold better agrees with sound Council, which is
compared to apples of gold in pictures of silver, then lead which shows only
that imbast flexiblenes to the various, and often contrary Dictates of any
faction, and is only a weight of punishment, not of office, which the gold
represents, but Traitors cannot endure a Crown of gold upon the head of their
king, they will only allow him a Crown of thorns, or lead.

The libeller taxes the king for want of modesty, in imputing want of reason,
and neglect of the public, rather to the faction then to himself, because
the faction was the Parliament. And he must be a man void of all modesty,
that does not judge such Actions as the king complained of to proceed from
want of reason, and neglect of the public, interest of parties, and
partialities of private will, and passion. The sectaries were wont to deprecate
all accusations of irreverence to their King, and complain, that they were
wronged, but the question is now changed, and contempt of the King is their
great virtue. The libeller throughout this whole discourse rejects the
consideration of the Kings conscience, and heereto these words of the Kings I
know noe resolutions more worthy a Christian King, then to prefer his
conscience before, his Kingdoms, says the sentence is fair in seeming, but
fallacious, for the conscience may be ill edifred. And because it may be so,
is it fallacious, that conscience must be preferred before Kingdoms? These
hipocrites, that pretend to Rebel for their conscience, accuse the king for
refusing to pass a law, in regard of the contrary persuasion of his
conscience, and it must be an ill edified conscience in him to forbear an act,
and a rightly informed conscience in them, that commit an act so bloody, and
scandalous to the whole world, and so dangerous to the souls of many, that
were drawn headlong into that sin, the Kings conscience cannot be preserved
without his negative voice, and therefore he might justly assert it to be his
right by law, and when the libeller can persuade men, that Parliaments are
infallible, and free from faction, and that Rebels are best judges, of what is
for the Kingdoms good, he may hope to be believed, that the king denied that,
which law, his oath, and office bid him grant. And all men see, that under the
name of the advice of Parliament, Rebels have introduced their own wills for
laws.

Upon the QUEENS DEPARTURE.
WHat concerns it us here to hear a husband divulge his household privacies,
extolling to others the virtues of his wife, an infirmity not seldom incident
to those, who have least cause, Just Testimony to virtue is never an
infirmity, but necessary from the husband, where conjugall affection has
derived the hatred of his Enemies to his wife. If the divulging of household
privacies concerned him not, it is his lewdenes to take occasions of derision,
and base language from it. Treasons to the mind are as pestilence to the body,
that turns all diseases into its own malignant humor, for this Libeller
cannot forbear despite to the King for speaking that, which he says does not
concern others, nor to the Queen for being named.

How good a wife she was to himself, how bad a subject is not much disputed,
And to whom was she a subject, to the Rebels? Those that acknowledge
themselves subjects to the King, will have the Queen esteemed a bad subject for
her Zeal to his State, and safety, these evil spiritts, that possess the
Rebels persuade men, that it is a fault to be bad subjects, and yet will allow
none to be subjects, but the King, his wife, and children.

It need be made noe wonder, though she left a Protestant Kingdom with as
li^le honor, as her mother left a Popish. This mention of her mother shewer
the extension of a Traiterous malice, that spares noe relations, nor conditions
though vnconcerned. Those, that compelled the Queens departure did more
contribute to the dishonor of a Protestant Kingdom, and the Protestant
Religion, whereof they take the name without the truth, then the greatest Enemy
to the Protestant Religion could have effected, what the case of her mother was
we enquire not, but the world sees, that these injuries to her Majest:
exceeded example, and Rebels injustice fixes noe dishonor, but on themselves.

The king says this is the first example of any Protestant subjects, that have
taken up Arms against their King a Protestant. The Libeller says it can be to
Protestants noe dishonor, when it shall be heard, that he first leavied war on
them, and to the interest of Papists more then of Protestants. But then it is
dishonor, if he first leavied not war upon them? And all that read his book
must conclude, that they first leavyed war upon him, what else does he mean by
defending the Tumults, seizing the forts, and Militia, raising an Army, and
vpbraiding the king with fears to hazard such a scuffle. But were it
otherwise, the Protestants have disclaimed his Traiterous pretense of taking
Arms against the King under color of Religion, or otherwise, and hold it
dishonor to their Religion, that such Rebellious principles should be charged
upon them, and nothing could be more for the interest of Papists, then that
Protestants should maintain, and practice that doctrine of Rebellion. The
world is satisfied, how disloyally the King was prosecuted by Arms, and had it
been otherwise, subjects ought to petition not return violence, and in all the
excuses that these Traitors have used, they never mention any offer of
satisfaction to the King, or desire to lay down his Arms, but require his
submission, and giving up his rights, or otherwise they would take it by force.
The precedence of the Scotts war will not take of the dishonor.

He says, Its a groundles, and dissembled fear, that she, that was for many
years averse to her husbands Religion should be now the more alienated, and
can the Libeller deny, but that the aversion of any may be encreast, and
confirmed by the wickedness of the persons of the contrary Religion, how
groundles then, and shameless is his exception?

If the fear of her delinquencie, and Justice demanded on her, was any cause
of her alienating the more, to have gained her by indirect means, had been no
advantage to Religion. As the King observed, that this was the first example of
Protestant subjects, that took Arms against their king: so this of charging
the Queen with Delinquencie was the first example in that kind, that
traiterous impudence had produced, and when it shall be heard, that a compaine of
such vile persons charge the Queen with Crimes fot assisting her husband, they
will be assured, that not fear of Delinquencie, but their barbarous cruelty
might more alienate her, and disadvantage Religion. Them, who accused her he
says well enough known to be the Parliament, the King censures, for men yet
to seek their Religion, whether doctrine, discipline, or good manners. And so
does the whole world, whatever name the Libeller give such men, who are well
enough known to be a Traiterous faction.

The name of true English Protestants is a mere schismatic name. And why?
Are there not several confessions in the Protestant Churches, and do they
hold one another Schismatickes for that reason? How often has this Libeller
named the best reformed Churches, is not that as much a name of schism? he is
ignorant in the nature of schism, though he be so well practiced in it, and
its strange he would observe a Schismatic name from the title of a nation,
and not from his title of Independencie, that produces as many titles, and
distinctions, as there be Parishes, or Parlours.

The King ascribes rudenes, and barbaritie worse then Indian to the English
Parliament. To the Libellers Parliament he very well may. He says the King
ascribes all virtues to his wife undervaluing the great Council of his
Kingdom in comparison of one woman. And not only he, but all good men
abominate that wicked Council, which used such rudenes, and barbaritie toward
her, and from hence the Libeller tells us there are examples of mischief under
vxorious Magistrates, and Feminine usurpation. And must Magistrates therefore
have noe wives, or not affections to them? And the examples of feminine
usurpation are more frequent in Republican Tribunes then Monarchs.

The king says, her tarrying here he could not think safe among them, who
were shaking hands with Allegiance to lay faster hold on Religion. The Libeller
says that he taxes them of a duty rather then a Crime, it being just to obey
God rather then man. And is perjury, and the breach of Alleagiance obedience to
God, and do men obey God, that break one Commandment upon pretense to keep
another. The Scripture tells us he that breaks one Commandment is guilty of
all, but these are they that say they love God, and yet hate their brother,
hate and kill their King Gods vicegerent.

The libeller says it was the fault of their courage, that they had not quite
shaken of, what they stood shaking hands with. Its like their conscience, and
Religion were not the cause they did not, but the Libeller was not of their
Council, for the time required they should keep their mask longer.

He is offended at the Kings prayer, that the disloyalty of his protestant
subjects may not be a hindrance to her love of the true Religion, and says
that he never prays, that the dissolutenes of his Court, the Scandalls of his
Clergy, unsoundness of his own judgment, Lukewarmenes of his life, letter o^
compliance to the Pope, permitting his nuntio here, may not be found far
greater hindrances. All these put together are far short of the scandal of
the disloyalty of his subjects. The Court dissolutenes is made a common place
of scandal, not verity in respect of the application, there being not such
excesses in his Majest: Court, that deserved a special observation, and the
restraint of dissolutenes was more observable, then the Crime. As to the
scandalls of his Clergy, though we must believe, that offenses will come, yet
the scandal of the present disloyalty was more offensive to those of
different Religion, then any disorders in Civil conversation, and the injustice
of the Rebels toward the Clergy, has showed the untruth of the scandalls,
that were cast upon them, and though their malice traduced, and persecuted
them, their proofs could not convict them of the scandal supposed. His
Majest: own judgment cannot be overcast by a Rebels malice, and his examplary
life cannot be stained by a Libellers pen. His letter to the Pope was noe
complaince, nor could it give offense to protestant or hope to Papist, and
these Rebels, that comply with Turks, and infidells least of all think it a
compliance. The Libeller well knows there was noe nuntio in England, and if
the King should have denied the Queen the exercise of her Religion, whereto he
was bound by the Articles upon the match, he had given greater scandal by
breaking the Articles, then by permitting her the repair of persons in matters
of her Religion. But says the Libeller, they must not sit still, that is not
Rebel, and see their Religion snatched away But they have Rebelled to snatch
away Religion. He says, Its known, that her Religion wrought more upon him,
then his upon her, and his favoring of Papists, and hatred of Puritans, made
men suspect she had perverted him. Noe doubt suspicions were industriously
raised, and carrefully nourisht against the King, though they believed them
not, that made use of them. The King was not bound to destroy all Papists, and
could not deny them the protection of a King, and he had just reason to suspect
those bloody Puritans, whose inclinations he descerned to that wickedness they
have since avowed.

From his suppositions he ascends to his exclamations. What is it, that the
blindenes of hypocrisy dare not do? It dares pray, and think to hide that
from the eyes of God, which it cannot from the open view of men. We find this
very frequent in this Author, and in this very Period, that in contempt of God,
and men, charges the King with Crimes he not only knew false but which are so
known unto the whole world, and conclude against' his own narrations, and
others view.

Upon his repulse AT HULL, and the fate of the HOTHAMS.
HE makes an introduction, that Hull was the Magazine of Arms, which the king
had bought with money illegally extorted from his subjects. He thinks, that if
goods be ill gotten, its lawful for him, and his Sectaries to rob him, that
possesses them, else to what use is it mentioned with what money the King bought
these Arms? But had the king noe means to procure Arms but by illegal
exaction? sure that will conduce little to the Apollogy of this breaker, that
Galumniates the King so much for seeking means from his subjects for public
safety.

Next he says these Arms were bought to be used in a causeles, and most
unjust Civil war against Scotland. What was the war in Scotland to Hothams
taking of Hull, or seizing the Magazine, when the war was ended? Railing will
neither make the war unjust, nor the mention of it here any way extenuate the
usurpation, but shows the barrennes of his matter by his repeated
insignificant falsehoods.

The Queen he says was gone to Holland to set to sale the Crown Jewels a
Crime heretofore counted Treasonable in Kings. Its like such a Treason, as he
makes to buy a Magazine of Arms to resist an invader, he should have done well
to have told, when this heretofore was. Its likely they that held it Treason
in Kings to have sold Jewels of the Crown would have made it some Crime to
have bought Jewels for the Crown, and it is noe Treason now to sell the
Crown, Jewels, and all by his cut throat crew.

The Parliament was not ignorant to what in^ent these sums were raised. their
own actions told all the world they were necessary to be raised.

The Kings refusing to settle the military power in trusty hands upon their
petitions, and doubting he would possess himself of Hull, they were
necessitated by the turbulence, and danger of the times of their own
authority, to put^ the Kingdom into a posture of defense, and to send Sr.
John Hotham to take Hull into his possession. How many lewd lies have they
sent abroad into the world, that the King made war upon them, and it was the
Libellers own pretense in the beginning of the last Chapter, and now plainly
tells they seized Hull, because they suspected the King intended it, and
because he would not settle the militia, as they desired. If he had no power
over the Militia, why did they petition him? If the Parliament be his superior
why did they petition at all? Do superiors petition inferiors? But what was
that turbulence, and danger of the Kingdom, was there any more, then what
themselves had made by rumors, and Tumults, and is not the seizing of a fort
an Act of war?

The King had attempted the same before. And was that any cause for them,
because the King sends to his Castles, or forts, must they therefore take them
from him? And he says letters of the Lord Digb^ were intercepted, wiss^ing the
King to retire to some safe place. And therefore these Rebels would provide he
should be safe in noe place.

The King offered to g^e in person into Ireland, and that he would Arm his
guard from his Magazine of Hull. The Parliament he says foreseeing the kings
drift petition him, that they might have leave to remove the Magazine of Hull
to the Tower of London. So careful they were to have the Rebellion in Ireland
proceed, that they desired his Majest: to forbear his going into Ireland out
of consideration of danger to his person, when as they intended to destroy him
at home, and the true cause was, that they would deteine these Arms to make
war against him, if he would not submitt to be deposed, and to keep the money
given for Ireland to drive on the war here.

The King afterward going to Hull required the Governor to deliver him the
Town, whereof the Governor humbly desired to be excused, till he could s^nd
to the Parliament. It seems the libeller would not have that a denial.

The King proclaimed Hotham Tray^our before the Town ^lls And noe man dobuted,
but he was so.

The King gave order to stopp all passages between him, and the Parliament.
And had he not reason to prevent supplies, and intelligences to a Traitor?

Yet says the Libeller he demanded Justice, as upon a Traitor, using a
strange iniquity to require Justice upon him, whom he had debarred from his
appearance. Traitors must be apprehended before their appearance, and it was a
strange iniquity in them, that would not apprehend a Traitor, as in Justice
they ought, but a most execrable impiety in such as pretend Justice, to clear
a malefactor without hearing both parties, as the libeller says the
Parliament did Sr. John Hotham, for he says the Parliament noe sooner
understood what had passed, they declare Sr. John Hotham had done noe more,
then was his duty. They meant noe doubt his duty to them, as fellow
Traitors, not to his king, and sovereign.

That this proves that to be false, which is here affirmed by the King, that
his greatest Enemies had scarce confidence enough to abett, or own it. And
such, as knew the manner of their proceedings at that time, know the truth of
what the King affirms, and though the necessity of their engagement made them
own it, yet there were very few, or none, that esteemed it an act of Justice
in them, but of Policy for their own security. The king says it affected
him more with sorrow for others, then anger for himself, nor did the affront
trouble him so much, as their sin. The libeller says, there is use of this
book to show us what a deluded thing the creature is, which is called the
vulgar, who will believe such vain glories as these. And surely we cannot
believe any creature so deluded, as those, for whose capacity the libeller
writes, that makes the deluded vulgar judges of laws, and kings, yet here
spurns it as a despised creature.

The strangenes of belief that he imagines, as that the King proclaimed him
Traitor without due process of law. If he could have told what the due process
of law was, no doubt he would. If a theife, or murderer be taken in the Act,
or escape, must there not be a proclamation for his apprehension? If Traitors
be in Arms against their King, is it choler, or rashness to proclaim them
Traitors?

The King had lately been convinced of his illegallitie with the five members.
He was injuriously denied Justice against them, which produced the second
insolence of Hotham.

The Kings relation declares his anger to be incensed, as he had, but does it
follow from thence, that he was not more sorry for others, then angry? May not
a fathers sorrow for his sons disobedience, exceed his anger, and may not a
King desire the punishment of a Malefactor, because he pitties his person, and
greives for the ill consequence of his offense? Yet this trifling Libeller,
would infer, that the king could not be more sorry, then angry, because his
words testify impatience of delay till Hotham be punished.

Its a strange operation of sorrow, that stirred him so vehemently to have
Hotham punished, and not to have him rep^nt. But this exception is more
strange, that a man may not be vehement for the punishment of one, for whose
offense he is greived, and there may be just cause of sorrow, for an Act, which
the repentance of the Actour cannott remedy. He knows well how little his
Majest: was likely to work upon Hotham at that time obstinate, but it was a
necessity upon his Majest: to endeavor, that he should be proceeded against
injustice.

There has not been observed in the King a sorrow for his own sins, nor for
such sins of others, as cannot be supposed a direct injury to himself. This
man will not have the Kings sorrow for his sins observed, nor acknowledged, we
have seen his malicious detractions of the Kings sorrow for his consent to the
death of the Earl of Strafford, and it cannot be expected from such men, that
they will give Testimony to any truth, that deny all evidence of it.

The Kings labor to have the sinner only punished will be c^ed revenge. And why?
They pretended justice, not revenge that after cut of Sr. John Hothams head.
May not a King do justice without revenge? The injustice in abettinge, and
protecting Sr. John Hotham at that time was the ground work of the succeeding
evils, and the same men, that denied justice at his Maj: desire took reveng
of the same insolency afterward.

Hull was not the Kings own town, but the Kingdoms. And how became they a
Town, have they not all their liberties, and graunts from the King? He might
have said that Towns under a popular Govern meant were the peoples, but in a
Kingdom, it is a fantastical dream, and the laws deny a possibility of any
such property having placed the soveraigntie of the Kingdom in the King, and
such a conclusion of right is inconsistent with a kingdom.

The Arms he says were public Arms bought with public money, or not his
own. If the king have money from the public may they take it away again, to
what end then do they give him subsidies, if the money be still their own, and
they may take away what is bought with it.

Had they been his own, as much as the private house, and Arms of any man are
his own the law permitts not to use them in away not private, but suspicious
to the Commonwealth. If vulgar suspicion may check public employment, he may
not look long to use any thing. And is it a crime in the king to use his
private wealth in a public war? No doubt, but his Majest: property is
as much, as any private man's, else his kingly office had little honor, or
strength, and he is not accountable for the use, which he makes of his Estate
either private, or public, and there was noe fear of the use, that the king
would make, but from Traitors, that would prevent his defense.

The King by his overtalking seems to doubt of belief touching his patience
at H^ll. He expected not, nor valued the belief of Traitors, but such as
soberly consider what he says, will not judge him over talking, but modestly
expressing his own temper, which endured so high a provocation.

The king says he could not, but observe, how God not long after pleaded, and
avenged his cause. The Libeller says most men, and commonly the worst are apt
to interpret the judgments of God to the justifying of their own cause. Its
possible the worst men may do so, but we see it very frequent with the best.
The Prophet David often takes notice of Gods dealing with his Enemies, and
wicked men. The Libeller might hence observe his Masters, the worst of men,
that interpret, and expound the Judgments of God, and the event of providence
to the justifing of their Rebellion how often has he in this Libell taken up
that Argument, and in this very Chapter makes an observation of Gods Judgment
upon the King, from their murder of him before his own Palace gate. And how
frequent are their successes produced as profes of the goodness of their cause,
but his Majest: observation is not grounded upon the event, but the evident
Crime of Hotham, which all men held Treason, but such, as would allow nothing
to be Treason against the King. Although we know not the reasons of Gods
ptoceedings, who often leaves good men to suffer, and wicked men prosper, yet
when we see the prime instrument of a wicked design perish by the hands of
those, whom he served in his unlawful enterprise, we may justly take notice
of the proportion between the sin, and the punishment.

His comparing Saul's conjecture of an advantage God had sent him in David's
being at Keilah, has no^ resemblance to the taking away of Hothams life, Saul
being not only deceived in the advantage, but conscious of Gods disfavour.

Hotham was safe, and successful, while be continued true to the Parliament.
But the guilt of his conscience made him unquiet.

If God had purposed such an end for his opposition to the King, he would not
have deferred to puinsh him till of an Enemy be was made the Kings friend, nor
have made his repentance the occasion of his ruin. These presumptuous Rebels
dare sit in judgment upon Gods ways, and prescribe a rule sor his proceedings.
Its true, because judgment is not executed speedily, the hearts of the children
of men are set upon evil, and the Libeller judges, that if the judgments of
God be not apparent in his time, that is forth with, they are none at all. God
brought his judgment upon the son of Ahab, and not upon himself, because he
humbled himself, and God punished the sins of David upon his posterity, though
he forgave him, and we may conceive the judgment of God upon a wicked Act, not
the repentance of it, though it come after in time. Strafford Duke of
Buckingham was an active assistant to Rich: the 3: in his usurpation, and after
revolting from him perished by that power he had raised, which all men look on
as a judgment upon his first compliance with that Tyrant, and the sat of
Hotham, and that Duke hold great proportion in regard of their Actions, and
sufferings.

Glorious deeds done to ambitious ends find a reward suitable. And that the
Libeller might justly apply unto Sr. John Hotham, who made popular applause the
end of his Treason, and perished by popular fury.

Me^ may here take notice what thanks he had from the king for revolting to
his cause. Repenting Traitors may have mercy, but they deserve not thanks,
and though his punishment may be remitted, the infamy of his Act will survive.

Because God judges not by humane fancy, therefore says he such events, as
are obvious to every fancy, are most like to be erroneous. And then such Acts
of providence, as make men say surely there is a God, that judges the earth
are most likely to be mistaken. Although Common fancies are likely to be
deceived, it is a sorry inference from thence, that what is obvious to every
fancy weak, and wise, should be more likely to be erroneous.

The king so far pitied Hotham, as he thought he at first acted more against
the light of his conscience, then many other men, in the same cause. To this
the Libeller says. They who act against conscience are least of all to be
pitied either at the Bar of humane, or divine Justice. Desperate sinners, as
most miserable, are most to be pitied in Christian Charity, though justice
proceed more severely against them, pitties are part of justice, the Libeller
is acquainted only with the operations of malice, not of pity, whereof his
whole discourse shows him destitute, otherwise the kings pity could not
argue him destitute of the Common grounds of nature, as the Libeller inferrs,
and shows that he esteems the common grounds of nature, Acts of Tyrany, and
insultation upon others, ruin, hatred, and scorn being all the Charity, that
Sectaries practice.

He says the king jerkes at some men's reforming to modells of Religion, and
that they think, all is gold of piety, that does but glister with a show of
zeal. To this says the Libeller. The piety of his Prelacie model, glistered
more upon the posts, and pillars, which their Zeal, and fervencie gilded
over, then in true works of spiritual edification. The repairing, and
beautifying of the houses of God was the highest commendation of many of his
faithful Servants, and the Scripture gives that for the high commendation of
the famous Jehojada, and we may expect spiritual edification from those, whose
zeal, and fervencie carries them to bestow their goods on such Actions,
nothing but destruction of Church, and piety from those, that decry such
commendable, and necessary works, and we have found, that such men, as have
pretended to spiritual edification, by traducing other men's zeal in the
outward service of God, have proved at last rotten Carcasses gilded over, and
painted sepulchers.

He is sorry, that Hotham felt the Justice of others, and fell not rather in to
the hands of his mercy. The libeller says he should have showed, what mercy
he had used to such as fell into his hands. He needed not show that, whereof
there are so many Examples.

But says the Libeller, whathever one man might have expected, the whole
nation found none, but had been swallowed up in blood, had not his power
failed. What need the King produce Examples of his mercy, when his most
ma^icious Enemies offered nothing to the contrary, but the war, which they had
necessitated him to make. There cannot be an Argument more convincing of the
want of all justification in these Rebels, then their perpetual recourse to
an incredible assertion, that the King caused the war, which besides the
falsenes of the allegation is not of weight to argue want of mercy, when as
Princes, and states may casually be engaged in a war, and yet be far from
cruelty, or designs of revenge, and his Majest: known backwardnes to a war,
and moderation in it, show his compassion as eminent to the public, as
particular persons.

The King says Clemency is a deb^, which he ought to pay to those, that crave
it, since we pay not any thing to God for his mercies, but prayers, and
praises. This says the Libeller has sound of gravitie, but the significance
of nothing pertinent. And yet it signifies, that we are to forgive others,
because God forgives us. But says the Libeller we ought by this reason as
freely to pay all things to all men. We ought noe doubt freely to pay what is
due to all men, but the Scripture more particularly requires Clemency, and
forgivenes from us in regard our selves have most need of it from God, and the
Libeller shows a great emptines of reason, that calls this an empty
sentence, and upon this occasion to repeat the payment of the kings duty to
the kingdom, when as he declares, that nothing, but the giving up of his
Crown could be a discharge of his duty, so grave a judge is he of debts, and
duties.

The King pitties Hotham, but aggravates rather then lessens, or concealos his
fault. Conceal, or lessen it, he could not, aggravate he does not, and being a
King his pity ought not to destroy his judgment, nor deceive him in the
offense of those he pardons.

If a reiterating judge be worse then a Tormenter, a reiterating standerer
deserves Torment. The mention of a malefactors offense, or repetition of a
public transgression is far from a Triumph, and as this Act of Hotham was a
groundworke of infinite misery: so his Majest: deep sense of the mischeife
of that fact, might reflect on it with serious observation, and pity without
any Triumph.

He is angry that the king says after times will dispute, whether Hotham were
more infamous at Hull, or at Tower hill. And says what knew he of after times,
and while he sits judging the fate of that unhappy father, and son, knew not,
that the like attended him before his own Palace gate, and as little knew,
whether after times do not reserve a greater infamy to the story of his life,
and Reign. The libeller well knew by the book he seeks to answer, that his
Majest: well knew the power, and malice of his Enemies, while he wrote this,
and that he expected they would show their utmost cruelty to his honor,
as well, as his life, but he was well assured their injustice, and disloyalty
could not effect what their impiety designed, and as long as Religion, or
reason inhabit the world, his story cannot be blotted in after times, but it
seems the libeller is apprehensive of future infamy, though he think himself
assured of present power.

He would seem an Enemy to vain repetitions in prayers, but its only of such
things, as Traitors will not pray for, otherwise there is large experience of
the vain babbling of sectaries in their prayers.

He says its too presumptious in a written, and published prayer to take it as
a favor from God before he knew it was intended him. He knew God had brought a
severe punishment upon a known offense, and how could this be presumption to
mention it, in a published prayer, but how can the libeller call it the
sacrisie named by Eeclesiastes, that practices such particular thankesgivings
for successes, when as the cause he maintains, and prosecutes is so
notoriously wicked.

The King says Let not thy Justice prevent the objects, and opportunities of
my mercy The Libeller says. To folly, or Blasphemy, or both shall we impute
this, shall the Justice of God give place, and serve the mercies of a man? all
other men, who know what they ask desire of God, that their doings may tend to
his glory. And does not he, that prays he may be able to show mercy to his
Enemies, pray, that his Actions may tend to Gods glory, Is not God glorified in
the mercies of men? Is not mercy in men a gift of God, and can this tri^ler
pretend sin in that prayer? which desires of God, that his Justice may not
prevent their mercy to their Enemies, May not men pray for their Enemies, pray
to have judgments diverted from them, pray to have an occasion to show them
mercy? But this libeller, that esteems so little to Blaspheame is careless how
falsely he charge it on others.

Upon the listing, AND RAISING ARMIES.
HE begins with the Kings mention of Tumults, the demonstrations he calls them
of the peoples love, and loyalty to the Parliament. Which in their nature more
then the kings denomination were demonstrations of disobedience to law, hatred
of Government, and disloyalty to the king. Their petitioning was in the
Authors own judgment the height of violence, and Barbarism, which he compares
to the Iron flaile, and those Arms which he calls defensive were so apparently
a Traiterous histolitie, that the ends, which he assigns for them admit not
the least color for the appellation of defensive.

The King takes noe notice, that those listed about him were the beginners of
these Tumults. Neither could he of so strange an imagination.

The king says his recesse gave them confidence, that he might be conquered.
The Libeller says, other men supposed both that, and all things else, who knew
him neither by nature warlike, nor experienced, nor fortunate, yet such says
he are readiest to imbroyle others. How well he performs the first period of
his book not to descant on the kings misfortunes his readers may here see,
that makes the kings misfortune his reproach, and a ground of their wicked
confidence to Rebel against him, but that such men are readiest to imbroyle
others is not so certain, but undoubted they are not readiest to imbroyle
themselves, and noe valor, nor experience, whereof his Majest: is well known
to have had a great measure can stopp a slandrous tongue. The mischeifes
brought upon his Majest: kingdoms sprung from such persons, as sought their
advantage by such broils, which all men see the King could never expect.

The King says he had a soul invincible. And the Libeller says, what praise
is that? the unteachable man has a soul to all reason invincible. And is an
invincible courage noe praise? He seeks to show his wit by applying
invincible to unteachable, when as if he had cited the Kings next words, as he
ought, he had lost his jest, for the King says, he had a soul invincible
through Gods grace enabling him, but he breaks sentences, and truth, least he
should break for want of matter.

That the King labors to have it thought, that his fearing God more then man
was the ground of his sufferings. The Libeller says, he pretended to fear God
more then the Parliament, who never urged him to do otherwise. And did they
not urge him to do otherwise, when they urged him to do that, which was
against his conscience? But there need not more be spoken of this, for the
Libeller calls that a narrow conscience, which will not follow a multitude
against its own persuasion.

He shows his levitie beyound that Creature he calls the vulgar, who now
affirms the King was drawn by his Courtiers, and Bishopps, and yet in the
beginning of his book he says, that the discourses, and preachings of
Courtiers, and Prelates against the Parliament was but a Copy taken from his
own words, and Actions, that all remissenes in Religion issued originally from
his own authority, all miscarriages in state may be imputed to noe other
person cheifely then to himself.

He goes on to compare the words of Saul, that he had performed the
Commandment of God to the Kings mention of his fearing God, and the kings
upholding the Prelates, against the advice of the Parliament, and example of al
reformations, is not much unlike, if not much worse, noe nearer like, then this
Authors writings to modesty, and loyalty. Is the advice of the Parliament,
and the example of all reformations equal to the express Command of God? The
examples of all Reformations, himself tells afterward are not concurrent in
the matter he mentions, and if they were so, are all points of reformation
equally necessary, and of the same obligation with the command of God? and was
the Reformation of the Church of England noe reformation? Why then does he say
all Reformation? And is not the Church of England equal, if not superior to
any part of the world, that has reformed? But we see what account these
hipocrites make of the Example of all Reformation, that have set up
schismatic confusions of Religion in contempt of all Reformation. His
Majest: did noe more in upholding the Prelates, then what the example of the
most primitive times, Godly Emperors, and holy martyrs instructed him in,
which noe Reformation ever contradicted, and he had no reason to hearken to the
advice of such, as then called themselves a Parliament, who had broken all the
laws, and privileges of Parliament, expelled the members, and were governed
by Tumults, and a company of Bedlam Sectaries against the doctrine, and
practice of the vinversall Church. The practice of Saul in persecuting David
well suits with the course of these Rebels, but they have gone beyound him in
malice, and disobedience in the matter both of David, and also the Amalekites,
he brake the Commandment of God in sparing Amaleke, these traitors
presumptuously break the Command of God in destroying their King, and Church.
And this man exceedes Saul's presumption, that makes the preservation of an
order continued in the Church in all ages as bad, or worse, then the sin of
Saul.

He says acts of grace are proud, vnselfe knowing words in the mouth of any
King, who affects not to be a God. Certainly this Libellers words show him not
only in affection, but in Act a proud vnselfe knowing man. Are there noe Acts
of favor, noe Acts of mercy in Kings, but all of necessity, but enough has
been said to these brainesicke dreams.

Never King was less in danger of violence from his subjects, till he
unsheathed his sword, nay long after, when he had spilt the blood of thousands,
they had still his person in a foolish veneratio^. Should a Christian call that,
which God Commanded, and David practiced foolish veneration, but they whose
wisdom is Rebellion, hold Divine wisdom foolishnes. And was he in so little
danger from those, that held that veneration foolish, were there none, that
held so, when they affronted him, and threatened him every day? To what end
should multitudes come about his Palace, and cry Justice, when they sought
murder? What would they have done if he had denied their demands, shall we
believe they intended noe violence, or shall we believe, that they, who had
seized the forts, and navy, and usurped the Government would have used noe
violence to his person, when they had him, if he plied not with them? Its true
many were not wholly vnshamed at the first, but the malice, and ambition of
others was sufficiently confirmed, and the multitude easily falls by Example.

The King complains, that Civil war must be the fruits of his seventeene
years reigning with such a measure of Justice, peace plenty, and Religion as
all nations either admired or envyed. The Libeller says for Justice let the
Council table, starr Chamber, and high Commission speak the praise of it. We
may be assured that malefactors will never praise Court of justice, we know
Sectaries, and seducers hated the high Commission, and seditious Libellers the
starr chamber, and conspiratours, and incendiaries the counsels of Kings, and
there were noe Acts past in these places of such exception, as the measure of
justice, which he enjoyed was not admired, or envyed by all nations.

His mention of abolishing Parliaments detracts not from the measure of
justice, peace, plenty, and Religion, and we have found what injustice has
succeeded.

The displacing of honest Judges he has misplaced to detract from the justice
of his Majest: Government, and as the placing of judges was in his Majest:
choice, so he might take notice, whether their places might not be better
supplied by others, and the change of two judges, for that's the number in
seventeene years, is beneath an exception, his railing declamation against
corrupt Government being only in general deserves not an answer, and the
known prosperity, peace, and plenty of the Kingdom, are a sufficient
confutation of such imaginary oppressions.

He says what peace was that, which drew out the English to a needeles, and
dishonorable voyage against the spaniards at Cades. It was that peace the
Parliament desired, and if the voyage proved successels his Majest: by
preventing further danger, and preserving peace notwithstanding the miscarriage
(which must be the dishonor only of the managers) sufficiently testifies how
well he deserved of his people for the continuance of their peace, and safety.

He asks next what that was, which lent our shipping to a Treacherous, and
Antichristian war against the poor Protestants of Rochell. What is this
against our peace at home, and though there were ships of ours used against
Rochel, it is sufficiently known they were not lent against Rochell, and the
Dutch ships, which were used, as ours were not lent to a Treacherous, and
Antichristian war.

He asks what peace was that, which fell to robb the french by sea to the
imbarring all our merchants in that Kingdom. Is not this man madd, that will
charge the use of the shipping against Rochell for a Crime, and call it a
Treacherous, and Antichristian war, and presently charge the King for making
war against the french, upon the ground of using his ships against Rochell,
and call it a robbing of the french by sea, and is it possible to avoyde the
loss of Merchants in case of hostility?

He proceeds to cry out on that unblessed expedition to the Isle of Ree
doubtful whether more calamitous in the succes, or design. Was not the
design in the favor of Rochell, did they not desire it? and yet he calls the
ill success of that Action the betraying all the flower of our military youth,
and best Commanders to a shameful surprisall, all, and execution. And who
betrayed them, and to what purpose, what advantage could his Majest: have by
such a loss? And was the war against Rochell Treacherous, and Antichristian,
and the releife too? But this Libeller is resolute to defy sense, and reason,
and now he has spoken against the peace we enjoyed, whereto does it amount,
was there any interruption of our peace at home, and was there not cause for
these expeditions abroad, If there were not the Parliament failed in their
Council to the King in advising the war with spain, and complaining of the
french for the misimployment of the ships against Rochell?

If peace were intended us at home, what meant these billetted soldiers in all
parts of the Kingdom. Dot noth he know the meaning, that mentions Cades, and
the Isle of Ree, where they were employed, surely he is so intent on words, as
he looses his Memory, as well as his other faculties.

But he has found out a design of German horse to subdue us in our peaceful
houses. These German horse have made much noise, and yet were never discovered,
and the King, who was advised to make a war in Germany, and other places by
the Parliament could not use German horse, but against England. But what is all
this to the great measure of peace we enjoyed above other nations. Can any
man, that reads this Libellers wilful impertinency judge other, then that he
fights blindfold, who would extend these foreign voyages, which had not the
face of war at home, and continved not beyound the four first years of his
Majest: Reign, to diminish the measure of our peace so long enjoyed, and that
in the midst of so many miscarriages, and conspiracies both at home, and
abroad.

For our Religion he says, where was there a more ignorant, profane, and
vicious Clergy learned only in the antiquity of their pride. The pride of
these Sectaries contemnes all learning, and antiquity, which condemns their
fantastical, and presumptuous novelezing. The learning of the English Clergy
is too well known to the world to receive any disreput from the Streechinge of
night oules, and of Kats.

Noe wise man could see, what was left for other nations to admire or envy,
but to pity. Other nations saw who had enough to cause them to admire our
happiness, not to pity our condition, and of this there is a large Testimony.

But says the libeller, wealth, and plenty in a land, where Justice Reigns
not is no Argument of a flourishing state, but of neerenes rather to ruin, and
commotion. The blessings of God, peace, and plenty are often turned into
wantonness, and wickedness by the people, and are often a sign by the peoples
abuse of ensuing ruin, or commotion, and of this the present condition of
England is a great Testimony, but it was never denied, to be the flourishing
state of any nation, and he will find little creditt to his supposition, that
Justice Reigns not, where there is wealth, and plenty in a land.

There were not some miscarriages only of Government, which might escape. And
of that nature are all the particulars gathred by him, if they had been true,
but an viniversall distemper, and reducement to arbitrary Government. There was
a distemper, and disaffection to Government in many seditious seducers, but an
viniversall distemper, and reducement to Arbitrary Government could not consist
with the oppression of that tranquillity, and security of the people, which
was visible to all men, the loss whereof brought on by these Rebels is too
late lamemted.

That his Majeest: owned the Actions, and protected the persons of men in
highest favor with him is noe argument of this vinversall distemper, no more
then the vulgar cries against rulers is an Argument of their miscarriage, or
the peoples moderation, who will have persons removed from Government, and yet
not agree, who shall succeed them. It was an Argument of great distemper in a
people, that cried out against the Kings evil Councillors, that could not
judge of their Actions, but of noe vinversall distemper in the Government,
neither could the king with piety, and justice leave his Ministers to the
malice of conspiratours and barbaritie of Tumults.

The king says, whose innocent blood has he shedd, what widows, or orphans
tears can wittnes against him? The Libeller thinks he has given an answer
by saying the suspected poysonnig of his Father not enquired into, and he
advanced, who was aceused by Parliament to be Author of the fact, and many
years of cruel war on his people in three Kingdoms. It is a wonder to
amazement, that such, whose language has noe Limits of truth, or modesty
should not be able to forge a probable Calumny, the Records of the Parliament
show, that noe man was accused for the poysoninge of the kings Father, nor
poysoninge named, ct the fact was fully enquired into, and all witnesses
examined, that had any knowledge of Circumstances touching it, and must this be
the particular to prove the king guilty, of shedding blood? We may see upon
what grounds they will draw blood, that offer such pretenses for taking the
blood of their king. Is it possible, that a Tyrant in seventeene years Reign
could not be proved guilty of the blood of one man? And can a Rebellion be
more apparently convinced, then by the seeking a cause for it from the
resistance, that is made against it, and the endeavor to suppress it? Was
ever a cause so barren of excuse, that had nothing, but its own guilt for
defense?

But he has found out a scotchman, not unacquainted he says with the
affairs, who affirms, that there has been more Christian blood shed by the
Commission, approbation, and connivance of King Charles, and his Father James,
in the latter end of their Reign, then in the ten Roman Persecutions. And is
not this a doughtie authority, what could he say more to prove himself a
false varlett? Whoever saw, or heard of this shedding of Christian blood, is it
possible, that so much blood should be shed, and noe man know it, but this
Scotchman? Was all the world so negligent to take notice of it, and did the
Scotchman, and this Author think, that the blood of the late war made up this
number, they may then expect vengeance upon themselves, and their bloody crew
for it, either here, or hereafter. They value such, as suffered in the ten
persecutions at the same rate they do their King, and their conscience, and if
they thought persecution odious, why do they exercise a persecution upon
Christians as cruel, as these persecuting Emperors?

He says not to speak of those many whippings, and other corporal
inflictions, wherewith his Reign also before this war was not unbloody. And
is a Reign bloody by inflicting death upon robbers, and murderers, or
whipping, and the Pillory upon, Cheates Infamous Libellers, and seditious
disturbers of Government, but of these latter the number was very small not
exceeding four in seventeene years, and these merited the punishment they
had, and an higher had not exceeded their crimes. Is the execution of law a
bloody Reign, he finds none, that suffered banishment, nor any that died in
prison, but such as were restrained by ordinary Justice.

He cannot pretend an arbitrary power in any of this, that the King infested
the true Church is noe other language, then what good Princes always received
from Sectaries, who accuse always for their restraint, infesting the true
Church, but all men now see they are the malignant Compamy that infest the true
Church, and the seducers of simple souls.

But he has a proof of blood above exception, where no blood was drawn, and
that is the six members, whom all men judged to have escaped no less then
Capital danger. Doubtless they had merited Capital punishment in the judgment
of all knowing men. That a just King may be offended for the escape of
malefactors is easily believed, but that saying the birds are flowne argues
much trouble is a secret to all men, and a proverb as often applied in jest,
as earnest.

The libeller says, that if some vulter in the mountains could have spoke, he
could not have uttered fitter words at the loss of his prey. The excesses in
blood, and cruelty of these Rebels cannot be expressed to the full, by the
savage nature of any Creature. The grinning of dogs howling of wolves, and
hissing of Serpents are not more hideous to nature, then the petulence of vile
persons against kings are abominable to Religion, and piety.

Because Nero was unwilling to set his hand to the execution of a Common
Malefactor, and wishing he had not known letters he would prove the King
prosecuting Traitors to have noe great aversation to blood, but it strongly
proves a bloody conspiracy, when the contrivers are held innocent, and the
King made the offender for seeking just punishment, and the Triumphs of such,
as protected those persons, and their impudent braving the King at his very
doors argued their haste to the shedding of that blood, which since has
covered the Land.

Touching the cause of the war, the King says, It was not my withdrawing from
whitehall, for noe account in reason could be given of those Tumults, where an
orderly guard was granted. The libeller says, that if it be a most certain
truth, that the Parliament could never obtain any guard fit to be confided in,
then some account of these pretended Tumults may in reason be given. But if
they be not only pretended, but apparently Tumults, there can be noe account
given of them, at least the libeller undertakes it not, and that they could not
obtain a guard fit to be confided in, is false, for they had a guard, and
Commander of their own nomination, though not the Earl of Essex.

The King asks, whom did he protect against the Justice of Parliament. The
Libeller says he endeavored to rescue Strafford, that was from their
injustice, if he had done so.

But says the Libeller he endeavored it, though with the destruction of them,
and the City, commanding admittance of new soldiers into the Tower. And is
it a necessary consequent, that the admittance of new soldiers into the Tower
were to the destruction of Parliament, and City. But did not such, as like
blood hounds, and wolves hunted the Earl of Strafford, that they might not
loose their prey, and the sweetenes of their revenge in drinking his blood,
stir up the Tumults to the destruction of King, Parliament, and Kingdom?

What can be disputed with such a King, in whose mouth, and opinion the
Parliament it self was never but a faction, and their Justice noe Justice, but
the Dictates, and overswaying insolence of Tumults, and rabbles. The Parliament
was never a faction in the Kings mouth, but it is in every man's mouth, that the
Parliament has been overswayed by a faction, and a faction have called
themselves the Parliament. And how can the Libeller define a Parliament, but he
must acknowledge that those, whom the King calls a faction were noe
Parliament, and that their Actions were noe Justice, but the Dictates, and
overswaying insolence of Tumults, and rabbles? himself prooves it by the
commendation he gives the Tumults, for effecting these Acts, which he now calls
the Justice of the Parliament, and noe wise man could think such a rabble fit
to Judge of Delinquents, or that such men, who fled from their fury were
thereby culpable of the Crimes objected, and the fairest Tyrall would sooner
have condemned to death, these Tumultuous accusers then the parties accused.
But who can talk with such a man, as this breaker, that reputes Monarchy
Tyrany, order in the Church an imposed Religion, and laws worse then
Ceremonies in Religion.

He compares the avoiding of his madd Judicature to Catilnies flight, and
excepting to the Roman Senate, and Cesars injecting scrupulous demurrs against
the Decres of the senate upon Lentulus, and Cethegus. But did either of them
object, that the power of Tumults overswayed the senate, or that the senate
wanted freedom, and had oppressed the members of it? If Catiline had set up a
senate as Caesar did afterward, and these Rebels have in England, and
oppressed the legal Government, the exceptions had been very just, but
exceptions against particular senators for private animosities cannot derogate
from the judgment of the whole being free.

That such reasons were urged for Strafford, was never heard at his Trial, or
other proceedings against him, the cases being contrary, for Lentulus, and the
rest were accused for conspiring against the state, and Strafford was accused
by those, that conspired against the state, and sought to take him away for a
cleerer passage to their design.

The King vouchsafes, to the Reformation, which both Kingdoms intended noe
better name then innovation, and ruin both to Church, and state, and the
expelling of Bishopps out of the Church, ruin to the Church, and out of the
house of Peers ruin to the state. And he asks how happy the nation could be
in such a governor, who counted that their ruin, which they thought their
deliverance. It cannot be doubted, but the abolition of the order, and
Government of Church and state, is an innovation, and performed by force
against the King, execrable Rebellion, and the King never doubted to say, that
such disorderly innovations were the ruin of Church, and state, and the
innovations, and ruins mentioned by the King to be agitated by some men are
not restrained to the cause of the Bishopps, though that alone, and the manner
of proceeding in regard of the injustice, violence, and the dangerous
consequences, that attend it, threatened ruin to Church, and state. It is
strange, that a people may mistake their ruin for their deliverance, and that
a wise Prince by denying them their will may keep them from perishing, which
their own errors would cast them into, but such, as knew how small a part of
the people, and how contemptible, affected those innovations, and how they were
cherisht by the leaders of Rebellion to strengthen their party, and how others
were drawn in by hopes, and fears, to comply with a potent faction for their
profit, or safety, and how great a party both for number, and quality
detested these innovations may well conclude that neither the nation thought it
their deliverance, nor the Kings refusal other, then a just care, and
providence for their good.

It is not likely, that the house of Peers gave hardly their consent to the
Bills against the Bishopps, that so easily gave it to attach them of high
Treason. But it is apparent they hardly gave their consent to those Bills, for
they had often rejected them, and therefore his presumption is of noe weight
against plain proof.

If their rights, and privileges were thought so undoubted in that house, then
was that protestation noe Treason, and the house will become liable to a just
construction either of injustice for so consenting, or of usurpation to
expect, that their voting, or not voting should obstruct the Commons. The
privileges of the Bishopps had they not been undoubted, they needed not, an
Act of Parliament, nor so many Acts of violence to take them away, neither can
the Commons pretend to greater right for their sitting in the one house, then
the Bishopps in the other, and the Libeller has rightly concluded, that their
protestation was noe Treason, but that their accusation by the house of Commons
was a false, and ungrounded Clamor, and their commitment by the Lords house an
odious injustice, but it could be noe usurpation to expect, that their voting,
or not voting was conclusive to the Commons. To what end did the Commons offer
their accusation to the Lords, if their voting, or not voting were not
considerable. Is it Justice, when they concur, and usurpation when they
dissent? But Lords house, and Commons house are usurpers, when they obstruct
the Dictates, and overswaying insolence of rabbles, and Tumults.

The Commons were not to de^st for five repulses of the Lords, noe not for
fifty from what in the name of the Kingdom they had demanded, so long as
those Lords were none of our Lords, and what if they had been your Lords, were
they then to desist, if so, it was more then they would do to their King, but
our, or not our makes noe difference to resolute Traitors. The Lords were so
far their Lords, as they were not to persist by the power, wherewith they were
entrusted for the kingdom in their demand after the Lords refusal, for to
what end has the law ordained a Lords house, and the Commons so long
practiced their addresses to them, if they may do what they please without
them? Does the use of the name of the kingdom add any right to them, that have
not the power of the kingdom, and demand things to the destruction of the
kingdom? The king allows not such a faction the name of a Parliament, which
has nothing of either house, but some members, that assume the name without
the privileges, and authority, that constituted it.

Though the Bill against root, and branch passed not till many of the Lords
with some few of the Commons, either enticed away by the king, or overawed by
the sense of their own malignitie deserted the Parliament, that was noe
warrant for them, who remained being far the greater number to lay aside the
Bill. He well knows they, that remained of the Lords house were an
inconsiderable number, and such, as deserted the Commons house wanted not many
of the number of them, that remained, and of them, that remained many were
overawad by force, and diverse plainly dissented to that Bill. The injustice
of them, that remained was intolerable that refused all reparation, or
security to such, as were injured by the Tumults, and it was a most perfidious
Act in them to enforce their members to desert the house, that they might
exercise their Arbitrary power over the kingdom, the injury was so apparent,
and the pretense of malignancie so ridiculous against the deserting members,
that noe sober man can imagnie enticement, or overawing to be the cause of
their withdrawing, and these remaining members ought to have forborne by their
duty to the kingdom, the passing of such a Bil in the absence of so many
members, but they, that will forbear noe degree of treason cannot probably
abstain from breaks of privilege, and less injuries.

He says this degrading of the Bishopps was orthodoxall in the Church ancient,
and reformed. What will not this man say? We need not wonder at his other
impudencies, that will affirm the taking away the order of Bishopps
orthodoxall in the ancient Church, which never wanted them.

The King says he was bound besides his judgment by a most strict, and
vndispensable oath to preserve that order, and the rights of the Church. And
says the Libeller. If the letter of that oath be not interpreted by equity,
reformation, or better knowledge, then was the King bound to grant the Clergy
all privileges granted to them by Edward the Confessor, and so bring in
Popery. Equity must be admitted in all interpretations of oaths, and so must
better knowledges, but the knowledge of other men is noe exposition to him,
that takes an oath, if his own knowledge be not convinced. The King has
sworn to preserve the privileges of the Church, to be a protector of the
Bishopps, and by what equity, reformation, or better knowledge would this
libeller induce the King to break this oath? If Sectaries say the calling is
unlawful against the judgment of the universal Church, must the king believe
this, and think himself absolved of his oath? The King never doubted, that
his oath could not bind him to sin, but he was assured, that it was a sin to
break his oath, when it was no sin to keep it, and while his conscience was
not informed of any unlawfulness in the matter of his oath, his sin must be the
more heinous to act against his oath, as well as his knowledge.

The Libeller talks of laws of God, and truth of the Gospel. But his
schismatic fancies must over rule laws, and oath, and though the German
Emperors, or other Kings had noe cause to leavy wars upon Protestant subjects
under color of a blind, and literal observance to an oath, it had been a
wickedness in their subjects to make a war on them to compel them to break
that oath.

It is not to be imagined, if what shall be established come in question, but
that the Parliament should oversway the King, and not the King the Parliament.
Neither can it be imagined that he, which is to be overswayed by the Parliament
is a King.

By all law, and reason, that which the Parliament will not, is no^ more
established in this Kingdom, neither is the king bound to uphold it, as a
thing established. Certainly laws are very vainly said to be made by the
King, if he have no voice in the making of them, and if they may be
vnestablished without him, and it was a wickedness, as well, as weakness to bind
him to uphold laws, and to govern his people justly, that had not so much as
voice in the making of their laws, and that was bound to govern by wicked
laws, if the Parliament would have them, such Imaginary powers cannot consist
with Religion, law, nor reason in the Government of England.

The King says had he gratified, he thinks, their Antiepisconall faction with
his consent, and sacrifised the Church Government, and Revenues to the fury of
their Covetuousnes, they would then have found noe colorable necessity of
raising an Army. The Libeller to this says. It was the fury of his own hatred
to the professors of the true Religion, which incited him to persecute them
with the sword of war, when whipps pillories, exiles, and imprisonments were
not thought sufficient. Its certain such a generation of Traitors, as have
persecuted the King with a war, justly merited to be whipped out of all
Kingdoms, and while this Libeller frequently sports at the Kings necessities,
he is not ashamed presently to call the war voluntary on his part. If the
Kings fury incited him to a war, he would not so often have sought peace, nor
been denied peace without the sacrifice of the Church.

But the Libeller says to color this war the K^ing cannot find wherewith
all, but that stale pretense of Charles the fifth, and other Popish Kings, that
the Protestants had only an intent to lay hands on the Church Revenues. The
King need not a color for making a war, whereto necessity enforced him. It
is apparent, that the sectaries in England intended to devour these Revenues,
and have effected it, and they profess to seek it by the sword, because they
could not have it otherwise.

But the Libeller says, it was never in the thoughts of the Parliament till
exhausted by war, their necessity seized on that for the Commonwealth, which
the Luxury of the Prelates had abused to Common mischeife. They need not have
been exhausted, if reason, Justice, or Religion could have contented them. They
will make a war, and robb, and steal from other men to maintain it. Did not
their pretended necessity come from their war to take away Episcopacy, and is
not the necessity of their own making to get these Revenues? What if goods
dedicated to Gods service were abused to luxury, were there none else in the
Kingdom so abused? Must they make choice of the Patrimony of the Church for a
sacrifice to their Covetuousnes, that they may spare their private?

That the King consented to the vnlording of Bishopps at Canterbury the chief
seat of their pride, for God would have it so. And can he tax the King for
his allusions upon the fate of Hotham, and obserring the course of Gods
judgments, and himself make such an observation from the Kings passing the
Bill at Canterbury? May it not be an aggravation of the offense in passing the
Bill there, rather then a punishment upon those, that were wronged by it, but
Canterbury had not relation to their peace in Parliament, but in Church, and
therefore his scene is mislayed.

The King says his consent to that Bill of putting Bishopps out of the house
of Peers was from his firm persuasion of their contentednes to suffer a
present diminution of their rights. The Libeller from hence argues the pure
mockery of a Royal assent to delude for the present. May not sober times
revoke what distempered madness had necessitated, and ^ad not the King just
cause to think, that after times would see the obliquitie of that Bill?

The Libellers consequence is that we may hence perceive the wisdom, and
integrity of those votes, which voted his consessions at the Isle of weig^t
for grounds of a lasting peace. And why might they not be so, though some of
them might not be thought fit to last long? And that by the judgment of both
King, and houses? But what were they, that voted, were they not the Libellers
Parliament, in whose behalf he has so often expressed his anger for the
Kings disesteeme of them, and calling them a faction, and now will have neither
wisdom, nor integrity in them?

He says from the kings pr^fefsing the continuance of his judgment touching
Episcopacy, there is a fair justification of the Parliament, who
notwithstanding his obstinate mind omitted not means, and patience to have
gained him. They omitted not reproach, and violence, but other means, or
patience they used not, and the Libeller has contrived a conviction of his
Parliament, that their not gaining his consent to their demands was the cause
of their war, which he hold justified by the Kings continued aversion.

The King says a great show of delinquents was made, which we^e but
consequences of his, and others withdrawing, or defense. This says the
Libeller is a pretty shift to mince the name of a delinquent into a necessary
consequent. It is injustice to make the name of delinquent a property, and
snare for innocence. Its plain, that the faction would have all, that adheared
not to them, or left them delinquents, and if such an extension be not minced,
the law it self will be, whose Rules will not define delinquents, but the
observation of them become delinquencie.

He says a Traitor is the consequent of his Treason, and a Rebel of his
Rebellion. And such are certainly delinquents, but for saking their society is
not a Crime to denominate a delinquent, and such only were by the faction
called delinquents.

The London Tumults was the Kings over^orne Theme, and stuffing of all his
discourses. Which was not at all mentioned in this place, but it is a Theme of
difficulty to the Libeller, and wherefore, he would stopp the belief of it by
his thread bare repetitions of the blood of the war, delinquents, Tyrany, and
Popery, which are become as vain, as the taunts of children.

He turns to the Scotts, and Covenanters, whom he calls misobservers of the
Covenant, and asks how they will reconci^e the preservation of Religion, etc.
With the Kings resolution, that esteems all the Zeal of their prostituted
Covenant noe better then a noise, and show of piety, etc. For the Covenanters,
and misobservers of the Covenant we leave to debate their own controversies,
but noe man knows what he supposes, that by those principles the King might at
length come to take the Covenant, and that then all had ended in a happy peace,
which he hates upon any conditions, but his own.

He makes an opposition between the Kings t^lling God, that his Enemies are
many, and telling the people they are but a faction of some few prevayling over
his Major part of both houses. Might not his Enemies be many, though a faction
of a few prevailed over the Major part of both houses, and wherein does the
King misappl^ David, or David accuse him? But the Libeller sticks not at
misapplication, nor false accusations.

The King says he had noe passion, design, or preparation to imbroyle his
Kingdom in a Civil war. The Libeller says, true, and yet formerly said,
that his fury incited him to prosecute them with the sword of war. How does he
handle his outworne Theme?

But he gives a reason, for that the King thought his Kingdom to be Issachar,
that would have couched down between two burdens of Prelaticall
superstition, and Civil Tyrany. As his Majest: subjects had peace without
burdens, so the rest of Issachar was more eligible, then the blood, and
Treachery of Simeon, and Levi, whose rage, and cruelty their Father cursed
upon his death bed, but such attempts the libeller likes better then Issachars
ease.

He says the King had made preparation by terror, and preventive force. The
fury of a war is come to terror, and preventive force. Its certain the
Rebels had used all means to prevent his defense, and his terror must be
little, whose force they had surprised.

The King says God will find out bloody, and deceitefull men, many of whom
have not lived out half their days. The Libeller says, It behoved him to
have been more cautious, how he tempted God til his own years had been
further spent. Is it temptation to rely on the truth of Gods word? And may not
innocent persons, whose lives are ready to be taken away by blood thirsty
Tyrants reflect upon Gods word touching wicked men's being cut of, though they
see their own life expiring?

The King in his prayer says, that God knew the chief design of this war
was either to destroy his reason, or force his judgment. The Libeller says
This is hideous rashness accusing God before men to know that for truth, which
all men know to be false. And is it not horrid presumption in the Libeller to
say all men know that to be false, which himself confesses true. And we must
expect, that the wickedness of these Rebels, which accuse verity of untruth
will reproach the sincerity of his Majest: in praying for his Enemies with
hypocrisy, their own corruption excluding confession of others integrity.

Upon their seizing the MAGAZINS, AND FORTS.
THe beginning of all war may be descerned by the Counsels, and preparations
foregoing, not only by the first Act of hostility. And by Counsels, and
preparations foregoing, such as were the alteration of the Government, which
this breaker confesses to be their chief end, and without which noe peace
could be granted, we may easily conclude, who made the first Act of
hostility, for these pretenses, which he musters up have neither the nature of
Counsels, nor preparations for the war, but are made excuses for Acts of
hostility, which they would not have pretended, had they not begun the war.
The particulars need not examination, but shall only be named to lay open the
nakedness of their pretenses.

And first he says noe King had ever more love at his first coming to the
Crown. Its true, but that moved envy in the seditious faction, who sought to
infuse contrary inclinations into the people.

He says never people were worse requited first by his mistrust, that their
liberties were the impairing of his Regal power. He had soon cause to
mistrust, that the conspiratours plotted to undermine his Regal power, upon
pretense of the peoples rights, and to that purpose raised jealosies among
them, the original of all Rebellion.

Next by his hatred to all those, who were esteemed Religious, doubting, that
their principles too much asserted liberty. His Majest: profession, and
practice sufficiently vindicate him from this aspersion to hate those, that
were esteemed Religious, but his piety permitted him not to esteem
hipocriticall sectaries Religious, and his prudence instructed him, that these
schismatickes, which this Libeller calls Religious maintained principles
destructive to Government, which they then abiured, but now avow.

That this was seen by his persecuting, which was never seen, for the
dissolution of Parliaments he has been already answered, but the untruth,
which he has added, whether more ridiculous, or abominable may not pass
vnobserved, which is, that these dissolutions were after they had granted more
money, then would have bought the Turk out af Morea, and set free all the
greeks. And yet the Parliament gave more to the Scotts for invading England.
Does this gross Mountebanque think, that the value of a subsidy in England,
and the number of them, that were granted to the King are so unknown, what
owls, and buzzards does he think would cast their eyes on his papers? surely,
if they be saleable, it is for sport, or scorn, and he might as well have said,
it was enough to subvert the Turkish Empire.

He says the King took Council, how he might subdue them to his will. The
reason of this pretense is to excuse their Rebellious conspiracy to subdue him
to their will.

The design of German horse is a bugbeare long since derided. Billetting of
Soldiers in all parts. Which were raised, and employed in that war, which the
Parliament advised, shows that impudence it self is bankerupt in pretenses
for their villainy.

That the pulpitts resounded all property to the King, and passive obedience
to the subject. Property they meddled not with, but it was their duty to God,
to preach the kings soveraignitie, and the peoples passive obedience, and what
affinity has such preaching with Counsels, and preparations for a Civil
war.

His mention of exactions cannot be omitted, though false, and impertinent.
Disarming of Trained bands is not done by using some of their Arms in the
public service, and it was far from preparation to a Civil war, to use
Arms against a stranger, but what is this, that was done so many years
before?

The frained bands he says were the most proper strength of a free nation. And
yet they are not permitted in some Republiques, though instituted, and improved
by our Kings.

That Ammunition was engrossed, and kept in the Tower was far from the design
of a Civil war on the kings part, it being a right of his prerogative, but a
sign of their conspiracy, and intention of Rebellion, that were troubled at
the kings care for overseeing the Ammunition of his Kingdom, and preventing
the misimployment either at home, or abroad.

The not buying without license, when noe man was denied to buy cannot be
interpreted a restraint, and the high rate could not imply any design of war,
it might be of benif^t. But were not all the places of England not only
allowed, but commanded to have their full stores for their trained bands, and
had not all ships their full proportions of Ammunition? These are potgun
preparations for a Civil war.

But says the Libeller, these were his Counsels, either to a Civil war, if
it should happen, or to subdue without a war, which is all one. Noe doubt its
all one in the Authors Judgment, for he esteems the means to preserve
obedience a sufficient ground for Rebellion. But if the King provided against a
Civil war, if it should happen, is that a reason in subjects to make it? And
do not they begin the hostility, by whom this war happens, and if the Kings
preparations were, if a Civil war should happen, must not this Civil war
happen by others, not him, who prepared only to prevent, and defend:

Thus far he has left the first Act of hostility upon his Masters, and now
he comes to the raising of two Armies against the Scotss, which were both
disbanded before this war begun, and who was the defendent the world well
knows.

But he says the latter of them was raised to the most perfidious breaking of
a solemn pacification. His railing signifes his own impiety, and want of
matter that insteede of declaring the fact of the first English hostility
seeks for scandalls from a Scotch Treaty, and would make the King persidious
in his defense, because they are Traitors in their assault.

He comes now to the beginning of this Parliament, and talks of bringing up
the Armies, and his often decanted Irish Papists, and french Army, that never
struke blow to be Counsels for beginning a Civil war, but these apparitions
were vanished long before the war begun. The letters to the King of Denmark
have been sufficiently cleared from being Counsels, or preparations to make a
Civil war, and the Libeller cannot fix any preparations upon the king, but in
case a war should be made upon him, which was then plotted, and evident to all
knowing men.

He says these, and many other were his Counsels toward a Civil war. If
the king should have taken noe Conncell to have resisted the violence, not only
prepared, but begun against him, it had been unkingly, and unnatural, knowing
how maliciously, and perficiously the conspiratours had called in the Scots,
bribed them with vast sums of money racked from the people upon pretense of
the kings service, how they had treacherously corrupted diverse officers, and
soldiers of the kings army, how they had dispersed false reports of him, and
his A^tions to disaffect the people, how they had given license to all lewd
persons to preach heresy, and Treason in the pulpits, how they had endeavored
to weaken the bonds of Government by punishing men for observing the laws, by
commending, and rewardinge malefactors, how they had affronted the king, and
stirred up the rabble to threaten violence to him, if he refused their
demands, and must he not now prepare for his defense, or submit his judgment?

His refusing to disband that Irish Army shows noe intention of his to a
Civil war, but the Rebels earnest solicitation for the disbanding of that
Army, and the English Army, likewise leaving the Scots vndisbanded shows their
false pretentions, and malicious preparations by disarminge the king of all
Armies to subdue him to their will. These Rebels, that seized the Tower to
strengthen themselves for making a war would have it believed, that the Kings
keeping it, which had always been in his possession, was a preparation to
make a war, and while they affronted him in his Court every day would have his
guard preparations to make a war.

These wagons of ammunition to be prepared by the King in that low condition,
and want of all things for war, which he then was in, are somewhat strange,
although necessary for him against the continued Acts of violence used by the
Tumults, and avowed by the saction in Parliament, and their continual
preparations for a war, and it is a demonstration of the Libellers impudence,
that would have such contemptible preparations in respect of the Rebels force
by land, and sea, and possession of the forts, Navy, and City of London, and
Magazins of the Kingdom, should be for the making of a war upon them, which
was in all reason so unable to withstand them.

The appearance of some hundreds of horse at Kingston, shows how greedy they
are of pretenses, that make such a scare crow a cause of their Rebellion.

And the Queens buying of Arms, and the forces raised in york shire were
much less then needed, when the Rebels had assumed the Militia of the
Kingdom under their own Command. And their petitioning the King for peace
(which the Libeller mentions to be that while) was that the King would submit
to their Government, and do what they required, and with what face now could
any ingenuous man deny, that the chief design of the war was either to
destroy his person, or force his judgment.

As to act of hostility, it is not much material, in whom it first begun
after such Counoells, and preparations. It is material to the truth of the
fact, whatever the Counsels were, but he has not named a Council, or
preparation for war but succeeding the design of Rebellion, and violence
begun, against their rage, all that he supposes on the Kings part, that looked
toward a war being only defensive, and on the part of the Rebels plainly
oppressive,

But he says in the Act also the King will be found to have had the
preceedenice, if not at London by the assault of his armed Court upon the naked
people, and his attempt upon the house of Commons, yet certainly at Hull, first
by his close practices on that Town, next by his seidge. Was the Kings going
with his guard to the house of Commons a proper army to make a wa^, they
heretofore called it a breach of privilege, and is it now grown so big with
time to be called a war? And must that, which continued not an hour be
defended with an Army raised many months after? And is his Iron flaile, and
the Parliaments Clients, that were so terrible to make laws by force become a
naked people, and the ragged Regiment a formidable Army? But if these do not
prove the King to have done the first act, for it seems he doubted it would
not, yet at Hull he is sure, and if the King had fortified all, or any of the
Towns of his Kingdom, is that the act of war? Is not the law evident, that
he may do it, and has it not been the approved practice of all ages? And if
he beseidged Hull, who began the war, they that surprised it, or he that would
recover it? And yet the Libeller gravely concludes from this fardle, that the
King is truly charged with beginning the war, though the particulars
themselves evince the contrary.

He says that at the Isle of weight, he charged it upon himself at the
public Treaty. What he did at that Treaty is well known to be in order to
the procuring of peace, and though they, that treated with him would have an
Act to acquitt them for their security, yet that could not alter the fact, and
the King took nothing on himself by consenting to pass an act, if the
Treaty took effect, which act by law, to whose interpretation only it was
subject, could not be expounded to charge the king with the beginning of that
war, but so mainfest is the untruth of their pretense, that they would aid
their cause by inferences from an Act of their own importunity, and violence
for their own security.

He says the securing of Hull was noe su^prifal, but a timely prevention. But
was it not always in the Kings power, and Custody before, and what they did
to Hull, they did to his other Castles, and is it noe surprizall to dispossess
those, that are in possession?

He says it were folly beyound ridiculous to count our selves a free nation,
if the King against the Parliament might appropriate to himself the strength
of a whole nation, as his proper goods. And is it less ridiculous to count
themselves a free nation, if the Parliament may appropriate to themselves all
the strength of the kingdom, as their own proper goods against all the people,
are they more a free nation, because they have many Masters? Our nation justly
accounted it self a free nation, and yet a king had all the strength of the
kingdom appropriated to him, as his own proper goods, and they have seen how
their liberty was preserved by that constitution, and how it has been lost by
usurpation of this right in the name of Parliament.

The Parliament had never the life; and death of laws in their power, and the
people never thought it for their Security, that they should, and the Libeller
may with as good reason call succeeding acts preventions as well, as this taking
of Hull a Securing. Are not the taking of Towns Acts of hostility under what
name soever, had not the taking of Hull been an Act of hostility in an Enemy?
And is it less in a Rebel? The question is now of an act of hostility, not
the right of it, and that the taking of a Town is not an act of hostility
will be incredible to the meanest capacity, and noe less, that the Parliament
have a power of hostility against the king.

He says the law of the land is at best but the reason of Parliament. And the
reason of Parliament is noe reason if it differ from the opinion of Sectaries,
witness his censure of voting the kings concessions a ground for peace: and it
were as dissonant from law, as reason, that a kingly Government should be
subject to the reason of a Major part in Parliament.

The king says, they knew his chiefest Arms left him were those only, which
the ancient Christians were wont to use against their persecutors, prayers, and
tears. At this the Libeller makes an exclamation, O Sacred reverence of God,
respect, and shame of men, whither were ye fled, when these hipocrisies were
^ttered? Was the Kingdom at all that cost of blood to remove prayers, and
tears. Shakespeare could not have framed a fitter exclamation for Rich. 3.
Doubtless reverence of God, respect, and shame of men are fled from this man,
that makes this vain, and profane outcry. Does it follow, that because the
King got strength, therefore he was possessed of it, when they rebelled against
him? does not he reproach him, that all his adherents hardly amounted to the
making, up of one ragged Regiment strong enough to assault the unarmed house of
Commons? And can he think there is a God, that cries out sacred reverence of
God, upon occasion of these words of his Majest: was ever king more destitute
of aid, and might more truly use that expression then he. Those thousands of
Cavileers, whose number he so often despised, and now advances are a
conviction of his contempt of God, and men, and his prophanes is more
abominable, then any oaths, curses, and carouses he supposes. And the numbers
mustred on Heworth Moore were a sufficient proof of the Kings want of Arms to
make a war, as they were then the matter of the Rebels scorn, and were not
the Libeller as vain, as wicked, he would not have mentioned the sale of the
Crown Jewels, to buy Arms for a ground of his exclamation, when nothing
could shame him more, were he capable of it, for may not a man justly say, that
the cheisest Arms left a King were prayers, and tears, when all his visible
means to procure Arms were the Jewels of his Crown? and those guns, which
were bought with the Jewels, he calls deadly instruments of war, but the
instruments of Rebels are harmeles, and vnkilling. Men of corrupt consciences
think they may profane the name of God at their pleasure by making their
lewd constructions of words, and Actions. And although this libeller jeere at
the Kings weakness in the beginning of this war, which was visible to all the
world, and the strength he found was unexpected by his Enemies, and that all
men judged prayers, and tears his chiefest Arms, yet because strength came to
him, the Libeller calls Ammunition, Regiments, and Brigades, prayers, and
reares, his ordinary Arms being slander, untruth, and prophanes.

In his next words he says, they, who fought for the Commonwealth have by the
help of better prayers vanquished. It seems he holds not their prayers their
chiefest Arms, who trusted more in other Arms, then their prayers, and might
thence have reasonably concluded, that their succes was not given to their
prayers, but permitted for the sins, and scourge of the nation.

The King reckons not the want of the Militia in reference to his own
protection, as his peoples. Not consideringe says the Libeller, how ill for
seventeene years he had protected them, and the miseries are like a forked
Arrow, it cannot be drawn out without incision of more flesh. He has told us,
that those miseries of seventeene years were peace, and plenty, which those
merciles Physicians will cure by an endless war, letting out the blood, and
tearing the flesh of the afflicted people, and we now descerne what Phisike
they intended for the Kingdom. Sawes to dismember them, swords to lance them,
and famine to pine them, till they were sufficiently purged of their former
prosperity, and he need not have used so many shifts to deny the beginning
of the war, when he says the cure of the Kingdom was to be made with
incisions. What want of protection appeared in those seventeene years, never
people were more secure? But the man mistakes the scene of his exclamation, as
his Sermonizers there notes, and tell the people of suffering that knew none
among them.

He says the wings of faith may be mistaken for the wings of presumption,
Presumptuous men are mistaken of the wings of faith, and this Libeller has
sufficiently expressed himself one of them, and may fear by his presumption to
fall head long.

The King says, that the Parliament have hung the Majest: of King-shipp in an
airy imagination of Regalitie between the privileges of both houses, like the
tomb of Mahomett. To this says the Libeller, he knew not that he was
prophesying the death, and burial of a turkish Tyrany, that spurned down
those laws, which gave it life, and being, so strong, as it endured to be a
regulated Monarchy, he was not prophesying, but relating a plain story how a
just Monarchy was oppressed by a Turkish imposture, and Tyrany, and an Empire
set up in an Army of Janissaries, that spurned down al law, and Religion, and
as the Turkish doctrine of propogating their superstition by blood, and war
was preached unto the people, as their duty to do the like for their new
heretical fancies, so their deceites in making the King a fantastique
supposition, and his authority nothing else, but the opinions of the two houses
was as gross, and lewd, as the imaginary Miracle of Mahometts Tomb.

From the Kings words touching the use of the Militia, that he would but defend
himself so far, as to defend his good subjects from these men's violence, who
persuade the world, that none but wolves are fit to be trusted with the
Custody of the sheepeheard, and his flock. The Libeller would infer this a
clear confession from his own mouth, that if the Parliament had left him the
sole power of the Militia, he would have used it to the destruction of them,
and their friends. And is an use for defense against wrong, and fraud, an use
to destruction? And if the faction called Parliament be not permitted to
destroy the sheepeheard, and his flock, is it a destruction to them? But they
knew themselves wolves, and could not be secure, while any power was out of
their hands, and therefore would persuade, that they were fittest to be trusted
with that, which was the sole defense against their rapacitic.

He says the King has been often told, that he had noe more power over the
sword, then the law. But who told him so? Never any but known Rebels
Parliaments have always said the contrary, and the practice of it in all
times was never questioned. Though Kings cannot be ordinary Judges, yet all
Justice slowes from them, and by their Commissions, and because their
condition, and place requires, that Justice be administered by their deputies
according to the Custom of all Governments, therefore they have not power to
use the Militia, which is most proper to their place, and cannot be separated
from their person, could not be told by reasonable men.

The pretended fear of Rebels, that he may by this power control the law
they will not extend to their own power of the militia, and may not their
Rebel general control all laws by the power of his Army? And does he not?
The subjects of England understood the security of their laws to rest in
their King, whose interest they knew it was to preserve them. Tyrany, and
breach of laws would make his Estate vnsecure, and dangerous, and therefore
they fought to defend him against such, as would destroy their laws, and him.
But in this clamor of the Libeller he only seeks to vilify Monarchical
Government, and to persuade all people, that live under Kings, that they are
not free, and understand not what is liberty, as is in other forms of
Government the people were not Commanded, and might choose their own laws,
and order their wars. There is frequent experience in the Roman Commonwealth
of the Rebellion of the people under ptetence of liberty, and seditious
inclinations will as soon take occasion to object Tyrany to senates, and
Parliaments, as kings What state can those Rebels frame, that may not
degenerate into a Tyrany, but they only feeke pretenses for their Rebellion
against the present Government to transferr it to themselves.

The King is contented to resign his power for his own time. And says the
Libeller he is careful, we should be slaves to his posterity, and leave us
the legaice of another war about it. There is noe doubt, but the Rebels
desired the Militia to enslave the people, and destroy the king, and they would
rather be devils then subjects. This Libeller makes noe difference between a
subject, and a slave, and though they pretended the settling of the Militia in
respect of present danger, yet they are so impudent to reject the kings offer
to settle it for his own time.

He says the King calls the Parliament a many headed Hydra of Government, and
not more eyes then mouths, which he falsely recites, for the King says, As
this many headed Hydra of Government makes a show to the people to have more
eyes to see, so they will find it to have more mouths too to be satisfied,
and here the Libeller according to his custom answeares sense with non sense,
for he says, surely not more mouths, nor so wide, as the dissolute rabble of
his Courtiers both he is, and she is, if there were any males among them. Does he
make a question, whether any males, and yet talk of a dissolute rabble? And
are the new senators commanded single life to prevent the generation of
Traitors? But the Kingdom finds, that those numbers of lean kine have
devoured more in seven years, then all the Courtiers in seven hundred.

He says to dispute what kind of Government is best would prove a long
Theme, it suffices, that his reasons here for Monarchy are found weak, and
inconsiderable. We have the word of a grave Author for it, who has made long
invectives, and yet never handled the Theme, nor answered any one reason
produced for Monarchy, and though it be a long Theme to dispute what
Government were best in his judgment, yet he might have made the question
shorter by disputing, whether subjects might Rebel to subvert the Monarchy
under which they live, And he would have Tyrany a ground for Rebellion, and
that Tyrany to be Monarchy, and if the dispute be long, the solution will be very
easy.

The King is not our sun, though he would be taken for it. And why did he say,
that the sun in all figurative use, and signification bears allusion to a
King, and blames the king for his comparison of the Earl of Strafford, and
here reprehends the allusion to himself? but they will be the sun, and set the
world on fire.

He asks wherefore we should not hope to be governed more happily without a
King, when all our misery has been by a King, or by our necessary
vindication, and defense against him. He may not well hope to be governed
happily by those, that have gotten power by wicked Arts. An unjust power will
seek to support it self by the same means it was raised. It cannot be hoped,
that they will govern happily, that seek the oppression of the greatest part
of the people, and that can secure their private fortunes, what ever become of
the Kingdom. They cannott hope for Gods blessing, which only can make happy
upon the many wilful, per^uries, hipocrisies, and cruelties, which they used
to usurp this Government, and the persecution, and murder of their lawful
sovereign, and they, that pretended misery they knew not for a ground to
change their Government, will find it by their folly, and madness.

He says the King would be thought enforced to perjury by having granted the
Militia, by which his oath bound him to protect the people. The Libeller asks,
if he can be perjured in granting that, why does he refuse for no other cause
the abolishing of Episcopacie? The Libeller himself has expressed other causes
of his refusal to abolish Episcopacie, but why may not one be perjured in
both, being equally bound by his oath. If the Libeller have a sense in this,
its very mystical, unless he mean, that a man need not fear many perjuries,
that committed one.

The protection of Delinquents was no part of his oath, but of the innocent,
and that he ought to do against popular fury, and any usurped authority under
what name soever.

That he was to protect by such hands, as the Parliament should advise him, was
noe part of his oath, and he could poorly protect, that must expect such
hands, as others should allow him, that were an oath to as little use, as the
power it supposed.

He may not hold a violent, and incommunicable sword over us under the show of
protection. And must there not be a sword of protection, because it may be
turned to violence, this is Rebels Logic, that would have no Judges, because
they may be corrupt? and these, that terrify the people with the dangers of
violence under lawful Governors use power most Tyranically, but wherefore
incommunicable, he thinks it a thundering word to startle the people like
Arbitrary Government, and fundamental laws. Is the sword of the supreme
power communicable, if it be in many hands, what if they fight one with
another, which is the sword then to protect the people, and how will they fight
for their Liberties?

The King says, that his yiedling the Militia was from the love of public
peace, and assurance of Gods protection. The Libeller asks, wherefore this
assurance of Gods protection came not till the Militia was wrung out of his
hands. Whence can he conclude, that it came not till then? But the wringing of
the Militia out of his hands shows how impudently these men pretend right, or
truth for their Actions, must a man give up his strength, when it is demanded,
because he has an assurance of Gods protection, and because he sees some
reason to part with it, as the king did for love of public peace, must he not
therefore have an assurance of Gods protection? his holding it fast was his
duty, and the wringing it from him has open injustice both in the Act, and
intention. And the Libellers prophanes in jeering at the kings saying, that God
was able abundantly to compensate him, as he did to Job whatever honor, power,
or liberty Chaldeans, sabeans, or the Devil himself deprived him of saying
Job used noe Militia, nor Magazine at Hull. Is not unlike the Apostates
scoffing at the Christians patience, and suffering.

The King says, Although they take all from him, yet can they not obstruct his
way to heaven. The libeller says, it is noe handsome occasion to tell us whither
he was going. And has it been an unhandsome occasion in the saints of God to
take occasion from their afflictions to declare their resolutions? But these
are his common censures.

He says private prayers in public ask something of whom they ask not.
But prayers upon a public occasion lose not their reward for being public.

Upon the NINETEEN PROPOSITIONS.
THE King uses plausibilitie of large, and indefinite words to defend himfelfe
at such distance, as may hinder the eye of Common Judgment from all distinct
view, and examination of his reasoning. It is the Libellers labor to keep his
reasoning from Common view, and therefore seeks to divert the readers by
Chimericall suppositions, and invectives against Monarchy, and repeated common
places of misgovernment. Upon examination the Kings plain, and distinct
reasoning will appear convincing to every right judgment.

The Libeller says. The king shows not, how it can happen, that the peace of
a people should be inconsistent with the conscience, and honor of a King. And
does this man hold, that the King ought to sacrifise Religion, Justice, and
piety for the peace of his people? Shall he destroy innocent men, and
persecute Christians to procure peace? Or are these things consistent with
honor, and conscience? and may not such things be desired by a wicked people
in order to peace? And therefore the Libeller vainly presses, that nothing is
more agreeable to the conscience, and honor of a King, then to preserve his
subjects in peace.

And is there anything more contrary to the conscience, and duty of subjects,
then to procure a Civil war, by demanding concessions of their King, which
in honor, and conscience he cannot grannt, and which being granted would be
noe ground for a lasting peace, though it avoided a present war.

The Libeller asks which of the propositions were obtruded on him with the
point of the sword, till he with the point of the sword thrust from him both
propositions, and propounders. A strange question in this Libeller, that has
so often obtruded the fears, and terrors raised in the King by the Tumults,
and Iron flaile, seizing of the Magazins, and not leaving him a sword, that had
a point to thrust, but this Theme is too much soyled by so often repetition,
and yet he proceeds to talk of merciles obtrusions, which for almost twenty
years the King had been forcing upon tender consciences by all sorts of
persecutions. And these tender consciences he will allow to be preferred before
the peace of the Kingdom. Truly these are not large, and indefinite words, but
apparent absurdities to the eye of every Common judgment, that the pretended
conscience of every hipocriticall sectarie must be preferred to the peace of a
King dome, and the King must be allowed none, but lose life, and Kingdom, or
prostitute his conscience. The Libellers examination of the Kings book, it
seems was noe other, then of his own writings, that huddles up
contradictions, and absurdities so obvious to the first sight. His labor to
declaime against persecution is not matter of fa^t, and the impertinencie of it
has been already sufficiently detected.

The king says Many things are required of him, nothing offered in requit all.
And the Libeller demands. What could satiate the desires of this man, who
being King of England, and Master of almost two millions yearly was still in
want. And yet the Masters in the new state affirm in their declaration, that
the constant Revenue of the Crown exceeded not a hundred thousand pound a
year, And why should not the King expect contributions from his subjects,
as well as al his Predecessors still had? And why will this man deny him
supplies, that so often obtrudes his wants, and he will have the King content
with Rebels Charity, and allows them to take al from him, when they list, as
the subjects money, this is the supreme honor, and Revenue, that the king
ought to content himself with.

It was for honors sake, that they put the King upon the giving part, not that
it belonged to him of right, for he says all laws are in the hands of the
Parliament, and King-shipp it self. He says it, and yet we must believe him,
that England was a Monarchy, if the Majesty were not in the king, how was it
other, then a republique, and it was for honors sake, that they have been
subjects these many hundred years, wherefore would he have the world believe
wars were made between compe^tours for the Crown of England; was it only to
be a king in a play, but we find, that what Rebels can attain by power, they
will assert for right, and they, which have had so many denialls, and have
professed conscientious, subjection at last come to say, it was for honors
sake, and of form, not necessity, that they were subjects.

The Libeller proceeds to show, that Monarchy cannot permit the requisites
necessary to society. That the will of one man in Government is contrary to
freedom. And why not the will of five hundred to the freedom of the rest, as
much as that one? These men think that their clamor against the power of one
man hes a great influence upon the ignorant people, which might have had some
belief before they had tried their new Masters. If we look upon the most
ancient stories of the world, we find the people both in peace, and war
commanded by one man, nature teaching the necessity of one general in an
Army, and the Government, which God himself appointed to his people was by one
man, and as moses was at first, so were his successors, and the kings after
Saul, and David, and this Libeller can speak nothing of this power of one man,
but must censure, and vilify Gods own institution, he offers nothing against
Monarchy but what hes equal opposition to Parliament, and all forms of
Government, for the peoples good, for which he says the king has his rights,
will as soon become a pretense for Rebellion against any Rulers, as kings.

His denial, that the King is not greater then his Parliament, is only
opposinge his bare word to all sense, and reason, for does the greater petition
the less, and yet the Parliament constantly petition the king.

He says the King can do noe wrong. And have not they then, that pretend he
had done wrong committed disobedience, and wrong?

The King can do noe right but in his Courts. And if they be his Courts, and
his deputies, and do all in his name, does it not follow, that it is his
doing? And though the kings sit not ordinarily in their Courts, yet they have
often sat in several Courts, and in Parliament the King himself gives
orders, as appears by the Presidents of all times, and wherefore did the
Parliament prefer their petition of right to the King, and importuned his
answer, if he had noe power to do right, but by his Courts? But what
concerns the administration of Justice by deputies is not peculiar to England,
but to all other Kingdoms.

Without his Courts he is noe King. And yet they are his Courts, and cannot
sit, but by his grant.

If the King do wrong in the highest degree, he must do it, as a Tyrant, not
as a King of England. But he is still King of England, though a T^rant, and if
subjects may judge their King, the ordinary acts of soveraigntie will be wrong in
the highest degree.

If he cannot, as one greater, give often to the Parliament, as the Libeller
supposes, and that it may be termed the Courtesy of England to ask any thing
of the King. They would not have importuned the Acts, that have passed this
Parliament, nor have used their Iron flaile to obtain them, and by his rule
subjection is noe more the Courtesy of England, then all other Countries,

We never forced him to part with his conscience, but it is he, that would have
forced us to part with ours, and does he that refuses the demand of another,
force his conscience, that demands? Does the Kings denial force his subjects
consciences, because they force themselves to Rebel? and enforce him to say
what they will have him.

The Authors descant upon the Kings words of the incommunicable Jewel of his
conscience discovers, how he has exposed his own to the flattery, and
slaverie of his Masters, and had he thoughts of conscience he would not have
valued it at the basest price.

The breeding of Most kings has ever been sensual, and most humoured. He
speaks it of his own sense, and inclination to such base offices. Kings have
greatest cause to avoyde such breeding, and persons of such condition.

The kings dissent from his whole kingdom is a supposition of that, which
never was, and were impossible ever to happen, but should it happen, they that
are governed must submitt to the governor, and that by all the Rules of
divine, and humane law.

The Libeller saying the king preferrs his love of truth before the love of his
people the Kings words are, the love I have of my peoples place has great
influence upon me, but the love of truth, and inward peace has more. And who
thinks not, that it ought to have so? For his search of truth, he had gone
amiss, if he had rested on those propounders, which the Libeller prescribes
him. And that unaccountable Prerogative, which the Libeller says is the truth
he loves, would have been judged a truth by the Libeller, if he had retained
either fear of God, or love to his Country.

It is our ill hap, that three kingdoms should be pestred with one conscience,
which scrupled to grant what the Parliament advised him. But it was the
misery of the three kingdoms, that a faction of depraved men, that had cast
away conscience should oversway the Parliament, and demand graunts for their
own ambition against the kingdom.

These scruples to many he says seem pretended, to others upon as good
grounds may seem real. And to this it seems the Libeller inclines, for noe
reason will permit, that he should suffer so much upon a pretense of
conscience.

It was the just judgment of God, that he, who was so cruel, and remorseles
to other men's consciences, should have a conscience so cruel to himself. And
were not they, that were so cruel to his conscience, condemned by their own
being herein the instruments of hell to afflict the consciences of others, but
these miscreants can sport themselves with their own si^s, and others,
sufferings. Has he made as much as a pretense of the Kings cruelty to any man's
innocence.

The Libeller recites, that the King said he thought fit to deny some things in
honor, and Policy, though he could approve them, which is not at al said by
the King, but that some things, which a King might approve, yet in honor, and
Policy might be denied at some time to some men. And who doubts it, can there
be a want of such considerations in a King?

Good Princes thought it their happiness to be always granting. How could
that be, if it be true, which he says they had nothing to grant? But good
subjects never demanded that, which should make their King unable to grant
any more.

He remembers himself now, that good things were to be granted for the things
sake, indifferent things for the peoples sake, and he has made it his
continued Theme, that the King could grant nothing in favor, but all was
necessary in Justice, and it is apparent, that the kings large concessions
invited these ungrateful Rebels to make those shameless demands, which
themselves knew noe king in honor, Policy, and Justice could grant.

Undoubtedly his Coronation oath binds him to a general, and implicit
consent to whatever the Parliament desired. And then undoubtedly the king must
be in worse condition then any subject, for noe man but he is bound to such a
blind obedience, and it is a strange blindenes in this man to offer such a
thing to be believed, which himself holds incredible, for he says, the Kings
oath cannot bind him against necessary reformation. And can it then bind him
to make wicked laws, which must be reformed? Is the Parliament infallible, and
may they not make ill laws? What is the reason, that the Libeller, and his
Sectaries would not give obedience to Acts of Parliament upon pretense of
conscience, and ought the king to consent to such laws, as the subjects ought
not to obey?

The King ought not to vie wisdom with the Parliament, and why then do the
Libeller, and his Sectaries vie wisdom with all former Parliaments?

Any of the Parliament may as far excel him in the gift of wisdom, as he
them in place, and dignity. But its very unlike, and near to impossible,
especially, if we look to the experience of all times, and it is often found,
that a King is wiser, then all his Council; And though the libeller say sure
it was not he, meaning the King: as wise men, as any of his Council, or
Parliament thought it was he, and never good subjects contended with their King
for that comparison.

The king says, that that were, as if Sampson should have consented to put out
his eyes, that the Philistines might with more safety mock, and abuse him. And
this says the Libeller out of an unwise, or pretended fear of scorn for
yiedling to his Parliament, he gives cause of suspicion, that he made a scorn
of his Regal oath. Could any man suspect, that his Regal oath bound him to
such a dispicable slavery, that a king should be in greater bondage to his
Parliament, then any vassal to a Lord, a king might justly scorn such an
oath, that would make him scorned by all, when he had taken it, but the
Libeller had noe better answer, and therefore retreates to his Common refuge
of insignificant repetition.

The King says to exclude him from all power of denial seems an arrogance,
The Libeller adds in the Parliament he means, and asks, what in him then to
deny against the Parliament. It is no arrogance to deny in him, that is asked,
but arrogance in him, that asks, to receive noe denial.

The king says its least of all becomminge those, that make their addresses in
a humble, and loyal way of petitioning, who by that confess their
inferioritie, which oblidgeth them to rest, if not satisfied, yet quieted with
such an answer, as the will, and reason of the superior thinks fit to
give. To this the Libeller says, petitioning in better English is noe more
then requesting, or requiring. And is it not good English to call our prayers
pititions, and is it better English to say we require, when we pray, and is
requesting, and requiring the same in good English? Is the petitioning of his
new Masters requesting, or requiring?

Men require not favors only, but their due, and that not only from
superiors, but equals, and inferiors. Its the first time, that such
requiring of favors was heard of, and a sorry inference, that because men
require of ^qualls, they may of superiors, and that there is noe difference
between superiority of Government, and superiority in fortune, or Title.

It was called, petitio consulatus, when the noblest Romans went about, and
begged that dignity of the meanest plebeians naming them man by man. But might
not those, to whom they went, deny their petition? Could they require their
election, as due, and was their begging, requiring? He would willingly make
badd English out of good Lattyn, though good Lattin may be noe good manners
from a subject to his king, and it is absurd in Government for any to pray,
that ought to command? and the Libeller seems distracted that would have
petitioning requiring, and prove it by the signification it has of begging.

They petitioned not, because all of them were inferior, but because he was
superior to any of them. But why then do they petition in their politic
Capacity as a Parliament? He tells us at last, it was for fashions sake more
then duty. But why then did they profess it to be their duty? He tell^ us
the Mysteries of their Religion, their professions, and promises are
Ceremonies, their submissions for fashion, this is the doctrine of cut throats.

By plain law cited before, the Parliament is his superior. And why had he
not brought in petitio principy, as well as petitio consulatus using it so
often, and that in good English is begging the question. Doubtless he thinks,
that some believe it is plain law, because he says so, but such, as read
his book find he understands not law, nor reason, and will not speak the
truth, he understands

It were a mad law, that would subject reason to supcrioritie of place. And
does not himself say it, that the Parliament is superior, and therefore the
kings reason must be subject to it? and is not he mad, or senseles?

He returns again to his invective against Monarchy, and one man's will, and
so its only the kings Crime, that he was a Monarch, and if the King be not
bound in a blind obedience to all, that the Parliament requires, we must all
be slaves, a proper inference, and upon this he concludes, that petitioning was
but form, because he does not like the Kingly Government.

It cannot be so absurd to bind the King to a blind obedience as to confine
the Parliaments reason to the will of one man. Much more absurd to bind the
King, and leave subjects vnconfined.

That the King did notbing, but what was opposite to his professed interest,
cannot be supposed, but in his concessions to the late Parliament, and we find
by sad experience, that nothing is more ruinous to the Kingdom, then a power
in the Parliament over the King, and they have been so far from a power to
confine the exorbitancie of Kings, that those illegal conventions, which acted
the Tragedies of some Kings were but the stales to usurpers, and molded to
their will.

That the King called them young statesmen he imputes to arrogance. Doubtless
the King might have said much more, then what he did, that most part of these
propounders were young statesmen, Is there a man in England, that doubts it, if
he regard either age, or experience, how they have governed themselves, and the
Kingdom all men see, who from so great tranquillity have turned it into a
lamentable combustion, and despised the Kingdoms interest both at home, and
abroad, that Phaetons miscarriage was never so answered by the practice of
any rash, and precipitate medlers in affairs of state, as these usurpers, and
as they drove furiously with Iehu, so they practiced his hypocrisy, that
loved the Kingdom better then the commands of God, and departed not from the
sins of Jeroboam, though he pretended Zeal for the Lord, and that omen of
confusion from such fury, and madness, his Majest: prayed God to divert, but the
Libeller is pleased with his own prognostickes, and makes augury a warrant for
any villainy, though the wickedness of his Masters may give just occasion to
think, their vengeance sleeps not.

He comes now to dictate law, and tumbling of his repetitions, that the
Parliament sit not, as subjects, but superiors, called not by him, but by the
law. And does not this man know the Parliament says all this is false, and
that they are his subjects, and called by his writ. Surely this Libeller takes
pleasure in outfacing all truth, otherwise he would not use such absurd, and
palpable falsities, and that after himself had said the king was trusted with
the summoning, and dissolving of Parliaments.

Unreasonable desires might be unexpected by the king, and denied. We may see,
that Iehues fury, and Phaetons rashness were not ill remembered to these men,
that held the enforcing of old laws, repairing of injuries, moderate desires
of reformation, so contemptible, that nothing, but the rooting up of the
foundation of Government could be a remedy for the kingdom, whose great
prosperity was their greatest greivance, and all those good laws, which he
commends were vseles, and to noe purpose.

That they, which came to the Parliament had no authority to redress
greivances, but to desire the redress, was acknowledged a truth by the late
Parliament, before their insole^ce was confirmed by the kings concessions.

That their Fathers made as vast alterations to free themselves from ancient
Popery is much mistaken, for whoever looks into the reformation of Religion in
England shall find, that it moved from the head, and that the Parliament
conformed themselves unto the Counsels taken by the king, and made not the
alterations the Libeller supposes. Alterations were made, where corruptions had
entered into doctrine, or practice, but it was very far from esteeming the
primitive Church, a time of superstition, and plucking up by the roots, what
ever was planted in the first ages of the Church. Sectaries are not to be
judges of what varies from Scripture, their opinions arising from disobedience,
must needs be full of error, and schism, and his Majest: had good reason to
prefer the doctrine, and practice of the primitive Church before any modern
opinion of reformation, and as all the pregnant, and solid reasons of the
Chnrches beyound the seas wrought less with the faction in Parliament, then
the Tumults, and rabbles, so far less with this Libeller, that defends a
schism from them all under the divided Conventicles of Independancy, and a
crew of ignorant, and irreligious Hobgoblins that eat the fat of robbery, and
oppression. And he here pretends the example of all the reformed Churches
against Episcopacie, and afterward confesses the Lutherans, who are the
greater part of a contrary practice.

The falsehood, and giddines of their oracles are more ridiculous, the^ ever
were the superstitious pilgramages of blind votaries. he, that thus reprehends
the kings oppositio^ to the change of Church Government, while he strives for
innovation exclaimes against it, as a Crime, for he says they would vindicate
the Government of the Church, innovated, and corrupted, he should have showed
from what time it was corrupted.

The king says, such, as were looked upon before as factious in the state, and
Schismatieall in the Church demanded not only tollerations for themselves in
their vanity, noveltie, and confusion, but also an extirpatiou of that
Government, whose rights they had a mind to invade. And the Libeller asks,
was this man ever likely to be advised, who setts himself against his chosen
Councillors, and censures the Government of other protestant Churches as bad,
as any Papist. Certainly such Councillors were very unfit to advise, that
were so ill qualified, such as the law judges offenders are incapable to
judge of law, and that such were these demaunders is evident to al men, that
know the laws, and Government of England. There are noe Protestant Churches,
that think their Government censured, if others differ from it, in any
particular, but they will hold it a Schismatic insolence in any to endeavor
to alter a Government well settled upon pretense to introduce another against
the will of the king. It imports not any contempt of the kingdom, if such, as
they chose be found either defective, or false, and to engage the kingdom in
all the impieties, that men act, which are chosen by them is as absurd, as
vainly pretended by the Libeller who will make a faction prevalent by Tumults,
and sedition to be the kingdom, and the king should have had his kingdom in
great contempt, if he had taken such a faction for the kingdom.

He draws an Argument from the penalty of being a Christian under the
heathens, and a Protestant under Papists. And surely had they sought to
introduce their Religion with the destruction of the Civil state, such a fact
would have merited the name of treason, but their course was contrary to these
Sectaries, who sought only to enjoy the liberty of their conscience, not to
enforce others.

That our savior coming to reform his Church was accused of an intent to
invade Caesar's right, as good a right, as ever the Prelate Bishopps had, the
one being gotten by force, the other by spiritual usurpation. Helps not the
Sectaries, for our savior was innocent of that false accusation, declaring his
kingdom not to be of this world, and acknowledged Caesar's right, bidding the
people to give unto Caesar the things, that were Cesars, but this man's prophanes
would have the accusation true, and lawful to invade Cesars right from the
false accusation of our saviors, and blasphemously avowes invading of the
Bishopps rights, because one better then cesars, for to what other purpose does
he compare the rights of Caesar, and the Bishopps, unless to justify their
dealinge with the Bishopps. And accuse our savior for intending the like to
Caesar?

The right of the Prelate Bishopps was gotten by spiritual usurpation. Could
any Jew, Turk, or Pagan speak more reproach fully against Christiaintie, that
the calling of those men, who were so eminent for suffering, and Martidome,
and gathering the Christian Church throughout the world was a spiritual
usurpation?

The objection or to his Majest: repeating the arguments from law, antiquity,
Ancestors, prosperity, and the like was very improper from him, whose
repititions of Tyrany, slavery, single voice, consent of the kingdom, and such
like have blotted so great a part of his book, and he, that would bind the
king to follow the Example of other Churches will exclude antiquity, and the
primitive Church, and authorize the schism of innovating Sectaries, because
Papists have used Arguments against them.

The king says, had he two houses sued out their livery from the wardship of
Tumults, he could sooner have believed them. But says the Libeller it
concerned them first to sue out their livery from his encroaching Prerogative,
The law allows noe livery from Royal Prerogative, but judges them Rebels
that seek it.

The Character set on them, that hunt after faction with their hounds the
Tumults, the Libeller has justified by his defense.

Its noe shame for a King to be a pupil to the Bishopps, whose calling it is
to give him spiritual Council, but it were madness to be a laquay to such me^,
who take upon them to judge of the callings in the Church of God, which have
noe calling to it, much more to a rabble, whom the Libeller himself holds
extravagant.

That nimrod was the first, that hunted after faction could never be told by
the Bishopps, much less, that he was the first, that founded Monarchy. The
Bishopps could have named a more ancient foundation in Adam, and Noah. They
find the hunters after faction by Tumults of a latter dale, Corah, and his
Company, that Rebelled against Moses, and Sheba, that spoke to the Tumults,
what part have we in David, or portion in the son of Jesse? and they find
them in the cursed Jews, that hunted by the Tumults against our Savior. In
Demetrious, and his Craftsmen against the Apostles, and in Alexander the Copper
Smith against St. Paul, and that's the game, which Rebels in all times hollowed
to, and the Mungrell sort never fail them, and these, that hunt with such
hounds preserve beasts of prey to devour the quiett, and profitable.

Certainly Parliaments made laws before Kings were in being, which must have
better authority then his reason to prove; We find kings making laws before
ever we read of Parliaments, and in Commonwealths we find their law makers
were single men, as Licurgus, Solon, and diverse others.

The kings holding his Crown by law, does not imply another law maker then the
king, who first made that law, whereunto the whole people were subject, but he,
that so lately blamed repetitions unseasonably falls into his old rode of
disputing against Monarchy, which he pretends to decline.

It has been anciently interpreted the presaging sign of a future Tyrant to
dream of copulation with his Mother. Here is a conceit plucked in by head,
and shoulders. Whereof was it a sign in Junious Brutus, that was directed by
the oracle to kiss his Mother, his succeeding act was the expulsion of the
kings, and change of the Government, was that less then Tyrany, or not so
presaged by the oracle, as well as a dream? Parliaments can be noe Mothers to
kings, that are created by kings. The king is by the law of England Father of
the Country, and the life, and soul of the law, but the Libeller will find
out a step Mother an Athalia to destroy the seed Royal, and set her
meestuous brood upon the throne, for these dreams were the delusions of some
prime Rebels, and could not allude unto just Title, but conceits are grown
low, when such dreams must be fetched in for reasons.

And from his dreams, it is not strange, he should fancy allusions (which
himself says are ordinary of the King to the sun) of force to swell up
Caligula to think himself a God. And because these Rebels can not be Gods,
they will be Devils.

The King says, these propositions are not the joint, and free desires of both
houses, next that the choice of many members was carried by faction. He says
Charles the fifth against the Protestants in Germany laid the fault upon some
few. And what is that to the faction in England? If they be not the joint
desires of both houses, as it was not, ought the King to take it for the advice
of Parliament, and forbear to show the fraud, because Charles the fifth said
the like upon another occasion.

The Court was wont to tamper with Elections, and he says noe faction was then
more potent. And yet he affirms they prevayled not, where then was their
potencie?

Because the king says, he cannot swallow such Camells of sacrilege, and
Injustice, as others do, The Libeller says, he is the Pharisee, up, and
down, is not as other men are. Is it Pharisaisme to profess with the Prophett
David the dislike of them, that follow superstitious vainties. Because the
Pharisee swallowed Camells, be such men Pharisees, that profess they will not?
and because the Sectaries pretended conscience of Ceremonies like the Pharisees
washing, the outside, while they devour the Estates of other men without
remorse, are they not Pharisees? and are they only, that profess they cannot
swallow such Camells Pharifees? this is a new found Pharisee.

The three Realms all most perished for want of Parliaments. We have seen
how near perishing they are by a Parliament, which has committed more
Injustice since it began, then all our stories have remembered for five hundred
years before.

The Libeller has found out a new kind of sacrilege, for he endures not to
have Church robbing called sa^riledge, and that is to bereave a Christi in
conscience of liberty for the narroumes of his own conscience. And by what
Engine is this sacrilege committed, does he, that abstaines for conscience
sake bereave another man's conscienc of liberty?

He thinks to take away superfluous wealth from the Clergy is not sacrilege
for that serves, as an excuse for their theft in taking from others what they
pretend ill used, and we may see the love these Sectaries have unto the goods
of the Church, that extenuate their impiety by pretending, that such men most
oppose that wickedness, whose righteousness, in other matters has been least
observed. And these are noe Pharisees, that traduce the opposers of their
sacrilege for want of righteousness in other matters, this is their new
righteousness, that allows none holy, but their own gang, and nothing unholy,
that they practice, and therefore they will not see the Kings virtues, least
they be driven to confess their own wicked Actions against him.

Upon the REBELLION IN IRELAND.
IT Could not possibly be so secrett from whence it sprung, as the contriver
supposed. And if he knew the contrivers, perhaps he might know, whether they
supposed it would be secrett, for they that pretended to be the principal
contrivers avowed it openly.

It cannot be imaginable, that the Irish guided by so many subtle, and
Italian heads should so far have lost the use of reason, and Common sense, as
not supported by other strength then their own, to begin a war so desperate
against England, and Scotland. And truly it may seem, that they, who thought
themselves wiser then Italian heads had lost reason, and Common sense, who
letting lose, or rather cutting asunder the Reins of Government, which held in
that kingdom to a people naturally disaffected to those, unto whom they were
subject, invited them to that Rebellion, first in a popular fury cutting of the
Ld. Lieutenant, to gratify them, and then leaving the Kingdom without a
successor, and preparing the way to a Civil war in England, stirring up
jealosies against the King, and weakening his Authority, and composing
Apologies for Rebellion, which would serve the Irishe pretenses, as well as the
diferences in England their designs, and those Italian heads saw as much
advantage from our broils, as want of aid from other nations, who were busied
to the utmost in their own most necessary concernements; And therefore the
libeller vainly inferrs authority for assistance promised from England, unless
it were from the faction in the houses, there being noe visible strength then
in any other, and there need not, nor could be any private assurance unto the
Irish Rebels from any other, but that faction, and it is most apparent, that
they neglected all means to remedy that mischeife, busying themselves wholly
in laying the ground work of the Rebellion in England, which they held their
most necessary concernement, and this was ground enough for Italian heads to
stir up that Rebellion.

The libeller proceeds upon his suppositions, as if they were granted truths,
and he would insinnate an equivocation in what the King says, That the sea of
blood is enough to drown any man ineternall both infamy, and misery, whom
God shall find the malicious Author, or instigatour of that effusion. Because
he says the Rebels themselves will not confess, that any blood was shed by
them maliciously, bu^ for the Catholic cause, or Common liberty. Therein
they differ not from the Libeller, and his English Rebels, for they will not
confess any of the blood they shed to be maliciously, but for Religion, and
Common liberty, and thence the Libeller learnes his skill to cast suspicions
upon the plainest expressions of others, he well descerned, that the King used
the word malicious for aggravation, not restriction, and his observation was
captious, when he read in the following Period, that the King affirms, nothing
could be more abhorred of him being so full of sin against God, disloyalty to
himself, and destructive to his subjects, and calls God to wittnes, that as he
could with truth wash his hands in innocence, as to any guilt in that
Rebellion, so he might wash them in his te^res, as to the sadd apprehension he
had to see it spredd so far, and make such waste. And the Libeller himself
after so impertinent, and malicious an insinuation confesses he denies, it
both here, and elsewhere.

But he says there is in it no such wide disagreeme^t from the scope of his
former Counsels, we are sure there could not be agreement with the scope of
his former Counsels. It was agreeable to the Counsels of Rebels to defame
the King with this aspersion, and it is not strange, that untruths may be
affirmed in three Kingdoms in reguard of the contrivers, that so
industriously spread them. But let us hear his reasons or reports. Its most
certain, that the King was ever friendly to the Irish Papists. And its
certain, that what he says is salfe, but what is that to their Rebellion
against himself, or destroying his Kingdom?

But his certainty is, that the King in his third year against the plain
advice of Parliament, like a kind of Pope sold them many indulgences for
money. And was he a kind of Pope to take their penalties of them, which the
law enacted for their recusancy, was that Pope like? That the King might not
receive the penalties, which the law gave him, or take compositions, where the
whole could not be had was never against the advice of Parliament, but this is
a very long stride from his third year to the beginning of the Rebellion, but
how does he hang this together.

The advancing the Popish party he says, but instances in noe particular, nor
for negotiating underhand by Priests, which were as impertinent to an inference
of the Kings friend-ship, or causing the Rebellion, as the use of such persons
by Ministers of State, though of different Religion.

He engaged the Irish Papists in a war against the Scotch protestants, there
was never popish engagement against the Scotts for the King, if in the kings
Army raised in that kingdom, there were Papists, it was without the engagement
of their party, but their engagement by alleagiance to their King, and whence
does it follow, that because the King raised an Army in Ireland he must
therefore raise the Rebellion in Ireland? and as its well known, that the
keeping up of that Army would probably have prevented the Rebellion of Ireland,
and that it was disbanded long before that Rebellion brake forth; so they,
which complained so much of that Army, and importuned to have it disbanded,
thereby prepared the way to their own Rebellion as groundless, and cruel, as
that of the Irish.

The summer before that dismal October a Committee of active Papists, all
since in the head of the Rebellion, (yet Sr. Hardresse waller was one of them)
were in great favor at whitehall, and admitted to private consultations of
the King, and Queen. Then all Companies of Traitors are Committees from the
example of the late Parliament. But he was loath to say, they were a Committee
(as they were) from the lower house of Parliament in Ireland, which kept
correspondence with the faction of the English Parliament, and made addresses
to them, and were encouraged by them in their proceedings with the King, and
their coming over was wholly to serve the design of the faction in England.

But noe mean matters were the subject of these conferences, for he gave away
his peculiar right to more then five Irish Counties for an inconsiderable Rent.
But it was not his right of soveraigntie, neither was this, which he calls noe
mean matter a conference about the Rebellion, and this peculiar right, which
this Libeiler accuses the King for parting with not to Papists peculiarly, but
subjects in general, the accusers of the Earl of Strafford charged him for
asserting to the King, and that inconsiderable Rent was in their judgment
excessive, these are the colors of Justice, and truth, which these Rebels put
on their Calumnies.

They departed not till within two months before the Rebellion. Rebels
ordinarily disgiuse their intentions, and therefore such might frequent the
Court, as the faction in Parliament pretended affection, and duty, while they
plotted to destroy the King, and now the Libeller resorts to his Scotch Author,
who he says declares. What should move the King to those close meetings, he
that beleives Sanders, Carries, and other Papists in their virulent forgeries
against Queen Elizabeth, may likely give credit to the Libeller, and his
friend the Scotchman, and take up infamous Libells for true stories.

The Libeller flies from hence to one of his common haunts, the design of
bringing up the English, and Scotch Army, and thinks it noe repetition, which
he had so often obtruded, and he inferrs, that because the King could not
prevayle with them, he betakes himself to the Irish, who had in readiness an
Army of eight thousand Papists, and a Committee here of the same Religion. But
what to do to kill one another? If the King sought to make use of the Irish,
that rebelled, he might more advantagiously have done it, then by cutting one
another throats, and had they intended him assistance, they would not have
consumed themselves against his subjects there, and how could he transport that
Army from Ireland, that was disbanded before ever the Rebellion brake forth,
and the Committee departed two months before.

He tells us from his friend the Scotchman, that there were they, who thought
now was the time to do service for the Church of Rome against the Puritant
Parliament. Its very likely there were they, who thought the Puritan faction in
Parliament had done more to the advantage of the Church of Rome by the
embroyling of England, then ever had been done since the reformation, and they
might well think it a fit time to attempt any design against the Kingdom.
And did not the Libeller think, that there are among the vulgar such
capacities, as receive legends, and Romanses for true stories, he would not so
grossly produce such discourses of five Counties given to the Irish, and four
offered to the Scotch, And of like stuff is his mention of the Kings attempt to
pervert the Scotch Army from their way homeward, and the plot, which he has
taken from his Scotch Colleague to remove out of the way such, as were most
likely to withstand, or not further his designs. With this liberty of
invention do these Traitors seek to mask their villainy

That a Commission under the great seal of Scotland commanded this
Rebellion. Was taken up after the pretense of the great seal of England was
detected of falsitie, and as this great seal of Scotland has as much untruth,
so it has noe more color, there being noe possibility for the King to use
that seal, not at all in his power to such a Commission.

The sending of the Ld. Dillon is of the same stamp, what the Irish did is
easily granted, but the falsehoods of this Libeller, and his friend the
scotchman are no mysteries of iniquity, but open, and detected cheates, and
one quotes the authority of the other, as if they were strangers met by
chance, and make Libelling their work to distract the people, and yet from
these devices the Libeller will conclude, that the King cannot be doubted to be
Author, or instigatour of that Rebellion. It had been ridiculous to cite a
gazett, but a branded stigmaticke, infamous. If his reason be moved by such
Arguments, it is the less wonder, that his language, and practice is foe
corrupt, and he may reckon himself among that rabble of the vulgar, he so
much despises.

These Testimonies likelyhoods, evidences, and apparent Actions, which he
mentions in the declaration of July 1643. Are of as little credit, as his friend
the Scot^hman. And there is not a more evident conviction of malefactors, then
their declarations against the king are of the guilt of those, that contrived
them, setting forth their duty, which they dissembled, and condemning their
actions, which they disavowed.

It is not credible, that the Irish Rebels would be foe far from humanity,
as to stander him being so well received by him at Oxford. If a man had wanted
an proof of the Libellers absurdity, he might here be furnished by himself,
that draws an Argument from the humanity of the Irish, whose barbaritie, and
Treachery is so great a part of his accusation against the king. They who
were received at Oxford upon offer of submission, were very far from pretense
of such a Commission, and it may be as well concluded they had a Commission at
Oxford, as before, because they were there, and as well concluded, that they
never Rebelled, as that they made noe salfe pretenses of their Rebellion.

The king need not bring proofs against a groundles accusation, that
contains not any evidence of fact, and a single denial by all laws is
preferred before such a charge, and it is as likely, that the Rebels in
Ireland should pretend his Seal, as those in England his authority, and noe
man doubts of the invaliditie of a Rebels pretense.

This Chapter is not without witness of his good affection to the Rebels, which
he collects from tha^ the king says, they were less in fault, then the
Scotts, from whom they might allege to have fetched their imitation, making
no difference, says the Libeller, be^eene men, that rose necessarily to defend
themselves, which noe Protestant Doctrine ever disallowed against them, who
threatened war, and those who began a voluntary, and caus^les Rebellion. If the
Irish made war not to be restrained from their Religion, had they not the same
cause, and the same pretense of defending themselves, as the other pretended
for refusing the Common prayer book, and expelling Bishopps? Where lies the
odds? Is it Protestant Doctrine, that they may defend themselves, and Papists
may not, and that Protestants may Rebel for Religion, Papists may not? That
were very much to the credit of Religion, but the Libeller will not acknowledge
the protestants, nor their Doctrine, who maintain it to be unlawful for
subjects to defend themselves against the supreme power, though Tyranically
abused, and there is noe need to fly to the Parliaments autho^itie, if
subjects may take Arms against their king upon pretense of defending
themselves.

The Libeller well knows the just indignation the Protestants abroad have
expressed for this scandal, the king names not the Scotts, but thinks, that
their blame must needs be greater, whose Actions the Irish had to allege for
their imitation, by how much protestant principles are more against Rebellion,
then those of Papists such, as infer good affection to the Irish from such
premises will easily make vain, or malicious rumors strong proofs.

The King says, he has the greatest share of dishonor, and loss, by what is
committed. The Libeller, as before makes this noe Argument, because every one,
that offends God, or his neighbor has the greatest share of loss and
dishonor in the end, and have they not worldly ends, in offending God, and if
these ends were not sought by them, they would not offend God?

He pretended before, that this was a politic contrivance of the King, and
now he would have it an act without design. Does he think, that the malicious
reports of him, and his Scotchman are of weight to make a man suspected of an
act directly tending to his own undoing, and would the King instigate the
Irish Rebellion for his own ends to have the assistance of the Irish, which by
such engagement could not assist him. Though presumptions are noe convincing
proofs, yet they are more credible, then suspicions, or reports. It is a
strong Argument for the peoples confidence in their King more then in other
men, because his interest lies cheifely in the common welfare of his subjects,
and it is hard to believe, that a King will knowingly do any thing against
that interest, and to his own loss, and dishonor, and whenever any have
offended in that kind, the proof of it has been more apparent, then the
authority of rumors, and Libells, but here the act it self cannot have any
possibility of concurrence to the Kings ends.

It too notoriously appears in another section, which he Mangles, but shall
here have it whole. The King says, it is thought by many wise men, that the
preposterous rigor, and unreasonable severitie, which some men carried before
them in England was not the least incentive, that kindled, and blew up into
those horrid flames the sparks of discontent, which wanted not predisposed
fuel for Rebellion in Ireland. The Libeller says that these some men are the
Parliament. And if the Rebels had feed an Advocate, he could hardly have
dazzled better. Truly the Libellers too notoriously does not amount to a dazzling
of any eyes from descerning his vain confidence. Does any thing herein excuse
a Rebellion, that speaks only of what succeeded it? And if the kings censure of
the proceedings of such, as managed the business against the Rebels, show an
affection to the Rebels then certainly most Princes, that have had wars in
Ireland were very guilty of that affection, that used like censures, but what
the king says here was spoken in Parliament by diverse members, who
disadvised the preposterous severitie, that was propounded, and afterward
proceeded in, and it will rest an indelible blemish of a rash, and unadvised
Council in those men, that in the beginning of a Rebellion would put a whole
nation into despair, and fear of extirpation.

That their wonted oppressions, as they conceived should rather have made them
against the King, then the Parliament is easily believed, for its known to all
the world they did rise against the king upon pretense of regaining their
national liberties from the English oppression, as they called it, and since
the Libeller sees so apparent an Argument of their rising against the king,
its blind madness to suspect their rising for the king. The Parliament then
pretended to act for the king, and that the Rebellion was against him, not
themselves, but the man deserts his Arguments, and falls to his old common
place, and will suspect the king, because he used the Prelaticall Religion, and
to force it upon others made Episcopal, Ceremonial, and common prayer book
wars. Such men, as made wars, and raised Rebellion to take away the order of
Bishopps, Ceremonies, and book of Common prayer established by laws in the
Reigns of best Princes with the advice of the most eminent confessors, and
Martyrs of the age, wherein they lived conformable to the Scripture, and purest
times of the Church, declare to the whole world, that they have neither shame,
truth, nor Religion, and are justly stigmatized for making not only Episcopal,
Ceremonial, and common prayer book wars, but Antichristian, and Diabolical
Rebellion.

That the Papists knew these wars were their wars may easily be believed, for
they must needs apprehend advantage from the Rebellion But its well known,
that the Papists are more jealous of Episcopacie, Ceremonies, and book of
common prayer, as they stand r^formed in the Church of England, then of the
Directory, Extemporall devotions, independent, or Pres biterall platformes,
that have noe foundation in the Scripture, or the doctrine, or practice of the
ancient Church, but what is this to the preposterous rigor, and uncharitable
fury, that he would justify? Does he mean, that the extirpation of the Irish
was the sole way to suppress open Idolatry, and is this what we may do
Evangecally to be their Reformers? Is blood, and massacre Evangelicall
reformation, and is kill, and reform the same thing? As that rigor observed
by his Majest: was altogether vnpolitique, so if it were intended in order to
Religion, it was most abominable, such Massacres being the designs of
irreligious persecutours, not Evangelicall Reformers, who though they fear not
their adversaries, yet will not give them cause of scandal, nor desperation,
and such, as make destruction their Reformation, show they fear men, whom
they seek to kill, not God, whom presumptuously, and hipocritically they
pretend to serve.

His instance of King James is as impertinent, as scurrilous, that after the
powder plot King James durst never do other, then equivoiate, and colleague
with the Pope, and his adherents. Does this viper believe, the Pope, or his
adherents had any such thoughts? Was the writing against the the Pope a
Colloguinge? The many invectives of Popish writers against him signify the
plain contrary; besides the laws made by him against Popish recusants show,
that the Author was in one of his lunatique transes, when he dreamt of that
heckticke trembling.

The retarding, and delays of releife to Ireland against that Rebellion, were
so apparently discovered to proceed from the faction in Parliament, that
there rests not the least color to charge it upon the King. They converted the
subjects money, and other preparations for the releife of Ireland to the
raising of the Rebellion in England, and they hindered the going over of a new
governor into that kingdom, because they would use his help to their
designs at home.

They were diffident to trust the King with an army, and therefore refused his
offer to go in person against the Rebels. It seems they had little compassion
on that people, that preferred their jealosies before their pity, and it is a
plain Treason, and encouragement to that Rebellion to pretend distrust of
their King, and shows they sought their own personal security before the
remedy of that Rebellion, and the safety of the kingdom. His Majest: might
justly find fault with those, who threatened all extreamitie to the Rebels,
and they, that exclude all mercy to every single person, where multitudes are
involved, and such, as followed Absalom with a simple heart, show neither
humanity, nor Christianity, when Fathers Brothers, Wives, and Children were
destroyed by such an occasion, neither is Magistracy, and war under the
gospel giuded by such passions, but by the rules of Christian pity, and such
as give themselves the license of universal Massacres, will not abstain from
embruing their hands in the blood of their Fathers, Brothers, Wives, and
Children, sparing neither ancient, nor suckling, King, nor Priest, defacing,
all Monuments of Christianity, and turning Religion into the discourses of
their hirelings, and all devotion into squint eyes, and disfigured faces, and
erect an Empire in themselves with the slaughter of all, that submitt not to
them.

The repetition of making the war by the King in England, is his Catholicon
against all exceptions, and Gewgawes of the Crown, and Copes, and an^ ^lisses,
and such trinketts, he thinks are names to sublimate his brain sick
Sectaries into their frenetique fit, and make them cry out great are the
Calves of their unknown Religion, whither they contemn the wisdom of God
under the law, and his mercy under the gospel, and will rather wade through the
blood of their Country, then endure power in the King, or decency in the
Church.

There is great difference between the instances of the destruction of the
sichemites, and the disciples calling, for fire from heaven against the City,
that denied lodging, and this of a nation by just war, and execution to slay
whole famelies of them, who had slain whole families before. But where lies
the odds, there was as much threatened to the Irish, as was done to the
sichemites? Though there were a difference between the sins of some, there was
noe difference between the innocence of many, and there is noe difference
between them, that will destroy promiscuously without mercy, where all are not
guilty in the one case, and the other. But why does not the Libeller state his
case right, and insteede of families set down the whole nation, as the truth
was? Did he shrink at the expression of the truth at large, and name families
to diminish the guilt?

That, which was done against the Benjamites, was by Gods revealed will in that
particular Case, and yet there was a remnant reserved of them, that escaped the
present stroke of the war, and they returned again to their possessions.

The Libeller says, he speaks not this, that such measure should be meated to
all the Irish, or as remembering, that the Parliament ever so decreed. But if
they did so, then this shall serve for their justification, for to what end
else is it, that he offers excuses?

To show, that this homily, (meaning it seems the Kings discourse) has more
of craft, and affectation, then sound doctrine. But either it is sound
doctrine, or else the Libeller must justify the contrary, to which he says
that which he speaks is not intended, and that, which he has brought shows,
that the homily he intends is sound Doctrine, and his intended opposition
signifies nothing, but his own corruption.

The King would have some punished, which he says were of least use, and must
of necessity have been sacrifised to his reputation. And can he think, that
the king caused the Rebellion, and yet would punish any for his reputation,
might they not then produce it? and how then could he sacrifise them to his
reputation, which would be more wounded by the punishing of one, then the
sparing of all.

The king says, some were to be pretected upon their submission from the fury
of those, who would soon drown them, if they refused to swim down the
popular stream with them. The Libeller says that fury is applied to the
Parliament. If such were their condition, its not misapplyed.

The Libeller says, he remembers not they had so decreed, and if not, how
could it be applied to them? And wherefore does he except to the soundnes of
the doctrine, if it concerned them not?

Those, who would not swim down the stream are Papists, Prelates, and their
faction. He means not English Prelates, for they have not yet been charged
with the Irish Rebellion, and if he mean the Romish Prelates, it were
superfluous, having named Papists before, and why does he say, that he speaks
not, that such measure should be meated to all the Irish, when he would have
the king esteemed a favourer of the Jrish Rebellion, if he protected any Irish
Papists upon their submission? For he says, by this, who sees not, that he,
and the Irish Rebels had but one aim. And whoever thinks he sees it by this
has neither sight, nor reason, and there is nothing to be seen in the
Libellers inference, but excessive impudence, and falsehood.

The King says, some kind of zeal is not seldom more greedy to kill the
Bear for his skin, then for any harm he has done. This the Libeller renders
our zeal, and would infer from thence, that the Parliament is more bloody in
the prosecution of their Justice, then the Rebels in their cruelty. And by
what construction can he make that good? may there not be by ends in a judge,
and yet his sentence not so bloody, as a malefactors Crime, and he, that
charges a Magistrate with a wrong end in giving a Just sentence, does not
diminish the Crime of the malefactor. Can any rational soul conclude upon
the Kings dislike of irregular proceedings against the Irish, that he excused
their Crime? This is chafe to cast in the eyes of his bleerde Sectaries, for
none else are so purblinde, and there need noe dispute, that the King
perfectly hated the Irish Rebellion, and justly censured the proceeding in that
unseasonable threatening of destruction. The instance of the bears skin was
made by a member of the lower house at the time, when they debated that
business, and yet they then thought it noe favor to the Irish, nor censure of
their own proceedings.

The cessation, which the King made was in favor of the Irish, and without the
advice of Parliament, to whom he had committed the managing of that war. The
King plainly descerned, that the design of the faction in Parliament in
managing the Irish wars was only to draw money from the people under that
pretense to subdue England, and destroy him by taking away al assistance from
him, and thence proceeds their Calumny upon the cessation; and their wilful
neglect, and diversion of succors amidst the reiterated Cries of the
protestants in that Kingdom, the importunity of the Lords Justices, and the
visible growth of the Enemy shows the advantage they made of that Rebellion,
and the King was bound in Justice, and honor to preserve that Kingdom, and in
Christian pity to relieve his distressed subjects, which he could not do
without resuminge the managing of that war, which had been so Treacherously
miscarried by those he trusted, and as he made that cessation by the advice,
and entreaty of his protestant subjects there, so they were sufficient
witnesses of the low condition themselves were in, and the power of the
Rebels.

But the Libeller would prove, that the Protestants there were on the winning
hand, because they kept their own notwithstanding the miss of those forces,
which were landed in wales, and Cheshire, who without difficulty Mastered a
great part of these Countries. The Protestants keeping of their own was by
the benifitt of that cessation, without which they hoped not to keep it, and
those Countries of wales, and Cheshire were not mastered by those forces, as
the Libeller supposes, but protected by them against the Tyrany of the
Rebellion then ontring upon them.

The Declaration, which he vouches for proof is an infamy to the Authors,
containing neither color of proof, nor soundnes of Argument, and of as little
creditt, as his own assertions. In the mean time those forces of the
Protestants, which the king got by that cessation declare to the world, that
the Irish Rebellion crossed his ends, and advanced those of the English Rebels.

The way-laying of provisions was contradicted by such apparent proofs in his
Majest: answeares, that until they make some reply to those particulars, their
clamours will signify nothing but want of matter.

The forces he called over stood him in noe small steed against our maine
forces. That noe way hinders, but that they might be termed handfulls in
respect of the numerous Rebels both in Ireland, and England. The reasons of
the cessation, besides the known evidence of truth, and weight have an
addition of Authority from the Libellers calling them false, and frivolous
without the least show of reason, it being his custom to style truth, and
reason by such Titles.

He reprehends the king for likening his punishments to Jobs Trials, before he
saw them have Jobs endings. And upon the same reason he will not allow the
Trials of the Martirs to have a likeness to Jobs, because the end in respect of
Temporal felicity was not the same.

The king says, he has not leisure to make prolix Apologies, from whence the
libeller concludes those long declarations, and Remonstrances, which he calls
Pamphletts set out in his name were none of his. And is not this a tidy
inference, because the king in prison expecting the execution of the cruel
designs of the Traitors had noe leisure to make prolix Apologies, therefore
the declarations, and Remonstrances published by him, while he was at liberty
were none of his. The king has given sufficient Testimony to stopp the mouth
af a destractour, that noe writings, published in his name were above his
ability. If his declarations were weighty, and just, why are they Pamphletts?
if not why, will not the Libeller believe him the Author whom he seeks to
vilify, but the world knows the declarations in the name of Parliament were
none of theirs, but voted upon the word of a junto by such as had not
capacity, to understand them.

That though the Common saying, that it is Kingly to do well, and hear ill be
sometimes true, yet more frequently to do ill, and hear well by the multitude
of flatterers, that deifie the name of Kings. It can hardly be proved, that
ever evil king had so many flatterers, as the best kings have detractours,
and himself produces instances, how the multitude deified Simon Mountford, and
such popular brovillions against their kings.

For the peace in Ireland, the Justice of it is now apparent, and he, that
pardons Rebels to save the effusion of the blood of his good subjects, shows
greater tenderness to the good, then they, that by endeavoring to exclude all
from mercy, expose them promiscuously to mutual slaughter, and may justly be
judged to look upon both with an indifferent eye, and that neither Justice,
nor pity, but greedy, and rapacious desires carry them to that cruelty.

The King prays at large for the Irish Rebels. It seems Charity for Enemies
is held a sin by these miscreants, otherwise he would not have censured a
prayer so becoming a Christian, that God would not give over the whole stock
of that seduced nation to the wrath of those, whose covetuousnes makes them
cruel, nor to their anger, which is too feirce, and therefore justly cursed.
The King deprecates the Rebellion of Ireland, and in his prayer concludes his
innocence, and that if he had not studied the composing of the differences
says, let thy hand be upon me, and my fathers house. And this the Libeller
calls a solemn Curse, which is his judgment of the Crime, and the assertion of
his innocence. Though God aff^ict his servants, his hand is not against them in
wrath, as this wretch presumes to say, and looks not on that curse, which God
denounces against bloody, and deceitefull men, that pretend his service in the
destruction of his servants.

Upon the calling in of the SCOTTS, and their COMING.
HE, that observes how great a part of this Libellers book his invectives
against Monarchy take up, and how frequently, and impertinently he offers his
exceptions against Kingly Government in excuse of falsehood, and Rebellion, may
well wonder at his exceptions to pretended repetitions, in the Kings book he
enters upon this Chapter with his opinion of the original of Kings to be
servants of the public. And yet the people were subjects to them, and how
far Kings mistake the nature of their office, that think they are Masters of
the people. And yet God gave nations to serve them. Though their power is for
public good, yet they have a peculiar propriety in that power, and Estate,
as private men in their private fortunes, and its more for the peoples good to
be subject, though to an evil King, then to fall to confusion. And if rulers
may not retain their power, because factious multitudes say, that they are but
entrusted for the peoples good, and that it is for the peoples good, that they
yeilde up the sword, they bare it in vain. Such a wooden sword have the
Rebels provided for all Rulers, but themselves, for when they get power by
their swords of steel, or mines of powder the people may not think, that they
shall find such Lords of straw, as they pretend governors of the people ought
to be. We are taught by Scripture, that the people are commanded to hearken,
and obey, not teach, and command, and though his supposition, that Government
is in the people, and that they ordained Kings be vain, and false by the
examples of Scripture, and of most Authenticke histories, yet were it admitted,
that a King came in by the peoples consent, they are not after such submission
Judges of their own obedience, or their Kings power.

It were vain to follow the Libeller in his exceptions to the words of favor,
and gratification, as sounding pride, and Lordly usurpation, as if kings only
had nothing in their power to oblidge men with all, these are the spleenetique
vapors of Rebellious distemper.

For the Kings concessions to the Scotts, either touching Episcopacie, or the
Militia, we shall hear his answer in due time, howsoever the king was not
bound to the same Actions, where Circumstances varied, nor after a fuller
understanding of the nature, and consequence of the things granted, and as his
Majest: professed a cleerer information after these Actions had passed him, so
he evidently saw, that they were more against his subjects good, then his own,
and that insteede of preventing an Arbitrary power, it would have introduced an
arbitrary license, and confusion into the Kingdom, and such men, as prefer
the bondage of popular confusion, or the licentious insolence of many Lords,
are either enchanted with a witch craft of Rebellion, or stupidly benumbed with
a senseles Lethargy.

With what Zeal the Libeller reproves the abuse of Scripture, when he
exclaimes, as if it offended his conscience, we may perceive by the allusion he
makes saying. Ireland was as Ephraim, the strength of his head, meaning the
Kings, Scotland, as Judah was his law giver, but over England, as over Edom he
meant to cast his shoe. Has this man reverence to Scripture, or the Author of
it?

He comes again to accuse the King for persecuting the consciences of
Religious men, a known untruth, yet so much beloved by the Libeller, as he
seems impatient to miss the repetition of it, and with this he joins his
reproving the Kings profession of being an Enemy of those, that forced the
conscience because he had made a war, and lost all, rather then not uphold the
Bishopps. It is an Argument, that he esteemed his conscience, that lost all for
it. But the Libeller says, they were persecuting Bishopps. The King upholding
Bishopps, vpholds not persecution, or abuse, and th e Libellers confounding the
office, and ill exercise of it makes known his want of Argument. The falsehood
of their Calumnies against the Bishopps is sufficiently manifested to the
world, that after so many vehement outcryes they have not proved on such act
of persecution done by any one of them, and not the presons but the office, and
law were the persecution in this man's judgment.

The King obtruded new Ceremonies upon us, upon the Scotts a new Liturgy There
were noe new Ceremonies obtruded by him in England, and this horrid Rebellion
to take away the Ceremonies, and Government legally established, and
continually practiced, under the name of innovations, detects both the fraud,
and outrage of their proceedings. The new leiturgie offered the Scots by advice
of their Bishopps, and Clergy, was an act befitting the care of a King, and
noe man will believe, that it was an offense te their consciences, who made noe
conscience of blood, and Rebellion upon pretense of their conscience, which the
world sees was an hipocriticall straining at a straw, and swallowing a Camel,
and these tender conscience men have written their tenderness of conscience with
the blood of their brethren; which will remain a memorial of their dissembled
sanctity.

What hinderance of the search of truth, he means is not understood, unless he
would have the dreams of mad sectaries confirmed by authority.

He would have the penalties of laws thought persecution of the conscience,
and sectaries the Judges, and says, if himself (meaning the King) and his
learned Churchmen were the obstinate part, should Reformation suffer them to
sit Lording like the great whore? And are sectaries Libells convictions of
Kings, and learned Churchmen, and the clamours of malefactors a sentence
against the Judge? Such is the Government, that must now rule the world, and
Reformation must be an Idol in the hands of a seditious sectarie, whereto the
people must fall down, and such unstable multitudes carried about with every
wind of doctrine are likely to be those many waters, on which the great whore
sits, which has for corruption, and cruelty a great resemblance unto those
false prophetts, that now seduce the people.

These Clergimen were not to bedriven like sheep, but driven out like wolves.
But they are thieves, and wolves, that enter into the sheepefold by violence,
and stealth, and the ambition, and greedines of these wolves will find
occasion to suck the blood, and devour the flesh of the sheep.

The king says, that he beleives the Presbiterie, though proved to be the only
institution of Jesus Christ, were not by the sword to be set up without his
conjent, which is contrary says the Libeller, both to the doctrine, and known
practice of all Protestant Churches, if his sword threaten those, who of their
own accord embrace it. But then it, cannot be set up by the sword, unless his
sword threaten those, that embrace it; And this jugler denies, what the king
says, and yet in effect professes it, and while he enrages the Tumults to set
up their Presbiterie with the sword produces Arguments only for defense. The
reformed Churches profess to follow the ancients in suffering, not associate
themselves to bloody Sectaries in Rebelling. And his next words impert that
private men may not contend with Magistrates, nor use force against them.

Though Christ, and his Apostles being to Civil affairs but private men
contended not with Magistrates, yet when Magistrates themselves, and especially
Parliament come to know Religion, they ought to defend it against any King, or
Tyrant. What is defense to the question in hand of setting up Religion by the
sword without the kings consent? May an inferior Christian Magistrate take
Arms against his superior a Pagan to set up Religion. Is he not as much a
private man as our Savior, and his Apostles, where the Civil power has not
given him a right? And as a Civil right is not imaginable, so the pretense of
a power from Religion is execrable, and false which will not permit an
usurpation upon the Civil right. There may be a King, where there is noe
Parliament, and it is noe more lawful for an inferior Migistrate, or to
Parliament, who are but private men in regard of the Prince, whose deputies
they are to take the sword to set up Religion against the King their
sovereign, then for any private men, and were not the libeller distracted
between evidence of truth, and his own corrupt inclinations, he would not
instance in the name of Magistrates, and Parliament, that but the line before
pretended the power of the people to do the same thing by the doctrine, and
practice of all Protestant Churches, and would make them more public persons,
then their Savior, and his Apostles, he thinks his reviling language of
Tyrany, and bloody Bishopps, and the King their pupil are irrefragable
Arguments in the judgment of his pupills.

There is a large difference between forcing men by the sword to turn
Presbiterians, and defending them, who willingly are so. But then it is
impious to force men to be so, what those wretches did to the King for not
being so, and for not consenting to impose it, upon the kingdom by a law, the
world knows, and the world is wittnes, and they have robbed men of their
possessions by the sword to set up this new Religion.

His charging Covetuousnes, and ambition to be the events of Episcopacy, is
schismatic malice, for Episcopacie in the beginning of the Church was
attended with poverty, and persecution, but the libeller will make Martyrdom
their ambition, and wants their Covetuousnes.

He will have, that English Episcopacie has marks of schism, whether we
look at Apostolic times, or reformed Churches, if he had showed wherein, it
had deserved an answer, but we see what Apostolic times he means, that
will not allow any Church of the world from the time of the Apostles til the
present age, and because the Church of England is not universal, therefore all
Sectaries may pretend themselves the Church.

For the authority of Scripture, he need not take pains to prove it. The
Church of England claims not power over other Churches, but to correct
Schismatickes within her self. The exposition of Scripture may not be received
from arrogant Sectaries against the judgment of the universal Church, and the
King might very well reject such reasons, as they, which offered them, had so
lately before disavowed, and pretended themselves scandalized with the
imputation of such opinions. The greatest number of these pretended Reformers
professed detestation of the opinion of lawfullnes in taking Arms against
their Prince, of the opinion of the vnlawfullnes of Episcopacy, book of Common
prayer, and Ceremonies, and who now would dispute with such men maintaining
these renounced opinions with such bloody vehemency.

It is not for the King to defend the Church otherwise then the Church would be
defended. And what is the Church in the libellers sense, nothing but the crew
of John of Leydons saints, and must the King follow them against the Church,
these are the Divills factours to set up an Idol Religion.

These deceivers talk of the power of the keys, in whose power holy things
are, as if the keys, that Christ gave to his Disciples are transmitted to this
distempered crew, that pretend a power of their own giving.

Their Blasphemous pretense of enthusiasmes has been the wonder, and scorn of
wise men, and that's the spirit which must not be fettered with a negative
voice? But may it not be fettered by the Parliaments negative voice, and why is
it more fettered by the kings then theirs? That which he calls Tyranicall, and
presumptuous in the king, with the same breath justifies in the Parliament, and
yet complains of Tyrany upon the conscience. Such consciences are senseles of
Tyrany, as well, as of sin having given themselves up to the Empire of hell.

The kings negative voice could impose nothing, yet these desperate hipocrites
say, they were compelled to implore the aid of Parliament to remove it from
their consciences. And if the ground of their war were to take away his
negative voice, their pretense of defensive force appears noe other then
violence, and persecution, which they so hipocritically complain of, and such
tender consciences, as feel not salshoods, and Rebellion must be merciless
destroyers of Religion, and Government, as these have proved.

The King had cause to seek aid against Rebellion, and oppression, but that's
noe warrant for Traitors to link themselves by conspira^ies to perform it,
and the King might justly wonder at their confident boasting of Gods
assistance, as if they had the certainty of some Revelation, and flying to the
Scotts succors, while they were so furnished with provisions for war. And now
after all the Libellers railing at Episcopacie Copes, and surplisses, he will
not permit. Arch Presbiterie Classical, Provincial, and diocesine Presbitery
claiming Lordly power, and superintendencie to be imposed upon them. He^res
Babell confounded, and they, that were linkt in disloyalty must part for
Presbitery, and independencie, and will not see the evil spirit, that first
combined them in Rebellion, and now divides them to fight one against another.

A Determination by the best divines in Christendom in a full, and free synod
is he says an improbable way, and every true Church has wherewithal from
heaven to be complete, and perfect within it self. And why does he tell us,
that no Church denominated by a particular name binds our faith, or obedience,
and has any Romanist affirmed more for their infallibility, then he ascribes
to every one of his Parlours, and wherefore is English protestant a
Schismatic name, as he affirms, and that the whole nation is not to be
thought so raw, as to need the help of other nations. But what is the whole
nation to every conventicle, are these seperaists the whole nation? And why
would he bind the King to other reformed Churches?

If the primitive Christians had been of his opinion, General Counsels had
been of little use, and the Disciples at Antioch needed not have sent to
Jerusalem for advice in a question. But these men thus shuffle, and pretend the
sufficiency of a nation, intend only the perfection of their Parlour
congregations, and allow noe sufficiency in Church, or nation, that submits
not to their insolent prescriptions.

He says the King accuses piety with want of loyalty, because he says in
vain do men hope to build their piety on the ruins of loyalty. The King
rightly determines, that piety is but pretended, where loyalty is despised,
as such do that think it safe to renounce all fidelity to their lawful
King, and his family, and depend on the faith of perjured villains upon
pretense of piety, as he persuades the Scotts to do.

Upon the COVENANT.
HE seems desirous to be short in this Argument, being a point, which he is
loath to touch, till he see the success of some attempts, and he would not
willingly be out of hope of the Scotts, nor venture to displease them by his
glosses.

To the mention of the Bishopps possession here since the first plantation of
Christianity in this I stand, and universal prescription since the Apostles
till this last centurie he says, But what availes the most primitive
antiquity against the plain sense of Scripture, which if the last Centurie
have best followed, it ought in our esteem to be the first. But where is the
plain sense of Scripture against antiquity? Its very plain, that these
Sectaries noe more esteem the present century, then the ancient, nor more the
scripture then either of them, but take a liberty to vent their own
fanaticall, and arrogant fancies for Scripture, and reject all ordinary means
upon pretense of a lying spirit. His Majest: meant not to oppose antiquity to
Scripture, but where the practice of antiquity is consonant to Scripture. Its
impious to reject the Communion of the first age. All helps of interpretation
are fetters to the proud Schismatickes, and this Libeller, that so lately
obtruded the Example of the reformed Churches in the case of Episcopacie,
quickly scorns the Classical, Provincial, and diocesine Presbiterie, and
the last Century has only seen the ascent of these Locusts, and he only likes
that part of the last Century, wherein they crept forth, and they would
willingly have the credit to be a part of other Churches, though they are in
truth Enemies to them all. We may with far better reason believe the
interpretations, and practice of the primitive Church, then any modern
Reformers, and there were never any, but those Sectaries so shameless to deny
the authority of antiquity, or charge it in this particular with an
aberration from Scripture, and many learned men living under Presbitery
acknowledge the dignity of Bishopps above Presbiters in the times of the
Apostles. The Libeller likes any limitations in the Covenant, dangerous to the
king, and so much of the Covenant as concerns the casting out of Bishoppsbut
he will swear, and forswear comformitie to the Church of Scotland, or any
other.

That this Covevant had former practice, unless in the french League cannot be
shown. The Libeller would have the Israelites entering a new into a Covenant
with Asa their King to be a new Covenant, when it was only a renewing of their
promise of obedience to God, noe Articles of their own devising, and as that
was with the King so he has found one without a King, for the Jews, after
the captivitee took solemn oath to walk in the Commandments of God without
consent demanded of that King, who was then their Master, and they had the
Authority of that King. But did they take an oath to use violence against that
King, if he consented not to them, or was the Covenent to walk in Gods
Commandments a new Covenant? This is like their pulpitt proofs.

That Protestant Churches have made Leagues, or Covenant against their King.

Or imposed their confessions with Civil penalties upon refusers without their
Prince is a notorious ^ander, for the protestation, it was confined to
established law, the Covenant to destroy law, and what was established by it,
the protestation to defend the Doctrine, the Covenant to destroy the
Government, which is comprehended in the Doctrine, and this the Libeller holds
needs noe reconcitement. There is noe doubt, but the Examples of Asa, and Esra
were approved by Scripture, but they are far from the Examples of the present
Covenant, and if the Libeller approve the taking of the Covenant, how does he
satisfy himself in the breach of it? he has found out away, for he may
as well break that, as his oath to his King, and obligation to former laws,
which he says are Conditional, and that condition to be expounded by every
man at his pleasure.

He proceeds to show the strength of the Covenant, and yet he will keep it
one way, and his brethren of another name, and sect another way. If he Covenant
oblidge to contrary courses, it cannot be a Rule of Reformation, and as it
clashes with former oaths to God, and the king rightly understood, so the
clashing of these, that devised it, shows, that the spirit of peace was not
desired by the contrivers, of that Covenant.

That the Kings book is replenished with Popish Arguments must be spoken in a
Corner, not publicly with any modesty, for the Protestants throughout the
world know the contrary, and will disavow this Covenanting power to be a part
of their Religion.

The salvoes, cautions, and reservations used in taking the Covenant were the
arts of the deceitefull composers, and its well known it was an artifice used
to persuade men to take it, that they might use the liberty of their own
sense, and the Libeller willing to say some thing in detraction of the King
upon every occasion, as if it were a sin to use truth, and ingenuitie,
transposes words of the Kings, which were used in reproof to additions of his
own, as if the King approved these shuffling cautions, who he well knows
detested both the Covenant, and them, and showed the inniquitie of these
deceites, and we have seen, that these Cautions have made Covenanter, and
anticovenanter, Presbiterian, and independent Rebel.

The Libeller likes well the poverty of the Ministers of the gospel. And
although the primitive poverty of Churchmen was very glorious, yet the
Christian Laity were never so sordid to think a liberal patrimony unfit for
them, and Religion has little power, where the Clergy are trencher chaplains
to gluttons feasts.

These men, that judge poverty a curse to themselves hold it Christ's legacy
to the Ministers. If there were any legacy, poverty was to all Christians,
as well, as Clergy, but we see, that notwithstanding these professions, their
Levites now hold more pluralities without remorse, then ever were known, and
shame not to contradict their former declamations, but it is the calamity of
the Church, that greedy dogs devo^re her patrimony, and barking detractours
tr^duce her Clergy.

Upon the many JEALOSIES etc.
TO wipe of Iealosies, and scandalls the best way had been by clear actions,
or till Actions could be cleared by evident reasons. Clear Actions, nor
evident reasons will stopp the mouth of malicious slanderers, nor abate the
industry of conspiratours in raising jealosies, But these, which his Majest:
complained of were tempered only to vulgar capacity, and were long since hist
at by all knowing men, who saw apparently they were not the opinions of the
devisers, but artifices of deceit, and the progress of this Rebellion has
cleared al mistakes, and taken away al credit from these fopperies. It is very
late for the Libeller to call to his aid the petitions, and addresses composed
by the faction in Parliament, when himself accuses them for want of wisdom,
and integrity, and whoever reads these addresses will easily find not only
cause to suspect the truth of what they say, but plain proof of falls hood,
and hypocrisy.

That the whole Parliament conspired against the King, he never said, and the
author well knows, that it was a potent faction only, to whom the King
imputes this injury, though their being elected to that place is no exemption
from a possibility of error, and Crime, and we have seen it beyound doubt,
that this faction conspired to blow up the peoples aff^ions toward him, and
batter down their loyalty by the Engnies of foul aspersions, and have acted
what the powder plot intended. The King offers not to purge himself by any
other Arguments, then such, whose proof is visible to all the world, and the
silliest people see, how they were cheated by factious Artists. The Kings
Arguments are not only demonstrable to the best but obvious to common
understandings, and it cannot be expected, that such, as are resolute in wicked
courses will ask forgivenes, or have it. The world knows the King, when he
wrote this, expected the Rebels cruelty, but feared it not, and there was not
cause to use insinuations, which were not to be divulged, till his death.
Tyrants, and usurpers are forced to flatter, but its a wicked slander to charge
him with flattery, that is feareles of cruelty.

This Libeller profanely descants on Scripture, as he does apparently upon the
Kings misfortunes, for upon the Kings saying, that he could willingly be the
^nah for restoring his peoples (...), if he did not foresee, that by the
di^erests of their, and his Enemies, as by contrary winds, the storm of their
miseries would rather be increased then allayed. The Libeller says these
winds were ne^heard heard of in the compass. And its very likely never
regarded by those, who never guided themselves by other compass, then sea
robbers, that make prey only their compass. But were not these divided mind^
heard of, when he spoke of Arch presbitery, and other subdivisions? And these
winds he says were pretended to be foreseen (...) he should be taken at his
(...). The King foresaw their intended murder, and though he feared it not,
his word never was to be taken to make himself accessory to his Enemies
impiety. But that controversy, he says, divine lot has ended. Suffering and
Martyrdom has been the lot of the righteous, but Gods controversy with their
persecutors is not thereby ended, and the Libeller r^kons too soon, the end of
his controversy, that entitles God with such Actions.

The Kings knowledge is sufficiently evident, and he has distinguished the
venerable gray h^ires of ancient Religion from the old scurfe of superstition,
and the vertigo of novell prophanes. And the whole some heat of his well
governing shows his judgment in state Phisike, and while Emperickes, and horse
leaches took upon them to amend the body, they turned the equal temper of it
into the feaverous rage of T^ing. There need noe oracle to tell, who heated
the furnace of this obloquy, it is sufficiently confessed, and they, that
endured Nobuchadnezars furnace might have warned this Libeller to have
abstained from that allusion, for if the oracle of truth, God himself
commanded the Jews to be subject to Nebuchadnezar notwithstanding his golden
Image, and madness.

The libeller might see his little wit ill applied in making the question, who
deserved to be thrown in Nebuchadnezar, or his three Kingdoms? And this high
conceit of his deserves the fieric furnace, that would persuade three
Kingdoms, they might cast in their King.

If his great seal were not sufficient without the Parliament to create
Lords, his parole must be unable to create learned, and Religious men. Surely
this man does not see what he says, for it is a confessed truth, that the
kings great seal without Parliament was sufficient to create Lords, and
though his judgment could not create men, yet by the choice he made, men are
satisfied, he descerned them better, then they, that would undertake to point
them out.

The opposition proceeded from heads far wiser, and spiritts of a nobler
strain, then ^pular preachers. And are not their buffe, and sword preachers
popular preachers? And are those wiser heads and nobler spiritts the Creatours
of preachers? And has the tub overturned the pulpitt?

The Priest led herodians with their blind guides, are in the ditch already.
These are the constant Testimonies of the Libelle^ reverence to Scripture, and
things sacred, what is become now of the advice of the Parliament, and three
Kingdoms? He was very much ^verseene, that would have divided interests such
unknown winds, and here blows away his brother Presbiterian for a
Priest-led herodian, and blind guide, traveling as he thought to sion, but
moored in the Isle of weight, And we see, that these, who began first with the
Bishopps will at last have noe Presbiters at all, but pretend with the Rebels
against Moses, that all the congregation is holy, and will sail by the wind
of their own brains without Card, or Compass. Factions are not only like
Mathematical Lines always divisible, but perpetually dividing. The Kingdom
of England cannot acknowledge the wisdom of those heads, from whom the
design of destroying King, and Kingdom proceeded, men wilful for mischeife
are far from wise heads, nor is insolence, or inhumanitie a Testimony of noble
spirits. Popular preachers now see they were deceived in their own judgments,
and abilities to govern, as well as of the goodness of the laws they were
governed by, and the persons, to whom they owed subjection, and that their
planting of disaffection to the Church of England in the people could not
attract reverence to them, but an attendance upon usurpers, who made use of
such preaching to improve the peoples disobedience to their lawful Rulers, and
they may now see, that aversion to the Church is a false measure of sincerity,
and that their followers after the shaking of their lawful governors, call
them, by whose ill principles they were misledd, blind guides, and while this
Libeller would seem to be a Christian, he not only seeks to make the name a
reproach, but the miseries thereof a scorn, whence comes his allusion of
Priest-led herodians, but from the passage touching the place of our saviors
nativitie enquired of the Priests by herod. and traveling to sion is not the
subjects of common pasquils.

The Kings letter to the Pope imports nothing to his purpose, and all men now
see, that Religion is not at all in their thoughts, and that these repetitions
are vulgar scare crows.

The innovations alleged by professed schismatickes, that innovate at
unquestionably demonstrate their own confutation.

His using the assistance of some Papists in settling protestantisme was
unseemly, and suspicious. But the use of them against such, as would vnsetle
the Civil Government, and destroy the King under pretense of vnsetling the
Religion established, is just, and necessary, and it inferrs not, that the most
part of Protestants were against him, because an active faction had surprised
the strength of the Kingdom, and necessitated him to seek succors, where he
might have them, the King never obtruded setlement of any thing new, but
defense against violence of what was established, and Papists may fight for
their King, though Traitors pretend to the Protestant Religion, for the ground
of their quarrel.

That noe man ever thought, that the King had learned that difference of
persuasion in Religious matters may fall out, where there is the samenes of
duty, Alleagiance, and subjection, And the Libeller asks, wherefore then such
compulsion to the Puritans, and Scotland about conformity to the Leiturgie?
Does the King say, that those of different persuasions ought not to be better
informed, and sought to be gained to a right understanding? though there may be
the samenes of alleagiance, ought he not to seek the samenes of persuasion in
points of difference? This is his common logic, and he asks, wherefore then
noe Bishopp, noe King? He might have answered himself, that there may not be
the samenes of opinion touching alleagiance in differences of Religion, though
there may be, and its now plain, though formerly not believed, that such, as
would have noe Bishopps, would have noe King, and had not the samenes of
intention, though the same duty, and obligation of alleagiance to their King,
as those of the contrary persuasion, and that Episcopacy is agreeable to
Monarchy, the contrary not, but Rebels catch at every shadow, and offer ^very
dream for a truth, and are as light in obtrudinge pretenses, as resolute to
act their villainies either with, or without them.

How diversified sects, can be all protestants, must be showed by some
doctrines, that protestants yet understand not, and the medly of Papists, and
protestants in a religious cause is noe more disproportioninge of Religions,
then the mixing of those diversified sects, which are noe more protestants,
then Papists. Maskes, and disguises were the foreprophesied garments of
Sectaries, and it is a sure sign, that their errors are wilful, not weak,
sparing noe falsehoods, whereby they may get power, and confating their
pretenses by their practice They heretofore professed great opposition to
Papists for doctrines of Rebellion, now they preach the same doctrines, and are
angry, that there are papists, that disclaim them. The ancient Christians held
it a Religious cause to defend their King, and Country, and were mixed with
Pagans in that cause, and so of late the protestants of France, and they held
it unchristian to forsake that Religious cause under pretense of Religion, and
those pretenses taken from Religion, the letter to the Pope, and evil
Councillors, are apparent to be nothing, but vulgar cheates to enforce the
King to consent to the Rebels demands, and wrest hisscepter from him.

The sharp afflictions of the Kingdom show they were not inveterate diseases
of Government, but a sudden pestilence, and such, as can believe, that the
Tyrany, of the present Masters are the laws of Parliament, deserve to be
governed by a whip, not by a scepter. The Libellers reproof of the peoples
levitie, praise of popularitie are inconsiste^t, and his argument of reproach
from dissenting to what the Parlian^ advised, and his charging the Parliament
for want of wisdom, and integrity turn all his arguments to his own shame,
and show, that it is not right, but Rebellion he pleades for, and that he
esteems neither Civil, nor Philosophical liberty which are confined to
Government, but confusion, and license without limitts.

If this Libeller would be subject (...) Magistrate, and in the laws, as he
professes, why does he Rebel against the Magistrate, and the laws, and why
does he pretend the Parliaments Authority, if he may break that authority?
As indeed he does allow, that noe obligations of Government can hold him, and
by the same rule he pretends injury to be restrained in one thing, he may in
every thing, and these Rebels like L^r usurp above all (...).

Though men ought not to speak evil of diginties, which are just, yet nothing
hinders to speak evil of those, who in their dignities do evil as often, as
it is the truth. The^ the Scripture unnecessarily forbad to speak evil of
dignities, for we may not speak untruth of any person, and if the Scripture
meant noe more then not to slander, in commanding not to speak evil of the
Ruler of the people, St. Paul needlessely retracted his words of the high
Priest. It shows how near the spirit of Lucifer, these men are, that pretend
a right to practice whatever our Savior, or such, as were inspired of God,
forbad upon pretense of actions done by power extraordinary, and yet there is
no example of this speaking evil of dignities, as the Libeller imagines, nor
of public reproaches. Though Kings were reproved, i^ was by such, as had
particular directions from God, not by every wandering ^evite, and they did not
defame them to others. And as his Maj: we believe was heard of God in mercy, so
he might without injury to the Prerogative of Christ pray to be made the head
stone of the conrer according to that subordination, which he held under God,
and Christ in ruling his people.

Upon the ORDINANCE against the book of COMMON PRAYER.
INnovations are generally more dangerous, then old errors by how much peace
is more desirable, then broils, and combustions. We have noe warrant to
believe such a condition in the Church of God, that should always be
reforminge, nor that the Christian Church had never lawful Pastors, nor any
thing practiced according to Christ's institution, till the present Sectaries
revealed it to the wo^ld. We have found by experience, that there is noe dotage
equal to tha^ men have upon their own opinions, nor any greater errors, nor
mischeifes more dangerous, then such, which are introduced by pragmaticall
Reformers, who would conform the world to their fancies, and innovation is
oftener obtruded under the name of reformation, then reformation is censured,
and opposed under the name of innovation.

The King says not, that the removing of the Leiturgie was a thing plausible
to the people, as he falsely relates, but says, that after popular contempts
offered to the book, and those, that used it, it must be crucified by an
ordinance. His Majest: likens not the rejection of the book to the crucifying
of our Savior, but the carriage of the rejecters to the cursed Jews, who
crucified our Savior, and these men, that rejected the book showed as little
reverence to him, that was to be prayed to by the forms in that book, as to
the book it self.

King Edw. 6. confesses to the Cornish Rebels, it was noe other, then the old
mass book done into English some few words expunged, which is very false,
though al, that is in the old mass book is not therefore to be rejected, and
these men may as well make an Argument they may not pray at all, because the
Mass book prescribed prayer, as well as reject forms of Devotion, because
they were in the mass book.

It was the Carnal fear of divines, and Politicians, that modelled the
Leiturgie, noe further of from the old mass, least they should incense the
people. This has been the conceit of Schismatic Politicians, though the
lightness of it be very apparent, for it cannot be thought, that the people
would be more incensed by an alteration of the prayer, then an alteration of
the language, and the taking away of the external superstitions was more
likely to incense the people, as it did, then any alteration of the Leiturgie,
and it had been very easy to have made any alteration in the Matter, when the
language was changed, and in the time of Queen Elizabeth, when no such fear
could be pretended, the demands of the schismatickes for abolishing the
leiturgie were held frivolous and seditious.

The Libeller says good desires rightly conceived in the heart, wholesome
words will follow of themselves. But wholesome words will beget good desires,
and how public prayer in the congregation can be used, unless a leiturgie be
admitted noe true Christian can find a way.

That the prescription of a Leiturgie was not imposed, nor practiced by the
first founders of the Church, is an apparent falsehood, The Lords prayer, and
the prescriptions of the Apostles to make prayers for all men, for Kings, and
al in authority, that we might lead a quiet life in all godliness, and
honesty, and the many leiturgies yet extant convince all, but wilful
gainsayers, and it had been in vain for the Apo^le to command the people to
obey such, as had the oversight of them, if they had noe authority to
prescribe things lawful, and honest, and this Libeller, that has been
flourishing with autho^tie of the reformed Churches, h^re condemns them all,
who, none excepted, use Leiturgies.

Without whose (meaning the first founders of the Church) precept, and example,
how constantly the Priest puts on his gown, and surplisses, so constantly
does his prayer put on a servile yoke of Leiturgie. It seems the mention of
gown, and surplesse are instede of Arguments to his well principled men, and
so is yoke of Leiturgie, though by his own confession, that yoke is not in
the Leiturgie it self, but only for the supposed want of precept, or example,
for if there had been either of them, as both are apparent, there had been noe
yoke in his judgment, neither can that be a yoke in Religion, which is not
sinful, and sin there cannot be without breach of a law, and if the Libeller
could reduce Leiturgies within that compass, he need not use those beggarly
negatives, and if the using of Leiturgie by the Priest be a yoke, do not the
peoples prayers, that put on the Priests extemporary words, put on a yoke of
Leiturgie? For are not his words as much yoke to them, as the public Leiturgie
of the Church to him? And it is evident, that they, who use noe set forms in
public prayer, direct them more to the hearers, then to God, studying for
expressions of their own parts, while others, that use set forms have their
affections more enlarged, and not yoked to the search of words.

Set forms are not rigorously forbidden to any man's private infirmity. But
they are rigorously forbidden, if they are thrust out of the Church, and every
man's prayers, and spirit imprisoned in the pinfold of set words, hastily
shuffled together by a man often times as defective in wholesome words, as
sound Devotion, whose doses of unprepared words, and matter lead the people
into imprecations, rather then prayers, and these men, that would confine all
public devotions to the sudden raptures of every unlearned Levite, seek to
shutt heaven at their pleasure, though their hands are as short, as their
understanding, and the spiri^t of utterance, as it respects our prayers, is not
exercised in words, but in the affections, which are vtterances to God.

What we may do in the same form of words is not so much the question, as
whether Leiturgie may be forced, as he forced it. And why does he say forced
it, meaning the King, when it was established by his Predecessors with consent
of Parliament, which the Libeller so much pretends to reverence? And he may
easily answer his question, that would have the form of words used by every
Minister to be forced upon all congregations, and we may justly use the same
words always, that contain pititions of all things necessary.

The Leiturgie comprehends not all truth. And does he think, that all truth
should be comprehended in prayer, or that any benifitt, or use of sacred
expressions is de^ed us, unless all the expressions of Scripture are contained
in public prayer. We have the full benifit of all sacred expressions, if our
nece^ties are fully represented, but his spirit of utterance is the use of
variety in expression, as if there were a necessity to use all expressions to
the same sense, and he would have ws believe, that the benifitt of sacred
expressions is barralled up in the new tub men whose prayers not only want
salt, but are besmeared with prophanes.

Though God reign down new expressions into our hearts, yet it is not fit
for the whole Church, to be yoaked to the fancies of every Levite, who often
mistake, Satanicall injection for the dew of heaven, and he is much mistake^ in
his comparison of retaining the form of wholesome words to reserved Manna, but
the loathers of this Manna of wholesome words are the true offspring of these
murmerers, that loathed the Celestial Manna, and bread of Angles, because they
had it all ways, accounting it a light food in regard of their sensual
appetite, as these men now think the forms of the Church light in regard of
the ordinary use, and of their own parts, which they would expose to the
people, and therefore, if Leiturgies, were Manna it self yet if whorded up,
and enjoined they will be found says the Libeller like reserved Manna, rather
to breed worms, and stink.

For the variety of words, though God have given us plenty, and that we ought
not to be nigardly of them to him alone, yet we find long prayers, and vain
repetitions condemned by God, and we are commanded, when we come before him,
that our words be few, and the questing of Scripture Phrase in prayers is now
found wanting in leiturgies, that was so lately scorned by the libeller for
the lipp work of every Prelaticall leiturgist. Sectaries prayers, though
dressed with variety of words are accompained with a nigardly devotion,
wherein God cheifely requires us to be copious, and this libeller is copious in
blasphemy, that will have the word of God, if whorded up, and enjoined to breed
worms, and stink.

The libeller would have his scoffs received for Argument, and to vilify the
use of set forms brings in the famine of the seidge of Jerusalem, when the
Priests brought still the same loaves of the shewbread, not being able to
procure new, and he would give us stones for bread, the Pharisees still
continue their old leaven of hypocrisy, though their words be varyed.

If the Lords prayer had been a warrant for leiturgies, why was neither that,
nor other set form after used mentioned by the Apostles, or commended to our
use. It had bee^ very needelesly prescribed by our savior, if it had never
bee^ used afterward, and it had been disobedience in the Apostles, if they did
not use it, being by our savior commanded. It is the common argument of
heretics to accuse God of improvidence, unless he proportion his revelations
to the measure of their fancies, and though the Counsel of God, and
supernatural truths to be believed were fully revealed, w^ may not believe,
that nothing was left to Christian prudence in the Church of God, and we cannot
pretend want of revelation in this point, where we have such express
prescription of the Lords prayer, and particular injunctions of the Apostle St.
Paul, and if we m^st expect such revelations, where is it revealed that every
congre^ must use only such words, as the Minister thereof extemporally dictates
in their prayers.

If God left our words to be putt into us without premeditation, why then does
the Libeller allow any man's private infirmity to use helps? will not God help
private infirmity that way, Or is every one in the congregation without
infirmity. How is any assured if the promise be universal.

Our savior encouraged his disciples with promise of assistance without their
premeditation, And why does he object want of Christian diligence to set
forms, if it be a fault to use it, and all must be done without premeditation.
And its like his preachers pray and sermonize without premeditation by the
stuff they utter, and we see what respect they bear to God, that pressed
diligence in their actions touching this life, and Rebellion, and exclude it
from devotion and that, which concerns God. what soever the Libeller says
concerning Gods graces, is nothing to the question, touching the use of
Leiturgies, unless he would have, that in the public congregation, every
person should have his prayer a part, and bring that disorder, which the
Scripture forbidds.

Voluntary prayers are less subject to formal, and superficial tempers, then
set forms, for in those he, who prays must consult first with his heart,
which in all likelihood may stir up his affections. But he does most commonly
consult with his brain both for matter, what is most pleasing, and what most
proper in expression, and it is incident unto most to fall into an affection of
their own conceptions, and abilities in these voluntary prayers, rather then
true devotion.

Affections grow lasy in set prayer, and come not up easily at the call of
words. But much more easily, then in the labor for words, and matter, and
those words are most empty of devotion, and prayer, which are the ostentation
of the presenters abilities, who is apt to seek satisfaction in contemplation
of his own parts, and his fervor is greater in looking on himself, then God.

Ostentation, and formalitie may taint the best duties. And why not then the
best institutions, and if vnpremeditated babbling may be restrained without
forbidding the spirit of God, which is in his sense his extemporary prayer, why
may not lasines, and formalitie be reprehended in such, as use the public
leiturgie without forbidding the use of it, but it is, as himself says the
Custom of hipocrites to take advantage at the least abuse of Good ^gs, that
under that covert, they may remove the goodness of those things, ^her then the
abuse.

Constancy attributed to the use of set forms, he calls the constancy of the
C^oe to be always using the same Leiturgie. And what then are his best
reformed Churches? this shows him one of those chattring birds, that Abraham
drove from his sacrifise, and this wretch trembles not to compare the set
forms appointed by God himself in the Scripture to the Cuckoe, and the use of
the Scripture is the constancy of the Cuckoe

The book for aught we know was composed by men neither learned, nor godly.
But they are ungodly, that without knowledge will suppose them neither learned,
nor Godly, but was the Martyrdom of many of them noe proof of their Godliness?
And are there noe works, that prove the learning of those Composers, does this
man think upon the credit of the protestant Religion?

Noe doubt the spirit helps our infirmities, but we have noe promise, that
the spirit shall enable every Christian to compose prayers for the whole
congregation, neither does the Libeller believe, that all his Ministers of the
new Religion are so endowed, if he do, he has few associates.

It is Gods promise, that where two, or three gathered together in his name
shall agree to ask any thing, it shable granted. And how can they agree
without a prescript form, is the agreement, that all must follow the desires
of one? That there was a Leiturgie in the Chuch, of the Jews has not been
denied by any learned man, and its apparent by the Titles of many of David's
Psalms, that they were used by the singers in the ordinary service of the
Church. That Christians used the Lords prayer, and other set forms cannot be
denied, and the Libeller is much deceived in his computation of the time, when
Leiturgies begun, for the Church never wanted them, and we have seen by
experience, that true piety, followed the use of Leiturgies, disobedience, and
prophanes the rejection of them, and such, as have rejected them, have proved
not only Truants, but Apostates to all sanctity.

What is said of Leiturgie is said of Directorie, and so farewell
Presbiterian. We find, that none make such presumptuous claim to Ministerial
gifts, as ignorant, and braineles persons, that have noe Title by calling, or
endowment.

The King had noe reason to object, that the Common prayer book was (...),
because it prayed so often for him, for large, and laborious prayers were made
for him in the pullpits. But its well known, that the Sectaries were neither
large, nor laborious in such prayers, and its justly doubted, not sincere, when
they used them, but would have men hear their hipocriticall formalitie, not
God to grant what they seemed to pray for, and all men can witness what prayers
were made for him in pulpits after the leiturgie was rejected, all the largenes,
and labor appearing in their prayers was to reproach his person, and procure
him dishonor, and misery.

The King in his prayers presumes Leiturgies to be lawful. What should hinder?
praying that the Church, and he might never want them. And what says the
Libeller could be worse prayed extempore, he might have answered himself,
that Prayer to want them was to call for Desolation upon the Church.

Of the Differences in point of CHURCH GOVERNMENT.
THe Libeller says, the Author in this Chapter discovers more of mystery, and
combination between Tyrany, and false Religion, then from any other hand would
have been credible. It Is strange, that so obvious, a truth should be incredible
from any hand. Was not Jeroboams new Religion the foundation of a Tyrany, and
have not all usurpers in the Civil state pretended some false Religion? Was
not Mahometts wicked imposture, and Tyraniall usurpation bredd together, and
have not the present Tyrants introduced a false Religion to support their
power? Has not schism been joined with the Rebellion?

We may have learnt both from sacred story, and times of reformation, that the
Kings of this world have ever hated, and instinctively feared the Church of
God. Its manifest Sectaries hate King, and Church, malefactors will compliane,
that Judges hate them for their virtues. We find in the ancient Church, that
Kings were the great protectours, and reformers of the Church, and its strange
that the Libeller, if he had looked back at all, had not seen David, Solomon,
Hezechiah, Josiah, and others. The Kings of Israel politiquely opposed the
true Church, for fear the people should return to the house of David, and if
we look upon Pagan Kings, we find Cyrus, and Artaxerxes helping the
establishment of the true Church. This Libeller has discovered a great
Mystery of Rebellion, that having made such outcryes of Tyrany against his
late Maj: here tells us the Tyrany was Monarchy, and they would not be subject
to the Kings of this world, to such impostors is England now subject, that kill
Kings, and make Tyrants, and this blaspheamer sticks not to charge the Church
of God, and the Doctrines thereof with opposition to Civil Government, and to
command the destruction of Kings.

Because the doctrine seems to favor Liberty, and equality. And are there
not Republiques that oppose the true Religion? True Religion presses
obedience, fa^hood, and imposture always hold forth license to the people.
Is there through all the book of God one word in favor of this Rebel,
liberty, and equallitie? And did not God plant his Church at first in an
apparent inequallitie, and subjection both in the state Civil, and
Ecclesiastical? And this brood of Sectaries have heretofore complained, that
their doctrines were traduced as opposite to Monarchy. And neither Liberty,
nor equallitie is sought for to the people, but to betray them to the power of
these deceivers, who are grown to that impudence to pretend doctrines of
confusion, and Rebellion to be the true Religion.

The Church, as ancient prophesies foretold should dissolve all their power,
and Dominion. Few sects professing Christ have appeared more Turkish, then
these present of England, they fancy an earthly Kingdom for the Church, as
Mahomett his Paradise, and then, that themselves are the true Church, and shall
have Dominion over all, and avow their intention to destroy all Kings, and
whoever submitt not to them. But certainly Kings understood not any such
prophesies, nor feared such pretenders, who make prophesies to agree with their
own wicked Actions, and ambitious desires.

His first instance is in Pharaohs oppressing of the Israelites. And does he
believe, that Pharaoh knew their doctrines, or prophesies, the man might have
learnt more from the Text, that being strangers they might over power him, and
thence grew his persecution, not from the libellers imaginary doctrine. He
makes a strange leap, that passes by all stories else, and would prove his
position by his own authority, and expects, that his libell against the King
shall make good his position, that Kings ever feared, and hated the true Church
a strong way of disputing, to prove that kings hated, and feared the true
Church, because the King did so, and to prove the King did so, because kings
did so, this is a stout Champion.

There need no answer to his bawling of the kings suspicion of men most
Religious, for time has tried, that they were Rebellious, and wicked Traitors
under the Masque of Religion.

He could not use violence as Pharaoh did, and therefore chooses a more
mystical way of Antichristian fraud, and like Balak to hire against a nation
of Prophetts other esteemed Prophe^s, and to wear out the Church by a false
Ecclasiasticall Policy. The Sum is to supresse Sectaries, and prevent
Traitors is this Ecclesiastical Policy, but where is this Mist^ of Kings
hating the true Church, is there noe true Church of God where there is
Government? And what proportion has this supposition of his to the kings
proceedings? Did he erect Bishopps, or was there any Religion established, or
publicly professed, which he opposed, but only false, and hipocriticall
factionists, which outwa^lly professing the established Religion sought for
gain, and pride, se^retly to draw disciples after them to the disturbance, and
subversion of the Church. There needs not any thing be said to his railing,
his corruption being apparent by objecting it to the calling of Bishopps, and
hates it, for the remedy against schism, which the Church had by them.

The King bestowed livings according to the law, and the Policy was not his,
but the ancient constitution of the Church, and this Monster, that reproaches
the retaining any thing in Leiturgie, or Government practiced by the ancient
Church is not ashamed to charge the king with breach of Canons, and the ancient
practice of the Church in conferring Ecclesiastical dignities, and the peoples
right in Elections was never pretended in England, and justly, and anciently
forbidden in the Church, neither do any Canons in force support that pretense.

That influence, which the king says is necessary for the Prince to have upon
Churchmen, noe man, that beleives the Scripture will think unfit, but how can
the Libeller make good, that the many Emperors, and Kings, that embraced the
Christian Religion hated, and feared it, for so they must by his grounds? And
how can he conclude from Pagans hatred to Religion, that it was only from their
kings, when as the stories are so plentiful in setting down the madd rage of
the multitude, the truth is seditious innovatours know, that their hopes, and
strength lie to seduce the silly people, and that it is the interest of
governors, to prevent their lewd endeavors, and thence proceed their
declamations against Rulers, and their proclamations of Liberty, and that,
which they call the Bishopps Tyrany is only their office to take away schism,
and schism is the way to Rebellion.

The Libellers judgment touching callings founded on Scripture, reformation, or
graces of the Bishopps, and others is of the same authority, as the
determinations of Traitors touching loyalty, and heretics touching sound
doctrine, and his end never agrees with his beginning, but in railing, and
incongruitie, for but now he made it the Kings Policy to hire the Bishopps,
and now it is the Bishopps Policy to work that persuasion in the King of noe
Bishopp, noe King, the man well knows, that noe Bishopp, noe king was the
persuasion, of King James, who found it true by his own experience without the
help of Bishopps, and yet so sottish does this Libeller presume his readers,
that makes the dependence, which Bishopps have only of the king the cause of
such persuasions, and yet in their own subtle sense, they were of another
mind, how the^ could their dependence be a cause of their persuasion, or was
their sense subtle, and grossly mistaken. Thus those blattering devils, that
in the beginning of the Parliament charged the Bishopps, to be Antimonarchicall
thereby to conceal their malice against the king, now make it their Crime to
favor Monarchy.

He has found a very strong proof, as he would have it out of the History of
the Council of Trent, that Bishopps are most potent, when Princes are weakest,
that argues not their dependence upon Princes, nor that aversion to Bishopps is
not aversion to Princes, it was spoken of Bishopps depending on the Pope, not
on Princes, and such Clergy men, as have their dependence on Pope, or people
will never wish, that the king should be potent to master their dependencie.

From this the King set himself to the removal of those men, whose doctrine
he feared would be the undoing of Monarchy. And needed he the Counsels of
Bishopps to provide for his safety against such men? And is that the evil
interest of Tyrany, and Episcopacie to prevent the designs of Traitors? Who
were Traitors, if they were not, that would undo Monarchy? The doctrine, and
designs of the schismatickes are hereby apparent to be against Monarchy, and
yet the prevention of such conspiracies is the Tyrany, and the corrupt
Counsels of Bishopps, which the hipocrites cry out on.

Noe temporal law could touch the innocence of their lives. And had they
innocence, that plotted the undoing of Monarchy under which they lived, and
could not the law touch it? Their disobedience to laws was a Crime
inconsistent with innocence, and must necessarily be punished by the laws they
disobey, and that, which he calls persecution of their consciences, and laying
scandalls before them was only the requiring of their obedience to Acts of
Parliament, whose authority he so frequently cries up, and the inflicting of
just penalties on their bodies, and Estates according to the laws was the
duty of the Magistrate, to whom the execution of them belonged, although the
indulgence they found from his Majest: in mitigating the penalties of law was a
great cause of their insolence, and that Calamity they have brought upon the
kingdom, and if the lives of these men be sought into, their pride, impudence,
calumny, lying, perjurie, covetuousnes, and cruelty declare their lives far
from innocent.

The man now breaks out into a thankesgiving for the successes of their
Rebellion, and though these hipocrites despise the thought of a Church, and
have noe Communion with any Church, ancient, or modern, yet the resistance of
them is war against the Church.

Noe Papist could speak more scandalously against reformation, then that
Episcopacie was the constant practice of all Christian Churches, till of late
years Tumult, pride faction, and covetuousnes invented new modells under the
Title of Christ's Government. It need not be observed again, how the Libeller
is affected to the reformation, that despises all but his own Babell, and
Tumults, factions, pride, and covetuousnes, the causes of some new modells
touches not so many, as he supposes, there being so many of the reformed
Churches, that receive not these new modells, but whoever they be, that obtrude
them, as Christ's Government, Scepter, and Religion, they will be marked with
the same names, that are here mentioned by the greatest number, if not all of
the reformed Churches.

The Apostles were not properly Bishopps, next Bishopps were not Successors of
Apostles in the function of Apostleshipp. If the Apostles were not properly
Bishopps he should have told, how they were improperly Bishopps, for by his
caution properly he admits they were someway Bishopps, and the Bishopps therein
their Successors, though not in that part of the Apostleshipp which concerned
special gifts, and the Testimony of Christ's conversation on earth, whereof
they were eye witnesses,

If they were Apostles, they could not be precisely Bishopps, and why not
precisely, if Bishopps.

They could not be Apostles, his reason is, because that of Apostle was
universal, extraordinary, and immediate, the other ordinary fixed, and
particular charge, and inspection. The calling of the seventie disciples was
universal, extraordinary, and immediate, and yet they were noe Apostles, and
because callings were at first extraordinary, must not they, whose office it
was to provide Successors to themselves, and others in the Church of God,
ordain others into their functions, and is it an Argument, that because, when
the Church was gathered, men had particular care of certain Churches,
therefore they were not of the same calling with others, that preceeded them in
gathering these Churches, and the latitude of territory in the exercise of a
man's calling does not make difference in the function.

It is against reason, and Charity to suppose an ignorance, and deviation of
the ancient Church taught by the Apostles in a point, that destroyed the
calling of such, as were to reproach the gospel, and the suddenness is not
imaginable in the introduction of Prelacy, unless by Apostolical constitution
in regard of the universality, and the Author cannot name any manifest
corruption so sudden, and universal after the Apostles, though he pretend many.

The Ecclesiastical History proves it clearly to be false, that noe example
since the first age for 1500 years can be produced of any settled Church,
wherein were many Ministers, and congregations, which had some Bishopps over
them. And his proof is out of Sozomen, who, he says, wrote above 1200 years
ago, and his Testimony, that in the Churches of Cyprus, and Arabia they had
Bishopps in every village, what then? he says what could these be more then
Presbiters? Yes they were Bishopps, for does any man doubt, that Bishopps, and
Presbiters were not distinct in Sozomens time, who so frequently mentions it,
and the Libeller complains of the corruption of introducing them in the ages
foregoing, there are many Counsels before Sozomen, which were universally
received, and in them subordinate of Presbiter to Bishopp is the undeniable
practice of the Church, and the quantity, or quallitie of Towns, or
Territories, wherein Bishopps were placed, noe way proves the lessening of
their order, neither can it be collected, because Bishopps were in small
villages, that therefore they were noe other then Presbiters, but herein the
Libeller shows his malicious opposition to truth in abusing Sozomen, who
having said, that Churches had several customs, and instances, that though
there were many Cities in Scithia, there was one Bishopp only over all, and in
other Countries Bishopps were in villages, not every village, and he might
as well conclude noe Presbiters in Scithia, as none, but Presbiters in Arabia,
and Cyprus.

The same Author tells the like of other nations, and that Episcopal Churches
did not condemn them. Wherefore should they condemn them? Its like they
would, if they had taken upon them to exercise the calling of Bishopps being
but Presbiters, for that was long before condemned by the Canons.

He makes a large leap from sozomen to four hundred years ago, and then he
says many western Churches in France, Piedmont, and Bohemia admitted not of
Episcopacy among them, and yet the doctrine, and practice of these Churches
published by themselves is, that they had Bishopps, and continue them still, and
this the libeller might see in their own books.

If we might believe what Papists have written of the Waldenses, he finds in a
book written 400 years since, that those Churches in Piedmont held the same
doctrine since the time, that Constantine with his mischeivous donations
poysened, Thus the exploded forgery of constantines donation is made
authenticke to reproach the Church, Sylvester, and the whole Church. This is
the Schismatic Charity to the first Christian, Emperor, and the whole
Church, but the man might have remembered, that Bishopps by his own confession
were long before the time of Constantine, and if we believe the waldenses
themselves, they had Bishopps in their Churches, who held the same doctrine,
and Government, and the antiquity of the waldenses proves, that they had
Bishopps, otherwise they had bee^ condemned by the ancient Church, as Aerius,
was, for if there had been any Churches, differing from universal practice in
the time of Constantine, it is not imaginable, that they had been vnobserved,
and we find noe mention of their dissent, but from the Papacy, and that long
after.

The famous Testimony of St. Jerome, whereto he reserrs the rest is far from
declaring openly, that Bishopp, and Presbiter are the same thing, but the
contrary is manifest in him, sor what proose can there be drawn from saint
Jerome, that Bishopps, and Presbiters were the same thing, who sajes, that
before schism by instigatio^ of the devil entered into the Church, and that one
said I am of Paul, another of Apollo, another of cephas, al things were
governed by the common counsel of the Presbiters, and who will think, that
there were no dis^t orders, because things were governed by the common counsel
of Presbiters, and when these schisms began, and when things were so gove^ed,
were there not Apostles in the Church, and superior to Presbi^ers?

St. Jerome affirms, that Bishopps rather by custom, then ordainement of
Christ were exalted above Presbiters. St Jerome speaks of privileges given to
Bishopps above Presbiters by custom, but he affirms the power of ordination
belonging to them, and not to Presbiters Though St. Jerome make a difference
betwixt the ordainment of Christ, and the practice of the Apostles, neither he,
nor any good Christian ever questioned the lawfullnes, and authority of such
Custom of the Church in the times of the Apostles, and this man, that in this
very Chapter said the King produced noe Scripture, and that antiquity was not
of weight against it, now gravely determines that interpretation of St. Jerome
in his sense shall be received before intric^ stuff tatled out of Timothy, and
Titus. Thus this profane hipocrite prostitutes Scripture, where it contradicts
their practices, and St. Jerome shall be preferred before Scripture, if he seem
to favor their sense, and vilified beneath Esops falls, if he dissent from
them.

If it be far beyound Court Element what is said by his Majest: it is not
above his own, the proper Element of this breaker is prophanes, and impudence,
and here again he importunately obtrudes the Kings letter to the Pope, which
he makes a chief support of his Traiterous pretenses, but the authority of a
gazet out of which he quotes it, is too mean to raise a scandal upon a Prince
in the judgment of any reasonable men, and this man well knows the fraud in
publishing that false Copy of the Kings letter, which he wilfully passes by,
and the satisfaction, which the King gave the Parliament, and whole Kingdom
upon his return out of Spain, and the dissolving of those Treaties, which
occasioned that letter must stopp the mouth of all detractours to offer it as
an argument of his Majest: inclination to the Roman Religion?

The Libeller answeares his Majest: argument to prove his sufferings out of
conscience, not Policy, because his losses were more considerable then
episcopacy with objecting hardening, and blindness, being himself hardened to
oppose all light of truth, and shut his eyes against the cleerest
demonstrations.

Where has more faction, and confusion ever been bredd, then under the
imparitie of his own Monarchical Government. The king pretended not, any
Government could absolutely shut out faction, but we may be sure those factions
are most dangerous to all Governments, whose principles are destructive to it,
and these factions were not bredd in the constitution of Monarchy, but among
the Enemies af it, and the envious man sowed his tares, while men slept, and as
he will not stand powling of the reformed Churches to know their numbers, so
he will hand over head affirm, that the far greater part in his Majest: three
kingdoms desired what they have now done to throw down Episcopacie, which
has as little weight as truth the reformed Churches are not vilified one by
another, though each maintain their several forms of Government, and his
Majest: is far from vilifying those Churches, but the Libeller vilifies
himself, and them that scoffs it their Archpresbitery classical, and
Diocesine Presbitery, and their Priest-led herodians, blind guides.

None but Lutherans retained Bishopps, and therein convinces himself of his
often repeated untruths, that all the reformed Churches rejected Episcopacy for
the Novations, Montanists having noe other Bishopps, then such, as were in
every village is another of his falsities in adding the word every, and it does
not prove, that these heretics had not Bishopps, and Presbiters, which
Christians may have, though they live in Caves, and deserts, and its evident in
story those heretics had Bishopps. That the Aerians were condemned for
heretics the Libeler well knows, and the King naming them so meddles not
with their particular heresies, and it is too obscure to be seen, that the
King fastens that opinion touching Bishopps, and Presbiters for their heresy.
Though the Clergy ought to minister the gospel, if the people supply them
not, yet such temutie, and contempt quickly becomes a Carkase indeed. The
Sectaries, that place their greatenes in being the ringleaders of faction turn
all Religion into a fantasme, and knowing they could never by any judicious
choice obtain preferment in the Church profess the dislike of them, and seek
their fortunes in seducing the multitude.

Its easily believed, that wealth may breed vices in the Clergy, as well, as
others, but must they therefore be made poor, and others rich by the robbery
of them? the Kings choice of Bishopps will convince the clamours of the
Schismatickes, and gives just cause to expect the evil consequences the King
foretells of their removal. That the function of Bishopps, and Presbiters was
not tied to place, though the exercise of it was by Ecclesiastical
constitution, he has been already told, and that it was necessary the
Apostolic power for the Government of the Church must descend to Bishopps,
there being noe others, that ever pretended to it.

How the Church florisht under Episcopacie, the extent of the Christian
Religion over so great a part of the world does sufficiently testify, and
the corruption of many in that order does not take away the benifitt of it,
which acrewed unto the Church by the labors of others, and all ages have
recorded persons of great learning, and holiness of life in that order.

He talks again of the Kings Coronation oath to give us such laws, as our
selves should choose, when he knows, that the clause, which he pretends to be
in that oath imports noe such thing, nor was that oath, wherein the clause is
pretended ever ministered to the King, nor diverse other Kings, nor ordained to
be so.

In likelihood they were nearer amendment, that sought a stricter form of
Church discipline, then that of Episcopacie. But they that sought to remove
Episcopacy would have the Church discipline in their own hands, that it might
be loose, and in likelihood they would not be strict to themselves, his
boasting of what the Scotts could work by power, shows, that he regards
nothing right, but power, and so he can prevayle, despises all Justice, and
conscience.

Upon the VXBRIDGE TREATY.
THat men may treat like beasts, as well, as fight, noe way opposes his Majest:
Aphorism, which affirms Treaties, a retiring from fighting like beasts to
agreeing like men, Treaties being managed only by the use of reason, fighting
by force, and his Majest: spoke of the nature of Treaties, not the abuses of
men in them, and though some fighting may be manlike yet the Act is common to
beasts, rational Treaties cannot

The Kings march, and fight at Brainford, the Libeller would make a thirst of
war though in the rigor of Marshall law, it might have been excused in a
natural Enemy that makes a trade of war. And may as justly be defended in the
King, whom that faction, which proferred a Treaty to him at Cole-brooke
intended to surprise him, having disposed their forces in such places, as must
have effected it, if he had not speedily prevented it by that onset. What he
intimates touching Oxford, Bristow, and scarborrow naming noe particulars, he
can expect no answer, and whoever looks over the memorial, of passages
touching Treaties will find that the Kings offers were so large, as nothing,
but desire of peace could have moved him to it, and nothing but guiltines, and
ambition could be the cause of their refusal.

That the faction in Parliament would have compelled him to part with his
honor as a King, the Libeller denies not, but asks what honor he had, but
the peoples gift, and yet he seeks to defend the Actions of these villains,
as defending themselves, and resorts to his common principles that Kings are
but the servants of the people, who may dispose of their Kings, and their
honor as they think best. And by his doctrine the King, and people must be
the prey of every powerful Traitor. It need not be repeated, that the
peoples welfare consists in supporting the rights of their King, and that it is
their misery to deprive themselves of him, and turn into confusion, and
slavery to usurpers, And it is Monstrous, that a kings highest Court sitting by
his regal authority should bandie themselves against their sovereign, and
like vipers eat out the bowels of their parent, fighting against that power,
which gives them being, and by an unnatural malice of the members to the head
cast the whole body into an incureable consumption. This insolence, and
presumption of the pretended Parliament has brought the loose rabble, and
lawles Army to despise the representation, which they so much magnify, and
do that unto them, which they did unto their king. It cannot be doubted, that
subjects cannot with duty treat on equal terms with their king, and the
practice of all times makes it manifest, that none but Traitors attempted it,
and it was a sufficient proof of the kings desire of peace, that he sought a
Treaty, where a submission was due to him.

The Kings instructions were to bribe their Commissioners with promise of
security rewards, and places. How he proves such instructions he tells us not,
but we are sure, that the demands of their Commissioners were security,
rewards, and places, for they would have all in their power.

There were but three heads of the Treaty, Ireland, Episcopacie, and the
Militia, the first was forestalled by a peace, that the King might pretend
(...) word against the Parliaments Arguments. And if there had not been a peace
made, it was a most detestable Rebellion, and blood thirsty cruelty to
continue an intestine war against the King, and his people of England, unless a
few Tribunes might have the management of that war in Ireland, and exclude the
King from any interest in that kingdom, and yet this must be a defensive war
on the Rebels part.

The King bids the Queen be confident, he will never quit Episcopacy, which
informs us by what patronage it stood. And how could that inform you, even as
well, as the Kings telling her, that Religion was the sole difference between
them, informs you, that the Queen directed him in matters of Religion.

The sword he resolves, says the Libeller to clutch as fast, as if God with
his own hand had put it into his. And there is noe doubt but he had, and it
was a Rebellious wickedness in that faction, which sought to wrest it from him
in despite of Gods ordinance, and their own sworn subjection. In all these
the King had reason, honor, and conscience on his side, and his pretense, that
the Queen was Regent in all these is far from credible, when causes to the
contrary are so obvious to every understanding. The Libeller himself
professes their intentions to take away the Kings right, and would suggest to
the world, that it was only the Queens Council, that he would preserve his
Crown,

Wise men could judge the composure likely to be more miserable, then happy.
But these wise men were taught by their guilt never to think themselves
secure, and to prefer their power before their conscience, and the Kingdoms
peace.

The English were called Rebels during the Treaty. And why not? till the
Treaty had made an abolition of their offense, for did they forbe are any of
their reproachful terms, or Rebellious actions against the king, and his
party during the Treaty?

The Irish were called good, and Catholic subjects. And that some of them
might be, though the Libeller cannot produce the instance of it.

The Parliament was called a Parliament for fashions (...), and in the Counsel
books enrolled noe Parliament. That it was no Parliament all knowing men
agree, and the enrolling of their opinions, that held it noe Parliament was noe
injury to the Treaty, and the Kings appellation of them a Parliament, because
they would not be treated with otherwise gives them noe right, nor shutts up
him from that opinion of their condition, which was true, and real. Christians
treat with the Turk by those appellations, he will be called by, though they
do not acknowledge them belonging to him.

It was a divellish fraud, that the King in his own esteem had been absolved
from performance, as having treated with Rebels, and noe Parliament, and they
insteede of an expected happiness brought under the hatchett. Who now does not
see, that force, and guilt were the continuers of this horrid Rebellion, and
blood, and that these Traitors perferred their private security before
public peace? But whence is this collection of a divellish fraud by a
divellish interpreter? If the King thought not the appellation due to them,
which he gave them, does it follow, that he must esteem himself absolved of
performance of his promises therefore? These are dreams from divellish
infusions, not reasonable suppositions, the titles of treating parties having
noe influence upon the performance of the things promised, and they of the
other side might have said, they were absolved from performance, because they
treated with the Kings Commissioners under other Titles then they had, or were
known by, but they would persuade the people, that they cannot be safe unless
the master Rebels rule.

May not that bratt superstition be justly laid to their charge, that impose
for the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom a yesterdayes invention of congregationall
consistories, and make it Religion, and truth of God to root out Prelates of
the Church of God?

For the meritt of the Treaties, and where the blame lay of their breach, the
world has long since full satisfaction, and that the Rebels came but
unwillingly to Treaties, and with reserves always to break it of, never
mittigating the rigor of any proposition in the least degree, and though the
Libeller, and others spitt Sulphur, and cast forth their clouds of lying, and
slander, yet the evidence of the facts dissolve, and consume their venom, and
confidence, and the meanest capacity descernes the falsehood, and cruelty of
their proceedings both in war, and Treaties.

Upon the VARIOUS EVENTS Of the war.
IT is noe new, or unwonted thing for bad men to claim as much part in God, as
his best Servants. And all men look upon the Rebels in England, as the
unparalleled prodigies of this hipocrisy, their claims unto Gods service, and
favor, the usurpation of those appellations, that belong to the Godly, their
ostentations of fastings, prayers, and thanks givings, and severe censures of
the persons, and manners of others, are a sufficient demonstration of this
presumption of men hardened in wickedness, and resolved to prosecute ambitious
disignes.

He is yet to learn what good use the King made of these various events,
neither will he acknowledge, though he see the use of insolence, and cruelty,
which the Rebels have made of their successes against him.

Those numbers, which the King grew to from small beginnings, came not out of
love, but fled to be protected from the fear of reformation. A jolly conceit,
what fear of reformation was there, or appears yet? It was necessary duty to
oppose Rebels, and confusion, and that was then known unto the silliest
people, but such, as were poysened by the contagious doctrines of Rebellious
Sectaries.

Such a snow ball might easily gather through those cold, and dark provinces
of ignorance, and lewdenesse. And can he think, that any Provinces are so
ignorant, and lewd, as these sinkes, and Kenells, whence the Rebels raked the
rabble of rascallitie, which they armed against the king? The libeller could
not be ignorant of what al his party acknowledge, the great disproportion in
quality both for place, and education, that was in the Kings party above
their own.

The Libeller would have Gods long suffering sometimes to harden, and be the
beginning of a severer punishment. But he overlookes that sensible obduration,
which successes have brought upon the Rebels, and as they are a severe
punishment upon the nation, so we may conceive by their wickedness, that their
prosperity binds them over to greater judgment.

He would convince the King of breaking laws, and that he had not the sword by
law, not so much, as to vnsheath against a foreign Enemy. And by so
palpable an untruth, it being known unto the whole world, that Leagues, and
wars with foreign nations were made by the King alone we may conclude, he
has quitted shame, and is resolved to stick to his false assertions, and
tottering Arguments, though never so contrary to his own Judgment, and
knowledge, and here again he repeates his jaded discourse of a free nation,
body of Parliament, and sword in a single hand so often spurred up, and down
since the beginning of his book. The libeller, if he would have used Arguments
should have expressed wherein his pretenses differ from other Rebels, for all
pretend Tyrany in their Rulers, and fighting for liberty, but he will have
fighting lawful to make a new Republique, and to take the sword to destroy the
old, and insteede of making the King guilty of the breach of laws, justifies
the Rebellion, because laws were executed. Whatever he objects for a reason of
Rebellion against a King is as possible to any other Government, for are al
Republiques of one Religion, and may the subjects of different Religion from
what is established in any state Rebel, and say it is unreasonable, that rulers
must be obeyed, when they will not conform to the opinions of a sect, and so
several opinions must decide their Religion by the sword. If such Rebels die
Martirs we have been much deceived of malefactors, and noe Traitors will want
a saint-shipp.

This opinion of his touching the holiness of Rebellion, he says, is not the
opinion, but full beleise of far holyer, and wiser men, then Parasuicke
preachers, For holy, and wise men the Libeller seems to be little acquainted
with, and unless they be the scandal of preachers, and basest of Parasites none
can be so vile to maintain such odious assertions. Its well known the Crim
catching sermonizers to these Rebels have confidence enough to speak what
they know not, and men hired to act a false part will blush at nothing; and
therefore, though never King was established by parliament, nor could be,
because they depended on him, and were called by him: though Parliaments never
acted in law, C^vill oaths, nor Religion but by the Kings assent, and the oath
which he calls the Kings, and has so often mentioned, was never established by
Parliament, yet against all evidence this libeller, and his Mates will affirm,
that nothing was thought to be established, which that house declares to be
abolished. Its like he means the house of Commons, which never till these
black times pretended a power to give an oath, much ^esse make a law, and
such, as make these vast untruths outgoe Parasiticke preachers, and all knights
of the Post, that are yet discovered.

It were absurd to give the Parliament a legislative power, and vpbraide them
for transgressing old Establishment. Whoever thought them to have a legislative
power? Is not the King the Legislatour, and they his Counsel, and is it not
absurd to give the Legislative power to them, that are to advise the
Legislatour, and when the two houses desire the King, that it may be made a law
by the King with their consent, is it not absurd, that one house should say all
the Legislative power is in them? But there need noe proof of their
transgressing old establishments, when they confess it. Its like the Rebels
think their heaven here, and they do not much value the loss of the other,
and noe man is troubled with his censure, to whom Charity, and truth are
alike despicable.

The Libeller, that scoffs at the seeking of heaven in forma pauperis shows
his value of heaven, and seeks none but that, which is to be found in forma
proditoris. He thinks to take of the horror of their death, that dyed in
wilful perjury, and Rebellion against the king by raving against the kings
party, who he says died most frequently with oaths, and other damning words
in their mouths, And is so impotent to hope, that the Calumnies of a perjured
wretch will find creditt, for were he not distempered by hellish delusion, or
sottishly drunken, he would not so stupidly affirm, that it was notorious,
that they, who were hottest in his cause, the most part of them were men oftener
drunk, then by their good will sober, it being a known truth, that men of
most eminent sobriety were hottest in the kings cause, and these traitors
never forbear any wickedness by their will but for their ends. The king need
not a discovery to the state of their consciences, more then by their Actions,
that fought against him, and he might justly believe they had never the better
of him in their own consciences, where they were more afraid to encounter
those many reasons from law, alleagiance, and Christian grounds, then in a
desperate bravery to fight. And is it to presume more then a Pope to say this?
But he that will not stick at open falsification will not stick to slander
thoughts, and offer conjectures for convertions, such as were most zealous in
his Majest: cause had a sobriety vnblemishable by a Traitors malice, and were
not only free from druken distemper, but brutish insolence, and brazen
impudence, which the Rebels rather affect, then repent of. And is there not a
just cause, that the consciences of many should grow suspicious, and corrected
by the pretentions of the misnamed Parliament, now proved false, and
vnintended? What Is become of their making a glorious King, laws of the land,
privileges of Parliament? Does not every man see they are all in the dirt
among the Libellers Ceremonies.

But they never pretended to establish his Throne without our Liberty, and
Religion, nor Religion without the word of God, ^or to judge of laws by their
being established, but to establish them by their being Good, and necessary.
They never pretended, that his throne was inconsistent with liberty, or
Religion, nor to judge of laws otherwise, then by being established. But who
must be the Dictatours, the Parliament, which is crumbled into a close
Committee, and state Counsel, or any rabble, that shall say this, or that law
is not good, and therefore to be repealed, though established, he ought to have
concluded, that they never pretended privilege of Parliament further then the
subterranean junto, or the Tumults should judge necessary.

To pray, and not to govern is for a Monk not a King. But is prayer
inconsistent with Government? Those men will accuse the King for being a
Christian, and have as little love to prayer, as obedience, a monk will better
govern, then such a man pray, who is constant to malice, and falsehood, and
this man that says to govern by Parliament justisies his Rebellion to take
away Kingly Government.

His legislative Parliament, and oppressed laws cannot be admitted, where
other answer is wanting, but the Libeller has long since thrust the force of
them out of doors by his many prevarications, confining them all in the
Cabinet of his own brain, which must determine whether they be good, and
necessary.

He is constant to John of Leidens principles, that must take away other men's
goods for doubt of ill using them, and because the King says, he feared the
temptation of an absolute Conquest, therefore it was pious, and friendly in the
Parliament to resist him. Their piety, and friendshipp were much alike, and
the Libellers Riligion might come in for a share. Its very probable, that this
war had never been, if the Act for continuance of the Parliament had not been
consented to by the King, and that Act might stopp the mouth of any reasonable
man, from saying there was such a power in the two houses, as the Libeller
dreams of, that desired that Act from the King, and it was never heard in our
story, that ever Parliaments made war against Kings, as Tyrants, or otherwise,
for how could they make awarr, that neither could, nor ever did pretend to sit
longer, then their King pleased, and the immodestie, and ingratitude of the
present Rebels have far exceeded the worst Examples.

He is obstinate to his principles, and fears to attribute anything to the
Kings concessions, or denial, and had he granted less in all probability
himself, and the Kingdom had suffered less.

It cannot be doubted, but the Libeller will invert whatever the King says,
and it is a great adventure, that he says the sins of their lives not seldom
fought against them, and we have great cause to believe their prosperity did
noe less, that continue hardened in so execrable a cause.

The King says he desires not any man should be further subject to him, then
all of us should be subject to God. And this Mountebanke holds this a
sacrilege worse, then Bishopps lands, for he says he desires as much
subjection, as is due to God, and so desires noe less then to be a god. And is
subjection to Princes in the, Lord subjection to them as God? And does the King
desire otherwise, that would have them noe otherwise obey him, then that they
might obey God, renouncing all obedience, that consists not with obeying God,
but sale work must be slight, and the Libeller would not exceed his hire.

The Rebels desiring the Kings acquittall of them for the blood of the war
confirms their guilt, not their innocence. Though God impute not to any man
the blood shedd in a just cause in respect of the ground, and reason of doing
it, yet there may be temptations unto natural infirmity in acting a just
cause, and the King was not without a sense of such danger, therefore the
Libeller wretchedly beggs an argument of his guilt from his prayer not to have
blood imputed to him.

Upon the REFORMATION Of the Times.
Noveltie, and perturbation are justly condemned not only by Christians, but
moral men, and it is a noveltie taken up only by Sectaries, that would confine
all Religion to their own frensy, and reject the universal consent of all
times, and places, and not only boasting of the truth of their own delusions,
but obtruding them upon the world, threatening fire, and sword to gainsayers,
and yet they will pretend the example of our Saviors publishing his gospel,
and pretend like reason for their fanaticke conceits, as for his divine
revelations, and miraculous Testimonies, and because reformation may be
necessary, therefore they conclude it must be as often, as these, that are
carried about with every wind of doctrine shall think fit, and they would
reduce Christianity to a cloud without water tossed to, and fro with the
breath of private opinion.

The first reformers in the time of Pope Adrian pretended not a reformation of
the universal Church, and a rejection of whatever was received by the
primitive, as those men now, neither did they presume to enforce others to
their persuasion, and though noveltie, and perturbation were objected to them,
yet they still deprecated that guilt, and it is a most unchristian, and
profane disposition to desregard laws established, and Religion settled upon
presumption of private opinions, and these of men neither learned, discreet,
nor honest. There is great difference between a clamor, and an undeniable
truth, and we may not think, that popular compliance, dissolution of all
order, and Government in the Church, schism, vndecencies, confusions,
sacrilegious invasions, contempt of the Clergy, and their Leiturgie, and
diminution of Princes are less odious, because Papists objected them, or that
any pretended reformation introduced by these detestable practices can be
acted, or approved by Christians, All men are wittnes, that the present
Sectaries are guilty of all these, The former reformers did not give occasion
for such aspersions, that desired only the liberty of their own consciences
from the practice, and belief of errors newly enjoined, and anciently
rejected in the Church, or else followed the orderly reformations which Princes,
and states authorized in their own Dominions, but these new reformers obtrude
their dictates upon all the world, and will dispose of all Kingdoms with the
Divill, as in their donation.

Let it be produced, what good has been done by synods since the reformation.
Its like not the good he means to authorize all manner of Lewd sects, and
Lunaticke opinions. But synods are customary, and have their set times in all
the reformed Churches, and if there be fraud, and packing in synods, as he
says, whence come Parliaments, that are of like constitution to be free? Is
there a privilege of Parliament to change nature, and that the members cannot
be guilty of fraud, faction, and Treason? There is not only fraud, and
packing by insinuations, conspiracies, and corruptions of the vulgar, but
violence, and confusion to Church, and state by tumultuary reformations, and
what is this doctrine of rejecting synods, but the justifying of all licentious
violence, and Lewd Rebellion to introduce men's private opinions.

The pulling down of Church windows, and Crosses, which were but Civil not
Religious marks, defacing the Monuments, and inscriptions of the dead,
mentioned by the King are the effects of a popular, and deceitefull reformation
in the account of all true protestants.

That Protestants were accused by Papists, as these are charged by the King
will not parallel guilt, nor hide the present Actions of these Traitors from
view, and detestation.

The Libeller does very preposterously produce the Example of Job, whose
sincerity was accused to God, as a protection for the hypocrisy of Sectaries,
while himself acts the part of him, that accused Job to God, and omits not the
traducing of all proofs of piety, Religion, and Justice in the late King.

But the infirmities of best men, and scandalls of hipocrites in times of
reforming can lay noe just blemish upon the integrity of others, nor purpose
of reformation. Noe man says it did, but if the Reformation it self be a
noveltie pretending not the consent of any times, but their own opinions of
places of Scripture different from all others, if that, which is offered in the
name of reformation be in it self confusion, and scandalous imputing
Antichristianisme to all the Churches of God, that were before them, and that
the way of introducing it be with presumption, blood, and Rebellion, we cannot
think, that any promoters of such an unchristian deformity can have any
integrity, or Religion, and they are not blemished, with the Crimes of others,
but their own. They, that have no public place, nor authority to reform
the Church cannot be excused of presumption, if they (meddle with it, and such
bu-sy bodies are moved with Carnal self seeking, and private ambition, not
sense of duty.

If any thing grew worse, and worse in the Church of England, it was the
increase of Sectaries, who would cover their hypocrisy with censure of
superiors, and laws. These Reformers pretend to reform laws, not
corruptions, for though they talk of the time of the Kings Reign, they
pretend to reform nothing, that was particularly worse in his time, then
before, and he might as well have asked, why Queen, Elizabeth in her forty
years reign had not reformed, as peevishly talk, that his Majest: should not
reform in twenty years, when it was held strange, that the Schismatickes
should be so distempered to pretend a necessity of reformation, there being
greater need of strengthening what was established. It is a Diabolical Method
to change the order of the Church by destruction of the Civil state, and just
reformation never opposes lawful authority in setting up a Government over
others. Though Christians might reform themselves, they always judged it an
abomination to impose their Religion upon the state they lived in. Private
reformations are of Christian right, but public are the prerogative of
supreme power, and though Princes ought to serve God in the first place, the
people are not to destroy Princes in the first place, they may worshipp God,
though they be persecuted, they cannot truly, if they take the sword to subdue
them, that are in authority, and they fear not God, that fear not their
King, our fear of God binds us to use noe violence against our King, nor upon
others, our Allegiance to our King being a part of our duty to God, and as the
Apostle convinces those, that hate their brother, not to love God, so in vain
do they pretend to fear God, that offer violence to their King. Can a
Christian break all the laws of the second table upon pretense of keeping the
first? And did not he, that Commanded to have noe other Gods, but him,
command the honor of Father, and Mother? May a private Christian robb, and
kill, because persons are not of his Religion. The scripture sajes, he that is
guilty of the breach of one commandment, is guilty of all, and though
Christians may not obey Commands contrary to the command of God, they may not
use violence, and force, but these are the Pharisees, that teach men by making
a vow upon pretense of Gods service to disobey Parents, which our Savior so
much condemns. Christ's Kingdom is spiritual in the hearts of the faithful,
not in a papal consistory, nor a congregationall pullpitt, they were best
Christians, that obeyed not wicked commands, but detested by all Christians,
that used violence against their Pagan Governors, and the reformed Churches
may see what Communion can be had with those, that profess those best
Christians, that were least subject to their King.

The King of Spain may profess to have his Kingdom from Christ, whatever his
Religion be, he has a just Civil right, which none ever doubted to
acknowledge, but these hell bred Sectaries, that allow noe right, but what is
founded on their will, and his repetition of the Letter to the Pope upon this
occasion shows he is under a famine of reason, that makes the Kings consta^cy
to the doctrine of the Church of England to proceed from his letter to the
Pope, calling it enmity to the true Church, are any so madd to think, that
the Pope was pleased with the doctrine of the Church of England? Did the
Libeller think there were a God, would he write so wilfully against his own
understanding, that the King engaged himself to hazard life, and Estate for
the Roman Religion, he would then think, that God were near him, and writ
down those words, which he will one day require an account of.

The King prayed against his hypocrisy, and Pharisaicall washings, whose
prayer is, thou, who must give truth for hypocrisy suffer us not to be
miserably deluded by Pharisaicall washings. Poetical license will not wash
away wilful slander, and malicious falsification, but this man makes
hypocrisy, and Pharisaicall washings his chief study, and hates the prayers
of others for his conversion from such wickedness.

Upon his LETTERS taken, and DIVULGED.
THE Publication of the Kings Letters had quite contrary effects to these,
which the publishers intended, and insteede of discovering matter to their
advantage, cast shame on their false aspersions, whereby they sought to
withdraw the affections of his people from him, they set forth both his
judgment, and affections opposite to Popery, and the Irish Rebels, and the
peace made with them not out of favor, but necessity to divert the final
destruction of the Protestant party there. The endeavors to be assisted with
foreign forces, when so horrid a Rebellion had taken deep root was neither
against any former professions, nor any rules of Justice, and piety, but
naming of Papists, and foreign forces were the bugbeares, wherewith the
faction affrighted the silly people, and under pretense of revenging the blood
of Ireland, sought to draw men inclinable to assist the King, or unwilling to
fight against him into that employment, that he might be more exposed to their
power, and they might have the better means to weaken him, and support their
own Rebellion. These Letters have discovered their gross impostures in
representing the King wholly Governed by the Queen, or others, showing
clearly, that his own judgment cheifely steered his own affairs, and its
like the faction long since saw their own rashness in that Publication, and
that the world took notice, that they were so far from doubting the Kings
affection to Popery, that their design was cheifely to declare his aversenes
to it, that they might prevent his succors from Princes of that Religion.

That it was done by them without honor, and Civilitie, no man boubts, unless
infected with Schismatic, or Rebellious malice, and between King, and
subjects matters can never be in that condition, that his honor, and their
duty are trifling, and superficall vanities, and with whom they are so we
may not wonder at any brutish, and inhumane Barbaritie, when was there an
example of such a Treason against nature, and humanity to divulge the Letters
between man, and wife touching conjugall privacie? And honor, and Civilitie
being taken, as he would have it for discretion, honesty, prudence, and plain
truth, the publishers of these Letters not only stand guilty of the breach of
those virtues, but appear the venomous, and unnatural Traitors to mankind.

To cover this base Act the Libeller says, that such courses are familiar with
none more then Kings, and produces, an Example out of Commines relating the
discovery of a Letter by Jews the eleventh written to him from the Duchess
of Burgundy, which he says the Historian does not charge with incivili^ie, or
dishonor. And is that the case of publishing Letters, that passed between
man, and wife, and may subjects do to their King, what Enemies may one to
another? The Libeller will say yes, for he holds noe subordination, though the
publishers professed the contrary, and would not be thought to have abjured
their Alleagiance, or that they took their King for their Enemy, but their
practices were noe more consistent, then the Libellers Arguments,

The injury offered to the Kings Mother was too well known to be a fained
suspicion or jealosie in him, and if they had not been guilty of that base
aspersion, they would have acquitted themselves some other way, then by the
publication, and frequent repetition. The Libeller appears to glory more in
recital of it, then in the argument, which he can draw from pretense of
saining a suspicion, and he, that suckes any imputations upon the King out of
those letters must be a Beetle, not a Be, and they, that from placing
constancy to his wife, before the mention of Religion, and law will spin a webb
of determination for the prioritie of affection, have more of the spiders
venom, then the Bees sweetenes.

They which esteemed their King, though one man the breath of their nostrills,
thought the nation could not be happy without him, And the late Parliament,
whereon the Libeller buildes his faith affirmed in their declarations, the
happiness of the Kingdom did soc mainely depend on his Majest: and the Royal
branches of that root, as in an ordinary way of providence, they would not
except it from any other fountain, or stream. And are they therefore a nation
of Idiots, and miserable, as he says.

The happiness of a nation consists in true Religion, piety, Justice, prudence
temperance, fortitude, contempt of avarice, and ambition. And how shall these
be preserved in a nation, by the rule of the rabble? And bandying the
Government with a racket between opposite factions, but these Rebels with the
madd men of Munster will introduce new Jerusalem with the destruction of their
Kings, and Rulers, and the Libeller its like looks to be a great saint in
this terrostriall Paradise, who says they, in whomesoever these virtues dwell
eminently need not Kings, but are the Architects of their own happiness, and
whether to themselves, or others are not less then Kings. The world has been
well acquainted with these Architects of Treason, and shall never want
pretenders to those virtues, whose practice shows them the builders of Babell,
that place their happiness in their power, and other men's confusion, the King
appears eminent in these virtues, not only by his constant actions, but in his
lious hold, which was admired for itts order amongst strangers above other
Courts, though by the Libeller traduced, as all laudable things are.

To make reconciliation desperate, the Libeller holds reasonable, and asks,
why they should fear it, and such, as intend not reconciliation with God,
think they have noe need to be reconciled to men.

Their fact is not parallel to Chams revealing his fathers nakedness, for the
King at that time could not be esteemed the father of his Country, nor had
ever merited that Title. And might not Cham have said so to his father,
as well, as do what he did? But they, who acknowledged that Title due to him,
as the Parliament did, and gave it him as their King, cannot excuse themselves
from a sin parallel to Chams, nor from the merit of his curse.

The Libeller professes aversenes to all reconciliation upon pretense of
Justice to the lives of them, that dyed for the freedom of their Country, and
yet he will not profess to want Charity, and why then is it mockery with God
for the King to pray, that God will judge his cause, and that the evil they
intended return on their own heads, that they may be ashamed, and covered
with their own confusion, as with a cloak the King forgave his Enemies, but
still prayed unto God for the vindication of his innocence by the conviction
of those false accusers, and this is not to wish them that evil, which hinders
Charity, but prayer for that favor of God, which protects innocence, and
that livery of detraction, and confusion the Libeller will rather wear, then
exchange it for the robe of righteousness, whose malice to the living, not
Justice to the dead draws these hipocriticall pretenses from him.

Upon his GOING to the SCOTTS.
IT was not an excuse, but a real intelligence, that the King had of their
consultations at London, designing mischeife to his person, if he came there
The junto did not use to proclaim their Counsels, neither was it pretended
they did, and though necessity Counseled the King to adventure upon their
loyalty, who first begun his troubles, yet the rigor of the English Rebels
drew on that necessity, and the Kings coming to the Scotts might work, if
there were any remainders of loyalty to devide those, who were only joined by
an unlawful, and dissembled confederacy, and it had not been an Act of
malice, but prudence to resolve upon such an hope, for friends they could not
be, that are contemned for an hireling Army, paid not in Scotch coin, but
English silver jeered with their Brotherly assistance, and monthly pay, and a
right understanding os the disaffection to the English Rebels toward them,
might recall them to their duty to the king, and withdraw them from their
disloyal combination.

The scotts needed not armies to defend their liberty, and conscience, which
were never invaded, and the charges were not out of charity to them, but for
the necessity of those, who sent for the scotch assist^ace, he il prete^ds a
cause for the scotts mistrust of the king in that case, where a ground of
suspision could not be imagined, and judges others by his own obduratio^, that
loyalty once broken is rather tempted to a final shipwreck, then preserved
by an opportunity to recover it.

Providence doubtless is never cousened, but deceivers, though they falsify
their faith to others must expect, that as their falsehood was permitted, so it
will receive its detection, and demeritts.

The man thinks much, that their professed loyalty, who fought against their
King should be called a riddle, and as it was a very dark one to general
understanding, so if they had preserved the Kings person being in their power,
they had given some solution doing what they said of their loyalty, not what
their former Actions imported. And does not the Libeller say, its ridiculous,
that they, whose professed loyalty led them to direct arms against the Kings
person, should think him violated by theit murder of him, which he calls
Justice, and who understands not, that so necessitous may be the state of
Princes, that their greatest danger may be in their supposed safety, and their
safety in their supposed danger. But he would have, that the only way for the
Kings preservation was to sacrifise his reason honor, and conscience, and not
to have run such hazards, though his Majest: left his force, he resolved not to
leave his conscience, and change an outward for an intestine war, and Rebels
desist not from their violence, whether he strive or yeilde. If he contend, he
is bloody, if he yeilde, he is wily, if he offer reason, he is obstinate, If he
acknowledge, he is guilty, and thus the players of a Rebel game, having
irrecoverably lost honor, and conscience play on still to gain power, and
increase guilt.

The words of a King are full of power by the law, and that law is not like the
Nazarites lock of sampson, but an anointing they have from God, which is
inseparable, though Rebels like the faithles harlot cut of his force, and
Armies, yet the right of his power is inseparable, and if these Traitors had
looked to precept, or Example, they might have found, that a Kings word had
power, and their persons reverence without respect to the merit of their
Actions. David pretended not, that Saul had not authority of law, when he
persecuted him without a cause, and when Saul's life was in his power. The King
appeals not unto Libellers, and common pasquills to judge of his reason, and
such', as are offended at the name, or estimation of reason, are likely to have
a small part in it.

Monuments of his reason appear as thinly in his Actions, and writting, as
could be expected from the meanest parts, bred up in the midst of so many
ways extarordinary to know something. Surely the Monuments of the Libellers
irrational assertions appear very thick in this whole discourse, and men may
be amazed at his folly, that makes him run into so many absurdities to avoyde
the confession of truth, how often has he objected to the King, that his
breeding could not enable him to judge of matters, and here would advance his
breeding to abase his parts, but such, as read the Kings book, and his will
see Monuments enough of his Majest: reason, and the Libellers absurdity, and
impudence.

The Kings deliberations touching his leaving Oxford, though mature, yet
foreseen to be of doubtful event, and therefore vainly observed by the
Libeller to contradict his prayer. Though I know not what to do, yet mine eyes
are toward thee. Wicked men contemn Princes, and God causes them to wander
in the wilderness, where their is noe way. The punishments upon Princes are most
frequent for the wickedness of the people, whereby they come to confusion, and
have many rulers, but it was a wilful falsification of the Libellers to cite
a Text as spoken of Princes, that was altogether applied to the people. Psalm
107.

Upon the SCOTTS Delivering the KING to the ENGLISH.
THis objecting of selling the King by the Scotts is so foul an infamy, as
befitts none to vindicate, but themselves. In the mean time the Libeller
thinks, he may say with the high Priests to Judas confessing his sin of
betraying our savior, what is that to us, and he would have the infamy only
rest on the seller, none on the buyer, and its like will, as he professes
disagree with the King to the worlds end, and will out babble all law, truth,
and reason, that such as fought to change the Government, and destroy the
laws, fought for them, and he may babble to the worlds end, and not be
believed against the evidence of the fact, and that miror before his face,
wherein he sees all that acted, which he denies, renders him not only a denyer
of principles, but common sense, and the Traitors decree of non addresses was
what they ever intended, though they had not a confidence to act it presently,
and from that example of disloyalty, the Libeller, and others made a change of
principles to suit with such monstrous productions. Its probable the Libeller
would be ever answearing fruiteles repetitions, for his answeares are noe
other, and yet he thinks himself not liable to censure for his stall
repetition in the lines before of the kings being unalterable in his will,
would have been our Lord, averse from Parliament, and reformation.

If the Libeller retained any estimation of David's heart, he would not so
often have reproached the use of David's words, And we have good reason to
believe, that he, that suffered David's troubles, was supported with a measure of
David's spirit, while his pe^secuters exercised on him the malice of David's
Enemies; And were not this Libeller possessed with an evil spirit, he would not
borrow matter of sport from stealing David's spirit, nor reproach, and slander
from Pamelaes prayer. which may be used more warrantably then reproved, but he
is drawn very dry that make such use of a scoff.

Upon the DENYING him the attendance of his CHAPPLAINES.
A Chapplaine is a thing diminitive, and inconsiderable. And the man would be
ignorantly witty upon the name, as unknown. That a King should not desire the
assistance of such persons of the Clergy, as were his Domestickes, and
acquainted with his conscience, or that such persons should not have a place in
the families of Kings, may seem a strange supposition in these men, that so
much magnify preaching, as the shopps of Mechannickes are turned to pulpitts,
and every Cooper grown a reverend Predicant.

The Scripture ownes noe such function, not of Presbiter, for what else are
Chapplaines, if he had looked for the names of his independent congregations,
he had not found them in Scripture. But they, that know noe places dedicated to
the service of God, know noe persons attending that service.

The Church not avowing them, they are left to such further examination, as the
Sons of Sceva the Jew met with. And itts like they meet with such examiners,
as the Sons of Sceva met with, such unclean spiritts, as professed to know
Jesus, and Paul, but hated both, and were the intelligencers of the Prince of
Darkness, and the Libeller in their Phrase says, Bishopps, or Presbiters we
know, and Deacons we know, but who are Chapplaines? He could not have chosen an
Example more proper for his imitation, that hates the name, and function of
Bishopps, and Presbiter, as those wicked spiritts the name of Jesus, and Paul,
and thence it is, that he has gathered the Cobwebs of the stage to cast upon
them, calling the Ministers of the gospel sewers, and yooman vs^ers of
devotion, and implements of the Court Cup'board, this is the devotion of these
reformers.

Their sending to the King Ministers, and others, whose excess of corrupt
affections were become venom, and fury against all loyalty, was to render his
condition more afflicted being only allowed to live among scorpions, and have
his habitation with Dragons, who were not only insolent Traitors, but
diminitive, and inconsiderable Creatures for a Religious charge. They denied
him his Chapplaines in affront, and to increase the measure of his sufferings,
and such, as feel not the absence of those Messengers of peace, which God has
appointed to bring glad tidings to his people, discover more prophanes, then
Michha superstition, and his ignorance condemns the presumptuous pretense to
knowledge in those Rebels: he lamented the loss of his Levite, in whom,
thoug erroneously, he thought himself blessed in regard of his Tribe, these men
think Bishopps, and Presbiters of noe more use, then Micahs Idol, for the
Libeller would not have household oraisons officiated by Priests, but where are
Priests forbidden that office. These men, that have so long used household
Conventicles, and had their wandering Levites to officiate, now know noe use of
them.

Kings heretofore, David, Solomon, and Ichosophat might not touch the
Priesthood, yet might pray in public, while the Priests stood, and heard. And
does it follow from the practice of these particular persons, that public
prayer was not a part of the Priests office, he might as well conclude from the
prayers of the publican, and Pharisee, because they were made in the temple,
and the King did upon good grounds, believe, a particular blessing on the
Priests prayers, as on his sermons, though God admit all men to call upon him:
And the Libeller shows with what Zeal those Sectaries call upon God, with
whom the Priests prayers are the chewing of Mattins, and yet these Enemies of
God will be called Christians, whose whole language is the derision of all
devotion Though the King had abilities of knowledge to pray beyound their
mimicke levites, yet he would neither usurp the Priests office, nor neglect
the use of it in confidence of his own parts, and the Monsters he mentions,
its like would preach repentance for not sinning, and would as easily preach
down true repentance, as preach up Rebellion, and the King had reason to give
such conspiratours the same welcome, that Solomon did to Abiathar, that abetted
the Treason of Adoniah, And he could not hope, that Joroboams Priests, who were
made of the lowest of the people, and supported the revolt from their lawful
King would teach other doctrine, then what tended to subversion of Church, and
state. We have seen, that with the sacrilege of the endowments of the Church,
the Rebels have set up their Images of Priests, and have banished all devotion,
and service of God censuring the saying of amen to a devout prayer for a
superstitious responsorie.

The prayers made by the forenamed Kings in the Temple, and by the Apostles,
and ancient Christians for above three hundred years were in vain, if the
heart cannot safely join with another man's extemporall sufficiency. And whence
does it appear, that any of these prayers, that were made for others to join
in, were made upon extemporall sufficiency, the contrary appears, when the
Scripture expressly dictates the words, which the Priest shall use, whereto
the people must say Amen, and there is not any story, from whence the want of
Leiturgies in the first age of the Church can be collected, but there are
Testimonies of their antiquity, as well, as necessity of their use. Its a
sign of a proph^ne heart, that makes his mirth, of divinity, and a very little
wit goes to the conceits of a closett Chapplaine, and a mind wandering after
preferment, or his dinner in the time of prayer. Doubtless he esteems a dinner
more, then devotion, that places the sum of his Religion in affected, and
scorneful suppositions of other men's intentions.

He asks, what avayles their praying with him. And why should men join in
prayer at all, is there noe efficacy in such conjuncture? We may not doubt
both of assistance in our prayers, and blessing upon them by joining with our
spiritual Fathers in that duty, and he, that has most oil in his own
lamp, will seek increase of it by those dispensers, which God has appointed.

The libellers objections are not like those apples of Asphaltis, whereto he
compares the Kings discourses, but like those foggs, and Mists, which arise out
of a putrified matter, and are offensive to the eyes, whom they would hinder
from beholding the sun, and are instantly dispelled with the same heat, that
moved them.

Many things were sung in the Kings Chapel, that were not understood. It may
be by some men, that would not, but such, as could understand what was read,
might understand what was sung in the Kings Chapel, there being neither
strange language, nor note to make any thing unintelligible.

His belief is, that God is noe more moved with a prayer elaborately penned,
then men truly Charitable with the penned speech of a beggar. There is no doubt
of it, if there want devotion in him, that uses it, but what difference is
there between a prayer elaborately penned, and hastily conceived, is God more
moved with extemporall, then elaborate expressions, and are not the tunes of
their new Levites too near the sound of Common beggars to be esteemed a fruit
of devotion by the hearers?

Upon his Penitential vows, AND MEDITATIONS AT HOLMEBY.
HOw long the Sectaries have made the frequent use of places of Scripture in
their prayers, the marks of their devotion need not be remembered, and now the
use of places of Scripture must be hypocrisy in the King. His devotions must
be persecuted as well, as his Estate, and person, and the Libeller had wanted
one principle brand of infamy, if he had omitted those censures of the kings
piety upon pretense of the practice of hipocrites, and wicked men, and he will
accuse the Godly, because wicked men have dissembled, and set parallel the
cleerest devotions of the saints of God to the expressions of the most
desperate, and execreable sinners, he will prove the King short of true
repentance, which is a subject indiscernable by a man of resolved impenitency,
God only knows the truth of the heart, and such, as turn Charity into
cursing are as far from a right understanding of others vprightnes, as
conscious of their own hipocrisy.

He produces upon the Kings imitation, and use of David's Psalms the sayings of
Cain, Esau, Pharaoh, Balaam, Saul, Ahab, Iehoram, Judas, and Simon Magus. That
we may not doubt, but the same malice reigns in this rayler, that appeared in
these hipocrites, and he might have found, that this course, which he takes in
standring the king was as frequent in former persecuters, as good words in the
mouths of hipocrites, the Rebels against Moses charged him with usurpation,
and imposture, saying, will thou putt out the eyes of these men, David's Enemies
cried fie on thee we faw it with our eyes, Job was charged to drink down
iniquity like water, John the Baptist to have a Devil, and our blessed
savior to be a glutton, and a wine bibber. Virtue, nor ability never wanted
detraction, and a just esteem of one, or other may not be expected from men,
that have neither, for if they had either, they would not set themselves
against both, he deals, as the Pharisees to watch the words of our Savior to
get a word for their accusation of him, and so the Libeller to cover the
shame of his wicked cause, catches at the Kings words to putt of the guilt of
their Rebellion, and makes it Gods disposing to that purpose, that the King
says let thy anger I beseech thee be against me, and my Fathers house, as for
these sheep, what have they done? And by this says he acquitts the
Parliament, and people, and takes the sin on himself, as David did. Noe doubt
he took on him his own sins, for which God brought on him his affliction, but
does he thereby justify his bloody persequuters, though he were punish^ by a
Rebellion, does he acquitt the Rebels? Does he mean wolves, when he names
sheep? The King expresses his Fatherly pity to his innocent subjects, and the
Libeller his emptines of defense in assuming so impertinent an inference, as
if David could not acknowledge Gods Justice in the Rebellion of Absalom without
the acknowledgment of his wicked Sons righteousness, nor the King use David's
confession fo Gods Justice upon occasion of the present punishment of the
people by the sword, and his proof is suitable to his collection, for he says
in the next line, he accuses the Church it self for the Churches Enemy. The
next line is, let my sufferings satiate the malice of mine, and the Churches
Enemies, sure the man would have his independent brethren the only true Church,
that are the Enemies of it, their victories are by Miracle, and what then are
the Turks, which were greater, and more strange then theirs? And let any man
compare the boastings of the Rebels with the Enemies of Gods Church in all
times, and there will appear the greatest likeness, that has been observed in
men driven by Diabolical instinct, and thence proceeds the Libellers
distemper, that having within so few lines before sought to hide their
Rebellion, cannot retain the motives of it, and those he expresses to be
liberty of schisms, the abolition of Bishepps, established laws, Kingly
power, and leiturgy, the oppressing of loyalty getting all force into the
Rebels hands, and to withstand them herein is Tyrany.

He resembles their sacrilege to David's eating the shewbread, and Ezechiahs
taking the gold, and silver out of the Temple. But did David make a war to
destroy the Priests, that he might eat the shewbread, or Hezechiah seek to
destroy the Temple, that he might take away the silver, and gold? And the
primitive Church sold their sacred vtensills to preserve their Priests, and
Bishopps, not sought to take them away, that they might convert the sacred
vtensills to their private avarice, and the Bishopps sold those sacred
vtensills, neither Princes, nor people durst lay their hands on them.

The Libeller will not endure any glory to be given to God, but by the medly of
Sectaries, nor any restitution of the King, to his chief City, but with the
spilling of his blood, and those that were faithful to him. In the beginning
of Christianity men had to do with Pagans, who opposed Religion directly, and
in this age we have to do with men, that would betray it to Pagans, by
obtruding such doctrines, and practice for Christian, which may make it odious
to moral heathens, who could only heretofore question the truth of our
belief, but may by these new reformers take occasion to accuse our Religion of
impiety, for these wretches represent it contrary to all the principles of
Common honesty. The Rebels cannot believe a pardon, they know their demeritts
so execrable, and therefore he will suppose the King would find means to
punish, though he promised pardon. They know the falsehood of their own hearts,
and thence is their suspicion. This libeller is not to be disputed with upon
principles of Religion, that receives noe Maxims, but of Rebellion, and
Tyrany, God graunts not always deliverance to his Servants from temporal
evils, though they pray for them, and this profane Libeller concludes their
prayers to be fained, because not granted, his words are fit for detestation,
and therefore to be observed by all, that they may abhor the black mysteries
of this sect, for he says, God having cut him of without granting any of
those mercyes, it follows, that his resolutions were as fained, as his vows
frustrate. What Turk, Jew, or devil could say more against suffering
Christians.

Upon the ARMIES surprisall of the KING at HOLMBY.
THe loud noise, that the Libeller has made hitherto of the great obstinacy
of the King in not harkening to the advice of Parliament is ended, and the
Parliament become a Council of scribes, and Pharisees, and they had been elder
Brothers long enough, and it was now time, that the younger should have his
turn, and the new model must dictate to the doting Parliament, and there must
not be a prevalence in the house of Commons to discard those men of invincible
valor without their due reward, and though they may murder the King, having
taken away his sword, they may not think to deal so with them, that have the
sword in their hands. The virulence of some false Ministers, which the King
must not name without reverence, and their seditious tongues more zealous
against schism, then Simony, or pluralities might in likelihood have done
mischief between these Brethren, but it was prevented, and in despite of the
Parliament, and these old warriors, and Zealous Ministers, the new model
seize the King their Captive, and this is the law, Religion, Reformation,
Liberty, and Parliament, which the king withstood, and the man after all his
law determines, that irregular motions may be necessary on earth sometimes as
well, as in heaven. Great worthyes by disobeying law often times have saved the
Commonwealth, and the law afterward approved that unblameable exorbitancie. But
wherefore has he all this time made breach of laws so heinous, it had been
ingenuous in him to have distinguished between the blameable, and unblameable
exorbitancy, and then he would not have found Coat, and Conductmoney, and the
rest of his particulars rise so high, as the unblameable exorbitancies he now
magnifies. But though Divine laws could not regulate the man's motions, as they
do Celestial bodies, yet the obstinacy in his evil courses makes him go
retrograde, and fight for law, and against law, for Parliament, and against
Parliament, and trust, and Elections in Parliament are become scarecrowes to
fright Children, not Conquerours.

Though the Presbiterian be supplanted, he shall find a better portion, then
uncircumcised Prelates. Its like the Jewish brethren seek to bring into
bondage such, as receive not their Antichristian Marks, and profess the
belief of revived heresies, eating the sacrifices of the dead. The story could
not certify the King, that there was division of tongues, or hands in the
builders of Jerusalem, but it told him, that they, which built had the Kings
Commission, and God may in mercy to the nation remove these bloody brethren,
that will destroy Jerusalem rather then quit their Tyrany over it. We may very
well see the judgment of God upon the nation in this bloody war, and though it
begun with the house of God, we may expect, that such men will not escape, that
have been the firebrands of this dissension, and wrought so great misery upon
the nation, and though the Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites gloried in the
Jews Captivity, as these Rebels in the Conquest, and Captivity of their
King, and Sanballat, and Tobiah, and these other Enemies of the Church despised
the weakness of the Jews in rebuilding the wall of Jerusalem, and in scorn
said, that a fox going on it would overthrow it speaking with the same
insolency, as the Libeller now uses, yet they may be assured, that God will
remember his Church, and the Enemies thereof, as he did Edom in the day of
Jerusalem.

The Libeller is a good witness against himself, saying to counterfeite the
hand of God is the boldest of all forgeries, and he, who without warrant, but
his own fantastique surmise takes upon him perpetually to unfold the secret,
and unsearchable mystery of high providence, is likely for the most part to
mistake, and slander them, and approaches to the madness of those reprobate
thoughts, that would wrest the sword of Justice out of Gods own hand, and
apply it more justly in his conceit, and himself makes the application, that
usurps the hand of God in the successes, and victories of Rebels to the
approbation of their impiety, and avow, the wresting of the sword of Justice
out of the hand of Gods vicegerent to employ it more justly in their own
conceit, and dares slander the mysteries of high providence by binding them to
their own fantastique surmises; What could he have spoken more appositely to
his own condemnation? All men, that behold the dealings of the Army with that
mock Parliament, do judge a very great proportion in that retalliation of
the injuries, they had offered the King, and they, that would lay hands on the
Militia are brought under the Dominion of those forces, which themselves had
raised for that usurpation, and here again the Libeller would find somewhat
to succor his feeble conceits of the beginning of the war from the Kings
confession, which says, noe man is so blind, as not to see herein the hand
of divine Justice, they, that by Tumults first occasioned the raising of Arms,
must now be Chastened with their own Army for new Tumults. And what now is the
Libellers extraction from hence, that because Tumults were the first occasion
of raising Arms, by consequence he himself raised them first against these
Tumults. Its a cripled cause, that stands on such crutches. Though Tumults
might be the first occasion, yet this was not the whole occasion, for these
Tumults were seconded by seizing the forts, and Navy, and raising an Army by
those, that raised the Tumults, and their guilt in raising Tumults, sought
protection from a formed Army, and this Method of divine Justice, sober men
observe with reverence, while irrational, and obstinate Traitors attribute
nothing, but their own successes to the hand of God in favor, which is in
wrath to themselves, and others.

These were new Tumults, for which the City was chastened, and cannot be
referred to another far fetched cause so many years before. But the City,
that raised Tumults for the Parliament many years before, is now punished for
Tumults, for that same pretended Parliament by that Army raised out of them,
and is it not evident here that the first inventers of mischeife, are scourged
with the whipps themselves had prepared for others.

The fact of Manlius defending the Capitol against the Gauls, and afterward
thrown headlong from the Capitol for sedition, might restrain the Libellers
wicked application of their murdering the King at the gate of whitehall to the
merit of his actions done there, but the City suffered by an Action, which
they had done for them, who now punish them for it, and they, that did a
wickedness with applause, are punished for it by those that applauded it, the
Actions of Manlius were opposite one to another, here the same.

It was a mercy they had a victorious Army so near to fly to. But it was a
judgment, that Tumults, which they had used to drive away the King, should
drive away them, and the Libellers Logickes serves him to as little purpose, as
his history, He would have, that the latter were real Tumults, the first but
pretended, and why will he believe the Parliament for the first, and not for
the latter? And why does he call them those few of both houses, that withdrew
from the first tumults, and those many from the latter, when it is most
apparent, that they, which withdrew at first were three times the number of
them, that forsoake at last.

It is not the place, but the end, and cause, that makes a Parliament. And then
all they, that say they have a good cause, and a good end are a Parliament, and
what need is there then of a writ, or Elections? And Tumults are as good, as
Parliaments, and the end, and the cause make them Tumults, and noe Tumults,
Parliament and noe Parliament, and an Assembly at the bear garden is as good,
as the house of Commons, he has found the event to salve all, for they
returned soon to their places, that fled from these latter Tumults, and that
is the final decision of all controversy.

The King brings in an inconvenient, and obnoxious Comparision of vengeance, as
the Mice, and Ratts overtooke a german Bishopp. And the inconvenience is, that
the Libeller will from the name of Bishopp wish the same evil to all Bishopps,
that befell, that evil Bishopp. Is the comparision obnoxious, because he is
impertinent in following his own ^haddow, and cursing those, that are
innocent. Is it obnoxious, that the King supporting the order of Bishopps
should produce the Example of an evil Bishopp followed by divine vengeance? Is
not the Libellers mentioning the seditious tongues of his false preachers more
obnoxious, then the naming of the German Bishopp? And is it not as easy to wish
the Ratts, and mice had pursued these false, and seditious preachers till they
had driven them out of the land, as the Bishopps?

Sorrow, and pity in an overmastred Enemy are looked upon, as the ashes of
his revenge burnt out upon it self. An over mastred Enemy may be more, then
Conqueror, and may have cause, and affection to pity the victor, and they
most need pity, that least feel the want. The Triump^s of Rebels are
unnatural Prodigies, and the dances of devils. The pity of innocent
Martirs, which they expressed for proud persecutours was looked on, as the Kings
by these villains, and the wicked Jews despised our saviors bidding them not
weep for him, but for themselves, and for their Children. Although the
Libeller so lately justified chastning of the Parliament, yet he will have it
an injury in the King to persuade men against the Parliament, and so he ties
the end, and the cause to what he pleases, and as long, as he can bring noe
better evidence, then the success of usurpation, he washes not of any guilt
from himself, nor his rowte.

The just praises of an Enemy are esteemed honorable, and known truths cannot
proceed from Craft, being so obvious to all, and it were nearer to madness,
then reason to suppose, that there were not among those, which acted against
the king, such as knew not what they did, and had as great ignorance, as the
Libeller impudence, that censures the Charity of a prayer for such persons.

Entitled to the PRINCE OF WALES.
THe Libeller undertakes to show, that although the King had been reinstalled
to his desire, or his son admitted should observe all his fathers precepts,
yet that would be so far from conducing to our happiness, that it would
inevitably throw us back again into all our past, and fulfilled miseries.
There is noe doubt, but Traitors will tell the people so, and that there is
noe happiness, but under their usurpation, and though they engage them in endless
wars, which the rebelling against just right must produce, yet they persuade
the people, that the condition of war, and blood is more eligible, then those
blessings of peace the Kingdom enjoyed under all their Princes. By our
happiness he intends doubtless his Rebel party, whose happiness is to reign,
and Tyranize over the people, and that cannot continue with reinstalling the
King. But the people of England expect not any end of their misery, but by
restoring the just rights of their lawful King, and they now descerne, that
the success of a wicked cause was a judgment of God upon the nation, whose
vnthankefullnes, for their long prosperity had justly provoked his wrath.

He goes on to his proofs, that the king bears wittnes in his own words,
that the corrupt education of his youth was not untruly charged upon him, or
his Son, and that he gathers from these words of the Kings, Court delights
are prone either to root up all true virtue, and honor, or to be contented
only with some leaves, and withering formalities of them without any real
fruits tending to the public good. And is it a proof, that because Court
delights are prone to produce such fruits therefore all, that live in Princes
Courts must necessarily have a corrupt education, and might not this Libeller
have clearly observed, that his Majest: was free from such a corrupt
education, that had so clear a sight of the ill consequences of Court
delights. Though there be these pleasures at the Court, it is not the education
of Princes, whose youth is seasoned by instruction against the corruption of
these baits. There are dangers to men's manners from abundance, and high
places, and thence the Libeller would infer, that there must neither be
wealth, nor power, but in the hands of his Pharisaicall Sectaries, who never
complain of such corruption. The desperate hypocrisy of these traitors is
laid open by their own words, and Actions, and the Libeller from the Kings
caution to his Son by the example of Rehoboam frames an expression, as if the
King affirmed it to be his own case, with such faithless dealing he addresses
himself to his heedeles readers, and tells all that he says, is the Kings
confession. There are doubtless men, that can relate the Kings life, and will,
but that need not in opposition to the slanders of Rebels, whose cause is
supported by the lewdenes of detraction. The long peace of the Kings Reign, in
the midst of wars round about us, shows, he was not idle in performance of
the Kingly office, and the war, and misery, that since brake out, was the
effect of great prosperity, which, as it corrupts the Court of Princes, so
the minds of the people, and makes way for the designs of seditious
Traitors, we had been sure to have heard slander enough upon the Kings
personal behavior, if he had been obnoxious to any suspicion, or tainted with
Court delights. The best Governments are subject to repinings, and the great
prosperietie of Solomon's Reign, when silver for the plenty was not esteemed,
drew after it popular Complaints of heavy burdens, and whatever Rehoboam
threatened, Jeroboam really performed, the madness of the people finding always
their murmurings repayed with greater sufferings. The disobedience, and
contempt of just authority, and of those principles of Government, and
Religion, which the King teaches his Son have been the occasion of al our
miseries, there being nothing like misery, or suffering before this horrid
Rebellion.

And now the Libeller will have the breeding op of his Majest: now li^ng in the
rugged, and boisterous license of undisciplined Camps, and garriso^s noe
better, then the effeminacies of the Court, and yet he will persuade us, that
Rebels nursed up in that boisterous, and unnatural disobedience are fittest
instruments of our happiness. Those principles, which the King had learnt in his
education, and which endured the Trial of a fiery adversity are received for
sound by all such, as have not renounced reverence to Religion. Those
principles, which the prosecution of a bloody Rebellion, and the continual
exercise, of rapine, falsehood, and oppression, have fixed in the hearts of
Rebels must necessarily make the words of the wise, and the ways of the just,
matter only of contempt, and derision, and such, as have once broken the bounds
of modesty, think it dishonor to have shame, and repentance, and will
advance their confusions insteede of order, their Blasphemies for zeal, their
sacrilege for reformation, their Tyrany for law, and all the hell they fear
is the loss of their usurped power, and the restoring of just right, and their
jealosies of loosing their own greatenes provokes them still to an increase of
their lewdenes, making truth, and right the object of their spite, and
persecution. These debaucht Rebels proclaim, that there is noe good but
Rebellion, noe work of God, but submission to it, and repentance for opposing
it.

If the Church of England be Antipapall, how comes it to be a schism? And why
has the libeller so continually made up his discourses with inclinations to
Popery? Independencie knows noe schism, for if it allow every meeting its
liberty, where is the schism?

Its a Rule, that noe Scripture, nor ancient Creed binds our faith to any
Church denominated by a particular name. But he rejects, what was received by
the universal Church. What does that contradict the Kings advice to his Son of
his esteem of the Church of England, if he believe, as he did upon good
ground, that it was agreeable in doctrine to the word of God? It is apparent,
that these Sectaries are separated from all Churches of the world, and that
Government, which they call Catholic had neither precept, nor practice in any
Church, being newly crept out of hell to persecute the Church.

Noe man was ever bid to be subject to the Church of Cornith, Rome, or Asia,
but to the Church without addition. And why does he deny to be subject to the
Church without addition, was there never Church before this day? here we have
the builders of Babell, none understand what another says, were not those that
lived in those Churches of Corinth, Rome, and Asia commanded to be subject to
the Governors of those Churches? Is it not the Apostles Command to obey
those, that have the oversight of them, and may every man despise their new
independent congregations, and seek for a Church without addition, and where
then will he find him? We may imagine what manner of state such Church
reformers will erect, and what it is they call reformation, that look upon all
Churches, as schisms, because not rent into as many parts, as particular
persons. These schismatickes pretend the Church of England almost grown
Popish, and yet nothing altered from the first reformation, and while they
disguise their meaning by pretending popery to get the vulgar unawares to
favor their dissembled zeal, they demand to have the Reformation
vnestablished. And the restraint of their Rebellion is Pharaohs prohibition to
the Israelites, that sought leave tosacrifise to God. It was a greate^
testimony of the Kings zeal to the Church of God, that he forewarned his Son
to suppress errors, and schisms, his own experience having taught him, that
these dogs, and evil workers are the greatest evils to Church, and state,
and these destroyers, that are the reproaches of Religion, the Scabbs, and
biles to the Church, allow noe protestant Churches to be communicated with,
that are not tainted with the same putrefaction, that has corrupted them.

For the Civil state the kings precepts tend to the preservation of Civil
liberty, and it was far from our Fathers to think, that any humane laws
were immutable, but further, that laws should be altered at the will of a
mutable multitude, and that their King should be excluded from the judgment of
the reasons for a change. He falls from the question touching repeal of
laws, and talks of saving the Kingdom, we may better trust the King with
saving the Kingdom, then any number of men we can pick out, whose private
fortunes may be saved, though the kingdom be lost.

The Turks, Jews, and Moors enjoy under the Turkish Government, what their
industry, and labor have made their own. If that be true the Libeller is
much out of the way to think it a reproach to Civil Government to compare it
to the Turks; what Civil liberty does the freest nation claim more, and
what do these Masters of the new Republique pretend to allow more? Do they
not plainly tell the people, they ought to have noe more, then they will give
them? Thus he will defend the Turk, Jew, and Moore rather then be an
Englishman.

There is noe doubt, but the liberty of the subject depends on the Regal
power in the first place. There is noe liberty without Government, and where
the Government is regal, the subject must maintain it, or be a Traitor, and
give up his liberty for a prey to ravenous usurpers.

That the King suffered it to be preached in his own hearing, that the subject
had noe property of his goods, but all was the Kings right. Is a mainfest
untruth, yet they, which make advantage of such inventions practice what they
reproach, for does not that thing they call a Parliament, consisting of a few
contemptible persons profess, that all the goods of the subjects are at their
disposing. By the laws of England noe act can be a law without the king,
though both houses propounded it, and in that negative voice of the kings, the
people reposed their liberty, which they would not wholly entrust to a Major
part of one, or both houses.

The power of the whole nation is vertually in the Parliament. But there is noe
virtue in it without the king. And is it vertually in such a part of the
Parliament, as either the Army, or the Tumults shall pick out? The Libeller
has borne wittnes for the kings Martyrdom, though he intended the contrary,
and while he names the Rebels war in their own defense, cannot avoyde to tell
the world, the Rebellion was to take away the Kings negative voice, and
establish laws at their own will. Every man will bear wittnes, that it is
Martyrdom to die, rather then burn incense to Idols, or Devils, and he that
refuses to introduce schism, and disorder into the Church, and committ
sacrilegious pillage of Church goods, and is persecuted to death for his
refusal, is noe less a Martyr, then he, that suffers for denying an
Idolatrous worshipp, and this is not to die for Religion, because established,
but that establishment, which we ought to preserve, and all the painting, and
dawbing of these Artisans of Rebellion will not deface that Martyrdom, which
their own wicked hands have testified. There are no reformed Churches, that
have abolisht the Decalogue, and so long a king, that dies by a wicked
Rebellion for not consenting to Trayterours demands is judged a Martyr by the
best reformed Churches, but he does not look before he leap, that brings in
the Romish Priests executed for that, which had been established, for he might
have known they were executed by laws in force, and for doing what noe law in
force allowed, and there is a great deal of difference between heretics
dying for errors against universal truths, and Martirs dying for universally
received truths.

The legislative Parliament, and law of Coronation, and obstinacy of one man
his so often chewed Rhetorique will not aid him to overcome so apparent
truth, and noe Parliament could have been so ridiculous, and contemptible a
thing, as they, which abuse the name have now made it, spurning it too, and fro
like a footeball at the will of the multitude, and noe men are more marks for
slaves, then such, as are destined to such a vassallage under such Masters.

Noe tolleration can please schismatickes, that is bounded with any laws, and
unless they have a liberty to tread down all law, and Religion, they account
it not freedom, and such tolleration, which other Churches account themselves
happy in, these Sectaries account despicable, that will have it not beneath the
honor of a Parliament, and free nation to receive a Schismatic pretended
Religion, devised by a junto of Mechannickes.

His suspicions of palliation are of the same stuff with his positions, and we
may well think upon his own grounds, that the Kings advice to his Son to be
tender of the people, was sincere, whose destruction would be his undoing.
Which might justly move a Prince to that tenderness. Powerful Rebels are noe
less infamous, then great, and these, who place the hopes of immortal praise
in the excess of villainies, only erect the Monuments of their impieties the
higher, that they may be seen by posterity, though they avoided for the
present the height of Hamans Gallows, and we may not think such men look to
be remembered in mercy with God, who showed none to men. They think with Cain
their sin greater, then can be forgiven.

Although the King Exhort his Son not to study revenge, yet they believe, that
he, or at least they about him intend not to follow that exhortation, and that
he says was seen lately at the Hague. Its like he intends, the killing of
Dorislans their Rebel Agent. Is that an Argument of studying revenge after
Reconciliation, that a professed villain was slain in the heat of indignation,
coming in Triumph with the blood of the Murthred King, as his Trophey? The
Libeller would willingly persuade the multitude, that it concerns them as much,
as those impious projectours of Rebellion to fear such revenge, and therefore
they may not repent, but like himself maintain Treason to be the better
cause, and to return to loyalty were ficklenes, and instabilitie.

He cannot endure the Government by Bishopps, for he says, it is away to
subdue the consciences of vulgar men to slavish doctrine. The doctrine he
means is order, and obedience, and he would have a compendious way to schism,
and Rebellion, and that's the grudge, which Traitors have at this Government,
and their professed quarrel.

He will not admit, that Parliaments can have freedom, if the King may deny
any thing, which a Major part propounds, as if they had noe freedom, unless the
prevailing party were absolute Lords, and yet their freedom is preserved,
though the Army pick out a few to be the Parliament, and send packing the
rest, and this is the foundation of the English freedom, as he would have it,
and that this Conventicle must have the name of Parliament, and not of a
faction. The conclusion, that the Libeller would have is, that the Parliament
should consist of a few Traiterous designers, to whose voice the rest must be
only an Eecho, and the sound of a Parliament must be noe other, then a bagpipe,
yiedling only such noates, as the breath, and stopps of the prime Masters allow
it. We have seen those tapistry Parliaments, which he mentions, which stay,
and remove at the pleasure of those Masters of the household; And should not the
King have a power to stopp the extravagant motions of these impetuous
Commanders, which blasted all such, whose wisdom, and gravitie offered
wholesome Counsels for public safety, and ordered their mutes, and noughts
to signify their pleasure The Kingdom would be sure of misery, as often, as
they see a Parliament, and the people see they must seek their preservation in
unity, which is Resident in the head, not in those broken fractions the
subject of division, and such, as seek vents, and ouletts from the supreme
Government are the whirle winds of misery, and confusion, but Traitors would
have laws as easily broken, as the spiders webb. And this Parliament, to which
the King must be subject, himself will allow noe more freedom, then to sit in
the noose of their Military general, which when he pleases to draw to geather
with one twitch, not only with his negative, but positive Commaud, shall
throttle the whole nation to the wish of Caligula in one neck, and this the
Kings negative was far from, and if the Libeller stitch together all the
quibbles of pasquills, and satirs, they will agree unto his Rebel Masters, but
lose their property by his application to lawful Government. Where they have
placed the Militia the Kingdom now feel, who understood not the word, when
they were at first hoodminckt by it to seek they knew not what.

The deliverance, which these men boast of is the deprivation of just
Government, and the substitution of lawles will, and the people see, that they
are so far from a deliverance, that they are delivered over to a languishing
misery under the sharpest servitude, and they now find their Idolizing a
Parliament has drawn them from their loyalty to him, whom God had set over
them, and cast them under the hard bondage of these Masters, and like them,
which rejected the sonns of Gideon, and took the son of his servant to
reign over them, they feel a fire of division kindled among them to devour
one another.

This Libeller allows not any thoughts of revenge in his Majest: now living
for the murder of his father, and yet reproacheth him for making peace with the
Irish, and not seeking their total extirpation, and the peace with them he
calls a sordid, dishonorable, and irreligious seeking of his Crown. But the
man is unwilling he should have any ways at al, and would persuade his
Sectaries, for none else will believe him, that the King may not make peace with
a Rebel submitting to oppose a Rebel persevering.

That the Presbiter Scott, which woes the King now living is put of proceeds
from his terms, not from his quality. Should not the people of England seek
the restitution of their King, and legal Government, whereof they have been
cheated with the adulterate ostentations of liberty, and redress of
greivances, they would appear arrant beasts, that cried out, and below'd by
the instinct of their drivers, fighting like brutes, till they ran into the
pinfold, where they are reserved for servitude, and slaughter by those Masters,
who allured them with food to put the yoke on their necks.

The Libeller dislikes the kings conclusion, that Religion to God, and loyalty
to the King cannot be parted without the sin, and infelicitie of a people And
says its contrary to the teaching of Christ, that noe man can serve two
Masters. These are fit Judges of our duty to God, or man, and fit reformers of
Church, and state, that will have the service of a Master, or obedience to a
father the serving of another Master, then God, and the spirit of God speaking
by St. Peter, fear God, and honor the King must contradict the teaching of
Christ, such Church makers do we now live with. Such, as served heathen
Masters, may not leave their service, though they serve not their heathen Gods
at their Command, and if they did desert their earthly Masters for that
reason, they did not serve their Master in heaven, who will be served by their
subjection to their earthly Masters, but he, that will serve himself cannot
serve God, and that self service is the whole work of these Rebels, who
pretend to put God in the first place, that they may leave him noe place, and
such, as desert their King upon pretense of Gods service, desert God to serve
themselves, and they will only enjoy their power, and wealth, and ease for Gods
sake, but suffer for him they will not, that kind of testimony to the truth of
Religion, they account among the corruptions of the first ages of the Church,
and they have found a more accurate, and pleasant way to serve God.

Entitled MEDITATIONS UPON DEATH.
BEcause the King affordes time to inveigh bitterly against that murder, but in
the Libellers language Justice done on him, it will be as he says needful to
say something in defense of those proceedings. Doubtless all, that wit, or
impudence can offer in defense of that Barbarism is far short of a colorable
excuse. He is courting of apocripha, and makes a Prologue out of Esdras, and
Josephus, Authors in his judgment, not less believed, then any under sacred,
and brings forth the story of the three wise questions, and zorobabells
determination for women, and truth. Quorsum haec? Though he be not asked, nor
in a nation, that gives such rewards to wisdom. (his Masters have not that
bounty to restore the King, that he may sit next him, their gratitude being
of the same Stamp with their loyalty) he shall pronounce his sentence
somewhat different, that either truth, and Justice are all one, or else that
Justice by his office is to put forth more strength in the affairs of
mankind. To what purpose does he so solemnly produce this piece of
Apocripha, and pronounce his sentence different? Justice is a virtue of the
mind, and putts forth noe more strength in the affairs of mankind then
truth, but he talks of justice, and truth, as if they were members of the
house of Commons. The sensual appetite of some is too strong for their
understanding, and thence proceeded the conclusions for the strength of wine,
and women. In others the understanding and reason are stronger, and there truth
is strongest, but we may be assured, that in this Libeller, and his Masters,
ambition, cruelty, and falsehood are strongest, and thence their Actions are an
oppression, and defiance of truth, and Justice, and they are grown so absurd,
as from the Titles of strength given to virtues, and passions, this triflinge
Libeller would have them non resident, and to act without a subject. If
Zorobabell had made truth a fantastical person, as this man strives to have
justice understood, he had surely lost his reward, as well, as the opinion of
his wisdom. This man would have Justice understood, as she is painted in a
piece of Tapistry.

Justice had a sword putt into her hand to use against all violence, and
oppression in the earth. By whom was this sword putt into her hand? Do these
Traitors believe, that their magnifying of Justice makes any man look on
their Barbarous Actions with less detestation, or that justice is any part of
their end, or Actions? Justice teaches Rulers how to use the sword put into
their hands, but is armelesse against any violence, and oppression without the
power of the Ruler. If the Magistrate do injustice, there is noe justice
committed to others against him. The wise man by the spirit of God tells us,
that he beheld wrong, and injustice, and the cries of the oppressed, and there
was noe deliverer, and where then was the Libellers justice? was not violence
there stronger then justice? Though divine justice cannot be avoided, humane
justice often fayles, and cannot reach the offender.

She is most truly, who accepts no person, and exempts none from the severitie
of her stroke. Though by the Rules of justice, there is no accepting nor
exempting of persons, yet the Magistrate, to whom alone the Rule belongs is
confined to persons, and places, justice forbidding all usurpation, and
striking is oppression, where lawful power gives not the sword.

She never suffers injury to prevayle, but when falsehood first prevails over
truth, and that is a kind of justice done on them, who are so deluded. And is
not falsehood an injury? why should justice suffer falsehood to prevayle more
then other injuries, and why should deluded, and deceived persons be deprived
of Justice. And is it Justice to suffer deceived persons to be injured? This
man sees the horrid Injustices acted by his Masters, and that must be a kind
of justice, because (in his sense) upon deceived men.

Though wicked Kings, and Tyrants counterfeite the sword, yet she communicates
not her power to any, but such, as are just, or at least will do Justice. Does
justice communicate her power to every just man, or that will do justice, and
are they not Tyrants, that take the sword, which is not given them by the
Libellers own judgment. He would needs make justice a Goddess, and Poetical
fancies, realities, and Bellona must lead an Army without a General. Kings
have their power from God, and God gives the sword ye even to wicked Kings; and
because the power is given them for justice, it is called the sword of justice,
though they use it oft-times to Injustice, and though there are so many
instances of wicked Rulers, who yet had their power from God, yet this impudent
Blaspheamour says. It were extreme partiality, and Injustice, the flat
denial, and overthrow of her self to put her own Authenticke sword into the
hand of an unjust, and wicked man, or so far to accept, and exalt one mortal
person above his equals, that he alone shall have the punishment of all other
men transgressinge, and not receive like punishment from men, when he himself
shall be found the highest Transgressour. He beleives not the Scripture tellinge
us Gods advancement of diverse Kings above their equals, and to that condition
of impunitie; And must it not necessarily follow from his principles, that God
is unjust, and partial in so doing? And if all men be not punished equally in
this life for the same offenses? Can there be a greater Blaspheamy? Were it not
the height of Injustice, if the governed should judge, and punish the
Governor? Were it possible for mankind to subsist in such a state, or can
there be a possibility of any right, or Justice in such confusion? The
Scripture forbids us to judge another man's servant, but this man will have the
father punished by the child, the Master by the servant, the Prince by the
people.

Justice is, and ought to be strongest. The strength of public Justice is the
Magistrate. Though Justice ought to be strong in our affections, and Actions,
yet all men are not obliged, nor permitted to do all Acts of Justice. The
execution of Civil Justice is the Magistrates office, it is the strength of
Injustice to usurp the calling of others. From this Lunaticke discourse of the
strength of Justice, he concludes. That if by sentence thus written, it were my
happiness to set free the minds of Englishmen from longing to return
poorelyvnder that Captivity of Kings, from which the strength, and supreme
sword of Justice has delivered them, I shall have done a work, not much
inferior to that of Zorobabell. The sentence of this brain sick Libeller is
very weak to work on any opinion, but the has set free some Englishmen from
the Captivity of a received error, for they were made believe they fought for
their King, and this man tells them it was to shake of Kings, and surely his
vainities, and deceites, and his Masters Tyrany will persuade the Englishmen to
seek their return under the free, and glorious Government of Kings from the
Captivity of these Tyrants, and usurpers, that have enslaved them; And that
horrid murder of the King under the shameless pretense of justice, must
necessarily work detestation of the fact, and a longing to be delivered from
the Dominion of such Monsters. Noe doubt this Libeller would think it an
happiness to be secure in his stolen power, but he must express more reason,
and less impiety to effect such a work, and he may be assured, that as long,
as there are men so ingenuous to acknowledge Justice, that they must detest
his cause, and him. And though Kings be unaccountable to men for their Actions,
it is noe way contrary to the wisdom of Zorobabell, who names not Justice,
and if he had given that strength to Justice, which he did to truth, it had
been in the same sense, understanding the force of Justice, as of other
virtues. The strength of the King is over the persons, that of truth, and
Justice over the mind. But if the King be accountable to men, are not they, to
whom he is accountable by the libellers Argument not only stronger then the
King, but stronger then Justice? And so Justice is not strongest, unless the
sword be putt into a madd man's hand, and the giddy multitude, from whom
nothing, but Injustice can be expected may punish their Rulers. To what end
were Governments ordained, if justice be only in the Governed? Were ever like
Tyranies, and Injustices committed by single Rulers, as by the unbridled
multitude, and yet justice must have noe strength in the mouth of a King, and
the word of Rebels only must be the strength of justice, and this Champion,
that binds justice to Rebel power, and excludes it from Kings, hopes to be a
Zorobabell to the Englishmen for his wise sentence.

That noe law of God, or man gives the subjects any power of Judicature without
or against the King, he will prove most untrue, and by that most ancient, and
universal law, he that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shedd,
and here he says is noe exception of a King. Though it be plain, that he, to
whom the power of shedding the blod of the offender, is committed, must
necessarily be excepted, unless they will suppose he must kill himself, does
the Libeller imagine, that by this law, all men were judges, or that the
subject may judge the sovereign, who is not permitted by any law to judge an
Equal? As the divine law appointed punishments, so likewise Rulers, and if
people may judge their Rulers, it anulls all the Commands of obedience to
superiors, all subordination in humane society, and all decision of
Controversy, while every one may pretend his own opinion the Rule of justice.

Next he has found the place in numbers. Ye shall take noe satisfaction for
the life of a Murderer. But judges, to whom the law was given, were appointed
to declare, who was guilty of Murder, and we may easily see, who had been the
Murderers, if every man were to judge a superior, or the multitude their
Rulers, and this the Libeller might have found in the same book where the
people charge Moses, and Aron with killing the people of the Lord, and Moses
says, they were ready to stone him. And the Libeller may with his
Anabaptisticall brethren upon better grounds abolish Magistracy, then make
every man a Magistrate, as by this reason he would. Though the law appointed
noe satisfaction for the life of a murderer, yet we find David pardoned the
murder of his son Absalom, and Civil punishments are not of immutable law, and
it had been murder to take away his life, whom the king had pardoned, and we
find, that though Jacob cursed the rage of his two sons, yet he put them not to
death for the murder of the Sichemites.

A law must be founded in unrighteousness, if the people do not punish their
Rulers, as the Rulers them. And such a law is contrary to those Rules of
righteousness God has prescribed, and is the destruction of mankind, not any
law at tall, and this man fears not to charge God with unrighteousness, that
forbidds evil speakinge of their Rulers though wicked, and unjust, and scoffs
at his ordinance calling anointinge a Charm. Can any man of Common reason
imagine, that a people will be obedient unto any, whom they have power to
punish, or that subjection can consist with such a condition?

The anointinge of Abiathar to be a Priest did not exempt him from the power of
the King. And can any reasonable man think, that any, but the King could have
used that power upon Abiathar, or that because the King, who was anointed to
that office over the Priest, was subject to the like from his people, or any
private man, as this Atheist will have it?

David, as a private man, and in his own cause feared to lift up his hand
against the Lords anointed, but this Cannot forbidd the law, nor disarme
Justice from havinge legal power against any King. This shows, that divine
law forbadd all men to take the Arms of justice without, or against the King,
who is referred to Gods justice, and justice has noe Arms, but his power.
What David feared, he judged all others had cause to fear, who can touch the
Lords anointed, and be innocent? If David were a private man, being anointed
King, who was a public man? But what David feared, these wretches despise,
and Count this forbearance of David a ceremony, which he might have forborne.
If David feared in his own cause to lift up his hand against the Lords
anointed, the Libeller is his own judge, and must be his tormenter, that makes
an impious defense of those, that lifted up their hand against the Lords
anointed in their own cause, and were by his own confession but private men,
and he would have their exorbitance, and disobedience to law unblameable. Was
David a more private man, then they? All supreme Counsels in other forms of
Government, that have not a Monarch, claim this privilege of exemptio^ from
their subjects Judicature, b^t those graceless Rebels hold nothing sacred,
the place of Gods vicegerent they will have to be an enormous privilege, and
blow away Religion, and justice like Chafe with the blast of their fancy,
though they pretend the strength of it above that of Kings.

He has done with Scripture, he descends now to saint Ambrose excommunicatinge
Theodosius, and he will allow the Bishopp to be a saint for this fact, though
his calling were Prelaticall, and unlawful in his judgment. But what is
spiritual excommunication to the puttinge of a King to death? This fact of
saint Ambrose is noe Rule. Though Christian Bishopps refused to give the holy
mysteries to Princes in cases of sins, they did not presume to make a Civil
separation between them, and their people, and will the Libeller allow the
Bishopps to be more public persons, then Christ, and his Apostles, and to do
what they would not? He, that makes such outcryes against Popery here takes up
the most scandalous doctrine, that any of them maintain, and which the most
sober disclaim, and takes up those Arguments, which the Jesuits use for the
Clergies, and Popes power over Princes, and yet the man would be accounted a
zealous Protestant. The examples of excommunication by the british Bishopps,
saint German Oudeceus, and the clergy of Morcant might be al true, but
nothing to the purpose, nor are their excommunications Rules for Christian
practice, neither can there be any inference of deposing, or murderinge Kings
from such Actions.

But sor the greater Credit he says the facts of these British Bishopps were
before we had Communion with the Church of Rome. And may not he look on
himself, and his crew with horror for vilysying, and reproaching the calling
of Bishopps, as Papell, and Antichristian, and yet confess it to be before we
had any Communion with the Church of Rome?

What power of deposinge Kings, and consequently of putting them to death was
assumed, and practiced by the Canon law, he says, he omitts, as a thing
generally known. Why would he not tell, by whom it was practiced, would that
discredit the Authority? What power the Popes practiced in deposinge Kings is
generally known, and detested by all good men being Actions contrary to all
laws, but of their own making. But did the people of England expect, that all
the promises of Reformation made by the late Parliament would end only in
approvinge the Tyrany, and usurpation of the Pope over Kings, and justifying of
the powder plot, and are all the complaints of the Protestant Divines against
the practice of the Popes become impertinent Clamours? But such a defense is
suitable to the cause.

Whole Counsels have decreed, that a Counsel is above the Pope, though by
them not denied the vicar of Christ, and we may be ashamed in our cleerer
light not to descerne further, that a Parliament is above a King. It were a
shame to us, if we should not descerne the difference between the independent
power of Kings, and the usurped power of the Pope, and this breaker wants
shame, that pretends cleerer light, and opposition to Rome, and yet beg
Examples from it. Such, as preferred the authority of Counsels above the
Pope, had their warrant from the ancient Counsels, which knew not the
vicarshipp of the Pope different from his brethren; And had these Counsels
thought him Christ's vicar, and infallible, as the Romanists now maintain,
their conclusion of the Counsels superiority could not consist with their
premises, being much alike this Authors ordinary Arguments. But what
resemblance has a Counsel of the whole Church to the Parliament, or Counsel
of a particular kingdom? By the laws of some kingdoms there are noe
Parliaments at all, and in Counsels they are not subjects, but brethren to to
the Pope, as they anciently styled themselves, and they anciently convened, and
departed without any leave from him, but in the English Parliament, they are
all subjects to the king, and their places were by his institution, and the
kings calling any convention for advice, does not alter the quality of
subjection.

He comes now to humane laws, and by them he will prove a divine truth. The
judgment given against Orestes, either at Athens, whose king he was not, or in
any other Country, where he was but a Titular, proves nothing, though the
story were Authenticke, and the proceedings legal, but popular furies, though
occasioned by their Governors Crimes are not Examples of imitation. Solons
laws belonged not to kingly Government, neither were the kings of Sparta
Monarchs, nor Licurgus a King indeed, though he had a Title, the constitution
of that State being a Republique, and their King noe other, then a Consul of
Rome, or a Duke of venice.

The Decree in Rome is far wide from the matter, and what the Senate did
against Nero, was in vindication of their ancient power, not acknowledging the
Justice of his soveraigntie. Though Theodosius decreed the law to be above the
Emperor, yet he decreed not any person to have power over the Emperor. The
law was above him in reguard it was his Rule, but could not make any person, or
society above him. The law is the directive power to Kings, but subject them
not to any, and it is a senseles deduction from the superiority of the Rule to
imagine an inferioritie of the Rulers to the people, or a community in power
by the Rule.

That Bracton, or Cleta say the King is inferior to the Court of Parliament,
is a manifest untruth, and Bracton says expressly, the King has not a
superior on earth to punish him, and that only God is the avenger of his
Actions, so far were these men from affirminge, that he stands as liable to
receive Justice, as the meanest of his subjects. But this man thinks, that
some of his Readers will believe, that the name of an Author is sufficient
Authority, though he speak contrary to what he alleadges.

It is said in an ancient book, the King ought to be subject to the law by his
oath. Though the King be bound to perform the law by his oath, is there any to
judge him, when all are his subjects, and derive their power from him, or is he
subject to any person? And who can judge another, that is not subject to him?
Because Kings bound themselves to do Justice, therefore did they give other
men power over them?

That the king permitted questions of his right to ordinary Judicature is an
use of Counsel, not subjection, all Courts being his Counsels, for decision
of controversies, but its a sorry inference, that Counselors in his affairs
should have power over his person. As the Parliaments right is circumscribed by
laws in regard of the subject, so it cannot be imagined absolute over the
king. By what the Libeller has said, he might well conclude, that kings are
oblidged to do justice, but that the people, or particular persons may judge
their king by any law divine, or humane, he has not offered a color, so
barren is he in an Argument, which he calls over copious.

Who should better understand their own laws, and when they are transgressed,
then they, who are governed by them, and whose consent at first made them.
Certainly he might very well have answered himself, that they, which governed
by such laws, and whose consent at first made them better understand them, and
when they are transgressed, then they, that are governed, and it is a course
very agreeable to these men's confusion, that the suitor should teach the judge.

The Libeller asks, who have more right to take knowledge of things done
within a free nation, then they within themselves. And surely they will not be
free long from destroying one another, where that's the liberty, for there
will be as many Transgressors, and as many laws, as there are opinions.

He goes about to answer the taking the oath of Alleagiance, and supreamacy.
And to this his answer is very ready, that these oaths were to his person
invested with his Authority, and his Authority was by the people given him
conditionally under law, and oath. And if his Authority had been conditional,
their oaths could not be absolute, as they are. This gift, and condition they
imagine were engraven in Seths Pillars, and they have been long enquiringe for
a Cabballisticke Rabbyn to find out the Characters. How the kings hereditary
succession is become a conditional gift, must have better evidence then
Aphorisms of confusion, never law contained either the gift, or condition,
nor was there ever such impudence before these Traitors, that avowed, because
they swore faith to their kings person invested with his Authority, they might
take away his Authority, and not break their oath, And it were a profane
oath, as well, as vain, that should be void at the will of the taker. The
kings oath added nothing to his right, being only an obligation of his
conscience, noe condition annexed to his right, and if he never took the oath,
his subjects obedience is noe whit diminished, and a king by inheritance needs
not admittance, the death of his predecessor puts him in possession, and this
is the known law of England. The Couquerour took on oath at his Crowninge,
and other times, that made noe condition to his Government. There is not only
reason, but absolute necessity for the avoiding of confusion, and ruin of
mankind, that the subject be bound to the king, though the king fail in his
duty, for the destruction of Government is more sinful, and inconvenient to
humane society, then any evil, that can come by a kings misgovernment.

He proceeds to answer objections touching the Covenant, wherein we shall
not much insist, but to detect the shifts of Malefactors to elude the evidence
of truth. They were accused by the King, and his party to pretend liberty,
and reformation, but to have noe other end, then to make themselves great, and
to destroy his person, and Authority, for which reason says the Libeller,
they added the third Article to preserve the Kings person, and Authority in
defense of Religion, privilege of Parliament, and liberties of the Kingdom.
And to show with what ingenuitie he dealt, in seeking to avoyde that just
accusation, the Libeller tells us, that they added that cause for a show only,
and they intended not to preserve the Kings person further, then it might
consist with their opinions touching Reformation, extirpatinge of Prelacy,
preservinge liberties of Parliament, and Kingdom, and in this very clause they
called the world to be wittnes with their consciences of their loyalty, and
yet made the preservation of their Kings person, and Authority, arbitrary by
their own opinions, and while this Libeller would have their Rebellion a
defensive war, he forbeares not to tell the world, that they resolved the
Kings destruction to attain their ends.

The sixth Article gives as much preservation, and defense to all, that enter
into the league, as to him. And it seems more, for they have dealt with none
of them, as with him, and he says, if the Covenant were made absolute without
respect to these superior things, it was an unlawful vow, and not to be kept.
It is agreed, that unlawful vows are not to be made, nor kept, but it is an
unlawful vow to destroy the King in order to his supposed ends, yet they
fear not to vow the destruction of any, that oppose them, though the honor,
and innocence of the persons were without the reach of laws, and they will
exempt neither callings, nor integrity from their lawles Injustice, and that
appeared by his gloss upon the fourth Article of the Covenant to bring persons
offending to trial, and condign punishment, all that should be found guilty
of such Crimes, and delinquencies, whereof the King by his letters, and proofs
afterward was found guil^ in what they thought him at the taking of the
Covenant, to be over ruled only by evil Counselors. And had not he avowed
all, that ever his letters contained in his former declarations, and has the
Libeller forgotten, that the imputation of Crimes to evil Counselors was but
a Ceremony, and are not his foregoinge words, that their ends, reformation, and
extirpatinge Prelacy were to be preferred before the preservation of the Kings
personand authority. This last age has produced a generation, that pretend
they do God service, when they scorn all his laws, and Religion, and hold
forth their execrable villainies to the world, as grateful, and well pleasinge
sacrifices to God, and make ostentations of their perjuries, and Blaspheamies,
as services to him. The nullities, and usurpation of those Monster judges, that
made themselves cut-throates of the King, needed not the Kings exceptions to
avoyde their illegallitie being so apparent, and what the King did, or said to
of them will remain to his honor, and the Libellers infamy, that glories in
the misfortunes of Princes, saying it was learnt from his graund-mother.

Its a sad fate to have his Enemies both accusers, parties, and Judges. The
Libeller says, what malefactor might not plead the like, if his Crimes have
made all men his Enemies. But there were hardly ever such malefactors, unless,
they, who took upon them to judge the King. He, that is an Enemy before
judgment, cannot be a judge of the Crime, and he, that is an Enemy to a
Malefactor uncondemned is not fit to condemn him, and such, as are Enemies to
Government, and are common destroyers cannot be judges,

That they of the powder plot might have pleaded the same, when their judges
knew not their persons, nor their guilt till trial, and conviction is a
suppo^ition like himself, but the powder plot is outdone by these miscreants,
that have destroyed king, and Parliament, and that, which the powder plotters
were ashamed to own, these villains recount to their honor, like these
Giants represented by Poetts, that made war against heaven, and thence this
Libeller dares scoff at the accusation of their Injustice with this lewd
Blasphemy, that at the resurrection, it may be as well pleaded, that the
saints, when they shall judge the world are both Enemies, judges, parties, and
accusers. Such are the thoughts of those wicked Atheists touching God, and his
saints, and it is not at all strange, that such profane persons exercise their
cursed speaking against Kings, and all in Authority, that spare not God
himself, and it is a small thing with them to vilify those, whom God has
anointed, and because God by his Prophetts complained against the evils of
some Kings, these men take on them to destroy all by that Authority, and say
the earth has long groaned under burdens of their disorder, Injustice, and
irreligion. God gives Testimonies to Kings in Scripture, that they were his
Servants, that he would by them restore, and preserve his Church, declared it
the greatest earthly favor to set such, as he loved on the kingly Throne,
bestowed his own Titles on them, and yet this Libeller referrs his readers to
Scripture for proof of Rebellion against kings, and would persuade the
reformed Churches, he is their Advocate in saying. To bind their Kings in
Chains, and their nobles in linkes of Iron is an honor belonging to the
saints. Such blasphemous expositers of Scripture are these Reformers. God gave
that honor to the Israelites to bind the kings of the Amorites, their Enemies
in Chains, and their nobles in linkes of Iron. These darlings of the Devil
will be the only saints, and make it their honor to destroy the powers, that God
has ordained and there must be neither kings, nor Nobles, but these evil
spiritts, whom noe Irons, nor Chains will restrain, and perjury, robbery,
murder, and Rebellion are the honor of these saints.

The building of Babell was not Nimrods work, (whom by asserted untruth he
calls the first king) that work was a popular vndertakinge, because the people
would erect a Republique of confusion, and not trust God to protest them, and
the Libeller could not have fallen upon an instance more like his present
madness, for as those builders faind confusion in pretending to prevent it, so
there Rebels pretend to preserve the Kingdom by turninge it into popular
confusion, and therefore those saints must destroy Babell, especially that
spiritual Babell, and first overcome those European Kings, which receive their
power not from God, but from the Beast. Does he mean the Beast with many
heads? It is his principal Argument, that Kings receive their power from the
people, and if so, then are they this beast. What Kings of Europe receive
their Kingdoms from his Beast? But there Sectaries are drunken with their own
prophanes, and pride, and have a strong delusion to believe the lies of their
own invention.

Those Kings are counted noe better, then his ten horns. Noe better, but by
what proof, are they the same by such frenetique dreams, as he produces? They
shall hate the whore, and yet the saints must destroy them, and shall burn her
with sire, and yet be overcome first themselves. But they shall at last join
their Armies with the Beast after they have destroyed the whore. And this is
the Babilonish Creed, a bundle of contradictions to carry their Giddy
followers into attempts as wicked, as their conceits are irrational. We see
the grounds of their cause, an hellish impulsion against Government, and hatred
of Kings, there having not been imposters of equal impudence since Mahomett,
that profess a Religion to destroy all Kings, and those Blasphemies, that were
abhorred in former Sectaries, and Entheusiasts are the Creed of those
miscreants.

It Is true, there be a sort of moody, hott brained, and always vnedified
consciences apt to engage their leaders past retirement, and then upon a sudden
qualme, and Swimminge of their conscience to betray them basely in the midst
of what was chiefly undertaken for their sakes. Seducers cannot think to be
vndiscovered forever, but such, as are not resolute villains have a moody
conscience in this man's judgment, the tender conscience is become moody, and
hott brained, and certainly such were many in this Rebellion, or it could never
have proceeded so far. Let such men never meet with any faithful Parliament
to hazard for them. And let never Parliament think to be better rewarded, that
follow a faction to betray their King, then to be subject to those base
multitudes, whom they suborned to attempts against their loyalty, and become
slaves.

He finds others, in whose consciences gain has sprung a sudden leake, and
these are they, that cry out of the Covenant broken. Thus the builders of
Babell are scattered, while they make conscience, and Religion their property,
and in the mean time, nothing is more the subject of their scorn. And if God
were mocked in pretending the Covenant in Scotland, and Vlster, he was much
more in England by crying out the King, Religion, laws, and liberty, and the
Libeller might have found such men, whose prosperity was sin, that Triumphed
in the afflictions of him, whom they persecuted, and said tush God has
forsaken him, let us smite him, that he rise noe more. The sin of Ahas, that
transgressed more in the time of his affliction has noe resemblance to a
virtuous Prince afflicted by Traitors, whose cruelty increased, while they
oppressed him, and exceeded the inhumanitie of the cursed Moabites, that burnt
the bones of the King of Edom into lime.

The Kings Charatie in forgivinge his Enemies, will find a right construction
with all true Christians, but malice, and detraction of all Acts of pity
cannot meet, with less, then detestation in all men any way quallified with
Religion, or reason.

Hipocrites Alms, are not more odious, then hipocrites censures, the cruelty
of Hipocrites will receive a greater condemnation, then their Alms.

Prayers for Gods Compassion, are not to share victory with Gods Compassion.
But such, as strive to slander men's prayers to God are as malicious to Gods
victory, as the devotions of those, that pray unto him. Such as read this
impudent Libell may rightly call it the Rebels Image, conteyninge precepts,
and positions of violence against Government, confusion of States, doctrines of
falsehood, and hypocrisy, praises of insolence, and cruelty, prophaninge of
Gods name, and word, scoffs at things sacred, dissolution of all bonds moral,
Civil, and Religious, of all orders, and degrees among men. And it must be
hatred to God, and a Diabolical impulsion, that drives on such persons to fill
up the measure of their wickedness.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 25. Line 6. Read not after needed. Page 25. L. 27. Sollecisme for
Sollesisme. Page 25. L. 30. that for then. Page 31. L. 19. for insteede of
from. Page 33. L. 10. in before their. Page 34. L. 1. Basilice for Aclastos.
Page 40. L. 11. from after lawful. Page 44. L. 12. Conventions for contentions.
Page 58. L. 3. supercilious for supersilious. Page 63. L. 8. uses be before
used. Page 67. L. 25. notions for motions. Page 67. L. 26. administered for
administrated. Page 69. L. 43. by for the. Page 72. L. 30. is for in. Page 81.
L. 17. and 19. Psalmistry for Psalmastry. Page 83. L. 23. is for in. Page 84.
L. 25. Iingle for Inigly. Page 87. L. 25. it is for is it. Page 88. L. 18. few
for fer. Page 90. L. 8. aspersion of the before most. Page 91. L. 2. occasion
for reason. Page 94. L. 9. connaturall for unnatural. Page 94. L. 13.
refrained for restrained. Page 94. L. 20. vigor for rigor. Page 95. L. 43.
Cheates for States. Page 111. L. 21. like for the. Page 111. L. 22. vapors for
reigns. Page 123. L. 9. prevent for present. Page 137. L. 19. he for we. Page
147. L. 31. cause before had. Page 149. L. 35. Stafford for Strafford. Page
150. L. 15. noe before part. Page 153. L. 11. we for he. Page 156. L. 37.
screeching for streching. Page 156. L. 37. Batts for Catts. Page 156. L. 39. we
for who. Page 159. L. 12. possession for oppression. Page 160. L. 10. not
before strange. Page 164. L. 5. place for peace. Page 172. L. 38. long for
strong. Page 173. L. 38. if for is. Page 179. L. 25. peace for place. Page 182.
L. 2. principij for principy. Page 184. L. 36. Savior for Saviors. Page 184.
L. 37. noe for one. Page 185. L. 25. date for dale. Page 186. L. 8. incestuous.
Page 194. L. 38. while they for whether. Page 197. L. 36. a junto. Page 208. L.
28. miseries for mysteries. Page 208. L. 30. now for not. Page 213. L. 26.
quilting for questing. Page 214. L. 9. infirm sor assured. Page 220. L. 28.
preach for reproach. Page 220. L. 44. subordination sor subordinate. Page 221.
L. 24. after poisoned read Silvester and the whole Church. Page 224. L. 19.
dele him. Page 228. L. 32. crum for crim. Page 229. L. 34. convictions for
convertions. Page 230. L. 15. is for a King, instead of, by Parliament. Page
236. L. 14. expect for except. Page 262. L. 15. Fleta for Cleta.


