JONAS REDUX, OR A Divine WARNING-PIECE Shot from the FORT-ROYAL of NINIVE, TO
ALL Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, and Empires, to Exhort them to be careful how
they do Admit of the Dominion of SIN, within their Respective Territories, lest
they fall into the like danger.

BY JONAS ANGLICUS.

St. Paul. Qui stat, videat ne cadat.

Horat. Mutato nomine, de te --

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's.
MDCLXXII.

To the Honorable Sir Joseph Sheldon Knight, ALDERMAN, And in near Election to
the Majoralty of the most Honorable City of LONDON, and the whole Honorable
Company of DRAPERS.
Most honored Sir,
THe many signal Obligations, that I have from my childhood received, from your
most Reverend and Honorable Uncle, his Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
have very much encouraged me; but the great fame of your growing Virtues, has
emboldned me (especially having the honor to be a Draper by descent) to
address my Jonas to you: who as he wants little of my Anagram, so I am sure
has been the forerunner of my Fortunes: In this only I have by Divine
Permission exceeded him, that for his three days, I have lain thirty years
perfectly in a Whales belly; but I still trust in our most good and gracious
God, that as he did him, so he will bring me, to a happy shore, either in this
world, or a better. In the mean time, I hope, this glorious City, which has
received so many fatherly chastisements from the Divine hand, by Sword, Plague,
and Fire, will by your noble Precept, and Example, take a fair warning, to sin
no more, least a worse thing come upon them. I cannot but hope likewise, my
hearty humble service, will prove no less acceptable to this most famous City,
of which you are so near the Supreme Government, under the Kings Majesty, whom
God long preserve in a most prosperous Reign, for his own glory, the good of
this most Honorable City, and the comfort of all us, his poor Subjects, and
most particularly of

Most honored Sir, Your most obedient, and Affectionate Humble Servant, Jonas
Anglicus.

CARMEN Heroicum de Propheta JONA a Balaena deglutito, and Ninivitarum ad DEUM
Conversione.
UT latuit Jonas Triduum sub pectore Ceti,
Vtque Deus Populo fasso peccata popercit,
Dicere fort Animus. Tu per quem scilicet unum
Omnibus Omnipotens parcit, sic Christ guberna
Os calamamque meum, ne quis mihi versus inanis
Excidat Incanto qui, non tua Numina cantet:
Nam sine te non est, possim quod scribere quicquam,
Tu mihi Principium, and Medium, Tu Finis adesto.
Vrbs Antiqua fuit, paene alto vertice tangens
Sydera, Dives opum, glebaque uberrima pingui:
Assyrii coluere viri, quam Fama Minores
Concelebrasse tulit Nini cum nomine Regis;
Hanc rapidus Tigris foelicibus irrigat undis,
Atque beat largo plenissima Copia Cornu,
Nilque deest penitus, rerum quod postulat usus.
Hen quam difficile est, sortem been far secundam!
Quam virtus and opes non sede morantur in una!
Dum nihil ergo deest Vrbi, dum Rebus abundat
Omnibus, in Tenebras ruit, atque oblita Jehovae
Qui Deus est unus, verusque, Nefanda Deorum
Numina Fictorum vano veneratur Honor:
Cumq, sit id primum Crimen, Liquisse Jehovam,
Crimina sponte sua, mox caetera cuncta sequuntur,
Virturesque fugant miseris ex Maenibus Almas.
Hae coelum querulae repetunt, urbemque relinquunt,
Caecaque deplorant humanae pectora Gentis,
Quae fidens opibus, virtutum Redditur Hostis,
Very oblita Dei, peccatisque oblita foedis.
At Deus aeterni residens super Aurea Coeli
Templa, suas cernens Natas ex urbe repulsas;
Protinus horribiles fremuit commotus in iras,
Et vix abstinuit, terras quin funditus omnes
Perderet illius Regionis, and igne cremaret,
Ni miseratus eas clementi cord fuisset:
Quod semper superat peccantis crimina mundi.
Ergo vocat Jonam, Vatem quem mittat in Vrbem,
Vt Populis paenam meritam denunciet, ac si
Esse Mali pergent, perituros sulphur cunctos,
Dum lux Dena quater rutilo fulgeret Olympo.
Ille stupens, dubitansque, Deo parere reousat,
Ambiguumque animum, nunc buc nunc dividit illuc.
Heu quid agam? reputat secum; qua voce furentes
Compellem populos? quodsi compello, Pericla
Mill parata mihi, me gens effraena necabit;
Sin aliqui forsan resipiscent, hosque misertus
Largus ut est veniae, Deus band extinxerit omnes,
Me Plebs deludet, Mendacemque Improba finget.
Quin potius quo Fata trahant, retrahantque, repent
Profugio; Incautus subeam quam tanta pericla.
Dixit: and Antiquam trepidus festinat Ioppen,
Conscenditque Ratem: Cilicum subiturus in Oras:
Vix e conspectu solidae Telluris, in Altum
Venerat, and Nantae spumas Maris aere ruebant,
Cum Deus observans illum, stat vertice Coeli,
Ah Miser, anne putas, inquit, te, evadere nostras
Posse manus? Homines sequeris? mea jussa recusas?
Dum fugis heu Scyllam, tibi mors erit ecce Charybdis.
Talia dum tacito secum Deus ore volutat,
Terribiles ventos, Tempestatesque sonoras
Convocat, and subito Tonitru coelum excitat omne.
Luctantur Zephyrusque Austerque and vectus Eois
Eurus equis, mugit Pelagus, micat ignibus ether
Conscius, involvit Tenebris pluviae Oceanum nox,
Praesentumque necem ante oculos sibi quisque videbat;
Cuncta vel in solo coeunt elementa profundo
Atque Chaos certum, mox omnia juncta minantur.
Horrent Attoniti, palmasque ad sydera tendunt,
Continuo Nautis gelidus pavor occupat Artus,
Navis and ut levior fiat, tum plurima vasa
Ejiciunt, laxantque foros, nihilominus undis
Turbida cessat Hyems, iterumque iterumque relucent
Fulgura Fulminibus commixta, nec amplius ullae
Aut Terrae apparent, aut Coelum, aut Pontus, and Aer.
Ambigui vasto jactantur gurgite passim,
Incerti quo Fata ferant; ubi nulla salutis
Spes aderat, tandem decernunt mittere sortem,
Tantorum exipsis, si quis sit causa Malorum.
Ecce autem dum sic ductis stat sortibus urna,
Sors Jonam tangit; culpam mox ille fatetur,
Sumque ait Hebraeus, propter me talia fiunt,
Me propter qui nempe Dei mandata recuso,
Cui Mare, cui Tellus, cui oeli sydera parent:
Projicite in fluctum, and Pelago me immergite vasto,
Cessabit Pelagus, maris ira tumorque quiescent.
Mirantur Nautae, atque stupent, paulumque morantur,
An sine morte viri, fortasse quiescere fluctus
Inciperent, sed nulla quies, mora nulla frementis
Est salis; ergo, suos Divos tamen ante precati,
In mare praecipitem puppi (miserabile) ab alta
Deturbant. Natat ecce miser, fluctusque silescunt
Continuo, and placidi substernunt aequora venti.
At Pater AEthereus facit ut Balaena propinquet,
Ejectumque virum Pelagoque patente Natantem
Excipiat veniens, ventrisque voragine condat.
Tum vero Jonam vere circumstetit borror,
Obstupet, ac plane quasi mortuus, abditus Alvo
Balaenae ingemit; ut tandem vix reddita men's est,
Sic cord ingeminat, ventrique immurmurat imo:
Sum Deus, qui cuncta creas, servasque creata,
En Miser hic jacco, velut atra per Antra sepulchri
Conditus, in medio presentis limine mortis.
Quae mihi spes superest ullius certa salutis?
Sed tamen una salus a te sperare salutem.
Tu miserere bonus miseri peccata fatentis
Nec precon irato damnatum projice vultu:
Eripe sed diro e Piscis ventre, and deem ab undis,
Salvus ut ex illis iterum tua Templa revisam:
Tum prius hic Cetus, sicca tellure natabit,
Quam tua tanta meo labentur pectore facta.
Annuit his votis Deus; exauditque vocantem,
Et cum Lux rosea jam tertia luce rediret,
Hunc Balaena Dei jussu, in solidam evomit oram.
Vera loquor nec ficta fides, Gens Ethnica quanquam
Rideat haec, atque hinc extet quoque fabula mendax,
Sit quondam ut vectus tergo Delphinis Arion.
Namque hominum ratio, quae non capit, omnia ridet,
Et non vera putat, sed pagina sacra legenti;
Esse ea quae dixi vera ac certissima, monstrat;
Quandoquidem Christi Typus haec and Imago fuerunt:
Nam veluti triduum Ceti ille in ventre latebat,
Funera sic Christus passus, Tumuloque quiescens,
Tertia Lux postquam rediit, redivivus in Auras
Ipse simul rediit, de victo victor Averno,
Sed respiravit postquam, viresque recepit
Raptus Amithaides immensae e fluctibus undae,
Summus eum ad populum rursus jubet ire Jehovah;
Totius Interitum errantis nunciet Vrbis;
Jussa facit laetus, primi memor ille pericli.
O Miseri, exclamat, gens o demersa nefandis
Criminibus, gens exitio Vicina futuro,
Audite, and memori mea dicta recondite mente:
Horrendos Ausus vestros atque Impia facta
Conspexit Deus, ille Deus, qui crimina semper
Pectore cuncta notat memori, paenisque rependit
Vindicibus, si non praesentibus, attamen olim
Aeternis, quae sunt vobis sine fine paratae.
Ille igitur vestra ob peceata exarsit in iras
Tantas, ut cum jam decies lux quarta resurget,
Perdere cuncta velit, quae tota urbs continet, igni.
Haec ubi dicta dedit vates, Timor anxius omnes
Cepit, and auditis Verbis tam tristibus, Vrbem
Horrida continuo per totam fama vagatur,
Advenisse diem fatis quo cuncta perirent.
Omnia Maestitia querula, miseroque tumultu
Implentur, penitusque omnes plangoribus aedes
Luctificis ululant? Coeli ferit ardua Fletur.
Rex ipse, invitas Rumor cum venit ad Aures,
Descendit Solio Regali, and vest Cilissa
Indutus, Capitis cineres in Vertice spargit,
Ac toti populo jejunia mandat, ut omnes
Suppliciter tristes, Sacci velamine cincti,
Numina tanta, Deitanti, decorde precentur,
Instantesque minas irasque avertere tentent.
Audiit Omnipotens voces, gemitusque vocantum,
Praebuit ac veniam votis, irasque remisit.
Vt Mandata Dei Jonas peragenda peregit,
Maenibus egressus miseris proeul urbe resedit,
Et sibi quae solemn arcerent umbracla paravit,
Sub quibus expectans tandem spectare volebat
Quid fieret, cui dira Deus decreverat, Vrhi.
Ast ubi quae fuerat merita urbs Infanda malorum
Paenituisse Deum sentit, paenasque remissas,
Indolet, and plorans luctu cor torquet inani;
Vel quia jure putat plecti debere Scelestos,
Vel quia, ne mendax habeatur forte, veretur.
Ergo mori mavult, tali quam vivere pacto.
Tempora purpurei finem jam veris habebant,
Et vehemens aestu donis Cerealibus aestas
Gaudebat; calidosque urebat Syrius agros,
Perque agros una Jonam, qui frigora captans
Vmbrarum, reperire nequit: cum Coelitus aestum
Huic fugat Omnipotens, hederamque repent virentem
Procreat: haec serpens toti sua brachia Jonae
Circum laxa dedit, summasque secuta per Auras
Edidit umbriferum quo delitet ille Cubiclum.
Hinc subeunt pectus Jonae nova gaudia laeti.
Sed quam parva nimis, quam parvo tempore durant
Gaudia? dum fruticem semper putat ille futurum,
Ecce volente Deo, cum jam nox altera adesset,
Vermis adest, hederamq, arrodit iniqua comantem.
Illa cadit, penitusque aret; tum Gaudia Jonae
Diffugiunt, iterumque novas mox ardet in iras.
Id Deus aspiciens, horum ceu conscius Author,
Number tibi, Amithaide, tantos, ait, herba dolores
Arida facta parit, quam nox dedit una vigentem,
Altera languentem subito exarescere vidit?
Cur ego non parcam buic urbi, quae Maenibus amplis
Terrigenas tot habet, quot hand vix gramina campis,
Qui cuncti ignorant curvum discernere recto?
Non ego prava probo, vehemens sed turpia plecto.
At qui me veniam votis ex Cord precantur
Supplicibus, faciles illis placidissimus Aures
Praebeo, nec culpae memini, paenasque remitto.
O and Londinum sis Ninivaea Secunda
Ter faelix Niobe, Lachrymis vel Nobile Saxum.
Dixit, and ut dixit populo fecitque priori,
Sic nobis etiam dicitque facitque benignus.
Illum ergo, ex animo, meeum, sic quilibet oret:
Omnipotens, Aeterue Deus, qui cuncta creasti,
Nos quoque, cen vitiis Vrbs haeo immersa nefandis,
Crimina Criminibus semper cumulando meremur
Nil nisi perpetuas iras Phlegetontis, and ignes
AEternos. Quis enim coelestia Numina curat?
Quis syncera colit divini dogmata verbi?
Vana Superstitio, Frandes, scelerata Libido,
Turpis Avarities, cumque Ambitione Tyrannis
Constituere sibi Regnum, virtute repulsa,
Quae misere e Terrae fugit procul omnibus oris;
Heu fugit proeul illa accusatura scelesti
Indigenas caecos mundi. Refipiscite, clamat,
O Miseri, resipisce animis O and Anglia caecis,
At tu, sum Deus, qui nil nisi parcere nosti,
Ac nisi cord rogent veniam, tunc perdere tandem;
Nos quoque qui veniam te supplice voce rogamus,
Resfice placatis oculis, paenasque remitte,
Quas meriti fuimus, tum quasque meremur in horas:
Vincere da Satanam, propriam da vincere carmem,
Nostraque mitte tuum sanctum in praecordia Flatum,
Qui Peccaturos moneat, moveatque pigrorum
Longuentes animos, dum quae Meliora decebat
Non faciunt stolidi, sed Deteriora sequnntur.
Sic Tua, sic Nati sic sancti Numina Flatus,
Non intermissis celebrabunt Landibus omnes.
Laus Christo Trino and Uni Deo.
A Heroic POEM upon the Prophet JONAS, who was Swallowed by a Whale, and the
Conversion of the NINIVITES to GOD.
HOW Jonas lay three days within a Whale,
By God committed to that moving Jayle,
And how confessing Ninive God spared,
My hand is ready, and my Pen prepared.
Thou blessed Savior, by whose blood alone
The world is spared from like Destruction,
So rule my heart, and hand, that not a word
May fall, but what thy glory may afford:
For without thee I can to nothing tend,
Be my beginning, middle, and my end.
An Ancient City stood, with lofty Towers,
Touching the Stars, and rich in Fruits, and Flowers;
Held by Assyrians, and late Poets sing
Was so called Ninive, from Ninus King:
This stately Tygris waters all about,
Blessed with a Horn of Plenty all throughout;
There nothing wanted that did need require,
Or that the heart of Man could well desire.
How hard a thing it is to bear such hap!
Virtue and Wealth sit seldom in one lap.
Whilst Ninivites with all things thus abound,
Reeling in darkness, and the world went round,
Forgetting God, who is the only True,
And giving Idols, what is his only due:
So leaving God, which is the greatest sin,
All villainy besides does straight creep in.
All virtues chased out of their City walls,
Carry complaints to Heaven of their foul falls;
Bewailing so the madness of Mankind,
Quick-sighted to all Vice, to Virtue blind:
Forgetting God, and all besmeared with evil
Give themselves up to the Clutches of the Devil.
But God above sitting 'ith' highest Throne
Of's Temples there, hearing his Daughters moan;
Was straight provoked to a most grievous wrath,
And scarce abstained from thundering Ruin forth
Against all the Neighboring parts, and burnt with Fire
But that his mercy mollifi'd his Ire:
As that is always greater than the world,
Though into Millions more Transgressions hurled;
Therefore he calls good Jonas, him to send,
And bid them all their manners for to mend,
Or to denounce this Doom, if they go on
They should be all in Conflagration gone.
Fire and Brimstone should be sent from Heaven,
Ere' the Suns course was finished six times seven.
The Amazed and doubting Prophet does refuse,
So daring Gods own dictate to abuse.
But he is recalled again, and changes mind
So often as Sails are altered by the wind.
What shall I do? so he begins his moan,
But straight his voice was strangled with a groan.
Yet he proceeds, How shall I dare come near
A people without grace, or wit, or fear?
If I go on, those Villains are so rude
I shall be murdered by the multitude;
But if they shall repent, and pardon merit,
As God's most gracious, and forgiving Spirit;
Or shall not execute his Fury full,
Then will they scoff, and kill me for a Gull.
No, I will rather go in spite of Fate,
Into the Sea, than to that City Gate.
So said, he hastens to the Seas nearest Door,
And mounts a Ship, bound for Cilician shore:
Scarce was he got clear out of sight of Land,
And Mariners did to their office stand,
But the All-seeing God observing this,
From Heavens height, as all things done amiss.
Ah witless wretch d' ye think ye ever can
Escape my hands, by a Retreat to Man?
Opposing so my Preccepts, Scylla fly
And fall upon Charybdis, and so die?
This whilst the Almighty pondered in his mind,
The Seas were raised with a Tempestuous wind,
Which God did call to make the Prophet quake,
Whilst with that storm the very earth did shake.
The Air and Water meets, yet you would think under,
Was the only Seat, and Region of Thunder.
There West and South are at a furious strife,
Which shall be soonest Master of his life:
Nay Eurus with his Oriental Steeds,
Does puff and blow, whilst the poor Seaman bleeds:
The bellowing waves do give a dismal note.
Like Io with her metamorphos'd throat.
The knowing sky was with its Lightning light,
Whilst guilty Seas were all involv^d in night.
There death's presented to each mortal eye,
Which they look on, and pray, but cannot fly.
Nay, what the dismall'st horror represents,
There Is sad confusion of all Elements,
And a most certain Chaos does appear,
Fire, Earth and Air, dwell all with Water there.
Now you must think though hot at work, cold Fear
Possessed each limb, and Artery that was there.
Yet that their Ship more lightly pass those waves,
They throw their wealth into those watery graves:
But Seas not sated with that Sacrifice,
Swell higher yet, nay higher, higher rise.
Now Thunder mixed with Lightning, does conspire
To make Earth look like Air, and Sea like Fire.
So were they tossed in that outrageous Gulf,
That all abord thought they held the ears of a Wolf.
Thus turmoild with the uncertainty of Fate,
No hopes appear the Tempest should abate;
So they determine to be tried by Lot
Who are the truly Innocent, who not.
The Lots being cast, Jonas is found the man
In Gods disfavour, deny't if he can:
No, he confesses fairly, I Am a Jew,
And for my sake great God does thus pursue:
It Is for my sake, who lately disobeyed
Him who has always Earth, Seas, and Heavens swayed:
Cast me into these waves, and straight the Main
Will be appeased, and you at rest again.
The Mariners amazed stand and stay,
Hoping the storm may cease another way;
And so to save the man, but yet no peace,
Nor fury of the angry billows cease.
Then having each one prayed unto his God
That he would abate the sharpness of his rod,
They throw poor Jonas over the highest Board
To see if's death their safety would afford:
There the wretch swims, and storms are straitway said,
As if the Sea had made the winds afraid.
But the great God of Heaven caused a Whale
To come and take him into's living Jayl.
The horror that then seized poor Jonas heart,
Is not to be expressed in any part;
And buried thus alive, he does complain,
Though yet he is scarce come to himself again;
His heart does humbly yet to God address,
In The bottom of that swimming Wilderness.
Almighty God who have created all,
And keep'st all things created least they fall,
Behold me miserable Sinner here
As buried in a living Sepulcher;
So in the middle placed of present death,
What hopes have I of any future breath?
But now my hopes are thou will safety bring,
When I Have no hopes in any mortal thing.
Be merciful to him that does confess,
Cast not thy Servant into wretchedness;
Let not this fishes belly and the waves
Be turned into my Dungeon, or my Graves.
Deliver me, O Lord, from this dark Den,
That I may see thy Temples among'st men.
Then shall this fish swim sooner upon land
Than I will disobey thy just command.
Thus gracious God was pleased to hear him pray
In his quick Sepulcher, and the third day
The obedient Whale did straight by Gods command
Cast the converted Prophet on dry land.
This is all truth I speak, though Heathen wits
Have laughed at this, with other holy Writs;
And so have thrust amongst the fabulous pack,
A false Arion on the Dolphins back.
So in man's reason what is not to command
They jeer, because they cannot understand;
Nor will believe at all, though Sacred Writ
Do certify at large the truth of it.
Nay, though it be the Figure of our Christ,
Yet they do what they can to have it hissed.
For as he lay three days within a Whale,
So past the Son of Man through Earths black Jayl;
From whence returning Conqueror to the World,
Hell and the Grave he to confusion hurled.
So when our Prophet was again restored
To the open Air, he the great God adored,
And taught obedience by his so late fall,
Goes straight to preach their ruin, One and All.
Bold Amithaides now does appear
Obedient to his God without all fear,
Remembering his past danger; and cries out,
You wretched people, that are drowned throughout,
In Seas of sins, and near a future fire,
Hear what I say, and so avoid Gods Ire.
Your horrid words, and your more impious deeds,
For which, though yours do not, my poor heart bleeds,
God has beheld, that God who always pays
Offenders, and in equal balance weighs.
So if he punish not with present pain,
Eternal torments sinners shall remain;
Which are prepared for you without all end,
Unless you shall your selves and manners mend.
He therefore is so angry for your sins,
By that the fortieth day from hence begins,
All shall be surely by sad Fire destroyed,
Unless his wrath by Penance you avoid.
This when the Prophet spoke, an anxious fear
Struck every person that his words did hear,
And a sad Horror seized on all the Town,
The Swordmen well as those that wore the Gown,
That now the day was come when all should fall
By Fire from Heaven, in Pile Funeral.
All places now were filled with sad complaint,
And he before was Devil now turns Saint.
All Quarters now were filled with grievous cries,
And sighs of sinners pierced the very skies.
The King who thought he did command the Globe,
Descends from Princely Throne, and Royal Robe,
And clad with Hair-cloth next his tender skin,
With Ashes on that head, a Crown was in;
Commands a Fast through all his People too,
And taught by his example what to do.
So in Procession, and with one accord,
They humbly go about and seek the Lord.
And pray his Mercy to avert the pain
His Justice threatens, they would deserved again.
The Almighty heard their cries and grievous groans,
And so was pleased too with their sad moans,
That he remitted all their sins, so loath
Is God to vengeance, and to show his wrath.
As Jonas had performed Gods command,
Gets from the City far on a high land;
And to keep off the Sun, prepares a shade,
Desirous for to see the end God made
With that rebellious and most sinful City,
Which had not yet deserved his Prayers, nor pity.
But when he found God did himself repent,
And from's intended punishment relent;
He grieves as much the clean contrary way,
To find from God his angry-Plagues delay.
Either for that he thought they ought to die
As wicked men, or that he seem^d to lie:
Therefore he chooses to embrace his death
Rather than length of a dishonored breath.
Now was it near the end of purple Spring,
And Ceres 'gan her Summer gifts to bring:
Now raging Syrius burnt the foaming fields,
And the poor Prophet to his fury yields.
For now he can no longer find the shade,
Which he well hoped his hands had surely made:
So the divine dignation from above
Chaseth the heat, and plants him in a Grove
Of green and growing Ivy, which embraced
His shaded limbs, as by it they would been laced:
So starting up aloft unto the Sky,
Gave a delightful shade for him to ly.
Here Jonas joys do strait begin again,
And hopes he shall be quit now of all pain.
But see how little are, and how unsure
The pleasures that all mortals can procure!
Whilst Jonas thought himself secure in the shade
Which by Gods will one single night had made:
Behold God willing now, another night
A Worm destroys it and its umbrage quite:
It withers straight, and falls, so Jonas joys
Are fled, and pleasures turned to sharp annoys.
So he grows angry, but Almighty God
Knowing himself the Author of that Rod,
Why Jonas* swith he* does that give thee grief
To see that dried which gave before relief,
And that which only one night kindly gave,
Another dry and languishing would have?
Why should not I then Nonive so spare
In which so many Souls of Mortals are,
And holds so many in its spacious walls,
As the fields grass, Trees leaves before their falls;
Who all don't know yet what is wrong from right:
I love the simply good, but punish spite;
But they who with an humble heart do crave
My gracious pardon, their remission have;
I always yield to Sinners gracious ears,
By hearty sorrows they avoid all fears
Of my displeasure, and from Heavens high vaults
Drops an Indulgence for all humanne faults.
So London like great Ninive appears,
Thrice happy Niobe turned stone with tears.
He said, and so he did, and as to them,
So he is to us unwilling to condemn;
Therefore let us, who' of's glory careful are,
Approach his Sacred Presence with this Prayer.
Almighty and great God, who made us all,
Make us to avoid that City's sins and fall.
And though we do by heaping Crimes on Crimes,
Deserve thy wrath showed in the worst of Times,
Nay all the Phlegetons and Stygian Fire,
Which thou'st prepared for Sinners in thine Ire.
For who does worship right thy holy Name?
Who keep's thy Word and Will with divine Flame?
Vain Superstition, Frauds and wicked Lust
With dirty Avarice, Ambition must
Reign over our Members, Virtues being suppressed,
Or fled to Heaven there to take their rest.
Oh they are fled away to accuse us there
Of our ungrateful sins, and follies here;
So they cry down to us, Sinners repent,
And God from's Indignation will relent.
But thou, Great God, who know best how to spare,
And only chastnest who obdurate are;
Us also who with suppliant voice require
Thy Grace, look on with pleased eyes and appeased Ire,
Remit the punishments we have deserved,
By following Satan, and our flesh so served,
Send down thy Holy Spirit to our hearts,
Which may convert us Sinners in all parts.
Inflame our Souls to follow better things
Than those which show much Honey, but leave Stings,
So Thine, Thy Sons, and Holy Spirits breath,
We Will glorify with Prayers until death.
Laus Christo Trino and Vni Deo,

