ARTIFICIAL Embellishments.

OR ARTS BEST DIRECTIONS How to Preserve Beauty or Procure it.

(...),
(...).
Anacr. OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, Ann. D. 1665.

To The HONORABLE And Truly Virtuous A. E.
MADAM,
THat Trifles should be made Presents to persons of quality, or that these
worthless lines, should court the Eye of Honor, are faults that scarce any
will pardon but Your Ladyship, whose Goodness is as Great as your Beauty is
Glorious. 'Twas That animated my presumption in presenting this piece to Your
Honor: for being so much divine in every thing else, You must be so in
Goodness, and accept a Mite from him, who is unable to make a more stately
offering. The design Lady of the Book is not to make any addition to Your
spotles features, but to borrow that from You which it promises to others
Beauty and Splendor.

Madam, Your Honors Most Humble Servant M. S.

To the Ladies.
DEformity (fairest Ladies) is a single name, yet a complicated misery; for a
young Algebraist in this only word, knows how to read a whole Iliad of evils.
Poets fancy the creature to be hatched in Hell; neither do they greatly injure
it, forasmuch as it brings with it sufficient matter for a whole Hell of misery
to those, whose darkened souls are clouded with it is frightfull adumbrations:
and as it comes from thence, so would it willingly thither again, as appears
from it is shunning the light, and only solacing it self in duskie solitudes.
For those whose bodies are dismissed natures press with some errata's, and have
not the royal stamp of Beauty to make them current coin for humane society,
make choice of obscurity; judging death less insufferable, then that ignominy
which too often attends deformity. It is a disease usually looked upon as
infectious, and has one symptom of dangerous consequence, it breeds
obstructions, and that chiefly to Ladies preferment; since none save Grooms or
Oastlers think those worth their courtship, who are rusted over with
ill-inticing looks.

Now to quit you Ladies from the loathsome embraces of this hideous Hagge,
(which might there be so many Furies in Hell, would make a fourth) I have
published these Cosmeticks; so Beautifying, that those who use them shall Diana
it in company, and with a radiant luster outshine their thickskind companions,
as so many browner Nymphs.

Though you may look so pallidly sad, that you would be thought to be dropping
in your Graves; and though your skins be so devoid of color, that they might
be taken for your winding sheets; yet these Recipe's will give you such a rosy
cheerfulnes, as if you had new begun your resurrection. They are the handsome
Ladies Panacaea, of such efficacy that they will teach you creatures of
mortality to retrace the steps of youth, and transform the wrinkled hide of
Hecuba into the tender skin of a tempting Helena.

Inchase but your cheeks Ladies, with some of our auxiliary unguents, and ye
shall see, that exact complexions make but foyles to advance your features: and
conceited beauties craven'd with their own defects shall crouch in your
presence, and force you almost to be proud; while having no parts to value,
they shall dispond themselves. When once your artificial roses display
themselves, others shall seem pale, as if they envied your tempting
perfectious; and their natural vermilion shall only serve them to blush that
their features are outvied by yours. Other Ladies in your company shall look
like brown-bread sippets in a dish of snowie cream, or if you will, like
blubberd juggs in a cupboard of Venice glasses, or earthen Chamber pots in a
Goldsmiths shop.

If you glory in Captives, and desire by a sparkling splendor to fire
Platonic Amoretto's out of their lawless liberty, borrow but luster from
these Artificial Smegmaticks, and you shall find none composed of a metal so
cold and Saturnine, that can Salamander-like resist your actuating flames: for
whiles those Madams who slight the use of these helps, shall have nothing to
heighten affection but the Antiperistasis of a December look, and Phlegmatique
complexion, your April and Sanguine face shall infuse heat into the cold
misogynist, and make the stoutest heart a sacrifice to love and altar too. If
any remain uncaptivated, it shall only be those leaden hearted cowards, who
dare not approach your inflaming presence for fear of melting, or those
emerited Soldiers of Venus, whose frigid constitutions banish all youthful
fires, out of a timorousness of being calcined. Nay the Lillies and Roses of
your cheeks shall be the Old man's true Anacampserote, such drugs that shall
make him think of former joys.

But perhaps a zealous Somebody censures you for evil hearts because you aim
at having good faces; and would like you the worse, should you once look so
well. Yet refuse not enlightened, yea enlivened eyes, but with Jonathan taste a
little honey though a furious Saul forbids it. Be not banished company for want
of Beauty, when Art affords an innocent supply; nor live a Martyr to that
narrow conscience, which forbids the use of oil to make a cheerful
countenance. Borrow our ruddie vermilion, and become purple-plusht roses to be
gathered by the hand of some captivated Hero, least in the green-sicknesse
livery of your own swarthy complexions, you be taken for thistles and crapt by
Asses.

THE INDEX. The Prooeme. PART. I. Of the whole Body and Beautifying thereof. 5.
Cap. 1. How Women with Child are to order themselves that they may be
delivered of fair and handsome Children. Page 7 Cap. 2. What course of life may
probably be the best either to procure Beauty or preserve it. Page 16 Cap. 3.
External means to gain a good Complexion. Page 30 Cap. 4. How to beautify a
white and pallid complexion. Page 39 Cap. 5. To smooth a rough and uneven Skin.
Page 41 Cap. 6. How to cleans the sweatie and sluttish Complexion. Page 42 Cap.
7. How to repair the beauty of an itchy or scabby skin, Page 46 Cap. 8. To
adorn the scurffie and mealy Complexion. Page 51 Cap. 9. How to polish the
Skin when it is disfigured with Scars, or marks of the Small Pox. Page 54 Cap.
10. How to remove spots in what part of the body soever. Page 58 Cap. 11. To
reduce the body that is too fat to a mean and handsome proportion. Page 63
Cap. 12. To make the body or any part thereof plump and fat, that was before
too lean. Page 65
PART. II. Of the Head, Neck, and Breasts, 70
Cap. 1. To cure Redness and fiery Pimples in the Face. Page 71 Cap. 2. How to
free the face from freckles. Page 82 Cap. 3. To whiten a tan'd visage and to
keep the face from Sunburn. Page 83 Cap. 4. To remove running Tettars, or
spreading Pustules. Page 85 Cap. 5. How to help the Complexion when it is
marred with blue and congealed blood, or black and blue, proceeding from a
stroke or bruise. Page 87 Cap. 6. To smooth the face disfigured with wrinckles.
Page 89 Cap. 7. How to cure chaps in the Face. Page 91 Cap. 8. Remedies for the
Face when it is Burnt or Scalded. Page 92 Cap. 9. To beautify the Face
howsoever disfigured. Page 94 Cap. 10 How to fasten the Hair, and keep it from
falling off. Page 102 Cap. 11. Remedies for the want of hair, how to make it
grow on any bald place, or there where it never came before. Page 104 Cap. 12.
How to take away hair and keep it from growing again. Page 107 Cap. 13. How
to make the hair Curle. Page 109 Cap. 14. To make the Hair Lank and flag.
Page 112 Cap. 15. To lengthen the Hair. Page 113 Cap. 16. To soften the Hair
when too harsh and stiff. Page 115 Cap. 17. Remedies for the Hair when it
splits. Page 117 Cap. 18. To make the hair of what color you please. Page 119
Cap. 19. How to cleanse the hair of scurfe and dandruffe. Page 123 Cap. 20.
How to beautify the forehead. Page 125 Cap. 21. How to beautify and adorn the
brows. Page 127 Cap. 22. Remedies for Inflammation, Bloodshot, or Spots in the
Eyes, and yellowness of the Eyelids. Page 130 Cap. 23. To alter the ill color
of the eyes and how to make them bigger or less. Page 135 Cap. 24. To make the
Lips ruddie, Page 135 Cap. 25. How to smooth the Lips when they are rough and
chapt. Page 137 Cap. 26. Remedies for such vices as are incident to the Nose.
Page 140 Cap. 27. How to fasten cleanse, and preserve the Teeth. Page 142 Cap.
28. To Sweeten the Breath. Page 145 Cap. 29. How to beautify the Neck. Page
148 Cap. 30. How to keep the Breasts from growing too big, and to make them
plumpe and round. Page 151 Cap. 31. Remedies for Inflammations or Hardness of
the Breasts, and chaps in the Nipples. Page 153
PART. III. How to Beautify the Arms, Hands Legs and Feet. 157
Cap. 1. To remedy sweating of the Armpits, and other inconveniences
proceeding thence. Page 158 Cap. 2. For Chaps and Warts in the Arms or Hands.
Page 160 Cap. 3 How to make the Hands fair and white, and to lessen the Veins
when they appear too big. Page 162 Cap. 4. For the Hands when they are swollen
and look red or blew with cold. Page 166 Cap. 5. Remedies for those vices which
are incident to the nails. Page 168 Cap. 6. Remedies for the galling, fretting
and sweating of the feet. Cap. 7. Remedies whereby to be freed from Kibes and
Corns. Page 172
PART. IIII. Sents and Perfumes fitted for several occasions.
Cap. 1. Perfumed Pomanders for Bracelets. Page 176 Cap. 2. Pouders for the
Hair, Linen, and Sweet Baggs.

Artificial EMBELLISHMENTS.
The Prooeme.
THE Soul that better part of Man, when it becomes Tenant to the Body, should
have it not a Prison but a Palace, a Lodging, whose structure and superficial
Ornaments might make its Pilgrimage pleasant, and invite its stay; not a
Dungeon, a Cyprian Ceramo to stifle it with its loathsome composure, or with
its deformed Frontispiece to fright it to a separation. It would be too much to
the discredit of our Nobler part, should we be as Mountains graved with golden
Ore, which clouded with barren dust, and sterill sands, usually seem as poor
without as they are rich within. Surely diamond souls inchas'd with Noble
functions, deserve a crystal case, and nature it self clothes Oriental
Jewels in mother of Pearl. The crooked body may perhaps yield service, but
never gain repute to a sprightly mind: and sad was the fortune of Socrates
whose Royal Soul was condemned to the Prison of a crooked or misshapen body:
More happy Fortune had the Roman Lucretia, whose braver Spirit, had for its
lodging a White Hall, suitable to its Grandeur, I mean her body, so fair in
features, that her Companions, some called her, others believed her Venus in
the disguise of Lucretia, or Lucretia coppied out from Venus.

Should we be as stately clothed as Vlpian was, when Alexander Severus wrapped
him in his Imperial Robes, we would neither think our selves too gaudy, nor
our Bodies clothed in too rich apparel: and should we be contented with any
tattered, deformed Body, which should be neat apparel to the soul, and which
it either finds or else would make so? For could our Soul always have a
supply of materials suting its active power, none should ever be deformed, but
too often encountering disobedient matter, which repells its plastic beams, it
frequently retreats it self, and in a retired solitude seems to lament that
Art comes not Auxiliary to its succor.

In pity to such imprisoned souls, Art unlocks its Magazeen of Medicines,
endeavoring to unite all parts of the Body in charming Concords of alluring
features, and give each Member such a pleasing splendor, that Native Beauties
seem but dull and dying shadows, to set forth their more rich and lively
Colors. But all Bodies not being equally capacitated for its impressions, it
usually imploys its skill about the Female Sex; whose soft and pliant earth,
Nature works with a more careful hand, to make it a thriving soil for the
tender plant of Beauty; so that it slights Men, and casts them by, as Canvace
too course and rough to draw thereon the taking lineaments of a clear and
smooth-faced Venus.

Ye Ladies then are the Dearelings that Art most respects, and for whose sake
are composed such Aromatique unguents, such beautifying oils and essences, that
would you but accept their profer'd assistance, there is none of you but might
equallize a Hellen: here only would be the difference, that a Paris came from
Troy to Ravish her, but multitudes would make longer journeys to Admire you.

This subsequent Treatise, (solely composed Ladies for your concernment) is
abundantly stored with such Artificial Embellishments: and that it might not
it self, be deficient in what it presents to you, Beauty; it is regularly
methodiz'd into a quaternion of parts. The First whereof treats of Embellishing
the Body in general; the Next of the Head, neck and breast; the Third of the
Hands, Arms, Legs and Feet; and the Last supplies you with Sents, Perfumes
and Pouders, fitted for the exigencies of any emergent occasion. Of each of
these in Order.

Artificial Embellishments.
PART. I. Of the whole Body, and the beautifying thereof.
THE Body, that weak and moving mansion of mortality, is exposed to the
treacherous underminings of so many Sicknesses and Distempers, that its own
frailty seems Petitioner for some artificial Enamel, which might be a fixation
to Natures inconstancy, and a help to its variating infirmities. For he that
narrowly observes that fading house of distempered clay, will soon find that it
aemulats the Moon in mutability; that though to day it be varnisht with a
purple and lively blush, to morrow it will be so white washed with a meager
paleness, as if Death had took it to hire, and made it a whited Sepulcher; that
though to day it be so smooth and plain, that Venus her self might be tempted
to take her Recreation there; to morrow it will be so rough-cast with a nasty
Elephantiasis, that Cupid can scarce walk there without being over shoes.

Now to sublimate Nature beyond the reach of Sickness, to a lasting and
aetherial Pulcritude, and by cosmetick Antidotes to fortify it with an
incapacity of being supprised by any feature-fretting malady, would be a
business should puzzle not only a whole Elaboratory of Chemists, but their
Archeus too; although of the privy Council to Nature, and confident to her
recluded privacies. But to make that Lure of Love, Beauty, of a more than
ordinary luster; to fix the Complexion of the Body so, that it be not too
frequent in its variation; or to keep the fair and damask skin from being too
much sullied with Deformities filthy fingers, is a task not transcending the
sphaere of a modest undertaking activity.

For it is that, which has with happy success been often effected, by a
convenient regulating the fantasy, or imagination of the Mother, whilst she
is with Child; by using food of quick concoction, and easy nourishment; by
moderate and frequent exercise; by the application of those things which adorn
the body with an enamouring and lively color; by taking away those which may
vitiate the features, as swarthiness of the Complexion, scars and spots of the
Skin, nasty sweat, etc. by keeping the body and every member thereof, that it
be neither too gross or too lean, and the like: Concerning all which, we
intend to give some Directions in the following Chapters of this First Part.

CHAP. I. How Women with Child are to order themselves that they may be
delivered of fair and handsome Children.
INtending to furnish you (lovely Ladies) with such Prescriptions as most
nearly concern the beautifying of the Body; it will be requisite to begin with
some special and singular means, how to help the comely formation, of the
tender Embryo, while it is yet in Natures Elaboratory, the Womb; that so it
may be educed from the confused Chaos of the lesser world, not a misshapen or
monstrous lump, but a sparkling luminary, and a piece that Nature may take for
a pattern, when she attempts the composure of a person she intends to boast of.

Amongst those several things which tend to this exact completing of the
Foetus, there is nothing more signally concurrs than the imagination of the
breeding Mother. This is that busy Architectrix of the brain, which contrives
such machinations, and acts such miracles, that it is a miracle almost to find
any that believe them. For, let but the great-bellyed Mother exercise
moderately, and use ordinary wholesome, diet, there will need nothing more to
have Children so fair, that you may by their own splendour be lighted to view
their perfections; then the regular ordering of the fancy: which is
superintendent to the growing infant, and the Mothers active emissary, that
with all obsequiousness executes her wishes on the tender Babe in the Womb.
For finding the soft and plyant Faetus pinioned in a membranious mantle, and
lying helplesly drowsy in Natures cradle, it freely without resistance makes
impression as the Mother directs it. So that she by the help of this invisible
Agent usually works and adorns the Infant with those features which her mind
most runs upon, and she her self affects.

He that considers the various relations that several Authors make of the
Fantasies imperious Tyranny over the growing Embryo, will with small
reluctance admit its Plasticks power in a comely composure. Helmont makes
relation of a Tailors Wife, who being big with Child, and seeing before her
doors a duel betwixt two Soldiers, one whereof lost his hand in the combat;
fell presently (being frighted with the sight) into labor, and was delivered
of a Daughter with one hand, the other arm bleeding, and having the hand cut
off at the same place with the maimed Soldier. The same Author gives us
another story altogether as strange, of a Merchants Wise at Antwerp, and a
familiar acquaintance of his, who some weeks before the time of her Delivery,
hearing that there were thirteen condemned persons to be beheaded, was desirous
to see them executed, and to that purpose gets to a friends house in the
Marketplace, where the windows looked full out upon the Scaffolds; but scarce
had she seen the first suffer, when she cried out for a Midwife, and was
delivered of a lovely Boy, that had his head newly parted from his shoulders.
Other Writers also give us the like stories. Gassendus in his Philosophy, tells
us of one great with Child, that being set upon by a company of bloody
Villains, and stabbed in several parts of her body, suddenly after died, and the
Child that was cut out of her Womb, had so many blue spots like broises in his
body, as the Mother had stabbs, and in the very same parts, wherein she was
wounded. Munster likewise makes mention of a Woman with Child, that standing
whispering with another, and a third coming softly behind, and knocking their
foreheads together, was soon after delivered of Twins, with their foreheads
joined together. Besides all this, there are yet more stupendous actions,
which may be reckoned as the products of a working Phancie, That Alcippe (in
Pliny) should be delivered of an Elephant: that a Woman in Aristotle, should be
Mother to a Child with a Rams-head: or, that Plutarcks Matron, expecting a Son,
should be saluted with an ugly Centaure, are effects which the most rational
heads generally refer to the imagination.

Now if Fancy or the Imaginative power can transpose the parts of the Foetus
and make it a monster; if it can turn executioner, and set the little Infants
soul free from the prison of its body, while its body is still prisoner to the
womb; why may it not as well act the Painter, and have the disposing of Natures
colors, to draw as it pleases, ravishing, or else less enticing features?
Certainly, if we confider what Galen relates of a woman who brought forth a Son
not like the Father, who was much deformed, but resembling a comely picture
hanging in her Chamber, whereon he wished her to think earnestly when she
embraced her Husband: Or if we call to mind how some by often looking on a
Black-a-moores picture, have been delivered of a Child clouded with Natures
sooty mask, and wrapped in the sable mantle of a swarthy skin; we cannot but be
convinced, that the Infant comes into the world apparel'd with those features,
which the Fancy, that commanding Empress of the Mothers brain, dispences from
her own wardrobe.

So that if ye desire (Ladies) to have Children, whose beauty shall eclipse
all other objects, and be an attracting magnet to neighbourring eyes, propose
to your Phancies such patterns as may excite both your own, and others
admiration; whether it be some person who monopolizes perfections, and is the
royal exchequer of unparalled beauty, or some lively pencil'd picture of a
most absolute proportion of parts, temper of colors, and vivacity of aspect.
For some such exquisite pattern being once made choice of, and in time of
conception, or else of being with child, often thought upon and beheld with
intensness, will by little and little imprint in the mind a noble Idea of the
same perfections, which the active Phancie soon apprehends as a proposed
pattern, to work thereby a parallel piece; and therefore with an obsequious
celerity informs the appetite, which immediately summons the subtle humors and
the most spirituous parts of the blood, as inferior officers, and they receive
an impression of this Idea, which they carry in triumph through all the coasts
of the microcosme, till they arrive at those parts whereto they were designed
by the direction of their Empress Fancy: Who thinking no repository too secure
for so fair a species, commands those agile emissaries to treasure it up in the
seed, which is the most new and durable aedifice in all its dominions, and
likely to last when all the rest shall lie buried in the dust of their final
ruins, Or if she be entrusted with this Idea, in the time of the Mothers being
great, she immediately sends those active agents with it to the Womb, that mint
of the microcosme, to have it stamped by the Plastic faculty on the growing
Foetus, that so it may be in a capacity to act its princely part on the theater
of the world, where it may attract the eyes of future admirers, and with a
radiant luster vye with its Prototype.

But some of you perhaps may be so scrupulous as to enquire, that seeing the
Phancie is merely a cognoscitive faculty, and Women usually fix their thoughts
on several and various objects during the times of Conception and Gravidation;
how it comes to pass that we find not the Infant subject to more numerous
mutations, according to the variety of impressions made by sundry species on
the imagination? The Reply to this will be easy, if we consider, that if the
matter were more seriously pondred, we should not find the Imagination so
seldom active as generally is supposed: for it is very probable that the
resemblance of every child, whether with the father, mother or any other
person, has some near dependence on some operation or other of the mothers
Phantasy; according as her mind was with more intensness fixed upon such or such
a party. But yet again it is not every act of the phantasy, which is able to
affect the formative power residing in the womb; but only that which is strong,
and attended with the powerful commotion of the spirits and humors in the
body. So that there being not many acts of the phantasy concomitated with the
energie of such commotions, it is no wonder that infants signally affected with
the mothers phantasy are so few. Those fantasies only induce such agitations
of the humors and spirits as are requisite to affect the Foetus, which are
followed by violent passions of a surprising fear or an earnest and longing
desire: for these are the most turbulent and impetuous passions that the mind
is subject to; which exciting the tenuious humors and spirits in all parts of
the body, cause both in the mother and infant remarkable alterations.

Take but an instance or two of the effects of both these unruly passions.
Baptista Porta in his natural magic, tells us of a woman who amorously
affecting a Marble statue, dead indeed in it self, but for her lust too lively,
by frequent looking on it, and continual keeping of it in her mind, brought
forth a son plumpe, pale, of a glittering color and in every thing
representing the features of the too much admired marble. Ficinus reports for a
truth of a woman that she brought forth a daughter which had a well proportioned
body, but for a head only two Scallop-shels joined to the shoulders, which she
opened at pleasure to receive her meat and lived so eleven years; and that
which occasioned the production of this monster, was, as he says, the mothers
longing for Scallops whilst she was with child and not being able after great
industry to get any to satisfy her impatient desires. So Delrio in his
magical disquisitions, gives us a relation of a noble Lady that was nurse to a
very beautiful prince then Dolphin of France, whom she loved so entirely that
she caused his effigies to be drawn, and carried it about with her, scarce
enduring it out of her sight; whereon it happened that she became mother to a
child so like the young Prince, that the generality of people knew no other
distinction save that of their clothes. And as for the passion of fear, Levinus
Lemnius has the history of an unhappy wagge that supprising a great bellied
woman with the sight of a boys picture with a monstrous great head, caused her
to bring forth a child of the same misshapen magnitude.

These instances are sufficient to demonstrate that the fancy when attended
with either of those passions, has power to alter the confirmation and
complexion of the yielding foetus; and that to have handsome and beautiful
children there is little else required, then the avoiding all monstrous objects
and stories which may distract the fancy; and in their stead, the proposing
of some amiable object, from whence the fantasy affecting it with a
passionate tenderness, may copy out an Idea of perfect beauty to communicate
to the plastic faculty; whose chiefest care is to erect a stately structure
out of the rude mass that lies so confused within the womb.

This is the opinion of several ancient and excellent Physicians as Hippocrat.
in his book of Superfoetation. Galen in the 14. cap. of his book concerning
Theriacle to Piso. And Laurentius in his Anatomicall Contraversies. l. 8. q.
10. of Wierus. Codronchus. But enough of these. I hasten in the next chapter to
give directions what course of life is requisite that those lead, who would
purchase that they have not, or else preserve that beauty they have already.

CHAP. II. What course of life may probably be the best either to procure
Beauty or preserve it.
COurse of life here mentioned, is intended as a general notion, comprehending
all those things which Physicians usually term res non naturales: so that it
almost takes in whatsoever may cause a sensible alteration in the body, as the
external air, sleeping and watching, repose or exercise, evacuation or
retention of the excrements, passions or perturbations of the mind, and lastly
meats or drinks whether medicinal or alimentary. For each of these as we shall
briefly show do signally affect both body and beauty too.

First then the air is that liquid ocean, wherein each Pilgrim of us all must
traffic if we intend to make thriving husbands, or gain the least addition
to the too soon wasted number of our fleeting days: It is our more gentle
Aeolus, that breaths forth prosperous gales into the expanded lobes of our
lungs, to land us safely at the silver top't Alps of hoary hairs. But seldom
is it that it keeps such an evennesse in in its blasts, as not to cause some
sensible variation, in our beauty that Loadstone of desire: For it variously
affects the body both within and without. Inwardly, as it is sucked into the
lungs, those panting bellows, so naturally contrived to keep the bosie furnace
of the heart boiling; then it communicates its qualities to the very fountain
of life; next to the blood, and so universally to the whole body. Outwardly, as
it beats continually upon the superficial skin, and causes roughness, chaps
and sundry other accidents according to its several constitution. So that
great care is to be taken to preserve the body from the impressions of an ill
disposed air, whether too moist, or too dry, too hot or too cold. For an air
too moist will soon wash off natures paint; and if ladies live too long in
foggs, it is the ready way to stain their damask skins. The lillies and roses
of the cheeks will fade rather then flowrish if too much watered: and Venus her
self though borne in Neptunes watery palace would never be nursed there,
fearing the tender plants of beauty would never thrive in that liquid soil.
Wherefore I can scarce approve the practice of some Ladies, who to allay the
petty exorbitancie of a ruddie color, in the evenings wherein damp mists and
dews fall, expose their naked breasts and faces to Cynthia's moistening rays,
as if the moon (because pale her self) would make them so; or her spitting in
the face were to scour it. Certainly beauty never consents that Laundresse
should whiten her livery, who uses no other soap then her own foggie
excrements. Such practices, I confess, since they occasion rheums, catarrhs,
and distillations may make the face white or pallid but never fair or
handsome. So on the contrary an air too dry does so wrinkle and chap the skin
our native shirt, that nature or art can scarce ever work it with a beautiful
embroidery. Next a bleake and piercing air is a mortal enemy to a lovely
complexion; it makes the skin rough, constipates the pores and hinders the
exhalation of the excrements, and these lying betwixt the skin and the flesh do
exceedingly vitiate the complexion, making it livid and dull. So that those
Ladies are to be reproved that go with their breasts bare and naked in the
midst of frost and snow. Those swelling mounts where Cupid makes his nest,
should have a warmer covering then a snowie fleece, for fear those milkie
fountains may be curdled with a chilly cold, and he forced to shift for fairer
lodgings. Neither is the contrary extreme of heat less prejudicial to a fair
and tender skin; it tempts the blood to the external parts, and there tanns it
into a wainscot hew: Be careful Ladies then, not to expose your beauty to a
parching heat, for fear you soon bewail your rash attempt in the sable veil
of a sootie skin. Therefore if it be in your power to choose an air to better
your complexions, make choice of a seat somewhat raised that it be not exposed
to the inconveniences of fogs and mists, which too frequently pester the lower
habitations; let it be sheltered round with pleasant woods and groves which may
fence you from the blew impressions of a pinching Boreas, and in the Summer
secure you that Sol with his amorous beams shall not kiss your beauty away.
But in this election of aires regard is to be had to the constitution of the
person; for those whose cheeks are tinctured with a deeper blush, ought to
choose a cooler; and those whose lilly features seem wan and pallid, a hotter
place; yet with this caution, that they expose themselves to no heat or cold
but what is moderate; for extremity of cold too violently repels the blood
inward and excess of heat draws it too much out.

In the next place moderation either in sleeping or waking conduces much to the
preservation of a comely face. Excessive sleep makes the body dull and heavy,
the color pale, swarthie and livid; for it is easy to^ know Morpheus's
sluggish votaries by those sullied impressions his leaden heels leave in their
fleshie robes. So on the other side watching over much spends the spirits,
exceedingly dries the moisture of the body; and if you make it a frequent
custom to extend it to unusual periods, it will scarce leave ye, Ladies,
blood enough to crimson your cheeks with a vermilion blush for the loss of
your beauty.

What has been said of sleeping and watching may rationally be interpreted of
repose and exercise: for repose is but a waking sleep and exercise a more
active watching. If any love their ease too much they soon contract the rust of
idleness, which will surely ironmould the finest skin; and they that exercise
immoderately; quickly were out beauties silken livery; and when once ye come
Ladies to wear deformities home spun garments, you are quite broke for
beauties; for none will think you worth the looking after, and your whole stock
of features will hardly procure any to lend you an eye.

How much evacuation or retention of the excrements either promote or hinder a
good complexion, you will easily imagine if you consider that the reaking
entrails are the bodies sink, which, if it be not duly cleans'd and scoured,
affects the face with such noisome exhalations that the squeamish Queen of love
will never be won upon to make it her court of residence.

The perturbations and unruly possions of the mind do offer greater violence to
the features then any thing else; their impetuous motions raise an earthquake
in the lesser world which ruins the stately structure of Cupids palace. Grief
is the moth of Beauty, it frets out the characters of natures fairest
Orthography; wearing off those ruddie and carnation flourishes which her
skillful pencill drew, it makes the face a discolourable blank; and renders
those who over much indulge it, so wannish and pale, that they seem but walking
shrouds to carry themselves to their own shadie sepulchers. Anger is beauties
burning fever, which fieres the furnace of the heart with too scortching
flames that bake the exterior features into a brownbread swarthinesse: and it
would be strange, should such course fare ever feast spectators eyes. Fear
congeals the blood and baths the body in a chilly sweat, which often enlivens
the hair to an active though frightfull erection, but never clears the skin:
nay it does your beauty more mischief then if you should intoxicate your
selves with Circe's bewitching potion: for the worst this could do, would be to
make ye handsome beasts; but fear causes a more frightfull metamorphosis and
makes ye foul deformed women. Lastly melancholy is a sullen humoursome spirit
that raises tempests in the very center of the body; which overcloud the face
with grief, and wrinkle the forehead before Thirty: it makes that Lady whom
it once overcomes, to be out of love with the whole world and beauty to be out
of love with her: while she thinks her self weary of other men's eyes, other
men finding little worth their sight, are as weary of viewing her: they soon
perceive that beauty transplanting her maiden lillies and ruddie roses to some
more courted Elysium; intends that face shall lie fallow, which melancholy
frowns wrinkle into uneven furrows. What has thus particularly been said of
some perturbations of the mind, may be understood of all in general; so that
all passions whatever, as they are usually called the Souls burning fever,
because they make it ferment it self into a pernicious excess; so may they
fitly be named the Beauties wasting consumption, since they leave no marks of
that excellent comeliness, which uses to work astonishment in all beholders,
but make the former good looks give place to a sallow complexion.

Lastly, Meats and Drinks have a controuling power over the features, and
proportionable lineaments of a taking face, and give great occasions toward
the making or marring a beauty: For by eating and drinking, the humors, and
more solid parts of the body, which are in a successive emanation, are
nourished and kept in continual repair. Certainly, if we may believe
Physicians, the moderate use of healthful diet corroborates the innate heat,
makes the external members well colored, and lively to perform those actions,
for which Nature has intended them. On the contrary, an intemperate life,
abandoned indifferently to all sorts of meats, without distinction either of
time or measure, stifles the internal heat, breeds corrupted blood, from whence
proceed obstructions of the more noble parts, a vitiated mass of malignant
humors, which cause a discolored, pale and tawny visage, stinking breath,
rotten teeth, running eyes, and infinite other inconveniences: Wherefore, let
those that would be beauties favorites, not study too much kitchen Philosophy,
nor busy their thoughts about too stately furnishing their sumptuous Tables,
let them have a care of making too bold with Wine; if Bacchus set the face with
his fiery carbuncles, and pitch his standard there, beauties vermilion
Herauldry will soon be expunged. Yet, on the other side, I would not have any
person bring her self down to the lowest Gamut of abstinence, for this will
spoil the harmony of a well tuned face, as much as if the guts were screwed up
to an E^la of intemperance. There is but little difference in either extreme;
excessive gluttony makes a Lady such a mountain of greasy mummy, that she
needs no other pomatum for her bloated checks, than the nasty sweat that
dribbles from her brow: And unusual abstinence makes the body like a thin
thatched Tenement, that has outstood the hopes of having fairer guests than
grunting Swine; the skin represents some white earth plaistering, and the bones
so many uneven-laid laths to bear it out. Yet is it the practice of many that
are neat and well proportioned enough, fearing they might grow too big and
gross, to meagre themselves by long and tedious fastings; and when they eat,
to ch^se meats of bad concoction, as herbs, fruits, sallads, vinegar, that so
by a hard and course diet, they might become neat and slender; when all they do
is nothing else but to extenuate and discolor the body by so rude an
abstinence. It were better if such would follow the counsel of Physicians, to
eat often and little, and that meat of good nourishment; to eat only once a
day, or eating twice, to rise from Table only half satisfied, and so they might
become of a mean and graceful habitude; without detriment either to health or
beauty. I have hitherto spoken of Meats and Drinks that are Alimentary; there
are yet others that are Medicinal, and that equally with these advance the
beauty. For since it is a thing very difficult, if not impossible, to live
always in such an Air as our temperament and constitution require, and that
many unwelcome emergencies neither suffer us long to be without care and
vexation, nor to keep an exact diet, or to take it in such a mediocrity and
oppertune time as is requisite to the breeding of good blood; since (I say) it
is a thing so troublesome continually to govern our selves by the rules and
measure of an exact method, it will be expedient to anticipate that alteration
or corruption, which may happen amongst the humors of the body, (through
excess, or any other misdemeanour in our course of life,) by some means or
other, which has power to expel those vicious qualities, which may cause an
ill complexion; that so the color may be kept clear and lively, the skin
smooth and subtle. The last means to effect this, will be in due time to purge
the body with some quick and gentle medicament, as Cassia, Manna, syrup of
Violets, white Roses or the like; if you would clear the body of superfluous
humors after too much indulging your pallat, you may take half a dram of
pillulae Ruffi going to bed, and the next day you shall have all the relics
of your late intemperance, swept out in three or four stools. Vinegar of
Squills, if taken in a morning for several times together, and you exercise
moderately after it, beautifies the body with a very fresh and lively color.
The same effects have the Trochisks of red Roses, if you carry them about you
and take now and then one at your pleasure. The frequent use of Clysters is not
without reason much commended, for that they do not only make the body soluble
and purge the peccant humors, but also divert those fumes and vapors which
ascending to the head alter much the beauty of the face. Syrup of Fumitory,
Agrimony, Cichorie, open obstructions, and correct the intemperature of the
liver; and for this reason are of singular use for clearing the complexion.

It would not be amiss, if I here put you in mind, to keep the body and all its
parts at ease, without straitning them or hindering their free motion and
repose: For to girt the body too close, to bind the arms or legs too hard,
draws the blood too much from the face, and makes it descend to the more
inferior parts. Your own observation may satisfy you in this particular, for
you may frequently perceive those persons become pale and loose their
complexion, who to have a small and slender body, girt themselves too close; or
to have a handsome leg and foot, use stockings and shoes much too straight.

When the humors apt to corrupt are expelled and the blood purified, in the
place of the vicious, you are to supply the body with good humors, by food of
light concoction and good nourishment, as Ponado's, well seasoned Broths, and
the like. But before you eat, rise something early, and exercise moderately,
that so you may help Nature to disperse those humors which were heaped together
during sleep, and make an equal distribution of the aliment, which in the last
nights repose has been digested. It is the ill custom of some Ladies, that
they might meliorate their complexions, to take in their beds Broths, Asses or
Goats milk, and after sleep upon it: such nourishment although it be good and
commendable in it self, yet taken in such a sluttish manner, instead of
breeding good blood, is soon corrupted and turned into a malignant nature; both
because the stomach when such meat is received, is not as yet discharged of its
excrements and pituitous superfluities; and the appetite is not as then
excited; for that the animal spirits which are the causes of it, are yet dull
and drowsy. Moreover, in the morning Nature being careful of its economy, is
employed to drive outward those humid redundancies which were heaped the night
before up in the body; but such unreasonable eating, diverts Nature from that
expulsion, and constrains her to retire inward to promote concoction; so that
being distracted by two such contrary motions, she performs neither so, as much
to farther the bodies health. Thus much for that course of life which ought to
be observed by those who would have their ravishing features penetrate those
flinty breasts against which Cupids shafts seem too blunt and dull: the next
Chapter supplies you with Remedies which shall so set off the loathsome
imperfections of a blear-eyed and withered Maegaera, that she shall be taken
for some attractive and heart subduing Venus.

CHAP. III. External means to gain a good Complexion.
IF in the flowery enamell of Natures garden there be any sensitive plant it is
beauty: for though it may thrive and flourish perhaps in the face that Elysium
of delights, during the youthful May of warmer years, yet even then must it
be cherished with a tender care: for so sensible is it of the softest touch,
that if the Sun (intending to borrow some of its luster to increase his own)
do but gently salute it with its subtle and limber rays, it presently shrouds
it self in a mantle of Jet, as if resenting his mildest embraces; as a rude
indignity, it were resolved to benight the face in a gloomy coverture, in
spite of his world of glory. So again if sullen Aeolus come so nere to blow
upon it with his chilly breath, it presently contracts its expanded roses, as
if it had rather degenerate into a deformed nature, then expose it self to the
saucie blasts of that blustering courtier. We cannot then be too careful of a
flower which is so nice and tender, neither can any with discretion blame those
Ladies that through an innocent care of enamouring looks, use some artificial
waters to preserve and cherish those features, which are of themselves too apt
to fade and wither. I must here yet give them this caution, to avoid those
things which rather adulterate then adorn the skin, such as Spanish white and
Mercury: the least inconveniences they must ex^ect from such drugs (except
prepared by a very skillful Artist) are a wrinkle-furrowed visage, stinking
breath, loose and rotten teeth. So that it will be more safe and better to use
decoctions, Pomatums, ointments and such like applications as you find
described here, which are not in the least dangerous and do exceedingly adorn
the beauty.

As for the use of them, before they are applied, the part must be washed with
warm water, and after with water and soap, or some other detersive liquor,
which may prepare and fit it for the action of the ensuing medicaments. Such
preparative liquors may be, distilled waters of mallows, elder, beans, water
lillies; cows milk distilled; infusion of white bread, decoction of French
barley, or any thing of the like nature, whereof you may have your choice in
this Chapter. When the part is cleansed, apply some of the following
Cosmeticks, let them lie on all night, and in the morning wash with bran and
water, or else with Violet water. The most approved Compositions for the
beautifying of the Body, are these:

Take the Roots of Dragonwort, Arum (or Cuckoe-pintle) Briony, of each one
ounce: sweet almonds peeled, half a pound: bean bran half an ounce: Camphire,
sal gem. sal ammoniac. borace, rock alum, all poudred of each two drams,
incorporate them together with the whites of eggs, and form thereof little
balls, which dissolve in cold water, wash your face therewith going to bed, let
it lie on till the morning, and then wash it off with this water following:

Take a pottle Pot well glazed, fill it half full with the roots of white or
marsh mallows washed and sliced, add thereto a pint of white wine, a dozen egg
shells clean washed and poudred, afterward pour in so much river or spring
water as will fill up the Pot, boil all these together to the consumption of a
third part, and then add the crum of a penny white loaf, and as much as a bean
of verdigreese, pounded and tied up in a little bag, strain the decoction into
a basin, and add to half thereof an ounce of finely poudred sugar, moisten a
fine white ragg in this water, and wash the face therewith, without wiping
after it.

Take two white pigeons, pull them, and cast away the guts, head, wings and
legs, then mince them into small pieces, then put them into a glass alembick,
strowing the bottom with some plantane leaves; add thereto oil of sweet
almonds three ounces, butter four ounces, a pint of Goats milk, the crum of a
white loaf, borace and sugar candy of each two drams, burnt alum and poudred
camphire of each three draws, the whites of 24 eggs, let all these infuse for
the space of twelve hours, then carfully stop the alembick, and distill them in
Balneo Mariae; put the distilled water into glass viols to settle in a cool
celler, strein it through a fine cloth, and wash your face there with morning
and evening: it makes the face, or any other part, exceeding comely: and is
that pigeon water which has been so much pris'd by the Court Dames at Paris.

Take alum, sal gem, of each one ounce, borace and camphire half an ounce,
oil of Tartar four ounces; beat and work them together, then add a pint of
briony water, distill them altogether in B.M. the water you draw from them will
be of mavelous virtue to beautify any part, and make it of a ruddy
complexion. Of the same effect is that which follows.

Take madder, frankincense, myrrh, oriental saffron, mastick, of each like
quantities, bruise them all, and steep them in white wine, anoint the face
therewith going to bed, in the morning wash either with cold or warm water, it
will purple any part with a gallant and pleasing blush. Or, take fraxinella
roots, chew them, and tie them in a fine ragg, and bath the face.

This following is much commended for making the face white and clear as
alablaster; Take myrrh two ounces, frankincense half an ounce, white ginger
three drams, cinnamon and sublimate of each two drams, camphire one dram,
whites of three or four eggs, put all these together in the belly of a young
pullet or capon well washed, and cleansed; add thereto Goats or Asses milk,
distill all together, and you shall have such a water that few things can equal
it. If you fear it because of the sublimate, after you have used it two or
three times, you may discontinue it, and use this following:

Take the white of an egg, beat it together with rose water, anoint the face
therewith, and when it has sometime been dried on wash with rose water. Or
often bath the face with rose water camphorated. It is exceeding good to
prevent those inconveniences which may happen from the use of such things as
too much dry and parch the face.

Slice four oranges and as many limmons, take white sugar and rock alum of
each one ounce; infuse them three or four hours in a quart of milk, then distill
them in B. M. and wet some fine cloth in the water to lay over the face when
you go to bed. Or, take Goats milk one quart, juice of citrons one pint, white
wine vinegar half a pint, the flowers of beans, water lillies, fumitory, of
each three handfuls, the whites of half a dozen eggs, camphire two drams,
distill and use them as the other.

Oil of myrrh is singular good to preserve the beauty, if when you go to bed
you wash your face with the distilled water of bean flowers, and afterward
anoint it with that oil: It is thus prepared, Take new laid eggs and boil them
hard, slit them and take out the yolks, then fill them up with poudred myrrh,
close them together, lay them in a moist cool place, and the myrrh will
dissolve into a water, which is the oil. After the same manner you may prepare
oil of Tartar, if you calcine and put it into the eggs, it is an exceeding
good Cosmetick.

Take Unguentum Citrinum three ounces, sperma coeti an ounce and a half, salt
of Ceruse half an ounce, oil of eggs as much, mash them together and make a
liniment. To make salt of Ceruse, you must powder the ceruse very fine, and mix
it with some distilled vinegar, so that to one ounce of ceruse there may be
four ounces of vinegar; let it infuse three or four days, then draw it off by
filtration, and and set that which is drawn off over the fire, in an earthen
pot well glazed and dried till it become a salt, as they make their cauteries.

Take prepared snails, that is, drawn out of their shells and washed so long in
salt and water till they loose their slime, then pound them and lay one bed of
them in the bottom of an Alembicke, and on them make an other bed of sal gem,
alum, frankincense, borace, camphire of each pounded two drams, then pour on
so much juice of limmons as may cover them two fingers, so let them macerate 5
or 6 hours together, and then distill them in Bal. Maris.

Take twelve limons, as many hen eggs, half a pound of turpentine well washed,
put the turpentine in the bottom of the alembick, boil the eggs hard and
distill all in B. M. this water is excellent to whiten the skin and change the
complexion, if you wash wish spring watar and dry the face, and after wash with
this without wiping.

This bath is very good, Take two handfulls of sage leaves, the like quantity
of lavender flowers and roses, a little salt, boil them in spring water and
therewith bath your body; remembering that you are never to bath after meals for
it will occasion many infirmities; bath therefore two or three hours before
dinner, it will clear the skin, revives the spirits and strengthens the body,
the same effects has this following.

Take rose water, vinegar, salt, boil all together in fair water, take
thereof a pint, mix some bran with it, and wash the body all over with it, let
it dry on, then wash it off, nothing can be better to mundifie the body.

Some Ladies delight much in sweet baths, therefore into half a pint of water
they put 5 or 6 drops of oil of spickenard; some beside this add musk, amber,
civet, lignum aloes, benjamin, storax, myrrh, cloves, roses, limmon and orange
flowers, rosemary, lavender, mint, pennyroyall. But your chymicall extracts far
excel all these, if you mix but half a dozen drops with your bath; such are
the oil of oranges, cloves, mace, nutmegs and the like.

When your bath is provided remember if you prise your health or beauty, that
it be not too hot; for then it scorcheth the skin and makes it rough; and
causes very many untoward infirmities. Thus much for the means to gain a good
complexion, I come in the next place to give some special remedies, how to
correct the more particular vices of an ill complexion: as a pale and swarthy
color, a rough, harsh, gross or sluttish skin, sweat, spots, itch, scab,
leprosy, scurf and the like.

CHAP. IV. How to beautify a white and pallid complexion.
Such colors when they annoy the complexion principally proceed from ill
humors, which abound in the body and are expelled forth to the external
superficies of the skin; wherefore those that desire to correct any vicious
color that offends their bodies, must in the first place by some purgation
evacuate that humor, whereto their distemper ows its original. Now the
palenesse of the complexion in women is principally occasioned by obstructions
of the spleen and liver, which cause in them a suppression of their monthly
purgations, which cause being by an orderly course of physic removed, the body
must be replenisht by a good and commendable diet. If this do not recover
their decaying beauty they may proceed to external applications; and to make
their cheeks and lips ruddie and lively, with good success use these things
following.

Dissolve the shavings of Brasil and Orkanet, in alum water, wherewith (after
you have sufficiently cleansed the face with water of lillies or bean flowers)
bath the cheeks and lips, letting it dry on. Or else bath the cheeks, lips or
any other part that is too pale and white with alum water wherein a pciee of
red turnsoile has been often steeped, or rub those parts with a piece of
shipskin colored red. To chafe the parts often with the hand or a course cloth
makes them look red and lively; for such frictions draw the blood and spirits
outward. Or in case of necessity use Pomatum and Vermilion made of cinnaberis.
Or, Take red Saunders bruise and steep it for 3 days in Aqua Vitae, then boil
it for an hour over a gentle sire adding a little alum and gum arabic, than
strein it and bath the parts therewith.

Take rock alum unc. 1. boil it in a pint of running water, when it is
dissolved take it off from the fire, let it cool, then add to it Vermilion
finely powdered one ounce, boil them again to a consumption of half, streine
the decoction and keep it for your use.

Take Brasil one ounce, Cloves half a score, grains of Paradise two scruples,
boil them with a pint of rectified Aqua vitae in a covered vessel; use it when
it is cold.

CHAP. V. To smooth a rough and uneven Skin.
THe skin is the bodies native shirt; which if it be of a courser thread, it is
some of Natures homespun houswifry, carelessly hudled up when she was in have to
finish a finer piece. To smooth such rugged, canvas and bring it to a pleasing
evennesse that may vie with the polisht Alablaster, art here presents an
inventory of of its best directions: so often proved that I presume any course
skinned Lady who will be so much her own friend to use them, may soon be freed
from doing penance in natures sackcloth.

Take peeld Almonds six pound, mastick, prepared ceruse and gum dragant of each
four ounces, the whites of 4 eggs, pound all together very carefully, let it
stand 5 or 6 days pounding it every day once, then put them in a press and
keep the oil that comes forth to anoint the skin withal.

Take hempseed, pound it small, moisten it with a little aqua vitae then heat
it in a frying pan made very clean, so hot that you cant endure to touch,
afterward put it into a bag and press it, the oil that comes from it is
exceeding good for the roughness of the skin.

Anoint any part that is too rough with oil of rape seed or bitter almonds, or
oil of wheat. Or take sweet almonds cleansed and peeled four pound, moisten
them with the spirit of wine and rose water mixed together of each one ounce,
beat them together and fry them, when they begin to smoke put them in a bag, so
press them and there will come forth an oil very clear, which you must put
into a pot of rain water and beat it together til it become exceeding white:
then keep it as a rare secret to smooth and pollish the skin.

CHAP. VI. How to cleans the sweatie and sluttish Complexion.
THE microcosme through the sordid sluttishnesse of some, is often drowned in a
nastie deluge of sweat; out a design perhaps to take Cupid captive and
birdlime his wings with such clammie excrements: but if they have no other
tempting bait, then the greasy pomatum which their own ill stuffed bodies
supply them with, I am afraid (though being blind he cannot see them) he will
smell them a mile off and so keep his distance. They would do much better to
break off this petty plot upon Cupid, and scour their bodies well with these
abstersives.

Take bryony roots half a handful, serpentary the less, (or friars Coule,)
pellitory of the wall, elecampane, of each three ounces, whole beans, rice,
white vetches, French barley of each two ounces and a half, flowers of camomile,
melilot of each one handful. Boil all these together in rain water and
receive the fume up in the face. If you would have it for your whole body,
double the quantities, boil them, power them forth into a bath, set a stool
in the bath, cast a sheet over you and so receive the vapoure.

Vnguentum Citrinum is of great efficacy to help this distemper if you add
thereto a little sublimate carefully prepared, or a little white hellebore
finely powdered. The fumes of the decoction of the shavings of Guajacum is
exceeding good.

Take bean meal, white vetches, sweet almonds blanched, gum dragant, bryony
roots of each half an ounce, pound them a part, then mix them and incorporate
them with whites of eggs; make them up into little balls. When you have occasion
to use them dissolve them in barley water, and bath the skin therewith, going to
bed, next day wash with water wherein the finest flower has been steept.

Take the roots of serpentary sliced, dry them in the sun, powder and sift
them, next incorporate them with rose water into a past, dry them again in the
sun and powder them, then add a third part of ceruse prepared so as is
directed in the 2. part. c. 1. then work all together with rose water, dry
them in the sun, and at last bring it with beating it in a mortar to a very
fine powder. When you would use it, mix it with the juice of limmons, and so
make it into a liniment for a sweatie part.

Take barley half ripe two pound, goats milk three pints, the whites of a dozen
eggs, mix and distill them in balneo maris, then use it. Or take sifted bran,
the best leaven two pound, as much vinegar as shall be requisite, the whites of
eight eggs, mingle them, and make it into a paste, then distill it in B. M.

Take thirty Snails prepared, a quart of Goats milk, hogs suet three ounces,
camfre poudred two drams, beat them together, and distill them in an Alembick.

The sluttishness and sweat of the skin, may proceed either from an external
cause, as negligence to wipe and cleanse the face from that filth and ordure
which may be engendered by the air, or any other accident; and then there needs
no more to beautify it, than a constant washing and rubbing it: Or, from an
internal, as fuliginous vapors d^^ain'd betwixt the Cutis and Epidermis, by
reason of its density. This is the more frequent cause, and for the more
general cure of it, the body must thoroughly be purged of those humors which
produce such excrements; and for topical applications, you are to use such
things as are set down in this Chapter. Or you may scour and cleanse the body
with water wherein fine wheat flower, or the crum of white bread has been
infused, adding to it a small quantity of the juice of limmons. Or with the
decoction of mallow roots, or lillies. As also with the infusion of the roots
of briony, with the juice of the roots of sowbread, or wild cucumers
incorporated with bean meal, with the oil of sulphur or tartar, mixed either
with clear fountain water, or else with any of the former decoctions. Thus far
concerning the nasty sweat of the skin; the next inconvenience that damages the
beauty, and which we intend to give remedies how to correct, are itch and scabs.

CHAP. VII. How to repair the beauty of an itchy or scabby skin.
I Am afraid, Ladies, that whilst I prescribe remedies for so loathsome a
skin-defiling malady, you will think I have forgot ye, and am now addressing my
self to your kitchen maids: I must confess these fretting exulcerations are
more frequently incident to such as are forced to content themselves with
courser commons; as amongst the fleecy troops, those are soonest scabby that
feed in unwholesome pasture. Yet the highest and best fed, are not always
exempted from the infection; nor are the most delicate Ladies, especially if
any thing irregular or intemperate, wholly secured, that they shall be no
fuller of ill humors than their skins can hold. If ever then your ill disposed
humors grow so strong, to break their way through the enclosing skin, it will
do you no harm to have something in readiness that may check their presumption.

Take Fumitory water an ounce and a half, succory water three ounces, syrup of
fumitory and succory of each one ounce; mix altogether, and take it for your
mornings draught, use it for five days together: then use this excellent
medicine;

Take Sena two drams, rhubarb one scruple, annis seeds half a scruple; white
wine half a pint; put all into an earthen bottle, stopit close, and set it over
warm embers all night, in the morning strain it out and drink it: if the
stomach be weak, and love not Potions, you may use these following Pills:

Take Citrine mirabolans, rubarb, of each half a dram, aloes washed in the
decoction of sena one scruple, make them up into Pills with syrup of Fumitory;
then anoint your self going to bed with this ointment. Take Brimstone an ounce
and a half, salt and sallad oil one ounce, grind the salt and sulphur
exceeding small; mix them with the oil, and when you go to bed use it for
three or four nights; only chafing it very well into the palms of the hands,
then draw on a pair of gloves; and keep them on all night; it will cure all
itch and scabs throughout the body.

Take as much man's urine as will serve to bath the diseased up to the knees;
add thereto* charecoal of oak poudered and black hellebore, but more hellebore
than coal: bath therewith the legs for fifteen mornings together, and longer
if need requite. This has its effect on every member of the body, so that
whether it be Totter, Leprosy, Itch, or running Scab, in short time it is
cured with this medicine.

Mercur. and other experienced Physicians, commend the success that these
ointments have, if they are applied to the pulse: Take oleum laurinum six
drams, quicksilver one dram and a half, borace three drams, ceruse one dram,
cumminseeds one scruple; make them into an ointment. Or, Take equal parts of
borace and aloes, a third part of prepared quicksilver, as much oil of Laurel,
make them into an Unguent; and with either of these anoint the pulses going to
bed: after you have bathed your arms for some while in warm water. I find these
much extolled, but I would not have you use them before you have tried something
else because of the quicksilver.

Before you practice with any medicine, remember to purge the body of that
humor which is the cause of your distemper. I shall here only add two or three
odoriserous waters which cure all such infirmities, and make the skin smooth
and delicate. Take Bawm, what quantity you please, beat it well, then set it to
macerate one night in white wine, the next morning draw off the water in a
glass still. It is exceeding sweet, and in a short time cures all scabs
throughout the body, if you add a grain of musk and bath it therewith: mixed
with natural balsame, and anointed on the face, 'twill make it of a lively rose
color.

Take dried Sage eight ounces, nutmegs five ounces, ginger, cloves, cinnamon,
grains of paradise, of each four ounces; bruise them, and then set them to
digest for twenty four hours in good white wine, afterward distill them
according to art in an Alembick: The water drawn from thence is so excellent,
that if you drink it in a small quantity for three days fasting, it cures all
Tetters and Scabs, breeds good blood, and causes a lovely complexion.

Take Turpentine a quarter of a pound, honey two ounces, aquae vitae three
ounces, wood of aloes beaten small, sweet saunders, of each three drams, gum
arabic one dram, nutmegs two drams, ambergreece one dram, powder all small,
and distill them with a gentle fire; and in your operation you shall draw three
several sorts of liquors: the first is clear, the second (when the fire is
increased) falls in drops like burning coals, the third descends a little
blacker and thicker than honey. The first is called mother of balsame; the
second oil of balsame; and the third artisicial balsame: If you anoint your
self with the first of these, it is exceeding good for spreading Scabs, or
itching Tetters; kept in the mouth, it sweetens the breath, fastens, preserves,
and whitens the teeth; anointing the face therewith, it makes it smooth and
ruddy. The second and third liquors recover complexion lost, are good for any
bruise, cure all distempers arising from the blood, or phlegm corrupted.

CHAP. VIII. To adorn the scurffie and mealy Complexion.
That Complexion is said to be mealy and scurffie, which appears full of little
white scales that fall off like small bran, when the face or other part is
rubbed with a woollen cloth. The thin and meager constitution is most frequently
troubled with this distemper; and it proceeds from thick and gross humors
detained betwixt the cuticle and the under skin, which corrupt after some
continuance, and then corrode that slender covering into a scaly dust.

To embellish such a complexion, the chiefest care must be to dislodge those
humors that lie betwixt the Epidermis and the grosser skin; for which intent
you may use urine, or white wine wherein sliced limmons have been boiled; a
lixivium made with the ashes of beets and coleworts, wherein boil lupins and
beans, and in the streined liquor dissolve a spoonful or two of honey or gall,
or something of the like nature to bath the face withal.

If the face be very lean, instead of the foregoing Fomentation, you may use
this that is not so drying. Take the leaves of buglosse, borage, pellitory,
mallows, fumitory, violets, cichory, endive, lettice, poppy, fengreek, cleans'd
barley, boil them together in water, adding a little bran bound up in a bag;
after the face has been bathed, wash it with this water:

Take bitter almonds, the meal of beans and vetches, of each one ounce; alum,
borace, mastick, olibanum, gum tragant, of each half an ounce; juice of limmons
seven ounces; water of plantane, roses and white lillies, of each three ounces;
new Goats milk four ounces; mix all together, and distill them with a gentle
fire.

Take Mel rosatum, rose water, juice of limmons, of each two ounces; gum
tragagant, mastick, ceruse prepared, starch, olibanum, of each three drams,
alum, white corral, cuttle bone, borace, of each two drams; sal gem, a dram
and a half; bean meal one ounce; the whites of three eggs, snails beaten with
their shells, six ounces; camphire half a dram; cinnamon half an ounce; mix
them, and distill them in Balneo Maris, then apply the water to the face.

Take Enula campan, burdock roots, of each two ounces; boil them in strong
vinegar, pound them and pass them through a streiner; add solphur vive two
drams, salt calcined a dram and a half, juice of limmons two ounces; dip a
cloth in this composition, and so bath the skin with it.

Take the water that is found in cavities of oaks, wash the skin therewith: Or,
Take the juice that is newly pressed from agrimony incorporated with salt and
vinegar; or the juice of burdock mixed with sulphur vive. The Decoction of
scabious drank for some mornings together, cures the skin of this infirmity.
Or, Take the roots of scrofulary out of the ground in Autumn, beat them
together with fresh butter, put it into an earthen pot close stopped, set it in a
moist place twelve or fifteen days, the butter will soon dissolve, strein it,
and keep it to anoint the body.

CHAP. IX. How to polish the Skin when it is disfigured with Scars, or marks of
the Small Pox.
VArious are the supprising casualties that deform a polisht Skin; each wound
is a grave where Loves dumb orator lies inshrin'd; and Surgeons usually the
unskilful Plaisterers, that make an ill-rais'd cicatrice the swelling monument
to departed beauty. The feature fretting Pox, if it sets but a foot within that
paradise of perfections the face; it leaves more disfiguring impressions there,
than a Coridons clouted shoes on a Cedar floor. Now to smooth, Ladies, and
polish your skins after such disasters, prise the medicines commended to you in
this Chapter as rarities; they will make the hills and dales of uneven faces meet
without a miracle, levelling them to such a smoothness, that little Cupid,
though blind, may sport himself there and never stumble.

Take mastick two ounces, gum arabic one ounce, saffron half an ounce,
turpentine three ounces, old sallad oil two ounces; make the mastick and gum
arabic into a gross powder, then put them into the oils and turpentine,
distill all together in a glass Alembick, and anoint the face with the water
going to bed; in the morning wash with warm water, wherein the finest flower
has been infused. It is exceeding good for any disfiguring scarr that appears
after the consolidation of a wound. Of the same nature is the next that follows.

Take oil of Tartar, and the mucilage of Psyllium seeds extracted with rose
water, of each one ounce; ceruse dissolved in oil of roses as much, borace and
sal gem. of each one dram; incorporate them well together and make an ointment.
Or, Take Tartar well burnt, boil eggs hard, take out the yolks after you have
slit them, and fill up the cavities with the burnt tartar; put them in a moist
place, and keep the water that comes from thence as excellent for scars.

Take litharge of gold two ounces, ceruse and salt, of each half an ounce;
vinegar, rose and plantane water, of each three ounces; camphire half a dram;
mingle and filtre it, so keep it for use. Or, Take wild cucumer roots finely
powdered one ounce, alum two drams, sulphur vive, nitre, of each one dram;
incorporate all together with lard well washed, use it as an ointment. These two
are of the same virtue with the former.

Take oil of Lillies, capons grease, oil of roses, of each one ounce and a
half; wash these well in rose and lilly water; then add to them the whites of
four or five eggs half boiled in their shells, oil of sweet and bitter almonds,
of each one ounce; incorporate them together in a marble mortar, and in the
working put in the mucilage of melon seeds, litharge of gold and chalk poudred,
of each two drams; make them into an Unguent: applied to the face, it takes
away all those scars the Small Pox too frequently makes there. Hares blood, if
you bath the skin often with it warm, fills the cavities with flesh, and makes
the skin even and plain. It is likewise an approved experiment, That the water
which comes from Sheep or Goats hoofs burnt, is very good for the same. Or, use
this following:

Take Litharge of gold washed nine times in rose water, and sifted as often, two
drams; reed roots dried and pounded, rice meal, powder of burnt bones, bean
meal, of each one dram; beat all together very small, then sift it through fine
tiffiny; incorporate it with the mucilage of flax seed, fengreek and psyllium
extracted in lilly water, and so bring it into the form of an Unguent. Apply it
to the face going to bed, on the morrow wash with barley water.

Bath the places with warm water, then strew thereon the cinders of burnt
Tartar, either alone or with myrrh. Or, bath the places with water wherein
cinnamon has a long time boiled, then put thereon the powder of litharge, it
will in short time take away all marks of the Small Pox.

Take wheaten starch, blancht almonds, of each two drams; sweet costus, gum
tragacanth, of each half a dram; reed roots half an ounce; barley meal, whole
melon seeds, beans dried and pounded three drams, saffron one scruple, powder
and sift the whole, mingle them with equal parts of rose water and juice of
orange peel, make a liniment, and with a feather anoint the scars of the pox,
leaveing it so all night; on the morrow wash with the decoction of camomile and
mellilot.

CHAP. X. How to remove spots in what part of the body soever.
I Have seen faces from whose features, beauty her self might have taken
copies, had not nature studying too much neatness played the curtezan, and
spoiled that which was handsome before by two much patching. Yet most Ladies
never think themselves Venus's for beauty, except they have some artificial
mole: though such stellae nebulosae eclipse more then increase the native
luster; and especially where nature is too free in her spots they are always
reputed blemishes not ornaments. Those then that have beauties characters
defaced with such blots, if they have recourse to these following directions,
shall find themselves quickly freed, and their features so ravishing that were
it the mode of this age to dedicate shrines to beauty, there is no^e of them
but would have their Altar, where the most generous heart should glory to be a
sacrifice.

To take away any spot whatever.
Bath them for three mornings together with alum dissolved in oil of Tartar,
wash after with lie and lupine meal. Or take two parts of plantaine water and
one of rosewater, sulphur vive powdered two ounces, rock alum beaten small one
ounce, boil them over the fire till a fifth part be consumed, then take it off
and stir it well till it be cool, afterward strein it through a fine cloth and
keep it for use. It takes away all kind of spots.

Take sugar candy, white frankincence of each two ounces, dissolve them in
juice of limmons half a pint, boil them gently in a little skillet, then
anoint the spots with it, after they have been washed with barley water.

Take lie made of Vine ashes, juice of coleworts, ox-gall of each a pound and a
half, dissolve therein half an ounce of alum and three whole eggs beaten, wet
a cloth in this composition and bath the spots therewith.

Take turpentine and masticke, tutia prepared, of each two ounces, camphire
half an ounce, steep them three days in strong vinegar, distill them in an
alembick, and keep the water for use.

To clear the skin of black spots.
Take the distilled waters of dock and melon roots of each one quart, ten
swallow eggs, salt nitre half an ounce, white Tartar two ounces, pound the
nitre and tartar then mix them altogether, let them stand 24 hours, then
distill them in an alembick in B. M. wash the black spots with the water in the
morning, at night wash them with oil of tartar and sweet almonds mixed together.

Take mastick powdered, sulphur vive of each one ounce, bay berries as many;
steep them in warm water for the space of ten days stirring them carefully
once or twice a day: then wash the black places with that water.

Take roots of iris Florent. wild cucumers, briony of each two pound, dittany
four ounces, flowers of beans, pellitory of the wall of each one handful,
flowers of water lilly two handfuls, steep them in white wine then mix them
with goats milk; after distill them in an alembick, and keep the water to wash
the spots.

For white spots.
These proceed commonly from a pituitous humor abounding in the body and are
thus remedied. Take barley, lupines, red Vetches, the roots of the greater and
less dragon wort of each one ounce, pound them and incorporate them with the
whites of eggs, make them up in little bals and dry them in the sun: when you
have occasion to use them dissolve one or two in rosewater, and so anoint the
spots going to bed, in the morning wash with the infusion of the crum of white
bread.

Take the ashes of asphodill roots mix them with vinegar and apply them. Or
steep the rind of Caper roots in strong vinegar. Or verdegreece finely powdered
and macerated a day and a night in juice of limmons, wet a linen cloth
therein, and bath the spots.

For green spots.
Powder the dried roots of dragon wort, to two ounces of this powder add
ceruse half an ounce, and as much cuttle bone powdered, work them together with
rose water and make them into little bals, dry them and keep them for your use:
when you have occasion dissolve a couple in a quantity of rose water and
therewith anoint the skin.

Take the juice of chelandine and strong vinegar make it into an ointment and
apply it. Or take brimstone, myrrh, frankincence, camphre of each two drams,
steep them in rose water the space of 8 days, stirring it once a day then let
it settle and use it to wash the face.

For red tawny spots.
Take Venetian ceruse one ounce, lapis calaminaris, litharge of each two drams,
prepared tutia, spodium of each one dram, powder them very small, then add the
water of plantaine, housleek, red roses of each two drams, mingle them and keep
it for your use.

In the morning fasting chew in the mouth a bit of mastick as soon as you
perceive it to dissolve anoint the spots therewith. Or powder pigeons dung,
flax seed, French barley, soake them in strong vinegar and anoint the spots.

CHAP. XI. To reduce the body that is too fat to a mean and handsome
proportion.
IT can be no pleasing sight, to see a soul pressed under a mountain of flesh,
and the body stretched to such dimensions that make it represent a walking
barrel. Were there nothing more then this, 'twere sufficient to deter any
from such an unwildie magnitude, that it always proves its own accuser,
exposing in too legible characters, Sloth, to every one that can but read. For
when ere the carcass swells it self into a bulk too voluminous, idleness is
there described in folio. Have a care Ladies then to keep your bodies in a mean
proportion, and if ever they enlarge themselves to extravagant limits, use
these directions to reduce them to their former bounds, so you may regaine your
credit and your beauty too.

Rise early in the mornings and use some violent exercise to sweat often; fast
much, rise half satisfied from your meals; let your first course be oily and
fattie things that the appetite may be soon satiated, and the body kept
soluble; the second course sharp, salt and bitter things: out all your meats
with vinegar, pepper, mustard, juice of oranges and limmons; sleep at night on
a quilt.

It is good to bleed largely twice a year, the right arm in the spring, the
left in the autumn; purge the body in those seasons with strong physic, once
a week take some laxatives, as pillulae ^^uffi, extractum Rudii; every morning
chiefly in winter use this powder.

Take the feeds of annis, fennel, agnus castus, rue, carroway, cummin, pepper,
ginger, mace, nutmegs, galingale, smallage, dried marjerom, gentian, round
birthwort, of each equal parts, take one dram of this powder in a glass of
white wine half an hour before meals.

Cooling applications may be laid to the heart or liver, as the juice or
decoction of plantane, shepherds purse, horstaile, lettuce, white henbane,
adding the powder of camfre, myrtle or the like.

If any one particular part be too corpulent, for the rest of the body, you may
bring it to a correspondent proportion if you use this unguent, Take Fullers
earth, ceruse and lead, mix them with the juice of white henbane and the oil
of myrtle; anoint the part therewith, having first bathed it with vinegar,
wherein brimstone, salt nitre, and rock alum have been dissolved. Some use
with ligaments to bind those passages, whereby the member is supplied with
nourishment.

CHAP. XII. To make the body or any part thereof plump and fat, that was before
too lean.
IN a contrary extreme to corpulency, are those breathing Skeletons that carry
Lent in their face at a Christmas feast, and look so meagerly that their
Confessors, since they have nothing leaft but skin and bones, dare not for
fear of a Soloecisme injoine them penance to mortify the flesh. No part
about them thrive so well as their bones, and these look as lusty, as if they
had eaten up the flesh, and were ready to leap of the skin to fall upon
others. Truly Ladies such leanness is a ravenous guest, and will keep you bare
to maintain him, if you have a mind to be rid of his company, observe these
prescriptions following and I dare engage he shall not long disturb you.

Let your chamber in the summer time be kept something cool and moist with
violets, lillies, or the like fresh flowers: before you eat, chafe the body
till it look red, then walk and stir about some houswifes employment. When
you eat take nothing that is salt or sharp, bitter or too hot, but let your
meats be sweet and of good nourishment, as fresh eggs, mutton, veale, capon, and
for three hours after meat take your recreation in dancing, singing,
discoursing etc. use some baths twice a month, and in the mornings this
electuary.

Sweet almonds, pistach nuts, white poppy seed, butter and sugar, beat them up
into the form of an electuary: take thereof morning and evening the quantity
of a walnut, it quickly fattens and gives a good complexion.

Take twelve or thirteen Lizards or outs cut off their heads and tails, boil
them and let the water stand to cool, take of the grease mix it with wheaten
flower, feed a Hen therewith till she be fat, then kill her and eat her; this
often used will make you exceeding sat, keep it for a rare and true secret.

Take a young Capon, the flesh of veal, four calves feet, white wine, fair
water of both 3 quarts: boil all in an earthen vessel, scumming of all the
fat. Then put this broth into a new vessel with a pound and a half of sugar,
cinnamon half an ounce, a dozen cloves, boil it gently again, then add
thereto the whites of two eggs, reboil it, and pass it through a streiner,
before it cool, mix a little musk, and amber, dissolved in rosewater.

Take the flower of rice half a pound, dissolve it in as much milk as is
sufficient, add thereto the flesh of a young Capon boild tender, sweet almonds
24. beat them well in a mortar then mix them with the milk and rice, streine
all through a course cloth, putting thereto what quantity of sugar you please.
Boil all over a soft fire till it coagulate into the form of a gelly: when it
begins to cool add of amber and musk dissolved in rose water as much as will
give it a grateful odor, often take a small quantity of it.

If one part fall away and be are no proportion to the rest of the body; you
may bring it to even terms thus. Take oil of Foxes an ounce and a half, oil
of lillies, the grease of Capons, and Geese of each two ounces, greek pitch,
pine rosin, and turpentine of each two ounces, boil all these together in an
earthen glazed vessel, adding oil of elder one ounce, then take it from the
fire and add new wax, as much as will suffice to make it into a stiff
cerecloth, when it is almost cold spread it upon a strong cloth, as much as
will wrap up the member, then apply it and leave it on all night; if you find
any inconvenience in it use this following bath.

Boil in claret wine half a handful of roses, wormwood, stoechas, calamint,
squinanth, rosemary, sage, cammomile, of each one handful; let a third part of
the wine be consumed, while it is warm, bath the place where the cerecloth was
applied; this bath does draw nourishment to the part, and strengthens its
retentive virtue. Thus much of what concerns the beautifying of the body in
general.

PART. II. Of the Head, Neck, and Breasts.
YE that intend, Ladies, to subdue hearts, and command with sovereignty in the
mint-house of others Affections, must be careful to keep in tune the harmony
of these parts; remembering that they were intended for beauties glorious
Frontispiece, to allure Spectators eyes, and with a Phoebeau luster, make them
its obsequious Heliotropes. By what means you are to preserve their splendour,
you may be instructed in this Second Part. Where you shall learn how to give
the Face such a commanding Beauty; that all who view it shall yield obedience,
and none rebel but those who cannot see; how your Eyes may be made Cupids
crystal burning glasses, to kindle devotion in your Captives hearts; and your
bushy Hair Venus's Grove, in whose twyning Maeanders a pleasing imprisonment
shall breed a dislike of former Freedom: In a wotd, how to advance your
Features to such a pitch of dazeling glory, that shall make Beauty it self out
of countenance, and put Cupid hardly to it, among so many fair ones, to know
his Mother.

CHAP. I. To cure Redness and fiery Pimples in the Face.
AN inundation of crimsoned blood often drowns the flowery Elysium of a charming
face; disfigoring it with such a flaming hue, as if the juycie god had made it
his vineyard, and planted it with rubie Grapes. To abate the fury of such high
colors, and fright them into a pleasing paleness; call to your assistance the
following Receipts.

As to the general cure, you are to abstain from wine, except it be very well
qualified; as also from all meats which heat the blood, as those which are
sharp or spicy: or are easy to be corrupted in the stomach, as milk, cheese,
etc. use in your broths lettuce, spinach, purslain, sorrel, and the like:
Blood-letting is exceeding good, chiefly in the median vein, in both the arms,
some days being interposed; then in the vein of the forehead, afterward in
the neck; apply cupping-glasses to the shoulders and neck, especially under the
chin, and sometimes to the thighs and legs; you may also apply leeches to the
cheeks and chin to evacuate the blood that is amassed under the skin.

For more particular remedies, if the malady be inveterate, begin with
Emolients, digestives, and things that do attenuate, not only to rarifie the
skin, but also to subtilize the humor. For if at first you use cold things and
repercussives, you will condense the skin through which the humors ought to
exhale and impact the humor into the substance of the flesh, and make it the
more contumacious to be dissolved; whereby the complexion is made more black
and swarthy.

Prepare then a Decoction of figgs, raisins of the Sun washed and stoned,
oatmeal, soap, french barley, the leaves of pellitory of the wall, camomil,
mallows, violets; receive the fume of this Decoction up into the face, covering
the face and neck with a napkin, to keep the fume from dissipating: continue
this three or four times that the face may be supple, and the skin fitted to
receive the virtue of your medicines the better.

Instead of this Decoction, you may spread on the visage the warm blood of a
pigeon, pullet, or capon drawn newly from under their wings; let the blood lay
on all night, in the morning wash it off with warm water, or the decoction of
soap, oatmeal, or the like. Or else in the place of these remedies, Take fresh
flesh of a neck of beef, veal, or mutton, cut two or three thin slices, lay
them on the red places, and change them often, or else they will stink: And in
case you have no fresh flesh, you may take slices of stale, put them on the
coals, and so apply them warm to the redness. The next morning wash the face
with fine rags dipped in the forementioned decoction.

When you find that those remedies do something mitigate the fiery color of
your face, and assuage the pimples, you may proceed to other medicines, that
have virtue to repercuss the thin and subtle blood, and bind the skin that it
may not be so apt to receive such noxious vapors, nor long retain them. Such
are these that follow:

Take a pint of rose water, put it into a glass, and steep therein camphire
and sulphur finely powdered, of each one ounce, myrrh and frankincense of each
half an ounce, set it in the sun twelve or fifteen days. Often wash the face
with water:

Take Brimstone one ounce, ceruse washed two drams, juice of limmons half a
pint, juice of onyons two ounces, cuttle bones and camphire, of each one dram:
pound what is to be pounded, and incorporate your pouders with your juyces;
anoint the face therewith going to bed, in the morning wash it off with the
decoction of bran.

Take the roots of the greater and lesser serpentary of each one ounce, bruise
them, and boil them with as much water of plantane, roses, water lillies and
vinegar, as will suffice to bring them to a mash, then beat them in a mortar
with oil of roses two ounces, adding the finest powder of burnt oyster shells
one dram and a half, camfre one scruple, Venetian ceruse two drams, salt,
powdered brimstone, of each one dram, juice of citrons one ounce; make all these
into a Liniment for your use.

Take litharge of gold, sulphur viue, of each half an ounce, powder and put
them into a glass with vinegar and rosewater; moisten a fine ragg in this
water, apply it to the face all night, in the morning wash with bran and water.

Take sulphur vive one ounce, litharge and ceruse, of each half an ounce,
powder and incorporate them with two ounces of fresh lard, well washed with the
juice of citrons, adding a little camphire, beat them sometime in a mortar,
then keep it stopped in a glass for your use. Or, boil strong vinegar with bean
and rose water, soak white rags therein, and apply them to the face.

If your red pimples yield to none of these external remedies, you must have
recourse to things more violent. Some use Vesicatories made of Cantharides and
Soap mixed together. Others flea the Epidermis, or superficial skin of the face,
with aqua fortis, and after skin it with other waters. But such medicines are
too offensive to the face, by reason of inflammations, and greater redness that
happen too often through such tampring. It were better, if necessity compels
you, to apply sublimate and quicksilver, for they are much safer than
Vesicatories, or aqua fortis, so they be prepared after that fashion which I
shall here describe.

To prepare Quicksilver, choose that which is most clear, white, and fluid;
strein it through a sheepskin, it will cleanse it of all its dross, (the oftener
you strein it, the purer 'twill be,) then boil it in vinegar with sage,
rosemary, time, camo. mile, melilot, then strein it again through a sheepskin,
at last mortify it with juice of limmons or fasting spittle. Being thus
prepared, it may with little danger be mixed with ointments, plasters, or
waters. Others steep quicksilver in strong vinegar and salt, for ten or twelve
days, changing the vinegar and salt every day, then they purify it with the
crum of hot white bread in an earthen pot three or four times, then they pass
it nine or ten times through a sheepskin, and at last mortify it with juice of
limmons.

Sublimate is prepared diverse ways, the most assured preparation for our
purpose is this following. Take Sublimate four ounces, bray it in a mortar with
a wooden pestle, till you make it so fine that it do not grate betwixt your
fingers, then moisten it with juice of limmons beating it all the while: then
take quicksilver, prepared carefully as you were taught before, one ounce,
work it together with the sublimate in the mortar (wherein you should have
first pounded half a dozen almonds, to make the mortar slippery and the
sublimate more easy to powder) after this work them well together with a wooden
pestle for the space of 3 or 4 days without ceasing, especially the first day
taking no rest; when you have beat it one whole day, add one pound of the
whitest Salt calcind, the next two days work and incorporate them together, so
that of black or gray it may become white as snow, and if at 3 days end it be
not sufficiently white, continue your trituration till it be so: when this is
done put it into a pot well glazed, power thereon a sufficient quantity of
spring water, stir it about with a wooden Spattula, then cover it and let it
settle till the water become clear, change the water three or four times for
the four first days: then stir and change the water once a day for nine days
following, setting it all the while in some shadie and moist place. When this
is done and the water clear, draw it off by inclination, and put the Sublimate
in some vessel to dry in the Sun, stirring it up and down that it may dry the
better, then keep it in a leaden pot.

The use of Quicksilver prepared as you were taught before is thus, Take lard
often washed in vinegar two ounces, prepared quick silver two drams, alum,
sulphur vive of each half a dram beat them together in a leaden mortar and make
them into an Unguent.

Take Lilly roots, roasted under the embers three ounces, pound and streine
them, fresh butter and lard washed in vinegar of each one ounce, sulphur vive
three drams, juice of limmon six drams, common salt half an ounce, camfre one
scruple, work altogether and make it into an ointment.

The most efficacious remedies for this distemper are made of Sublimate, the
best ways of using it are these. Take Vnguentum citrinum, pomatum washed in
juice of limmons of each one ounce, sublimate well prepared half an ounce,
ceruse washed in rose water and borace, both finely powdered on a marble, of each
two drams. camphre powdered half a dram, incorporate these together, then steep
them 2 or 3 days in distilled vinegar.

Take sublimate prepared half an ounce, burnt borace two drams, grind them on
a marble, after make them into little bals with the whites of eggs brought to a
water, which upon occasion you may dissolve in rose water to wash the face.

But since Sublimate and Mercury though never so well prepared often injure the
teeth and cause a stinking breath, it will be good when you apply them to the
face, to take something that may withstand such inconveniences; as often as you
use them* to wash the mouth with oil of sweet almonds, or else to keep a piece
of gold in the mouth.

When you make any application of quicksilver or sublimate consider whether the
face be gross and corpulent, or lean and meager: if it be gross you must mix
them with such things as dry excedingly as borace, ceruse, calcined tartar,
unguentum citrinum; if it be lean, you must use them with oil of sweet
almonds, pomatum, mucilage of gourd seeds etc.

CHAP. II. How to free the face from freckles.
FReckles are the product of fuliginous vapors, and like smoke usually molest
those most that have the fairest skins: as if beauty jealous of being outvi'd
by too clear complexions, did bestow that yellow livery on others which she
deserved to wear her self, The best means to remove such disfiguring spots
are these.

Take Oil of tartar one dram, milk of the figtree, honey of each two drams,
incorporate them well together, and bath the face therewith, Or take cummin
seed beaten three ounces, salt two ounces, brimstone one ounce, put them in a
marble mortar, and beat altogether with the juice of celandine and urine, make
it into an ointment and wash the face there with going to bed, in the morning
wash with fair water.

Take roots of wild cucumbers, lillies, briony, borage, daffodill, dragonwort,
of each one ounce, date stones, bitter almons of each as much, white coral,
meal of lupines and beans, crystal, cuttle bone, nitre, sal gem, white
marble burnt, sarcocolla of each two ounces, ceruse five ounces, beat all these
into an exceeding fine powder, make them into little bals with the juice of
limmons, and dry them in the Sun; when you would use them, take one or two
and mix them with Ox or Sheeps gall, and so anoint the face, let it lie on
three or four hours, then wash it off with warm water.

Take what quantity you please of juice of limmons, put it into a glass
bottle, add thereto fine sugar and borace pounded, set it in the Sun eight
days, shake it well together once a day: after use it. Or fill a thick and
strong glass bottle with rosemary flowers, bury it half a year in a dunghill,
having stopped it close; in that time the flowers will be turned to water, wash
the face therewith, it is exceeding good against the freckles.

Take calcined tartar one pound, mastick one ounce, camphre half an ounce,
incorporate them with the whites of eggs and apply it where it is needful.

Beat radish seed and dragon roots together, put them in aqua vitae, and set
them in the Sun eight days together, then distill them in a Limbeck, and you
shall draw a water admirable against all spots in the face.

Boil litharge in white wine vinegar till half be consumed, then streine the
vinegar, take a little thereof, mix it with an equal quantity of oil of
tartar, it will be as white as milk; bath the freckles therewith.

Wash the face with soap and warm water, then moisten the freckles with oil
of tartar, or oil of alum, continue this for some weeks.

Beat as much sandarack with honey as will make it pretty thick, apply it to
the freckles, and keep it on so long till it scorch the skin: then dissolve
galbanum with a little nitre in vinegar, and bath therewith. And when any of
these medicines offend the skin wash it with warm water, or anoint with oil
of roses, or oil of sweet almonds.

CHAP. III. To whiten a tan'd visage and to keep the face from Sunburn.
AMber haird Hyperion spying faces to dawn with a world of dazeling features,
that might rob him of his Persian votives, or withdraw the Heliotrope from its
wonted homage; to secure his brightness from being eclipsed by such teeming
beauties, clouds them in the shadie covertures of night, while he makes day to
all the world beside: but to make your beams of beauty break through such sable
curtains take these prescriptions following.

White bryony water two drams, rose water one ounce, the white of one egg,
oil of tartar two drams, verjuice one ounce, mix them and wash the face
therewith, then dip a linen cloth in it and lay it to the face all night.

Mix ceruse with oil of myrtle and white wine, bath the face therewith going
to bed. Or take rose water two ounces, woman's milk one ounce, pounded myrthe
two drams, the white of an egg, beat them together, going to bed wash the
tanned places with it.

Make pomatum with oil of sweet almonds, wax and camfre. Else take the roots
of Sowbread, scrape them and press out the juice, boil it to the consistence
of honey, then use it to anoint the face. Or mix the powder of burnt cuttle
bones with honey, apply it in form of an unguent to the face.

To keep the face from Sunburn, you had best wash with water drawn from the
whites of eggs, or juice of sour grapes; or anoint the visage with a liniment
made of powdered Mastick, and oil omphacine. Or take goats suet well washed in
clear water, beat it in a mortar with rose water, strein it through a thick
cloth, then take oil of sweet almonds one ounce, sugar candy two drams, camfre
half a dram, boil them all together, stirring them continually that they may
be white, when it has boiled a pretty while put it into a glass for your use.
If you go abroad in the Sun or Wind anoint the face with it, and 'twill
preserve your complexion.

Take pepper wort, roots of basil, serpentary the less of each three ounces,
boil them in a quart of water, make a liniment to apply to the face for an
hour; then take it off and wash with warm water, it is exceeding good to
clear the face from Sunburn. Briony roots boiled in oil; or cuttle bones
burnt and mixed with honey, if they are applied have the same effects.

CHAP. IV. To remove running Tettars, or spreading Pustules.
TEttars, which some call Ringworms, are the noxious vermin that greatly
damage beauties paradise, and crap its fairest flowers; defacing quite the
lillies and roses that use to flourish, with a lovely grace, in the fruitful
soil of a comely cheek. To secure your faces flowery Elysium from such wasteful
insects:

Take vinegar of Squills two ounces, aloes powdered two drams, juice of dock
roots, oil of tartar, of each half an ounce; incorporate them together in form
of an ointment, then apply it.

Make a Decoction of dock roots, mallows, fengreek in strong vinegar, and use
it: then apply leeches; or make small scarifications, that some quantity of
blood may issue forth; then anoint the place with the oil of tartar, or apply
dock roots steept in vinegar.

Take sublimate prepared three grains, put it to half a pint of water, put it
in a glass into a boiling pot, till the sublimate dissolve: Keep the water as
a choice experiment for any spreading tettar or pustule.

Take Tartar two drams, burnt alum three drams; powder and incorporate them
with the whites of eggs for an ointment, Or, Take sulphur vive two drams and a
half, nettle seed one dram, camfre half a dram, fresh butter two ounces, make
an ointment, wash it in rose water, then use it.

Take plantane water two ounces, white vitriol two drams and a half, burnt
alum one dram; mix them to bath your tetters or pimples withal. Or else, Take
grains of paradise half a dram, cloves, gum tragaganth, ginger, of each half an
ounce, brimstone six drams; reduce all to a fine powder, to be workt well
together with lard, to make an ointment.

CHAP. V. How to help the Complexion when it is marred with blue and congealed
blood, or black and blue, proceeding from a stroke or bruise.
THere often happens an effusion of the blood betwixt the flesh and the skin,
where it stays and is congealed, to the great disadvantage of the face: The
cause of this distemper may be either internal, as corrupted blood in the body;
or external, as a cold, chilling air, stroke or fall.

If the cause be internal, powder rubarb, steep it some days in strong
vinegar, and bath the face therewith: Or, chew in the morning fasting, cummin
or mustard seed, or calamus aromaticus, and anoint the face with it. Turnips
boyld in honey; aloes mixed with honey; or honey incorporated with the ashes of
burnt garlic, are exceeding good in this case.

When this blewness of the visage proceeds from cold, there is nothing better
than to chafe the face often with the hand or a course cloth, or else, which is
more effectual, you may use for a Fomentation aqua vitae warmed.

If after a fall or bruise, the face, or any other part remain bluish, it will
be convenient to discuss the congealed blood, which may conveniently be done
thus:

Take the roots of marsh mallows, of the great and lesser serpentary, of white
lillies, wash them clean, pound and boil them to a mash in rain water, mix it
with the oil of tartar and dears suet, adding a little camphre and make it
into the form of an unguent.

Take the kernels of peaches pounded four ounces, goard seed two drams, mix
and pound them together, then press out the juice or rather oil; you shall
find it exceeding good for any black and blew bruise.

Take yellow arsnick, sal ammoniacum one scruple and a half, mix them with the
juice of coriander seed in quantity about three ounces, bathe the bruised
places with it. Aqua vitae heated and applied to the bruise presently after the
stroke with two spunges, changing them as fast as they cool, will take away
all signs of the bruise.

CHAP. VI. To smooth the face disfigured with wrinckles.
THE smiling glories of beauties spring are often nipt with an early autumn;
when sharp sith'd time cuts those flowery graces down, and shrouds them in the
furrows of a wrinkled face. Now to make your verdant features flowrish in
spite of envious time, or after their decay to smooth the face for a new
plantation,

Take oil of bitter almonds two ounces, lilly roots finely powdered one ounce,
make it into an ointment with the oil of roses and a little wax, and so apply
it to the faces

Take oil of S. John's wort one ounce, oil of myrtle, quinces, water lillies,
jesmine, mastick, of each half an ounce, melt all together in an earthen
vessel, then take it, from the fire, adding a convenient quantity of rose
water, then let it cool and use it.

Take thin shavings of ivory, make a decoction thereof in water, streine it and
keep the thickest, to mix with an equal part of incense and mouth glue, make
it into an unguent, anoint the face therewith going to bed, in the morning
wash with fair warm water.

Wash the wrinkled places with a decoction made with an equal quantity of
bryony roots and figgs. Or take incense, the scum of silver of each half an
ounce, white pepper an ounce, powder all apart, incorporate them with mouth
glue, make them up into small bal^, dissolve these in rose water and make a
liniment for the face.

Take the juice of sweet almonds drawn without fire, honey, the roots of
lillies, roasted under the embers and pounded, white wax washed with rose water,
make it into the form of a salve, soake a piece of linen therein for a
cerecloth, and make a mask of it to lay over the face going to bed.

Boil pomegranate pills in white wine and whey, till the wine be consumed and
the whole remain like a liniment. Or dry in the Sun wild cucumer and bryony
roots, powder them and often wash the face with the powder steept in wine,
afterward wash with cold water.

CHAP. VII. How to cure chaps in the Face.
WHen the injurious violence of wind or weather has rent your silken Skins, if
you intend to unite the separating parts, you will find these your serviceable
cements.

Take Staggs suet and Goats suet of of each half an ounce, burnt borace two
drams, new wax half an ounce, oil of roses two drams, make it into an ointment
and use it. Or else take Capons grease and camfre, mix them and anoint the
chaps therewith every night, in the morning wash with bran and water. Some
dissolve mouth glue in warm rose water, and anoint the face therewith.

Distilled oil of turpentine is very good; so is fresh butter, if you take
three ounces of it, and mix it with the mucilage of gum tragaganth, of fleawort
seeds, and of quince seeds, of each an ounce and a half, and so make it into
the fashion of an ointment for your use.

Take kids suet one ounce, oil of the whites of eggs, of sweet almonds, and of
pressed henbane seeds of each half an ounce, goose and hens fat of each as much,
litharge of silver prepared, washed ceruse, prepared tuttie, red lead of each
one dram, saffron one scruple, camfre half a scruple, mix them and with a
sufficient quantity of white wax make it into an ointment.

CHAP. VIII. Remedies for the Face when it is Burnt or Scalded.
IF the face that Magazin of Beauty be supprized by catching flames and blown
up into blisters, your securest way will be to allay the fury of that offensive
element, thus

Take lead burnt and washed two ounces, Goats suet, white wax, of each one ounce
and a half; turpentine six drams, prepared lapis calaminaris, washed ceruse; of
each two drams, mirrhe, mastick, olibanum, of each one dram, aloes epat.
camphre, nitre of each half a dram; mix them and make a plaster.

To draw out the fire and take away the inflammation take the whites of two
eggs, oil of roses and rose water of each two ounces, work them together and
then apply them. Or take two raw onions, salt, Venice soap, bole armenick, of
each an ounce, beat them together in a mortar, adding by degrees as much oil
of roses as as will suffice to make it into an ointment.

To hinder the rising of blisters and take away pain, you may use this, Hens
dung, the whitest and freshest you can get three ounces, fresh butter six
ounces, sage leaves one handful, plantaine leaves two handfuls fry them a
while over the fire, and anoint the affected part therewith several times a
day.

Or else you may take old lard, melt it with rose water, then streine it
through a clean cloth, when it is cold wash it 6 or 7 times in plantane water,
and to half a pound of this lard, add the yelks of 4 eggs; if the pain be
vehement, you may mix a dram of opium with it.

In case the ulcer be sordid and purulent, make application of this; Take the
inner rind of green elder, oil of roses of each half a pound, boil them with
a gentle fire, strein them and add oil of the yelks of eggs two ounces,
frankincense two drams, tuttie one dram, wax enough to make it into an ointment.

To make the cicatrice smooth and fair, wash the ulcer after it is
sufficiently cleans'd with plantaine water having first dissolved therein a
little alum, being washed, strew thereon some metallique powder, either of
tuttie, ceruse, litharge burnt and washed.

CHAP. IX. To beautify the Face howsoever disfigured.
THis chapter Ladies, makes you a present of universal remedies, that will
fortify your faces against any distemper, and in spite of all the maladies that
beauty is subject too, make them matchless: the only inconvenience that I
fear from them is, that some of ye when ye look in your glasses, may fall in
love with your own shadows, and so linger away Martyrs to your selves.

The oil or water of Talque applied to the face makes it as white as
alablafter. The manner of preparing it is this, Take talque, the most tender
and transparent you can get, what quantity you please, slit it into thin
slices, put them into a glass viol for the space of ten or twelve days, with
the juice of limmons, during the frost in winter; make a bag of the thickest
cloth you can procure, put the former steeped Talque into the bag, with the
hardest river flints, let the bag when close tied be rubbed together by two
men, till the talque be exceeding finely powdered, then take it out and put it
into a earthen pot that is not glazed, with a narrow mouth, stop the vessel and
biud it well about with strong wire, then put it into a reverberatory for the
space of 12 hours, then take it from the fire by degrees, when it is cool
powder it with as much speed as you can (least it draw and take in the air,)
on a marble, then put it into a bag, with a hook at bottom whereon to hang a
vessel to receive the liquor, then hang the bag with such a vessel in a deep
well, about a fathom from the water, for the space of 30 or 40 days, until the
humidity begins to drop: then take it up and put it in some moist place where
neither air nor wind comes, leave it hanging til all the moisture be dreind
away, the liquor which you receive is the water of Talque: by the same means
you may make oil of Talque, if you put that which remains in the bag into a
Retort giving fire to it by degrees till you draw all the oil forth: this is
the most usual and experienced way of preparing water or oil of Talque.
Others prescribe this method, Take of the best talque what quantity you please,
slice it into thin leaves, then calcine it thus, take sulphur finely powdered,
make one strewing of it in a crucible, then put a laying of talque, after cover
it with more sulphur, using this method till you have put in what quantity you
please, and remembering there be more talque then sulphur, and that it be
always in the middle of the sulphur: cover the crucible, lute it well, and
bind it about with wyre, set the crucible in a strong fire, for six hours,
afterward pound it and pass it through a searce, then wash it well in hot
water, till the water be fresh, then pour of the water by inclination and leave
the Talque to dry; when it is dry put it again into a crucible, and put it to
the fire for other twelve hours. Next, Take one pound of this Talque, sal
armoniack two ounces, powder them carefully together, put them in a moist
place, and leave them there till they dissolve into a water; when it is
dissolved, separate the two waters by a gentle inclination, taking heed you do
not mix the waters. The water which is clear and uppermost is the water of sal
armoniack; that which is at bottom, is the water of Talque, which is as white
as pearl, filtre it and keep it carefully in a glass; it makes the face as
white as snow, and may be used by a Princess.

Take sweet almonds blanched, four pound; sandarach, mastick, ceruse, sulphur
vive, of each two ounces, gum tragaganth one ounce; whites of eggs three
ounces; beat them together, and leave them to macerate seven or eight days,
beating them together once a day, then heat them till they begin to smoke,
after press them, and you shall have ^n oil excellent good to beautify the
face. Or else going to bed chew five or six peeled almonds, then put them in a
linen cloth and bath the face therewith. Or, Take oil of tartar, mingle it
with distilled vinegar in the palm of the hand, adding a little camphre, and
use it to bath the face.

Dissolve in fair water Ceruse one pound, strein it through a thick cloth,
leave that which is streined in a vessel one night till the Ceruse be settled to
the bottom; pour off the water, and dry the Ceruse in the Sun, covering it with
a cloth that it loose not its whiteness; when it is dry, add thereto a like
quantity of starch and gum dragant: keep the mixture, and when you would use
it, mix it with a little Woman's or Asses milk, wash your face therewith going
to bed; in the morning wash with water wherein wheat flower has been boiled;
continue this twelve or fifteen days. Ceruse, since it is so excellent to
whiten and clear the face, and seeing there are sundry sorts of it, I will here
give a direction or two for their several preparations.

Ceruse of Wheat is made thus: Take what quantity you please of the finest
french Wheat, steep it in fair water five or six days till it burst, then
strein it and beat it a little; then strein it again in other clean water, then
strein it again through a cloth; when it has stood a little, and the water is
something clear, pour off that water and pour on another, beat it together a
long time, strein the juice into more water, then set it in the Sun till the
water be clear, then pour off the water gently, and to the sediment which
remains in the bottom add more water; do this, continuing the change of water
morning and evening, for six days together, keeping the vessel continually
covered, and in the day time setting it in the Sun; on the seventh day pour off
the water by a gentle inclination, setting that which remains in the bottom to
dry in the Sun; after it is dried, powder it finely and keep it close stopped in
a glass. This Ceruse is of singular virtue to whiten, clear, and pollish the
skin; Tuke then one ounce of this Ceruse, white Corral and Borace, of each half
a dram; Nitre one scruple; reduce them all to a very fine powder, and when you
would use it, dissolve one part thereof in rosewater with camphre and musk;
bath your face with it going to bed, in the morning wash with water and the
crum of white bread.

The Ceruse of the roots of either of the Serpentaries, is thus prepared; Take
the roots in July or August, slit them into little round slices, put them on a
string some distance one from the other, and so dry them in the Sun, after
powder them as fine as possible, then sift the powder and mingle it with fair
water, strein it through a fine cloth so often, till the whole substance of the
root pass through the streiner; then set the thickened water in the Sun ten or
twelve days, in which time you are to let it stand covered twelve hours
without meddling with it, that the root may settle to the bottom; then pour the
water off gently and put in clear, stirring it up and down that the water and
the powder of the root may mix together; change the water after the same manner
twice a day, during the said ten days, at last pour off the water without
putting in more, and leave the Ceruse to dry in the Sun; when it is dry, powder
and incorporate it with rosewater (camphorated and sented with musk) as much as
will suffice to make it into small balls, which you most dry in the Sun and
keep in a glass vessel. When you would use them, dissolve them in rosewater to
wash your face withal at night, the next morning wash with water of Lillies.
This Ceruse is exceeding good to take away all stains, spots and freckles from
the face. After the same manner is made the Ceruse of the roots of Briony, wild
Cucumers, Water lillies. Thus much concerning the preparation of Ceruses.

Take litharge of silver and gold of each one dram, put them into strong white
Wine vinegar, adding camfre and alum of each half a scruple, musk and cloves
to sent the Composition; boil all in a little vinegar, then filtre and keep
it; then boil a little rock alum in water, keep it a part; for your use
mingle these two waters together, and bath the face, neck, or breasts.

Take Camfre one dram, alum, borace two drams, oil of tartar one ounce; all
being finely poudred, boil them in two quarts of rosewater, strein and keep
it; It Is excellent to whiten the face, neck, or breasts.

Take bitter Almonds peeled one pound and a half, the whites of thirty eggs
with their shells, the tender branch of a fig tree cut into small bits,
incorporate them together, and distill them in a glass alembick over a gentle
fire; add to the water which you draw, sugar candy, borace, and camphre, of
each one ounce, olibanum two ounces; pounded all small, then still them again;
and preserve the water that you draw, as a secret to beautify either the face
or breasts.

CHAP. X. How to fasten the Hair, and keep it from falling off.
HAir (Ladies) is the silken fringe to Beauties bed; or if you will, the
slender sleaves that nature spins for Cupid, thereof to weave his
heart-surprising nets; if once it fails, that amorous god looses a considerable
part of his artillery, and after never acts but weakly for ye: So that it
concerns ye, who triumph over entangled Captive^, to tender its preservation.
You may keep that you already have, a fast Friend to you, thus:

Take myrtle berries, gals, emblick myrobalans, of each a like quantity boil
them in oil of roses. It is a Receipt as old as Galen, but as good as most, if
it does not succeed, use the next.

Take myrrh, pine bark, myrtle leaves, maiden hair, pound them together very
well, then add a double quantity of labdanum pounded; put all into white Wine
and oil of Radish seed, anoint the head very well with it going to bed; next
morning wash it with this bath: Sorrel leaves, maiden hair, emblick myrobalans,
boil them in water, and add a little pounded myrrh; it very much fastens the
hair. Or else, Take the leaves of Willow, Plantane, rock Alum, boil them in
water, adding a little poudred Tutty and Myrrh: make a bath and wash therewith.

Take the juice of the youngest Myrtle leaves two ounces, juice of wild Olives
four ounces, red Roses dried two ounces, Roman Wormwood two drams, boil all
these in a quart of white Wine till half be consumed, then strein it, and add
a little poudred labdanum and use it to wash the head.

The golden water drawn from honey in a glass still is much commended. Or take
the leaves and roots of vervaine, put them into oil of green grapes, set them
in the sun many days, then streine it and keep it for your use.

Take an equal quantity of labdanum, wormwood, juniper berries, nigella seeds,
vervaine, bind them up in a linen cloth and macerate them five days in oil,
there is nothing better to fasten the hair; or to make hair grow.

CHAP. XI. Remedies for the want of hair, how to make it grow on any bald
place, or there where it never came before.
IF some disaster, Ladies, have trod too hard on your heads, and killed those
pleasant plants that use to flourish there; you may again attire them with
their native beauty and repair all former ruins thus,

Take marsh mallow seed, boil it in sallet oil 'til it become thick, with
this oil anoint the head 6 or 7 times in an hour going to bed; when that is
done take what quantity you please of the same seed, boil it well with water
and wash the head therewith; it makes the hair come exceeding thick, the same
effects has this which follows,

Boil in white wine oil of mastick tree, myrtle and labdanum of each two
ounces, maiden hair macerated two days in the same wine four ounces, set them
over the fire til the wine be evaporated, after apply it as an ointment to the
head.

Nigella romana burnt and incorporated with honey; Bees and Wasps burnt and
incorporated with oil; gals and the ashes of hasel nuts mixed with honey; the
kernels of peaches pounded and boiled in vinegar; the cinders of cantharides,
southernwhod, maidenhaire, lilly roots, mixed with bears grease are exceeding
good for those that have but thin hair.

Take Euphorbium, laurel berries, rocket seed of each two drams, sulphur vive,
white hellebore burnt of each half a scruple, make a linement with wax
dissolved in oil of laurel; if applied it will soon supply you with hair.

If you would cause hair to grow on any bald place, do thus; Pound elm roots,
boil them in water til there remain a slimy scum on top, gather that for your
use; then rub the bald place with a cloth til it look red, and after anoint it
with that scum.

Or take pumice stone beaten exceeding fine, rub the skin therewith so long as
you can endure it, then bath it with vinegar, mixed with an equal quantity of
nitre, sal armoniack, sulphur vive; your own experience will approve it.

Take barley bread and salt, role them up in parchment, burn them in a crucible
and reduce them to a powder, which make into an ointment with bears grease. It
is a secret of nature. Or take cantharides, fling away the head and feet, rub
them on the bald place and so leave them, blisters will rise first and then
hair,

CHAP. XII. How to take away hair and keep it from growing again.
WHen the Lillies and Roses of your Faces Elysium, are oretopt by the hasty
growth of superfluous excrescencies, you may secure the glorious hue of your
beauties pride, and eradicate those aspiring weeds that disturb you, by taking

Quick lime four ounces, auripigmentum one ounce and a half, Florentine iris
root one ounce, sulphur, nitre, of each half an ounce, lie made with the ashes
of bean stalks one quart; mix all together and boil it so long in a glazed
earthen pot till putting a pen therein all the feathers peel off, then add half
an ounce of the oil of spike or any other perfume; and from what part of the
body soever you are minded to take away the hair, anoint it with this unguent
and in a quarter of an hour you shall find the effects; but remember when the
hair falls away to anoint with oil of roses.

Take Orpiment and quick lime of each an ounce and a half, the seeds of
fleawort and henbane of each half an ounce, sublimate two drams, ivy gum one
dram and a half, opium one scruple, pound all small and steep them in as much
common lie as may cover them four fingers, then boil them as the former.

Take quick lime half a pound, steep it in common lie or urine, add to it half
an ounce of orpiment, boil it to the consistence of a sirrup. As for the use
of the foregoing medicines, you are to foment the place with warm water a
little before you apply them; a quarter of an hour after wash with hot water,
and when the hair is taken away anoint the place with some cooling oil as
oleum rosat, oil of henbane, the ointment of Rhasis camphorated.

After that the hair is taken from any part, if you would keep it from growing
again, take the gall of a Hedghog, the ashes of muscle shells burnt, mix them
with bats blood and use it as an ointment. Or else bats blood, the juice of ivy
and radish roots, goats gall, mix and use them, or take opium and henbane
finely beaten, mix them with vinegar so anoint therewith; any of these will
keep the hair from ever growing: the same effects have these following.

Take the blood of Frogs, terra sigillata, sumach, roses of each as much as
shall be sufficient, beat them together and steep them in the juice of
nightshade for four and twenty hours, then distill them and wash with the water
the depilated places.

Take ivy gum, emmets eggs, orpiment, colophonie of each one ounce, leeches
burnt half an ounce; grind and mingle them with frogs blood and make an
ointment.

Take juice of henbane, sanguis draconis, gum arab. frankincense of each three
drams, juice of nightshade as much as will suffice to make it into an ointment.

CHAP. XIII. How to make the hair Curle.
TWining curls are now much the mode, and none thought paragons for Beauty,
save those whose graceful locks do reach the breasts and make spectators think
those ivory globes of Venus are upheld by the freindly aid of their crispie
twirls. If any affect the fashion they may serve themselves with these
directions so advantagiously, that none shall desire to be free that may have
the glory to be fettered with their curled hair.

Take gall nutts, filings of steel, cipresse leaves, quince seeds as much as
you please; quick lime half as much as either of the first, steep them in water
wherein rye has been boiled, let it stand one day, then boil it to the
thickness of honey, anoint the hair therewith and curle it up going to bed.

Boil salt in water, gather the scum thereof and mix it with myrrh, it is
marvelous in curling the hair.

Some to make their hair curle wind it up going to bed upon a hot Tobacco pipe
or iron. Others dissolve gum arabic or mouth glue in water, moistning the
hair, with it, afterward they let it dry. Some instead thereof use the white
of an egg or else bear or ale. But to give you farther and better directions,
first rub the hair well with lie or urine, that so it may be washed very clean:
then take 20 oak gals, maiden hair two ounces, and as much salt water boiled
to the consistence of honey, work them all well together, and for two days
anoint the hair therewith, on the third wash it with this following Bath.

Boil firn roots, beet leaves of each a like quantity so long in water, till a
third part of the water be consumed, then take it from the fire, put in a
little gum arabic and when it is cool use it.

Take oil of fenugreek, oil of white henbane, mix therewith mirrh and gum
arabic, and use it for an ointment. Or take beets and myrtle a like quantity,
dry them in the shade, powder them, then mingle one ounce of the powder with
two ounces of oil olive, and use it as the other.

Take mallow roots, seeds of flax and psyllium, boil them a long time
together, strein it and wash the hair therewith. Or make lie with oak ashes,
boil therein nutgals, roots of dane wort, maiden hair, afterward dissolve
therein a little litharge, bole armeniake, gum dragant, wash the hair with it,
when it is dried in, anoint with oil of myrtle.

CHAP. XIV. To make the Hair Lank and flag.
THE bushie forest of the head is sometimes labarinth'd with mazie and rude
maeanders; while the locks themselves retreat in such recoiling twirls, as if
they rook the breasts for a pair of snowie mountains, and were afraid their
tender tops should touch them: they may be forced to extend themselves to a
pleasing length if you follow these prescriptions.

Take oil of lillies, oil of roses, of each one ounce, oil of violets two
ounces, green marsh mallows finely beaten three ounces: boil them altogether,
anoint the hair thoroughly therewith, combing it afterward very well.

Take borage, mallows, beat them small and work them well together with common
oil, let them stand together in a warm place a day and a night; next morning
put them in an alimbeck, and distill them ore a gentle fire the water that you
draw from them, keeps the hair from frisling and makes it flag and smooth,

Take oil of roses four ounces, work it well together in a great bottle with
an equal quantity of fair spring water, then anoint the hair, twice a day
therewith.

CHAP. XV. To lengthen the Hair.
Hair though an excrement, is yet carefully cherisht as a plant of value: for
most fancye it to be the microcosmical flax whereof Cupid twists his
bowstrings. To see it (I confess) in the female sex, of a more then usual
length is a pleasing spectacle, and if therebe any Lady that desire it, she may
by these means efffect her wishes.

Use first this unguent, take a wild gourd, hollow it within, fill it with oil
of laurel, orpiment, henbane leaves, boil it over the fire and anoint
therewith: then use once a week this bath following.

Take agrimony, elm bark, vervaine, boil all in a sufficient quantity of
water, till the third part of the water be consumed and wash therewith while it
is warm.

Take the hardest and stiffest honey, boil it for some while over the fire,
into three pound of this honey, while it is over the fire, break 20 eggs, take
them out when they are hard and put in so many more; at last take only the
yolks of the eggs and beat them with the honey into a past, then put them into
an alembick, and with a gentle heat, draw from thence a liquor to wash the
hair withal, if you would increase its length.

Take lavender, white saunders, cardamoms, costus of each one ounce, in the
spring time steep all these for 24 hours in a pint and a half of the best
white wine, then set it on the fire that you may receive the vapor of the
decoction up into the hair, afterward wash the head with it.

Take old white lard three pound, mince and beat it small till it come to a
past, then distill it in a limbick, and keep the water that arises from it to
anoint the hair; it will make the hair of a fair length and soft.

Take willow peel, wormwood and southernwood, dried roses of each two ounces
steep them in a quart of fair water for a night or two, then set it over the
fire till a third part of the water be evaporated, keep it and often wash the
hair with it.

Take the ashes of maidenhaire, politrik, reed roots, flax seed; make a lie of
all these ashes, wherein dissolve a little myrrh, adding thereto a third part
of whitewine and then use it.

CHAP. XVI. To soften the Hair when too harsh and stiff.
THE Hair on some hangs like thatch on a country Cottage, and serves more for
use then ornament; to secure them from the impetuous injuries of wind and
weather, rather then with its soft and tender sleaves, to delight admiring
eyes. Such stiff bristles are usual attendants to churlish Corydons, who are
represented by nothing better then the parallel emblem of surly swine. Those
then who desire a more graceful covering, and and would alter the harsh conceit
that others are apt to entertain of their hoggish natures, may to their great
advantage use these directions.

Take the roots of galingale, fig leaves, camomile, melilot, myrtle berries
what quantity you please, make thereof a decoction wherein dissolve salt nitre,
and rock alum of each two drams adding the like quantity of pumice stones and
cuttle bones; set all over a gentle fire, and while it is warm, bath the head
therewith before the fire or else in the Sun.

Take the roots of white and black hellebore, briony, birthwort round and long,
wake Robin, dry, and then powder them, afterward rub the hair well therewith.
Or else make a lie of vine twig ashes, wherein boil the meal of beans,
vetches, barley and lupines, streine the lie and add thereto a little white
wine; then use it.

Take Emets eggs, henbane seed, rock alum, psyllium and opium, of each a like
quantity, boil them in distilled water of vinegar, bathe the hair well
therewith, when you have done this, make this powder, Take salt Nitre, four
ounces, Pumice stone poudred two ounces, Lilly roots and Cuttle bone, of each
two drams; beat them all very fine and rub the hair with it. After you have
done this, use again the former Decoction.

Take white Saunders and Rhodium, of each two ounces, Myrrh and white Amber,
of each two drams, Gentian roots one dram; powder these, and use it: If it be
for any person of quality, you may add two or three grains of Musk. This
Powder is excellent good for the hair.

CHAP. XVII. Remedies for the Hair when it splits.
When Nature has spun the slender hair to its utmost length, if it be not
carefully kept, 'twill be fray'd and ravel'd at ends by sundry accidents, which
seem to envy that work they cannot better. Your best provision against such
injuries, are these;

When you go to bed, Take Oil and Water a like quantity, put them into a
bottle and incorporate them well together, anoint the hair well with it going
to bed, next morning wash it with this following; Take marsh mallows, fleabane,
willow bark, boil them in spring water, and use it to wash the head. This will
keep the hair from splitting, but if it be split already, you must use this:

Take Myrtle and Willow leaves of each two ounces, poudred labdanum six
scruples, emblick myrobalans poudred half a dram, oil of Myrtle four ounces,
white wine two ounces; boil all these over a gentle fire to a consumption of
the third part, then use it to anoint the extremities of the hair therewith.

Take the juice of Willow leaves and Myrtle leaves, of each one ounce, boil
and evaporate half a way, after add poudred labdanum one ounce, then mix all
with oil of myrtle; keep it for your hair.

CHAP. XVIII. To make the Hair of what color you please.
YEllow Hair was much in request among the ancients, whence the Poet Forma
placet nivensque color flavique capilli. Yet now this color is loaded with
obloquies; for it is a fancy generally received, that the locks can never
sparkle with golden flames without, except there be some cherishing heat of
lust within: so that of late Black is more the fashion, being looked upon as a
quality congregating not the sight only, but hearts and affections too.

To make the Hair yellow.
If any Lady be in love with this color, she may order her hair thus; Take
shavings of Box, stechas, cedar, liquorice roots scraped and bruised, coltsfoot
roots, maiden hair, of each two ounces, and a little saffron; set all these
over the fire till two parts of the water be consumed, then strein it, and wash
the hair therewith.

Or, Take rock Alum, Sandarach, of each three ounces, Saffron one ounce,
Madder four ounces, Vine twigge ashes two drams; beat the ashes very small with
the Madder, boil the mixture in water till half be consumed, then take it from
the fire and strein it; afterward add the Saffron, Sandarack, and Alum: keep
it close in a bottle; when you would use it, first comb the hair very well,
then take a sponge and bath it with this Composition. When it is dry, wash it
with water wherein Fengreek, Barley, Cumin and Soap have been boiled.

Make Lie with the ashes of Ivy bark, wherein boil over a gentle fire Madder
roots, Gentian, Celendine, shaving of Box, yellow Saunders, Liquorice cleansed
from its outward bark, of each one ounce, Orange peele, and the inner rind of
Barberry tree, of each half an ounce, green Lupines pounded two ounces, Broom
flowers, yellow Stoechas, moth Mullein a sufficient quantity of each; bath the
hair with a sponge dipped in this Decoction, then dry it gently in with warm
clothes evening and morning: use likewise a Comb steeped in this Decoction, it
gives a graceful color to young peoples hair.

Take the first buds of the black Poplar, pound them with fresh butter, set
them in the Sun for five days, then strein them and press out the butter, wash
it with lie made of the ashes of Box tree, then use it to anoint the hair.

To make the Hair or Beard black, though before gray.
The hair, either of head or beard, will be as black as Jet, if you Take the
shells of green Walnuts, bark of Oak roots, of each three ounces, the oldest
and deepest colored red Wine, eight ounces; boil them to the consumption of
half, then strein the juice and press it hard; whereunto add one pound and a
half of oil of Myrtle, set in six days in the Sun in a leaden Mortar, and
stir it with a leaden Pestle, then use it.

Take burnt Lead three ounces, Nutgals, Walnut shells, of each four ounces,
terra sigillata the like quantity, Roman vitriol six ounces, sal gem. one ounce
and a half, Nutmegs, Cloves, of each one ounce, sal amoniac, aloes, of each
half an ounces powder and steep them three days in sharp vinegar, then distill
it in an Alembick, and afterward keep it for use.

Take quick Lime one ounce, of both the litharges half an ounce; make a mass
with the Decoction of Nutgalls and Walnut shells; oil of Camomile two ounces.
Or, Take litharge of gold two ounces, ashes of calcined Tartar half an ounce,
quick Lime an ounce and a half; dissolve all in man's urine, till it come to be
as thick as an ointment, then use it for the hair.

Take Privet and Vitriol, what quantity you please, put them in oil and set it
over the fire till it begin to boil, anoint the hair therewith, having a care
that it does not touch the skin, for 'twill make it very black. Dogs urine kept
in glass four or five days, if you anoint your hair therewith, will dye it of
dark black color.

Take Litharge of Silver, quick Lime, burnt Lead, crude Antimony, of each one
ounce; pound and infuse them in the distilled water of Walnuts. Or, Take
Sulphur, Vitriol, Nutgals, quick Lime, Litharge, of each two drams; powder them
fine, and incorporate them with running water to make a mass, wherewith rub the
hair going to bed, in the morning wash it off with warm water and white wine.

CHAP. XIX. How to cleanse the Hair of Scurffe or Dandruffe.
DAndruffe or Scurffe is a mealy dust, that over-clouds the hair of the Head,
Brows, and Beard: It proceeds from corrupted serous humors, which by reason of
their acrimony, corrode the cuticle from the subjacent skin, and fret it into
little pieces like bran. Those who are subject to this distemper, if they would
ease themselves, must use this method.

If the body abound with ill humors, first purge it with some convenient
medicine, afterward wash the head, or other part affected, with this Lie; Take
the ashes of the roots of Beets and Coleworts, make a lixivium therewith,
wherein boil Lupins and Beans, a sufficient quantity; then strein the
Decoction, and add a sixth part of Honey. When the Head has been well washed
with this, dry it carefully with a warm course cloth, then anoint it with this
Unguent:

Take bitter Almonds lightly heated in an oven, old Walnuts, of each six
ounces, Sulphur half an ounce, Vitriol two drams, Honey of Squills two ounces,
the dregs of old Wine three ounces; make it into a Liniment for your use with
red Wax.

Take the ashes of Figtree, boil them in water and vinegar till the third part
be consumed; then add Lupines and Beans, boil them again till a third part be
consumed, take it from the fire, strein and use it. Or boil the roots of wild
Cucumers in vinegar, to the consistence of honey, anoint the Head with it all
over.

Take Ox gall and salt, temper them with the juice of Beets, anoint therewith
two or three days; Then wash with this following Lie: Take the strongest
vinegar and fair water, two pound; set it over the fire, and when it begins to
boil, put in a little Salt and flowers of Camomile, wash the head often
therewith.

Take oil of Rue one pound, Soap one ounce, Salt finely beaten half an ounce;
work them together into one mass; then wash with this following:

Boil Beets, Fengreek, Briony roots, Bean meal, in fair spring water, set all
together over the fire till half be boiled away; then take it off, and when it
is cool use it to bath the head withal.

CHAP. XX. How to beautify the Forehead.
THE Forehead is the Ivory throne where Beauty sits in state, it must therefore
be smooth, and raised to a decent height; for if it be too low, it is much
beneath the grandeur of her commanding majesty; and if furrowed with wrinkles,
it will put her too much in mind of humane frailty, to let her take a pleasing
recreation there.

To make the Forehead high, eradicate the hairs which incroach too much upon
its bo^nds, thus, Take as much Mastick as you shall have occasion to use, steep
it in warm water till it be so soft, that you can spread it upon a filler, then
bind that fillet to the Forchead all night, and in the morning twitch it off.
So you may take hair from any part of the body. And when they are thus pulled
away, that they grow not again, use these medicines:

Take a pretty quantity of Henbane seed, wrap it in a Colewort lease, and roast
it under the cinders; then beat it in a mortar and press out the liquor; add
to it a little Orpiment poudred, and make thereof a Liniment to apply to the
part.

Or else, Take the gall of an Eele, mix it with oil of Roses, or the blood of
a Bat, and use it. Or, Take quick Lime, Lizards dung, boil them in an equal
quantity of vinegar and oil of Henbane, till the vinegar be consumed, make it
into an Unguent for your use.

To smooth and pollish the Forehead when it is wrinkled, Take the shavings of
Hartshorn, boil them in water till there come a kind of oyliness on top, with
the scum of the water, and Bean meal, make a paste, which you must make into
small balls. Keep the water wherein you did boil the Hartshorn, and when you
have occasion to use it, dissolve so many little balls in a small quantity of
the water, as will make it into the thickness of a Cearcloth; apply it to the
Forehead all night, and in the morning when you take it off, wash with warm
water. Use this method often.

Or else, Take your whitest Mutton suet, wash it half a score times in cold
water, mix it with the froth of whites of eggs made in a mortar, beating them
together with a Pestle and a little butter; then add a little Mastick and
Frankincense beaten to powder, and anoint the face often therewith.

CHAP. XXI. How to beautify, and adorn the Brows.
THe two Brows are Cupids groves of pleasure, where he shelters himself from
the too violent heat of the inflaming eyes. Or rather as a controuling
Intelligence made superintendant to the Crystal Sphares below him, he keeps
his residence there, that he might with the more facility direct their beamy
influencies, when and whither he pleases. You may, Ladies, by these means make
them beautiful.

If the hairs on the brows grow too thick, or irregular, you may pull them up
by the rootr with a pair of mullets, and afterward use those means which we
have formerly described to keep the hair from growing.

If the brows themselves fall too low over the eyes, You must work a little
Mastick together with the joyce of Coleworts; and going to bed, put the brow up
into its place, and apply the Mastick to it all night in form of a Plaster.

When the hair sheds from the brows, the use of those things is good which we
have already given you to fasten the hair. Or else, Take the small filings of
Lead, and incorporate them with Goose grease to anoint the brows withal. Or if
ye please, Take black Henbane seed two drams, Maiden hair one dram, unguentum
irinum three spoonfuls, bruise what is to be bruised, afterward make it up with
oil into the form of an Unguent to anoint the brows withal, after you have
first bathed them with water wherein Myrtle berries have been boiled.

The hair that is fallen from the brows, may be made to come again, if you burn
Bees or Wasps, and mix them with Honey; but have a care you touch no other
place, for wheresoever it lights, it makes the hair grow.

If the Eyebrows are of a reddish or white color, you may make them of a
lovely black by these means:

Take red Filberds, what quantity you please, calcine them thoroughly in an
earthen vessel, or crucible, work them together with Goats grease, anoint the
hair therewith, and if it foul the skin, wash it off with warm water: This will
make the brows very black. The same effect has this which follows:

Take Maiden hair poudred one ounce, Labdanum two ounces; beat them well
together with Bears grease, and rub the brows therewith. Many use black Lead
only to rub the brows withal, and if ye do it without soyling the skin, 'twill
give them a very pleasing dark color.

CHAP. XXII. Remedies for Inflammation, Bloodshot, or Spots in the Eyes, and
yellowness of the Eyelids.
SParkling eyes are the starry jewels of a Heavenly face, which with their
active influence, and amorous motions rule the restless fate of every Lover:
When once those twinkling twins make break of day through their enclosing lids,
their piercing beams of glory amuze spectators, and make them pay a tributary
devotion to those Crystal Orbs from whence they flow. The beauty of the eyes
is much impaird by inflammations, bloodshot, duskie spots, which much eclipse
and cloud their splendor. Such vices may thus be remedied:

If the eyes be inflamed, you are first to begin with a good diet, and never
eat or drink any thing that may send fumet to the head; then you must be
careful either to evacuate or divert that humor which causes the malady, by
purging, blood-letting, drawing blisters in the neck, In the next place, apply
them that may alter and digest the humor, if it be hot. it is to be done with
cold things; as Fndive, Purslaine, Nightshade, Rosewater, Woman's milk. If it be
a cold rhume that falls into the eye, boil Laurel leaves in white Wine, bind
them in form of a Plaster to the eye, or make a Pultice of Celondine with
white Wine, apply it to the eye, it both eases the pain, and takes away
inflammation. Or, Take Rue and Fennel roots, beat them well in a mortar; then
boil them in white Wine and bath the eyes with the Decoction.

If the pain and pricking be extreme, Take the white of an egg, beat it
together with some Poppy water. You may make a very good Plaster for all
inflammations thus, Take an equal quantity of Saffron, Myrrh, Opium, gum
Arabic; powder and dissolve them in Rosewater, make a Plaster and dry it, and
when you have occasion, soften it with Rosewater or the white of an Egg.

When the pupil or sight of the eye is covered with any spot, after you have
purged the body, bath the eyes with Liquor pressed from Sowes or Wood lice,
being bruised in a mortar, and in less then thirty days, it will be taken
away. Or, apply to the eye a bag full of cummin seed steep in warm white wine.

Take prepared tuttie, sugar candy, ginger of each one dram, sarcocol, white
tartar of each two drams, musk half a scruple; powder, sift and mix them
altogether, and put now and then a little of it in the eye.

Take the seeds of fennel, parsley, wild parsnip, anise, carroway, roots of
celendine, sorrel, betony, leaves of agrimony, tormentil, rue, vervaine of
each a like quantity, pound them all, and the first day steep them in white
wine, the second in woman's milk, on the third distill them: keep the liquor
close stopped in a vessel, and put two drops of it into the eye every day, it
will take away all spots whatever.

To help the eyes when they are bloodshot, take green wormwood pound and mix it
with the white of an egg, bind it warm to the eye; the second time that it is
applied it will core you. Mix the crum of warm white bread, with the yolke of
an egg, shut the eye and lay it upon it. Or soake unwasht wool in an equal
quantity of oil of violets, whites of eggs, juice of rue and apply it to the
eye.

If the lower lid of the eye in the cavitie of it be of a tawny swarthy color,
you may by these means remedy it. First let the Physician remove the
principal cause, then take oil of fenugreek and anoint the discolored places
with all. Or else anoint them with the oil of Cedar, which is exceeding good
to take away such ill colors. Take some Pomegranate peels and press them,
anoint the lids with the juice, and twill make them return to their former
color.

CHAP. XXIII. To alter the ill color of the eyes and how to make them bigger
or less.
ALL colors do not equally grace the eyes: they are Cupids torches, that
should shine with a splendent flame, and never burn too blew; which is a
color looked upon as fatal, and never more aptly placed then in Bellonas (
Mars's grimlookt sisters) eye. Neither again do all dimensions suit with their
office; they are Cupids crystal quivers, and must not be too big for that
little archer, nor yet so small as not to contain his magazeen of shafts. Those
that have eyes of an ill color, if they would have them black let them take

Antimony washed and dried five ounces, lapis lazuli one ounce, musk, camfre of
each three grains, wood of aloes two ounces, frankincense three ounces,
saffron half an ounce: make a very fine powder of all these, at night when you
go to bed put a little of it into the eyes, in the morning they will be black
as if they had been so naturally.

Gioranni Marienallo an Italian, says he has often made proof of this which
was communicated to him by an Armenian. Take acacia, gals of each an equal
quantity, powder them exceeding small, then mix them with the juice of anemonie
or wind flower, making it up in the thickness of honey, then pass it through a
streiner and keep it for your use in a glass.

The same Author exceedingly commends this following. Take henbane flowers, dry
them in the shade and keep them: when you have occasion to use them put them
into white wine and bath the eyes therewith, it will make them black.

If the eyes be too little through the wasting of the whole body or any other
distemper, have respect to the humor which causes it and purge that,
afterward bath them frequently with a sponge dipped in warm water or in woman's
milk newly come from the breast.

If they are too big and bear too large a proportion to other parts, make an
issue behind in the neck, purge the head and body, drink water, and abstain as
much as can be from meats that are strongly nourishing. After this take cotton,
anoint it with honey mixed together with saffron, bind it over the eyes going to
bed, and often wash them with cold water and salt.

CHAP. XXIV. To make the Lips ruddie.
PAleness when once it affects the lips, makes the world believe, that those
rubie portals of the mouth, have lost their varnish by being too much knocked
at* Those Ladies whose lips lie under such a suspicion, may beutifie them witha
coral complexion, thus

Take the juice of briony, wild cucumers, reeds, rose water of each one ounce,
clarified honey four ounces, boil all together, strein it and keep it in a
glass: it is exceeding good to anoint the lips and gives them a ruddie and
vermilion hue.

Take the shavings of your deepest colored brasil three ounces, make them into
a very fine powder, steep it three days in three pints of fair spring water,
then add fix drams of icthyocolla or fish glue bruised and minced, let it
stand til it becomes soft and dissolves, then set it over the fire again and
add grana tinctoria ( chermes berries) four ounces, rock alum one ounce,
borace three drams, boil all these til half be consumed, streine it and in a
glass vessel keep it close stopped eight days, before you use it. It gives a
very amiable redness to pale or blue parts, whether lips or cheeks, that which
you put on at one time will last 8 days, in which time it will not be done off
either by sweat or water.

Take fine filings of brazil two ounces, madder one ounce, Chermes berries half
an ounce, infuse them in strong white wine the space of four days then add
half an ounce of rock alum and boil altogether to a consumption of half,
filtre it and keep it for your use. It is of very great efficacy to
vermilionize either the lips or cheeks. Of the like virtue is that which follows

Take rock alum, fish glue of each one ounce, shavings of brasil two ounces,
steep all three days in fair water, then boil them, strein them and put them
in a glass to use at your pleasure. It will make any pale or bluish part, to
be very fair and lively ruddie.

CHAP. XXV. How to smooth the Lips when they are rough and chapt.
WHen those pretty sister Rubies, have been kissed too hard, either by a chilly
and cold mouthed Boreas, or a scorching and hot lipt Sol; to repair the
breaches such rude embraces make on their cherrie Skins, use these things
following Ladies, they will make them seem such smooth and blushing wax, as
Cupid will think himself honored to imprint his kisses on.

Take Stags suet two pound, fresh lard six ounces, wash them often in white
wine, then work them well together till all the white wine be pressed out,
then put it into an earthen glazed vessel. adding nardus Indicus three grains,
cloves half an ounce, nutmegs two drams, seven or eight pippins pard, cord and
sliced, steep all these one whole day in a sufficient quantity of rose water,
then keeping it covered, set it over a gentle fire, stirring it up and down
with a woden spatula till all the rose water be evaporated, strein it through a
thick cloth into a clean vessel half full of rose water; let it stand till the
suet be cold, and swim on the top of the water, then put it again into an
earthen pot, adding oil of sweet almonds six ounces, Virgins wax four ounces,
melt all these over the fire, strein it again into rose water through a thick
cloth, let it as before stand till it is cold, then take that off which swims
on the top of the rose water and wash it well in some sented water till it be
as white as snow; then keep it for your use in a dry place that it do not
mould. Some add to this pomatum, coral finely powdered to make it the more
drying; others add juice of alkanet to give it a vermilion color; there is
nothing better then this for any chaps whatever.

Make an ointment of oil of roses and a little wax anoint the lips therewith,
or champ a little gum tragagant in your mouth and afterward moisten your lips
with your tongue.

Take oil of violets, mucilage of quince seeds, hens fat of each one ounce,
litharge and gum dragant of each one dram, make them into an ointment and apply
it to the lips. All fats and marrows are very good.

Take the mucilage of quince seeds, oil of mastick of each one ounce, goose
fat, beef marrow of each half an ounce, a little new white wine, make these up
into an ointment with as much wax as shall suffice. Or take a fine linen ragg
dip it in the juice of housleek, and apply it to the lips. Michael Nostredame a
Frenchman much commends cotton dipped in common oil and laid to the navel going
to bed. It is an easy thing and soon tried.

CHAP. XXVI. Remedies for such vices as are incident to the Nose.
BEauty is a nice and cleanly Dame, that loves to have the nose (though but the
sink to convey filth from the brain) kept neat and handsome, as well as the
other parts which are designd for more honorable uses.

Stanch and snivell do very much impair the credit of this patt. The stanch of
the nostrils proceeds sometimes from a fool stomach; for if the kitchen be
nastie the chimny seldom sinels well, if this be the cause, you must have
recourse to the Physician. But sometimes the fault is in the nose it self, as
when it is affected with some fore or ulcer, then you may follow this method.

Take Calamus Aromaticus, damask roses, galingale, lavender, reduce all into a
fine powder, then sift it and snuff it up into the nostrils. Or take one
scruple of London Theriacle, dissolve it in white wine and draw it several
mornings up into the nose.

Take Roses, Cloves, lignum aloes of each two drams, Spicknard one dram, Musk
two grains, powder what is to be poudred and make them all into a past, with
the best white wine, and so make them into little pills; when you would use
them, dissolve one in a little rose water and drop it into the nostrils, but
first wash the nose well with white wine, wherein roses and lavander have been
boiled; this will both cure the distemper and cause a sweet breath.

If the nose be to much charged with snivell; the frequent use of gentle
clysters and vomits is very good. Or else anoint the head with some heating
oil, if it be a cold distillation; and with a cooling oil, if it be a hot.
When you go to bed, rub the feet with pitch dissolved in oil, and wash the
nose in wine, wherein put a little poudred myrrh; By the use of these things
you may sufficiently purge the dregs, which distill from the beak of your
dropping Alembick.

CHAP. XXVII. How to fasten, cleanse, and preserve the Teeth.
LEast the Microcosme might be supprized by any treacherous invader, the teeth
are set as ivory Portcullis's to guard its entrance. Or rather Nature has made
the sharpset teeth as so many mincing knives to belong to her kitchen, the
Stomach: If they happen through any mischance to be rusted over, the best way
to scour them, will be every morning to rub the teeth with poudred Tartar,
after wash them with white Wine, if it be in the spring; or with cold water if
it be in the summer.

Take rock Alum, Salt, Nitre, of each four ounces, pound and dissolve them in
Vinegar, then distill them: to one ounce of this water add juice of limmons
three ounces, and rub the teeth therewith.

Take rock Alum burnt, poudred coral, Sanguis draconis, Pumice stone, powder
them all pretty fine, and rub the teeth therewith. Or, Take white Coral, Cuttle
bone, white Tartar, dried roots of Florentine iris, of each a like quantity, a
little burnt Alum: Make of them all a fine powder, and keep it dry to rub the
teeth.

Take calein'd Salt three drams, Galingale two drams, Hartshorne burnt four
drams, flowers of Schoenanthum and Roses dried, one dram; make them into a
Powder to rub the teeth with. If the teeth be very black, you may touch them
slightly with oil of Sulphur or Vitriol, but not too often.

When the teeth are loose, your best way to fasten them, will be to Take Galls,
Pomegranate flowers, Cyperus, Roses, Sumach, a like quantity of each; Take half
the quantity of these in rock Alum, powder all, and rub the teeth and gums
therewith.

Or else, Take Galls one ounce, Myrrh half an ounce, Pomegranate bark one
scruple; boil them in vinegar, and make a Gargarisme to wash the mouth. Some
dissolve Alum in vinegar to wash the mouth withal.

To keep the teeth from rotting, Take calcined Hartshorne, cypress leaves, of
each one dram, Cinkfoyle roots two drams, Maiden hair burnt one dram, Rose
leaves a dram and a half; bring all into a powder and use it as a Dentifrice to
rub the teeth with. It makes them white, and keeps them sound. If the teeth are
already rotten and corroded, Take Opium, Myrrh, Storax, of each one dram,
white Pepper, Galbanum, Saffron, of each half a dram, beat them together and
apply them to the corroded tooth.

Or, Take Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, juice of Spurge, Galbanum, of each a
like; mix altogether, and put it into the rotten tooth.

Boil Sage leaves in wine, wash the teeth well therewith; then, Take black
Hellebore, mix it with Honey, and put it into the hollow tooth. Others only put
burnt Alum into it, and find much good by it.

CHAP. XXVIII. To Sweeten the Breath.
WHen your breath, Ladies, by reason of exulcerated Lungs or rotten Teeth,
sends forth a stanch more noisome then old Saturns sweaty socks, make your
application to these following medicines, and you shall embalm the air with so
rare a sent, that all the aromatic fumes of Flora's garden, shall never enrich
it with a more delicious sweetness.

Take Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of each one ounce, Mace, sweet Saunders, of
both half an ounce, Wood of Aloes an ounce and a half, Musk half a dram; after
you have poudred these, make them up (with Rosewater, Sugar, and gum Tragant)
into small bullets, to hold in the mouth.

Take wood of Aloes, Galingale, Myrtle leaves, three sorts of Myrabolans
prepared, Cinnamon, Mace, Pepper, Ginger, Nutmegs, Cardamoms, Laurel berries,
of each two drams, Musk, Amber, Camfre, of each half a dram, Sugar two ounces;
make all into a powder, and take one dram thereof in a morning; it is exceeding
good to strengthen the Stomach, and sweeten the breath.

Or else, Take gum Tragant one ounce, Sanguis Draconis two drams; sleep them
two days in Rosewater, then put them into a mortar, adding an ounce of Sugar,
Starch half an ounce, Musk dissolved in Rosewater one scruple; pound them well,
then mix them together with a Spatula, and make them up into little pellets as
big as barley corns, dry them, and after that they are thoroughly dried, put
one now and then into your mouth, and let it dissolve.

Take Cinnamon half an ounce, cloves two drams, nutmegs, mace, citron pill, of
each one dram, Florentine iris, the lesser galingale, of each half a dram,
yellow Saunders, wood of Aloes, of each one scruple, ambergreece, musk, of each
half a scruple; steep them when they are poudred in a quart of the best Malmsey
Wine ten or twelve days, then strein it through a woollen cloth, afterward put
it into a Bottle, and keep it close stopped for your use. Take a spoonful or two
of it in the morning fasting; it sweetens the breath exceedingly, and
strengthens the heart and stomach.

If the breath be infected by rotten teeth, Take the best Styrax two drams,
sweet Asa one dram, the best iris root half a dram, gallia moschata, yellow
saunders, of each one scruple: Distilled oil of Roses half a scruple, mix them;
and with a little gum tragant, dissolved in cinnamon water, make a mass; out of
which you may form little long pills to put into the hollow teeth.

When the breath smells of Garlic, Onyons, or any thing else that is eaten,
Take coriander seeds, or zedoary, chew them in the mouth, and drink a good
draught of Wine after, it will take away the sent of any thing that was eaten
before. The same effect has Mint if it be chewed in the mouth. Fennel seeds,
or Galingale champt after the drinking of Wine, takes away the smell of the
Wine; so do sour Apples and Quinces.

CHAP. XXIX. How to beautify the Neck.
NOthing more commends the Neck for comely, than to be white and smooth; for
it is a part usually exposed to sight, and ought to represent a Pillar of
pollisht ivory, that supports the head with a luster becoming that place where
the understanding seats his throne. It is usually impaird by Kernels, Kings
evil, hard Tumors, and Swellings.

For Kernels (which usually breed in those places where the emunctuaries of the
nobler parts are) if they come in the neck, (after the body has been purged,
and the Cephalicke vein opened in the arm) apply mollifying and discussive
Fomentations, with spunges dipped in strong vinegar, then apply a Plaster of
Oxycroceum, adding a little gum ammoniac, bdellium, sagapenum, opoponax, powder
of euphorbium.

For the Cure of the Kings evil, the powder of Sarsaparilla, drunk to the
quantity of half a dram, for forty days, morning and evening, in white Wine,
availes marvellously. The like operation have all your nitrous and vitriolick
waters; for an external Plaster, you may use Emplastrum divinum. In Autumn,
Take the root of Scrofulary, beat it together with fresh butter, put it into an
earthen vessel well covered in a moist place, leave it so fifteen days, then
melt the butter over a gentle fire, strein it and use it to anoint the place.
Take a live Mole skinned, three or four Serpents skins, the roots of Scrofulary,
Solomon's seal, Briony, wild Cucumers, of each three ounces, boil them together
in an equal part of wine and water, so long till the liquor be evaporated; add
at last, a little white Wine vinegar; first anoint the place with two spunges
dipped in strong vinegar, and applied as hot as you can endure: then make use of
the ointment.

The swellings and tumors of the Neck, (I mean those which arise betwixt the
skin and the aspera arteria) are thus to be ordered.

First, purge the body with Cephalic Pills: use a drying and temperate diet:
Then, Take sal gem. amber, alum burnt, cuttle bone, nutgalls, long and black
pepper, cinnamon, ginger, pellitory of Spain, of each half an ounce; powder all
very fine, and add four ounces of Rosewater. Take every morning, in the waine
of the Moon, a spoonful of this powder, and so continue using it with your
meat: when it is gone, make it again and use it.

Foment the place with the Decoction of Briony, wild Cucomers, Beets, Sage,
Camomile, Melilot. Or put them all into a bag, and apply them as hot as the
Patient can endure; then put on the part affected a plaster of diachylum, to
which you may add euphorbium, sulphur, verdigreece.

If the beauty of the Neck be any whit impaired by Freckles, Spots, Wrinkles,
or Leanness; you may use the same remedies which we have before prescribed for
these Maladies, in the Tenth and Twelfth Chapters of the First Part; and the
Second and Sixth in this Second Part.

CHAP. XXX. How to keep the Breasts from growing too big, and to make them
plumpe and round.
YOur care, Ladies, to preserve the the Beauty of these parts, must not be
inferior to that, wherewith you cherish any: for the Breast must be made
remarkable with an outvying splendor, that so the graceful rising of those
snowy hills, might like a pair of stately promontories, tempt wandering Lovers,
and make them take your Microcosms for the only fortunate Islands. If ye sear
they will grow too big, ye may be these means keep them within their bounds.

Put as much pounded Cummin seed into water as will suffice to make it into the
consistence of a plaster; bind it when you are young, somewhat straight to the
paps, with a fillet dipped in water and vinegar, letting it remain three days,
then take away the Cummin, and apply the roots of white Lillies, incorporated
with water, bind it likewise to the breast pretty straight, and keep it on
other three days. Use this plaster often.

Bath the paps with Rosewater and vinegar, whereto you may add a little Camfre
and Tutty. Or, powder rock Alum, mix it with oil of Roses, and anoint the
paps with it. Or with oil of Myrtle, and juice of Henbane mixed together. Some
use to drink in their beer, half a score grains of Hares dung to keep the
breasts from growing too big.

If the Breasts have already exceeded their dimensions, the diet that you use,
must be more sparing and drying, that there be not too great plenty of blood;
care must likewise be had, to draw the blood downwards from the breasts. Ye may
apply this, to hinder the breasts from receiving too much blood,

Take the juice of Hemlock, with the water of Myrtle and Prunella, a small
quantity of Vinegar and Alum, dip a linen cloth therein, and apply it to the
breasts.

When the Breasts are flaccid, and hang down too low, you may make them round
and plump thus; Take Quinces, green Grapes a like quantity, beat them well
together; add a little bole, seed of Plantane, Annis, Fennel, Cummin; with the
juice of Plantane and vinegar mixed; spread it upon the breasts in form of a
Plaster. The same effects have dried Figs, incorporated well with Cummin and a
little vinegar. You may likewise dissolve Pitch, mix it together with oil, and
apply it to the breasts.

CHAP. XXXI. Remedies for Inflammations or Hardness of the Breasts, and chaps
in the Nipples.
WHEN some intestine heat impairs the radiant whiteness of those snowy hills;
or curdles the milky nectar of the breasts, into such a hard and compacted
thickness, that not being able to get forth, it must of necessity lie and
generate sharp corroding streams, which fret the tender out-lets of Cupids
fountains: Ye may, Ladies, in this Chapter furnish your selves with recuring
remedies.

For your Breasts, when they are first Inflamed, Take the green leaves of
Plantane, Mallows, of each four handfuls, Earthworms newly prepared, six
handfuls, oil of Roses three ounces, oil of Camomile and Mellilot, of each
one ounce, Barley meal three ounces, boil all these together; and with a
sufficient quantity of this Decoction, adding Bdellium dissolved in vinegar,
two drams; make a Plaster, and apply it to the breasts. Or else,

Take the crum of white bread, Barley meal, of each one ounce and a half, the
meal of Beans and fengreek, of each half an ounce, Roses, and the flowers of
Camomile poudred, of each two drams; boil them, then add rose vinegar one
ounce, oil of Camomile and Roses, of each one ounce; make it into a Pultiss,
and apply it.

Take the leaves of Lettuce, Purslane, of each one handful, red Roses half a
handful; boil them in water, and add to the Decoction, two ounces of vinegar;
dip cloths therein, and apply them to the breasts: If great pain does accompany
the Inflammation, you may use this as a singular remedy, Take Album Graecum,
powder it very fine, make it into a plaster with white wine, or vinegar, and
apply it warm to the breasts.

Sometimes there is hardness in the breasts which accompanies the
inflammation, in such a case take bean and barley meal of each one handful, the
meal of the seed of flax and fenugreek of each half a handful, the oil of
roses three ounces, saffron one scruple, mix them together and make an ointment.

If after this, the paps remain hard, apply some repercussive medicines, that
the breasts may not draw more blood then they can digest: anoint the breasts
and under the armpits with this medicine, take bole arm. one ounce, with a
sufficient quantity of oil of roses, of myrtle, and vinegar make an unguent.
To the paps apply this discussive cataplasme; take dry mint two handfuls, worm
wood one handful, boil them to marsh, strein them, add the meal of beans,
lupines, of each half an ounce, make a pultis with the oil of lillies and
apply it. If the blood be curdled, dissolve it with this, take smallage four
ounces, oxymel two ounces, meal of red vetches and lupins of each two ounces,
make them into a cataplasme.

When the paps are subject to chaps and clefts use things mollifying and
attenuating; before the milk come to the breasts: wherefore it will be good
for married Ladies before they lie in, to use some mollifying poultises, or to
anoint the paps with wax workt well together with oil or fresh lard. Or else
take

Bole arm. myrrh of each half a dram, ceruse two scruples, with a sufficient
quantity of Ducks fat, make an unguent for the paps. Or else you may anoint
them with oil of sweet almonds. The pomatum described in the 25 chap. of this
Part is exceeding good in this case.

PART. III. How to Beautify the Arms, Hands, Legs and Feet.
A Among those best means that ye have Ladies, to get your selves in Fames
immortalizing Calendar, canonized for Beauties; it is one, to study the
ornament of these parts, which though they seem the outbranches only of
rational trees, yet conduce much to the splendor of beauties Paradise.

CHAP. I. To remedy sweating of the Armpits, and other inconveniences
proceeding thence.
SOmething is seems of miracle, that Ladies arms should keep those they once
incircle such fast prisoners, that few of them are ever known to regaine their
former freedom. Nothing inferior to Cupids magic spells, they never surround
any, but by their enchantments work on them so strange a metamorphosis, that
they leave them nothing may speak them men, but humane shape. If any Lady find
that her embraces have no such powerful charms, she may justly suspect there
is something that frights the amarous vermin from the bait, before they have
leisure to be intoxicated. Such sents are thus removed.

After the body has been purged, use a bath made with bawme, myrtle, lavender
and other herbs of a good sent in wine or water, wherewith bath the places
affected. or else bath them with wine and rose water wherein you have boiled
alum, myrrh, calamus aromaticus, lignum aloes, cloves.

If you bath the armpits with any sort of alum dissolved in water, it will
condense the pores, and hinder the sweat from streining through the skin. Or
else you may often wash the arm pits with white wine wherein nutmegs or mace
have been boiled, or wherein three grains of musk have been dissolved; it
hinders the transpiration of sweat and gives a pleasing odor to the body.

Monsieur Liebault a French man advises to keep this pomander under the
armpits. Take Styrax calamite, ladanum, benjamin of each half a dram, cloves,
mace, lignum aloes, lavender flowers of each half a scruple, musk one grain,
with gum tragagant dissolvd in rose water and a little turpentine make them up
for use.

As for internal remedies to alter the ill constitution of your bodies, I
would commend this to ye; Take the best Marmalade of quinces two ounces, candid
ginger one ounce, green calamus aromaticus preserved, half an ounce, nutmegs,
cassia lignea, the lesser galingale, mace, of each one dram, the seeds of
coriander prepared, of bishops weed of each half a dram, oil of Cloves and
Cinnamon of each one scruple, the whitest sugar dissolved in cinnamon water one
pound, mix all these, and according to art make them into pectoral lozenges; a
dram whereof taken in a morning does wonderfully strengthen a cold stomach,
repair a decayed complexion, and utterly take away all foetid fumes that use to
exhale from the body.

CHAP. II. For Chaps and Warts in the Arms or Hands.
YOur Alabaster Arms and Hands Ladies, are the fleshie altars whereon your
superstitious Inamorato's offer to you, as female Deities the first fruits of
their devotion in zealous kisses. Your care should be to keep them in such a
soul-inchanting symmetrie, that might confirm your Idolizing lovers in the
opinion they have conceived, that you are more then mortal.

If the hands or arms are chapt, in the morning as soon as you are up, bath
the chaps with spittle, then anoint them with Capon or Duck grease well washed
with rose water. Or else take a little mastick finely powdered, incorporate it
with oil of roses and white wax; you may likewise mix poudred mastick with the
white of an egg, and anoint the chapt places with it. Or take

Olibanum, mastick, of each two drams, oil of roses, new wax and Capons
grease, of each half an ounce, make them into an unguent and use it. If the
chaps proceed from heat, take hens grease and camfre, mix them to anoint the
chaps withal every night, in the morning wash with bran and water: if the
hands are chapt with cold use this, Litharge of silver, mirrhe, ginger powdered,
a like quantity of each; mix them with oil of roses and new wax, make an
unguent, first bath the chaps with spittle, then anoint with this ointment, let
it lie on all night, in the morning wash with warm water, it heals the chaps
and makes the skin fair and clear.

To free your self from warts, apply to them a plaster of Cantharides, but let
it touch no part else, and it will eat them away by little and little. Or bath
them often with the milk that issues from the figtree.

Take Litharge one pound, quick Lime half a pound, sal Ammoniac half an ounce,
common Vitriol three drams; boil all in water to the consumption of three
parts of the water, then strein it, and bath the Warts therewith.

The best way is to touch them with oil of Vitriol, very slightly; for if you
lay on any great quantity, it will quickly eat to the bone. Warts, when they
come first, and are tender, may be removed with black Soap, mixed with burnt
Salt, salt of Nitre, milk of Spurge, juice of Celondine, juice of wild
Cucumers, powder of Cantharides. Some rub them with a piece of raw Beef, and
afterward bury it. Others use Marigold leaves.

CHAP. III. How to make the Hands fair and white, and to lessen the Veins when
they appear too big.
IF any Lady be already the Cynosure to neighboring eyes, and would be
elevated to the highest altitude in peoples aestimation, besides the attractive
lure of a pleasing face, she ought to have hands, whose radiant whiteness might
dazzle spectators eyes, that so they might go on blindfolded in the fond humor
of admiring her. And then I dare secure her, men will be such close captives to
her imperious tyranny, that she need never fear being disdained by any apostate
Lover. The best means to bring the hands to such a lillied splendor, follow
here:

Take the pressings of sweet and bitter Almonds, which remain after the Oil is
drawn from them, of each four ounces, Bean meal two ounces, your finest French
Barley, ground and sifted, meal of Lupins, of each an ounce and an half, powder
of Florentine iris one ounce, red Roses dried, Benjamin, of each six drams,
salt of white Tartar, the whitest Chalk washed and prepared, burnt ivory, fresh
sperma coeti, of each half an ounce, oil of Rhodium one scruple, oil of
Cloves and Lavander, of each half a scruple; mix them all well together, and
with a little of the mixture often rub and wash the hands: it is of an
excellent sent, and makes the hands exceeding white, smooth, and soft.

Take Venice Soap dissolved in juice of Limmons one pound, white virgin Honey
four ounces, prepared Sublimate, white Sugar candy, the roots of Florentine
iris, of each one ounce, salt of white Tartar, whitest sperma coeti, Sugar,
alum, Venetian borace, of each half an ounce, true sented Balsame of Peru two
drams, gallia moschata one dram, oil of Rhodium, Cinnamon, Cloves, of each one
scruple. Use the mixture to wash and rub the hands withal. It is of the same
efficacy with the former.

Take Venice Soap, what quantity you please, cut it in small pleces, set them
so long to dry in the Sun, that you may bring them into a powder. Afterward,
Take one pound of this powder, iris root, and Saunders poudred, of each four
ounces, starch six ounces; beat them altogether in a mortar, adding liquid
storax, and oil of benjamin, what quantity you please; anoint the hands with
this Composition, and it will marvelously whiten, smooth, and sent them.

Take half a pound of Figs, as many Raisins of the Sun stoned, and a like
quantity of bitter Almonds, beat them all severally in a mortar, as small as
you can, then mix them together, adding two Limmons pared and minced, and two
good handfuls of Bean meal, boil all these in a pint of white Wine vinegar,
stirring them continually; when it has boiled so long that it sticks no more
to the Posnet, then put it forth into a gally pot, and keep it; use some
quantity of it to scour your hands every time you wash.

Take Labdanum four ounces, Styrax calam. three ounces, Benjamin two ounces,
put them into a brazen mortar heated, work them together with a hot Pestle till
they are pretty soft, add poudred Soap two pound, then strew thereon liquid
Storax two ounces, make it into a Composition with a little Rosewater, and keep
it to scour your hands.

Take Starch, meal of Beans, Lupins, Rice, iris roots, of each four ounces;
powder them very small, searce them, and then mix them together; when you wash
your hands, take a little of this powder and moisten, to rub them withal.

If you like an Ointment, do thus; Take oil of sweet Almonds four ounces, take
a little white Wax and put to it, boil it over the fire, add one dram of
Camfre, and make it into an Unguent: it will both keep the hands from sun-burn,
and make them exceeding white.

When the milky whiteness of the hands is eclyps'd by the azure veins that
swell too big, chaff them well with water wherein alum has been dissolved;
then wash them in warm water, presently after anoint them with an unguent made
of Ceruse.

Take wax an ounce and a half, turpentine three ounces, frankincense,
fenugreek, mastick of each two ounces and a half, three grains of musk,
dissolve the wax and turpentine, in a new pipkin, then add half a pound of
common oil; when it begins to boil, strew in the mas^ick, frankincense,
senugreek, all being powdered, incorporate them together and make an ointment.

CHAP. IV. For the Hands when they are swollen and look red or blew with cold.
IF your hands like the flowery fields, dismantle themselves of their richest
livery at the approach of the crabbed winter, and laying aside their youthful
loveliness, do shelter themselves under some more serious color, that may
better suit with the humor of that grave decrepit season: Ye may I adies
reapparell them with their native whiteness, by the help of these directions
following.

Often bath your hands in wine wherein you have boiled, nettles, rosemary,
time, rue, penny royal; the frequent use of this decoction will keep them from
swelling. As soon as they begin to swell and rise into knobs apply a
repercussive plaster made of barley meal and juice of limmons; or take
litharge, oil of roses and vinegar work them well together into a liniment to
anoint the affected places. If the swellings do not yield to these medicines.

Take the yolks of five eggs, calcine them, and mix them well with barrows
grease, anoint the hands well therewith going to bed, draw on a pair of smooth
gloves and so lie all night.

Take turpentine, mix it with half its quantity of salt, stir them well
together, till they are pretty thick, then apply it to the swollen hands.

Take oil of dil, and oil of sweet almonds, of each one ounce, mucilage of gum
tragaganth made with pennyroyal water, three drams, powdered starch eight drams,
mix and make them into an ointment; it takes away the cold swellings of the
hands and reduces them to their former Color.

CHAP. V. Remedies for those vices which are incident to the nails.
THE nails are pearlie helmets wherewith prudent nature has armed the active
fingers, to which (if they are neatly burnisht) they give a commanding
comeliness; and may at a pressing exigencie be fit materials to head Cupids
piercing shafts: their oriental beauty is thus preserved.

When the nails are spotted remove the spots with these medicaments;
Incorporate myrrh with a sufficient quantity of turpentine and apply it. Or
else take sulphur vive work it together with a convenient quantity of pitch and
tar, use it as a plaster; you may if you please add a little vinegar. Mix
flax seed beaten with honey and wax, put it to the nail that is spotted.

If the nail be bruised and becomes black by reason of the blood that congeals
underneath, apply a cerecloth that is made of capons grease and sheeps grease
with oil of cammomile or dil: afterward to dissolve the settled blood use goats
dung tempered with sulphur. Or incorporate cummin seed with diachylum ireatum
and oil of camomile in form of an unguent. Ducks grease mixed with Euphorbium
is singular good to discuss the condensed blood.

By some mischance or other the top of the finger is oftentimes so bruised,
that the nail comes off; to make it come again foment the part with wine
wherein dates have been steeped.

Take Flaxseed one ounce, cardamoms three drams, as much honey as will make it
into a plaster: this will make a nail that is cleft or rotted to come away:
the same effect has the juice of stinking orach. When the nail by these means
is fallen off, to make it grow again you may use that which was before
prescribed.

If the flesh or skin grows too much over the nails, milk of spurge dropped
thereon is very good. Or take salt, barley meal and costus poudred; mix them
with so honey, as will make them into a plaster and apply it to the flesh.

CHAP. VI. Remedies for the galling, fretting and sweating of the feet.
THE Body, that fleshie palace of a deathlesse guest, would sink beneath its
own magnificence, were it not upheld by the feet, those beauteous pedestals to
the sister columns that more immediately support the structure: If they are
once fretted, or stand on too moist a foundation, they may chance to slip, and
so the whole aedefice of beauty hazard it self by catching a fall. Your wisest
way will be to secure them thus,

When the feet are galled take emplastrum diachalcit, dissolve it in oil of
myrtle and use it to anoint the feet. Oil of eggs made by expression, or else
oil pressed from wheat betwixt two iron plates is very good. You may likewise use
those things which have been formerly commended to take away chaps. Vnguentum
album, or diapomphol, are not applied without good success, the like might be
said of the oil of flax, fresh butter and the yolk of an egg made into an
unguent.

The feet if they are often subject to troublesome sweatings may thus be
ordered, bath them in warm water wherein alum has been dissolved; or else
wash your feet in water wherein the flowers and berries of myrtles, the leaves
of cypress, tamarisk, mint, marjoram; and after you have washed them well,
anoint them with litharge powdered and mixed with honey.

There is yet another distemper incident to the feet, which I had almost
forgot, they are often apt to be numbed with a kind of pinching chilness. You
may Ladies, free your selves from this distemper thus. Make a decoction of the
roots of enula campana, angelica, flowers of camomile, melilot, and once or
twice a week bath your feet in it. You may likewise boil mint, marjoram, sage,
laurel, pepper wort, in white wine and use it as the former decoction.

CHAP. VII. Remedies whereby to be freed from Kibes and Corns.
THE servile feet, though they veil bonnet to all the nobler parts, and are
leveld with that, below which they cannot well fear a fall; yet seem to have
something of pride, while they often swell into tumors, and to those
dimensions they cannot reach themselves, they arive in needless excressencies:
You may check this their petty ambition, and securely trample upon them, if
your hands will take but the pains to walk to your feet and apply these
medicines.

For the kibes or those red, hard, itching tumors that are troublesome to the
feet in frostie weather, bath them well till they are very soft in warm water
wherein mallows or senugreek have been boiled, or in hot grains or oats boiled
in aqua vitae; then apply to them an unguent made of oil of mastick, oil of
spike, and wax of each a like quantity.

Take the powder of gum tragaganth, incorporate it with oil of mastick and use
it for a liniment, Or take goats suet one pound, Galls powdered one ounce, melt
and strein the suet, then add the gals: use it as an unguent. Or take neats
foot oil two ounces, galbanum half an ounce, boil them till they are pretty
thick, then anoint the kibes therewith, having first well bathd them. Boil
half an ounce of litharge in oil, stirring it continually then add three
drams of galbanum and make it into an ointment. Take ammoniack half an ounce,
rosin one ounce, mastick, frankincense of each one dram, meal of fenugreek half
an ounce, wax and oil as much as shall be sufficient, dissolve the gum
ammoniac and the rosine over hot embers, then add the wax and the oil, when it
is all melted add the meal of fenugreek and the frankincense powdered, make it
into an unguent.

Bears grease, sea water, the decoction of leeks, frankincense incorporated
with lard, pomegranate peels boiled in wine, all these if they are applied are
very good. But if the kibes are broken and exulcerated, anoint them, with
unguen^um apostolorum, strewing thereon powder of mastick, incense, myrrh,
then bind up the part affected with a fillet, steept in hot white wine, and
cover it with a warm cloth.

Corns in the toes or feet, may be removed by the same means which we have
prescribed for warts. Or take pure galbanum, new wax, soften them with your
breath, and work them together, apply them as close to the corn as you can.
First soften the corn with some fomentation, then apply a cautery; some use
leaven, others the powder of the root of rest harrow.

Wash the feet, and apply to the corns the milk of fig leaves; then shave them
with a razor to the quick, and if there happen any inflammation, anoint them
with unguentum rosatum. Bruise the leaves of rue and bind them to the corns:
quick lime likewise kills them. Or take water of tartar three ounces, black soap
one ounce, quicksilver half an ounce, boil these nine times, and every time
when they begin to boil, make it cease by pouring in cold water, then wash the
corns with this water morning and evening, then shave them to the quick, then
wash them again as before, then shave them and they will be quite taken away.
Some apply ox gall, changing it every day till the corns fall away.

PART. IV. Sents and Perfumes fitted for several occasions.
YE have heard Ladies how to furnish your selves with a Beauty, so
transcendent, that shall puzzle Rhetoric to study Hyperbolies to express it
by; so captivating, that none shall dare style himself a Platonic; or at most,
he only whom your divine features shall make believe that ye are more than
mortal. The former receipts shall furnish each of ye with loveliness enough for
your whole Sex, and make ye Pearls in beholders eyes; these following shall
make ye walking gardens, so that ye shall lead your servants by the noses after
ye; they shall all turn Camoeleons and live on that air which ye perfume.

CHAP. I. Perfumed Pomanders for Bracelets.
QUestion not, Madams, but Pomander Bracelets conduce much to the making of
your Captives numerous; though they bind only your arms, yet they take men your
prisoners: for none can have the courage to resist, that once see how much
bracelets make ye Women of your hands. The best directions for making them, are
such.

Take two ounces of the best damask rose buds, the whites being cut off; musk,
ambergreece, of each forty grains, civet twenty grains; let your roses be
beaten fine, as is usual for Conserves; then add the former things with a
little Labdanum; beat them well together, and make them up with gum tragaganth
dissolved in rosewater.

Take Styrax Calamite, Labdanum, of each a dram and a half, Benjamin one dram,
Cloves, Mace, wood of Aloes, Lavender flowers, of each half a scruple, musk,
ambergreece, of each four grains, a little turpentine, gum traganth dissolved
in rosewater, as much as will suffice; mix them well together in a warm mortar,
and make all into a Pomander, according to art.

Take Florentine iris roots, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, of each half an ounce;
yellow Saunders, Styrax calam. sweet Asa, of each two drams, Ambergreece one
dram, Musk of Alexandria half a dram, sweet Balsame of Peru, oil of Rhodium,
of each one scruple; mix all well together, and add two drams of Civet. This
Composition will be dear, but ye may make it in less quantity; taking either
half, or a quarter of the doses. Beside, the exceeding pleasant smell, it is
good in Pestilential times, and in Fits of the Mother.

Take the shavings of the greenest Cypress wood one ounce, Florentine iris six
ounces, Cloves three ounces, Calamus aromaticus three drams, wood of Aloes fix
drams; pound them altogether in a still place. Take three or four hundred red
damask Roses clean picked, beat them in a mortar with a wooden Pestle; when they
are half beaten,;put in the former pouders, then pound them again, moistning
them with a little damask Rose water; and when they are well mixed, make them up
into small Trochicks, and dry them in the shade. Of this Composition ye may
make musk soaps, sweet pouders, and pomanders; and to make the Composition more
excellent, ye may put what musk and ambergreece ye please, so that ye powder
the musk, and dissolve both that and the ambergreece in rose water, then mix
them with the former Composition.

Take of the former Trochisks of roses half an ounce, the best labdanum two
ounces, Styrax Calam. Benjamin, of each one ounce, violets poudred one ounce,
amber and musk, of each half a dram; powder what is to be poudred, and work
them well together into a paste; out of which ye may make Pomanders of an
excellent and durable sent.

If ye like a perfumed Composition to carry about with ye in a silver box, ye
cannot have a better than this, Take your true Jasmine butter half an ounce,
essence of orange flowers, essence of cinnamon, oil of orange peel, oil of
nutmegs, essence of roses, of each half a scruple, flowers of benjamin one
scruple, essence of musk, amber, and civet, of each half a scruple; all these
ye must work well together in a cold and small marble mortar, then put it into
your box.

CHAP. II. Pouders for the Hair, Linen, and Sweet Baggs.
IF after ye have used all hitherto commended, ye meet with any that defies
your charms, and is obstinate; do not yet despair, Ladies, for this Chapter
teaches ye, how ye shall tickle his nose, and fetch him about with a powder,
which will give ye so rich a sent, that the roses and violets in all your
cheeks, shall not make ye half so sweet.

Take Florentine iris roots, finely poudred one pound, Benjamin four ounces,
Cloves the like quantity, Storax two ounces; powder them all very fine, and mix
them together. This ye may use to sent your hair-pouder withal, adding about
three ounces of this powder to a pound of Starch, sifted and pounded; or else,
to a like quantity of Rice, powder of Post, or French Beans, being first
pounded and then sifted.

Take Iris roots six ounces, red Rose leaves poudred four ounces, Cyperus half
a dram, Marjoram, Cloves, and Storax, of each one ounce, Benjamin, yellow
Saunders, of each half an ounce, Violets three drams, Musk one dram. If ye
powder them gr^sly, they may serve to put in sweet bags to lay amongst linen;
but if ye powder them small, and seirce them through a seive, ye may keep the
grosser part for the former use, and with the more fine, ye may perfume your
hair-pouders. This ye may observe in your other pouders.

Take Iris roots three pound, Cyperus roots, Benjamin, yellow Saunders, lignum
Rhodium, Citron peel, Storax Calam. Cloves, Cinnamon, p^re Labdanum, of each
one ounce, sweet Marjoram twelve handfuls, flowers of Roman Camomile, and
Rosemary, leaves of sweet Musk, Time, and Savory, of each two handfuls and a
half, the best Musk a quarter of an ounce, Civet half so much, Ambergreece half
a dram; let all be driven into a gross powder, except the Amber, Civet, and
Musk, which must be finely poudred, and afterward mixed. This is an excellent
powder for Linen, and Bags; it will endure sixteen years exceeding strong, and
is as good a Composition as any where you can meet with. If ye mix a less
proportion of Zibet, Musk, and Amber, it cannot be expected to be so pleasant,
nor lasting.

Take from the Apothecaries common Iris roots poudred one pound, calamus
aromaticus two ounces, roses four ounces, coriander seeds two ounces, lignum
Aloe one ounce, marjoram, orange peels, of each one ounce, storax calam. ten
drams, Labdanum six drams, Trochisks of Roses two ounces, Lavender four ounces,
Cloves two ounces, Bay leaves half a dram, galingale two drams; mix all these
and powder them fine, then add musk and amber, of each half a dram.

Take yellow Saunders one ounce, calamus aromaticus a like quantity, marjoram
three drams, the leaves of damask Roses and Violets poudred, of each two drams,
Nutmegs and Cloves, of each one dram, musk half a dram; all must be beaten into
a gross powder, then put it into silken bags to lay amongst Linen.

Take the roots of Florentine Iris four ounces, Violet flowers newly d^yed one
ounce, the root of round Cyperus two drams, the true distilled oil of Roses a
dram and a half; reduce all these into a very fine powder. This gives a very
delightful and pleasing smell, and is composed for their sakes who do not
affect those strong Perfumes that are made with musk and Zibet. Ye may put it
in silken taffity bags to lay amongst linen, or else it may serve to strew on
the hair, or clothes.

Take the pressings (that which remains after the oil is drawn forth) of sweet
and bitter Almonds, of each four ounces, the flower of French Barley and
Lupins, of each two ounces, the roots of the best Iris pounded one ounce, white
Roses dried, Benjamin six drams, salt of white Tartar, whitest Chalk poudred,
Sperma Coeti, of each half an ounce, oil of Rhodium one scruple, of Cloves and
Lavender half a scruple; mix and make them into a powder, it gives the hands
and skin an excellent odor, makes them white and smooth if ye often rub it on
them, or use it to wash withal.

CHAP. III. Sweet Waters, Oils and Essences.
SUch Ladies is the efficacy of these liquors that they will cherish rather then
extinguish the flames of love, they will put ye in so sweet a pickle, that will
make ye dainties shall sharpen the appetite of those that have no flomack to
fall on a Lady. In a word the Pope and all his Conclave shall never do so many
wonders with their holy water as you may do with these.

Take three pints of damask rose water, malmsey half a pint, the flowers of
lavender and spike of each two ounces, Florentine flower de Luis roots two
drams, nutmeg, styrax Calam of each half a drum. Infuse altogether for a
fortnight in a close stopped bottle, then distill them in a glass alembick,
putting into the nose of it a scruple of musk and as much amber greece. Ye may
mix this water with ordinary water for your hands, or put some of it on a
chafing dish of coals, it will recreate the senses with a pleasing vapor. An
equal quantity of rose water and vinegar set on the coals does the same.

Take rose water four ounces, cinnamon half an ounce, yellow saunders poudred,
wood of aloes, citron peel, cloves of each half a scruple, musk two grains, mix
them, and they will make an excellent sented water.

Take oiles of musk one dram, of cloves six grains, of lillies of the valley
three grains, a little Virgin wax, mix them together according to art, and you
shall have an odoriferous balsam that comforts the brain and revives the
s^irits, if ye anoint the nostrils with a little of it.

Take cloves, cinnamon, lavender, nutmegs of each two drams, oiles of cloves,
angelica, spike, lavender, of each half a scruple, wax four drams, musk and
amber of each three grains, make them into a Balsame which will be of the same
virtues with the former.

Take musk finely powdered a dram and a half, put it into a glass alembick,
pour thereon two quarts' of rose water, distill this over a gentle fire in B.
M. keep the water that ye draw from thence in a glass close stopped, it may be
serviceable to Queens and Empresses.

Take rose water three quarts, assa dulcis poudred one ounce, storax, cloves,
wood of aloes, camfre of each one dram, musk and civet, of each one scruple,
put all these into a glass bottle, close stopped, which boil for the space of
four hours in water, then take the vessel wherein the water is and let it cool
by degrees; when it is cold streine it through a thick cloth, then put it into
another glass vessel with fifteen grains of musk, stop it close and set it in
the Sun five days. This perfume is so strong, that if you mix one part thereof
with twelve of water, it will be exceeding sweet.

Take Lavender flowers seven handfuls, rosemary flowers, clove July flowers,
orange peel of each three handfuls, mint, sage, bay leaves, elder flowers,
pennyroyall of each one handful, cloves four ounces, galingale, nutmegs,
calamus aromaticus, ginger, cinnamon, of each one ounce, the best sented white
wine three quarts, powder all the spices and steep them in white wine, put all
into a glass vessel stopped, set it in the Sun eight days, then put it into a
glass alembick with musk and distill all in B. M. Whether it be distilled or
not, it is a very sweet water, excellent to wash the hands if ye mix one drop
of it with a hundred of common water, if it be applied to the face it will free
it from spots and freckles.

Take twenty grains of musk, nutmegs, cloves, galingale, spikenard, grains of
paradise, mace, cinnamon, of each one ounce, powder all very small, and put
them all into a pint bottle of rose water, let them steep four days, then
pour on more rose water and after distill them in B. M. Or tie in a very fine
rag, musk and civet of each one dram, put the bag into a three quart bottle
filled with rose water, expose it some days to the sun, and ye shall have a rich
sented water.

Take the purest Benzoin twelve ounces, powder it very fine, then take liquid
styrax as much as will suffice to make it into a past, when it is well mixed put
it into a glass alembick with a glass head; which ye must set in ashes or
sifted sand, and cement a receiver to the nose of the alembick, with potters
clay and the whites of eggs very close, that the vapors may have no vent forth;
(which if they have they will be so strong that to most they will seem a stink rather
then a perfume, and to some persons may be very prejudicial) when things are
thus fitted kindle fire under it by degrees, afterward make the fire stronger;
at first ye shall draw a yellow water in a small quantity and worth little, but
presently after there will arise a vapor white as snow, that will stick to the
alembick; when ye perceive that this rises no more then make the fire stronger,
but not too violent, then will an oil ascend that is sweeter then the former:
and according to the color of your oiles, remember to change your receivers;
your last oil will be an excellent Balsame. But to make an exact perfume, take
an ounce and a half of the white snow, oil of sweet almonds newly drawn four
ounces, melt both over a gentle fire, stirring it continually with a spattula
till the snowie part be dissolved, and to give it a reddish color put in a
small piece of the root of alkanet; so ye may have a perfume of an excellent
sent. Is you would have this oil of a richer odor, ye may dissolve therein one
scruple of amber greece. The black oil that remains at the bottom of your
alembick, is of a very strong smell, but mixed with liquid styrax will make
excellently sented pomanders: if ye keep it by it self, ye were best to keep it
open that so the strong sent may evaporate.

CHAP. IV. Sweet Candles, and Perfumes to burn.
YE are much beholding, Ladies, to ordinary Candles; for when the sooty night
would be-friend your Chambermaids, and make them seem as handsome as your
selves, that which discovers the cheat, and makes ye be preferred before them,
is the friendly light those Candles lend; they show the difference betwixt a
beauty and the foiles that usually attend her. But if those common ones do ye
much service, these will more; for if ye can once procure these ignes fatui to
lead them, ye may be sure to make fools of men; and never fear but ye shall
have servants, after ye have got such enamouring flames.

Take Labdanum two ounces, Storax one ounce, Benjamin and Cloves, of each half
an ounce, Mace a quarter of an ounce; beat all to a powder in a brazen mortar,
and when they are finely poudred, set the mortar over a gentle fire, and work
them well together; then take rosewater eight spoonfuls, dissolve therein musk
and civet, of each three grains; afterward, put it with the rest of the
ingredients, into the mortar; when ye have mixed all thoroughly together, make
the whole mass into small long roles; when they are dry, you may put them into
a silken bag, and lay them amongst linen, or burn them in your chamber, or any
where else at your pleasure. They are a pleasing Perfume, and will last good
seven years.

Take Labdanum two drams, Styrax calam. a dram and a half, benjamin,
frankincense, white amber, wood of aloes, red roses, wood of cypress, cinnamon,
cloves, of each two scruples, amber, musk, of each five grains; make them up
into small cakes with gum tragaganth dissolved in spirit of roses, one whereof
cast upon the coals, sents your chamber with a delightful vapor.

Take Labdanum one ounce and a half, dried charcoal made of willow one ounce,
myrrh, wood of aloes, styrax calam. of each one ounce and a half, amber, musk,
of each seven grains; dissolve half an ounce of gum tragant in rosewater with a
little spirit of wine, and make them up into roles like small candles.

Take gum styrax calam. benjamin, of each equal quantities, dissolve them in
the best rosewater; as soon as they are dissolved, strein them hard thorough a
thick cloth: afterward dry them, and powder them, and keep the powder for your
use. Take of this powder thus prepared one ounce, the weightiest wood of aloes
poudred, two drams, red roses dried, ambergreece, of each one dram, zibet,
musk, of each half a dram, sweet balsame of Per^, oil of Rhodium, of each one
scruple, ivory burnt till it be black, as much as will suffice: powder what is
to be powdered, then mix all with rose water, and work them together into a kind
of black paste and make it into small bals, which you must wrap in rose leaves
and dry them in the shade, then keep them well stopped in glasses. This is a
perfume for Persons of quality. One or two of them cast upon coals or put into
a quantity of rose water that is set over the coals, will fill the room with a
ravishing and celestial vapor, that refreshes the brain and vital spirits
and corrects the malignity of any contagious air.

Take Styrax calam, prepared as before, benzoin, of each half an ounce, your
best wood of aloes two drams, Zibet that is not adulterate one dram, Gallia
moscata one scruple, oil of roses, and of cloves, of each half a scruple, mix
them according to art, and with damask rose water make them into little bals.
They are of the same virtue with the former and used in the same manner.

CHAP. V. How to perfume Gloves.
TO add the roses sweetness, to the lillied loveliness of your snowie hands,
sent your gloves with these perfumes: and they who take ye by the hand, shall
find all pleasures graspt in a handful, wherein all ravishing objects are,
that can convey those charming delights to the admiring fancy, that both please
the sight and feast the other senses too.

First then perfume your gloves thus, Take a pair of smooth new Cordavan
gloves, wash them well for two or three days (once a day) in good white wine;
pressing them well and smoothing them, after every washing; after the last
washing, when they are almost dry wash them in rose water, wherein musk has
been dissolved; let them lie in that water for one day; then pull one of the
gloves on your hand, and with your other hand smooth and dry it, then do the
same to the other glove. When this is done, steep in water for four or five
days four ounces of gum tragagant, the whitest you can get; musk, amber, dried
marjoram of each one scruple; boil them gently altogether, and in the boiling
add half a scruple of Zibet, put these into a coverd vessel till they are cold,
then chaff and rub it well into the gloves, afterward lay them in some place to
dry.

Or wash those gloves ye intend to perfume, first well in white wine, then dry
them in the shade, after wash them in a pint of rose water, sented with oil of
cloves, jasmine, nutmegs, labdanum of each half a scruple, then take musk,
zibet, ambergreece of each five grains, beat them together in a mortar with a
little oil of spike, and mucilage of gum tragagant dissolved in rose water,
chaff this composition into the washed gloves, before the fire.

FINIS.

