The CASE between a FATHER and his CHILDREN. Humbly represented to the
Honorable LORD MAYOR and Court of ALDERMEN.
My Lord,
Since Gods providence has so highly advanced you to that Honor and Dignity,
as to be in some measure a Father to this City, that has been famous for
Loyalty, Justice, and Equity; and I knowing your Lordship to be so good, that
you hate to do any thing that should lessen the Grandeur, or to encourage
Rebellion or Disobedience, and I question not but your Brethren the Aldermen
are of the same mind: Therefore I thought I could not apply my self to any
fitter persons than your Worships, neither can I expect that any should
consider my Case so well as your Honor. I beseech your Lordship to pardon me
in giving you this trouble, it is the great love I bear to Unity, and the
consideration that I am a Mother of Children, and in some part am sensible of
the Excellency of Obedience, and how it prevails over the hearts of Parents; so
that thereby they are instrumental to obtain the Blessing of God Spiritual and
Temperal; but what a lamentable case it is when Children are disobedient and
rebellious, it provokes the Wrath of God and Man, and makes them miserable in
this World and the World to come, without Repentance. The serious consideration
of this, has caused me to present to your Lordship, and the Aldermen your
Brethren, a Case between a Father and his Children.

There is a certain Friend of mine that lives near me, whose Virtue and
Patience is known to all the Neighborhood, and that he is the most Indulgent
Father, and loves his Children extraordinary, therefore he thought himself
happy and did not question their Assistance, when he stood in need thereof, but
the Children taking no notice of his necessity, he was compelled to crave their
Assistance; but the Children finding their Father in necessity, they dealt
subtly, and said amongst themselves, We will deal by him as we please, and he
shall condescend to our Proposals, for who knows whether our Father has walked
according to the Rules of Law or no, and if not, we will get advantage thereby,
and so we will not allow any Succor to our Father, nay not so much as respect
them that love him, neither shall they Succor him, but we'll hate them with a
mortal hatred that shall either lend him, or give him any thing; nay moreover,
our Father shall not sell any thing, for we will count them our great Enemies
that shall buy any thing; so we are resolved to humble our Father, to comply
with our desires, or to make him miserable, in not Ministering to his
necessities: But God, that overrules all things, took pity of this good
Father, and endued him with Patience to bear it, and the Lord helped him, and
when his Children were a little peaceable and quier, he thought with himself, I
will try whether my Children walks by the Law or no; if they do, certainly I
shall have Justice done me, for the Law of God and Man is on my side; for they
both exhort to Love and Obedience: But when the Father proposed this Question,
though it was with mildness and sweetness, they were so far from acknowledging
their Faults, that they would make themselves as though they had received an
injury to be questioned, and therefore they would Right themselves by the Law;
and though they would not assist their Father in his necessity, yet they could
find Kash to encourage the Lawyers. But I Will appeal to your Lordship and your
Brethren, Whether these Children are not unkind and ungrateful? Should not they
rather humble themselves, and acknowledge their Faults, and amend it for the
time to come? For they may very well think that their Father is Wise, and would
not take any notice of any thing, before he had good ground. Therefore I
beseech you for the Lords sake, to favor me so much, as not to despise my poor
weak Endeavors, who longs for a Unity between the Father and his Children, but
cannot be so happy without your Lordship and the Aldermen your Brethrens
Assistance; and through you and by you I do not question but to obtain it.
Therefore I beseech you for the Lords sake, to use all pious Endeavors to make
up this Breach and to decide this Controversy, for Blessed are the
Peacemakers; undoubtedly my Lord, thrice Blessed will you be to be
Instrumental in this Peace, for this end Christ took Humanity upon him, to make
Reconciliation between God and Man, so that they might be able to cry, Abba
Father. These Children has been naturally Good, but only too much inclined to
hearken to the Whisperings of Satan and his Instuments, to incense them against
their Father, as he did in the beginning with our First Parents, to make
themselves miserable by their disobedience. So Satan envies these their
happiness, and therefore persuades them to disobedience; thinking thereby to
make them miserable and wretched: for it is seldom known that an unkind Child
to a Temporal Father, was ever counted an Obedient Servant to God, if not
Obedient then Rebellious. What against Heaven? Then Gods Hand will be against
them, which the Lord of his Mercy prevent, shall be always the Prayers of

Your Humble Servant and Souls Well-wisher, ELINOR JAMES.

London, Printed by Tho. James at the Printing-press in Mincing-lane. 1682.


