Certain Letters OF HENRY IEANES Minister of Gods word AT CHEDZOY. AND Dr
JEREMY TAILOR Concerning A passage of his, in his further Explication of
Original sin.

OXFORD, Printed by HEN: HALL for THO: ROBINSON, 1660.

Dr Tailor in his further explication of the doctrine of original sin, page
496.
THat every man is inclined to evil, some more, some less, but all in some
instances; is very true: and it is an effect, or condition of nature, but no
sin properly; 1: because that which is unavoidable is not a sin; 2: because
it is accidental to nature, not intrinsecall, and essential; 3: It is
superinduced to nature, and is after it, etc.

To the unprejudiced Reader.
I shall only give thee a brief narrative of the occasion of the ensuing
letters: one Mr T. C. of Bridgwater being at my house, brake out into
extraordinary, (that I say not excessive, and Hyperbolicall) praises of Dr
Jeremy Tailor; I expressed my concurrence with him in great part; nay I came
nothing behind him in the just co^mendations of his admirable wit, great parts,
quick and elegant pen, his abilites in Critical learning, and his profound
skill in antiquity: but notwithstanding all this I professed my dissent from
some of his opinions which I judged to be erroneous; and I instanced in his
doctrine of original sin; now his further explication of this lay then
causually in the window (as I take it) which hereupon I took up, and turned
unto the passage now under debate, and showed unto Mr T. C. that therein was
gross nonsense, and blasphemy; he for his own part, with a great deal of
modesty, forthwith declined all further dispute of the business, but withal he
told me, that he would, If I so pleased, give Dr Tailor notice of what I said;
whereunto I agreed, and in a short time he brought me from the Dr a fair, and
civil invitation to send him my exceptions, and with it a promise of a candid
reception of them; whereupon I drew them up in a letter unto Mr T. C. the Copy
whereof follows.

Letters of the Author And Dr JEREMY TAILOR To Mr T. C.
Sir,
I have here, according unto your desire sent you my ecceptions against that
passage in Dr Tailor, concerning which you discoursed at my house; It is in his
further explication of the Doctrine of original sin, page 496: and it is the
second argument, which he brings to prove; that inclination to evil is no
sin properly; because it is accidental to nature, not intrinsecall and
essential. The argument put into form may be reduced into two syllogismes.

The first.
Sin properly is not accidental to the nature of man. An inclination to
evil is accidental to the nature of man: therefore An inclination to evil is
no sin properly.
A second Syllogism is.
Sin properly so called is intrinsecall, and essential to the nature of man.
An inclination to evil is not intrinsecall, and essential to the nature of
man: therefore, An inclination to evil is not sin properly so called.
Unto the first of those syllogismes; I answer that the major is false; and
that according to Porphyry his so celebrated definition of an accident.

Accidens est quod adest, and abest sine subject^ interitu: that is, as the
best Commentators upon Porphyry expound the words. An accident is that, which
may be affirmed, or denied of it is subject, without any repugnancy, or
contradiction to the essence, and definition thereof; now to deny sin of man,
gives no overthrow to his essence and definition, for a man that is no sinner
may be animal rationale; sin therefore is accidental to the nature of man.

The major of the second syllogism is no less false, than that of the first,
as for the term, intrinsecall, I shall not stay upon it; because the Dr uses
it as equivalent to essential, as is apparent by the Antithesis, he puts
between it and accidental; but shall wholly insist upon the word essential: To
say, as the Dr does by consequence, that sin is essential to the nature of
man, is an assertion, guilty of nonsenses Blasphemy, and libertinisme.

1. Nonsense. A thing may be said to be essential unto an other, either a
priori, and then it is predicated of it, in primo modo dicendi per se; or else
(...) posteriori, and then it is predicated of it, in secundo modo dicendi per
se. And to say that sin is either of these ways essential to the nature of
man, is such pitiful, and prodigious nonsense, as that I cannot think it
worthy of any serious refutation.

In a second place I charge it with Blasphemy: it blasphemes three actions,
three acts of God.

1. The creation of man. 2. The incarnation of Christ. 3. The full
glorification of the Saints at the resurrection.
1. The creation of man: God was the Author of whatsoever was essential unto
man; And if sin be essential unto the nature of man, then God was the Author
of sin.

2. The incarnation of Christ: in which God made Christ like unto man in
essentialls; If sin then be essential unto the nature of man, God made
Christ sinful; a blasphemy that I tremble to mention.

3. This opinion blasphemes God's full glorification of the Saints in the
resurrection; for it affirms by just consequence, that they shall be raised
with sin; because doublesse they shall be raised with whatsoever is
essential to the nature of man.

In the third, and last place this Tenet is chargeable with libertianisme: It Is
a licentious doctrine, and opens a gap to the greatest profaneness; for it
takes away all conscience of sin, all repentance of it for the time past, all
caution against it for the future: If sin be essential to the nature of man,
what reason has he to be humbled for it? to ask God pardon for it? to make
any scruple of the committing of it?

And thus having briefly performed my promise, and satisfied your request, I
shall rest

Your affectionate friend, and humble servant HENRY JEANES.


Before the receipt of this, Mr T. C. gave an account unto Dr Tailor of what he
remembered in our discourse, and received from him an answer, which he concealed
from me until the delivery of my paper, and then he produced it. This answer
together with my reply thereunto I shall next offer unto thy Consideration.

To his respected Friend Mr. T. C. these, etc.
Mr. C.
I thank you for your letter, and friendly information of Mr Jeanes his
exception; but if he had been as careful to understand as he was forward to
object, and mistake, he had eased you, and me of this little trouble. He
objects that I say, that enclination to sin is no sin, because it is
accidental, not intrinsecall, and essential: and he gives reasons why such a
reason is absurd. To all which I return this soft answer, that he says true,
but nothing to the purpose. For the thing that I was to prove then, was the
precedent word: [that every man is inclined to evil, some more, some less:]
that is, that this inclination to evil is not regular and uniforme, and
therefore not natural, for as for the other clause] it is an effect or
condition of nature, but no sin properly] that was the less principal part
of the proposition, and to it only the first reason was apportion'd, viz: [that
which is unavoidable is not a sin.) But if he had considered the business I
was then upon, be must needs have seen that I was explicating that clause of
the Church Article [and is inclined to evill] which I was to say, was an
inclination not natural, not intrinsecall, not essential; but accidental:
and i^ this thing I pursue, and to this all the other reasons relate to the end
of that section, and none of them, the first only excepted, relates to the
latter part of the proposition, which if I had left out, and the reasons
relating to it, the sense had been as complete, and my argument not the worse,
and my discourse no less pertinent. And unless he refer the l4 ast reasons,
that is, all after the first to that clause of the variety of our inclination
to evil, he will not only mistake the second reason, but all the rest. Besides
this if Mr Jeanes had so much ingenuity as he pretends to have Logic, he
would have perceived that for me to mean, what he says I mean, had been the
perfect destruction of all my discourse, and all my intention, for if I had
said, that nothing could be a sin; but what is intrinsecall and essential,
then I had affirmed that not only some sin, but all sin had been natural.
Now my Thesis being, that no sin, properly such, is natural; it cannot be
imagined that I should mean what he dreams of: it had not been to my purpose,
either there or in the whole question. But all the following reasons do so
explicate, and fully manifest the meaning of the second; that I wonder how Mr
Jeanes if he be that person which he would be thought, could mistake, it,
unless he be also that person he would not be thought: I could say many more
things, but this being the truth of the business, and the real purpose of my
discourse, I need add no more; but one thing I cannot but add to Mr Jeanes,
that is, since be instances in our B. Savior, he must needs allow that
concupiscence, taking it for those desires, which are purely natural, and
concreated with us, cannot possibly be a sin: Because as Mr Jeanes rightly
observes, whatsoever is natural to man, was in Christ, because he had all our
mere nature, but he had, not our sin; therefore, our mere nature has no
sin: for Christ was in all things like to us, sin only excepted, but he
took upon him our nature, and nothing of that was excepted; therefore our
nature of it self is not properly sinful: nothing of our constitution is
criminal.

Sir, I have given you a fair and easy answer. I pray let Mr Jeanes have so
much conveyed to him, as concerns that part to which he objects: and if he
writes any thing against me, let him take notice of this my answer, or else all
the World shall take notice of his impertinent, and uningenious dealing: I pray
let not this letter go out of your hand, because I have no copy of it, if Mr
Jeanes should be trouble some: But if he be, it will be sufficient to acquaint
his neighborhood with my defense, for what he says shall go no farther. Sir,
I hope you will expound this trouble I put you to in reading a long letter to
my readiness to do you service, and as a return of those great kindnesses by
which you have obliged

London July 4th. 1657. Sir, Your very affectionate friend to love and serve
you JER: TAILOR.
Postscript.
I hope I have spoken clearly enough in the explicating, and untying this knot
in the bulrush; but if it be not extremely plain, for your own satisfaction
make but the second part of the proposition to be a Parenthesis; thus,
beginning at (and it is an effect, etc: unto 2.) and then the thing is
extremely plain, for there the design was only to say and prove that
although man be (more or less, as it happens) inclined to sin, yet his
nature is never the more criminal for that: for it is besides his nature, it
is accidental to it, not but that it is natural to be inclined to such
objects; but that this should be sinful is but in some cases, and it is
accidental, and it is because those object; were forbidden after our nature
was given to us. Man is naturally inclined to some things, which are not
naturally, but accidentally sinful.




To his Loving friend Mr T. C. these etc.
Sir,
I have received Dr Tailor his letter sent unto you, bearing date July 4th.
What design you had in concealing of it so long from me I cannot guess. But
if you had delivered it before I had sent you my objections, you would have
eased me, and Dr Tailor of some trouble: for I should then have let alone these
objections, and have only proved, that I did him no wrong, in charging him with
the conclusions, against which these objections were directed; to wit, that no
sin is accidental; that all sin is essential, and intrinsecall.

Two things he lays to my charge, want of care to understand him, and
disingenuity.

1. Want of care to understand him. ]If he had been (he says) as careful to
understand as he was forward to object, and mistak^, he had eased you, and me
of this little trouble.] But if the Dr had been a man of that ingenuity, which
you fame him for, he would have confessed his carelessness in expressing of
himself, and not have charged me with want of care to understand, that to be
his meaning which I could not understand to be his meaning without offering
violence to his words: he propounds two propositions (without any thing, but a
copulative conjunction interposed between them) And unto the last of these
propositions he subjoyneth 6 reasons. Now what rule of Logic obliged me to
carry the 5 last of these reasons backwards, and to place them between the above
mentioned propositions, I readily confess my self to be utterly ignorant, and
shall be very ready to sit down at the Doctor's feet, and to learn any such
rule of him. If the Dr must have such liberty allowed him to make such
unexampled transpositions, he is a very formidable adversary, not to be coped
with by mortal wights, who cannot guess, how he will in an after game sever
these reasons, that he has first joined together.

Logic informs me that secondly signifies a relation of order betwixt it
self and firstly. But now if two reasons be related unto not one, but several
conclusions, I would feign know why one should be the first, and the other the
second reason.

Besides here is a first reason, that has no second reason following it,
relating unto the same conclusion. There goes a story of an Alderman in
Oxford, that upon the reading of some records touching something controverted
betwixt the Town, and University, he brake out into this expression; unless we
can prove King Henry the 8th to be before King Henry the seventh the University
will have the better of us: But if we can make it good, that King Henry the 8th
was before King Henry the 7th, then there is no doubt, but that we shall in
this particular have a full Conquest over the Scholars. I take this to be a
fable: But however give me leave to make application of it unto my present
purpose. All the wrong, that the Dr can pretend, that I have done him, is
because I did not place secondly before firstly, and if he can make it good,
that I ought to have placed, secondly before firstly, then I must needs
confess I have done him a great deal of Injury, and shall be ready to ask
his pardon; and unless such proof can be made, he must lay the blame upon the
Confusion, and disorder of his own discourse: But to go on. The Dr tells us,
that this clause [it is an effect, or condition of nature, but no sime
properly, is the less principal part of the proposition:] both clauses then,
according unto him, make but one proposition; and this is a great failing
against that Logic, which the learned have hitherto used; for by that, these
two clauses are not parts of one proposition, but several, entire, distinct
propositions.

But perhaps he may say, that they make one compounded proposition.

Unto this I shall reply, 1. That a compounded proposition consists ever of
simple propositions. Now the last of these clauses (to say nothing of the
first) is a compounded proposition it self, for it is an adversative
preposition; and therefore, though these two clauses may make an aggregation of
several propositions, yet they can never concur to the Composition of one.

2. If both clauses make one compounded proposition, then it is a copulative
proposition; because they are knit together by a copulative conjunction; Now a
copulative proposition is not true, unless all parts be true; and consequently
it is not proved to be true, unless all parts be proved to be true: Now the
Doctor for the proof of this pretended copulative proposition jumbleth
together 6 reasons without any note of distinction to direct the Reader, unto
which part of the proposition (as he calls it) he should apply the several
reasons: and whether this proof of a copulative proposition be not illogicall,
I appeal unto any man, that knows any thing in Logic.

He informs you, that the first reason is apportioned to be unto the latter
part of the proposition (as he calls it) and the 5 other reasons unto the first
part of the proposition But what precept of Logic, or Grammar I have
transgressed in not making such a distribution, or application of his reasons,
he does not acquaint you.

But the Doctor directs you unto two ways for the finding out of his meaning.

The First to leave out the second clause, and the reason relating unto it. If
I had (says he) left out the latter part of the proposition, and the reasons
relating to it, my sense had been as complete, and my argument not the worse,
and my discourse no less pertinent.

But the second clause being left in, perturbeth, and confounds the sense,
and occasioneth the mistake: and who (I pray) is to be blamed, the Dr for
putting it into the Synthesis, or I for still keeping it in the Analysis of his
words? It would be a strange, and unheard of way of analyzing, that a Reader
should loppe off two lines at a time of an author: But it should seem we are
to make such defalkations to make your great Dr speak sense; only I would know
by what warrant, and obligation.

A second way, which will make it extremely plain (as he tells you in the
postscript) is to make the second part of the proposition (as he terms it) and
the reason relating unto it to be a Parenthesis.

But, 1. that this was not brought in by way of Parenthesis, who is in the
fault?

Again, 2. The Dr has told us, that it is the second part of the same
proposition with the foregoing clause, and if so, then it cannot be inserted as
a Parenthesis betwixt it, and the following proposition.

And besides, 3. If he bring in the words only by way of Parenthesis, I would
feign know what is to be done with 2ly, in this case he must new figure, and
number his reasons. That which he figureth to be the second reason, must be the
first, and his six reasons will prove to be but five.

The second thing that he charge me with is disingenuity. Besides this (says
he) if Mr Jeanes had so much ingenuity, as he pretends to have Logic, he
would have perceived, etc.

1. As what he speaks of my pretending unto Logic, I think unworthy of any
answer, and shall leave it unto the Reader to judge of the wit, and ingenuity
thereof.

2. It is no disingenuous part in me to charge the Dr with a conclusion, that I
prove his words to be guilty of: For as for his meaning, I cannot guess at it,
but by his words, but I believe the unpartiall Reader, will judge it a very
high point of disingenuity in the Dr, not to acknowledge the incommodious
structure of his words.

But let us hear wherein my disingenuity consists. If Mr Jeanes (says he) had
so much ingenuity as he pretends to have Logic, he would have perceived that
for me to mean, what he says I mean, had been the perfect destruction of all
my discourse, and all my intention.

If this be all; The Dr has no reason to charge me with want of ingenuity in
this particular; for I do very well perceive, that for him to mean, what I
say, his words hold forth (for as for any secret, and reserved meaning, I have
nothing to do with) had been the perfect destruction of all his discourse,
etc. But I believe the Docto'rs meaning is, that it is an ingenuous part in me
to think it possible, or probable for him to assert any thing, that is the
perfect destruction of all his discourse, and all his intention. Now this I
utterly deny. I have no such apprehension of the Doctor's infallibility; but
take him to be a man as likely to contradict himself, as other mortals.

There is one thing more, that the Dr add's concerning our blessed Savior,
that concupiscence taking it for those desires, which are purely natural, and
concreated is no sin, because it was in Christ.

Unto which I answer that this is nothing unto the purpose; for the
concupiscence in controversy is prerternaturall, and never created, or
concreated by God.

It is an inclination unto evil; and therefore irregular, and disorderly: it
is that which the Apostle terms, the sin, that dwells in him, Romans 7.17:
which made him do that evil, which he would not, verse: 19: which he hated,
verse: 15. The law of his members warring against the law of his mind, verse: 23:
the body of this death, from which be desired to be delivered, verse: 24: And
(methinks) he should be afraid to ascribe this concupiscence unto Jesus
Christ, who was the Lamb of God without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet.
1.19: holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26: And thus I
have according unto the Doctor's desire, taken notice of his answer, and shall
not be so hasty as to write any thing against him, but that I shall stay a
convenient time to hear the uttermost, that he can say; and when our Paper
shall be made public unto all the World, I do not doubt but there will be
more that will accuse him of incogitancy, than me of impertinency. Many
ingenious and learned men, and some, that otherwise admire the Dr, have made
the same construction of his words, that I have, and thought that, he here
forgot himself. I am informed that the Dr in a letter unto you, tells you, that
he desires not to be troubled with my trif^ng Logic, I hope he reviles not
Logic as trifling, for then I know in what herd of writers to rank him, and
should decline him as an irrational adversary, who is an enemy to the very art
of reason.

But it is not Logic it self I believe, but my Logic, that he thus
bespatters: and if it be so, I shall return nothing unto this his censure, but
leave you, and others his admirers to judge of the humility, and ingenuity
thereof.

I have heard that the Dr has printed a very good Grammar, if he will also
publish a Logic, for the better information of such triflers as my self, I
do assure you, that I will very diligently peruse it, and if it be more solid,
weighty, and serious, than those which I have hitherto read, give him many
thanks for it.

As for his last letter, I have not yet had the leisure fully to peruse it, but
by that cursory view which I have taken of it, I find it to be as empty of
reason, (though fuller of passion) as the former: you have given it out that it
is unanswerable; but I shall desire you to have a little patience, and if I do
not give it a satisfying answer, I shall submit unto what penance you will
injoyne me. In great have I rest.

Your affectionate friend, and servant, HENRY JEANES.
Chedzoy August 31. 1657.

Mr C. thought, that the Doctor's letter would supersede all further
disputation; but perceiving that I was unsatisfied, and that I intended a
replication, he conveyed my objections unto the Doctor, which begat a very
angry letter from him; unto which he would not vouchsafe so much as a
superscription; but I saw the Contents concerned me, and therefore unto thee I
shall present it, together with my answer thereunto, submitting both unto thy
censure, and so shall rest

Devoted to thy spiritual service HENRY JEANES

Sir,
I understand by my very good friend Mr T. C that you are very much troubled at
a passage in my [further explication of original sin] page: 496: The words are
these [that every man is inclined to evil, some more, some less, but all in
some instances, is very true, and it is an effect, or condition of nature; but
no sin properly.] The offense you conceive is because, one of the reasons I
bring to prove it is, because it is accidental to nature, not intrinsecall and
essential.] upon this you fancy that I intend that all sin is intrinsecall
and essential to nature: which indeed if I had said, I had been as very a sool
as you conceive me, and worse; for besides the reasons you are pleased to
object, which I am no way by this concerned to examine, I had destroyed my
maine intention nay, that which I was proving in that very place; for my work
there was to prove that no sin is, or can be natural.

Now then although I know you could easily have understood what I did and must
mean there; yet because you are pleased not to do it; I will point in out to
you. To be inclined to evil is an effect or condition of nature; but no sin
properly, vizt: of nature; for that is the subject of the Question: whether
inclination to evil be an effect of nature, or an inherent principle of evil;
a sin natural and necessary. Now that it is not this; I do suppose that
reason, which you so misconstrued competent: viz: It is not a natural or
necessary sin, not a sin of our nature, because it is accidental to
nature, not int^insicall, not essential; If it be in our nature, it must be
naturally inseparable, it must be at first, it must be in all persons, that
have our nature. And this is my meaning; and that you may not be troubled at
the word essential; I mean it not in the strict physical, but in the moral
sense; that which is not aster our nature, but together with it in real being:
and I explicate it, by intrinsecall; I oppose it to accidental; (in this
reason) and to [superinduc'd] in the next, Sir I did give an account to Mr C.
in a letter to him, which I know was sufficient, and (...); for cujus est
loqui, ejus est interpretari; I told you perfectly what is my meaning, it is
very plain by the whole design of that, that it must be my meaning; it is
also clear enough an very easy in the expression, and therefore I now appeal
to your ingenuity, whether you ought to have made such tragedies with that
which common sense would have made plain to you, unless you had received a
prejudice.

And now Sin, to your two syllogismes, be pleased to the subject of the two
majors, to add but this qualification; [naturall] and try if those horrid
consequents will follow which you affixed to your own (...).

But I shall for this once consider the particulars.

1. You charge it with nonsense; but with your favor you prove it most
pitifully, your reason is, that to say [essentiall] is predicated of (sin) in
either of the two ways, dicendi pe^ se, is such pitiful and prodigious
nonsense, that you think it not worthy of any serious resutation: so that this
is your argument [to say that sin is essential is prodigious and pitiful
nonsense; g. it is prodigious and pitiful nonsense] surely a good argument; or
thus, that which is such nonsense that you think not worthy of refutation, is
certainly nonsense: but to say that sin is essential is such nonsense that
you think not worthy of refute: therefore it is nonsense. I do not say your
argument is nonsense, but I am sure it is no argument, unless a bold
affirmative be a sufficient proof in your Logic. But to the thing that sin
is essential, is indeed false to say, but to say so, is not nonsense. And
whereas you will suppose me to say so, you are uncharitable, and something
unreasonable in it: for I was to prove that inclination to sin, was not a
sin of our nature (as was pretended,) because what was natural, is
intrinsecall and essential, as docibility to man; which because to be inclined
to sin is not, g. it is not a sin, viz: of nature.

In the next place you charge this with blasphemy If I had lai^ or meant what
you pretend^; you had reason. But then pray consider how your charge will
return really upon your self. For if it be blasphemy to affirm God to be the
Author of sin; then what I derived from Adam is no sin, for that Adam's
sin should descend upon me, I demand, who was the Author of that? If you
please you may take time to consider it; but in the interim, if you be pleased
to read a little discourse of mine called Deus justificatus, you shall find my
Question not to be answered by you, if you have any regard to the authority, or
to the reason of Mr Calvin, Dr Twisse, and some other Bigots of your party.
Your second charge of Blaspemy, is that my reason does by implication involve
Christ in the guilt of sin; because whatsoever is essential he had. But than
if you remember, that I say not, that sin is essential; and that I bring the
reverse of this very argument against your party and opinion in some of my late
discourses, you have reason to shake the fire out of your own bosom, not to
tell me, that I burn. For if inclination to sin be a sin naturally, and
derived from our Parents, I demand whether or no had not Christ all natural
desires? If he had not, he was not a persect man. If he had then all natural
desire: are not natural sins, for if you say they be you are the blasphemer by
the consequence of your affirmative; not I: But God forbid that either of us
should. Your third reason also is as pretty. For first; I demand whether a
possibility to sin be not of the nature of man (for that is all I mean by
essential.) If it be not; ^ow came Adam to sin his first sine? if it be; I
ask whether shall the Saints in the resurrection be raised up with it or no?
If yea, then you blaspheme God's full glorification of the Saints in the
resurrection, for impeccability is certainly a part of their full
glorification; If nay, then it is do blasphemy to say that in the resurrection
the Saints shall be raised up without something that is essential to them, or
of their nature. But Sir, what think you of mortality? is that essential, or
of the nature of man? I suppose you will not deny it. But yet I also believe
you will confess that though we are sown a corruptible body, yet we shall be
raised an incorruptible; and the mortal shall put on immortality. Once more,
is it natural to be natural? that will not be denied; but then remember that
although to be natural is essential, that is, of the essence of the body, yet
the natural body shall rise without it is naturality, it is sown a naurall
body, it is raised a spiritual. So that you see if I had said this which you
charge upon me, which is so contrary to my thoughts, and so against my purpose,
yet your arguments could not have overthrowns it. It is good advice, (...). If
you had been pleased to have learned my meaning, before you had published your
dislike, I should have esteemed my self obliged to you in a great
acknowledgment: now you have said very much evil of me, though I deserved it
not. For suppose I had not prosperously enough expressed my meaning; yet you
who are a man of wit and parts could easily have discerned my purpose and my
design, you could not but know and consider too, that my great design was to
say, that sin could not be natural; that it is so far from being essential,
that us is not so much as subjected in our common nature, but in our persons
only. But beside this Sir, I am a little to complain of you, that when you had
two words at your choice to explicate each other, (intrinsecall and essential)
you would take the hardest and the worst sense, not the easiest and most ready:
for you cannot but know that (essential) is not always to be taken in the
strictest sense of Philosophy ^or that which is constitutive of a nature; but
largely and for all sorts of proprieties, and the universal accidents of
nature; as it is essential to man to laugh, to be capable of learning, to be
mortal, to have a body of contrary qualities, and consequently by nature
corruptible; and in a moral discourse to call for metaphysicall
significations, and not to be content with moral and general, ^y proceed from
an itch to quarrel, but not from that ingenuity which will be your and my best
ornament.

Although I have not much to do with it, yet because you are so great a
Logician, and so great an admirer of that, which everyone of your Pupils knows
I mean, Prophyr'es definition of an accident: I care not if I tell you, that
the definition is imperfect and false, it is not convertible with the
Definitum. For even essential things may be taken away, sine interitu
subjecti. I instance: to be quantitative, is essential to a body, and to have
successi^^ of duration; but yet in the resurrection, when bodies shall be
spiritual and eternal, those other which are now Essential predicates shall be
taken away, and yet the subject remain, and be improved to higher and more
noble predicates. This I have here set down, not that I at all value the
problem whether it be so or no; but that you may not think me a Socinian
particularly in this Article, or that I think the bodies in the resurrection
shall be specifically distinct from what they are: I believe them the same
bodies, but enabled in their very beings: For to a specifical and substantial
change, is required that there be an introduction of new forms; but yet the
improving of Essential, predicates, is no specification of subjects, but
melioration of the first: But the consequent is, that abesse, and adesse, etc.
is not an excellent definition of an accident. And yet further, it follows,
That if sin were as essential to a man, as mortality is, or to be quantitative,
yet there is no more need that a man should rise with sin, then with mortality:
But Aristotle's Philosophy, and Porphyries Commentary, are but ill measures in
Theology; and you should do well to scour bright that armor in which you
trust, which unless it be prudently conducted, it will mak^ a man a Sophister,
rather then a Theolog^e; but you are wiser. I have only this one thing to
add, That the common discourses of Original sin, make sin to be natural,
necessary and unavoidable; and then may not I use your own words? This Tenet is
chargeable with Libertinism: It is a licentious Doctrine, and opens a gap to
the greatest profaneness: For it takes away all conscience of sin, all
repentance of it for the time past. If sin be natural, necessary, and
unavoidable, as it is to us, if we derive it from Adam, etc. What reason has
he to be humbled for it, and to ask God pardon for it? so that you have done
well against your own Opinion; and if I had not used the argument before, I
should have had reason to thank you for it: Now as it is, you are further to
consider it, not I. Sir, Though I have reason to give you the priority in every
thing else, yet in civility I have far out done you: You were offended at a
passage, which you might easily, but would not understand: You have urged
arguments against me, which return upon your own head: The Proposition you
charge me withal, I own not in any of your senses, nor (as you set it down) in
any at all; and yet your Arguments do not substantially or rationally confute
it, if I had said so: Besides all this, you have used your pleasure upon me,
you have reviled me, slighted me, scorned me, untempted, unprovoked* you never
sent to me civilly to give you satisfaction in your objection: but talked it in
my absense, and to my prejudice; yet I have sent you an answer, I hope
satisfactory, and together with it a long Letter, which in the midst of my many
affairs, and straightened condition, is more then I can again afford: And after
all this, I assure you that I will pray for you, and speak such good things of
you, as I can find, or hear to be in you, and profess myself, and really be,

August 15. 1657. Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant in our blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus. Jer: Tailor.
Postscript.
Sir, I received yours late last night, and I have returned you this, early
this morning, that I might in every thing be respective of you; but I desire
not to be troubled with any thing that is not very material; for I have
business of much greater concernment; neither can I draw the saw of contention
with any man about things less pertment. I expect no answer, I need none, I
desire none; but expect that you will employ your good parts in any thing
rather, then in being ingeniosus in alieno libro: Your talents can better (if
you please) serve God, then by cavelling with, or without reason.



To the Reverend and Learned, Dr. Jeremy Tailor.
SIR.
WHat you mean, by my being very much troubled at a passage in your further
Explication of Original Sin, I know not; Indeed I expressed unto Mr. T. C. my
dislike of it, and charged it with nonsense and Blasphemy: And this charge I
have proved; and now shall briefly vindicate the proof of it, from your Reply
in this my Rejoinder. You tell me, that your work in that very place, is to
prove, That no sin is, or can be natural: Now I cannot find any thing sounding
that way within forty lines of these words; and that it was my duty to look
further for the Coherence of them, I confess, I knew not. Another great mistake
also, it seems I have committed; in that I have not so high thoughts of you, as
to think it impossible, or very unlikely, that you should be so uncautelous as
to drop any contradiction unto your main intention: And this is an error that I
can hardly shake off as yet; but I do assure you, that I shall endeavor to
have as reverend an opinion of you as I possibly can; only, I shall never
exempt you from a possibility of erring: never think that you sit upon a Chair
made of Irish Timber, that cannot endure a venomous Spider to hang his web
thereon. I shall, for that which follows, insert the words of your Letter
verbatim, that the Reader may the better compare them and my answer together.

Dr. Tailor.
Now although I know you could easily have understood what I did, and must mean
there; yet, because you are pleased not to do it, I shall point it to you.

Jeanes.
I wonder why you should think it so easy a matter to understand your meaning,
seeing you, who are the Author, differ from your self in assigning what it is;
for in your Letter unto Mr. C. you apportion'd this second Reason solely unto
the first Clause; That every man is inclined to evil, some more, some less, but
all, in some instances is very true: And here in your Letter to me, you apply
it unto the second Clause: It is an effect or condition of nature, but no sin
properly. Suppose I were at a loss, yet you have no reason to blame me, until
you agree with your self: I have no Spectacles to look into your meaning, but
your words, and that they were related only unto one Proposition, as a reason
thereof; and yet related to two Propositions, as a proof of each, was a thing
that I could never possibly divine, nor cannot yet understand; and herein, I am
afraid, you are as unable to teach me how this can be, as I am incapable of
learning; but if you can teach any such thing unto me, you shall find me,
though perhaps not an apt, yet a willing and thankful Scholar: But to deal
plainly with you, I am very confident that your words in themselves hold forth
neither of those senses that you propound; and if by dint of argument you can
prove either of them from your words, you shall have my most penitent and
submissive confession of my mistake, and shall have full leave to prescribe me
as public and shameful a satisfaction, as you can think on; unto which, I do
promise to conform my self. But let us hear how you point out your meaning to
me.

Dr. Tailor.
Yet because you are pleased not to understand what I did, and must mean there,
I will point it out to you: To be inclined to evil, is an effect or condition
of nature, but no sin properly, viz. of nature; for that is the subject of the
question, whether inclination unto evil be an effect of nature, or an inherent
principle of evil; a sin natural and necessary? Now that it is not this, I do
suppose that reason, which you so misconstrued, competent, viz. it is not a
natural, or necessary sin, not a sin of our nature, because it is accidental to
nature, not intrinsecal, not essential.

Jeanes.
To rescue your second reason from that which I charge it with, you are fain to
make an additional supply unto the Proposition; unto which, you say, your
second reason is competent. To be inclined to evil, etc. is no sin properly, no
natural and necessary sin, no inherent Principle of evil. Now unto this
addition I shall apply your words that you have concerning Binius and Baronius
in the like case; whether it may be allowed you by any license, less then
Poetical, let Critics judge: Surely, Sir, if the most of your Writings be thus
elliptical, they will be unintelligible unto me without a Commentary, and if
you must be indulged the liberty of making such interpolations, all the
Universities in Christendom are no match to dispute with you.

But to insist a little upon the examination of this Interpolation.

1. You seem to make equivalent these two propositions; Inclination to evil, is
an inherent principle of evil; Inclination to evil, is a sin natural and
necessary: But I am utterly unsatisfied touching this their equivalency, and
shall desire you to clear it up unto me.

Nay further, I very much question the truth of the first Proposition; this
inclination to evil, is not as inherent principle of evil; and shall entreat
you to inform me, whether you deny it to be a principle of evil, or an inherent
principle, and think it only adherent, circumstant, or the like: but I believe
you will tell me of some Ellipsis in your words, that I ought to understand,
and supply something to make out your sense: What it is, I will not adventure
to guess at, but leave it to you to express it your self.

Secondly, The conclusion that is confirmed by your second Reason, is the same
with that which is proved by your first Reason; and that was, that inclination
to evil was no sin, without the additional Epithets of natural and necessary.
It is no sin, say you, properly; because, that which is unavoidable, is no sin:
and indeed, the unavoidableness of our inclination to evil, may be a probable
argument that it is no sin, and require an answer; but no competent reason at
all to prove it not to be natural and necessary: But seeing you say, it must be
your meaning that these Epithets should be interposed, we will for once suppose
it, for Disputation sake, and see whether we can understand by any means what
you would have.

1. You say, your meaning in your conclusion is, that Inclination to evil is no
sin, viz. of nature, which I shall consider anon, when I shall come to examine
that subtilty of yours, That sin is not so much as subjected in our common
nature.

2. Let us inquire what you mean by natural and necessary.

1. What you mean by natural: There be diverse significations of the word
natural, which are impertinent to our present Discourse, and therefore I shall
omit them. I suppose that you take natural, either for that, which is so
termed, in regard of connection with our nature; or else in respect of Physical,
and necessary resultancy from our nature.

If you take it for that, which is so termed, in regard of connection with our
nature, which is coeval with our nature, derived unto us in the Nativity and
Conception of our nature, then your second Reason is Tautological, a most
pitiful and miserable begging of the question, for you tell us afterward, that
by essential, you mean that which is not after our nature, but together with it
in real being; and then, there will be no more difference betwixt essential and
natural, in this acception of it, then there is betwixt ensis and gladius, and
so your Argument explained will stand thus.

Inclination to evil is not connexed with our nature; because it is not
connexed with our nature: it is not coeval with our nature, derived unto us in
the Conception and Nativity of our nature; because it is after our nature, and
not together with it in real being.

2. If you take natural, in regard of necessary resultancy from our nature;
then your Argument is impertinent, and concerns not those whom you oppose; for
they deny, as well as you, that inclination unto evil is natural in such a
sense: Let two speak for all.

First, Bishop Davenant in his Determinations, where his determination of the
sixteenth Question, is, Pro^itas ad malum non fluit ex principiis naturae
integrae.

The second is Dr. Baro in his Metaphysics, page 256. Theologi nostri
asserunt, concupiscentiam nul'o modo esse quid necessario consequens naturam
humanam in se spectatam; and ideo dicu^t eam esse quid superadditum, and
adventitium, in animo hominis existens post ^apsum.

But perhaps you may pitch upon some other acception of natural; if you do, I
shall beseech you not to chide me, but to certify my mistake by explication of
your meaning; for I have done my best to bolt it out, and must needs profess,
that I cannot guess at any other signification of natural, which you can here
in this place with any probability pretend unto: But if you can acquaint me
with any other, when I know it, I shall be ready to examine it.

But to proceed unto the next Epithete necessary: When you said, that an
inclination to evil was not properly a sin, your meaning was (you say) that it
was not a necessary sin.

But then I desire to know how your first Reason will be suited unto this
conclusion, for your first Reason stands thus, because that which is
unavoidable, is not sin; and I would entreat you also to inform us, what is the
difference here betwixt necessary and unavoidable; for if there be no
difference, I shall shrewdly suspect your arguments sick of that infirmity,
called petitio principii.

But perhaps we must here make the like supply, and understand you thus,
because that which is unavoidable is not a necessary sin; if so, your Argument
reduced unto form, will run thus.

Nothing that is unavoidable can be a necessary sin: But an inclination to evil
is unavoidable: Therefore it is not a necessary sin.

Unto your major I say, that though unavoidableness, in one sense, may carry a
repugnancy unto sin, yet not to necessary; it may prove a thing not to be a
sin, but it makes nothing against its being necessary; for that which is
unavoidable, may be, and is necessary; it is probable therefore, that necessary
was never in your first thoughts, but put in, to secure your second Reason from
mine Objections against it.

However, yet I shall here propound and apply a distinction of necessary,
usual among your Antagonists: Dr. Edw: Reynolds 3 Treatises, page: 209.
A thing, say they, may be said to be necessary, in regard of either primitive
and created, or consequent and contracted necessity.

If you speak of that, which is necessary with that necessity, which is
primitive and created, then indeed I grant your conclusion true, and your
second reason competent unto it: Inclination unto evil is not a necessary sin,
in regard of a Primitive and Created necessity.

But now this were utterly besides the main of your intention, for here you
would sight with nothing but your own shadow, because your adversaries do not
avouch such a necessity in our inclination to evil, but defy and abhor it more
then your self; and you cannot affix any such thing unto them, unless you
grossly calumniate them.

If you speak of that which is necessary, with a consequent and contracted
necessity; then your conclusion is false, and your second reason no
confirmation thereof; if it be put into form, it will make up two Syllogisms.

The first Syllogisin.
Nothing that is accidental, can be a sin necessary, with a consequent and
contracted necessity. But our inclination to evil is accidental. Therefore it
is not a necessary sin in respect of a consequent and contracted necessity.
The second Syllogism.
Every thing that is necessary in respect of a consequent and contracted
necessity, is intrinsecal and essential. But inclination to evil is not
intrinsecal and essential. Therefore it is not necessary, in regard of a
consequent and contracted necessity.
The major in both Syllogisms is evidently false, as will appear, when you
attempt the proof of them: and I am very confident, you never will own them, if
you can any other way shift off my objections.

In the next place, we have a strange Paradox of yours, which I understand not,
I shall propound it, and briefly consider it.

Dr. Tailor.
If it be in our nature, it must be naturally inseparable, it must be at first,
it must be in all persons that have our nature.

Jeanes.
I shall not peremptorily charge this Proposition with falsehood, until I know
how you explicate it, and yet I will tell you what reason I have to suspect it
to be very false; diverse accidents are in our nature, properly and strictly
inherent in our nature, which yet are naturally separable from our nature,
which were not at first, which are not now in all persons that have our nature:
I might instance in several acquired habits, and immanent acts of the rational
soul, which are neither adequate unto, nor coeval with, nor naturally
inseparable from it.

But I look for some strange Ellipsis; a Rhetorical Scheme it seems you are
much delighted with; but if you use it too often, it will prove rather a Weed,
then a Flower in your Rhetoric; you expect, it seems, I should pay such
reverence unto your Writings, as great Critics do unto the Ancients, in whose
words, when they cannot make sense, they suppose some Chasma to fill up, with
which they torture their brains; but I have something else to do, then to
trouble my self with Divinations at your meaning: when you vouchsafe to
acquaint us what it is, I shall then examine it.

But having seen how ill you have sped in new shaping your conclusion, let us
see next whether your success be better in the qualification of your second
reason for it.

Dr. Tailor.
And this is my meaning, and that you may not be troubled at the word
Essential; I mean it not in the strict Physical, but in the moral sense, that
which is not after our nature, but together with it in real being, and
explicate it by extrinsecal; and I oppose it to accidental in this reason, and
to superinduced in the next.

Jeanes.
But first, pray who could tell that you thus meant it, until you now tell me:
Is this a usual and received sense of the word? and if it be, direct me unto
those moral Philosophers and Divines, that thus take it; if it be not, my
ignorance of it is purae negationis, not pravae dispositionis, not privative
and blameable: Analogum per se positum stat pro famosiori Analogato; and
therefore I appeal unto your own ingenuity, whether I have injured you, by
supposing that you took Essential in the accustomed acception thereof.

2. I shall beseech you to set down the difference that you make betwixt
natural in your conclusion, and essential in your second reason for it; and
when you have done this, I am very confident to make it appear, that your
Argument is either a mere tautology, or an utter impertinency; but of this
before.

Next you refer me unto your former Letter unto Mr. C.

Dr. Tailor.
Sir, I did give an account unto Mr. C. in a Letter to him, which I know was
sufficient, and (...).

Jeanes.
The vanity of this brag you will soon acknowledge, when you shall compare that
Letter with this unto me; for in this you apply the second reason unto the
latter cause as a congruent proof; it it is an effect, or condition of nature,
but no sin properly: And this you point out to be your meaning, and say, That I
could easily have understood it: But in your Letter to Mr. C. you aver, that
this second reason is appliable only unto the first clause; That every man is
inclined to evil, some more, some less, etc. and not at all unto the second;
nay, that it is not appliable unto it, without a mistake of not only the
second, but the four other reasons also; and of this too, you say that it must
be your meaning, and that it is clear enough, and easy in the expression; and
you wonder that Mr. Jeanes, if he be the man, that he would be thought could
mistake it: Here you propound inconsistent and contrary meanings, and it seems
you intend to tie me unto such hard meat, as that I must find out each to be
your meaning; but this is a task, that my understanding cannot perform, and
therefore I shall beg assistance from the light and learning of yours: and
until you afford this, I shall offer unto your consideration this common rule
in Logic, That contrary propositions cannot be both true, but one of them must
needs be false: But these two propositions, this second reason is referred unto
the second clause, as a competent proof, and this second reason is not referred
unto the second clause, are contrary propositions; the opposition betwixt
singular propositions, being, as Scheibl^r well shows, de prop: cap. 11. number.
18. most aptly reducible unto contrariety; and yet both these propositions are
yours, the first in this letter, the latter in your former letter, and
therefore one of them must needs be false; you are not then so much (...),
extra teli factum, out of Gunshot, but that my poor trifling Logic is able to
reach you: if you should deny the matter of Fact, that both these propositions,
are yours, your letters will convince you of untruth, and I shall need no more
then to transcribe your own words: The first Proposition you have in these
words of this Letter, To be inclined to evil, is an effect, or condition of
nature, but no sin properly, viz. of nature, etc. a sin natural and necessary;
now that it is not this, I do suppose that reason, which you so misconstrued,
is competent, etc. The second, in several passages of your former Letter; as
for the other clause, it is an effect, or condition of nature, but no sin
properly, that was the less principal part of the Proposition, and to it only
the first reason was apportioned; and again afterward, none of the other
reasons, the first only excepted, relate to the latter part of the
Proposition: But let us hear your reason for the sufficiency of your Letter
unto Mr. C.

Dr. Tailor.
For cujus est loqui, ejus est interpretari.

Jeanes.
I shall willingly grant you all fair liberty of interpreting your self, so you
do it logically and rationally; but that which you expect, is rather a
licentiousness, then a true liberty of interpretation.

First, You would have a license of transportation, to carry your words where
you please; you would have the second reason placed betwixt the two
Propositions, and before the first Reason; thus in your Letter to Mr. C.

Next, You usurp the license of interposition, to put in what you please; as
when in this Letter you add the Epithets of natural and necessary to sin.

And thirdly, You take up a strange license in exposition of your Terms; for if
you cannot justify what you say, if such a term in your words be taken in the
common and usual sense: Then you impose upon me an unusual, that I say not a
new and unheard of signification thereof. Thus you deal with the word Essential.

And lastly, You assume a license of contradiction, to contradict your self, to
say and unsay; one while to make this your meaning, and another time to make
that which is contrary your meaning; and you think that I am obliged to take
these contrary meanings to be both your meanings.

Surely Sir, if you can get a Patent for these four Licenses, you will, for
matter of Disputation, be shot-free and invulnerable; your Opponents may throw
their caps at you, but not an Argument of theirs can touch you.

Dr. Tailor.
I told you perfectly what is my meaning, it is very plain by the whole design
of that, that it must be my meaning, it is also clear enough, and very plain,
and very easy in the expression; and therefore I now appeal to your ingenuity,
whether you ought to have made such Tragedies with that, which common sense
would have made plain unto you, unless you had received a prejudice.

Jeanes.
As for this triumphant appeal which you make in the close here to my
ingenuity, I need say nothing, but refer unto the premises; only I cannot but
give one Advertisement unto your Disciples, that you sometimes triumph when you
have not conquered.

Dr. Tailor.
And now Sir, to your two Syllogisms, be pleased to the subject of the two
Majors, add but this qualification [natural] and try if those horrid
consequents will follow, which you affixed to your own (...).

Jeanes.
I have already considered with how little sobriety you have added this
Qualification of natural, and, I believe, the impartial Reader will conclude
with me, that you have foisted it in upon second thoughts, only to avoid those
horrid consequents, unto which your words in themselves are liable.

Dr. Tailor.
But I shall for this once consider the particulars. 1. You charge it with non
sense; but with your favor you prove it most pitisully: Your reason is, that to
say [Essential] is predicated of [sin.] in either of the two ways dicendi per
se, is such pu^ful and prodigious nonsense, that you think it not worthy of
any serious r^sutation: So that this is your Argument, To say that sin is
Essential, is prodigious and pitiful nonsense, therefore it is prodigious and
pitiful nonsense.

Surely a good Argument; or thus, that which is such nonsense that you think
not worthy of refutation, is certainly nonsense: But to say that sin is
Essential, is such nonsense, that you think not worthy of refutation,
therefore it is nonsense. I do not say your Argument is nonsense, but I am
sure it is no Argument, unless a bold affirmative be a sufficient proof in your
Logic. But to the thing, That sin is Essential, is indeed false to say, but to
say so is not nonsense. And whereas you will suppose me to say so, you are
uncharitable, and something unreasonable in it; for I was to prove, That
inclination to sin was not a sin of our nature (as was pretended) because what
was natural is i^^rinsecal and essential, as Doc^bility to a man: which because
to be inclined to sin is not, therefore it is not a sin, viz. of nature.

Jeanes.
First, Here is a gross and egregious falsification of my words, and that
without any advantage to your cause: Your reason is, say you, That to say
Essential is predicated of sin in either of the two ways, dic^ndi per se, is
such pitiful and prodigious nonsense, that you think it not worthy of any
serious refutation: Whether these words be justifiable, or no, I need not
inquire; for there are no such words in my Paper, neither can you, with all
your wit and learning, infer any such matter therefrom.

Secondly, To make sport for your followers, you mis-represent my Argument; and
first, clap it into a single Enthymeme, and then into one Syllogism, both of
your own forging; in both which you leave out two mediums, that are in my
Argument, which reduced unto form, will make up two Syllogisms: To convince you
of this unfair, injurious, and dis-ingenuous dealing, I shall insert my words
at large. To say (as the Doctor does by consequence) that sin is essential to
the nature of man, is an assertion guilty of nonsense; a thing may be said to
be essential to another, a priori, and then it is predicated of it in primo
modo d^cendi per se; or else a posteriori, and then it is predicated of it in
secundo modo dicend^ per se. And to say that sin is either of these ways
essential to the nature of man, is such pitiful and prodigious nonsense, as
that I cannot think it worthy of any serious refutation.

The learned Reader will soon perceive how little alliance your Enthymeme and
Syllog^sm have with my Argument; and to him I appeal, to judge of the unworthy
and unscholarly in jury that you have herein done me; but yet, for the eternal
stopping of your mouth, I shall Analyze this my Argument. My conclusion was,
that to say (as you do by consequence) that sin is essential unto the nature of
man, is an assertion guilty of nonsense; this I prove from a distribution of
essential; whatsoever is essential is such, either a priori, or a posteriori.
But to say that sin is essential, either a priori, or a posteriori, is
nonsense. Therefore to say that sin is essential to man, is nonsense.


This Syllogism is grounded upon a known and received Maxim [Negatis cunctis
partibus subjectis totius universalis de aliquo subjecto negatur ipsum to um
universale, negatis cunctis membris dividen^ibus, negatur ipsum divisum]

The major I presumed none would deny, and as for the minor, that I proved from
a description of both ways of being essential.

That which is essential to a thing, a priori, is predicated of it in primo
modo dicendi per se; that which is essential to a thing, a posteriori, is
predicated of it in secundo modo dicendi per se.

Now to say that sin is predicated of man, in either primo, or secundo modo
dicendi per se, is nonsense: Therefore to say that sin is essential to man,
either a priori, or a posteriori, is nonsense.

The major I thought undeniable, and as for the minor, here indeed I stopped
too in the proof thereof, as thinking all further proof of it needless; because
I took it, and still do take it to be, propositio per se nota, which needs no
proof, but a bare explication of its terms; propositio per se nota dicitur;
quae non est nota per aliud, as Lychetus; quae suis tantum terminis
cognoscibilis, as Collegium Conimbricense gather out of Aristotle; quae tales
terminos habet, ut ii recte intelle^i possint causare evidentem notitiam totius
propositionis fine addito; omnis propositio hactenns est per se nota, ad quam
evidenter cognoscendam intellectus non postulat aliquod medium, sed solum
term^^rum penetratione contentus est, so Scheibl^r.

Now, for the terms of the minor Proposition: I presumed, that all explication
of them was needless unto a Scholar of so great a repute as Dr. Tailor: And
therefore, without more ado, I inferred, that to say that sin is either of
these ways essential, either a priori, or a posteriori, is such pitiful and
prodigious nonsense, as that I could not think it worthy of any serious
refutation. And now Sir, I shall entreat you to review my Argument, being thus
truly Analyzed, and I shall appeal unto your conscience, when you are next upon
your knees before God, whether you have not deeply wronged me, to represent my
Argument thus defectively (that I say not falsely) on purpose, I am afraid, to
render it and me ridiculous. Suppose any man should be so absurd, as to say,
That a Stone is animal; and I to refute him should thus argue, Omne animal est
aut homo, who is endued with reason, as well as sense; or Brutum, which is
endued with sense, but not with reason; but to say that a stone is either homo,
or brutum, is such pitiful and prodigious nonsense, as that I cannot think it
worthy of any serious refutation. Now he that shall say this is no Argument,
but only a bold affirmative, will go a degree beyond boldness; for it is
plain, that here are couched and employed two mediums. First, a distribution of
animal in hominem and brutum: Next, a description of each member of the
distribution, and my Argument is exactly paralelled unto this. But Sir, though
I thought, that, before you, I might have spared my labor to prove that it is
nonsense, to say that sin is essential unto man, either a priori, or a
posteriori; that its predicated of man, either in primo, or secundo modo
dicendi per se; yet, because you seem to blame mine omission of such proof, I
shall now give you herein, I hope, sufficient satisfaction.

First, To say that that which is privative is positive, is nonsense: But to
say that fin is essential unto man, either a priori, or a posteriori, is to
say, that that which is privative is positive (for the essentials of man are
positive, and the formality of sin is a privation.)

Therefore to say that sin is essential unto man, either a priori, or a
posteriori, is nonsense.

Secondly, To say that that which is predicated of man per accidens, is
predicated of man in primo, or secundo modo dicendi per se, is nonsense
(because praedicatio per se and per accidens, are opposite ways of predication.)

But to say that sin is predicated of man in primo, or secundo modo dicendi per
se, is to say, That that which is predicated of man per accidens, is predicated
of man per se (for that sin is predicated of man, per accidens, will be
questioned by none, who know what primus modus dicendi per accidens is.)

Therefore to say that sin is predicated of man in primo, or secundo modo
dicendi per se, is nonsense.

Thirdly, To say that that which is predicated contingently of man, is
predicated necessarily of him, is nonsense.

But to say that sin is predicated of man in primo, or secundo modo dicendi per
se, is to say, That that which is predicated of man contingently, is predicated
of him necessarily, (for sin is predicated of man contingently, because man and
sin cohere contingently; man might not have been a sinner, and when he shall
not be a sinner, he will still be a man; and then (...), per se est gradus
necessitatis.

Therefore to say that sin is predicated of man in primo, or secundo modo
dicendi per se, is nonsense.

If these arguments satisfy you not, you may command more of me when you
please, as also any further enlargement of these.

Yea but you say, that sin is essential is false to say, but to say so is
not nonsense.

To this I answer, that however it may be sense in Grammar, yet it is nonsense
in Logic; because it is a contradiction; for in Logic every contradiction not
only express, but that also which is virtuall and employed is nonsense, a bull,
as we usually speak: thus it is nonsense to say that lignum est serreum; that a
spirit is corporeal; that a body is bodilesse, without quantity or extension;
that an accident subsists; or that a substance properly inhereth.

Now my three arguments above irrefragably prove that, to say that sin is
essential to man is a contradiction; for it is in effect as much as to say,
that that which is privative is positive; that that which is predicated of man
per accidens, is predicated of him per se; that that which is predicated of man
contingently, is predicated of man necessarily; and these are gross and
palpable contradictions; and therefore not only false, but most pitiful and
prodigious nonsense.

You accuse me of uncharitableness, and unreasonablenesse, in supposing that
you say that sin is essential unto man; but from this accusation I have
sufficiently vindicated my self by beating you from all your miserable shifts;
And unto what I have said herein, I shall refer both your self and the
Reader.

Dr Tailor.
In the next place you charge me this with blasphemy: if I had said or meant
what you pretended, you had reason; but then I pray consider how your charge
will return really upon your self; for if it be blasphemy to affirm God to
be the Author of sin, that what I derived from Adam is no sin; for that
Adam's sin should descend upon me, I demand who was the Author of that? If
you please you may take time to consider it; but in the interim if you be
pleased to read a little discourse of mine; called Deus justificatus, you
shall find my question not to be answered by you; if you have any regard to the
authority or to the reason of Mr Calvin, Dr Twisse, and some other of the
Bigots of your party.

Jeanes.
1. Here you tempt me to a digression; and you may with as good reason call
upon me to answer all the reproaches that Bellarmine in this particular,
throws upon the Protestant Churches, and some of the most eminent members
thereof, as propound this question unto me.

2. However yet I briefly answer to it, that Adam was the author of the descent
of his sin upon me, not God; for to be the Author of sin is to be a
deficient, culpable cause thereof; and it is impossible that God should be
defective in a culpable manner; and that our doctrine of original finne makes
him to be such, you may boldly affirm, but can never prove.

3. Bishop Davenant in the doctrine of original sin is one of our party; and
he speaks that which will abundantly satisfy your demands, in his
animadversions upon Hord page 323.224. It was not (says he) God's absolute
decree of Preterition, but Adam's voluntary act of rebellion, which brought
sin, and the guilt of sin upon himself, and all his posterity, God having
justly decreed that Adam's children should participate with him in his state of
righteousness, did as justly decree that they should also participate in the
state of sin.

If this Author deny the propagation of sin from Adam, he must acknowledge
himself a Pelagian, etc. His whole discourse concerning original sin and
the propagating thereof unto all mankind is erroneous, in that he falsely
presumes, that the divine decree must needs be effective or causative of all
the events decreed; whereas if the events be actions sinful, God's decrees are
permissive, and ordinative, not decrees of causing, much, esse necessitating
such evil actions, as bath been often told him.

4. I have seen your little discourse called Deus justificatus; and must say
of it as Florus did of the Ligurians: lib. 2 cap. 3. Major aliquanto labor erat
invenire quam vincere; The Rhetoric of it is so rank, as that it will be a
very hard matter to find out the Logic and reason that is in it.

If you please to put your arguments into form, you then may command me to
consider them; but otherwise, I shall be very loath to adventure upon any thing
of yours; for I find by this present debate about two or three lines, that I
shall not without great difficulty search out what is your meaning.

5. I wonder why you say, that by this discourse I shall find your question not
to be answered by me; why (pray Sr) could I answer it before you propounded it?
but your meaning is, I suppose, that I shall find, that your question cannot be
answr'd by me: but the event will try that.

6. That which you mean in Mr Calvin, and Dr Twisse, are I think those places
which you quote, page 32: of that your discourse; and then unto the place in
Calvin you have an answer in Dr Twisse ( vind: gra: lib. 2. dig: 2. cap. 3.
page 42.) where he cleares it from the crimination of Bellarmine: And then for
the place in Dr Twisse you may gather an answer from that he says unto Mr
Hord, ( page 149.150.) who makes the like objections against him from another
place.

7. You are the unmeetest man in the world to upbraid me with the Bigots of my
party; for the rigid Zelots of your party, in your doctrine of original sin,
are such whom you may be ashamed to name. Indeed in this point there are very
few of your party, save the Pelagians of old, and now the worthy Divines of the
Racovian den, and their followers; unto whom the best and the most learned of
Protestants will hardly vouchsafe the name of Christians. The Archbishop of
Armagh termed them, in a sermon of his (that I heard) a company of baptized
Turks; and indeed Turks, and Infidels can hardly be greater enemies unto the
divine person, and nature of Christ, unto his offices, and unto his great and
glorious work of redemption, and satisfaction, than these wretched miscreants
are.

Dr Tailor.
Your second charge of blaspemy is, that my reason does by implication involve
Christ in the guilt of sin; because whatsoever is essential he had; but
then, If you remember that I say not, that sin is essential; and that I
bring the reverse of this very argument against your party and opinion in some
of my late discourses, you have reason to shake the fire out of your own
bosom, not to tell me, that I burn; for if inclination to sin be a sin
naturally and derived from our Parents; I demand whether or no had not Christ
all natural desires? if he had not, he was not a perfect man; If he had then
all natural desires are not natural sins; for if you say they be, you are
the blasphemer by the consequence of your affirmative, not I; but God forbid
that either of us should.

Jeanes.
First, here is no retortion of my argument; for none of my party or opinion
hold, that inclination unto evil is essential unto man: Flaccius Illyricus
maintains, that original sin was the essence, or substance of the soul;
but I never heard that his followers were considerable; he has (I am sure)
both Papists and Protestants; Calvinists, and Lutherans for his opponents: but,
perhaps you confound natural with essential, and make them all one; if you
do, your reason will be nothing, but petitio principii.

2. I believe, you here play with the equivocation of the word natural, a
thing (though it may be tolerated in a Sophister,) altogether unworthy of a
Theolegue.

Inclination to sin may be said to be natural, either consequutive, or
connexive.

That inclination to evil is natural consequ^tive (that it flows, and
results Physically, and necessarily from our nature,) I flatly deny: and if you
can direct me unto any place in your books, where you prove it to be natural
in this sense, I shall take it into consideration. Indeed to say, that it is in
this sense natural, is to throw a reproach upon God the Author of nature.

But it is natural connexive; together with our nature derived unto us from
our first Parents; and yet not in Christ, who had not his nature from Adam in
an ordinary way of Generation, but was miraculously conceived by the holy
Ghost, and sanctified in the womb of the Virgin Mary.

This inclination unto evil is a sinful blemish of our nature; because it is a
cause of sin, and qualis causa talis est effectus. A good tree, says our
Savior, cannot bring forth evil fruit, Matthew. 7.18. This inclination to evil
brings forth much evil fruit, and therefore it cannot be good; and
consequently it is bad, and sinful; and therefore could not be in Christ; (who
even as man) was the most holy one of God. Indeed if Christ had wanted any
propriety of man's nature, he had not then been a perfect man, but, that
inclination to evil is a propriety of our nature, sc: proprium 4 to modo you
are never able to make good.

But, Sir, in good earnest, do you think that Christ was inclined unto evil?
if you do not, your discourse of Christ is impertinent; if you do, I shall
conclude your opinion to be blasphemous; and unto it shall oppose this
following argument.

He in whom dwelled an all-fullnesse of the Godhead bodily; he in whom dwelled
an all-fullnesse of habitual grace; he who enjoyed the beatificall vision, was
not, could not be inclined unto evil.

But, in Christ dwelled an all-fullnesse of the Godhead bodily; in him also
dwelled an all-sullnesse of habitual, and sanctifying grace; he enjoyed the
beatificall vision

Therefore he was not, could not be inclined unto evil.

The Minor will not be denied by any Orthodox Divine, and we may say the same
of the Major, for, he that shall think that the grace of personal union, the
allfullnesse of habitual grace, and the beatificall vision are not sufficient
to exclude from Christ all inclination untoevil will render both his learning,
and religion too suspected.

But, to put the matter out of doubt, take this following argument for
confirmation of the Major: there could not be the least inclination unto evil
in that person, in whom there was an utter averseness from evil in summo
gradu; (for of contraries, that which is in a remiss degree is not consistent
with the other in the highest and most intense degree) but, in that person, in
whom there was an all-fullnesse of the Godhead, an all-fullnesse of habitual
grace, and the beatificall vision, there was an utter averseness from evil,
and that in summo gradu; and therefore impossible that there should be in him
an inclination to evil in the least degree.

The Papists extenuate the malignancy of concupiscence as much as may be,
affirming that in the regenerate it is no sin, and that it had been in Adam
if he had been created in his pure naturalls; yet, they think not so well of
it, as to ascribe it unto Christ.

Indeed Durand is accused for speaking somewhat suspiciously this way; but he
is contradicted by the generality of the Schoolmen; Suarez in 3 am partem
Thom: disp. 34. Sect. 2. Greg. de. Valentia. Tom. 4. did. 1 quaest. punct. 3.
who hold that somes peccati, concupiscence was neither actu primo, nor secundo
in Christ.

1. Not in actu primo, and for this they allege three reasons. 1. The absolute
perfection of his virtues, and all-fullnesse of grace. 2. The perpetual
vigilance, and advertency of his reason. 3 The government of his humane nature,
and actions, by his divine and infinite person.
2. Not in actu secundo, because in him, the very first motions unto sin
would have been voluntary, and consequently sinful.
Unto this purpose Becanus, ( Sum: Theolog: Scholast: Tom: 5. cap. 12. quaest:
5. page: 200.) observes; that the first motions of concupiscence may be said to
be voluntary two manner of ways. 1. Antecedently; when one willingly admits
them when he may avoid them. 2. Consequently; when one yields consent unto them
after they are crept in, in the former way or manner they had been voluntary in
Christ; because Christ could have avoided them, by reason of the government of
the person of the word; if he had not therefore avoided them, but willingly
admitted them, they had in him been blameworthy.


Dr Tailor.
Your third reason also is as pretty; for, first; I demand whether a
possibility to sin be not of the nature of man; (for that is all I mean by
essential) if it be not; how came Adam to sin his first sin? if it be, I
ask whether shall the Saints in the resurrection be raised up with it or no?
If yea; then you blaspheme God's full glorification of the Saints in the
resurrection; for impeccability is certainly a part of their full
glorification. If nay; then it is no blasphemy to say that in the resurrection
the Saints shall be raised up without something that is essential to them, or
to their nature.

Jeanes.
That possibility to sin is essential unto every rational creature I grant;
and hereupon inferte, that it is not separated from the Saints in their full
glorification; neither shall I fear your charge of blasphemy herein, having
the generality of Schoolmen, (both Thomists, and Scotists) and reason too on
my side. Indeed, the Saints of Heaven do constantly, and interruptedly shun,
and decline sin; yet, it is an ev^ll possible unto their nature, considered in
it self; however they are secured therefrom by their glorified state and
condition: for though sin, and a fulness of glory be inconsistent; yet it is
no contradiction, or repugnancy, that their natures abstractly considered,
secluding the consideration of their glory, should be sinful. Yea, but you
say, impeccability is certainly a part of the full glorification of the
Saints; and what is impeccability but an impossibility of sinning; if God then
make the Saints impeccable, he takes away from them all possibility of sinning.

For answer.

1. There is a twofold impeccability. 1. By nature. 2. By the grace and gift of
God.


Impeccability by nature takes away all possibility of sinning; but it is
received generally as a rule among the Schoolmen, that a creature cannot be
made impeccabi^is per naturam, (that is) such a one, as cannot by nature sin.
And, if you please, you may view the proofs thereof in Capreolus lib: 2. Did:
22. quaest. 1.

Impeccability by the gift and grace of God does not eradicate the remote power
of sinning; but only keeps it from being actuated; and it is this impeccability
only, that is part of the Saints glorification.

2. A thing may be said to be impossible, sensu diviso, or sensu composito.

In sensu diviso it is not impossible, but possible, for the Saints in Heaven to
sin; for that (considered in themselves without the custodient grace of God
always underpropping them) they are liable unto sin, the lamentable fall of
the Angels of darkness is an evident proof.

But now, sensu composito, it is indeed impossible for glorified Saints to
sin; that is; it is impossible for them to sin considered under this
reduplication, as fully glorified; because fulness of glory and sin cannot
stand together. This answer is in Scotus ( lib. 4. did: 49. quaest: 6.) whose
words I shall insert for the sake of some Readers who may not have him in their
studies:) Respondeo; patet, quod beatus est impeccabilis in sensu
compositionis, hoc est, non potest simul esse beatus, and peccare: sed in sensu
divisionis, quod maneas beatus non habeat potentiam and possibilitatem ad
peccandum potest intelligi dupliciter: vel per aliquid sibi intrinsecum, quod
excludit potentiam talem; vel per causam extrinsecam, quod excludit potentiam
propinquam ab illo, etc: nulla est causa intrinseca in voluatate Michaelis nunc
beati, per quam excludatur potentia ad peccandum pro alias, in sensu
divisionis, non est autem causa intrinseca prohib^ns istam potentiam omnino
reduci ad actum: sed per causam extrinsecam est impossibilis potentia illa
propinqua ad peccandum, videlicet per volutataem Dei praevenientem illam
voluntatem, ut semper continet actum fruendi, and ita nunquam possit pote^tiam
suam r^m^am non s^^endi, vel peccandi, reducere ad actum: siquidem umquam causa
secunda praeveata a causa superiori agente ad unum oppositum potest potentia
propinqua exire in aliud oppositum. Concedo ergo, quod infert, quod Michael
beatus, and sit peccabilis in sensu divisionis loquendo de potentia remota.

Dr. Tailor.
But Sir, what think you of Mortality? is that essential, or of the nature of
man? I suppose you will not deny it. But yet I also believe you will confess,
that though we are sown a corruptible body, yet we shall be raised an
incorruptible, and the mortal shall put on immortality.

Ieanes.
For answer, I shall propound a distinction of mortality, that is very obvious
and ordinary. A thing may be said to be mortal, either respectu potentiae
remotae, or respectu potentiae propinquae.

1. In respect of a remote power of dying, which has in it the remote cause of
dissolution, an elementary matter. 2. In regard of a near power of dying,
arising from the actual conflict, and corruptive influence of the Elements, and
their contrary qualities.
The latter Mortality is separable, but then it is not essential.

As for the former Mortality, which alone is essential, I think very few doubt,
but that it is also inseparable from the nature of a man's body: for, the
immortality and incorruption of the bodies of the Saints in the resurrection,
will not be by taking away out of their bodies the remote causes of corruption,
the Elements, and their contrary qualities, (for, then their bodies would not
be mixed; and so not for substance the same that they were) but by an hinderance
or prevention of the corruptive influence of the Elements, and their contrary
qualities.

That I am not singular in this, I shall manifest, by transcribing the
Testimonies of some few Schoolmen, who though they differ one from another in
assigning the cause and reason of the impassibility and incorruptibility of
glorified Bodies; yet they all agree with Durand in this, That glorified Bodies
are not impassible, per privationem potentiae passivae, sed per aliquod
praestans impedimentum actualis passionis ne fiat.

The first shall be of Scotus, ( lib. 4. did. 49. quaest. 13.) Dico ergo quod
causa impassibilitatis est voluntas divina non coagens causae secundae
corruptivae, and per hoc, est illud impassibile, non potentia remota, sed
propinqua, non a causa intrinseca, sed extrinseca impediente, sicut dictum est
de impeccabiliuate supra, etc. exemplum hujus de igne in camino, qui non egit
ad consumptionem trium puerorum, non quidem per aliquam impassibilitatem
intrinsecam pueris, nec ex carentra potentiae passivae, nee ex contrario
intrinseco impediente, sed quia Deus ex voluntate sua non cooperabatur ad illam
actionem.

The second is of Durand ( lib. 4. did. 44. quaest. 4.) Restat ergo quod
corpora gloriosa non erunt impassibilia simpliciter, and absolute per
privationem principii passivi, cum natura corporum gloriosorum, sit futura
eadem quae prius, sed erunt impassibilia p^r aliquid praestans impedimentum
actualis passionis ne fiat.

Quid autem sit illud, utrum sit aliqua forma inhaerens, an solum virtus divina
assistens, duplex est opinio: dicunt enim quidam quod talis impassibilitas
erit, per aliquam formam inexistentem, etc.

Alius modus est, quod impassibilitas corporum gloriosorum non erit per aliquam
formam inhaerentem, sed solum per virtutem divinam* assistentem beatis ad nutum
and prohibentem actionem cujuscunque extriaseci inserentis passionem.

This latter way Durand takes himself, and endeavoreth to confirm it by three
Reasons.

The third shall be of Suarez, ( in tertiam part: Thom: disp: 48. p. 531.) nam
licet in corpore glorioso maneat eadem materia, idemque temperamentum ex
qualitatibus contrartis, inde solum fit, corpus illud in nuda natura sua
consideratum, esse corruptibile, and in beatitudine retinere quasi causam
remotam, seu naturalem radicem corruptionis: nihilominus tamen secundum
proximam dispositionem intrinsecam esse incorruptibile and impassibile: quia
affectum est alia quadam perfectione quae ex se potest impdire, ne illa
naturalis corruptibilit as in actum reducatur.

Dr. Tailor.
Once more, Is it natural to be a natural? that will not be denied: But then
remember, that although to be natural is essential, that is, of the essence of
the body, yet the natural shall arise without its naturality; it is sown a
natural body, it is raised a spiritual.

Jeanes.
1. That that which is natural, is natural, will not be denied, as you say; but
it is propositio identica nugax, a most trifling Tautology: and unto what
purpose you propound a question concerning it, I know not.

2. Of things natural unto man, some are natural powers, some are natural
acts: Natural (first) powers may be and are essential unto the body; and so
they are inseparable too; our Bodies, when they shall be raised, shall not want
so much as one such natural power: But natural acts are accidental, and in the
resurrection there may be no place for the exercise of, at least, some of them,
viz* Generation, Nutrition, and the like; as touching such things, we shall be
like the angels in Heaven, as it were spiritual.

3. In the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.44. it is not (...), a natural body, but (...),
an animal or souly body, that is, actuated and animated by the soul after a
natural way and manner, by the intervention of bodily helps, such as eating,
drinking, sleeping, and the like. And in all congruence of opposition hereunto,
a glorious body is said to be a spiritual, in regard of an immediate
supportance by the spirit, without any corporeal means, and without any use of
the generative and nutritive faculties.

Dr. Tailor.
So that you see, if I had said this which you charge upon me, which is
contrary to my thoughts, and so against my purpose, yet your Arguments could
not have overthrown it.

Jeanes.
Whether you do not here boast, and triumph without a victory, I am very well
contented to refer it unto the learned Reader.

Since my penning of my exceptions, sent unto Mr. C. I have read the
Metaphysics of Dr. Robert Baro, that learned Scot; and in them I find the
like of these three last Arguments of mine, urged against the error of Flaccius
Illyricus; that Original Sin is of the substance of man, and essential to him
after the fall, a proposition subalternate unto that which I charge you with;
his words are as follows, Prima opinio damnanda and a nostris Theologis and a
Pontificiis de natura peccati originalis est absurdissima haeresis Illyrici,
statuentis peccatum originale esse de substantia hominis, seu esse quid homini
essentiale post lapsum, contra quam sententiam Bellarminus disputans; varias
affert rations: praecipuae hae sunt, Primo si peccatum esset pars substantiae
humanae, aut Deus erit author peccati, quippe qui substantias omnes creavit,
aut si quis neget illam substantiam esse a Deo, cogetur sateri^cam esse a
Diabolo, qui est author peccati; necessarium enim est, ut habeat aliquam
causam; at utrumque consequens est absurdum, ergo and antecedens: Secundo, aut
Christus non assumpsit naturam humanam integram, aut peccato non caruit, quorum
utrumque est absurdum: Tertio, Ad diem judicii natura hominis resurget, and
aeternam vitam possidebit, saltem quoad electos: Peccatum vero tum nullum erit
in glorificatis, ergo peccatum non est quid esseatiale, sed quid separabile est
ab ipsa naturd, page 248, 249. These reasons differ so little from mine, as
that you may think perhaps that I have borrowed mine from either Bellarmine or
Baro, which yet I assure you I did not: The reason why now I recite these
Reasons, is to show, that my arguments are not such weak and pitiful things,
but that very Learned Men have made use of the like, to disprove a proposition
subordinate unto that which I go about to refute.

Dr. Tailor.
It is good advice (...), if you had been pleased to have learned my meaning
before you had published your dislike, I should have esteemed my self obliged
to you in a great acknowledgement.

Jeanes.
Your advice out of Aristophanes, I like very well; I am not conscious unto my
self that I have toward you transgressed against it: for before I uttered a
syllable of dislike, I used my best endeavor to find out what was your
meaning, and to that purpose, made use of that little Logic and Reason which I
had; and as for that meaning which I assix unto your words, let the Reader
determine, whether I have violated any rule of Logic or Reason, in imputing it
unto you: What I took to be your sense, together with my Objections against it,
I sent unto Mr. C. to be transmitted speedily unto you, exposing all unto the
utmost severity of your examination; and wherein I have here trespassed against
charity or justice, I would fain know.

Besides, my distike I expressed only in a private place, before very few, in
private discourse, and I have not hitherto published it, from either Press or
Pulpit.

Dr. Tailor.
Now you have said very much evil of me, though I deserve it not.

Jeanes.
This I deny, and flatly challenge you to prove what you aver.

Dr. Tailor.
For suppose I had not prosperously enough expressed my meaning, yet you, who
are a man of wit and parts, could easily have discerned my purpose and my
design: You could not but know, and consider too, that my great design was to
say, That sin could not be natural, that it is so far from being essential,
that it is not so much as subjected in our common natures, but in our persons
only.

Ieanes.
1. Whether what you say of my wit and parts, be not a seem, I shall not
trouble myself to inquire, but leave it unto your conscience: However, I
suppose, you think your self far superior unto my poor self in wit and parts,
and I also readily acknowledge as much: Now I wonder why you should think that
I should so easily find out what is your meaning, seeing you (whose abilities
so far transcend mine) be so unprosperous, not only in the expression, but in
the after interpretation of your meaning, as that you dissent in a latter
Letter, from your self in a former Letter: How can you reasonably expect that
I, who am not (as one of your Profelites lately said) worthy to be named the
same day with you, (I shall not deny the truth of the comparison, nor envy you
the honor thereof) should (as the Pro verb is) see further into a Millstone
then you, who are so Eagle and quick sighted.

Secondly, Whereas you say, That sin is not so much as subjected in our common
nature, but in our persons only; I doubt that I understand you not, for to me
it seems very evident, that sin, (so far as a privation can be inherent) is
truly inherent in our natures; for it has all the Requisites of inherence,
that Aristotle lays down ( Categor: cap. 2.)

1. It is in our nature.

2. Not as a part of our nature.

3. Neither can it exist severed and apart from our natures: Sin is seated in
all individuals of our nature, whilst living here upon earth, Christ his
humanity alone excepted; and therefore why may not we say, that it is subjected
in our common nature? Seeing those accidents are seated secundarily, and
mediately in second substances, which are primarily and immediately placed in
their respective first substances; substantiae secundae substant accidentibus
gratia primarum.

Yea, but you will (perhaps) say, it is subjected in our persons only,
therefore not in our nature: But this is a very sorry Objection': For who knows
not the distinction of subjectum, in subjectum quo, and quod; our persons only
are subjectum quod of fin, our natures notwithstanding may be subjectum quo of
it; and we may say the same of other accidents. I find you ( page 494.)
quoting that usual Axiom, actiones sunt suppositorum; but, if you had
considered the limitations that are usually given thereof, you would have
spared the urging of it: actio est suppositi (says Scotus) ultimate denominati
ab action, sed non ut solius denominati ab ipsa: But you may have some deep
meaning, which I fathom not; fair leave may you take to explain your self.

Dr. Tailor.
But besides this, Sir, I am a little to complain of you, that when you had two
words at your choice to explicate each other (intrinsecal, and essential) you
would take the hardest and the worst sense, not the easiest and most ready.

Ieanes.
I have here given you, not only no cause, but not so much as any shadow or
color for complaint.

1. I gave a reason why I insisted on the word essential only, and passed by
the term intrinsecal; because you use intrinsecal as equivalent unto essential,
as is apparent, by your opposing it unto accidental: And have you said, can you
say any thing to the contrary.

2. I would fain know why you should say that essential is a harder word then
intrinsecal; there is, I am sure, that equivocation in the word intrinsecal,
which is not in the word essential; for, that which is accidental, may be
intrinsecal; there being intrinsecal, as well as extrinsecal accidents;
interaum and externum (say Philofophers) sumuntur, vel ratione essentiae, vel
ratione loci, and subjecti.

Dr. Tailor.
For you cannot but know, that essential is not always to be taken in the
strictest sense of Philosophy, for that which is constitutive of a nature; but
largely, and for all sorts of properties, and the universal accidents of
nature.

Ieanes.
The distinction of essential, into that which is such constitutive, as
constituting the essence, or that which is such, consequentive, as necessarily
resulting from the essence, I very well know: and I grant the proprieties which
are such, quarto modo, which agree omni, soli, semper, are in this latter sense
said to be essential; but that essential is ever taken, as you say, for all
sorts of proprieties, those which are such, primo, secundo, or tertio modo, is
notoriously false, for then essential would be taken for that which is most
accidental; but let us examine your instances.

Dr. Tailor.
As it is essential to a man to laugh, to be capable of learning, to be mortal,
to have a body of contrary qualities, and consequently by nature corruptible.

Ieanes.
If you should affirm in the public Schools of either of the Universities,
that to laugh is essential to man, you would not only be laughed, but hissed,
and houted at: the gross and palpable absurdity of this your Assertion, I thus
prove.

Nothing that is accidental to man, can be said to be essential to him.

But to laugh is accidental to man.

Therefore it is not essential.

The Major is apparent from the opposition, that you your self make betwixt
essential, and accidental.

The Minor is thus confirmed.

That which is predicated of man contingently, is accidental to man.

But to laugh is predicated of man contingently.

Therefore it is accidental to man.

The Major is plain, because contingency of predication is one of the chief
things which distinguishes accidens praedicabile, from all other predicables,
and it is a reciprocal character thereof.

And for the Minor, that is no less evident: indeed risibile is essential unto
man, and predicated of him in secundo^modo dicendi per se; but ridere to laugh
is accidental, because it is predicated of man contingently; for a man and
actual laughter cohere contingently: the lowest degree of necessity in
affirmative and essential predications, is de omni; and de omni
posterioristicum, requires universitatem temporis as well as subjecti; that
is, propositio (...) debet esse semper vera; now all men do not always laugh,
and therefore laughter is predicated of man contingently, and consequently
accidental to him.

You see, Sir, I am bold to trouble you, ever and anon, with my trifling
Logic, and you can expect no other, as long as you thus trespass against what
is most trivial and obvious in Logic, the very A. B. C. thereof.

2. As for the second instance, you bring capacity of learning: that is taken
for potentia prima, or secunda.

1. If it be taken for potentia prima, then it immediately flows from the
soul, and is essential to man, consequntive, as a proprium 4 to modo of man,
and so it is inseparable from him; but, if taken for potentia secunda, so it
arises from the disposition of the temper and organs of the body, and is not
essential, but accidental, and separable from man.

As for the third, to be mortal, I have already spoken of that sufficiently.

As for the 4th instance; to have a body of contrary qualities is essential
consequutive. and a posteriori unto an essential predicate of man; viz: a mixed
body; and so is essential unto man, and predicated of him in secundo modo
dicendi per se, as a mixed body is predicated of him primo modo dicendi per se.
For, as Scheibler [ de prop: cap: 4. n: 41.] shows, ad praedicationes per se
secundi modi pertinent non solum praedicationes illae, in quibus proprium
praedicatur de subjecto suo primo, veluti corpus est quantum; sed etiam illae
praedicationes in quibus proprium praedicatur de speciebus sui primi subjecti,
veluti homo est quantus: but this has no alliance with laughing, for it
agrees always unto all men.

Dr. Tailor.
And in a moral discourse to call for Metaphysicall significations, and not to
be content with moral and general, may proceed from an itch to quarrel, but
not from that ingenuity, which will be your and my best ornament.

Jeanes.
It has hitherto been a received rule amongst all Logicians; that in mixed
questions, the terms of which belong unto several disciplines, we must for
the explication of each term, have recourse unto the discipline, unto which it
appertains; and you can say nothing to disprove this rule: whether
inclination to evil be essential to man? is a mixed question; for inclination
to evil or sin, is a Theological term, and essential, is a Metaphysicall
term; and therefore, in taking it in a Metaphysicall sense, I have done
nothing, but what Logic, and reason have prescribed me; and therefore I shall
not fear your passionate, and irrational censure of me for it. To clear this
yet further by instancing in mixed propositions of the like nature; an formale
peccati in genere sit privatio vectitudinis debitae rationali creaturae? an
formale peccati originalis sit solum privatio originalis justitiae? an prenitas
ad malum fluat ex principiis naturae integrae? an Sacramentum sit ens
respectivum? an Sacramenta sint causae Physicae gratiae?

Now if here you should be pleased to say, that in these questions to call for
Metaphysicall significations, of privatio, principium, ens respectivum, and
causa Physica, may proceed from an itch to quarrel, but not from that
ingenuity, which will be our best ornament, you will bewray but little
judgment, and less ingenuity.

2. If that, which you call essential in a moral, and large sense, do not
either constitute the essence, or necessarily flow therefrom, it will in the
upshot prove to be but accidental; and how then comes it that you oppose it
unto accidental? But you will, perhaps,, tell me, that I must take accidental
in a moral, and large sense, as well as essential; But, Sir, what is there in
your words to guide me unto this sense of accidental? I took accidental for
the concrete of accidens praedicabile, and so I believe have most Scholars
that have read you; and why it should not be thus understood I think you can
allege no reason, but that, you know not otherwise to make any tolerable sense
of your words: your discourse is Polemicall, and if therein you use
Philosophical terms, and I call for a Philosophical signification of the
terms, with what forehead can you accuse me for being quarrelsome, and
disingenuous? if when you cannot defend what you say, according unto the
proper, and usual signification of the words you use, you must have liberty to
fly unto large and unusual senses of them, you may say even what you please;
for no man will be able to understand what you say, unless he has a peculiar
key unto your writings,

But let us inquire what can be here meant by accidental in a moral and large
sense: essential, you say, in a moral sense, is that which is not after our
nature, but together with it; and, in conformity hereunto, accidental in a
moral sense must be that which is after our nature, and not together with it,
and then I shall desire you to awake, and consider, whether your second reason
be not coincident with your third; for your second reason, as you expound it,
stands thus; inclination to evil is after our nature, and not together with it
in real being: And your third reason is this, inclination to evil is
superinduced unto nature, and is after it, etc.

Dr Tailor.
Although I have not much to do with it, yet because you are so great a
Logioian, and so great an admirer of that which every one of your Pupils
knows, I mean Porphyries definiton of an accident, I care not if I tell you
that the definition is imperfect and false.

Jeanes.
1. You have ever and anon an uncivil sling at my poor Logic; But, Sir, let me
be so bold as to tell you, that as my Logic is the object of your contempt, so
that my Pupils cannot find in that Logic, which you manifest in these your
papers, matter for either their envy or emulation.

2. Why, pray Sir, do you say, that I am so great an admirer of Porphyries
definition of an accident? indeed I say, that it is a celebrated definition of
an accident; but thereby I signify only that it is frequently and much used,
commonly known, and in every man's mouth; and this acception of the word is
usual in Cicero, as these instances following evidence: Celebratur omnium
sermon laetitiaque coavivium: hoc delatum est tum ad vos pontifices, post
omaium sermon celebratum, quemadmodum iste omnia fecit: quod ita esse
constanti fama atque omnium sermon celebratum est: quid porro in graeco
sermon tam tritum atque celebratum est quam, etc.

3. Though you care not to tell me, that Porphyries definition of an accident
is false, and imperfect; yet you should have been careful to have brought
stronger objections against it, than those you have urged, for they contain
such gross, and absurd untruths, as that every one that understands them, will
think you a very incompetent judge of the definitions of Porphyrie and
Aristotle. Indeed how far you are to seek in the nature of accidents,
appears by your talking of accidents constitutive of a substance, in your
discourse of the Real-presence, etc: ( Sect: 11. number: 12: page: 209.) but let us
hear your objections.

Dr Tailor.
It is not convertible with the definitum; for even, essential things may be
taken away fine interitu subjecti.

Jeanes.
For an answer unto this, I shall refer you to your self, in your book, but
now mentioned of the Real-presence of Christ in the holy Sacrament. ( Sect. 11.
number. 30. p. 244. and 245.) God can do what he pleases, and he can reverse the
laws of his whole creation, because he can change or annihilate every
creature, or alter the manners and essences; but the question now is, what
laws God has already established, and whether or no essentials can be
changed, the things remaining the same? that is, whether they can be the same,
when they are not the same? he that says God can give to a body all the
essential properties of a spirit, says true, and confesses God's Omnipotency;
but he says also that God can change a body, from being a body to become a
spirit; but if he saves, that remaining a body it can receive the essentials of
a spirit, he does not confess God's omnipotency, but makes the Article
difficult to be believed, by making it not to work wisely and possibly: God can
do althings, but are they undone, when they are done? that is, are the things
changed in their essentials and yet remain the same? then how are they
changed, and then what has God done to them?

But to come unto your instances.

Dr. Tailor.
I instance to be quantitative is essential to a body, and to have succession
of duration; but yet in the resurrection when bodies shall be spiritual, and
eternal, those other which are now essential predicates shall be taken away,
and yet the subject remain, and be improved to higher, and more noble
predicates.

Jeanes.
1. As for the 1. of these instances it is without doubt, that to be
quantitative is essential unto a body a posteriori, and consecutive as a
proprium thereof 4 to modo. but.

1. That quantity is separable from a body was never affirmed by any besides
the Patrons of either transubstantiation or consubstantiation.

2. If a body were without quantity, it would be without extension, and so
would exist in an undivisible point without distinction of parts, and so it
would be (...), a bodilesse body, which is a flat contradiction.

But for refutation of this, I shall refer you to your own self in your
discourse of the Real-presence, etc. ( Sect. 11.13 page 211.) But I demand,
when we speak of a body what we mean by it? for in all discourses and
entercourses of mankind by words, we must agree concerning each others meaning:
when we speak of a body, of a substance, of an accident, what does mankind
agree to mean by these words? all the Philosophers and all the wise men in the
world, when they speak of a body, and separate it from a spirit, they mean,
that a spirit is that which has no material divisible parts Physically that
which has nothing of that which makes a body that is extension and limitation
by lines and superficies. And, (Page 212.) when we speak of a body all the
world means that, which has a finite quantity. Page 219.220: that which I now
insist upon is, that in a body there cannot be indistinction of parts, but each
must possess his own portion, or place, and if it does not, a body cannot be a
body. Sect. II. number. 18. Again, ( Tag. 221. number. 20: ejusd: Sect:) If Christ's
body be in the Sacrament according to the manner of a substance not of a body;
I demand according to the nature of what substance whether of a material or an
immaterial? if according to the nature of a material substance, then it is
commensurate by the dimensions of quantity, which he is now endeavoring to
avoid. If according to the nature of an immateriall substance, then it is not a
body, but a spirit, or else the body may have the being of a spirit, whilst it
remains a body, that is, be a body, and not a body at the same time.

Here every material substance, by your opinion is commensurate by the division
of quantity, and therefore no material substance can be without the dimensions
of of quantity; afterward in ( page 241. and 242. number: 29. ejusd: Sect:) you
bring in a shift of Bellarmines unto which you return a very good answer, both
which I shall transcribe. Bellarmine says that to be coextended to a place is
separable from a magnitude or body, because it is a thing that is extrinsecal
and consequent to the intrinsecal extension of parts, and being later than it,
is by divine power separable: but this is as very a sophism as all the rest;
for if whatever in nature is later than the substance, be separa le from it,
than fire may be without heat, or water without moisture; a man can be without
time, for that also is in nature after his essence, and he may be without a
faculty of will, or understanding, or of affections, or of growing to his
state, or being nourished, and then he will be a strange man, who will neither
have the power of will, or understanding, of desiring, or avoiding, of
nourishment or growth, or any thing, that can distinguish him from a beast, or
a tree, or a stone; for these are all later than the essence, for they are all
essential emanations from it, thus also quantity can be separated from a
substantial body if every thing that is later than the form can be separated
from it.

When you wrote this, you thought it a gross absurdity to aver that quantity
could be separated from a substantial body; when you have answered your self,
I shall then take up the Cudgels, and reply unto your answer in the mean while,
I shall consider your argument by which you endeavor to prove quantity
separable from a body.

It stands thus; in the resurrection bodies shall be spiritual; therefore to be
quantitative, which is now an essential predicate, shall be then taken away.

For answer.

1. If the bodies of the Saints shall be raised without quantity, then without
extension, without integral parts, without heads, eyes, arms, legs, feet, and
this would be a very pretty, and proper resurrection; it would indeed be an
invisible resurrection; this is a very strange, and false assert on, contrary
as to the constant tenet of both ancient, and modern Divinity, so also unto
express scripture; In my flesh, says Job, shall I see God, whom I shall see
for my-selfe, and my eyes shall behold, and not another, Job. 19.26, 27: the
bodies of the Saints shall in the resurrection be conformed unto Christ's
glorious body in his: Philip 3.21: and that was a visible and palpable body, it
might be seen and felt, it had flesh and bones, and hands, feet and sides, Luke
24 39, 40: John. 20.27: see Aquin: sup: ad 3 am part. sum: etc: quaest. 30.
Art. 1. Tertullian upon these words of the Apostles [this corruptible shall put
on incorruption] has this gloss, quantitativam and eandem numero essentiam
digito demonstrat, magis enim express loqui non poterat, n^si cutem suam
manibus teneret.

2. As for the spirituality of our bodies in the resurrection, that shall not
be destructive of their quantity; for they shall be spiritual, not in regard of
substance; but in respect of either immediate supportance by the spirit, or
else resemblance unto a spirit.

1. In respect of immediate supportance by the spirit without the help of
bodily means, meats, drinks, sleep, medicaments, etc: he that raised up
Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that
dwells in you, Romans 3.11: or else

2. (As others conjecture) in regard of resemblance unto a spirit as touching
some particulars in the resurrection; they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage; but are as the Angels of God in Heaven, Matthew. 22.30.

But that spirituality of the body in Paul's sense of the word is no
impeachment unto the quantity of it is evident enough from what you say in your
treatise of the Real-presence, etc: for therein you rightly aver, that
Christ's body is now a spiritual body, and yet maintain against the Papists
that it is endued with quantity, and has partem extra partem, one part without
the other answering to the parts of his place.

Your second instance is, to have succession of duration, this is essential to
a body think you; yet in the resurrection, when our bodies shall be eternal, it
shall be taken away.

But here Sir, my poor Pupils, because you are so great a Metaphysitian, care
not much if they tell you, That succession in duration is so far from being
essential to a body, as that it does not at all agree thereunto; and they have
learnt at out of Scheibler, Metap. lib. 1. cap. 16. n. 48.53.91, 92, 93, 94,
95, 96, 97, 98, 99, cap. 19. n. 9, 10, 11, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. And Saurez,
disp: 50. Sect. 5. and 7. Metaphysitians no ways inferior unto your great self.

Out of them they thus argue, whatsoever has a successive duration, has also
a successive essence or being; but now no body has a successive essence or
being, therefore no body has a successive duration.

The Major is evident, because as Suarez and Scheibler well prove, the duration
of a thing is not distinguished from the actual existence thereof, really, but
only ratione ratiocinata.

And then for the Minor, it may be thus confirmed, Whatsoever has a successive
essence or being, has the parts of its essence in fluxu, so that it is partly
past, partly present, and in part to come; but no such thing can be affirmed of
any body, and therefore no body has a successive essence or being.

Or thus, No permanent being has a successive being or essence; but every body
is a permanent being, therefore no body has a successive being or essence.

The Minor, that alone asks proof, may be thus confirmed: Whatsoever has all
the parts of its essence or being together (so that in no moment of time there
is wanting unto it any thing requisite unto its essential integrity) that is a
permanent being; but every body has all the parts of its essence or being
together (so that in no moment of time there is wanting unto it any thing
requisite unto its essential integrity.)

Therefore every body is a permanent being.

If you should say, That God only has permanency of being, according to that
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 102.26, 27. The Heavens shall perish, but thou shall
endure; yea all of them shall wax old, like a garment; as a vesture shall thou
change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same.

Unto this they will answer, That you do but trifle with the equivocation of
the word permanency, it is (they will say) opposed unto either mutability or
succession; if it be opposed unto mutability and defectibility of being, then
God alone has permanency of being; but if it be opposed unto succession of
being, then every created being, besides motion, has permanency of being; and
this Scheibler has taught them, Met: lib. 1. cap. 19. n. 35. Nullae rei
(inquit) convenit fluxus vel successio partium essentialium praeterquam motui
(permissive loquendo) unde non est tempus successivum, nisi tempus quo durat
ipse motus: nempe sicut essentia motus consistit in successione partium: ita
etiam duratio motus consistit in successione partium, and proinde utrumque est
ens successivum, si tamen a part rei loquamur, tum solum unum ens est
successivum, nempe motus, duratio enim motus a part rei cadem est cum essentia
ipsa. If you should say with Bonaventure, and others, That succession of
duration distinguishes the creature from the Creator, and therefore every
creature has succession of duration: They will again (out of the forementioned
Authors) distinguish of a twofold succession, privative and positive.

1. A privative or negative succession, and that is, either betwixt not being,
and being, or betwixt being, and not being; thus when a man is begotten, his
being succeeds his not being, and when he dies, his not being succeeds his
being; and this privative succession does distinguish the creature from the
Creator, and therefore does or may agree to every creature: for even the Angels
had a beginning, and so there was a succession of their being unto their not
being; and they might have an end, by Gods omnipotency, if he had not decreed
otherwise: nay, God could annihilate them merely by the withdrawing of his
preservative influence, and so there might have been a succession of their not
being unto their being: this succession is opposed unto an intrinsecal
necessity of existence, or unto an immutable permanency, seu stabilitati
permanentiae, as Suarez phraseth it, Disp: 50. Sect. 5. n. 26. and not unto
permanency of being as such: This succession, if we speak of the power and
capacity of it, is essential to our bodies, and withal, it is inseparable from
them; for even after the resurrection, God could (if he had not determined the
contrary) reduce them unto their first nothing.

A positive succession has for both its extremes a positive being, and this is
again (they will say) either discrete, or continuous.

1. Discrete between beings totally perfect; as the knowledge of one Plant
succeeds the knowledge of another Plant: But this succession does not
constitute a successive being

There is another succession, which they call continuous, and that is not
betwixt total beings, but betwixt parts of the same being; when they do not
exist together, but one after another, in fluxu (as they say) and this
succession is proper and peculiar unto motion, though not unto every motion.
Thus far my Pupils.

Dr. Tailor.
This I have here set down, not that I at all value the problem whether it be
so or no, but that you may not think me a Socinian particularly in this
Article, or that I think the bodies in the resurrection shall be specifically
distinct from what they are here; I believe them the same bodies, but enobled
in their very beings, for to a specifical and substantial change, is required,
that there be introduction of new forms.

Jeanes.
1. You will not be thoroughly and sufficiently distinguished from the Socinians
in this Article, if you think the bodies in the resurrection shall be
numerically distinct from what they are here; and therefore I shall entreat you
to tell us in your next, how far you accord with or dissent from them in this
particular.

2. You here say, that to be quantitative, shall be taken away from our bodies
in the resurrection; and the sequel of this is, that bodies in the resurrection
shall be specifically distinct from what they are here; for a quantitative
substance, and a substance without quantity, are specifically distinct; because
the one is material, a body, and the other immaterial, a spirit, and not a body
at all, unless nomine tenus.

Dr. Tailor.
But yet the improving of essential predicates, is no specification of
subjects, but a melioration of the first.

Jeanes.
The ordinary Reader may perhaps think, that there is some great mystery wrapped
up under these hard words; but the plain meaning of them, is (as I suppose)
that the improving of essential predicates, does not make a specifical change
of subjects, but only advance a subject unto a better being. Essential
predicates may be said to be improved three manner of ways. 1. By abolition of
them. 2. By intension of them. 3. By addition unto them.

The two latter are impertinent to this business in hand; for suppose (though
not grant) that the essential predicates of substances might be improved by
intension of them, or by addition unto them; yet what will this make to the
separability of essentials from a subject: The improving of essential
predicates, that belongs unto our present purpose, is by abolition of them, and
by substituting new and more noble essentials in their room; and that
essentials may be abolished, and new essentials substituted in their rooms (the
things remaining the same) is a thing you may magisterially and imperiously
dictate, but can never Scholastically prove.

But (perhaps) you will say, that you take essential in a Moral and Theological
sense: But Sir, you must remember, that you are not to take essential here, in
such a latitude, as to include accidental and contingent predicates; for if you
should, Porphyry's definition of Accidens will remain unshaken by what you say:
Would not this be a ridiculous Argument? accidental and contingent predicates
may be taken away, sine subjecti interitu, therefore adesse and abesse sine
subjecti interit^, is no excellent definition of an accident; and yet this will
be your very argument, if by essential predicates you mean any thing besides
the four first predicables, unto which all essential predicates are reducible.

Dr. Tailor.
But the consequent is, that abesse and adesse sine subjecti interitu, is not
an excellent definition of an accident.

Jeanes.
The arguments from which you infer this consequent, are overthrown, and
therefore this consequent falls to the ground of it self, without you support
it by some fresh arguments.

Dr. Tailor.
And yet further, it follows; That if sin were as essential to a man, as
mortality is, or to be qu^ntitative, yet there is no more need that man should
rise with sin, then with mortality.

Ieanes.
And, pray Sir, why do not you add, and with quantity? Do you begin to startle
at this Proposition? that men shall rise without quantity: But as touching the
separability of both mortality and quantity from bodies in the resurrection, I
have spoken already so fully, as that I may spare to say any thing anew of it.

Dr. Tailor.
But Aristotle's Philosophy, and Porphyry's Commentary, are but ill measures in
Theology, and you should do well to scour bright that armor in which you trust,
which unless it be prudently conducted, will make a man a Sophister rather then
a Theologue: but you are wiser.

Ieanes.
Aristotle and Porphiry are no contemptible Authors in Philosophy; but who ever
thought them infallible in Philosophy, or their Books measures in Theology?
Philosophy is a very useful Handmaid unto Divinity, and none will decry it,
but such whose sayings and writings cannot endure the test thereof; nothing
that is true in Philosophy, can be false in Divinity; for verum vero non
opponitur, one truth does not, cannot clash with another: As for my Philosophy,
I hope God will preserve me from trusting in it, or in any other arm of flesh:
If you can detect any error therein, I shall be ready to retract it, and be
very thankful to you for your pains; as for the dirt you have hitherto thrown
thereon, it will not stick, but recoileth on your own face.

Dr Tailor.
I have only this one thing to add, That the common Discourses of Original
Sin, makes sin to be natural, necessary, and unavoidable, and then may I not
use your own words, this Tenet is chargeable with Libe^tinism, it is a
licentious Doctrine, and opens a gap to the greatest profaneness, for it takes
away all conscience of sin, all repentance of it for the time past; if sin be
natural, necessary, and unavoidable, as it is to us, if we derive it from Adam,
etc. what reason has he to be humbled for it, and to ask God pardon for it? so
that you have done well against your own opinion; and if I had not used the
argument before, I should have had reason to thank you for it: now as it is,
you are further to consider of it, not I.

Jeanes.
If you understand by natural, that which naturally results from nature, and by
necessary and unavoidable, that which is denominated such from a primitive and
created necessity, that which you say is a foul slander against the common
discourses of Protestants against Original sin: But if you mean by natural that
which is connexed with, and coeval unto our nature, and by necessary and
unavoidable, that which is such in regard of a consequent and contracted
necessity, it will be nothing to the purpose: for you (and you may take in to
boot your good friends of Racovia) are never able to prove, that the assertion
of such a naturality and necessity of Original sin, is any bar to humiliation
or repentance for it, unto Prayer for the pardon of it.

Dr Tailor.
Sir, Though I have reason to give you the priority in every thing else, yet in
civility I have far outdone you.

Ieanes.
First, You have written a Letter to me without a Superscription, and I have
returned one unto you with a Superscription; and this I take, to be of the two,
the greater civility.

If I may believe the echo of the neighborhood, you have written several
Letters unto Mr. T. C. concerning me, that cannot pretend to any great
civility, for they are said to be stuffed with insulting reproaches: unto which
I shall return nothing, but my Prayers for the increase of your charity and
humility.

Dr. Tailor.
You were offended at a passage, which you might easily, but would not
understand; you have urged arguments against me, which return upon your own
head: The Proposition you charge me withal, I own not in any of your senses,
nor (as you set it down) in any at all, and yet your arguments do not
substantially, or rationally confute it, if I had said so.

Ieanes.
Here you sum up your Conquests, but whether you do not reckon without your
Host, let the Reader judge.

Dr. Tailor.
Besides all this, you have used your pleasure upon me; you have reviled me,
slighted me, scorned me, untempted, unprovoked; you never sent to me civilly to
give you satisfaction in your Objections, but talked it my absence, and to my
prejudice.

Ieanes.
Unto all this, a general negative is a sufficient answer, until I know the
Particulars that your Delator has informed you with; but perhaps, you may
think that for such an obscure person as my self, to dare to except against
what you write, is to revile, slight, and scorn you; if you be so impatient of
contradiction, I shall leave it unto your own bosom to judge from what spirit
it proceeds: When you published your Book, you exposed it to every man's censure
that would read it; and will you accuse every man of uncivility that passes
his censure upon any passage in it, in a private discourse with friends? But
Sir, upon Mr. C. his entreaty, I sent him in writing the reasons that I had for
my censure, and these reasons were by my consent to be conveyed to you, and
therefore I sent unto you mediately by another to give satisfaction to my
objections: If you shall say that 't was uncivil for me not to make my address
immediately unto your self, it is a charge will easily be wiped off; I was, as
I thought, an utter stranger unto you, and Mr. C. professed a greet
acquaintance with, and interest in you, and assured me that my Exceptions
should be received with all possible candor, and promised his diligence and
fidelity in conveying of them unto you; my objections therefore were sent
civilly unto you, though sent by him; but however you are thus severe, the
Reader, I hope, will have a more charitable opinion of my procedure herein, and
think, that you have no reason to make such Tragical Out-crys against me for
abusive uncivilities toward you.

Dr. Tailor.
Yet I have sent you an answer, I hope, satisfactory, and together with it a
long Letter, which in the midst of my many affairs and straightened condition, is
more then I can again afford.

Jeanes.
Unto your long Letter I have returned a longer answer; and whether yours or
mine be satisfactory, I am contented to refer it unto the indifferent Reader:
If your condition be straightened, I wish it were more plentiful: But my affairs
are, I believe, neither for number nor importance inferior unto yours; and from
them I have borrowed so much time, as to answer you, and shall be ready to do
so again to perform unto you the like office.

Dr Tailor.
And after all this, I assure you that I will pray for you, and speak such good
things of you, as I can find, or hear to be in you; and profess my self, and
really be, Sir, Your affectionate friend and servant, in our blessed Lord and
Savior Jesus. Jer: Tailor.

Ieanes.
For this your promise I give you hearty thanks, and shall endeavor to make you
as grateful a return as I can, in the like Christian offices of love, and so
shall rest,

In Christ Jesus your humble servant, Henry Jeanes.

POSTSCRIPT. Dr Tailor.
Sir, I received yours late last night; and I have returned you this early in
the morning, that I might in every thing be respective of you.

Jeanes.
This I easily believe, and am confident, that upon review of your Letter you
will acknowledge, that according to the proverb, you have made more haste then
good speed.

Dr. Tailor.
But I desire not to be troubled with any thing that is not very material, for
I have business of much greater concernment; neither can I draw the saw of
contention with any man about things less pertinent. I expect no answer, I need
none, I desire none, but expect that you will employ your good parts in any
thing, rather then in being ingeniosus in alieno libro. Your talents can better
(if you please) serve God, then by cavilling with or without reason.

Ieanes.
Whether or no the controversy between us be not material, but less pertinent;
whether your Letter be so satisfactory, as that it needs no answer? as also,
whether I cavil without reason (to cavil with reason, is a Catachresis as
harsh as ratione insanire, and as hardly justifiable, but by a licentia
poetica) are things in which I refuse you for my Judge, and appeal unto the
learned and unprejudiced Reader.

Secondly, That you neither expect nor desite an answer from me may be very
probable, but that I was obliged to return you one, I have 3 Reasons that
convince me. First, By my silence, the truth which you have wronged would
suffer. Secondly, your Papers have been with a great deal of diligence
published, and if I should not give them an answer, I should be accessory to
the Funeral of my own good name. And Thirdly, A friend of yours, when he gave
me this your Letter, told me, That I could not answer it, and that you were, as
he thought, infallible: now I thought it my duty to undeceive him, who having
your person in too great an admiration, greedily swalloweth whatsoever falls
from your pen, though never so false and erroneous.


FINIS.

