A COLLECTION OF Seven and Fifty approved RECEIPTS Good against the PLAGUE.
Taken out of the Five Books of that Renowned Dr. DON ALEXES Secrets, for the
benefit of the poorer sort of people of these Nations.

By W. J. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, for John Wingfield at the Bible and Anchor
in Tower-street near Mark-lane end, 1665.

The Author to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Through Gods divine providence, have had at several times, great occasion
to make use of Medicines for the health of my own body, as namely in the year
1642, for Cuts and Shots, where then I came acquainted, and into familiarity
with Master George Dunne Chyrurgion, Master Leadbeater the Apothecary, Master
Guye, Master Hicks, and Master Nicholas Culpepper, by whose familiarity I lost
nothing, in the end of September 1663 our house was visited with the Plague,
one died before we knew what it was, the family was five in number, I lay in
the same bedding the deceased dyed out of, he dyed full of the marks, I had a
Boil in my Groyne that never brake, but went away by purging and vomiting, my
fellow had one that brake, yet none dyed but the first, I helped to Coffin about
six persons, in one family at that time, yet by Gods providence am yet a live,
in the year 1649, I had along sickness from Midsomer till Christmas, of that
miserable disease called the griping or plague of the Guts, which caused me to
search all public means for cure, and having spent what means I had upon
Doctors like the woman that had the bloody Issue: And all gave me over for
dead, I betook me to search for directions in books, and after the reading of
many providence guided me to light upon the most excellent and approved Works
of that famous Doctor named DON ALEXES, a man well skilled in the Latin Greek
Hebrew Chaldee and Arabic tongues, and of diverse other Nations and Countries,
he being naturally inclined and took a singular pleasure in Philosophy, and in
the secrets of nature, he traveled seven and twenty years to gain knowledge,
the five books were translated into English by Master William Ward and Master
Richard Andrews and Dedicated unto the Right honorable Francis Lord Russell
Earl of Bedford, but lest I should make my Porch greater then my building, I do
refer those that would be further satisfied, unto those five books aforesaid,
where they shall find every one inserted, I gathered them at first for my own
particular private use, but considering the scarcity of the books and
altogether at an extraordinary dear rate, I have for the public benefit of all
men exposed them to the care of the Printer to serve for public use.

June 12. 1665. W. J.

A Collection of Seven and fifty Receipts good against the Plague.
CHAP. I. An approved Remedy against the Pestilence be it never so vehement.
TAke an Ounion and cut him overthwart, then make a little hole in each piece,
the which you shall fill with fine Triacle, then set the pieces together again
as they were before, then wrap them in a white linen cloth. Putting it so to
Roast in the Embers and Ashes, then when it is Roasted enough press out all the
juice of it: and give the patient a spoonful thereof to drink, and so by Gods
help he shall feel ease and most undoubtedly be healed.

CHAP. 2. A very good perfume against the Plague.
TAke Mastick, Cyprus, Incence, Mace, Wormwood, Mirrhe, Lignum Aloe, Tegname
Musk, Ambergreise, Timioma, Nutmugges, Mirtle-tree, Bay Tree, Rosemary, Saige,
Roses, Elder, Cloves, Juniper, Rue, Pitch, and a kind of Raw-pitch, called in
Latin Rasise, stamp all these together mix them well set them on the embers,
or Coals and so perfume the Chamber.

CHAP. 3. Another very good Remedy against the Plague.
TAke the Ripe berries of a Baytree, then pill off the black skin that is upon
them, beat them into powder with a little Salt, and as soon as the party
perceives himself infected with the Plague, and that he begin to have a hot
Fevor, he must take a spoonful of the said powder, mixed with a little Vinegar
and water, let him heat it a little and drink it, and then covering himself
warm sleep, sleeping soundly by Gods help he shall be cured in a short time,
but if the Fevor come with a cold, instead of Vinegar he must take wine, and
then do as is said before, this has been experimented on many in the last
great Plague time.

CHAP. 4. For him that is sick of the Plague.
TAke white Dittany, Turmentill, white Coral, Genitine, Bole Armoniack, Terra
sigilata, and Endive, water of Scabius, and the Accedent coming upon him, this
must be made at least four hours before it be used, take of the said things
stamped each one by it self, and put them severally inglasses, and make of all
of them a drink at your own discretion, making the Vinegar mount in the glass a
little above the other things, and let the patient take it hot, covering
himself hot in his bed until he sweat, and by Gods help he shall undoubtedly
be Cured.

CHAP. 5. A mavelous preservative against the Plague
TO make this take white Dicany, round Aristolochia, with Crocodilium otherwise
called Cardina, or Cordua, with Voruine, Gentian, Zeduarise, an herb called in
Latin, per muli, of each of them two Ounces, stamp all these together with a
handful of Rue, then take a glass that holds at least three quarts, and fill
it with the best wine you can find, whereinto you shall put all the foresaid
things, and let it stand so in your house, and in dangerous times take every
morning a glass full of the said wine before you go out of your house, but
first observe to eat a Walnut a Fige and a branch or two of Rue, do this every
morning.

CHAP. 6. An approved good ointment to make an Impostume break and the Plague
sone to fall off.
TO make this take a quantity of Oil of Olive and set it on the fire in some
firm vessel, put thereto fine Cerus or White Lead well stamped together,
literage of silver very fine and thine, with a quantity of Common wax, set it
on the fire until you may spread it with your finger upon a smooth stone, then
take it from the fire and power a little Vinegar upon it, but have a care of
your face, then make a Plaster of this ointment, as big as all the sore, and
make a hole in the midst thereof the breadth of a penny, make then a little
plaster of suppling ointment the bigness of the hole, then make another
plaster of the same bigness, and lay it on the suppling plaster, the
mortifying plaster be between both, let this lie twenty four hours, then
change only the middle plaster, leting it so lie twenty four hours longer,
but remember to anoint the top of the sore with some Hogs suite, or Hen or
Capons grease to mollify it, so it will be hard in the middle, and round about
it will be tender flesh, in such sort that the sore will break and come forth
about the end of forty and eight hours, take of the foresaid plasters, and lay
upon it another plaster made with fresh Hogs grease, then will the dead flesh
fall out with the core, like unto a round half Ball, but the hole will remain
which you must dress with healing ointment, you must strew burnt Alum beaten to
powder to eat the dead or rather proud flesh away.

CHAP. 7. Another remedy against the Plague.
TAke the topes of Rue a Garlick-head, or half a quarter of a Walnut, and a
corn of Salt, eat this every morning continuing so a month together, this is
also good against the worms both in young and old.

CHAP. 8. Another very good Remedy against the Plague.
TAke a quantity of the water of wild Pursley, called in Greek Melissophillon,
Melephilo, and Melenon, and in Latin Apiastrum, with Plantine water, of each
of these a like quantity in several glasses, take daily of this mixing equal
quantities together in a small glass, and then you shall drink thereof, so by
the blessing of God you shall be preserved and keept safe from the infection of
the Plague, this water is also good for Fistula's and has been often proved
true by experience.

CHAP. 9. Another perfect Receipt against the Plague.
FIll a Glass a third part full of fine Triacle, and one third part with
Aquavitae, and fill the other third part with the Urine of a man child that is
a virgin and healthful mix all these well together, and give the patient to
drink a glass full three mornings one after another, this was proved in Venice
in the year 1504. and in London in the last great Plague.

CHAP. 10. Another against the Plague.
AS soon as the party feels himself infected, let him swallow a quantity of
the best Triacle, then take of the same Triacle the bigness of a Chestnut, and
lay it on the sore that begins to rise, rubbing it well round about with the
same Triacle, then immediately take a young Pegion and cut him in the midst
quick feathers and all, lay him to the sore warm as he is in his feathers, let
him lie till that part of the Pegion become green, and the Triacle red, then
take it off, and you shall perceive, that out of the Pegion will come a green
water, which is all the venom that was in the sore, then cure the place with
this following plaster, take two parts of fresh Barrows greass, and one part
of Woormwood well stamped and lay it upon the sore and the effect follows.

CHAP. 11. A thing often experimented against the Plague.
TAke two Ounces of Mastick, one Ounce of Euphorbium, five Ounces of Spignard,
beat these into powder and give it the patient to drink, if he be under ten
years of age give him but a Scruple of it, if betwixt ten and twenty years of
age give him half a dram, if above twenty years old give him a dram, then take
the herb called in Greek Pentaphylon, in Latin Quinque folium, in English
Cinkfoil, and wrap it like a round Apple in a linen cloth lay it so under the
embers a certain time, and having taken it out, cut it in three pieces in the
middle, and lay it upon the sore, this will give immediate ease unto the
patient proved and experimented many times.

CHAP. 12. A preservative against the Plague proved oftentimes.
IN a dangerous time take three branches of Rue, a Walnut and a Fig, eat all
this and your stomach shall be fenced against Infection.

CHAP. 13. Another
TAke Vinegar the juce of a white Ounion, the juce of Rue and of Milfoil,
Yarrow, or Nose-bleed, of each of them alike quantity mix all together, and
give the patient a glass full very hot, but let it be before the sixth hour
after the pain has taken him; then make him sweat in a warm bed, this has
been an approved remedy.

CHAP. 14. In a suspect time of the Plague.
TAke Pennirial with Sugar Russet, make an Electuary, eat the bigness of a
Chestnut at breakfast this has been proved and found good.

CHAP. 15. Another most excellent Medicine good against the Plague.
TAke Wallnuts that are green tender and good to Confecture, or Preserves, put
them in Vinegar the space of eight days, then take them out again, and break
them in pieces, then put them into the Limbeck, without Vinegar, and still the
water of them; the patient shall drink every day a small half glass full and
after drinking of this potion, let him sweat well in his bed

CHAP. 16. A rare and perfect secret against the Plague.
Take an Ounce of Aloes Epaticum, half an Ounce of Mirrhe, half an Ounce of
Saforne beaten into powder, sift the Aloes and Mirrhe together, then steep and
soake the Saforne, or wash it with Whine wine that is very strong, so that it
be like sauce, put then the other powder to it, and mix all well together, if
need require you may put more Wine to it so make thereof a paste, and so make
pills of the same, but if you will have it very strong put to every Ounce half
an Ounce of Diagridum and half an Ounce of Camphire, Mr. Francis Albert took
three eight parts of the said pills without Diagridum, soaking them in good
Wine and gave them to his patient as soon as he could and caused him to sweat
much in his bed and by sweating disolved the venom.

CHAP. 17. Another very rare approved Receipt.
Take the flowers or blosoms of Walnuts, dry them in the shadow, and when the
nuts be in season to confect, you shall cut part of them into small pieces,
putting the same into small Vinegar for three days, then take them out and
mingle flowers distilling them through a Limbeck of glass, or of earth, well
leaded, keep this water diligently, and when any man feels himself infected
with the Plague, give presently to him two Ounces or three Ounces more or less
as the party is in years or strength, and he shall loose his disease by stool
or by vomit, or else it will force the sore to come forth, which you may ripen
and break and draw forth the core and so heal the same as is before declared.

CHAP. 18. To make a Carbuncle and all other Botches Impostumes and Plague
sores to break, a present remedy and very easy to be made.
Take bay Salt well beaten into powder and serced, incorporate it with the yolk
of an Egg then lay it on the Carbuncle or sore, and be you assured that by
Gods grace it will take away all the venom and poison of the Plague sore, so
that in short time he shall be cured; this Remedy has been often proved.

CHAP. 19. A very good Remedy against the Marks of the plague commonly called
Gods marks or God tokens.
Take fresh and green Rhopenticum, which is the herb and root called Themore
or great Centory, it is named of Pliny, as Bulius does write ( Rhacoma) with
the roots of the herb called Sanguinaria dactillon, of some Dens Canis, of
Dioscordious it is called Coronopus, that is to say Crows foot, some take it to
be Dandelion, take therewith the roots of Turmiltill, and white Dittany, of
each of these an Ounce, stamp all well then put them in a pot or violl with
clear water at your discretion, rather too much then too little, till it pass
three handfulls above the other things in the pot: then boil it with a clear
fire without smoke, until one third part be deminished then strain it softly
into a clean glass and it will be of the color of wine, when necessity does
require you may give the patient a glass full in the morning and another at
night two hours before supper, but it must be very hot, then cover him well in
his bed and make him sweat, when the Marks come forth he shall become like a
Lazer or a Lepper and by Gods blessing shall recover in a short time and be
perfectly whole.

CHAP. 20. Against the mortality of the Pestilence an approved remedy.
Take Gentian, Seduaria, roots of Turmentile of each of them two Ounces, Red
Sandal, white and Recent, Ditany, Hearts horn burnd, white pearl, bole Armoniack
round Aristolochia, of each of them an Ounce, half an Ounce of Camphere, two
Ounces of white Sugar: of all these things beaten together into powder you
shall take at every time a dram with three Ounces as Endive water, or Sorrel
water, mix the water and the Sugar with the bigness of a Walnut of fine
Triacle, you must minister this Medicine before the sickness have continued
with the person twelve hours for it is the surer, if the patient be an infant
then give him but half a dram of it with an Ounce and a half of one of the said
waters, and with the like quantity of Triacle, this drink is neither solvable
nor laxative, nor does cause any grief to the patient but only kills the
poison, if any person have drunk or eaten any poison it is a very good Medicine
for him, it is also very good against a hot fevor or Ague, note also that if it
be possible the patient must be let blood before he take this or suddenly after.

CHAP. 21. To make little round balls good against the Plague.
Take of Labdanum, half an Ounce, Storax Calamica one Ounce, Diambre, two
grains of Camphere, fifteen grains of Cloves, Nutmukes and Mace of each of them
an eight part, a scruple of Damask Roses, half a dram of Sinamon, fifteen
grains of Spignard, Musk and Civit, of each of them eight grains half a dram of
fine Violets, four grains of Lignum Aloes the bigness of a bean of Calomie
Aromanticie, four grains of fine Amber, the bigness of a bean of Mirrhe, first
stamp the Labdanum with a hot Pestle, then stamp well the Storax Calatimae, and
all the other things each by it self and then mix all together and stamp them
still with a pestle ading to it at every time Sorax laquide and Rose water
until all the said things be well incorporated, and then make round bal's
thereof to smell to or use at your own discretion.

CHAP. 22. A very perfect oil Against the Plague and all manner of poison.
Take of the oldest oil you can get, and boil it the space of an hour, and for
every pound of the said oil put in fifty Scorpians or as many as you can get,
put all this in a pot uncovered set the pot in a Kettle of boiling water until
the third part of the oil or somewhat less be consumed, then take out the
Scorpions and strain the oil into another pot, then stop it close, and set it
in the Sun three months, or by the fire on hot Ashes the space of four days,
but first put in two Ounces of Unicorns horn, one Ounce of Triacle, three
Ounces of Aquavitae, when any person feels himself infected with the Plague
or poison let him be anointed with the said oil about the heart and pulses and
he shall find a marvelous effect.

CHAP. 23. A marvelous secret for to preserve a man from the Plague and has
been proved in England of all the Physicians in that great and vehement Plague
in the year 1348, and in the year 1625 in London, that in the year 1348 crept
throughout all the known world, and Authors affirm that there was never any
person that used this secret but was by Gods grace preserved from the Plague.
Take Aloe Epaticum, or Cicotrim, fine Sinamon, of each of these three drams,
Cloves, Mace Lignum Aloe, Mastick, bole Armoniake of each of them half a dram,
let all these things be well stamped together in a Mortar, then mingle them
together, then keep it in a close vessel, and take thereof every morning two
penny weight in half a glassfull of white wine, with a little water, drink it
in the morning at the dawning of the day, and so you may by the grace of God go
hardily into all infection of the Air and receive no damage by the Plague.

CHAP. 24. A very sure and perfect remedy to cure a man of the Pestilence.
Take the berries of Ivy, that grows on trees or walls, and not of them that
are found on the ground, you must gather the said berries very ripe and toward
the north if it be possible if not take them as you can get them; although they
be not very ripe, dry them in the shadow and keep them in a wooden box as a
most precious thing, and if any be infected with the Pestilence, beat the said
berries to powder in a clean Mortar, and give the patient the said powder in a
glass full of white wine, as much as will lie upon a groat or more; then cover
him in his bed and cause him to sweat, then change his shirt sheets and all the
coverings of his bed if it be possible, if not at least change shirt and
sheets, some having taken this over night have found themselves well in the
morning, and cured.

My Author affirms that in the year 1523 he saw in Aleppo Amilanos that had
two Plague sores one under his thigh and another under his left arm, and having
taken the said powder morning and evening he found that the said sores brake of
themselves by virtue of this excellent Medicine, sent and blessed by God himself
who gives understanding unto man, it is good for all persons to have so easy
a thing ready by them.

CHAP. 25. A present remedy to heal the Pestilence by drawing out the venom
from the sore approved.
Take a quick Hen and pluck the Rump and place where she lays eggs quite
bare, then set her so that the bare place may be upon the grief, that she may
be held upon the sore, a great while the Hen draws all the poison to her
self, or at least so much as will ease the patient, shortly after she will dye,
you may do this with three or four several Hens immediately one after another
they will draw all the venom from the sore, then anoint the place with good
Triacle using the Ivy and bay berries and other remedies before described to
break draw and heal the sore.

CHAP. 26 How to make balls to smell to in time of the Plague.
Take one part of Storax one part of Libdany half a part of Cloves, sum
Camphere, Aquavitae of Spignard, sum Nutmukes of all these make a paste with
Rose water wherein you must disolve sum Gum dragon and Gum Araback, work them
well together, make of this balls to hold in your hands to smell at.

CHAP. 27. An excellent perfume for a chamber in the time of a Plague or
Pestilence.
Take of Storax, Calamica, Bengewine, Lignie, Aloes, of each an Ounce, five
Ounces of Coals of Willow beaten into powder, mix these things with Aquavitae,
as much as will make them into a paste, make thereof little Cakes or what forms
you please, and so keep them, when you use them put a little of them on a
Chafing dish and in consuming them by little and little they will make a
singular good Odor in the place where you burn the same.

CHAP. 28. Against the Plague.
Take three Ounces of the Liquor of the inner rind of an Ash tree,, and still
it with three Ounces of white Wine, give the patient to drink of it every three
hours and by Gods help within twenty four hours he shall be well.

CHAP. 29. Another against the Plague.
Take three Ounces of Walnuts that be not yet full ripe, prepared and distilled
at Midsomer, and let the patient drink thereof and he shall be whole, but it
will be better to take the outward pills of Walnuts in September when they be
black, so that they be not rotten, and distill them and give the patient a
glassfull thereof to drink very warm he being let blood this this will help him
much.

CHAP. 30. A preservative in time of Pestilence, and against all venom or
poison, and against the biting of a mad Dog.
If you eat before meals a Wallnut or two two dry Figs, and some leaves of
Garden Rue with a corn of Salt, it will be a great and good preservative
against the Plague, and against all poison that a man eats, the same being
stamped and laid to the biting of a mad Dog it heals it, so do Nutmukes work
the like effect.

CHAP. 31. An approved composition as well to preserve as to heal, very good in
the time of a contagious Plague.
Take an Ounce of the best Triacle, half an Ounce of the juce of Lemons, a
Scruple of Saforne, a little of the two sorts of Pearls, Red Coral and Sorrel
seed, of each half a dram two grains of Camphere, mingle all these together
very well with two or three drops of Odeferious white wine, and make thereof an
ointment, spread a quantity thereof upon a piece of Crimson silk lay this hot
upon the patients heart and remove it morning and evenning.

CHAP. 32. Another most excellent Composition, and a very good preservative
against the Pestilence often tried and experienced.
Take a Pimpernell dried an ounce and a half of Sordii Veti, some Roots of
Gentian, Imparatory, Zedoariae, of each six drams, Calamint Apiastrum, or
Citraginie, Enuly Campanie Roots Tormentilla, which is a kind of Cinkfoile,
Bay berries the seed of Cardus Benedictus, which is one of the kinds of the
herb called Atriactilie, with an Oringe or Citron, Oxill dis, which is a kind
of Sorrel, bole Armoniack prepared of each three Drachmes Lickorish scraped,
Clycanisie Seminis the seeds of Scatiola, which is Mubus Sativa, of the kinds
of Endive and Succory, Cinamonie, exquisitie, of each two drams Gilli-flowers,
Red Roses and Coriander, prepared, the seed of Basil, Cortisis Citrie Fixie,
Santuly luteie vel raboi Agalochi, that is Xilaloe Ligni Aloes, the scraping of
Ivory and red Coral, Pearls of each a dram and a half, and two Scruples of
Saforne beat all these very small mingle them with Sugar of equal quantity, or
else with Oxemelite, or Sirupo aceratoe, or Oxyfacchata, or rather the sirrup
of Lemons, but for weak stomachs make like to a Lickquid confection, either,
Opiate vel Massee, or else let there be an Electuary pertabellas of a dram
weight, or four scruples, then add unto every ounce of Sugar, a dram of the
said powder, then take thereof two or three hours before your meals, if it be
in powder take a dram or half a dram at the least, with some convenient liquor
of those which are now named if it be opiate, the quantity of a Chestnut or a
Walnut if it be in form of a mass and thick make two or three pills or more
very soft for to take at one time drinking after the same sum of the Liquors
already mentioned when it is in little tablits you may take one or two or more
at your discretion.

CHAP. 33. Another composition in powder, but in another manner for the same
purpose.
Take the Roots of Angilica, Gentian, Zedoaria, of the roots of Tirmentilla the
seeds of Coxalidas Citrie Mallie, Cinnamon, elect with a kind of Casia of yellow
or red Sandall or Sanders Cardus Benedictus of each two drams, a dram and a
half of Oringe Pills, one dram of the scrapings of Ivory, half a dram of red
Corrall the like weight of fine Sugar, put to all these things as the powder
shall seem pleasant and good, or if you will seek another way as is spoken of
in the first preservative, as concerning the quantity of this composition, at
every time, and the time of using it let it be as the other before, but if you
will have them both let them not be of a like sort, but the one being in powder
in tablits the other in Opiat, or mass, with pills.

CHAP. 34. Common Pills very good for the same.
Take Aloes probae, and Lote, two ounces, one ounce of Saforne, one ounce of
good Mirrhe, or else Mirrhe and Ammoniacum, disolved in white wine of each half
an ounce, mix them together with honey Roset, but in winter you may put
Zedoaria, Agallochi, or Red Sandis of each of them a dram, but in summer take
away the Mirrhe and Amoniacum and put to it bole Armoniacke prepared three
drams, half a dram of Red Corrall with a scruple of Camphere to take commonly a
pill or two before your meals, sometimes a dram after your first sleep as you
shall prove by experience.

CHAP. 35. Antidotes or Medicines, and comfortable preservative of small cost
easy to find that poor people may prepare for themselves.
1. Take Garlic and drink a little wine after it, or a Fig with a Walnut and
Rue and a little salt specially in winter. 2. Take twenty leaves of Rue with
two Walnuts and as many Figs and a grain of Salt all being mixed together
receive it in the morning. 3. Take six leaves of Rue with Vinegar. 4. Take the
Root of the herb called in Latin Imperatora, of sum Lascopitium, Gallicum. 5.
Take the Root of Angelica. 6. The Roots of Gentian. 7. The Root of Zedarie. 8.
Of Cardus Benedictus. 9. Of Garlina. 10. Take the herb called Scordium in small
powder the quantity of a dram, either in a soft mass made with sodden honey and
vinegar, or with some surrup as of Lemons or in Opiat the bigness of a Chestnut,
or of a small Pease with wine in winter, in summer with Rose water, or with the
juce of Sorrel. 11. Sorrel alone or with Pimpernell in Vinegar and drink of
it in the morning. 12. Or the juce of them wherewith you may make a taste in
summer. 13. Or Juniper berries, the leaves of green Pimpernell of Bittany of
Pulegion of Sorrel of each a like quantity brayed together and sodden in
honey, put thereto a little Vinegar like a conserve.

CHAP. 36. Another rare Medicine.
Take Juniper berries, bole Armoniack, of each two drams or of both alike
quantity being stamped lay it in sweet oil and Vinegar or in Oxmillite, in the
mean form either Opiat or mass. If it be Opiat take as much as a Chestnut, if
it be Mass take one great Pill, and drink after it a little Hidromill or
Oximill or wine.

CHAP. 37. It is requisite to speak something of a savor and sweet smell; as
powders balls waters and perfumes, and first of a powder for many purposes.
Take four ounces of Ivise Florientiana, of Margrom Cloves and Red Roses of
each an ounce of Millissophilie, Nucise Odoratee or Muscate Zedorie, Cinnamon
Agallochi, yellow, Sanders, Mastick Storax Calamita and Bengroin, half an ounce
of each, and two scruples of Juncus odoratus, Calami odoravie, Syici
Nardiradicise one dram of each.

Make of these a powder to smell, to be beaten of broken, in some piece of fine
silk or a piece of fine linen cloth, beat all these things grossly for to
perfume and wash your head and beard, or let them lie a time in white wine and
Rose water, and strain them, keeping the water to use when you please, or you
may still them in a double vessel, that they may be Aqua Aromatica, this being
laid upon the coals is to perfume your chamber twice every day morning and
evening, it is good also to wear about you or to put in a little bag and lay it
amongst linen or woollen clothes.

CHAP. 38. Another sweet smelling ball.
Take two ounces of pure Labdanum, one ounce and a half of Bengroine one ounce
of Willow coals of Storax Calamita, six drams, two drams, a piece of Marjoram,
and yellow or red Sanders, of red Roses and Calainus Aramaticus, two scruples a
piece, then take six drams of oil of sweet Almonds and as much of Bengroin,
with half an ounce of Storax Calamita sith these things together then put
thereto six drams of Rose water. Then strain it, and let that which is
strained, be soft made with two ounces of white wax, and put to it of Storax
liquida, one dram, make it like as Cereatum, or plaster incorporate these
together with a hot pestle putting thereto a dram and a half of musk.

CHAP. 39. Another sweet ball more sweet for the summer.
Take three ounces and a half a piece of Roses and Violets with an ounce a
piece of the berries and leaves of Myrtle, and the coals of Willow, six drams a
piece, of Juniper berries and Oringe pills, two drams of red Sanders, one dram
of Bengroin with two scruples of Camphere, make a powder of these, then take an
ounce and a half of oil of Roses, with two drams a piece of Storax Calamita,
and Bengroine, with an ounce of Rose water with two ounces of white wax, beat
all the rest together with a hot pestle, put to it a little musk and use it.

CHAP. 40. Of five outward Remedies to purge the Air, the presentest and
easiest and of smallest price for persons low in estate and condition.
First take Juniper berries with some of the root cloven asunder and dried with
some of the forementioned drugs and make thereof a perfume this is good to
purge the Air. Secondly, sprinkle your Chamber with Vinegar alone or mixed with
Rose water. Thirdly, when you are to go out into company, put into your mouth
the Pill or seed of a Cittorn, or Cinnamon, or Cloves or the Roots of Angelica,
or Zedoarie or such as are before mentioned, hold these in your mouth and chaw
them for you shall find that they will give a good odor. Fourthly, if you
desire to smell to a sponge or to a Hancherchief both day and night, Malmsey or
other strong wine and sweet; such as are Muscadell alone or else with Rose
water, wherein there has been tempered some Aromaticall drug already spoken
of, and also Cloves and Nutmukes, are very good for this purpose. Fifthly, if
it be in summer take a little Camphere, with a little cold water and twice so
much Vinegar, this is also very good.

Chap. 41. Eight C^usions for the whole sum of governing of man's body
especially in the time of the Plague.
1. It is necessary that you keep every thing neat and clean in your house
often washing and cleansing the same, and that as much as in you lies you do
avoid going into all evil Air. 2. Besure that you fly all excess of Riot and
superfluity of intemperate eating and drinking, and with all the carnal
company of women 3. When you travel walk moderately and overheat not your
self, neither sleep in the day time, but moderately in the night, avoid as much
as you may inordinate watching.

Chap 42. A soverain powder against the venom of the Plague, fit for Princes
and Rich people.
Take Sapphire Hiacinthe Smaragdus, of one or two or of all of these one dram,
of pearls bole Armoniack of the best, with the seeds of Oxalise of each of
these two drams, of the scrapings of Ivory two scruples of Unicorns horn one
scruple, of the seed of Ocinum, half a scruple, yellow or red Sanders Agalocchi
or Xilaloes of the best, Doronicie, Cinnamon, exquisite Safforone of each three
grains six grains of Musk, make of these a fine powder, and leave out the musk
for them that love it not, the use of the said powder and others that follow
shall be declared hereafter if God permit.

Chap. 43. How to make a powder for the poorer sort of people.
Take two drams of bole Armoniack with three drams of the Seeds of Oxalis,
Aloes Epeticum Lotum, and Red Corrall of each of these a dram, the powder of
Diatrio Santalon, eight scruples with the pills of dry Oringes, Cloves Cinnamon
and Safforone of each of these five drams, make of these a fine powder, you may
use the same with conserves or without them, with sirrups or with distilled
waters, but much rather with juces and such convenient licquors as is before
named.

Chap. 44. How with little cost to make a drink for the poor.
Take of the powder prescribed for the Poor, Conditirosatie, or conserve of
Roses, Condii boraginis, or rather Coraginis of each a dram and a half two
ounces of the Suck of Oxalis, two ounces Succi avantii Coragares extract with
Rose water and of good white wine vinegar of each an ounce and make thereof a
drink.

Chap,. 45. A drink that has been proved good against the Plague.
Take two drams of the powder of Mugwort of the first and second sort, the
seeds of Sanctie or of Oringes, of Mirrhe of each a dram, the scrapings of
Hearts horn a dram, beat them well and mix them together, you must drink this
of white viniger before a fire* and as soon as there appears any swelling in
the groine or flank, or under the Armpits, or any where else the remedy must be
ready, for the medicine provokes great sweat whereby the venom or infection
avoideth every part. The patient thus swearing by the fire his infected sweat
must be rubed and dried with hot linen clothes, which must be always changed
until the savor of the sweat be gone with rubbing.

CHAP. 46. How opiate is made.
Take of the first or second powder Oringe pills conserved of each an ounce and
a half, the conserve of Roses the conserve of Bugloss, two ounces of each of
the sirrup of the juce of Cittorns Oringes or Lemons or else of Oxalis, or
^mphacini, sufficient make of it a licquid Electuary in form of an Opiate,
whereof take an ounce or more and drink some of the foresaid liquors and such
as here follow, you may mingle an ounce of purslane with the said liquor.

Chap. 47. How to make a drink meat after the taking of Opiate, or to be mixed
with the Opiate for the strongest or meanest men according to the time and
place.
To do this take the juce of Cittorne or Lemons three ounces of the wine of
swore Oringes with good white and clear vinegar and Rose water of each of these
an ounce and mix these all together

Chap. 48. How to make a good drink for the poor.
Take three ounces of the juce of Sorrel that is very clear of bitter an^
swore oringes, with white and clear vinegar and Rose water of each of these an
ounce make thereof a drink, mix it with a little sugar to make it pleasant.

Chap. 49. How to make a drink to cause one to sweat.
Take a dram of good Triacle, or a dram of Mithridatum, with hole Armoniack of
the best of the powder of one of the herbs called Cardiacee, described before,
half a dram, Scabious water two ounces, water of Oxalise, Bugloss Borage of
each an ounce and make a drink thereof.

Chap. 50. How to to make a drink easy for the poor of low price.
Take the decoction of Scabious, and of the flowers of red pop^ge a glass full
with a little sugar or a little white vinegar, or a ptisane, made with barley
and Aniseeds and the roots of Parsley the roots of Suckrey the one or the other
decoction with sharp sirrup two ounces or a little white vinegar. You must
understand that these foresaid drinks be taken hot, the patient being well
covered in his bed the Triacle and Mithridate although they be of great
efficacy yet are they not meet for women with child nor for young children,
the use of them ought not to be often nor in great quantities, when the Fevor
is great, some men's advice is to mingle the medicine for sweating with some
distilled water or with the decoction of herbs, concerning the part to which
the venomous matter has its course, now if a man knows that the matter goes
to the head, let the patient take it with some distilled waters or with the
decoction Bitony, but if it go to the vital parts, or to tha breast and heart,
with the water of the decoction of Borage, which is very Bugloss, if it go to
the belly and bowels with liquor of wormwood, if to the Liver, then with the
decoction water of Egrimony which is the true and Real Zupatorium.

Chap. 51. How to provoke sweat and heal the Plague.
Take of the herb called Rape, with the roots of the lesser Planton and knot
grass of each half a handful bray them well and boil them in vinegar then
strain them through a linen cloth, give the sick person of this to drink when
he goes to bed it will cause him to sweat out all the ill humers.

Chap. 52. An excellent preseruative against the Plague.
Take one ounce of the juce of green nuts, half an ounce of the juce of
Agrimony, three drams of the juce of Rue, three ounces of the juce of Issope
four ounces of the juce of hemp mingle them altogether, then take half an ounce
of the said mixture with half a dram of mumea and half an ounce of Sugar Candy
and one dram of sugar of Roses, an Electuary thereof and dissolve the quantity
of a Chestnut of it in good wine and drink thereof when you rise and when you
go to bed.

Chap. 53. Another against the Plague.
Take of the roots of Turmentill finely powdered, one dram with half a dram of
Triacle dissolve it in sorrel water and give it the diseased.

Chap. 54. How to make another preservative against the Plague.
Take two eggs and make a hole upon the top of each of them, then take out the
whites put into them so much whole Safforne as will half fill up the egg to
the middle, cover them with other egg shells boil them till they become red,
then bray them with all the shells, and put thereunto of white Diptamue and
Turmevill of each three drams of vomiting nuts one dram and a half of the seeds
of Rockit the quantity of the beaten eggs bray them all together the second
time, then put thereunto of good Triacle the weight of the other things except
the eggs and make an electuary of the which give two drams in the morning when
the patient rises before he goes to labor.

Chap. 55. Another preservative against the Plague.
Take Safforne of Setwell, of Turmentill of Diptamus of each of these one ounce
of Triacle of Mithridate of sugar of Bugloss of each eight drams with the
sirrup of the pills of pomecitterns, make a lectuary of the which to preserve
the party, according to his age, if he be above the age of fifteen years give
him two drams in the morning before meat with white wine, and after it give him
two Mastick Corlander seeds, if he be but 14 years of age give him but one
dram, and a half, being under the age of 8 years give him one dram, when he
goes out of the house let him hold in his mouth a little of the electuary; in
the curing the plague the foresaid confection must be given as soon as he
feels himself to have the Ague, within the space of 24 hours with the which
the water of Sumak, the quantity aforesaid according unto age, it helps all
cold infirmities or griefs, ministered with wine or with Aquavitae having first
made the universal Remedies of purging letting of blood and such like.

Chap. 56 How to make a good water against the Plague or Surfeite.
Take Red sage, Celendine Rosemary, Herbgrass Wormwood Mugwort, Pimpernell,
Dragons, Scabius Tyromony, Rosasolis, and Balm, of each of these a handful or
like quantity by weight, wash and swing them in a linen cloth, shred them and
put them into a galon of white wine with a quarter of an ounce of Gentian
roots, and of Angelica roots the like quantity let it stand two days and two
nights close covered and distill it at your pleasure that glass in which you
keep it be stopped very close.

Chap. 57. How to purify the Air in a Plague time.
Take an ounce of balsum, one ounce of the flower of Sulpher with an ounce of
mirrhe powder, all these together put thereto as much perno as will make them
into a stiff past then make it into little cakes then in the time of a
pestilence every day or every other day put one or two of these upon a chasing
dish of coals this is good says mine Author to purify the Air.

FINIS.



