ON THE DEATH OF THE Lord General MONCK.
Who Is Body is deceased! Old Albemarl's?
He whom our grateful gracious Lord King Charles
Called Father? He that did out-wit the crafty
Rump-Rulers with their Committee of Safety?
He that (without Jest loss of Blood) did bring
Our much desired, long banished Lord the King
Home to his Crowns and Kingdoms? Is He gone
Why then a Pillar of the State is down.
Great Britain may put on a Mourning dress
The Court has one great Constellation less
No loyal Englishman that now draws breath
But has a fatal interest in his death:
For the whole Kingdom was concerned in Him;
The Body Politic has lost a Limb;
The Camp does miss an Arm, the Court an Eye,
The King an Heart filled full of Loyalty.
As he had Prudence, Courage, Worth and Wit,
So he had Fortune, which makes all things hit.
As He had Resolution to Do,
So He had judgment to know When and How
VVitness his Iter Boreale when
He was mysterious to the wisest men
And did not agitate so much with Swords
As by a well-rul'd Regiment of Words
Intricate motions which though high and right
Were swift and subtle as a Swallows flight:
For though besieged with Questions, Foe, nor Friend
Could tell to what intent his March did bend.
In brief, 'twas destined by Divine Decree
In God's High Court that He and none but He
Should have the fate (though much before was done)
To fix the injured Heir safe in his Throne
Which our abstruse Star-students could not see
But put a Period to Monarchy:
And did proclaim their Sense with Tongue and Pen,
That we should never have a King again:)
By His example we may all agree,
That Honesty is the best Policy:
And that to do things justly, may befriend
A man in the best way to his own End:
In this wise Art he was a man complete,
And by his being Good grew to be Great:
For we may see by what was lately done,
His only aim was not Ambition.
For when He had his Dukedom and Repose
In the Kings Arms, Enfranchised from all foes:
In his old Age (His Loyalty was such)
He ventured Life and Honour' against the Dutch:
No petty Peril, but as fierce a slaughter
As could be acted by Sword, Fire and Water:
Where He was liable by one small shot
To leave at once, even all that he had got.
This Action made it Evident he stood
Not for His own End, but His Country's good;
Which made the King invite him to retreat,
Never was King and Subject better met,
Or ever did things with more due regard,
One to Deserve, and the other to reward.
No King such Servant in such great disaster,
Nor ever Subject had a better Master:
But Death has parted them, and We (in gross)
At once may weep for Him and the Kings loss.
His Epitaph.
LEt no profane igneble foot tread nere
This hallowed piece of Earth, George Monck lies here;
A small poor Relict of a noble Spirit,
Free as the Air, and ample as His Merit:
Whose least perfection was large, and great
Enough to make a Common man complete:
A Soul refined and culled from vulgar men,
Who brought King Charles to his lost Crown again.
Who for Religion and His Countries good,
Valued not Fortunes, Honors, Health or Blood:
Here, Here He lies who loved unto the end,
The Church, the King, his Country, and his Friend.
T. J.

London, Printed for William Thackeray in Duck-Lane. 1669.


