THE NATURE, NOBILITY, Character, and Complement OF MONEY.
Nam Genus and Formam Regina Pecunia donat.
IN this word [MONEY] more is comprehended
Than ever Tongue declared, or Pea commended:
It governs all the Land, circles the Sea,
And is the Worldling's Primum Mobile.
Money has such an influence on Men,
It sets up Kings, and plucks'em down again.
Money! it is the Crown of all Events;
It does compound for all Impediments;
It is a Spell that does all Spirits raise;
Honor, Health, Power, Pleasure, Profit, Praise.
Quaery. But will it buy Content? or can it cure
A cancerous Conscience? (Answ.) Nothing hits more sure.
For you shall read in many a Roman Story,
Money can free the Soul from Purgatory:
It makes the Pope Infallible to be;
Because'tis more infallible than he.
For Money, Men are int' all hazzards hurld,
It Is the adored Idol of the World.
Though one Sect damn another, yet, in fine,
They Are all Devota's at Pecunia's Shrine:
Albeit in Arguments they rant and tear,
Plot and Confound, They Are all of one Mind there.
The simple-seeming Quaker that will shun-ye
In points of holiness, will take thy Money.
The Scripture Pedlers that do prate and cant,
And cry the Laurd, Money's the meaning on it:
Amongst some Sects which different Tenants hold,
The Gospel is but a new name for Gold;
And sacred Offices are often sold
For Secular Silver. As, in days of old,
All plenty was comprised in Milk and Honey;
So in these days all merit lies in Money.
It is and does all things in every Cause;
It gives new meanings unto old made Laws.
Nothing but Money can do and undo:
It Is Pro and Con, and Moderator too.
If this thing Money were not all in all,
How could the Sciences be Liberal?
It does maintain the Court, the Camp, the School;
The greatest Politician's but a Fool,
If he want Money: it is so bright, so sunny,
That Men sell Houses, Lands, and Towns, for Money.
Down Kirk, down State, down every thing must fall,
Rather than want Interest and Principal.
Money does comprehend Lawyers and Laws;
It is a Chancellor in every Cause.
Meum and Tuum are the Bounds of Right;
Yet for all this Meum and Tuum fight:
Though Meum have the Milk, Tuum the Honey;
Yet Tuum will fall out for Meum's Money.
It rules both Right and Wrong. What makes this stir
Betwixt the French, Dutch, and the Emperor,
But Money, or what Money does bring forth,
Navyes and Nations? It Is all Money's worth:
Money is Sovereign of Sea and Shore;
It does at once, both make and heal the Sore;
It bids defiance to all shapes of Slaughter
At Sea, it makes Men run through Fire and Water,
Soar to the Sun, and sink to the Sea's center,
Dare Death in all his glories, so the venture
Does produce Money, though but one small ray;
A Soldier will do this for a Month's pay.
When Money her allicient look extends,
Some Men will truck for Fathers, Brothers, Friends,
Which makes me pray, the King may keep his hold:
His Father was the price of Gadly Gold;
And His King too, though of celestial birth:
'Twas Money bought the King of Heaven and Earth;
And that same fatal Money made the Elf,
That treacherous Treasurer, to sell himself
Eternally, where Money's influence
Is of no power to buy him back from thence.
Money does all things else; 'twere, of the two,
Shorter to say what Money cannot do,
Than what it can; our Privileges, Laws,
Religion, Reformation, Good old Cause,
Are all but words for Money; It does teach
The Courtier how to Flatter, Priests to Preach,
Soldier to Swear, and Citizen to Lie,
And is the vital Blood of Sovereignty.
It makes the Aged Young, the Crooked Straight,
The Dwarf a Giant, The Fool Fortunate.
To close up all, (for I but briesly show 'em)
It is fitter for a Volume than a Poem.
I Will leave this Theme to those that better know it,
Money's too great a stranger to a Poet.
T. J.

LONDON, Printed for William Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-Lane MDCLXXXIV.


