A Summary Account OF THE PROCEEDINGS Upon the HAPPY DISCOVERY of the Jacobite
Conspiracy.
In a SECOND LETTER to a Devonshire Gentleman.
London, March 3. 1695. Dear Sir,
JUST now is come to Hand yours of the 27th past, calling for my Answer to that
of the 18th, which I hope is now with you; for I sent it by the last Post, and
also a Duplicate thereof, as you desired, under cover to our Friend at Totness.
However, lest those should be intercepted, I here give you a Transcript of it,
with the addition of some things which since occur, omitting the Minutes which
you requested me to hand to you of Gadbury's and Partridge's Predictions of
this Hellish Plot, having sent you their Almanacks, and also that of
Woodward's, by the Exeter Carrier, which I know is a safe way.

Mine told you that on Monday the 24th, the King came to the House of Lords,
and in a Speech acquainted both Houses;

That he was come on an extraordinary Occasion, which might have proved fatal
if it had not been disappointed by the singular Mercy and Goodness of God.

That he had received several concurring Informations of a Design to
assassinate him and that our Enemies were very forward in their (...) for a
sudden Invasion of the Kingdom.

That His Majesty had not been wanting to give the necessary Orders for the
Fleet, and that he hoped there was a Strength of Ships, and in such a
Readiness, as would be sufficient to disappoint the Intentions of our Enemies.

That he had dispatched Orders for bringing Home such a Number of our Troops,
as might secure us from any Attempt; and exhorted them to do every thing which
they should judge proper for our Common Safety, etc.

Upon this astonishing News the House of Commons (Nemine Contradicente)
resolved to address His Majesty to congratulate his happy Deliverance, and to
give him their Thanks for imparting the Horrid Design to the House, and to
desire His Majesty to take more than ordinary Care of his Royal Person,
assuring him that they will stand by, assist, and defend His Majesty with their
Lives and Fortunes, against the late King James and all other His Enemies both
at Home and Abroad; and that in case His Majesty should come to any violent
Death (which God forbid) they would revenge the same upon all his Enemies and
their Adherents, etc.

The House of Lords also unanimously agreed upon an Address to His Majesty, to
which they desired the Concurrence of the Commons; who made some Amendments
thereunto, to which the Lords agreeing: The same Evening both Houses attended
His Majesty therewith. You have here a Copy thereof.

WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled; having taken into
our serious Consideration, what your Majesty has been pleased to Communicate
to us this day, think it our Duty in the first place to give Your Majesty most
Humble Thanks, for having acquainted Your Parliament, with the great Danger
Your Sacred Person has been so nearly exposed to, and the Design of an
Invasion from our Enemies Abroad; We heartily Congratulate Your Majesty's Happy
Preservation, and thankfully acknowledge the signal Providence of God in it;
and at the same time Declare our Detestation and Abhorrence of so Villainous and
Barbarous a Design: And since the Safety and Welfare of Your Majesty's
Dominions do so entirely depend upon Your Life, We most Humbly Beseech Your
Majesty to take more than Ordinary Care of Your Royal Person: And we take this
Occasion to Assure Your Majesty of our utmost Assistance, to Defend Your
Person, and Support Your Government against the late King James, and all other
Your Enemies, both at Home and Abroad; hereby Declaring to all the World, That
in case Your Majesty shall come to any Violent Death, (which God forbid) we
will Revenge the same upon all your Enemies, and their Adherents. And as an
Instance of our Zeal for Your Majesty's Service, we will give all possible
Dispatch to the Public Business: And we make it our Desire to Your Majesty, to
Seize and Secure all Persons, Horses, and Arms, that Your Majesty may think fit
to Apprehend upon this Occasion.

To which His Majesty gave a gracious Answer to the effect following, viz.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Thank you heartily for this kind Address: On my Part you may be assured;
that I will do all that is within my Power for the Conservation of this
Kingdom, to which I have so many Obligations. I will readily adventure my Life
for the Preservation of it, and recommend my self to the Continuance of your
Loyalty and good Affections.


The House of Commons also the same day resolved upon the following Association
to be signed by their Members.

WHereas there has been a Horrid and Detestable Conspiracy, Formed and Carried
on by Papists, and other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, for Assassinating his
Majesty's Royal Person in Order to Encourage an Invasion from France, to
Subvert our Religion, Laws, and Liberty: We whose Names are hereunto
Subscribed, do Heartily, Sincerely, and Solemnly Profess, Testify and Declare,
That his Present Majesty King William is Rightful and Lawful King of these
Realms. And we do Mutually Promise and Engage to stand by and assist each
other, to the utmost of our Power, in the Support and Defense of his Majesty's
most Sacred Person and Government, against the late King James and all his
Adherents. And in case his Majesty come to any Violent or Untimely Death (which
God forbid) We do hereby further Freely and Unanimously Oblige our Selves, to
Unite, Associate, and Stand by each other, in Revenging the same upon his
Enemies, and their Adherents; and in Supporting and Defending the Succession of
the Crown, according to an Act made in the First Year of the Reign of King
William and Queen Mary, Entitled, An Act Declaring the Rights and Liberties of
the Subject, and Settling the Succession of the Crown.

There is also an A^^^^iation agreed upon by the House of Lords, which was
carried by a Majority, which will appear to be of a Comfortable Importance.

Their Lordships Association differs so little from that of the Commons, that I
do not transcribe it; but show you how they vary: Instead of the Words [King
William is RIGHTFVL and Lawful King] their Lordships insert,

That His present Majesty King William has A RIGHT BY LAW to the Crown of this
Realm, and that neither the late King James, nor the pretended Prince of Wales,
nor any other Person has any Right whatsoever to the same, etc.

Ninety six of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, have already subscribed their
Association, and others, who were at first absent, come in daily; it has been
refused only by 15, whose Names lying in a narrow Compass, I here give you.

Marquess of Hallifax. Marquess of Normanby (who when King James Abdicated we
knew by the Title of Earl of Mulsgrave.) Earls of Nottingham. Chesterfield.
Thanet. Winchelsea. Scarsdale.
Earls of Craven. Feversham. Aylesbury.
Lord Jeffries. Lord Chandois. Lord Ferrers. Dr. Sprat, Bishop of Rochester.
Dr. Watson, Bishop of St. David's.


Their Lordships have also ordered Letters to be sent to these undernamed
Peers, who are in the Country, to attend the House; and their subscribing is
not doubted.

The Dukes of Beaufort, and Richmond.
Earls of Rutland. Derby. Bristol.
Lord Viscount Weymouth. The Lords Fitz-Water. Leigh. Lempster. Osulston.
Willoughby. Coventry. Rockingham.



The House of Commons having, as I told you, agreed upon the above-written
Association, ordered it to be engrossed, to be Signed by their Members; and
near 400 of that August Assembly, which consists of 513, have already (with
great Alacrity) subscribed it. But some at present hesitate, some others refuse
it, their Names are underwritten.

Berks Sends 9. Members:
WIlliam Jennyngs Simon Harcourt.
Bucks. 14.
Alexander Denton Mountague Drake Sir James Etheridge.
Cornwall. 44.
Henry Lord Hyde John Manley Daniel Eliot Henry Fleming Francis Buller John
Tredenham Seymour Tredenham Sir William Coryton John Mountstevens Bernard
Granvile Charles Lord Cheney * Francis Gwyn.
Cheshire. 4.
Sir Thomas Grosvenor.
Derbyshire. 4.
Sir Gilbert Clarke.
Devon. 26.
Francis Courteney * Sir Edward Seymour John Granville.
Dorsetshire. 20.
* Thomas Strangways Thomas Freke * Richard Fownes.
Chor. 30.
* Robert Byerly Sir Mannaduke Wivill Sir Michael Wentworth.
Essex. 8.
Sir Eliab Harvey.
Gloucester. 8.
Robert Pain William Frye Richard How John How.
Herefordshire. 8.
Robert Price.
Huntington. 4.
Anthony Hammond.
Kent. 18.
* Sir John Banks.
Lancashire. 14.
Leigh Banks Thomas Brotherton Sir Roger Bradshaw Peter Shakerley.
Lincolnshire. 12.
George Lord Castleton Sir John Bolles.
Norfolk. 12.
Sir John Wodehouse.
Northampton. 9.
Thomas Cartwright * Gilbert Dolben.
Northumbecland. 8.
* William Foster.
Oxford. 9.
* Mountague Lord Norris * Sir Robert Jenkinson Heneage Finch Sir Edward Norris
Thomas Rowney James Bertie Sir Robert Dashwood.
Salop. 12.
* Edward Kynaston John Kynaston * Andrew Newport * George Weld.
Somerset. 18.
Sir John Trevillian * Edward Berkley * John Sandford Sir Charles Carterett Sir
John Smith.
Southampton 26.
Henry Holmes * Thomas Done
Staffordshire. 10.
* Robert Burdett Sir John Leveson Gower * John Gray * Sir Henry Gough.
Surrey. 14.
John Parsons.
Sussex. 28.
* Sir William Morley John Lewknor Sir Thomas Dyke William Stringer.
Warwickshire. 6.
William Bromley Andrew Archer George Bohun * Lord Digby Francis Grevill.
Westmoreland. 4.
Sir William Twisden * Sir Christopher Musgrave.
Wiltshire. 34.
Robert Bertie William Harvey Henry Pynnill Thomas Bennet William Daniel.
Worcestershire. 9.
Samuel Swift * Henry Parker.
Wales. 24.
* Edward Jones Jeffery Jefferies * Sir Richard Middleton * Edward Brereton Sir
John Conway * Thomas Mansel,

In all but 93 Dissenters.

Pardon me, Sir, that I forgot to insert the name of Wi: Williams, who you may
remember Spewed Sir Robert Peyton out of the House of Commons, for
corresponding with the late King when Duke of York. And who told King Charles
II. That the Commons were not given to Change; but it is now evident that some
of their Quondam Speakers are.

On Tuesday the House ordered that their absent Members, as they come to the
House, do come up to the Table, and sign the Association; or, in their Places,
declare their Refusal so to do: and

On Thursday it was ordered that the Association, and the Subscriptions
thereunto, be entered upon the Journal of the House; and Resolved that it be
presented to His Majesty, by the Speaker, and the whole House, before the end
of the Session.

It was also, the same day, ordered that such Members who have not already,
shall by Monday Fortnight Sign the Association, or declare their Refusal; and I
do on as good Ground, as Gadbury foretold the Plot, predict that the Body of
Refusers in this Honorable House will scarce, at the summing up, amount to the
number of one hundred.

Permit me now (Dear Sir) to Recreate my self a little in remarking on what I
have laid before you.

As the Doubting Lords are but few; so of the twenty six Members of your Large
and Rich County of Devon, you find but three Dissenters: and but one (I include
not their Bishop) of the eighteen in the Spacious County of Kent. No more than
one out of twelve in another of the largest Counties of England, I mean
Norfolk. To augment their Number, Essex (another of our greatest Counties)
furnishes one out of eight. Cheshire one out of their four. Derbyshire one out
of four also; and Herefordshire such another one out of eight. The Diminutive,
but Opulent, County of Huntington, has lent them another out of four: and that
Honest County of Surrey one out of fourteen, but I assure you it is a very
Sorry One.

You find not one of the sixteen Members for the Cinque Ports in this
Non-Association; and the twelve Counties of Wales have of their twenty four
Members but eight Refusers, of whom one is now His Majesty's Counsel, and was
of King James's Counsel against the Bishops. Indeed they have a Recusant Bishop
to head them, of King James's own making; but unless I misremember he was not
one of the seven golden Candlesticks.

You want (Sir) in the above-written List eleven of our English Counties, which
are these,

Bedfordshire Sends 4 Members. Cambridgshire. 6. Cumberland. 6. Durham. 4.
Hertfordshire. 6. Leicestershire. 4. London, Middlesex and Westminster. 8.
Monmouthshire. 3. Nottinghamshire. 8. Rutland. 2. Suffolk. 16.
Of which Number, being 67, I tell you for their Honor, there is not one
Recusant.

I farther observe to you, that in the seven old Associated Counties, viz.
Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, Huntington, Bedford and Hertford, there are
but 3 Recusants; and you will find above 4 times that Number of Associating
Lords there. In London and the contiguous Counties, viz. Middlesex, Bucks,
Berks, Wiltshire, Hantshire, Surrey, Sussex, Kent, Lincoln, and Northampton,
which make another 11 Counties, and send no less than 172 Members; you will
find, upon review of the foregoing List, that there had been but 19 Refusers,
had not Mr. Done and Mr. Parsons added two to their Number.

Now to detain you no longer in discoursing of the House of Commons; let this
assure you that the City of London had like to have been as unanimous as the
first 11 Counties. A Common Council was this last Week summoned, where the
foregoing Association being proposed it was agreed unto and signed by every
Member present (that whole Body consisting of 234), one only excepted; whose
name may not be forgot, it is Lawrence Cole, a Man of little Note before he was
one of honest Mr. Bateman's Jury.

I hope Sir, this pleasant Scheme of the Kingdom, and its Affairs, will in some
measure relieve you from the Panick fear into which you say Gadbury and
Partridge had put you. Now for the Service of the Government, you have my free
consent to show this to your Honest Neighbors (especially to our Friends of
Exeter and Totness.) Nay to any Man, for, tho as you know I pay a Deference to
Sir E. Seymour, and a far greater to the Nations Representatives, I am
confident I shall not in this Juncture incur their displeasure by naming a
squeamish Conscienced Gentleman, who (after 7 years Apprenticestip) will not go
the Length to avow K. William's Right to the Crown.

When a Town is on Fire, the blowing up a House is surely justifiable. Our
Neighbor Nation once upon a time told a bigger Man than Sir E. S. that a King
for some Crimes might Forefault; and had Sir E. been thrown out of the House
last Week, I should not have laid it to Heart.

I have long ago resolved to run a Muck against all the Enemies of this
Government, and know by Consequence that I am to expect no Quarter when it is
overturned, which makes me now as fearless of being called to a Reckoning, as I
am of this Plot; but should that betide me, I wish it may be before the present
Commissioners for Accounts.

I have Sir, been so prolix that I cannot now enter into the particulars of
this Diabolical Conspiracy, but for your Comfort it is happily discovered, and
most miraculously disappointed. Admiral Russell now blocks up the French Fleet
about Calais, and I hope to tell you by the next that he has destroyed them.

The Tower of London was to have been delivered up to the French Cutthroats,
and they say by Major Hawley an Officer there; it is certain he is secured.
Take Heart my Friend, for our Enemies will not easily get possession of the
Powder there, and I am confident all the Saltpeter in Devonshire, (should 200
Tuns be discovered in any Vault there) will not supply enough to blow up this
Government. For my part come what will, I resolve never to be bribed into the
Jacobite Party; no, tho I should be tempted with the value of such a Cargo,
which Sir E. S. well knows is not less worth than 12000 l.

You must not expect a License to this, for Sir Roger L'Estrange had last Night
the Mishap to be committed Close Prisoner to Newgate.

I am, Sir, Yours sincerely B. J.
P. S. Sir, I esteem my self obliged to beg pardon, that I have here repeated
the Name of Worthy Mr. Cartwright of Northamptonshire (...) yesterday, upon
second Thoughts, signed the Association; and I question not but the rest will
fellow the good Example he has set them.




