A SERMON Preached at Bugbrook in Northamptonshire, May 15. 1642. upon the
collection for Ireland. Condemned in the Morning, in the Church, before the
whole Congregation for Popery: and in the afternoon there, for having many
lies in it of a high nature.

Published by the Author in a just vindication of himself from that unjust
scandal.

Psalm. 101.7. He that works deceit, shall not dwell within my house: he that
tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight.

LONDON, Printed by THO: HARPER, MDCXLII.

To the understanding Reader.
Judicious Sir:
I Protest I do even blush to think how I shall be censured for publishing
(in this printing time) this tumultuary exercise of mine, opus unius aut
alterius diei, (longer time I could hardly afford my self, it being my usual
custom to preach twice every Lords day, as I did then) but I am as it were
forced to do it, in respect of my people committed to my charge, and in
tenderness to mine own reputation, but especially for the honor of Gods
truth, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For presently after I had read the Act
for the contribution toward the relief of our poor distressed brethren in
Ireland, and en ded this Sermon concerning it, before I came out of the Pulpit,
it was said that it might have been preached at Rome; and after the end of my
afternoones Sermon, I was told, that I had spoken many lies that morning in the
Pulpit of a high nature, for which I should be made to be ashamed. Now if
these words should settle a belief in any of my Parish (which they might, if I
should silently pass them over) I may ask the question with the Prophet, Esaias
53.1.
Who will believe our report? How can my doctrine edify, or my Sermons benefit
my auditors, or who will credit me? how must I be disesteemed by those amongst
whom I live? Esaias 9.15.
For the Scripture says, That the ancient and honorable man is the head: and
the Prophet that tells lies is the tail. Lastly, how is God dishonored,
when his sacred Message shall openly be called a Lie? If I should pass it over
in silence, were not this to suffer Gods glory to be turned into shame? Psalm.
4.2.
When you have read it (which is soon done) I beseech you tell me whether I
have deserved such ill language as was given me publicly for it, or for such
kind of preaching to be called a papisticall Priest, as they usually do; I
have not added nor diminished a word of that I spoke in the Pulpit, which if I
should do, I must look to hear of it with a witness, for there are those
who take notes of all I say, God grant with better hearts then the Scribes and
Pharisees heard our Savior, and not with purpose to have me arraigned, as at
the last day, for every idle word.

I am sure of it, when I have labored in Gods vineyard with all my strength,
and sincerely taught the sacred truth of his holy word, endeavoring to
enfeeble the hands of wickedness, by exciting unto works of holiness, piety,
and obedience to the Law.

The bold Antinomians have cried me down for a false Prophet (and all others
who of late have walked in the same path, have been condemned, one of them
called openly, A cursed Preacher of the Law.)

Besides, when I have otherwise faithfully done my duty in my place, according
to the ^aw established, I have publicly in the Church been rebuked, and told
of an Order to the contrary in the Parliament (of whose wisdom and justice I
have such confidence, that I will ever be ready to pay unto it that duty and
obedience which we all owe unto it) which they could not produce, and upon
search I have found that there was no such thing.

My usage has been such, that some of my enemies have wondered how flesh and
blood (as I have been informed) was able to bear it, and truly without the
great blessing of God, illius oneri succubuislem.

I have suffered so often, and so many words of diminution, and disparagement,
that they have been the clothing that I have every day put on; I have
publicly been used so contemptibly, that in me the profession suffers.
And privately I have been smitten by the tongues of those from whom I thought
I had deserved encouragements.

My words have been altered and changed, some left out, and some put in, as
much as would serve for a calumny, and no more, and taught to speak a new
thing from the scope of my intention, and then fastened and fathered on me, as
naughty persons lay their bastards at honest men's doors. So I may truly say
with David, That is laid to my charge which I knew not. And to heap up
affliction upon affliction, without any pity to my weak and sickly body, they
unmercifully demand more then the sull tale of brick, and yet some of them
afford me little, Exodus 5 7.8.
some no straw at all.

And not withstanding all this, I have given all fitting respect to the persons
of all, although I have hated some men's indiscretions and errors: I have done
courtesies to some of them even against their wills, that so by my well doing I
might put to silence (according to the advice of Saint Peter) the ignorance of
foolish men. 1 Pet. 2.1^.


And that I might make it appear to the world, Act. 24.16.
that I have labored to have a clear conscience void of offense both toward
God and toward men: that so at the last day (when no colors shall do us good,
when no cloak of holiness shall cover our malice and hypocrisy, for we shall
be judged naked) by the merits of my Savior, and faith in his blood, I might
stand innocent before the great Tribunal of Jesus Christ, in whom I shall ever
profess my self to be

Your servant, G. I.

A Sermon preached upon the benevolence for Ireland.
GAL. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity let us do good unto all men,
especially to them who are of the household of faith.


OUr Savior Christ does reduce the ten Commandments unto two, the love of
God, the love of our neighbor, Luke 10.28. Saint Paul includes all in one word
love, as you may find it in the 14. verse of the precedent Chapter. All the
law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self. But then this love must be active, and working, not lazy and idle,
but practical, showing it self in actions of charity without weariness: And
the Apostle gives a good reason for it in the verse that goes before my Text,
Let us not be weary in well-doing: for in due season we shall reap if we faint
not.

As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially to
them who are of the household of Faith.

In which words I observe these parts: First, an act, Let us do: Secondly, the
quality of it, Good: Thirdly, the object in general terms, Unto all men; In
special terms, The household of Faith. Fourthly, the time when, Whilst we
have opportunity: Fifthly, the motive, or reason persuading us thereunto,
intimated in the illative particle of my Text, Therefore; which referres us
back to take a view of what has been said before: and there we shall find a
reason given in the verse immediately preceding my Text; because we in due
season shall reap. As if he should have said, If we sow our good works with a
charitable hand upon all men, especially upon the household of Faith, we shall
in the time of gathering at harvest, when the Wheat shall be gathered into the
Garner, and the Chafe burnt with unquenchable fire, reap a plentiful crop, a
full, ample, and gracious reward of our Charity, In due season we shall reap if
we faint not. So as for the sprinkling and scattering of a small portion of our
goods in a convenient seedtime for works of charity, we shall have a large
return of the principal, with interest, in the season of harvest at the last
day.

As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially to
them who are of the household of faith.

I begin with the first parts, the act, and the quality of it: Let us do good.

Above all things, says the Apostle, put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfection, Coloss. 3.14. Now abides Faith, Hope and Charity; but the greatest
of these is Charity, 1 Cor. 13. ult.

David calls that man happy, whose sins are covered: Beatus vir cujus tecta
sunt peccata: Blessed is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose
sin is covered, Psalm. 32.12.

And Solomon says, That love covers all sins, Prove. 10.12. And St. Peter
says, that Love covers a multitude of sins. Multitudinem peccatorum operit
charitas; above all things have fervent Charity: for charity covers a multitude
of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8.

Though I speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity,
says the Apostle, I am but as sounding Brass, and a tinckling Cymball. And
though I have the gift of Prophecy, and the understanding all mysteries, and
all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so as I could remove mountains,
and have not Charity, I am nothing.

Therefore whilst we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men;
especially to those of the household of faith.

He that shall say I have quieted my thoughts through the merits of Christ
Jesus, and my faith in him, and that I am reconciled, and have made my peace
with God, and therefore from henceforth I may say, with Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 4.8.
that J know a crown of righteousness is laid up for me, and has not charity,
deceives himself, and the truth is not in him.

It was most excellent counsel which the Prophet Daniel gave King
Nebuchadnezzar, Break off thy sins by righteousness, Dan. 4.17.
and thy iniquity by showing mercy to the poor.

The man that stood before Cornelius in bright clothing told him, Act. 10.30.
that his prayers were heard, and that his alms deeds were had in remembrance
in the sight of God.

Therefore while we have opportunity, etc.

To do good, and communicate forget not, Heb. 13 16.
for with such sacrifice the Lord is well pleased.

Esurivi, says our Savior Christ, I was an hungery, and ye gave me meat, I
was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger and ye took me in,
naked and ye clothed me, Matt. 25.35
I was sick and ye visited me, I was in prison, and ye came to me, therefore
venite benedicti patris mei, come ye blessed of my father, possidete regnum,
take possession of an eternal kingdom: the declarative reason is, Quia
esurivi, J was an hungered and ye gave me meat.

Therefore whilst we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, etc.

And so I come unto the object, All men.

What unto our enemies? that is a hard matter, that goes against the hair; a
task that will startle flesh and blood to undertake, but this is a law which
our Savior Christ does impose upon us; But I say unto you, Mat. 5.44.
love your enemies.

Anciently lex talionis was in use with the Jews, and the Gentiles, as may be
gathered out of the 38. of the same chap. And this to many seemed a natural
and a just law, as we find in Arist. A. Gellius, Alex. ab Alexan. and others.

Plutarch reports that the first of the house of the Cornelii that was burned
after his death was Sylla, fearing the same punishment, lege talionis, should
be inflicted on him which his enemy Marius had suffered, whom he plucked out of
his grave.

But our Savior crossing this law, says, Mat 5.38.
this was a law of old, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; But I say
unto you, do good to those that hurt you, bless them that curse you, pray for
your persecutors, as in the same Chap. verse 44.

I confess that this is the greatest temptation, and the hardest encounter
that flesh and blood is put to. Saint August. making a repetition of all the
commandments, says, that there is none harder to be kept, then that of loving
our enemies, and restraining the appetite from revenge against them that shall
defame, and persecute us.

Quis cum invenerit inimicum, dimittet eum in via bona, says Saul, who when he
has taken his enemy at an advantage, will let him go in safety.

What a hard matter will it be then according to the command of the Apostle,
here in my text, to do him good?

Redime me a calumniis bominum ut custodiam mandata tua, keep me from the
slanders of men that I may run the way of thy commandments; whereby it
seems that David having set before him all the commandments of God, the
slander of his enemes did so cow his resolution, that he did, as it were, say,
oh Lord! if thou do not redeem me from this temptation, I shall hardly be
able to serve thee, as I would. Psalm. 92.
Paulo minus, says David, again upon the same occasion, habitasset in inferno
anima mea, a little more, and my soul had dwelt in hell, the motions of
revenge put me into such speed, that if the hand of the Lord had not forcibly
held me back, I had run in my fury headlong to hell.

But that which to man seems impossible, God makes easy; and therefore our
Savior, Matt. 11.
says, jugum meum suarve, and onus leve, My yoke is easy and my burden
light. He that gives the commandment, will give us ability to perform it in
some measure.

Nolentem per venit ut vellet, volentem subsequitur, ne frustra vellet. Aug.

He will give us his preventing, and his subsequent grace to make us both
willing and able to obey his command, in doing good unto all men, even our
enemies.

Iudicium sine misericordia qui non faciunt misericordiam, Let him, says Saint
James, Jam. 2.13.
look for no mercy in the world to come, that shows no mercy in this life.

One of the reasons why Hamon, King Assuerus great favorite, found no pity in
Queen Hesters, nor the Kings breast, though he begged it on his knees with
tears in his eyes, was, for that he had plotted such a merciless villainy, as
to destroy all the Jews, Hest. 1.3.
both men, women, children, at one blow, and therefore he was thought to
deserve no favor.

Nathan propounding unto David that parable of him, that having many sheep of
his own, had robbed his neighbor of his only sheep, having no more besides
in all the world, was so incensed against this so great an injury, that he
held him for the present unworthy of pardon. 2. Sam. 12.
As the Lord lives he shall die.

The word of God cannot fail. Heaven and earth shall pass away, Matt. 24.35.
but my words, says our Savior, shall not pass away.

And the Prophet Amos threatens cruel persons with most severe punishment.
Am. cap. 4. and cap. 6.


And Solomon says that the hard heart shall have many a shrewd pang when he
lies upon his death bed. But our Savior bestows a blessing upon those that
are ready to do good, and to show mercy unto others. Mat. 5.7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

As we have therefore opportunity let us do good to all men, especially to
them, who are of the household of faith.

And so I come to the particular object, the household of faith, especially to
them who are of the household of faith.

It was the custom of the primitive Church to have their goods in common that
the necessities of every man might be supplied. As many as were possessors of
lands and houses, sold them, Act. 4.34.35.
and brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the
Apostles feet, and distribution was made unto every man, according as he had
need.

But now men are so far from doing so, that distribution might be made
according to the wants of other men, that they do not only rob them, but the
Apostles also, nay God himself. Will a man rob God, says the Prophet in the
Lords name, Yet ye have robbed me: Mal. 3.8.
but ye say wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and offerings. Mark what
follows; Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me. I make no
application of what I have said, if any man here present be guilty of this
sin, let him take heed that he partake not of the curse. The words are Gods,
Ye are cursed with a curse, the reason is, Mal. 3.8.9.
because ye have robbed the Lord, and it is plainly set down wherein ye have
robbed him, ye have robbed him in tithes and offerings.

Saint Paul says, that they which minister about holy things, live of the
sacrifice, and they which wait on the Altar, are partakers of the Altar: even
so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.13.14
And here in my text he does enjoyne us, to do good unto all men, especially
to those who are of the household of faith, and preach the Gospel and faith in
Jesus Christ.

All are to be relieved, especially the faithful. It is a cruel
hard-heartednesse to see a Christian in want, and not to relieve him. If I
should see a true professor of faith in Christ Jesus beg his bread, or walk
unclothed, and should not feed him, and with mine own garment cover his
nakedness, I were worthy to eat the bread of affliction, and drink the water
of bitterness, and to want a worse garment then Adam had to cover his
nakedness. But alas! charity now adays is cold.

Probitas laudatur and alget. Where are the Hospitals, and the goods bestowed
in pios usus, which were frequent heretofore? Where is he that cries out with
Zacheus, Behold, Luke 19.8.
if J have done any man wrong, I am ready to return him satisfaction, and
half my goods I give unto the poor. What follows hereupon, but the blessing
of all blessings, salvation. Verse 9.
And Jesus said unto him, this day is salvation come into thy house.

Therefore while we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially
to those that are of the household of faith.

While we have opportunity. Why not to day? To day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts. This is the day wherein you may exercise your charity,
and show your love to the Gospel, do not neglect it, for perhaps you may
never have the like. We are not sure to live another day. Luke 1^.20.
Remember how the fool in the Gospel was deceived in his expectation. And
therefore I exhort you to do it to day, while it is yet called to day, lest ye
dye before to morrow.

And truly I never knew greater reason for it. Res ipsa loquitur, if I should
be silent, the known wants of our poor brethren in Ireland were motive
sufficient to put heat and life into a cold and dead pity, into a frozen,
benumbed, and soulelesse charity.

Now is a time to show your love to the Gospel, you that in show are the great
professors of it, now you have an opportunity to manifest your love to Christ
Jesus, and your zeal to his flock, to the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands, who have not only lost their green pastures, and waters
of comfort, but their wool, skin, and flesh, by the paws and teeth of the
papisticall, Jesuiticall Irish Wolves. I fear we are not all so valiant, as
with our swords, with David, to endeavor to rescue and deliver these harmless
Lambs out of the mouths of these Romish Bears and Lions, 1. Sam. 17.35.
to take them by the beards, and smite them, as he did: yet let us labor by
supplies and maintenance, and by our benevolence to preserve those from the
sword, and hunger, and cold, that have escaped their fury.

I have read many sad stories of the miseries of Christians, but never the like
to this of our brethren in Ireland. Whole families, nay whole parishes, nay
whole towns, nay whole Counties, and in them (besides thousands of the
Plebeians, and poorer sort) many of the Gentry, and some of the Nobility, and
best rank, have been robbed, and tortured, and murdered, nay worse then this,
for there is a cruelty beyond death, their naked bodies have been thrown out
into the open air, no man being suffered to bury them, and left a prey for
Swine, Wolves, Dogs, Vultures, and Crows, and other beasts and birds of raven
and prey. Nay I can tell you greater cruelties yet, for there may be more
cruelty showed to the living, then to those that are murdered in a usual way,
either at their death, or after their death. When they have spoiled the
professors of the Gospel of all their goods, (who were worth thousands a
little before) they have stripped, and ravished, and whipped them, and sent them
away naked, not sparing women with child, and giving suck, though of the best
rank, mercilesly exposing them to hunger and cold in the midst of winter,
sometimes in rain, sometimes in storms, and sometimes in snow, whereby some
hundreds, may I not say thousands? have been starved, or frozen to death.
Neither has the house of God been safe from their fury.

-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis?
So as we may say with David, Psalm. 79.1, 2, 3.
O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem a heap of stones, the dead bodies of thy servants
have they given to be meat to the fowls of the air, and the flesh of thy
Saints unto the beasts of the land; their blood have they shed like water on
every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to bury them. Wherefore it is
time for us to pray with him, Verse 9.
Help us oh God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name. For they have not
only slain thy people, and thy Priests, but have blasphemed thy name, torn
thy sacred word, trod it under foot, rolled it up and down in durty and mirie
places, and then cast it into the faces of thy Saints with disdain, and scorn.

And shall not we that are Christians endeavor to our utmost to preserve the
house of God, the people, the Priests, the word, the name, the glory of God
from such wickedness, profanation, and blasphemy?

You that are the best Christians show your selves most forward in this work,
by your bounty show your zeal to Christian religion, to Christ's dear
servants, to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to the name, and glory of God
almighty.

Give me leave to alter Saint Paul's words alittle, and to say, Non quaero vos,
sed vestra. 2 Cor. 12.14.
I desire you not to venture the spilling of your bloods, or the loss of your
lives, but your charity, your benevolence for the releife of your brethren,
your poor distressed brethren in Ireland, and this I beg for the Gospel
sake, for Jesus Christ his sake, for Gods sake.

Now show your faith by your works, you that bost so much of your faith,
otherwise we may suspect the life of it, for faith without works, Jam. 2.
is but a dead faith.

Not circumcision, Gal. 5.6.
nor uncircumcision, says Saint Paul, but faith that works by love. Faith
that works not by love, can no more save your souls, then a dead man can
protect your bodies: show then your faith by your love, and your love by your
bounty, to cloth, and feed the distressed servants of Jesus Christ. Besides
what I have alleged already for this purpose, there is a motive sufficient in
the latter part of the precedent verse, We shall reap if we faint not. Let us
not be weary of well doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint
not. And that is the last part of my Text, a motive to excite and stir us up to
a timely and season able benevolence. We shall reap if we faint not.

So you see I desire nothing but what tends to your own good.

He that is merciful rewards his own soul, Prove. 11.17.
says the Wiseman. He does himself a courtesy, he places his estate there,
where the hand of the worst fortune, or enemy, cannot reach it. He that has
money, goods, house, or land, Quantum non milvus oberret, may in a short time
be as much necessitated as ever Job was. Riches have wings, and fly from us:
if the element of fire or water prove our enemy, and set upon us, in an
instant it may make us poor enough, but the sword is the roughest gamester of
all, and that commonly sweepes away the whole stake at once, without leaving us
any thing whereby we may set up again. Quas autem dederis semper habebis opes.
So as we are sure of nothing, but what we give away. Math. 19.20.
Lay not up therefore for your selves treasure upon-earth, where the rust and
moth do corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for
your selves treasures in heaven, where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and
where thieves do not break through and steal.

He that pittieth the poor, Prove. 19.17.
lends to the Lord, and look what he lays out, it shall be paid him
again.

Let therefore the light of your charity and bounty shine before men, that
others by your example may be stirred up to works of piety, that so your
Father which is in heaven may be glorified, and your poor brethren in Christ
Jesus relieved.

Remember what the Prophet David says, Psalm. 41.2.
Blessed is the man that provideth for the sick and needy, for the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble.

And the greater provision you make for them, the greater shall be your
deliverance in your necessity. For Saint Paul says, that he that sows
little, shall reap little, and he that sows plenteously shall reap
plenteously. But yet let every man do according as he is disposed in his
heart, not grudging, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor.
6.7.


Be ready then and forward to give alms of thy goods, and turn not thy face
from these poor souls, and then the face of the Lord shall not be turned away
from thee.

As therefore you love your brethren in Christ, as you love the Gospel of
Christ, as you love the name and glory of Christ Jesus, as you love your own
souls, (...) a liberal manner extend your compassionate charity for the
relief of your poor distressed brethren in Ireland, so you shall gather to
your selves a good reward in the day of necessity, and in due season reap the
fruit of it by the mercy of our heavenly Father: to whom, with the Son and
the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all power, might, and majesty, both now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

